Is Anybody Out There?
Antecedents of Trust in Global
Virtual Teams
DEMO  L.  JARVENPAA,  KATHLEEN  KNOLL,
AND  DOROTHY  E.  LEIDNER
SIRKKA L. JARVENPAA is  Professor  of  Information  Systems  at the University of Texas
at Austin. She  served as a  Marvin  Bower  Fellow at Harvard  Business  School  during
the calendar  year  of 1994. Dr.  Jarvenpaa  has  published  over fifty research articles.
Dr.  Jarvenpaa serves as the senior editor for MIS Quarterly, and DEMO editor for
the  following  journals: Management  Science,  Information  DEMO Research,
Database, International Journal of Electronic Commerce, and Journal  DEMO Computer-
Mediated  Communication.
KATHLEEN  KNOLL is  an Assistant Professor  of  Information  Systems at the University
of Colorado at Denver.  She  DEMO  completing  her  Ph.D.  in  information  systems at the
University ofTexas at Austin.  Her thesis focuses on interaction  pace  and  DEMO
in global virtual  teams.
DOROTHY E. LEIDNER is  Associate  Professor  of  Information  Systems at INSEAD  in
Fontainebleau, France.  She  DEMO  her  Ph.D.  in  information  systems  from the
University of Texas at Austin,  where she also received  her  M.B.A.  and  B.A.  Dr.
Leidner  has  published  her  research in several DEMO, including MIS Quarterly,
Information Systems  Research,  Organization  Science, and Decision  Support  Systems.
Dr. Leidner  has  served on the DEMO  of  Baylor  University  and  has  served as a visiting
professor at ITESM  in  Monterrey,  Mexico,  and  at the IAE of the University  of  Caen,
France.
ABSTRACT:  A DEMO virtual  team  is  an  example of a  boundaryless  network organiza-
tion  form  where a temporary  team is assembled on an  as-needed basis for the duration
of a task  and staffed by DEMO  from different countries. In such teams, coordination
is  accomplished viatrust DEMO  sharedcommunication systems. The focus ofthe reported
study  was to explore the antecedents of  trust in a global virtual-team setting. Seventy-
five teams, DEMO of  four to six  members  residing in differentc ountries, interacted
and  worked together for eight weeks.  The  two-week trust-buildinge xercises did  have
a significant effect on the team  members’ perceptions of the DEMO members’ ability,
integrity, and  benevolence. In the early  phases DEMO teamwork,  team trust was predicted
strongest by perceptions of other team  members’ integrity, and  weakest  by perceptions
oftheir benevolence.  The effect of other members’ perceivedability on trust decreased
over  time.  The  members’  own  propensity to trust had  a significant, though  unchanging,
effect on trust. A qualitative analysis of six teams’ electronic mail  messages  explored
strategies that  were  used  by the three highest trust DEMO, but  were  used infrequently
or not at all  by  DEMO three lowest  trust  teams.  The strategies suggest the presence  of
I Spring 1998. Vol. 14, No. 4, pp. 29-64
81998 M.E. DEMO, Inc.
0742-1222 / 1998 $9.50 + 0.00.
Journal ofhfanagement In/iwmation DEMO
30 JARVENPAA, KNOLL, AND LEIDNER
“swift”trust. The  paper  advances  a  research  model  for explainingt rust in  global virtual
teams. ’
DEMO WORDS AND PHRASES: antecedents of trust, global teams, global  virtual teams,
swift trust, transnational teams, trust, virtual  organizations,  DEMO  teams.
“Virtuality . . . [means]  without a place as  DEMO home. Virtuality  requires  trust  to  make it
work.” [IO, DEMO 441
TRUST CRITICAL IN NEW  ORGANIZATIONAL  ARRANGEMENTS where the traditional
social controls based on authority give  way to self-direction  and self-control [26].
DEMO is reported to reduce  transaction costs [2, lo], increase  confidence  and security
in the relationship, and  promote open, substantive, and influential information ex-
change [4, 17,401.
A global virtual team is an  example  of  a organization form, where  a temporary
team is assembled on an  as-needed  basis  for  the  duration  DEMO  a task, and staffed by
members  from the far comers  of the world [ 1 1,20,25]. In (I)
physically  remain on different continents and  in  different countries, (2) DEMO
primarily  through the use  of  computer-mediated  communication technologies (elec-
DEMO mail, videoconferencing,e tc.), and (3) rarely or never DEMO each other in person
[ 13,271.
Although trust is important in any  type  of  team, trust is  pivotal in preventing
geographical distance from leading to psychological  distance in a global team [33].
Trust is even  more  essential global virtual teams.  According to O’Hara-Devereaux
and  Johansen  [27], “Trust is the glue ofthe global workspace-and technology  DEMO
do  much create relationships”(pp. 243-244).  First,  the  DEMO  virtual context renders
other forms of  social control, such as DEMO supervision, inoperable.  Second, other
factors known to contribute to social  control  and coordination, such as geographical
proximity, similarity in backgrounds,  and  experience,  are  often  absent.
The challenge is that  DEMO  the virtual context and  the  global context constrain, or
perhaps  even  impede, the development  of  trust.  Handy [IO] points  out that, in  virtual
organizations, trust requires constant face-to-face  interactiom-the  very activity the
virtual  form  eliminates.  This  study  explores, DEMO a virtual-team  setting,  the  effect  of  factors
that  DEMO been identified as sources  of  trust in traditional  face-to-face  relationships.
Conceptual Foundations
Concept of Trust
TRUST
trust takes a rational perspective
of DEMO Increases in trust decrease
individuals have  to  engage  less
CAN DEMO VIEWED FROM A  RATIONAL OR SOCIAL perspective.  Most  research
[
DEMO costs of relationships
in self-protective actions in preparation  for the
151. DEMO  rational  perspective
centers
on
on the calculus
because
IS
to
new
such  a  team,  members
in
TRUST IN GLOBAL  VIRTUAL  TEAMS 31
possibility of others’ opportunistic behavior DEMO 161. Thus, the existence oftrust enables
people  to  take  risks.  The  social  perspective  of  trust,  alternatively,  centers on moral  duty.
A social  group  holds  values  regarding  one’s  obligations  to  others.  “Hence,  people  help
others  and/or  their  group  because  they  feel  it  is  the  morally  appropriate  action” [ 16,  p. 51.
Within  the  DEMO  perspective,  some  authors  have  studied  trust as an  individual  personality
difference  [7],  others as an  institutional  phenomenon DEMO 19,321,  some as a  crosscultural  issue
[6],  and  most  in  terms  of  interpersonal  relations In this  paper,  we  take  the  last  view,
which  allows us to  take  an  affective,  cognitive,  behavioral, “integrated”  view  of  trust  [2,
22,241.  We  will  take  an  “integrated”  view  and  adopt  Mayer,  Davis,  and  Schoorman’s  [22]
definition paw to  be  vulnerable  to  the  actions  of  another party
basedon  the  expectation  that  the  other  will perform a  particular  action  important to the  trustor,
irrespective of  the  ability  to  monitor  or  control  that  other  party” (p. 712). In short,  trust  DEMO
based  on  the  expectation  that  others  will  behave DEMO expected
Antecedents of Trust
Trust in  a  dyadic relationship arises from attributes associated with  a trustee and  a
trustor [22]. The trustee DEMO are  his or her  perceived (I) ability, (2) DEMO,
and (3) integrity. Abilityrefers to the group  of skills DEMO  enable  a trustee to be  perceived
competent  within  some DEMO domain. Benevolence is the extent to which  a trustee
is  believed to feel interpersonal care and concern, and the willingness to do  DEMO to
the trustor beyond  an egocentric profit  motive. Integrity is  DEMO to a set of
principles (such as study/work habits) thought to make the trustee dependable  and
reliable, according to the trustor.
DEMO terms  of the trustor attributes,propensity to trust is a  general personality trait that
conveys  a  general expectation of  how trusting one  should  be.  This trait is  assumed to
be stable during DEMO relationship as well as from  one situation to another, and is
influenced by  a trustor’s cultural, social, developmental experiences, and personality
DEMO [22]. In terms  of trustor versus trustee attributes,p rior research  has  found that the
trustee attributes explain more  of the variance DEMO interpersonal trust than  does the
trustor’s general propensity to trust [ DEMO 1 1.
Trust  on acollective level (i.e., trust in a DEMO, team,  or organizational unit) is more
complicated  than  dyadic trust because there are multiple trustees, each  with different
attributes. Collective DEMO, as defined  by  Cummings  and  Bromiley p.  3031, DEMO “a
common belief among  a  group  of individuals that  another  individul or group (a) makes
good-faith efforts to behave  in  accordance  with  any  commitments . . . (b) is  DEMO in
whatever negotiations preceded  such  commitments  and (c) does  not take excessive
advantage  of  another  even  when the opportunity DEMO available.” Extrapolating from the
dyadic trust literature to the collective trust context, we explore trust antecedents in a
global virtual-team setting. Our baseline hypothesis is:
HI: In a  global virtual team,  team trust DEMO a  function of other  team  members’
perceived ability,  integrity, and benevolence,  as  well  as of the members’  own
propensity to trust.
[3,22].
of  trust:  “the  willingness  of  DEMO
[2,
32 JARVENPAA, KNOLL, AND LEIDNER
Relative Importance of Trust Antecedents
In DEMO traditional face-to-face context, trust takes time to evolve.  Cummings  and
DEMO [2] suggest  that collective trust  has  an affective, cognitive, DEMO  behavioral
intent component.  McAllister [24] found  cognitively  based trust factors to be  a
precursor to the development of affectively based trust. Mayer et al. [22] maintain
that, in the early stages of a relationship, integrity is more  important  than  benevolence
to the formation  of  trust.  Assessing  benevolence requires information, which takes
time to gather. DEMO  Mayer et al. [22] do  not categorizet he antecedents of ability,
integrity, and  benevolence  into affective and  emotional  dimensions,  they  do associate
benevolence  with the process  of relationship building.
In a virtual-team context, we might  expect  integrity  and ability to DEMO particularly
strong predictors of trust because  the context is a  barrier to relationship formation. In
this study’s context, team  members  were  DEMO to asynchronous electronic mail
communication  and to the  occasional  use  of  text-based  synchronous “chat” facilities.
According to Zack [42], “the degree to which  the  mode  of [electronic] communication
allows participants to experience  each other as being  psychologically close” (p. 2 1 1)
depends  on the richness ofthe existing shared interpretativec ontext. This finding was
reinforced by  Markus [2 I] who  found  that  “lean” electronic DEMO  can  be  rich  in the
situation where the parties know  each other, but  if  the parties are confined to electronic
DEMO for long periods of time, they  expected their relationships to be  “cold
and  impersonal”  (p. 520). Among strangers who  do  not share a  common  past  and
unfamiliar with  each other’s personalities, there is no sharedcontext. Hence, electronic
communication  can  be  expected to be  impersonal  and  task-focused. Trust in a
virtual-team context might therefore be  more strongly related to  ability  and integrity,
and less to benevolence.
H2: In the early  phases,  a  global  virtual team ’s trust  is predicted more strongly
by team DEMO ’perceptions of the other  members’  integrity and ability than
by the other  members’  benevolence.
In traditional relationships, Mayer et al. [22] predict that, with time, benevolence
should increase. The interactions will  reveal  DEMO  about the benevolence  of
others. Recent  work on computer-mediated  teams suggests that  benevolence  might
predict  team trust after the members  DEMO  interacted  for  a  while.  Walther [38] found
that  geographically dispersed and culturally diverse partners, who  relied totally on
computer-mediated  communication  and  were  never able to meet  each other physi-
cally, communicated  more  affection  and  reported  higher  levels of intimacy, as well as
social and  physical attraction, than  did  colocated  partners. In another study, Walther
[36] did not find computer-mediated  communication  groups be  any  more  task-ori-
ented  than  face-to-face  teams. DEMO basis ofhis studies, Walther [34,35,36,37,38]
developed  a  hyperpersonalization theory for  groups  limited to computer-supported
communication.  The  theory  argues because  individuating  information (cues that
help others understand if DEMO are similar or different, for example, physically) is so
scarce DEMO a  virtual context, members  assume similarity and  tend to reveal factors and
are
to
On
that,
TRUST IN GLOBAL VIRTUAL TEAMS 33
cues about  themselves  that  only  reinforce this similarity. In turn, this overattribution
of similarity may  nurture perceptions of  concern, care, and a belief in the virtue of a
team relationship. Hence,  we  predict:
H3: Over time DEMO a  global virtual team, team members ‘perceptions of others’
benevolence will have a stronger effect on  team trust.
Team Building
To perceive integrity and ability, members  must  make their assessments of others on
the basis of  past history, namely, other’s track  record or recent  performance a  team.
This in  turn suggests that, for integrity to be  rated high, a member  has to have
information available on how consistentlyo thers met their past  commitments  and  how
closely their performance  matched expectations of fairness and  norms of reciprocity
[24]. Likewise, to rate ability high, team  members  would  have to have DEMO
information on the other members’  backgrounds,  work experiences, and current
organizational contexts. To perceive benevolence,  personal  information  must  be
revealed  by others to reinforce beliefs about  shared goals, rewards, and DEMO in
establishing a  good  relationship.  Thus,  team exercises that DEMO on increasing
information  exchange  among  team  members  and  encourage  commitment  and  com-
pletion  of tasks early  in the collaborative process  might  be  expected to have a
positively impact on perceptions of other members’ ability, integrity,  and  benevo-
lence, as well as team trust overall. The effect on team trust is  expected  DEMO the
exercises should  not  only  reveal  information  about the DEMO,  but also help create
a  team identity, which is an  important facilitator of trust in a collective context [ 141.
Hence,  we  advance the fourth hypothesis:
H4: The level of participation DEMO  the team-building exercises  will  be  positively
associated with team trust as  well as with other  team  members  ’perceived
integrity, and benevolence.
Figure 1 summarizes the research  model tested via  the four DEMO
Methodology
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN HELD A GLOBAL VIRTUAL collaboration for
masters’  students  over a period  of  eight  weeks  DEMO  the  spring  semester  of 1996. Three
learning  objectives  guided  the  collaborative  process:  to  learn  how  to  collaborate  with
others in a  virtual  setting,  to  obtain  international  exposure  by  working  with  people  from
different  countries,  and to leam  about  the  Internet.  This  section  describes  the  collaboration
participants,  collaboration  activities, data collection,  and  DEMO
Collaboration Participants
Potential participants were recruited through contacts with professors who  DEMO partic-
ipated in previous collaborations [ 131, correspondence  with  academic DEMO,
in
ability,
34
JARVENPAA. KNOLL, AND LEIDNER
/-\
Team  Building
Benevolenc
Trust
Propensity
to  Trust  Others
Figure I. Research Model
word-of-mouth  inquiries,  and advertising via  a  newsgroup servicing information
systems professionals and academicians. All DEMO received  a  common  letter
explaining the conditions for student participation.
DEMO the letter explicitly stated that  one  of  the conditions for  participation
included  having the exercise comprise 20 to 40 percent  of DEMO students' course grade,
the context of  the students' participation  varied.  Most professors folded the exercise
into one of their regularly  DEMO  courses  where it counted  for 20 percent to 75
percent  of their course grade. In a  few cases, however,  professors  asked  some students
to participate in the  project  without  any  connection  to  a specific course. To further
motivate the students' participation, the professors were  provided  with reports on the
number  of DEMO mail  messages their students sent after the first  two  and  four
weeks. Also, a  monetary  reward ($600) was  promised DEMO the best  web site. Finally,
all  team  members  were  asked to rate  each other's contribution to the final project.
DEMO  hundred  and eighty-five masters' students from twenty-eight universities
around the DEMO elected to participate  in the exercise (appendix A lists the universi-
ties).  Of these students, 350 students sent at least one  message to their teammates.  The
teams  had the following  characteristics: (1) Each  member  on  a  team  resided on a
DEMO continent or subcontinent of the world. (2) Each  team  had a mix of students
from  low-  and  high-context cultures.
Tasks
The
a final project (see
were voluntary.
the successful
teams  were  charged  with  completing three
Table I for
The students' course  grade  and  the $600
completion  of the final  project.
the
timing
of
tasks:  two  team-building
the  exercises).  The  team-building
reward  were  based
exercises
exercises
solely
and
on
Table 1. Collaboration
Schedule
TRUST IN GLOBAL  VIRTUAL  TEAMS
March 4
DEMO 24
March 31
April 2
April 29
April 30
Collaboration  began
DEMO  exercise I completed
Team-building  exercise II completed
First questionnaire  administered
DEMO  project  completed
Second  questionnaire  administered
35
The  Team-Building
Exercises
DEMO first two  voluntary tasks encouraged participants to exchange  information  about
DEMO  that  would  be  relevant for assessing  one another’s project-related DEMO
(ability), their motivations  for contributingt o the  team effort (benevolence), and their
work/study habits believed to  be  compatible  with a successful effort (integrity). The
first exercise asked participants to  send a description  of  themselves to their team
members.  The DEMO paragraph  was to include a brief personal description. The  second
paragraph  was to contain professional information-to describe past job experience,
their current focus of  study  and  why  they  chose to study  DEMO subject, what their
aspirations were,  and  any international experience  DEMO  had.  The third paragraph  was
to answer  two  questions:  what  they  wanted to learn  from this project  and  DEMO skills
they  had that would  enable  them to contribute to DEMO project. The final paragraph  was
to describe what  they felt would  be the challenges ofworking in an internationalv irtual
environment  and to DEMO any  concerns  they  had  with  regard to the successful
DEMO of the project.
The purpose  of the second exercise was to DEMO the team  members to assess how
well their team  members  DEMO their commitments  and  completed their work tasks
(integrity) before the final  assignment  commenced.  This exercise required  each  team
member to locate one  web site he or she felt  was  of relevance to business persons.
Each  team  member  was to report the address of the site as well as a  one-paragraph
explanation of what  DEMO the site relevant. Team  members  were  asked to consider
information-related  characteristics  and  features  of  the  page  that  made  DEMO relevantdhe
quality  of  links,  the  accessibility ofthe page,  DEMO  options  included in the  page,  and  so  forth.
DEMO  World  Wide  Web  Project
The third assignment, the final  project,  asked teams to propose a World  Wide  Web
site (or pages)  providing a new service or offering to ISWorld  Net  (ISWorld  Net is an
organization committed to disseminating information to both  IS practitioners and
academicians via the Internet  and  newsgroups).  DEMO  teams  were information
of interest to global  information  technology practitioners working in aglobal business
setting. The students had  four  weeks to DEMO  this  project.  Each  team  member  was
required to submit the same deliverable, representing the collective efforts of the
group, to DEMO or her professor.
the
to present
36
JARVENPAA, KNOLL, AND LElDNER
Technology
Students  communicated solely through electronic means.  The  host  institution estab-
lished a WWW site on  DEMO  Internet (http: //uts.cc.utexas.edu/bgac313/index.html).
The purpose of DEMO central repository of information  was to ensure  that  all students
DEMO access to the same  information  on the assignments, a  schedule for completing the
voluntary  team building exercises and the required  final DEMO, pointers to other
WWW sites containing relevant information, advice for  DEMO collaborators, deci-
sion-making  methods  and software tools, a  list  of  time  zones  based  on  Greenwich
Mean  Times,  DEMO  bulletin  board addressing technical  and  assignment issues, and a
DEMO  paper describing virtual collaborations.
Data  Collection
The list processor  archived DEMO mail  messages  sent to the “team address.”
Students were notified at the start of the exercise that  messages  were  being collected.
Occasionally students used the reply function to respond to messages sent by individ-
DEMO,  thereby  communicating  with  that  individual alone. In prior global virtual-team
collaborations, we learned from student interviews and  from questionnaire responses
DEMO team  members  rarely  sent  individual  messages,  and  when  they did, they sent very
few [ 131. Furthermore,  when  teams  held  chat sessions (and invariably not  everyone
could attend DEMO  of  time  zone constraints), our analysis of the electronic DEMO
archives suggests that attendees summarized  the  meeting  results for others.
DEMO  members  were  sent  an electronic survey to complete  immediately  following
the deadline for the second  trust-building exercise (after the first  month).  The  team
members  were able to complete  and  submit  the  survey electronically. A second  survey
was sent to the team  members the day  following  the deadline for the completed  DEMO
project (after the second  month).
Measurements
The items for each construct are reported in appendix B. The trust-building exercises
were  coded to give a measure  of  the participation in the exercise. A team  was  given
one  point for each  member  that contributed to DEMO exercise. Thus, for a  four-person
team, the maximum  number  DEMO  points  was eight if  each  member contributed to both
exercises. The  total  points  were  added  per  team  and  DEMO  normalized to account for
the differences in team  sizes.
Because trust was the central variable  of concern, we  used  two separate DEMO for
trust that had  been  used  before.  Both  were  used  because  neither  had  been  found
definitive by  previous  research.  The first measure  was  used  by  Pearce al. [28,29]
to measure trustworthiness. The trustworthiness scales were  modified to reflect the
team rather than the organization as the unit  of analysis. The  DEMO  measure  was a
modified  version  of the Schoorman,  Mayer,  and  Davis [30] instrument on trust.
Schoorman et al.’s [30]  DEMO  were also used to assess ability, benevolence,  and
et
TRUST IN GLOBAL VIRTUAL  TEAMS
37
integrity, and propensityt o trust.  The modifications to the Schoorman et al. instrument
involved  adapting the questions that  were  originally  designed for a  dyadic relationship
to fit DEMO context of multi-interdependencies found in  a  team context. Individuals were
asked  about their perceptions of the attributes of the other members (as DEMO to a
single other trustee). We  could  have  asked  each individual to respond to their
perceptions of  each trustee (Le.,  each  team  member),  but this would  have  been
DEMO tedious and  might  have  reduced the response  rate. In addition, trust in  a
collective entity is possible even if one particular DEMO is deemed less capable,
benevolent, or honest  than the others. The  measure  of  propensity to trust was  modified
to take DEMO account the international context.  Because trust has  an object4ne trusts
in someone or somethingit is necessary to provide  an object to the general  propen-
sity to trust.  We felt that the international context might  pose  a  major  challenge to the
teams  because collective trust DEMO suggested to be difficult to establish among culturally
heterogeneous  groups [ DEMO The  modified  measure  captured propensity-to-trust stu-
dents from other countries (i.e.,  foreign students). All  of the above  items  were
measured  on  a five-point scale ranging  from I (to no DEMO) to 5 (to  a great extent).
Analysis and Quantitative DEMO
IN TOTAL, 165 OF THE 350 TEAM  MEMBERS  COMPLETEDTHE FIRST DEMO fora response
rate  of 47 percent.  Two  hundred  and  DEMO  of  the  350  team  members  completed  the
second  survey  for  a  rate of 6 1 percent.  The  response  rates are reasonable  given  that  most
of  the  teams  had  one  or  two  inactive  members-members  who  did  DEMO  send  any  messages
to their  team.  Inactive  team  DEMO  were  not  expelled  from  participation  since we  felt
DEMO  coping  with  such
Of interest was  team trust and  DEMO antecedentsa t a  team  level of analysis. As such,
for each  team, was  necessary to collapse the responses  of the DEMO team  members
into a single team score. This  was  accomplished  by  averaging the responses  of the
individual members on  each  DEMO  Before so doing,  teams  with  responses  from  fewer
DEMO  two  members  were eliminated from the data set  because  DEMO single respondent  was
not  a  good representation of  the team.
In general, the factor analyses supported the proposed scales with  some DEMO
For  example,  one  of the items of the benevolence scale, “The other team  members
were  very  concerned  about the ability of the team to get along,”  was  not retained. The
DEMO comprising  each of the constructs are shown,  with their factor DEMO, in Table
2. The reliability measures  are  also  shown. All variables exceeded 0.8 on the reliabil-
ity score except the trust construct. DEMO trust and trustworthiness were  highly
correlated at time  period (p DEMO 0.0 19) and  time  period  2 (p = 0.003), we  dropped trust
from further analysis and  used the measure  DEMO trustworthinesst o represent trust.
Descriptive Statistics
The descriptive statistics on a  DEMO  level are shown in Table 3. The  first section of
the table shows the responses  on the first survey  administered  upon  DEMO of the
lack of  commitment  was  a of  the  DEMO  process.
I
part
it
38
JARVENPAA, KNOLL, AND LEIDNER
Table 2.
Variable
Factor Analysis  and Reliability
Alpha
Items
Loading
Trust
Trustworthiness
Ability
Integrity
Benevolence
0.66 If I DEMO  my  way, I would  not  let  other  members
DEMO  any  influence  over  important  issues
(-) I really  wish I had  a  good  way  to  oversee
the work  of the  other  members
I would  have  been  comfortable  giving  the  other
members  complete  responsibility  for
completion of this  project
0.92 Overall, the people in my group  were  very
DEMO
We  were usually  considerate of one  another’s
feelings on this  team
The  people in my group  were  friendly
I could  DEMO  on  those  with  whom I worked in my
group
Overall, the people in my group  were  very
trustworthy
(-)There  was a  noticable  lack of confidence
among  my team  members
DEMO The  other  team  members  had  much  knowledge
about  DEMO  work  that  needed  to  be  done
The  other  team  members  seemed to be
successful  in  the  activities  DEMO  undertook
I felt  very  confident  about  the  other  DEMO
members’ skills
The  other  team  members  had  specialized
capabilities  that  increased  our  performance
The  other  team  members  were  well  qualified
The  other  team  members  were  very  DEMO of
performing  their  tasks
0.92 The  other  team  members  displayed a solid
work  ethic
The  other  team  members  tried  hard  to be fair in
dealing  with  one  another
I liked  the work  values  of the  members on my
team
DEMO  other  team  members  were  strongly
committed to the  project
(-)The  other  team  members did not  behave in
a  consistent manner
0.85 The  outcomes of  this project  were  very
important to the  other  team  members
The  other  team  DEMO not  knowingly do
anything  to  disrupt  the  project
The  other  team  members  were  concerned
about  what  was  important  to the team
The  other  team  members everything  within
their  capacity help  our  team  perform
0.78
0.64
0.72
0.81
0.76
DEMO
0.82
0.82
0.71
0.72
0.78
0.84
0.70
0.84
0.76
0.90
0.77
0.84
0.86
0.83
0.77
0.81
0.87
0.84
to
did
did
Table 2.
Propensity  to
Continued
0.86
Most  foreign  students  tell  the  truth  about  the
TRUST IN GLOBAL VIRTUAL TEAMS
Most  DEMO  students  answer  personal
questions  honestly
Most  foreign  students are very  competent  in
terms of  their  studies
Most  foreign  DEMO are honest  in  describing
their  experiences  and  abilities
0.70
DEMO
0.68
0.84
39
trust-building exercises. The  second  section of the table shows the responses to the
second  survey  administered  upon  completion  of  the final project.  The third section
shows  the descriptive statistics for the teams  having at least two  respondents on both
of DEMO surveys. Table 4 shows  the correlations among the variables. To  compute the
correlations, the data set was  composed  of  those  teams  that  had  two or more  respon-
dents on both the DEMO and the second  surveys.  This  reduced  our  sample size DEMO
twenty-eight teams. Overall, trust and antecedents of  trust  increased  over  time.  Of
seventy-fivet eams, one  team  was  combined  with  another  team after the trust-building
exercises because the team  had  DEMO  one active member. All other teams  had at least
two participating members.  Only  one  of the remaining seventy-four teams  did  not
submit the final assignment.
Hypothesis Testing
Hypothesis 1 predicted that, within  DEMO  global  virtual  team,  team trust is  a function of
members’ ratings of the other team  members’  perceived ability, integrity, DEMO  benev-
olence, as well as of the members’  own  propensity to trust students from other
countries. Hypothesis 2 predicted that early in DEMO  team’s  formation the team’s  trust
would  be predicted more strongly by perceptions of  the  other  team  members’ integrity
and ability DEMO  by others’ benevolence.  Hypothesis 3 predicted that others’ perceived
benevolence  DEMO  have a greater effect on trust  over time.
A MANOVA was  run to test these hypotheses, followed by  an ANOVA. The
MANOVA used trust at time  period I and  time  period 2 as the dependent variables
and the antecedents of trust (ability, integrity, benevolence,  and propensity to trust) as
the independent variables (F( 16, 28) = 12.28, p > 0.000). This first hypothesis  DEMO
partially supported. Ability (b = 0.190, p > 0.043), integrity (b = 0.533, p > O.OOO),
and  propensity to DEMO (b = 0.198, p > 0.033) at time  period I were  significant  predictors
of  trust  taken  directly  after  the  team  building  exercises (afterthe first  month).  Benevolence
was  not  significant  at  time  period 1. At  the  end DEMO project  (after two months),  integrity
(b = 0.443,~ > 0.004), benevolence (b = 0.333,~ > 0.004), and  propensity to trust  students
from  other counties (b = 0.152, p > 0.044) were  significant  predictors  of  trust  at  time
period 2, but  ability  was  not  (see  Table 5). Hence,  hypothesis 2, which  emphasized  the
salience  DEMO  integrity  after  the  first  month,  was  supported, DEMO was  hypothesis 3, which
predicted  that  the  relative  effect OF benevolence on trust would increase with time.
40
JARVENPAA, KNOLL, AND LEIDNER
Table 3.
Descriptive Statistics
Teams  with  at  least
two respondents
on the first survey
Abilityl
Integrity1
Benevolence1
DEMO  to trustl
Trust-building score
3.70
3.70
3.70
3.82
1.69
0.41
0.50
DEMO
0.38
0.32
2.67
2.40
2.33
3.00
0.80
Teams  with  at  DEMO  two  respondents  on  the  second  survey
Trust2 4.06 0.52 2.20
Ability2 3.77 0.57 1.75
Integrity2 3.72 0.71 1.60
Benevolence2 3.70 0.65 DEMO 4.80
Propensity  to  trust2 4.00 0.43 3.00
Teams  with  at  least  two  respondents  on  both  surveys
Trustl
Abilityl
Integrity1
DEMO
Propensity  to trustl
Trust-building score
Trust2
Ability2
Integrity2
Benevolence2
Propensity  to  trust2
3.81
3.81
3.76
3.85
1.80
4.04
3.75
3.65
3.66
3.91
0.32
0.43
0.45
0.39
0.25
0.40
0.39
0.65
0.49
0.36
2.67
2.80
2.88
DEMO
1 .oo
3.00
2.50
1.80
2.25
3.00
4.35
4.60
4.50
4.47
2.00
4.60
4.42
4.53
4.42
4.53
N
60
28
28
28
28
28
DEMO
28
28
28
28
Hypothesis 4 predicted  that  the  level  of  participation  in  the  team-building  exercises
would  be  positively  associated  with  ratings  of  other  team  members’  ability,  integrity,  and
benevolence, as well as overall  team  trust.  The  team-building  exercises  were  designed  to
encourage  participants  to  share  information  concerning  their  abilities  that  would be of
value to the  team  (ability),  their  motivation  for  participating in the  proiect  (benevolence),
and  their  worWstudy  habits  (integrity).  Correlations  were  used to test  this  hypothesis.
Hypothesis 4 was  only  partially  supported.  The  exercise  DEMO  significantly  correlate  with
the  antecedents  of  trust:  ability (r = 0.377,~ > 0.024), integrity (r = 0.300,DEMO > 0.061), and
benevolence (r = 0.424,~ > 0.0 DEMO) at  time  period 1. Surprisingly,  though,  the  trust-build-
ing  exercise  did  not  positively  and  significantly  correlate  DEMO  the  measure  of trust at  time
period 1 (r DEMO 0.22 IO, p > 0.109) or with  the  level of  trust  measured  at  time  period 2 (r =
0.2335, p > 0.095). Hence,  it  seems  that  the  DEMO  did  increase  the  team  members’
knowledge  of  each  other,  but  the  exercise  did  not  directly  affect  trust.  Hence, any effect
that  the  exercises  had
on trust  appeared
to occur  indirectly  through
the antecedents.
Table 4.
At time  period  1
Correlations  (Pearson Coefficients and  Their Significance  Levels)
At time  period
1
Trust1
Abilityl
Integrity1
DEMO
to trustl
Trust2  Ability2
0.017
Abilityl
Integrity1
Benevolence1
Propensity  to
trustl
At time  period  2
Trust2
Ability2
Integrity2
Benevolence2
Propensity  to  DEMO
0.000
0.000
0.701  0.365
0.000
0.619
0.000
0.028
0.479
0.005
0.61
DEMO
-0.065
0.372
0.544
0.001
0.442
0.009
0.41 0
0.01 5
0
0.380
0.023
0.142
0.236
0.358
0.031
0.208
0.144
0.130
0.254
0.744  0.885
0.000  0.000
At time  period
Integrity2
0.506
0.003
-0.1 11
0.288
0.482
DEMO
0.342
0.037
0.139
0.240
0.791  0.728
0.000  0.000
2
lence2
0.556
0.001
-0.064
0.374
0.597
0.000
0.467
0.006
0.140
0.239
0.801
0.000
0.905
DEMO
Trust-build-
to trust2 ing score
0.485
0.004
-0.020
0.459
0.390
0.020
0.522
0.002
0.537
0.002
0.248
0.101
0.377
0.024
0.300
0.061
0.424
0.01  2
0.21 3
0.138
0.627
0.000
0.389
0.020
0.470
0.006
0.337
0.040
-0.033
DEMO
-0.049
0.403
-0.052
0.397
0.061
0.379
-0.089
0.327
P
42
JARVENPAA, KNOLL, AND LEIDNER
Table 5.
ANOVAs for Hypothesis  Testing
Dependent  variable:  Trust  at
Independent  variables:  Ability,  Integrity,  Benevolence,
Regression
coefficient
DF
F
D>
time I
Propensity DEMO trust (at  time I)
t
D>
Ability
Integrity
Benevolence
Propensity  to trust
0
0.533
0.149
0.198  2.206
4.179
1.192
0.000
DEMO
0.033
Dependent  variable:  Trust time 2
Independent  variables:  Ability,  Integrity,  Benevolence,  Propensity to trust (at time 2)
Ability
Integrity
Benevolence
Propensity  to trust
0
0.443  2.972
0.333
0.1 DEMO  2.066  0.044
3.029
0.004
0.004
at
In summary, the quantitativer DEMO suggest that the traditional antecedents of trust
from the dyadic relationship literature were  associated  with  team trust in a global
virtual-team context. It appears to take time  for  benevolence to affect trust.  Ability
seems to be  a significant predictor at the outset, but  not after two  months  followed by
a  major task accomplishment.  Mayer et DEMO [22], in discussing trust  in  dyadic face-to-
face relationships, predicted  that  integrity  would  be  most salient early  in the DEMO
ship and that benevolence  would  increase as the relationship among the parties
developed.  Mayer  et  al.
effects of ability on trust. Hence,  our results are consistent with the predictions of
Mayer et al. DEMO with  the  additional caveat that the effect of ability on trust also seems
to change  with time. As the relationship forms  among DEMO members, the effect of ability
decreases. The  team-building exercises had apositive effect on the antecedents oftrust
related to perceptions ofthe other  team  DEMO  The exercises did not  appear to have
any  direct effect DEMO trust.
[22] made  no
specific predictions
with  regard
to the temporal
Qualitative  Analysis
of High-  and  Low-Trust
Teams
Although the above results are interesting, they  revealed little about the behaviors  and
strategies that distinguished high-trust  teams  from  low-trust  teams. To explore this
question DEMO  behaviors  and trust, an analysis was  conducted  of the DEMO
transcripts for the three teams  with the highest final  trust score and the three teams
with the lowest final trust score. The transcripts DEMO  each  team  were  treated as a case.
The data analysis followed guidelines proposed  by  Eisenhardt [5]. The  goal  was to
TRUST IN GLOBAL, VIRTUAL, TEAMS
43
iden@  similarities  and  differences
across
the six cases. Table 6
resided. A summary of  the
six cases follows. (All
member  names
are
reports
members,  the  total  number  of  messages,  and  the  countries  in  which  the team
disguised.)
on the  number  of
members
Team A: High Trust
Team A was  composed  of five members, all DEMO  whom  made  contributions to the project
and  three  of  whom  carried  the  majority  of  the  load. This team  exhibited a high level
of optimism  and  excitement, orientation,  rotating  leadership,  good  time  manage-
ment, a clear  sense  DEMO  task  goals,  and  most  of  all  high  DEMO  of  individual
and accountability, The  team  was  mindful  DEMO  the  need  to  communicate frequently and,
even  during  their  weekend  trips,  provided the team  members  with  alternative  ways to
communicate  with  them.  Even  though  three  of  the  five  members  did  most  of the work,
DEMO members  continued  to  address  the  whole  team.  The  team  members  were cognizant
of maintaining  “team  spirit,”  as  they  themselves  referred  to  it.
From the start, all DEMO  expressed  excitement  about the forthcoming  collabora-
tion (“Looking  forward  very  much  to  working  with  you all”; “It is exciting to work  in
a team  with so wide a I DEMO  we  can  make a good  assignment”)  and,
rather than waiting  for  others  to  ask for their  personal  DEMO,  volunteered it with
their fmt message. This optimism  prevailed  throughout  the  project.  The  team  revealed
many instances  of  positive  reinforcement  such “great  job!”  and  members  would
send  messages  congratulating a member on his or  her  excellent  work.  The positive
individual and  team  references  increased the  project  went on and  escalated at the
end with  vast  amounts  of  enthusiasm at the  effectiveness  and  commitment  of the team
members. In DEMO,  many  comments  were  made  comparing  their  team to other
teams,  invariably  referring  to  the  problems  that  DEMO  had  heard their colleagues  speak
about,  whereas  they  DEMO  themselves  on an extraordmry team.  The final messages
conveyed a DEMO  of  accomplishment  and  warm feelings toward  team  mates (DEMO shall
be in touch soon, to congratulate  us  all winning!!”;  “It’s  been  great fun as well as
rewarding,  keep  DEMO  touch”).  This  team  seemed to have  trust  from  the start and
maintained  it  through  an  upbeat  tone  in  communication.
The  team  was  task-oriented  and rarely engaged in social  comments  of any kind,
except  for  twice alluding DEMO European football scores. The  team  had a clear  sense
of DEMO goals and  was very aware of time constraints, reminding each other of
forthpoming  deadlines. This team  had  their  eye  constantly on the clock  even  in the
beginning  weeks.  For  example,  early  during  the  project  members  stated,  “We  need DEMO
keep  meeting the deadlines or the project will  slip,” “We don’t have a large  amount
of  time,”  and  “there DEMO this  deadline.”  Compared  with  other  teams,  this  team’s
communication  was  relatively  free  of  excuses  for  not contributing to the team.
Initially  one member attributed  lack  of participation to access problems  caused  by
a strike at his  university;  another  member  attributed  lack  of  contact to a flu, and DEMO third
to a recent  move to a new  apartment.  However,  the third quickly noted, “Do you  know
what  the devil‘s DEMO died of? Bad excuses. So therefore I will stop apologizine
and DEMO working.”  From  then on, there  were  few  excuses  DEMO  why  members  had not
task
background  and
initiative
as
as
on
44
JARVENPAA, KNOLL, AND LEIDNER
Table 6.
Communication  Events
of the  Six
Teams
Team
No. of
members*who  dropped
out
No. of
members
DEMO no. of Messages  per
messages member**  represented  members***
A
5
DEMO
114
22.8
B
5
1
123
C
4
1
123
30.75
D
E
F
4
4
4
0
0
0
49 12.25
34
69
DEMO
17.25
Countries
Philippines
Austria
Denmark
Finland
USA
Ireland
USA
South  Africa
DEMO
Brazil
Ireland
Canada
AustriaDenmark
England
Australia
The
Netherlands
Austria
Finland
France
Ireland
USA
Denmark
Finland
Austria
USA
Denmark
No. of less
active
0
0
DEMO
2
1
2
* Does not  include  members  that dropped DEMO of the  project.
** Does not  include  messages from members  that  later dropped out of the  project.
*** Member considered  less  active  when  other  members  ask  each  other  what  happened  to  the
member.
contributed. Rather,
ing  constraints.
The  DEMO  that  most  marked  team
explicit  roles
a great deal DEMO initiative  with  regard  to  managing the group  process and
DEMO work.  Moreover,
and
the  members  tended  to
each
inform
other
in advance
of
forthcom-
engaged
A is  that the members  DEMO  for
in independent  work  activities. is,  each  individual  DEMO
the  major
in their  abilities  and
the members  exhibited  DEMO
in
That
TRUST IN GLOBAL
VIRTUAL TEAMS
45
their own independent tasks and did DEMO wait for the approval of the group before
embarking on their individual tasks. In several cases the strong individual initiative
led  to redundancy, DEMO two members  having  worked  on essentially the same thing
unaware DEMO  someone else was working on it simultaneously: “Here is my  DEMO
masterpiece. . . . Again, I made  this  without  being  aware that Jim  already made an
abstract.  But it’s okay . . . at least, now  we’re all in full gear! All DEMO best  to our group.”
Often a third  member  would collate DEMO work of the two members  who  had been
working independently and come up with a final version that merged the best ideas
from DEMO two (e.g.,  “Dear  Virtuals!  Mike and Jim  have  DEMO  that I like and I have
things to add so I DEMO going to do a cut and paste thing and add in  DEMO  own bits”).
In addition to independence of work, this team  was  characterized by rotating
leadership in the sense that individuals acted DEMO leaders  when  they  saw the need. All
five members  made process suggestions and content  contributions. Never did one
person nag the other team members to give feedback, to complete their work, or to
DEMO for tasks. Indeed, this team  began  with  Jim  immediately DEMO,
“unless you prefer to  have a vote,” to coordinate DEMO team-building exercises. Later,
a member, Steven,  suggested that the DEMO have  one  member as leader each week,  but
that the leader rotate. He proposed a five-weeklfive-leader  chart. The chart proved
needless as leadership responsibilities rotated smoothly as  the need arose. At one
point, DEMO member took the lead in preparing the final paper to be turned in, but a
different member sent a message to the team to  encourage everyone to review the
document  quickly and provide feedback so DEMO the first team  member could finalize
the document for submission.
The DEMO also had internalized a clear mutual goal (“a winning  proposal”)  and  kept
reminding  each  other that the goal was  within DEMO reach  (“we  can do this together.
Let’s not  give up the fight now! GO-GO-GO Team  xx!!!”).  This seemed to have DEMO
contagious  motivational effect on members.  At  one  point a potential problem appeared
when Jim announced on April 19 that he  would be unavailable until April 28 because
he was tired and taking a trip. DEMO would  mean that he  would be absent during the
majority of the project time. The problem  was  ignored by the other members DEMO
continued working on the content of a draft  proposal.  Two days later, he informed the
team that, having  reread the contributions to date, he decided to postpone his trip. Jim
then  ended up DEMO perhaps more than  any other single team member as he
completed DEMO proposal draft, the html code for their web page, and the final paper.
Finally, team A had a serious focus on substantive comments: Rarely did members
respond “looks good,” “ok,” “fine with me,” when  reviewing another member’s work.
Their feedback was specific, in-depth, and thoughtful, indicating a careful reading of
each submission and a concern to contribute to the improvement  of the material. There
were in fact very  few questions submitted among the 1 13 communication events-the
members  DEMO,  submitted work, and responded to the work submitted by others.
DEMO members did not ask “shall I do this”  but  merely acted and then asked for
feedback. This is in marked contrast to some DEMO the low-trust  teams where individuals
would  ask  what  needed  DEMO be done, give very  minor feedback, and always state what
DEMO  to  be  done  but not actually do it themselves. Team  A,  in fact, wasted  very little
46
JARVENPAA,  KNOLL,
AND LEIDNER
time actually deciding  what to do; on the contrary, individual
shared their results for improvement.
members DEMO
and  then
Team B: High Trust
Team B was  above DEMO characterized by frequent communication  with  a positive tone,
by  DEMO  very explicit division of labor, by acute attention to time  DEMO,  and  by
proactive action. From the start, the team  DEMO  sought  to establish clear goals for
the project and also to minimize  redundant efforts. Compared  with  team  A,  this  group
exchanged  more  messages  on  “how,”  not just “what.”  DEMO is, the  members did not
just divide work  and  work independently, but rather divided the work  and  gave  each
other DEMO comments on how to accomplish the work.  Like  team  A,  team B
communicated their excitement  and  optimism in their first messages (“I am  very
excited about  working on the project with all of you. . . ”; “I am really looking  forward
to  work  with  you . . . the  assignments do look  DEMO interesting”). Also  like  team  A,
team B engaged  in  very little socializationo utside ofthe initial team-building exercises
although short pleasantries were  exchanged (e.g., “Happy Easter”).
Team B engaged  in  a  continuous  stream of communication.  This  team sent several
messages  each day. Indeed, one  member  wondered  why the other members  wanted to
have chat sessions when e-mail was  working so well. The  team did, nevertheless,
engage  in several chat sessions. In most cases not all members  were able to connect.
In order not to exclude these members, detailed minutes  were  kept  and  e-mailed to the
nonchatting  members.
As with  team  A, the leadership role DEMO team B was neither fixed nor constant.
Although  the  team  DEMO appointment of a  team leader and other roles given
their past  group  work experience, each  member  was  a leader of his or her portion of
the work,  with  process leadership shared  DEMO all members.  One  member  took a
leadershipr ole in  terms of setting a schedule  and defining procedures  (such as agreeing
to check  mail at least once  a day); however, the other members revised her suggestions
until the entire group agreed.
This  team  DEMO  conscious  of  time  and  managed  it  by repeatedly DEMO milestones
and revising them accordingly. A  team  member  wanted  to  prepare explicitly for
unexpected  emergencies  by including “buffer time”  in  the schedule. The  team also
deliberately tried to accomplish parallel although  DEMO interdependent activities
(e.g., design of the layout of the page  DEMO the content of  the  page) to save time.
This  team  was highly proactive: At the outset, the  team  had  DEMO that members
should  push  forward  without  waiting for approval  DEMO others, although  redundancies
should  be  minimized.  The  team also discussed  how  each  should notify others of
upcoming constraints. This  DEMO established early  on  an expectation of participation.
This threatened the functioning of the team  when  a  new  member,  Tom,  DEMO  added
after the team-building exercises. After an initial flurry of  messages, this new  member
was silent for nine days. An active team  member wrote, “Where  is  Tom?’ On the
following day, DEMO  team  member wrote: “Some  of us may  have trouble DEMO
time, even if only  an  hour or so, on a daily basis till project  completion.  If we have
the
TRUST IN GLOBAL VIRTUAL TEAMS
47
competing demands  on our time, DEMO should communicate our constraints and make
efforts to contribute in a meaningful matter at the same time.” Shortly after this
message, Joe sent a message  about apossible chat session specifically including Tom’s
name and asking Tom  what he thought. Then, several days later Tom responded, “I
am not missing. I am still chasing all your work. . . . DEMO can  thought [sic] that I am
an investigator, not your teammate.” Four days later, Anna remarked in the
message, “We don’t know DEMO become of Tom.” Tom responded that  the
group’s activities were beyond  his  ability.  Seven  days  later,  Anna  again  noted,DEMO
“Does  anyone  know  whether Tom has  dropped  out  or  is he still  part  of  this
team?”  Joe  DEMO, “I think  he  has dropped out: no participation in ‘chat’
session, no contribution, no news, no ideas . . . .” Then Anna sent a message to the
whole team  asking Tom to  withdraw. Tom responded, “No problem.” Although the
whole situation could  have  resulted  in  some significant group disagreement, because
of the initiative DEMO by one of the members  to remove him  from the team, the group
norms of acceptable participation were reinforced.
In team B, DEMO  team  work was associated with  rapid  and  thorough response
DEMO the ideas of others in the group, whether they were procedural DEMO content-based,
and whether they  were  in  complete agreement or DEMO stated disagreement. The
members were very cognizant  of letting others know  when  they  would, and when  they
would not, be available. Indeed, the team grew so accustomed  to  rapid feedback that
at one point a member seemed startled that no one had  submitted comments to her
abstract-when she had sent the abstract  less  than  twenty-four  hours  before! Rarely
did the members  have  to ask for DEMO and  even  more  rarely did members only
cursorily peruse their DEMO work; rather, their feedback gave evidence of
thorough and thoughtful  DEMO  of their teammates’ work. The members developed
close affinity with  each other, and the final messages conveyed a strong expectation
of future interactions.
Team C: High Trust
Perhaps the most  unique aspect of team DEMO was that this team  went through a
metamorphosis or  distinct transition halfway through the main task assignment.
Before the metamorphosis, the team was very unlike team A and B,  but after the
transition, the team exhibited many of the characteristics of  team A and B. The early
messages from the members  of  team C were lukewarm  at  best  and  charged  with social
content and anxiety (“Am I alone here?’). The members kept  begging for feedback
and rarely  received  more  than  “GREAT” or a one-line  response. The team was
preoccupied with  procedures  about  how members should label their messages, how
the team should  make decisions, how  to behave in DEMO chat session,  who should do what,
how  much the DEMO  weighed  toward a member’s grade,  and so on. The team had
difficulty obtaining  content  from anyone-all the members seemed reluctant to
DEMO  forward  without approval from the others.  One  member constantly reminded
the team of all of  his  work on the project, as if to  imply  that  they were not working
hard enough.  DEMO  members disappeared for days without  prior notice, leading the
48
JARVEN’AA, KNOLL, AND
LEIDNER
team to invent  the  notion  of AWAL (“Absence  Without  Authorized  Leave”).  The
progress  DEMO  slow  and  largely  accomplished as a result  of  external crises (e.g., a
member  had to report on the team’s  DEMO  in an organized class at his university).
Midway  through the project,  Kathy,  after a two-day  delay,  reviewed  the  work  that
had  been  done  and  asked  why  her  comments  were “so bluntly”  included  in  the  page
without  discussion.  She  found  this  “a  bit  frustrating”  and  DEMO  “sad” that her  contribu-
tion  was  not as much as the  others. This seriously  outraged  another  member,  Jim,  DEMO
felt that he was  doing so much  work  and  what  did  he  get  in  response,  complaints. The
incident,  however,  was  handled  very  promptly.  Before  even  receiving  any  responses
and  only six minutes  after  her  complaint,  Kathy  sent  two  messages  stating  that  the
team  was  nevertheless  very  good  and  she  was  very  pleased.  Evidently,  before  reading
Kathy’s  two  follow-up  messages,  Jim  responded  with his emotionally  charged  mes-
sage,  but he also immediately  sent  two  follow-up  messages  apologizing fmt 25
minutes  DEMO  and  the  second
response. Within hours  the  third  active  member,  Jeff,  wrote  that  disagreements  were
normal  and  that  they  were still a great  team  and  should  continue  with  the  work.  The
incident,  which  easily  DEMO  have  permanently  disrupted this team,  instead  helped to
focus  them  and  encouraged  them to give  feedback on each  DEMO  ideas.
After the incident,  the  members  organized  themselves,  gave  point-by-point  feedback
to  each  others’  work,  and greater  confidence  in  their own portion  of the work-
indicated  by  less  direct  request for feedback.  They  also  gave  more  positive  feedback
and  thanks to each  other for the work  they  were  doing,  as  well as making  remarks
about  how  well the team  worked  together.  The  members  themselves  noticed  the
change  in the team. At  one  point  Kathy  stated  that  she  liked the “new  group
atmosphere”; the DEMO  readily  agreed.
The  team  proactively  excluded  inactive  team  members.  One  member,  who  was
receiving no course  credit DEMO the  project,  dropped  off  the  team  after a DEMO  that
he was  not  contributing.  Another  member,  Alex,  made no comment for a long  period
and the other members  informed the coordinator  that he should be dropped  from  the
team.  However,  he  then  returned  and  made  some  contributions  that  turned  out to be
of no value-a page of links  he  had  designed  without so much as a sentence  description
of  where  the  links  went  and a set  of  pictures  that  were  irrelevant to the project. This
member  again  disappeared  for a long  period  and  the  members  began DEMO ask  “where is
Alex?’  and  tried to decide  what to do.  One  member  sent  another  message to the
coordinator  that  Alex  should  be  dropped  from  the  team.  Alex  again  reappeared  but
this time  was  not  forgiven. DEMO tried  to  get  into  the  good  graces  of  one  of  the  members,
Jim,  by  addressing  his  message to Jim  and  stating  that,  while  he  DEMO  that  Kathy
would  never  forgive fum, he  would  DEMO  to  rejoin.  Jim  did  not  respond.  He  then sent a
second  message to Jim  saying  that  all  the  messages  with  documents  from  Jeff  were
unreadable,  which  he  knows  “may  be on purpose,”  but  he  DEMO still like to read  them.
Again,  Jim  did  not  respond.  Alex  sent a third  message  to Jim asking for DEMO html  code;
again,  there  was no response.  The  team  took  active  steps to redefine the team.  From
this DEMO on, the team  acted  as if  it  were  composed  of  three  individuals.
The  team  established  clear  roles  DEMO  divided  work.  Kathy  searched  for  the informa-
(the
DEMO minutes later)--before he,  too,  had  heard  anyone’s
felt
TRUST IN GLOBAL
VIRTUAL TEAMS
49
tion that would  be  contained  in  the  homepage,  Jeff  wrote  the  paper  that  was to be
turned in and  wrote definitions to be included  DEMO  the  homepage,  and  Jim  did the page
layout  DEMO  coding for the  homepage.  Jim  was the leader  in  terms of work; he
consistently  gave  direction the  other two DEMO on what  needed to be done.  At
one  point,  DEMO  sent message  from  Bill  Gates  that  congratulated the team on their
web  pages. This message  heightened the team’s  excitement  DEMO  had  continued
motivational  value  even  after  Jim  admitted  sending  the  fake  message. One of the other
members  took DEMO lead  in  keeping an eye on the  deadlines. This team DEMO
made promises  of  dates  when  they  would do certain  things  and  consistently  stuck to
their promised  dates.  They also made a point  of  notifying  the  members  of dates when
they would be unavailable  to  check  their  mail.  Nine  DEMO  contained  information
concerning  when  they  would  not  be  available.
In summary, team C was  able to make a transition DEMO a rather  passive  team to one
of the most active teams  in  the  face  of  disaster. In the  latter  half  of  the  main project,
the team  exhibited  characteristics  DEMO to teams A and B. Like  teams A and B, the
members  expected  to  have future interactions,  either  virtual or DEMO,  reflecting
the closeness  that  members  had  developed  with  one  another.
a fake
to
Team D: Low Trust
Team D
DEMO project,  and  very
see if others
ing
received, the other  members  merely  replied
duced  themselves  nor  greeted
sarcastic reply,  one  member  wrote  “reply  reply  reply  reply  reply”  in  response
another  member’s  request for a
may  not  have  been  intended as
as well as the fact  that it  DEMO the fvst
not be expected  to create positive  feelings  among  the  recipients.
The first several  messages  indicated a lack  of  understanding  of the project and the
lack  of  task  goals. DEMO an  early  message,  one  member  asks  “what heck”  they are
supposed to do.  One  response  was “I also don’t  know  what  to  do.”  Another  was similar.
The same  individual  repeated the question  one  week  later.  Another  individual  re-
sponded  by  giving the URL address  where the instructions  DEMO be located  but  did
not  summarize for the  member  DEMO  the  project  entailed.
The members  of this team  showed  great  reluctance  to  take on individual  responsi-
bility and be DEMO  Rather than volunteer,  members  would  ask  who  would DEMO to
volunteer to do this or that.  Eventually  one  member,  Blake,  emerged as a leader.  There
was  only one instance of positive  feedback  where a member  thanked  another for
providing  leadership.
Indeed,
or absent. For example, on April 23, Blake  had  completed
was  characterized  from  the  beginning  by little
DEMO
were  already  on-line  and
themselves.  However,  even  when  responding  to  members  that  their  messages  were
got the DEMO  but  neither
the
only  member  who  made  any  DEMO  was  the  leader.  Others  were silent
a draft site DEMO gave the
communication,
feedback.  The  team  began  the  DEMO  by  checking to
ifthe
intro-
as
to
message
to include a greeting or a closing
certainly
a
“ok,
the other  members. In what  could  be  interpreted
reply  if  his  message  was  received.  While the
sinister,  the  failure
message  sent  by  this  individual  would
system  worked  without
few goals for
actually
introduc-
the
50
JARVENPAA, KNOLL, AND
LEIDNJSR
location to the  other  members  and  asked  for  feedback.  There  was  no  feedback  DEMO
by a member who asked, “anyone out there?”  Blake sent the address again, along
with a long description of  the work DEMO had done. The only reply was  “Er . . . nice
DEMO . . . should I know these words . . . ” There would be no further communica-
tion  in team D from this point until the end  of the project. In this message, the
DEMO responded to his own messages-“Hi Blake. No, I have no comment.  Bye,
Blake”-in  what  can  be interpreted as a cynical  DEMO  of  the  lack  of  feedback  from
the other  DEMO  The  leader  completed  the  final  assignment  alone  and  submitted  it
from  “Team D” without  mentioning  inactive  members.  Ironically, three weeks  later a
member sent a desperate  request for the URL-he needed  it  to  receive  course  credit.
There  DEMO  no  response.
Team E: Low Trust
Team E so little  communication  that it appeared  as  if no one  on  the  team
was  willing to contribute,  unlike  team D, where  at  least  one  member  was  willing  to
work.  The first word  to  describe  team E is  blase;  the  second noncommittal.  Each
member in his or her  introduction  stressed  DEMO  pressures. One member  stated  that his
goal for the project  was “to spend  as  little  time as necessary  but still DEMO a decent  grade.”
The  other  members  had no particular  DEMO  The  concern  with  other  commitments  was
evident  throughout. DEMO member  asked  each  member  to  state  how  much  the  project
was  worth  toward  their  grade.  She  appeared  to  want to know  who  should  be  mostly
responsible DEMO the  project  (i.e.,  the  one  for  whom the This
sort of  logic  appeared  to  be  very  destructive  to  the  smooth  functioning  of a team.  The
same  DEMO  later  stated a message  how many projects she  was workiig on. In a
following  message  from  another  member,  he  too  stated the number  of  different
projects he was  working  on  as  though  to  suggest  that  she  deserved  DEMO special leniency
just because  she  had  other  work  to  do.  The  next  message  was  from  the  third
participating  team  member  who  stated  that  he had  not  DEMO  his  mail  recently
because he  had “so much  work”  to  do.
This  team also suffered  from  lack  of  DEMO  One  member  did  volunteer to turn
in the fmt team-building  assignment  and  one  member  volunteered  to  code  the  team’s
project  into  html  form.  However,  the  latter  DEMO  was a mixed  blessing  as the member
refused to do DEMO  other  work,  including  giving  feedback  on  ideas, DEMO from  taking
a final  proposal  and  converting it to  DEMO  form.  The  team  was  very  task-oriented  and
never  engaged in social  comments  of  any  kind.  Only two instances  of  positive
feedback  were given-both when  one  individual  thanked  another  for  turning  in
material.
The team  communication  was  DEMO  low.  At  one  point  there  was  an  eight-day
lapse  in  communication  (April 5-13) at a critical juncture in the  project  where the
teams  needed  to  choose  their  topic  and  define  the  parameters.  On  April  14, DEMO member
gave two seemingly  interesting  possible  topics  but  never  received  any  feedback  on
the  ideas. On April 19 he  asked  again  for  feedback  “even  if  you  don’t  DEMO  strong
feelings.”  Three  days  later  there  was a message-a team  member  volunteered to code
suffered  from
is
project  counted  the  most).
the
in
TRUST IN GLOBAL  VIRTUAL
TEAMS
51
the project into html.  She DEMO, “Can  we  PLEASE  try to respond”  but  did  DEMO  even
mention  a  word  about the previous  member’s ideas. DEMO April  22,  a  member  gave
more ideas, again  DEMO  commenting on the original two ideas presented  by  a
member DEMO April 14 and  repeated on April  19.  The contributor of DEMO original ideas
did provide  feedback on the  new ideas and contributed one  more possible topic. The
third participating member  preferred the latter DEMO and  that  was  the topic chosen.
This  member  agreed DEMO be  responsible for two  of  the sections. He completed the
DEMO by the determined date but his material  lacked  depth.  The  same  problem
occurred  with  the  member responsible for the other DEMO sections. Hence, the final
product  was  a  weak  proposal  prepared  by individuals who  divided the work  and
commented on no one’s portions other than their own.  This  team  did  not  choose
final topic until  April 2Nwo days  before  the  project  was due!
Interestingly, this team  had  one  nonactive  member.  DEMO  member  asked  what  had
happened to this member  but DEMO one  responded.  The  nonactive  member  was ignored,
perhaps  because  even the “active” members  were  barely active.
four
the
Team F: Low Trust
Team F was characterized by  both  lack  DEMO  individual initiative and  an  unwillingness
to give substantial feedback to DEMO work.  Like  team E, team F suffered from
infrequent participation. DEMO individuals were  primarily responsible for the total
output of the project  and  both  of  them  refused to put forth full individual DEMO given
the lack of  commitment  from the other  members.
Although DEMO team  members  expressed their interest and  commitment in early
messages, no member  was  willing to take charge. Each  time  something  was  needed,
a  member  would  ask  who  was  going to do  the activity rather  than volunteering. This
began  with the first exercise in  which  a  member  said  that  DEMO  needed to
coordinate the activity and  asked for a volunteer. No one volunteered. The  member
who  asked the question eventually volunteered himself. DEMO  same  member later asked
three times, “who is writing the DEMO?’  but did not contribute so much as a sentence
or DEMO idea. Only  one individual gave  any ideas for  the  project  itself.  Another individual
gave  feedback on the ideas, essentially stating DEMO  they  were  all  unfeasible  because
oftheir scope or difficulty, but  gave no additional ideas himself.  Another  member said
the ideas were too general  but offered no suggestions on how to focus.
This  team  had participants who  would  give  very  minor contributions-such  as a
URL site to be  included  in page-but would give DEMO description of the site, hence
leaving the work  of  deciding  what to call the link, and  how to describe it  in the paper,
to someone else. That  “someone else” was the member  who stated early on that  he
wanted to be responsible for DEMO  and  page  layout.  As  with the coder  in  DEMO E, this
individual was entirely unwilling to make  any decisions regarding content. Through-
out the project, he  reminded the others that  he  was just coding the information  they
sent-they were  supposed to tell him  what to include and  what  not to include. Each
time  a  URL  address  was sent, he replied, “am I DEMO to include this?’ He neither
reviewed the link  independently  nor  gave  any  comments  concerning its suitability.
the
52
JARVENPAA, KNOLL, AND
LEIDNJ?R
Rather  than  the  messages  full  of  content  found  in  the  high-trust  teams,  the  messages
of this team  were  brief  and  full  of  questions. At  one  point a member  asked  if was
all right  if he sent some  site  addresses  he  found,  instead  of just sending  them  and
describing  them.  The  response was: “alright,  alright,  alright.”  Team F members  DEMO
also unwilling  to do  anythmg  beyond  what  they  already  knew.  The  person  coding the
pages  was  very  experienced  with  page  development  and  hence  insisted  on  doing DEMO
coding  but  would  do  nothing  else.  Toward  the  end,  the  coder  informed  the  other  team
members  DEMO  he  was  going  on  vacation  and had “already  DEMO  his  “share  of the
work.”
At  best,  the  DEMO  of this team,  excluding  the  one  member  who  did  send  some
ideas  and  wrote  sections  of  the  paper,  can be described as inactive.  Only three instances
of  positive fedback occurred, two of  which  were  rather  mixed, DEMO . . . ” The
team  was  unable  to  complete  the  final  assignment.
Discussion
A PATTERN-MATCHINGAPPROACH [5,41] WASUSEDTOINFER behaviors and Strategies
common  to  the  high-trust  teams,  but  less  DEMO  to,  or  nonexistent  in,  the  low-trust
teams.  DEMO 7 summarizes  the  results  on  the  strategies.  Strategies  DEMO  were:
proactive  action,  task  versus  procedural  orientation,  positive  tone,  rotating  leadership,
task  goal  clarity,  role  division,  time  management,  nature  of  feedback,  DEMO  frequent,
sometimes  intense  bursts of interaction.  The  strategies DEMO reinforcing  of  each  other.
Proactive Orientation
The case studies  suggest  that  the  members  in  high-trust  teams  exhibited  individual
DEMO,  volunteered  for  roles,  and  met  their  commitments.  The  high-trust  teams  also
dealt  decisively  with  members  who  were  perceived to be  free-riders. The low-trust
teams  were  opposite  in  these  respects.  The  low-trust  teams  suffered  from  inaction,
characterized  by  the  asking  of  questions  but  rare  delivery  of  any  substantive  work,
and  by  asking for volunteers  but  rarely  volunteering. team  members  also  DEMO
notified the team  in  advance  of  their  absences.
On DEMO  three  high-trust  teams  there  were  instances  of  members stating in advance
that they  would be out  of  town for the  weekend, or for as much  as a week,  and  then
fmding a computer  from  which  to  log  in  and  contribute.  The  exertion  of  extra  effort
reinforced the DEMO  of  perceived  commitment  the  members  had  toward  the  team.
The than ignoring  or
accepting, the problem.  The  teams  took  initiatives  to  inform  the  project  coordinator
of any nonactive  members.  Even  though  the  teams  were  unaware  DEMO  whether  or  not
their  complaints  resulted  in  the  official  withdrawal  of  the  nonactive  member  from the
project,  they  were  more  comfortable as a team  if  they  identified the members  who
were  not  contributing  and  redefined  DEMO  team  around  the  active  members.  By  contrast,
DEMO low-trust  teams  ignoref free-riders.
The
high-trust  teams  dealt  with  free-riders  by  confronting,  rather
the
it
work,  but
TRUST IN GLOBAL VIRTUAL TEAMS
Table 7.
Strategies
between  High-  and  Low-Trust  Teams
~ ~~~~ ~ ~ ~~~~ ~~~ ~~~~ ~~~
Behaviorshtrategies  DEMO  teams  Low-trust  teams
1. Style  of  action
2. Focus  of  dialog
3. Team spirit
4. Leadership
5. Task  goal  clarity
6. Role  division  and
specificity
7. Time  management
8. Pattern of  interaction
9.  Nature of feedback
Proactive
Task  output  driven
Optimistic
DEMO
Team’s responsibility
Emergent  and
interdependent
Explicitlprocess-based
Frequent,  few  gaps
Predictable,  substantive
Reactive
Procedural
Pessimistic
Static
Individual  responsibility
Assigned,  independent
Nonexistence
infrequent,  gaps
Unpredictable,
nonsubstantive
53
Task versus Procedural Orientation
In DEMO teams, the action orientation meant  that  team  members  were  highly
focused on results.  The  communication  almost exclusively rallied  around DEMO assign-
ments.  Rarely did the teams  have  time for social DEMO One of the high-trust teams
discussed topics unrelated to the assignments, DEMO this was  only in the early stages
when the team  had difficulty in making  progress.  Although the communication in the
high-trust teams  was task-oriented, it is important to note  that  it  was DEMO empathetic.
The  team  members discussed each others’ tasks and results in a  very supportive and
amicable fashion, which  in turn reinforced the team’s collective commitment  and  good
will.
Like the high-trust  teams, DEMO low trust teams  engaged  in little social communication.
Yet, unlike DEMO high-trust  teams, the low-trust  teams  rarely  expressed  empathy:  What
little emotion  was  expressed  tended to reflect  uncertainty  about  whether  anyone  was
reading their messages or frustration and  disappointment DEMO no one else was contrib-
uting.
Interestingly, the high-trust  teams  DEMO  not  spend  much  time on group procedures,
except  DEMO  team in  the  early  slow stages. Rather  than  being  concerned that someone
else was  working on precisely the same thing, individuals on the high-trust teams tried
to produce  high-quality  work  and  then share the work  with the team for feedback and
improvement.  The  low-trust  teams spent relatively  more  time on procedures as
DEMO tried to evade responsibility and get others to do the work.
Positive Tone
The  high-trust  team  members  expressed  excitement  and  showered other members  with
compliments  and  encouragement. On several  occasions, the high-trust  teams  ex-
pressed  how fortunate they  were to have  such a well-knctioning team.  Even at the
end, the team  members  made explicit attempts to laud  each other for excellent work.
54
JARVENPAA, KNOLL, AND LEIDNER
Two of the high-trust  teams  DEMO  convinced the start of the third assignment that
they  would  DEMO the winning  team.
The high-trust so gently  that it was  DEMO perceptible
that a disagreement  had  occurred. If a  member  made  a  suggestion  with  which  another
member disagreed, such as DEMO suggestion  of  a  member of team  C that they  DEMO  use
majority  vote to determine the idea  chosen  for  DEMO  final project, the dissenting member
responded  not by directly addressing DEMO point  of  disagreement  but  by offering an
alternative along  DEMO  an  explanation.
The low-trust teams  lacked  positive  tone in DEMO  communications.  Compared  with
the high-trust teams, the low-trust  teams  exhibited little emotion  of  any  kind  in their
messages.  Nor  did  the  team  members express any  interest in winning the $600 award;
rather, the low-trust teams  focused  on  what  they  might lose if they  performed  poorly
rather than on what  they  might  gain  if  they  performed  well.  In DEMO low-trust
teams  were inordinately concerned  with the differences in the course  credit  that  team
members  received for completing the final  project.  The  low-trust  teams  had  few
instances of disagreement,  but  because  they  were  giving so little feedback  on  the  other
members’  work, there was  not  much  opportunity to disagree.
Rotating Leadership
The  high-trust  teams  rotated leadership-the members  each  demonstrated certain
leadership traits during the course  of the project  but the DEMO leader was  neither
chosen  nor consistent throughout. As the perceived  DEMO for a member to press the
others to present ideas arose, DEMO member filled the position. As the need arose for
someone to organize the remaining  work,  a  member filled that position. In terms  of
the output, the same  would  apply.  The  members  DEMO leaders in their particular area
of  skill  and the other members  followed their directions. The  members  who  took on
responsibility for DEMO the html  for  the projects directed  the other teammates  during
the coding period, whereas  the  members  responsible  for writing the draft made
suggestions to the other team  members  concerning  what to do. By contrast, the
low-trust teams  had  no leadership or, DEMO one case, a leader with no followers.
Task Goal Clarity
The DEMO teams discussed the goals of the assignments to a greater extent  DEMO
the low-trust teams. In case of  ambiguity in the assignments, the members in the
high-trust  teams  did  not  hesitate to contact DEMO coordinator with questions rather than
making their own assumptions. Already  during  the  team-building exercises, the
high-trust  teams exhibited knowledge  of the DEMO objectives and  expressed
what their personal goals were  in the context of the overall collaboration and the
assignments. Contrary to the high-trust teams, the  low-trust  teams  undertook little
discussion of task goals. Most  DEMO the communication  concerning  task goals was  in the
context of  a  member  not  knowing  what  they  were  supposed to do. In these instances,
a member  in the low-trust  teams  tended provide  only the URL to the site where the
to
by
teams  handled  disagreements
addition,
TRUST IN GLOBAL VIRTUAL TEAMS
55
assignment  information  resided rather than  summarizing the assignments  him or
herself for the benefit of  others.  Members  of  the  low-trust  teams did not exhibit
knowledge  of the assignments  and  did  not tie their own  personal goals DEMO the
assignments  during  the  team-building exercises beyond statements of “spend DEMO little
time as necessary.”
Role Division and Specificity
Although the role of  an  individual  team  member  tended to emerge after the individual
had  produced  something on his or her  own,  each  DEMO the high-trust  teams exhibited
various roles for the team  members.  DEMO fact that individuals were  not  assigned to
teams  based on DEMO particular specialization or skill  may  have necessitated a flexible
role arrangement  whereby the role  was  decided after an individual took initiative for
a certain task and  produced  a  result  (“You  will  be  our  webmaster”).  Also  in high-trust
teams, the division  of  work  did  not  mean  complete  independence.  Rather,  one  person
would  come up  with the first  iteration  DEMO the work  and others would  provide detailed
feedback. Hence, the DEMO teams associated roles with  independence  followed
by several iterations of  DEMO  and  rework.  The  low-trust  teams  appeared to
associate division of  work  with  complete  independence of work. In summary, the
high-trust teams  appeared to use roles so that  they  were able to reduce  team interde-
pendence to moderate levels. The  low-trust  teams  divided  work so that  they  could
eliminate their interdependence.
Time DEMO
The high-trust teams explicitly discussed the assignment schedules, established
milestones, monitored the milestones, and  kept  a close  eye on time, reminding
other members  of  impending deadlines. Furthermore, the high-trust teams  were
DEMO aware  of time  zone differences and  how to manage the DEMO clock  to reduce
the “downtime”  when  no  one  was  working on the common parts. The low-trust
teams  did not discuss time  management apart from  reminding others of  the  date
when the DEMO  was due. The low-trust teams  only referred to the time  DEMO
differences in the context  of  who  should  submit the completed  assignments. The
low-trust  teams  were also more  likely to ask DEMO coordinator for extra time. In short,
the low-trust teams exhibited neither a sense of  urgency  from  impending deadlines
nor  a notion DEMO  managing time.
Nature of Feedback
In the high-trust teams, members  DEMO  substantial  feedback oriented toward  improving
the content of a  fellow  member’s  work.  The  feedback frequently involved  some
content contributions to add to the work, as well as some organizing and editing
comments. In the  low-trust teams, feedback  was often a  very  minor “ok” or “looks
good to me” statement that  added  very little DEMO to the actual work.  Thus,  even if a
56 JARVENPAA, KNOLL, AND LEIDNER
member specifically requested  feedback on his or her  work,  he or she was likely to
get only  an  acknowledgment  that  the  work  was  perused,  however cursorily.
Frequency  and  Pattern of Interaction
Probably to reduce the uncertainty  of the global context, high-trust  teams  engaged  in
frequent communication,  gave substantive feedback on fellow  members’  work,  and
notified each other of their absences  and  whereabouts. Overall, some  of  the  high-trust
teams  had four times the message  volume  of  a  low-trust  team.  Frequent,  and  some-
times intense, bursts of  interaction  appeared to reinforce  trust  in the high-trust  teams.
Low-trust  teams  repeatedly issued messages  of “Is there anyone  out  there?’
In both  high-  and low-trust teams, individuals were  reluctant DEMO believe  that their
messages  were actually successfullys ent if they  DEMO  not  receive fairly rapid  feedback.
As  a  means of DEMO the stress related to not  knowing  whether  one’s  message  DEMO
received and, if so, whether  it  was read, the DEMO on the high-trust  teams  were
carefid to inform their teammates  DEMO  they  would,  and  when  they  would not, be
available to check their messages.  This  gave the other members a DEMO  of certainty
concerning  when their messages  would  be  viewed  and  answered. By contrast, the
low-trust teams suffered from  lengthy  DEMO lapses in  communication  followed
by  sudden  unexpected  reemergences.
A DEMO of Trust  in  Global  Virtual Teams
Triangulation of  our qualitative results  with  the  recent literature on trust  suggest  that
the three high-trust  teams  might  have exhibited a form  of “swift” DEMO Swift trust [2 I]
was  developed to explain  behaviors  in DEMO temporary  teams. In a temporary
team,  team  members  “have  never  worked together and  do  not  expect to work  again”
[2 1, p. 1681. Members  of  such  teams  do  DEMO  have  the  time to develop  trust in a  gradual
DEMO  cumulative  fashion.  Rather,  the  team  members  act as if trust is present  from the
start.
Whereas trust is typically conceptualized as either an affective or a cognitive
construct, swift trust is a  form  of  depersonalized  action.  According to Meyerson,
Weick,  and  Kramer [23], “There is less emphasis on feeling, commitment,  and
exchange  and  more on action, . . . and  DEMO  absorption in the task” (p. 191); “swift
trust may  DEMO  a  by-product  of  a  highly active, proactive, enthusiastic, generative style
of action” (p. 180). The  “swift trust” enables DEMO to take action, and this action
will  help the team  DEMO  trust  and  deal  with  uncertainty, ambiguity, and  vulnera-
bility  while  working on complex  interdependent  tasks  with strangers in a situation of
high  time pressure.
Besides the action orientation, the DEMO strategies associated with the three high-
trust teams  seem to align  with  the  Meyerson et al. [23] coping  mechanisms  of
temporary  teams  and  hence be  associated  with  swift trust. Meyerson et al. discuss
how there are few  purely  social  exchanges  in  temporary  teams  because  “anything that
subtracts from  task  performance . . . should  be a glaring  threat” (p. 177). We  found
to
TRUST IN GLOBAL VIRTUAL TEAMS
57
the global virtual teams to be  task-oriented.  Meyerson al.  [23] also point to the need
to have  a  moderate level, not  a  high level, of dependence  DEMO  any particular member
to reduce  perceived vulnerability. The strategy of rotating leadership reduced  depen-
dence  on  any particular person. The strategies of clear task goals, role division, and
specificity gave the teams  a  sense  of clear expectation and task systems  and  thereby
provided DEMO illusion of  reduced  vulnerability.  The sense of limited time  and explicit
time  management is related to Meyerson et al.’s [23] comment  DEMO  “temporary  teams
rarely exhibit certain kinds of dysfunctional  group  dynamics”  that  deal  with “jealousy,
misunderstandings,  and hurt feelings” (DEMO  190).  According to Meyerson et al. [23],
“there is simply  not  enough  time for things to go wrong”  (p.  190). Finally, high levels
of interactivity tend to reduce  ambiguity  and  uncertainty  and  should strengthen trust
in  temporary  teams  [23]. In the three high-trust  teams,  members  communicated
frequently and  provided extensive and substantive feedback to each other.
The  high-trust  teams  appeared to exhibit swift trust  from the outset. In particular,
the teams’ early messages  contained traces of initiative and  trustful actions. The
DEMO teams did not exhibit any overt lack  of trust in the DEMO; hence, we  can
only  assume that trust also existed ex ante in these teams. However, this trust decreased
almost  immediately,  DEMO the members  lacked action and initiative. By contrast,
the action DEMO in  the  high-trust  teams  appeared to reinforce  and strengthent DEMO
Hence, action seems to be  an  important  antecedent as well as an  outcome of trust.
Action that went  beyond  the call of  duty strengthenedt rust.
The current case analysis does not provide clear evidence on the relationship
between action and the other antecedents of  trust: integrity, ability, benevolence,  and
propensity to trust. [I] maintain  DEMO trusting behavior  will affect
trust directly. By contrast, Mayer et al. [22] argue  that trusting behavior  will influence
trust indirectly through the DEMO of trust; that is, inactivity might be interpreted
as a lack of goodwill (benevolence), a  lack  of ability to contribute (DEMO), andor a
lack of reliability and  honesty (integrity).
In summary, trusting action  is as much  an  antecedent  of  DEMO as an  outcome of it.
The relationship between action and trust DEMO to be highly recursive in a virtual-
team context. Figure  2  advances  a  model  of  trust  for global virtual teams.
Conclusion
THE PURPOSE OF THE  REPORTED STUDY WAS TO EXPLORE the  antecedents DEMO trust
in global virtual teams.  Although the team-building exercises had a DEMO effect
on the  perceptions of other members’ integrity, ability, and DEMO,  they  did
not  have a direct effect on trust. In the early phases of teamwork,  team trust was
predicted more strongly DEMO  perceptions  of other team  members’ integrity, and  least
strongly DEMO  the  perceptions  of their benevolence. The  salience of other members’
perceived ability on trust decreased  over time.  The members’  own  DEMO to
trust had  a significant, although  unchanging, effect on trust. Perhaps the  most
interesting  finding was that  the qualitative case analysis suggests that  high-trust
et
Boyle  and  Bonacich
58
I
I
Members’  Propensity
to Trust  Others
Fisre 2. A DEMO of Trust in a Global Virtual Team
teams exhibit swift trust [23]. Prior to discussing implications for research  and
practice, we consider some  of  the limitations.
Limitations
Given  that the teams  did  not  have  an  opportunity to meet  in  person  or  use  telephone
or video  conference facilities, one  might  argue  that  DEMO current context was contrived.
Nevertheless, from  a  practical standpoint, our study provides  a  glimpse  of the future
where  compressed  time  windows  and  project  budgets  do  not  allow  people DEMO travel
for overseas  team meetings. The study provides a rare  opportunity to examine  pure
virtual interaction free from  any influences of  face-to-face interaction.
The study’s methodology  can  be criticized in  several  ways. DEMO, the team-building
exercises might  have  been too brief or might  have  been  considered artificial by the
participants. Devising exercises to increase DEMO in teams is a potentially lucrative
project but  was  beyond the scope  of the current study. Second, the tasks might  not
have  been appropriate to all participants no evidence  suggesting
that certain participants DEMO the project  irrelevant to their studies. Third, the case
analyses relied on members’  using the team address rather  than direct their mail DEMO the
individual members’ addresses. Hence, the team analyses might  be  DEMO on limited
information. Our  prior studies [I31 suggest that  teams  DEMO relatively infrequent
individuallyd irected messages  because it is  much easier to use  a  team  address. Fourth,
the measurements of trust  DEMO the antecedents of trust were  modified  from  a scale
JARVENPAA, KNOLL, AND LEIDNER
I
I
Swift
Trust
I
InitiativelActiod
Result  toward DEMO
Task Goal
Other
Members’
Perceived
b- Ability,
Benevolence,
Integrity
4
even  though  we  had
TRUST IN GLOBAL VIRTUAL  TEAMS
59
intended for dyadic, as opposed DEMO team,  relationships. Finally, although professors
whose students were invited to DEMO were  informed that the collaboration should
count for 20 to 40 DEMO  of a student’s course grade, there were  wide discrepancies
in DEMO credit and  hence in participants’ risk level.
The external validity  of  the  results  might  be faulted for  the  use  of students as
participants. One  should  note,  however,  that the DEMO were  in  masters’  programs
and  most of the students had significant work experience. The  theory  of swift trust
assumes  that  DEMO  are  assigned to teams on the  basis of their ability. DEMO the current
study this was  not the case  because  we  did  not  start this study by exploring swift trust.
Many transnational DEMO  have  an  appointed  project leader. The current teams  were
DEMO and,  unless  they  appointed  a leader, a leader emerged, or leadership was
shared, the teams  were “leaderless.” In addition, DEMO  teams  had  only  two active
members,  where other teams  had as many as four or five active members.  Unfortu-
nately, we  were  not able to ascertain  whether or not  all DEMO members  completed the
survey. Hence, there is a potential  bias DEMO the  responses in that some active team
members  may  not  have  completed surveys  and we cannot  determine  the  reasons
for their failure to provide  responses. Finally,t he teams  were limited DEMO electronic mail
and occasional chat sessions: No video  conference or telephone  conference facilities
were available. Hence, the technology  was  of  lower  bandwidth  than  might  be  expected
in situations where  team  members  do  not travel.
Implications for Research
The  research on trust in global virtual teams  is a wide  open field. Future research
DEMO  examine the relationship between trusting behavior  and the other antecedents
of trust. Our earlier study alluded to the  importance of structure and  DEMO in
well-functioning virtual teams [ 131. Future  work  might study how  norms  emerge  and
how  they are enacted. The current study DEMO tentatively that, once the high-trust
teams  agreed on, for  example, the acceptable time lapse between  messages, the
members  adhered to DEMO relatively  well  and  those  who  did  not  were  asked
team.  It  remains  unclear  whether the existence oftrust allowed DEMO norms to emerge
or whether the consensus  of  norms reinforced the trust. We suspect both are true.
Future studies should  also  examine  if virtual teams  go  through the type of transition
between inertia DEMO  revolution  in  the  work  behaviors  and  themes  found  by  Gersick
[8] in face-to-face teams. Such  transition  was  only explicitly evident in  team C, but
our qualitative analysis of three DEMO  and three low-trust  teams  might  not  have  been
in-depth enough.  Future  research  also  needs verify the current findings and  more
rigorously assess swift trust and the means to maintain it. The  initial list of strategies
may or may  not  be  unique to our context. Also, future work  needs to develop  an
understanding  DEMO the relationship between  swift  trust  and  team  behavior  and  should
explore distrust versus trust in a  virtual context. Finally, future research  should  study
whether  dyadic  and  team  trust are DEMO different and require fundamentally
different measures.
Finally, much  work  remains  in terms of the type  of tasks, individuals, team size, DEMO
to
to leave the
the
60 JARVENPAA, KNOLL, AND LEIDNER
the length  of  project duration DEMO are most suited to  virtual collaboration. There  is a
plethora of issues related to global clock  management  and the best  ways to divide and
integrate work in a  team dispersed around the world.  DEMO studies should  assign
individuals to teams on the basis of  skill  or  specialization  and  should  examine the
concept  of roles DEMO  virtual teams.
Implications for  Practice
For practicing global virtual teams, DEMO study suggests a number  of strategies that they
might  deploy to reinforce trust and, in turn, to improve their team  process  DEMO
These strategies include proactive behavior, empathetic  task  communication, positive
tone, rotating team  leadership,  task  goal clarity, role  division,  time  management,  and
frequent interaction with  acknowledged  and  detailed  responses to prior  messages.  The
study also points out the importance  of  having virtual  members those who  have a
high propensity to trust. But,  perhaps  most  important,  virtual  members  should  have
high levels of initiative, results orientation, and  integrity.
Concluding
Note
The current paper  has  explored the emerging  phenomenon  of  global  virtual  teams
where  only virtual, not face-to-face, interaction  is  possible.  The antecedents com-
monly associated with  trust  in  face-to-face  dyadic relationships-trustor’s perceived
ability, benevolence, integrity, and trustee’s propensity to trust-were  found to predict
trust in the virtual-team context. A number  of  behavioral strategies were identified
that  appeared distinguish the highest-trust  teams  from lowest-trust teams. These
strategies suggested the presence  of swift trust. The  DEMO  proposed  a  preliminary
model of trust for global virtual teams.
DEMO the current analysis was on the team level, one  might  DEMO able to infer
implications for individuals. Those individuals who  perform  best  in global virtual
teams are not likely to  be  entirely  DEMO  from individuals who  perform  best alone:
individuals who are DEMO, who  are  willing to take initiative on their own,
DEMO  who are goal-driven. Latham  and  Lock [ 181 found that, in  an internationals etting,
a  team  member skilled in self-management, in  goal setting, self-monitoring, and
self-assessment was critical for  performance.  Snow, Snell, and  Davison [33] found
similar results: In successful transnational teams, team  members  were  committed to
the  team’s  DEMO  and  norms,  could  be  counted on to perform their respective tasks,
and  enjoyed  working in a  team.  When  such  capable individuals commit to a  team,  they
are able DEMO to manage the uncertainties  and  unknowns  of  a global virtual-
team  environment.
to
the
Acknowledgmenfs:
Miller at  Baylor  University  DEMO
The  authors
thank Ori Spector at the University ofTexas
their able  assistance  on  this  project.
at Austin and  Mike
as
TRUST IN GLOBAL VIRTUAL TEAMS
61
REFERENCES
~ ~~~~
1. Boyle, R., and Bonacich, P. The development of  trust and mistrust in mixed-motive
games. Sociometry, 33  (1970), 12W 39.
2. Cummings, L.L., and Bromiley, P. The organizational trust inventory (OTI): develop-
ment  and validation. In R.M. Kramer and T.R. Tyler (eds.), Trust in Organizations:  Frontiers
of Theory  and  Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: DEMO Publications, 1996, pp. 302-330.
3. Deutch, M. Trust and suspicion. DEMO of Conflict  Resolution, 2 (1 958), 26S279.
4. Earley, PC. Trust, perceived importance of praise and criticism, and  work performance:
an examination of feedback in the United States and England. Journal DEMO Management, 12,4
( 1986), 457473.
5. Eisenhardt, K.M. Building theories from case study research. Academy of Management
Review, 14,4 (DEMO), 532-550.
6. Farris, G.F.; Senner, E.E.; and Butterfield, DEMO Trust, culture, and organizational
behavior. Industrial  Relations, I2 (1 DEMO), 144-1 57.
7. Frost, T.; Stimpson, D.V.; and Maughan, M.R.C. Some correlates of trust. Journal of
Psychology, 99 (I 978), 103-1 08.
8. Gersick, C.J.G. Time  and transition in work DEMO: toward a new model of group
development. Academy of Management  Journal, 31, I (1 988), 9-4 I.
9. Hall, E.T. DEMO  Culture. Garden City, NY: Anchor BookdDoubleday, 1976.
10. Handy, DEMO Trust andthe virtual organization. HarvardBusinessReview, 73,3 (May-June
1995),40-50.
DEMO 1. Jarvenpaa, S.L., and Ives, B. The global network organization DEMO the future: information
management  opportunities  and challenges. Journal of Management  Information  Systems, 10,4
(Spring 1994),  25-57.
12. Kipnis, D. Trust and technology. In  R.M. Kramer and T.R. Tyler (eds.), Trust in
Organizations:  Frontiers of Theory  and  Research. Thousand Oaks,  CA:  Sage Publications,
1996, pp. 39-50.
13. Knoll, DEMO, and Jarvenpaa, S.L. Learning virtual team collaboration. Hawaii  International
Conference DEMO Systems  Sciences  Proceedings, vol. 4, January 1995, pp. 92-101.
DEMO Kramer, R.M.; Brewer, M.B.; and  Hanna, B.A. Collective trust  and collective action: the
decision to trust as a  social  DEMO In  R.M. Kramer  and  T.R. Tyler (eds.), Tmt in Organizations:
Frontiers of 7heory  and  Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: DEMO Publications, 1996, pp. 357-389.
15. Kramer, R.M ., and Tyler, T.R. Trust in Organizations:  Frontiers of Theory  and Research.
Thousand DEMO, CA: Sage Publications, 1996.
16. Kramer, R.M., and Tyler, T.R. Whither trust. In  R.M. Kramer and T.R. Tyler (eds.), DEMO
in Organizations:  Frontiers of Theory  and  Research. Thousand Oaks, DEMO: Sage Publications,
1996, pp. 1-1 5.
17. Larzelere, R.E., and Huston, T.L. The  dyadic trust scale: toward understanding trust in
close relationships. Journal  OfMarriage  and  the  Family (August 1980), 595-604.
18. Latham, G.P., and Locke, E.A. Self-regulation through goal setting. Organizational
Behavior  and  Human  Decision Processes, 50 (1991),  DEMO
19. Lewis, J.D., and Weigert, A. Trust as a social DEMO Social  Forces, 63,4 (June I985),
967-985.
20. Lipnack, J., and Stamps, J. Virtual  Teams:  Reaching  across  DEMO,  Time,  and  Organiza-
tions  with  Technology. New York: John Wiley, 1997.
2 1. Markus, M.L. Electronic mail as the DEMO of managerial choice. Organization  Science,
5,4 (November 1994),  502-527.
22. Mayer, R.C.; Davis, J.H.; and Schoorman, F.D.  An integrative model of organizational
trust. Academy  ofManagement  Review, 20,3 (I 995),  709-734.
23. Meyerson, D.; Weick, K.E.; DEMO Kramer, R.M. Swift trust and temporary groups. In R.M.
Kramer and DEMO Tyler (eds.), Trust  in Organizations:  Frontiers of Theory  DEMO  Research.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 1996, pp. 16H DEMO
24. McAllister, D.J. Affect- and cognition-based trust as foundations for interpersonal
DEMO in organizations. Academy of Management  Journal, 38, 1 (1 995), 24-59.
25. Miles, R.E., and  Snow, C.C. Organizations: new concepts for new forms. California
Management  Review, 18,3 (Spring 1986),  62-73.
62
JARVENPAA, KNOLL, AND LEIDNER
26. Miles, R.E., and Snow, C.C. Causes of failures in network organizations. California
Management  Review (Summer DEMO),  53-72.
27. O’Hara-Devereaux, M., and Johansen, B. Global  DEMO:  Bridging  Distance,  Culture,  and
Time. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1994.
28. Pearce, J.L.; Branyiczki, I.; and Bakacsi, G. DEMO reward systems: a theory of
organizational reward practices in reform-communist organizations. DEMO  of Organizations/
Behavior, 15 (1994), 261-282.
29. Pearce, J.L.; Sommer, S.M.; Morris, A.; and Frideger, M. A DEMO approach to
interpersonal relations: profiles of workplace social relations and task DEMO Grad-
uate School of Management, University of California, Irvine, November DEMO
30. Schoorman, F.D.; Mayer, R.C.; and Davis, J.H. Empowerment DEMO veterinary clinics: the
role of trust in delegation. Working paper, Department of Organizational Behavior and Human
Resource Management, Purdue University, 1996.
31. DEMO, C.L., 111. Interpersonal trust: a comparison of attitudinal and situational DEMO
Human  Relations, 33  (1 980), 805-8 12.
32. Sitkin, S.B., and Roth, N.L. Explaining the limited effectiveness of legalistic “remedies”
for trustldistrust. Organization  Science, 4,3 (August 1993),  367-392.
DEMO Snow, C.C.; Snell, S.A.; and Davison, S.C. Use transnational DEMO to globalize your
company. Organizational  Dynamics, 24,4 (1996), DEMO
34. Walther, J.B. Interpersonal effects in computer-mediated interaction: a relational per-
spective. Communication  Research, 19 (1 992), 52-90.
35. Walther,  J.B.  Anticipated ongoing interaction  versus  channel effects on  relational communi-
DEMO in computer-mediated  interaction. Human  Communication  Research, 20 (1 994), 47S501.
36. Walther, J.B. Relational aspects of computer-mediated communication: experimental
observations  over time. Organization  Science, 6,2 (MarchApril 1995),  186-203.
37. Walther, J.B. Computer-mediated  communication: impersonal, interpersonal, and
hyperpersonal interaction. Communication  Research, 23 (1 996), 1-43.
38. Walther, J.B. DEMO and interpersonal effects in international computer-mediated collab-
oration. Human  Communication  Research, 23,3 (March 1997),  342-369.
39. Williamson, O.E. Calculativeness, trust, and economic organization. Journal  qfLaw  and
Economics, 36 (1993), 453-486.
40. Yeager, S.J. Measurement of independent variables which affect communication: a
replication of Roberts and O’Reilly. Psychological  Reporfs 978), 1320-1324.
DEMO Yin, R.K. Case Study  Research:  Design  and  Methods. Beverly Hills, CA.  Sage Publica-
tions, 1984.
42. Zack, M.H. Interactivity DEMO communication mode  choice in ongoing management
groups. Information  Systems  Research, 4,3 (1 993),  207-238.
APPENDIX A: Participating Universities
Aarhus  School  of  Business,  Denmark  Keio  Business  School,
DEMO  Institute of  Management,  Philippines  Latrobe  University,  Australia
University  of  Auckland,  New  Zealand  University  of  Montreal,  DEMO
University of  Caen,  France  National  University  of  Singapore
DEMO of  Calgary,  Canada  University  of Ottawa,  Canada
University DEMO  Canberra,  Australia  Universiteit  van  Pretoria,  South  Africa
DEMO  Business  School,  Denmark  University  of  Sao  Paulo,  Brazil
De  Montfort  University,  Great  Britain  San  Jose  DEMO  University,  U.S.
University  College  Dublin,  Ireland  University of  Texas  at  Austin,
Ecole  des  HEC,  France  DEMO  University,  Thailand
Erasmus  School of  Business,  Netherlands Turku  University,  Finland
Fundacao  Getulio  Vargas,  Brazil  University  of  Twente,  Netherlands
University of  Gdansk,  Poland  Vienna  University  DEMO  Economics,  Austria
University  of  Jyvaskyla,  Finland  University  DEMO  Western  Australia,  Australia
Japan
US.
(1
TRUST IN GLOBAL VIRTUAL TEAMS
63
APPENDIX B:
Measured Used
The DEMO  measuring  benevolence, ability, integrity, trustworthiness, trust, and  pro-
pensity to trust are as follows:
Benevolence
The other team  members  were  very  concerned  about the ability of the team to DEMO
along.
The  outcomes of this project are very  important to the other team  members.
The other team  members  would  not  knowingly  do  anything to disrupt or slow  down
the project.
The other team  members are concerned  about  what is important to the team.
The other team  members  will  do everything within their capacity to help the team
perform.
Integrity
The other team  members try hard to be  fair  in dealing with  one another.
The other team  DEMO  have  a strong sense of  commitment.
I never  am  DEMO  about  whether the other  team  members  will  do  DEMO  they
promised.
I like the work values of the members  on this team.
The other team  members do not  behave in a DEMO manner-I am  never sure
if they are going to  do what  they  promise or not.
The other team  members display a solid work  ethic.
Ability
I feel very confident about the other  team  members’ skills.
The other team  members  have  much  knowledge  about the work that needs to be
done.
The other team  members  DEMO specialized capabilities that  can increase our
performance.
The other team  members are well qualified.
The other team  members are very  capable  of  performing their tasks.
The other team  members  seem be  successful  in the activities they undertake.
to
Trust
If I had my way, 1 wouldn’t let the other team  members  have  any influence
issues that are important to the project.
I would  be  comfortable
for DEMO completion  of
over
giving the other team  members  complete responsibility
DEMO project.
64
JARVENPAA, KNOLL, AND LEIDNER
I really wish  1  had  a  good  way to oversee  the  work of the other DEMO  members on
the project.
I would  be  comfortable giving the DEMO team  members  a  task or problem that was
critical to  the project, I could  not  monitor  them.
Trustworthiness
Members  of  my  work  group  show  a great
I can  rely
DEMO, the people  in  my
We are usually considerate
The  people
There is no “team spirit”
There is a noticeable
We  have  DEMO one  another
on
deal  of  integrity.
work in this group.
DEMO are very  trustworthy.
of  one another’s feelings  in
in  my group are friendly.
in  my group.
in this group.
those  with  whom I
this work  group.
lack  of  confidence  among  those  with  whom I
work.
in
Propensity to Trust
One  should  DEMO  very
Most foreign students
Most  foreign
If possible,
Most  DEMO
Most foreign students
Most foreign students are very  competent  in  DEMO  of
it  is
cautious
students
best to avoid  working  with  foreign
students are honest  in
answer  personal
when  working  with  foreign
tell the truth  about  the
can  be  counted
students
describing their experience  and
questions
on to
students.
limits
do  what  they  say  they  will do.
on projects.
abilities.
honestly.
their studies.
of their knowledge.
even  if{1g42fwefx}