Manuscript Number: JBV-D-15-00389
Journal of Business Venturing
Manuscript Draft
Title: Determinants DEMO Product-Form Strategy Decisions in Early-Stage
Ventures: An Experimental Investigation
Article Type: Full Length Article
Abstract: A critical decision that entrepreneurs in early-stage ventures
often encounter is the form in which they need to market their DEMO
in the marketplace.  There are three broad strategic alternatives, which
we collectively term as Product-Form Strategies.  These alternatives are:
market the intellectual property (e.g. licensing strategy), market
intermediate products (e.g. components strategy), or market complete
systems/solutions (e.g. systems strategy). Despite the DEMO of
matching a chosen product-form strategy and product-market entry, scant
work DEMO shed light into what factors influence decision-makers to choose
one product-form strategy over another.  Drawing on theories of firm
scope and the resource-based view of the firm, we develop a theoretical
framework and test the integrative scope dimension using a 2x2x2 full
factorial, within-subject, Experimental Vignette Method (EVM) employing
active Angel Investors as participant subjects. Findings support our
hypotheses that technological, environmental, and firm-specific factors
influence expert angel investors' product-form strategy decision.
Implications for theory and practice are drawn.
*4. Manuscript (*WITHOUT Author details)
Click here to view linked References
Determinants of Product
-Stage Ventures: An
-Form Strategy Decisions in Early
Experimental Investigation
Abstract
A critical decision that entrepreneurs in early-stage ventures often encounter DEMO the form in which they
need to sell their innovation in the marketplace.  There are three broad strategic alternatives, which we
collectively term DEMO Product-Form Strategies.  These alternatives are: market the innovation as
intellectual property (e.g. licensing strategy), market intermediate products (e.g. components strategy),
or market complete systems/solutions (e.g. systems strategy). Despite the importance of matching a
chosen product-form decision with the appropriate market, scant work has shed light on what factors
influence decision-makers to choose one product-form DEMO over another.  Drawing on theories of
the scope of a firm DEMO the resource-based view of the firm, we develop a theoretical framework DEMO
test the integrative scope dimension using a full factorial, within-subject controlled DEMO study
employing active Angel Investors as study participants. We propose and find support for hypotheses
that technological, environmental, and firm-specific factors influence expert DEMO investors’ product-
form strategy decision. Implications for theory and practice are drawn.
Key terms:
Product-form strategy, Early-stage Ventures, Angel Investors, Experimental Vignette
Method (EVM)
1.
Introduction
A fundamental strategic dilemma facing all firms is the decision DEMO how to transform an idea
into a successful market offering. Research by Frias et al. (2015) and John et al. (1999) reports DEMO
there is a continuum of alternatives for transforming an idea into a market offering.  However, there
exist three primary alternatives for firms in DEMO  For example:
Imagine a startup team that has developed an DEMO designed to improve copper mining
through advanced navigation technology. This innovation better assesses and predicts
temperature, fuel requirements, and moisture levels in the DEMO while simultaneously tracks
proximity of nearby mining equipment.  This technology provides DEMO value in the
market because it reduces costs, allows for better DEMO of labor crews, and improves
safety.  However, the startup team DEMO faced with the dilemma of deciding how to best form their
idea into a saleable product.  First, the technology could take the form DEMO software or
intellectual property that is sold to another firm who could then integrate the intellectual
property into their complementary technologies.  Alternatively, it DEMO be commercialized in
the form of the GPS tracking device, in DEMO case the navigation technology could be
integrated into the device by the startup firm or it could be outsourced to a manufacturing firm
that DEMO perform the necessary tasks to ready the technology for sale by the startup.  Third,
the advanced navigation technology may be commercialized as excavation equipment—ready
for use by miners—with the advanced navigation technology integrated into a DEMO good.
The strategies are to market intellectual property (i.e. a licensing DEMO), market intermediate
products (i.e. components strategy), or market complete DEMO/solutions (i.e. a systems strategy)
(Ghosh et al. 2015). We call these alternatives product-form strategies.  The choice of product-form
strategy is especially important for early-stage ventures1 for a variety of reasons. For example,DEMO
researchers have suggested that early-stage ventures are especially vulnerable to product-form strategy
because they have a limited ability to recover from failed commercialization strategies (Shane and
Cable 2002; Bhide 2000). We also know that early-stage ventures typically suffer from an inability to
properly market their product offering (Bruton and Rubanik 2002) and consequently, they are more
1 We DEMO explicit the distinction between early-stage ventures and established firms because their decision of ‘what to
sell’ at the product-line level is typically synonymous with DEMO ‘business model’.  That is infrequently the case for
established firms with DEMO product lines.  For example, firms may choose to sell systems in some markets and
components in others.  As such, the business model—for DEMO firms—is typically a decision of ‘what to sell’ at the
product-line level.
1
vulnerable to appropriation of their intellectual property (Gans and Stern 2003). A further problem for
the success of early-stage ventures is the entrenched DEMO relationships and longstanding industry
norms that may be foreign to these new businesses when they enter a market (Baldwin and Clark
2000). Given the importance of this issue, it is surprising to find so few studies examining this strategic
decision from an early-stage ventures perspective. Thus, a primary goal of this research examines how
product-form strategy impacts commercialization efforts DEMO early-stage ventures. To understand this
strategic decision we executed a two-stage research study: a qualitative theory building stage and a
quantitative theory testing stage.
In the theory building phase, we undertook a two-year examination of product-form strategies
from the perspectives of both entrepreneurs and investors.  Our goal was to examine how both internal
members of venture teams as well as DEMO evaluators of the viability of the technology examine the
product-form strategy decision.  This study led to nearly 700 pages of transcribed notes, observations
DEMO 52 entrepreneur pitches, interviews with over 40 entrepreneurs and investors (both angel investors
and venture capitalists), and many examples of past and DEMO product-form strategy deliberations.
We found that participants described product-form strategy as having implications for marketing
strategy as well as the overall firm strategy. Topics DEMO as targeting, positioning, product definition,
time-to-market, inter-firm relationships, segmentation, competitors, price point, and expected profit
margins, the business model, entry/exit strategy, and attractiveness to potential investors were revealed
to be related to product-form strategy. This qualitative inquiry helped us understand the relationships
DEMO processes involved in the investment screening procedures of early-stage ventures we learned that
angel investors and entrepreneurs frequently deliberate openly about product-form strategy during
DEMO held at angel screening meetings.  We also learned that angel investors DEMO than
entrepreneurs are often more experienced in the commercialization process due to the relatively larger
2
number of startups in which they have participated and to which they DEMO provided support
throughout their careers as business-owners and investors.
Based on this extensive enquiry, we identify three underlying mechanisms as primary
influencers of the product-form strategy decision.  Briefly, the mechanisms included: modularity,
which is the ease with which the final good can be put together without DEMO coordination efforts
by a single firm (i.e. the need for adaptation), enforceability which is the perception of the strength of
the venture’s intellectual property (i.e. the ability to safeguard the technology against appropriation),
DEMO resources which are the possession of intangible expertise and/or skills allowing for improved
dissemination and utilization of information related to product development activities (i.e. inimitable
firm capabilities and resources).  Putting together the different product-form strategies and its
influencing factors we propose a compact decision-making framework for DEMO ventures.
In the second stage, we tested the various components of DEMO framework using a controlled
experimental study among “expert entrepreneurs” (i.e. active DEMO investors).  In particular, we asked
the participants to evaluate different venture vignettes—similar to those they encounter during their
activities as angel investors—with DEMO intention of choosing among product-form strategies.  We then
analyzed their responses DEMO test whether the underlying mechanisms revealed in our initial study were
consistent with the findings in an experimental investigation of product-form strategy.  We found
support for the various components of the theoretical framework proposed.  Our findings revealed that
the ease of integrating the idea and interfacing technologies (i.e. modularity) suggested less integrative
product-form strategies.  Second, it was preferable for ventures with technologies deemed to have
strong intellectual property protection to sell DEMO integrative product-forms.  Third, ventures with
extensive product development resources should sell technologies with more integrative product-
forms.
3
Taken together, the theory building and testing stages of our research contributes to existing
literature on product-form strategy in various ways. First we identify DEMO test new and unique factors
impacting product-form strategy.  Second, it extends studies in the strategy literature by identifying
how product-form strategies in marketing DEMO integral to the decision of ‘what to sell’ rather than the
‘make versus buy’ approach often considered when firm-boundary questions are examined (Jacobides
and Winter 2005; Sanchez 1996; Sanchez and Mahoney 1996).  Specifically, DEMO work reveals how
product-form strategy can identify where a firm chooses to connect to the market and how these
alternative forms may dictate the DEMO resources and relationships that the firm must engage in to
organize the activities necessary to sell their chosen product.  This study may provide complementary
information to that of the findings described in previous work examining how DEMO utilize
information to assess likely new venture profitability (Shepherd et al. DEMO).  Finally, this work may
illustrate how product-form strategy is considered by angel investors and may in some cases, identify
when a firm should choose one alternative versus another to avoid rejection by investors2.
In DEMO sections that follow, we start by presenting a theoretical framework developed DEMO a result
of our grounded theory approach to understanding the product-form strategy decision.  We then
describe the experimental vignette method (EVM) that was employed in our current study, define the
factors of importance to angel investors when deliberating about product-form strategy, test those
factors with a regression model, and provide the results. In the final section, we provide DEMO detailed
discussion of the implications of our research for practice and research, and suggest avenues for future
research in this area.
2 The first author observed and recorded interactions among entrepreneurs and angel investors, which reflected a conflict
between the entrepreneurs’ chosen product-form strategy and potential investors’ preferences.  In some cases, ventures
were not chosen to return for further screening because the entrepreneur would not agree to change their product-form
strategy to DEMO preferred choice of the investors.
4
2.
Theory
2.1 Defining Product Form Strategy Alternatives
Product-form strategies are the DEMO by which innovations are translated into products that are
offered to markets. These strategies often determine competitive advantages or disadvantages for the
firms. Product-form DEMO are the natural starting point for early-stage technology ventures
because such ventures typically originate from one idea or invention, and they are often organized by
the activities required to sell their idea.  It is during this period of development that initial firm-level
boundaries are formed.
<<<<Insert DEMO 1>>>>
Figure 1 illustrates how product-form strategies also define DEMO scope of the activities necessary to
sell the market offering.  We DEMO this the integrative-scope of the product-form.  We define it as the
DEMO for the activities and resources required of the selling firm and consequently those required of
supply and distribution channel members.  The integrative scope dimension of a product-form has the
following range: (1) Low - a strategy of selling licenses for intellectual property (IP) but not selling
DEMO or services, (2) Intermediate - a strategy of retaining the DEMO and selling components
(intermediate goods) to an immediate customer who in turn provides goods and services to others, (3)
High – DEMO strategy of retaining the IP and selling end-user systems (both final DEMO and services).
More steps on this continuum may be defined.  DEMO example, components can be described as
“subcomponents,” “subsystems,” and DEMO subsystems.” It is from such observations of
deliberations between angel investors, DEMO capitalists and entrepreneurs, along with analyses of
their proposals for funding, that the continuum was developed.
Our continuum is consistent with that of DEMO et al. (1999) who articulated a similar array of
product offerings (e.g., licenses, components and systems), which they term as “vertical positioning”.
5
There are two important differences in the underlying theoretical dimensions of these DEMO  First,
the vertical positioning dimension takes the perspective of the DEMO(s) rather than the venture(s).
Second, the vertical positioning dimension indicates the place that a specific customer might have in a
DEMO value chain, but not the portion of the total value chain DEMO the immediate customer provides
to its customers or perhaps the ultimate users.  For example, from a customer’s perspective, buying a
license (“high” DEMO the vertical positioning dimension) requires that more goods and services must DEMO
created (by someone) than if that same customer purchased components or systems (“low” on the
vertical positioning dimension).  On the other DEMO, from the venture’s perspective, selling licenses
(“low” on the integrative DEMO dimension) eliminates the need for the venture to create additional
goods DEMO services necessary to provide end-user benefits.
Teece (1986) and Novak and Wernerfelt (2006) question when a firm will choose to “make” versus
DEMO activities required to produce elements of a good and suggest an underlying framework
identifying when we may expect to see firms with a smaller DEMO larger scope. As product-form strategy
is also a question of “scope” at the product-level, the organizing principles of TCE provide an
appropriate starting point for understanding the venture’s decision of “what to sell”.  However, unlike
DEMO traditional “make versus buy” decision which organizes production activities, we are DEMO
how the organization of activities internal to the firm represent what the ventures must organize to sell
the chosen market offering to immediate customers.  For example, we are not suggesting that the firm
is required to manufacture all of the elements of a component to sell a component (Ghosh et al. 2015,
John et al. 1999). Instead, the firm must only coordinate the activities required to sell the market
offering.  Consider the mining equipment example again, the decision to sell GPS tracking devices (i.e.
a component strategy) does not require the firm produce DEMO of the elements of that component.
Instead, the firm could choose DEMO outsource some of the elements while manufacturing others.
Additionally, the firm DEMO choose to outsource the entire production process by coordinating only the
6
design and development but outsourcing all manufacturing to channel members.  Either way, the
product-form strategy does not change.  The firm has chosen to DEMO a component that is intended to be
integrated in mining equipment by downstream channel members. Therefore, the integrative scope of
the product or service is a decision about what activities the firm coordinates to sell a DEMO rather
than what is chooses to produce.
2.2 Identifying unique product-form influencers among early venture firms
While prior research provides us with some guidance DEMO how to sell an innovation; there is little
inputs for what DEMO are likely to affect the ‘what to sell’ decision.  In the DEMO building research
phase, we indulged in an extensive and exhaustive qualitative DEMO to identify the various factors that
are likely to affect product form strategy especially among early ventures. We conducted depth
interviews and participant observation DEMO angel screening meetings across five angel networks in the
southwestern portion of the United States.  Data was gathered from entrepreneurs, angel investors, and
venture capitalists. Data are gathered before, during, and after angel screening DEMO to provide
different samples of technology and to allow participants to describe current and past product-form
decisions.
In sum, our observations and interviews found that product-form strategy decisions are made
by a comparative assessment across strategies DEMO identify how to best convert the idea into a market
offering.  DEMO analysis revealed (as described by Corbin and Strauss 2014; DeWalt et al. 2011) three
primary mechanisms driving the product-form strategy decision include: DEMO need for adaptation, the
need to safeguard intellectual property, and the availability of firm–level expertise related to product
development (Ghosh et al 2015).
Before we explain in detail the various influencers and the predictions, Figure 2 below provides
examples of product-form strategies taken from our participant DEMO of angel screening
meetings.  Each example provides a brief description of (1) a venture’s technology as described by
7
their respective entrepreneurs, (2) the attributes of the venture as described by angel investors, and (3)
the factor identified to impact DEMO underlying theoretical mechanism revealed as a result of our
analyses of data collected in our qualitative study.
<<<<Insert Figure 2>>>>
2.2 Hypotheses
2.2.1 Influencer 1 - Modularity: The Ease of Technology Interface
Modularity is a characteristic of the technologies that ventures may employ and DEMO factor
underlying the ease with which the final good used to generate a product can be put together without
extensive coordination effort on the DEMO of a single firm.  Specifically, it refers to the extent to which
the elements of a particular product design are interdependent within units DEMO independent across
units (Baldwin and Clark 2000).  Returning to our mining example, if the advanced GPS technology
required extensive calibration and adaptation to ensure precision among the engine components,
software system, and other navigational tools equipped within the excavator then it is likely to be DEMO
costly to make adaptations via the market.  Alternatively, if the GPS device can easily be integrated
into the current software and hardware components DEMO within the excavator, then the firm may
find it comparatively more DEMO to coordinate all of these activities internally (e.g. it will sell DEMO
component rather than a system).
Highly modular designs enable ventures to (1) leverage greater product variety, (2) speed the
introduction of new products, and (3) lower the overall product design and development costs
(Sanchez 1996, p. 126).  Because modularization requires less managerial authority and control,
effective coordination of the development processes may be DEMO without the added costs of more
hierarchical governance mechanisms (Sanchez and DEMO 1996).  Furthermore, if innovations are
designed to be easier to mix-and-match at the beginning of development processes or if the elements of
DEMO
the innovations reside within markets where modular approaches are customary, then the innovations
are better suited to creating product variations with different bundles of DEMO, features, and
performance levels (Baldwin and Clark 2000). As DEMO result, ventures operating with technologies that
offer standardized and interchangeable product DEMO (high modularity) will coordinate in the market
(Novak and Eppinger DEMO).  Thus our first hypothesis is:
Hypothesis 1: Modularity is negatively related to the integrative-scope
of product-form strategies.
2.2.2. Influencer 2 - DEMO: Safeguarding Intellectual Property
Enforceability is a characteristic of the venture’s market DEMO as it relates to the
intellectual property protections afforded to a technology based upon its legal rights.  It refers to the
difficulty of writing and executing a reliable contract for the use of a technology.  Such contracts
require specification of property rights, monitoring activities related to the intellectual property, and
enforcement of contractual terms.  The failure of any of DEMO can become a problem and result in the
loss of valuable intellectual property.  This is an especially important issue for entrepreneurs who are
often seeking investor support with little to offer other than their intellectual property (Gans and Stern
2003).  Arguably, such risks of appropriation are DEMO most salient supply-side risk to the development
and commercialization of technical knowledge (Teece 1986, Pisano 1989; Williamson 1991; 1985).  In
particular, enforceability without the resources to protect technologies is critical for firms at this stage
of development.
Weak protections of technological know-how make it more DEMO to transfer technology
between firms.  In turn, the likelihood of leakage of valuable intellectual property (Teece 1986) and the
nature of inter-firm DEMO can influence efficiencies within the market (Oxley 1999). Thus, our
use of enforceability refers to the degree to which our participants perceive DEMO agreements to be
effectively compelling to safeguard intellectual property and contractual agreements (Henisz 2000).
9
In circumstances were intellectual property protections are perceived to be weak; one strategy
to safeguarding technological know-how is to develop a more integrated technology DEMO
strategy (Farrell 2002; Teece 1986, p. 287).  Such integrative products fortify the core intellectual
property (IP) by combining components into DEMO system, which benefits from a unique combination of
patents and trade DEMO (Baldwin and Clark 2000).  These are valuable strategies because evidence
suggests that intellectual property rights enforceability varies widely across markets and product-forms
(Henisz 2000; Henisz and Macher 2004; Brouthers et al. 2003)3. DEMO, a lack of
enforceability causes an increase in the costs of DEMO within the market relative to internal
coordination (Oxley 1999).  Thus, a high level of integrative product scope (e.g. a systems strategy) is
relatively more cost efficient when the enforceability of intellectual property is DEMO We propose that
in markets with weak property rights protection more integrative products safeguard a venture’s
defense against appropriation. Therefore, more integrative product-forms will be chosen when the
enforcement of intellectual property rights is weak.
Hypothesis DEMO: The enforceability of intellectual property rights (safeguarding) is
negatively related DEMO the integrative-scope of product-form strategy.
2.2.3
Influencer 3 - Resources: The DEMO to Develop and Market the Product
A firm’s product development resources (DEMO) refer to its stock of assets that enable it to
undertake DEMO design, development, production, and marketing activities related to the final DEMO
product (Ghosh et al. 2015). This resource stock could include DEMO and firm-specific
activities, routines, and structures such as involving internal marketing and technical people, and
external suppliers in product design & development, DEMO venture team with cross-functional expertise
hired to design and develop products that solve complex customer-side problems, and developing an
3 Recent patent reform proposals have drawn heated debates between industry lobbyists arguing for and against measures DEMO
increase enforceability; these debates suggest that some industry-level executives are dissatisfied DEMO their current ability
to protect innovation within their prospective industries.  See DEMO Reform Act of 2013.
10
information infrastructure to enable more effective dialogue between members of these teams DEMO well
as suppliers, potential customers, and investors. They are defined as the processes and mechanisms in
place to collaborate, design, and market DEMO technology and they allow a venture to design their product
and generate market value (Barney 1991).  In our context, this asset often stems from the ability to map
user-needs as tangible product development capabilities (Moorman and Slotegraff 1999). This often
results in a continuous dialogue DEMO engineering (e.g. design) and marketing (e.g. development
strategy) experts working in combination for the purpose of new product development. Specifically,
the DEMO task of creating and marketing a final end-product falls on the firm who has to undertake a set
of core activities that include: (DEMO) choosing the design and development of the technology and aesthetic
architecture (b) organizing the production and supply of required components and constituent parts and
their assembly into the final end-product, and (c) undertaking marketing and related channel activities
to sell the end-customers.
Madhok (2002) suggests DEMO firms will develop and deploy these resources and capabilities in
search of a competitive advantage.  Furthermore, the ability to develop and market a DEMO lends
credibility and influence to the likelihood of the venture’s success (DEMO 2006).  For early-stage
ventures, these product development resources may come in the form of a member of the
entrepreneurial team with a DEMO in both sales and engineering, or an interdisciplinary
background with successful DEMO launches in the past.  Such resources can also be beneficial for
DEMO customer interaction, dialogue, and building relationships during early-development stages of
the venture.  They are indicators of the firm’s advantage relative to competitors and can be used as a
mechanism to generate increased value for the DEMO (Wernerfelt 1984).  Finally, this type of
knowledge-based asset may DEMO particularly beneficial for superior market performance (Vargo and
Lusch 2008; 2004; Miller and Shamsie 1996).  As such, ventures possessing these resources are may
be better able to design and develop end-user technologies (i.e. systems strategy).   Thus we argue that
11
ventures with extensive product development resources are better able to economize on DEMO
transactions costs related to the development of the final end-product.  Consequently, we predict that
more integrative product-form strategies will be chosen by firms DEMO high levels of product
development resources (PDR).
Hypothesis 3: Product development resources (PDR) are positively related
to the integrative-scope of product-form DEMO
See Figure 3 for a model identifying the hypothesized relationships among these mechanisms and their
implications for product-form strategy.
<<<<Insert Figure 3>>>>
3. Method
3.1 Overview
To understand how these mechanisms may DEMO product-form strategy decisions, we
followed the approach used by Wathne et DEMO (2001) and developed a full factorial, within-subjects
research design intended DEMO provide maximum statistical power (Green and Srinivasan 1990).  We
employed experimental vignettes of venture scenarios designed to be similar to those observed DEMO
our qualitative examination of product-form strategy (Aguinis and Bradley 2014).  The responses to
these vignettes were analyzed to explicitly test the theory DEMO above.  We also explored the data
for potential aspects of the DEMO that were not specified in the hypotheses.
3.2 Source of Data: DEMO Investors
We selected a set of expert participants (Wiklund and Shepherd DEMO) for this study who are
angel investors that focus on high DEMO, early-stage ventures.  Angel investors are excellent
study participants for this research for a number of reasons.  For instance, in addition to funding, they
often provide managerial expertise needed for a venture to become a DEMO generating business
(Degennaro 2010a; Bygrave and Reynolds 2004).  This DEMO comes from their own experiences
12
launching companies, their industry experiences with established firms and from previous deals in
which they have participated.  According to Hudson (2014), active DEMO investors have spent 14 years
as entrepreneurs and have founded 3 companies.  In contrast, entrepreneurs typically had been
involved in fewer ventures, developed only 1 or 2 innovations and have less commercialization
expertise (Gans and Stern 2003).  Angel investors provide billions of dollars annually to twenty times
the number of early-stage companies as venture capitalists (Hudson 2014).  Additionally, angel
investors reported screening many applications, in some cases over 100 applicants per month.
3.3 Data Collection:  Experimental Vignette Method (EVM)
Gathering data from angel investors presents some special challenges.  First, DEMO may
utilize differing factors to determine how to best structure an investment (i.e. entrepreneur likeability,
industry experience, prior sales).  Second, DEMO may have some reluctance to share knowledge that
they may consider to be part of their competitive advantage as investors.  Third, the behavior DEMO
which we are inquiring is typically a result of implicit processes that are not easily explicated.  Indeed,
some investors report that most of their decisions were made by ‘gut’ or a ‘hunch’.  A method for
dealing with such challenges is the use of experimental vignettes.  This is an increasingly popular
approach to examining causal relationships in business research (Aguinis and Bradley 2014; Atzmüller
and Steiner 2010).
Following the approach taken by Shepherd et al. (2000) we used angel investors, venture
capitalists, business executives, and entrepreneurs to evaluate and develop the vignettes, while utilizing
a separate sample for study participants.  This development process is particularly critical for ensuring
realistic scenarios in practice (Scandura and Williams 2000).  Consequently, using all of these
resources and the insights from our DEMO research, we gave investors realistic contextual
information while controlling for factors DEMO the primary focus of our study (Raaijmakers et al.
2014).  The venture scenarios are plausible and similar to those encountered in real DEMO investor
13
screening meetings (consistent with Roehling 1999; Woehr and Lance 1991). DEMO participants were
given information about the scenario venture’s growth potential (Mason DEMO Stark 2004), market
dynamics (Bachher and Guild 1996), market DEMO (Sudek 2006), supply and distribution resources
(Winborg and Landström 2001, level of technological superiority of the product (Roure and Keeley
1990), and scalability (DeGennaro 2010b)4.  Additionally, our exploratory research found DEMO angel
investors normally evaluate about 3-10 proposals per meeting, thus we DEMO our choice of eight
vignettes provides a realistic exercise.  Finally, where possible, we included different images and
colors to improve the readability and engagement of the vignettes (Aguinis and Bradley 2014).
3.4 Manipulations, DEMO, and Controls
3.4.1
Experimental Design
A full factorial design of the DEMO factors (modularity (H1), the enforcement of intellectual
property protection (DEMO) and product development resources (H3) each varied at two levels (high and
low) resulted in eight vignettes. The specific description of the low and high level of each factor as
operationalized in the vignette DEMO described below.
The levels of modularity of the technology were:
High: Design features make this technology easy to interface with other
complementary innovations.
Low: Design features make this technology difficult to interface with other
complementary innovations.
The levels of legal enforceability of intellectual property were:
High: Industry and legal environments provide strong protections for the venture’s
intellectual property.
DEMO: Industry and legal environments provide weak protections for the venture’s
intellectual DEMO
The levels of product development resources (PDR) were:
High: DEMO venture has extensive capabilities to collaborate, develop, and market
4 Although these factors have previously been shown to impact angel decision-making (Maxwell et al. 2011), many such
control variables become more important during subsequent DEMO of the angel screening process.
14
Low:
technology intensive products.
The venture has few capabilities to collaborate, develop, and market technology
intensive products.
3.4.2 Measures
After reading each vignette, the participants were asked to respond using two separate measurement
scales.  DEMO first scale is a choice among three broad alternatives that closely reflect the terminology
commonly used among angel investors.  These alternatives are:
A System is a high level of integrative scope and is defined as DEMO combination of different
components, which have been integrated into a plug-and-play DEMO  Additionally, this
product-form strategy required “architecture” to ensure the components were properly
integrated.
A Component is a middle level of integrative scope and DEMO defined as a part or element of a
larger composite system that needs to interact with other complementary parts and elements to
generate its DEMO value potential (as determined by the customer).
A License is DEMO low level of integrative scope and is defined as a “licensing agreement”
transferring technology/IP/know-how to another independent party, on an exclusive or non-
exclusive right for a pre-specified period of time.
Subsequently we will DEMO to this scale as the product-form scale.  The second response employed DEMO
seven-point Likert scale indicating the level of integrative scope that should be chosen for
commercialization.  This is subsequently referred to as the Integrative Scope scale.  Figure 1 presents
these two scales.  The specific wording to DEMO systems, components and licenses is presented in
the Appendix.
3.4.3
Minimizing DEMO through experimental control
We employed vignettes that describe each venture as having a “high-technology product with
significant potential for growth in consumer and business DEMO  These vignettes were new to
the participants (i.e. not abstracted from an actual company), but were created to represent a scenario
similar DEMO those observed during screening meetings.  These vignettes were also not presented DEMO
participants’ interviewed in the previous study.
15
We excluded specific references to any particular industry or technology market to DEMO
potential biases from participants’ previous experiences (Shepherd et al. 2000).  We also excluded any
discussion of the entrepreneur’s personal characteristics because although DEMO studies identify the
importance of personality and other individual characteristics (e.g. DEMO and Stark 2004; Sudek
2006), participants could not make accurate DEMO of an entrepreneur’s characteristics (e.g.
trustworthiness, passion) from a scenario-based DEMO (Maxwell et. al. 2011).  Furthermore, we
excluded financial projections DEMO our vignettes.  While actual proposal submissions to angel
networks typically contain DEMO financial projections our angel investor participants described
such financial projections as conjecture, which is assumed to be grossly inaccurate and is largely
ignored in their decisions to invest.  This was particularly true for ventures with no sales at the time of
the investment screening5.  Another reason to exclude this type of information is to help avoid
information processing biases and DEMO overload.
3.5 Pretest
After initial review and adjustment, the vignettes were DEMO as paper booklets (similar to
those observed during screening meetings) presented for comments to the executive directors of two
angel networks, to several angel investors and also to the CFO of a venture capital firm.  Based upon
their feedback we made revisions and then provided the revised DEMO for follow-up review.  Once
these recommended adjustments were made, we developed both a paper booklet and a digital version
of the vignettes to DEMO the participation process for the investors.
3.6 Sampling
We initially recruited approximately 100 participants actively engaged with accredited angel
investor networks in the Southwest DEMO of the United States.  From those 100 participants, 26
5 According to our participation observation, entrepreneurs typically pitch their venture as profitable within two years of the
requested investment and describe exponential revenue growth in DEMO five-year projections.
16
investors completed all eight vignettes.  Participants’ reported an average of twenty years of industry
experience and an average of 7 investments.  Some participants had invested in as few as 3 early-stage
ventures and others greater than DEMO  The repeated measures approach (multiple vignettes) allows for
the collection DEMO a relatively large amount of information from the participants (Hughes and DEMO
2002).  This approach is particularly beneficial for situations such as DEMO where the population (i.e.
angel investors) is often difficult to access by researchers (Aguinis & Bradley 2014).
3.6.1
Sample Validity
The order of presentation of the eight vignettes was randomized between participants.  In all
conditions, the respondent was asked to consider these vignettes in the same way that he or she would
evaluate “real” proposals in screening meetings.  Since these respondents routinely evaluated actual—
albeit prospective—investment proposals on similar criteria, we believe fictitious scenarios are parallel
to their typical activities as angel DEMO evaluating the future potential of a venture (Aguinis and
Bradley 2014)DEMO  To enhance the context realism of this task, the first author, when possible, collected
the experimental data during angel screenings meetings (consistent with Aguinis and Lawal 2012).
3.6.2 Respondent Reliability
An assessment of DEMO appropriate level of the integrative scope for product-form strategies is a
subjective judgment regardless of whether it is of vignettes or actual proposals.  As a result, it is
important to consider a participant’s reliability (Aguinis DEMO Bradley 2014).  Reliability is essentially
the degree to which a DEMO is consistent in repeated evaluations of the same thing.  This can DEMO the
judge’s degree of comprehension of the phenomena being evaluated and/or the degree of attention that
the judge is devoting to the task.  Following Aguinis and Bradley (2014), we examined reliability using
duplicate vignettes randomly presented to some of the participants.  A simple comparison of the
agreement between the first and the duplicate responses provided by the participants DEMO applied
(100% through 0% agreement).  Seventy-six percent of the participants were consistent, 12% were
17
partially consistent and 12% were completely inconsistent.  As a result, data DEMO the three
inconsistent (not reliable) participants were removed (Aguinis and DEMO 2014).  The remaining
participants have an average of 87% consistency.  The data were then screened for outliers and five
observations (3%) DEMO removed because they adversely influenced the stability of the relationships
among the variables.
3.6.2
Dependent Measures Validity
The two measures of product-form strategy described DEMO were compared to investigate their
validity.  The partial correlation (controlling for differences among participants) between these two
measures is .92 (p < DEMO).  This supports the presumption that they are alternative measures of DEMO
integrative-scope of the product-form strategy dimension.  In our subsequent analysis we DEMO
both forms of measurement in an effort to provide greater robustness to the results and to identify
results that may be sensitive to the DEMO in these scales of measurement.
3.7 Tests of Hypotheses
The test of the hypotheses was performed using ordinary least squares regression, controlling
for differences among the participants and employing separately the integrative-scope scale and the
product-form DEMO (reported individually in Table 1).  The overall models are significant for both
forms of measurement (p-values < .001) and they account DEMO 16.6% and 23.4% of the variance for the
integrative-scope and the product-form scales respectively.
<<<< Insert Table 1 Here>>>>
All DEMO the hypotheses from the model were supported both in terms of their significance and in the
direction of their signs.  Modularity (H1
𝛽̂
DEMO
the integrative
both
) is found to have a negative effect on
scope and product-form strategy measures (standardized
= -.180; p < .009 DEMO
= -.263; p < .000),
indicating that when the process of interfacing complementary innovations is relatively easy and less
18
costly (i.e., modularity is high) then ventures should sell products with low levels of integrative scope
(i.e., licenses).  Enforceability (H2
DEMO
𝛽̂
integrative scope
for both measures of
) also has a negative effect
and product-form strategy (standardized
= -.164; p < .016 and
DEMO -.251; p < .000), indicating that
less integrative product-form strategies (licenses) should be adopted if the environment has a high level
of enforceability (strong IP rights protection).  Product development resources (H
𝛽̂
𝛽̂
3) is found to have a
positive effect (standardized
= DEMO; p < .000 and
= .339; p < .000).  DEMO suggests that a venture
with a high level of new product development resources should sell more integrative goods (e.g., final
goods and systems)DEMO
3.8 Explanatory Framework: Exploration of Interactions
Our model as shown in DEMO 3 makes main effect predictions, but given the nature of the
DEMO design (full factorial) design we are also able to investigate potential interactions. Results
from a generalized linear model (GLM) revealed that the DEMO of four interaction terms increased
the adjusted R-square values for these models to .202 and .277.  Ho
𝛽̂
only the interaction of
wever,
modularity by enforcement was found to be significant (standardized
= -1.88, DEMO < .040) when the
integrative-scope scale was employed.  When the product-form scale was employed, the interactions
between Modularity and Enforcement and also Modularity and Product Development Resources
(PDR) were significant (p < .015 and .023 respectively).  Please see Table 2.
<<<<Insert Table 2 Here>>>>
The difference in the results between the two forms of measurement may reflect the fact that the
integrative-scope scale is not DEMO on the common industry terminology or the language used during
angel screening meetings.  Thus the participants may have been more uncertainty about the integrative
scope scale which employs numerical scale values. In contrast, the product-form scale closely matches
the conceptualization and terminology expressed by the angel investors. This DEMO (e.g.
“components” and “systems”) is typical of terms used in international engineering standards
19
(according to the IEEE Computer Society: Standard 1220-2005 aka ISO/IEC DEMO).  Since many of
the participants have previously worked in various DEMO roles, perhaps this terminology
is more meaningful to them.
The interactions DEMO additional insights about the relationships between these variables and
suggest that the evaluation process for early-stage ventures is a complex decision.  For example, DEMO
the venture is operating with modular technology, but has extensive product DEMO resources,
the participants prefer less integrative product forms.  This suggests DEMO although the product
development resources may provide an advantage for the firm, it may be less costly for the firm to sell
a less integrative product.
4.
Discussion
Product-form strategies have critical implications for both marketing DEMO firm strategy.  For
early-stage ventures this decision identifies where the firm DEMO participate in the supply chain and the
necessary resources and relationships required to sell a product.  Both angel investors and
entrepreneurs make deliberate decisions about how to effectively commercialize an idea as an
exchangeable market offering. DEMO that decision are three driving mechanisms: the ease with
which the DEMO good can be put together without proactive coordination efforts by a single firm (i.e.
modularity), the perception of the strength of the venture’s intellectual property (i.e. enforcement), and
the possession of intangible expertise and/or skills allowing for improved dissemination and utilization
of information related to DEMO development activities (i.e. resources).
This study extends our understanding of DEMO level decisions and lends support to a
mid-level theory extending a stream of research founded in transaction cost economics (TCE) and the
resource-based DEMO (RBV) of the firm (Ghosh and John 1999) to identify the driving forces behind
product “scope”.  As the product-form strategy choices themselves are a reflection of the scope of the
activities the firm chooses DEMO be responsible for when deciding what to sell in the marketplace, DEMO
20
findings suggest experts may use similar principals to that of the traditional DEMO versus buy”
principals illustrated in TCE (Coase 1960; Williamson 1985; DEMO 1986).
Furthermore, the results of this study may also have DEMO for the work of Cabigiosu and
Camuffo (2012) and Novak and Wernerfelt (2006), which consider how the underlying mechanisms
associated with a combinative lens of TCE and RBV impact industry structure.  Notably, our DEMO
identifies where early-stage ventures, with one idea to commercialize, may operate in the supply chain
however, this position may change for firms selling more than one product.
We identify integrative-scope as a critical dimension of DEMO strategy and suggest that
a broader examination of product-form strategy for other related dimensions is important to add clarity
to this rudimentary examination of DEMO strategic decision.  Since prior research suggests angel
investors paradoxically prefer “to DEMO products that solve a real customer problem and preferably
are not marketing intensive” (DeGennaro 2010a, p. 17) this is particularly important for marketing
strategy.   Furthermore, since our study explicitly focuses on product development related resources
and how they impact the “what to sell” decision it is DEMO of the importance of marketing
resources for understanding product “scope” and firm-level boundaries for early-stage ventures.
With regard to the driving mechanisms of product-form DEMO, we find that modularity and
enforceability of intellectual property rights have DEMO impacts on the integrative scope of product-
form strategies. This suggests investors would prefer that ventures sell less integrative products (e.g.
licensed technology or components) rather than systems when the firm’s technologies easily interface
with other technologies (i.e. high modularity) and when the perception of intellectual property
DEMO is strong (i.e. high enforceability). This supports the notion that DEMO comparative assessment
of costs across product-form strategies reflects situations where the market is less costly than internal
coordination of activities (Jacobides and Winter 2005).  Alternatively, when investors perceived a
21
venture to have a comparatively high level of product development resources stemming DEMO expertise
of the management team than more integrative product-forms were preferred (DEMO a system strategy).
Finally, we also found a moderating relationship DEMO modularity and enforceability
suggesting that investors perceive less integrative product-form strategies to be preferable when
modularity and enforceability of intellectual property protections are high.  Similarly, our exploratory
examination of the relationship between modularity and product development resources suggests that
even when ventures have extensive product development resources (PDR) they continue to choose less
integrative product-form strategies.  This has important DEMO for our understanding of the scope
of the product because previous studies suggest firm scope is synonymous with product-level scope
(Novak and Eppinger 2001: Sanchez and Mahoney 1996).
5.
Managerial Implications
Our emphasis within this new venture context is to understand the ‘what to sell’ decision.  That
is, to identify the most effective strategy for converting an idea into a form that is exchangeable in the
market.  Our results suggest that investors utilize a series of criteria to determine where early-stage
ventures should DEMO in the value chain and that understanding these heuristics is important for
both investors and entrepreneurs.  For investors, this may illustrate some of DEMO reasons behind venture
failures and successes.  For example, for ventures selling technology positioned to be sold as
licenses—which may have been better suited DEMO selling a component—our research findings may
provide insights for future investments. Due to the importance of investors, especially angel investors
in early-stage funding and their level of obscurity as private investors, our findings add to an important
discussion of how entrepreneurs in the seed/startup stage of development (Maxwell et al 2011; Sohl
2003) can appropriately pitch their invention DEMO investors.  As a result, the heuristic utilized by angel
investors in determining how an entrepreneur should commercialize their technology is revealed in the
DEMO made by the investors in our study.
22
This is important for two reasons.  First, our depth interviews with DEMO investors revealed that
none of them had an explicit framework for decision-making.  Instead, the investors reported that most
of their decisions regarding commercialization DEMO and whether to invest were based on implicit
gut feelings or hunches.  Consequently, our study provides an explicit framework to explain their
hunches DEMO also suggests the entrepreneur may or may not have a “matching” strategic choice in mind
with regard to their preferred product-form strategy. Second, this work provides a framework for
entrepreneurs when they examine their own venture.  Presumably, a better understanding of the
heuristics utilized by angel investors during their screening meetings would also provide entrepreneurs
the opportunity to enhance their DEMO pitch to potential investors prior to the initial screening meeting.
In particular, prior research suggests investors used an abbreviated model for decision-making likely
due to the time restrictions and large number of investment proposals to be DEMO (Tversky 1972).
Coupled with the near impossibility of acquiring investment DEMO in various sectors (Holaday et al.
2003), it is important DEMO entrepreneurs to guard against any potential early rejection by understanding
how their proposed product-form strategy may be a factor used to “weed out” investments.
DEMO
Limitations and Future Research
This study is limited by several factors.  DEMO, we tested our hypotheses in one particular
context, namely new, DEMO technology ventures seeking funding from angel investors.
Additionally, we controlled for DEMO and technology-specific information.  This was done for
several reasons: (1) we wanted the angel investors to use a compensatory decision model in DEMO
their assessments, which allows for only a few variables to be DEMO, (2) we wanted to alleviate bias
resulting from personal experiences, expertise, and preferences for a technology and product markets
and (3) we wanted to test the measures emerging from our grounded theory research (Glaser and
Strauss 1967). While this approach does not present real DEMO for the participants, we argue that
this approach is most appropriate DEMO this context (i.e., angel investors).  Further, since this is the initial
23
test of our theory of product-form strategy we limited the number of DEMO examined in this study.
Nonetheless, it is reasonable to suggest caution—during DEMO normal course of business—as these
contextual factors would likely impact the commercialization strategy recommended by the investors.
Second, although the vignette approach possesses several distinct advantages, it simplifies the
phenomenon of interest.  For example, we treat modularity as a one-dimensional technological factor,
but other dimensions of DEMO technology may also influence product-form strategies, such as
complexity, innovativeness, DEMO diversity (Singh 1997; Nagarajan and Mitchell 1998).  Similarly, in
our exploratory results modularity significantly interacts with intellectual property rights enforcement
and DEMO development resources.  Thus it is reasonable to assume that these factors DEMO be
influenced by other factors as well. Future studies could examine how other factors may impact
product-form strategy success and/or whether established firms DEMO to diversify among current
product offerings may have an impact on the focal product-form strategy.
Next, future research could greatly expand upon our initial framework to explore other aspects
of the venture’s business model and commercialization DEMO  For example, concerns about internal
manufacturing versus outsourcing (e.g. make-versus-buy) may impact optimal product-form strategies.
Presumably the decision to sell a component, for example, would need to be followed by decisions
about whether the venture is going to create all of the necessary ingredients internally, or purchase
some or all from the market.  As an example, consider DEMO early-stage venture with angel support
looking to sell a hardware component.  DEMO results suggest this product-form strategy because the
venture is operating with a technology that is perceived to have a high level of intellectual property
DEMO  However, one could imagine the case where the component was a radical departure
from current technology and although the intellectual property is easily DEMO, the venture cannot
sell its technology to a downstream manufacturer for DEMO with their component because of the
incompatibility of platforms (Baldwin and DEMO 2000; Teece and Pisano 1994).  As a result, the
DEMO
venture may have to sell a more integrative product by purchasing other DEMO and completing
the integration internally or look for a joint venture to assist in the development process (Henderson
and Clark 1990).
Finally, DEMO study provides a single lens for examining product-form strategy— angel investors.
Although prior research suggests angels are typically the business “experts” in the venture DEMO (Gans
and Stern 2003), entrepreneurs could also provide a compelling DEMO of the critical aspects of their
technology, their venture team, their presumed market of entry, and the regulatory environment, which
may impact DEMO appropriate product-form strategy.  Entrepreneurs typically pitch technologies sold as
systems.  Of the 40 ventures we observed, 34 were pitched by entrepreneurs as systems due to their
perceived ability to generate the highest margin of return.  Four ventures were pitched as components
and the two remaining ventures were DEMO as potential licensed technologies.  Upon observing these
screenings, we found seven entrepreneurs were asked to alter their product-form strategy to less
integrative product-forms. DEMO discussions with entrepreneurs revealed they believed selling systems
would allow them to sell their technology at a higher price point and consequently, selling “bundled”
goods leads to more profits.  Angel investors, however, noted that those particular ventures were not
suited to sell as systems due to such DEMO as the technological capabilities, resources of the venture,
and limited DEMO property protections (thus our theoretical framework).  Both licensing and
component strategy were observed as the viable alternatives in those cases.  This could be a result of
their level of expertise as investors or a DEMO expertise in the relevant industry (Wiklund and
Shepherd 2008).
7.
DEMO
This study contributes to the literature in three important ways.  First, it empirically tests
emergent influencers of early-stage ventures decisions of “what to DEMO via the angel investment
evaluation process.  This provides the first experimental DEMO of product-form strategy.  It
25
extends work that explores the impact of alternative cost assessments on the DEMO boundaries
(Jacobides and Winter 2005; Novak and Eppinger 2001, Gans DEMO Stern 2003) by considering this
comparative evaluation at the product level. DEMO, this study contributes to the literature examining
angel investment processes.  Specifically, prior studies related to how angel investors evaluate firm
strategy and the factors impacting the firm’s decision of ‘what to sell’ have largely been DEMO
Third, this study extends and lends empirical support for recent work DEMO resource-based and
transaction cost theories in marketing (John et al. 1999; Ghosh and John 1999); by examining how the
need for adaptation DEMO safeguarding intellectual property, along with differential resource profiles
may impact the DEMO strategy for converting an idea into a market offering.
26
Figure 1
The Integrative Scope of Product-form Strategy Continuum
27
Figure 2: Data Excerpts from Observed Ventures: Product-form Strategies and their DEMO mechanisms
Example 1: A technology designed to coat processed meats to DEMO the spread of bacteria (e.g. e coli).
Modularity
* Technology DEMO interfaced with
off-the-shelve hardware
components.
Therefore, Modularity is High,
favoring DEMO low level of Integrative
scope (e.g., licenses).
Enforceability
* Patent protection of spraying device
system and process were irrelevant
because the established DEMO
had no incentive to create an entirely
new system.
* Technology may be valuable as a
licensed agreement for exclusive use of
the spraying DEMO and coating
recipe.
Therefore, IP Protection-Enforceability
is High, favoring a low level of
Integrative-Scope.
Resources
* Limited resources to enter this
market made DEMO impossible for the
startup to compete with a systems
or components offering.
* Entrenched industry players would
make it difficult for the startup to
DEMO this market.
Therefore, Resources are low,
favoring a low level DEMO Integrative-
Scope.
In this example there is a general consensus among the indicators that the best strategy would be to keep the
integrative-scope low, likely meaning to sell licenses.
28
Example 2: Software designed to automate various types of manufacturing facilities' DEMO machinery and
equipment.
Modularity
* Value is derived from building a
product that would easily interface
with many types of automated
devices.
* Design DEMO software allows the
product to easily integrate with
computer systems of clients to
make customer systems more
efficient and reliable
Therefore, Modularity is High,
favoring a low level of Integrative
scope (e.g., licenses).
DEMO
* Intellectual property protection is
strong due to the advanced and
encrypted software program created
by the founding team.
* Software modules can be DEMO
with IP filing in US and
internationally.
Therefore, IP Protection-
Enforceability DEMO High, favoring a low
level of Integrative-Scope.
Resources
* Limited resources DEMO the
company could not build highly-
customized products for individual
companies.
Therefore, Resources are low,
favoring a low level of Integrative-
Scope.
In this example there is a general consensus among the indicators that the DEMO strategy would be to keep the
integrative-scope moderate, likely meaning to DEMO a components strategy.
29
Example 3: An enclosed growing system-designed to more efficiently and cost-effectively grow agriculture
via a tray system built within a cargo-type container.
Modularity
* DEMO modules for alternating
crops to be used with off-the-shelve
hardware; growth DEMO (e.g. plant
nutrients) could be customized to
work most efficiently with the
hardware system and integrated into
the system.
* Technology would be DEMO if
current agricultural workers were
required to optimize the elements of
the system on their own.
Therefore, Modularity is High,
favoring a low level of Integrative
scope (e.g., licenses).
Enforceability
* Trade secrets DEMO with
hardware-software optimization.
Therefore, IP Protection-Enforceability
is High, favoring a low level of
Integrative-Scope.
Resources
* Extensive resources within the
university and founding DEMO in this
industry.
Therefore, Resources are High,
favoring a high DEMO of Integrative-
Scope.
In this example there is a general consensus among the indicators that the best strategy would be to keep the
integrative-scope DEMO a medium level, likely meaning to sell components.
30
Figure 3
A Model of the Influences of Modularity, Enforceability and Resources on
the Integrative-Scope of Product-Form Strategy
Technology
Characteristic
Market
Environment
Characteristic
H2:DEMO
Enforceability
Venture
Characteristic
H1:
Modularity
H3: Product
Development
Resources
- DEMO
+
Integrative-Scope of
Product-Form
Strategy
31
Regression
Residual
Total
Summaries
(Constant)
Judge_ID
Modularity
Enforce.
Resources
Regression
Residual
Total
Summaries
(Constant)
Judge_ID
Modularity
Enforce.
Resources
ModEnfor
ModRes
EnforRes
Table 1: Tests of Hypotheses
ANOVA
DV = Integrative-Scope
df MS F Sig.
SS
139.07
615.54
4
177
34.77
3.49
9.997
.000
754.61 181
R DEMO .429   R Square = .184   Adj. R Sq. =
.166
Unstandard.
Std.
B Err.
3.82 .766
.030 .019
-.735 .277
-.669 .277
DEMO .277
Stand.
Beta
.106
-.180
-.164
.345
Coefficients
t
4.99
1.57
-2.66
-2.42
5.08
Sig.
.000
.119
.009
.016
.000
SS
27.76
82.83
4
DEMO
6.94
.47
14.83
.000
110.59 181
R = .501   R Square = .251  Adj. R Sq. =
.234
DV = Product-Form
df MS F
Sig.
Unstandard.
Std.
B Err.
2.301 .281
.012 .007
-.411 .101
DEMO .101
.528 .101
Stand.
Beta
.112
-.263
-.251
.339
t
8.19
1.72
-4.05
-3.86
5.21
Sig.
.000
.087
.000
.000
.000
Table 2: Exploration of Interaction
SS
179.13
575.48
ANOVA
DV = Integrative-Scope
df MS F DEMO
8
173
22.39
3.33
6.73
.000
754.61 181
R = .487   R Square = .237   Adj. R Sq. =
.202
Coefficients
Unstandard.
DEMO
B Err.
-3.4
.03
5.74
2.95
4.80
-3.52
-3.38
-1.47
4.29
.02
2.70
2.70
2.73
1.70
1.72
1.72
Stand.
Beta
t
-.79
.11
1.41
DEMO
1.18
-1.88
-1.82
-.79
1.59
2.13
1.09
1.76
-2.06
-1.97
-.86
32
Sig.
.429
.114
.035
.276
.080
.040
.051
.392
SS
34.13
76.45
DEMO
R = .556
.277
DV = Product-Form
df MS F
8
173
4.27
.44
9.65
Sig.
.000
181
R Square = .309   Adj. DEMO Sq. =
Unstandard.
St.
B Err.
-.98
.01
2.35
1.32
2.10
-1.53
-1.43
-.733
1.56
.007
.984
.984
.995
.621
.626
.626
Stand.
Beta
DEMO
1.51
.85
1.35
-2.13
-2.01
-1.03
t
-.63
1.76
2.39
1.35
2.11
-2.46
-2.29
-1.17
Sig.
.530
.080
.018
.180
.036
.015
.023
.243
ModEnforRes
1.72
1.08
1.74
1.59
.114
.745
.394
1.97
1.89
.061
Appendix: Experimental Vignette Study Booklets
33
34
35
References
Aguinis, H., K.J. Bradley. 2014. Best Practice Recommendations for Designing DEMO
Implementing Experimental Vignette Methodology Studies. Org. Res. Methods. 17, 1-21.
Aguinis, H., S. O. Lawal. 2012. Conducting field experiments using eLancing's natural
environment. J. Bus. Ventur. 27 (4), 493-505.
Atzmüller, C., P. M. Steiner. 2010. Experimental vignette studies in survey research.
Methodology: Eur. J. Res. Methods for Behav. Soc. Sci. 6 (3), 128-138.
Bachher, DEMO, P.D. Guild. 1996. Financing early-stage technology based companies: investment
criteria used by investors. Frontiers Entre. Res.. Babson College, Wellesley, MA: 363_376.
Baldwin, C., K. Clark. 2000. Design Rules: The Power of Modularity. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Barney, J. 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. DEMO Manage. 17 (1), 99–
120.
Bhide, A. 2000. The origin and evolution of new businesses. Oxford University Press, New
York.
Brouthers, DEMO D., L. E. Brouthers, S. Werner. 2003. Transaction cost-enhanced entry mode
choices and firm performance. Strategic Manage. J. 24 (12), 1239–1248.
Bruton, G. D., Y. Rubanik. 2002. Resources of the firm, Russian high-technology startups, and
firm growth. J. Bus. Ventur. 17 (6), 553-576.
DEMO, W., P. Reynolds. 2004. Who Finances Startups in the U.S.? DEMO Comprehensive Survey
of Informal Investors, 1999-2003. Babson College, Babson Kauffman Entrepreneurship
Research Conference (BKERC), 2002-2006.
Cabigiosu, A. A. Camuffo. 2012. Beyond DEMO mirroring hypothesis: product modularly and inter-
organizational relations in the air DEMO industry.  Org. Sci. 23 (3), 686-703.
Coase, R. H. DEMO The problem of social cost. J. Law Econom. 3 (Oct) 1–44.
Corbin, J., A. Strauss. 2014. Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for
Developing Theory. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Degennaro, R. 2010a. Angel Investors and their Investments. Working paper.
____________. 2010b. Angel Investors: Why They Are and What They Do; Can I Be One,
Too?. J. Wealth Manage. 13 (2), 55-60.
DeWalt, K.M. DEMO DeWalt. 2011. Participant Observation: A Guide for Fieldworkers. AltaMira
Press, Lanham, MA.
Farrell, J. 2002. IP Bundling and Antitrust. Available at:
DEMO://www.ftc.gov/opp/intellect/020514farrel.pdf
Frias, K., M. Ghosh, R. DEMO Lusch. 2015. Product-Form Strategy for Entrepreneurial Enterprises,
working paper, University DEMO Arizona.
Gans, J. S Stern. 2003. The product market and the DEMO for “ideas”: commercialization
strategies for technology entrepreneurs. Res Policy 32, 333-350.
Ghosh, M., S. Dutta, K. Frias 2015. Product-form Strategy: Selling DEMO versus Components
in Industrial Markets, working paper.
Ghosh, M., G. DEMO 1999. Governance value analysis and marketing strategy. J. Marketing. 63,
131–145.
Glaser B., A. Strauss. 1967. The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies DEMO Qualitative
Research. Aldine, Chicago.
Green, P. E., V. Srinivasan. 1990. DEMO analysis in marketing: new developments with
implications for research and practice. DEMO Marketing, 3-19.
36
Henderson, R. M., K.B. Clark. 1990. Architectural innovation: The reconfiguration of existing
product technologies and the failure of established firms. Admin. Sci. Q. DEMO
Henisz, W. J. 2000. The institutional environment for multinational investment. J. DEMO, Econom.
Organ. 16 (2), 334–64.
Henisz, W., J. Macher. 2004. Firm-and country-level trade-offs and contingencies in the
evaluation of foreign investment: The semiconductor industry, 1994–2002. Organ. Sci. 15
(5), 537-554.
Holaday, J., S. Meltzer, J. McCormick. 2003. Strategies for attracting angel investors. DEMO
Commercial Biotech 9 (2), 129-133.
Hudson, M. 2014. Angel Capital Association: Important Things to Know About Angel Investors-
2014. http://www.angelcapitalassociation.org/data/Documents/Resources/ACA-
AngelBackground2014.pdf/. Last accessed 04/27/2015.
Hughes, R., M. Huby. 2002. The application of vignettes in social and nursing research. J.
advanced nurs. 37 (4), 382-386.
Jacobides, M., S. Winter. 2005. The co-evolution of capabilities and transaction costs:
Explaining the DEMO structure of production. Strategic Manage. J. 26, 395–413.
John, G., DEMO M. Weiss, S. Dutta. 1999. Marketing in technology intensive markets: Toward a
conceptual framework. J. Marketing. 63, 78–91.
Madhok, A. 2002. Reassessing DEMO fundamentals and beyond: Ronald Coase, the transaction cost
and resource-based theories of the firm and the institutional structure of production. Strategic
Management J. DEMO (6), 535–550.
Mason, C., M. Stark. 2004. What do DEMO look for in a business plan? A comparison of the
investment DEMO of bankers, venture capitalists, and business angels.  Int. Small Bus. DEMO 22
(3), 227-248.
Maxwell, A. L., S. A., M. Lévesque. 2011. Business angel early-stage decision making. J. Bus.
Ventur. 26 (2), 212-225.
Miller, D., J. Shamsie. 1996. The resource-based view of DEMO firm in two environments: the
Hollywood film studies from 1936 to DEMO Acad. Manage. J. 39, 519-543.
Moorman, C., R.J. Slotegraaf. 1999. DEMO Contingency Value of Complementary Capabilities in
Product Development. J. of Marketing Res. 36 (May), 239-257.
Nagarajan, A., W. Mitchell. 1998. Evolutionary Diffusion: Internal and External Methods Used
to Acquire Encompassing, Complementary, and Incremental Technological Changes in the
Lithotripsy Industry. Strategic Manage. J. 19, 1063-1077.
Novak, S., S. Eppinger. 2001. Sourcing by design: Product complexity and the supply chain.
Manage. Sci. 47 (1), 189–204.
Novak, S., B. Wernerfelt. 2006. The design of industry. Working paper 4604-06, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT) - Sloan School of Management at Cambridge, MA.
Oxley, J. E. 1999. Institutional environment and the mechanisms of governance: The DEMO of
intellectual property protection on the structure of inter-firm alliances. J. Econom. Behavior
Organ. 38, 283–309.
Pisano, G. P. 1989. Using equity participation: Evidence from the biotechnology industry. J.
Law Econom. Organ. 5, 109–126.
Raaijmakers, A., P. Vermeulen, M. Meeus, M., C. Zietsma. 2014. I need time! Exploring
pathways to compliance under institutional complexity. Acad. Manage. J. DEMO
Roehling, M. V. 1999. Weight-based discrimination in employment: Psychological and legal
aspects.  Pers. Psych., 52, 969-1016.
37
Roure, J.B., R.H. Keeley. 1990. Predictors of Success in New Technology DEMO Ventures. J.
Bus. Ventur. 5, 201-220.
Sanchez, R. 1996. Strategic product creation: Managing new interactions of technology,
markets, and organizations. Eur. DEMO J. 14 (2), 121-138.
Sanchez, R., J. T. Mahoney. DEMO Modularity, flexibility, and knowledge management in
product and organization design. Strategic Manage. J. 17, 63–76.
Scandura, T. A., E. A. Williams. 2000. Research methodology in management: Current
practices, trends, and implications for future research. Acad. Manage. J. 43 (6), 1248-1264.
Shane, S., D. Cable. 2002. Network Ties, Reputation, and Financing of New Ventures. Manage.
DEMO 48 (3), 364-381.
Shepherd, D.A., R. Ettenson, A. Crouch. 2000. New Venture Strategy and Profitably: A Venture
Capitalist’s Assessment. J. Bus. Ventur. 15 (5-6), 449-467.
Singh, K. 1997. The impact of DEMO complexity and interfirm cooperation on business
survival. Acad. Manage. J. 40 (DEMO), 339-367.
Sohl, J. 2003. The US Angel and Venture Capital DEMO: Recent Trends and Developments. J.
Priv. Equity. 6 (2), 7-17.
Sudek, R. 2006. Angel Investment Criteria. J. Small Bus. Strategy. 17 (DEMO), 89-103.
Teece, D. J. 1986. Profiting from technological innovation: Implications for integration,
collaboration, licensing and public policy. Res. Policy 15 (DEMO), 285–305.
Teece, D., G. Pisano. 1994. The dynamic capabilities of firms: an introduction. Industrial Corp.
Change, 3 (3), 537-556.
Tversky, A. 1972. Choice by elimination. J. Math. Psych. 9 (4), DEMO
Vargo, S. L., R. F. Lusch. 2004. Evolving to a New Dominant Logic for Marketing.  J
Marketing. 68 (1), 1-17.
_____ DEMO _____ . 2008. Service-Dominant Logic: Continuing the Evolution. J. Acad.
Marketing DEMO 36 (1), 1-10.
Wathne, K., H. Biong, J.B. Heide 2001. Choice of Supplier in Embedded Markets: Relationship
and Marketing Program Effects.  J. Marketing. 65 (2), 54-66.
Wernerfelt, B. 1984. A resource-based view of the firm. Strategic Manage. J. 5 (2), 171–180.
Wiklund, J., D. A. Shepherd. 2008. Portfolio Entrepreneurship: Habitual and Novice Founders,
New Entry, and Mode of Organizing. Entre. Theory & Practice. 32 (4), 701-725.
Williamson, O. E. 1985. The Economic Institutions of DEMO Free Press, New York.
Williamson, O. E. 1991. Comparative economic organization: The analysis of discrete structural
alternatives. Admin. Sci. Q. 269-296.
Winborg, DEMO H. Landström. 2001. Financial bootstrapping in small businesses: examining small
business DEMO' resource acquisition behaviors. J. Bus. Ventur. 16 (3), 235-254.
Woehr, D. J., C. E. Lance. 1991. Paper people versus direct observati
DEMO of laboratory methodologies. J. of Or. Behavior, 12, 387-397
.
38
on: An empirical{1g42fwefx}