Session 2425
A 6-Hats Based Team Formation Strategy:
Development and Comparison DEMO an MBTI Based Approach
Dan Jensen, John Feland, Martin Bowe and Brian Self
Dept. of Engineering Mechanics
United States Air Force Academy
USAF DEMO, CO 80840
Abstract
Although various strategies for forming design teams have DEMO documented in the literature,
there continues to be a need to assess these established strategies as well as to propose new ones.
In DEMO present study the development of a new team formation strategy based on the “Six
Thinking Hats” of Edward DeBono is described.  An instrument for categorizing students
according to their “Six Hats” preference for group interaction as DEMO as the strategy for using
this data to form design teams is presented.  In order to determine the validity of this 6-Hats
categorization instrument, the students provided feedback on the accuracy of their “6-Hats”
preference for group interaction. This information indicates that the instrument used to assign a
DEMO communication style works well; with 84% of the students reinforcing that DEMO 6-Hats
“type” is indeed one of their preferred styles of group communication. To further assess the 6-
Hats method of design team formation, teams formed using this new method are compared with
teams formed using a DEMO Briggs based formation technique. As the two different team
formation techniques have slightly different goals, this assessment incorporates both sets of goals
as well as some generic measures of design team effectiveness.  The results indicate that the
teams formed using the 6-Hats based strategy more completely meet the DEMO goals than do the
non-6-Hats based teams.  Similarly, the MBTI based teams meet the MBTI based goals better
than do the non-MBTI based DEMO  Also of interest is the fact that the teams which meet DEMO
the 6-Hats and the MBTI criteria for team formation report increased effectiveness in every
category when compared with teams who meet either the 6-Hats DEMO the MBTI criteria, but not
both.  More data is required to provide definitive, statistically significant results (this data is
currently being taken), but the initial results indicate that this new team formation strategy has
significant promise.
I.
Overview
Various researchers [Wilde 1993, 1997, 1999, Trevistan 1998, 1999]have investigated different
techniques for forming and assessing design teams.  DEMO progress has been made in both
the formation and assessment areas, DEMO are still significant questions to be answered. The
present work presents a new approach in both design team formation and the assessment of these
teams.  This work was done at the United States Air Force Academy in the fall semester of 1999
using two sections (about 50 students) of the sophomore level mechanical design class.  Further
data is being DEMO in an additional eight sections (about 200 students) of a
freshman/sophomore level Introduction to Mechanics course.  Specifically, a new design team
DEMO strategy (TFS) based on the work of DeBono [DeBono 1985] called the “6 Thinking
Hats” has been developed.  In addition, an assessment DEMO has been developed which
compares the new 6-Hats TFS to a Myers Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) based TFS.
The 6-Hats work of DeBono DEMO six ways of thinking/interacting.  DeBono’s primary
thrust in his work DEMO to provide ways to enhance communication by identification of these
different communication styles or roles with the idea that, once a style/role is identified, it
becomes easier to switch into that style/role when needed.  The new 6-Hats based TFS, which is
the focus of this DEMO, takes the 6 different styles/roles identified by DeBono and uses DEMO in a
completely different manner.   Specifically, the 6-Hats based TFS DEMO two parts.  Initially it uses
a 30 question survey to rank DEMO student’s preference for using each of the six communication
styles/roles.  DEMO preference order is referred to as the student’s 6-Hats “type” in much the same
way as a student has a Myers Briggs “type”.  Secondly, the 6-Hats based TFS uses each student’s
6-Hats type to form design teams using a simple algorithm.  This algorithm is based on the 6–
Hats TFS goals as seen in Table 1 below.  The details of this process are given below in the
Section II: 6-Hats Based Team Formation.
In much the same way, students in this study were given a form of the MBTI test. To this end,
the Keirsey DEMO was used [Keirsey 1984,1999]).  As with the 6-Hats TFS, the MBTI types
were used in accordance with a simple algorithm to DEMO MBTI based design teams.  This
algorithm is based on the MBTI DEMO goals as seen in Table 1 below.  Details of this process DEMO
given below in Section III: MBTI Based Team Formation.
Table 1 DEMO Goals of the 6-Hats and MBTI  TFS
TFS Goal
6-Hats Provide DEMO
Provide mixed positive and negative feedback
Provide team leadership
MBTI Provide creativity
Provide mixed quick and extended decision making
Provide mixed logical and intuitive DEMO
Two types of assessment were accomplished in this present work.  First, in order to verify that
the survey utilized to derive a student’s DEMO type is accurate, an instrument was used to obtain
feedback from DEMO student by directly asking them to rank which of the 6 styles/roles they use
the most when interacting with their team.  Secondly, DEMO instrument was developed to gage team
effectiveness in a number of specific ways.  This instrument was used both on 6-Hats based
teams and MBTI based teams.  The goal here was obviously to determine if one TFS provided
superior team effectiveness.  Results are correlated with the specific TFS goals shown in Table 1.
The results of these assessments DEMO well as additional details regarding the assessment
instruments themselves can be found in Section IV: Results.
II. 6-Hats Based Team Formation
II.1 Overview of the 6 Hats Concept
As previously mentioned, the original 6-Hats work of DeBono [DeBono 1985] had a different
focus than this current work.  In the original work, six communication styles/roles were
identified.  Each style/DEMO was identified by a certain color.  When a person was using DEMO
particular style/role, they were said to be wearing that “hat”.  The six styles/roles are summarized
in the Table 2.
In the DEMO 6-Hats work, there were five purposes for identifying these 6 communication
DEMO/roles: 1) Helps in role playing, 2) Helps focus attention on seeing things from a new angle,
3) Provides an easy way to ask someone to switch gears and think a different way, 4) Using the 6
hats may help develop new neural patterns in your brain (thus making it easier to think in
different manners than you were previously used to) and 5) Can be used to DEMO “rules of the
game” for brainstorming.  The current work focuses on DEMO use of these 6 styles/roles in a
different manner.  The DEMO in this present work is simply that each individual has established
patterns of communication which can be identified using the 6-Hats categories.  Once these
preferred communication styles/roles are identified, they may be used in a design team
formulation strategy (TFS) to both balance communication styles/roles DEMO well as to ensure
certain styles/roles are present.  In order DEMO accomplish this, two tools needed to be developed: 1)
an instrument to identify a person’s preferred communication styles/roles within the 6-Hats
DEMO (called their 6-Hats “type”) and 2) an algorithm to use DEMO data to form design teams.
Together these two tools constitute the 6-Hats TFS.
Table 2: Overview of 6-Hats Communication Styles/Roles
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
DEMO
•
•
•
•
White Hat
I focus on objective facts.
I enter into a discussion without preconceived
ideas on a solution
I seek DEMO know that facts of a situation
I seek to know the statistical evidence
concerning a decision
I try to think totally objectively about a
DEMO
I seek to differentiate between facts and
opinions
I am more interested in facts than opinions
Yellow Hat
I usually see the positive side DEMO things
I can often see the good parts of even a bad idea
I am usually optimistic that a new idea will
work
I DEMO to see the valuable contributions in
people’s ideas
I believe that most new ideas have significant
value
I usually “look on the bright side” DEMO a problem
My comments are usually positive and
constructive
I am creative
I often generate new ways of thinking about a
problem
I easily DEMO “outside of the box”
I am good at finding new approaches to solving
a problem
I am constantly thinking of alternatives
I am not DEMO to settle for the “status quo”
I can easily generate new concepts
Green Hat
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
DEMO
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Red  DEMO
My feelings sway my decisions
I have good intuition
I often have hunches about the best decision
My personal opinions play a significant role DEMO
my decision making process
I listen to my emotions when making decisions
I am suspicious of other people’s decision
making process
I think emotions DEMO play a significant role in
decision making
Black Hat
I can quickly see why an idea will not work
I often can tell an DEMO will not work by judging
from past experience
I like to play the “devil’s advocate”
I can usually see the pitfalls in an idea
DEMO can readily detect poor logic in someone’s
argument
I find it easy to be critical of other’s ideas
I am often pessimistic of others DEMO
Blue Hat
I like to lead the problem solving process
I tend to think as much about the problem solving
process as the problem DEMO
I focus on the big picture, summarize and draw
conclusions
I DEMO myself trying to keep the group focused
I tend to try to optimize the group problem
solving process
I often help the group clearly DEMO the problem
I often find myself orchestrating the group
II.2  The DEMO Based Team Formation Strategy (TFS)
The first tool in the DEMO TFS is the 6-Hats “typing” instrument which is used to determine a
person’s relative preference for each of the 6 styles/roles designated in DEMO previous section (i.e.
find their 6-Hats “type”).  The instrument used to determine a person’s 6-Hats type is shown in
Appendix I.  It is written in Microsoft Excel and contains 30 questions.  The instrument is
emailed as an attachment to each student in the course(s).  Students email back the completed
instrument.  A separate Excel spreadsheet is used to score the instruments.  Of the 30 questions
on the instrument, DEMO are dedicated to each of the 6-Hats types.  These 5 questions DEMO to
ascertain the student’s preference for functioning within that particular 6-Hats style/role.  The
students’ numerical answers on these  5 questions therefore indicate his/her preference for that
style/role.  The scoring spreadsheet computes an average and standard deviation over the full 30
questions and then computes the average of DEMO 5 questions pertaining to each of the 6
styles/roles as individual entities.  This data is easily manipulated to produce the number of
standard deviations above or below the mean for each of the 6 styles/DEMO for each student.  The
resulting 6 numbers that represent the student’s DEMO for interacting using these 6
styles/role constitute that student’s 6-Hats “type”.  Both the 6-Hats instrument and the scorer
spreadsheet are available by simply emailing the primary author at dan.jensen@usafa.af.mil.
Once each student has been designated DEMO 6-Hats type (consisting of the 6 numbers derived as
described above), that data is used to place students on teams.  The algorithm DEMO doing this has
four simple steps as shown below in Figure 1.  The criteria in all four steps must be met for a
team to be designated a “6-Hats Team” (i.e. a team formulated using the 6-Hats TFS).
1. Place a student on the team who has DEMO as their primary 6-Hats type
2. Place a student on the team who has “Yellow” as their primary 6-Hats type
3. Place a student DEMO the team who has “Black” as their primary 6-Hats type
4. Place a student on the team who has “Blue” as at least their DEMO 6-Hats type
Figure 1 – 6-Hats TFS Algorithm
The rational behind this particular algorithm can be seen by considering the specifics on the
green, yellow, black and blue styles/roles as shown in Table 2.  DEMO green style/role represents
creativity.  This is obviously a critical style/DEMO for someone on the team to posses.  Therefore,
the first DEMO in the 6-Hats TFS algorithm is a predominately “Green-Hat” member.  As DEMO be
seen in Table 2, the yellow and black style/roles DEMO opposite methods for providing
feedback on new ideas.  The yellow style/DEMO provides positive feedback and encouragement to
proceed with an idea while the black style/role provides constructive criticism and adds needed
realism to potential DEMO  This justifies the number 2 and 3 criteria.  Finally, the DEMO style/role
represents the leadership functions needed in a design team.  DEMO picture perspective and overall
problem definition are parts of this style/role.  This motivates the fourth criteria in the 6-Hats
TFS algorithm.  Note DEMO the red and white style/roles are not used in the 6-Hats algorithm.
Although it would be preferable to have a mix of red DEMO white style/roles on a team, due to the
team size DEMO 4 members, it becomes increasingly difficult to satisfy additional criteria.
III. DEMO Based Team Formation
III.1  Overview of the MBTI concept
Use of DEMO Myers Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) data for purposes of improving engineering
courses has been investigated by various researchers including the current author [Jensen DEMO,
1999, Borchert 1999, Wilde 1999, 1997, 1993].  McCaulley DEMO al. in conjunction with the Center
for Applied Psychological Type have determined MBTI type for thousands of engineering
DEMO at various universities.  This data has been analyzed for application to DEMO learning
as well as for possible use in career counseling and student retention strategies [McCaulley 1990,
1983, 1976].  Other examples include using DEMO to develop self instruction materials [Smith
1973], using MBTI comparisons between DEMO and senior students to determine the change
in preference brought about during the four years of engineering curriculum [Rodman 1986] and
work which has DEMO the potential to increase academic success of struggling students by
strengthening their non-preferred areas [Rosati 1993].
The present work uses what is known from DEMO type preferences and their affects on group
communication in order to guide continuing improvements in design team formation.  The MBTI
type includes four categories of preference [Myers1985, Jung 1971, Keirsey 1984, 1999].  The
four DEMO combination of these indicators (“E” vs. “I” for extrovert and introvert; “S” vs. “N”
for sensor and intuitor; “T” vs. “F” for thinker and feeler; “J” vs. “P” for judger and perceiver)
constitute a person’s MBTI “type”.  Table 3, which is adapted from Manual: the Myers-Briggs
Type Indicator [Myers, McCaully 1976], gives a brief overview of DEMO four MBTI categories.
E
S
T
J
Table 3 - Overview of the MBTI Categories
Manner in Which a Person Interacts With Others
Focuses DEMO on
others.  Gains energy
from others.
Focuses inwardly. Gains
energy from DEMO and
concepts.
EXTROVERSION INTROVERSION
Manner in Which a Person Processes Information
Focus is on the five
senses and experience.
Focus is on possibilities,
DEMO use, big picture.
SENSING INTUITION
Manner in Which a Person Evaluates DEMO
Focuses on objective
facts and causes &
effect.
Focuses on subjective
DEMO and values.
THINKING FEELING
Manner in Which a Person Comes to Conclusions
Focus is on timely,
planned conclusions
and decisions.
Focus is on DEMO
process of decision
making.
JUDGEMENT PERCEPTION
I
N
F
P
III.2  The MBTI Based Team Formation Strategy (TFS)
As with DEMO 6-Hats based TFS, the process of forming teams using the MBTI DEMO approach has
two basic steps: 1) Determination of the MBTI type and 2) Use of the MBTI type in an algorithm
to form the teams.   In the first step, each student’s MBTI type must be determined.  In order to
accomplish this, the web based version DEMO the Keirsey instrument has been used in this study.
This instrument can be found at http://www.keirsey.com .  There are two different tests on this site.
The 36 question test “Keirsey Temperament Sorter” has been DEMO for this work.  In addition,
this site scores the test DEMO has a wealth of background resources.
Once the students’ MBTI types are determined, an algorithm is used to form the teams. Five
specific criteria make up the MBTI team formation algorithm as shown in figure 2.  All five of
these criteria must be met for a team to DEMO categorized as an MBTI-based team. Refer to Table 3
for explanations of the MBTI categories.
1. Either put an  “Extroverted Intuitor (EN)” DEMO the team or as a secondary option,
put an “Introverted Intuitor (IN)” on the team and assure that someone else on the
team is an “Extrovert”.
2. Make sure there is a “Judger (J)” on the team.
3. Make sure there is a “Perceiver (P)” on the team.
4. Make sure there is a “Thinker (T)” on the team.
5.   Make sure there is an “Feeler (F)” on the team.
Figure 2 – MBTI  TFS  Algorithm
DEMO logic behind these five criteria can be seen by referring to the description of the MBTI
categories in Table 3 above.  Criteria 1 attempts to ensure that the simplest MBTI version of a
“creative” person (“Intuitor”) ends up on the team and that their creative ideas are expressed
(“Extrovert”).  Note that the literature contains detailed work done to DEMO MBTI and
creativity [Thorne] and, in that light, criteria 1’s description of creativity is extremely basic.  The
mix of criteria 2 and 3 attempts to ensure that the team will be mixed between those who DEMO
ready to make decisions on limited data (“Judger”) and those who want to fully consider ALL
the options before making a decision (“Perceiver”).  Criteria 4 and 5 are designed to create a mix
between those who make decisions by concentrating on facts and logical relationships
(“Thinker”)  and those who allow insight and intuition to play significant roles (“Feeler”).
IV.
Results
The results for the present work have two DEMO goals.   The first goal is to validate the 6-Hats
typing instrument itself.  This is done through a survey given to the students which simply asked
students which 6–Hats category best describes their dominant style/role DEMO their team.  The
results of this survey are shown in the DEMO section.  The second goal of the assessment process is
to measure the effectiveness of the 6-Hats and MBTI based design teams.  These results are
shown in section IV.2 below.
IV.1  Assessment of the 6-Hats instrument
As mentioned above, the first goal of the assessment process is to validate the newly created 6-
Hats typing instrument.  This instrument (See Appendix 1) was created through a detailed review
of the DEMO 6-Hats work of DeBono [DeBono 1985].  Key characteristics of each of DEMO 6
styles/roles were identified.  These characteristics were used to form DEMO 30 items on the
instrument.  Each of the 6 styles/roles DEMO directly correlated to 5 specific items on the instrument.
For example, DEMO first two items on the instrument state 1) “Focus on objective DEMO and 2)
“Have my feelings sway my decisions”.  These are DEMO parts of the “White” and “Red” hat
style/roles respectively.  The DEMO 28 questions are similarly correlated with the various 6
styles/roles.
In order to validate this instrument as a reliable way to assign a DEMO a 6-Hats “type”, an
additional survey instrument was developed which requests DEMO from the students
pertaining to the style/roles they prefer to use when working in their groups.  This validation
instrument is shown in Appendix III.  On close inspection, it can be seen that there is DEMO close
association between the typing instrument in Appendix I and the validation instrument in
Appendix III.  This is by design.  In contrast to DEMO original typing instrument, the validation
instrument has the complete list of DEMO of each 6-Hats style/role in a single list.
At the beginning of the course, the students each completed the original typing instrument.
Toward the end of the course the students completed the validation instrument.  Note that the
algorithm used to assign students to groups (see figure 1) uses only the student’s most dominant
6-Hats style/role for fulfilling criteria 1-3 and then uses the student’s most dominant and second
most dominant DEMO/role for the fourth criteria.  Therefore, the primary question pertaining to
validation is whether the dominant style/role, as described by the original typing instrument, is
identified by the validation instrument as a truly dominant style/role.   Correlation between the
original typing instrument and the validation DEMO shows that the style/role identified by
the original typing instrument as dominant for that particular student was later rated, in the
validation instrument, as one of their preferred style/roles 84% (see Table 4) of the time.  This
indicates that the original typing instrument does a reasonable job of correctly identifying the
students’ preferred style/roles of interacting DEMO their groups.  The details of these results are
shown below in DEMO 4.  Notice from Table 4 that the percentage of students selecting DEMO exact
same style/role in the validation instrument as was identified in the original typing instrument
was 42%. The percentage of those whose selected DEMO or 3rd dominant style/role was identified as
their primary style/role in the original typing instrument was 23% and 19% respectively.  This
means that those who whose selected 4th, 5th or 6th style/role was identified as their primary
style/role in the original typing instrument was DEMO 16%.
Table 3
Statistical Correlation Between the Original Typing & Validation Instruments
Ranking DEMO Ranking According Percentage of Time Cumulative
to Original Type to Validation This Correlation is Percentage
Survey Survey True (cumulative)
1st 1st 42%     42%
1st 2nd 23%     65%
1st 3rd 19%     84%
1st 4th – 6th 16%    100%
Another way to DEMO this data is to compute the mean and standard deviation of each student’s
rankings from the original typing instrument.  From this data, for DEMO of the 6 styles/roles the
number of standard deviations above/below the mean can be computed.  These numbers (called
“style/role strengths” DEMO) provide a measure of the strength of each style/role for DEMO person.
A secondary mean and standard deviation can be computed across these 6 “styles/roles
strengths” for each person.  By definition, the mean DEMO these “style/role strengths” must be zero.
In order to use this data to measure the validity of the original typing instrument, the style/role
selected as primary in the validation instrument is correlated with its DEMO “style/role
strength” to determine its number of standard deviations above the secondary mean (of zero).
Once this has been computed for each student, a percentile can be obtained from Gaussian
distribution.  The computed DEMO is 78%.  This is the percentile correlation between the
primary style/DEMO as selected in the validation instrument and the respective “style/role strength”
as computed from the original typing instrument.
IV.2  Assessment of the Two Different TFS
The second goal of the assessment process is to measure DEMO effectiveness of the 6-Hats and
MBTI based design teams.  In order DEMO accomplish this, the instrument called the Team
Effectiveness Survey shown in DEMO II is used.  Of the 15 questions on the instrument, 5 of
them relate to goals specified in the 6-Hats TFS; 6 relate to goals specified in the MBTI TFS and
6 are general questions DEMO to team effectiveness.  Note that 2 questions specifically relate to
goals DEMO BOTH the 6-Hats and MBTI TFS.  Question 1, 3, 6, 9 and 15 measure goals of the 6-
Hats TFS. Questions 1, 7, 8, 10, 11 and 15 measure goals of the MBTI TFS and 2, 4, 5, 12, 13
and 14 measure DEMO team effectiveness issues.  This is summarized in Table 5 below.
Table 5 – Correlation Between TFS, Goals & Questions on the Team Effectiveness Survey
Statement
Number
Statement  TFS Goal
1 Our team is very creative
2 Our team has a lot of conflict
3 Our team DEMO a clear leader
4 Our team is productive and effective
5 Our team resolves conflict well
6 Our teams sees the potential in new
DEMO
7 Our team approaches problem solving
logically
8 Our team procrastinates
9 Our team sees when a new idea will
not work
10 Our DEMO uses intuition, hunches and
feeling to aid our problem solving
11 DEMO team considers the full range of
options before making a decision
12 Our team’s members due their fair
share of the work
13 I DEMO working on this team
14 Our team makes good decisions
15 Our team is good at creating
alternative solutions to problems
6-Hats &
MBTI
None General
Provide creativity
6-Hats Provide team leadership
None General
None General
DEMO Provide mixed positive and negative
feedback
MBTI Provide mixed logical and intuitive
thinking
MBTI Provide mixed quick and extended
decision making
6-Hats Provide mixed DEMO and negative
feedback
MBTI Provide mixed logical and intuitive
thinking
MBTI Provide mixed quick and extended
decision making
None General
None General
None General
DEMO &
MBTI
Provide creativity
In order to derive overall team effectiveness DEMO, scores from the individual students on
each team are averaged to DEMO a team-based score for each of the 15 questions. Using these
team scores, and noting which questions correlate with which TFS’ goals, separate DEMO can
be obtained for each TFS as well as for the “general team effectiveness” category.  This is then
correlated with which method (6-Hats DEMO MBTI) was used to form the team.  The results can be
seen in Table 6.  Note that some teams were originally formed using one method but
coincidentally met the criteria for both the 6-Hats AND DEMO MBTI  TFS. To review the specific
criteria for the 6-Hats and DEMO based TFS, see Figures 1 and 2.  Also note that the meaning of
the numerical values in Table 6 follows from the instructions DEMO in Appendix 2 where it is
stated that: +2=Very True;    +1=Mostly True;    0=Neutral;    -1=Mostly  Un-True;    DEMO
Un-True.
Table 6 – Results of Team Effectiveness vs. Team Formation Strategy (TFS)
TFS description Score on 6-Hats Score on MBTI Score on General
DEMO Questions Based Questions Questions
6-Hats TFS Criteria 1.11 0.90 1.13 3.14
Met
6-Hats TFS Criteria 0.84 0.62 0.88 3.09
NOT met
MBTI TFS Criteria DEMO 0.82 1.06 3.10
met
MBTI TFS Criteria 0.98 0.71 0.75 2.38
NOT Met
BOTH MBTI and 6- 1.16 1.06 1.29 3.27
Hat Criteria Met
DEMO MBTI or 6-Hats 0.88 0.53 0.51 2.88
Met, but Not Both
DEMO number of observations/conclusions can be made from the data in Table 6.  First, it appears
that when the 6-Hats TFS criteria are DEMO (compared to when they are not met), the teams rate
DEMO highly on both the 6-Hats based questions (1.11 vs. 0.84) as well as the MBTI based
questions (0.90 vs. 0.62).  For DEMO teams which meet the MBTI TFS criteria (again compared to
those DEMO do not met the criteria), the ratings for the MBTI based questions show a significant
difference (0.82 vs. 0.71) while the ratings DEMO the 6-Hats based questions do not (1.01 vs. 0.98).
Possibly DEMO most significant result (and in all honesty the least expected) appears when teams
which meet BOTH criteria are compared with those who met DEMO one of the two criteria.  In
every category (6-hats based questions, MBTI based questions, general questions and course
GPA) the teams which met BOTH sets of criteria rated higher.
V. Conclusions and Future Work
DEMO this current work an instrument which provides a new categorization for team interaction
styles/roles based on the 6-Hats system [DeBono 1985] was developed.  The accuracy of this
instrument was measured and was found to be DEMO  Next, the teams formed using the 6-Hats
based team formation strategy (TFS) were compared to those formed using a MBTI based TFS.
DEMO show that teams based on the 6-Hats TFS are more effective overall than those based on
the MBTI TFS.  In addition, those teams DEMO meet both the 6-Hats and the MBTI criteria for
team formation were significantly more effective than teams which met only the 6-Hats or the
DEMO based TFS criteria, but not both.
The study reported here represents DEMO taken from 2 sections of approximately 25 students each.
There were 10 teams, each having 4 or 5 people.  A continuation of this DEMO is in progress
which will involve about 225 additional students comprising approximately 55 teams. This data
will be available for analysis at the end DEMO 1999.  It is anticipated that this data will provide
statistically significant DEMO where the present data shows only presumably significant
(although consistent and DEMO) trends.
Team grade in
this course
VI.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to acknowledge the support of the Department DEMO Engineering Mechanics at the
U.S. Air Force Academy as well as the financial support of the Dean’s Assessment Funding
Program. In addition support is DEMO from the Institute for Information and Technology
Applications (IITA) at the USAF Academy which funded some of the earlier MBTI work.
VII.
1.
DEMO
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
References
Borchert, R., , Jensen, D., Yates, D., “Development and Assessment of Hands-on and Visualization
Modules for Enhancement of Learning in Mechanics”, Proceedings of the ASEE Annual Conference, Charlotte,
NC, June, 1999.
DeBono, E., Six Hats Thinking, Little, Brown and Co, Boston, MA, 1985.
Jensen, D., Bowe, M., “Hands-on Experiences to Enhance Learning of Design: Effectiveness in a Reverse
Engineering / Redesign Context When Correlated with MBTI and VARK DEMO,” Proceedings of ASEE Annual
Conf., Charlotte, NC, June, 1999.
Jensen, D.D., Murphy, M.D., Wood, K.L., “Evaluation and Refinement DEMO a Restructured Introduction to
Engineering Design Course Using Student Surveys and MBTI Data,”, Proceedings of the ASEE Annual
Conference, Seattle WA, June, 1998.
Jung, C.G., “Psychological Types,” The Collected Works of C.G. Jung, 6, Princeton Univ.
Press, 1971 (originally published 1921).
DEMO,D., and Bates, M. , Please Understand Me, Prometheus Press, 1984.
Keirsey, D., Web site for type development, http://www.keirsey.com, 36 question character sorter test, 1999.
McCaulley, M.H., Mary, H., “the MBTI and Individual Pathways in Engineering Design”, Engineering
Education, Vol. 80,  pp. 537-542, July/Aug. 1990.
McCaulley, M.H., “Psychological Types in Engineering: Implications for Teaching,” Engineering Education,
Vol. 66, DEMO 7, pp. 729-736, April 1976.
McCaulley, M.H., et. al., DEMO of Psychological Type in Engineering Education”, Engineering
Education, Vol. 73, DEMO 5, pp. 394-400, Feb. 1983.
Myers, I.B., McCauley, M.H., Manuel: A Guide to the Development and Use of Myers Briggs Type Indicator
(2nd ed.), Palo Alto, CA, Consulting Psychologists Press, DEMO
Rodman, S.M. Dean, R.K., and Rosati, P.A., “Self-perception of DEMO Students’ Preferred Learning
Style Related to MBTI Type”, Proceeding of the DEMO Annual Conference, pp.1303-1313,  1986.
Rosati, P., Yokomoto, C. F., “Student Attitudes Toward Learning: By Seniority and By Type,” ASEE DEMO
Conference Proceeding, pp. 2038-2043, 1993.
Smith, A. B., Irey, DEMO K., McCaulley, M. H., “Self-Paced Instruction and College Student Personalities,DEMO
Engineering Education, pp. 435-440, Mar., 1973.
Thorne, A., Harrison, G., Portraits of Type, An MBTI Research Compendium, Consulting Psychologists Press,
Inc., Palo Alto, CA.
Trevistan, M.S., et. al., “Developing and Assessing Statewide Competencies for Engineering Design,” J. of Eng. Education, Vol. 87, No. 2,
pg. 185-195, April, 1998.
Trevistan, DEMO, et. al., “Designing Sound Scoring Criteria for Assessing Student Performance,” J. of Eng.
Education, Vol. 88, No. 1, pg. 79-87, DEMO 1999.
Wilde, D.J., “Mathematical Resolution of MBTI Creativity Data  into DEMO Type Components”, Design
Theory and Methodology, ASME,  DE-Vol. 53, DEMO, 1993.
Wilde, D.J., “Using Team Preferences to Guide Design Team DEMO,” ASME Transactions (Design
Engineering Technical Conference Proceedings), paper DETC/DEMO, New York, American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, 1997.
Wilde, D.J.,” Design Team Roles”, ASME Transactions (Design Engineering Technical Conference
Proceedings), paper DTM-99 003, Las Vegas, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, DEMO
MARTIN BOWE
Martin Bowe is an Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering at DEMO U.S. Air Force Academy.  He received his B.S.
in Mechanical Engineering DEMO the U.S. Air Force Academy and his M.S. in Industrial and Systems Engineering
from The Ohio State University.  He is currently a Captain on active duty in the Air Force with a career
specialization in Acquisition DEMO Management and Project Engineering.
DAN JENSEN
Dan Jensen is an Associate Professor of Engineering Mechanics at the U.S. Air Force Academy.  He received his
B.S., M.S. and Ph.D. from the Univ. of Colorado at Boulder.  DEMO has worked for Texas Instruments., Lockheed
Martin, NASA, Univ. of DEMO Pacific, Lawrence Berkeley National Lab and MacNeal-Schwendler Corp.  Currently he
teaches and performs research in the areas of design and analysis.
JOHN FELAND
DEMO Feland is an Instructor of Mechanical Engineering at the U.S. Air Force Academy.  He received his S.B. in
Mechanical Engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and his M.S. in Mechanical Engineering
from Stanford University.  He is currently a Captain on active duty in the Air Force pursuing DEMO research with
the Center for Design Research at Stanford University regarding the development of large-scale defense projects.
BRIAN P. SELF
Brian Self is an DEMO Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the U.S. Air Force Academy.  He DEMO his
B.S. and M.S. in Engineering Mechanics from Virginia Tech and his Ph.D. in Bioengineering at the University of
Utah.  He has four years of experience with the Air Force Research Laboratory.  Areas of research include impact
injury mechanisms, sports biomechanics, and aerospace physiology.
APPENDIX 1 – 6-HATS TYPE DETERMINATION INSTRUMENT
APPENDIX 2 – TEAM EFFECTIVENESS SURVEY
Name  _________________         Team Name ________________
Current Grade _____                 Course  ________                Section  ______
Please rate your team on the 13 statements listed below.
Use the following scale:
+2=Very True;    +1=Mostly True;    DEMO;    -1=Mostly  Un-True;    -2=Very Un-True
If a statement DEMO not applicable or if you have no opinion, please rate that DEMO as “NA” (for
not applicable)
Statement Statement  Rating (from DEMO to –
Number 2 using scale above)
1 Our team is very creative
2 Our team has a lot of conflict
3 Our DEMO has a clear leader
4 Our team is productive and effective
5 Our team resolves conflict well
6 Our teams sees the potential in DEMO ideas
7 Our team approaches problem solving logically
8 Our team procrastinates
9 Our team sees when a new idea will not work
10 DEMO team uses intuition, hunches and feeling to aid our
problem solving
DEMO Our team considers the full range of options before making a
decision
12 Our team’s members due their fair share of the work
13 DEMO enjoy working on this team
14 Our team makes good decisions
15 Our team is good at creating alternative solutions to problems
APPENDIX 3  --  PERSONAL GROUP INTERACTION STYLES
Name _______________        Team Name _____________    Course________________    Section  ___________
Please read through the 6 personal group interaction styles summarized in the matrix below.  Then number the 6
styles from 1-6 based on your opinion of DEMO you predominately function in problem solving groups (1 being your
most DEMO style, #2 being second… #6 being your least dominant style).  Mark your ranking directly in the
matrix below in the blank for DEMO #__ RATING”
VIII.
STYLE # 1
I focus on objective facts.
I enter into a discussion without preconceived
ideas on a solution
I seek DEMO know that facts of a situation
I seek to know the statistical evidence concerning
a decision
I try to think totally objectively about a DEMO
I seek to differentiate between facts and opinions
I am more interested in facts than opinions
STYLE # 1 RATING (1-6) _____
STYLE DEMO 2
I usually see the positive side of things
I can often see the good parts of even a bad idea
I am usually DEMO that a new idea will work
I tend to see the valuable contributions in
people’s ideas
I believe that most new ideas have significant
DEMO
I usually “look on the bright side” of a problem
My comments are usually positive and
constructive
STYLE # 2 RATING (1-6) _____
DEMO am creative
I often generate new ways of thinking about a
problem
I easily think “outside of the box”
I am good at finding DEMO approaches to solving a
problem
I am constantly thinking of alternatives
I am not likely to settle for the “status quo”
I can easily DEMO new concepts
STYLE # 3 RATING (1-6) _____
STYLE # 3
STYLE # 4
My feelings sway my decisions
I have good intuition
DEMO often have hunches about the best decision
My personal opinions play a significant role in my
decision making process
I listen to my emotions DEMO making decisions
I am suspicious of other people’s decision making
process
I think emotions should play a significant role in
decision making
STYLE #5
DEMO can quickly see why an idea will not work
I often can tell an idea will not work by judging from
past experience
I DEMO to play the “devil’s advocate”
I can usually see the pitfalls in an idea
I can readily detect poor logic in someone’s argument
I DEMO it easy to be critical of other’s ideas
I am often pessimistic of others ideas
STYLE # 5 RATING (1-6) _____
STYLE # DEMO
I like to lead the problem solving process
I tend to think as much about the problem solving
process as the problem itself
I DEMO on the big picture, summarize and draw
conclusions
I find myself DEMO to keep the group focused
I tend to try to optimize the group problem solving
process
I often help the group clearly define the DEMO
I often find myself orchestrating the group
STYLE # 6 RATING (DEMO) _____
The 6 interaction styles are adapted directly from the “6 DEMO work of Ed DeBono as reported in the book Six
Thinking Hats, Ed DeBono, Little, Brown & Co, 1985
STYLE # 4 DEMO (1-6) _____{1g42fwefx}