organization's post-bankruptcy strategic change. We test a
sample of 47 major DEMO that filed for Chapter 11
bankruptcy protection and replaced their ('EG. Our results
indicate that there is a statistically significant three-way inter-
action DEMO CEO origin, TMT tenure, and CEO duality.
Based on our results, we suggest that post-hankruptcy strate-
gic change will be highest for firms where an outsider has
been hired as CEO, the outsider is given duality, and the TMT
has long tenure.
A Multilevel Examination of Work-Life Practices: Is More Always
Better? '. 232
Richard E. Kopelman, DEMO J. Prottas, Cynthia A. Thompson and
Eileen WhiteJahn
We researched the DEMO question: Is there a relationship
hetween the number of work-family piactices DEMO by an
organization and three psychologically relevant variables: ein-
ployce perceptions DEMO organizational family support (POFS),
affective commitment (AC), and DEMO forms of work>family
conflict? Data were examined (a) at DEMO indiNidual level of
analysis and (b) at tbe group level of analysis using a conven-
ience sample of 298 individuals in 104 work DEMO The
number of work-family practices was significantly related to
POFS and AC at the individual level {Betas of .44 and .20,
respectively), DEMO even more highly related at the work-unit
level (Betas of .52 DEMO .32, respectfully). Consistently positive
relationships were found between the number DEMO work-life
practices offered and FOFS and AC, but not work-family con-
DEMO Larger mean effect sizes (d) were found at the group
level of analysis than at the individual level for POFS (.40 and
.31, respectively), and for AC (.43 and .29, respectively). We
concluded that with regard to the numher of work-life prac-
tices offered, "More is better."
Relationship between Entrepreneurs' Psychological Capital and Their
DEMO Leadership 254
Susan M. Jensen and Ered Luthans
Entrepreneurship and leadership have arguably been among
the most explosive fields of study within recent years, yet little
research attention has been given to entrepreneurs as leaders
or DEMO psychological strengths that may be related to their
(155)
leadership hehaviors. Using a sample (N = 76) of husiness
founders DEMO relatively new, small organizations, this study ex-
amined the relationship between their psychological capital
(Ltithans and Youssef, 2004) and their self-perceptions of au-
thentic leadership (Avolio et ai, 2004; Luthans and Avolio,
2003). Results indicate initial empirical support for this re-
lationship. Limitations DEMO recommendations for practice
and future research conclude the article.
Business Strategy Types and Innovative Practices 274
Tim Blum^ntritt and Wad^ M. Danis
This study DEMO examines how a firm's strategic ori-
entation impacts its maiiagement of innovative activities.
Drawing on the strategic management and innovation liter-
atures, we develop and empirically test hypotheses arguing
that a firm's strategic orientation DEMO impact iLs perception
of harriers to innovation, its sotirces of ideas DEMO innovation,
and its targets for innovation. The data, from over DEMO firms,
generally support the hypotheses. The study's findings sug-
gest that a firm's strategic management and its management
of innovation are DEMO integrated.
JOdRNAL OF MANAGERIAL lSSL/h:S
Vol. XVIII Number 2 Sumvier 2006: 2.54-273
Relationship between Entrepreneurs' Psychological
Capital and Their Authentic Leadership
Susan
M.
Jensen
A.ssistanl Professor of Management
University of Nebraska-Kearney
Fred Luthans
George Holmes DEMO Professor of Management
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
What is required to create and sus-
tain a successful new business ven-
ture? A long list of necessary elements
has heen suggested and explored, in-
cluding financial resources (DEMO,
(xKiper et ai, 1994), solid market
analysis (e.g.. DEMO et ai, 1997),
strong social support networks (e.g.,
DEMO and Aldrich, 1991), and cer-
tain personality characteristics (e.g.,
Brockhaus and Horwitz, 1986). To
date, however, the emerging con-
cepts of positive psychological capital
(Luthans et al.., 2004; Lutbans and
Youssef, 2004) and authentic leader-
ship (Avolio et al, 2004; Lnthans and
Avolio, 2003) applied to entrepre-
neurship have not yet DEMO explored.
In fact, while the pivotal role of busi-
ness founders DEMO been widely ac-
knowledged in the study of entrepre-
neurship, very DEMO attention has
been given to their psychological or
leadership capacides (Daily DEMO at,
2002). Tbe same is true ofthe organ-
izational behavior and leadership lit-
erature, with limited attention given
to the founders ol" newer, smaller or-
ganizations, despite recognition of
the quantum differences between
emerging and established companies
(Miller and Ftiesen, 1984). This arti-
DEMO urges recognition of the leader-
ship challenges faced by entrepre-
neurs, DEMO explores the link between
entreprenetirs' positive psychological
capital and leadership approach.
DEMO each has generally ig-
nored the other, tlie fields of entrepre-
DEMO and leadership have arguably
been among the most explosive within
recent years. How to create and sustain
new organizations is viewed as critically
important DEMO today's glohal economy.
Tbere is also growing support that
positive psychological and leadership
capabilities are crucial for organiza-
tiotial success and sustainable com-
DEMO advantage (Luthans and
Youssef, 2004; Pfeffer, 1998). Yet,
JOURNAL OF MANAGERL\L LSSUES Vol. X\ll l Number 2 Summer
(254)
JENSEN AND LUTHANS
while the call for expanding the study
of leadership DEMO the context of
newer, smaller organizations has ex-
isted for over DEMO decade (Cooper,
1993), to date—especially as related
to positive DEMO capacities
such as hope, optimism, and resil-
iency—no empirical research exists.
Thus, this study addresses this void hy
examining how positive psychological
capital of business founders as iden-
tified by Luthans and colleagues may
be DEMO to dimensions of their au-
thentic leadership as identified by
Avolio and colleagues. While direct
organizational performance out-
comes are not included in this DEMO,
the findings from this exploratory
study can serve as a point of depar-
ture lor future research focused on
the link between the DEMO lead-
ership of entrepreneurs and sus-
tained competitive advantage of their
enterprises.
fhis article hegins hy acknowledg-
ing tlie leadership demands placed
on entrepreneurs DEMO the need to
more fully integrate leadership and
entrcprcneurship studies. Then, DEMO
concept of authentic leadership is de-
scrihed, followed hy a discussion DEMO
the hypothesized relationships be-
tween authentic leadership and posi-
tive psychological capital {including
the constructs of optimism, resil-
iency, and hope). The DEMO
and results of the study arc then out-
lined. The article concludes with a
discussion of practical implications
and future research.
ENTREPRENEURS AS LEADERS
DEMO ability to motivate others has
heen identified as being critical to an
entrepreneur's success (Eggcrs and
Smilor, 1996). This focus on DEMO hu-
man element of entrepreneurship.
255
including the challenges and rewards
of effectively leading others, is also
given surface attention in the entre-
preneur literature—"the difference
between managing and leading''
(Rohbins, 2002), "ways to become a
caring leader" {Davis, 2002), iind the
importance of "cultivating the trust
and commitment of employees"
{Hiam, DEMO). With few exceptions,
however, leadership issues have not
heen DEMO primary emphasis in entre-
preneurship research. One of the few
would he Chandler and Hanks'
{1994} study that indicated venture
capitalists consider a DEMO foun-
der's demonstrated leadership ahility
to he critical when determining
whether or not to provide funding for
that founder's new venture. Ireland,DEMO
Hitt and Sirmon {2003) further argue
that human capital is the DEMO of all
strategic entrepreneurial behaviors,
and call for entrepreneurial leader-
ship that nourishes an entrepreneu-
rial capability. However, scant empir-
ical research exists that addresses the
arguments for studying emerging or-
ganizations to enhance our DEMO
standing of the development of hu-
man and intellectual capital {e.g.,
Shane and Venkataraman, 2000).
By the same token, organizational
behavior DEMO leadership scholars
have also given very little attention to
entrepreneurs as leaders. Exceptions
here include the Baum, Locke and
Kirkpatrick (1998) study that dem-
onstrated the importance of the busi-
ness founder's ahility to DEMO a
clear vision to employees, and Ardi-
chvili et al. {1998) who examined the
leadership styles and management
practices of Russian entrepreneurs.
Studies DEMO explored how chief ex-
ecutive officers perceive their role as
strategic leaders {e.g., Harrison and
Pelletier, 1997), hut often the organ-
JOURNAL DEMO MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVIII Number 1 Suminer 2006
256
REIATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENTREPRENEURS'
izational context of that leadership
has been DEMO as a "given" entity
consisting of ongoing patterns of in-
terlocked hehaviors (Wcick, 1979).
Organizational leadership research
has largely ignored new, small organ-
izations. To better tuidcrstand how
these unique, but important small
businesses are created and sustained,
Gartner et ai (1992) emphasize DEMO
can he gained from studies like Baum
et ai (1998) and Ardichvili et al
(1998) that integrate the interests of
entrepreneurship, organizational be-
havior and leadership. This study is a
prelimitiary, first step toward provid-
ing such an integrated research ap-
proach.
WHAT IS AUTHENTIC
LEADERSHIP?DEMO
Drawing from emerging positive
psychology which focuses on identi-
fying, etnphasizing DEMO building on
what is right (rather than wrong) witb
people and building on their
strengths as individuals (rather than
attempting to repair their weak-
nesses), Avolio and colleagues (Avo-
lio et al, 2004; Luthans and Avolio,
2003) have recently proposed a
model for authentic leadership. The
concept of authenticity as used here
traces its roots to DEMO Greek phi-
losophers' dictates of "know thyself
and "to thine DEMO self be true." Un-
derstanding one's self, owning one's
personal experiences, and acting in a
manner consistent with one's true
self define personal authenticity
(Harter, 2002). An authentic leader
is DEMO wfio is not only trtie to him/
herself, hut behaves DEMO sucb away that
followers are also ahle to gain self-
awareness and psychological strength
(Luthans and Avolio, 2003).
Authentic leadership is presented
DEMO an approach tbat creates condi-
tions for higher trust, which helps
DEMO to build on their strengths
and be more positive, to broaden
DEMO tbinking, to add value and a
sense of what is right DEMO their deci-
sions, and to improve the overall per-
formance of DEMO organization over
time (Avolio et al., 2004). A husiness
founder who displays stich authentic
leadership may, therefore, he better
equipped to DEMO tbe challenges
typically faced by new bnsiness ven-
tures and realize the full potential of
his/her vision. Tbe concept of au-
thentic leaders DEMO their "cascading
and contagion" effect (Luthans and
Avolio, 2003), in fact, seem ideally
suited for meeting the challenges
faced hy founders of new business
ventures, and is consistent with Sex-
ton and Bowman's (1985) descrip-
tion of an entrepreneur as a "capable
exectitive and more."
Authentic leaders recognize that
task accomplishment and associate
development DEMO intertwined and are
equally important objectives (Lti-
thans and Avolio, 2003). Yet entre-
preneurs have often been depicted as
unable to "scale" due to a narrow
task focus (Hamm, 2002), thereby
limiting their organization's poten-
tial, fiowever, a study by Willard et DEMO
(1992) dispelled this notion of "foun-
der's disease"—and DEMO study of au-
thentic leadership might offer in-
sights into the.se fmdings. Willard et
al. (1992) noted that many fonnders
can and do DEMO growth success-
fully, with no significant performance
differences noted between founder-
DEMO and professionally-man-
aged firms. Their study focused only
on fmancial performance outcomes,
not leadership styles, and while be-
yond the scope of this study, future
JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAI. ISSUES Vol. XVIII Number 2 Summer 2006
JENSEN AND LUTHANS
257
research can explore whether proc-
esses used in DEMO most successful firms
{hoth founder- and professionally-
managed) may, in fact, reflect an au-
thentic leadership perspective.
We propose that authentic leader-
ship (Avolio et cd., 2004; Luthans and
Avolio, 2003) can provide a compre-
hensive, theory-driven framework for
studying the leadership process of
business founders. Figure I shows this
authentic leadership theoretical
model adapted for this DEMO As
shown, this model acknowledges the
life cycle aspects of leadership DEMO
opment and integrates positive psy-
chological capital {Luthans et al,
2004; Luthans and Youssef, 2004). We
propose this aiuhentic leadership
model DEMO be applied to business
founders in an entrepreneurial con-
text. Thus, DEMO study hrings together
the entrepreneurship and leadership
fields of study to explore the research
question—what relationship exists
between the positive psychological
capital of entrepreneurs DEMO their
self-perceptions of leadership?
context and support networks
needed for and available to successful
entrepreneurs has heen cited {e.g.,
Aldrich and Wiedenmayer, 1993; Du-
hini and Aldrich, 1991).
Despite the attention given DEMO per-
sonal background and context, the
"who I am" dimension DEMO the model
has, to date, been limited to identi-
fying discernihie personality charac-
ter traits that distinguish entrepre-
neurs. These efforts have been DEMO
at hest, and there has been a spirited
debate as to DEMO it is appropriate
{or even possible) to identify' distin-
guishing characteristics of successful
entrepreneurs {Carland et al, 1988;
Gartner, 1988). DEMO fact, Gartner
{1985) pointedly asserted that, based
on demographic and DEMO fac-
tors, there appear to be as many dif-
ferences among DEMO as be-
tween entrepreneurs and others, and
more recent research {Reynolds DEMO ai,
2002) further demonstrates the di-
verse demographics of nascent DEMO
preneurs. The result has heen that
the entrepreneurship field has gen-
erally evolved to the point that there
is no one definitive type or DEMO of
a successful entrepreneur. This is
reminiscent of the earlier pattern of
the leadership field, from its initial fo-
cns on "great man DEMO'" to more
contingency-based approaches. So,
while the focus of recent entrepre-
neurial research may be primarily on
the activity or processes, rather than
the person {i.e., life experiences,
demographics, or personality traits),
it has also heen recognized that the
importance of the entrepreneur'DEMO
psychological strengths and capaci-
ties should not be ignored, lest we
"run the risk of missing or misappre-
hending the soul of the DEMO"
{Herron and Sapienza, 1992: 50).
MODEL ALIGNMENT WITH
AUTHENTIC
ENTREPRENEURIAL
LEADERSHIP
By examining the importance of
life experiences, entrepreneurship
scholars have focused significant ef-
fort on the "where I came from" an-
DEMO shown in the model in Fig-
ure 1. Attention has been given to the
founder's past entrepreneurial and
managerial experience, education,
and family background {e.g., see
Bird, 1993; Shane, 2000). Similarly,DEMO
the dimension of "how I am sup-
ported" has received considerable at-
tention in the entrepreneurial litera-
ture. For example, the environmental
JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVlll Niinibt-r '2. Summer 2006
258
RF.I^TIONSHI F iiF.TWP:F.N ENTREPRENEURS '
>
3
(^ ^ "^
o
o X
B t ^
P
e
g>
Si a
o
a
ft. S
ft.
1
«£ .Si
a.
1...
-5:DEMO
t
a
_©
"eo 4t ^ C
N Bi g
'Sn
O
JOURNAL OF NL\NAC;t:RIAI.LSSUES Vol. Wil l Number 2 Summer DEMO
nces
CAL
nal 1
JENSEN AND
Our proposed model incorporates
the critical importance of positive
psychological DEMO, or simply
PsyCap, that serves as a key antece-
dent to authentic entrepreneurial
leadership. This PsyCap is based on
positive psychology' and its derivative,
positive organizational behavior
(POB), that encourages recognition
of what is "right" with people and fo-
cuses on psychological strengths that
DEMO open to development and enable
individnals to thrive and flourish and
have a positive impact on perform-
ance outcomes (Lulhans, 2002a,
2002b; Luthans et at, 2004; Lulhans
and Youssef, 2004). Consistent with
an entrepreneurial perspective, Stew-
art and colleagues (1998) note that
entrepreneurs tnust be aware of how
their personality and natural procliv-
ities fit DEMO goals of their business ven-
tures. However, in contrast with POB
DEMO !Ls state-like capacities that are
open to development and change,
Stewart et al. (1998) took a more dis-
positional approach (i.e., DEMO,
relatively fixed, and not open to de-
velopment) , using three classic
themes in the entrepreneurship lit-
erature (achievement motivation,
risk-taking propensity, and prefer-
ence for innovation) to examine
one's "proclivity for entrepreneur-
ship."
While recognizing one's predispo-
sition to successful DEMO owner-
ship yields value, we propose that ad-
ditional benefit can DEMO obtained by
identifying positive psychological ca-
pacities that are amenable to change,
such as the optimism, resiliency, and
hope components of psychological
DEMO shown in our model. Just as
Palich and Bagby (1995) argue that
cognitive processes (uniike personal-
ity traits) can be changed, we posit
that if certain psychological states
LUTHANS 259
such as optimism, resiliency, and
hope (i.e., what we term psychologi-
cal (apital) are determined to make
a contribntion to entrepreneurial
success, then importantly these states
can be learned and reinforced
through training and development.
Exploring the linkage DEMO posi-
tive psychological capital and authen-
tic entrepreneurial leadership hchav-
iors may provide insigliLs for
supporting and developing entrepre-
neurs toward greater success.
RELATIONSHIP DEMO
PSYCHOLOGICAL CAPITAL AND
AUTHENTIC LEADERSHIP
Positive psychological capital, or
"who you are" (Luthans and Youssef,
2004), is proposed to provide DEMO
age and competitive advantage, dis-
tinct from that afforded hy human
DEMO (i.e., "what you know"; see
O'Leary et aL, 2002) and social capital
(i.e., "who you know"; see DEMO and
Kwon, 2002). The constructs of opti-
mism, resiliency, DEMO hope were used
in this study to represent positive psy-
chological capital, as each meet the
positive organizational behavior cri-
teria of being 1) positive and
strength-based, 2) grounded in the-
ory and empirical research, 3) meas-
urable, 4) state-like and open to de-
velopment, and 5) having a positive
impact on work-related performance
(Luthans, 2002a, 2002b).
While the positive impact of opti-
mism on academic, DEMO, and po-
litical success has been well docu-
mented (see Peterson (2000) and
Seligman (1998) for reviews), re-
search focused DEMO the impact of op-
timism on work/entrepreneurial per-
formance is limited. Seiigman's
(1998) attributional approach to O[>
timism describes optimists DEMO those
JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVIII Number 2 Summer 2006
260
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENTREPRENEURS'
who, when faced with failure, make
DEMO that are external (not
their fault), unstable (temporary set-
back) and specific (problem in this
situation only). This contrasts with
DEMO who fail making internal
(their own fault), stiihle (will last a
long time), and global (will under-
mine everything they do) attribu-
tions.
To date, tbere have been only a few
studies DEMO such optimism to en-
trepreneurship. For example, a study
in New DEMO indicated the busi-
ness founders' high degree of opti-
mism helped DEMO the high rate of
business formation in the region
(Pinfold, 2001). Research also has in-
dicated that entrepreneurs tend to be
notably DEMO optimistic than middle
managers in their assessments of busi-
ness situations (DEMO Cooper et ai,
1988), and Palich and Baghy (1995)DEMO
depict an entrepreneur's tendency
for positive framing as a cognitive bias
with potential for both favorable
(e.g., enhanced opportunity recog-
nition capahilities) or unfavorable
(e.g., excessive or false optimism)
outcomes.
Optimism or, more precisely, real-
istic optimism (Peterson, 2000), is
presented in the Luthans and Avolio
(2003) model as an important ingre-
dient DEMO the development of authen-
tic leaders. While concerns that an
optimism "DEMO effect" may ex-
ist with respect to its impact on entre-
DEMO performance (Palich and
Bagby, 1995), we propose that an en-
trepreneur with a positive, optimistic
outlook would he better equipped to
motivate and inspire associates to be
future-oriented and committed to the
organization. Thus, this leads to the
fust hypothesis for the study:
Hypaihesv, I: EntrefmmruTs' tevet of optimism
i.i ptisitivety retated to perrepHons of their DEMO
tic leaden hip.
In addition to optimism, the tur-
bulent environment DEMO by today's
entrepreneurs suggests resiliency as
another critical component of their
PsyC^ap. With roots in clinical psy-
chology, resiliency is defined as "DEMO e
capability of individuals to cope suc-
cessfully in the face of significant
change, adversity or risk. This capa-
bility changes over time and is en-
hanced by protective factors in the in-
dividual and environment" (Stewart
et ai, 1997: 22). One who is resilient
has the capacity to bounce back when
faced with uncertainty, adversity, or
DEMO failure. Like optimism, there has
been little research focused on the
DEMO of resiliency in the workplace,
and even less focus on the resiliency
of entrepreneurs and leaders.
While resiliency was once viewed as
a DEMO gift that few possess, research
evidence now indicates that resiliency
comes DEMO "the everyday magic of
ordinary, normative human re-
sources" (Masten, 2001: 235). Draw-
ing from the largely clinically-ori-
ented research, three commoti
themes ofthe resiliency capacity have
particularly important relevance for
authentic DEMO leaders:
(1) a staunch acceptance of reality,
(2) a deep belief, often buttressed by
strongly-held values, that life is DEMO
ingful, and (3) an uncanny ability to
improvise and adapt DEMO significant
change (Contu, 2002).
Although there is no empirical re-
search, anecdotal stories abound de-
picting the resiliency of entrepre-
neurs. One such example is John Lee,
founder of JRL Enterprises. After an
DEMO literally destroyed his fledg-
ling petrochemical transportatioti
company. Lee emerged like a phoe-
JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVIII Numbti 2 Summei 2006
JENSEN AND LUIHANS
261
nix from the ashes. Demonstrating
his resihency through DEMO to en-
gage his employees and rebuild his
firm in an entirely new strategic di-
rection, Lee transformed his organi-
zation into an even stronger industry
leader (Cox and Camp, 2001).
In meeting the DEMO criteria
for PsyCap, resihency has considera-
ble support for being state-like DEMO
open to development (Stewart et al,
1997). Wliile to DEMO there is a void of
direct research on the impact of re-
siliency in the workplace in general
and entrepreneurship in particular,
there DEMO indirect research support
(e.g.. Block and Kreman, 1996) that
highly DEMO individuals tend to be
more effective in a "fuzzier" world
(DEMO as that faced by entrepreneurs
seeking to build a new business ven-
ture). Thus, this leads to our second
hypothesis of the study;
Hypothesis 2: Entrepreneurs' tevel of resiliency is
positively related lo DEMO of their authentic
tecidership.
Hope, the third component of
PsyCap included DEMO this sttidy, is com-
monly used in everyday language
(e.g., "let's hope for the best that our
business venture succeeds"), but as a
positive psycholog)' concept, it has a
precise, DEMO meaning and
rich theoretical background and re-
searcli support. The most widely rec-
ognized definition of hope comes
from positive psychologist C. Rick
Snyder (2000). Through his extensive
stream of theory-building and re-
search, he has clearly demonstrated
that hope is comprised of both an in-
dividual'DEMO determination to set forth
and maintain effort toward goals (de-
scribed DEMO willpower, or agency) and
the ability to discern alternative
courses of action possible to attain
those goals (described as waypower,
or pathways thinking). There is clear
evidence that hope has a positive im-
DEMO on academic and athletic suc-
cess, mental and physical health, and
one's capability to cope with hardship
(e.g., Curry et al, 1997; Onwuegbuzie
and Snyder, 2000).
Emerging research also indicates a
DEMO impact on workplace per-
formance, with results from an on-
going DEMO of U.S. companies sug-
gesting that firms with higher-hope
employees arc more profitable (Ad-
ams et al, 2002), and managers with
higher DEMO levels have correspond-
ingly higher performing work units
with better retention rates and more
satisfied subordinates (Peterson and
Luthans, 2002). A more DEMO rel-
evant exploratory study also found a
positive relationship between busi-
ness owners' hope levels and ex-
pressed satisfaction with business
ownership (Jensen DEMO Luthans,
2002).
Hope meets the same P.syCap inclu-
sion criteria as optimism and resil-
iency by being positive, tneasurable,
and open to development, hnpor-
tantly, research has also clearly estab-
lished hope'DEMO conceptual independ-
ence and discriminant validity (e.g.,
Carifio and Rhodes, 2002; Magaletta
and Oliver, 1999; Snyder, 2000). For
example, while resiliency is a reactive
phenomena, hope is proactive, and
while DEMO depends on external
attrihutions and distancing from neg-
ative outcomes (Seligman, 1998),
hope is concerned with outcomes
and actions initiated by the self and is
linked to positive goals (see Luthans
and Jensen (DEMO), Snyder (2000)
and Snyder et al (1996) for DEMO more
thorough discussion of the concep-
tual independence and discriminant
validity of hope and optimism).
JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAI. ISSUES Voi. XVIII Number 2 DEMO 2006
262
Hope is presented by Avolio et al.
(2004) and Luthans DEMO Avolio
(2003) as a largely overlooked posi-
tive psychological capacity that can
significandy impact the developmen-
tal process of authentic leadership.
Snyder and DEMO (2003) further as-
sert that effective leaders are able to
create environments of hope, and
that high-hope individuals are better
equipped to lead, as they are able to
clearly conccyjiualize goals, articulate
those succinct DEMO to others, and
can forge sub-goals to complex goals
that are DEMO and temporally dis-
tant. Theref^ore, this leads to our
third hypothesis DEMO the study;
Hypothesu 3: Entrepreneurs' levet of hope is pos-
itively related lo perceptions of their authentic
teadership.
Collectively, the criteria-meeting
states of optimism, resiliency, and
hope are used in this study to DEMO
sent the core construct of positive psy-
chological capital. These same three
states were supported by factor anal-
vsis in a previous study to DEMO
the core construct of PsyCap of work-
ers that was related to their perform-
ance (Luthans et ai, 2005). Thus, this
leads to our final hypothesis for this
study:
Hypothesis -I: Eiitritpreiieurs' DEMO level ofpsy-
chotogicat capilat is positively related lo percep-
tions of tlieir authentic leadership.
METHOD
To test the study hypotheses, psy-
chological capital and authentic lead-
ership data from those who founded
and now lead relatively DEMO, small en-
terprises were gathered and analyzed.
The following sections provide DEMO
on this sample, the questionnaires
that were used to measure psycholog-
DEMO capital and authentic leadership,
REIATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENTREPRENEURS'
and the control variables used in the
analysis.
The Study Sample
In an effort to DEMO fully capture
the "emerging'' context for the
study, active efforts were made to
identify entrepreneurs/leaders who
had relatively recently founded small
DEMO that they now actively
lead. Questionnaire surveys were
mailed to 148 business founders/
owners, located primarily in the Mid-
west, that met DEMO criteria. Completed
surveys were received from 76 (i.e., a
representative majority of 51%). Half
ofthe respondents' firms had been in
operation for five years or less, and
almost all were less than ten years old.
Most (85%) had fewer than six full-
time employees, with an average of
3.5 employees for the firms included
in the study. DEMO entrepre-
neurs/leaders founded and now ac-
tively run service businesses (DEMO of
the sample), retail stores of various
types (51%), DEMO manufacturers/
wholesalers (8%). Most of these busi-
nesses were DEMO as sole propri-
etorships (27%) or c-corporations
(59%).
As DEMO demographics, the respon-
dents included a large numher of
both males (57%) and females
(45%), and there was a wide range DEMO
age from 26 to 77 years (with a mean
age of DEMO years). They were predom-
inantly Caucasian (96%) and most
(DEMO) had attended college. Their
total business experience ranged
from 1 to DEMO years (with a mean of 17
years); however, most (DEMO) had
launched only this current business
venture in their lifetime.
JOURNAL DEMO MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVIII Number 2 Summer 2006
JENSEN AND LUTHANS
263
Measures of Positive Psychological
Capital
The study used DEMO and valid
standardized measures widely recog-
nized and published in the positive
psychology literature.
State Optimism. A slightly modified
Life Oiienliition Test (LOT)-Revised
(Shifren and Hooker, 1995) was used
to assess state optimism. This widely
used standardized scale uses a five-
point Likert scale (1 = strongly disa-
gree, 5 = strongly agree) and in-
cludes eight DEMO, but from face
validity and factor analysis, three
items that did not load as expected
were dropped. The coefficient alpha
for this study DEMO an acceptable .72.
Shifren and Hooker (1995) revised
the original LOT to include state-like
properties of optimism as opposed to
more trait-like mood DEMO affect. Ex-
amples of items included are "right
now I'm DEMO about my future,"
and (reverse scored) "If something
can go wrong for me now, it will."
Resiliency. The 11-item resiliency
measure used in this study is based on
the widely recognized scale DEMO
oped by Block and Kreman (1996)
and Klonhlen (1996). Although the
trait-state distinction is more along a
continuum than being dichotomoiis,DEMO
the concept and this measure has
been argued in the resiliency litera-
ture as being open to change and de-
velopment, i.e., state-like (Masten,
2001). This measure uses a four-point
Likert .scale (1 = does not apply at all
to me, 4 — applies very strongly to
me) and the items contain strong
face validity for application to entre-
preneurship (with statements such as
"I am regarded as DEMO energetic per-
son," "I like to do new and difficult
DEMO"). This measure has demon-
strated strong reliability in the past
(Block and Kreman, 1996), and had
a coefficient alpha of .82 for the cur-
rent study.
State Hope. The widely recognized
six-item State DEMO Scale (Snyder et
al.., 1996) measured hope in this study
DEMO had a coefficient alpha of .89. Us-
ing an eight-point Likert scale (1 =
definitely false, 8 = definitely true)
aud designed DEMO to measure
state hope (as opposed to disposi-
tional hope), DEMO items include "I
can think of many ways to reach my
DEMO goals" and "At the present
time, I am energetically pursuing DEMO
goals."
Overall Positive Psychological Capi-
tal. The standardized scores for each
of the state optimism, resiliency, and
hope measures were combined (with
each component receiving equal
weight) to create the measure of pos-
itive psychological capital for this
study.
Measures of Authentic Leadership
As described earlier, an authentic
leader knows him/herself, and acts in
accordance with those beliefs, creat-
ing a future-oriented, ethical, fol-
lower-building climate (Avolio DEMO al.,
2004; Luthans and Avolio, 2003).
Thus, in DEMO study the perceptions of
such authentic leadership reflect the
respondents' assessments DEMO
how frequently they engage In such
behaviors, as well as their DEMO ori-
entation and ethical climate created
within the organization. To date,
based on the Avolio and Luthans
model tested in this study, no specific
authentic leadership scale has been
developed. Thus, in this study a mul-
tiple measures approach was used
with widely recognized standardized
scales measuring DEMO authentic-
like behaviors, future orientation,
JOURNAL OF MANA(;FRI.\ L ISSUES Vol. XVIII Number 2 SumrntT 2006
264
and ethical climate. The standardized
scores on these measures were com-
DEMO to derive the study's authentic
leadership measure. As a way to aug-
ment and examine convergence with
the leaders' self-reports, data were
DEMO gathered by measuring employ-
ees' perceptions of asubsaniple (N =
60) of tbe participants' demonstrated
authentic leadership using tbe same
measure witb DEMO language
from self to "your leader."
Leadership Behaviors. To measure
DEMO leadership bebaviors in
terms of face validity and as concep-
tualized by Avolio et al (2004) and
Lutbans and Avolio (2003), 30 items
were used from tbe Bass and Avolio
(1993) Multifactor Leadersbip DEMO
tionnaire Form 5-X. Each business
founder assessed his/her leadership
bebaviors, DEMO the frequency,
for example, tbat he/she "considers
the moral and etbical consequences
of decisions," "helps employees de-
velop their strengths," "goes beyond
self-interest for the good of tbe or-
ganization," allows for employees to
"see tbeir best ideas being imple-
mented" DEMO "feel they are treated
with respect," along with other items
DEMO relevant to tbe conceptuali-
zation of authentic entrepreneurial
leadersbip shown in Figure I. In the
current study, a coefficient alpha of
.82 was found for this measure of au-
thentic leader beha\aor.
Future Orientation. The tendency DEMO
exhibit proactive, risk-taking, and in-
novative bebavior within an organi-
zation bas been described as entre-
preneurial (Covin, 1991). As we DEMO
proposed that an authentic entrepre-
neurial leader has such a future ori-
entation, Knight's (1997) ENTRES-
CALE measure was used to assess this
tendency. The eight items reflect pro-
clivity toward new tecbniques (e.g..
REI-ATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENTREPRENEURS'
"as tbe founder of this firm, I DEMO a
strong empbasis on innovations"),
competitive posture (e.g., "DEMO dealing
with competitors, my firm typically
avoids competitive clashes, preferring
a live-and-let-live approach"), risk-
taking activity, environmental bold-
ness, and decision-making style.
These items are averaged to create a
single indicator of entrepreneurial
DEMO (coeflkient alpha
= .88).
Ethical Climate of the Organization.
Victor DEMO Cullcn's (1988) Ethical
Climate Questionnaire (ECQ) was
used to evaluate tbe ethical climate of
tbe organization. Tbe 26-item instru-
ment asks DEMO to evaluate tbe
climate of their organization by stat-
ing the degree to which a series of
statements describing tbeir firm are
true or DEMO, along a six-point Likert-
type scale (0 = completely false, DEMO =
completely true). Ethical Climate
Questionnaire scores reveal strength
of etbical climate along five dimen-
sions: instrumental, caring, inde-
pendence, rules, and law/code. As
the authentic entrepreneurial lead-
ership model is based DEMO the tenet of
building an ethical organization con-
cerned with the needs and develop-
ment of both the leader and follow-
ers, a "DEMO" ethical climate has
strong face validity to tbe concept of
autbentic DEMO leader-
sbip, with such descriptors as "the
most important concern here is the
good of all people in tbe company"
and "in this company, people look
out for each other's best interests."
Alternatively, an "instrumental" eth-
ical climate as portrayed by Victor
and Cullen (1988) wotild appear least
consistent with autbentic entrepre-
neurial leadership, based on tbe de-
scriptors used, such as "in this com-
DEMO, people are mostly out for
JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVlll DEMO 2 Summer 2006
JENSEN AND LUTHANS
265
themselves" and "people are ex-
pected to DEMO anything to further the
company's interests, regardless of the
consequences." Thus, for the mea-
sure of authentic entrepreneurial
leadership, the caring DEMO the re-
verse-scored instrumental scales were
used (coefficient alpha ^ .80)DEMO
Control Variables
Since the Avolio and Luthans Au-
thentic Leadership Mode! and its ad-
aptation for this study of husiness
founders provides a holistic DEMO of
the leadership process, to more read-
ily isolate the relationship DEMO
positive psychological capital and the
authentic leadership behaviors of
husiness founders, DEMO was necessar}' to
incorporate a number of control var-
iables. Data DEMO collected to capture
the demographic characteristics of
the participating entrepreneurs, in-
DEMO age, education, gender, eth-
nic orientation, and prior business
experience. Information on the busi-
ness enterprises' characteristics was
also obtained, including DEMO in op-
eration, size, industry, and type of
business (i.e., described by the foun-
der as "growth-oriented" business or
a "DEMO choice to provide a living
wage for you") .
RESULTS OF THE STUDY
The measurement properties of
our proposed positive psychological
capital, which comhines the three
states of optimism, resiliency, and
hope, were examined. Principal com-
ponents exploratory factor analysis
(using varimax rotation) revealed
that DEMO comhined 22 PsyCap items
loaded on three factors, which cu-
mulatively DEMO 43.02 percent of
the variance. As expected, each ofthe
three component DEMO demon-
strated strong positive correlations
with overall positive psychological
capital as follows: state optimism (r =
.648, p < .01), resiliency (DEMO ^ .754, p
< .01), and hope (r = .798, p < .01).
These indices, consistent with find-
ings of DEMO previous study {Luthans et
aL, 2005), can be considered as DEMO
least preliminary support for the core
construct of positive psychological
capital used in this study.
Besides the PsyCap core construct,
the viability of DEMO proposed authen-
tic entrepreneurial leadership con-
struct—which reflects not only the
entrepreneur's descrihed authentic
leadership hehaviors, but also the fu-
ture and ethical orientation—was
also examined. The exploratory fac-
tor analysis (using principal compo-
nents and varimax rotation) suggests
that the combined 46 items measur-
ing authentic entrepreneurial lead-
ership loaded on four factors (lead-
ership behavior, future DEMO,
caring ethical climate, and instru-
mental ethical climate), which DEMO
tively explained 40.9 percent of the
variance.
As shown in Table 1, each of the
four hypotheses proposed in the
study received support. Significant
positive relationships were found be-
tween the entrepreneurs' self-percep-
tion of authentic leadership and their
optimism (r = .23, p < .05), DEMO
iency (r = .38, p < .01), hope (r DEMO
.47, p < .01), and their overall mea-
sure of DEMO capital (r = .48,
p < .01). As a DEMO of convergence and
to counter the same-.source bias issue,
a significant positive correlati(m (r =
.35, p < .01) was also found between
a large sample with availahle data on
participating entrepreneurs (N = 60)
self-assessment of their authentic
JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Voi. DEMO Number 2 Summer 2006
266
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENTREPRENEURS'
leadership and that reported by their
employees.
DEMO one of the control variables
(business type) was found signifi-
cantly related (r = .35, p < .01) to
reported authentic entrepreneurial
leadership (i.e., entrepreneurs who
described tbeir business as "growth-
oriented," rather than a "lifestyle
choice to provide a living wage." re-
DEMO correspondingly higher per-
ceived levels of authentic entrepre-
neurial leadership).
Stepwise regression analysis was
performed using the entrepreneurs'
reported authentic leadership as DEMO
dependent variable, and their psy-
chological capital and all control var-
DEMO entered as independent predic-
tors, labl e 2 provides results of DEMO
regression analysis. Only two variables
emerged in the fmal model, witb DEMO
chological capital entering first with
a coefficient of determination of .220
(DEMO = 20.841, p < .01). The control
variable business type DEMO entered
and raised tbe R^ to .287, tbus increas-
ing tbe DEMO variance by six per-
cent.
DISCUSSION
Altbough tbis is only an exploratory
rather tlian a casual experimental
study, the results do suggest a positive
relationsbip between entrepreneurs'
positive psychological capit;il and their
self-perception of DEMO leader-
ship. Entreprenetirs' reported levels
of optimism, resiliency, and hope
DEMO demonstrated a significant pos-
itive rclatiousbip with the perception
of their authentic leadership. Also, as
an overall core constrtict, their psy-
chological capital DEMO as an effec-
tive predictor of the perceptions of
their authentic leadership, even be-
yond that provided by the demo-
graphics of tbe founder and the busi-
ness itself These findings give
preliminary support to the DEMO
value of entrepreneurs' psychological
capital and tbeir authentic leader-
ship. In DEMO, tbese initial find-
ings suggest further attention be
given to tbe DEMO strengths
and authentic leadersbip that may en-
able entrepreneurs to not only sur-
vive, but thrive within a challenging
and dynamic environment such as
typically exists today for newer,
smaller organizations. However, be-
fore any definitive conclusions can be
drawn, some limitations must be
noted.
The reliance on self-reports and
the cross-sectional researcb design
are obvious limitations of the DEMO
However, since this study was largely
concerned witb self-perceptions, tbe
use of such self-reports is not unrea-
sonable (Scbmitt, 1994). Also, the sig-
nificant consistency noted between
participating entrepreneurs' self-re-
ports and tbeir employees' assess-
ments of tbeir authentic leadersbip is
also encouraging. However, DEMO re-
search efforts could be strengthened
by employing multiple methods of
collecting data. Also, future study is
needed to directly test the relation-
ship between atitbentic leadership
and sustained firm performance (Lu-
thans and Avolio, DEMO). As all tbe
companies in tbis study are privately
owned, DEMO sources of veri-
fiable financial performance data
were not available for tbis study. How-
ever, ongoing research does suggest a
positive link between authentic lead-
ership and the work attitudes of em-
ployees in newer, smaller organiza-
tions (Jensen and Luthans, 2004),
which could potentially translate into
stronger firm performance. Further,
researcb focused on the concept of
DEMO OF MANAGERLVL ISSUES Vol. XVIII Number 2 Summer 2006
2
O
c
3
H
JENSEN AND LUTHANS
*
* #
oc DEMO n
* * *
* * *
* * * *
oo (^ oo r-
• ^ ( N f^ Tt"
C
<DEMO
N O m
N O (N
OOOOOJOOO O
r~-^r^r~^ooo'/~iOr' DEMO
(NOO—lOOOfNC J
— O O — — — OO C
— DEMO o — inoo- ^
— OO O — O — O
267
o
V5
o
a.
QJ
L .
<u
(U
a
^Q.
DEMO '
'.B
lU
s
y:
at
ca
" M
"DEMO
"
x;
y
oc
• B
a a;
E
"a^
.
o
H
Co
oo
-
•7: (U
a. 3J, c
CT QJ N
[/I 3 y; >^
QJ
,0 oj i :
c ^^ c tS
• ^
OJ
3 BJ
' ^ . 5
j -5 ~
p
VI
JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAI. DEMO Vol. Wil l Number 2 Summer 2006
3
a
QJ
ns
ion
iabl
lie
268
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENTREPRENEURS'
Table 2
Results of Regression Analysis for DEMO Leadership Self-perceptions
2.631**
T<.0 1
N
Adjusted R
F
76
.287
.268
14.714**
4.187**
trust (e.g., CosLigan et al, 2004) also
DEMO employt'e trust in the organ-
izational leader as a critical predictor
of firm succe.ss. Clearly, tlie link be-
tween authentic leadership (and DEMO
it may engender the trust of associ-
ates) and the performance DEMO entre-
preneurial ventures demands further
exploration.
Consistent with the call hy Gartner
et al. (1992) for research that inte-
grates the interests of DEMO
ship, organizational behavior and
leadership, this study urges recogni-
tion of the leadership challenges
within newer, smaller firms. The au-
thentic leadership model proposed
hy Luthans and Avolio (2003) offers
a holistic framework for DEMO
leadership development within that
emerging husiness context. While
this study used that authentic leader-
ship model to focus solely on the busi-
ness founder, further research is also
needed lo more fully explore the psy-
chological DEMO ofthe employees of
a new firm, and how the authentic he-
DEMO of those employees may also
be critical to the success of an emerg-
ing organization. In their discussion
of leadership and motivation, Isaac et
al. (2001) argue that every organiza-
tion needs a workforce comprised DEMO
leaders. The idea of enhancing the
JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVIII Number 2 Summer 2006
Authentic Leadership Self-perceptions
P
Control Variable:
Business DEMO
.264
Independent Variable:
Psychological Capital
.421
JENSEN AND LUTHANS
269
chance for new venture success by
creating a DEMO organization not only
led by an authentic leader, but also
staffed DEMO a team of self-motivated,
positive employees, seems plausible.
The authentic DEMO model (Lu-
tbans aud Avolio, 2003) can be ap-
plied DEMO future studies to more fully
explore authentic leadership and its
impact on employees and the sus-
tained veritable performance of the
organization.
In conclusion, this sttidy serves as
an exploratory, initial step toward
better understanding and applying
the emerging concepts of positive
psychological capital and authentic
leadership to DEMO entrepre-
neurs within tbe context of newer,
small businesses. While more re-
search is needed to draw definitive
conclusions, these initial findings do
stiggest the potential value of recog-
nizing, developing, and leveraging
the DEMO psychological capital of
entrepreneurs so they can authenti-
cally lead their emerging organiza-
tions to desired, successful outcomes.
References
Adams, V. H., C. R. Snyder, K. L. Rand, E. A. King, D. R. Sigmon and K. M.
Pulvers. 2002. "Hope in the Workplace." In Workplace DEMO and Organi-
zational Perfonnance. Eds. R. Giacolone and C. Jurkiewicz. New York, NY:
Sharpc.
Adler, P. S. and S. Kwon. 2002. "Social Capital: Prospects for a New Concept."
Acaderny of Management Revieit) DEMO: 17-40.
Aldrich, H. E. and (i. Wiedenmayer. 1993. "From TraiLs to Rates: An Ecological
Perspective on Organizational Eouudings." Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm
Emergence, and Growth I: 145-195.
Aidicbvili, A., R. N. DEMO and A. Gasparishvili. 1998. "Leadership Styles and
Management Practices of Russian DEMO: Implications for Transfer-
ability of Western HRD Interventions." Human Resource Development Quarterly
9 (2): 145-155.
Avolio, B. J., W. L. Gardner, E. O. Walumbwa, E. Luthans and D. R. May. 2004.
"Unlocking the Mask: A Look at the Process By Which Atuhentic Leaders
Impact Eollower Attitudes and Behaviors." Leadnship Quarterly 15: 801-823.
Bass, B. M. and B. J. Avolio. 1993. Manual: 7 he Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire.
Palo Alto, CA: (consulting P.sychologist Pre.ss.
Baum, J. R., E. A. Locke and S. A. Kirkpatrick. 1998. "A Longitudinal Study of
the Relation of Vision and Vision Communication in Venture Growth in En-
trepreneuria l DEMO'" Journal of Af/ljlied Psychology H3 (1) : 43-54 .
Bird, B. J. 1993. "Demographic Approaches to Entrepreneurship: The Role of
Experience and Background." A chances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence, and
Growth I: U-48.
Block, J. and A. M. Kremau. 1996. "I Q and Ego Resiliency: Conceptual and
Empirical Connections and Separateness."yoMraa/ of DEMO and Sodal Psy-
chology 70: 349-361.
Brockhaus, R. H. and P. S. Hoi-witz. 1986. "The P.sycbology of the Entrepre-
neur." in The DEMO and Science oJ Entrepreneurship. Eds. D. Sexton and R. W.
Smilor. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publisbing Co. pp. 25-47.
JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. DEMO Number 2 Summer 2006
270 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENTREPRENEURS'
Carifio, J. and L. RJiodes. 2002. "DEMO Validities and the Empirical Rela-
tionships Between Optimism, Hope, Self-efficacy, DEMO Locus of Control." IDS
Press (Work 19): 125-136.
Carland, DEMO W., F. Hoy and J. C. Carland. 1988. "Who is an Entrepreneur? Is a
Question Worth Asking." American Journal oJ Small Business (Spring): 33-39.
Chandler, G. N. and S. H. Hanks. 1994. "DEMO Competence, the Environ-
ment, and Venture Performance." Entrepreneurship Theory and DEMO
(Spring): 77-89.
Cooper, A. C 1993. "(Challenges in Predicting New Firm Performance."/ouma/
of Busine.ss VenturingH: 241-253.
, E.J. DEMO and C. Y. Woo. 1994. "Initial Human and Finan-
cial Capital DEMO Predictors of New Venttue Performance." Journal of Business
Venturing9: 371-395.
., C. Y. Woo and W. C Dunkelberg. 1988. "Entrepreneurs' Perceived
Chance s for Success.'' Journal of Business Venturing^ (1): 97-108.
Costigan, R. D., R. C. Insinga, G. Kranas, V. A. Kureshov DEMO S. S. liter. 2004.
"Predictors of Employee Trust ofTbcir CEO: A Tbree-Country Study. "Jouma/
of Managerial Is.siies 16 (2): 197-216.
DEMO, O. L. 2002. "iiow Resilience Works." Haivard Business Review (May): 46-
55.
Coviu, J. G. 1991. "Fntreprenetirial verstis GonseiTative Firms: A Comparison of
Strategies and Performance." ycjuraa/ of Management Studies 28: 439-462.
Cox, L. W. and S. M. Camp. 2001. International Survey of Entrepreneurs: 2001 Ex-
ecutive Report. Katiffman Center for Entrepreneurial Leadership at tbe Ewing
Marion Kauffman Foundation.
Curry, L. A., C. R. Snyder, D. I. Cook, B. G. Ruby and M. Rehm. 1997. "Tbe Role
DEMO Hope in Studeut-athletc Academic and Sport Achievement." foumal of Per-
sonality DEMO Social Psychology 73: 1257-1267.
Daily, C. M., P. P. McDougall,DEMO G. Covin aud D. R. Dalton. 2002. "Goveruauce
and Strategic Leadership DEMO Entrepreneurial Firms." Journal of Managements^
(3): 387-412.
Darling, J. DEMO, II. L. Crouch and E. B. Kialt. 1997. "Doing Business in Eorcign
Markets: Keys for Success of the Small Business Firm." Journal DEMO Managerial
Issues^ (2): 145-162.
Davis, P. 2002. "Bectjming a DEMO Leader." Entref)reneur.com. Retrieved from
bttp://www.Futreprcncur.com/artidc/0,4621,DEMO,00.btml.
Dtibini, P. and H. Aldrich. 1991. "Personal and Extetided Networks are Central
to the Entrepreneurial Procesa.''' Journal of Busine.ss Venturing^: DEMO
Eggers.J. H. and R. W. Smilor. 1996. "Leadership Skiiis of Entrepreneurs: Re-
solving Paradoxes and Enhancing tbe Practices of Entrepreneurial Cirowtb."
In DEMO and Entrepreneurship. Eds. R. W. Smilor and D. L. Sexton. West-
port, CT: Quorum Books.
Gartner, W. B. 1988. "Wlio is an DEMO? Is the Wrong Question." Entre-
preneurship Theory and Itactice 13 (DEMO): 47-68.
1985. "A Gonceptual Framework for Describing tbe Pbenomenon of
DEMO Venture Creation." Academy of Management Review 10 (4): 696-706.
JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVlll Niimbci2 Summer 2006
JENSEN AND LUTHANS 271
, B.J. Bird and J. A. Starr. 1992. "Acting As If; Differentiating Entrepre-
netirial from Organizational Behavior." Entrepreneurship 'Theoiy and Practice
(Spring): 13-31.
Hamm, J. 2002. "WTiy Entrepreneurs Don't Scale." Harvard Business Review (De-
cember): 110-115.
Harrison, E. and M. A. Pelletier. 1997. "CEO Perceptions of Strategic Leader-
ship."/DEMO/o/Mffrm^o-ma/foMS'i 9 (3): 299-318.
Hiuter, S. 2002. "Authenticity." In Handbook of Positive Psychology. Eds. C. R. Sny-
der DEMO S. Lopez. London: Oxford University Press, pp. 382-394.
Herron, L. DEMO H. J. Sapienza. 1992. "The Entrepreneur and the Initiation of
New DEMO Launch Activities." Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice (Fall): 49-
55.
Hiam, A. 2002. "The Secret to Entrepreneurial Success." Entrepreneur.com. Re-
trieved from http://www.Entrepreneur.eom/articlc/0,4621,304726,00.html.
Ireland, R. D., DEMO A. Hitt and D. G. Sirmon. 2003. "A Model of Strategic DEMO
preneurship: The Construct and its Dimensions." Journal of Management 29
(DEMO): 963-989.
Isaac, R. C , W. J. Zerbe and D. DEMO Pitt. 2001. "Leadership and Motivation: The
Effective Application of Expectancy Theory." Journal of Managerial Issues 13
(2): 212-227.
Jensen, S. M. and F. Luthans. 2004. "The Entrepreneur as an Authentic Leader:
Impact on Associates' Work-Related Attitudes." Presented at the Academy of
Management, Organizational Behavior Division, national meeting. New Orleans,
LA.
2002. "The Impact DEMO Hope in the Entrepreneurial Process: Explora-
tory Research Findings." Decision Sciences Institute Confidence I*roceedings. San
Diego, CA.
Klonhlen, E. A. 1996. "Conceptual Analysis and Measurement ofthe Construct
of Ego-resiliency." /owmrt/ of Personality and Social Psychology 70: 1067-1079.
Knight, G. A. 1997. "Cross-cultural Reliability and Validity of a Scale to Measure
Eirm Entrepreneurial Orientation." yowrrm/ of DEMO Venturing 12: 213-225.
Luthans, F. 2002a. "The Need For and DEMO of Positive Organizational Be-
havior." Journal of Organizational Behavior 23: 695-706.
. 2002b. "Positive Organizational Behavior: Developing and Managing
Psychological Strengths." Academy of Management Executive 16: 57-72.
and B.J. Avolio. 2003. "Authentic Leadership: A Positive Development
Approach." In Positive Organizational Scholarship. Eds. K. S. Cameron, J. E.
Dutton and R. E. Quinn. San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koebler. pp. 241-258.
., F.O. Walumbwa and W. Li. 2005. "Ib e DEMO Capital
of Chinese Workers: Exploring the Relationsbip with Performance." Manage-
ment and Organization Review 1 (2): 249-271.
and S. M.Jensen. 2002. "DEMO: A New Positive Strength for Human
Resource Development." Human Resource Management Review 1(1) : 304-322.
., K. W. Lulhans and B. DEMO Lutbans. 2004. "Positive Psychological Capital:
Going Beyond Human and Social DEMO" Business Horizons 47: 45-50.
and C. M. Yotissef. 2004. "Human, Social, and Now Positive Psycholog-
ical Capital Management: Investing in People DEMO Competitive Advantage."
Organizational Dynamics ^S (2): 143-160.
JOURNAL OF DEMO ISSUES Vol. XVIII Number 2 Summer 2006
272 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ENTREPRENEURS'
Magaletta, P. R. and J. M. Oliver. 1999. "The Hope Construct, Will, and Ways:
Their Relations with Efficacy, Optimism, and (Jeneral Well-being.'' Journal of
Clinical Psychology 55 (5): 539-551.
Masten, A. S. 2001. "Ordinary Magic: Resilience DEMO in Development." Amer-
ican Psychologist 56: 227-239.
Miller, D. and DEMO H. Friesen. 1984. Organizations: A Quantum View. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: DEMO Hall.
O'Leaty, B. S., M. L. Lindholm, R. W. DEMO and S. E. Freeman. 2002. "Se-
lecting the Best and Brightest: Leveraging Human Capital." Human Resource
Management A\\ 325-340.
Onwuegbuzie, A. J. DEMO C. R. Snyder. 2000. "Relations Between Hope and Grad-
uate Student.s' Coping Strategies for Studying and Examination Taking." Psy-
chological Ri-ports 86: DEMO
Palich, L. E. and D. R. Bagby. 1995. "Using Cognitive Tbeory to Explain Entre-
preneurial Risk Taking: Challenging Conventional Wisdom." Journal of DEMO
ness Venturing 10: 425-438.
Peterson, C^. 2000. "The Future of DEMO" American Psychologist 55: 44-55.
Peterson, S. J. and F. Luthans. DEMO "Tbe Positive Impact and Development of
Hopeful Leaders." Leadership and Organization Development Journal 24 (1): 26-
31.
Pfeffer, J. 1998. The DEMO Equation: Building Profits by Putting People Eirst. Boston,
MA: Han'ard Business School Pre.ss.
Pinfold, J. F, 2001. "The Expectations of New Business Founders: Tbe New Zea-
land Case." Journal of Small DEMO Management 39 (3): 279-285.
Reynolds, P. D.. N. M. Carter, W. B. Gartner, P. C. (ireene and L. W^ Cox. 2002.
"The Entrepreneur Next Door: Characteristics of Individuals Starting Com-
panies in DEMO" In Executive Summary of the Panel Study of Entrepreneurial
Dynamics. Kansas DEMO, MO: Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation.
Robbins, S. 2002. "Tbe Difference Between Managing and Leading." Entrepre-
neur.com. Retrieved from bttp://www.Entrepreneur.com/article/0,4621,
304743,00.btml.
Schmitt, N. 1994. "Method Bias: The Importance of Tbeory and Measurement."
Journal of Organizational Behavior 15: 393-398.
Seligman, M. E. P. 1998. Learned Optimism. New York, NY: Pocket Books.
Sexton, D. L. and N. Bowmati. 1985. "The Entrepreneur: A Capable Executive
and Morc.^' Journal of Bu.siness Venturing I: 129-140.
Shane, S. 2000. "Prior Kiiowtedge and the Discovery of Entrepreneurial Oppor-
tunities." DEMO Science \\ (4): 448-470.
and S. Venkataraman. 2000. "The Promise of Entrepreneurship as a
Field of Research." Academy of Management Review 25: 217-226.
Sbifren, K. and K. Hooker. 1995. "Stability and Cbange in Optimism: A Study
Among Spouse Caregivers." Expeiimental Aging Research 21: 59-76.
Snyder, C. R. 2000. Handbook of Hope. San Diego, Cv\: Academic Press.
and 11. Shorey. 2003. "Hope and Leadership." In En(ylopedia DEMO Lead-
ership. Ed. K. Cbristensen. Harrison, NY: Berkshire Publishers.
S. C. Sympson, F. C. \'basco, T. F. Borders, M. A. Babyak and R. L.
Higgins. 1996. "Development and Validation of the State Hope Scale, "
of Personality and Social Psychology 70: 321-335.
JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. XVIII Number 2 Summer 2006
j AN
D LUTHANS 273
Stewart, M., G. Reid and C. DEMO 1997. "Fostering Children's Resilience."
joumnl of Pediatric Nursing 12: 21-31.
Stewart, W. H., Jr., W. E. Watson, J. C. DEMO and J. W. Carland. 1998. "A
Proclivity for Entrepreneurship: A Comparison of Entrepreneurs, Small Busi-
ness Managers, and Corporate Mtinagers.'" Journal DEMO Business Venturingl4: 189-
214.
Victor, B. and J. B. Cullen. 1988. "The Organizational Bases of Ethical Work
Climates." Administrative Science Quarterly 3S: 101-125.
Weick, K. E. 1979. The Social Psychology of Organizing. 2nd Edition. New York, NY:
Random House.
Willatd, G. E., D. A. Krueger and H. R. Feeser. 1992. "In Order to Grow, Must
DEMO Fotmder Go: A Compari.son of Performance between Founder and Non-
founder DEMO High Growth Manufacturing Firms.''' Journal of Husiness Ven-
turingi: 181-194.
JOURNAL OF MANAGERIAL ISSUES Vol. X\1I1 Number 2 Summer 2006
{1g42fwefx}