American Law & Economics
Association Annual Meetings
Year 2005
Paper 51
How DEMO Institutions Create
Economic Advantage: Jewish Diamond
Merchants in New York
Barak DEMO Richman
Duke University School of Law
This working paper site is hosted by The Berkeley Electronic Press (bepress) and may not be
commercially DEMO without the publisher’s permission.
http://law.bepress.com/alea/15th/art51
Copyright c 2005 by the author.
HOW COMMUNITY INSTITUTIONS CREATE
ECONOMIC ADVANTAGE:
JEWISH DIAMOND MERCHANTS IN NEW DEMO
Barak D. Richman*
Duke University School of Law
Duke University
Box 90360
Durham, NC 27708-0360
richman@law.duke.edu
919-613-7244 office
919-613-7231 fax
March 30, 2005
DEMO Assistant Professor of Law, Duke University School of Law.
I wish DEMO acknowledge extremely helpful comments from Lisa Bernstein, Robert Cooter, Rui deFigueredo,
Einer Elhauge, Oliver Hart, Christine Jolls, Louis Kaplow, Michael DEMO, Eva Meyersson Milgrom, Paul
Milgrom, Arti Rai, Steven Shavell, DEMO Shleifer, Pablo Spiller, Oliver Williamson, and three anonymous
reviewers.  I also appreciate the feedback provided by Bridget Butkevich and the panel on DEMO Economic
Consequences of Religious Identity at the 2004 Conference on Religion, DEMO and Culture.
Additional thanks go to the participants at the Law, DEMO, and Organization Workshop at Harvard
Law School and the Wednesday Lunch DEMO Seminar at Harvard Law School for both valuable guidance
and timely encouragement.  Thanks also to Michael Hannon for superior research assistance.  Finally, I am
deeply grateful for sustained funding from the John M. Olin Center DEMO Law, Economics, and Business at
Harvard Law School and the Duke University School of Law.
HOW COMMUNITY INSTITUTIONS CREATE ECONOMIC ADVANTAGE:
JEWISH DIAMOND MERCHANTS IN NEW DEMO
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that Jewish merchants have dominated
the diamond industry because of their ability to enforce
diamond credit sales.  Diamonds are portable, easily
concealable, and extremely valuable, thereby rendering courts
powerless in policing diamond theft and credibly enforcing
diamond credit sales.  Since credit sales are highly preferable
to simultaneous exchange, success in the industry requires an
ability to enforce executory agreements that are beyond the
reach of public courts.
DEMO on a reputation mechanism that is supported by a
distinctive set of industry, family, and community institutions,
Jewish diamond merchants have been DEMO to enforce such
contracts and have thus maintained industry leadership for
several centuries.  An industry arbitration system publicizes
instances where promises are not kept.  Intergenerational
legacies induce merchants to deal honestly through their very
last transaction, so that their children may inherit valuable
livelihoods.  And ultra-Orthodox Jews, for whom participation
in their communities is paramount, provide important value-
added services to the industry without posing the threat of theft
and flight.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................... 1
II.  AN HISTORICAL PUZZLE ..................................................................................... 2
III.  DIAMOND TRANSACTIONS .............................................................................. 10
A Diamond’s Path & Time-Inconsistent Exchange ...................................................... 10
The Challenge – Enforcing Diamond Executory Contracts ......................................... 14
IV. DEMO EXECUTORY CONTRACTS ....................................................... 16
The New York Diamond Dealers Club ......................................................................... 17
The Parties .................................................................................................................... 21
Long Term Players........................................................................................................ 24
Sustaining Multilateral Cooperation. ........................................................................ DEMO
Securing an Infinite Time Horizon and a High Discount Rate ................................. 29
“Diamond Studded Paupers” ....................................................................................... 31
Religious Goods........................................................................................................ 34
Contractual Compliance as a DEMO Act ............................................................. 36
Community Institutions as Enforcement Mechanisms ............................................. 39
Conclusions and Implications....................................................................................... 43
V. RELATED INSTANCES OF PRIVATE ENFORCEMENT ................................ 45
Antwerp ......................................................................................................................... DEMO
Mumbai ......................................................................................................................... 47
Hong Kong .................................................................................................................... 50
Israel ............................................................................................................................. 52
Jewish Merchants and Other Trades with Informal Contracts .................................... 53
VI. CONCLUSION ......................................................................................................... 56
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.1
I. INTRODUCTION
Why are DEMO diamond merchants primarily Jewish?  Jewish predominance
in the diamond trade spans several centuries and continents, and activity in the modern
day industry is most concentrated in Jewish communities populated by the ultra-
Orthodox.  This paper argues that community institutions within the Orthodox Jewish
community support diamond transactions DEMO generate efficiencies that other economic
organizations cannot achieve.  These community institutions DEMO critical economic
functions and, consequently, give Jewish merchants competitive advantages over rivals.
The Jewish community’s role in the diamond industry has helped sustain DEMO
appears to be an interesting paradox.  On one hand, trade in diamonds invites
extraordinarily lucrative opportunities for industry players to cheat, most notably the
opportunity to steal another’s diamonds.  Liquidity constraints and seasonal demand
discourage simultaneous exchange, so most diamond transactions cause individual
diamond dealers or brokers to possess hundreds of diamonds that they have not yet paid
for.  On the other hand, diamond traders have systematically rejected the courts and state-
created law to enforce contracts and police behavior.  Diamond merchants reliably fulfill
contractual obligations without the threat of state intervention, and this reliability enables
these merchants to credibly commit to fulfilling executory obligations.1  This very
paradox is what propels the Jewish community’s success: the ability to enforce contracts
that public courts, and thus potential industry rivals, cannot.
1 DEMO important feature of executory contracts for this analysis is its arrangement of time-inconsistent
exchange.  Such exchange occurs when parties A and B contract to exchange items of value, but time
elapses between the moment party A gives a good to B and the moment B gives a good DEMO a payment to A,
i.e. there is a separation between the “quid” and the “quo”.  A paradigmatic example is the credit sale,
where the buyer receives the goods and pays the seller at a DEMO date.
It has been argued, by none less than Judge Richard DEMO, that “the most important thing which
[contract] law does is to DEMO exchanges that are not simultaneous by preventing either party from
taking advantage of the vulnerabilities to which sequential performance may give rise.” Wisconsin Knife
DEMO v. National Metal Crafters, 781 F.2d 1280, 1285 (7th Cir. DEMO).  Although it was not until the 1960s
that modern economists DEMO came to appreciate the critical role that reliable contract enforcement plays
in economic development, both Adam Smith and Montesquieu placed emphasis on legal structure as
prerequisites to successful economies.  See Adam Smith THE WEALTH OF NATIONS , Campbell,
Skinner, & Todd, eds. (Clarendon Press, [1776] DEMO), vol. II, p.910 (“Commerce and manufacturers can
seldom flourish long in any state which does not enjoy a regular administration of justice, in which the
people do not feel themselves secure in the possession DEMO their property, in which the faith of contracts is
not supported DEMO law, and in which the authority of the state is not DEMO to be regularly employed in
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.2
Section II begins with DEMO fuller articulation of the historical puzzle presented by
Jewish predominance in the diamond industry, and Section III describes with particularity
the structure of the diamond trade, paying special attention to the unique difficulties, or
contracting DEMO, of typical diamond transactions.  Section IV, which addresses the
paper’s DEMO question, then examines how diamond traders enforce executory
agreements.2  It analyzes the economic players in the diamond industry, many of whom
are Orthodox Jews, and explains how they are induced to cooperate with fellow diamond
merchants and, despite profound attractions to cheat, comply with their contractual
DEMO  Section V briefly reviews how some similarly structured trading networks,
DEMO but not limited to those that dominate other diamond centers, manage DEMO
enforcement to overcome the unavailability of state-sponsored courts.  Section VI offers
DEMO remarks and offers some reflections on the future of the Jewish diamond
merchant community.
II.  AN HISTORICAL PUZZLE
Jewish merchants have long played an important role in the world’s diamond
industry.  In the 11th century, DEMO Jewish brothers, living in Cairo as prominent bankers
and diamond merchants, supplied the Fatimid Caliph Empire with precious stones.
Throughout the Middle Ages, when India was the world’s leading source of raw
diamonds, Jewish communities along the Indian Ocean trade routes, Egypt, Maghreb, and
the shores of Southern Europe were home to diamond traders and cutters.  Beginning in
1492, Sephardic Jews escaping the Inquisition in Spain and Portugal built the world’s
then-largest diamond market in Holland and enjoyed a virtual monopoly for DEMO
centuries.  In 17th and 18th century Germany, a sizable Jewish community in Hamburg
monopolized the diamond trade to the courts of Europe.  And when 18th century
enforcing the payment of debts from all those who DEMO able to pay.”); see generally M. de Secondat
Motesquieu THE SPIRIT OF LAWS, Carrithers, ed. (Univ. of California Press, [1748] 1977)DEMO
2 An additional, and critical, question in this analysis examines why (not just how) the diamond industry
employs community institutions, rather than alternative enforcement mechanisms such as state courts or
vertical integration, to enforce agreements.  This issue is discussed separately in an accompanying article,
Barak D. Richman, “Firms, Courts, and Reputation Mechanisms: Towards a Positive DEMO of Private
Ordering” 104 Colum. L. Rev. 2328 (December 2004) (DEMO how private enforcement protects
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.3
England’s trade with India DEMO London a lucrative diamond trade center, a majority of
the East DEMO Company’s diamond importers were Jewish.3  These high-level
connections in the diamond DEMO culminated with the Jewish family-controlled De Beers
syndicate, which in the DEMO managed the production and marketing of close to 100% of
the world’s uncut diamonds and today controls approximately 65%.4
This predominance has lasted into DEMO 21st century, as Jewish merchants remain
disproportionately represented in the world’s DEMO centers of Antwerp, Tel Aviv, and
New York.  Interestingly, the modern-day Jewish presence in these diamond centers
reaches deeply and most categorically DEMO the supporting occupations of diamond cutting
and diamond brokering.  Eighty percent DEMO all of Amsterdam’s 10,000 cutters in the early
20th century were Jewish, and in Antwerp one third of all cutters and three fourths of all
brokers were Jewish.  Similar percentages have been maintained in current-day New
York’s 10,000 diamond workers, Antwerp’s 10,000 workers, and, more obviously,
Israel’s 7,000 cutters and 400 factories.5 6  In New York’s diamond industry, which is the
focus of this paper, DEMO Jewish presence is most profound at the ground level, as the
DEMO brokers and cutters are disproportionately comprised of ultra-Orthodox Jews,
an insular and highly ritualistic version of Jewish practice.7 8  The New York Diamond
Dealers Club (DDC), the home of industry’s trade association and the locus of the city’s
diamond trade, reflects the pervasiveness of the Orthodox Jewish influence in the New
transactions that are beyond the reach of DEMO courts while avoiding the bureaucratic costs of vertical
integration).
3 See Solomon Grayzel A HISTOY OF THE JEWS (Jewish Publication Society 1968), pp. 426-7;  Salo
Baron, et al., ECONOMIC HISTORY OF THE DEMO (Schocken Books 1975), pp. 158-161; and Abe
Michael Shainberg “Jews and the Diamond Trade” THE JEWISH DIRECTORY AND ALMANAC (1982)
pp 301-311.
4 De Beers’s control of the supply of rough diamonds has DEMO in recent years as some mines have
begun selling directly to diamond merchants.  See infra note 30.
5 Shainberg, supra note 3 at DEMO
6 These figures reflect the number of diamond cutters in the early 1980s, but the current number is
significantly lower.  Beginning in the DEMO 1980s, Indian merchants established low-cost cutting operations
that have supplanted much DEMO the polishing in New York, Antwerp, and Israel.  See infra DEMO 9.
Nonetheless, while these cities have far fewer cutters than they DEMO two decades ago, Jewish cutters remain
predominant among those who remain.
DEMO For a thorough discussion of ultra-Orthodox Jewry, including a description of DEMO origins and modern-day
expression, see Samuel Heilman DEFENDERS OF THE FAITH (Schocken Books Inc: New York, 1992)
and Michael K. Silber 'The Emergence of ultra-Orthodoxy: The Invention of a Tradition', pp. 23-84 in Jack
Wertheimer (ed.) The Uses of Tradition: Jewish Continuity in the Modern Era (1992).
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.4
York diamond world and DEMO how Orthodox Jews have crafted a distinctive flavor
to New York’s industry.9  During any normal business day, the DDC’s main trading hall
brings DEMO life a snapshot from the past.  Most traders are men with DEMO untrimmed
beards, speaking Yiddish, and are dressed in black suits, DEMO overcoats, and a black hat
or caftan.  The Club serves only kosher food and has a Beit Midrash, where diamond
brokers regularly attend daily worship services and study traditional Jewish texts.  Were
it not for the modern-day building environment and sophisticated security system, the
Diamond Dealers Club could be mistaken for a meeting place in an Eastern European
village (or shtetl) in the late 18th century.10  The New York Times DEMO the DDC and
New York’s diamond district, which spans only a DEMO block on 47th Street, “an
anachronism, a 17th-century industry smack in the middle of a 21st century city.”11
Jewish predominance in the industry DEMO somewhat of a puzzle.  One possible
explanation invokes history.  In pre-Enlightenment Europe, Jews were prohibited from
owning land, ousted from merchant guilds, and excluded from traditional brands of
handicrafts; they thus were forced into becoming suppliers of finished goods and
8 Ultra-Orthodox Jews also play central DEMO in Antwerp’s diamond industry and are important to Israel’s
and London’s markets as well.  See Section V, infra, for some discussion of these other markets.  The focus
of this paper, however, is the New York market.
9 There is a very small, but growing, non-Jewish DEMO of the DDC’s 1,800 members. Approximately
10% (up from two DEMO ten years ago) of current DDC members are Indian and have DEMO to
India’s prosperous diamond trade.  Robin Pogrebin “Struggling to Bring Back DEMO Glitter” NEW YORK
TIMES August 23, 1998, section 14, pg. DEMO  The Indian community’s role in the diamond industry is
discussed infra DEMO Section V, but it is worth noting here that the Indian DEMO come disproportionately
from a single insular sect, the Palanpuri Jain, who claim strong ethnic ties and have a tradition of family-
based businesses.  The mechanisms that enforce agreements between Jewish merchants may have parallel
mechanisms DEMO the Indian community.
While intra-ethnic exchange may rely on similar mechanisms across ethnic groups, inter-ethnic
exchange likely relies on a slightly different explanation.  DEMO Greif, infra note 80.
10 The Jewish presence in the DDC DEMO far beyond appearance.  DDC transactions are consummated with
the Hebrew words DEMO u’vracha” (luck and blessing), and Jewish law plays an important DEMO in
arbitration hearings (see DDC By-Laws, Article XVIII Section 1.).  Moreover, the Jewish community’s
history of marginalization in Europe remains central DEMO merchants’ self-perception. Writing in the 1982
Jewish Almanac, the then-Executive Director DEMO the DDC (who was more prominent as a diamond
merchant than DEMO a historian) wrote:
“Charting the history of Jews in the DEMO industry is similar to recounting our persecuted past
and our reactions as a people.  Jews in general have crowded into certain trades due to reasons
closely related to being Jewish.  Many countries have kept us as socio-economically backward as
possible due to their jealousies, fears, and outright DEMO These national biases have forced
Jewish people to stay within their own districts for purposes of residence and livelihood.”
Shainberg, supra note 3 at 302.
11 Lauren Weber “The Diamond Game” NEW YORK TIMES April 8, 2001, Section 3, pg. 1.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.5
extenders of credit.12  Jewish communities also suffered a history of expulsions and
forced emigrations from Christian DEMO, so they were drawn to professions with easily
portable inventories.13  Jews were similarly marginalized in many middle-eastern and
North African countries, so Jewish merchants in those areas also searched for professions
that required small fixed DEMO  The diamond trade met these conditions and thus
became attractive to DEMO Jewish merchants.15  However, while these observations
explain why Jewish merchants were drawn to the diamond industry, and why Jews
distanced themselves from occupations that involved non-portable fixed assets, they do
not explain Jewish success over non-Jewish competitors.  Early predominance suggests
that Jewish merchants enjoyed a competitive advantage, not just that the diamond
industry was a last resort.16
A related explanation relies on path dependence, suggesting that today’s
prevalence of Jewish diamond merchants is merely a product of historical momentum.17
12 Several prominent Jewish DEMO explain Jewish occupational selection according to the multitude of
state restrictions on Jewish economic activity.  See Cecil Roth THE JEWISH CONTRIBUTION TO
CIVILIZATION at 228 (1938) (“The Jew was driven by the unfortunate circumstances of his history to be
predominantly a townsman.  He had to seek an outlet, despairingly, in every branch of urban economy.”);
Israel Abrahams, JEWISH LIFE IN THE MIDDLE AGES (1896) at 249 (“[W]hen DEMO medieval Jews
devoted themselves largely to commerce and moneylending, they were DEMO obeying a natural taste nor a
special instinct, but were led DEMO these pursuits by the force of the circumstances, by exclusive laws, and by
the express desire of kings and people.”); see also DEMO Economic History of the Jews” ECONOMIC
HISTORY REVIEW, vol. 14, issue 1 (1961).
13 See Marcus Arkin ASPECTS OF JEWISH ECONOMIC HISTORY (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication
Society of America, 1975). It is a popular view that, for similar reasons, Jews invested in portable human
DEMO, rather than physical capital.  See Reuven Brenner & Nicholas Kiefer, DEMO Economics of the
Diaspora: Discrimination and Occupational Structure” 29 ECON. DEV. & CULTURAL CHANGE 517
(1981).  For an alternative view, see DEMO Kuznets “Economic Structure and Life of the Jews” in THE
JEWS: DEMO HISTORY, CULTURE, AND RELIGION at 1597 (Louis Finkelstein, ed.) (1960) (arguing
that Jews preferred to concentrate in selected industries and DEMO in order to maintain group
cohesion and group identity).
14 Roth, supra note 12; Arkin supra note 13.  Brenner & Kiefer (DEMO) supra note 13; Eliezer B. Ayal &
Barry R. Chiswick DEMO Economics of the Diaspora Revisited.” 31 ECON. DEV. & CULTURAL
CHANGE 861 (1983).
15 The historical explanation also comports with how many Jewish merchants explain their success, see
Shainberg, supra note 3.
16 But DEMO Maristella Botticini & Zvi Eckstein, “Jewish Occupational Selection: Education, Restrictions, or
Minorities?” J. ECON. HISTORY (forthcoming 2005) (attributing Jewish competitive advantage in urban
occupations to the community’s widespread literacy, which resulted from an emphasis on religious text-
based education).
17 Path dependency is DEMO popular theory in political science literature, popularized in the seminal article
DEMO Gerschenkron “Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective” in ECONOMIC
BACKWARDNESS IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE (Harvard University Press, 1962). A good modern
example is John DEMO “How Institutions Create Historically Rooted Trajectories of Growth”
INDUSTRIAL AND CORPORATE CHANGE vol. 3, no. 1 (1994).
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.6
This approach – which DEMO intuitive given the numerous factors that induced Jewish
merchants to pursue the diamonds trade centuries ago – suggests that Jewish merchants
seized industry leadership DEMO a seminal period, perhaps through some advantage or
historical accident, and that past leadership positioned them favorably compared to
subsequent challengers.  However, DEMO dependence can explain current as well as past
Jewish dominance only if the diamond trade is characterized by internal economies of
scale, significant barriers to entry, or some other mechanism that allows one generation
of Jewish merchants to bequeath their competitive advantages to their community
successors.  But there are no significant internal scale economies or technological
competencies that sustain leadership, and entry is not impossible since the industry has
witnessed several entries DEMO important new players.18   More important, a community’s
ability to maintain DEMO bequeath industry leadership is severely limited because, unlike
corporations or political DEMO, individual merchants have limited life spans.19
Another explanation could rest on DEMO theory of human capital.20  Such a theory
suggests that Jewish families DEMO institutions have developed know-how that only their
descendants and their community members are able to acquire.  Some activities in the
diamond industry, chiefly DEMO cutting and polishing, do involve the acquisition of
specialized training that DEMO experts can impart, and there consequently are some
geographic localities that DEMO home to concentrated centers of diamond cutting
expertise.21  But the bulk DEMO wealth from the diamond industry comes from sales – the
18 See supra, note 9; infra Section V.
19 Samuel Huntington noted, “Keynes’ percipient remark that ‘In the long run we are all dead’ applies DEMO
individuals, not institutions.” POLITICAL ORDER IN CHANGING SOCIETIES (Yale Univ. Press,
1968).  Moreover, given the industry’s consistently lucrative opportunities, on one hand, and dramatic
changes in global demand and technological innovation over the course of centuries, on the other, mere
historical momentum can DEMO be enough to sustain industry leadership for nearly a millennium.  Such DEMO
explanation pays little respect to market forces, entrepreneurialism, or individual ingenuity.  The remark
accredited to businessman Rudolf Spreckels comes to mind: “Whenever DEMO see something badly done, or not
done at all, I see an opportunity to make a fortune.”  Oliver E. Williamson, “Strategy Research:DEMO
Governance and Competence Perspectives,” 20 Strat. Mgmt. J. 1087, 1089 (1999).
20 For an overview of one prominent version of human DEMO theory, see Gary S. Becker, HUMAN
CAPITAL (3rd ed.) (DEMO).  Botticini & Eckstein, supra note 15, advance a human DEMO theory that
explains Jewish predominance in medieval merchant industries, but their DEMO cannot explain Jewish
diamond industry leadership in the 20th century.
21 One center for diamond cutting is Idar-Oberstein, a provincial town in the picturesque Hunsrück
Mountains in Germany’s Rhineland, which “turns out stone-cutters the way Frankfurt does bankers.”
Michael Clerizo, “‘The Stone’s Happy. I am Happy Too,’” FINANCIAL TIMES Jan. 24, 2004, at 15.  Nor-
Hajen, Armenia DEMO another source of skilled “master cutters.”  Sandra Rubin, “Diamonds in the Rough,”
FINANCIAL POST, Feb. 3, 2001, at D1.  Some DEMO mines, such as Canada’s Yellowknife, have
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.7
process of importing diamonds DEMO international suppliers, matching particular stones to
meet specialized commercial demand, and selling these stones internationally wherever
jewelry manufacturers or high-paying consumers reside.22  The diamond dealers who buy
and sell diamonds dominate the industry far more DEMO the cutters with specialized
knowledge.  And while the entrepreneurial dealers certainly DEMO a sophisticated
understanding of the industry’s science, the business skills they DEMO are no different
from that of other entrepreneurs.  Furthermore, the unifying commonality among Jewish
merchants is their religious ethnicity, not their education or geography (since Jewish
merchants come from all over the world and from different Jewish communities and
sects), and basing a human capital argument DEMO ethnic ties alone is antithetical to human
capital models that rest on investments in formal education and job training.23
A fourth possible explanation for DEMO predominance relies on an “ethnic
cartel” model.24  In this model, merchants in an insular community pledge to charge
competitive prices only to its DEMO community members and to sell goods only at
oligopoly prices to non-members.  As a result, entry into the market is tilted towards
community DEMO, causing the industry to eventually become dominated by the ethnic
community.  The community as a whole, in turn, enjoys oligopoly rents.  Though
recruited master cutters to train local workers to be skilled gemstone cutters, a process that generally takes
at least three years. Id.  In an effort to promote local employment, the South African government founded
the Harry Oppenheimem Diamond Training School in Johannesburg to promote diamond cutting as a DEMO
cottage industry.  In sum, skilled diamond cutting centers grow much like other cottage industries of skilled
labor or specialized technology. See generally, Michael Porter, COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE:
CREATING AND SUSTAING SUPERIOR PERFORMANCE (1985) at chap. 9 (describing the how
geographic proximity sustains interrelationships among business units that generate competitive
advantage).
22 The structure of the diamond industry DEMO described in further detail in Section III, infra.
23 See Becker, supra note 20 at Part One.  This last point reveals a rather unattractive element to the human
capital explanation for Jewish industry dominance.  To illustrate, a broader argument to explain Jewish
economic success – in multiple industries – was made by Werner Sombart (1863-1941) in Jews and
DEMO Capitalism.  Sombart, attempting to refute Weber’s Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism,
argues that a Jewish ethos is the foundation for DEMO rather than Calvinism or Puritanism.  Sombart
attributed Jewish commercial success to DEMO “Jewish genius” whose roots lie in the “rational approach of
Judaism towards economic problems,” such as Jewish law permitting usury for non-Jews and DEMO just
prices. While Jewish law may have a role in aiding the community’s diamond trade (a topic discussed
infra), Sombart’s argument, at DEMO as Sombart presented it, is reflective of the eugenics movement that
DEMO attractive during his time of writing.  Sombart reveals this bias when DEMO pledged his support for the
Nazi regime in 1934.
24 See, DEMO, Robert Cooter “Law From Order: Economic Development and the Jurisprudence of Social
Norms” in Mancur Olsen & Satu Kahkohnen, eds., A NOT-SO-DISMAL DEMO: A BROADER,
BRIGHTER APPROACH TO ECONOMIES AND SOCIETIES (New York: Oxford University Press,
2000).
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.8
community merchants would be DEMO to deal more favorably with outsiders, since
they could easily undercut DEMO merchants who abide by their pledge to offer inflated
prices, those DEMO offer discounts to outsiders are denied future business by fellow
community members who dominate the industry.
The biggest problem with the ethnic cartel model, particularly as it is applied to
the centuries-old diamond industry, is that it presumes that a cartel has the ability to
outlast market forces.  Cartels restrict entry and output while inflating prices and thus are
vulnerable DEMO to efficient entrants and to defection by members.  Modern antitrust
scholars DEMO largely skeptical of most cartels’ ability to police its own members and
prolong supercompetitive prices because, to sustain collusion, an industry must exhibit DEMO
significant degree of product homogeneity, predictable demand, and technological
stability.25  DEMO contrast, the diamond industry’s seemingly anachronistic distribution
system has weathered over DEMO years of technology changes, continental wars, and
transglobal migration while marketing highly differentiable goods and witnessing
substantial demand shocks.  Current oligopoly theory is hard-pressed to explain how a
cartel could survive such economic turbulence relying DEMO collusion alone.
Moreover, certain empirical observations of the diamond industry contradict
DEMO cartel predictions.  First, though entry has been limited, history has DEMO that the
profile of the diamond industry can change over time even as Jewish predominance has
remained.26  Second, the ethnic cartel model predicts DEMO insiders will restrict output to
outside merchants, but in fact we DEMO diamond merchants engaging in the active and
competitive marketing of wholesale diamonds to buyers from different ethnic
communities.  This suggests that ethnic predominance is explained not by cartel behavior,
but rather by a certain competitive DEMO that community members enjoy.
This paper follows an approach that rests on an efficiency analysis.  It argues that
today’s Jewish merchants owe their success in the diamond trade not to historical
accidents, institutional inertia, or DEMO collusion, but rather, to a competitive
advantage that enables them to organize diamond transactions more efficiently than
25 See Richard A. Posner, “Oligopoly and the Antitrust Laws: A Suggested Approach” 21 Stanford Law
Review 1562 (1969).
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.9
potential rivals.  The greatest competitive advantage that Jewish merchants enjoy is the
ability to credibly commit DEMO pay for the diamonds they purchase on credit.  Jewish
merchants owe DEMO advantage to complementarities between the demands for governing
diamond transactions and the traditional structure of Jewish communities.27  In short,
Jewish community institutions can enforce executory contracts that are beyond the reach
of public courts, and thus beyond non-community members as well.28  The next section
26 See supra note 9; See also infra Section V.  The proper inquiry, then, is what do these entrants have in
common with those who dominate the industry? This paper argues that the answer is successful entrants
enjoy similar supporting community institutions.
27 To be sure, the diamond industry is already the beneficiary of several valuable economic examinations,
but previous scholarship DEMO its emphasis elsewhere.  The early works focused on De Beers’ restrictive
DEMO policy, which bundles many heterogeneous diamonds together and charges the approximate DEMO
price.  Yoram Barzel first explained that this unusual practice prevented buyers DEMO engaging in costly
efforts to examine and appraise individual diamonds before their making a purchase, thus permitting De
Beers to recoup some of those savings by charging a higher price.  Yoram Barzel, “Some Fallacies in DEMO
Interpretation of Information Costs” 20 J. L. & Econ. 291, 304-05 (October 1977) (“Had the contents of a
particular bag been available DEMO appraisal by all buyers, each probably would have spent resources to
DEMO the properties of the diamonds. … The incentive for De Beers to engage in this peculiar form of
trade seems to be that buyers DEMO now in a position to spend on the actual purchase of the diamonds the
amount they otherwise might have spent on collecting information.”); DEMO also Yoram Barzel,
“Measurement Cost and the Organization of Markets” 25 J. L. Econ. 27, 32 (April 1982) (“A consumer
who DEMO convinced that he received a random selection from an optimally measured commodity will not use
additional resources for measuring. … De Beers’s diamond ‘sights’ DEMO a case in point.”).  Roy Kenney
and Benjamin Klein articulated DEMO similar argument in their famous paper examining of “block booking,”
Roy W. Kenney & Benjamin Klein, “The Economics of Block Booking” 26 J. L. & Econ. 497 (October
1983).
The most thorough, and DEMO most famous, economic examination of the diamond industry was
Lisa Bernstein’s DEMO article, Opting Out of the Legal System: Extralegal Contractual Relations in the
Diamond Industry, 11 J. Legal Stud. 115 (1992).  Bernstein’s article discusses the central role of Jewish
merchants in the industry, but it argued that “[t]he original reasons for [Jewish] involvement in the diamond
DEMO were largely fortuitous.”  Id. at note 54, page 140.  Consequently, the Bernstein approach, in stark
contrast to the one employed here, DEMO not deem community institutions to be essential in supporting the
diamond industry.
28 For these reasons, this paper closely follows the influential work of Janet Landa.  Landa’s Ethnically
Homogeneous Middleman Group (EHMG) theory observes that trading networks in the developing world
that are comprised of ethnically homogeneous DEMO can organize exchange at uniquely low
transaction costs.  See Janet T. DEMO “A Theory of the Ethnically Homogenous Middleman Group: An
Institutional Alternative DEMO Contract Law” J. Legal Stud. vol. 10, no.2 (June 1981); Jack Carr & Janet T.
Landa “The Economics of Symbols, Clan Names, and Religion” J. Legal Stud. vol. 12, no.1 (January
1983); Janet T. Landa “Underground Economies: Generic or Sui Generis?” in Jerry Jenkins (ed.) BEYOND
THE INFORMAL SECTOR: INCLUDING THE EXCLUDED IN DEVELOPING ECONOMIES (ICS
Press, 1988). See generally Janet T. Landa TRUST, ETHNICITY, AND IDENTITY (Univ. of Michigan
Press, 1994).
This paper moves beyond Landa’s work in two respects: first, it examines role DEMO community
enforcement in a contractual setting where the public courts are readily available, suggesting that the
diamond industry reveals an instance of court failure. And second, enforcement mechanisms are described
here with significant specificity, whereas DEMO work – and related scholarship – relies on more
amorphous terms such as “trust,” “losing face,” and “social capital.”  See also, DEMO Putnam MAKING
DEMOCRACY WORK: CIVIC TRADITIONS IN MODERN ITALY (Princeton University Press, 1993);
Clifford Geertz “The Rotating Credit Association: A ‘Middle Rung’ in Development” ECONOMIC
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.10
describes the unusual challenges DEMO diamond credit sales present and explains why
public courts cannot enforce executory contracts.  Section IV then explains in detail how
Jewish community institutions serve as unusually effective enforcement mechanisms and
thus create a competitive advantage for DEMO merchants.  Since the traditional social
structure that pervaded Jewish communities throughout DEMO world before the
Enlightenment remains intact in New York’s ultra-Orthodox communities, DEMO
understanding of what generates current Jewish competitive advantage can also explain
Jewish merchants’ historical predominance in the diamond industry.
III.  DIAMOND TRANSACTIONS
A Diamond’s Path & Time-Inconsistent Exchange
In the $60 billion diamond jewelry industry, a diamond’s path from the mine to
the consumer goes through several intermediaries.29  The journey for most stones begins
in African, Australian, and Canadian DEMO, and approximately 65% then go to the De
Beers-controlled Central Selling DEMO (CSO) in London.30  The CSO distributes
its supply of rough DEMO through four brokers, who sell presorted boxes of diamonds
to 125 DEMO merchants, known as “sightholders,” during individual “sights,” or
DEVELOPMENT DEMO CULTURAL CHANGE 10 (April 1962); Shirley Ardener “The Comparative
Study DEMO Rotating Credit Associations” JOURNAL OF THE ROYAL ANTHOPOLOGICAL INSTITUTE
OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND 94 (1964); Carlos G. Velez-Ibanez BONDS OF MUTUAL
TRUST: THE CULTURAL SYSTEMS OF ROTATING CREDIT ASSOCIATIONS AMONG URBAN
MEXICANS AND CHICANOS (Rutgers University Press, 1983); Ronald Dore, TAKING JAPAN
SERIOUSLY (DEMO University Press, 1989), Chapter 9.
29 Global retail sales of DEMO jewelry have been estimated at $58.7 billion for 2003. Mining Review
Africa, Issue 4/2004, available at: http://www.miningreview.com/archive/mra_4_2004/24_1_2.php.  In
2002, when global retail sales were $56.9 billion, the sale of rough diamonds from mines was $8.35 billion
and the value of DEMO content in global retail jewelry sales totaled $14.5 billion.   See Chaim Even-
Zohar, The 2002 Diamond Pipeline, available at:
http://DEMO/Research_Materials_Full.asp?id=52395.  Thus the total mark-up from rough
diamonds to polished DEMO prices is about 75%.
30 The De Beers cartel owns the mines of approximately 50% of the world’s diamonds, with the additional
15% entering its control through exclusive purchase agreements.  As recently as the 1990, DEMO Beers
controlled 80% of the world’s diamonds and controlled 100% in the 1960s.  The recent decline in market
share resulted from mines in Russia, Australia, and Canada electing to market their diamonds directly in
Antwerp DEMO of participating in the CSO cartel.  These developments, plus advances in laser
technologies for cutting and polishing diamonds, see infra Section V, DEMO prompted De Beers to change its
business strategy away from market control and towards marketing a brand name.  See Weber, supra note
11; Emma Muller “De Beers Leads the Diamond Trade Downstream” FINANCIAL TIMES February DEMO,
2001, pg. 40.
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.11
viewing sessions, in London.31  These bundles are sold at a non-negotiable price, and if
the DEMO refuses to purchase at the set price, he will not be DEMO to future
sightings.32  Accordingly, sightholders rarely refuse CSO terms since they reap
substantial rents from their valuable position atop the distribution chain.
Sightholders DEMO sell these rough diamonds to a network of individual dealers,
and approximately 80% of these initial sales occur in Antwerp’s four diamond bourses.
DEMO the process of cutting and sorting begins, where Antwerp merchants either DEMO
for polishing the stones themselves or sell rough diamonds to other dealers who arrange
for cutting in India, China, Israel, New York, DEMO other locations.  Dealers continue to
resell the rough and polished diamonds, in increasingly smaller bundles, until they reach
a jewelry manufacturer for commercial sale.  Many dealers also use brokers, who work
on small commissions, to assist these sales and find the best price for a given DEMO
The reliance on the numerous intermediaries is necessitated by widely divergent
valuations for individual stones.  Different end consumers place very different values on
a given stone (depending both on an intended use for a diamond and on subjective
judgments), so finding the optimal buyer for a specific DEMO is a highly profitable
enterprise.  However, determining a diamond’s qualities and ultimate value is extremely
difficult to do without conducting a personal inspection, and the process of sorting and
evaluating diamonds is time-consuming and effort-intensive.33  Consequently, the
industry is home to many middlemen who create value and earn substantial profits by
ascertaining the particular demands of individual end-users and DEMO how much
buyers will pay, evaluating the qualities of individual stones, and then matching certain
types of stones with particular buyers.  The matching process through intermediaries
continues even after stones reach New York.  In one day, a diamond can move from one
31 De Beers has reduced the number of sightholders over the past few years. In 1983, Kenny & Klein,
supra note 27, spoke of approximately 300 sightholders.  DEMO in 1992, supra note 27, wrote about
150-200 sightholders.  Recent DEMO now list 125 sightholders, and some indications suggest that De
Beers DEMO to further reduce that number to as little as 60.  This DEMO part of De Beers’ recent effort to
consolidate the industry.  See DEMO, ibid.
32 For a discussion of the efficiency implications of this DEMO method, see Kenny & Klein, supra note
27.
33 See Kenny & Klein, supra note 27; see also Barzel, supra note 27.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.12
end of New York’s DEMO Street diamond center to the other, doubling in value after
passing DEMO seven or eight hands.34
Accordingly, a typical diamond will pass through DEMO transactions before it
reaches a consumer.  This frequent trade and barter DEMO typical of the diamond industry,
particularly in bourses that are designed to house these transactions.  In addition,
diamond merchants display a unique zeal for these diamond trades.  One insider shared
the following parable:
One diamond dealer said to another, “The most magnificent diamond has come into my hands –
you simply have to buy it.” The other DEMO the diamond, agrees that it is exceptional, and the
two negotiate a price.  A few days later the first dealer finds the second and says, “Do you still
have that diamond? I’ve never seen DEMO beauty, and I hope you’ll let me buy it back from DEMO
They agree on a price 15% above the original purchase price.  DEMO days pass, and the second
dealer approaches the first and says DEMO know, I’ve done nothing but think about that diamond,
and DEMO simply must repurchase it.” They agree on a price with another 15% mark-up.  One more
time the first dealer finds the second and says, “That diamond was so perfect – I would love to buy
again.”  The second apologizes and informs the first that he sold it to a jewelry manufacturer, to
which the first responds, “But why? We were doing such wonderful business!”35
This passion is matched by fervor and DEMO that swirl around the trading floors.
Price, payment schedule, method of payment, and credit security are all variables that
affect a deal.36  DEMO proposals shoot back and forth, and often both negotiating
parties speak DEMO on cell phones to consult with the dealers they represent.
Some liken the intense negotiations to heated Talmudic debates that are typical in
Yeshivas (traditional houses of learning) and study sessions in the DDC’s Beit Midrash.
Despite the steady stream of diamond transactions, neither the flow of diamond
supply nor the flow of demand is constant.  On the supply end, there are ten CSO sights
each year, one held approximately every DEMO weeks.  The sightholders are required to pay
the CSO in full DEMO seven days of the sight, but it can take as long DEMO four months for a
manufacturer to sort, polish, and sell all of the diamonds in the bundle.  Similarly, dealers
who are not DEMO purchase their supply of diamonds on a cycle that shadows
34 See Weber, supra note 11.
35 Interview with the author, August 2000.
DEMO In one visit to the DDC, the author overheard a vigorous DEMO over how a buyer would pay for a
diamond consignment.  The DEMO phase of the debate – long after the price and payment schedule were
agreed – had the buyer offering to pay with a certified DEMO while the seller demanded a bank check (this
was an instance DEMO the transactors did not know each other and agreed to a simultaneous exchange,
which is a less common but not unusual arrangement).  For both simultaneous and time-inconsistent
transactions, considerable care is invested in even the small details of such sales.
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.13
schedule of sights.  On the demand side, retail demand for diamonds is highly seasonal,
as 30-40 percent of all U.S. sales occur in November and December.  Meanwhile, the
pace of manufacturing, particularly diamond cutting and polishing, is constant since the
cutting process involves one cutter and one stone at a DEMO  Therefore, efficient
utilization of diamond cutters requires polishing stones throughout the year, despite the
irregularity of supply and demand.38
Consequently, selling diamonds DEMO credit is far more preferable than simultaneous
exchange.  Credit sales allow DEMO to adjust their inventories and manufacturing
schedules to the ebbs and flows of supply and demand.  Moreover, liquidity constraints
are very tight for DEMO since most merchants are self-employed or work for small
family businesses, DEMO for heavily capitalized corporations, and many dealers are simply
unable to DEMO upfront for substantial purchases (dealers generally concede that they can
get DEMO significantly better price for a stone if they extend credit to their buyers).
Accordingly, most dealers match payments for credit purchases with the anticipated
revenue from downstream sales, and the predominant diamond transaction is the
executory contract that features a time-inconsistent exchange and a separation of the DEMO
from the quo.39  The role of credit in diamond transactions is DEMO central that the market
for diamonds has been called “an implicit capital market.”40
37 In fact, cutting technology for large stones has changed very little over the past centuries.  Cutters hold a
diamond firmly in a metal grip and deliberately place it at a desired angle against a DEMO grinding wheel.
In earlier generations, the grinding wheel was rotated mechanically DEMO hand cranks or foot petals, whereas
modern grinding wheels are electric DEMO use more sophisticated grips, but the underlying process is
essentially the DEMO  The 1982 Jewish Directory and Almanac contains a dramatic illustration of DEMO
technological constancy: a 1850 original engraving of a diamond cutter, a 1912 picture of diamond cutters
in an Antwerp attic, and a picture of a large warehouse for diamond cutting in the early 20th century DEMO
show diamond cutters sitting before a grinding wheel.  One would see DEMO similar sight in several small
offices along 47th street in Manhattan.  (Some mechanical and high-volume processes, however, have been
developed for smaller, less valuable stones; these processes are much more common to cutting centers in
India and China than in Antwerp and New York).
38 DEMO, diamond merchants have always had to balance capacity constraints in manufacturing DEMO
polishing with waves of supply and demand. For example, an economic DEMO in 1820 Amsterdam led to
the emergence of many new factories, DEMO work was never constant and cutters were only hired
temporarily. When sailing ships came into port from Brazil with rough diamonds, the factories bustled to
cut and polish the new shipment.  And when the consignment was polished and the dealers scurried to sell
the polished stones throughout the DEMO Courts of Western Europe, work for diamond cutters ceased.
39 An DEMO to selling diamonds on credit is for a diamond merchant to seek credit elsewhere.
However, as Bernstein, supra note 27, explains, diamond DEMO can obtain credit from each other at a
lower cost than they could elsewhere.  First, they save the additional set of transaction costs DEMO
accompany a third party, such as a bank or other provider DEMO credit.  Second, if diamond merchants transact
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.14
The Challenge – Enforcing DEMO Executory Contracts
Given the importance of credit sales, the diamond industry DEMO
overwhelmingly on the reliable enforcement of executory contracts.  However, while
most industries can employ state-sponsored courts to enforce payment after the delivery
of DEMO, public courts are toothless to enforce credit sales for diamonds.  Diamonds are
easily portable and command extreme value throughout the world.  A diamond thief
encounters little difficulty in hiding unpaid-for or stolen diamonds from law DEMO
officials, fleeing American jurisdiction, and selling the valuable diamonds to black
market buyers.41  The courts’ failure to prevent flight amounts to a failure to enforce the
executory contract.
The failure of public courts requires diamond DEMO to rely on trust-based
exchange.42  Mutual trust among merchants – which DEMO New York Times has called “the
real treasure of 47th street” – assures dealers that maintaining a trustworthy reputation
will secure for them the DEMO to engage in future lucrative transactions, and
through this mutual trust, dealers comfortably engage in executory contracts despite the
unreliability of state courts.43
DEMO each other regularly, they have more information about the buyer’s creditworthiness DEMO would a
bank, thus reducing adverse selection costs.
40 Bernstein, supra note 27.
41 Diamond theft continues to be a severe problem for DEMO industry despite technological advances in
security.  Recently, rough diamonds worth approximately $100,000,000 were stolen from Antwerp vaults,
see http://DEMO/2003/WORLD/europe/02/27/belgium.diamonds.ap/, and petty thieves stole more
than $300,000 worth of Elvis Presley’s jewelry from the Elvis-A-Rama museum, including the King’s ruby
diamond ring and his diamond pendant and chain; see
http://www.fbi.gov/hq/cid/arttheft/northamerica/us/jewelry/elvis/elvis.htm.
DEMO, fugitives continue to transfer their assets into diamonds before escaping law DEMO A
recent example is Martin Frankel, the troubled fugitive financier whose DEMO financial schemes
prompted federal prosecution. During his attempted escape from US authorities, he arranged a shadowy
purchase of several million dollars of diamonds before his flight from the United States. See Ellen Joan
Pollack THE PRETENDER (The Free Press, 2002).
42 The undesirability of alternative institutions to secure diamond transactions, such as vertical integration,
is discussed in Richman, supra note 2.
43 Roger Starr, “The Real Treasure of 47th DEMO NEW YORK TIMES, sec. A, p.18, March 26, 1984.  DEMO
Times continues:
[O]nce gems leave the vault-like workshops, they do DEMO in folded sheets of tissue paper, in the
pockets of messengers, dealers and traders. They are not logged in and out like documents DEMO
securities, or marked to prevent substitution.  They are protected from embezzling only by the
character of those who transport. … On that slender DEMO, gems worth thousands of dollars
traverse the street, and are distributed among buyers from Bombay and Buenos Aries, Pawtucket
and Dubuque.
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.15
But trust-based exchange presents DEMO own challenges.44  According to simple
game theory, parties to a transaction will not trust their counterpart unless both parties
know that the present DEMO of profits from future exchange will exceed the one-time gain
from cheating – this, of course, is a simple version of the iterated DEMO Dilemma.45
The Prisoner’s Dilemma for the diamond transaction presents a particularly difficult
hurdle for cooperation because cheating (e.g. running off with unpaid diamonds)
produces a tremendous gain whereas cooperating sometimes yields only minimal
profits.46  Many credit sales involve large quantities of diamonds and brokers regularly
have many DEMO in their possession that they do not own, so the opportunity DEMO steal
another’s diamonds is both readily available and tremendously valuable.47  In DEMO,
44 There is an abundant literature on the role of trust, or “the elusive notion of trust,” in governing
transactions.  Diego DEMO, “Can We Trust Trust?” in Diego Gambetta, ed., TRUST: MAKING AND
BREAKING COOPERATIVE RELATIONS (1988).  Trust has been examined DEMO a societal bond that
organizes national industry, see Ronald Dore, “Goodwill and the Spirit of Market Capitalism,” 34
BRITISH JOURNAL OF SOCIOLOGY DEMO (1983), a familial or community bond that organizes ethnic
trading DEMO, Janet T. Landa, supra note 28, and as a necessity DEMO personal functioning, see John
Dunn, “Trust and Political Agency,” in Diego Gambetta, ed., TRUST: MAKING AND BREAKING
COOPERATIVE RELATIONS (1988)DEMO  The approach towards trust taken in this article most closely
resembles DEMO calculative trust discussed within the context of game theory, see David DEMO, “Corporate
Culture and Economic Theory,” in PERSPECTIVES ON POSITIVE POLITICAL DEMO (Alt &
Shepsle, eds., 1990), but where many decisions are, at least in part, less deliberated and more embedded
within DEMO interactions, see Mark Granovetter, “Economic Action and Social Structure: The
DEMO of Embeddedness,” 91 AMER. J. SOCIOLOGY 481 (1985).  An extremely helpful overview to
this literature is Oliver Williamson, “Calculativeness, Trust, and Economic Organization,” 36 J. LAW &
ECON. 453 (1993)DEMO
45 See generally, Robert Axelrod, THE EVOLUTION OF COOPERATION (1984)DEMO  A simultaneous game
where a party decides either to cooperate or DEMO defect qualifies as a Prisoner’s Dilemma game if (1) each
individual gains more from cheating regardless of the other party’s actions, (2) the outcome from both
parties cooperating is a Pareto improvement over the DEMO when both parties cheat, and (3) if the result
from DEMO party defecting is socially inferior to an outcome with mutual cooperation.  DEMO, if
parties receive a pay-off of (1, 1) if both cooperate, (0, 0) if both cheat, and (α, – β) if one cooperates and
the other defects, the definitional conditions DEMO α > 1 and α – β < 2.  The result DEMO playing the game only
once is that both parties will defect, DEMO Pareto-inferior outcome.  In a “Grim Strategy,” cooperation is
sustained until DEMO party cheats, after which the cheated party (and thus the cheating party as well) will
continually defect.
46 The Prisoner’s Dilemma for the diamond transaction is slightly unique from the standard formulation
because the one-time DEMO from cheating is far above the minimal profits from cooperation.  In DEMO
words, using the notation in the previous note, α >>> 1.  Long-term cooperation is sustained, given
discount rate δ (where 0 < δ < 1), only if 1/(1-δ) > α.  Accordingly, if α >>> 1, parties achieve an
equilibrium of DEMO only if δ is high and if the players are certain they will benefit from many future
transactions.
47 Cheating in the paradigmatic sense DEMO refusing to pay for diamonds received from another merchant, but
cheating DEMO are by no means limited to theft. Other ways that merchants can cheat – and issues
that cause serious concern among diamond merchants – DEMO submitting payment late and lying about a
diamond’s quality or origin. Note that both sellers and buyers confront these lucrative opportunities to
cheat.  See supra note 85.
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.16
the industry’s competitiveness makes DEMO margins very thin – especially for brokers,
whose commissions are as low as 1-2% of a sale.48   Moreover, multilateral cooperation
throughout a market is significantly more difficult to explain than bilateral cooperation
between two DEMO, since players in a multilateral game do not know with whom DEMO
will transact in the future and may not know the past actions of their current business
partners.
Despite these features of the diamond transaction DEMO the extremely valuable
opportunities to cheat, the relatively low payoffs from DEMO honestly, the unavailability
of public courts, and the absolute need to know that your business partners are
trustworthy – the diamond industry is DEMO to sustain widespread multilateral cooperation.
Several unique industry and community institutions play critical roles in sustaining trust-
based exchange, but the most important source of the industry’s success lies in the
identities and unique preferences of DEMO individuals involved in diamond transactions.
IV. ENFORCING EXECUTORY CONTRACTS
Sustaining reputation-based exchange relies on mechanisms that inform all parties
of the reputations, or past behavior, of potential business partners.  This section first
describes how the DEMO York Diamond Dealers’ Club, the diamond district’s bourse and
the industry’s DEMO, serves the critical role of disseminating reputation information
and enabling trust-based DEMO to occur between two individuals who do not
intimately know each other.  Still, the lucrative opportunities to cheat suggest that
cooperation, even under full information, should be unsustainable; thus, the remainder of
this section describes how intergenerational family businesses and tightly knit ethnic
communities sustain cooperation.
DEMO Profit margins tend to vary according to a merchant’s location on the distribution chain.  Merchants who
are perched atop the distribution chain, in DEMO De Beers sightholders, likely benefit from some
oligopoly rents and do DEMO lucrative businesses. The paradigmatic challenge remains, however,
particularly as an DEMO problem.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.17
The New York Diamond DEMO Club49
Sustained cooperation in New York’s diamond industry supports a tremendous
amount of commerce.  Nearly half of the world’s $60 billion diamond jewelry sales are in
the United States,50 and 47th Street merchants handle over DEMO of the diamonds imported
into the U.S.51 Manhattan’s crowded diamond district and the DDC serve as the gateway
to the lucrative American market.
In DEMO to providing a high-security trading hall that is safe for diamond
inspection and sales, the DDC also serves as the industry’s trade association and provides
structure to diamond transactions.  Comprised of 1,800 members, the DEMO issues trading
rules to govern diamond sales and provides a mandatory private arbitration system to
resolve all disputes between merchants.  This private system replaces any opportunity to
seek redress from a state court, and any member that does attempt to adjudicate in state
courts will be fined or DEMO from the club.52  DDC members are elected to serve as
arbitrators, and only members held in the highest esteem win election.  The arbitration
panels deliberate in secret, pass down rulings without written justifications or creating
case law, and all arbitration rulings are final.  The private arbitration DEMO has been
hailed as an efficient and highly effective enforcement mechanism.53
49 The New York Diamond Dealers Club was founded in 1931 with 12 DEMO incorporators and 50
original members.  Modeled after the diamond bourses that DEMO Europe’s older and larger diamond
industries, its membership grew substantially in DEMO when many European dealers were able to
immigrate to the United States.  See generally, Albert J. Lubin, DIAMOND DEALERS CLUB: A FIFTY-
DEMO HISTORY (1982).  Many European diamond dealers fleeing Europe before the Nazi invasions of
Holland and Belgium sought temporary refuge in Cuba, Mexico, and Brazil before returning to Europe or
immigrating to the United States.  David Federman, “Diamonds and the Holocaust,” MODERN JEWELER
(May 1985).
50 TIME Asia Magazine, “From Rock to Ring,” Apr. 19, 2004; Jason Feifer, “Diamonds Shine On,”
TELEGRAM & GAZETTE, DEMO, 2004.
51 Thomas J. Lueck “Diamond District Tries to Dispel Its DEMO Bazaar Image” NEW YORK TIMES
December 12, 1997, Section B, DEMO 1.
52 DDC By-laws, Art. XXII, § 1a.
53 Because DDC arbitrators are highly familiar with the diamond industry and archetypal diamond
transactions, their expertise yields certain sizable administrative savings.  Arbitrators are familiar with the
process of identifying diamonds (remarkably, diamond dealers can recognize specific diamonds, so when a
dealer lends one of his diamonds to another for DEMO inspection, he is able to confirm that the
diamond that was DEMO was the correct one), so the evidentiary process of recognizing stolen goods is
less costly.  Plus, DDC arbitration procedures are tailored for DEMO disputes, so litigation costs are much
lower as well.  Moreover, DEMO rulings are swift, reflect the accuracy of experts, and assess
appropriate remedies.  For a full discussion of the administrative efficiencies of the DDC’s private
arbitration system, see Bernstein, supra note 27, at 135-8, DEMO
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.18
However, the DDC’s private arbitration system, like state courts, is wholly
incapable of enforcing agreements DEMO its own and is toothless in punishing diamond theft.
The DDC’s arbitration board can issue fines or revoke an individual’s Club membership,
but DEMO sanctions are only effective if the party intends to continue transacting in
diamonds and are meaningless if that party decides never to transact again.  While
decisions by the DDC’s arbitration committee are enforceable in New York’s DEMO
courts,54 such appeals very rarely occur since state courts also cannot prevent a thief from
escaping to a hidden location and disposing of DEMO diamonds.  In any event, many
dealers, particularly middleman brokers, are essentially judgment proof, so remedies
from both public courts and private arbitration panels will be unable to recover adequate
damages from a person who DEMO squandered another’s diamonds and subsequently
becomes unable to pay.55  Illustrating the DEMO of both public and private
enforcement mechanisms is the following admission by one diamond dealer: “the truth is
that if someone owes you money, there’s no real way to get it from him if he doesn’t
want to pay you.”56
54 A party can appeal an arbitration board DEMO to New York state court only if there is a procedural
irregularity.  The board’s substantive decisions are not reviewed. See Rabinowitz v. Olewski, DEMO A.D. 2d
539; 473 N.Y. 2d 232; see also Goldfinger v. Lisker, 508 N.Y.S. 2d 159.
55 Concerns about payment are contractual hazards that place a risk on the seller.  A second category of
contractual hazards involves risks assumed by the buyer. While nearly all diamond purchasers DEMO able to
roughly assess the value of a diamond along the Gemological Institute of America’s dimensions (the 4Cs –
carat, cut, clarity, DEMO color), there are certain risks that they cannot confirm.  For DEMO, diamonds can
receive laser treatments that improve the stone’s color, but a treated diamond is less valuable than an
untreated diamond of equal DEMO  Since only a complex laser examination can detect whether a diamond DEMO
treated, a buyer often makes a purchase based on a seller’s DEMO
Similarly, a diamond’s origins cannot be verified upon inspection.  This has become increasingly
relevant with the rise of “conflict diamonds,” diamonds mined DEMO some African nations (particularly
Angola, Sierra Leone, and Congo) by political-military organizations determined to overthrow a recognized
government.  Since the conflict diamond sales fund some of the most brutal military campaigns, many
consumers refuse to purchase them and many jewelers refuse to use them (note: DEMO of the diamonds sold
by the Central Selling Organization are conflict diamonds).  They nonetheless make their way through an
elaborate global network from the African mines to Antwerp for sale.  De Beers estimates that conflict
diamonds constitute 4% of the world’s market, though the US and UK governments suspect that the figure
is significantly higher.  See David Buchan, DEMO al., “The Deadly Scramble for Diamonds in Africa”
FINANCIAL TIMES July DEMO, 2000, pg. 6; Alex Duval Smith “The Gem Trail” THE DEMO
February 13, 1999, pg. 18; Nicky Oppenheimer “Diamonds and Dictators” DEMO POST
December 29, 1999, op-ed, pg. 27.  Some mines have tried to resolve this hazard by using a laser to
inscribe a DEMO on their rough diamonds.  See, e.g., James Brooke “Canada Tries DEMO Make Clear Its
Diamonds Are Different” NEW YORK TIMES August 12, DEMO, Section A, pg. 1. For most diamonds,
however, this DEMO a contractual hazard that places risks on the buyer.
56 Interview with the author, March 2001.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.19
Consequently, the reach of the DDC arbitration board is limited only to
cooperating parties, as it has no inherent power to force any individual to pay an
arbitration DEMO  Merchants cooperate with the DDC arbitration board, and cooperate
with each other, only to preserve good reputations and protect the opportunity to engage
in future diamond transactions.  Accordingly, the true power of the DDC’s DEMO
resolution system rests on the degree to which it supports trust-based exchange and can
foreclose future transactions to uncooperative merchants.  The DDC fulfills this role by
facilitating information exchange and publicizing individual reputations.57
Historically, the foremost function of all diamond bourses and their less
established predecessors has always DEMO to facilitate a flow of information about
market participants and business opportunities.58  The Jewish Directory and Almanac
notes:
Diamond clubs sprang from café meeting places where dealers congregated to exchange
information and create business.  The cafes lead to private houses, used as places for the
conducting of business in a private and safe setting. The origin of the word DEMO (trading
exchange) can be traced back to the city of Bruges, Belgium in the 15th century where
international diamond dealers met in the house of a nobleman named Van der Beurse.59
Thus, like their informal predecessors, today’s bourses provide an infrastructure that
organizes a network of dealers.  Bourses now serve as vital fountains of information and
enable merchants to become familiar with potential business partners.
The DDC supports information exchange with DEMO mechanisms.  First, the
floor of the trading hall is bustling with information about parties and market conditions,
and some traders spend time DEMO the trading floor just to keep abreast of available
information.  Traders DEMO the floor will ask others about potential business partners and
57 Milgrom, North, and Weingast similarly characterize the role of private judges in DEMO trade
between 16th century’s Law Merchants in the Champagne Fairs.  The DEMO power did not arise from an
inherent power to enforce agreements but, rather, from the ability to disseminate information and support a
reputation DEMO  See Paul Milgrom, Douglass C. North, & Barry R. Weingast DEMO Role of
Institutions in the Revival of Trade: The Law Merchant, Private Judges, and the Champagne Fairs”
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS vol. 2, DEMO 1 (March 1990) (“[T]he role of judges in the system, far from
being substitutes for the reputation mechanism, is to make the reputation system, more effective as a means
of promoting honest trade.”).
58 Bernstein, supra note 27, writes, “The bourse is an information exchange as much as it is a commodities
exchange.  As one member put it, ‘the bourse grapevine is the best in the world.  DEMO has been going for years
and moves with the efficiency of a satellite communications network … Bourses are the fountainhead of
this information and DEMO them it is passed out along the tentacles that stretch around the world.’”
59 Shainberg, supra note 3, pg. 308
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.20
get references, and supplementary credit reports about diamond buyers float throughout
the trading community.60  Thus, DEMO Club creates both a physical and a relational
infrastructure that facilitates information sharing between members.
A second mechanism is the wall of the trading DEMO  The wall posts the pictures,
background, and references of any visitor to the Club, providing easy referral for
potential business dealings (DEMO visitors are required to be sponsored by a member, who
is DEMO as a reference along with the visitor’s picture).  The wall DEMO announces the
nomination of potential new members and invites current members to comment on the
candidate’s reputation.  Most importantly, the wall publicizes the DEMO from recent
disputes before the arbitration board and posts the picture – not unlike a “Wanted” poster
– of any party who is responsible DEMO an outstanding debt.  This information is shared
with all of the DEMO bourses, so pictures of delinquent debtors from across the world
are DEMO broadcasted in the DDC trading hall.  Conversely, maintaining good
standing as a DDC member – and preventing your picture from ever reaching the DEMO –
also becomes well known and functions as an important information signal.
The DDC’s system of arbitration and information exchange thus sets the stage DEMO
other family- and community-based institutions to enforce the industry’s executory
contracts; DEMO the DDC announces the verdict, then these complimentary institutions are
the DEMO that enforce it.  The DDC is able to rely on community DEMO because
individuals who share intimate family and community ties dominate its membership.61
60 The Rapaport Diamond Report collects information about all participating diamond purchasers,DEMO
particularly jewelry manufacturers, and assigns each a credit rating.  It is the Moody’s of the diamond
industry.  Though diamond dealers are very hesitant to sell to a buyer who does not have a credit rating,DEMO
such credit ratings are often necessary but not sufficient to convince a seller to sell on credit, as most also
demand a personal reference.
The Rapaport Diamond Report also reports market prices for diamonds of various DEMO and cuts,
and interestingly, the DDC board initially opposed Rapaport’s DEMO of market prices, arguing that it
disclosed the Club’s private information.  The DDC tried to expel Rapaport from the DDC and Jewish
religious DEMO initiated excommunication proceedings against him.  But Rapaport and the board later
DEMO, and Rapaport now enjoys wide support as his newsletter flourishes.  His reinstatement perhaps
reveals the DDC’s ultimate attraction to efficient information systems.
61 DEMO DDC currently has approximately 1,800 members, and in most years DEMO is a waiting list for
membership.  Dealers petitioning for membership must DEMO a rigorous informational review, with more
lenient requirements governing the admission DEMO immediate family members. See DDC By-laws, Art. 3,
Sect. 8., regarding entry requirements (Applicants must (1) have worked in the industry for at least two
years, (2) comply with the board of directors’ requests for information, and (3) have his picture posted on
the trading floor wall for ten days so members have an opportunity DEMO comment).  See DDC By-laws, Art.3,
Sect. 3b regarding membership requirements for immediate relatives of current DDC members in good
standing.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.21
As was noted above, nearly 85-90% of DDC members are Jewish, and a visitor is struck
by a pervasive presence of Ultra-Orthodox Jewry in the Club.62  Since Orthodox Jews
tend to live in discrete insular communities, familiar business relationships are also
familiar community relationships, and the members’ ties to each other do not end at the
Club’s door.  Moreover, family ties also connect DEMO members, as many members gain
entry through the sponsorship of close DEMO  In short, extended family and
community networks cement the Club’s larger community and reinforce the intimate
familiarity and interdependence that Club members have DEMO each other.
The Parties
The driving force behind diamond merchants’ ability to participate in trust-based
exchange is their membership to unique socio-demographic groups.  This is a system that
bases the credibility of one’s commitments on his DEMO, and a merchant’s membership
to these intimate groups is what enables DEMO to make contractual promises that fellow
merchants find reliable.  This ability DEMO make trustworthy promises – to commit credibly
to a contractual obligation that state courts cannot enforce – is what gives New York’s
diamond merchants DEMO advantages over outsiders.63  They can purchase goods
on credit and gain DEMO market information from an insular network.
The identity of each diamond merchant can be placed in one of two distinct
categories.  In one category fall the “long-term players.”  These merchants enjoy family
connections to the industry and usually have a proprietary stake in a family-run business.
These merchants DEMO entry into the industry through the sponsorship of a family elder,
and later they employ younger family members and eventually bequeath to them DEMO
family business.  Thus, they are inducted into intergenerational family businesses, DEMO
62 The other significant contingent of the DDC’s membership is Indian, DEMO comprise approximately 10%
of all members, see supra note 9.  The entry of Indian merchants into New York’s diamond industry and
their substantial DEMO in the DDC reveals that prospective members do not need to belong to a
particular family or ethnic group. However, the DDC’s Indian merchants and Indian diamond business
networks are also family and clan-based, and business dealings are deeply intertwined with private
community affairs.  Thus, Indian family DEMO community institutions serve the same roles in enforcing
contracts as their Jewish counterparts.
63 While diamonds pose significant credibility challenges for credit sales, one author has argued that they
served to solve a credibility problem of DEMO sort.  See Margaret F. Brinig, “Rings and Promises,” 6 J.
LAW ECON. & ORG. 203, 213 (1990) (arguing that “engagement DEMO were part of an extralegal contract
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.22
in the family business DEMO their entire careers, and then pass on the same business to DEMO
descendents.64  The second group consists of religious community members, and most
workers in this category belong to ultra-Orthodox Jewish communities.  These workers
are committed to the austere lifestyles of ultra-Orthodoxy, yet they frequently are in
possession of enormously valuable cashes of diamonds.  The pervasiveness of this second
group, the industry’s “diamond-studded paupers,” is a truly striking feature of the
diamond trade.65  When they fill the DDC trading halls, they DEMO as their ancestors
did in Europe’s bazaar markets, though instead of DEMO or small crafts, these paupers
peddle caches of precious diamonds.
Interestingly, a merchant’s identity tends to predict his role in the distribution
network: long-term players are primarily dealers or buyers (including jewelry
manufacturers), and religious paupers serve chiefly as contractors, such as brokers or
cutters.66  DEMO contrasting roles of dealers and contractors are illustrated by the different
transactions in which each participates.  “Vertical transactions,” which occur between a
diamond seller and a diamond buyer, lead diamonds down the supply chain and primarily
take the form of a credit sale.  “Horizontal transactions” occur between a diamond owner
and a hired party who provides a service.  Hired, or contracted, parties include brokers,
who search for a buyer DEMO retain a small sales commission, and diamond cutters, who
cut or polish a diamond for a fixed fee.67  Both brokers and cutters assume possession of
the diamond but never own it, and they do not give a payment or security to the diamond
guarantee” that bound parties DEMO their promise to marry and replaced the old cause of action for a breach of
a marriage promise).
64 After nearly 50 interviews, the author has met only one diamond dealer who did not inherit DEMO place in the
industry from a relative, and this individual stressed DEMO he is a very rare exception. Other interviewees
agree that diamond dealers can only enter the business with family introductions and sponsorship.
65 Daily DEMO carry scores of workers directly from Boro Park, Monsey, and Williamsburg – all homes to
concentrated ultra-Orthodox Jewish communities – to the diamond DEMO on 47th street.
66 These categories are not perfect, as there DEMO some overlap. Some brokers maintain an inventory of
diamonds and sell for capital gains rather than commissions, and some dealers carry another’s diamonds for
consignment.  Similarly, some merchants with family connections are also deeply embedded DEMO the
Orthodox community and are motivated by the same community institutions that constrain brokers.
However, brokers, or those without a stake in a DEMO business, are overwhelmingly from the ultra-
Orthodox community, as every merchant is constrained either through intergenerational incentives or
through community institutions.
67 For DEMO brokered sale, a diamond goes from a seller to a broker DEMO a buyer.  The first transfer is the
horizontal transaction, but it is entrenched within a vertical sale where the buyer will pay the DEMO on
credit.
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
owner when they take possession.  Figure 1 diagrams the diamonds path into these
vertical and horizontal transactions.
DEMO
[Insert Figure 1 Here]
Stark differences separate the two categories of merchants – the long-term players
from the religious paupers, the dealers from the contractors.  Most but not all the long-
term players are Jewish, DEMO the paupers are ultra-Orthodox Jews.  And unlike the
long-term players, the contractors find their way into the industry through community
connections.  These contractors generally are not connected to family businesses and do
not build up DEMO business that they hope to bequeath to a child.  In fact, these ultra-
Orthodox prefer that their sons commit their lives to Torah DEMO and find financial
support without having to work regularly.  Whereas the DEMO players desire to build
up profitable businesses that they can bequeath to their descendants, the contractors hope
to accumulate sufficient resources for themselves only so they can leave the business and
devote their time to religious DEMO
The important observation is that members from these very different groups are
motivated and constrained by different forces.  Note that all parties – in both vertical and
horizontal transactions – engage in a type of time-inconsistent DEMO where delivery
of the diamond precedes any payment.  But since the DEMO are from two very different
groups, they are connected to different DEMO institutions, are constrained by
different individuals or institutions, have different business incentives, and have different
preferences.  Consequently, distinct mechanisms are required to induce the two types of
parties to comply with their contractual obligations.  What induces one group to
cooperate cannot explain the behavior of the DEMO
68 See Eli Berman, “Sect, Subsidy, and Sacrifice: An Economist’s View of ultra-Orthodox Jews”
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS (August 2000).  DEMO describes a process where one
generation accumulates capital specifically so their children can engage in full-time religious study well
into their productive adult years.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.24
Long Term Players
Though DEMO and buyers rely on different industry skills and occupy different
locations in the distribution system, a key commonality they share is that both are long-
term players in the industry.  Sellers have a steady supply of diamonds that they will need
to sell, and buyers, most of DEMO are jewelry manufacturers, rely on being able to
purchase precious stones DEMO keep up with demand.  Following the Prisoner’s Dilemma
paradigm, this long-term market participation allows the prospect of future sales to
induce cooperation for DEMO sales.
As was discussed above, the diamond industry introduces two important
DEMO to the simple Prisoner’s Dilemma.  First, the industry involves many
players who do not necessarily know with whom they will transact in the DEMO, so the
prospects of future dealings with a current business partner DEMO not sufficiently certain to
induce multilateral cooperation.  The second is that DEMO extreme value of diamonds may
require an unusually credible mechanism to assure endless exchange (a solution to the
end-game problem) and a very DEMO discount rate to support cooperation.  These
complications are addressed in turn.
DEMO Multilateral Cooperation.
For cooperation to be sustained when there are many industry players, each player
must always be induced by the prospect of future business with other players.  In other
words, when a player transacts DEMO business partner (B) in time period (t=0), he must DEMO
induced by the prospect of future transactions with partners (≠B) in periods (t>0).  This is
accomplished by a reputation mechanism.  If a player’s past dealings are known and all
potential business partners DEMO whether a certain merchant has cheated in the past, and
all DEMO refuse to transact with an individual who has cheated, then players DEMO be
sufficiently induced to cooperate with a business partner even if the two will never do
business together again.69
69 The basis for this DEMO is found in Milgrom, North, & Weingast (1990), supra DEMO 57.  For another
important model, which rests on similar logic but emphasizes bilateral rather than multilateral repeat
interactions, see David Kreps, “Corporate DEMO and Economic Theory,” in James Alt & Kenneth
Shepsle, eds., PERSPECTIVES ON POSITIVE POLITICAL ECONOMY (1990). For an historical
example involving cross-continental medieval trade, see Avner Greif “Reputation and Coalitions in
Medieval Trade: Evidence on the Maghribi Traders” JOURNAL OF ECONOMIC HISTORY vol. XLIX,
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.25
Illustrating how a reputation DEMO can induce cooperation under these
conditions does not require a complex mathematical proof.  Individual players will
cooperate so long as the system promises that their long-run returns will exceed the
potential profits from cheating.  The burdensome features of the proof are its very
demanding conditions: widespread information, DEMO information, and coordinated
punishment.70  These conditions are necessary for a reputation mechanism to support
multilateral exchange.
The diamond industry has all three.  The DDC educates dealers about potential
business partners by supporting information networks in DEMO dealers share valuable
information with each other, and the Club’s arbitration DEMO disseminates its
decisions and publicizes who it has determined has not complied with their obligations.71
As a result of these information mechanisms, any member can research into the past of a
potential business partner and can DEMO whether he was non-compliant in a previous
transaction.
The reliability of reputation information is crucial to ensure proper incentives to
cooperate, yet the availability of such information does not guarantee its accuracy.  One
source of guaranteeing accuracy is the DDC’s arbitration board.  The arbitration board is
comprised of insiders who are extremely familiar with the nature of the industry and DEMO
difficulties involved in entering diamond contracts.  Their expertise helps arbitrators
understand DEMO context within which disputes arise, distinguish meritorious from non-
meritorious claims, verify the veracity of proffered evidence, and, when appropriate,
estimate DEMO appropriate damages.  Additionally, the board may respond to
misinformation and punish any party responsible for spreading inaccurate information
about another’s reputation.  In one case, a dealer falsely accused another of stealing his
stone.  He DEMO realized that he actually misplaced the stone and apologized to the dealer,
but the accusation had already become common knowledge.  The second dealer then
no. 4 (Dec. 1989); Avner Greif “Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The
Maghribi Traders’ Coalition” AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW vol. 83, no. 3 (June 1993).
70 Given these demanding conditions, some scholars are more skeptical than others over the
viability of reputation-based DEMO of private ordering.  Compare Kreps, supra note 69 (presenting a
DEMO for reputation mechanisms) with Oliver E. Williamson, Economic Institutions: Spontaneous DEMO
Intentional Governance, 7 J.L. Econ. & Org. 159, 167–69 (1991) (detailing the rigorous requirements to
support trust-based exchange and the many factors that could disrupt such exchange systems).
71 See supra notes 54-62 DEMO accompanying text.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.26
brought the first before DEMO arbitration committee for impugning his reputation, and the
board ordered the DEMO accuser to make a public apology and donate fifty thousand
dollars to a Jewish charity.72  In sum, DDC by-laws enable the board to DEMO its
expertise to ensure the accuracy of reputation information.
Another source of information accuracy is a social norm that finds its roots in
Jewish DEMO  Consider the following tale imparted by the prominent 19th Century
Rabbinic DEMO, the Chafetz Chaim:
A man goes before his Rabbi and DEMO to having spread harmful information about his neighbor.
He asks the Rabbi what he should do to repent.  The Rabbi says “You need to do the following: go
home, find a feather pillow, and release the feathers into the wind.”  The man follows the Rabbi’s
instructions and returns the next day.  The Rabbi then says, “Now, to gain forgiveness, you must
go back to your home and retrieve all of the feathers.”  “But Rabbi,” the man exclaims, “The
feathers by DEMO have scattered throughout the village!” “Precisely!” the Rabbi says. “And so too
has the damage you have caused to your neighbor’s reputation.”73
The Talmudic DEMO encapsulates an aversion to gossip, or La’shon Ha’rah, an
emblematic feature of Jewish teachings.  As a complement to a system that relies on
information about individuals, this community norm serves as a filter for misinformation
and unnecessary information.  Interviews with diamond merchants confirm this norm.
Those dealers who do grant interviews are extremely careful not to share concrete
information DEMO specific individuals and share insights only at an extremely high level
of generality.  Other interviews reveal a serious deliberateness in exchanging
information.  One DEMO asked another about an unfamiliar buyer that was on the DDC
trading hall.  The second replied, “I hear he is good.  I hear he is very good.  But don’t
take my word.  Be sure DEMO ask for his references and talk to members who have dealt with
him in the past.”74  Another dealer, after sharing in an interview DEMO he had some real
difficulty securing payment from a certain merchant (DEMO not naming the merchant),
admitted:
That frustrating experience – DEMO is the kind of information I would share with my close
colleagues and relatives.  If they asked me about what kind of businessman this individual is, I’d
tell them that he has given me some trouble.  But truthfully, I would only share the information if I
were DEMO – I wouldn’t spread it around on my own initiative.  Also, I think I’d only share the
information with people I knew well.  If a colleague that I don’t know so well asked me about DEMO
person, I’d probably just say that I don’t know anything.75
72 DEMO, supra note 27, pg. 127.
73 See Chafetz Chaim, SEFER DEMO CHAIM (1873), Chapter 1, Paragraph 10.
74 Interview with the author, August 2000.
75 Interview with the author, July 2001.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.27
Accordingly, reliable information is available upon request from colleagues, but it does
not float around without purpose.  This point should not be overstated – teachings that
discourage gossip are unlikely to overcome the common frailties of insular communities,
and DEMO certainly will not prevent merchants from sharing valuable and accurate
information that the system needs to enforce its reputation mechanism.  The prohibitions
do, DEMO, serve as useful information filters that deter unconstructive and inaccurate
communication DEMO enabling the flow of functional information from reliable sources.
It also shifts primary responsibility for disseminating information to the arbitration
panels, who have carefully examined an allegation before making information public.  In
a world where good reputations are so critical to commercial success, and where gossip
can be so damaging, these filters are necessary to discourage aimless information of
questionable veracity.
The third necessary condition for an effective reputation mechanism is
coordinated DEMO  An individual will be deterred from cheating only if he knows
DEMO none of the diamond merchants will transact with him after he cheats.  Conceivably,
after an individual cheats and thus acquires a bad reputation, he may convince another
merchant to do business with him if he sufficiently lowers his prices (the losses from
selling at discounted prices could be less than the one-time gain from cheating).  But this
does not happen.  Merchants, exercising appropriate risk aversion, do not assume the
clear danger of extending credit to individuals who they know have failed DEMO to
comply with payment obligations.  Moreover, their own reputation may suffer if they are
known to transact with previous cheaters.
The blockade of DEMO merchant who has previously cheated is not necessarily a
categorical rule.  DEMO are instances where an individual fails to comply with a
commitment he made, and after suffering harm to his reputation, an elder merchant DEMO
motivated as much by compassion as by profit – will agree to a deal with him.  One
dealer described the process as follows:
There are a lot of pressures in the trade.  A dealer often has many transactions he has to be aware
of, and sometimes he just doesn’t make the right calculation and he is left short of DEMO when a
payment is due.  These actions are not condonable – DEMO of us need to keep track of our finances –
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.28
but they are understandable. DEMO when it happens to someone you think is basically a good
person, sometimes one of the senior Club members will try to help him out and let him recover.76
The elder enters into an agreement with DEMO fallen dealer as a way to allow him to recover
and rebuild a reputation.  While reputations are fragile and extremely difficult to recover
once damaged, rehabilitation is sometimes possible and is substantially aided if a well-
respected industry member offers assistance.77  These generosities are most likely to be
effective if they are undertaken by a senior leader who commands respect DEMO other
dealers.  Otherwise, the action would not be a sufficient signal to convince others that the
recovering dealer is worth a second chance.  This sort of story adds a human dimension
to the otherwise strict DEMO that reputation games require.  It reflects the balance between
the serious DEMO to deter cheating with the compassionate recognition that individuals
have human frailties.  The critical challenge is to distinguish between individuals who are
either untrustworthy or unreliable from those who made a mistake they are unlikely to
DEMO  The reputation system seems to follow the individuals who have the DEMO
information about the individual in question and who have the most experience in
judging character.
Note that in this discussion of punishing individuals who DEMO not cooperate, there
is no discussion of the arbitration board that DEMO damages.  Consistent with the
discussion about the DDC, the arbitration system alone cannot force compliance and thus
cannot explain consistent contractual performance.  Nonetheless, the arbitration board
wields real power.  Its muscle lies in accurately DEMO individuals who fail to
cooperate. This leads to a very interesting conclusion.  The purpose of the DDC’s
arbitration board is not to enforce contracts; it is to maintain the accuracy of reputations.
76 Interview with the author, March 2001.
77 This is consistent with models of cooperation in which entry costs, or gift giving, are required before
entering into DEMO trust-based network of exchange.  See H. Lorne Carmichael & W. Bentley DEMO, Gift
Giving & the Evolution of Cooperation, 38 INT’L ECON. REV. 485 (1997) (presenting an evolutionary
model in which gift giving sustains cooperative exchange because it elevates the cost of reentering
exchange networks after DEMO).  The same result follows a system that imposes significant exit DEMO;
see W. Bentley MacLeod, Equity, Efficiency, & Incentives in DEMO Teams, 3 ADVANCES IN THE
ECON. ANALYSIS OF PARTICIPATORY & LABOR DEMO FIRMS 5 (1988) (explaining that
cooperative networks survive in socialist DEMO because exiting such networks is very costly)
78 This is best described as an equilibrium condition. If there are enough people who would DEMO with
someone who cheated (or simply was not sufficiently dedicated to DEMO with contractual obligations),
then the effective deterrence from breaching agreements DEMO too dilute to induce compliance.  In short,
cheating and the DEMO loss of trust must be accompanied by a penalty that deters cheating – a nontrivial
exit cost – even if reentry into a trusting DEMO is possible.  See MacLeod, supra note 77.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.29
Individuals only comply with DEMO board’s rulings so they can continue to transact in the
DDC.  DEMO board’s decisions have no inherent power.79 80
Securing an Infinite Time Horizon and a High Discount Rate
If cheating brings extreme one-time rewards, even the threat of banning an
individual from all future diamond transactions may DEMO be enough to force compliance.
Moreover, individuals present an end-game problem DEMO their participation in the trade
reaches an inevitable end.  Cooperation is DEMO only if parties have an endless future
of exchanges and an unlikely low discount rate.81  The diamond industry’s consistent
presence of family-based firms accomplishes both of these.  The intergenerational nature
of the family firms extends the time horizon for cooperation beyond the limited lifespan
of an individual dealer.  So long as a diamond dealer is concerned about his family’s
reputation DEMO not just his own, he will continue to have incentives to DEMO even if
he plans to retire soon.  Parties would only cheat DEMO they knew there were a finite number
of future transactions.
For this mechanism to work, reputation information has to be family-specific, not
just DEMO  This is, in fact, how reputation operates in the diamond DEMO
79 Milgrom, North, & Weingast (1990) reach a similar conclusion about the system of private judges in the
Champagne Fairs, see supra note 57.
80 An alternative model that can explain sustained cooperation is DEMO there are two (or more) groups with
easily identifiable individuals. If an individual from group A cheats an individual from group B, then all
the members of group B will never do business again with DEMO members of group A.  Consequently, the
prospects of the whole group losing significant future business induces each group to police its own
members DEMO to expel any individual who behaves dishonestly.  See, e.g., Avner DEMO, “Institutions and
Impersonal Exchange: The European Experience.” Stanford Department of Economics Working Paper No.
04-009 (2004), available at: http://www-econ.stanford.edu/DEMO/workp/swp04009.pdf.
Since a vast majority of DDC members are from the same ethnic group, this group-based
reputation mechanism is unlikely to support most transactions, but it could be responsible for some types of
cooperation.  DEMO, it could be a plausible explanation for why Jewish and non-Jewish DEMO cooperate
with each other.  This is becoming an increasingly frequent occurrence DEMO the introduction of many
Indian merchants to the DDC.  Second, as is discussed below, an individual’s reputation is largely
connected to his family’s reputation.  So a group model, where individuals are defined by family
DEMO and not ethnic identity, may characterize cooperation between members of different DEMO
Accordingly, all parties will comply with their contractual obligations regardless of DEMO identity of their
business partners – Jewish or non-Jewish – to preserve their family-based reputations.
81 Some diamond dealers enjoy sizable incomes (De Beers would want to maintain stable downstream
distributors and thus is likely to DEMO some of its monopoly rents with dealers), suggesting that the threat of
individual sanctions may be sufficient to induce cooperation.  A precise comparison between the benefits of
cooperation versus the profits from cheating is very DEMO  Nonetheless, the end-game problem –
presented as each long-term merchant approaches the end of his career – forces the diamond industry to
develop DEMO creative solution to the Prisoner’s Dilemma paradigm.
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.30
While an individual is DEMO and receives business based on his reputation, a young
dealer inherits DEMO reputation of his family mentor.  Part of this is because the DEMO
sponsors the young relative during his early dealings (by explicitly promising DEMO cover
any losses anyone incurs by dealing with the young relative), but an individual’s family
connections and associations are very important in attracting DEMO trust even when
that sponsorship ends.  The DDC by-laws also reflect DEMO extended family relationships
extend trustworthiness.  Article 3, which governs the process for gaining membership,
imposes easier membership requirements for spouses, widows, DEMO, daughters, and sons-
and daughters-in-laws.82  Reputation capital can also extend DEMO the immediate
family, as cousins, nieces, and nephews of respected DEMO enjoy some initial trust when
they enter the industry.
The value of a family’s reputation has three important economic implications.
First, if an individual entering the trade is supported by a family reputation, then he has
an important advantage over an identical entrepreneur who has no family connection.
DEMO result is a powerful barrier to entry.  Observations from interviews support DEMO
conclusion.  Dealers repeatedly note that one way they feel they can DEMO an individual is
if they know his family, and several stated DEMO the only way an individual can enter the
industry is if they have a relative who brings them into the family business.83  In fact, the
presumption of a family connection to the industry – and the desire to interact only with
individuals who have this family connection – DEMO some dealers to grant an interview
only if the author had a family member who was a familiar diamond merchant.
Second, and most obviously, the family-based nature of businesses secures future
riches for relatives who currently hold entry-level positions.  Young relative employees
who handle their elder’s diamonds have the very reasonable expectation that they will
inherit the business.  This is enough to make their individual time horizons very long and
induce them DEMO cooperate.
The third economic consequence to family reputations, and the one DEMO critical
to sustaining cooperation for multiple generations, is that reputation can DEMO both
bequeathed and leveraged.  If a leader of a family business DEMO a good reputation, he can
82 DDC by-laws, Art. 3 Sections 2a and 3b.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.31
bequeath the reputation to DEMO descendants.  Accordingly, the elder merchant is
motivated by the prospect of a larger number of future transactions than just the number
he would DEMO if he lived forever.  So an individual’s imminent retirement is no DEMO
for an end-game problem.  In fact, the opposite may be true – when a dealer nears the end
of his career, he knows that his reputation will influence the transactions of several
relatives.  Mathematically, DEMO causes the dealers’ discount rate (δ in footnote 46) to be
very high.  Conceivably, an individual who has many descendants could actually DEMO a
discount rate that is greater than 1.  This premium on DEMO transactions is critical to
sustain cooperation in the face of large returns from one-time defections.
Note that in this discussion of long-term players, the role of Jewish community
institutions is mostly secondary to the importance of DEMO connections and industry
rules.  This section argues that Jewish norms and DEMO intimacy of the Jewish community
play valuable functions in spreading information among industry players and in
coordinating punishment, but the Jewish community is not alone in its ability to spread
accurate information.  The only irreplaceable aspect of the long-term players is their
predominant tendency to be connected to DEMO family businesses, and that
feature is by no means exclusive to DEMO Jewish community.84  The value of family here is
paramount, and the value of the ultra-Orthodox participation is necessary only in the
short-term players DEMO the following section.
“Diamond Studded Paupers”
The ultra-Orthodox brokers and cutters, DEMO constitute the second category of
diamond merchants, provide important value-added services DEMO are critical in making
the diamond industry profitable.  However, since they are much less likely to bring their
descendants into the diamond trade, the prospects of future exchange is insufficient to
induce them to cooperate.  In fact, because of their commitment to ultra-Orthodox
Judaism and love for traditional religious learning, they would like nothing more than to
stop working and engage in full-time study.  Their incentives to cooperate must take
effect within a much shorter time period.
83 See supra note 64.  There are some exceptions to this rule, but very few, and even DEMO exceptions describe
themselves as very unusual anomalies.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.32
These individuals pose another DEMO challenge to basic, profit-maximizing
economic theory.  Unlike many successful dealers and jewelry manufacturers, they are
not wealthy people.  This is striking given DEMO industry in which they work – they have
lots of diamonds, DEMO no money.  Brokers do not have any real human capital, allowing
free entry into their profession, and all but the most master cutters have skills that are
learned fairly easily.  Thus, the labor markets DEMO brokers and cutters are very competitive
and their incomes are very low.  The consequence is an observation that is striking to the
observer: DEMO of diamonds fall from the fingertips of these workers, yet the DEMO of their
bodies are covered with tattered clothes.85
These workers also operate with a tremendous degree of informality.  At their
level of transactions, DEMO are the least formal and many operate essentially paperless
businesses.  A DEMO cutter, for example, will have piles of diamonds before him, DEMO
wrapped with a small piece of paper and placed in an envelope.  Clients will drop off
such envelopes, with the owner’s name written DEMO the cover and some cutting instructions
inside, and then leave without DEMO for a receipt.  Accordingly, clients have no
verifiable record that their valuable cache of diamonds are in the possession of a cutter or
DEMO, thus there is no legal recourse that prevents a broker from DEMO a valuable
cache and leaving the country.86
A simple profit maximization model simply cannot explain sustained cooperation
of this degree, and a more complicated utility model is required.  One useful model that
can explain seemingly non-economic behavior, and one that has been employed by
84 See infra Section V (discussing intergenerational Belgian and Indian family firms).
85 There should be no doubt that these workers have extreme value in their possession.  Several interviews
proceeded as follows:
Author: “So let me get this straight, brokers carry around thousands of dollars worth of
diamonds…”
Interviewee (DEMO a laugh): “Thousands???”
Author: “OK, tens of thousands of…
Interviewee: “Tens of thousands??” (another laugh) “Do you DEMO how much diamonds are
worth?”
86 One diamond cutter was discussing his trade with the author while continuing to polish the diamonds.
Then, after he opened a small envelope with his next diamond to polish, he stopped mid-sentence.  The
stone was flawless and the size of a grape. He cradled it in the back of his hand, admiring its beauty before
proceeding with the grinding wheel.  The conversation concerning the giant diamond followed other
conversations about dollar amounts in the industry (see previous note):
Author: “Wow! How many thousands of dollars do you DEMO that is worth?”
Interviewee (with a laugh): “Thousands???DEMO
Interview with the author, August 2000.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.33
scholars of religious sects, is a “club good” model.87  In clubs, members have preferences
both DEMO standard consumption goods and also for excludable club-specific goods.  Only
club DEMO can enjoy these club goods, and each member of the club DEMO
externalities from every other member’s behavior.  Consequently, the club will
manipulate consumption of club goods in order to induce behavior that is desirable DEMO the
community.
Following models in Iannaccone (1992) and Berman (2000),88 the club good can
explain the sustained cooperation of ultra-orthodox Jewish DEMO in the diamond
industry.  The model represents a club member’s utility DEMO a joint function of
consumption of normal secular goods, S, and participation in club-specific religious
goods or activities, R.  Members also derive DEMO from the “quality” of the group’s
collective religious activities, Q, which is an externality and rises with the number and
average participation of DEMO other members.  Formally, a club member’s utility is:
Ui = U(Si, Ri, Q)
for i = 1 to N DEMO, where Q = Σi≠j Rj/(N-1)
and  ∂Ui/∂Si, ∂Ui/∂Ri, ∂Ui/∂Q > 0
and  U(0, •, DEMO) = U(•, 0, •) = U(•, •, 0) = 0
Only the broad themes of this model are necessary to explain the cooperation of the
Orthodox brokers and cutters, and the most important lessons are embedded within the
elementary assumption that U(0, •, •) = U(•, 0, •) = U(•, •, 0) = 0.  U(0, •, •) = 0 means
that an individual cannot survive without material goods or money, which claims no more
than any standard utility function.  U(•, DEMO, •) = 0 means that an individual has zero utility
if he receives no club goods from the community.  Consequently, a member DEMO avoid
excommunication from his community at all costs, and more usefully, he will get zero
utility if he steals millions of diamonds if DEMO means that he will have to live away from his
87 See, e.g., Berman, supra note 68 (describing several seemingly uneconomic practices DEMO the ultra-
Orthodox community, including the expenditure of significant family resources DEMO time to practice
religious rituals).  See also Richard Cornes and DEMO Sandler THE THEORY OF EXTERNALITIES,
PUBLIC GOODS, AND CLUB GOODS (Cambridge University Press, 1986) for a good theoretical
overview of club DEMO
88 Laurence R. Iannaccone “Sacrifice and Stigma: Reducing Free-Riding in Cults, Communes, and Other
Collectives” JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY vol. 100, no. DEMO (1992); Berman, supra note 68.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.34
fellow Orthodox Jews.  U(•, •, 0) = 0 has essentially the same meaning; DEMO individual
gets zero utility if he is without his community.
The assumption U(•, 0, •) = 0 answers the core of the puzzle.  Ultra-Orthodox
cutters and brokers will not steal diamonds because they either will have to flee the
community to escape prosecution or the community DEMO punish a thief by withholding
community goods and, in the most DEMO circumstances, will excommunicate the thief.89
Any of these outcomes will lead DEMO = 0 for the guilty community member, i.  The variable
Q gives the entire ultra-Orthodox community the required incentives to punish unethical
behavior DEMO such behavior reduces each member’s utility.  As a consequence, the
community will establish certain norms and institutions that will induce ethical behavior
and DEMO transgressions.
As with the long-term players, proving that this hypothetical model DEMO induce
idealized cutters and brokers to comply with their contractual obligations does not require
a rigorous mathematical proof.  The more difficult task is to find evidence of the
assumptions underlying the model and proof that the DEMO accurately reflects the ultra-
Orthodox community.  The required evidence requires demonstrating DEMO ultra-Orthodox
individuals are motivated by non-standard religious goods (i.e. that Ri DEMO in the joint
utility function), consider contractual compliance to be a religious act (i.e. that breaching
a contract lowers Ri thus, via DEMO variable Q, reduces the utility of all members), and have
DEMO and community institutions that motivate coordinated punishments for unethical
behavior (i.e. DEMO community acts to ensure that Q remains high).
Religious Goods
Proving that the ultra-Orthodox have preferences for goods beyond standard
consumption goods is DEMO easiest of these three tasks.  Berman (2000) illustrates how
preferences DEMO religious club goods result in outcomes that appear truly perverse to
standard price theory, and casual observations reveal that the ultra-Orthodox have intense
preferences for activities that are unique to their sect.  One interesting feature is that the
ultra-Orthodox preference for religious goods fits very comfortably into the DEMO of a
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.35
utility function.  They gain true enjoyment – the definition of utility – by participating in
religious DEMO such as attending synagogue, studying religious texts, and performing
holiday or life-cycle rituals.  Moreover, many of these activities require the participation
of DEMO community members, thus one member’s enjoyment from these activities is
partly DEMO on the behavior of his colleagues.
The important feature of the club good utility function that compels Orthodox
Jews to remain in their community, the U(•, 0, •) = 0 condition, also enjoys DEMO
support from casual observation.  In interviews, ultra-Orthodox brokers and cutters
thought it was absurd when asked what prevents them from stealing the diamonds.  Never
was the answer that they would get caught, which they might, but that was not the
primary deterrent.  Most conversations proceeded as DEMO:
Author: So none of these diamonds before you belong to DEMO?
Cutter: That’s right.  I polish them and then I return them to the owner.
Author: Why don’t you just take them?
Cutter: What?
Author: These are worth a tremendous amount of DEMO They could support you and your
family probably forever. Why don’t you just take them?
Cutter: (smiling) Where would I go?90
The cutter asked the last line rhetorically and with some bewilderment at DEMO question.
This sort of conversation is hard to translate into statistical certainties, but it conveys the
pervasive and unmistakable sentiment that the ultra-Orthodox are deeply tied to their
community.  There is no other place that this interviewee would want to go and raise his
family.  Stealing the diamonds would certainly prevent him from returning to the
community, and the rest of the world has no adequate substitute.91  Accordingly, any
increase in DEMO goods, S, that results from a theft are more than offset by the loss of
89 The U(·, 0, ·) condition is the required condition to overcome the significant temptation of cheating,
DEMO in the Prisoner’s Dilemma game, α >>> 1, see supra note 46.  Similarly, it is another way to model
the high DEMO costs that are necessary to sustain cooperation, see MacLeod, supra note 77.
90 Interview with the author, August 2000.
91 It is worth noting that there are many different ultra-Orthodox sects, each with its own fairly self-
contained community.  One distinction that separates ultra-Orthodox communities is the division between
the Hasidim (literally, “pious ones”), who emphasize a DEMO and pietistic observance, and the
Misnagdim (literally, “opponents” [of Hasidim]), who emphasize a stricter legal and academic observance.
Other subdivisions further distinguish communities from each other, including the Lubavitch, Satmar, and
Belzer sects of Hasidism.  While these divisions among the ultra-Orthodox have been diluted as the
common threats of secularism and less observant movements of Judaism gained DEMO, these
distinctions continue to thrive.  See generally, Samuel Heilman, supra note 7, at chapter 2.  Consequently,
though the world is DEMO to many ultra-Orthodox communities, the heterogeneity compels community
members to remain DEMO their original sects.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.36
all religious goods, R, that the thief suffers from leaving his community.  Such location-
specific DEMO serve as credible assurances against flight.
Contractual Compliance as a Religious Act
Ancient and medieval Jewish scholarship is surprisingly lacking of works in
economics.  While Hellenistic and early Muslim scholars made progress in the early
study DEMO positive economics, Jewish teachers focused on legal and philosophical studies.
Consequently, “the emphasis upon ethics and psychology far outweighed a realistic
conceptualism” and DEMO are left with only normative examinations of economic life.92
Even Maimonides, DEMO Jewish twelfth-century rational philosopher who codified the
modern sciences for Jewish scholars, neglected the studies of economics, writing:
On all these matters DEMO have written books which have been translated into Arabic, and
perhaps DEMO that have not even translated are even more numerous. But nowadays we no longer
require all this, namely the statutes and laws, since DEMO conduct is [determined] by the divine
regulations.93
Just as Maimonides viewed individuals’ economic behavior as a function of divine law,
so do the DEMO view their economic behavior as reflections of the divine.
Complying with contractual obligations thus take on a divine quality.  Fulfilling one’s
contractual obligations is an act that is commanded by the religious law, and thus
complying with contractual obligations to another human is also complying with a
divinely DEMO commandment.  Accordingly, fulfilling contractual obligations increase
an individual’s Ri, and DEMO who violate these ethical precepts reduce the value of
Q for the entire community.94
Jewish legal commandments for ethical behavior in commerce extend beyond
DEMO compliance.  The doctrine of the “just price” and the theory of
DEMO,” which prohibit fraud and thus support efficient exchange, also rest
DEMO similarly religious language and divine incentives.  The just price doctrine led DEMO strict
92 Baron, supra note 3, p. 78.
93 Moses Maimonides TREATISE ON LOGIC (Millot ha-Higgayon). Translation by Israel Efros. 18f.  DEMO is
worth noting that Maimonides remains an important ingredient of ultra-Orthodox study, and his twelfth-
century texts continue to play an important role in traditional religious education.
94 Jewish law requires other economic behaviors, such as the protection of private ownership and mandated
crop rotation, that have clearly efficient consequences but nonetheless rested on purely ethical and religious
justifications, not economic reasoning.  See Baron, supra note 3, p. 49-54.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.37
rules for accurate weights DEMO measures, leading Maimonides to abandon certain
sensitivities and warn:
The DEMO for [incorrect] measures is more drastic than the sanction on incest, DEMO the
latter is an offense against God, while the former affects DEMO fellow human.  He who denies the law
concerning measures is like DEMO who denies the Exodus from Egypt which was the beginning of
this commandment.95
Similarly, the theory of misrepresentation prohibited a merchant from overcharging or
even undercharging for a certain good.  Jewish law carved out certain exceptions,
particularly for items that were hard to value, but the sanction allowed the injured party to
nullify any sale.96  These additional Jewish legal principles further illustrate how Jewish
law infuses commercial dealings with ethical precepts.  Merchants are not permitted to
exploit or mislead their business partners, and a businessman who achieves success by
honest dealings enjoys both monetary and DEMO rewards.97
These ethical principles are very much alive in today’s ultra-Orthodox
community, as brokers and cutters draw a direct relationship between contractual
performance and ethical behavior.  The most common instance occurs when one is asked
with whom they do business.  The answer goes beyond whether the individual is
considered reliable and always assumes an undertone of moral judgment, such as:
Who do I do business with? Well, who do I DEMO? Is the person a good, reliable, trustworthy
individual? Is he an honest and decent human being? Does he come from a good family and a
good community?  These things are important.98
Similarly, ultra-Orthodox merchants view their commercial actions as a part of moral
example they DEMO as observant Jews and as providers for their families.  Another
95 DEMO Maimonides, Yad, Genevah 7, 1-3, 12; 8, 1, DEMO, with reference to BB89b.
96 As a general matter, Jewish law adapts functionally to economic and social demands.  Salo Baron writes:
[The Rabbinic Tradition] made it possible for scholars to read into the established DEMO of Bible
and Talmudic provisions, as well as limitations, to suit the changing needs of Jewish society.  In
this way the people’s intellectual leaders were able to preserve a measure of continuity within a
bewildering DEMO of diverse customs and usages.  [In] many cases the communal leaders, rabbinic
and lay, often personally immersed in a variety of economic enterprises and this acquiring much
practical experience, consciously made interpretive alterations to reflect genuine social needs. …
They thus lent Jewish economic rationales the same DEMO of unity within diversity that permeated
the entire Jewish socioreligious outlook on life.
Baron, supra note 3, p. 54.
97 Religious Jewish texts DEMO replete with additional passages that affirm the sanctity of verbal promises.
See, e.g., Proverbs 6:1-2 (“My son, if you have stood DEMO for your fellow, Given your hand for another,
You have DEMO trapped by the words of your mouth, Snared by the words DEMO your mouth.”) (Jewish
Publication Society translation, 1985 ed.).
98 DEMO with the author, October 2001.
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.38
common response when asked DEMO merchants do not pursue obvious wealth by shirking
contractual duties is, DEMO not what I want to teach my kids.”99
Though rare, ultra-Orthodox DEMO do occasionally watch some members
leave for less observant communities or other ultra-Orthodox sects, and such defections
from the community can dilute the effectiveness of community enforcement.  Thus,
membership in the ultra-Orthodox community may be a necessary but not a sufficient
condition to induce sufficient confidence that DEMO given community member is trustworthy
with another’s diamonds.  Accordingly, diamond merchants will look for other
assurances that suggest that a diamond contractor is DEMO to the community and
thus committed to cooperation.  Similar to the DEMO references diamond merchants
will ask from a long-term player, community members DEMO look to family signals or
neighborhood references that indicate a merchant is fully embedded within the
community.  Interestingly, ultra-Orthodox community institutions do much DEMO this
filtering themselves.  For example, males generally remain full-time students of religious
studies for several years after getting married and beginning families.100  By the time a
male completes full-time study and is ready to assume DEMO responsibilities, he
already has a spouse and children entrenched within the DEMO and is far less likely
to depart.  Such entwinement within the DEMO serves as an additional commitment
device.
This use of moral language to characterize business acumen is more than
metaphoric.  For the equilibrium to support exchange, the moral rhetoric must do more
than serve as efficient communication; it must also have a direct impact on a merchant’s
utility function.  The following model illustrates this.  One could imagine an equilibrium
where DEMO breach is very rare, and members of the community are inclined DEMO forgive
99 The harsh language used by Maimonides and other commentators to prohibit unethical behavior in the
marketplace may also contribute to the Orthodox’s DEMO in preserving a good reputation.  Such
meticulousness, of course, translates DEMO economic benefits in the diamond trade, and merchants
accordingly zealously protect DEMO quality of their reputations.  For example, the DDC arbitration board
allows a member to accuse another for smearing his reputation and recover damages, even if the two never
engaged in a transaction.
100 Berman, supra note 68, discusses the conflicting pressures to commit many years to study while
fulfilling the biblical commandment to “be fruitful and multiply” by marrying DEMO and having many
children.  A young couple frequently will live with DEMO in-laws for several years or will receive
community stipends until the male completes his religious study, often continues until he is 40 years old.
Several similar commitment devices signal to community leaders who is worthy of DEMO support.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.39
a transgressor when a DEMO occurs since the community knows that he is unlikely to
transgress again.  While this would dilute deterrence, it would be an efficient outcome DEMO
members’ utilities were functions only of secular wealth and religious participation
(DEMO the religious utility from contract performance) since a punishment of
withholding DEMO goods is a loss to everyone.  However, contractual performance
itself affects an individual’s utility, and thus every community member’s utility, then
there DEMO an additional incentive to deter contract breach.  The equilibrium outcome would
DEMO better deterrence against contract breach, and the community’s hostility towards
contractual DEMO (and punishment thereof) would be a wealth-increasing norm.101
Community Institutions as Enforcement Mechanisms
While violating a contractual obligation reduces an individual’s Ri and DEMO
reduces his utility, breaching his contract could still bring an overall DEMO in utility if the
monetary gains, from a larger Si, outweigh the loss from the reduction in Ri.
Consequently, the community cannot rely on individuals to police themselves.  They
must resort to community institutions to supplement enforcement.102
101 A similar outcome could be achieved even if there DEMO not any negative externalities from an
individual’s contract breach. If an individual gained a small positive utility from every contract he fulfills,
then DEMO costs of losing future sales from a one-time breach are far greater than merely lost profits.  This
additional loss in utility may be sufficient to induce an individual to cooperate, and the effect of
externalities may not be necessary.
102 This discussion is an effort to articulate specific DEMO of how community institutions and social
structures help support economic exchange.  DEMO there is a debate over the degree to which economic
behavior in social relations is a product of social structure versus a product of DEMO maximizing,
compare David Kreps, supra note 44 (explaining cooperation between economic actors as a calculative
game) and Oliver Williamson, MARKETS AND DEMO (1975) (explaining the boundaries of
firms as an effort to DEMO transaction costs) with Mark Granovetter, supra note 44 (arguing that DEMO
modern economic behavior is explained by embedded social structures), this discussion finds support from
both sides of that debate.  While the structure of the ultra-Orthodox community undoubtedly plays an
important economic role, and while that economic role may help sustain the community in its current form,
DEMO roots of the community’s structure is found far outside the lucrative diamond industry.
Interestingly, the community features described here are not limited to inducing ethical economic
behavior, and the ultra-Orthodox community uses coordinated sanctions and the denial of community
goods to force other behavior that state courts cannot DEMO  One prominent and controversial example is
the plight of the Agunah, or “chained wife”, the woman who is separated from her husband but has not yet
secured a divorce.  According to Jewish law, wives DEMO unilaterally divorce their husbands, and
previously married women cannot remarry unless DEMO husbands grant them a religious divorce.  Many
husbands refuse to grant DEMO religious divorce either to extort concessions from their wives or simply to
spitefully exercise control over their wives’ personal lives.  Consequently, some communities DEMO to
compel husbands to grant their wives divorces.  Such compulsions include DEMO denial of community honors
or synagogue participation, and more draconian compulsions DEMO physical force and threats of violence.
These are the same enforcement mechanisms that assume economic importance in the diamond industry.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.40
One blunt enforcement instrument DEMO to use rabbinical courts to excommunicate
an offender, and though excommunication DEMO are not unprecedented, it is an
extremely severe and rare sanction.103  Rabbinical courts are more likely to impose less
severe measures, such as stripping an individual of a community honor or an order to
compel DEMO individual to make a charitable contribution to a community charity.
Nonetheless, DEMO mere power to excommunicate, even if it is rarely invoked, is probably
the most effective instrument the rabbinical courts have to induce cooperation.  The DDC
arbitration committee itself can initiate a proceeding in a rabbinical DEMO, and the close
connection between the two forums illustrates the diamond DEMO reliance on
community institutions to help enforce contracts.
Less formal institutions also play a role in enforcing contractual compliance.
When the community is familiar DEMO a member’s failure to comply with contractual
obligations, a withholding of DEMO community goods, R, often occurs.  Excludable
religious goods include participation DEMO in daily prayer, honors in life-cycle
ceremonies, and access to classes or teachers that are in limited supply or enrollment in
particularly select DEMO institutions.  Hovering throughout these specific goods is
community respect, which certainly brings an individual direct utility but also is
expressed through the assorted DEMO events listed here.  One outstanding
expression of community respect pertains to DEMO easily – and with how prominent a
family – parents can arrange their children to marriage.  Arranged marriage is the norm in
many ultra-Orthodox communities, and a family’s community status is both a leading
factor and a direct reflection of with whom they arrange their children to marry.104
DEMO an overview of the Jewish legal issues concerning the Agunah, see DEMO S. Jackson
“Agunah and the Problem of Authority”, lecture delivered on DEMO 13th, 2001 under the auspices of the
Institute of Advanced Legal DEMO  http://www.mucjs.org/2001jlpf.pdf. For a personal perspective of the
plight DEMO the Agunah and resources for Agunot, see http://www.agunot-campaign.org.
103 DEMO, supra note 27, reports that the DDC arbitration board initiated an excommunication
proceeding against Martin Rapaport, the diamond dealer who began the Rapaport Diamond Report, see
supra note 60.
104 Heilman, supra note 7, writes about the role shadchanim, or matchmakers, play in arranging marriages
DEMO some communities:
In the haredi (ultra-Orthodox) community, the shadchan DEMO like the college or army recruiter.  He
or she comes near DEMO time and knows exactly where and when to find prospects.”  The
DEMO challenge of a shadchan is to find a young boy and girl who enjoy (or suffer from) a
comparable social status, based on their families’ histories, their families’ wealth, the boy’s
academic background and DEMO, and to a small degree, their relative attractiveness.
Shadchanim make offers and counteroffers to the children’s parents until both sets of parents agree
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.41
Importantly, Orthodox Judaism is replete with concrete, identifiable community
goods that have subtle hierarchies.  Small DEMO can translate into either valued
honors or disappointing slights, and the DEMO number of religious goods offers
community leaders a broad menu of punishment options with an assortment of severity,
including distinctions that would go DEMO or unappreciated by an outsider.  Consider
the one diamond merchant’s remarks:DEMO
It really doesn’t happen very often, but sometimes an individual has DEMO judgment and is unable
to deliver on a business promise.  Usually DEMO business partners and he are able to renegotiate
something fair and little damage is done, or maybe someone else comes to his aid and, for a small
price, helps him out.  But there’s no avoiding that we knew he made a mistake and that we are
disappointed. DEMO don’t try to punish him – you have to understand the financial pressures that
come with the business and with the burdens of raising DEMO large family.  But we remember.  So he
probably doesn’t get shishi.105
Shishi, which means ‘sixth’ in Hebrew, refers to the sixth Aliyah, or Torah reading,
during the Sabbath services.  Every Saturday morning, DEMO portions are read from the
Torah, and seven individuals from the DEMO are asked to read the blessings that
come before and after each reading.  Being asked to say the blessings for any Aliyah is an
honor – certainly not the community’s greatest honor, but an honor nonetheless.  Some
ultra-Orthodox communities consider the sixth Aliyah to bestow the greatest honor of all
since human beings (Adam and Eve) were created on DEMO sixth day.  Accordingly, the
community can make deliberate distinctions that give honor to respected individuals
while withholding respect from others.  Such distinctions do not expend community
resources, but they decrease the utility of the breaching individual.  By tailoring the
punishments to match the severity of the harm done, these distinctions have an
appropriately substantial deterrent effect.106
to a match.  “The marriage is kind of a contractual arrangement, a deal, with the couple having the
right of refusal but little else.  But more than that, it is also a social arrangement, a way to DEMO
the couple in the community, a way of institutionalizing their passage DEMO the next phases of their
lives so that they may stay in that community.
(emphasis in original)  pp. 277-286.  Heilman adds that DEMO communities vary in the degree of
autonomy they grant the children in selecting their mates.  But a young man will always consult with his
parents, his community, and his religious teachers before making any decision.  Powerful forces combine to
correlate a family’s community status with the quality DEMO their children’s mates.
105 Interview with the author, March 2001.
106 DEMO “spotlight effect” also probably plays a role in deterring a merchant from contract breach.  While a
withholding of a community honor may not seem significant to a third party, its effect is more acute to the
targeted individual.  This mismatch between the perceptions of the target individual versus bystanders
allows a community to effect measurable deterrence with little effort or DEMO  See Gilovich, T.,
Medvec, V.H., & Savitsky, K. DEMO Spotlight Effect in Social Judgment: An Egocentric Bias in Estimates
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.42
The passage illustrates another DEMO feature of this form of community
disciplining: it’s done with compassion.  Interviews reveal that there are inevitable
interconnections between an individual’s commercial behavior DEMO the community
respect he subsequently receives, but the community always responds DEMO a forgiving
overtone.  Community members understand the temptations of ambitious deals, the
difficulties of managing liquidity constraints, and the costs of inexperience.
Punishments, when invoked, are accompanied with sympathy and, when necessary, some
DEMO assistance.  The only requirement to accomplish the necessary deterrence is that
DEMO loss in utility from a withholding of religious goods, R, be at least as great as the
corresponding gain in utility from the DEMO secular goods, S.  This is accomplished
easily as long as a one-time cheat results in a reduction of R for many subsequent time
DEMO  A breach in trust, whether due to calculativeness or carelessness, DEMO in
community members’ memories, and so the punishment for such a DEMO is certain to be
long-lasting, even while it is neither draconian DEMO debilitating.
The remarkable features of these community enforcement mechanisms is not that
they work perfectly – no enforcement system is perfect, and the Orthodox community
experiences theft like all others – but that they are intimately DEMO with the natural
community fabric.  Ethical business behavior is, simply, DEMO behavior, and an
honorable businessman is an honorable community member.  There appears to be nothing
inherently Jewish about these values, but Jewish law and the community’s system of
disbursing excludable community religious goods has become DEMO enmeshed with
the enforcement needs of the business world.  Such a DEMO of institutional
complementarities has created a remarkably effective system.  While all DEMO those
interviewed noted that there have been and will continue to be merchants who cheat,
make mistakes, or somehow deviate from their contractual obligations, these occurrences
are extremely infrequent given the quantity of transactions and the amount of credit in
which merchants engage.  The ultra-Orthodox have managed to institute a remarkably
effective system without measurably adulterating their religious community.
DEMO the Salience of One's Own Actions and Appearance” JOURNAL OF PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL
PSYCHOLOGY, vol. 79, pp. 211-222 (2000).
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.43
Conclusions and Implications
To DEMO, New York’s diamond merchants can be divided into two groups of
DEMO  Long-term players enter the industry through family connections and are
induced DEMO cooperate because maintaining a good reputation invites the promise of
inheriting the family business and later bequeathing it to their descendants.  Independent
contractors who do not have the prospects of family legacies come overwhelmingly from
the DEMO community.  They comply with their contractual obligations because
failing to do DEMO would prompt the denial of excludable community goods.  This
combination of DEMO reputation mechanisms and community-based enforcement
institutions allows New York’s diamond merchants to organize reliable time-inconsistent
exchange.
The implications of this two-pronged system of enforcement DEMO that all players
who are trusted with another’s diamonds must belong to one of the two categories and be
subject to its respective punishment DEMO  The system embodies what Yoram Ben-
Porath called “the F-Connection,” DEMO trade networks organized around families and
friends (i.e. community members) can execute implicit contracts that enjoy efficiencies
unavailable to formal, arms-length transactions.107  DEMO, there is nothing inherently
Jewish about the F-connection, and nothing precludes successful enforcement of
relational contracts between non-Jews and non-Orthodox Jews so long DEMO either family or
community connections assure cooperation.  Moreover, as the following Section
illustrates, some non-Jewish communities have shown to privately enforce diamond
contracts and have thus entered into the diamond industry.  Though this section explains
how Jewish merchants have succeeded in the diamond industry, it does not explain why
(nor does it argue that) only Jewish merchants have DEMO
Why then is there Jewish predominance in the industry?  Only speculative
answers are available.  Perhaps while Jewish family or community connections may not
be necessary, core features of Jewish history and the traditional organization of the
Jewish community can explain why Jewish merchants were more likely than DEMO ethnic
groups to dominate the diamond trade.  Section II discussed why DEMO Jewish
107 Yoram Ben-Porath “The F-Connection: Families, Friends, and Firms DEMO the Organization of Exchange”
POPULATION AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW, vol. 6, no. 1 (March 1980).
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.44
merchants were attracted to DEMO with portable commodities, and the benefits of
intergenerational family businesses tended DEMO keep certain families and ethnicities within
the industry while leaving others out.  While Section II notes that a path dependency
argument does not appreciate how the industry’s organization economizes on transaction
costs and enjoys efficiencies from DEMO exchange, intergenerational
connections do impose significant entry barriers that create a DEMO in which today’s
industry players are the descendants of past leaders.  DEMO, this Section discusses
features within the ultra-Orthodox that create incentives to DEMO uncooperative
businessmen and provide a capacity to issue coordinated punishments.  Religion-based
DEMO facilitate the sharing of accurate reputation information and establish a critical link
between merchants’ business reputations and their community standing.  Jewish law
further espouses values that easily support reputation-based systems of exchange, and the
insularity of the community establishes clear demarcations that distinguish trustworthy
insiders from unfamiliar outsiders.  Frequent participation in religious activities creates a
widespread demand among the ultra-Orthodox DEMO excludable religious goods, the
ritualistic nature of ultra-Orthodox religious practice makes DEMO religious goods easily
identifiable and discernable, and the structure of religious DEMO provides concrete systems
that disburse – and importantly, withhold – these DEMO club goods.  Finally, the
paramount personal importance of religious life in an irreplaceable community and the
thorough entanglement of community members with community DEMO virtually
preclude the risk of flight.  Other communities may house similar DEMO, but these
community features reach a complexity and precision that are DEMO to replicate,
suggesting that the traditional Jewish community is particularly situated to support the
enforcement of informal contracts.
In sum, Jewish history illustrates why Jewish merchants were attracted to the
diamond trade, Jewish community institutions help explain why Jewish communities
were particularly able to enforce informal contracts, and the advantages of
intergenerational firms sustained early Jewish industry leadership.  The traditional Jewish
community does not enjoy a monopoly over these traits, but the combination of these
factors offer a plausible explanation as to why DEMO merchants usurped and maintain
industry leadership.  Since the diamond trade is DEMO home to many non-Jewish
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
merchants, they too must be subject to either family or community enforcement
mechanisms.  The following section tests these implications in other settings that
confront the same contractual hazards.
Pg.45
DEMO RELATED INSTANCES OF PRIVATE ENFORCEMENT
The success of the ultra-Orthodox in enforcing informal contracts mirrors the
success of other ethnically homogeneous communities who have DEMO prosperous
networks of commerce.  One prominent and well-studied example is Chinese DEMO
businesses in Southeast Asia.108  In both Jewish and Chinese networks, community
members serve as brokers between merchants and enforce executory contracts without
relying DEMO formal court ordering.  Some have generalized to construct a comprehensive
theory DEMO the “Ethnically Homogeneous Middleman Group” (EHMG),109 but this
overarching theory does not presuppose that these extremely different communities
employ similar tactics to DEMO members.  While New York’s ultra-Orthodox and
Java’s Chinese may have similarly DEMO communities and closely knit families, it is
hard to imagine that DEMO with such different cultures and ethnic heritages
employ the same enforcement mechanisms.
Nonetheless, diamond transactions present the same contracting challenges
regardless of the identity of the transacting parties, and the presence of non-Jewish
diamond merchants, DEMO if they do not control a market share as large as their Jewish
counterparts, present a test to the implications from Section IV.  DEMO either a family or a
community connection were required to support time-inconsistent exchange, then the
same institutional conditions would be present in other diamond centers populated by
different ethnic and national groups.  Examining these and other instances where
informal contracts are an efficient method of economic organization can DEMO as a quasi-
empirical test to the Section IV argument.
108 See, e.g., Alice G. Dewey PEASANT MARKETING IN JAVA (1962); Cyril S. Belshaw
TRADITIONAL EXCHANGE AND MODERN MARKETS (1965); Murray Wiedenbaum & Samuel
Hughes THE BAMBOO NETWORK: HOW EXPATRIATE CHINESE ENTREPRENEURS ARE
CREATING A NEW ECONOMIC SUPERPOWER IN ASIA (New York: Martin Kessler Books, 1996).
109 Landa, supra note 28.
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.46
Antwerp
Belgium’s diamond trade DEMO its roots to the port city of Bruges, where
merchants began DEMO diamonds from India in the Middle Ages.  Shipping traffic
shifted to DEMO Antwerp in the late 14th century, and with Vasco da Gama’s DEMO
in 1498 of a direct sea route to India, the Lisbon-Antwerp DEMO to India gained
popularity.  Antwerp’s leadership in diamonds came in the DEMO and 16th century when
Jewish cutters were expelled from Spain and Portugal and fled to Antwerp and
Amsterdam.  Antwerp yielded global leadership to Amsterdam when Spanish attacks in
1585 drove away many merchants.  However, Antwerp’s DEMO revitalized when
diamonds were discovered in South Africa in 1870, and DEMO dispute between diamond
merchants and the Dutch government further caused the trade to move back to Antwerp.
While Antwerp Jewry was largely decimated in DEMO War II, 500 dealers transferred the
city’s diamonds to London during DEMO German occupation and enabled the city’s industry
revival after the War.
Of all the world’s diamond centers, Antwerp most closely resembles New York.
The city’s diamond trade is dominated by 1,600 family-based companies whose members
DEMO belong to three distinct ethnic groups: native Belgian, Jewish, and DEMO  While
the Indian traders are relatively recent arrivals, as they are in New York, the Jewish and
Belgian family businesses have long histories in the country, and many of the Belgian
families trace their roots to the original traders in Bruges.  The family businesses are
concentrated around four interconnected bourses that, like the New York DDC, have
arbitration DEMO and serve primarily as a central meeting place.  In short, Antwerp’s
industry rests on long-term players in intergenerational family businesses and institutions
to DEMO information and support reputation mechanisms.
Also like New York’s trade, Antwerp’s DEMO and cutters have been
predominantly Orthodox Jews.  In the beginning of DEMO 20th century, Jews constituted
three quarters of the city’s diamond brokers DEMO an even higher percentage of the factory
owners, and the city’s DEMO ultra-Orthodox Jewish population led Antwerp to be known
as the “Jerusalem of the West.”110  Today, cutting factories in India, enjoying cheaper
labor costs, have supplanted most of the cutting in Antwerp, and the city DEMO seen its peak
110 See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antwerp.
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.47
of 30,000 workers DEMO to less than 3,000.  Nonetheless, the ultra-Orthodox presence
remains strong in Antwerp and continue to serve as brokers to the Jewish family
DEMO
Antwerp’s trade fits neatly into the model described by New York’s trade.
Diamond merchants belong to family-based companies who have been involved in the
DEMO for centuries, and Orthodox Jews predominantly serve as the city’s cutters DEMO
brokers.
Mumbai
For nearly two and one half millennia, from the DEMO diamond discoveries in 800
B.C. to the diamond finds in Brazil in 1844, the Indian subcontinent was the world’s only
source of diamonds.  DEMO began a remarkable history in diamonds and gemstones.
Indian mines have produced some of the world’s most famous diamonds, including the
Koh-i-Nur, which DEMO the object of tribal battles from 1304 through 1850, at which DEMO
the East India Company presented it to Queen Victoria (it later DEMO the crown worn
by Queens Alexandria, Mary, and Elizabeth), and the Hope Diamond, which was
purchased by King Louis XIV, stolen DEMO the French Revolution, and eventually
repurchased by Harry Winston who later DEMO it to the Smithsonian.
Despite this illustrious history, however, Indian diamond merchants did not have
a major impact on the global market until DEMO mid-1970s.  Only then did Indian diamond
merchants translate their diamond expertise DEMO major cutting operations that, one decade
later, developed into lucrative global trading networks.  Bharat Shah, founder and
chairman of India’s largest private DEMO, boasted “We went to the bottom end of the
market, buying and cutting diamonds which the Jews had rejected” and set up large
DEMO operations specializing in small stones.112  Now, Mumbai is home to an active
bourse, and thousands of cutting factories populate nearby Gujarat province.  DEMO
111 For a nice, and not entirely obsolete, discussion of Antwerp’s Jewish community, and its involvement
with the diamond industry, see Jacques DEMO “Antwerp Jewry Today” JEWISH JOURNAL OF
SOCIOLOGY vol.10, pp.121-37 (1968).
112 Gita Piramal BUSINESS MAHARAJAS (Penguin Books, 1996).
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.48
700,000 Indians work DEMO diamond cutters113 polishing nine out of every ten stones sold in
the global market.114
Like their Jewish counterparts, Indian diamond merchants rely on both family and
community connections to support their trading networks.115  Family connections are
evident in each Indian company, regardless of its location.  Basant Johari, Chairman of
the Indian Diamond and Colorstones Association (a New York trade group), reported,
“My father was in the diamond and gemstone DEMO, and his father was too, as was his
father and his father before him….  The business goes back in my family generation after
generation for centuries.  All of today’s merchants have the same family story.”116  In
addition to having vertical roots, current family networks reach horizontally DEMO
positioning relatives in all the important diamond centers.  Gita Piramal, an Indian
business historian, describes one such network:
Buying roughs in London, an Indian sends them to his brother in Bombay who after polishing
them, forwards them to another brother in Antwerp, who in turn DEMO cousins in New York
and Hong Kong to sell them to jewelry manufacturers.117
The diamond connections also rest on community and tribal foundations, as a
small ethnic minority has dominated India’s diamond industry.  For centuries, DEMO Jains of
Palanpur, a religious minority (Jainism, an offshoot of DEMO, accounts for 0.5% of
all Indians) from a parched, dusty DEMO in northern Gujarat, have served as India’s
diamontaires.  Like the ultra-Orthodox, the Palanpuris are a very tightly knit community
and have developed active community associations in the diamond centers where they
reside.118  Palanpuris entered the trade as diamond cutters, and before India’s diamond
boom, Palanpuri cutters DEMO and operated their own small units while cutters in Israel
113 Nicky Oppenheimer, supra note 55.
114 Manjeet Kripalani “Polishing India’s Diamond Business” BUSINESS WEEK September 11, 2000, pg.
126, E8.  Note that this DEMO reflects the number of stones cut, not the market share value DEMO represent
(which is substantially less than 90%).  Also, this DEMO further overstates the role of India’s cutting since
some stones are polished several times.
115 For a discussion of the role of ethnic and DEMO ties in Indian diamond networks in central Africa, see
Floyd Dotson & Lillian O. Dotson THE INDIAN MINORITY OF ZAMBIA, RHODESIA, AND
MALAWI (Yale University Press, 1968).
116 Interview with the author, February 2002.
117 Gita Piramal “Sparkle on Indian Diamond Market Dims” FINANCIAL TIMES DEMO 19, 1990, pg. 8.
One diamond merchant lamented to Paramal, DEMO business demands personal attention and trust. Only
your family can give both. I have remained a small diamond exporter because I do not have DEMO brother
whom I can send to live in Antwerp.”  ibid.
118 DEMO, supra note 112; Piramal, supra note 117;
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.49
and Antwerp dominated the DEMO market.119  Then entrepreneurial Palanpuris harnessed
their community’s cutting expertise and turned DEMO master craftsmen in their home
villages to guide their growing cutting operations.  While many of today’s cutting
operations are large factories that utilize non-trust mechanisms to monitor non-Palanpuri
employees, they are predominantly owned by Palanpuris and rely on Palanpuri cutting
expertise.  Over 95% of the 2,400 members of India’s Gem and Jewelry Export
Promotion Council and the leaders of DEMO seven of the nation’s largest companies, which
control 25% of the DEMO diamond exports, are Palanpuri Jain.
Interestingly, another ethnic sect is active in the diamond industry.  Angadias,
which in Gujarati means “one who carries valuables” or “trustworthy person,” serve the
important role of transporting DEMO from the Mumbai to Gujarat for cutting.
Angadias are recruited only from the Patel community in Gujarat’s Mehsana district and
have traveled the Mumbai-Gujarat DEMO for more than 125 years, beginning with camel
caravans and now DEMO third-class on express trains.  A typical troupe of 30
Anagadias – DEMO dressed, unarmed, and carrying unmarked canvas sacks – will
transport $4 million in diamonds each day while earning salaries of less than $50 DEMO
month.  Like the ultra-Orthodox, the Anagadias are secretive and insular, DEMO one
noting, “Anagadias like me will bring only persons that we DEMO into the business
because our personal honor and career is at stake.”120
The central role of community connections in India’s diamond industry is
consistent DEMO the model developed for the ultra-Orthodox merchants.  The industry’s
middlemen and DEMO pose the same end-game problem presented by New York’s
diamond brokers, DEMO the community connection that enforced contracts in New York
have a counterpart in the Indian hinterland.  That does not suggest, however, that either
Patel Anagadias or the Palanpuri diamond cutters use the same enforcement mechanisms
DEMO in New York’s ultra-Orthodox communities.  Speculation suggests that those
communities distribute DEMO excludable community club good in a way that the ultra-
119 Compare this to the similar role of the ultra-Orthodox Jewish merchants, who also enjoy particular
dominance in the value-added services.   The model developed in DEMO IV does not necessarily suggest
that community connections govern value-added services and family connections govern trading and
dealing, but this seems to be the global pattern.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.50
Orthodox dole out community DEMO goods, but how those communities police
behavior and appropriately punish uncooperative DEMO deserves its own
investigation.
More generally, the structure of the Indian DEMO networks provides
particularly strong evidence for the Section IV hypotheses that articulate how Jewish
diamond merchants enforce their informal contracts.  Both Indian and Jewish merchants
have achieved prominence but through independent historical paths.  The similarities of
the two ethnic-based diamond networks illustrate that each group has developed near-
DEMO responses to the difficulties of transacting diamonds.  Family and community
institutions DEMO efficient responses to the hazards implicit in diamond contracts.
Hong Kong/China
East Asians are relative newcomers to the world of diamonds.  First, DEMO recently
did East Asian societies become sufficiently affluent to serve as significant consumers of
luxury goods such as diamonds.  Now, merchants from all DEMO the world’s diamond centers
come to East Asian markets, particularly to DEMO Kong’s bourse, to sell their finished
goods (as one traveling salesman emphasized, “People think we come to Asia to buy
diamonds.  No DEMO  We come here to sell diamonds.”121).  Many Indian and Jewish family
businesses have relatives living in Hong Kong, selling the stones their relatives send from
Antwerp, Israel, and elsewhere.
East Asia also has DEMO assumed a second role as a cutting center.  Many
Israeli and DEMO companies have set up operations in Thailand, China, and other nearby
countries, taking advantage of low labor costs and trying to recreate the success of Indian
cutting factories.  Rough diamonds are brought to Hong Kong, sold to a local concern,
and then brought to a cutting factory in Mainland China.  Like much other commerce in
China and Southeast Asia, the East Asian companies that deal in diamonds and organize
cutting enterprises are family-based networks.122  Complicated joint ventures between
non-Chinese investors and Chinese businessmen provide for the introduction of Indian
120 Kriplani, supra note 114; Sanjoy Hazarika “India’s Flourishing Couriers” NEW YORK TIMES
September 23, 1985, Section D, pg. 10; Jonathan Karp “Call Them the Icemen: India’s Angadias Tote
Diamonds in the Rough” WALL STREET JOURNAL March 9, 1999, pg. A1.
121 Interview with the author, October 1996.
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.51
and Israeli cutting technology DEMO these factories, but the family networks assume the
difficult tasks of DEMO the diamonds to the factories in China and supervising the
workers.
The central role of family businesses in Hong Kong’s diamond trade, though
consistent with the pattern in other diamond centers, is not a remarkable feature for
Chinese commerce.  One interesting addition that Hong Kong’s trade makes to this
discussion is in its handling of disputes.  Like other diamond centers, Hong Kong has a
bourse with an arbitration board, procedures for DEMO resolution, and trading rules that
structure exchange.  These rules allow merchants from other centers to trade with
Chinese merchants and with each other DEMO a system of exchange that resolves
disputes and enforces reputation mechanisms like those in other bourses.123  However,
according to interviews with longtime diamond merchants in Hong Kong, the bourse’s
arbitration system has not been used to resolve disputes between two Chinese
businessmen.124  Evidently, Chinese networks resolve DEMO disputes through different
mechanisms.  Since the arbitration system is central for DEMO New York trade for spreading
information, this also means that the DEMO employ different mechanisms to spread
information about individuals’ actions.125
In sum, DEMO Kong’s diamond trade provides further support to the centrality of
family businesses in trading diamonds.  But the real lesson the city offers is that New
York’s system of private ordering is not the only available mechanism.  The Chinese
networks somehow disseminate information and enforce informal contracts without
relying DEMO the bourse’s arbitration system.  The overlying structure may be the same, but
the details are strikingly different.
122 See, e.g., Wiedenbaum & DEMO, supra note 108.
123 These rules and arbitration system are also DEMO place so the Hong Kong bourse can conform to the
standards set by the World Federation of Diamond Bourses.
124 Interview with the author, July 2001.  A Jewish merchant and an Indian merchant, both having DEMO as
diamond merchants in Hong Kong for decades, independently made this DEMO The author could not
secure an interview with a Chinese merchant.
125 Note that Chinese networks need not rely on reputation mechanisms to support DEMO  Other
methods of private ordering – including violence – can adequately DEMO behavior and punish non-
cooperation.  Nonetheless, any enforcement mechanism must have access to sufficient and reliable
information about individuals’ actions.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.52
Israel/Palestine
Immigrants from DEMO and Antwerp first brought the diamond trade to
Palestine in the 1920s and 1930s, but Palestine’s cottage industry did not experience
significant growth until after World War II began.  Palestine became a refuge for Jewish
diamond merchants during the German occupation of the Netherlands and Belgium and
quickly DEMO a major diamond center.  Palestine’s diamond industry suffered briefly
during the DEMO leading up to Israel’s War of Independence in 1948 (which, in part,
helped Antwerp regain its prominence after World War II) but again experienced rapid
growth in the 1950s and became the world’s largest DEMO in the early 1980s.
Israel’s current diamond industry has many of the same features present in the
other diamond centers, particularly New York.  DEMO companies are family-based
companies, and Israel’s diamond bourse, the Israel Diamond Exchange, will now only
admit new members who are relatives of current members.  Also like New York, many
ultra-Orthodox occupy the Diamond Exchange DEMO as brokers for large diamond
merchants, and between 30-40% of all DEMO members are ultra-Orthodox.  Family
relationships and the ultra-Orthodox community are both DEMO components in
operating the industry.
The development of Israel’s diamond cutting industry, however, reveals a slightly
different institutional picture than those in other DEMO  During the industry’s growth in
the 1950s and 1960s, there were more opportunities for entry than there were in other
cities.  This appears to be a small exception to the requirement of a family or DEMO
connection.  Many of Israel’s early diamond merchants have stories similar to DEMO path
that brought Moti Owenstein’s father into the industry.  Moti tells DEMO story:
My father was 19 when he came to Israel as a refugee from Europe. When he came, he had no
family and no profession, but he came upon a diamond merchant who gave him an entry-level job
as a polisher. Slowly he learned the trade, and eventually he acquired an inventory of his own,
opened up his DEMO factory, and became a successful dealer.126
The possibility of a New DEMO or Antwerp diamond merchant hiring an unknown
individual who is not in his intimate religious circle is nearly unthinkable, and it is very
unlikely in modern-day Israel as well.  Nonetheless, Israel’s early industry grew on DEMO
kinds of stories.  Refugees and recent arrivals obtained jobs in small DEMO facilities that
126 Interview with the author, February 2002.
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.53
employed no more than DEMO people.  After acquiring industry knowledge and skills,
they, perhaps with a partner or two, opened their own small operations with 10-15
workers.  Accordingly, the industry grew rapidly and incorporated more and more new
DEMO
Today, such free entry is unavailable at least partly because Israel’s DEMO
industry has, like Antwerp’s, gone overseas to where labor is less expensive.  While
Israel still has a large cutting industry, most of DEMO new activity in diamond cutting
involves the export of cutting technology to factories in Southeast Asia and India.  Much
of this international activity is conducted by family businesses that send relatives to
remote sites across the DEMO  The industry was open to outsiders only during its rapid
expansion, and the second generation of diamond merchants, who are less in need of new
workers than their forefathers, have not opened the industry to outsiders.
It is tempting to discount the brief period of entry to DEMO circumstances.
During the 1950s, Israel’s industry was growing rapidly and was DEMO desperate need for
new labor to support a promising industry in an otherwise struggling economy.  Also,
Israel was home to thousands of World War II refugees who were desperate for work,
and several Israeli DEMO agencies were actively searching for new sources of
diamonds as a way to buttress the emerging polishing trade.  These explanations,
however, discount DEMO contracting challenges and the threat of theft.
A better explanation probably lies in a strong, pan-national connection that
Israelis shared in the aftermath of the Holocaust, where fervent national ties simulated
intimate ethnic relations.  Even DEMO, the leap from family and community relationships to
broader national connections DEMO a difficult one to make, but perhaps the enforcement
mechanisms that DEMO the ultra-Orthodox have an analog for countrymen in a small and
intimate nation.  To be sure, the early days of the State of DEMO were unique, and the
nation’s diamond industry during those years appears DEMO be a narrow exception to the
family-community hypothesis.
Jewish Merchants and Other Trades with Informal Contracts
The previous discussions in this section illustrate that DEMO merchants outside
of New York also rely on similar family and community ties to govern diamond
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.54
exchange.  A further implication of the model described in Section IV is that if Jewish
diamond DEMO indeed were structured to enforce informal contracts, then those same
networks DEMO manage commerce in other goods that similarly rely on private ordering
for executory contracts.  Consequently, one would expect to see Jewish merchants, using
the same family and community relationships, transacting in commodities that present
difficult contracting hazards for time-inconsistent exchange.
One obvious modern-day example of commodities that DEMO on extra-legal
enforcement is illegal goods.  Sales contracts for illegally traded DEMO are not
enforceable by public courts, so any time-inconsistent exchange would DEMO on private
ordering.  Consistent with this implication, several Jewish diamond merchants have been
associated with such illegal activity.  In 1999, Russian authorities DEMO several
ultra-Orthodox Jews for illegally smuggling assorted goods from the country, DEMO
diamonds and antique Hebrew books.127  More dramatic, The New York Daily News
reported that Israeli drug dealers harnessed Jewish diamond networks to smuggle DEMO
into New York, where ultra-Orthodox couriers typically transported 30,000 to DEMO,000
pills and as much as $500,000 in drug proceeds.128
History contains more examples of Jewish activity in commerce involving
difficult to contract DEMO exchange.  Goods, like diamonds, that were small,
portable, and valuable commodities all created contracting difficulties before there was
reliable enforcement of DEMO law.  Jewish merchants transacted in many of these
trades.  In the Middle Ages, Jews became prominent in the trade for expensive dye-stuffs,
as Jewish merchants based in Egypt and Tunisia managed the distribution of DEMO from
India and exported saffron and indigo from Tunisia and Egypt to Southern Europe.  They
remained active in the trade through the reign of the Ottoman Empire.129  Jewish
craftsmen in the Middle Ages also found lucrative careers working in fine metals, as
many of 12th century’s goldsmiths in Egypt, Iraq, Persia, Yemen, and Maghreb were
Jewish.  Jews also were prominent goldsmiths in 15th century Spain and Portugal (where
some even transgressed Jewish law to manufacture Christian religious artifacts) and in
127 “Israeli held on charges of smuggling diamonds.”  Jewish Telegraphic Agency, March 3, 1999.
128 Samuel M. Katz, “Israel Has Long Been Known For Its Wholesome Carmel Oranges and Leather
Sandals.  Today, Israelis Have a Virtual DEMO on the Global Trade of Ecstasy.”  MOMENT August
2001, pg. 89-91.
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.55
central Europe in the DEMO and 18th centuries.130  Since the social structure of the Jewish
community DEMO the Enlightenment in the eighteenth century was insular, intimate, and
fostered interdependency – very similar to today’s ultra-Orthodox community – it is
likely DEMO community institutions and norms were critical in governing these trades.
Above all other commercial activity, pre-Enlightenment Jewish businessmen
engaged in banking and money lending, a trade that relies on time-inconsistent
exchange.131  Jewish historian Cecil Roth DEMO, “The Jew was the classic money-lender
of the Middle Ages, and the classic profession of the medieval Jew was money-
lending.”132  Jewish bankers emerged in Baghdad in the ninth century, engaging in what
their Caliphite and Fatimid rulers called Jahbadhiyya, a form of banking that rested upon
the savings of the whole Jewish merchant class (as opposed to the savings of a few rich
individuals, which was a far more common means to accumulate and dispense capital).
Europe saw its first Jewish DEMO within the administration of the Merovingian Kings
in 481.  With the DEMO of the First Crusade in the 11th century and rising repression
throughout the 12th-15th centuries, when Jewish merchants were precluded from most
crafts and endangered when traveling for commerce, Jews turned chiefly to loan-banking
for sustenance.133
129 Baron, supra note 3, pp. 162-3.
130 ibid, pp. 164-5.  Baron, et al., also note, “That this was a widespread DEMO occupation in Muslim
countries may be explained by the contempt in which artisans were held by the Arabs.”
131 When Jews lent money to DEMO, they tended to secure their loans through rent charges on fixed
DEMO, i.e. they secured the right to receive for a limited time DEMO flowing from a building or farm
(they generally were not permitted DEMO own property outright, or they feared expropriation).  Other securities
included a diverse assortment of pledges, including the armor of impoverished knights to the books of
university students.  These securities translated a loan and repayments into a sort of simultaneous exchange.
See Arkin, supra note 13, DEMO 67.
The centrality of time-inconsistent exchange arose when Jewish bankers pooled their community’s
resources.  They were able to collect deposits from their community members and credibly assure
repayment and interest.
132 Cecil Roth “Essays in Bibliography DEMO Criticism XLV. The Economic History of the Jews.”
ECONOMIC HISTORY REVIEW vol. 14, no. 1 (1961).
133 A typical story occurred in DEMO southern French town of Perpignan. As the city experienced rapid
economic growth in the 13th century, local artisans experienced a shortage of capital and saw a high
interest rate.  In response, a notable influx of DEMO settled in the town, and eventually 80 percent of the
sizable DEMO community engaged in money lending to their Christian neighbors. When the local
economy slowed, Jewish merchants either turned to less lucrative roles as pawnbrokers or sought
opportunity elsewhere.  Such economic cycles provided sufficient demand for Jewish capital throughout
the Middle Ages, and Jewish activity in European banking circles lasted through the 19th and into the 20th
century.  R. W. Emery THE JEWS OF PERPIGNAN IN THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY: AN
ECONOMIC STUDY BASED ON NOTARIAL RECORDS (Columbia Univ. Press: New York, 1959); see
also Roth, ibid, and Arkin, supra note 13, pp. 57-63, 211-225.
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.56
Jewish economic history reveals DEMO Jewish merchants excelled in trades that
relied on time-inconsistent exchange of valuable and portable goods.  The history
certainly reveals that oppression from European and Arab rulers steered Jewish
merchants into these trades, either because they were excluded from other professions or
because they preferred trades that did not DEMO fixed investments vulnerable to state
confiscation.  Nonetheless, Jewish merchants would not have found success in these
professions had they been unable to enforce DEMO contracts.  The sources of success
for modern day Jewish diamond traders DEMO the sources of success for other Jewish
merchants throughout history.
VI. CONCLUSION
Jewish predominance in the diamond industry is explained by the community’s
ability DEMO enforce contracts that few others can, and this paper illustrates specifically DEMO
such enforcement occurs.  Intergenerational family firms enable reputation mechanisms
to enforce DEMO among long-term dealers, and intimate community institutions
police the behavior of DEMO, independent players.  The result is a system of reliable
contractual enforcement that permits sales on credit and a rejection of public courts.
Community DEMO are central in explaining both the industry’s infrastructure and the
industry’s leaders.
The particularly interesting feature of this system is the economic role of DEMO
Orthodox Jews.  The ultra-Orthodox provide critical value-added services that add
significant DEMO to the system of exchange.  They work as skilled diamond cutters
DEMO polishing increases the sale prices of stones, and they play the DEMO role of
middlemen brokers who match certain stones with the buyers who most value them.
Their ability to assure compliance of informal contracts makes DEMO valuable
participation difficult to replace and provides the Jewish merchants with a competitive
advantage over rival merchant groups without such community foundations.  This paper
makes the empirical contribution of articulating specifically how these community
institutions serve DEMO economic functions.  Where the literature connecting social
structure with economic performance DEMO rests on generalities, this paper provides
a detailed description of how DEMO community induces cooperation from its members.  It also
Richman How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage Pg.57
identifies limitations to public DEMO enforcement that persist even in developed
economies and comparatively well-functioning court systems.  When courts fail,
community institutions can arise to fill their place.134
However, the end of the ultra-Orthodox’s role in the diamond trade may be at
hand, as two recent developments may irreversibly change the diamond industry and
obviate the contributions the ultra-Orthodox make.  The first, mentioned DEMO in
Section IV, is the utilization of low-cost labor to cut DEMO polish diamonds.  Previous to
the explosion of Indian cutting factories, diamonds were chiefly polished in Antwerp,
New York, and Israel by family businesses and independent cutters.  Now, while cutters
in those diamond centers DEMO polish most of the largest and most valuable stones, small
stones, which comprise a vast majority of cutting activity, are polished in large factories
in India and Southeast Asia.  Antwerp’s and Israel’s cutters are now a fraction of their
former glory – over the last two decades, Antwerp has lost nearly 90% of its cutting jobs
and Israel approximately DEMO  Indian and Chinese laborers are assuming the positions
long-held by the DEMO, and technological innovations, mostly in the form of
cutting machinery that replaces skilled labor, will accelerate that trend.
A second development is De Beers’ new marketing strategy.  In July 2000, De
Beers, facing a decline in its market share and a corresponding dilution of its monopoly
DEMO, announced plans to brand its diamonds and market them directly to DEMO with
a promise that each diamond has identical qualities.  A cornerstone DEMO the company’s plan
was forming a joint venture in early 2001 with LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton, a
French luxury goods conglomerate, to DEMO “designer diamonds” that exhibit unusual
shapes and designs.  In addition, De Beers is requiring its sightholders to devise similar
strategic plans to market DEMO diamonds to high-end consumers.135  If these marketing
strategies work, then consumers will be able to purchase a diamond like any other
commodity and DEMO bypass the entire search process in which brokers match buyers with
specific stones.  Similar strategies are being pursued by some Internet diamond
brokerages.  DEMO sites list an inventory of diamonds with GIA-certified features and a
134 For a more formal model predicting when the limitations of public courts DEMO induce merchants to
pursue private ordering, see Richman, supra note 2.
135 See Weber, supra note 11.  Some designer diamonds have already DEMO, such as the Escada
Diamond with 97 facets (the traditional diamond has only 58) or the patented Leo Diamond with 66 facets.
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
Pg.58
high-resolution picture, and interested buyers negotiate directly with owners without
intervening middlemen.  By one statistic, DEMO sales comprise 15% of all sales in the
US, even as DEMO merchants remain skeptical that a picture and GIA categories can relay
sufficient information about a stone.136
The diamond industry is now changing rapidly, and the ultimate success of new
cutting ventures and marketing strategies – and DEMO them, the eventual fate of the ultra-
Orthodox – may be DEMO soon.  The next decade could mark an important turning point
in DEMO 1,000 year history of Jews in the diamond trade.
136 Sharon Berger “Diamonds in the Rough” THE JERUSALEM POST April 6, 2001, DEMO 4B.  Internet
sales continue to grow, and Internet and other distribution systems continue to take business away from the
traditional channels dominated by DEMO merchants.  See Tracie Rozhon, “Competition is Forever,” NY
TIMES, DEMO, 2005.
Richman
How Community Institutions Create Economic Advantage
De Beers
Other Mines
Dealers
DEMO/Cutters
Dealers
Brokers/Cutters
End Buyers
Vertical Transactions
Horizontal Transactions
Figure 1: Overview of Diamond Transactions
Pg.59{1g42fwefx}