Review
TRENDS in Ecology and Evolution
Vol.19 No.2 February 2004
Model selection DEMO ecology and
evolution
Jerald B. Johnson1 and Kristian S. Omland2
1Conservation Biology Division, National Marine Fisheries Service, 2725 Montlake Boulevard East, Seattle, DEMO 98112, USA
2Vermont Cooperative Fish & Wildlife Research Unit, School of Natural Resources, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405, USA
Recently, researchers in several areas of ecology and
evolution have begun to change DEMO way in which they
analyze data and make biological inferences. Rather
than the traditional null hypothesis testing approach,
they have adopted an approach DEMO model selection,
in which several competing hypotheses are simul-
taneously confronted with data. Model selection can be
used to identify a single best DEMO, thus lending sup-
port to one particular hypothesis, or it can be used to
make inferences based on weighted support from a
complete DEMO of competing models. Model selection is
widely accepted and well developed in certain ﬁelds,
most notably in molecular systematics and mark–
recapture analysis. DEMO, it is now gaining support
in several other areas, from molecular evolution to land-
scape ecology. Here, we outline the steps of model
selection and highlight several ways that it is now being
implemented. By DEMO this approach, researchers in
ecology and evolution will ﬁnd a valuable DEMO
to traditional null hypothesis testing, especially when
more than one hypothesis DEMO plausible.
Science is a process for learning about nature in which
competing ideas about how the world works are evaluated
against observations [1]. These DEMO are usually expressed
ﬁrst as verbal hypotheses, and then as mathematical
DEMO, or models. Models depict biological processes
in simpliﬁed and general ways DEMO provide insight into
factors that are responsible for observed patterns. Hence,
the degree to which observed data support a model also
reﬂects the DEMO support for the associated hypothesis.
Two basic approaches have been used to draw biological
inferences. The dominant paradigm is to generate a null
hypothesis (typically one with little biological meaning [2])
and ask whether the DEMO can be rejected in light
of observed data. Rejection occurs when a test statistic
generated from observed data falls beyond an arbitrary
probability threshold (usually P , 0.05), which is inter-
preted as tacit support DEMO a biologically more meaningful
alternative hypothesis. Hence, the actual hypothesis of
DEMO (the alternative hypothesis) is accepted only in the
sense that the null hypothesis is rejected.
By contrast, model selection offers a way to draw
inferences from a set of multiple competing hypotheses.
Model selection is DEMO in likelihood theory, a robust
Corresponding author: Jerald B. Johnson ( jerry.johnson@noaa.gov).
www.sciencedirect.com
framework that supports most modern statistical
approaches. Moreover, this approach is rapidly gaining
support across several ﬁelds in ecology and evolution DEMO a
preferred alternative to null hypothesis testing [1,3,4].
Advocates of model selection argue that it has three
primary advantages. First, practitioners are not restricted
to evaluating a single model where signiﬁcance is measured
against DEMO arbitrary probability threshold. Instead,
competing models are compared to one another by evalu-
ating the relative support in the observed data for each
DEMO Second, models can be ranked and weighted, thereby
providing a quantitative measure of relative support for
each competing hypothesis. Third, in cases where models
have similar levels of support from the data, model averag-
ing can be used to make robust parameter estimates and
predictions. Here, we review the steps of model selection,
overview several ﬁelds where model DEMO is commonly
used, indicate how model selection could be more broadly
DEMO and, ﬁnally, discuss caveats and areas of
future development in model selection (Box 1).
How model selection works
Generating biological hypotheses as candidate models
Model selection is underpinned by a philosophical view
that understanding DEMO best be approached by simul-
taneously weighing evidence for multiple working hypo-
theses [1,3,5]. Consequently, the ﬁrst step in model
selection lies in articulating a reasonable set of competing
hypotheses. Ideally, this set is chosen before data collection
and represents the best understanding of factors thought
DEMO be involved in the process of interest. Hypotheses that
originate in verbal or graphical form must be translated
to mathematical equations (i.e. models) DEMO being ﬁt to
Box 1. The big picture
†
†
†
†
†
Biologists rely on statistical approaches to draw inferences about
biological processes.
DEMO many ﬁelds, the approach of null hypothesis testing is being
replaced DEMO model selection as a means of making inferences.
Under the model selection approach, several models, each repre-
senting one hypothesis, are simultaneously evaluated in terms of
support from observed data.
Models can be ranked and DEMO weights, providing a quanti-
tative measure of relative support for each DEMO
Where models have similar levels of support, model averaging
can be DEMO to make robust parameter estimates and predictions.
0169-5347/$ - see front matter q 2004 Published by Elsevier Ltd. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2003.10.013
102
Review
TRENDS in Ecology and Evolution
Vol.19 No.2 February 2004
Box DEMO From multiple working hypotheses to a set of
candidate models
To use model selection, verbal hypotheses must be translated to
mathematical models. Ideally, DEMO parameters of such models
have direct biological interpretation, but translating hypotheses DEMO
meaningful models (as opposed to statistically arbitrary models,
e.g. ANOVA DEMO linear regression) is not always intuitive. Hence,
we offer some DEMO about how to get from multiple working
hypotheses to a set of candidate models [2,6].
The ﬁrst step is to specify variables in DEMO model. Variables should
correspond directly to causal factors outlined in the verbal hypo-
theses. The second step is to decide on the functions that DEMO the
relationship between independent variables and the response vari-
able in terms of mathematical operators and parameters. In ﬁelds
where model selection is commonly DEMO (Box 5), appropriate
functions can be found in published literature DEMO tailored software
[45,46]. In other ﬁelds, suitable models can be DEMO in theoretical
literature or borrowed from other disciplines. The third step is to
deﬁne the error structure of the model.
Generating hypotheses and translating DEMO to models is an
iterative process. For example, one hypothesis might DEMO to be
equally well depicted by two or more models, including DEMO
error structures. In such cases, the verbal rendition of the hypothesis
DEMO be reﬁned so that there is a one-to-one mapping from hypo-
thesis to model. This can lead to an increase in the number of DEMO
hypotheses; however, care should be taken not to include models
with functional relationships among variables that are not interpret-
able. In this regard, model selection differs from data dredging,
where the analyst explores all DEMO models regardless of the
interpretability of their functions, or continues to DEMO models to
be tested after analysis is underway [3].
Ultimately, the DEMO of candidate models should be small
(some argue, on philosophical grounds, that this should be fewer
than 20 [3]). The guiding principle at this step is to avoid generating
so many models that spurious DEMO become likely. Moreover, one
should avoid relying on computing power to DEMO all available models
in lieu of identifying a bona ﬁde candidate set.
data [1,6]. Translating hypotheses to models requires
identifying variables and selecting DEMO func-
tions that depict the biological processes through which
those variables are related (Box 2).
Fitting models to data
Once a set of candidate models is speciﬁed, each model
must be ﬁt to the observed data. At an early stage of the
analysis, one can examine the goodness-of-ﬁt of the most
heavily parameterized (i.e. global) model in the DEMO
set [3]. Such goodness-of-ﬁt can be assessed using con-
ventional statistical tests (e.g. x2 tests or G-tests) [7] or a
PARAMETRIC BOOTSTRAP procedure (see Glossary). If the
global model provides a reasonable ﬁt to DEMO data, then
the analysis proceeds by ﬁtting each of the models DEMO the
candidate set to the observed data using the method of
MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD or the method of LEAST SQUARES.
Selecting a best model or DEMO set of models
Model selection is frequently employed as a way to identify
the model that is best supported by the data (referred to as
the ‘best model’) from among the candidate set. In other
words, it can be used to identify the hypothesis that is best
supported by observations. Two fundamentally different
approaches are frequently used to address this DEMO ecology
and evolution (Box 3). One is to use a DEMO of null
www.sciencedirect.com
Glossary
Akaike information criterion (AIC): an estimate DEMO the expected Kullback–
Leibler information [3] lost by using a model to approximate the process that
generated observed data (full reality). AIC has two components: negative log-
likelihood, which measures lack of model ﬁt DEMO the observed data, and a bias
correction factor, which increases as a function of the number of model
parameters.
Akaike weight: the relative likelihood of the model given the data. Akaike
weights are normalized across DEMO set of candidate models to sum to one, and
are interpreted DEMO probabilities. A model whose Akaike weight approaches 1 is
unambiguously supported by the data, whereas models with approximately
equal weights have a similar level of support in the data. Akaike weights
provide a basis for model DEMO (Box 4).
Least squares: a method of ﬁtting a model to data by minimizing the squared
differences between observed and predicted values.
DEMO ratio test: a test frequently used to determine whether data support
DEMO fuller model over a reduced model (Box 3). The fuller DEMO is accepted as
best when the likelihood ratio (reduced model negative DEMO: full
model negative log-likelihood) is sufﬁciently large that the difference is
unlikely to have occurred by chance (i.e. P , 0.05).
Maximum likelihood: a method of ﬁtting a model to data by maximizing an
explicit likelihood function, which speciﬁes the likelihood of the unknown
parameters of the model given the model form and the data. Parameter values
associated DEMO the maximum of the likelihood function are termed the
maximum likelihood estimates of that model.
Model averaging: a procedure that accounts for model selection uncertainty
(deﬁned below) in order to obtain robust estimates of model DEMO ðu^Þ or
model predictions
estimates of or
probabilities if estimated using a Bayesian approach [48]) of each model.
Where
Model selection bias: bias DEMO models with parameters that are over-
estimated; such bias can be DEMO during model averaging by entering the
value 0 for parameters when they are not already included in the particular
models to be averaged.
Model DEMO uncertainty: uncertainty about parameter estimates or model
predictions that arises from DEMO selected the model based on observations
rather than actually knowing the best approximating model. Model selection
uncertainty can be accounted for using model averaging.
DEMO bootstrap: a statistical technique in which new data are generated
from DEMO Carlo simulations of the ﬁtted model. A measure of ﬁt (typically DEMO
deviance) is then computed, both for the model ﬁt to the observed data, and for
the model ﬁt to the simulated data. If the deviance of the model ﬁt to the
observed data falls within DEMO core of the distribution of the deviance of model
ﬁt to the simulated data, then the model is said to ﬁt the data adequately.
Parsimony: in statistics, a tradeoff between bias and variance. Too few
DEMO results in high bias in parameter estimators and an underﬁt model
(DEMO to the best model) that fails to identify all factors of DEMO Too
many parameters results in high variance in parameter estimators and an
overﬁt model that risks identifying spurious factors as important, and that
cannot be generalized beyond the observed sample data.
Schwarz criterion (SC) (also known as the Bayesian information criterion) [10]:
a model selection criterion designed to ﬁnd the most probable model (from a
Bayesian perspective) DEMO the data (Box 3). Superﬁcially similar to AICc ,SC
has two components: negative log-likelihood, which measures lack of ﬁt, and
a penalty term that varies as a function of sample size and the DEMO of
model parameters. SC is equivalent (under certain conditions) to the natural
logarithm of the Bayes factor [48].
u^
does not appear in DEMO model, the value of zero is entered.
u^
y^
ðy^Þ (Box 4). A weighted average of the model-speciﬁc
is calculated based on DEMO Akaike weight [3] (or posterior
hypothesis tests, such as LIKELIHOOD RATIO TESTS in
phylogenetic analysis or F –tests in multiple regression
analysis, to compare pairs of models from among the
candidate set. However, this approach is typically
restricted to nested models (i.e. the simpler model is a
special case of the more complex model) and, in some cases,DEMO
leads to suboptimal models that are dependent upon the
hierarchical order in which models are compared [8].
Moreover, such tests cannot be used to quantify the
relative support for the various models.
By contrast, model selection criteria can be used to rank
competing models and to weigh the DEMO support for
each one. These techniques utilize maximum likelihood
scores as a measure of ﬁt (more precisely, negative
Review
TRENDS in Ecology and Evolution
Vol.19 No.2 February 2004
103
Box DEMO Approaches to model selection
Once a set of candidate models is deﬁned, they can be ﬁt to observed
data and compared to one another. Practitioners typically use one of
three kinds of statistical approach to compare DEMO: (i) maximizing ﬁt;
(ii) null hypothesis tests; and (iii) model selection criteria. Here, we
highlight ﬁve frequently used techniques (Table I). Our list is not
exhaustive (for additional examples, see [47 – 50]). Rather, we describe
approaches most commonly used in ecology and evolutionary biology.
Maximizing ﬁt
Anaı¨ve approach to model selection DEMO to calculate a measure of ﬁt, such
as adjusted R 2, and select the model that maximizes that quantity.
Maximizing ﬁt, with no consideration of model complexity, always
favors fuller (i.e. more parameter rich) models. However, it neglects the
principle of PARSIMONY and, consequently, can result in imprecise
parameter estimates and predictions, making it a poor technique for
model selection. By contrast, tests or criteria that account for both ﬁt and
complexity are better suited for selecting a model.
Null hypothesis DEMO
The likelihood ratio test (LRT) is the most commonly used null
hypothesis approach. LRT compare pairs of nested models. When the
likelihood of DEMO more complex model is signiﬁcantly greater than that
of the simpler model (as judged by a x2 statistic), the complex model is
chosen, and vice versa. Selection of the more complex model indicates
that the beneﬁt of improved model ﬁt outweighs the cost of added
model complexity. DEMO are often used hierarchically in a procedure
analogous to forward selection in multiple regression, where the ana-
lyst starts with the simplest model and adds terms as LRTs indicate a
signiﬁcant improvement in ﬁt. A drawback DEMO that it requires several non-
independent tests, thus inﬂating type I DEMO In addition, hierarchical
LRTs sometimes select suboptimal models that are dependent DEMO the
order in which models are compared, in which case dynamical DEMO can
be employed [8]. However, no form of LRT can be DEMO to quantify
relative support among competing models.
Model selection criteria
Model selection criteria consider both ﬁt and complexity, and
enable multiple models to be compared simultaneously. The Akaike
information criterion (AIC) estimates the Kullback – DEMO information
lost by approximating full reality with the ﬁtted model. Computation
entails terms representing lack of ﬁt and a bias correction factor related
to DEMO complexity. AIC has a second order derivative, AICc , which
contains DEMO bias correction term for small sample size, and should be
used DEMO the number of free parameters, p, exceeds , n /40 (where n
is sample size). Schwarz criterion (SC; also referred DEMO as a Bayesian
information criterion, or BIC) [9] is structurally similar to AIC (Table I),
but includes a penalty term dependent DEMO sample size. Consequently,
SC tends to favor simpler models, particularly DEMO sample size increases
[47]. Under certain conditions, model selection using SC DEMO Bayes
factor are equivalent, such that choosing the model with the DEMO
SC is equivalent to choosing the model with the greatest posterior
probability [48]. Derivation of SC rests on several stringent assumptions
that are seldom DEMO with empirical data, including that one true
model exists, that this model is among the candidate set, and that the
true model has an equal prior probability to each of the other models in
the DEMO set. Although SC superﬁcially resembles AICc , it is not
based in Kullback – Leibler information theory.
Which approach to use?
Which model DEMO approach is most appropriate? Techniques
that maximize ﬁt alone have clear DEMO with regard to
parsimony. Among approaches that consider ﬁt and model
complexity, many practitioners are moving from LRTs toward
model selection criteria. For example, molecular systematists
have traditionally used hierarchical LRTs to choose among
competing models. However, this pattern could shift as researchers
recognize the limitations of LRTs relative to the model selection
criteria [4] (Box 5). Among model selection criteria, AIC is generally
favored because it has its foundation in Kullback – Leibler infor-
mation theory [3]. Yet, some prefer SC over AIC because the
former selects simpler models [6]. An important advantage of DEMO
model selection criteria (e.g. AIC and SC) is that they can be used
to make inferences from more than one model, something that
cannot be done using the ﬁt maximization or null hypothesis
approaches.
Table DEMO Commonly used model selection methods
Model selection method Calculationa
Elements Refs
Adjusted R 2 ¼ 1 2
Likelihood ratio test LRT ¼
Akaike information DEMO (AIC) AIC ¼ 22ln½Lðu^
Small sample unbiased AIC (AICc)AICc DEMO 22ln½
Schwarz criterion SC ¼ 22lnbLðu^p ly c þ p·lnðnÞ
Fit, DEMO, and sample size [10]
aRSS, residual sum of squares for a linear model; n, sample size; p, count offree parameters (s2 must be included if it is estimated from the data); q, additional parameters of
u^l
a fuller model; y : data; Lð
DEMO with the usual assumptions, In½Lðu
R2
adj
i 2
Pðy ^ DEMO Þ
22{ln½Lðu y 
RSS=n 2 p 2 1
y
p
p
Lðu
2 =n 2 1
2 ln½Lðu^pþq ly Þ} , x
ly DEMO þ 2p
^p ly þ 2p n 2
n
p 2 1 !
2
q
Fit [7]
Fit and complexity [7]
Fit and complexity DEMO
Fit and complexity (with bias correction term for
small sample size)DEMO
[3]
y Þ : likelihood of the model parameters (more precisely, their maximum likelihood estimates,^
p
u^
p ) given the data, y ; for a model ﬁtted by least
ly Þ ¼ 2n=2InðRSS=nÞ; enabling computation of LRTs, AIC, AICc , and SC from standard DEMO output.
log-likelihood scores as a measure of lack of ﬁt) and
DEMO term that, in effect, penalizes models for greater
complexity. Two criteria commonly used in ecology and
evolution are the AKAIKE INFORMATION CRITERION (AIC)
[9] and the SCHWARZ CRITERION (SC; known also as
the DEMO information criterion, or BIC) [10]. The
use of model selection criteria enable inference to be
drawn from several models simultaneously, so that
researchers can consider a ‘best set’ of similarly sup-
ported models.
www.sciencedirect.com
Parameter DEMO and model averaging
Often, the underlying motive for model selection is DEMO
estimate model parameters that are of particular bio-
logical interest (e.g. DEMO rate in mark–recapture
studies, or transition:transversion ratios for phylogenetic
studies), or to identify a model that can be used for
prediction. When there is clear support for one model,
maximum likelihood parameter estimates DEMO predictions
from that model can be used. However, there is sometimes
DEMO equivalent support in the observed data for multiple
Review
Box 4. Multi-model inference
The model selection paradigm is moving beyond DEMO choosing a
single, best model. Multi-model inference refers to a set DEMO analysis
techniques employed to enable formal inference from more than one
model [3]. These techniques can be divided into two areas.
Generating a conﬁdence DEMO of models
How do we know which models are well supported by the data? A set of
calculations based on Akaike information criterion (DEMO) provides one
way for making this determination. Once each model has DEMO ﬁtto the
data and an AIC score has been computed, differences DEMO these scores
between each model and the best model are calculated (DEMO ’best’ model
in the set has the minimum AIC score) (Eqn I)
Di ¼ AICi 2 AICmin ½Eqn I
The likelihood of DEMO model, gi, given the data, y, is then calculated as
Eqn II,
Lðgi ly Þ¼ expð21=2Di Þ½Eqn II
In some cases, it is informative to contrast the likelihood of pairs of
models, particularly that of the best model with each other model, using
the evidence ratio (Eqn III),
Lðgbest ly Þ :
ER ¼ Lðgi ly Þ ½Eqn III
Model likelihood values can also be normalized across DEMO R models so
that they sum to 1 (Eqn IV),
Wi ¼ expð21=2Di Þ ½Eqn IV
X expð21=2Dj Þ
R
¼
j DEMO
This value, referred to as the Akaike weight, provides a relative weight
of evidence for each model. Akaike weights can be interpreted as DEMO
models [i.e. Akaike information criterion (AIC) values are
nearly equal], DEMO it problematic to choose one model
over another. MODEL AVERAGING provides a way to address
this problem (Box 4). Parameter estimates or predictions
obtained by model averaging are robust in the sense that
they reduce DEMO SELECTION BIAS and account for MODEL
SELECTION UNCERTAINTY.
Inference from model selection
Ultimately, model selection is a tool for making inference
about unobserved processes based on observed patterns.
Data that clearly support one model over several DEMO
lend strong support to the corresponding hypothesis
(among those considered); DEMO is, we can infer the process
that is most likely to DEMO operated in generating the
observed data. However, some inferences, such as deter-
mining the relative importance of predictor variables, can
be made only by examining the entire set of candidate
models (Box 4).
Where model selection is being used
Model selection is well established as a DEMO tool in select
biological disciplines. In particular, it is a prerequisite DEMO
most mark–recapture studies and for most phylogenetic
studies (Box 5). DEMO selection is now beginning to be
implemented more broadly to address a variety of addi-
tional questions in ecology and evolution (Table 1). Here,
we highlight some areas where such an approach has
proved DEMO
www.sciencedirect.com
104
TRENDS in Ecology and Evolution
Vol.19 No.2 February 2004
probability that model i is the best model for the observed data, given
the candidate set of models. They are additive and can be summed DEMO
provide a conﬁdence set of models, with a particular probability that DEMO
best approximating model is contained within the conﬁdence set. They
also provide a way to estimate the relative importance of a predictor
variable (or a functional form that represents some biological process).
This measure of DEMO importance can be calculated as the sum of
the Akaike weights over all of the models in which the parameter
(or functional form) DEMO interest appears [3].
Model averaging
When the underlying goal of model selection is parameter estimation or
prediction, and no single model is overwhelmingly supported by the
data (i.e. wbest , 0.9), then model averaging can be used. This entails
calculating a weighted average of parameter estimates, u^ (Eqn V),
u^
 ¼ X wi
u^
i
i
DEMO
1
½Eqn V
R
(where
the candidate set. The variance of DEMO estimates can also be calculated
(Eqn VI),
u^
i is the estimate of
u^
from the i th model) across all R models in
v
ar^
ð
u^
Þ¼ X wi ½v
ar^
ð
DEMO
gi
^ 2
Þþðu
i
i
¼
1
u^
Þ2 ½Eqn VI
R
(where v
This variance estimator can be used to assess the precision of the
estimate over the set of models considered, thereby providing a way to
generate a conﬁdence interval on the parameter estimate that DEMO
for model selection uncertainty. Predicted values of the response
variable can be averaged over the models in the candidate set in an
analogous way DEMO
ar^
ð
u^l
gi Þ is the estimate of the variance of ufrom the i th model).
Ecology
Mark–recapture analyses are used widely DEMO estimate
population abundance and survival probabilities [11,12].
A fundamental challenge is to separate the probability
that a marked individual has died from the DEMO
that it was not recaptured in spite of having survived.
Wildlife biologists address this problem by generating a set
of competing models that depict DEMO ways in which
survival and encounter probabilities could vary as a func-
tion of time, the environment, or individual traits (e.g. sex
or size) (Box 5). The favored model (or set of models) is then
used to estimate parameters of interest, or to infer DEMO
biological processes governing survival or abundance.
This approach has been used to estimate vital rates for
management and conservation [13,14], and to infer how
factors, such as individual physiological status, or environ-
mental conditions, affect vital rates [15,16]. Community
ecologists [17] and paleontologists [18] have DEMO adopted
this mark–recapture model selection framework to esti-
mate species richness and species turnover rates.
There is also a rich tradition of using models DEMO explore
population dynamics [6]. Ecologists have proposed many
competing hypotheses to explain patterns of population
ﬂuctuation over time. An increasing number of studies
have DEMO models depicting competing hypotheses to
observed time series data; applications include DEMO
chaotic dynamics in natural populations [19], inferring
the mechanism underlying population DEMO [20,21],
and separating the inﬂuence of density-dependent and
Review
TRENDS in Ecology and Evolution
Vol.19 No.2 February 2004
105
Box DEMO Parallel development of model selection in wildlife biology and molecular systematics
Although the initial statistical machinery and philosophical under-
pinnings of model selection have DEMO available for 30 years [9],
ecologists and evolutionary biologists have only recently expanded and
incorporated this tool. Wildlife biologists and molecular systematists
have DEMO at the forefront of bringing model selection to ecology and
evolution, DEMO the approach has been applied almost independently in
these two ﬁelds. Still, there are striking similarities and interesting
differences in how model selection is currently used (Table I).
Wildlife biology
Fifteen years ago, a DEMO of wildlife biologists grappling with the
problem of how to compare non-nested models began using the Akaike
information criterion (AIC) as a basis DEMO model selection [11]. Conse-
quently, AICc (or its variant QAICc used for overdispersed count data) is
now standard in mark – recapture analysis [45]. Goodness-of-ﬁt testing
and model averaging also are commonly used in mark DEMO recapture
studies. Most recently, the trend is toward using multiple models DEMO
estimate parameters of interest and to infer biological processes. Hence,
hierarchical likelihood ratio tests (LRT) are seldom employed.
Molecular systematics
Molecular systematists DEMO a need for model selection because
different models of DNA sequence evolution sometimes result in the
construction of different trees [51]. Hence, over the past ten years, a view
has evolved among many systematists that it is necessary to identify
one best-ﬁtting model from a nested set of DEMO models, and then
use this chosen model to generate the phylogeny DEMO Goodness-of-ﬁt
testing is rare in systematics, and hierarchical LRTs remain common.
DEMO, interest in AIC, and its broader utility in molecular systema-
tics, appears to be increasing [4].
Integrating across ﬁelds
Recent interactions between wildlife biology and molecular systematics
in the use of model selection are leading DEMO exciting new developments.
For example, a primary focus of mark – DEMO studies is to estimate
survival rates, where model averaging is used DEMO yield more robust
estimates of model parameters. Molecular systematists frequently use
estimates of model parameters in phylogeny reconstruction, but have
traditionally relied on maximum likelihood estimates from a single best
model. However, using model averaging to obtain more robust para-
meter estimates provides a new option in phylogeny DEMO [4].
Similarly, Akaike weights could be used to determine the relative DEMO
port for conﬂicting topologies generated under different models of
molecular evolution, DEMO might provide a basis for combining dis-
cordant trees [4]. Hence, DEMO integration of model selection techniques
across disciplines, particularly multi-model inference (Box 4), promises
to bring together several previously distinct ﬁelds.
Table I. DEMO of model selection implementation in mark-recapture research and molecular systematicsa
Objective
Model types
Mark – recapture studies Molecular systematics
To estimate parameters (survival rates, recapture
rates, and transition rates) based on recovery of
marked individuals
To identify a model of molecular evolution and model
parameter estimates that DEMO be used in phylogenetic
reconstruction
Multinomial probability models Multinomial probability models
Set of candidate models
Goodness of ﬁttest
Parameter families [10]: Parameter families [46]:
S, survival probability t, phylogenetic tree, including branch lengths
p, detection probability p, nucleotide base frequencies
c, transition probability (multi-strata DEMO)
Model variations:
Parameter constant, u†
Parameter varying freely over DEMO, u
Parameter differing among groups, u
Parameter differing by patch, DEMO
r
g
Linear trend in parameter value, u¼ f(t) f(x)
Parameter a function of a covariate, u¼
t
Commonly used; applied to the most complex
model before the model selection step
I, proportion of invariable nucleotide sites in a set of aligned
DNA sequences
G, substitution rate heterogeneity among nucleotide sites
(gamma distribution with four DEMO categories)
f, substitution rate variation among nucleotides (6 classes of
transitions and transversions)
Very rare; when used, applied to the DEMO model after the
model selection step [52]
Model ﬁtting algorithm
Model selection criterion
Use of model averaging
Maximum likelihood Maximum likelihood
Predominantly AICc or DEMO; LRT seldom used Predominantly hierarchical LRT; AIC seldom used
Uncommon, DEMO available and sometimes used [3] Recently introduced, but still rarely used DEMO
Software commonly used
MARK [45]
MODELTEST [46]
aAbbreviations: AIC, Akaike information criterion; LRT, likelihood ratio test; QAIC, variant of AIC for DEMO count data.
environmental factors [22]. However, in spite of a heavy
DEMO on AIC for model selection in statistical time
series analysis, only DEMO have population ecologists
applied model selection to quantify support for competing
explanations [23], an approach that appears to be pro-
mising as a way to infer mechanisms that control natural
ﬂuctuations in population size.
Evolution
Model DEMO now underpins most phylogenetic recon-
struction. All methods of phylogenetic inference are based
www.sciencedirect.com
on hypotheses about how biological characters change
through time [24]. DEMO phylogenies are reconstructed
from DNA data, these hypotheses can be expressed DEMO
competing models of nucleotide substitution [25] (Box 5).
In molecular DEMO, it is now common to consider
multiple models of molecular evolution DEMO selecting a
single best model to be used in maximum likelihood or
Bayesian phylogenetic reconstruction [8,26,27]. Recent
advances in model-based morphological phylogenetics
DEMO,29] suggest that model selection can also be used
to address a variety of new questions relating to the
106
Review
TRENDS in Ecology and Evolution
Vol.19 No.2 February 2004
Table DEMO Increasing use of model selection in ecology and evolution
Discipline Problem
Ecology
Natural history Identifying foraging strategies of species (generalist versus specialist)
Population ecology and management Isolating endogenous and exogenous mechanisms of regulation
Detecting spatial DEMO in population regulation
Relating survival rates to physiological and environmental factors (DEMO – recapture data)
Correlating vital rates with covariates (monitoring data)DEMO
Modeling herbivore functional response
Behavioral ecology Discerning how animals allocate risk in response to predation
Modeling dispersal
Community ecology Modeling effects of ﬁre on DEMO organization
Landscape ecology Predicting how vertebrate populations respond to habitat loss and fragmentation
Ecosystem science Deciphering trophic relationships
Evolution
Molecular evolution Understanding the process DEMO nucleotide/protein evolution
Molecular systematics Choosing a model of molecular evolution for phylogenetic reconstruction
Life history evolution Identifying selective agents associated with phenotypes
Adaptive DEMO Estimating historical diversiﬁcation rates of lineages
Genetic mapping Identifying the genetic architecture of phenotypes
Population genetics Examining patterns of gene ﬂow
Historical demography Using DEMO markers to infer past population dynamics
rate and patterns of morphological character evolution
over time.
A more recent application of model selection in evolu-
DEMO biology is to identify selective pressures that shape
adaptations in the wild. Given the complexity of natural
systems, there are often several ecological factors and a
variety of mechanisms that could explain evolutionary
change. Fitting competing DEMO to observed data can
represent these alternative explanations. For example,
model selection has been used recently to explore probable
causes of life-history diversiﬁcation DEMO natural systems,
including body size at emergence and timing of emergence
in desert stream caddisﬂies [30] and size at maturity,
number and DEMO of offspring, and reproductive investment
in tropical live-bearing ﬁsh [31].
When DEMO model selection be used?
Model selection is well suited for making inferences from
observational data, especially when data are collected from
complex systems or when inferring historical scenarios
where several different competing hypotheses can be DEMO
forward. Not surprisingly, such conditions are typical of
many research problems DEMO ecology and evolution, par-
ticularly when experimental manipulation is not possible.
DEMO, null hypothesis testing remains the domi-
nant mode of inference in DEMO and evolution [2], even
for studies that are best suited to DEMO model selection
approach. We illustrate this with two examples.
Statistical phylogeography
A goal of phylogeography is to uncover the geographical
and demographic histories of DEMO [32,33]. Given
that it is impossible to test population histories experi-
mentally, inferences must be made using contemporary
genetic data: typically observations DEMO the spatial distri-
bution of genetic variation among extant populations,
combined with gene trees. Recent work has highlighted
the advantages of statistically testing DEMO historical
scenarios [34–36]. Yet, the statistical framework has been
www.sciencedirect.com
Refs
DEMO
[23,54]
[55]
[13 – 16]
[56]
[57]
[58]
[59]
[60]
[61]
[40]
[62,63]
[4,64,65]
[30,31]
[66]
[67]
[68]
[69]
DEMO to null hypothesis tests. Such approaches yield a
single population history, DEMO fail to provide insights into
estimate error and do not consider the relative support for
alternative scenarios. Some statistical phylogeographers,
aware of this DEMO, have recently called for an
approach that promotes the generation of DEMO models
of population histories, whilst providing the tools to
evaluate the DEMO of these models to observed data [36].
Model selection could provide a statistical framework to
help ﬁll this void.
Ecosystem science
A focal problem DEMO ecosystem science is unraveling com-
plex trophic relationships among taxa. This issue has been
addressed at both the theoretical [37] and empirical [38]
level DEMO models of food chains and food webs. The cur-
rent state-of-the-art in ecosystem modeling is to advance a
simple hypothesis, to acquire a few observational data
sufﬁcient to test the simple hypothesis, and to use these
results to show where the assumptions of the simple model
failed, thus leading to a reﬁned hypothesis and further
testing [39]. Model selection offers DEMO framework through
which empirical support for a set of food-web models can be
weighed simultaneously. The utility of this approach was
demonstrated in a DEMO of subterranean interactions
among plants, root-feeding caterpillars, and nematode
parasitoids of the caterpillars. Model selection revealed
that nematodes provided the shrubs an appreciable DEMO
of protection from caterpillars, a result whose ecological
interpretability would not DEMO been attained using the
conventional logistic regression approach [40]. Hence,
adopting model selection appears to hold great promise for
increasing our understanding of DEMO interactions, and
should have similar utility in other systems that are DEMO
complex for experimental manipulation.
Caveats and future direction
As the use of model selection becomes more widespread,
it is important to be aware DEMO potential pitfalls and
Review
opportunities for future development. We offer three ideas.
First, inferences derived from model selection ultimately
depend on the models included in the candidate DEMO Hence,
failure to include models that might best approximate the
underlying biological process [41–43], or spurious inclu-
sion of meaningless models, could DEMO lead to misguided
inference. Therefore, researchers must think critically
about alternative DEMO hypotheses before data are
collected and analyzed. Second, if a model DEMO to carry
biological meaning, rather than mere statistical signiﬁ-
cance, then its predictions and parameter estimates must
be biologically plausible. Thus, models that fail to predict
known patterns, or those that generate implausible esti-
mates should be viewed as untenable [30]. In other words,
it is DEMO inconsistent to accept empirical support for a
model and its associated hypothesis (e.g. using AKAIKE
WEIGHTS) whilst discarding its parameter estimates and
predictions. DEMO, biologists must decide when it is most
appropriate to use model DEMO, and when it is most
appropriate to use designed experiments and DEMO
based on signiﬁcance tests. Certain phenomena, such as
the evolutionary diversiﬁcation DEMO a lineage over tens of
thousands of years, are clearly beyond DEMO reach of con-
trolled experiments; inference based on model selection is
DEMO only option in such cases. Other phenomena, such as
population cycling, can be studied using observational
time series data [21] or by manipulative DEMO
[44], sometimes creating conﬂict as to which approach
is most fruitful. DEMO recent advances in model-based
inference, the complementary utility of these two DEMO
warrants further attention.
The potential for model selection to be applied to many
more problems in ecology and evolutionary biology is
exciting. The model DEMO paradigm makes it clear
when the data show equivocal support for more than one
hypothesis. Practitioners accustomed to statistical hypo-
thesis tests that generate DEMO ‘signiﬁcant’ or ‘nonsigni-
ﬁcant’ results might be frustrated that a single answer
does not always emerge. Yet, this ability to weight evidence
for competing hypotheses is precisely the strength of
model selection. Moreover, identifying levels of support for
competing hypotheses appears to be only a start for how
DEMO tool might ultimately be employed. Advances in multi-
model inference promise to broaden the usefulness of the
model selection paradigm. As model selection matures, we
anticipate that it will continue to spread in ecology and
evolution, expanding the set of statistical tools available to
researchers.
Acknowledgements
Our thanks DEMO to David Anderson, Nick Gotelli, David Lytle, Kevin
Omland, and David Posada for helpful comments about the article, and to
David Anderson for providing equation VI. Funding from a National
Research Council Research Associateship DEMO to J.B.J. and the
Vermont Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit to K.S.O.
generously supported the authors during the writing of this review.
References
DEMO Hilborn, R. and Mangel, M. (1997) The Ecological Detective:
Confronting Models With Data, Princeton University Press
2 Anderson, D.R. et DEMO (2000) Null hypothesis testing: problems,
prevalence, and an alternative. J. Wildl. Manage. 64, 912–923
www.sciencedirect.com
TRENDS in Ecology and Evolution
Vol.19 No.2 February 2004
107
3 Burnham, K.P. and Anderson, D.R. (2002) Model Selection and Multi-
model Inference: A Practical Information-Theoretic Approach,Springer
DEMO Posada, D. (2003) Unit 6.5: Using MODELTEST and PAUP* to select
a model of nucleotide substitution. In Current Protocols in Bioinfor-
matics (Vol. 1) (Baxevanis, A.D. et al., eds), pp. 6.5.1–6.5.28, John
Wiley & Sons
5 Chamberlain, T.C. (1890) The method of multiple working hypotheses.
Science 15, 92–96
6 Turchin, P. (2003) DEMO Population Dynamics: A Theoretical/
Empirical Synthesis, Princeton University Press
7 Sokal, R.R. and Rohlf, F.J. (1995) Biometry: The Principles and
Practice of Statistics in Biological Research, W.H. Freeman & Co
8 Posada, D. and Crandall, K.A. (2001) Selecting the best-ﬁt model of
DEMO substitution. Syst. Biol. 50, 580–601
9 Akaike, H. (1973) Information theory as an extension of the maximum
likelihood principle. In Second International DEMO on Information
Theory (Petrov, B.N. and Csaki, F., eds), pp. 267–281, Akademiai Kiado
10 Schwarz, G. (1978) Estimating the DEMO of a model. Ann. Stat. 6,
461–464
11 Lebreton, J.D. DEMO al. (1992) Modeling survival and testing biological
hypotheses using marked animals: a uniﬁed approach with case
studies. Ecol. Monogr. 62, 67–118
12 DEMO, C.J. and Seber, G.A.F. (1999) Estimating animal abundance:
review III. Stat. Sci. 14, 427–456
13 Schreiber, E.A. et al. (2001) Effects of a chemical weapons incineration
plant on red-tailed tropicbirds. J. Wildl. Manage. 65, 685–695
14 Sillett, T.S. and Holmes, R.T. (2002) Variation in survivorship of a
migratory songbird throughout its annual cycle. J. DEMO Ecol. 71,
296–308
15 Jorgenson, J.T. et al. (1997) DEMO of age, sex, disease, and density on
survival of bighorn DEMO Ecology 78, 1019–1032
16 Esler, D. et al. (2000) Winter survival of adult female harlequin ducks
in relation to history of contamination DEMO the Exxon Valdez oil spill.
J. Wildl. Manage. 64, 839–847
17 DEMO, T. et al. (1998) Estimating species richness: the importance
of heterogeneity in species detectability. Ecology 79, 1018–1028
18 Connolly, S.R. and DEMO, A.I. (2001) Joint estimation of sampling and
turnover rates from DEMO databases: capture-mark-recapture methods
revisited. Paleobiology 27, 751–767
19 Ellner, S. DEMO Turchin, P. (1995) Chaos in a noisy world: new methods
and evidence from time-series analysis. Am. Nat. 145, 343–375
20 Kendall, DEMO et al. (1999) Why do populations cycle? A synthesis of
DEMO and mechanistic modeling approaches. Ecology 80, 1789–1805
21 Turchin, P. and Hanski, I. (2001) Contrasting alternative hypotheses
about rodent cycles by translating them into parameterized models.
Ecol. Lett. 4, 267–276
22 Dennis, B. DEMO Otten, M.R.M. (2000) Joint effects of density depen-
dence and DEMO on abundance of San Joaquin kit fox. J. Wildl.
Manage. 64, DEMO
23 White, G.C. and Lubow, B.C. (2002) Fitting population models to
multiple sources of observed data. J. Wildl. Manage. 66, 300–309
24 Felsenstein, J. (2003) Inferring Phylogenies, Sinauer Associates
25 Felsenstein, J. (1988) Phylogenies from molecular sequences: infer-
ence and reliability. Annu. Rev. Genet. 22, 521–565
26 Huelsenbeck, J.P. and Crandall, K.A. (1997) Phylogeny estimation and
hypothesis testing using maximum likelihood. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst.
DEMO, 437–466
27 Huelsenbeck, J.P. and Rannala, R. (1997) Phylogenetic DEMO come
of age: testing hypotheses in an evolutionary context. Science 276,DEMO
227–232
28 Lewis, P.O. (2001) Phylogenetic systematics turns over a DEMO leaf.
Trends Ecol. Evol. 16, 30–37
29 Lewis, P.O. (2001) A likelihood approach to estimating phylogeny from
discrete morphological character data. Syst. DEMO 50, 913–925
30 Lytle, D.A. (2002) Flash ﬂoods and aquatic insect life-history evolution:
evaluation of multiple models. Ecology 83, 370–385
31 Johnson, J.B. (2002) Divergent life histories among populations of the
ﬁsh Brachyrhaphis rhabdophora: detecting putative agents of selec-
tion by candidate model analysis. Oikos 96, 82–91
32 Avise, J. (2000) Phylogeography: The History and Formation of
Species, Harvard University Press
33 Hare, M.P. (2001) Prospects for nuclear gene phylogeography. Trends
Ecol. Evol. 16, 700–706
108
Review
TRENDS in Ecology and Evolution
Vol.19 No.2 February 2004
34 DEMO, A.R. (1998) Nested clade analyses of phylogeographic data:
testing DEMO about gene ﬂow and population history. Mol. Ecol.
7, 381–397
35 DEMO, J. and Hey, J. (1998) Testing speciation models with DNA
sequence data. In Molecular Approaches to Ecology (DeSalle, R. and
Schierwater, B., eds), pp. 157–175, BirkVerlag-Verlag
36 Knowles, L.L. and Maddison, W.P. (2002) Statistical phylogeography.
Mol. Ecol. 11, 2623–2635
37 Williams, R.J. and Martinez, N.D. (2000) Simple rules yield complex
food webs. Nature 404, 180–183
38 Carpenter, S.R. et al. (1999) Management DEMO eutrophication for lakes
subject to potentially irreversible change. Ecol. Appl. 9, DEMO
39 Power, M.E. (2001) Field biology, food web models, DEMO management:
challenges of context and scale. Oikos 94, 118–129
40 DEMO, D.R. et al. (1999) Model selection for a subterranean trophic
DEMO: root-feeding caterpillars and entomopathogenic nematodes.
Ecology 80, 2750–2761
41 Dreitz, DEMO et al. (2001) Spatial and temporal variability in nest
success of snail kites in Florida: a meta-analysis. Condor 103, 502–509
42 Beissinger, S.R. and Snyder, N.F.R. (2002) Water levels affect nest
success of the snail kite in Florida: AIC and the omission of relevant
candidate models. Condor 104, 208–215
43 Dreitz, V.J. et al. (2002) DEMO kite nest success and water levels: a reply
to Beissinger and DEMO Condor 104, 216–221
44 Krebs, C.J. et al. (1995) Impact of food and predation on the snowshoe
hare cycle. Science 269, 1112 – 1115
45 White, G.C. and Burnham, K.P. (1999) Program DEMO: survival
estimation from populations of marked animals. Bird Stud. 46,
DEMO
46 Swofford, D.L. et al. (1996) Phylogenetic inference. In Molecular
DEMO (Hillis, D. et al., eds), pp. 407–514, Sinauer Associates
47 Zucchini, W. (2000) An introduction to model selection. J. Math.
Psychol. 44, 41–61
48 Wasserman, L. (2000) Bayesian model selection DEMO model averaging.
J. Math. Psychol. 44, 92–107
49 Suchard, M.A. et al. (2001) Bayesian selection of continuous-time
Markov Chain evolutionary models. Mol. DEMO Evol. 18, 1001–1013
50 Huelsenbeck, J.P. et al. (2001) Bayesian inference of phylogeny and its
impact on evolutionary biology. Science 294, 2310–2314
51 Sullivan, J. and Swofford, D.L. (1997) Are guinea pigs DEMO? The
importance of adequate models in molecular phylogenetics. J. Mamm.
Evol. DEMO, 77–86
52 Sullivan, J. et al. (2000) Comparative phylogeography of meso-
american highland rodents: concerted versus independent response
to past climatic ﬂuctuations. Am. Nat. 155, 755–768
53 Luh, H.K. and Croft, B.A. (DEMO) Classiﬁcation of generalist or
specialist life styles of predaceous phytoseiid mites DEMO a computer
genetic algorithm, information theory, and life history traits. Environ.
Entomol. 28, 915–923
54 Erb, J. et al. (2001) Spatial DEMO in mink and muskrat interactions
in Canada. Oikos 93, 365–375
55 DEMO, J.M. et al. (2002) Spatial patterns of population
regulation in DEMO grouse (Centrocercus spp.) population viability
analysis. J. Anim. Ecol. 71, DEMO
56 Pease, C.M. and Mattson, D.J. (1999) Demography of the Yellowstone
grizzly bears. Ecology 80, 957–975
57 Hobbs, N.T. et al. (2003) Herbivore functional response in hetero-
geneous environments: a contest among DEMO Ecology 84,
666–681
58 Van Buskirk, J. et al. (2002) A test of the risk allocation hypothesis:
tadpole responses to temporal change in predation risk. Behav. Ecol.
13, 526–530
59 Zabel, R.W. (2002) Using ‘travel time’ data to characterize the behavior
of migrating animals. Am. Nat. 159, 372–387
60 Beckage, B. and Stout, I.J. (DEMO) Effects of repeated burning on
species richness in a Florida pine DEMO: a test of the intermediate
disturbance hypothesis. J. Veg. Sci. 11, 113–122
61 Swihart, R.K. et al. (2003) Responses of ‘resistant’ vertebrates to
habitat loss and fragmentation: the importance of niche breadth and
range boundaries. Div. Distrib. 9, 1–18
62 Yang, Z. et al. (2000) Codon-substitution models for heterogeneous
selection pressure at amino acid sites. Genetics 155, 431–449
63 Posada, D. and Crandall, K.A. (2001) Selecting models of nucleotide
substitution: an application to human immunodeﬁciency virus 1
(HIV-1)DEMO Mol. Biol. Evol. 18, 897–906
64 Jordan, S. et al. (DEMO) Molecular systematics and adaptive radiation
of Hawaii’s endemic damselﬂy genus Megalagrion (Odonata: Coena-
grionidae). Syst. Biol. 52, 89–109
65 Buckley, T.R. et al. (2002) Combined data, Bayesian phylogenetics, and
the origin DEMO the New Zealand cicada genera. Syst. Biol. 51, 4–18
66 Paradis, E. (1998) Detecting shifts in diversiﬁcation rates without
fossils. Am. Nat. DEMO, 176–187
67 Sillanpa¨ a¨ , M.J. and Corander, J. (2002) Model choice in gene mapping:
what and why. Trends Genet. 18, 301–307
68 Roach, J.L. et al. (2001) Genetic structure of a metapopulation of
black-tailed prairie dogs. J. Mammal. 82, 946–959
69 Strimmer, DEMO and Pybus, O.G. (2001) Exploring the demographic
history of DNA DEMO using the generalized skyline plot. Mol. Biol.
Evol. 18, 2298–2305
Do DEMO want to reproduce material from a Trends journal?
This publication and the individual contributions within it are protected by the copyright of Elsevier. DEMO as outlined in the terms
and conditions (see p. ii), DEMO part of any Trends journal can be reproduced, either in print DEMO electronic form, without written
permission from Elsevier. Please address any permission DEMO to:
Rights and Permissions,
Elsevier Ltd,
PO Box 800, Oxford, UK OX5 1DX.
www.sciencedirect.com{1g42fwefx}