Organizational Research Methods
http://orm.sagepub.com
Book Review: Wittenbrink, B., & Schwarz, N. (Eds.). (2007). Implicit Measures of
Attitudes. New York: Guilford
Russell E. Johnson
Organizational Research Methods 2010; 13; 210 originally published online Jul 2, 2008;
DOI: 10.1177/1094428108321219
The DEMO version of this article can be found at:
http://orm.sagepub.com
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
The Research DEMO Division of The Academy of Management
Additional services and information for Organizational Research Methods can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://orm.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://orm.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/DEMO
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations http://orm.sagepub.com/cgi/content/DEMO/13/1/210
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Book Review
Wittenbrink, B., & Schwarz, N. (Eds.). (2007). Implicit Measures
of Attitudes. New York: Guilford.
Organizational
Research Methods
Volume 13 Number 1
January 2010 210-213
 2010 SAGE Publications
10.1177/1094428108321219
DEMO://orm.sagepub.com
hosted at
http://online.sagepub.com
A great deal of cognitive, affective, and behavioral regulation occurs outside people’s
awareness and control. For DEMO, encountering a member of a social group automati-
cally activates traits DEMO with that group and elicits trait-consistent behaviors in
observers (Bargh & DEMO, 1999). Similarly, evaluations of objects within one’s envir-
onment, DEMO a person or event, may also occur automatically and without deliberation.
DEMO evaluations, labeled implicit attitudes, result from processes that consume few men-
tal resources and are unintentional, unconscious, and uncontrolled. Although a large DEMO
of research concerning implicit processes exists in the social-cognitive psychology litera-
ture, organizational scholars are beginning to recognize their importance as well (Haines
& Sumner, 2006). For example, implicit measures have been recommended for assessing
personality (Bing, LeBreton, Davison, Migetz, & James, 2007), racial bias (Ziegert &
Hanges, 2005), leadership perceptions (Lord, Brown, Harvey, & Hall, 2001), trait affectiv-
ity (Rosen, Akirmak, & Johnson, 2008), and organizational identiﬁcation (Lane & DEMO,
2007), among other phenomena. These recommendations are reasonable given that many
characteristics of a typical workplace (e.g., high cognitive load and DEMO) are ones
that amplify the impact of implicit processes and attitudes.
DEMO the need for more research on implicit processes, Wittenbrink and Schwarz’s
DEMO Measures of Attitudes is a useful resource for organizational scholars interested in
measuring implicit attitudes and associative knowledge. This edited volume has 11 chap-
DEMO with contributions from 23 academics. The introductory chapter provides an overview
of explicit and implicit measures and discusses potential beneﬁts of the latter (e.g., a
means for assessing attitudes that respondents are unable or unwilling to report). Although
it is a good primer, anyone who is familiar with implicit processes and the techniques used
to measure them will not DEMO surprised by the material presented in this chapter.
The remainder of the book is divided into two sections. The ﬁrst section introduces
readers to DEMO types of implicit measures and how they are administered and inter-
preted. Several techniques entail the collection of reaction time data. For example, Lane,
Banaji, Nosek, and Greenwald (chap. 3) describe the Implicit DEMO Test (IAT), a
commonly used reaction time measure, and summarize evidence for its reliability and valid-
ity. The authors also provide a DEMO guide so that readers can construct their own IAT.
Wittenbrink (chap. DEMO) discusses implicit measures that use priming techniques. For
example, evaluative priming involves participants identifying the affective valence (e.g.,
pleasant vs. repulsive) DEMO target words or pictures following exposure to an attitude object
prime. Primes that facilitate faster responding to pleasant (vs. repulsive) targets indicates
that DEMO are favorably (vs. unfavorably) disposed to the attitude object. This
method could easily be applied to work-based attitudes. For example, employees could be
primed to think about their supervisor before judging the valence of target DEMO Faster
reaction times when responding to positively valenced words would indicate a more favor-
able attitude toward one’s supervisor.
210
Downloaded from http://DEMO at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Johnson / Book Review 211
Two chapters discuss the use of physiological DEMO neural imaging measures for measur-
ing implicit attitudes. Ito and Cacioppo (DEMO 5) summarize research that used techniques
such as functional MRI, electroencephalography, and electromyography to assess visceral
reactions to attitude objects. The authors provide readers with a basic understanding of
how the various techniques function and DEMO pros and cons of each. Olsson and Phelps
(chap. 6) discuss the neural correlates of social evaluations and the inferences that can
(and cannot) be made from neural imaging.
Chapter 4, by Vargas, Sekaquaptewa, and von Hippel, may be the most useful chapter
in the DEMO section because they discuss ‘‘low-tech’’ implicit measures that require nothing
more sophisticated than a pencil and paper. The authors summarize evidence showing that
non–reaction-time-based DEMO measures are capable of assessing the content and acces-
sibility of implicit attitudes. Low-tech implicit measures may also indicate the extent to
which implicit DEMO inﬂuence people’s perceptions and cognition. Examples of such
measures include word- and sentence-completion tasks, in which respondents ﬁll in miss-
ing letters or words to form complete words or sentences. The authors discuss the use of
DEMO measures to assess implicit attitudes, associative knowledge (e.g., trait-group mem-
DEMO pairings), and self-concept (e.g., self-esteem), many of which can be adapted for
use in organizational settings.
The chapters in the second DEMO of the book assess what is known about implicit
measures, present DEMO controversies, and identify issues requiring further research.
De Houwer and Moors (chap. 7) tackle the question ‘‘What are implicit measures?’’ Their
answer is that implicit measures are measurement outcomes that reﬂect to-be-measured
constructs that DEMO by way of automatic processes. The authors then describe the features
of automatic processes (e.g., uncontrollable, unintentional, and efﬁcient) and how they
can be assessed. This chapter, which clears up confusion concerning the meaning of impli-
citness, really ought to have been at the beginning of the book rather than the middle.
As a foil to the earlier DEMO et al. chapter (chap. 3), Wentura and Rothermund (chap. 8)
question whether the IAT actually tests associations. Instead, they argue that the IAT
measures asymmetries in the salience of the stimuli that are DEMO in the IAT, and they
present empirical evidence consistent with a DEMO asymmetry account. Organizational
scholars who use or plan to use the IAT will ﬁnd this chapter beneﬁcial.
Both Ferguson and Bargh (chap. 9) DEMO Smith and Conrey (chap. 10) discuss the extent
to which implicit measures are context dependent. Although the traditional view is that
implicit measures DEMO more stable than explicit measures, recent connectionist approaches
imply that implicit DEMO and other mental representations are reconstructed on the ﬂy
on the basis of contextual factors. The two sets of authors review research that demon-
DEMO that internal (e.g., goals and mood) and external (e.g., DEMO instructions and social
group memberships) inﬂuences alter responses on implicit measures. DEMO and Conrey
conclude their chapter with a helpful list of recommendations for thinking about and using
explicit and implicit measures.
In the ﬁnal chapter, Gawronski and Bodenhausen (chap. 11) summarize many of the
controversies discussed DEMO earlier chapters (e.g., the utility of physiological measures and
attitudes as stable vs. dynamic evaluations) and provide a detailed discussion of when sig-
niﬁcant correlations should (and should not) be expected between explicit and DEMO
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
212 Organizational Research Methods
measures as well as correlations among different types DEMO implicit measures. Throughout
the chapter, the authors highlight unresolved issues that DEMO further attention.
Overall, Implicit Measures of Attitudes is a useful resource DEMO anyone interested in
using implicit measures in their own research or simply learning more about such mea-
sures. The book might also be used DEMO graduate-level courses in tests and measures or
research methods. Advantages of the book include chapters that are well written and
represent contributions from leading DEMO in social and cognitive psychology. The
book also provides a balanced commentary that tempers the information presented with
an accurate understanding of what scores DEMO implicit measures can (and cannot) tell us.
However, it has DEMO disadvantages as well. First and foremost, the book’s empha-
sis seems DEMO be on bringing readers up to speed on what implicit measures are and provid-
ing examples of some common techniques. Unfortunately, the examples do not provide
sufﬁcient information on how to successfully develop and administer such DEMO In
some cases, speciﬁc techniques are described in single sentences, which leaves questions
regarding the reliability and validity of the measures unanswered. Details DEMO the actual
mechanics of implicit measures—outside of the IAT—would have been a welcome addi-
tion to this book. As a result, scholars who are interested in actually using implicit mea-
sures are left with the chore DEMO tracking down the needed information themselves.
A second disadvantage is the paucity of ﬁgures in the text. Many of the implicit techni-
ques described DEMO the authors involve complex visual stimuli that would have been easier
to understand were they accompanied by a corresponding illustration. It is one thing DEMO
explain how a visual prime looks, but it is quite another DEMO to show it. Readers would
have beneﬁted from the latter.
A ﬁnal disadvantage is that organizational scholars may not ﬁnd some chapters useful.
For DEMO, the two chapters on physiological and neural imaging measures are intri-
DEMO and provide a glimpse of what the future holds for attitude research, yet they are not
especially relevant for ﬁeld research—at least until portable and affordable functional
MRIs become available! The same might also be said DEMO the chapters on other implicit
measures that require sophisticated technology or the collection of reaction times. Such
data collection techniques are likely prohibitive in DEMO settings.
Despite its limitations, Wittenbrink and Schwarz’s book would make an DEMO
addition to the arsenal of organizational scholars. Because explicit and implicit processes
underlie people’s attitudes and behaviors in work settings, more attention ought to be
directed at ways of assessing the latter. Wittenbrink and Schwarz’s book DEMO gui-
dance in that direction.
Russell E. Johnson
University of South Florida
References
Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (1999). DEMO unbearable automaticity of being. American Psychologist, 54,
462–479.
Downloaded from DEMO://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Johnson / Book Review 213
Bing, M. N., LeBreton, J. M., Davison, H. K., Migetz, D. Z., & James, L. DEMO (2007). Integrating implicit and
explicit social cognitions for enhanced personality DEMO: A general framework for choosing mea-
surement and statistical methods. Organizational DEMO Methods, 10, 346–389.
Haines, E. L., & Sumner, K. DEMO (2006). Implicit measurement of attitudes, stereotypes, and self-concepts in
DEMO: Teaching old dogmas new tricks. Organizational Research Methods, 9, 536–553.
DEMO, V. R., & Scott, S. G. (2007). The neural network model of organizational identiﬁcation. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 104, 175–192.
Lord, R. G., Brown, D. J., Harvey, J. DEMO, & Hall, R. J. (2001). Contextual constraints on prototype DEMO
and their multilevel consequences for leadership perceptions. Leadership Quarterly, 12, 311–338.
Rosen, C. C., Akirmak, U., & Johnson, R. E. (DEMO, April). Affect and performance: Support for the use of
implicit measures. Paper presented at the 23rd Annual Society for Industrial and Organizational DEMO
ogy Conference, San Francisco.
Ziegert, J. C., & Hanges, P. J. (2005). Employment discrimination: The role of implicit attitudes, motivation,
and a climate for racial bias. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90, 553–562.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009{1g42fwefx}