Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
1982, Vol. 43, No. 6, 1306-1317
Copyright 1982 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0022-3514/82/4306-1306S00.75
Measurement of Specific Interpersonal Trust:
Construction and Validation of a Scale DEMO Assess
Trust in a Specific Other
Cynthia Johnson-George
Woodburn Center for Community
Mental Health
Annandale, Virginia
Walter C. Swap
Tufts University
Scales were developed for the assessment of one individual's trust in another in
meaningful DEMO relationships. For male subjects, the scale includes fac-
tors of reliableness, emotional trust, and general trust. For female subjects, sim-
ilar, but not identical, reliableness and emotional trust factors emerged. The scales
demonstrate adequate reliability and are discriminable from the related constructs
of liking and love. DEMO scales were empirically validated in two experiments. In
Experiment 1, subjects' responses on the Reliableness subscale varied appropri-
ately as a function of DEMO reliable or nonreliable behavior of the target person.
In Experiment 2, DEMO' responses on the Emotional Trust subscale varied
appropriately when the target DEMO either betrayed or did not betray a confi-
dence. In both experiments, the appropriate subscale was more sensitive to ex-
perimental manipulations than were the other trust subscales, attesting to the
discriminant validity of the trust factors.
Interpersonal trust is a basic feature of all
social situations that DEMO cooperation
and interdependence. Whether loaning
money, forming a car pool, or visiting a phy-
sician, one must decide whether the risk of
becoming vulnerable or dependent is worth
the possibility of a shared positive outcome.
DEMO is this element of risk—that is, despite a
careful assessment of DEMO other person's in-
tentions, capabilities, ^and motives, one can
DEMO be certain of a satisfactory outcome—
that gives the trust dilemma its basic char-
acter. Within an interpersonal bargaining re-
lationship, trust has been described as in-
volving
two parties who are to a certain extent DEMO
with respect to the outcomes denned by their joint
choices, and DEMO of the parties (P) is confronted with the
choice between trusting or not trusting the other (O).
. . . It is important to note that both P and O are cog-
nizant of DEMO risk to which P exposes himself in his de-
cision to trust O.. . . That is, P knows that O can betray
him and O knows that P has extended his (P's) trust
DEMO in the face of that risk. (Kee & Knox, 1970, DEMO
358-359)
Risk is also implicit in Carl Rogers's (1961)DEMO
Requests for reprints should be sent to Walter C.
Swap, Department DEMO Psychology, Tufts University,
Paige Hall, Medford, Massachusetts 02155.
description DEMO the client's initial feeling:
I'm afraid of him, DEMO want help, but I don't know whether
to trust him. DEMO might see things which I don't know
in myself—frightening and bad elements. He seems not
to be judging me, but I'm sure he is. I can't tell him
what really concerns me, but I can tell him about some
past experiences which are related to DEMO concern.
(P. 67)
While willingness to take risks may be DEMO
of the few characteristics common to all trust
situations, willingness to DEMO trust in any
given situation will be determined by a va-
riety of more specific factors. For example,
the individual you trust to DEMO your cat while
you are on vacation may not be trusted to
repair your car, and your trusted mechanic
may not be your chosen target for intimate
self-disclosures. The present research explic-
itly acknowledges the situation- DEMO target-
specific nature of interpersonal trust as well
as the variety of connotations the word trust
possesses. This emphasis contrasts with re-
search focusing DEMO general predispositions to
trust.
The Interpersonal Trust Scale (Rotter,
1967, 1971, 1980) and the Philosophies of
Human Nature Scale (Wrightsman, DEMO)
were both developed to measure the general
tendency of an individual to trust others.
1306
INTERPERSONAL TRUST
High trusters emerge as independent and
trustworthy (Rotter, 1971), honest (Steinke,
1975), and open to seeking psychological
help (Fisher & Turner, 1970). But to relate
trust only to positive personal attributes is a
disservice to those who, for very good rea-
sons, refuse to trust a specific other person.
To blindly trust the seller of a used car, the
leader of a cult, or DEMO the president of one's
country is at best naive and potentially dan-
gerous. Further, the capacity of these scales
to predict trust in others is restricted to con-
ditions of very limited intimacy (Chun &DEMO
Campbell, 1974; Kaplan, 1973). Finally, be-
cause such scales predict a willingness to trust
across target persons and situations, they do
not accurately determine an individual's
trust in another under particular circum-
DEMO Rotter (1971) theorizes that trust,
assessed by his scale, DEMO most accurate in
highly ambiguous, novel, or unstructured sit-
uations, DEMO one's generalized expectancy
is all one can rely on. This observation is
consistent with Mischel's (1973) acknowl-
edgement of the limited DEMO of trait
measures when the individual is experiencing
"powerful treatments."
DEMO games such as the Pris-
oner's Dilemma (Deutsch, 1958, DEMO)have
been used to study both individual difference
measures which correlate with cooperative
behavior and situational factors which pro-
mote cooperation. Thus, high authoritarians
(Deutsch, 1960) and those who are basically
competitively oriented (Kelley & Stahelski,
1970) tend not to cooperate. The power of
situational DEMO (competitive, coopera-
tive, or individualistic orientation) and com-
munication format in influencing coopera-
tion (Rubin & Brown, 1975) has been doc-
umented. But despite modifications of the
game paradigms to approximate real-world
situations (Brickman, Becker, & Castle, 1979;
Rapoport & Chammah, 1965) and attempts
to explicate cognitive analogs of behavioral
cooperation (Kimmel, Pruitt, Magenau,
Konar-Goldband, & Carnevale, 1980; Messe
& Sivacek, 1979; Ross, Green, & House,
1977), game research still has DEMO appli-
cability. Individuals bring to the experiment
implicit notions about game playing and face
a partner who is, at best, a stranger and, at
worst, an experimenter's programmed strat-
1307
egy. In these rare cases where the Prisoner's
Dilemma game is played between friends
(Oskamp & Perlman 1966), greater cooper-
ation results. Thus, most bargaining research
does little to extend notions about trust to
personally meaningful others.
Intimate DEMO relationships have
both a history and a future. They are not
static laboratory still frames nor can they be
explained purely in terms of DEMO individ-
ual's personal characteristics, dynamics, or
style. If John is involved in a relationship
with Marsha, whether he trusts her to keep
a secret is apt to be based on beliefs about
her personality, her past history of betrayal
of confidences, and the current climate of
their association. John's general trust in peo-
ple and whether he DEMO usually willing to trust
his Congressman or insurance agent or even
whether he trusts Marsha to remember ap-
pointments may be only marginally relevant.
DEMO understand trusting relationships,
therefore, we need to deal with specific DEMO:
both trust in a specific other person and a
specific type of trust. There is a clear analog
between this research and that DEMO Rubin
(1970), whose interest in positive interper-
sonal affect resulted DEMO the development of
scales assessing degrees of both liking and
loving between particular individuals rather
than general levels of warmth toward hu-
manity.
Systematic DEMO of specific inter-
personal trust and its relationship to other
variables such as love, liking, and self-disclo-
sure has been hampered by the DEMO of a valid
instrument of measurement. This article re-
ports on the construction and validation of
a scale for use in interpersonal relationship
research. DEMO particular, the scale is geared to-
ward measurement of the varieties DEMO inter-
personal trust held by one individual for a
specific other person. Details of scale con-
struction are followed by reports of two ex-
DEMO designed to validate the scale and
demonstrate its usefulness.
Construction of the Specific Interpersonal
Trust Scales
Item Generation
Through discussions with others and re-
DEMO of the theoretical literature dealing with
1308
CYNTHIA JOHNSON-GEORGE AND WALTER C. SWAP
interpersonal trust, 50 items describing hy-
pothetical situations thought to involve trust
in another were generated. Items DEMO
fell into one of four a priori categories: trust-
ing another DEMO one's material possessions,
a belief in the other's dependability or reli-
ability, trusting another with personal con-
fidences, and trusting DEMO with one's
physical safety. A few items did not fall into
any of these categories, and a few seemed to
span more than one.
The 50 items, half keyed in the negative
direction, were DEMO to 15 judges with
instructions to rate each item for its impor-
tance as a determinant of trust. The 43 items
with the highest DEMO agreement were
retained. To assess discriminant validity,
these 43 items were randomly interspersed
with Rubin's (1970) 13-item Liking and Lov-
ing DEMO, which shared the same format with
the trust items.
Method
Subjects. DEMO total of 180 male and 255 female un-
dergraduates in introductory psychology courses at Tufts
University completed the inventory during class time.
Procedure. Subjects DEMO instructed to think of a spe-
cific other person the same sex as themselves in whom
they had a great deal of trust (as defined by the subject).
Responses on 9-point scales, anchored by "DEMO
agree" and "strongly disagree," were subjected to a prin-
cipal-components factor analysis, followed by both or-
thogonal (varimax) and oblique rotations using the
BMDP-08M factor analysis program (Dixon, 1975).
Results
Questionnaire DEMO were analyzed in
two stages. First, responses to the full 69-item
DEMO were factor analyzed to deter-
mine if trust, love, and liking are discrimi-
nable concepts. Second, a factor analysis of
the 43 trust item responses was conducted.
For male respondents, orthogonal and
oblique rotations yielded essentially identical
factors. A general trust factor emerged, with
12 trust items having substantial loadings
(denned here as at least ±.40 on one rotation
and ±.25 on the other, both ps < .01). No
Loving or Liking scale item loaded signifi-
cantly on this factor. An 8-item DEMO com-
prising only Loving scale items, and a 9-item
factor comprising DEMO Liking scale items and
one trust item also emerged. A fourth factor
comprised 8 trust and one Liking scale item,
and a fifth DEMO consisted of 7 trust items.
For female respondents, orthogonal and
oblique DEMO also yielded similar iden-
tifiable factors. However, these female factors
were DEMO distinct in composition from the
male factors. Factor 1 consisted of 8 trust
items, all related to dependability. Factor 2
consisted of 10 items, all from Rubin's Lov-
ing scale. A third factor comprised 7 items,
6 of which were Liking scale items. Factor
4 consisted DEMO 4 Liking scale and 3 trust
items; Factor 5, 5 trust items; and Factor 6,
7 trust and one Loving scale item.
Since the loving, liking, and trust items
tended to form separate DEMO, clear-cut ev-
idence for discriminant validity was dem-
onstrated. Their function DEMO, the Lov-
ing and Liking scales were therefore elimi-
nated, and responses to the 43 trust items
were factor analyzed to determine the DEMO
structure of the trust construct itself.
Components of trust: Male sample. DEMO
male subjects, four interpretable factors
emerged. Orthogonal and oblique rotations
yielded DEMO identical solutions. Table
1 summarizes the results of the orthogonal
rotation. Factor 1 appears to be a general
trust factor, with items spanning a wide va-
riety of interpersonal situations and a priori
categories. Factor 2 DEMO labeled Emotional
Trust, since these items refer to situations
involving confiding, freedom from criticism
and embarrassment, and other emotion-laden
situations. Factor 3 (DEMO) deals with
keeping promises and commitments, and
Factor 4 (Dependability) is characterized by
a confidence in the other's help or assistance
DEMO needed and in the other's sense of re-
sponsibility.
Components of trust: Female sample. For
female subjects, three factors emerged, which
were similar for both rotations. As Table 1
indicates, Factor 1 is an amalgam of the male
Factors 3 and 4 and is called Reliableness.
DEMO 2 closely resembles the male Factor
2 and is also called Emotional Trust. How-
ever, this factor, unlike the male Factor 2,
DEMO an element of the other's credibility
or honesty. Factor 3 (DEMO Trust) con-
cerns one's physical safety and well-being.
That this DEMO did not emerge for males
may reflect societal norms dictating that
INTERPERSONAL TRUST
Table 1
The Specific Interpersonal Trust Scale
Item
Male sample"DEMO
Overall Trust
1. If gave me a compliment I would, question DEMO really
meant what was said. (R)
2. If we decided DEMO meet somewhere for lunch, I would be certain
would be there.
DEMO I would go hiking with in unfamiliar territory if
assured me he/she knew the area.
4. I wouldn't want to buy a DEMO of used furniture from
because I wouldn't believe his/her estimate of its worth. (R)
5. I would expect to play fair.
6. 1 could rely on to mail an important letter for me DEMO I
couldn't get to the post office.
7. I would be able to confide in and know that he/she
would want to DEMO
8. I could expect to tell me the truth.
9. If I had to catch an airplane, I could not be sure would
get me to the airport on time. (R)
Emotional Trust
1 . If unexpectedly laughed at something I did or said, I
would wonder if he/she was being critical and unkind. (R)
2. I could talk freely to and know that would want to
listen.
3. DEMO never intentionally misrepresent my point of view
to others.
4. If knew what kinds of things hurt my feelings, I would
never worry that he/she would use them against me, even if
our relationship changed.
5. I would be able to confide in and know that he/DEMO
would want to listem
6. If didn't think I had handled a certain situation very
well, he/she would not criticize me in front of other people.
7. If I told what things I worry DEMO, he/she would not
think my concerns vwere silly.
Reliableness
1. DEMO my alarm clock was broken and I asked to call me at a
certain time, I could count on receiving the call.
2. If couldn't get together with me as we planned, I would
believe his/her excuse that something important had come
up.
3. If promised DEMO do me a favor, he/she would follow
through.
4. If DEMO going to give me a ride somewhere and didn't
arrive on time, I would guess there was a good reason for
the delay.
5. If we decided to meet somewhere for lunch, I would be certain
he/she would be there.
Female sample11
Reliableness
1. If I DEMO injured or hurt, I could depend on _^ to do what
DEMO best for me.
2. If borrowed something of value and returned it broken,
would offer to pay for the repairs.
1309
M"
DEMO
7.19
7.98
7.58
7.99
7.86
7.50
8.08
6.99
6.42
7.70 (
DEMO
7.48
7.50
6.36
7.08
6.53
7.78
7.98
6.99
7.19
8.20
8.02
SD
2.00
1.63
1.60
1.74
1.51
1.66
1.63
1.18
2.12
2.33
1.43
1.73
DEMO
1.63
' 2.17
1.96
2.16
1.64
1.17
1.87
1.63
1.25
1.55
Factor
loading1"
-.43
.42
.62 '
-.46
.50
.69
.49
.55
-.50
-.48
.44
.62
.61
.44
.48 -
.64
.70
.36
.39
.62
DEMO
.65
.58
(table continued)
1310 CYNTHIA JOHNSON-GEORGE AND WALTER C. SWAP
Table 1 (continued)
Factor
Item Ma SD loading11
3. If my alarm clock was broken and DEMO asked to call me at a
certain time, I could count DEMO receiving the call. 7.26 1.88 .39
4. If agreed to feed my pet while I was away, I wouldn't
worry about the kind of care it would receive. 8.45 1.11 .53
5. If promised to DEMO me a favor, he/she would follow
through. 8.16 1.13 .52
DEMO If were going to give me a ride somewhere and didn't
arrive on time, I would guess there was a good reason for
the delay. 7.67 1.67 .57
7. I would be willing to lend DEMO any amount of money,
because he/she would pay me back as soon as he/she could. 8.08 1.51 .52
Emotional Trust
1. DEMO couldn't get together with me as we had planned, I
DEMO believe his/her excuse that something important had
come up. 8.35 1.03 .56
2. I could talk freely to and know that he/she DEMO want
to listen. 8.27 1.19 .59
3. would never intentionally misrepresent my point of view
toothers. 8.04 1.60 x.50
4. If knew what kinds DEMO things hurt my feelings, I would
never worry that he/she DEMO use them against me, even if
our relationship changed. 7.95 1.59 DEMO
5. I would be able to confide in and know that he/she
would not discuss my concerns with others. 8.05 1.34 .65
6. DEMO could expect ___ to tell me the truth. 8.40 .99 .73
Note. R = reverse keyed.
a 9-point scale, 9 = strongly agree; DEMO for reverse-keyed items are reflected. b Orthogonal (varimax) rotation.
c n = 180. d « = 255.
women, more than men, may DEMO Specific Interpersonal Trust Scale for Males
their physical dependence upon others. It is (SITS-M) includes those items with substan-
also noteworthy that no DEMO trust factor tial loadings on Overall Trust (Factor 1),
was found for females to parallel the male Emotional Trust (Factor 2), and Reliableness
Factor 1. Possibly males are less likely than (Factor 3), whereas the Specific Interpersonal
females to make fine discriminations when Trust DEMO for Females (SITS-F) includes
rating another's trustworthiness, responding those DEMO with substantial loadings on Re-
instead with a more global perception. liableness (Factor 1) and Emotional Trust
(Factor 2). The SITS-M thus consists of 19
The Specific Interpersonal Trust Scales items, with Item 38 appearing as part of both
_ ,,.,. . • the DEMO and Overall Trust subscales
The primary goal of this investigation was and Item 57 appearing on Overall Trust and
the construction and validation of DEMO to Emotional Trust The SITS_F consists of 13
assess an individual s trust in a specific other items from the Reliableness and Emotional
person. DEMO general, the factors that emerged Tmst subscales. Each of the five DEMO has
corresponded with the a priori factors that a respectabie reliability, DEMO coefficient al-
guided the generation of items Two factors has ran^ from a low of 7, for the 5_item
having similar item contents for males and SITS_M Reiiabieness subscale to .83 for the
females (Emotional Trust and Reliableness) 9_item SJTS_M Overall Tmst subscale
and the male Overall Trust factor were cho-
sen for inclusion in the validity studies. Op- Experiment DEMO: Reliableness
portumties for cross-sex comparisons as well
as investigation of discriminant DEMO In this experiment, an attempt was made
within the construct of DEMO result. Thus, the to manipulate trust through perceptions of
INTERPERSONAL TRUST
another as reliable or unreliable. Specifically,
subjects were paired DEMO a partner who be-
haved in either a reliable or unreliable man-
ner toward them and were then asked their
impressions of their partner DEMO the SITS. It
was hypothesized, first, that reliable rather
than unreliable partners would receive higher
trust ratings on all subscales and, second, DEMO
there would be a greater difference between
ratings of reliable and unreliable partners on
the Reliableness subscale than on the other
subscales. Such a DEMO would provide ev-
idence of discriminant validity.
Method
Subjects. Twenty male and 20 female undergraduates
enrolled in lower level psychology courses at Tufts Uni-
DEMO volunteered to fulfill a course requirement. Fifty
subjects were scheduled for the experiment, but 5 did
not keep their appointments and, due to DEMO nature of
the experimental manipulation, could not be resched-
uled. Five DEMO revealed suspicions about the manip-
ulations and were excluded from the analyses. All re-
maining subjects arrived on time for the experiment,
which DEMO vital for the effectiveness of the manipulation.
Design and overview. Ten males and 10 females were
randomly assigned to the reliable and the unreliable DEMO
ner conditions. Subjects were told that they would be
participating in an interpersonal coordination experi-
ment with another person. The reliableness of the part-
DEMO was manipulated by portraying the partner as arriv-
ing either on time or 10 minutes late after all subjects
were specifically asked to be DEMO for the appoint-
ment. After the manipulation, subjects solved the co-
DEMO problems,, filled out the SITS for their part-
ner, and DEMO debriefed and dismissed.
Procedure, Subjects were contacted individually by
telephone to DEMO appointments for the experiment.
The experimenter explained that the study involved in-
terpersonal coordination between pairs of subjects and
added:
I just want DEMO emphasize one more thing. It's really
important that you keep this appointment if you tell
me that you can make it. Since I'DEMO scheduling two
of you at that time, the other person will DEMO incon-
venienced if you don't show up or don't come on
time. If you find you can't make it, please call me at
[number]. Remember, you are making a commitment
to your partner to come and come on time.
Upon arrival, each subject was seated in a soundproof
cubicle equipped with a desk and two chairs and DEMO
to read the instructions. High-trust condition subjects
were told the partner had arrived and was seated in the
adjoining cubicle and that the experiment DEMO begin
shortly. Low-trust condition subjects were told that the
partner had riot yet arrived and that the experiment
would begin as soon as he DEMO she did so.
Printed instructions introduced a study of interper-
sonal coordination under various conditions of com-
1311
munication. First, subject pairs would be asked to solve
a series of coordination problems without direct com-
munication. DEMO, they would be working directly
with their partners to solve additional DEMO They
were further told that they would receive feedback about
their joint performance after each part and that they
would be asked to answer DEMO about their partners
at various times. After 5 min., the experimenter DEMO
to answer questions. She then explained that there would
be a delay before the experiment could begin. In the
high-trust condition, the experimenter explained:
I just discovered that I don't have all of the DEMO
that we need for the experiment. Evidently, the sec-
retary didn'DEMO make as many copies as I asked for. I'll
have to go make more copies before we can start. We
can begin as DEMO as I get back.
At the end of 10 min., the DEMO returned, apol-
ogized for the delay, and handed the subject a copy of
the eight coordination problems, adopted from Schelling
(1960). DEMO were told they would have 10 min. to
answer the problems. In the low-trust condition, the ex-
perimenter explained:
We can't begin yet because your partner still isn't here.
By the way, this same guy [girl] signed up last week
and didn't show up DEMO all, but he [she] promised to
be here this time. If DEMO's okay with you, let's wait a few
more minutes.
DEMO 5 min., the experimenter returned to ask if the
subject would DEMO waiting a few more minutes, adding
that unless the other arrived DEMO there would not be
enough time to run the experiment anyway. After 5
more min., the experimenter returned to announce that
the partner had finally arrived and the experiment could
begin. Thus, in both conditions subjects waited an un-
expected 10 min. for the experiment to begin, but only
those in the low-trust condition could attribute their in-
convenience to DEMO partner. As in the high-trust condi-
tion, subjects were given the DEMO problems and
told they had 10 min. to answer them. The remainder
of the session was identical for all subjects.
After collecting subjects' answers, the experimenter
returned with a feedback sheet informing them that they
had coordinated on four of the eight problems. Suc-
cessful coordination was indicated DEMO those four prob-
lems for which, in fact, the subject had given the most
common response, according to Schelling's (1960) data.
Subjects were asked to study the feedback sheet and then
to complete DEMO SITS. The SITS instructions asked sub-
jects to form "as accurate DEMO impression as possible" of
the partner and to respond to each DEMO of the scale with
the partner in mind.
After collecting the SITS, subjects were informed that
there would be no second part of the experiment. A
manipulation check questionnaire was administered.
Finally, subjects were debriefed and probed about their
suspicions during the experiment and about their
impressions of DEMO partner.
Results
Subjects were asked to indicate along 61-
point scales the extent to which (a) they felt
1312
CYNTHIA JOHNSON-GEORGE AND WALTER C. SWAP
Table 2
Mean Item Scores DEMO a Function of Trust
Manipulation, Subscale, and Sex: Experiment 1
DEMO condition
Subscale
Overall Trust
(9 items)
Emotional Trust
(7 items)
Reliableness
(5 items)
Total
Emotional Trust
(7 items)
DEMO
(6 items)
Total
Emotional Trust
(4 items)
Males
Females
Total
High trust
(n = 10)
Males
6.42
5.41
6.46
6.10
Females
5.58
6.54
6.06
Common items
5.15
5.42
5.28
Low trust
(n = 10)
4.61
4.83
4.28
4.57
6.03
6.16
6.10
4.75
5.65
DEMO
Reliableness
(3 items)
Males
Females
Total
6.30
6.43
6.36
4.30
DEMO
5.13
inconvenienced waiting for the experiment
to begin and (b) they saw their partner as
responsible for this inconvenience. There
were no differences DEMO trust conditions
on the first item, F(\, 36) = DEMO However,
subjects in the low-trust condition were
much more likely to perceive their partners
as responsible for the inconvenience they did
experience than DEMO subjects in the high-
trust condition (Ms = 36.4 and 8.8, respec-
tively), F(l, 36) = 54.0, p < .001. These data
suggest that the reliableness manipulation
was successful.
The SITS data DEMO analyzed in the fol-
lowing manner: Since the composition of the
DEMO subscales was different for males and
females, their data were analyzed DEMO
In addition, sex of subject was included in
the analysis of DEMO items that were common
to the subscales of both sexes. Since subscales
varied in number of items, the unit of anal-
ysis was the mean score per item on each
subscale. Thus, a subject's score on any sub-
scale could theoretically vary from 1 (low
trust) DEMO 9 (high trust).
For male subjects, a 2 X 3 (Trust X Sub-
scale) analysis of variance with repeated mea-
sures DEMO the second factor revealed, as pre-
dicted, a main effect for trust, F( 1,18) = 17.8,
p < .001, DEMO high-trust subjects expressing
more trust in partners (M = 6.10) than sub-
jects in the low-trust condition (M - 4.57).
The subscale factor did not reach signifi-
cance, F(2, 36) = 1.99. However, the Trust X
Subscale interaction did reach significance,
F(2, 36) = 8.86, p < .01. Inspection of the
means in Table 2 indicates that the Reli-
ableness subscale was particularly sensitive
to DEMO manipulation of trust, whereas the
Emotional Trust subscale was relatively un-
DEMO Not surprisingly, means on the
Overall Trust subscale were more consistent
DEMO those on the Reliableness subscale, as
would be expected if it DEMO measures over-
all, generalized trust. The Emotional Trust
subscale results suggest DEMO subjects were
unwilling to use the information provided by
the trust manipulation to generalize about
another's trustworthiness in qualitatively dif-
ferent situations. These DEMO provide rather
strong support for the discriminant validity
of the subscales.
A parallel analysis of variance was con-
ducted for females' responses. As Table 2
reveals, means for the two trust conditions
were only trivially different (Ms = 6.06 for
high-trust and 6.10 for low-trust subjects).
There was a significant subscale main effect,
with subjects in both conditions DEMO
more trust in partners on the Reliableness
subscale (M = 6.35) than on the Emotional
Trust Subscale (M = 5.81), F(l, 18) = 8.61,
p < .01. There was also a DEMO Trust X
Subscale interaction, F(l, 18) = 4.52, p <
.05. Compared with low-trust subjects, high-
trust subjects were more DEMO of their
partners on the Reliableness subscale and less
trusting on the Emotional Trust scale. These
results are clearly more ambiguous than
those for DEMO, although it is encouraging
INTERPERSONAL TRUST
that subjects responded appropriately to the
Reliableness scale.
An analysis DEMO responses to items common
to male and female subscales was conducted
to partially explicate the preceding sex dif-
ferences. Mean scores on common items DEMO
the Reliableness subscale and the Emotional
Trust subscale were analyzed in a 2 X 2 X 2
(Trust Condition X Sex X Subscale) DEMO
of variance, with repeated measures on the
third factor. The effect DEMO trust condition was
significant, F(l, 36) = 4.78, p < .05, with
means in the expected direction (see Table
2)DEMO Overall, females were more trusting than
males, F(l, 36) = 6.06, p < .05. Subscale was
also significant, F(l, 36) = 9.70, /?<.001,
with subjects rating partners as more trust-
worthy on the Reliableness subscale than on
the Emotional Trust DEMO The Trust X
Subscale interaction was highly significant,
F(l, DEMO) = 12,43, p < .001, indicating that
the Reliableness DEMO was more affected
by the trust manipulation than was the
Emotional Trust subscale. Again, this finding
is important in establishing discriminant va-
lidity. As Table 2 indicates, the Emotional
Trust subscale was insensitive to the manip-
ulation (Ms = 5.28 for high-trust and 5.20
for low-trust subjects), whereas the three
common Reliableness subscale items dis-
criminated the high-trust from DEMO low-trust
subjects (Ms = 6.36 and 5.13, respectively).
Experiment 2: Emotional Trust
In this experiment, subjects' impressions
of another as trustworthy in a personal,
emotional sense were manipulated. Subjects
were exposed to DEMO who either fulfilled
or did not fulfill a promise to keep confiden-
tial the personal information disclosed1 to
him or her. Hypotheses parallel those DEMO
for Experiment 1. First, a person portrayed
as emotionally trustworthy was DEMO to
receive higher ratings of trust on all subscales.
Second, it DEMO expected that subjects would
make more disparate ratings of trustworthy
and untrustworthy others on the Emotional
Trust subscale than on the other subscales.
Method
DEMO Eighty-four students enrolled in personality
and developmental psychology classes at Tufts Univer-
1313
sity completed the experimental questionnaire. Fifteen
males and 27 females were DEMO in each of the two trust
conditions.
Design and overview. Each subject received one form
of an alleged interview transcript involving a therapist,
DEMO client, and the therapist's supervisor, all the same sex
as the subject. In the course of the interview, the therapist
either betrayed a confidence of the client's to the su-
pervisor or did DEMO betray a confidence. After reading
the transcript, subjects completed the SITS.
DEMO transcript. The seven-page handout in-
cluded the following sections:
1. Introduction. The dialogues were described as ac-
tual interviews conducted at the counseling DEMO of a
nearby university. The participants were identified as a
therapist, DEMO as a 21-year-old senior undergrad-
uate majoring in mental health studies; DEMO client, an un-
dergraduate who had contacted the center for help DEMO
certain personal problems; and a supervisor, a PhD psy-
chologist who supervised the clinical work of the ther-
apist. Subjects were told that DEMO would be reading tran-
scripts of two conversations, one a clinical DEMO
between client and therapist and the other a training
interview between therapist and supervisor. Subjects
were urged to try to form "as accurate an impression as
possible of the therapist as a person."
2. Client DEMO The conversation between ther-
apist and client focused on the client's description of
personal difficulties and the reasons for contacting the
counseling center. DEMO dialogue was written to approx-
imate a Rogerian-style interview, thus portraying DEMO
therapist in a neutral, noncommittal fashion throughout.
The high-trust and low-trust DEMO of the questionnaire
differed only in two sentences spoken by the therapist
near the end of the conversation. In response to the
client's DEMO hesitancy about sharing information of
a personal nature, the therapist in DEMO high-trust con-
dition said:
But things we talk about here will be completely con-
fidential, completely between you and me and the
person who supervises my work here. I share all my
interviews with my DEMO in weekly meetings,
since I'm still in training. Other than that, though, I'm
not going to discuss this with anyone, and of course
you would have to give permission before anyone else
DEMO use the tape for research purposes or anything
like that.
In the low-trust condition, the therapist merely stated:
But things we talk about here will be completely con-
fidential, completely between you and me. I'm not
even going to discuss this with anyone, and of course
you would have to give permission before anyone else
could use the DEMO for research purposes or anything
like that.
3. Training interview. This interview between ther-
apist and supervisor was portrayed as having taken place
several DEMO after the initial interview with the client.
The training interview was identical for all subjects, ex-
cept for appropriate gender references. During the in-
terview the therapist revealed most of the personal in-
formation discussed by DEMO client. The therapist did not
indicate that there had been a discussion of the confi-
1314
CYNTHIA JOHNSON-GEORGE AND WALTER C. SWAP
dentiality of the interview or DEMO the supervisor of
the client's concern that the personal nature of the in-
terview might be revealed to someone else. The training
interview DEMO represented a violation of the client's
trust in the low-trust condition but not in the high-trust
condition, where disclosure to the therapist was explic-
itly mentioned.
The SITS was presented on a separate page following
DEMO training interview. Subjects were instructed to imag-
ine themselves "in a DEMO of someone who shares a
relationship with the therapist, someone who DEMO a friend
of hers [his]" and then to complete the scale. DEMO the
scale was constructed on the basis of trust ratings of
same-age peers, the therapist was portrayed as an un-
dergraduate and presumably of relatively equal status.
Procedure. The transcripts and questionnaires were
distributed during class DEMO The experimenter asked
that they be completed anonymously. Subjects were de-
briefed in class and were assured that undergraduate stu-
dents would not, in all likelihood, conduct such inter-
views at a university counseling center.
Results
As in Experiment 1, the SITS data were
first analyzed independently for males and
Table 3
Mean Item Scores as a Function of Trust
DEMO, Subscale, and Sex: Experiment 2
Trust condition
Subscale
Overall Trust
DEMO Trust
Reliableness
Total
Emotional Trust
Reliableness
Total
Emotional Trust
Males
Females
Total
High trust
(n = 10)
Males
6.11
5.95
. 6.45
6.17
Females
6.79
6.78
6.79
Common items
6.04
6.69
6.36
Low trust
(n = 10)
5.58
4.99
6.15
5.67
5.12
5.98
5.55
4.75
5.09
DEMO
Reliableness
Males
Females
Total
6.58
7.17
6.84
6.18
6.18
6.18
females. A subsequent analysis was carried
out for items common to the subscales for
DEMO sexes, including sex as a factor. Again,
the unit of DEMO was the mean score (1.0-
9.0) per item ori each subscale.
For male subjects, a 2 X 3 (Trust X Sub-
scale) analysis of variance with repeated mea-
sures on the subscale factor revealed DEMO
high-trust subjects expressed more trust in
their partners (Af = 6.17 DEMO 5.57), F(l, 28) =
3.25, p<.10. All DEMO expressed most
trust on the Reliableness subscale (M = 6.30)
DEMO least on the Emotional Trust subscale
(M = 5.47), F(DEMO, 28) = 11.35,;? < .001. The
Trust X Subscale DEMO was not signif-
icant, F(2, 56) = 1.83, p < .25, but means
were in the predicted direction, suggesting
that DEMO Emotional Trust subscale was most
sensitive to the manipulation of trust and
reaffirming the discriminant validity of the
subscales (see Table 3).
A 2 X 2 (Trust X Subscale) analysis of
variance for female DEMO revealed a
highly significant main effect for trust, F(l,
DEMO) = 12.78, p < .001, with high-trust sub-
jects scoring DEMO highest on both subscales.
Again, there was a significant subscale main
DEMO, with higher ratings on the Reliableness
subscale, F(l, 52) = 4.97, p < .01. The sig-
nificant Trust X Subscale interaction, F(1,
52) = 5.3, p < .05, reveals, as hypothesized,
the differential sensitivity of subscales to the
trust manipulation (see Table 3).
Analysis of combined male and female
responses on DEMO items (Trust X Sex X
Subscale) revealed no significant effect for sex
of subject, nor any significant interactions
involving sex. As in the preceding analyses,
however, there was a significant effect for
trust, DEMO(l, 80) = 8.62, p < .01; scale, F(DEMO,
80) = 32.63, p < .001; and Trust X DEMO,
F(l, 80) = 6.08, p< .05.
In general, results of Experiment 2 con-
firmed all hypotheses. Compared to subjects
in the low-trust condition, subjects assigned
to the high-trust condition rated the therapist
as more trustworthy, particularly on the
Emotional Trust subscale.
General Discussion
The development of a psychological con-
struct that is meaningful and measurable by
INTERPERSONAL TRUST
1315
a given instrument requires evidence of con-
struct uniqueness DEMO discriminability
(Campbell & Fiske, 1959). Discriminant va-
lidity of specific interpersonal trust was es-
tablished in two ways. First, factor analyses
of subjects' responses to items of the Rubin
(1970) Loving and Liking Scales and items
of the SITS provide evidence that trust can
be DEMO separately from other positive
interpersonal attitudes. Trust items clustered
in interpretable groups that did not include
items previously demonstrated to tap liking
and love. DEMO course, real-life experiences of
trust are undoubtedly associated with such
feelings DEMO love, liking, respect, and mutual-
ity. However, specific interpersonal trust is
psychologically meaningful and nonredun-
dant.
Second, evidence for discriminant validity
of individual subscales of the SITS comes
from two experiments. It was predicted DEMO
both that subjects confronting someone who
was portrayed as trustworthy in some partic-
ular sense would make trusting ratings on the
SITS compared with DEMO faced with an
untrustworthy other. This hypothesis re-
ceived support in both experiments. More
relevant to the issue of discriminant validity,
however, are the Trust X Subscale interac-
tion effects, which were predicted and ob-
tained. In Experiment 1, subjects confronted
a partner who was specifically requested to
be punctual so as not to inconvenience the
subject, and this partner seemingly either did
or did not comply. As expected, for both
males and females, trust ratings on the Re-
liableness subscale were differentially influ-
enced by this manipulation to a greater ex-
tent than were DEMO other subscales. The only
jarring note in the otherwise consistent pat-
tern of supportive results was the tendency
of low-trust females to rate their DEMO
partners as more emotionally trustworthy.
We offer no interpretation for this anomaly.
In general, however, impressions of another's
reliableness did not extend DEMO the areas of
emotional trust or overall trust, thus affirm-
ing DEMO uniqueness of the dimension tapped
by the Reliableness subscale.
In Experiment 2, subjects were asked to
rate another's trustworthy or untrustworthy
behavior in an emotionally laden, interper-
sonal situation. Although all subscales were
somewhat sensitive to this manipulation,
trust ratings on the Emotional Trust subscale
demonstrated DEMO most pronounced effect for
all subjects. The fact that one was deemed
untrustworthy with personal confidences did
not contaminate the impression of reliable-
ness. DEMO trustworthiness was thereby
affirmed as unique and independent.
The moderate responsivity of the Overall
Trust subscale shows that it measures gen-
eral, nondiscriminant trust in another. Its
sensitivity to condition differences in Exper-
iment 1 suggests DEMO it may tap a dimension
of trust more similar to reliableness than
emotional trust. Possibly this particular mea-
sure would be useful in situations DEMO the
exact kind of trust under consideration is
unknown.
Sex Differences and Trust
There is substantial evidence from this in-
vestigation that males and DEMO think
about trust quite differently. Sex differences
in construct definition, with DEMO utilizing
more differentiated dimensions, emerged in
the factor analyses. Further, the particular
content of these factors was sufficiently dif-
ferent for the two DEMO to make separate
scales a necessity. Finally, results of Experi-
ment DEMO revealed females consistently making
more trusting ratings of partners, even on
DEMO common to the two scales. Examina-
tion of some comments made by female sub-
jects during the postexperimental interview
might illuminate this finding. Several DEMO
trust females spontaneously reported that
they avoided making a hasty judgment,
wanted to give the other a second chance, or
otherwise expressed unwillingness to make
a low rating despite a recognition that it was
deserved. DEMO these same women did not
report feeling less inconvenienced by the tar-
diness or less certain that tardiness signaled
unreliability, this finding suggests that women
may be more hesitant to label another as
untrustworthy on limited DEMO, in-
stead moving slowly and collecting addi-
tional data before solidifying DEMO an opin-
ion. Evidence that females score higher on
measures of generalized trust in others has
been obtained by others (Chun & Campbell,
1974; Rosenberg, 1957; Wrightsman, 1964).
1316
Reliableness and Emotional Trust
One consistent yet unexpected finding was
the DEMO for subjects to rate stimulus
persons as significantly more reliable then
emotionally trustworthy. Ratings made by
female subjects in Experiment 1 and by sub-
DEMO of both sexes in Experiment 2 con-
formed to this pattern. It seems unlikely that
the higher Reliableness ratings are simply the
product of DEMO item difficulty artifact; subjects
in the original sample did not display DEMO
a tendency toward higher ratings on the Re-
liableness items; if DEMO, they were lower
(see Table 1). Rather, the effect DEMO most likely
due to implicit characteristics of the dimen-
sions themselves, DEMO they interact with the
level of intimacy of the relationship. Reli-
ableness is a quality that seems more super-
ficial and less special than DEMO trust-
worthiness. Behaving in a reliable manner is
a norm of everyday social interaction and
perhaps can be assumed to exist in the ab-
DEMO of contrary information. Subjects in
the experiments could readily attribute reli-
ableness to another, since they were in the
early stages of trust formation. However, un-
like subjects in the original sample, who were
responding DEMO intimate friends, experimental
subjects could not so easily assume that the
DEMO would be emotionally trustworthy.
Usefulness of the SITS and Future
Directions
Interpersonal trust has been shown to in-
volve various components that can be DEMO
sured independently and fluctuate as a func-
tion of the precise nature and meaning of the
target person's behavior. These results sug-
gest DEMO number of useful applications of the
SITS in experimental and clinical research.
Trust toward a specific individual might me-
diate certain frequently investigated behav-
DEMO, such as self-disclosure and cooperative-
ness. In clinical settings, the SITS could be
used to determine levels of trust in people
who are DEMO viewed as trustworthy (e.g.,
parents, spouse) or who ought DEMO be viewed
as trustworthy (e.g., the therapist). Scores
that diverge substantially from those of the
normative sample might suggest efforts on
the DEMO of the therapist and client to discover
CYNTHIA JOHNSON-GEORGE AND WALTER C. SWAP
reasons for the mistrust and to work toward
a more trusting DEMO Similar assess-
ments of specific interpersonal trust would
have value in group work where mistrust
among group members could inhibit the
communication of feelings DEMO information.
Despite the encouraging results, consid-
erable research remains if we DEMO to develop
a thorough understanding of interpersonal
trust and its measurement. One vital next
step is to collect information bearing on the
ecological validity DEMO the subscales. Will a
trusting score on the Reliableness subscale,
for instance, predict trusting behavior toward
the target in real-life situations? Future DEMO
vestigations also might focus on dimensions
other than those presently represented in the
SITS, providing evidence for the validity of
subscales measuring dependability or physi-
cal trust. Ultimately, it is hoped that refine-
ment of such an instrument as the SITS will
provide a means for studying the DEMO
ment of trust over time. The process of trust-
ing another, DEMO it is to be truly understood,
must be investigated in the context of an
evolving, shared association between individ-
uals.
References
Brickman, DEMO, Becker, L., & Castle, S. Making trust easier
and harder through two forms of sequential interac-
tion. Journal of Personality and Social DEMO,
1979, 37. 515-521.
Campbell, D. T., & Fiske, D. W. Convergent and dis-
criminant validity by the multitrait-multimethod
matrix. Psychological Bulletin, 1959, 56, 81-105.
Chun, K. T., & Campbell, J. B. Dimensionality of the
Rotter Interpersonal Trust Scale. Psychological Re-
ports, 1974, DEMO, 1059-1070.
Deutsch, M. Trust and suspicion. Journal .of Conflict
Resolution, DEMO, 2. 265-279.
Deutsch, M. Trust, trustworthiness and the F-scale.
Journal DEMO Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1960,61,
138-140.
Dixon, W. J. (Ed.). BMDP biomedical computer pro-
grams. Los Angeles: University of DEMO Press,
1975.
Fisher, E. H., & Turner, J. L. DEMO to seeking
' professional help: Development and research utility
of an DEMO scale. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 1970, 35, 79-90.
DEMO, R. M. Components of trust: Notes on the use
of Rotter's scale. Psychological Reports, 1973,33, 13-
14.
Kee, H. W., & Knox, R. E. Conceptual and method-
ological considerations in the DEMO of trust and sus-
INTERPERSONAL TRUST
1317
picion. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 1970,14, 357-
DEMO
Kelley, H. H., & Stahelski, A. J. Social interaction based
DEMO cooperator's and competitor's beliefs about others.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1970,
16, 66-91.
Kimmel, M. J., Pruitt, D. J., Magenau, J. M., Konar-
Goldband, E., & Carnevale, P. J. D. Effects of trust,
aspiration, and gender on DEMO tactics. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 1980, 38, 9-22.
DEMO, L., & Sivacek, J. Prediction of others' responses
in a mixed-motive game: Self-justification or false
consensus? Journal of Personality and Social DEMO
chology, 1979, 37, 602-607.
Mischel, W. Toward a cognitive social learning recon-
ceptualization of personality. Psychological Review,
1973, 80, 252-283.
DEMO, S., & Perhnan, D. Effect of friendship and dis-
liking DEMO cooperation in a mixed-motive game. Jour-
nal of Conflict Resolution, 1966, 10, 221-226.
Rapoport, A., & Chammah, A. M. Prisoner's DEMO
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1965.
Rogers, C. R. DEMO becoming a person. Boston: Houghtoh
Mifflin, 1961.
Rosenberg, M. Faith-in-people DEMO occupational atti-
tudes. In Occupations and values. Glencoe, 111.: Free
Press, 1957.
Ross, L., Green, D., & House, P. The "false consensus
effect": An egocentric bias in social perception and
attribution DEMO Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 1977, 13, 279-301.
Rotter, J. B. A new scale for the measurement of inter-
personal trust. Journal DEMO Personality, 1967, 35, 651-
665.
Rotter, J. B. Generalized expectancies for interpersonal
trust. American Psychologist, 1971, 26, 443-452.
Rotter, J. DEMO Interpersonal trust, trustworthiness, and
gullibility. American Psychologist, 1980, 35, DEMO
Rubin, J. Z., & Brown, B. R. The social psychology DEMO
bargaining and negotiation. New York: Academic
Press. 1975.
Rubin, Z. The measurement of romantic love. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 1970,16, 265-
273.
Schelling, T. C. The strategy of conflict. New York: Ox-
ford University Press, 1960.
Steinke, G. D. V. The prediction DEMO untrustworthy be-
havior and the interpersonal trust scale (Doctoral dis-
sertation, University of Connecticut, 1975). Disser-
tation Abstracts International, 1975, 36, 3586B. (Uni-
versity Microfilms No. 76-1713)
Wrightsman, L. S. Measurement of philosophies of hu-
man nature. Psychological Reports, 1964, 14, 743-
751.
Wrightsman, L. S. Personality and attitudinal correlates
of trusting and trustworthy behaviors in a two-person
game. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
DEMO, 4, 328-332.
Received November 4, 1981{1g42fwefx}