Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2007, Vol. 33, No. 3, 461– 474
Copyright 2007 by the American Psychological DEMO
0278-7393/07/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-7393.33.3.461
Aspects of Endowment: A Query Theory of Value Construction
Eric J. Johnson
Columbia University
Gerald Ha¨ubl
University DEMO Alberta
Anat Keinan
Columbia University
How do people judge the monetary value of objects? One clue is provided by the typical endowment
study (DEMO Kahneman, J. L. Knetsch, & R. H. Thaler, 1991), DEMO which participants are randomly given
either a good, such as a DEMO mug, that they may later sell (“sellers”) or a choice DEMO the good and
amounts of cash (“choosers”). Sellers typically demand DEMO least twice as much as choosers, inconsistent
with economic theory. This DEMO is usually explained by an increased weighting of losses, or loss
DEMO The authors provide a memory-based account of endowment, suggesting that people DEMO
values by posing a series of queries whose order differs for sellers and choosers. Because of output
interference, these queries retrieve different aspects of the object and the medium of exchange, producing
different valuations. The authors show that the content and structure of the recalled aspects differ for
DEMO and choosing and that these aspects predict valuations. Merely altering the order in which queries
are posed can eliminate the endowment effect, and changing the order of queries can produce
endowment-like effects without ownership.
Keywords: decision making, preference construction, loss aversion, endowment effect
The endowment effect (DEMO & Tversky, 2000) represents
a severe challenge to views of the “rational” decision maker—
assumed by economics—and to psychology’s ability to explain
deviations DEMO that standard. In the typical endowment study
(Kahneman, Knetsch, & DEMO, 1990, 1991), half of all partici-
pants are randomly given a good such as a coffee mug. All
participants then partake in DEMO market in which the experimenter
offers to buy the mug from those who got one and to sell a mug to
those who did DEMO The typical result is that those who have
received a mug value it 2 to 3 times more than those who did not.
Thus, the value of an object depends on ownership, even when that
ownership is assigned randomly.
The most common psychological characterization of the endow-
ment DEMO is loss aversion, which describes and summarizes two
phenomena: First, DEMO depend on a reference point; second,
Eric J. Johnson and DEMO Keinan, Columbia Business School, Columbia
University; Gerald Ha¨ubl, School of Business, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
This research was supported by National Science Foundation Grant
SES-0352062 to Eric J. Johnson and DEMO Canada Research Chair in Behav-
ioral Science awarded to Gerald Ha¨ubl.
We thank Dan Ariely, Daniel Kahneman, George Loewenstein, Bobbie
Spellman, Elke DEMO, and seminar participants at the University of
Alberta, Columbia University, DEMO University, Duke University, Har-
vard University, the Massachusetts Institute of DEMO, the University
of Toronto, and the Second Asian Conference on Experimental Business
Research for many helpful comments. We also thank Praful Mangalath for
DEMO the latent semantic analysis.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Eric J.
Johnson, Columbia Business School, Columbia University, 514 Uris Hall,
New York, NY 10027. E-mail: ejj3@columbia.edu
461
decreases in the DEMO value of an attribute have more influence
on valuation and choice than equivalent increases in objective
value. In the endowment effect, the reference point is the current
state of affairs, and the good represents either a gain or a loss. Loss
aversion is a major premise of prospect DEMO and is used as a
basis for explanations of many decision phenomena. These include
why the framing of options influences choices (Tversky & Kah-
neman, 1981), how the addition of irrelevant options affects choice
(DEMO & Tversky, 1992), why there are differences in organ
donation DEMO across countries (Johnson & Goldstein, 2003) and
differences in retirement DEMO with different defaults (Madrian
& Shea, 2001), and why people do not sell stocks that have gone
down in value (Shefrin & Statman, 1985; see Kahneman & Tver-
sky, 2000, for a DEMO).
The endowment effect illustrates how the strategies used in
evaluating simple objects have significant economic conse-
quences. For example, this result challenges the Coase theorem, an
important assumption in the economic analysis of social welfare
and political economy, which suggests that the value of an object
is independent of initial ownership (Kahneman et al., 1990). De-
spite DEMO importance, empirical robustness, and explanatory power,
there is only a limited amount of research on, and little agreement
about, the psychological DEMO underlying the endowment
effect, particularly as compared with the number of DEMO
demonstrations of the effect.
Two other candidate accounts, often suggested by DEMO
economists, are strategic misrepresentation and wealth effects.
The strategic misrepresentation account DEMO that participants
think they are making opening offers much like starting positions
in a negotiation rather than stating their true valuation of the good.
DEMO control for this possibility, experimenters use a standard
method in experimental DEMO (see Becker, DeGroot, & Mar-
462
JOHNSON, HA¨
UBL, AND KEINAN
schak, 1964, or “BDM”), which provides respondents with an
incentive for truthful revelation of their value for a good. Partici-
pants must indicate, for each of a number of amounts of money
(i.e., possible market prices), whether they DEMO prefer the mug
or the money. The experimenter then announces the market price,
which was determined a priori, and completes transactions with
participants according to what they stated to be their preference at
that price. DEMO anything other than their true value costs
participants money. To control for wealth effects, experimenters
have contrasted two equivalent decisions with different frames:
Selling prices (for those who are given a mug) and choices DEMO
tween money and the object (for those who are not). DEMO controls
have become standard in research on the endowment effect (Kah-
DEMO et al., 1991), but Plott and Zeiler (2005) have DEMO
argued that it is a misunderstanding of the incentive procedure, and
DEMO loss aversion, that accounts for the endowment effect. The
experiments we DEMO in this article include controls for both
wealth effects and strategic misrepresentation, and they allow tests
for understanding of the task.
A more psychological class of explanations suggest that buying
and selling shift the decision maker’s DEMO of attention, consistent
with the notion that most evaluations are sensitive DEMO implicit goals
(Fischer, Carmon, Ariely, & Zauberman, 1999), DEMO that the relative
weights attached to different features of an object differ for buyers
and sellers (Birnbaum & Stegner, 1979; Birnbaum, Yeary, Luce, &
Zhao, 2002). Consistent with this explanation, Carmon DEMO Ariely
(2000) suggested that the endowment effect is caused by a “focus
on the forgone” (pp. 360). In their account, buying DEMO selling
generate increased attention to the object that is about to be lost. In
the typical endowment study, they argued, buyers focus on DEMO
money that they are about to give up, and sellers focus DEMO the good
that they are about to surrender. This account is supported by
studies that manipulate aspects of the good or money, with inde-
pendent effects on buying and selling prices. For example, the list
price of a ticket to a basketball game affects buying prices more
than DEMO prices, whereas the anticipated climate in the arena
influences selling prices DEMO than buying prices.
However, these ideas may be only a start DEMO understanding what
underlies the endowment effect. In this article, we develop DEMO test
a process account of endowment effects that is based on the notion
that valuations depend on memory retrieval processes. This ap-
proach has DEMO advantages: First, it connects the valuation of
simple objects with the literature on memory and leverages our
understanding of retrieval. Second, it may help identify boundary
conditions, delineating when endowment effects may and may not
occur. Third, a process explanation may help identify whether loss
aversion actually reflects experienced preferences or, instead, is an
artifact that should be DEMO in measuring values. Finally, a
mechanism-based explanation might suggest interventions that
DEMO reduce or eliminate endowment effects.
A Query Theory of the Endowment Effect
Our starting point is that preferences, like all knowledge, are
subject DEMO the processes and dynamics associated with retrieval
from memory, and that DEMO principles can largely explain the
endowment effect and other phenomena in evaluation (see Weber
& Johnson, 2006). Indeed, if one takes the view that preferences
are sometimes constructed, it seems highly plausible that memory
in general, and in particular the retrieval of information about the
objects in question, will play a central role. In this spirit, Kahne-
DEMO and colleagues (Kahneman, Ritov, & Schkade, 1999) have
observed DEMO reported preferences are often predictions about
future enjoyment and that these predictions depend on what is
retrieved.
Premises of Query Theory
Our explanation of DEMO endowment effect is based on four
premises. The first is that decision makers naturally decompose
valuation questions such as “What should be my selling (or buy-
ing) price?” into a series of queries, such DEMO “Why should I make
the trade?” or “Why should I not make the trade?” The second
premise is that these queries are DEMO serially, one after the
other, and that query order differs across response modes. Note
that this decomposition and execution may well be automatic,DEMO
without the awareness of the decision maker. The third premise of
our account is that because of output interference, query order
matters: The DEMO query results in a richer and more heavily
weighted representation than the second. To produce differences in
valuation, our fourth premise suggests, different DEMO modes
produce different query orders: Choosers tend to first consider why
DEMO might not enter into the transaction and then consider why
they might enter into the transaction. Sellers, we argue, tend to
execute the DEMO two queries in the reverse order.
The first premise, that valuation DEMO based on a series of queries,
suggests that people respond to a question like “How much would
you pay for this mug?” DEMO decomposing it into a series of standard
queries (Collins & Michalski, 1989). To be more precise, we argue
that the decision maker first considers the advantages of current
state or status quo and then DEMO the opposite state of affairs.
For example, a seller will tend DEMO first evaluate the advantages of
owning the mug. To illustrate, in DEMO 1 we provide a possible
taxonomy of the aspects considered in a pricing judgment, along
with typical aspects listed by participants in our experiments.
These four types of aspects fall into two categories. Positive
aspects focused DEMO the object (e.g., a mug) and negative aspects
focused on DEMO currency are termed value increasing, because they
tend to enhance the DEMO of the object. These are shown in the top
left and bottom right panels of the table. Aspects that focus on
negative properties of DEMO object or on positive properties of the
currency are termed value decreasing, because they tend to reduce
the value of the object. Our analysis is novel in that we argue that
queries are about the ad DEMO goal-derived categories asking about
why the trade should or should not be made (Barsalou, 1983),
whereas Carmon and Ariely (2000) suggested that focus is driven
by the natural categories of objects and currency. DEMO argue that
this focus on the advantages and disadvantages of the trade is
based on the need to evaluate the current potential action, but we
will test this claim empirically.
Our second premise is based, in the decision literature, on the
idea that different weights are revealed by different response
modes and, consistent with Fischer et al. (1999), DEMO this shift in
weights is caused by a shift in the goals that are used to construct
values for different response modes. For example, Fischer et al.
suggested such differences in goals as an explanation of DEMO
prominence effect—the finding that decision makers are more
likely to prefer the alternative that is superior on the most impor-
QUERY THEORY AND THE ENDOWMENT EFFECT 463
Table 1
Classification of Aspects DEMO on Focus and Valence (With Examples for Mugs)
Aspect valence
DEMO
focus Positive Negative
Mug A nice memento of this experiment. The mug is ugly.
It says U of. . .on it and can be DEMO of a memory for me. I don’t really need a coffee mug.
The mug looks dusty and a little dirty.
It can be used DEMO a Christmas present for my sister.
You can never have too many mugs.
[2.59] [0.99]
Money I am a starving student and a couple DEMO dollars is still a couple of dollars. I could not buy that much with the money.
[1.67] [0.04]
Note. Numbers in brackets indicate the DEMO of these aspect types in a typical aspect listing. The top left and bottom right cells have value-increasing
aspects; the top right and bottom left cells have value-decreasing aspects.
tant attribute in choice rather than in DEMO (Tversky, Sattath, &
Slovic, 1988).
Our third premise, that the results of queries depend on query
order, is based on the idea of output interference in memory
research, suggesting that directed recall of some members of a list
can result in a decrease in DEMO for the unrecalled part of the list
(Dempster, 1995). This observation closely parallels the phenom-
enon of retrieval-induced forgetting (Anderson, Bjork, & Bjork,
1994; Anderson & Spellman, 1995; Perfect, Moulin, Conway, &
Perry, 2002) and is related to a number DEMO memory phenomena.
Similar interference effects have been demonstrated in many dif-
ferent experimental paradigms, including the closely related part-
list cuing paradigm (Mueller & Watkins, 1977). The effects seem
robust, occurring for both semantic and episodic memory and for
verbal as well as nonverbal materials, such as visual stimuli and
motor skills (see Anderson & Neely, 1996, for a review). Recent
studies have identified conditions under which implicit DEMO
also demonstrates interference effects (Lustig & Hasher, 2001;
Perfect et al., 2002). Although there is a current debate on the
relationship between inhibition and interference (Anderson &
Spellman, 1995; MacLeod, Dodd, Sherad, Wilson, & Bibi, 2003),
we simply require that queries show order dependence, such that
the first query leads to suppression of answers to the second,
generating a different set of query DEMO, which the decision
maker then uses to construct the value of DEMO object. Because we are
agnostic about the mechanism generating the effect, DEMO distinguish
the empirical observation of interference from putative mecha-
nisms such as inhibition (Friedman & Miyake, 2004; MacLeod et
al., 2003). DEMO specific idea is that retrieving one type of infor-
mation about the potential trade, such as the positive features of the
mug, will DEMO with retrieval of the other aspects of the trade,
such as what else one could do with the money.
Our final premise, that the order of queries depends on the
endowment state, will of course be subject to empirical verifica-
tion, but it also reflects the intuition that people consider the
advantages of the current state of affairs along DEMO the disadvan-
tages of an alternative reality before they think about the disad-
vantages of their current state and the advantages of an alternative
DEMO Put another way, decision makers tend to first assess the
advantages DEMO the status quo, then assess the advantages of the
alternative state (Kahneman & Miller, 1986).
Aspect Listing
To obtain some indication of the aspects considered during a
pricing decision, we used a variant of a verbal report methodology
called an aspect listing. We asked respondents to DEMO into a
computer interface the things they were considering as they made
their pricing judgment, recording the content, order, and latency of
these entries. Of course, this is only an approximate measure of the
cognitions that occur as respondents make this judgment. Although
the queries themselves may DEMO automatic processes and thus dif-
ficult to observe, the aspect-listing method DEMO designed to capture
their effect by showing what is produced by the queries. Compared
with more sophisticated measures, however, this approach has the
DEMO of being easily scalable to the kinds of large samples
and market settings that are used to demonstrate the endowment
effect.
Predictions
This perspective DEMO several clear predictions that we test
in the course of this research, specifically, the following:
1. Listed aspects should differ, in content and number,
depending on an individual’s endowment state.
2. The sequence DEMO aspects should correspond to our hy-
pothesized order of queries, which DEMO on endow-
ment state. Although we cannot observe the queries used
per se, we should be able to see their effects in what is
produced. Specifically, when participants are endowed
with the good, value-increasing aspects DEMO be more
numerous and appear earlier in the aspect protocol, and
DEMO opposite should occur when participants are not en-
dowed.
3. Aspect listings should predict prices. If the retrieval of
aspects is used to determine DEMO, then the quantity and
valence of aspects should predict prices. This DEMO
would demonstrate that these concurrent reports (Erics-
son & Simon, 1993) are not epiphenomenal and, if we
observe the standard pattern of DEMO, not reactive
(Russo, Johnson, & Stephens, 1989).
464
4. Changing the order of queries might eliminate the en-
dowment DEMO Because endowment changes query or-
der, which in turn changes the DEMO of aspects consid-
ered, we might, by manipulating the order of queries,
change prices. By reversing the natural order of queries,
DEMO should be able to diminish or eliminate the endow-
ment effect.
5. Finally, we should be able to produce changes in value
without endowment. If the construction of value depends
on query order, changing query order alone should
change people’s valuation of a good, even when owner-
ship is held constant.
General Method
With the current work we sought to DEMO a phenomenon
widely replicated using the methods of experimental economics
with concepts from the study of memory. In our experiments, we
attempted to meet the requirements of experimental economics
(Hertwig & Ortmann, 2001), while DEMO the challenge of collect-
ing individual-level measures appropriate for testing our hypoth-
eses. We implemented a number of practices that are common in
experimental DEMO All transactions were real—mugs were
actually bought, sold, or chosen in a market. Experimental sessions
consisted of small groups of participants who actually DEMO or
received money as a result of their pricing decisions. There was no
deception. Finally, we used comprehension tests to ensure that
participants understood all critical task instructions, and we elim-
inated participants who did not.
Experiment 1: Does Endowment Change the Aspects
Considered?
This experiment was based on a standard endowment paradigm,
with the exception that participants DEMO also asked to list aspects
of what they considered prior to indicating their valuations.1 After
setting their price and executing any ensuing market transactions,DEMO
respondents saw these aspects again and indicated both the focus
(thoughts DEMO the object or the money) and the valence of each.
If DEMO aspect listings reflect the information retrieved from mem-
ory and used by respondents to determine their valuation, they
should differ in content, number, and order for choosers and
sellers. In addition, we expected these aspects to predict prices.
Method
Participants
Eighty-seven participants were recruited on a university DEMO
pus. They were each paid $5 for their participation and, depending
DEMO their choices, received either a mug or a cash amount deter-
DEMO by their choices and the incentive-compatible mechanism.
JOHNSON, HA¨
UBL, AND KEINAN
ipants had to indicate an experimenter-induced valuation of a
good. They DEMO allowed to proceed only if they entered this
valuation correctly.
Test of understanding. Some have argued that the endowment
effect may involve respondents’ misconceptions DEMO task instruc-
tions (Plott & Zeiler, 2005). The BDM approach to value elicita-
tion (described above) is fairly complex. Participants were DEMO
both in the general introduction at the beginning of the experiment
and in the instructions to the endowment task that the transaction
was actually DEMO to be carried out in accordance with their
responses and that once they had indicated their valuations they
would not be able to change DEMO mind. To ensure that participants
fully understood the pricing task and market mechanism, we asked
them to identify which outcomes would occur under certain hy-
pothetical conditions (i.e., different market prices) given the val-
uation they had entered during the practice task. All respondents
were given two DEMO questions repeatedly until they
answered both correctly. Random responding to these test ques-
tions (without repetition) would require an average of five attempts
DEMO pass. Seven participants (out of 87) did no better than chance
and were eliminated.
Revelation of endowment state. Participants were given the
opportunity DEMO examine a mug placed in front of them, after which
they DEMO to a computer screen that revealed their endow-
ment state—they were randomly assigned to either a “selling”
condition (i.e., endowed) or a “choosing” condition (i.e., not
endowed). More specifically, respondents were informed either (a)
that the mug was theirs to keep but that they would later have an
opportunity to sell it to the experimenter for DEMO amount of
money (selling condition) or (b) that they would later be able to
choose between receiving the mug and receiving some DEMO of
money (choosing condition).
Aspect listing. Before indicating their valuation DEMO the mug,
participants listed the aspects they were considering in making
their decisions. Specifically, they were asked to type all reasons
why they personally would want to either have the mug or have the
money, one reason at a time (see Appendix A for details).
Pricing. To eliminate the potential confound of wealth states
with endowment, we contrasted selling prices to a choice condi-
tion, in which participants chose between receiving the mug and
receiving various amounts of money. This contrast controls DEMO the
wealth position of those endowed and those not endowed, with DEMO
only difference between conditions being the description of the
transaction (see DEMO, Small, & Loewenstein, 2004, p. 338, for
further discussion DEMO why choice is a superior control to selling).
Participants revealed their valuation of the mug on a scale ranging
from $.50 to $12, with increments of 50 cents. In the selling
condition, participants were asked to indicate whether, at each of
these 24 prices, they would DEMO to sell the mug or not (see
Appendix B for details)DEMO The corresponding question in the choos-
Materials and Procedure
Practice task. Prior to the main task, respondents completed a
practice task during which they were required to use the computer
interfaces for both aspect listing and DEMO in a domain unrelated
to that used in the main task. To practice the pricing task, partic-
1 The thought-listing procedure used here differs from other methods for
assessing reasons, such as cognitive responses (Cacioppo, von Hippel, &
Ernst, 1997), in that it is concurrent with rather than retrospective to the
task and serves as a manipulation DEMO well as a measure.
QUERY THEORY AND THE ENDOWMENT EFFECT
465
ing condition was whether, for each of the amounts, participants
would prefer to get the mug or the money.2
Market transaction. Once participants had completed the pric-
ing task, the experimenter announced the market price, which had
been determined a priori. Transactions were then completed ac-
cording to the preference that each participant DEMO expressed in
connection with that amount during the pricing task. That is, in the
selling condition, participants either kept the mug or sold DEMO to the
experimenter for the market price (in cash), depending DEMO their
earlier response. In the choosing condition, participants either
received a DEMO or the market price (in cash), according to their
preference DEMO revealed in the pricing task.
Self-coding of aspects. Participants were presented with the
aspects they had listed earlier, one at a time, and DEMO to indicate
both the focus (whether the statement referred to the DEMO or the
money) and the valence (positive or negative, in DEMO to the
focus) of each aspect. Of note, in several other studies we have had
aspects coded by naive raters, and these codings produce very
similar results.
Finally, participants responded to a series of general questions,
including the Positive and Negative Affect Scale (PANAS;
Watson, Clarke, & Tellegen, 1988) for measuring mood and some
demographic DEMO, and completed a funnel debriefing for
detecting evidence of suspicion as DEMO the purpose of the study.
Results
Prices
As can be seen in the top line of Figure 1, this study replicated
the standard endowment effect. Sellers, who had been endowed
with a mug, demanded an DEMO of $5.71 to surrender it. Choos-
ers, who faced the same DEMO decision but had not been
endowed with anything, were indifferent between DEMO a mug
and receiving $3.42, on average. This difference was significant,DEMO
F(1, 79)  228.9, p  .0001, and similar results are provided by
a median test ( p  .01).
DEMO of Aspects
Participants generated different aspects depending on whether
they were endowed, as shown in Figure 1. As suggested by our
query account, DEMO produced more value-decreasing aspects
(positive thoughts about the money and negative DEMO about
the mug) than sellers (2.38 vs. 1.77), whereas sellers produced
more value-increasing aspects (positive thoughts about the mug
and negative thoughts about the money) than choosers (1.81 vs.
1.43). A repeated DEMO analysis of variance (ANOVA) con-
firmed this interaction between endowment and aspect type, F(1,
75)  3.82, p  .06.
Because participants listed different numbers of aspects, we
tested this prediction by calculating, for each participant, a score
that reflects his or her DEMO to produce value-increasing as-
pects before value-decreasing ones. This score, the DEMO
median rank difference of aspect types (SMRD), is defined as
DEMO(MRi  MRd)/n, where MRd  median rank of value-decreasing
aspects in a participant’s sequence, MRi  median rank of value-
increasing aspects in a participant’s sequence, and n  total
number of aspects in a participant’s sequence.3 The SMRD score
can take on values from DEMO (all value-increasing aspects were listed
before any value-decreasing aspects) to –1 (all value-decreasing
aspects were listed before any value-increasing aspects).
As predicted, the mean SMRD score was significantly higher for
sellers (.62) than for choosers (.26), F(1, 79)  4.14, p DEMO .05. This
result provides support for our hypothesis that ownership of an
object leads to a difference in queries, as reflected by differences
in the order in which aspects are produced.
Predicting Prices From Aspects
The DEMO generated by respondents are not epiphenomenal, or
what economists term “cheap DEMO,” because they help predict
participants’ valuations of the mug. Using price as a dependent
variable and the number of value-increasing aspects and value-
DEMO aspects produced by each respondent as independent
variables in a multiple regression reveals that this crude encoding
of aspects explains 21% of the variance DEMO valuations, F(4, 75) 
4.81, p  .001. Both regression coefficients are in the expected
direction—that is, the effects of the number of value-increasing
and value-decreasing aspects on price are positive and negative,DEMO
respectively. As a comparison, endowment state (i.e., whether a
participant DEMO a seller or a chooser) explains only 16% of the
variance DEMO valuations.
Discussion
Experiment 1 provides initial support for the first three of the
five predictions of our query-based account of the endowment
effect: First, respondents generate different kinds of aspects if they
are setting selling prices than if they are choosing between the
object and a set of DEMO amounts. This experiment also provides
strong support for the hypothesized change in recall order: Con-
sistent with our prediction that endowment state influences query
order, value-increasing statements are generated earlier by sellers
and value-decreasing statements are generated earlier by choosers.
Finally, consistent with the third prediction of our theoretical
account, the number and valence of these aspects predict valua-
tions, and they do so at least as well as the endowment manipu-
lation itself.
Order of Aspects
The sequential nature of our query account DEMO that the kind
of aspects generated will change during the aspect listing. For
participants endowed with a mug, we expected that aspect listings
would initially consist of mostly value-increasing aspects and that
value-decreasing aspects would be DEMO more frequently to-
ward the end. We expected the reverse would be true for partici-
pants not endowed with a mug.
2 Exact instructions DEMO the experiment are available from the authors
upon request.
3 Note that for any sequence (of length s) in which only one of DEMO two
response categories of interest (i.e., value-increasing or value-decreasing
aspects) DEMO, the median rank of the unobserved response category is
set to DEMO  1, which is a conservative way of representing the low DEMO of
accessibility of thoughts of that type. In addition, for the DEMO of
calculating the SMRD score, n s  1 for such DEMO sequences.
For sequences that include responses from both categories, n  DEMO
466
JOHNSON, HA¨
UBL, AND KEINAN
$7.00
$5.71
$6.00
$5.00
3
DEMO
1
0
Value-Increasing Aspects
Value-Decreasing Aspects
$3.42
1.81
1.77
1.43
2.38
Endowed Not Endowed
Figure 1.
Effects of endowment on valuations (line graph) DEMO generated aspects (bar graph).
$4.00
$3.00
$2.00
$1.00
$0.00
Experiment DEMO: Eliminating Endowment Effects
Although the results of Experiment 1 support our DEMO theory
account of the endowment effect, much of this evidence is DEMO
lational and could also be consistent with other accounts. Stronger
evidence for our query-based explanation would be provided by a
test of our fourth DEMO, that by manipulating the order of
queries, we might actually influence the aspects considered by
respondents and the magnitude of the endowment effect. DEMO Ex-
periment 2, we did this by manipulating, for some participants, the
order in which they generated value-increasing versus value-
decreasing aspects. In particular, we included a condition that
reversed the natural order of queries to memory for a given
endowment state suggested by our query theory DEMO confirmed by
Experiment 1. We expected that this reversal of the natural query
order would result in a smaller endowment effect, as well as a
difference in the nature of the aspects produced by participants.
Method
DEMO
Eighty-three participants were recruited on a university campus.
They were paid $5 each for their participation and, depending on
their choices during the experiment, also received either a mug or
a cash amount, as determined DEMO the incentive-compatible BDM
mechanism.
Materials and Procedure
The procedure was similar to Experiment 1, starting with a
practice task. Again, participants who did DEMO better than chance in
the practice task were eliminated (10 participants)DEMO In addition, 1
participant was eliminated for evidently having misunderstood the
DEMO task. This left us with 72 usable participants.
As in Experiment 1, participants were assigned to either a
selling condition (i.e., endowed) DEMO a choosing condition (i.e., not
endowed). After learning their endowment state and before indi-
cating their valuation of the mug, participants listed the aspects
they were considering in making their decisions. We used two
DEMO conditions. One was an unguided condition where,
as in Experiment 1, participants simply listed all of the aspects they
were considering without any externally imposed query order. In
the other condition, the natural order of queries to memory for a
given endowment state suggested by our theory DEMO reversed, such
that sellers (endowed) were asked to first produce DEMO
decreasing aspects and then produce value-increasing aspects,
whereas choosers (not DEMO) were asked to list value-
increasing before value-decreasing aspects. Thus, participants in
Experiment 2 were randomly assigned to one of four conditions in
DEMO 2 (endowment state: selling vs. choosing)  2 (order of aspect
generation: unguided vs. reverse of natural order) between-
subjects design.
DEMO
Prices
As can be seen from the line graph in Figure 2, we observed a
strong endowment effect in the unguided aspect-listing condition
but not in the conditions in which the aspect-listing task reversed
what we DEMO to be the natural query order. Indeed, in the latter
condition, the endowment effect was eliminated entirely. An
ANOVA on prices confirmed these DEMO, with a significant
Endowment State  Order of Aspect Generation interaction, F(1,
Number of Aspects
Valuation
1
0
-1
-2
Figure 2.
QUERY THEORY AND THE ENDOWMENT EFFECT
DEMO
$3.72
-0.17
Endowed
Not Endowed
$5.05
$4.91
Endowed
Not Endowed
0.20
-0.22
-1.23
467
$7.00
$6.00
$5.00
$4.00
$3.00
$2.00
$1.00
$0.00
Unguided Reverse DEMO
Effects of endowment and query format on valuations (line graph) and generated aspects (bar graph).
68)  5.04, p  .05. This is best described by an analysis of simple
effects within the DEMO aspect-listing conditions, which revealed a
large endowment effect for unguided aspect DEMO, F(1, 68) 
7.55, p  .01, as DEMO on the left side of Figure 2, but no
endowment effect DEMO the reverse-order condition, F(1, 68)  0.24,
p DEMO .50, as can be seen on the right side of the DEMO Thus, our
manipulation—simply altering the order in which participants re-
ported DEMO aspects they were considering—was successful in com-
pletely eliminating the endowment effect.
Content of Aspects
Again, we expected the aspects considered by participants to
vary as a function of their endowment state and the nature of DEMO
aspect production task. In particular, we anticipated a significant
effect of DEMO on the aspects considered, but only for the
unguided query format DEMO not for the reverse of the natural order.
Here, we computed DEMO difference between the number of value-
increasing and value-decreasing aspects that each participant pro-
duced. The means of these difference scores for the four DEMO
are depicted in the bar graph in Figure 2.
Consistent with the results of Experiment 1, respondents in the
unguided condition produced substantially fewer value-increasing
than value-decreasing aspects (indicated by a negative difference
score) when DEMO were not endowed with the mug and produced a
roughly equal number of the two types of aspects (indicated by a
difference score close to zero) when they were endowed. By
contrast, when the natural DEMO order was reversed, participants
produced a roughly equal number of value-increasing DEMO value-
decreasing aspects, independent of endowment state.
We tested these impressions DEMO a repeated measures ANOVA
that included aspect type as a within-subject factor and endowment
state and aspect query format as between-subjects factors. Our
primary DEMO was the Endowment  Query Format interaction,
which was statistically significant, F(1, 67)  4.14, p  .05. An
analysis DEMO simple effects revealed that only the unguided condi-
tion, and not DEMO reverse-order condition, showed the interaction
between aspect type and endowment.
The DEMO interaction in difference scores for aspects in
Figure 1 mirrors the pattern of prices and suggests that, as hypoth-
esized, the differences in DEMO aspects are responsible for the
differences in the endowment effect. To further test this theory, we
regressed the prices of the mug on both the number of value-
increasing and the number of value-decreasing aspects. As DEMO
dicted, the coefficient for value-increasing aspects was positive
( .47, DEMO  .05) and that for value-decreasing aspects was
negative ( –.34, p  .06, one-tailed).
Order of Aspects
The unguided query DEMO allowed an analysis of the se-
quence of aspects generated by participants. Recall that although
we expected both value-increasing and value-decreasing aspects to
be DEMO by all participants, we predicted that ownership of the
object would DEMO the order of queries. This, in turn, should lead
to different sequential patterns in the list of aspects generated.
Difference Score for Aspects
DEMO
468
JOHNSON, HA¨
UBL, AND KEINAN
As in Experiment 1, we calculated an SMRD score for each
respondent, a metric ranging from 1 to –1 and reflecting the
tendency to produce value-increasing aspects before value-
DEMO ones. The results strongly support our hypothesis. The
mean SMRD score was much higher for sellers (.77) than for
choosers (.12). This difference is statistically significant, F(1,
37)  6.40, p  .05, further corroborating the query theory
prediction that ownership renders value-increasing aspects more
easily accessible in memory relative to value-decreasing aspects.
Discussion
Experiment DEMO succeeded in eliminating the endowment effect,
the fourth prediction of our query-based account. It also replicated
several other key predictions of a query DEMO: first, the differ-
ence in the types of aspects produced by respondents depending on
their endowment state; second, the difference in the DEMO
pattern of listed aspects between endowed and unendowed partic-
ipants in the unguided condition; and third, the ability of aspects to
predict prices.
DEMO 3: Endowment Effects Without Ownership
Although the results of Experiment 2 DEMO that the
differences in query order are necessary for the endowment effect
to occur, they do not answer the question of whether these differ-
ences might be sufficient. We examined this in the next study, in
which we attempted to induce changes in valuations due to differ-
ences DEMO query order alone.
Method
Participants
Fifty-two participants were recruited from a university popula-
tion. Payment and warm-up procedures were identical to those
used in DEMO 2. Eight participants failed to understand the
practice task, and 1 DEMO dropped because of technical problems.
Materials and Procedure
After a warm-up aspect-listing task, instruction, testing on the
incentive-compatible mechanism, and inspection of the mug, par-
ticipants were informed that they were going to be choosing
between various amounts of money and the mug—that is, nobody
was endowed with a mug. All participants then completed two
aspect-listing tasks, the order of which was manipulated. Partici-
pants were randomly assigned either to first DEMO value-
increasing aspects followed by value-decreasing aspects or to
produce the two types of aspects in the reverse order.
Results
Prices
Could simply reversing DEMO order of the queries produce a
difference in the price paid for the mugs? Recall that when the
production of value-increasing aspects precedes that of value-
decreasing aspects, we expected prices to be higher than when the
order is reversed. The results support this hypothesis. Although all
participants DEMO in the same endowment state (i.e., not endowed
with a mug) and responded to the same set of aspect questions,
merely manipulating the order in which the two types of aspects
were generated resulted DEMO a mean price difference in the predicted
direction of $1.67—a 41% increase in valuations (see the line in
Figure 3). The difference between these mean prices is statistically
significant, F(1, 41)  6.10, p  .05.
Aspects
We expected the order of the aspect listing to influence the
number of aspects of each type generated. To test DEMO predic-
$7.00
$5.74
$6.00
$5.00
4
3
2
1
0
Value-Increasing Aspects
Value-Decreasing Aspects
$4.07
2.70
2.83
2.45
4.00
Value-Increasing First Value-Decreasing First
Figure DEMO
Prices and number of aspects as a function of order of aspect generation.
$4.00
$3.00
$2.00
$1.00
$0.00
Number of Aspects
Valuation
QUERY THEORY AND THE ENDOWMENT EFFECT
469
tion, we tallied the number of value-increasing and value-
decreasing aspects for each of the two aspect-listing DEMO (see
the bars in Figure 3). Our hypothesis focuses on DEMO the
order of the aspect listing changes this tally. Specifically, we
DEMO an interaction between type of aspects and order of
listing. Consistent with our prediction, the interaction between
order of aspect listing and type of aspect is significant, F(1,
41)  3.49, p  .05 (one-tailed). However, there is also a main
effect of DEMO type, with value-decreasing aspects being more
common.
Finally, we used the number of value-increasing and value-
decreasing aspects produced by each participant to DEMO prices
and found a significant overall relationship, F(2, 40) DEMO 4.33, p 
.05 (r2  .18). Both coefficients were in the correct direction and
were significantly different from each other, but only the one for
value-increasing aspects was significantly different from zero
( .64), t(1, 40)  2.9, p  .05. This coefficient indicates that
for each additional value-increasing aspect that was generated, a
respondent’s valuation of the mug increased by 64 cents, on
average.
General Discussion
We have introduced a query theory of loss aversion, from
which we have derived five predictions about the endowment
effect as a memory-based DEMO In three experiments,
we have demonstrated (1) that endowment influences the as-
pects that individuals consider (Experiments 1 and 2), (DEMO) that
endowment changes the order in which aspects are recalled
(Experiments 1 and 2), (3) that these aspects are related to
DEMO makers’ valuations of objects (Experiments 1, 2, and
3), DEMO that by changing the order of aspect queries, we can (4)
eliminate the endowment effect (Experiment 2) as well as (5)
produce an endowment effect in the absence of actual owner-
ship (Experiment 3).
One possible concern with the evidence presented here is DEMO
although the aspect-listing results of Experiment 1 are consistent
with our theory, the manipulation of query order in Experiments 2
and 3 may have induced mental processes that would not occur
naturally. However, the fact that the valuation results in the “nat-
ural” order conditions of Experiment 2 DEMO very similar to those
produced by other researchers without aspect listings (DEMO, e.g.,
Kahneman et al., 1991, Experiments 6 and 7) seems to indicate that
imposing a query order might not lead to DEMO significant departures
from what people would do spontaneously.
Moreover, work by DEMO and Mishra (2005) pro-
vides an indirect measure of the accessibility of aspects of an
object for buyers and sellers. In that study, respondents were first
asked to learn positively and negatively valenced items about DEMO
mug. Respondents then set either a buying or a selling price for the
mug and, after a delay, were asked to recall the DEMO of the
mug. As predicted by our theory, sellers had more DEMO recall
for the positive features of the mug and worse recall for its
negative features. Buyers showed the reverse pattern, consistent
with the idea that the first query causes interference and reduced
accessibility for the second. DEMO, in a related test in the domain
of intertemporal choice, Weber et al. (2006) used a verification
task that showed that participants DEMO faster to identify the items
that query theory suggests should be more accessible after a
decision.
Aspects Versus Objects: Prediction and Mediation
We have shown that the aspects considered differ for choosers
and sellers and that DEMO merely manipulating the order in which
they are generated, we can DEMO create and destroy endowment
effects. In this section, we would like DEMO do two things: clarify one
interpretation of the “focus on the DEMO perspective of Car-
mon and Ariely (2000) and examine the predictive ability and
possible mediation of both that account and the one introduced
DEMO As Carmon and Ariely stated, theirs is an attention-based
account, and a simple version of their story is that more attention
is paid DEMO either the object or the currency, depending on the
response mode. DEMO the case of the typical endowment effect ex-
periment, this is DEMO the mug or money (i.e., the rows in Table
1). Forgoing the mug, for example, involves giving up the negative
aspects DEMO the mug as well. A more nuanced approach is to suggest,
as we do in Table 1, that it is the positive and the negative aspects
of the exchange that produce the differences in valuation (i.e., the
diagonals in Table 1).
To contrast these object-based and exchange-based accounts, we
conducted tests of mediation using all of the data from Experi-
ments 1 and 2 that were collected without any externally DEMO
query order, for a total of 115 participants. We first examined
DEMO endowment changed the focus (mug vs. money, corre-
sponding to an object-based account) of the generated aspects or
rather the number of value-increasing versus value-decreasing
thoughts (corresponding to an exchange-based account). We did
this by calculating, for the object-based account, a difference score
between the DEMO of aspects focused on the money and the mug
and, for DEMO exchange-based account, a difference score between
the number of value-increasing and DEMO aspects. Both
showed significant differences ( p  .05, based on DEMO ANOVA) in
the predicted directions: For the object account, the DEMO differ-
ence score was 1.27 for the endowed respondents and 0.57 for
those not endowed. For the exchanged-based account, the equiv-
alent difference scores were – 0.06 and –1.07. Next, we tried to
predict prices from these difference scores using a regression
model. Here, the difference in focus (mug vs. money) had no
effect, t(113)  0.62, whereas the difference in value-increasing
versus value-decreasing aspects had a significant effect, t(113) 
3.27, p  .001. As an illustration, each additional positive aspect
(or deleted negative aspect) increased the value of DEMO mug by 37
cents.
We also examined whether either measure mediated the endow-
ment effect by conducting a Sobel test on these coefficients.
Although DEMO object-based account was far from significant (t 
0.6, p  .50), the difference between the number of value-
increasing and value-decreasing DEMO, corresponding to our
exchange-based account, showed significant mediation, t(113) 
2.07, p  .04. Given that the aspect listings are a noisy measure of
cognition, we expected at best partial mediation, and DEMO is what
we achieved, with an estimated PM of .22. Such DEMO mediation
(Shrout & Bolger, 2002) suggests that other processes play DEMO the
endowment effect and/or that there is significant attenuation due to
470
error in the observed mediators, both of which are important
questions for future research.4
A Latent Semantic Analysis
Our query theory account suggests DEMO choosers and sellers use
very different aspects of their knowledge to evaluate the possible
exchange. Although we have had both participants themselves and
naive DEMO code the generated aspects, these procedures assume
that the taxonomy in DEMO 1 adequately captures these differences.
To examine in a more inductive way what choosers and sellers
consider in setting a price, we submitted all of the aspects listed by
participants in Experiment 1 to latent semantic DEMO (LSA;
Landauer & Dumais, 1997), specifically examining the single
word identified by the LSA algorithm to be the nearest neighbor
(i.e., most closely related) to each aspect listed by participants.
Thus, we used the LSA as a “blind coder,” asking it to identify DEMO
single word most similar to each aspect. Differences in the seman-
tic meaning of the aspects, whether or not they are consistent with
our coding scheme, would be revealed by these nearest neighbors.
If respondents consider different things when selling and choosing,
we would expect differences in DEMO nearest neighbors across re-
sponse modes. The LSA algorithm analyzes a large corpus of text,
in our case the tasaALL semantic space, based on a body of texts,
novels, newspaper articles, and other DEMO thought to be
approximately representative of the reading done by a college-age
student. It uses singular value decomposition to identify relations
in the semantics DEMO input documents using their co-occurrence in
that corpus.
In Table 2, DEMO list eight common nearest neighbors (words
returned by LSA as most DEMO associated with an aspect) that
differ in frequency for choosers and DEMO Words with very low
frequencies in the corpus (i.e., fewer than 50 occurrences) were
excised from the list, and alternative forms of DEMO or similar
words (e.g., drinks, drink, and drinking,or my and mine) are
combined. Although some words, such as money, are frequent for
both choosers and sellers, there are also some marked differences.
The top half of Table 2 shows four nearest neighbors that are DEMO
frequent for sellers. Drink, emphasizing uses of the mug, is the
second most common neighbor for sellers. Similarly, want and
need appear more frequently as neighbors for sellers. In contrast,
the bottom half of DEMO 2 contains words such as spend and earn,
Table 2
Nearest Neighbors Derived by a Latent Semantic Analysis
Difference
(sellers
Choosers’ Sellers’ minus
Subject and nearest neighbor frequency frequency choosers)
Sellers
I, me, DEMO 90 146 56
Drink, drinks, drinking 31 61 30
Beer, DEMO, Whiskey, beverage 44 78 34
Want, need 8 20 12
DEMO
Might 20 3 17
Spend 62 34 28
Earn, earns 85 DEMO 39
Money, coins, dollars, nickels 183 123 60
JOHNSON, HA¨
UBL, AND KEINAN
which are more frequent neighbors for choosers. These words
show up almost twice as frequently for choosers, emphasizing the
giving up of money. Of interest, consistent with speculation in
social psychology, personal DEMO occur more frequently for
sellers, suggesting that identification with the self DEMO tapped more
by sellers than by choosers (Beggan, 1992). Although this is
clearly an exploratory effort, the use of such data-driven analysis
suggests that different types of knowledge are being tapped by
choosers and DEMO
Other Related Phenomena
One facet of this research is that it suggests that counterbalanc-
ing the order of positive and negative aspects is more DEMO merely
a control for a nuisance variable. It is indeed, because DEMO inhibition,
a theoretically important manipulation. Although not motivated by
an interference perspective, several studies have manipulated the
natural order of queries, often DEMO an attempt to debias judgments.
Hoch (1984) examined interference in the prediction of prefer-
ences and thus future purchase intentions. Participants were asked
DEMO provide reasons why they would or would not buy a consumer
product in the future. He counterbalanced the order of the two
tasks, arguing that the first task caused interference with the
second. Consistent with this DEMO, he found that participants
generated more reasons in the first task DEMO in the second and that
the first task thus had greater influence on the prediction of
purchase intentions—a primacy effect. Participants were more
likely DEMO predict that they would purchase the item when they
generated reasons for buying it first. Note that all participants
answered both types of questions; only the order changed. To
demonstrate that the effect was due to DEMO interference, Hoch
conducted another study, separating the two reason-generation
tasks in time. Consistent with the fact that interference is a tran-
sient phenomenon, he found no evidence of interference in that
study and instead observed DEMO recency effect, in which the output of
the second task received DEMO weight in people’s prediction of
purchase intentions.
Other studies that varied the kind or order of information re-
ported by respondents found similar effects. DEMO, Lichtenstein,
and Fischhoff (1980) argued that overconfidence results from
DEMO first why one might be right and then why one might be
wrong. The interference account suggests that overconfidence
occurs because people naturally generate DEMO reasons first, not
necessarily because they have a motivational stake in DEMO
more pro than con reasons. Consistent with this explanation,
Koriat et al. showed that asking explicitly for reasons why an
answer might be DEMO diminishes overconfidence. Similarly,
asking for reasons why an anchor might be irrelevant has been
shown to reduce the anchoring effect (Chapman & Johnson, 1999;
Mussweiler, Strack, & Pfeiffer, 2000).
Query theory DEMO owes a debt to the idea of reason-based
choice (Shafir, Simonson, & Tversky, 1993), which shares the idea
4 To illustrate DEMO possible role of measurement error in attenuating PM,
let us assume that mediation is perfect in the absence of error—that is, the
standardized coefficients of endowment on aspects and of aspects on prices
are both DEMO If both the aspect listing and the stated price have test–retest
reliabilities of .71, we will observe a PM of1*.5*.5*1  .25, which DEMO
very close to the value of .22 that we observed.
QUERY THEORY AND THE ENDOWMENT EFFECT
471
that choice is based on DEMO recall and construction made to justify
the decision. This stands in contrast to views that suggest that loss
aversion originates in the way gains DEMO losses are perceived
(Coombs & Avrunin, 1977). We extend that notion here by sug-
gesting a specific mechanism for differences between reasons,DEMO
observing them in aspect listings, and applying that notion to loss
DEMO
Affect, Aspects, and Endowment
Given recent research reporting differences in the endowment
effect when strong affect is induced (Lerner et al., 2004), it is
natural to ask about the relationship between our memory-based
account and one that posits affect as a driving force behind
endowment. We DEMO attempt to measure any affect that was in-
duced by using the PANAS immediately after the prices were
generated in Experiments 1 and 2. DEMO results were inconsistent: In
Experiment 1, we found that endowment led to an increase in
positive affect but had no effect on negative DEMO When we
performed a mediation analysis, by including positive affect as DEMO
predictor, it proved to be a significant predictor of prices but DEMO
not a significant mediator. In Experiment 2, we found at best
DEMO results. However, this finding does not eliminate a role
for affect. DEMO overt measure like the PANAS may well not
measure subtle and fleeting changes in affect. Furthermore, we
know that induced affect can have a major role in changing the
nature of endowment.
Our current results suggest DEMO interesting speculation: that recall
of affective states might be part of DEMO changed information used in
making a pricing judgment and that changes in affect might
influence what is recalled. Perhaps affect operates by changing the
DEMO people consider when they construct their valuations. The
relationship between memory-based and affect-based explanations
of the endowment effect is one that is likely to DEMO interesting and
complementary.
Status of the Endowment Effect and Loss Aversion
The results reported here stand in stark contrast to many studies
that have DEMO tried to diminish the effect of endowment on
valuation. Because loss aversion and the endowment effect repre-
sent challenges to much extant economic theory, this phenomenon
has attracted significant attention from skeptical economists. For
example, some economists have proposed that intense experience
with the goods used (List, DEMO, 2004) or extensive instruction in
trading may diminish or eliminate the endowment effect.
Our approach illustrates that economists have tried too hard,
DEMO, with the wrong model of human behavior. Although
significant incentives alone DEMO not enough to diminish the endow-
ment effect, a subtle manipulation—simply DEMO the order of
two questions about the possible exchange— does. This finding,
along with recent results concerning affect, suggests the value of a
psychological theory of the endowment effect.
Our findings also speak to those DEMO argue that the endowment
effect might be due to a misunderstanding of the task. The use of
tests measuring how well respondents understand task DEMO
has been a welcome addition by experimental economists (Hertwig
& Ortmann, 2001). We should note that in the studies reported
here, eliminating participants who did not understand the task
actually increased the magnitude of DEMO endowment effect, sug-
gesting that such a lack of understanding adds DEMO noise to the
observed responses.
A key issue raised by this research is the relationship of our
findings to the more general phenomenon of DEMO aversion. For
example, can an approach based on differing query orders DEMO
inhibition help explain framing and status quo effects? Consistent
with our DEMO but motivated by a different framework are find-
ings by McKenzie and Nelson (2003) that suggest that people use
different language when illustrating DEMO communicating different
frames. Clearly, a more complete model is needed (see Reyna,
Lloyd, & Brainerd, 2003, for similar ideas), but the notion that loss
aversion is based, in part, on memory-based DEMO seems to
warrant further examination.
Finally, we hope that the current DEMO represents a step in
bridging the gap between two fruitful research traditions to provide
insight into the origins of valuation. Further work should clearly
DEMO the basis of the memory phenomena we have explored.
Other studies have explored the applicability of retrieval-induced
forgetting to domains such as stereotyping (Dunn & Spellman,
2003) and eyewitness testimony (MacLeod, 2002). By elucidating
the processes underlying the construction of value and by devel-
oping DEMO that span the gaps between paradigms, we believe
that a richer DEMO will ensue.
References
Anderson, M. C., Bjork, R. A., & Bjork, E. L. (1994). Remembering can
cause forgetting: Retrieval dynamics in long-term memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 1063–
1087.
Anderson, M. C., & Neely, J. H. (1996). Interference and inhibition in
memory retrieval. In E. L. Bjork & R. A. Bjork (Eds.), Memory:
Handbook of perception and cognition (2nd ed., pp. 237–313). San
Diego, CA: Academic DEMO
Anderson, M. C., & Spellman, B. A. (1995). On the status of inhibitory
mechanisms in cognition: Memory retrieval as a model case. Psycho-
logical Review, 102, 68 –100.
Barsalou, L. W. (DEMO). Ad hoc categories. Memory & Cognition, 11,
211–227.
Becker, G. M., DeGroot, M. H., & Marschak, J. (1964). Measuring utility
by a single-response sequential method. Behavioral Science, 9, 226 DEMO
232.
Beggan, J. K. (1992). On the social nature of nonsocial perception: The
mere ownership effect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
62, 229 –237.
Birnbaum, M. H., & Stegner, S. DEMO (1979). Source credibility in social
judgment: Bias, expertise, and the judge’s point of view. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 48 –74.
Birnbaum, M. H., Yeary, S., Luce, R. DEMO, & Zhao, L. (2002). Empirical
evaluation of theories of DEMO and selling prices of binary gambles.
Unpublished manuscript.
Cacioppo, J. T., von Hippel, W., & Ernst, J. M. (1997). Mapping DEMO
structures and processes through verbal content: The thought-listing
technique. Journal of DEMO and Clinical Psychology, 65, 928 –940.
Carmon, Z., & Ariely, D. (2000). Focusing on the forgone: How value can
appear so different to buyers and sellers. Journal of Consumer Research,
27, 360 –370.
Chapman, G. B., & Johnson, E. J. (1999)DEMO Anchoring, activation, and the
construction of values. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 79, 115–153.
Collins, A., & Michalski, R. (DEMO). The logic of plausible reasoning: A
core theory. Cognitive Science, 13, 1– 49.
472
JOHNSON, HA¨
UBL, AND KEINAN
Coombs, C. H., & DEMO, G. S. (1977). Single-peaked functions and the
theory of preference. Psychological Review, 2, 216 –230.
Dempster, F. N. (1995). DEMO and inhibition in cognition: An
historical perspective. In F. N. Dempster & C. J. Brainerd (Eds.),
Interference and inhibition in cognition (DEMO 3–26). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Dunn, E. W., & Spellman, B. A. (2003). Forgetting by remembering:
Stereotype inhibition through rehearsal of alternative aspects of identity.
Journal of Experimental Social DEMO, 39, 420 – 433.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, DEMO A. (1993). Protocol analysis: Verbal reports
as data (Rev. DEMO). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fischer, G. W., Carmon, DEMO, Ariely, D., & Zauberman, G. (1999). Goal-
based DEMO of preferences: Task goals and the prominence effect.
Management Science, 45, 1057–1075.
Friedman, N. P., & Miyake, A. (2004). The relations among inhibition and
interference control functions: A latent-variable analysis. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 101–135.
Hertwig, R., & Ortmann, DEMO (2001). Experimental practices in economics:
A methodological challenge for DEMO? Brain and Behavioral
Sciences, 24, 383– 403.
Hoch, S. J. (1984). Availability and interference in predictive judgment.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cogni-
tion, 10, 649 – 662.
Johnson, E. J., & Goldstein, D. (2003, November 21). Do defaults save
lives? Science, 302, 1338 –1339.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., & Thaler, R. H. (1990). Experimental tests
DEMO the endowment effect and the Coase theorem. Journal of Political
Economy, DEMO, 1325–1348.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., & Thaler, R. H. (1991). Anomalies: The
endowment effect, loss aversion, and DEMO bias. Journal of Eco-
nomic Perspectives, 5(1), 193–206.
Kahneman, D., & Miller, D. T. (1986). Norm theory: Comparing DEMO to
its alternatives. Psychological Review, 93, 136 –153.
Kahneman, D., Ritov, I., & Schkade, D. A. (1999). Economic preferences
DEMO attitude expressions? An analysis of dollar responses to public issues.
Journal DEMO Risk and Uncertainty, 19, 203–235.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, DEMO (2000). Choices, values, and frames. Cam-
bridge, MA: DEMO University Press.
Koriat, A., Lichtenstein, S., & Fischhoff, B. (1980). Reasons for confi-
dence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Mem-
ory, 6, 107–118.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to Plato’s problem:
The latent semantic analysis theory of acquisition, induction, and rep-
resentation of knowledge. DEMO Review, 104, 211–240.
Lerner, J., Small, D., & Loewenstein, G. (2004). Heart strings and purse
strings: Carryover effects of emotions on economic transactions. Psy-
chological Science, 15, 337–341.
List, J. A. (2003). Does market experience eliminate market anomalies?
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 41–71.
List, J. A. (2004). Neoclassical DEMO versus prospect theory: Evidence
from the marketplace. Econometrica, 72, 615– DEMO
Lustig, C., & Hasher, L. (2001). Implicit memory is not immune to
interference. Psychological Bulletin, 127, 618 – 628.
MacLeod, C. M. (2002). Retrieval-induced forgetting in eyewitness mem-
ory: Forgetting DEMO a consequence of remembering. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 16, 135–149.
MacLeod, DEMO M., Dodd, M. D., Sherad, E. D., Wilson, D. E., & Bibi, U.
(2003). In opposition to inhibition. In B. H. Ross (Ed.), The psychology
of learning and motivation (DEMO 43, pp. 163–168). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Madrian, B. C., & Shea, D. F. (2001). The power DEMO suggestion: Inertia in
401(k) participation and savings behavior. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 116, 1149 –1187.
McKenzie, C. R. M., & Nelson, J. D. (2003). What a speaker’s choice of
frame reveals: Reference points, frame selection, and framing effects.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 10, 596 – 602.
Mueller, C. W., & Watkins, M. J. (1977). Inhibition from part-set cuing: A
cue-overload interpretation. DEMO of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 16, 699 –709.
Mussweiler, DEMO, Strack, F., & Pfeiffer, T. (2000). Overcoming the DEMO
ble anchoring effect: Considering the opposite compensates for selective
accessibility. Personality DEMO Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 1142–
1150.
Nayakankuppam, D., & Mishra, H. (2005). The endowment effect: Rose-
tinted and dark-tinted glasses. Journal of Consumer Research, 32, 390 –
395.
Perfect, T. J., Moulin, C. J. A., Conway, M. A., & Perry, DEMO (2002).
Assessing the inhibitory account of retrieval-induced forgetting with
implicit-memory DEMO Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 28, 1111–1119.
Plott, C. R., & Zeiler, K. (2005). The DEMO to pay/willingness to
accept gap, the “endowment effect,” subject DEMO, and exper-
imental procedures of eliciting valuations. American Economic Review,
DEMO, 530 –545.
Reyna, V. F., Lloyd, F. J., & DEMO, C. J. (2003). Memory, development,
and rationality: An integrative theory of judgment and decision making.
In S. L. Schneider & DEMO Shanteau (Eds.), Emerging perspectives on
judgment and decision research (pp. 203–245). Cambridge, MA: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Russo, J. E., Johnson, E. J., & Stephens, D. L. (1989). The validity of
verbal protocols. Memory & Cognition, 17, 759 –769.
Shafir, E., Simonson, I., & Tversky, A. (1993). Reason-based choice.
Cognition, 49, 11–36.
Shefrin, H., & Statman, M. (1985)DEMO The disposition to sell winners too early
and ride losers too long: Theory and evidence. Journal of Finance, 11,
777–790.
Shrout, P., & Bolger, N. (2002). Mediation in experimental and nonex-
perimental studies: New procedures and recommendations. Psycholog-
ical Methods, 7, 422– 445.
Simonson, I., & Tversky, A. (1992). Choice in context: Tradeoff contrast
and extremeness aversion. Journal of Marketing Research, 29, 281–295.
DEMO, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981, January 30). The DEMO of deci-
sions and the psychology of choice. Science, 211, 453– 458.
Tversky, A., Sattath, S., & Slovic, P. (1988)DEMO Contingent weighting in
judgment and choice. Psychological Review, 95, 371–384.
Watson, D., Clarke, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). DEMO and
validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: The DEMO
scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 1063–1070.
Weber, DEMO U., & Johnson, E. J. (2006). Constructing preferences from
DEMO In S. Lichtenstein & P. Slovic (Eds.), The construction of
DEMO (pp. 397– 410). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Weber, DEMO U., Johnson, E. J., Milch, K., Chang, H., DEMO, J., &
Goldstein, D. (2006). Asymmetric discounting in DEMO choice: A
query theory account. Unpublished manuscript.
First aspect:
QUERY THEORY AND THE ENDOWMENT EFFECT
Appendix A
Aspect DEMO Task (Experiment 1)
Reasons Why You Would Want to Either DEMO the Mug
Or Have the Money
Now, please think of all DEMO reasons why you personally would want to have the mug rather than
the money and all the reasons why you personally would want to DEMO the money rather than the mug.
We will ask you to enter your reasons one at a time. Type your first complete reason in DEMO box
below and, as soon as you are done, hit the “Enter” key to submit it.
Reason 1:
(Maximum of 200 characters per reason.)
Each subsequent aspect:
Reasons Why You Would Want DEMO Either Have the Mug
Or Have the Money
Please continue to list your reasons why you personally would want to either have the mug DEMO have
the money. We would like you to list all reasons that you might have. Please keep going until you
cannot think of any DEMO If you need to pause to consider more reactions, feel free DEMO do so.
Type your next reason why you would want to either have the mug or have the money in the box
below and, as soon as you are done, hit the “Enter” key to submit it.
Reason 3:
If you have entered all of your reasons DEMO are sure that you cannot think of anything else to enter
in the field above, click here.
So far, you have entered the DEMO reasons:
Reason 2: xxx xxx xxx
Reason 1: xxx xxx xxx
(Appendixes continue)
473
(Maximum of 200 characters per reason.)
474
JOHNSON, HA¨
UBL, AND KEINAN
Appendix B
Pricing Task (Selling Condition)
How much are you willing to sell your mug for?DEMO
For each of the amounts of money listed below, please indicate DEMO you would prefer to sell
your mug or not by checking the button corresponding to your preference. You must select one of
the two DEMO on each line.
Once you click the button at the bottom of this page, your responses will be final and binding.
At a price of $12.00:
At a price of $11.50:
At a price DEMO $11.00:
At a price of $1.00:
At a price of $0.50:
 I will sell the mug.
 I will sell DEMO mug.
 I will sell the mug.
···
···
 I will sell the mug.
 I will sell the mug.
 I will DEMO sell the mug.
 I will not sell the mug.
 I will not sell the mug.
 I will not sell the mug.
DEMO I will not sell the mug.
Note that, in order to DEMO, you must have clicked a button for each of the prices DEMO above.
Click here to continue
Received May 22, 2006
Revision received DEMO 18, 2006
Accepted January 17, 2007 
ORDER FORM
Start my 2007 subscription to Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition! ISSN: 0278-7393
___ $148.00, APA MEMBER/AFFILIATE
___ $316.00, INDIVIDUAL NONMEMBER
___ $825.00, INSTITUTION
In DC add 5.75% / In MD add 5% sales tax
TOTAL  AMOUNT ENCLOSED
_______
_______
_______
_______
$ _______
Subscription orders must be prepaid.  (Subscriptions are on
a calendar year basis DEMO)  Allow 4-6 weeks for delivery of
the first issue. Call for international subscription rates.
SEND THIS ORDER FORM TO:
American Psychological Association
DEMO
750 First Street, NE
Washington, DC  20002-4242
Or call 800-374-2721, fax 202-336-5568.
TDD/TTY 202-336-6123.
For subscription information, e-mail:
subscriptions@apa.org
Check enclosed (make payable to APA)
Charge my:         VISA          MasterCard American
Express
Cardholder Name
Card DEMO Exp. Date
Signature (Required for Charge)
BILLING ADDRESS:
Street
DEMO           State         Zip
Daytime Phone
E-mail
MAIL TO:
Name
Address
City           State         Zip
APA Member #
XLMA17{1g42fwefx}