Advanced Review
Decision making under risk
and uncertainty
Joseph G. Johnson1∗ and DEMO R. Busemeyer2
Decision making is studied from a number of different theoretical approaches.
Normative theories focus on how to make the best decisions by DEMO algebraic
representations of preference from idealized behavioral axioms. Descriptive
theories adopt this algebraic representation, but incorporate known limitations
of human behavior. Computational approaches start from a different set of
assumptions altogether, focusing instead on the underlying cognitive and
emotional processes that result in the selection of one option DEMO the other. This
review comprehensively but concisely describes and contrasts three approaches in
terms of their theoretical assumptions and their ability to account for DEMO and
neurophysiological evidence from experimental research. Although each approach
contributes substantially to our understanding of human decision making, we
argue that the computational approach is more fruitful and parsimonious for
describing and predicting choices in both DEMO and applied settings and for
understanding the neurophysiological substrates of decision making.  2010 John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd. WIREs Cogn Sci 2010 1 736–749
Dnearly everything we do. From the commonplaceecision making is a faculty DEMO is evident in
to the consequential, our lives are guided by DEMO
decisions we make. Therefore, it is important to
understand how we DEMO decisions, so that we may
be aware of how various factors DEMO have exerted an
inﬂuence on past decisions, and so that we DEMO be able
to improve upon future decisions. Indeed, one could
easily DEMO that our decision-making ability and the
agency it provides us is what separates us from lower
order animals.
Because decision making is so central DEMO our
lives, it is not surprising that it receives research
attention DEMO a wide range of disciplines: cognitive
psychology, economics, political science, marketing,
social psychology, engineering, philosophy, and more.
Although this breadth in contributing disciplines
is beneﬁcial in bringing multiple perspectives to
bear, it is also (at least partly) responsible for
somewhat divergent or inconsistent DEMO goals.
Some researchers are interested in how to make the
‘best’ decision under speciﬁc conditions, while others
∗ Correspondence to: johnsojg@muohio.edu
1 Department DEMO Psychology, Miami University, Oxford, OH 45056,
USA
2 Psychological DEMO Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington,
IN 47405, USA
DOI: 10.1002/wcs.76
736
are interested in the explanation for a speciﬁc course
DEMO action; some prefer to know what decision should
be made, while others strive to understand why.In
the current review, we identify three major streams of
development in decision theory that can be classiﬁed
according to DEMO focal behaviors and functional nature
of the corresponding decisions.
First, a DEMO deal of foundational decision
research was focused on the notion of making ‘opti-
mal’ decisions. Given a particular situation, how
should one go about selecting the best among compet-
ing alternatives? This normative research stream has
the goal of reducing a decision situation essentially
to a mathematical optimization DEMO and ﬁnding
the correct solution to this problem. It is responsible
for treating decision outcomes as random variables,
casting decision problems in expectation DEMO, and
deriving solutions that maximize the expected utility
among probability distributions DEMO outcomes pro-
duced by different actions.
Second, this treatment gave rise DEMO a counterpoise
among researchers who wanted to impart a more
psychological and constrained view of decision
making. Because humans often make ‘suboptimal’
decisions, how can we describe and predict the choices
that one will make in DEMO particular situation? Research
with this descriptive focus attempts to describe how
DEMO actually make decisions, rather than trying to
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Volume 1, September/October 2010
WIREs Cognitive Science
ﬁnd ideal decisions for any given situation. People are
DEMO likely to be able to apply the analytic machinery
developed within the normative approach, and the
descriptive perspective can be characterized by the
addition of psychological factors that embellish this
basic machinery. That is, this approach retains a form
of the utility maximization goal but is focused on
DEMO psychological adjustments need to be made to
account for observed human decisions.
Third, beyond providing psychological meaning
and justiﬁcation to descriptive modiﬁcations of the
normative theories, many recent researchers examine
the decision processes themselves, rather DEMO just
the ﬁnal choice. What mental or neural operations
are taking place that lead to the selection of one
option over another in a DEMO situation? This
computational approach seeks to understand what
the underlying (cognitive and emotional) processes
are that produce the observable actions predicted by
the descriptive theories. Rather than beginning with
utility maximization goals derived from the DEMO
approach, and then modifying them as needed in the
descriptive approach, the computational approach is
built directly from cognitive and emotional processing
assumptions. DEMO attempts to formally deﬁne the
dynamic processes—whether neural, componential,
or DEMO over time determine a ﬁnal decision.
This advanced review will provide an update
on the status and contemporary research for each of
these major DEMO streams. It will provide sufﬁcient
background in the development of each approach
but focus on how they deal with current issues and
challenges in DEMO realm of decision making. It will
focus on individual (rather than DEMO or group)
decision making. It will also focus on situations
dealing mainly with risk in the form of known possible
outcomes with well-speciﬁed DEMO These
situations are distinct from situations of uncertainty
involving ambiguity in the probability distribution
over outcomes, or situations of certainty where choice
outcomes are clearly deﬁned. Although these different
domains share some similarities, they are treated
distinctly in the extant literature; space constraints
prevent detailed treatment of each.
NORMATIVE APPROACHES TO
DETERMINE ‘OPTIMAL’ CHOICE
We make many different types of DEMO everyday.
What should I do this weekend? Should I pay off
DEMO credit card or wait? Should I take the job offer
or DEMO? Do I take this job or keep looking? Most
theories of decision making assume any of these
decisions can be abstracted and represented DEMO the
Volume 1, September/October 2010
Decision making
selection of a DEMO course of action X described
by the value of the possible outcomes {x1, x2,
...and the associated probability that each outcome, xn} DEMO could result from selecting the action
would occur if the action were selected {p1, p2,
...to one of selecting from among competing simple, pn}. This representation reduces the choice task
random variables (see Ref DEMO, for a critique of this
‘gambling metaphor’, or Ref 2, DEMO an alternative
‘naturalistic’ research paradigm). The simplest rule,
mathematically, DEMO then to select the option X that has
the highest expected value EV(X):
n
EV(X) = 
pixi (1)
i=1
For example, take a decision with two options:
(A) a certain outcome valued at $1 million, and
(B) an uncertain option with an 89% chance of
$1 million, a 10% chance of 5 million, and a 1%
chance of receiving nothing. The expected value
calculation in Eq. (1) suggests that one should take
the second DEMO, because EV(B) = $1.39 million >
$1 millionThe EV DEMO seems reasonable for gambles played= EV(A).
repeatedly many times. But for gambles with high
stakes that are only played once, it is easy to see
that this objective may not be so appealing. Bernoulli3
DEMO that most people did not make choices in
line with the expected value rule when the values
(x) were determined with large objective DEMO
(e.g., $1 million). He proposed that people did not
view (monetary) outcomes objectively, but rather they
did so subjectively. That is, $1000 does not have
the same subjective value to both a miller and a
millionaire—the former places more subjective worth
on the same objective DEMO amount. In fact, given
the hypothetical choice between A and B DEMO, the
majority of experimental participants select A even
though it has DEMO lower expected value. Presumably,
this is due to the fact that the subjective experience of
receiving $5 million instead of $1 million is DEMO ﬁve
times as pleasurable as receiving $1 million instead
of $0. Rather, as wealth increases, the additional
value placed on subsequent increments decreases (an
additional $1 million means more if you are broke
than if DEMO already have $4 million).
DIMINISHING MARGINAL UTILITY
The increments in subjective value corresponding
to increases in objective value decrease as the
initial objective DEMO increases; this is termed as
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
737
Advanced Review
diminishing marginal utility. This explains why a raise
of $10,DEMO per year would be quite meaningful to
the average reader, but DEMO not to Bill Gates.
The concept is similar to the Weber–Fechner Law in
psychophysics, where changes in stimulus intensity
have different psychological sensations depending on
the initial magnitude. Mathematically, this is typically
represented with a simple power utility function,
U(x) = xα . This form also allows for describing an
individual’s risk attitudes with a single parameter:
DEMO 0 <α < 1, the utility function is concave and
risk-averse behavior is predicted, whereas a convex
function predicting risk-seeking behavior emerges if
α> 1.
Mathematically, this involves a function that
transforms objective value DEMO subjective utility, U(x).
A simple modiﬁcation then suggests one DEMO select
an option with the highest expected utility EU(X):
DEMO
EU(X) = 
=1
piU(xi )(2)
i
DEMO concept is intuitively plausible and could
explain actual choice behavior. Furthermore, DEMO is easy
to impute psychological meaning on the utility func-
tion, DEMO as risk attitudes (see section Diminishing
Marginal Utility). However, this approach was crit-
icized by some theorists who adhered strongly to
the DEMO approach, because there was no ratio-
nal foundation for why people DEMO use the EU
for choices only played once. In 1944, a DEMO
book by von Neumann and Morgenstern overcame
this limitation by providing an axiomatic foundation
for expected utility theory. The original EU theory
was restricted DEMO gambles with objectively known
probabilities, but Savage4 is credited with further
DEMO the axiomatic foundation of von Neumann
and Morgenstern5 beyond subjective utility to addi-
tionally include subjective probability for uncertain
events with no objectively known DEMO, a
notion raised earlier by Ramsey6 and de Finetti,7
as DEMO as by von Neumann himself. Mathematically,
the subjective expected utility (DEMO) of an option then
becomes
n
SEU(X) = 
=1
πiU(xi )(3)
i
Here, the events are assigned subjective probabilities,
πi . Savage’s4 axiomatization is still considered as a
rational DEMO, as the subjective probabilities were
still constrained by the laws of DEMO However,
it did not take long before additional empirical
wires.wiley.com/cogsci
evidence about human choice behavior challenged
SEU on other grounds.
Allais8 presented DEMO with the choice between
A and B introduced earlier, as well DEMO a choice between
two other options: (C) an 11% chance DEMO receiving $1
million, otherwise nothing and (D) a 10% chance DEMO
receiving $5 million, otherwise nothing. Here, the
options C and D are created simply by changing
a ‘common consequence’ of an 89% chance DEMO $1
million in A and B, respectively, to an 89% chance at
$0. If one chooses A over B in the ﬁrst choice, then
this implies a utility function that predicts one should
still take DEMO C over D, because SEU(A) > SEU(B)
implies SEU(C) > SEV(D). However, although most
people select DEMO instead of B, they select D instead
of C. This choice DEMO is inconsistent with SEU,
regardless of the form of U(x). Speciﬁcally, it violates
one of the axioms (independence) set forth by von
Neumann and Morgenstern5 and Savage.4
This empirical inconsistency prompted re-
DEMO to explore further modiﬁcations to the SEU
framework. At this point, DEMO the basic algorithm
was retained (maximization of a mathematical
expectation), DEMO began to depart substantially
from these previous ‘rational’ ideals in order to explain
the decisions of we ‘irrational’ humans.
Another important advance in utility DEMO was
the extension of the theory to outcomes described by
multiple conﬂicting attributes.9 For example, when
choosing a medical insurance plan, one needs DEMO
consider not only the cost of the plan but also
the breadth of the coverage, the quality of the
care provided by the coverage, and other attributes
of the plan. Thus this decision involves evaluating
consequences with respect to several conﬂicting
objectives. Should one spend more money to DEMO
greater coverage or should one save money but take
a risk with lower coverage? The most commonly
used multiattribute utility model combines the values
of the conﬂicting attributes according to a weighted
additive rule (much like the utility theory for gambles),
where the weights reﬂect the tradeoffs among the
attributes. The weighted additive rule is considered to
be a DEMO rule which allows deﬁcits on one
attribute to be compensated by advantages on other
attributes.
DESCRIPTIVE APPROACHES
TO EXPLAIN OBSERVED CHOICE
Descriptive theories in DEMO making, as their name
suggests, are more concerned with describing the
choices people actually make rather than providing
a ‘rational’ basis for making DEMO, as EV, EU, and
738
 2010 John Wiley & DEMO, Ltd. Volume 1, September/October 2010
WIREs Cognitive Science
SEU aimed to do. This shift is due, in large part, to the
fact that psychologists began to relax the idealistic
models heretofore introduced by mathematicians,
statisticians, and economists. The most popular
descriptive theory of choice is termed as prospect
theory, introduced by Kahneman and Tversky.10
Prospect Theory
Prospect theory introduced four important aspects
from cognitive DEMO to impart a more human-
centered view of decision making.10 First, DEMO suggested
a predecisional ‘editing’ stage where the decision
problem is prepared, DEMO as by eliminating clearly
inferior choice options and simplifying and mentally
ordering outcomes. Second, it introduced the notion
of reference dependence, where outcomes DEMO not
evaluated absolutely but relative to some benchmark,
such as one’s current wealth or ‘status quo’.11
Third, it suggested that outcomes could be evaluated
differentially based on whether they were seen as gains
or losses DEMO to the status quo—that is, there were
separate utility functions for DEMO UG(x) and losses
UL(x). Fourth, speciﬁcally, it DEMO the concept of
loss aversion, that the marginal utility of a DEMO
change is greater for losses (a $100 loss is more
aversive DEMO a $100 gain is pleasant).
Formally, these assumptions can be DEMO
rated into Eq. (3) with the appropriate speciﬁca-
tion (Figure DEMO): UG(x) = f (x −S)for x −S > 0and
tus quo andUL(x) =−λff(Sis concave for gains, convex DEMO losses,− x) for x −S < 0 where S is DEMO sta-
and steeper for losses (λ is a parameter to model
DEMO degree of loss aversion). Kahneman and Tver-
sky also introduced the term decision weight for the
multiplier attached to each outcome. Although they
DEMO decision weights were based on the objective
probabilities, π(p), DEMO explicitly distinguished this
notion from a purely probabilistic evaluation.12 They
put forth a strictly convex form for π(p) that implied
overweighting of small probabilities and underweight-
ing of large probabilities; a revised form suggests
concavity for small probabilities (Figure 1).25 .These
restrictions on Eq. (3), spurred by reﬂecting on human
thinking rather than any rational calculus, DEMO
a theory that was much more accurate at describing
actual choices—but only to a degree.
SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY
AND UNCERTAINTY
Prospect theory introduced the important DEMO of
decision weights, but this in turn raises the question
of DEMO these weights are psychologically determined.
Volume 1, September/October 2010
(a)
(b)
p(p)
UG(x)
S
UL(x)
Decision making
x
FIGURE 1 | Cumulative prospect theory’s value and DEMO
functions.
Kahneman and Tversky10 introduced the probability
weighting function, which could DEMO interpreted in
terms of concepts such as discriminability and
attractiveness,13 or affective notions such as elation
and disappointment.14 Computational models of
decision weighting DEMO how these weights may
result from probability judgments based on memory
retrieval15 or as the result of differential attention and
‘dwelling’ on speciﬁc outcomes DEMO events.16
Craig Fox’s extension of support theory to
decision making17–19 describes how individuals in
circumstances of uncertainty might estimate proba-
bilities, which in turn can then be used to derive
decision weights. Support theory distinguishes among
DEMO descriptions of events as the carriers of belief
(rather than the DEMO events themselves) and is
based on support for a focal or DEMO description
relative to other possible descriptions. This is an
important theory for extending decisions under risk
(known event probabilities) to situations of uncer-
DEMO (unknown event probabilities).
p
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
739
Advanced Review
Rank-Dependent Theories
Even prospect theory was unable to account for DEMO
the observed trends in human choice behavior.10,20,21
For example, DEMO predicted that people would choose
options even if they were clearly dominated by other
options in the choice set (see Ref 22, for DEMO review)
and was severely limited to choice options with only
two outcomes. It also implied that the weight given
to an outcome was DEMO of the value of the
outcome. That is, the weight given DEMO a probability
of 0.10 would be the same regardless whether this
probability corresponded to the worst or the best
outcome of a gamble, which is not true for human
choices.23
In the late 1980s, several researchers indepen-
dently arrived at an idea that served as the next
major DEMO to the expected utility frame-
work. In particular, it allowed the DEMO weight
of an outcome to be dependent on the rank order
of the outcome (e.g., whether it was the worst or
the best), and hence these theories are called rank-
dependent utility (RDU) theories (see also rank-and-
sign-dependent utility in Ref 24). This was achieved
by changing the basis of the weighting function
from the probability of DEMO x to the proba-
bility of winning xor more (decumulative prob-
DEMO). Tversky and Kahneman25 extended their
original theory into cumulative prospect theory,
perhaps the most popular RDU theory. Formally,
RDU theories propose DEMO following general func-
tion for the decision weight assigned to a positive
outcome xj:
w(xi) = π pj −π 
+1 pj
n
i
(4)
A notational change produces the following overall
utility of an option X:
n
i
n
RDU(X) = 
=1
w(xi)U(xi )(5)
i
RDU theories, via Eqs (4) and (5), introduce
a subtle but important distinction between the
subjective probability and the decision weight. The
subjective probability refers DEMO the distortion of
decumulative probability, π(·), and is thus DEMO
a further transformation that describes the relativea psychophysical measure. Decision weight, DEMO(·), is
weight given to an outcome when integrating across
other outcomes to determine the holistic value of
an option. In earlier SEU DEMO, the decision
wires.wiley.com/cogsci
weight was simply equal to the subjective DEMO,
w(p) = π(p).
Conﬁgural Weight Theories
Michael DEMO and his colleagues advocate a
descriptive theory that is similar in some respects to
RDU theories, but incorporates important differences
and makes competing predictions regarding some
important empirical phenomena.26,27 For example,
RDU theories predict DEMO individuals should never
choose an option that is stochastically dominated
by another. If we deﬁne XQ as the random value
produced by gamble Q DEMO XR as the random value
produced by gamble R, then option DEMO stochastically
dominates option R if and only if Pr(XQ > x) ≥
Pr(XR > x)for all x, and the inequality DEMO strict for at
least one x (i.e., the cumulative distribution function
of Q is always above that of R). In fact, for certain
gamble types, people seem to robustly select an option
that is stochastically dominated by another option in
the choice set.27
Birnbaum’s conﬁgural weight DEMO (CWU)
theories are able to explain these violations of
stochastic DEMO, as well as the other behaviors
covered previously. CWU theories retain DEMO algebraic
representation and expectation maximization rule of
all previous utility theories. The key difference is in
the speciﬁcation of the weighting function, which
is exempliﬁed by the transfer of attention exchange
CWU model (TAX; see DEMO 28). In the TAX model,
similar to the RDU models, lower values of a gamble
‘steal’ or ‘tax’ decision weight from higher values.
But in addition, the TAX model assigns a separate
weight to each outcome listed in a gamble even
if the same value is DEMO more than once. For
example, the single weight assigned to $100 DEMO
the gamble ‘0.5 chance to win $100 or else win
nothing’ is not the same as the total weight assigned
to both of the DEMO outcomes in the gamble ‘0.25
chance to win $100, 0.25 chance DEMO win $100, and
0.5 chance to win nothing’. RDU theories assign
DEMO based on the cumulative probability of an
outcome, and so these DEMO gambles would be treated
as the same. The violations of stochastic dominance
indicate that people do not treat these gambles as the
same.
HISTORICAL DEMO
ON CONFIGURAL WEIGHTING
The conﬁgural weight models formally applied to
decision-making behavior are found as early as Birn-
baum and Sutton.29 However, it is notable that the
740
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Volume 1, September/October 2010
WIREs Cognitive Science
idea of conﬁgural weighting can be traced back even
DEMO to explanations of social judgment biases in
Birnbaum and Stegner,30 , based on work by Birnbaum
et al.31 Thus, conﬁgural weighting theories actually
predate both the decision-theoretic work on rank-
dependent weighting functions and even DEMO
theory.
Regret Theory
Prospect theory, RDU theories, and CWU theories
strove to incorporate human tendencies into the eval-
uation of outcomes and their DEMO probabilities,
or weights. Other theories sought to redeﬁne the basic
currency of a choice option, such as by introduc-
ing utility derived not just from the actual outcome
values, but also by comparisons to outcomes of fore-
gone options.32,33 Loomes and Sugden33 introduced
their regret theory DEMO response to prospect theory and
showed how it could explain the same empirical results
put forth by Kahneman and Tversky10 as evidence for
the DEMO Essentially, regret theory assumes that util-
ity U(x) is composed of two distinct components,
an evaluation of the outcome that is DEMO and a
difference between that outcome and those forgone.
For example, DEMO one is choosing between
two gambles, A and B, determined by a coin ﬂip.
If one chooses A, then $100 is won if the coin
lands on heads, and nothing is won if it lands on
tails; B offers $70 for heads and $30 for tails. In
evaluating option A, regret theory proposes that the
utility assigned to the outcome ‘heads’ will be a (linear)
combination of the utility of $100 and the additional
utility or ‘rejoice’ associated with the fact that, had
B been chosen, then only $70 would have been won.
Conversely, evaluation of the outcome ‘heads’ for
option B involves the utility of $70 as well as the
disutility or ‘regret’ associated with the fact DEMO one
could have obtained $30 more had A been chosen. The
basic psychological mechanisms involved in regret
theories are similar to those studied extensively DEMO
other psychological domains, such as work in social
psychology on counterfactual DEMO Mellers
et al.35 extended these ideas and developed a more
detailed model of the emotional basis for these regrets.
Security-Potential/Aspiration Theory
Lola Lopes DEMO additional psychological con-
structs such as hope, fear, and goal achievement to
develop a descriptive theory of decision making called
security-potential/aspiration (SP/A) theory.36,37 This
theory assumes that a decision maker simultaneously
considers two distinct criteria in making decisions.
First, one considers a utility component similar to
Volume 1, September/October 2010
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Decision making
those found in RDU theories. However, Lopes DEMO
for evaluation of outcomes in both a low-to-high,
cumulative fashion and the decumulative, high-to-low
fashion posited by RDU theories. Her reasoning is that
individuals may exhibit security-minded behavior that
focuses on the probability of obtaining DEMO outcome
with a value of xorless, and/or a potential-minded
analysis DEMO line with RDU that focuses on the probabil-
ity of obtaining an outcome with a value of xormore.
Mathematically, Lopes allows for a parameter that
moderates the degree to which the security-minded
versus potential-minded analyses contribute DEMO the
assessment of outcome utility.
Second, SP/A theory includes the DEMO of an
aspiration level or goal achievement component. That
is, in DEMO to the value assigned to options based on
the assessment of their outcome value (as described
in the preceding paragraph), options are evaluated
favorably if they allow a decision maker to achieve
some preset goal. DEMO, this aspiration
criterion evaluation for an option is based on the
DEMO that the option provides an outcome at
or above the aspiration level. If one has a goal of
winning $80 in the coin ﬂip DEMO from the previous
section, then A has a 50% chance of DEMO this
aspiration level (corresponding to the ‘heads’ value
of $100 > DEMO) and B has no chance of meeting the
aspiration level (neither outcome is >$80).
SP/A theory assumes that a decision maker inte-
grates the two components into a holistic utility value
for each DEMO and again maximizes the expec-
tation of this utility. Each single component may
produce competing predictions that produce internal
conﬂict. For example, with an aspiration level of $80,
A is preferred using the goal criterion; however, a
security-minded decision maker who focuses on the
low outcomes may prefer option B on this criterion
(due to its advantageous low outcome, relative to A).
Mathematically, model parameters can specify the rel-
DEMO degree to which each component contributes to
choice behavior.
COMPUTATIONAL APPROACHES TO
MODEL LATENT CHOICE PROCESSES
Descriptive theories of choice embellish the basic
framework DEMO maximizing an expectation with obser-
vations from human psychology. Prospect theory,
RDU theories, and CWU theories make claims about
the speciﬁc nature of utility and probability assess-
ment that depart from rational norms and laws DEMO
probability. Other theories include additional consid-
erations beyond an expected utility assessment, such as
the potential satisfaction or disappointment resulting
741
Advanced Review
from comparing outcomes to those forfeit (regret the-
ory), or the desire for a choice option to fulﬁll some
goal (SP/A theory). In contrast to all of these descrip-
tive approaches DEMO focus on choice as determined
by the maximization of some utility function, compu-
tational approaches focus on the underlying cognitive,
motivational, and DEMO processes from which
choices dynamically emerge. In this section, we will
DEMO several popular research streams that adhere
to this philosophy.38
PROCESSING ASSUMPTIONS AND
MODEL REPRESENTATION
Computational models do not begin with the algebraic
utility maximization DEMO of the normative
and (most) descriptive approaches. However, it
could DEMO that choices in line with the normative
goals of utility maximization evolve from the
underlying processes. If so, it could be that utility
maximization is indeed representative of human
choice behavior, even if the algebraic representation
is merely paramorphic—thus, computational and
descriptive approaches are not mutually exclusive.
Heuristic and Rule-Based Approaches
Perhaps the most intuitive computational approaches
specify simple procedures DEMO making choices, often
called heuristics. Heuristics are typically expressed as
verbalizable DEMO or ﬂowcharts for applying discrete
steps to make a decision (see DEMO 39, for a review and
organizing framework).
Elimination by Aspects
DEMO of the earliest popular heuristics was Tversky’s40
elimination by aspects (EBA) model. Consider for
example the problem of buying a new digital
camera. DEMO is a multiattribute decision involving the
consideration of attributes such as price, resolution
of the camera, size of the camera, etc. Rather than
maximizing a weighted average of attribute values,
as suggested by multiattribute DEMO theories, the
EBA model proposes that individuals sequentially
consider different aspects, such as whether the
price is within budget, whether the resolution is
satisfactory, and whether size is sufﬁciently small for
a new digital camera. The probability of considering
an aspect is proportional to its importance, so
that if price is the most important attribute to a
consumer, it is most likely to be considered ﬁrst.a
When considering an aspect, any choice option that
does not meet a minimum criteria (e.g., a DEMO
over one’s budget of $300) is eliminated from the
742
wires.wiley.com/DEMO
choice set and not considered any further. This
sequential aspect selection and elimination process
continues until only a single choice option ‘survives’.
Tversky40 illustrated DEMO ability of this model to
account for violations of rational choice axioms
(e.g., violations of independence from irrelevant
alternatives; see Ref 41 for discussion). Although
Tversky40 also showed how EBA could be represented
as DEMO (random) utility model, it has a decidedly
different ﬂavor through DEMO presentation in terms of
simple rules and is not ‘rational’ in the sense that
it is noncompensatory. An option can be eliminated
from consideration DEMO on the basis of a single
attribute even though it may be holistically the
‘best’ because of its many advantages on other
attributes.
Thorngate’s DEMO for Gamble Forms
Thorngate42 proposed 10 distinct decision heuristics,
based largely on the work of Coombs et al.43 that were
formulated for application DEMO choices among gambles
like those presented earlier. For example, his minimax
DEMO selects the alternative with the highest min-
imum outcome value, or DEMO ], and the maximax
heuristic chooses according to max[xn ]. His DEMO
likely heuristic chooses the alternative with the lowest
probability of its worst outcome, min[p1 ], whereas the
most likely heuristic chooses according to DEMO
Other suggested heuristics include elimination heuris-
tics like EBA, and an DEMO heuristic that
selects based on the highest average outcome value
(ignoring DEMO; see also Ref 44). Thorngate’s
analyses showed that these simple DEMO often
selected options that were normatively optimal (in
terms of expected DEMO) or very close to it.
The Adaptive Decision Maker Hypothesis
Payne DEMO al.45,46 proposed that decision strategies,
including utility maximization algorithms as well as
simple heuristics, could be formalized in terms of
what they called elementary information processing
(EIP) units, such as ‘retrieve’, ‘add’, ‘multiply’,
and ‘compare’. Implementing maximax among two
alternatives A and B DEMO involve four EIPs:
retrieve a1 , retrieve b1 , compare a1, b1 , choose
max [a1, b1 ]. This speciﬁcation welcomes precise
DEMO in computer simulations and allows
for the derivation of measures such as decision time
and information acquisition. It is worthy to note that,
DEMO Payne et al.45,46 did not introduce novel
heuristics per se, DEMO method of formalizing and
studying heuristics has been enormously inﬂuential
on subsequent computational modeling. Furthermore,
they introduced an adaptive view of strategy selection,DEMO
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Volume 1, September/October 2010
WIREs Cognitive Science
based on an efﬁcient frontier involving a tradeoff
between DEMO levels of effort (in terms of EIPs)
and accuracy (relative to a normative algorithm). This
represents an important advance in understanding
DEMO heuristic from among many may be applied in
any given situation.
Gigerenzer’s Adaptive Toolbox
Gigerenzer and Todd47 and the ABC Research
Group also advance DEMO notion of a collection of
decision heuristics. Many of their heuristics are
very similar to the earlier mentioned heuristics in
terms of the process DEMO For example, the
priority heuristic48 involves sequential application of
thresholded versions DEMO the maximin, most-likely,
and maximax heuristics. First, choose the option
that maximizes the minimum possible outcome; but
only if the minimum outcome value is sufﬁciently
larger than the other options’ minimum outcomes.
Otherwise, consider the probability p1 of each option’s
lowest outcome, and so on. Although the actual
heuristics are very similar to those already mentioned,
this DEMO stream is notable for three additional
characteristics. First, it is applied DEMO prediction,
inference, and categorization, as well as decision
making. Second, like Payne et al.,46 it stresses the
adaptive nature of the development and application
of simple heuristics (hence the term ‘adaptive toolbox’)
in terms of ecological ﬁt between the heuristics and the
environment. Third, they decompose the majority of
their heuristics into three distinct components: a rule
for guiding information search, a rule for determining
when to stop search, and a decision rule applied
to the information collected. This strikes a balance
between the low-level EIP-based description and the
presentation of holistic DEMO
Decision Field Theory
The most inﬂuential type of decision model in cog-
nitive science is the sequential sampling/accumulation
model. This type of model DEMO been applied to neu-
roscience, sensation, perception, memory, and catego-
rization domains.49 The ﬁrst application of sequential
sampling models to decision making DEMO risk and
uncertainty was decision ﬁeld theory (DFT; Refs
50–53, DEMO reviews; see also Ref 54, for a neural
network representation of DFT). Most broadly, DFT
is a mathematical model based on cognitive princi-
ples of selective attention and relative evaluation, that
models deliberation as a dynamic system accumulat-
ing evidence in favor of each choice option. DEMO ﬁrst
option to reach a criterion level of evidence is selected.
In contrast to descriptive utility theories, DFT thus
Decision making
makes speciﬁc quantitative predictions about infor-
mation acquisition and response times, in addition to
choices.
First, DFT assumes that attention shifts to dif-
ferent dimensions of the choice task over time. For
gambles, these shifts occur (independently) across
the outcomes of each option, with the probability of
attending to an outcome proportional to its objective
probability (see Ref 16, for details)DEMO For preferen-
tial choice, these transitions are typically assumed
to be DEMO across attributes, with the simplifying
assumption that attention to a speciﬁc DEMO (e.g.,
the price of all camera models) at any moment is pro-
portional to the attribute’s importance51 (see Ref 55,
for alternative assumptions).
Second, the current focus of attention generates
a relative evaluation for each choice option. When
price is under consideration, then those options with
the highest prices will receive low evaluations. Specif-
ically, an option’s evaluation is based on the affective
reaction to the option’s value DEMO the focal attribute,
relative to the average reaction of all the other com-
peting options’ values.
Third, these momentary evaluations are accu-
mulated over time to describe the current preference
for each option at each DEMO during deliberation
(Figure 2). To the extent that attention focuses DEMO fea-
tures that are favorable for a particular option, that
option DEMO have a greater value of preference over
time. This accumulation process can be subject to spe-
ciﬁc effects such as gradual decay to produce DEMO
effects, as well as inhibitory inﬂuences from compet-
ing options (i.e., as one option becomes preferred, it
inhibits or reduces the preference DEMO other similar
options). An option is chosen, ending deliberation,
DEMO it reaches a preset threshold level of preference
used as a criterion for being ‘good enough’ to merit
selection.
DFT has been successful in DEMO for var-
ious puzzling phenomena in pairwise choice between
gambles under risk and uncertainty,50 as well as robust
paradoxes arising in multialternative and DEMO
tribute choice problems51 and pricing.56 It provides
a measure of preference strength (rather than just
direction) and has recently been extended to predict
DEMO conﬁdence as well.57 It also uniquely accounts
for effects of decision time such as speed–accuracy
tradeoffs50 and changes in preference under time
pressure.58 DFT DEMO also been extended to model rule
learning and rule-based decision making, DEMO
strategy switching.59 It has been successfully applied
to engineering problems such as human-in-the-loop
control systems60 and agent-based models of emer-
gency evacuation decisions.61
Volume DEMO, September/October 2010
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
743
P(t)
θ2
θ1
Options
O1
O2
O3
Attributes
A1
A2
DEMO
Advanced Review
A
wires.wiley.com/cogsci
B
t0 t1 t2 t3 t
FIGURE 2 | Decision ﬁeld theory (DFT) representation of preference
accumulation for DEMO options. Preference P(t) accumulates for each
option, shown as separate trajectories, over time t.At time t1,optionB
is preferred with a higher value of P(t);attime t2, preference is equal
between the DEMO options, after which option A is consistently preferred.
Choice is determined DEMO an option’s trajectory reaches the threshold
level of preference, P(t) = θ . A decision maker with a threshold of θ2
would DEMO select option A at time t3; a more impulsive individual
modeled DEMO θ1 would select option B at time t1.
Connectionist Approaches
Several contemporary computational models of
decision making besides DFT have been cast in neu-
DEMO network architectures. While these models may
be less transparent and in some sense more com-
plex, they are popular in many cognitive domains and
have the advantage of neurally plausible mechanisms
(Figure 3).
Leaky Competing Accumulator Model
Usher and McClelland 62 proposed a connectionist
model that employs DEMO recursive network to describe
how preference builds for various choice options over
time. This model is very closely related to DFT
(see Ref 63, for a comparison of the two). It also
involves sequential comparison of attributes where
the options ‘compete’ for preference based on their
relative DEMO, and these momentary comparisons
are ‘accumulated’ over time into a holistic DEMO
value for each option, with some degree of decay (or
‘leaking’). In contrast to DFT, it includes the notion of
loss aversion from prospect theory as a fundamental
assumption.
Coherence-Seeking Network Models
Thagard and DEMO applied Thagard’s network
model called ECHO to decision making, and other
DEMO have since extended this formulation.65–67
744
Attention X
FIGURE 3 | Generic neural network representation of a decision
problem. Each of three choice options DEMO described by three attributes.
An attention node determines which attribute(s) DEMO/are processed at
each time step and thus embodies decision weight. Links between
attributes and options represent the value of each option on the
DEMO attribute. All solid connections are assumed to be
bidirectional for parallel constraint satisfaction (PCS) models, and
feedforward for leaky competing accumulator (LCA) and decision ﬁeld
theory (DFT). Inhibitory bidirectional connections among options
(DEMO lines) model competition among options in LCA, PCS, and DFT
DEMO LCA and DFT assume an additional layer between options and
attributes to compute differences.
Most recently, Andreas Glockner et al.¨ 68,69 have
successfully applied one of these parallel constraint
satisfaction (PCS) models to various DEMO
tasks. PCS models involve a search for coherence or
consistency among a set of choice options, such as in
trying to resolve conﬂicting preferences across options
(one option may have a lower price, but another DEMO
better resolution, and so on). Upon presentation of a
choice DEMO, PCS mechanisms are activated to ﬁnd
the best interpretation of the DEMO in a perception-
like process. Rather than explicitly describing any
necessarily conscious strategy or heuristic that is
applied to a choice problem, these models rely on
a more holistic or Gestalt conceptualization where a
preferred option DEMO instantly or over the course
of deliberation.
Choice options and outcome values are rep-
resented as network nodes, and links represent the
possession of certain aspects as well as their decision
weight (based on link strength; see (Figure 3). The
basic intuition is that there are DEMO sets of node acti-
vations (option preference strengths) that will produce
a stable network (consistent representation), based on
the constraints in the form of attribute values and
weights. Given the decision problem representation,
DEMO advantages of one option are automatically
highlighted by increasing the activation of supporting
and decreasing the activation of contrary information.
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Volume 1, September/October 2010
WIREs Cognitive Science
An activation updating algorithm continues to adjust
the node DEMO until a stable state is achieved, at
which point the node (choice option) with the highest
activation is predicted to be chosen. Importantly, these
models involve bidirectional links between attributes
and options and are thus able to explain ‘restruc-
turing’ of the choice problem,70,71 such DEMO changes
in attribute importance or decision weight across the
choice task (DEMO, coherence shifts) that are not possible
in static, descriptive approaches.
DEMO Approaches
Several researchers have acknowledged the crucial
role that memory plays in decision making.72,73
In fact, simple recognition memory can be used
to make inferential decisions when the likelihood
of recognition based on salience is DEMO with
the decision criterion.74 Dougherty et al.15 use a
memory-based judgment model to account for several
robust phenomena in judgment and estimation tasks,
DEMO as base-rate neglect, hindsight bias, and the
conjunction fallacy.75 Elke Weber, Eric Johnson, and
colleagues also propose that memory processes can
be DEMO to model decision tasks.76,77 This approach,
most recently dubbed ‘Query theory’, assumes that
preferences that drive choice and other decisions are
based on a collection of serially posed queries to
memory concerning relevant characteristics DEMO the
task. For example, if deciding whether to buy a
certain DEMO camera, an individual might attempt
to recall experiences with similar models DEMO generate
the pros and cons of buying the camera. Query
theory is able to explain some empirical trends
in human decision behavior by embellishing DEMO
simple notion with what is known about human
memory, such as DEMO position effects, priming, and
interference. Although the theory’s assumptions have
been empirically supported, at this point it has not
been formally introduced as a mathematical model
or at a speciﬁc algorithmic level, as the preceding
computational models have.
SUMMARY AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
We do not propose that DEMO of the approaches
described above is privileged in any objective sense.
Rather, each approach may be seen as possessing
inherent strengths and weaknesses, DEMO as differen-
tially applicable across domains or academic pursuits.
The class of utility models born from the normative
approach has the appeal of an DEMO foundation,
meaning that adherence to speciﬁc principles ensures
that a utility representation can be created to describe
Decision making
and predict their choices.24 DEMO allows for a strict and
concise way of expressing a decision policy, and lends
itself to easy derivation of closed-form predictions.
The problem arises when individuals or people in gen-
eral fail to adhere to these DEMO Computational
approaches beneﬁt from increased attention to men-
tal and emotional processes and thus psychological
plausibility. They can also account for many of the
DEMO of these principles and often of collections
of violations. However, these DEMO are less transpar-
ent and thus often more difﬁcult to treat analytically,
often requiring simulation or direct application to a
speciﬁc context to DEMO predictions. Finally, both
within and across classes of models, it is important
to understand the tradeoff between ﬂexibility and
robustness of models. For DEMO, does the increased
predictive power of prospect theory over earlier SEU
DEMO justify the ‘cost’ of increasing the number of
free parameters? Furthermore, is the increase in ﬁt to
the data theoretically meaningful above and DEMO
that afforded by this increased ﬂexibility (see Refs
78–80, for excellent discussions of these issues)?
This review has provided a comprehensive but
concise account of the development of theories in
decision making under risk DEMO uncertainty. Although
decision research has come a long way, there are DEMO
many open questions that are not fully addressed,
even by the more sophisticated theories covered
in this review (see Ref 81). How independent are
evaluations of attributes and/or alternatives? Is the
evaluation of probability (or weight) separable from
the evaluation of outcome value? Furthermore, this
review is not exhaustive of the theories and approaches
in decision research. For example, an entire class of
random utility theories82 is beyond the scope of this
review, as are some of the more recent computational
models. A ‘dual systems’ approach recognizing the
role of automatic or DEMO processes, in addition
to more directed and deliberative processes, is also
becoming quite popular83–85 (see Ref 86 and the
related commentaries for various perspectives; and
Ref 87, for the historical precedent in cognitive
science)DEMO Finally, the ﬁeld has relatively recently
focused a great deal on DEMO the role of
affect or emotion in decision making35,88–90 (see DEMO
91, for an earlier treatment).
An important recent development in DEMO
research is the advent of neuroscientiﬁc methods
to better understand decision making under risk
and uncertainty (see Ref 92, for a concise review
DEMO organizing framework; for more extensive
summative treatment, see Refs 93,94). In fact, this has
spawned an entire ‘subﬁeld’ called neuroeconomics
or decision neuroscience that attempts to verify
Volume 1, September/October 2010
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
745
Advanced Review
the underlying neural substrates associated with the
various components of DEMO theories and their pur-
ported mechanisms.95 Work in this vein has indeed
found evidence for brain regions responsible for rep-
resenting the components of DEMO theories such as
probability and reward value96 (see Ref 97, for a dis-
cussion), as well as evidence for distinctions between
gains DEMO losses consistent with prospect theory.98
Although this work supports the necessary condition
of an adequate neural representation underlying utility
theories, it is not sufﬁcient evidence for the maximiza-
tion goal process. That is, there is evidence for the
ingredients of utility theories, but not necessarily for
the mechanism that uses this information to produce
choice (action selection).
There is now substantial neurophysiological evi-
dence supporting the mechanisms hypothesized by
computational accumulation DEMO such as DFT
and leaky competing accumulator (LCA) (see Refs
DEMO,100, for reviews). Speciﬁcally, recent research indi-
cates that neuronal activation accumulates over time
during decisions under risk and uncertainty, and an
action is performed when the accumulated evidence
surpasses a threshold.94,101,102 DEMO, in contrast to
the normative and descriptive utility maximization
theories, there is considerable neuroscientiﬁc evidence
wires.wiley.com/cogsci
for neuronal populations that may be DEMO for
the computational process that produces observable
decision behavior.
In closing, DEMO would like to convey the excite-
ment and opportunity that face the ﬁeld of decision
making. Current advances are beginning to produce
fruitful practical DEMO For example, prospect theory
has impacted economic theory, and computational
models (heuristic rule-based models and dynamic
accumulation models) are being incorporated into
DEMO and agent-based models of mixed human
and machine systems. The number and nature of
tools at our disposal continue to grow (including
experimental techniques for process tracing; see Refs
45,46,103), as does the number and nature of ﬁelds
involved in studying decisions. As they do, we hope to
better understand how people make decisions, predict
what decisions might be made in given situations, and
reﬂect and improve upon those already made.
NOTES
a Note that this model is closely related to DEMO earlier
lexicographic models of Coombs104 and Fishburn.105
These models, however, speciﬁed a deterministic order
for attribute selection.
REFERENCES
1. Goldstein WM, Weber EU. Content and discontent:
Indications and implications of domain speciﬁcity in
preferential DEMO making. In: Busemeyer JR, Hastie
R, Medin DL, eds. Decision Making from a Cognitive
Perspective. The Psychology of Learning and Moti-
vation, vol. 32. New York: Academic Press; 1995,
83–136.
2. Zsambok DEMO, Klein GA, eds. Naturalistic Decision
Making. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates;
1997.
3. Bernoulli D. Specimen theorie novae de mensura sortis
DEMO of a new theory of the measurement of
risk]. Econometrica 1738/1954, 22:23–36.
4. Savage LJ. The Foundations of Statistics.New York:
John Wiley & Sons; 1954.
5. von Neumann J, Morgenstern O. Theory DEMO Games and
Economic Behavior. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
sity Press; DEMO
6. Ramsey, FP. Truth and probability. The Foundations
of Mathematics and DEMO Logical Essays: Routledge &
Kegan Paul; 1931.
746
7. de DEMO B. Foresight: its logical laws, its subjective
sources. In: Kyburg DEMO, Smokler H, eds. Studies in Sub-
jective Probability: New York: John Wiley & Sons;
1937/1964.
8. Allais M. Le comportement DEMO l’homme rationnel
devant le risque: critique des postulats et axiomes de
DEMO AmØricaine [The behavior of the rational man´
facing risk: Critique of DEMO postulates and axioms of the
American school]. Econometrica 1953, 21:503–546.
DEMO Keeney RL, Raiffa H. Decisions with multiple objec-
tives: Preferences and value tradeoffs. New York: John
Wiley & Sons; 1976.
10. Kahneman DEMO, Tversky A. Prospect theory: an anal-
ysis of decision under risk. Econometrica 1979,
47:263–292.
11. Markowitz HM. Portfolio Selection. New York: John
Wiley & Sons; 1959.
12. Edwards W. Subjective probabilities inferred from deci-
sions. Psychol Rev 1962, 69:109–135.
13. Gonzalez R, Wu DEMO On the shape of the probability
weighting function. Cognit Psychol 1999, DEMO:129–166.
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Volume 1, September/October 2010
WIREs Cognitive Science
14. Brandstatter E, K¨ uhberger A, Schneider F. DEMO cognitive-¨
emotional account of the shape of the probability
weighting function. J Behav Decision Making 2002,
15:79–100.
15. Dougherty MRP, Gettys CF, Ogden EE. MINERVA-
DM: a memory process model for judgments of DEMO
hood. Psychol Rev 1999, 106:108–209.
16. Johnson JG, Busemeyer JR. Process weighting model.
Unpublished manuscript [under review], 2009.
17. Fox CR, DEMO A. A belief-based account of decision
under uncertainty. Manage Sci 1998, DEMO:879–895.
18. Fox CR. Strength of evidence, judged probability,
and DEMO under uncertainty. Cognit Psychol 1999,
38:167–189.
19. Tversky A, DEMO CR. Weighing risk and uncertainty.
Psychol Rev 1995, 102:269–283.
20. DEMO J. A theory of anticipated utility. J Econ Behav
Org 1982, DEMO:323–343.
21. Yaari ME. The dual theory of choice under risk. Econo-
metrica 1987, 55:95–115.
22. Starmer C. Developments in non-expected utility the-
ory: the hunt for a descriptive theory of choice under
risk. JEcon Lit 2000, 38:332–382.
23. Birnbaum MH, McIntosh WR. Violations of DEMO
independence in choices between gambles. Organ
Behav Hum Dec 1996, 67:DEMO
24. Luce, RD. Utility of Gains and Losses:Mahwah,NJ:
DEMO Erlbaum Associates; 2000.
25. Tversky A, Kahneman D. Advances in prospect the-
ory: cumulative representations of uncertainty. JRisk
Uncertain 1992, 5:297–323.
DEMO Birnbaum MH. New paradoxes of risky decision mak-
ing. Psychol Rev 2008, 115:463–501.
27. Birnbaum MH, Navarette JB. Testing descriptive utility
theories: violations of stochastic dominance and cumu-
lative independence. J Risk Uncertain 1998, 17:49–78.
28. Birnbaum MH, Chavez A. Tests of theories of decision
making: violations of branch independence and distri-
bution independence. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process
1997, 71:161–194.
29. Birnbaum MH, Sutton SE. Scale DEMO and utility
measurement. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process 1992,
52:183–215.
30. Birnbaum MH, Stegner SE. Source credibility in social
judgment: bias, expertise, and the judge’s point of view.
J Pers Soc Psychol 1979, 37:48–74.
31. Birnbaum MH, Parducci A, Gifford RK. Contextual
effects in information integration. J Exp Psychol 1971,
88:158–170.
32. Bell DEMO Regret in decision making under uncertainty.
Oper Res 1982, 30:961–981.
DEMO Loomes G, Sugden R. Regret theory: an alternative the-
ory of rational choice under uncertainty. Econ J Nepal
1982, 92:805–824.
Volume 1, September/October 2010
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Decision DEMO
34. Epstude K, Roese NJ. The functional theory of
counterfactual thinking. DEMO Soc Psychol Rev 2008,
12:168–192.
35. Mellers BA, Schwartz DEMO, Ho K, Ritov I. Decision affect
theory: emotional reactions to DEMO outcomes of risky
options. Psychol Sci 1997, 8:423–429.
36. Lopes DEMO Between hope and fear: the psychology of
risk. Adv Exp Soc DEMO 1987, 20:255–295.
37. Lopes LL. Algebra and process in the DEMO of risky
choice. In: Busemeyer J, Hastie R, Medin DL, eds. Deci-
sion Making from a Cognitive Perspective. San Diego,
CA: Academic Press; 1995, 177–220.
38. Busemeyer JR, Johnson JG. Computational models of
decision making. In: Kohler DJ, Harvey N, eds. Black-
well Handbook of Judgment and Decision Making.
Oxford: Blackwell Science; 2004, 133–154.
39. Shah AK, Oppenheimer DM. Heuristics made easy:
an effort-reduction framework. Psychol Bull 2008,
134:207–222.
40. Tversky A. Elimination by aspects: a theory of choice.
Psychol Rev 1972, 79:281–299.
41. Rieskamp J, Busemeyer JR, Mellers BA. Extending the
bounds of rationality: evidence and theories of prefer-
ential choice. JEconLit 2006, 44:631–661.
42. Thorngate W. Efﬁcient decision heuristics. Behav Sci
1980, 25:219–225.
43. Coombs C, DEMO R, Tversky A. Mathematical Psy-
chology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice DEMO; 1970.
44. Dawes RH, Corrigan B. Linear models in decision
making. Psychol Bull 1974, 81:95–106.
45. Payne JW, Bettman JR, Johnson EJ. Behavioral decision
research: a constructive processing perspective. Annu
Rev Psychol 1992, 43:87–131.
46. Payne JW, Bettman JR, Johnson EJ. The Adaptive Deci-
sion Maker. New York: Cambridge University Press;
1993.
47. Gigerenzer G, Todd PM, the ABC Research Group.
Simple Heuristics that make DEMO Smart.New York:
Oxford University Press; 1999.
48. Brandstatter E, Gigerenzer G, Hertwig R. Risky¨
choice with heuristics: Reply to Birnbaum (2008),
Johnson, Schulte-Mecklenbeck, and Willemsen (2008),
and Rieger and Wang (2008). Psychol Rev 2008,
115:281–290.
49. Ratcliff R, Smith PL. A comparison of sequential sam-
pling models for two-choice reaction time. Psychol Rev
2004, 111:333–367.
50. Busemeyer JR, Townsend JT. DEMO ﬁeld theory:
a dynamic-cognitive approach to decision making
in an uncertain environment. Psychol Rev 1993,
100:432–459.
747
Advanced Review
51. Roe RM, Busemeyer JR, Townsend JT. Multi-
alternative DEMO ﬁeld theory: a dynamic connec-
tionist model of decision-making. Psychol Rev DEMO,
108:370–392.
52. Busemeyer JR, Diederich A. Survey of decision DEMO
theory. Math Soc Sci 2002, 43:345–370.
53. Busemeyer JR, Johnson JG. Micro-process models of
decision making. In: Sun R, ed. Cambridge DEMO
book of Computational Psychology. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press; 2008, 302–321.
54. Busemeye JR, Jessup RK, Johnson JG. Townsend
JTBuilding bridges between neural models and complex
human decision making behavior. Neural Networks
2006, 19:1047–1058.
55. Diederich A. Dynamic stochastic models for decision
making under DEMO constraints. J Math Psychol 1997,
41:260–274.
56. Johnson JG, DEMO JR. A dynamic, stochastic, com-
putational model of preference reversal phenomena.
Psychol Rev 2005, 112:841–861.
57. Pleskac TJ, Busemeyer JR. Two-Stage DEMO Signal
Detection: A theory of conﬁdence, choice, and response
time. DEMO Review, 2009 In press.
58. Diederich A. MDFT account of decision DEMO under
time pressure. Psychon Bull Rev 2003, 10:157–166.
59. Johnson DEMO, Busemeyer JR. Rule-based Decision Field
Theory: a dynamic computational model of transi-
tions among decision-making strategies. In: Betsch T,
Haberstroh S, DEMO The Routines of Decision Making.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; DEMO,
3–20.
60. Gao G, Lee JD. Extending the decision ﬁeld DEMO to
model operator’s reliance on automation in supervisory
control systems. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern 2006,
36:943–959.
61. Lee S, Son Y, Jin J. Integrated human decision making
and planning model for evacuation scenarios under BDI
framework. ACM Trans Model Comput Simulation
(in press).
62. Usher M, McClelland JL. Loss aversion and inhibition
in dynamic models of multi-alternative choice. Psychol
Rev 2004, 111:757–769.
63. Busemeyer JR, Townsend DEMO, Diederich A, Barkan R.
Contrast effects or loss aversion? Comment DEMO M.
Usher, J. L. McClelland’s. (2004). ‘Loss aversion and
inhibition in dynamical models of multi-alternative
choice.’ Psychol Rev 2005, 112:253–255.
64. Thagard P, Millgram E. Inference to the best plan:
a coherence theory of decision. In: Ram A, Leake
DB, eds. Goal-driven Learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press; 1995, 439–454.
65. Guo FY, Holyoak KJ. Understanding similarity in
choice behavior: A connectionist model. In: Gray DEMO,
Schunn C, eds. Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth
Annual Conference of DEMO Cognitive Science Society.
wires.wiley.com/cogsci
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; DEMO,
393–398.
66. Holyoak KJ, Simon D. Bidirectional reasoning in deci-
DEMO making by constraint satisfaction. J Exp Psychol
Gen 1999, 128:3–31.
DEMO Simon D, Krawczyk DC, Holyoak KJ. Construction
of preferences by constraint satisfaction. Psychol Sci
2004, 15:331–336.
68. Glockner A, Betsch T. DEMO option and strat-¨
egy choices with connectionist networks: towards an
integrative DEMO of automatic and deliberate decision
making. Judgm Decis Mak 2008, 3:DEMO
69. Glockner A, Betsch T, Schindler N. Coherence shifts in¨
probabilistic inference tasks. J Behav Decision Making
(in press).
70. Montgomery H. From cognition to action: the search
for dominance in decision making. In: Montgomery H,
Svenson O, eds. Process and Structure in Human DEMO
sion Making. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 1989,
23–49.
71. Svenson O. Differentiation and consolidation theory of
human decision making: a frame of reference for the
study of pre- and post-decision processes. Acta DEMO
(Amst) 1992, 80:143–168.
72. Hastie R, Park B. The relationship between memory and
judgment depends on whether the judgment is memory-
DEMO or on-line. Psychol Rev 1986, 93:258–268.
73. Weber EU, Goldstein WM, Barlas S. And let us not
forget memory: the role DEMO memory processes and
techniques in judgment and choice. In: Busemeyer JR,DEMO
Hastie R, Medin DL, eds. Decision Making from the
Perspective of Cognitive Psychology. Psychology of
Learning and Motivation Series. New York: Academic
Press; 1995.
74. Goldstein DG, Gigerenzer G. Models of ecological
rationality: the recognition heuristic. Psychol Rev 2002,
109:75–90.
75. Tversky A, Kahneman D. Extension versus intuititve
reasoning: the conjunction fallacy in probability judg-
ment. Psychol Rev 1983, 90:293–315.
76. Weber EU, Johnson EJ. Constructing DEMO from
memories. In: Lichtenstein S, Slovic P, eds. The Con-
DEMO of New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press. 2006, 397–410.
77. DEMO EJ, Haubl G, Keinan A. Aspects of endow-
ment: a DEMO theory of value construction. JExp
Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 2007, 33:DEMO
78. Myung IJ. The importance of complexity in model
selection. J Math Psychol 2000, 44:190–204.
79. Pitt MA, Myung IJ. When a DEMO ﬁt can be bad. Trends
Cogn Sci 2002, 6:421–425.
80. DEMO S, Pashler H. How persuasive is a good ﬁt?
A DEMO on theory testing. Psychol Rev 2000,
107:358–367.
748
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Volume 1, September/October 2010
WIREs Cognitive Science
81. Hastie R. Problems for judgment and decision making.
DEMO Rev Psychol 2001, 52:653–683.
82. McFadden D. Econometric Models of DEMO
Choice. In: Manski C and McFadden D, eds. Structural
Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applica-
tions. Cambridge: MIT Press; 1981.
83. DEMO SA. The empirical case for two systems of
reasoning. Psychol Bull 1996, 119:3–22.
84. Sloman SA. Two systems of reasoning. In: Gilovich DEMO,
Grifﬁn D, Kahneman D, eds. Heuristics and Biases: The
DEMO of Intuitive Judgment. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press; 2002.
85. Kahneman D, Frederick S. Representativeness revis-
ited: Attribute substitution in intuitive judgment. DEMO:
Gilovich T, Grifﬁn D, Kahneman D, eds. Heuristics
and DEMO: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment.New
York: Cambridge University Press; 2002, 49–81.
86. Stanovich KE, West RF. Individual differences in rea-
soning: DEMO for the rationality debate? Behav
Brain Sci 2000, 23:645–665.
87. Shiffrin RM, Schneider W. Controlled and automatic
human information processing: II. DEMO learning,
automatic attending, and a general theory. Psychol Rev
1977, 84:127–190.
88. Bechara A, Damasio H, Damasio AR. Emotion, deci-
sion making, and the orbitofrontal cortex. Cereb Cor-
tex 2000, 10:DEMO
89. Damasio AR. Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and
the Human DEMO New York: Grosset/Putnam; 1994.
90. Lowenstein G, Lerner J. DEMO role of emotion in decision
making. In: Davidson RJ, Goldsmith HH, Scherer KR,
eds. Handbook of Affective Science. Oxford: Oxford
University DEMO; 2003.
91. Zajonc RB. Feeling and thinking: preferences need no
inferences. Am Psychol 1980, 35:151–175.
92. Rangel A, Camerer C, Montague PR. A framework
for studying the neurobiology of value-based decision-
making. Nat DEMO Neurosci 2008, 9:545–556.
Decision making
93. Camerer C, Lowenstein G, Prelec D. Neuroeconomics:
How neuroscience can inform economics. JEcon Lit
2005, 43:9–64.
94. Gold JI, Shadlen MN. Representation of a perceptual
DEMO in developing oculomotor commands. Nature
2000, 404:390–394.
95. Sanfey AG, Loewenstein G, McClure SM, Cohen
JD. Neuroeconomics: cross-currents in research on
decision-making. Trends Cogn Sci 2006, 10:108–116.
96. Platt ML, Glimcher DEMO Neural correlates of deci-
sion variables in parietal cortex. Nature 1999,
400:233–238.
97. Sanfey AG. Neural computations of decision utility.
Trends Cogn DEMO 2004, 8:519–521.
98. Tom S, Fox CR, Trepel C, Poldrack RA. The neural
basis of loss aversion in decision making under DEMO
Science 2007, 315:515–518.
99. Schall JD. Neural basis of deciding, choosing and act-
ing. Nat Rev Neurosci 2001, 2:33–42.
100. Smith PL, Ratcliff R. Psychology and neurobiology of
simple decisions. Trends Neurosci 2004, 27:161–168.
101. Ratcliff R, Cherian A, Segraves M. A comparison of
macaque behavior and superior colliculus neuronal
activity to predictions from models DEMO simple two-
choice decisions. J Neurophysiol 2003, 90:1392–1407.
102. Schall DEMO Neural correlates of decision processes: eural
and mental chronometry. Curr Opin DEMO 2003,
13:182–186.
103. Svenson O. Decision making and the search for funda-
mental psychological regularities: What can be learned
from a process perspective? Organ Behav Hum Decis
Process 1996, 65:252–267.
104. Coombs DEMO A Theory of Data.New York,NY: Wiley;
1964.
105. Fishburn DEMO Utility theory. Management Science 1968,
14:335–378.
FURTHER READING
Brandstatter E., Gigerenzer G, Hertwig R. The priority¨ heuristic: making choices without trade-offs. Psychol
Rev 2006, 113:409–432.
Busemeyer JR, Jessup RK, Johnson JG, Townsend JT. Building bridges between neural models and complex
decision making behavior. Neural Netw 2006, 19:1047–1058.
Gold JI, Shadlen MN. The neural DEMO of decision making. Annu Rev Neurosci 2007, 30:535–574.
Koehler D, Harvey N, eds. Blackwell Handbook of Judgment and Decision Making. Oxford, DEMO: Blackwell
Science; 2004.
Lichtenstein S, Slovic P, eds. The Construction of Preference. New York: Cambridge University Press; 2006.
Volume 1, September/October 2010
 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
749{1g42fwefx}