This article was downloaded by: [Temple University Libraries]
On: 07 February DEMO, At: 20:00
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England DEMO Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer DEMO, London W1T 3JH, UK
Venture Capital: An International
Journal of DEMO Finance
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
DEMO://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tvec20
Business Angel Academies: Unleashing
the Potential for DEMO Angel
Investment
Amparo San José a , Juan Roure a & Rudy Aernoudt b
a IESE Business School , Barcelona, Spain
b EHSAL Business School , Brussels, Belgium
c IESE Business School , Avenida Pearson 21, 08034, Barcelona,
Spain E-mail:
Published online: 23 Feb 2007.
To cite this article: Amparo San José , Juan Roure & Rudy Aernoudt (2005) Business Angel
Academies: Unleashing the Potential for Business Angel Investment, Venture Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 7:2, 149-165, DOI: 10.1080/13691060500063392
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13691060500063392
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,DEMO
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever DEMO to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions DEMO views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not DEMO relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, DEMO,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities DEMO
or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in DEMO to or
arising out of the use of the Content.
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
DEMO or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/DEMO/terms-
and-conditions
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:00 07 February 2015
Venture Capital,
Vol. 7, No. 2, 149 – 165, April 2005
Business Angel Academies: Unleashing
the Potential for Business Angel
Investment
AMPARO SAN JOSE*, JUAN ROURE* & RUDY AERNOUDT**
*IESE Business School, Barcelona, Spain, **EHSAL Business School and Cabinet Director of the Flemish
Minister for Economy, Brussels, Belgium
(Accepted 6 December 2004)
ABSTRACT Previous research has highlighted the existence of an information problem
(information gap) among DEMO angels, mainly due to their desire to keep a low public DEMO
and to the informal character of the market. The creation of business angels’ networks was
promoted in order to deal with this gap. This DEMO, however, only partly succeeded in
converting the stock of virgin angels into active informal investors. On the basis of the study of a
DEMO of investors attending a business angels’ academy, this paper argues that DEMO a conversion
can only be signiﬁcant if the problem is approached from the perspective of their lack of
understanding of the investment process. An DEMO source of diﬃculty in the development and
establishment of informal investment projects is the fact that many angels (especially potential
angels) lack an DEMO understanding of the investment process. They are therefore unable to
take advantage of the investment opportunities that might arise. The implication is that there DEMO a
need for a new form of intervention: the creation of DEMO angel schools or academies,
conceived of as frameworks for the exchange of experiences and closer co-operation.
KEY WORDS: Business angels, investment skills, knowledge gap, business angel academy
An Informal Market: Underdeveloped Potential
In DEMO to realize the full potential of the informal market, there have DEMO calls for
a second generation of BANs, able to target both DEMO potential investors and
entrepreneurs who are in need of ﬁnance but will not consider raising external
capital. This second generation of BANs should focus DEMO ‘educating’ the market
place. This is the context in which the idea of a business angel academy or business
angel school emerged; as a place that could fulﬁl that role, and where angels would
progress along a learning curve through all the phases of the angel investment
procedure (Mason and Harrison, 2002).
Correspondence Address: Juan Roure, IESE Business School, Avenida Pearson 21, 08034 Barcelona,
Spain. Email: roure@iese.edu
ISSN 1369-1066 Print/1464-5343 Online/05/020149-16 # 2005 Taylor & Francis Group DEMO
DOI: 10.1080/13691060500063392
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:00 DEMO February 2015
150
San Jose´
et al.
It is widely accepted that the informal DEMO capital market is largely
undeveloped in Europe, as compared to the DEMO (EBAN, 1998), though studies
measuring its size are hampered by the lack of transparency and the informal
character of the market. The DEMO Entrepreneurship Monitor (Reynolds et al., 2003)
reported a total informal investment in the nations surveyed of almost 1% of their
combined GDPs, while the prevalence of informal investors was 2.9% of the
population (aged 18 and older). In almost all European countries, the informal VC
(including family and friends and other informal sources of ﬁnance) market DEMO much
more developed than the formal, or institutional, venture capital market, and its
relevance as a source of ﬁnance for start-ups is clearly superior to its formal
counterpart. However, the GEM deﬁnition of informal investors cannot be
reconciled with the deﬁnition of ‘business angels’ found in many DEMO academic
studies and business environments. Of the private investors in the 2003 GEM study,
52.6% provided personal funds to close family members and DEMO, 29.2%
invested funds in business proposals from neighbours or friends, 8.9% invested in a
work colleague’s proposal, and only 9.3% of individuals in the study reported having
provided ﬁnance to strangers’ projects (Reynolds et al., 2003). Hence, this family,
friends, fools approach is much broader than the business angel concept more usually
found in the literature (Aernoudt, 2001).
Nevertheless, the number of individuals who are potential DEMO, often referred
to as virgin business angels (Aernoudt, 1999b), DEMO is, individuals who fulﬁl all the
conditions for becoming a business DEMO but have never invested, has been estimated
at 850 000 in DEMO and 1.75 million in the US. Moreover, there is evidence that DEMO
pool of non-active investors is increasing compared to the investment ﬁgures (DEMO,
2003). Research on business angels in Denmark shows that 45% have invested less
than 10% of the capital which they had allocated DEMO investment in unquoted
companies (Napier, 2002). Despite the increase in membership of angel groups, 41%
of angels in those groups in the US were not active (Sohl and Sommer, 2003). This
represents DEMO steady increase over the last three years (32% in 1998). DEMO increase in
the proportion of latent investors over time indicates that while many high-net-worth
individuals may be attracted to the early-stage equity market, they have not converted
this interest into direct participation. Clearly, cyclical market downturns might play a
role in this non-activity. Nevertheless, it is clear that it is not the lack of funds to invest
that is impeding DEMO The ineﬃciency is linked to non-tangible factors.
Against this background, the DEMO of this paper is to identify the diﬀerences
between active and passive business angels, to understand the training needs of
business angels and to diﬀerentiate the training needs of active and passive business
angels. Finally, the paper aims at exploring the potential role of nascent business
angel academies DEMO converters of latent angels into active angels, and as promoters of
DEMO informal market. In Europe today, only two examples of organized business
DEMO academies exist (Aernoudt, 2003). The survey will be focused on one of those
countries.
Business Angel Networks are Not the Panacea
Ineﬃciencies DEMO the informal market have been explained (Mason and Harrison,
1995; Aernoudt, 1999a; Harding, 2002) by the existence of information asymmetries,DEMO
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:00 07 February 2015
Unleashing the Potential for Business Angel Investment
151
which comprise a knowledge DEMO where there is risk aversion on the supply side and
uncertainty and resistance to venture capital on the demand side. Lawton explained
these ineﬃciencies DEMO a the mismatch between the perceived risks and the perceived
returns on the part of the investors, and also by a knowledge gap which is the result
of imperfect information on both sides: on the part of SMEs by ignoring the beneﬁts
of venture capital investment; and on the part of investors by not ﬁnding access to
investment opportunities (Lawton, 2002).
Entrepreneurs also have diﬃculties ﬁnding potential investors, who prefer DEMO keep
a low public proﬁle concerning their willingness/capability to invest. This situation is
described as an information gap in the market. An inadequate DEMO of good ideas
from the demand to the supply side of the market can explain some of the
ineﬃciencies. The lack of information about DEMO market—that is, data on investment
statistics, exits or returns to be analysed and contrasted by researchers or experts—
hampers the external assessment of DEMO real opportunities represented by this market,
hence contributing to its ineﬃciency (Esposito and Prats, 2003).
The basic assumption of this study DEMO that the majority of business angels needed
neither advice nor technical assistance on how to select projects (although an
exception was admitted in the analysis of technology ventures—see Freear et al.,
1996; Mason and Harrison, 1998). Therefore business angel networks (BANs), or
introduction services DEMO approach investors with investment opportunities, were
considered the best approach for DEMO with those eﬃciencies and helping to
overcome the information gap (Aernoudt, 1999b).
BANs were conceived of to respond eﬃciently to information in DEMO market. They
provide a channel of communication between investors and entrepreneurs in order to
minimize the cost of the entrepreneurs’ search for capital and DEMO enable investors to
examine a larger number of investment opportunities and hence facilitate their access
to proposals that meet their investment criteria. Business angel DEMO are also
important instruments for raising awareness about the market on both sides: for
both entrepreneurs seeking external capital and potential investors. These networks
have been organized in various ways, as public or private organizations, DEMO,
local or national, based on direct contact, magazines, or DEMO Diﬀerent BAN
models have responded to diﬀerent needs in their markets of operation.
Business angel networks can be considered as the ﬁrst attempt to DEMO a true
mechanism to increase the eﬃciency of the market and consequent deal ﬂow (Sohl,
1999). Mason and Harrison (1995) consider the underwriting of the BANs’
operational costs by public authorities to be DEMO most cost-eﬀective measure to
overcome the equity gap. Attempts to improve the supply of informal venture capital
through business angel networks have not always DEMO successful, and so criteria
have been established in terms of geographic DEMO, public-private nature or
sector approach (Aernoudt, 1999a). The relative DEMO of BANs has been both
widely endorsed and strongly contended (Mason DEMO Harrison, 2002); there is no
universal agreement on their eﬀectiveness.
DEMO the lack of an instrument for communication and demand or supply
deﬁciencies, framework conditions are also highly relevant to the development of the
informal venture capital market (taxes, entrepreneurial culture, administrative
constraints and so on; EBAN, 1998; Mason and Harrison, 1999; McGlue, 2002;
DEMO Commission, 2003).
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:00 DEMO February 2015
152
San Jose´
et al.
The concentration of eﬀorts on improving framework DEMO such as taxes,
legal aspects and the promotion of business angel networks has not been eﬃcient in
bringing business angels’ investment activity to DEMO desired level. Nevertheless,
despite imperfections they have been successful in many respects (Sørheim, 2003),
and part of the ineﬃciencies can be related to regional track records and speciﬁc
industry experiences. Business angel networks DEMO succeeded in creating awareness
and in drawing the mutual attention of potential investees and investors to the
possibilities of the market, but have not yet succeeded in mobilizing a signiﬁcant
number of business angels. BANs have DEMO, as a general rule, with the exception of
the ‘Band of Angels’, invigorated the syndication phenomena, which is considered
underdeveloped in Europe DEMO to the US. Therefore, further analysis of the
informal investment market DEMO deemed indispensable in order to explore new ways to
cope with the underdevelopment of the angel market.
In Search of New Approaches
Besides classical DEMO such as investors not seeing enough deals that meet their
investment criteria and the poor quality of the investment proposals that they
receive, Mason and Harrison (2002) add other constraints to angels’ ability to invest,DEMO
thereby transferring ineﬃciencies to the demand side of the market. Indeed, DEMO
claim they are often unable to negotiate acceptable investment terms and conditions
with entrepreneurs.
Business angel investment is an activity marked by the increasing DEMO of
businesses and the environments in which they operate. The ‘lonely’ entrepreneur is
more and more a rarity, and new, high potential businesses DEMO a broad range of
capacities, hence such businesses are often initiated DEMO a team of entrepreneurial
individuals.
Sørheim and Landstrom (2001) argue that the lack of competency amongst
investors might be relevant to the underdevelopment DEMO the informal market. Their
work classiﬁes investors into four groups of which only one can be considered to be
composed of classical business angels. DEMO rest lack either competency or investment
activity. Sohl and Sommer (2003) also point to investor education as a factor
inducing a person to DEMO from potential to active investor. Considering angel
investment as a specialized risky asset class in households’ portfolios, Maula et al.
(2003) claim that educational policy measures could be targeted at the informal
market in order DEMO increase the propensity of individuals to invest, and recognize the
role DEMO education in creating a supportive culture for informal investment.
We can argue that an important contributor to this knowledge gap is the lack of
DEMO adequate understanding of the investment process, such that business angels are
DEMO from taking advantage of opportunity investments as they arise. While
entrepreneurs are often trained to elaborate and present their business plans to
investors and DEMO advised on what to expect from investors, the only training for
DEMO angels is experience.
Lack of investor training is a factor whose importance is not unknown to the
formal venture capital market. One of the DEMO to the development of the early
stage venture capital market in Europe is the lack of capacity of mainstream venture
capitalists to assess the DEMO of early stage ventures, and innovative projects in
Downloaded by [Temple DEMO Libraries] at 20:00 07 February 2015
Unleashing the Potential for Business Angel Investment
153
particular (Aernoudt, 2000; European Commission, 2001). Most investment analysts
hold a ﬁnance or economics degree, whereas only one-ﬁfth hold an engineering or
other technical degree, DEMO, according to surveys in the venture capital
industry, the ideal recruit for this role has a technical degree plus an MBA (European
Commission, 2003b). A range of actions by the European Commission have aimed
to build within the venture capital industry a lasting capability to appraise DEMO
manage early stage projects in technologically innovative small and medium-sized
enterprises (DEMO Commission, 2003a).
The angel investment process requires the synchronization of DEMO diﬀerent
components, whose objective is to achieve overall success. From this DEMO of view,
the process implies the participation of entrepreneurs, advisers, intermediaries and
angels, all with diﬀerent characteristics and personalities. Hence, an DEMO factor
for success is the management of the investment process, whereby DEMO entrepreneurial
and interpersonal skills are elements as decisive as the provision of capital.
According to the above argument, business angels are (in addition DEMO the ﬁnancial
capacity that they provide): individuals who have access to investment opportunities;
are skilled in discerning the potential of those investment DEMO; and are
eventually capable of managing the complete investment ﬂow to DEMO Hence, two
resources important to a business angel’s investment activity can DEMO identiﬁed:
networks, whether informal or formal, which provide the investor with investment
opportunities or allow for the growth of co-investment operations; and skills that
will provide the investor with the capacity to assess the DEMO of investment
opportunities and manage the process.
Business Angel Education: Building DEMO Capability
In order to increase the investment activity of potential investors, DEMO as a
complement to the business angel networks, upgrading of investment DEMO
skills could be a real issue. Freear et al. (2002) propose looking at investment activity
as a function of angel’s perceived level of DEMO and competence in their ability
to deal intelligently with the ‘central mysteries’ of venture investment, namely
pricing, structuring and exiting. Indeed, a potential investor who is not able to
properly assess the risk or potential DEMO a venture at the screening stage will certainly
not progress into further stages of investment. The combination of theory and
practical applications used to DEMO entrepreneurship (Fiet, 2001) can be used to
provide business angels DEMO the basis for making their decisions and to understand
how to create wealth. However, despite entrepreneurs being at the other end of the
informal market, business angel schools should set out from the premise that most
business angels have accumulated considerable experience as entrepreneurs and/or
managers, consistent with the fact that not only wealth makes an individual a
business DEMO
The design of a business school able to upgrade such skills has to be done
recognizing the diﬃculties of narrowing down the proﬁle of DEMO, their
individuality and their tendency to operate beyond oﬃcial programmes.
As DEMO be seen from Figure 1, the academy should enable investors to DEMO
their activity, given the ﬂow of deals emerging through the business DEMO network. It
should not only mobilize virgin angels and increase the activity of the existing angels,
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:DEMO 07 February 2015
154
San Jose´
et al.
but should be a tool for promoting DEMO Especially in Europe, a greater level
of syndication is a must DEMO order to cope with the smaller equity gap problem, as the
DEMO amount invested by a business angel in a project does not enable the investee
to survive until the company is ready to receive formal DEMO capital.
Methodological Issues
Research on the informal market is, in general, hampered by the lack of data on
business angels and on the DEMO market. The information on business angel
proﬁles comes from a very few sources, the most representative being Mason and
Harrison in the UK, (yearly investment activity report and 1992; 1995; 1999 and
others); DEMO and Peters (2002, 2003) and Brettel (2003) in Germany; Napier
(2002) in Demark; Sørheim (2001) in Norway; Hindle DEMO Lee (2002) in Singapore;
Visser and Williams (2001) in the Netherlands; Osnabrugge (1997), Sohl (1999), and
Freer et al. (1994) in the USA (see also Hindle and Rushworth, DEMO, for an overview
of diﬀerent studies).
The information presented here DEMO derived from two diﬀerent samples. The ﬁrst
survey was carried out prior to the setting up of IESE’s School of Business Angels
programme. IESE, in Barcelona, is one of the leading European schools in the ﬁeld
of entrepreneurship. Although IESE provides resources to a dedicated venture
capital fund DEMO its students and alumni, there was no prior initiative in the DEMO of
business angels. The questionnaires supporting these two research projects, although
DEMO similar objectives, are not always fully comparable and therefore certain
deﬁning DEMO of business angels in a particular region or area have to be
presented in isolation.
The survey was distributed to the 53 participants in DEMO programme, and 27
responses were received. The second survey—carried out after DEMO completion of the
programme—was intended to measure perception of possible changes regarding
Figure 1. Role of business angel schools and BAN in the market
DEMO by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:00 07 February 2015
Unleashing the Potential for Business Angel Investment
155
investment skills. A total DEMO 38 responses were received for this second questionnaire,
which included several of the questions in the initial survey. The analysis of
responses was DEMO with notes taken by the research team during the
working sessions held as part of the programme, with interviews with a reduced
number of angels, and with researchers’ observations during the meetings held with a
special group of angels constituted as a brainstorming committee for the establish-
ment DEMO a business angel network associated with the business school.
Due to the lack of business angel schools in Europe, this paper cannot present a
comparative evaluation of the experience of the participants in the programme, the
improvement of their investment skills or the mobilization of informal capital.
The DEMO of Student Business Angels
The results of the survey show that individuals attending the Business Angels
Academy (BAA), including active and passive business angels, have similar
characteristics to those found in other research, namely, they are male, between
35 – 55 years old, with an DEMO past, a ﬁnancial capacity to invest and the
desire to be DEMO in the venture (Mason and Harrison, 1992; Landstrom, 1993;
Freer et al., 1994; Osnabrugge, 1997; Coveney et al., 1997; EBAN, 1998; Aernoudt,
1999b; Feeney et al., 1999; DEMO and Wenban, 1999; Hindle and Lee, 2002; Stedler
and Peters, 2002).
The wealth and risk proﬁle of the angels enrolled in the programme also reﬂects
similar results to existing research. Business angels have, on average, e470,000
available for investment. The median is very similar, and only very few investors
declared themselves able to allocate e 2 million to investments. Most angels have an
investment capacity of between e60 DEMO and e300 000. Angels would ideally invest an
average of e100,000 in a single project.
Regarding the way in which business angels approach DEMO in relation to the
impact of losses on their wealth, most DEMO the investors declared that they were
prepared to assume the total loss of their investments (65%). A loss amounting to
e 50 000 would aﬀect the family wealth of 5% of the angels; this ﬁgure rises to 36% if
the loss amounts to e150 000. However, note should be taken of the existence of
wealthier (or riskier) investors (23%), who will not be aﬀected by losing amounts of
over DEMO million.
The contribution to the management of the company, whether occasionally DEMO on
a daily basis, is one of the most valuable characteristics DEMO business angels. At early
stages, which is when most investment takes DEMO, ﬁnancial and technological assets
are not a guarantee for success, new companies lack managerial skills and need help
on the marketability of their DEMO The strong commitment of angels is also
present in the size of the stakes they subscribe. Although not seeking control, their
stake might depend either on the perception of the risk of the project or on DEMO
market. Respondents to the survey reported their preference for being involved with
the ﬁrm as coaches or advisors (see results from survey below), and they expressed
their willingness to devote an average of 26 hours DEMO month. (The preference of
respondents for the type of involvement in DEMO ﬁrm was: coach 50%; member of the
board 35%; minority DEMO (no involvement) 10%; and variable, depending on
the investment (DEMO).)
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:00 07 February 2015
156
San Jose´
et al.
Business angels might, as widely reported in research, have time to spend on the
new venture because their accumulated wealth and their professional capacity is
largely proven, and they therefore do not feel the pressure that (perhaps younger)
professionals or entrepreneurs feel in the earlier stages of their career. But business
angels are rarely DEMO or have idle time. As few as 8% work part-time, and DEMO are
involved (on average) with more than three institutions, boards DEMO foundations (see
Table 1).
Regardless of their investment experience, participants in the school programme
have signiﬁcant entrepreneurial experience. As many as 69% DEMO started a new
business at least once, and most of them DEMO be deemed to be serial entrepreneurs,
since the average number of enterprises created by each investor is three (mean two).
Nearly half of angels (46%) currently own a business (the questionnaire does not
specify whether they were the initial entrepreneurs in that business or if DEMO bought
in at a later stage). Hence, many of these DEMO are already in the third career phase,
and have been through the corporate career phase, the entrepreneurial learning
phase and the integrated investment career phase; the understanding of their career
choices may prove helpful in directing eﬀorts to locating and attracting potential and
existing informal investors (Politis and Landstrom, 2002). Certainly these informal
investors are ‘entrepreneurial learners’ who continue to develop their entrepreneurial
skills throughout their careers, resulting in a valuable competence that they can share
as informal investors with less experienced DEMO (Erikson and Nerdrum,
2001).
Traditional sectors are the most DEMO cited as sources of professional
experience: manufacturing (the region of Catalonia—where IESE is based—has a
strong tradition of textile manufacturing); ﬁnancial services; construction and
distribution (either retail or wholesale). Since experience determines the future
investment of business angels, they normally invest in the sectors they know best,
and so it seems that business angels are not DEMO panacea when dealing with technology-
driven new ventures. In fact, during DEMO working sessions held with participants at
the school, they expressed a DEMO suspicion of high-tech ventures.
This is consistent with the approach of other European angels. For instance,
British business angels only invest 30% of DEMO total in the high-tech sector, while
manufacturing and services represent 64%. DEMO, NEBIB, the Dutch BAN,
reports that most angels in the Netherlands ‘have earned their money’ in companies
that oﬀer a mixture of DEMO and sales. The view that ‘venture building’ skills are
widely applicable to any number of industry settings (Kelly and Hay, 1996) is
Table 1. Main current occupation of business angels
Spain UK Germany
Head of DEMO company 46% 36% 55%
Employed as head of company/director 28% 18%
Management team 50%
Retired/semi-retired 4% 6%
Independent means 15%
Other 34% DEMO
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:00 07 February 2015
Unleashing the Potential for Business Angel Investment
157
conﬁrmed by research carried DEMO on German business angels, who, no matter what
previous experience they have (only 40% had previous experience in the sector they
invested in) show a clear preference for diversiﬁcation into technology sectors
instead of remaining in the sector where they gathered that experience. For instance,
German DEMO angels with experience in the trade sector devoted 52% of their
investments to IT, 21% to life sciences and 20% to the services sector (Stedler &
Peters, 2002).
As has been mentioned, the DEMO in the school were not only virgin
business angels. On the contrary, the majority of them (69%) reported that they
already had experience as business angels. Many of them are already experienced or
serial business DEMO, since the average number of investments they have made is
two. DEMO of them were closing their ﬁrst investment deals when they joined the
school (shown in Figure 2 as ‘in progress’).
Angels mention returns and the need to pursue personal challenges as the main
reasons for DEMO Equally, business angels are aware of the opportunities oﬀered
by their DEMO and business networks and want to materialize these opportunities
using their own and their families’ wealth. The social component, although it does
not appear amongst the most important reasons for investing, is also present
together with the perception of the social responsibility of coaching the next
generation of DEMO
Business angels can also act as ‘love money’ investors by ﬁnancing the ventures of
family members and friends. Lastly, business angels are not tax-driven investors,
although they take into consideration the ﬁscal framework of investment, in this
survey ﬁscal incentives appear as one of the least important DEMO for investment.
In common with other surveys carried out in Europe, DEMO observe that returns are
always among the top three reasons for investing, together with personal challenges
or satisfaction and the willingness to pass knowledge on to new entrepreneurs. In
general, taxes do not play a relevant role (see Figure 3). However, a survey in the UK
DEMO low rates of capital gains as the main factor encouraging investment, DEMO
high rates were the main discouraging factor (Mason and Harrison, 1999). Catalan
Figure 2. Business angel experience of school participants
Downloaded by DEMO University Libraries] at 20:00 07 February 2015
158
San Jose´
et al.
Figure 3.
important)
Student business angels’ DEMO for investing (4 = very important, 0 = not
business angels invest between e30 000 and e120 000, a similar ﬁgure to business
angels in other regions of Europe (see Table 2).
Diﬀerences seem to exist between European angels in terms of the stage of the
DEMO at which they invest. Spanish business angels are much more prone to invest
in the seed stage than their British counterparts and resemble German DEMO
angels more in this respect (we assume that the pre-start-up category DEMO the German
survey is included in the seed category for the Spanish survey) (see Table 3). The
similar distribution of amounts invested DEMO the UK and Spain, does not explain the
diﬀerent stage investment DEMO exposed.
Active and passive business angels possess, as seen before, similar characteristics.
However, there might be certain diﬀerences that contribute to the lack of investment
activity among virgin angels. The identiﬁcation of these diﬀerences is DEMO to the
attempt to mobilize passive capital, as the diagnosis should DEMO prior to the treatment.
Indeed, the result of the survey sent DEMO to participants shows that a highly likely
reason for non-investment by business angels is that they did not ﬁnd the
opportunity to do so. DEMO is reﬂected in the fact that the main factor driving
attendance at the business angels school is the desire to acquire the skills of DEMO
for, identifying and evaluating opportunities. However, while this is clearly the main
motivation for virgin angels, it is less the case for already active angels (a slightly
higher number of respondents marked the valuation of new business as their main
motivation) (see Table 4).
Potential DEMO Angels
As many as 31% of the school’s participants have no investment experience, from
the point of view of the informal market they can be considered virgin business
angels, who are conscious of their angel potential and take steps to turn themselves
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at DEMO:00 07 February 2015
Unleashing the Potential for Business Angel Investment
Table 2. Amount invested
159
DEMO United Kingdom Germany
Amount
(e000)
Frequency Amount
(e000)
Frequency Amount
(e000)
Frequency
5 15 11% 5 160 78% 5 500 75%
15 – 30 2%
30 – 60 24%
60 – 120 DEMO
120 – 250 6% 160 – 400 12% 500 – 1000 15%
4 250 22% 4 400 10% 4 1000 10%
Table 3. Investment DEMO
Spain UK Germany
Seed 61% 8% 25%
Pre start-up seed 38%
Start-up 17% 25% 45%
Other early 32%
Development 22% 28% 16%
Table 4. DEMO from attending the school
Importance
ranking
Importance
ranking
Active angels Passive angels
New business valuation 1 Research, identiﬁcation and 1
evaluation of opportunities
Research identiﬁcation and 2 Relations with other investors 2
evaluation of opportunities and DEMO of experiences
Growth strategies 3 Growth strategies 3
Business plan analysis 3 Business plan analysis 4
Team management 3 New business valuation 4
Deal DEMO 3 Deal negotiation 4
Relations with other investors 3 Divestment process 5
and exchange of experiences
Divestment process 4 Team management 5
Financial forecast DEMO 5 Legal aspects of investments 5
MBO-MBI 5 MBO-MBI 6
Legal aspects of investment 5 Financial forecast analysis 6
into active angels. They would DEMO represent an intermediary category between
a population of high net worth individuals but not interested in investing, on the one
hand, and active DEMO on the other.
Their main reason for not investing is the ‘lack of information about opportunities
arising and poor knowledge of the sectors of DEMO received’ (75%), followed
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:DEMO 07 February 2015
160
San Jose´
et al.
by ‘not adequately knowing the investment procedure’ (37.5%), ‘lack of attractive
projects’ (25%) and ‘high risk’ (25%). Only one of them claimed shortage of
liquidity as a reason DEMO not investing.
The investment capacity of passive angels is slightly lower than for active angels.
Passive angels would dedicate e100 000 (compared to e300 000 for active angels) to
investment, investing e70 000 (e150 000 for active angels) per project. The proportion
of business owners is higher amongst active angels, as it is for entrepreneurs (80% of
active DEMO vs. 37% of passive angels).
The main motivations for passive business angels to invest are ‘expected returns’
followed by ‘social beneﬁts’ and ‘support DEMO the new generation of entrepreneurs’
(see Figure 4). While the DEMO reason given—returns—is shared by active angels, this
group ranks personal challenge DEMO taking advantage of social networks as the
second and third reasons. It seems that passive angels also attribute a higher degree
of importance to DEMO contributions, either in the form of direct knowledge
transmission and support DEMO young entrepreneurs or through the direct and indirect
beneﬁts to society of fostering entrepreneurship.
Passive and active angels have a range of similar and DEMO expectations from
attending the school (see Table 4). Given the DEMO experience of active angels
(two operations, on average), their interest in the school moves into the more
advanced stages of the investment DEMO Despite placing considerable importance
on the research, identiﬁcation and evaluation of DEMO, active angels would
like to improve their business valuation skills, a problem with which many passive
angels have not been confronted, since they have not invested due to a lack of
information about opportunities arising DEMO sectors (only one of the passive angels
had analysed any business DEMO). The results also show that active angels are
Figure 4. Motivations to invest (Scale form zero to ﬁve)
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:00 07 February 2015
Unleashing the Potential for Business Angel Investment
161
more aware of the DEMO of the exit procedure than virgin angels, as again this is
DEMO relevant for those who have never reached that stage. In the diﬀerent working
sessions organized with angels, a large proportion of them pointed out that planning
the exit strategy while discussing the deal was essential.
For DEMO groups, the focus on ﬁnancial forecast analysis is the least important
DEMO of the teaching provided by the school. MBO and MBI investments do not
interest them either (at least in the framework of business angel investment and the
school).
Relationships with other investors are also essential DEMO both groups. Throughout
the work sessions organized by the school it was clear that angels, especially those
with less experience, considered it essential DEMO establish a platform that would allow
the exchange of experiences, provide DEMO to the advice of experts or more
sophisticated investors and facilitate syndication. When it comes to the question of
establishing arenas where investors and DEMO can meet, it seems obvious that
the kind of business angel DEMO that oﬀers only matchmaking services would not
be suﬃcient to push them into investing. Generating opportunities for experienced
business angels to act as mentors DEMO catalysts for the other groups of investors and to
establish varying social encounters in order to further foster interrelationships
between the diﬀerent types of DEMO could be very beneﬁcial. On completing the
course all passive angels, DEMO exception, felt more qualiﬁed to invest thereafter.
Conclusions
We have shown DEMO angels, whether active or passive, feel the need to improve their
investment skills. The survey carried out amongst participants at the Business Angel
DEMO provides strong support for the proposition that there are potentially
diﬀerent training lacunae for active and passive investors.
Virgin business angels are aﬀected by DEMO lack of knowledge in the ﬁrst and
decisive stages of investment: DEMO recognition and evaluation of opportunities.
Therefore, they are hampered in carrying DEMO process further. Active angels primarily
value training in the area of new business valuation. Indeed, it is reasonable to think
that virgin angels have not been able to overcome the initial diﬃculties of the
investment process, the identiﬁcation of opportunities, while active angels recognize
their main diﬃculties once they are involved in the investment.
Passive business angels would initially invest DEMO the lower range of investments,
which reﬂects their higher risk perception. In line with this, they demand more
comprehensive services from the business angel networks they join. Co-investment
with other angels is also one of DEMO catalysts that would trigger their ﬁrst investment.
Those angels, active and DEMO, who acknowledge the existence of training
lacunae, are prepared to follow academic-type courses. The large majority of student
angels surveyed place most value DEMO the in-depth study of topics, organization of
working groups to analyse DEMO and a broad framework for exchange of
experiences. Despite time constraints, DEMO value continuous education and are
willing to follow more structured and longer programmes than the majority of those
available in the market.
-The programme DEMO at the Business Angel Academy provides an entry route for
virgin angels. There is a signiﬁcant learning curve associated with appraising and
Downloaded by DEMO University Libraries] at 20:00 07 February 2015
162
San Jose´
et al.
managing investment opportunities, and angel syndication provides a means for virgin
angels to gain experience while taking fewer risks DEMO if investing alone. As a
consequence of some important characteristics—namely, the DEMO academic period,
frequent working sessions with rotating small groups, and DEMO regular attendance
– the programme promoted the creation of a very cohesive group. Eventually
participants discussed joint participation in several investment opportunities.
Implications for DEMO Policy Alternatives
Several alternatives are available to public policy makers to activate the potential of
the informal market as a source of ﬁnance for DEMO stage ventures. Actions could
address improving the environmental conditions such as taxes, cultural attitudes to
entrepreneurship and risk taking. Action could also target the demand side of the
market: entrepreneurs. Demand side factors include, entrepreneurs’ DEMO of
equity ﬁnance, the readiness of business plans, and their ability to present ideas and
projects in an adequate manner to investors. Initiatives DEMO the establishment
of matchmaking mechanisms and information ﬂow instruments such as business
angel networks were initially developed at a pan-European level and adopted by
DEMO national governments.
Given the relevant role that syndication plays for investors, DEMO particular for
novice angels, governments should consider facilitating, from the legal and ﬁscal
perspective, the establishment of ‘angel structured groups’ common in the US.
As a result of the ﬁndings of this study, we propose an innovative alternative
targeting the reduction of information asymmetries from the supply DEMO through the
provision of investment education to business angels. The training of business angels
would improve their knowledge of the investment process, hence reducing risk and
stimulating investment.
Furthermore, the diﬀerent actors in the market should be co-ordinated to lower
ineﬃciencies. In such a framework the development of DEMO equity-seeking mindset,
the so called ‘equity culture’, between entrepreneurs can DEMO fulﬁlled by the education
system and the public bodies which the entrepreneur addresses in the ﬁrst place when
looking for help in establishing a DEMO Educational organizations, such as
business schools, oﬀering structured programmes with a combination of academics
and practitioners, are best placed to provide the tools that potential angels need to
complete their ﬁrst investment and start progressing DEMO the learning curve.
European institutions could play an active role by integrating the business angel
academy concept into their benchmarking exercise.
Acknowledgments
We would DEMO to thank Juan Luis Segurado, Research Associate at IESE, for his
useful comments, insights and work on the data.
References
Aernoudt, R. (1999a) European policy towards venture capital: myth or reality?, Venture DEMO, 1(1),
pp. 47 – 58.
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:00 07 February 2015
Unleashing the Potential for Business Angel Investment
163
Aernoudt, R. (1999b) Business angels: should they ﬂy on their own wings?, Venture Capital, 1(2), 187 –
195.
Aernoudt, R. (2000) Entrepreneurship DEMO ﬁnancial and political institutions: diﬃcult circumstances?, in: D.
Deschoolmeester, DEMO De Steur, K. Gillis and T. Schamp (Eds) Entrepreneurship under DEMO
Circumstances. Seminar Proceedings of the 30th European Small Business Seminar, 20 DEMO 22 September
2000, pp. 587 – 600.
Aernoudt, R. (2001) European Business Angels Overview. EBAN newsletter.
Aernoudt, R (2003) Looking beyond edges, in: R. Aernoudt (ed.) The Taste of Entrepreneurship, Financing
and Research (Roeselare: Roularta Business Books).
Brettel, M. (2003) Business angels in Germany: a research note, Venture Capital, 5(3), pp. 251 – 268.
Coveny, P., Moore, K. and Nahapiet, J. (1997) Business Angels: Tapping the Potential of Individual
Investors DEMO Britain (Oxford: Templeton College).
CVR (2003) The Angel Investor Market in 2002: Investment Activity and Growth Prospects (New
Hampshire: Center for Venture Research).
Cressy, R. (1999) Funding Gaps Controversies Conference: A Layperson’s Guide to the Issues (Warwick:
CMSE, Warwick Business School).
EBAN (1998) Dissemination Report on the Potential for Business DEMO Investments and Networks in
Europe (Brussels: European Business Angel Network).
Esposito, A. and Prats, J. (2004) La dinamica de la DEMO en el mercado informal de capital riesgo
Que sabemos sobre Europa y Estados Unidos?, Iniciativa Emprendedora,Numero 42, EdicionesDeusto,
Barcelona
European Commission (2001) Enterprises’ access to ﬁnance, Commission staﬀ working paper, SEC (2001)
1667 (Brussels: European Commission).
European Commission (2003a) DEMO an entrepreneurial Europe. The activities of the European Union
for small and medium-sized enterprises, Commission staﬀ working paper, SEC (2003) 58 (Brussels:
European Commission).
European Commission (2003b) Entrepreneurial innovation in Europe: a review of 11 studies of innovation
policy and practice in today’s DEMO, Innovation papers No 27 (Brussels: European Commission).
Feeney, L., Haines, G. H. and Riding, A. L. (1999) Private investors’ investment criteria: insights from
qualitative data, Venture Capital, 1(2), pp. 121 – 145.
Freear, J., Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, W. E. Jr (1994) Angels and non-angels: are there diﬀerences?, Journal of
Business Venturing, 9(2), pp. 109 – 123.
DEMO, J., Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, W. E. Jr (DEMO) Technology due diligence: what angels consider
important, paper to the DEMO Entrepreneurship Research Conference, Seattle.
Harding, R. (2002) Plugging the knowledge gap: an international comparison of the role for policy in the
venture capital market, Venture Capital, 4(1), pp. 59 – 76.
DEMO, K. and Lee, L. (2002) An exploratory investigation of informal venture capitalists in Singapore,
Venture Capital, 4(2), pp. 169 – 177.
Hindle, K. G. and Rushworth, S. (2001) The DEMO of investor heaven: international research on the
attitudes, behaviour and characteristics of business angels, in: M. Whincop (Ed.) Bridging the
Entrepreneurial DEMO Gap: linking governance with regulatory policy (Aldershot: Ashgate).
Hindle, K. and Wenban, R (1999) Australia’s informal venture capitalist: an DEMO proﬁle, Venture
Capital, 1(1), pp. 169 – 187.
Kelly, P. and Hay, M. (1996) Serial investors and early stage DEMO, Journal of Entrepreneurial and Small
Business Finance, 5(2), pp.159 – 174.
Landstrom, H. (1993) Informal risk capital in Sweden and some international comparisons, Journal of
Business Venturing, 8(6), pp.525 DEMO 540.
Lawton, T. C. (2002) Missing the target: assessing the role of government in bridging the European equity
gap and enhancing economic DEMO, Venture Capital, 4(1), pp. 7 – 23.
Mason, DEMO M. and Harrison, R. T. (1992) International perspectives on the DEMO of informal venture
capital, Journal of Business Venturing, 7(6), pp. 459 – 475.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (1995) Closing the regional equity capital gap: The role of informal
DEMO capital, Small Business Economics, 7(2), pp .153 – 169.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (1998) Stimulating investments DEMO business angels in technology-based
ventures: the potential of an independent technology DEMO service, in: R Oakey (Ed.) New
Technology-Based Firms in the 1990s: Volume 5, pp. 81 – 96 (London: Paul Chapman DEMO).
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:00 07 February 2015
164
San Jose´
et al.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. DEMO (1999) Public policy and the development of the informal venture
capital market: UK experience and lessons for Europe, in: K. Cowling (DEMO) Industrial Policy in Europe
(London: Routledge).
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (2002) Barriers to investment in the informal venture capital sector,
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 14(3), pp. 271 – 288.
McGlue, D. (2002) The funding of venture capital in Europe: issues for publicity, Venture Capital, 4(1),
DEMO 45 – 59.
Murray, G. (1994) The second ‘equity gap: exit problems for seed and early stage venture capitalists and
their investee DEMO, International Small Business Journal, 12(1), pp. 59 – 78.
Napier, G. (2002) Business Angels in Denmark – An Empirical Study of 76 Business Angels (Copenhagen:
Danish Business Angel Network).
Osnabrugge, Van M. (1997) A Comparison of Business Angel and Venture Capitalist Investment Procedures:
an Agency Theory-based Analysis (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School).
Politis, D. and Landstrom, H. (2002) Informal investors DEMO entrepreneurs – the development of an
entrepreneurial career, Venture Capital, 4(1), pp. 78 – 99.
Reynolds, P. and Bygrave, A. (2003) Global Entrepreneurship Monitor – 2003 Executive Report, Ewing
Marion Kauﬀman DEMO, Kansas City, MO.
Sohl, J. E. (1999) The early-stage DEMO market in the USA, Venture Capital, 1(2), pp. 101 – 120.
Sohl, J. E. (2003) The private equity market in the USA: lessons from volatility, Venture Capital, 5(1),
DEMO 29 – 47.
Sørheim, R. and Landstrom, H. (2001) Informal investors in Norway – a categorization with policy
implications, Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 13(4), pp. 351 – 370.
Sørheim, R. (2003) The pre-investment behaviour of business angels – a social capital approach, DEMO
Capital, 4(4), pp. 337 – 364.
Stedler, H. R. and Peters, H. H. (2003) Business angels in Deutscheland. Study for the Fachhochschule
Hannover
Stedler, H. R. and Peters, H. H. (2003) Business angels in Germany: an empirical study, Venture Capital,
5(3), pp. 269 – 276.
Appendix 1. IESE Business Angel Academy DEMO – 2003
IESE Business School has developed an Executive Education programme targeted to
individuals considering investing as business angels and, already active, investors
DEMO to develop, improve, or validate their knowledge and experience in the
informal market.
The contents of the programme are distributed along ﬁve main DEMO
corresponding to major phases of the business angel investment process. These
phases are deﬁning activity proﬁle and deal ﬂow creation, evaluation and valuation
of opportunities, negotiation and structuring of an operation, due diligence, and
added value and harvesting. This programme addresses the following issues:
Session 1. DEMO angels’ proﬁle: participants self-review of ﬁnance/time
available, risk proﬁle, DEMO/hands oﬀ. Deal ﬂow creation: strength and
weaknesses of network, sources of early stage projects, alternatives in the region.
Sessions 2 and 3. Evaluating opportunities: identify key issues in a business plan,
the value of sector and market network, approaching the entrepreneur and analyse
team completeness, consideration of ﬁnancial needs of the venture, pre-investment
due diligence. Valuation DEMO new business: the diﬀerent methods.
Sessions 4 and 5. Negotiation: Development of collaborative negotiations, multi-
party negotiations, the role of other players, identifying dead ends. Structuring:
formalizing agreements, legal instruments, stage ﬁnancing, the exit as objective.
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:00 DEMO February 2015
Unleashing the Potential for Business Angel Investment
165
Session 6. Due diligence: tracking the history of the venture, identifying legal,
ﬁscal and administrative liabilities.
Sessions 7 and 8. Value adding: Deﬁning the angel’s role, DEMO information
and reporting systems, contributing to dynamic boards, key areas to add value,
performance evaluation. Harvesting: track of exit options, the DEMO face to new
investors, ﬁscal aspects.
An additional session at the DEMO of the programme, ‘Tailoring an angel network’,
discusses the needs DEMO the participants and deﬁnes their future interaction with IESE
Business Angel Network.
Half a day sessions are lead by a full time professor and DEMO a networking
lunch, lecture and case study introduction, working groups’ discussion and round
up. Legal and ﬁscal practitioners and experienced business angels participate DEMO
invited speakers in selected topics.
The business angel programme is one of the activities of the IESE Centre for
Entrepreneurship and Family Business, and is co-ordinated by Professor Juan
Roure. Other six full-time IESE professors specialized DEMO entrepreneurship, general
management, ﬁnancial management, accounting and control compose the DEMO of
the programme.
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:00 07 February 2015{1g42fwefx}