American Economic Association
Maps of Bounded Rationality: Psychology for Behavioral Economics
Author(s): Daniel Kahneman
Source: The American Economic Review, Vol. 93, No. 5 (Dec., 2003), pp. 1449-1475
Published by: American Economic Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3132137
Accessed: 12/08/DEMO 04:35
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use DEMO, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you DEMO not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://DEMO/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=aea.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or DEMO
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly DEMO to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and DEMO build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
American Economic Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The
American Economic Review.
http://www.jstor.org
Maps
Psychology
of Bounded
for Behavioral
Rationality:
Economicst
By DANIEL
KAHNEMAN*
DEMO work cited by the Nobel committee was
done jointly with Amos Tversky (1937-1996)
during a long and unusually close collaboration.
Together, we DEMO the psychology of intu-
itive beliefs and choices and examined their
bounded rationality. Herbert A. Simon (1955,
1979) had proposed much earlier DEMO decision
makers should be viewed as boundedly rational,
and had offered a model in which utility maxi-
mization was replaced by satisficing. Our DEMO
search attempted to obtain a map of bounded
rationality, by exploring DEMO systematic biases
that separate the beliefs that people have and the
choices they make from the optimal beliefs and
choices assumed in rational-agent models. DEMO
rational-agent model was our starting point and
the main source of our null hypotheses, but
Tversky and I viewed our research primarily as
a contribution to psychology, with a possible
contribution to economics as a secondary ben-
efit. We were drawn into the interdisciplinary
conversation by economists who DEMO that
psychology could be a useful source of assump-
tions for economic theorizing, and indirectly a
source of hypotheses for economic research
(Richard DEMO Thaler, 1980, 1991, 1992). These
t This article is DEMO revised version of the lecture Daniel
Kahneman delivered in Stockholm, Sweden, on December
8, 2002, when he received the Bank of Sweden DEMO in
Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel. The article
is copyright ? The Nobel Foundation 2002 and is published
here with the permission DEMO the Nobel Foundation.
* Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ 08544 (e-mail: Kahneman@princeton.edu).
This essay revisits problems that Amos DEMO and I
studied together many years ago, and continued to discuss DEMO
a conversation that spanned several decades. It builds on an
analysis of judgment heuristics that was developed in col-
laboration with Shane Frederick (Kahneman and Frederick,
2002). A different version was published in American DEMO
chologist in September 2003. For detailed comments on this
version I am grateful to Angus Deaton, David Laibson,
Michael Rothschild, and Richard DEMO The usual caveats
apply. Geoffrey Goodwin, Amir Goren, and Kurt Schoppe
provided helpful research assistance.
hopes have been realized to some extent, giving
rise to an active program of research by behav-
ioral economists (Thaler, 2000; Colin Camerer
et al., forthcoming; for other examples, see
Kahneman and Tversky, 2000).
My work with Tversky comprised three sep-
arate programs of research, some aspects of
which were carried out with other collaborators.
The first explored the heuristics that people use
and the DEMO to which they are prone in vari-
ous tasks of judgment under uncertainty, includ-
ing predictions and evaluations of evidence
(Kahneman and Tversky, 1973; Tversky and
Kahneman, 1974; Kahneman et al., 1982). DEMO
second was concerned with prospect theory, a
model of choice under DEMO (Kahneman and
Tversky, 1979; Tversky and Kahneman, 1992)
and with loss aversion in riskless choice (Kah-
neman et al., 1990, 1991; Tversky and Kahne-
man, 1991). The third line of DEMO dealt with
framing effects and with their implications for
rational-agent models (DEMO and Kahneman,
1981, 1986). The present essay revisits these
DEMO lines of research in light of recent ad-
vances in the psychology of intuitive judgment
and choice. Many of the ideas presented here
were DEMO informally decades ago, but
the attempt to integrate them into a DEMO
approach to judgment and choice is recent.
Economists often criticize psychological re-
search for its propensity to generate lists of
errors and biases, and for its failure to offer a
coherent alternative to the rational-agent model.
DEMO complaint is only partly justified: psycho-
logical theories of intuitive thinking DEMO
match the elegance and precision of formal nor-
mative models of belief and choice, but this is
just another way of saying that rational models
are psychologically unrealistic. Furthermore,
the alternative to simple and precise DEMO is
not chaos. Psychology offers integrative con-
cepts and mid-level generalizations, DEMO gain
credibility from their ability to explain ostensi-
bly different phenomena in diverse domains. In
this spirit, the present essay offers a unified
1449
1450
THE
AMERICAN
ECONOMIC
REVIEW
DECEMBER
2003
treatment of intuitive judgment and DEMO,
which builds on an earlier study of the relation-
ship between preferences and attitudes (Kahne-
man et al., 1999) and extends a model of
judgment heuristics recently proposed by Kah-
neman and Shane Frederick (2002). The guid-
ing ideas are (i) that most judgments DEMO most
choices are made intuitively; (ii) that the rules
that DEMO intuition are generally similar to the
rules of perception. Accordingly, the DEMO
of the rules of intuitive judgments and choices
will rely extensively on visual analogies.
Section I introduces a distinction between
two generic modes of DEMO function, corre-
sponding roughly to intuition and reasoning.
Section II describes DEMO factors that determine
the relative accessibility of different judgments
and responses. Section III relates prospect the-
ory to the general proposition that changes and
DEMO are more accessible than absolute
values. Section IV explains framing effects in
terms of differential salience and accessibility.
Section V reviews an attribute substitution
DEMO of heuristic judgment. Section VI de-
scribes a particular family of heuristics, called
prototype heuristics. Section VII discusses the
interactions between intuitive and deliberate
thought. Section VIII concludes.
I. The
Architecture
of Cognition:
Two
Systems
DEMO present treatment distinguishes two
modes of thinking and deciding, which corre-
DEMO roughly to the everyday concepts of rea-
soning and intuition. Reasoning is what we do
when we compute the product of 17 by 258, fill
an income tax form, or consult a map. Intuition
is at work when we read the sentence "Bill
Clinton is a shy man" as mildly amusing, or
when we find ourselves reluctant to eat DEMO piece
of what we know to be chocolate that has been
formed in the shape of a cockroach (Paul Rozin
and Carol Nemeroff, DEMO). Reasoning is done
deliberately and effortfully, but intuitive thoughts
seem DEMO come spontaneously to mind, without
conscious search or computation, and without
effort. Casual observation and systematic re-
search indicate that most thoughts and DEMO
are normally intuitive in this sense (Daniel T.
Gilbert, 1989, DEMO; Timothy D. Wilson, 2002;
Seymour Epstein, 2003).
Although DEMO thought is the norm,
some monitoring of the quality of mental oper-
ations and overt behavior also goes on. We do
not express DEMO passing thought or act on
every impulse. But the monitoring is normally
lax, and allows many intuitive judgments to be
expressed, including some DEMO are erroneous
(Kahneman and Frederick, 2002). Ellen J.
Langer et al. (1978) provided a well-known
example of what she called "mindless behav-
ior." In her experiment, a confederate tried to
cut in DEMO at a copying machine, using various
preset "excuses." The conclusion DEMO that state-
ments that had the form of an unqualified re-
quest were rejected (e.g., "Excuse me, may I use
the Xerox DEMO?"), but almost any statement
that had the general form of an explanation was
accepted, including "Excuse me, may I use the
Xerox machine because I want to make cop-
ies?" The superficiality DEMO striking.
Frederick (2003, personal communication)
has used simple puzzles to study cognitive self-
monitoring, as in the following example: "A bat
and a ball cost $1.10 in total. The bat costs $1
more DEMO the ball. How much does the ball
cost?" Almost everyone reports an initial ten-
dency to answer "10 cents" because the sum
DEMO separates naturally into $1 and 10 cents,
and 10 cents is about the right magnitude. Fred-
erick found that many intelligent people yield DEMO
this immediate impulse: 50 percent (47/93) of a
group DEMO Princeton students and 56 percent
(164/293) of students at the University of Mich-
igan gave the wrong answer. Clearly, these re-
spondents offered their response without first
checking it. The surprisingly high rate of DEMO
in this easy problem illustrates how lightly the
output of effortless associative thinking is mon-
itored: people are not accustomed to thinking
hard, DEMO are often content to trust a plausible
judgment that quickly comes to mind. Re-
markably, Frederick has found that errors in
this puzzle and in others of the same type
were significant predictors of high discount
DEMO
In the examples discussed so far, intuition
was associated with poor DEMO, but in-
tuitive thinking can also be powerful and accu-
rate. DEMO skill is acquired by prolonged
practice, and the performance of skills DEMO rapid
and effortless. The proverbial master chess
player who walks past a game and declares
"white mates in three" without slowing is per-
DEMO intuitively (Simon and William G.
Chase, 1973), as is the experienced nurse who
VOL.
93 NO.
5
KAHNEMAN:
MAPS
OF BOUNDED
RATIONALITY
1451
O
DEMO
z
L)
INTUITION
Fast
Parallel
Automatic
Effortless
Associative
Slow-learning
Emotional
SYSTEM 1
Slow
Serial
Controlled
Effortful
Rule-governed
Flexible
Neutral
I
Percepts
Current stimulation
DEMO
Conceptual
Past,
Can be evoked
Present
representations
and Future
by language
I
FIGURE 1.
THREE
COGNITIVE
SYSTEMS
PERCEPTION
REASONING
SYSTEM 2
detects subtle DEMO of impending heart failure
(Gary Klein, 1998; Atul Gawande, 2002).
The distinction between intuition and reason-
ing has recently been a DEMO of considerable
interest to psychologists (see, e.g., Shelly
Chaiken and DEMO Trope, 1999; Gilbert,
2002; Steven A. Sloman, 2002; DEMO E.
Stanovich and Richard F. West, 2002). There is
substantial DEMO on the characteristics that
distinguish the two types of cognitive processes,
for which Stanovich and West (2000) proposed
the neutral labels of DEMO 1 and System 2.
The scheme shown in Figure 1 summarizes
these characteristics. The operations of System
1 are fast, automatic, effortless, associative, and
often emotionally charged; they are also gov-
erned by habit, and are therefore difficult to
control or modify. The operations of System DEMO
are slower, serial, effortful, and deliberately
controlled; they are also relatively flexible and
potentially
rule-governed.
The difference in effort provides the most
DEMO indications of whether a given mental
process should be assigned to System 1 or Sys-
tem 2. Because the overall capacity for mental
effort DEMO limited, effortful processes tend to dis-
rupt each other, whereas effortless processes
neither cause nor suffer much interference when
combined with other tasks. DEMO example, a driv-
er's ability to conduct a conversation is DEMO sen-
sitive indicator of the amount of attention
currently demanded by the driving task. Dual
tasks have been used in hundreds of psycholog-
ical DEMO to measure the attentional de-
mands of different mental activities (for DEMO
review, see Harold E. Pashler, 1998). Studies
using the dual-task method suggest that the self-
monitoring function belongs with the effortful
operations DEMO System 2. People who are occu-
pied by a demanding mental activity (e.g., at-
tempting to hold in mind several digits) are
much more likely to respond to another task by
blurting out whatever comes DEMO mind (Gilbert,
1989). The phrase that "System 2 monitors the
activities of System 1" will be used here as
shorthand for a hypothesis about what would
happen if the operations of System 2 DEMO dis-
rupted. For example, it is safe to predict that the
DEMO of errors in the bat-and-ball question
will increase, if the respondents DEMO asked this
question while attempting to keep a list of
words in their active memory.
In the language that will be used here, the
perceptual system and the intuitive operations
1452
THE
AMERICAN
ECONOMIC
REVIEW
DECEMBER
2003
of System 1 generate impressions DEMO the at-
tributes of objects of perception and thought.
These impressions are not voluntary and need
not be verbally explicit. In contrast, judgments
are always explicit and intentional, whether or
not they are overtly expressed. Thus, System 2
is involved in all judgments, whether they orig-
inate DEMO impressions or in deliberate reasoning.
The label "intuitive" is applied to judgments
that directly reflect impressions.
Figure 1 illustrates an idea that guided DEMO
research that Tversky and I conducted from its
early days: that DEMO judgments occupy a
position-perhaps corresponding to evolution-
ary history-between the automatic operations
of perception and the deliberate operations of
reasoning. All the characteristics that DEMO
of intuition have attributed to System 1 are also
properties of perceptual operations. Unlike per-
ception, however, the operations of System 1
are DEMO restricted to the processing of current
stimulation. Like System 2, the DEMO of
System 1 deal with stored concepts as well as
with percepts, and can be evoked by language.
This view of intuition suggests that the vast
store of scientific knowledge available about
perceptual phenomena can be DEMO source of useful
hypotheses about the workings of intuition. The
strategy of drawing on analogies from percep-
tion is applied in the following section.
DEMO The
Accessibility
Dimension
A defining property of intuitive thoughts is
that they come to mind spontaneously, like per-
cepts. The technical term for the ease with
which mental contents come to mind is acces-
sibility (E. Tory Higgins, 1996). To understand
intuition, we must understand why DEMO
thoughts are accessible and others are not. The
remainder of this section introduces the concept
of accessibility by examples drawn from visual
perception.
Consider DEMO 2a and 2b. As we look at
the object in Figure 2a, we have immediate
impressions of the height of the tower, the DEMO
of the top block, and perhaps the volume of the
tower. DEMO these impressions into units
of height or volume requires a deliberate oper-
ation, but the impressions themselves are highly
accessible. For other attributes, DEMO perceptual
impression exists. For example, the total area
that the blocks DEMO cover if the tower were
4C7
z
e-.w.
Figure 2b
-
z~~~~~~~~~~~
Figure 2c
Figure 2a
FIGURE 2. EXAMPLES OF DIFFERENTIAL ACCESSIBILITY
dismantled is DEMO perceptually accessible,
though it can be estimated by a deliberate pro-
cedure, such as multiplying the area of a block
by the number of blocks. Of course, the situa-
tion is reversed with Figure 2b. Now the blocks
are laid out and an impression of total area DEMO
immediately accessible, but the height of the
tower that could be DEMO with these
blocks is not.
Some relational properties are accessible.
Thus, DEMO is obvious at a glance that Figures 2a
and 2c are different, but also that they are more
similar to each other than either is to Figure
2b. And some statistical properties of ensembles
are accessible, while others are not. For an
example, consider the question "What DEMO the
average length of the lines in Figure 3?" This
question is easy. When a set of objects of the
same general kind DEMO presented to an observer-
whether simultaneously or successively-a rep-
resentation of the set is computed automatically,
which includes quite precise information about
the DEMO (Dan Ariely, 2001; Sang-Chul
Chong and Anne Treisman, 2003). The repre-
sentation of the prototype is highly accessible,
and it DEMO the character of a percept: we form an
impression of the DEMO line without choosing
to do so. The only role for System 2 in this task
is to map the impression of typical length onto
DEMO appropriate scale. In contrast, the answer to
the question "What is the total length of the
lines in the display?" does not DEMO to mind
without considerable effort.
As the example of averages and sums illus-
trates, some attributes are more accessible than
others, both in DEMO and in judgment. At-
tributes that are routinely and automatically
produced by the perceptual system or by System
VOL.
93 NO. 5
KAHNEMAN:
MAPS
OF BOUNDED
RATIONALITY
1453
FIGURE DEMO
OF
DIFFERENTIAL
ACCESSIBILITY
STATISTICAL
PROPERTIES
1, without intention or effort, have been called
natural assessments (Tversky and Kahneman,
1983). Kahneman and Frederick (2002) com-
piled a partial list of these natural assessments.
DEMO addition to physical properties such as size,
distance, and loudness, the list includes more
abstract properties such as similarity, causal
propensity, DEMO, affective valence,
and mood.
The evaluation of stimuli as good DEMO bad is a
particularly important natural assessment. The
evidence, both behavioral (John A. Bargh,
1997; Robert B. Zajonc, 1998) and neurophys-
iological (e.g., Joseph E. LeDoux, 2000), is
consistent with the idea that the assessment of
whether objects are good (and should be ap-
proached) or bad (should be avoided) is carried
out quickly and
circuitry. A remarkable
Bargh (1997) illustrates
ation process, and its direct
avoidance. Participants
stimuli on a screen,
each stimulus
a lever DEMO blanked
affectively charged words, some positive (e.g.,
LOVE) and DEMO aversive (e.g., VOMIT), but
this feature was irrelevant to the participant's
task. Half the participants responded by pulling
the lever toward DEMO, half responded by
pushing the lever away. Although the response
neural
DEMO
link
were shown a series of
and
as soon as it appeared,
the screen.
efficiently
the speed of the evalu-
to approach
instructed
DEMO respond
to
The stimuli
by moving
were
by specialized
experiment
reported
and
was initiated within a fraction of a second, well
before the meaning of the stimulus was con-
sciously registered, the emotional valence of the
word had a substantial effect. Participants were
relatively faster in pulling a DEMO toward them-
selves (approach) for positive words, and rela-
tively DEMO pushing the lever away when the
word was aversive. The tendencies to approach
or avoid were evoked by an automatic process
that was not DEMO conscious voluntary control.
Several psychologists have commented on the
influence of this primordial evaluative system
(here included in System 1) on the attitudes DEMO
preferences that people adopt consciously and
deliberately (Zajonc, 1998; Kahneman DEMO al.,
1999; Paul Slovic et al., 2002; Epstein, 2003).
The preceding discussion establishes a di-
mension of accessibility. At one DEMO of this
dimension we find operations that have the
characteristics of perception and of the intuitive
System 1: they are rapid, automatic, and effort-
less. At the other end are slow, serial, and
effortful DEMO that people need a special
reason to undertake. Accessibility is a contin-
uum, not a dichotomy, and some effortful op-
erations demand more DEMO than others. Some
of the determinants of accessibility are probably
genetic; DEMO develop through experience. The
acquisition of skill gradually increases the ac-
cessibility of useful responses and of productive
ways to organize information, until skilled per-
formance becomes almost effortless. This effect
of practice is not limited DEMO motor skills. A
master chess player does not see the same board
as the novice, and visualizing the tower in an
array of blocks would also become virtually
effortless with prolonged practice.
The impressions that become DEMO in
any particular situation are mainly determined,
of course, by DEMO actual properties of the object
of judgment: it is easier to DEMO a tower in Figure
2a than in Figure 2b, because the DEMO in the
latter is only virtual. Physical salience also de-
termines accessibility: if a large green letter and
a small blue letter are shown at the same time,
"green" will come to mind first. DEMO, sa-
lience can be overcome by deliberate attention:
an instruction DEMO look for the small object will
enhance the accessibility of all its features.
Analogous effects of salience and of sponta-
neous and voluntary attention DEMO with more
abstract stimuli. For example, the statements
"Team A beat team B" and "Team B lost to
1454
THE
AMERICAN
ECONOMIC
REVIEW
DECEMBER
2003
FIGURE 4. AN EFFECT OF DEMO ON ACCESSIBILITY
team A" convey the same information, but be-
cause each sentence draws attention to its gram-
matical subject, they make different thoughts
accessible. Accessibility also reflects temporary
states of associative activation. For example, the
mention of a familiar social category temporarily
increases the accessibility of DEMO traits associated
with the category stereotype, as indicated by a
lowered DEMO for recognizing behaviors as
indications of these traits (Susan T. Fiske, 1998).
As designers of billboards know well, moti-
vationally relevant and emotionally arousing
stimuli spontaneously attract attention. Bill-
boards are useful to advertisers DEMO paying
attention to an object makes all its features
accessible-including those that are not linked
to its primary motivational or emotional signif-
icance. The "hot" states of high emotional and
motivational arousal greatly increase the acces-
sibility of thoughts that relate to the immediate
emotion and to the DEMO needs, and reduce the
accessibility of other thoughts (George Loe-
wenstein, 1996, 2000; Jon Elster, 1998). An
effect of emotional DEMO on accessibility
was demonstrated in an important study by Yu-
val Rottenstreich and Christopher K. Hsee
(2001), which showed that people are less sen-
sitive to variations of probability when valuing
chances to receive emotionally DEMO out-
comes (kisses and electric shocks) than when
the outcomes are monetary.
Figure 4 (adapted from Jerome S. Bruner and
A. Leigh Minturn, 1955) includes a standard
demonstration of the effect of context on DEMO
sibility. An ambiguous stimulus that is per-
ceived as a letter within a context of letters is
instead seen as a number when placed DEMO a
context of numbers. More generally, expecta-
tions (conscious or not) are a powerful determi-
nant of accessibility.
Another important point that Figure 4 illus-
trates is the complete suppression of ambiguity
in conscious perception. DEMO aspect of the dem-
onstration is spoiled for the reader who sees the
two versions in close proximity, but when the
two lines are shown separately, observers will
not spontaneously become aware of the alterna-
tive interpretation. They "see" the interpretation
of the object that is the DEMO likely in its con-
text, but have no subjective indication that DEMO
could be seen differently. Ambiguity and uncer-
tainty are suppressed in intuitive judgment as
well as in perception. Doubt is a phenomenon of
System DEMO, an awareness of one's ability to think
incompatible thoughts about DEMO same thing.
The central finding in studies of intuitive deci-
sions, DEMO described by Klein (1998), is that
experienced decision makers working DEMO
pressure (e.g., firefighting company captains)
rarely need to choose between options because,
in most cases, only a single option comes to mind.
The compound cognitive system that has
been sketched here is an DEMO computa-
tional device. It is well-adapted to its environ-
ment and has two ways of adjusting to changes:
a short-term process that is DEMO and effort-
ful, and a long-term process of skill acquisition
that DEMO produces highly effective re-
sponses at low cost. The system tends to see
what it expects to see-a form of Bayesian
adaptation-and it is DEMO capable of responding
effectively to surprises. However, this marvel-
ous creation DEMO in important respects from
another paragon, the rational agent assumed in
DEMO theory. Some of these differences are
explored in the following sections, DEMO review
several familiar results as effects of accessibility.
Possible implications for theorizing in behavioral
economics are explored along the way.
III. Changes
or States:DEMO
Prospect
Theory
A general property of perceptual systems is
that they are designed to enhance the accessi-
bility of changes and differences. Perception is
DEMO: the perceived attributes
of a focal stimulus reflect the contrast between
DEMO stimulus and a context of prior and con-
current stimuli. This section will show that
VOL.
93 NO. 5
KAHNEMAN:
MAPS
OF BOUNDED RATIONALITY
1455
FIGURE DEMO REFERENCE-DEPENDENCE IN THE PERCEPTION
OF BRIGHTNESS
intuitive evaluations of outcomes are also
reference-dependent.
The role of prior stimulation is familiar in the
domain of DEMO Immersing the hand in
water at 20?C will feel pleasantly warm after
prolonged immersion in much colder water, and
pleasantly cool after immersion in much
warmer water. Figure 5 illustrates reference-
dependence in vision. The DEMO enclosed squares
have the same luminance, but they do not ap-
DEMO equally bright. The point of the demonstra-
tion is that the brightness of an area is not a
single-parameter function of the light energy
DEMO reaches the eye from that area, just as the
experience of DEMO
eter function of the temperature to which one is
currently exposed. An account of perceived
brightness or temperature also requires a param-
eter for DEMO reference value (often called adapta-
tion level), which is influenced DEMO the context of
current and prior stimulation.
From the vantage point of a student of per-
ception, it is quite surprising that in standard
economic analyses the utility of decision out-
comes is assumed to be DEMO entirely by
the final state of endowment, and is therefore
reference-independent. DEMO the context of risky
choice, this assumption can be traced to DEMO
brilliant essay that first defined a theory of ex-
pected utility (DEMO Bernoulli, 1738). Ber-
noulli assumed that states of wealth have DEMO
specified utility, and proposed that the decision
rule for choice under DEMO is to maximize the
is not
a single-param-
expected utility of wealth (the moral expecta-
tion). The language of Bernoulli's essay is pre-
scriptive-it speaks of what is sensible or
reasonable to do-but the DEMO was also in-
tended as a description of the choices of reason-
able men (Gerd Gigerenzer et al., 1989). As in
most DEMO treatments of decision-making,
Bernoulli's essay does not acknowledge any
tension between prescription and description.
The proposition that decision makers evaluate
outcomes by DEMO utility of final asset positions
has been retained in economic analyses for al-
most 300 years. This is rather remarkable, be-
cause the idea is easily shown to be wrong; I
call it Bernoulli's error.
Tversky and I constructed numerous thought
experiments when we began the study DEMO risky
choice that led to the formulation of prospect
theory (Kahneman DEMO Tversky, 1979). Exam-
ples such as Problems 1 and 2 DEMO convinced
us of the inadequacy of the utility function for
wealth as an explanation of choice.
Problem 1
Would you accept this gamble?
DEMO chance to win $150
50% chance to lose $100
Would your choice change if your
overall wealth were lower by $100?
1456
There will be few takers of the gamble in Prob-
lem DEMO The experimental evidence shows that
most people will reject a gamble with even
chances to win and lose, unless the possible win
is at least twice the size of the possible loss
(e.g., Tversky and DEMO, 1992). The an-
swer to the second question is, of course, neg-
ative. Next consider Problem 2:
Problem 2
Which would you choose?
lose $100 with certainty
or
50% chance to win DEMO
50% chance to lose $200
Would your choice change if your
overall wealth were higher by $100?
In Problem 2, the gamble appears much more
attractive than the sure loss. Experimental re-
sults indicate that DEMO preferences are
held by a large majority of respondents in prob-
lems of this kind (Kahneman and Tversky,
1979). Here again, DEMO idea that a change of
$100 in total wealth would affect preferences
cannot be taken seriously.
We examined many choice pairs of this
type DEMO our early explorations, and concluded
that the very abrupt switch from DEMO aversion
to risk seeking could not plausibly be ex-
plained by a utility function for wealth. Pref-
erences appeared to be determined by
attitudes DEMO gains and losses, defined relative
to a reference point, but Bernoulli's theory
and its successors did not incorporate a ref-
erence point. DEMO therefore proposed an alter-
native theory of risk, in which the DEMO of
utility are gains and losses-changes of
wealth rather than states of wealth. One nov-
elty of prospect theory was that it was explic-
DEMO presented as a formal descriptive theory
of the choices that people actually make, not
as a normative model. This was a departure
from a long history of choice models that
served double duty as normative logics DEMO as
idealized descriptive models.
The distinctive predictions of prospect the-
ory follow from the shape of the value func-
tion, which is shown in Figure 6. The value
function is defined on gains and losses and DEMO
THE
AMERICAN
ECONOMIC
LOssES
VALUE
DECEMBER
FIGURE 6. A SCHEMATIC VALUE FUNCTION FOR CHANGES
characterized by three features: (1) it is con-
cave in the domain of gains, favoring risk
aversion; (2) it DEMO convex in the domain of
losses, favoring risk seeking; (3) most impor-
tant, the function is sharply kinked at the
reference point, and loss-averse-steeper for
losses than for gains by a factor of about
2-2.5 (Kahneman et al., 1991; Tversky and
Kahneman, 1992).
DEMO Bernoulli's formulation is transparently
incorrect as a descriptive model of risky
choices, as has been argued here, why
has this model been DEMO for so long?
The answer appears to be that the assign-
ment of utility to wealth is an aspect of ra-
tionality, and therefore compatible with the
general assumption of rationality in economic
theorizing (Kahneman, 2003a). Consider
Problem 3:
Problem 3
Two persons get their monthly report
from a broker:
A is told that her wealth DEMO from
4M to 3M
B is told that her wealth went from
1M to .IM
Who of the two individuals has more
reason to DEMO satisfied with her financial
situation?
Who is happier today?
REVIEW
2003
VOL.
93 NO. 5
KAHNEMAN:
MAPS
OF BOUNDED
RATIONALITY
1457
Problem DEMO highlights the contrasting interpre-
tations of utility in theories that define outcomes
as states or as changes. In Bernoulli's analysis
only the first DEMO the two questions of Problem 3
is relevant, and only long-term DEMO
matter. Prospect theory, in contrast, is con-
cerned with short-term outcomes, and the value
function presumably reflects an anticipation of
the valence and intensity of the emotions that
will be experienced at moments of transition
DEMO one state to another (Kahneman, 2000a, b;
Barbara Mellers, 2000). Which of these con-
cepts of utility is more useful? The cultural
norm of reasonable decision-making favors the
long-term view over a DEMO with transient emo-
tions. Indeed, the adoption of a broad perspective
DEMO a long-term view is an aspect of the meaning
of rationality in everyday language. The final-
states interpretation of the utility of outcomes is
DEMO
These considerations support the normative
and prescriptive status of the Bemoullian defi-
nition of outcomes. On the other hand, an ex-
clusive concern with the long term may be
prescriptively sterile, because the long term is
not where life is lived. Utility cannot be di-
vorced from emotion, and emotions are trig-
gered by changes. A theory of choice that
DEMO ignores feelings such as the pain of
losses and the regret of mistakes is not only
descriptively unrealistic, it also leads to pre-
scriptions that do not maximize the utility of
outcomes as they are actually DEMO
that is, utility as Bentham conceived it (Kahne-
man, 1994, 2000a; Kahneman et al., 1997).
Bernoulli's error-the idea that DEMO carriers
of utility are final states-is not restricted to
decision-making under risk. Indeed, the incor-
rect assumption that initial endowments do not
matter is the basis of Coase's theorem and of its
multiple applications (Kahneman et al., 1990).
The error of reference-independence is built
into the standard representation of indifference
maps. It is puzzling to a psychologist that DEMO
maps do not include a representation of the
decision maker's current holdings of various
goods-the of the reference point in
prospect theory. The DEMO is not included,
of course, because consumer theory assumes
that DEMO does not matter.
The core idea of prospect theory-that the
value function is kinked at the reference point
and loss averse-became useful to economics
DEMO good fit for a rational-agent
model.
counterpart
when Thaler (1980) used it to explain riskless
choices. In particular, loss aversion explained
violation of consumer theory that
and labeled the "endowment effect":
price for DEMO goods is much
the buying price, often by a factor
The DEMO of a good to an
higher when the good is viewed
could be lost or given up
is evaluated as a potential
1990, 1991; Tversky and Kahneman,
When half the participants in an
market were randomly chosen to be endowed
with a good (a mug) and DEMO was allowed, the
volume of trade was about half the amount
DEMO be predicted by assuming that value was
independent of initial endowment (DEMO
et al., 1990). Transaction costs did not explain
this counterexample DEMO the Coase theorem, be-
cause the same institution produced no indica-
DEMO of reluctance to trade when the objects of
trade were money tokens. The results suggest
that the participants in these experiments did not
value DEMO mug as an object they could have and
consume, but as DEMO they could get, or
give up. Interestingly, John A. List (DEMO, b)
found that the magnitude of the endowment
effect was DEMO reduced for participants
with intense experience in the trading of sports-
cards. Experienced traders (who are also con-
sumers) showed less reluctance to DEMO one
good for another-not only sportscards, but also
mugs and other DEMO if they had learned to
base their choice on long-term value, DEMO than
on the immediate emotions associated with get-
ting or giving up objects.
Reference-dependence and loss aversion help
account for several phenomena of choice. DEMO
familiar observation that out-of-pocket losses
are valued much more than opportunity costs is
readily explained, if these outcomes are evalu-
ated on different limbs of the value function.
The distinction between "actual" losses and
losses DEMO opportunities is recognized in many
ways in the law (David Cohen DEMO Jack L.
Knetsch, 1992) and in lay intuitions about rules
of fairness in the market (Kahneman et al.,
1986). Loss aversion also contributes to the
well-documented status-quo bias (William
Samuelson and Richard Zeckhauser, 1988). Be-
cause the reference point is usually the status
quo, the properties of alternative options are
evaluated as advantages or disadvantages
a
Thaler
the selling
higher
of 2 or more.
individual
than when the DEMO good
gain (Kahneman et al.,
1991).
experimental
that
identified
DEMO
appears
as something
to be
that
1458
THE
AMERICAN
relative to the current
vantages of the alternatives
their
DEMO of loss aversion
chapters
advantages.
situation,
Other
are
in Kahneman
applications
documented
and Tversky (2000).
and the disad-
loom larger than
of the con-
in several
IV. Framing
Effects
In the display of blocks DEMO Figure 2, the same
property (the total height of a set of blocks) was
highly accessible in one display and not in an-
other, although both displays contained the
same information. This observation is entirely
unremarkable-it does not seem shocking that
some attributes of a stimulus are DEMO
perceived while others must be computed, or
that the same attribute DEMO perceived in one dis-
play of an object but must be computed in
another. In the context of decision-making,
however, similar observations raise a significant
challenge to the rational-agent model.
The assumption that preferences are DEMO af-
fected by inconsequential variations in the
description of outcomes has been called exten-
sionality (Kenneth J. Arrow, 1982) and invari-
ance (DEMO and Kahneman, 1986), and is
considered an essential aspect of DEMO
Invariance is violated in framing effects, where
extensionally equivalent descriptions lead DEMO
different choices by altering the relative salience
of different aspects of the problem. Tversky and
Kahneman (1981) introduced their discussion of
framing effects DEMO the following problem:
The Asian disease
Imagine that the United States is pre-
paring for the outbreak of an unusual
Asian disease, which is expected to kill
600 people. Two alternative programs to
combat the DEMO have been proposed.
Assume that the exact scientific estimates
of the consequences of the programs are
as follows:
If Program A is adopted, 200 people
will be saved
If Program B is adopted, there is a
one-third probability that 600 people will
be saved and a two-thirds DEMO that
no people will be saved
ECONOMIC
REVIEW
In this version of the problem, a substantial
majority of respondents favor Program A, indi-
DEMO risk aversion. Other respondents, se-
lected at random, receive a question in which
the same cover story is followed by a different
description DEMO the options:
400 people will
If Program A' is adopted,DEMO
die
If Program B' is adopted, there is a one-
third probability that nobody will die and
a two-thirds probability that 600 people
DEMO die
A substantial majority of respondents now
favor Program B', the risk-seeking option. Al-
though there is no substantive difference be-
tween the DEMO, they evoke different
associations and evaluations. This is easiest to
see DEMO the certain option, because outcomes that
are certain are overweighted relative DEMO out-
comes of high or intermediate probability (Kah-
neman and Tversky, 1979). Thus, the certainty
of saving people is disproportionately attractive,
while accepting the certain death of people is
disproportionately aversive. These immediate
DEMO responses respectively favor A over B
and B' over A'. DEMO in Figures 2a and 2b, the
different representations of the outcomes DEMO
light some features of the situation and mask
others.
In an essay about the ethics of policy,
Thomas C. Schelling (1984) presented DEMO com-
pellingly realistic example of the dilemmas
raised by framing. Schelling reports asking his
students to evaluate a tax policy that would
allow a DEMO child exemption to the rich than
to the poor. Not surprisingly, DEMO students found
this proposal outrageous. Schelling then pointed
out that the default case in the standard tax table
is a childless family, with special adjustments
for families with children, and led his class to
agree that the existing tax schedule could be
rewritten with a family with two DEMO as the
default case. In this formulation, childless fam-
ilies would DEMO a surcharge. Should this sur-
charge be as large for the poor as for the rich?
Of course not. The two versions of DEMO question
about how to treat the rich and the poor both
trigger an intuitive preference for protecting the
DECEMBER
2003
VOL.
93 NO. 5
KAHNEMAN:
MAPS
OF
BOUNDED
RATIONALITY
1459
poor, but these preferences are incoherent.
Schelling's problem highlights an important
point. DEMO effects are not a laboratory cu-
riosity, but a ubiquitous reality. DEMO tax table
must be framed one way or another, and each
DEMO will increase the accessibility of some
responses and make other responses less likely.
There has been considerable interest among
behavioral economists in a particular DEMO of
framing effect, where a choice between two
options A and DEMO is affected by designating
either A or B as a default option. The option
designated as the default has a large advantage
in such DEMO, even for decisions that have
considerable significance. Eric J. Johnson et DEMO
(1993) described a compelling example. The
states of Pennsylvania and New Jersey both
offer drivers a choice between an insurance
policy that allows DEMO unconstrained right to sue,
and a less expensive policy that restricts the
right to sue. The unconstrained right to sue is
the default DEMO Pennsylvania, the opposite is the
default in New Jersey, and the takeup of full
coverage is 79 percent and 30 percent in the DEMO
states, respectively. Johnson and Daniel G.
Goldstein (2003) estimate that DEMO
drivers spend 450 million dollars annually on
full coverage that they would not purchase if
their choice were framed as it is for New DEMO
drivers.
Johnson and Goldstein (2003) also compared
the proportions of the population enrolled in
organ donation programs in seven European
countries in which DEMO was the default
and four in which nonenrollment was the de-
fault. Averaging over countries, enrollment in
donor programs was 97.4 percent when this
was the default option, 18 percent otherwise.
The passive acceptance of the formulation
given has significant consequences in this
case, as it does in other recent studies where
the selection of the default on the form DEMO
workers completed to set their 401(k) contri-
butions dominated their DEMO choice
(Brigitte Madrian and Dennis Shea, 2001;
James J. Choi et al., 2002).
The basic principle of framing is the passive
acceptance of the formulation given. Because of
this passivity, people fail to construct a canon-
ical representation for all extensionally equiva-
lent descriptions of DEMO state of affairs. They do
not spontaneously compute the height of a
tower that could be built from an array of
blocks, and they do not spontaneously trans-
form the representation of puzzles or decision
problems. DEMO, no one is able to recog-
nize "137 x 24" DEMO "3,288" as "the same"
number without going through DEMO elaborate
computations. Invariance cannot be achieved by
a finite mind.
The impossibility of invariance raises signif-
icant doubts about the descriptive realism of
rational-choice DEMO (Tversky and Kahne-
man, 1986). Absent a system that reliably gen-
erates appropriate canonical representations,
intuitive decisions will be shaped by DEMO factors
that determine the accessibility of different fea-
tures of the situation. Highly accessible features
will influence decisions, while features of low
accessibility will be largely ignored-and the
correlation between accessibility and reflective
judgments of relevance DEMO a state of complete
information is not necessarily high.
A particularly unrealistic assumption of the
rational-agent model is that agents make their
choices in DEMO comprehensively inclusive context,
which incorporates all the relevant details of the
present situation, as well as expectations about
all future opportunities and risks. Much evi-
dence supports the contrasting claim that peo-
ple's views DEMO decisions and outcomes are
normally characterized by "narrow framing"
(Kahneman and Daniel Lovallo, 1993), and by
the related notions of "DEMO accounting"
(Thaler, 1985, 1999) and "decision bracketing"
(Daniel Read et al., 1999).
The following are some examples of the
prevalence of narrow framing. The decision of
whether or not to DEMO a gamble is normally
considered as a response to a single opportunity,
not as an occasion to apply a general policy
(Gideon Keren and Willem A. Wagenaar, 1987;
Tversky and Donald A. Redelmeier, DEMO; Kah-
neman and Lovallo, 1993; Shlomo Benartzi and
Thaler, 1999). Investors' decisions about partic-
ular investments appear to be considered in
isolation from the remainder of the investor's
portfolio (Nicholas Barberis et al., 2003). The
time horizon that investors adopt for evaluating
their investments appears to be unreasonably
short-an observation that helps explain the
equity-premium DEMO (Benartzi and Thaler,
1995). Finally, the prevalence of the gain/loss
framing of outcomes over the wealth frame,
which was DEMO in the previous sec-
tion, can now be seen as an DEMO of narrow
1460
THE
AMERICAN
ECONOMIC
REVIEW
DECEMBER
2003
framing. A shared feature of DEMO these examples
is that decisions made in narrow frames depart
far more from risk neutrality than decisions that
are made in a more inclusive DEMO
The prevalence of narrow frames is an effect
of accessibility, which DEMO be understood by
referring to the displays of blocks in Figure
2. The same set of blocks is framed as a tower
in Figure DEMO, and as a flat array in Figure 2b. Al-
though it DEMO possible to "see" a tower in Figure
2b, it is DEMO easier to do so in Figure 2a. Nar-
row frames generally reflect the structure of the
environment in which decisions are made. The
choices DEMO people face arise one at a time, and
the principle of DEMO acceptance suggests that
they will be considered as they arise. The prob-
lem at hand and the immediate consequences of
the choice will be DEMO more accessible than all
other considerations, and as a result decision
DEMO will be framed far more narrowly than
the rational model assumes.
V. Attribute Substitution: A Model
Heuristics
of Judgment
The first research program that Tversky and I
undertook together consisted of a series of stud-
ies DEMO various types of judgment about uncertain
events, including numerical predictions and DEMO
sessments of the probabilities of hypotheses.
Our conclusion in a review of this work was that
"people rely on a limited number of heuristic
principles which reduce the complex tasks of
assessing probabilities and predicting values DEMO
simpler judgmental operations. In general, these
heuristics are quite useful, but sometimes they
lead to severe and systematic errors" (Tversky
and Kahneman, 1974, p. 1124). The article in-
troduced three heuristics-representativeness,
availability, and anchoring-that were used to
explain a dozen systematic biases in judgment
under uncertainty, including nonregressive pre-
diction, neglect of base-rate information, over-
confidence, and overestimates of the frequency
of events that are easy to recall. Some of the
biases were identified by systematic errors in
estimates DEMO known quantities and statistical
facts. Other biases were defined by discrep-
ancies between the regularities of intuitive
judgments and the principles of probability
theory, Bayesian inference, and regression
analysis.
FIGURE 7. AN ILLUSION OF ATTRIBUTE SUBSTITUTION
Source: Photo by Lenore Shoham,
2003.
Kahneman and Frederick (2002) recently re-
visited the early studies of judgment heuristics,
and proposed DEMO formulation in which the reduc-
tion of complex tasks to simpler operations is
achieved by an operation of attribute substitu-
tion. "Judgment is said to be mediated by a
heuristic when the individual assesses a speci-
DEMO target attribute of a judgment object by
substituting another property of that object-the
heuristic attribute-which comes more readily
to mind" (p. 53). DEMO the early work, Kah-
neman and Frederick's conception of heuristics
DEMO not restricted to the domain of judgment
under uncertainty.
For a perceptual example of attribute substi-
tution, consider the question: "What are the
sizes of the two horses in Figure 7, as they are
drawn on the page?" The images are in fact
identical in size, but the figure produces a com-
pelling illusion. The target attribute that DEMO
ers intend to evaluate is objective two-
dimensional size, but they DEMO unable to do this
veridically. Their judgments map an impression
of three-dimensional size (the heuristic at-
tribute) onto units of length that are DEMO
to the target attribute, and scaled to the size
of the DEMO This illusion is caused by the
differential accessibility of competing interpreta-
tions of the image. An impression of three-
VOL.
93 NO. 5
KAHNEMAN:
MAPS
OF BOUNDED
RATIONALITY
1461
dimensional DEMO is the only impression of size
that comes to mind for naive observers-paint-
ers and experienced photographers are able to
do better-and it produces DEMO illusion in the
perception of picture size.
A study by Fritz Strack et al. (1988) illus-
trates the role of attribute substitution in DEMO dif-
ferent context. College students responded to a
survey which included the two following ques-
tions in immediate succession: "How happy are
you DEMO your life in general?" and "How many
dates did you DEMO last month?" The correlation
between the two questions was 0.12 when they
appeared in the order shown. Among respon-
dents who received the DEMO questions in re-
verse order, the correlation was 0.66. The
psychological DEMO
tion' is inferential, but straightforward. The dat-
ing question undoubtedly evoked in many
respondents an emotionally charged evaluation
of their romantic life. This DEMO was
highly accessible when the question about
happiness was encountered next, DEMO it was
mapped onto the scale of general happiness.
In the interpretation offered here, the respon-
dents answered the happiness question by re-
porting what came to their mind, and failed to
notice that they were answering a question
that had not been asked-a cognitive illusion
that is DEMO to the visual illusion of
Figure 7.
The most direct evidence for attribute substi-
tution was reported by Kahneman and Tversky
(1973), in a task of categorical prediction. There
were three experimental groups in their DEMO
ment. Participants in a base-rate group evalu-
ated the relative frequencies of graduate
students in nine categories of specialization.2
Mean estimates ranged from 20 DEMO for Hu-
manities and Education to 3 percent for Library
Science.
Two other groups of participants were shown
the same list of areas of DEMO specialization,
and the following description of a fictitious
graduate student.
' The observed value of 0.66 underestimates the true
correlation between the variables DEMO interest, because of
measurement error in all variables.
2 The categories DEMO Business Administration; Com-
puter Science; Engineering; Humanities and Education;
DEMO; Library Science; Medicine; Physical and Life Sci-
ences; Social Sciences and Social Work.
of the high correla-
Tom W. is of high DEMO, although
lacking in true creativity. He has a need
for order DEMO clarity, and for neat and
tidy systems in which every detail DEMO
its appropriate place. His writing is
rather dull and mechanical, occasion-
DEMO enlivened by somewhat corny puns
and by flashes of imagination of the
sci-fi type. He has a strong drive for
competence. He seems to DEMO little feel
and little sympathy for other people and
does not enjoy interacting with others.
Self-centered, he nonetheless has a deep
moral sense.
I
Participants in a similarity group ranked the
nine fields by the degree DEMO which Tom W.
"resembles a typical graduate student" (in that
DEMO). The description of Tom W. was deliber-
ately constructed to make him more representa-
tive of the less populated fields, and this
manipulation was successful: the correlation be-
tween the averages of representativeness rank-
ings and of estimated base rates was -0.62.
Participants in the probability group DEMO the
nine fields according to the likelihood that Tom
W. would have specialized in each. The respon-
dents in the latter group were graduate DEMO
in psychology at major universities. They were
told that the personality sketch had been written
by a psychologist when Tom W. was in high
DEMO, on the basis of personality tests of du-
bious validity. This DEMO was intended to
discredit the description as a source of valid
information.
The statistical logic is straightforward.
scription based on unreliable information must
be DEMO little weight, and predictions made in
the absence of valid evidence DEMO revert to
base rates. This reasoning implies that judg-
ments of probability should be highly correlated
with the corresponding base rates in the Tom
DEMO problem.
The psychology of the task is also straight-
forward. The similarity of Tom W. to various
stereotypes is a highly accessible natural assess-
DEMO, whereas judgments of probability are dif-
ficult. The respondents are therefore DEMO to
substitute a judgment of similarity (representa-
tiveness) for the required judgment of probabil-
ity. The two instructions-to rate similarity or
A de-
1462
0
m
-
.0
id
._9
e c
(a
0
0
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1
THE
AMERICAN
DEMO
REVIEW
DECEMBER
2003
(a)
Tom W.
R I
0
0
DEMO
5
_ 4
3
c
2
3
4
5
6
7
mean rank (similarity)
8
9
(0
1
2
3 4 5 DEMO
mean rank (similarity)
FIGURE 8. TWO TESTS OF ATTRIBUTE SUBSTITUTION DEMO A PREDICTION TASK
(b)
Linda
7
7
1
probability-should therefore DEMO similar
judgments.
The scatterplot of the mean judgments of the
two groups is presented in Figure 8a. As the
figure shows, the correlation between judg-
ments of probability and similarity is nearly
perfect (0.98). The correlation between judg-
ments of probability and base rates is -0.63.
The DEMO are in perfect accord with the hy-
pothesis of attribute substitution. They also con-
firm a bias of base-rate neglect in this
prediction task. DEMO results are especially com-
pelling because the responses were rankings.
The large variability of the average rankings of
both attributes indicates highly consensual re-
DEMO, and nearly total overlap in the system-
atic variance.
Figure 8b DEMO the results of another study
in the same design, in which DEMO were
shown the description of a woman named
Linda, and a DEMO of eight possible outcomes
describing her present employment and activi-
ties. The two critical items in the list were #6
("Linda is a DEMO teller") and the conjunction
item #8 ("Linda is a bank teller and active in
the feminist movement"). The other six pos-
sibilities were unrelated and miscellaneous
(e.g., elementary school teacher, psychiatric
social worker). As in the Tom W. problem,
some respondents ranked DEMO eight outcomes
by the similarity of Linda to the category
prototypes; DEMO ranked the same outcomes
by probability.
Linda is 31 years old, DEMO, outspoken
and very bright. She majored in philoso-
phy. As a DEMO she was deeply con-
cerned with issues of discrimination and
social justice and also participated in an-
tinuclear demonstrations.
As might be expected, 85 percent of respon-
dents in the similarity group ranked the con-
junction DEMO (#8) higher than its constituent,
indicating that Linda resembles the image of a
feminist bank teller more than she resembles a
stereotypical DEMO teller. This ordering of the
two items is quite reasonable for judgments of
similarity. However, it is much more problem-
atic that 89 percent of respondents in the prob-
ability group also ranked the conjunction higher
DEMO its constituent. This pattern of probability
judgments violates monotonicity, and has DEMO
called the "conjunction fallacy" (Tversky and
Kahneman, 1983).
The observation that biases of judgment are
systematic was quickly recognized as relevant
DEMO the debate about the assumption of rationality
VOL.
93 NO. 5
KAHNEMAN:
MAPS
OF BOUNDED
RATIONALITY
1463
in DEMO (see, e.g., Peter A. Diamond,
1977; David M. Grether, 1978; Howard Kun-
reuther, 1979; Arrow, 1982). There has also
been some discussion of the role of specific
judgment biases in DEMO phenomena, espe-
cially in finance (e.g., Werner F. M. De DEMO
and Thaler, 1985; Robert J. Shiller, 2000; An-
drei Shleifer, 2000; Matthew Rabin, 2002). Re-
cent extensions of the notion of heuristics to the
domain of affect may be of particular relevance
DEMO the conversation between psychology and
economics, because they bear on the DEMO con-
cept of a preference. As was noted earlier, af-
fective DEMO is a natural assessment, which is
automatically computed and always accessible.
DEMO basic evaluative attribute (good/bad, like/
dislike, approach/avoid)DEMO
for substitution in any task that calls for a fa-
vorable or unfavorable response. Slovic and his
colleagues (see, e.g., Slovic et al., 2002) intro-
duced the concept of an affect heuristic. They
showed DEMO affect (liking or disliking) is the
heuristic attribute for numerous target at-
tributes, including the evaluation of the costs
and benefits of various technologies, the safe
concentration of chemicals, and even the pre-
dicted DEMO performance of various indus-
tries. In an article aptly titled "Risk DEMO
Feelings," Loewenstein et al. (2001) docu-
mented the related proposition that beliefs about
risk are often expressions of emotion.
If different target DEMO are strongly in-
fluenced by the same affective reaction, the
dimensionality DEMO decisions and judgments
about valued objects may be expected to be
unreasonably low. Indeed, Melissa L. Finucane
et al. (2000) found that people's judgments of
the costs and benefits of various technologies
are negatively DEMO, especially when the
judgments are made under time pressure. A
technology DEMO is liked is judged to have low
costs and large benefits. These judgments are
surely biased, because the correlation between
costs and benefits is generally positive in the
world of real choices. In the same vein, Kahne-
man et al. (1997) presented evidence that dif-
ferent responses DEMO public goods (e.g.,
willingness to pay, ratings of moral satisfaction
for contributing) yielded essentially inter-
changeable rankings of a set of policy issues.
Here again, a basic affective response appeared
to be the common factor.
Kahneman et al. (1997) suggested that peo-
is therefore
a DEMO
ple's decisions often express affective evalua-
tions (attitudes), which DEMO not conform to the
logic of economic preferences. To understand
preferences, DEMO, we may need to understand
the psychology of emotions. And we DEMO
take it for granted that preferences that are con-
trolled by the emotion of the moment will be
internally coherent, or even reasonable by the
cooler criteria of reflective reasoning. In other
words, the preferences of System 1 are not
necessarily consistent with the preferences of
System 2. DEMO next section will show that some
choices are not appropriately sensitive to vari-
ations of quantity and cost-and are better de-
scribed as expressions DEMO an affective response
than as economic preferences.
VI. Prototype
Heuristics
The results summarized in Figure 8 showed
that the judgments that subjects made about DEMO
Tom W. and Linda problems substituted the
more accessible attribute of similarity (repre-
sentativeness) for the required target attribute of
probability. The goal DEMO the present section is to
embed the representativeness heuristic in a
broader class of prototype heuristics, which
share a common psychological mechanism-
the representation of categories by their proto-
types-and a remarkably consistent pattern of
biases.
DEMO the display of lines in Figure 3, the average
(typical) DEMO of the lines was highly accessi-
ble, but the sum of DEMO lengths was not. Both
observations are quite general. Classic psycho-
logical experiments have established the fol-
lowing proposition: whenever we look at or
think about a set (ensemble, category) which is
sufficiently homogeneous to have a prototype,
information about the prototype is automati-
cally accessible (Michael I. Posner and Stephen
W. Keele, 1968; Eleanor Rosch and Carolyn DEMO
Mervis, 1975). The prototype of a set is char-
acterized DEMO the average values of the salient
properties of its members. The high accessibil-
ity of prototype information serves an important
adaptive function. It allows DEMO stimuli to be
categorized efficiently, by comparing their fea-
tures to DEMO of category prototypes.3 For
3 Stored information about individual exemplars also
contributes to categorization.
1464
example, the stored prototype of a set of lines
allows a quick decision about a new line-does
it belong with the set? There is no equally
obvious function for the automatic computation
of sums.
The DEMO accessibility of sums and the high
accessibility of prototypes have significant con-
sequences in tasks that involve judgments of
sets, as in the following examples:
(i) category prediction (e.g., the probability
that the DEMO of bank tellers contains
Linda as a member);
(ii) DEMO a quantity of public or private
goods (e.g., the personal dollar value of
saving a certain number of migratory birds
from drowning in DEMO ponds);
(iii) global evaluation of a past experience that
DEMO over time (e.g., the overall aver-
siveness of a painful medical procedure);
(iv) assessment of the support that a sample of
observations provides for a hypothesis
(e.g., the probability that a sample DEMO col-
ored balls has been drawn from one spec-
ified urn rather than another).
The objects of judgment in these tasks are
sets DEMO categories, and the target attributes have
a common logical structure. Extensional DEMO
tributes are governed by a general principle of
conditional adding, which DEMO that each el-
ement within the set adds to the overall value an
amount that depends on the elements already
included. In simple cases, the value is additive:
the total length of the set of DEMO in Figure 3 is
just the sum of their separate lengths. In other
cases, each positive element of the set increases
the aggregate value, but the combination rule is
nonadditive (typically subadditive).4 The at-
DEMO of the category prototype are not exten-
sional-they are averages, whereas DEMO
attributes are akin to sums.
The preceding argument leads to the hypoth-
esis that tasks that require the assessment of
4 If the judgment DEMO monotonically related to an additive
scale (such as the underlying count DEMO the number of birds),
the formal structure is known in DEMO measurement literature
as an "extensive structure" (R. Duncan Luce et DEMO, 1990,
Ch. 3). There also may be attributes that DEMO an underlying
additive scale, in which case the structure is known DEMO the
literature as a "positive concatenation structure" (Luce et
al., 1990, Ch. 19, volume 3, p. 38).
THE
AMERICAN
ECONOMIC
REVIEW
extensional variables will be relatively difficult,
and that intuitive responses DEMO be generated
by substituting an attribute of the prototype for
the extensional target attribute. Prototype heu-
ristics involve a target attribute that is exten-
DEMO, and a heuristic attribute which is a
characteristic of the category DEMO Proto-
type heuristics are associated with two major
biases, which generalize DEMO biases of represen-
tativeness that were introduced in the preceding
section:
(i) Violations of monotonicity. Adding ele-
ments to a set may DEMO the average and
cause the judgment of the target variable to
decrease, contrary to the logic of exten-
sional variables. The prevalent judgment
that Linda is less likely to be a bank teller
than to be DEMO feminist bank teller illustrates
this bias.
(ii) Extension neglect. Other things equal, an
increase in the extension of a category will
increase the value of its extensional at-
tributes, but leave unchanged the values of
its prototype attributes. The apparent ne-
glect of the base rates of DEMO of special-
ization in judgments about Tom W. is an
example.
Studies that have examined the two biases in
different contexts are described next.
DEMO Pricing Goods
The price of a set of goods is an extensional
variable. If price is evaluated by the attractive-
ness of a prototypical DEMO of the set, viola-
tions of monotonicity and extension neglect are
DEMO
Scope Neglect.-Complete or almost com-
plete neglect of extension has often been ob-
served in studies of the willingness to pay for
public goods, where the effect is called "neglect
of scope." The best known DEMO is a study
by William H. Desvousges et al. (1993) in
which respondents indicated their willingness to
contribute money to prevent the drowning DEMO
migratory birds. The number of birds that would
be saved was varied for different subsamples.
The estimated amounts that households were
willing to pay DEMO $80, $78, and $88, to save
2,000, 20,000, or 200,000 birds, respectively.
DECEMBER
2003
VOL.
The target attribute in this case is willingness to
pay (WTP), and the heuristic attribute appears
to be the emotion associated with DEMO image of
a bird drowning in oil, or perhaps with the
DEMO of a bird being saved from drowning
(Kahneman et al., 1999).
Frederick and Baruch Fischhoff (1998) re-
viewed numerous demonstrations of DEMO scope
neglect in studies of willingness to pay for pub-
lic goods. For example, Kahneman and Knetsch
found that survey respondents in Toronto were
willing to pay almost as much to clean up the
lakes in DEMO small region of Ontario or to clean up
all the lakes in that province (reported by Kah-
neman, 1986). The issue of DEMO neglect is
central to the application of the contingent val-
uation method (CVM) in the assessment of the
economic value of public goods, and it has been
hotly debated (see, e.g., Richard T. Carson,
1997). The proponents of CVM have reported
experiments in which DEMO was some sensitiv-
ity to scope, but even these effects are DEMO,
far too small to satisfy the economic logic of
pricing (DEMO, 1996; Kahneman et al.,
1999).
Violations of Monotonicity.-List (DEMO) re-
ported an experiment that confirmed, in a real
market setting, violations of dominance that
Hsee (1998) had previously reported in a hypo-
thetical pricing task. In List's experiment, trad-
ers of sportscards assigned significantly higher
value to a set of ten sportscards labeled "Mint/
near mint condition" than to a set that included
the same ten cards and three additional cards
described as "poor condition." In DEMO series of
follow-up experiments, Jonathan E. Alevy et al.
(2003) DEMO confirmed an important difference
(originally suggested by Hsee) between the
prices that people will pay when they see only
one of the goods (separate evaluation), or when
they price both goods at the same DEMO (joint
evaluation). The goods were similar to those
used in DEMO's experiment. The predicted viola-
tion of dominance was observed in separate
evaluation, especially for relatively inexperi-
enced market participants. These individuals
bid an average of $4.05 for the small set of
cards, and only $1.82 for the larger set. The
violations of dominance were completely
eliminated in DEMO joint evaluation condition,
where the bids for the small and large sets
averaged $2.89 and $3.32, respectively.
93 NO. 5
KAHNEMAN:
MAPS
OF BOUNDED
RATIONALITY
Alevy et al. (2003) noted that System 1 DEMO
pears to dominate responses in separate eval-
uation, whereas System 2 DEMO to the
dominance rule when given a chance to do so.
There was a definite effect of market experi-
ence, both in this study and in List (2002): the
bids of highly experienced traders also
showed violations of monotonicity in separate
evaluation, but the effect was much smaller.
B. Evaluations of Extended Episodes
The global utility of an experience DEMO ex-
tends over time is an extensional attribute (Kah-
neman, 1994, 2000a, b; Kahneman et al., 1997),
and the duration of the experience is a measure
of its extension. The corresponding prototype
DEMO is the experienced utility associated
with a representative moment of the episode. As
predicted by attribute substitution, global eval-
uations of the episode exhibit both duration
neglect and violations of monotonicity.
Duration Neglect.-In a study described DEMO
Redelmeier and Kahneman (1996), patients un-
dergoing colonoscopy reported the DEMO of
pain every 60 seconds during the procedure (see
Figure 9), and subsequently provided a global
evaluation of the pain they had suffered. The
correlation of global evaluations with the dura-
tion of the procedure (which ranged from 4 to
66 minutes in that study) was 0.03. On the other
hand global evaluations were correlated (r =
0.67) DEMO an average of the pain reported at
two points of time: DEMO pain was at its peak,
and just before the procedure ended. For exam-
ple, patient A in Figure 9 reported a more neg-
ative evaluation of the procedure than patient B.
The same pattern of DEMO neglect and Peak/
End evaluations has been observed in other
studies (Barbara L. Fredrickson and Kahneman,
1993; see Kahneman, 2000a, DEMO a discussion).
These results are consistent with the hypothesis
that the extended episode (which can be consid-
ered an ordered set of moments) is represented
in memory by a typical moment of the
experience.
Violations of Dominance.-A randomized
clinical experiment was conducted following
the colonoscopy study described DEMO For half
the patients, the instrument was not immedi-
ately removed DEMO the clinical examination
1465
1466
8
7
6
4D 5
a- 4 -
.
IL
3 DEMO
2 -
1 -
0
0
A
Patient
THE
8 -
7-
6
t5.
c4
l
3
2 -
10
Time
(minutes)
20
1
0
10
Time (minutes)
FIGURE
9. PAIN
INTENSITY
REPORTED
BY TWO
COLONOSCOPY
PATIENTS
A
AMERICAN
ECONOMIC
REVIEW
Patient
B
DECEMBER
I
20
DEMO
0
ended. Instead, the physician waited for about a
minute, leaving the instrument stationary. The
experience during the extra period was uncom-
fortable, but the procedure guaranteed that the
colonoscopy never ended in severe pain. DEMO
tients reported significantly more favorable
global evaluations in this experimental condi-
tion than in the control condition (Redelmeier et
al., 2003).
Violations DEMO dominance have also been
confirmed in choices. Kahneman et al. (1993)DEMO
exposed participants to two cold-pressor ex-
periences, one with each hand: a "short" ep-
isode (immersion of one hand in 14?C water
for 60 seconds), and a "long" episode (the
short episode, plus an additional 30 seconds
during which the water was gradually warmed
to 15?C). When they were later asked which
of DEMO two experiences they preferred to re-
peat, a substantial majority chose DEMO long
trial. This pattern of choices is predicted from
the Peak/End rule of evaluation that was de-
scribed earlier. Similar violations of domi-
DEMO were observed with unpleasant sounds
of variable loudness and duration (Charles DEMO
Schreiber and Kahneman, 2000). These vio-
lations of dominance suggest DEMO choices be-
tween familiar experiences are made in an
intuitive process of "choosing by liking." Ex-
tended episodes are represented in memory by
DEMO typical moment-and the desirability or
aversiveness of the episode is dominated by
the remembered utility of that moment (Kah-
neman, 1994). When DEMO choice is to be made,
the option that is associated with the higher
remembered utility (more liked) is chosen.
This mode of DEMO is likely to yield choices
that do not maximize the utility that will
actually be experienced (Kahneman et al.,
1997).
C. Other
Prototype
Heuristics
The pattern of results observed in diverse
studies of prototype DEMO suggests the need
for a unified interpretation, and raises a signif-
DEMO challenge to treatments that deal only with
one domain. A number of authors have offered
competing interpretations of base-rate neglect
(Leda Cosmides and John Tooby, 1996;
Jonathan Jay Koehler, 1996), insensitivity to
scope DEMO WTP (Raymond Kopp, 1992), and
duration neglect (Ariely and DEMO,
2000). In general however, these interpretations
are specific to DEMO particular task, and would not
carry over to demonstrations of extension DEMO
glect in the other tasks that have been dis-
cussed. In contrast, the account offered here
(and developed in greater detail by Kahneman
DEMO Frederick, 2002) is equally applicable to
diverse tasks that require an assessment of an
extensional target attribute.
The cases that have been discussed DEMO only
illustrations, not a comprehensive list of proto-
type heuristics. For DEMO, the same form of
nonextensional thinking explains why the me-
VOL.
93 NO. 5
KAHNEMAN:
MAPS OF BOUNDED
RATIONALITY
1467
dian DEMO of the annual number of murders
in Detroit is twice as high as the estimate of the
number of murders in Michigan (Kahneman
and Frederick, 2002). It also explains why
professional forecasters assigned a higher
probability to "an earthquake in California
causing a flood in which more than 1,000
people will drown" than to "a flood some-
DEMO in the United States in which more than
1,000 people will drown" (Tversky and Kah-
neman, 1983).
As these examples illustrate, there is no guar-
anteed defense against violations of monotonic-
ity. How could a forecaster who assigns a
probability to a lethal flood ensure (in finite
time) that there is no subset of that event which
would have appeared even more probable?
More generally, the results reviewed in this
section suggest a profound incompatibility be-
tween the capabilities and DEMO rules of
intuitive judgment and choice and the norma-
tive standards for beliefs and preferences. The
logic of belief and choice requires accurate
evaluation DEMO extensional variables. In contrast,
intuitive thinking operates with exemplars or
prototypes that have the dimensionality of indi-
vidual instances and lack the dimension DEMO
extension.
VII. The
Boundaries
of Intuitive
Thinking
The judgments that people express, the ac-
tions they take, and the mistakes they commit
depend DEMO the monitoring and corrective func-
tions of System 2, as well DEMO on the impressions
and tendencies generated by System 1. This
section reviews a selection of findings and ideas
about the functioning of System 2. DEMO more
detailed treatment is given in Kahneman and
Frederick (2002) and Kahneman (2003b).
Judgments and choices are normally intui-
tive, skilled, unproblematic, and reasonably
successful (Klein, 1998). The prevalence of
framing effects, and other indications of super-
ficial processing such as the bat-and-ball prob-
lem, suggest that people mostly do not think
very hard and that System 2 monitors judg-
ments quite lightly. On some occasions, how-
ever, the monitoring of System 2 will detect a
potential error, DEMO an effort will be made to
correct it. The question for this section can be
formulated in terms of accessibility: when do
doubts about one's intuitive judgments come to
mind? The answer, as usual DEMO psychology, is a
list of relevant factors.
Research has established that DEMO ability to
avoid errors of intuitive judgment is impaired
by time pressure (Finucane et al., 2000), by
concurrent involvement in a different DEMO
task (Gilbert, 1989, 1991, 2002), by performing
the task in the evening for "morning people"
and in the morning for "evening people" (Galen
V. Bodenhausen, 1990), and, surprisingly, DEMO
being in a good mood (Alice M. Isen et al.,
DEMO; Herbert Bless et al., 1996). Conversely,
the facility of System 2 is positively correlated
with intelligence (Stanovich and West, 2002),
with the trait that psychologists have labeled
"need for cognition" (which is roughly whether
people find thinking fun) (Eldar Shafir and
DEMO A. LeBoeuf, 2002), and with exposure to
statistical thinking (Richard E. Nisbett et al.,
1983; Franca Agnoli and David H. Krantz,
1989; Agnoli, 1991).
The question of the precise conditions DEMO
which errors of intuition are most likely to be
prevented is of methodological interest to psy-
chologists, because some controversies in the
literature on cognitive illusions are resolved
when this factor is considered (see Kahneman
and Frederick, 2002; Kahneman, 2003b). One
of these methodological issues is also of con-
siderable substantive interest: this is the distinc-
tion between separate evaluation and joint
evaluation (Hsee, 1996).
In the separate DEMO condition of List's
study of dominance violations, for example,
DEMO groups of traders bid on two sets of
baseball cards; in DEMO evaluation each trader
evaluated both sets at the same time. The results
were drastically different. Violations of mono-
tonicity, which were very pronounced in the
between-groups comparison, were eliminated in
the joint evaluation condition. The participants
in the latter condition evidently realized that one
of the sets of DEMO included the other, and was
therefore worth more. Once they had DEMO
the dominance relation, the participants con-
strained their bids to follow DEMO rule. These
decisions are mediated by System 2. Thus, there
appear DEMO be two distinct modes of choice:
"choosing by liking" selects the most attractive
option; "choosing by rule" conforms to an ex-
plicit constraint.
Prospect theory introduced the same distinc-
tion between modes of DEMO (Kahneman and
1468
THE
AMERICAN
ECONOMIC
REVIEW
DECEMBER
2003
Tversky, 1979). The normal process corre-
sponds to choice by liking: the decision maker
evaluates each gamble in the choice set, then
selects the gamble of highest value. In prospect
theory, this mode of choice can lead to the
selection of a dominated option.5 However, the
theory also introduced the possibility of choice
by rule: if one option transparently dominates
the other, the DEMO maker will select the
dominant option without further evaluation. To
test this model, Tversky and Kahneman (1986)
constructed
criteria: (i) gamble A dominated gamble B; (ii)
the prospect-theory value of B DEMO higher than
the value of A; (iii) the gambles were DEMO,
and the dominance relation only became appar-
ent after grouping outcomes. As expected from
other framing results, most participants in the
experiment evaluated the gambles as originally
formulated, failed to detect the relation between
them, chose the option they liked most, and
exhibited the predicted violation DEMO dominance.
The cold-pressor experiment that was de-
scribed earlier (Kahneman et DEMO, 1993) is
closely analogous to the study of nontransparent
dominance that Tversky and Kahneman (1986)
reported. A substantial majority of participants
violated dominance in a direct and seemingly
transparent choice between cold-pressor experi-
ences. DEMO, postexperimental debriefings
indicated that the dominance was not in fact
transparent. DEMO participants in the experiment
did not realize that the long episode included the
short one, although they did notice that the
episodes differed in duration. Because they
failed to detect that one option dominated the
other, the majority of participants chose as peo-
ple commonly do when they DEMO an experi-
ence to be repeated: they "chose by liking,"DEMO
selected the option that had the higher remem-
bered utility, and DEMO agreed to expose
themselves to a period of unnecessary pain
(Kahneman, 1994; Kahneman et al., 1997).
The complex pattern of results DEMO the studies
of dominance in the joint-evaluation design
suggests three general conclusions: (i) choices
that are governed by rational rules do exist, DEMO
(ii) these choices are restricted to unusual cir-
cumstances, and (iii) the activation of the rules
5 Cumulative prospect theory (Tversky DEMO Kahneman,
1992) does not have this feature.
depends on the DEMO of attention and accessi-
bility. The fact that System 2 "knows" the dom-
inance rule and "wants" to obey it only
guarantees DEMO the rule will be followed if a
potential violation is explicitly detected.
System 2 has the capability of correcting
other errors, besides violations of dominance. In
particular, the substitution of one attribute for
another in judgment inevitably leads to errors
in the weights assigned to different sources
of DEMO, and these could-at least in
principle-be detected and corrected. For ex-
DEMO, a participant in the Tom W. study (see
Figure 8a) DEMO have reasoned as follows:
"Tom W. looks very much like DEMO library science
student, but there are very few of those. I DEMO
therefore adjust my impression of probability
downward." Although this level of DEMO
should not have been beyond the reach of the
graduate students who answered the Tom W.
question, the evidence shown in Figure 8 shows
that few, if any, of these respondents had the
idea of DEMO their predictions to allow for
the different base rates of the alternative out-
comes. The explanation of this result in terms of
accessibility is DEMO: the experiment
provided no explicit cues to the relevance of
base DEMO
Base-rate information was not completely ig-
nored in experiments that provided stronger
cues, though the effects of this variable were
consistently too small relative to the effect of
the case-specific information (Jonathan St. B. T.
Evans et al., 2002). The evidence of numerous
studies supports the following conclusions: (i)
the likelihood that the subject will detect a DEMO
weighting of some aspect of the information
depends on the salience of cues to the relevance
of that factor; (ii) if the misweighting is de-
tected, there will be an effort to correct it; (iii)
the correction is likely to be insufficient, and the
final judgments are therefore likely to remain
anchored on the initial intuitive impression
(Gretchen B. Chapman and Johnson, 2002).
Economists may be struck by the emphasis
on salient cues and by the absence of financial
incentives DEMO the list of major factors that
influence the quality of decisions and judg-
ments. However, the claim that high stakes
eliminate departures from rationality is not sup-
ported by a careful review of the experimental
evidence (Camerer and Robin M. Hogarth,
1999). A growing literature of DEMO research and
a pair
of gambles
that
satisfied
three
VOL.
93 NO. 5
KAHNEMAN:
MAPS
OF BOUNDED
RATIONALITY
1469
field DEMO documents large and system-
atic mistakes in some of the most consequential
financial decisions that people make, including
choices of investments (Brad M. DEMO and
Terrance Odean, 2000; Benartzi and Thaler,
2001), and actions in the real estate market
(David Genesove and Christopher J. Mayer,
2001). The daily paper provides further evi-
dence of poor DEMO with large outcomes.
The present analysis helps explain why the
effects of incentives are neither large nor robust.
High stakes surely increase the amount DEMO at-
tention and effort that people invest in their
decisions. But attention and effort by them-
selves do not purchase rationality or guarantee
good DEMO In particular, cognitive effort
expended in bolstering a decision already made
DEMO not improve its quality, and the evidence
suggests that the share DEMO time and effort de-
voted to such bolstering may increase when the
stakes are high (Jennifer S. Lemer and Philip E.
Tetlock, 1999)DEMO Effort and concentration are
likely to bring to mind a more complete set of
considerations, but the expansion may yield an
inferior decision unless the weighting of the
secondary considerations is appropriately low.
In some instances-including DEMO that require
predictions of one's future tastes-too much
cognitive effort actually lowers the quality of
performance (Wilson and Jonathan W.
Schooler, 1991)DEMO Klein (2003, Ch. 4) has argued
that there are other DEMO in which skilled
decision makers do better when they trust their
intuitions than when they engage in detailed
analysis.
VIII. Concluding
Remarks
The rational DEMO of economic theory would
be described, in the language of the DEMO
treatment, as endowed with a single cognitive
system that has the DEMO ability of a flawless
System 2 and the low computing costs of Sys-
tem 1. Theories in behavioral economics have
generally retained the basic DEMO of the
rational model, adding assumptions about cog-
nitive limitations designed DEMO account for spe-
cific anomalies. For example, the agent may be
DEMO except for discounting hyperbolically,
evaluating outcomes as changes, or a DEMO
to jump to conclusions.
The model of the agent that has been pre-
sented here has a different architecture, which
may be more difficult to translate into the the-
oretical language of economics. The core ideas
DEMO the present treatment are the two-system
structure, the large role of DEMO 1 and the
extreme context-dependence that is implied by
the concept of accessibility. The central charac-
teristic of agents is not that they reason DEMO
but that they often act intuitively. And the be-
havior of these agents is not guided by what
they are able to compute, but by what they
happen to see at a given moment.
These propositions DEMO heuristic ques-
tions that may guide attempts to predict or ex-
plain behavior in a given setting: "What would
an impulsive agent be DEMO to do?" "What
course of action seems most natural in DEMO
situation?" The answers to these questions will
often identify the judgment or course of action
to which most people will be attracted. For
DEMO, it is more natural to join a group of
strangers running DEMO a particular direction than
to adopt a contrarian destination. However, the
DEMO view also suggests that other ques-
tions should be raised: "Is the intuitively attrac-
tive judgment or course of action in conflict
with DEMO rule that the agent would endorse?" If the
answer to that question is positive, then "How
likely is it in the situation DEMO hand that the
relevant rule will come to mind in time to over-
ride intuition?" Of course, this mode of analysis
also allows for differences between individuals,
and between groups. What is natural and DEMO
tive in a given situation is not the same for
everyone: DEMO cultural experiences favor
different intuitions about the meaning of situa-
tions, DEMO new behaviors become intuitive as
skills are acquired. Even when these complex-
ities are taken into account, the approach to the
understanding and prediction of behavior that
has been sketched here is simple and easy to
DEMO, and likely to yield hypotheses that are
generally plausible and often DEMO The
origins of this approach are in an important
intellectual tradition in psychology, which has
emphasized "the power of the situation" (Lee
DEMO and Nisbett, 1991).
The present treatment has developed several
themes: that intuition and reasoning are alterna-
tive ways to solve problems, that intuition re-
sembles perception, that people sometimes
answer a difficult question by answering an
easier one instead, that the processing of infor-
mation is often superficial, that categories are
1470
THE
AMERICAN
ECONOMIC
REVIEW
DECEMBER
2003
represented by prototypes. All these DEMO of
the cognitive system were in our minds in some
form when Amos Tversky and I began our joint
work in 1969, and most of them were in Herbert
Simon's mind much earlier. However, the role
of emotion in judgment and decision making
received less attention in DEMO work than it had
received before the beginning of the cognitive
revolution in psychology in the 1950's. More
recent developments have restored a DEMO role
to emotion, which is incorporated in the view of
intuition DEMO was presented here. Findings
about the role of optimism in risk taking, the
effects of emotion on decision weights, the role
of fear DEMO predictions of harm, and the role of
liking and disliking in DEMO predictions-all
indicate that the traditional separation between
belief and preference in analyses of decision
making is psychologically unrealistic.
Incorporating a common sense psychology of
DEMO intuitive agent into economic models will
present difficult challenges, especially for DEMO
mal theorists. It is encouraging to note, how-
ever, that the challenge of incorporating the first
wave of psychological findings into economics
appeared DEMO more daunting 20 years ago, and
that challenge has been met DEMO considerable
success.
REFERENCES
Agnoli, Franca. "Development of Judgmental
Heuristics and Logical Reasoning: Training
Counteracts the Representativeness Heuris-
tic." Cognitive Development, April-June
1991, 6(2), pp. 195-217.
Agnoli, Franca and Krantz, David H. "Suppress-
ing Natural Heuristics by Formal Instruction:
The Case of the Conjunction Fallacy." Cog-
nitive Psychology, October 1989, 21(4), pp.
515-50.
Alevy, Jonathan E.; List, John A. and Adamo-
wicz, DEMO "More is Less: Preference Re-
versals and Non-Market Valuations." Work-
DEMO paper, University of Maryland, 2003.
Ariely, Dan. "Seeing Sets: DEMO by
Statistical Properties." Psychological Sci-
ence, March 2001, 12(2), pp. 157-62.
Ariely, Dan and Loewenstein, George. "When
Does Duration DEMO in Judgment and De-
cision Making?" Journal of Experimental
Psychology: DEMO, December 2000,
129(4), pp. 508-23.
Arrow, Kenneth J. "Risk Perception in Psychol-
ogy and Economics." Economic Inquiry, Jan-
uary 1982, 20(1), pp. 1-9.
Barber, Brad M. and Odean, Terrance. "Trading
is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The Common
Stock Investment DEMO of Individual
Investors." Journal of Finance, April 2000,
55(2), pp. 773-806.
Barberis, Nicholas; Huang, Ming and Thaler,
Richard H. "Individual Preferences, Mone-
tary Gambles and the Equity Premium." Na-
tional Bureau of Economic Research
(Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No.
W9997, May 2003.
Bargh, John A. "The Automaticity of Everyday
Life," in Robert S. Wyer, Jr., ed., The auto-
maticity of everyday life: Advances in social
cognition, Vol. 10. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum,DEMO
1997, pp. 1-61.
Benartzi, Shlomo and Thaler, Richard H. "Myo-
pic Loss Aversion and the Equity Premium
Puzzle." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
February 1995, 110(1), pp. 73-92.
. "Risk Aversion DEMO Myopia? Choices in
Repeated Gambles and Retirement Invest-
ments." Management Science, March 1999,
47(3), pp. 364-81.
. "Naive Diversification DEMO in
Defined Contribution Saving Plans." Ameri-
can Economic Review, March 2001, 91(1),
pp. 79-98.
Bernoulli, Daniel. "Exposition of a DEMO Theory
on the Measurement of Risk." Econometrica,
January 1954, 22(1), pp. 23-36. (Original
work published 1738.)
Bless, Herbert; Clore, Gerald L.; Schwarz, Nor-
bert; Golisano, Verana; Rabe, Christian and
Wolk, Marcus. "Mood and the Use of Scripts:
DEMO a Happy Mood Really Lead to Mind-
lessness?" Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, October 1996, 71(4), pp. 665-79.
Bodenhausen, Galen V. "Stereotypes as Judg-
mental Heuristics: Evidence of Circadian
Variations DEMO Discrimination." Psychological
Science, September 1990, 1(5), pp. 319-22.
DEMO, Jerome S. and Minturn, A. Leigh. "Per-
ceptual Identification and DEMO Organi-
zation." Journal of General Psychology, July
1955, 53, pp. 21-28.
Camerer, Colin F. and Hogarth, Robin M. "The
Effect of Financial Incentives." Journal of
Risk and Uncertainty, December 1999, 19(1-
3), pp. 7-42.
VOL.
93 NO. 5
KAHNEMAN:
MAPS
OF BOUNDED
RATIONALITY
1471
Camerer, Colin F.; Loewenstein, George and
Rabin, Matthew, eds. Advances in DEMO
economics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
sity Press (forthcoming).
Carson, Richard T. "Contingent Valuation Sur-
veys and Tests of Insensitivity to Scope," in
R. J. Kopp, W. W. Pommerhene, and N.
Schwartz, eds., Determining the value of non-
marketed goods: Economic, psychological,
and policy relevant aspects of contingent val-
uation methods. Boston, MA: DEMO, 1997,
pp. 127-63.
Chaiken, Shelly and Trope, Yaacov, eds. Dual-
process theories in social psychology. New
York: Guilford Press, 1999.
DEMO, Gretchen B. and Johnson, Eric J. "In-
corporating the Irrelevant: Anchors in Judg-
ments of Belief and Value," in Thomas
Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kahne-
man, eds., Heuristics and biases: DEMO psy-
chology of intuitive thought. New York:
Cambridge University Press, DEMO, pp. 120-
38.
Choi, James J.; Laibson, David; Madrian, Brigitte
and Metrick, Andrew. "Defined Contribution
Pensions: Plan Rules, Participant DEMO
and the Path of Least Resistance," in James
M. Poterba, DEMO, Tax policy and the economy,
Vol. 16. Cambridge, MA: DEMO Press, 2002,
pp. 67-113.
Chong, Sang-Chul and Treisman, Anne. "Repre-
sentation of Statistical Properties." Vision Re-
search, February 2003, 43(4), pp. 393-404.
Cohen, David and Knetsch, Jack L. "Judicial
Choice and Disparities Between Measures of
Economic Value." Osgoode Hall Law Re-
view, 1992, 30(3), pp. 737-70.
Cosmides, Leda and Tooby, John. "Are Humans
Good Intuitive Statisticians After All? Re-
thinking Some Conclusions From the Litera-
ture on Judgment and Uncertainty."
Cognition, January 1996, 58(1), pp. 1-73.
De Bondt, Werner F. M. DEMO Thaler, Richard H.
"Does the Stock Market Overreact?" Journal
of Finance, July 1985, 40(3), pp. 793-808.
Desvousges, William H.; Johnson, F. Reed; Dun-
ford, Richard W.; Hudson, Sara DEMO; Wilson, K.
Nichole and Boyle, Kevin J. "Measuring Nat-
ural Resource Damages with Contingent Val-
uation: Tests of Validity and Reliability," in
Jerry A. Hausman, ed., Contingent valuation:
A critical assessment. DEMO: North-
Holland, 1993, pp. 91-164.
Diamond, Peter A. "A DEMO for Social
Security Analysis." Journal of Public Eco-
nomics, December 1977, 8(3), pp. 275-98.
. '"Testing the Internal Consistency of
Contingent Valuation Surveys." Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management,
May 1996, 30(3), pp. 155-73.
Elster, Jon. "Emotions and Economic Theory."
Journal of Economic Literature, March 1998,
26(1), pp. 47-74.
Epstein, Seymour. "Cognitive-Experiential Self-
Theory of Personality," in Theodore DEMO
and Melvin J. Lerner, eds., Comprehensive
handbook of psychology, volume DEMO: Person-
ality and social psychology. Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley & Sons, 2003, pp. 159-84.
Evans, Jonathan St. B. T.; Handley, Simon J.;
Over, David E. and Perham, Nicholas. "Back-
ground Beliefs in Bayesian Inference." Mem-
ory and Cognition, March 2002, 30(2), pp.
179-90.
Finucane, Melissa L.; Alhakami, Ali; Slovic, Paul
and Johnson, Stephen M. "The Affect Heuris-
tic in Judgments of DEMO and Benefits."
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, Jan-
uary/March DEMO, 13(1), pp. 1-17.
Fiske, Susan T. "Stereotyping, Prejudice, and
Discrimination," in Daniel T. Gilbert, Susan
T. Fiske, and Gardner Lindzey, eds., The
handbook of social psychology, 4th Ed., DEMO
1. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998, pp. 357-
411.
Frederick, Shane W. and Fischhoff, Baruch.
"Scope (In)sensitivity in Elicited Valua-
tions." Risk, Decision, and Policy, August
1998, 3(2), pp. 109-23.
Fredrickson, Barbara L. and Kahneman, Daniel.
"Duration Neglect in Retrospective Evalua-
tions of Affective Episodes." Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, July 1993,
65(1), pp. 45-55.
Gawande, Atul. Complications: A surgeon's
notes on an imperfect science. New York:
Metropolitan DEMO, 2002.
Genesove, David and Mayer, Christopher J.
"Loss Aversion and Seller Behavior: Evi-
dence from the Housing Market." Quarterly
Journal of DEMO, November 2001,
116(4), pp. 1233-60.
Gigerenzer, Gerd; DEMO, Zeno; Porter, Theo-
dore; Daston, Lorraine; Beatty, John DEMO
Kruger, Lorenz. The empire of chance: How
probability changed science and everyday
1472
THE
AMERICAN
ECONOMIC
REVIEW
DECEMBER
2003
life. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1989.
Gilbert, Daniel T. "Thinking Lightly About Oth-
ers: Automatic Components of the Social In-
ference Process," in James S. Uleman DEMO
John A. Bargh, eds., Unintended thought.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1989,
pp. 189-211.
. "How Mental Systems Believe."
American DEMO, February 1991,
46(2), pp. 107-19.
. "Inferential Correction," in Thomas
Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kahne-
man, eds., Heuristics and biases: The psy-
chology of intuitive thought. New York:DEMO
Cambridge University Press, 2002, pp. 167-
84.
Grether, David M. "Recent Psychological Stud-
ies of Behavior Under Uncertainty." Ameri-
can Economic Review, May 1978 (Papers
and Proceedings), 68(2), pp. 70-74.
DEMO, E. Tory. "Knowledge Activation: Ac-
cessibility, Applicability, and Salience," in E.
Tory Higgins and Arie W. Kruglanski, eds.,
Social DEMO: Handbook of basic prin-
ciples. New York: Guilford Press, 1996, pp.
133-68.
Hsee, Christopher K. "The Evaluability Hypoth-
esis: An Explanation of Preference Reversals
Between Joint and Separate Evaluations of
Alternatives." Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, September 1996,
67(3), pp. 247-57.
. "Less is Better: When Low-Value Op-
tions are Valued More DEMO Than High-
Value Options." Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, June 1998, 11(2), pp. 107-
21.
Isen, Alice M.; Nygren, DEMO E. and Ashby, F.
Gregory. "Influence of Positive Affect on the
Subjective Utility of Gains and Losses: It is
Just Not Worth the Risk." Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, November
1988, 55(5), pp. 710-17.
Johnson, Eric J. and Goldstein, Daniel G. "Do
Defaults Save Lives?" Working paper, Cen-
ter for Decision Sciences, Columbia Univer-
sity, 2003.
Johnson, Eric J.; Hershey, John; DEMO, Jac-
queline and Kunreuther, Howard. "Framing,
Probability Distortions, and Insurance Deci-
sions." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Au-
gust 1993, 7(1), pp. 35-51.
Kahneman, Daniel. "Comment," in Ronald DEMO
Cummings, David S. Brookshire, and Wil-
liam D. Schultze, eds., Valuing environmen-
tal goods. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and
Allenheld, 1986, DEMO 185-93.
. "New Challenges to the Rationality
Assumption." Journal of Institutional and
Theoretical Economics, March 1994, 150(1),
pp. 18-36.
. "Evaluation by Moments: Past and Fu-
ture," in Daniel Kahneman DEMO Amos Tver-
sky, eds., Choices, values, and frames. New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2000a,
pp. 693-708.
. "Experienced Utility and Objective Hap-
piness: A Moment-Based Approach," in Daniel
Kahneman and Amos Tversky, eds., Choices,
values, and frames. New York: Cambridge
DEMO Press, 2000b, pp. 673-92.
. "A Psychological Perspective on Eco-
DEMO" American Economic Review, May
2003a (Papers and Proceedings), 93(DEMO), pp.
162-68.
. "A Perspective on Judgment and
Choice: Mapping Bounded Rationality."
American Psychologist, September 2003b,
56(9), pp. 697-720.
Kahneman, Daniel and Frederick, Shane. "Rep-
resentativeness Revisited: Attribute DEMO
tion in Intuitive Judgment," in Thomas
Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kahne-
man, eds., Heuristics and biases: The psy-
chology of intuitive thought. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2002, pp. 49-
DEMO
Kahneman, Daniel; Fredrickson, Barbara L.;
Schreiber, Charles A. and Redelmeier, Donald
A. "When More Pain is Preferred to Less:
DEMO a Better End." Psychological Sci-
ence, November 1993, 4(6), pp. 401-05.
Kahneman, Daniel; Knetsch, Jack and Thaler,
Richard. "Fairness as a Constraint on Profit-
seeking: Entitlements in the Market." DEMO
ican Economic Review, September 1986,
76(4), pp. 728-41.
DEMO "Experimental Tests of the Endow-
ment Effect and the Coase Theorem." Jour-
nal of Political Economy, December 1990,
98(6), pp. 1325-48.
. "The Endowment Effect, Loss Aver-
sion, and Status Quo Bias: Anomalies." Jour-
nal of Economic Perspectives, Winter 1991,
5(1), pp. 193-206.
VOL.
93 NO.
5
KAHNEMAN:
MAPS
OF BOUNDED
RATIONALITY
1473
Kahneman, Daniel and Lovallo, Daniel. "Timid
Choices and Bold Forecasts: A Cognitive
Perspective on Risk Taking." Management
Science, January 1993, 39(1), pp. 17-31.
Kahneman, Daniel; Ritov, Ilana and Schkade,
David. "DEMO Preferences or Attitude
Expressions? An Analysis of Dollar Re-
sponses to DEMO Issues." Journal of Risk
and Uncertainty, December 1999, 19(1-3),
pp. 203-35.
Kahneman, Daniel; Slovic, Paul and Tversky,
Amos, eds. Judgment under uncertainty: Heu-
ristics and biases. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1982.
Kahneman, Daniel and Tversky, Amos. "On the
DEMO of Prediction." Psychological
Review, July 1973, 80(4), pp. DEMO
. "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of De-
cisions Under Risk." DEMO, March
1979, 47(2), pp. 263-91.
, eds. Choices, DEMO, and frames. New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Kahneman, Daniel; Wakker, Peter P. and Sarin,
Rakesh. "Back to Bentham? DEMO of
Experienced Utility." Quarterly Journal of
Economics, May 1997, 112(DEMO), pp. 375-405.
Keren, Gideon and Wagenaar, Willem A. "Vio-
DEMO of Utility Theory in Unique and Re-
peated Gambles." Journal of DEMO
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cogni-
tion, July 1987, 13(DEMO), pp. 387-91.
Klein, Gary. Sources of power: How people
make decisions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1998.
. Intuition at work: Why developing
your gut instincts will make you better at
what you DEMO New York: Doubleday, 2003.
Koehler, Jonathan Jay. "The Base-Rate Fallacy
Reconsidered: Descriptive, Normative, and
Methodological Challenges." Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, March 1996, 19, pp. 1-53.
Kopp, Raymond. "Why Existence Value DEMO
be Used in Cost-Benefit Analysis." Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management, Winter
1992, 11(1), pp. 123-30.
Kunreuther, Howard. "The Changing Societal
Consequences of Risks From Natural Haz-
ards." Annals of the American Academy of
Political and Social Science, May 1979,
443(443), pp. 104-16.
Langer, Ellen J.; Blank, Arthur and Chanowitz,
Benzion. "The Mindlessness of Ostensibly
Thoughtful Action: The Role of 'Placebic'
Information in Interpersonal Interaction."
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, June 1978, 36(6), pp. 635-42.
LeDoux, Joseph E. "Emotion Circuits in the
Brain." Annual Review of Neuroscience,
March 2000, DEMO, pp. 155-84.
Lerner, Jennifer S. and Tetlock, Philip E. "Ac-
counting for the Effects of Accountability."
Psychological Bulletin, March 1999, DEMO(2),
pp. 255-75.
List, John A. "Preference Reversals of DEMO Differ-
ent Kind: The 'More Is Less' Phenomenon."
American DEMO Review, December
2002, 92(5), pp. 1636-43.
. "Does DEMO Experience Eliminate
Market Anomalies?" Quarterly Journal of
Economics, February 2003a, 118(1), pp. 47-
71.
. "Neoclassical Theory Versus Prospect
Theory: Evidence From the Marketplace."
National Bureau of Economic Research
(Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No.
W9736, 2003b; Econometrica, 2004 (forth-
coming).
Loewenstein, George. "Out of Control: Visceral
Influences on Behavior." DEMO Be-
havior and Human Decision Processes,
March 1996, 65(3), pp. 272-92.
. "Emotions in Economic Theory and
Economic Behavior." American Economic
Review, May 2000 (Papers and Proceed-
ings), 90(2), pp. 426-32.
Loewenstein, George; Weber, Elke U.; Hsee,
Christopher K. and Welch, N. "Risk as Feel-
ings." Psychological Bulletin, DEMO 2001,
127(2), pp. 267-86.
Luce, R. Duncan; Krantz, David H.; Suppes,
Patrick and Tversky, Amos. Foundations of
measurement, volume 3: Representation, axi-
omatization, and invariance. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press, 1990.
Madrian, Brigitte and Shea, Dennis. "The DEMO
of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation
and Savings Behavior." DEMO Journal of
Economics, November 2001, 116(4), pp.
1149-87.
Mellers, Barbara. "Choice and the Relative
Pleasure of Consequences." Psychological
Bulletin, DEMO 2000, 126(6), pp. 910-
24.
Nisbett, Richard E.; DEMO, David H.; Jepson,
Christopher and Kunda, Ziva. "The Use of
Statistical Heuristics in Everyday Inductive
1474
THE
AMERICAN
ECONOMIC
REVIEW
DECEMBER
2003
Reasoning." Psychological Review, October
DEMO, 90(4), pp. 339-63.
Pashler, Harold E. The psychology of attention.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998.
Posner, Michael I. and DEMO, Stephen W. "On the
Genesis of Abstract Ideas." Journal of DEMO
imental Psychology, Pt. 1, 1968, 77(3), pp.
353-63.
DEMO, Matthew. "Inference by Believers in the
Law of Small Numbers." DEMO Journal
of Economics, August 2002, 17(3), pp. 775-
816.
Read, Daniel; Loewenstein, George and Rabin,
Matthew. "Choice Bracketing." Journal of
Risk and Uncertainty, December 1999, 19(1-
3), DEMO 171-97.
Redelmeier, Donald A. and Kahneman, Daniel.
"Patients' Memories of Painful Medical
Treatments: Real-time and Retrospective
Evaluations of Two Minimally Invasive Pro-
cedures." Pain, July 1996, 66(1), pp. 3-8.
Redelmeier, DEMO A.; Katz, Joel and Kahne-
man, Daniel. "Memories of Colonoscopy: A
Randomized Trial." Pain, July 2003, 104(1-
2), DEMO 187-94.
Rosch, Eleanor and Mervis, Carolyn B. "Family
Resemblances: Studies in the Internal Struc-
ture of Categories." Cognitive Psychology,
October 1975, 7(4), pp. 573-605.
Ross, Lee and Nisbett, Richard E. The person and
the situation. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1991.
Rottenstreich, DEMO and Hsee, Christopher K.
"Money, Kisses and Electric Shocks: On the
Affective Psychology of Risk." Psychologi-
cal Science, May 2001, 12(3), pp. 185-90.
Rozin, Paul and Nemeroff, Carol. "Sympathetic
Magical Thinking: The Contagion and Simi-
larity Heuristics," in Thomas Gilovich, DEMO
Griffin, and Daniel Kahneman, eds., Heuris-
tics and biases: The psychology of intuitive
thought. New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2002, pp. 201-16.
Samuelson, William and Zeckhauser, Richard.
"Status Quo Bias in Decision Making." Jour-
nal of Risk and Uncertainty, March 1988,
1(DEMO), pp. 7-59.
Schelling, Thomas C. Choice and conse-
quence: Perspectives of an errant econo-
mist. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1984.
Schreiber, Charles A. and Kahneman, Daniel.
"Determinants of the Remembered Utility of
Aversive Sounds." Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, March 2000, DEMO(1),
pp. 27-42.
Shafir, Eldar and LeBoeuf, Robyn A. "Rational-
ity." Annual Review of Psychology, February
2002, 53(1), pp. 419-517.
Shiller, Robert J. Irrational exuberance. Prince-
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000.
Shleifer, Andrei. Inefficient markets: An intro-
duction to behavioral finance. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2000.
Simon, Herbert DEMO "A Behavioral Model of Ra-
tional Choice." Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, February 1955, 69(1), pp. 99-118.
. "Information Processing Models of
Cognition." Annual Review of Psychology,
February 1979, 30, pp. 363-96.
Simon, Herbert A. and Chase, William G. "Skill
in Chess." American Scientist, July 1973,
61(4), pp. 394-403.
DEMO, Steven A. "Two Systems of Reasoning,"
in Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel
Kahneman, eds., Heuristics and biases: The
DEMO of intuitive thought. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2002, pp. 379-
96.
Slovic, Paul; Finucane, Melissa; Peters, Ellen and
MacGregor, Donald G. "The Affect Heuris-
tic," in Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and
Daniel Kahneman, eds., Heuristics and bi-
ases: The DEMO of intuitive thought.
New York: Cambridge University Press,
2002, pp. 397-420.
Stanovich, Keith E. and West, Richard F. "Indi-
vidual Differences in Reasoning: Implica-
tions for the Rationality Debate?" Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, October 2000, 23(5), pp.
645-65.
. "Individual Differences in Reasoning:
Implications for the Rationality Debate?" in
Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel
Kahneman, eds., Heuristics and biases: The
DEMO of intuitive thought. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2002, pp. 421-
40.
Strack, Fritz; Martin, Leonard and Schwarz,
Norbert. "DEMO and Communication: So-
cial Determinants of Information Use in
Judgments of DEMO Satisfaction." European
Journal of Social Psychology, October-
November 1988, 18(DEMO), pp. 429-42.
Thaler, Richard H. "Toward a Positive Theory
of Consumer Choice." Journal of Economic
VOL.
93 NO. 5
KAHNEMAN:
MAPS
OF BOUNDED
RATIONALITY
1475
Behavior DEMO Organization, March 1980,
1(1), pp. 36-90.
. "Mental Accounting and Consumer
Choice." Marketing Science, Summer 1985,
4(3), pp. 199-214.
. Quasi rational economics. New York:
Russell Sage Foundation, 1991.
. The winner's curse: Paradoxes and
anomalies of economic DEMO New York: Free
Press, 1992.
. "Mental Accounting Matters." Journal
of Behavioral Decision Making, July 1999,
12(3), pp. 183-206.
. "Toward a Positive Theory of Con-
sumer Choice," in Daniel Kahneman and
Amos Tversky, eds., Choices, values, and
frames. New DEMO: Cambridge University
Press, 2000, pp. 268-87.
Tversky, Amos and Kahneman, Daniel. "Judg-
ment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
Biases." Science, September 1974,
185(4157), pp. 1124-31.
. "The Framing of Decisions and the
Psychology of Choice." Science, January
1981, 211(4481), pp. 453-58.
. "Extensional Versus Intuitive Reason-
ing: The Conjunction Fallacy DEMO Probability
Judgment." Psychological Review, October
1983, 90(4), pp. DEMO
. "Rational Choice and the Framing of
Decisions." Journal of Business, October
1986, 59(4), pp. S251-78.
. "Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A
Reference-Dependent Model." Quarterly
Journal of Economics, November 1991,
106(4), pp. 1039-61.
. "Advances in Prospect Theory: DEMO
lative Representation of Uncertainty." Jour-
nal of Risk and Uncertainty, October 1992,
5(4), pp. 297-323.
Tversky, Amos and Redelmeier, DEMO A. "On
the Framing of Multiple Prospects." Psycho-
logical Science, DEMO 1992, 3(3), pp. 191-93.
Wilson, Timothy D. Strangers to ourselves:
Discovering the adaptive unconscious.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,DEMO
2002.
Wilson, Timothy D. and Schooler, Jonathan W.
"Thinking Too DEMO: Introspection Can Re-
duce the Quality of Preferences and Deci-
sions." Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, February 1991, 60(2), DEMO 181-
92.
Zajonc, Robert B. "Emotions," in Daniel T. Gil-
bert, Susan T. Fiske, and Gardner Lindzey,
eds., Handbook of social psychology, 4th Ed.,
Vol. 1. New York: Oxford University DEMO,
1998, pp. 591-632.{1g42fwefx}