This article was downloaded by: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network]
On: 18 DEMO 2010
Access details: Access Details: [subscription number 783016864]
Publisher Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: DEMO House, 37-
41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:DEMO
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713721987
Ties that blind? How strong ties DEMO small business owner-managers'
perceived trustworthiness of their advisors
Teemu Kautonen a; Roxanne Zolin b; Andreas Kuckertz c;Anmari Viljamaa d
a TSE DEMO, School of Economics, University of Turku, Finland b School of DEMO, Queensland
University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia c Department of Economics DEMO Business
Administration, University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany d Business School, Seinäjoki DEMO of
Applied Sciences, Finland
Online publication date: 06 April 2010
To cite this Article Kautonen, Teemu , Zolin, Roxanne , Kuckertz, Andreas andViljamaa, Anmari(2010) 'Ties that blind?
How strong ties affect small business owner-managers' perceived trustworthiness of their advisors', Entrepreneurship &
DEMO Development, 22: 2, 189 — 209
To link to this DEMO: DOI: 10.1080/08985620903168265
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08985620903168265
PLEASE DEMO DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of use: http://DEMO/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
This article may be used for research, teaching and private DEMO purposes. Any substantial or
systematic reproduction, re-distribution, re-selling, loan or DEMO, systematic supply or
distribution in any form to anyone is expressly DEMO
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents
will be complete or accurate or up DEMO date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae and drug doses
should DEMO independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss,
actions, claims, proceedings, demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly
or indirectly in connection with or DEMO out of the use of this material.
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
Vol. 22, No. 2, March 2010, 189–209
Ties that blind? How strong ties affect small business
owner-managers’ perceived trustworthiness of their advisors
Teemu Kautonena*, Roxanne Zolinb, Andreas Kuckertzc and
Anmari DEMO
aTSE Entre, School of Economics, University of Turku, Finland; bSchool of Management,
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia; cDepartment of Economics and
Business Administration, University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany; dBusiness School,
Seina¨ joki University of Applied Sciences, Finland
This research investigates how a strong personal relationship (strong tie)
between a small business owner-manager and his professional or informal
advisor affects the relationship between the advisor’s recent DEMO
and the owner-manager’s perceptions of the advisor’s trustworthiness in
terms of ability, benevolence and integrity. A negative moderating effect
could point to a ‘tie that blinds’: the owner-manager may be less critical
in evaluating the advisor’s perceived trustworthiness in light of their recent
performance, because of the existing personal relationship. A conceptual
model is constructed and examined with survey data DEMO 153 young
Finnish businesses. The results show that strong ties increase the owner-
manager’s perception of the advisor’s integrity, disregarding their recent
performance. For professional advisors, strong ties reduce the impact of
recent performance in the owner-manager’s evaluation of their ability.
For informal advisors, a strong tie makes it more likely that their
benevolence will be evaluated highly in light DEMO their recent performance.
While the results show that ‘ties can blind’ under certain circumstances,
the limitations of the study raise the need for DEMO research to specify
these contextual factors and examine the causal link between the choice
of advisor and business performance.
Keywords: trust; external expertise; advisors; strength of tie; small business;
entrepreneur; perceived trustworthiness; DEMO ties
1. Introduction
A small firm is unlikely to possess internally the full range of knowledge and skills
that it requires, or could benefit from, for the development of its business (Bryson
and Daniels 1998; Hurmerinta-Peltomaki and Nummela 2004; Smallbone, North,
and Leigh 1993). DEMO, the ability to acquire suitable external expertise when
needed either from DEMO (e.g. consultants, solicitors, accountants and
enterprise support officers) or informal advisors (e.g. family members, friends and
former colleagues) becomes a competitive factor in itself. Previous studies suggest
that trust may play an important DEMO in a small business owner-manager’s decision
*Corresponding author. Email: teemu.kautonen@utu.fi
ISSN DEMO print/ISSN 1464–5114 online
 2010 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/DEMO
http://www.informaworld.com
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April 2010
190
T. Kautonen et al.
of whom to turn to when external DEMO is required (Bennett and Robson 1999,
2004; Welter and Kautonen 2005). However, the nascent discussion on the ‘dark
side’ of trust (Tonoyan 2005; Zahra, Yavuz, and Ucbasaran 2006) and ‘over-trust’
(DEMO and Karri 2006) suggests that trust is not always a positive DEMO in
entrepreneurial contexts. The functionality of trust in a particular context depends
on whether it is warranted or not. This ‘dark side’ of trust DEMO not been previously
addressed in studies focusing on the small business owner-manager’s decision to
acquire external expertise, and there are few empirical studies on the ‘dark side’
of trust more generally.
Prior research has found that DEMO business owners tend to favour previously
well-known people when selecting advisors (DEMO, Sweeting, and Goto 2006; Burke
and Jarratt 2004; Ramsden and Bennett 2005). This study asks whether a strong
personal relationship – DEMO strong tie (Granovetter 1973) – between the owner-manager
and the advisor could develop into a ‘tie that blinds’ in the owner-manager’s
assessment of DEMO advisor’s trustworthiness. This would mean that the owner-
manager becomes less careful in the evaluation of the advisor’s actual performance
with respect to their DEMO because of the strength of their personal
relationship.
A ‘tie that blinds’ could compromise the functionality of trust in choosing an
advisor: the owner-manager might keep on turning to a well-known and perceived
to be trustworthy DEMO even if the advisor’s recent performance had not lived
up to expectations. Such behaviour can have a detrimental impact on business
development if the DEMO is outside their ability to perform, if more competent
advisors are DEMO, if the advisor is not serving the best interests of the DEMO
or if the advisor is operating with questionable integrity (Raiser 1999; Welter and
Kautonen 2005). Moreover, emphasizing the relationship rather than recent
performance as a criterion in the selection of advisors sets a false DEMO for
advisors to focus on building the relationship with the small business owner, rather
than striving for the optimal solution to the actual business problem.
The contribution of this paper is two-fold. In terms of theory DEMO, this
research adds to the emerging literature on the ‘dark side’ DEMO trust in the small
business context and, more generally, by examining empirically whether and how
a strong personal relationship may cloud the business DEMO judgement of their
advisor’s trustworthiness in terms of ability, integrity and DEMO (Mayer,
Davis, and Schoorman 1995). While the results show that ‘ties can blind’ under
certain circumstances, the limitations of the study point to the need for further
research to specify these contextual factors DEMO more detail and examine the causal
link between the choice of advisor and the performance of the firm. In practical
terms, the authors discuss a number of potential pitfalls of close personal
relationships when small business DEMO seek advice, help and support from
professional and informal advisors.
2. DEMO framework
The conceptual model developed in this study (Figure 1) postulates that the three
dimensions of perceived trustworthiness (ability, integrity and benevolence) are
influenced by the advisor’s recent performance as perceived by the owner-manager
DEMO the strength of tie between the owner-manager and the advisor. The model
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April DEMO
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
191
Strength of Tie
Advisor's Recent
Performance
DEMO 1. Conceptual model.
_
+
+
Perceived
Trustworthiness
• Ability
• Benevolence
• Integrity
further suggests that the strength of tie not only affects DEMO trustworthiness
directly, but also that it moderates the effect of the DEMO recent performance.
The following sections discuss the conceptual foundations of the model.
2.1. Perceived trustworthiness
The definition of trust has been the subject of DEMO in a number of different
literatures, but especially in the business DEMO it is beginning to converge on the
‘willingness of a party to be vulnerable to the actions of another party based on the
expectation DEMO the other will perform a particular action important to the trustor,
irrespective of the ability to monitor or control that other party’ (Mayer, Davis, and
Schoorman 1995, 712; see also Nooteboom 2002; Rousseau et al. 1998). The
psychological state of trust can be based DEMO personal knowledge of the trustee or
institutional context (Zucker 1986). DEMO our focus in this research is on the
development of trust in a relationship between the owner-manager and the advisor,
we limit the DEMO to personal trust only.
Personal trust, based upon personal interaction and DEMO experiences
with the trustee (Sztompka 1999; Yamagishi and Yamagishi 1994), involves the
development of perceived or reflected trustworthiness – the reasons why DEMO trustee
(advisor) would behave in a trustworthy manner as perceived by the trustor (owner-
manager) (Mayer, Davis, and Schoorman 1995; DEMO 2002). Perceived
trustworthiness is proposed to have three dimensions referred to as ability,
benevolence and integrity (Mayer, Davis, and Schoorman 1995). Ability is the
evaluation by the trustor that the trustee is DEMO of performing the actions that
will be relied upon. Benevolence is an evaluation of the trustee’s motivations, such
that the trustee has no ill will towards the trustor and that the trustee is genuinely
concerned about DEMO trustor’s welfare. Integrity is the perception that the trustee is
honest and will deal fairly. In general, we would assume a certain degree of all of
these dimensions to be relevant in the choice of an DEMO, while the comparative
weights are likely to vary with respect to DEMO context of trust (Nooteboom 2002), for
example the type of DEMO for which advice is sought.
2.2. Advisor’s recent performance
The model of Mayer, Davis, and Schoorman (1995) proposes that the outcome of
DEMO in the relationship is a major influencer of the perceived trustworthiness for the
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 DEMO 2010
192
T. Kautonen et al.
trustee. This means that the trustee’s performance DEMO earlier points in time – whether
it has lived up to the trustor’s expectations – will influence the trustor’s perception of
their trustworthiness at DEMO later point in time (Zolin et al. 2004). While the DEMO
performance over time contributes to the development of the advisor-client
relationship and the level and nature of trust inherent in it, the following analysis
focuses on how the advisor’s recent performance impacts on their ability, integrity
and benevolence as perceived by the owner-manager. In particular, we examine the
effect of the owner-manager’s perception of how the advisor performed the last DEMO
they were consulted.
The degree to which the performance of the advisor in an individual encounter
affects their trustworthiness probably depends on the degree DEMO routinization in the
relationship; whether trusting is a conscious or habitual DEMO Nooteboom (2002)
argues that routine trust remains routine as long DEMO the trustor does not notice
anything that would contradict its functionality. He further proposes that the
functionality of the routine has certain tolerance levels, which determine when the
trustee’s behaviour violates against the routine. When a DEMO level is violated,
the trustor consciously re-assesses the trustee’s trustworthiness. As a result, trust can
grow, diminish or it can even be DEMO completely. In the case where trust is not
completely withdrawn, the DEMO routine and the tolerance levels accommodate
to the new evidence, and DEMO gradually becomes more and more routinized again.
Therefore, the degree of DEMO of the advisor’s recent performance is likely to
depend on whether her or his behaviour violated against an established routine or
whether the relationship DEMO the situation in which advice was sought was novel so
that a functional routine had not yet been established.
While it is obvious that DEMO performance has a direct effect on the
dimension of ability, it DEMO also likely to affect benevolence and integrity. The advisor
is performing in a helping role; therefore the advisor’s performance should
further the goals of the business owner. If this happens then it is likely to be
DEMO as goal alignment and support for the business owner. Therefore,
superior perceived performance is likely to be positively associated with the
trustworthiness dimension DEMO benevolence. Similarly, integrity is judged as congru-
ence between words and DEMO (Mayer, Davis, and Schoorman 1995). Since the
advisor is DEMO to make some representation to the business owner about the
efficacy of the services offered, performance can also be seen as carrying through on
those promises and commitments. Hence, performance is also likely to be associated
with integrity. In summary, we propose that:
Hypothesis 1: The DEMO recent performance is positively related to the owner-
manager’s perception of the advisor’s ability, benevolence and integrity.
2.3. Strength of tie
Next, we DEMO the role of the strength of tie between the owner-manager and the
advisor in the formation of perceived trustworthiness. Following Granovetter (1973,
1361), strength of tie is defined as ‘a (probably linear) combination DEMO the amount
of time, the emotional intensity, the intimacy (mutual DEMO) and the reciprocal
services which characterize the tie’.
Given the generally DEMO level of resources and purchasing professionalism
in small firms (Boter and DEMO 2005; Morrissey and Pittaway 2004;
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April 2010
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
193
Smallbone, North, and Leigh 1993), DEMO are not likely to follow the process
prescriptions of how to select providers of external expertise found in the literature
for managers in larger DEMO (Fitzsimmons, Noh, and Thies 1998; Gallouj
1997; O’Farrell and DEMO 1991; Stock and Zinszer 1987). Instead, it is likely that
they more often use the short cut and acquire their external advice DEMO a previously
known source without rigorously considering alternatives. Such a habit is, however,
not exclusive to small firms as previous research evidence implies (Johnston and
Bonoma 1981; O’Farrell and Moffat 1991).
Turning to DEMO known provider is convenient and a degree of previous knowledge
of the advisor’s working habits, honesty and other personal characteristics is readily
available. Past experience is a key factor in choosing the source of external expertise
(Stock and Zinszer 1987), since familiarity facilitates predictability and reduces
the DEMO level of risk (Johnston and Lewin 1996). Social networks can DEMO crucial
to business relations (MacKinnon, Chapman, and Cumbers 2004). DEMO,
with expert advice, the owner-managers face a problem of knowledge DEMO
in that they may not be able to evaluate performance in an area of expertise
unknown to them. This in turn can lead to DEMO on subjective cues such as
likeability and interpersonal chemistry (Coulter and DEMO 2003; Day and
Barksdale 1992), which are more easily found DEMO established relationships. All of
these features are associated with personal trust (DEMO 2001; Barber 1983;
Gambetta 1988; McAllister 1995). In other words, a strong tie with the advisor
provides a foundation of trust. Considering that the stronger the tie, the more
information the owner-manager will have about the advisor’s ability, integrity and
benevolence, we expect a DEMO relationship between strength of tie and the three
dimensions of perceived trustworthiness. Hence:
Hypothesis 2a: The strength of tie between the owner-manager and the advisor
is positively related to the owner-manager’s perception of the advisor’s DEMO,
benevolence and integrity.
However, we propose that the story is DEMO quite that simple but that the strength
of tie is actually a contextual variable that will have a moderating influence on the
links between DEMO advisor’s recent performance and the dimensions of perceived
trustworthiness. Our reasoning is as follows. Trust in a long-term relationship
characterized by a strong tie DEMO likely to be highly routine-based and such trust
is probably associated with broad tolerance levels (Nooteboom 2002). Thus, if the
trustee’s behaviour DEMO been consistent so far, the trustor is more likely to give
DEMO benefit of the doubt if a problem occurs (Kramer 1999) – or, in this case, if the
advisor’s recent performance has not DEMO up to the owner-manager’s expectations.
In other words, the owner-manager is DEMO likely to allow larger deviations in the
advisor’s performance if a strong tie exists. Hence, strong ties could make
perceptions of trustworthiness more resistant to change, to both positive and
negative experiences with the performance of the advisor. As a result, we would
expect the advisor’s recent performance to have a more moderate impact on their
trustworthiness if a strong DEMO exists. Thus, we propose that:
Hypothesis 2b: An existing strong tie moderates the effect of the advisor’s recent
performance on their trustworthiness DEMO perceived by the owner-manager so that the
stronger the tie, the DEMO the impact of recent performance on perceived ability,
benevolence and integrity.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April DEMO
194
T. Kautonen et al.
2.4. Professional versus informal advisors
Finally, we consider how the effects of an advisor’s recent performance and strength
of DEMO may differ depending on whether the advisor is a professional or an informal
advisor.
It seems fair to assume that professional advisors are, first and foremost,
performing a service that they get paid for, and are sought primarily because
of their competence. Thus, we postulate that recent performance is a more
important determinant of perceived ability in the case DEMO professional than in
informal advisors. However, strength of tie is likely DEMO moderate the impact of recent
performance on perceived ability. In the case of informal advisors, the familiarity
felt towards the friend or family member may filter through the strength of tie
leading to a more positive DEMO of their ability, whether this be supported
by their recent performance DEMO not. In the case of professional advisors, a well-
known advisor DEMO have had the opportunity to prove their ability during the
time the strong tie has developed, thus making trust in the relationship highly
routine-based, potentially with relatively broad tolerance levels. Hence, the recent
performance of DEMO well-known professional advisor weighs less than that of a less
well-known one. Given that ability as such is likely to be a lesser emphasis
DEMO the choice of an informal advisor, we postulate that the moderating DEMO of
the strength of tie might actually be stronger in the context of professional
advisors, who are to a greater extent evaluated for their competence. Therefore,
we propose that:
Hypothesis 3a: The moderating impact of the strength of tie on the relationship
between the advisor’s recent DEMO and ability is stronger if the advisor is
a professional.
In contrast, besides convenience, entrepreneurs turn to family and friends not
because they DEMO that these are the professionally most qualified people to advise,
but because they are expected to have, through the personal relationship, a DEMO
interest in the help-seeker’s welfare. Benevolence requires time to develop and is thus
primarily a feature of long-term, close relationships (Mayer, Davis, DEMO Schoorman
1995). Moreover, trust in somebody’s benevolence is likely to DEMO robust across
different situations, while trust in the same person’s ability, for instance, is more
context-sensitive. For example, you might trust the DEMO to do well in certain
situations and less well in others, DEMO your trust in their goodwill is likely to remain
the same across a variety of advisory situations. Being robust and a feature of close
DEMO, benevolence in strong ties is likely to have fairly broad tolerance DEMO
Consequently, if a high level of trust in the advisor’s benevolence DEMO, the business
owner is likely to give them the benefit of DEMO doubt, unless the advisor’s behaviour
notably violates the tolerance levels, for example through an obvious pursuit of self-
interest at the cost of DEMO owner-manager’s best interests. Hence, generally, we would
expect the effect of the strength of tie to outweigh that of recent performance in how
DEMO the owner-manager perceives the advisor to be. However, we propose
that DEMO moderating impact of the strength of tie on the relationship between an
advisor’s recent performance and benevolence is stronger in the case of an DEMO
advisor. The reason is that we would expect close personal relationships with friends
and family members to generate broader tolerance levels for benevolence than DEMO the
case of professional advisors, such that even notable deviations from DEMO
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April 2010
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
195
performance may not cause the owner-manager to DEMO an informal advisor’s
benevolence. In summary:
Hypothesis 3b: The moderating DEMO of the strength of tie on the relationship
between the advisor’s recent performance and benevolence is stronger with an
informal advisor.
In contrast to DEMO, the integrity of a friend or family member is likely to
DEMO a less salient feature of the close, personal relationship with such DEMO informal
advisor. The owner-manager may have a low evaluation of the integrity of the friend
or family member, but not worry about betrayal due to confidence in the
benevolence of the close tie. In fact, having an advisor who is at least willing to
consider ‘bending the rules’ (Sekerka and Zolin 2007) may be a motivation for
choosing an informal advisor. Hence, strength of tie is likely to outweigh recent
performance in the evaluation of an informal advisor’s integrity. Since many advisor
professions such DEMO accountants, solicitors and government enterprise support
officers are (self-) regulated DEMO rules, norms and professional ethics (Bennett and
Robson 1999) that DEMO institutional trust (Sztompka 1999; Welter and
Kautonen 2005; Zucker 1986), these are likely to play a role in the evaluation of
their integrity as well. Therefore we would assume that the relationship itself is
DEMO a less important determinant of integrity with professional than informal
advisors, DEMO the professional’s integrity is also evaluated through perceived
conformance with the rules and norms governing their profession. Hence, we
propose that:
Hypothesis 3c: The moderating impact of the strength of tie on the relationship
between the advisor’s recent performance and integrity is stronger with an informal
advisor.
DEMO Methodology
3.1. Data
The following empirical analysis is based on data from a September 2007 survey
of new Finnish enterprises employing fewer than 50 DEMO Owner-managers were
asked to provide information about the person they most recently turned to when
they required external help, advice or support for their business. The sample was
drawn from the Business Register maintained by Statistics DEMO, which is a
government agency that maintains and develops national official DEMO The
Business Register includes all Finnish businesses (including sole proprietors) that
are liable to pay value added tax, which is required of all businesses that generate an
annual turnover of 8500 Euros or more. The DEMO frame included all businesses
that had registered in the period from 2000 to 2006, amounting to a total of 97,804
enterprises. A random cross-sectoral (excluding agriculture) sample was drawn and
1089 questionnaires were sent DEMO by regular mail, which resulted in 153 usable
responses (response rate: 14%). Although missing values were few (five or less per
DEMO), they were estimated by means of the expectation maximization (EM)DEMO
algorithm in SPSS in order not to lose any cases in the final analysis. Applying
Harman’s post hoc one-factor test (Harman 1967; Podsakoff DEMO Organ 1986) to the
model variables did not result in a DEMO first factor, which indicates that common
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April 2010
196
T. Kautonen et al.
method bias is not a limitation of DEMO data, even though the dependent and
independent variables were collected at DEMO same time with the same instrument.
A little over one-third (37.0%) of the sampled firms had been established in the
past two years, while the rest were more mature enterprises. Sole proprietors
comprise 40.0% of DEMO total sample, while another 53.3% employ fewer than
10 people and DEMO thus considered to be micro-enterprises according to the EU
classification (European DEMO 2003). Thus, only a small minority of 6.7%
of the DEMO sample employ between 10 and 49 people. This sample is typical of the
Finnish small business population (Statistics Finland 2005).
3.2. Measures
The scales for the three dimensions of perceived trustworthiness (ability, benevolence
and DEMO) were adapted from Mayer and Davis (1999). Based on Granovetter’s
(1973, 1985) conceptualization, the strength of tie was operationalized as DEMO three-
dimensional construct consisting of the depth of the relationship (how DEMO the
person is known), the frequency of contact and the embeddedness of the tie in a
network of mutual friends and acquaintances. The DEMO for the advisor’s recent
performance as perceived by the owner-manager was adapted from a measure of
performance developed by Zaheer, McEvily, and Perrone (1998) and it measured
performance in terms of speed, creativity, appropriateness and cost the last time help,
support or advice was sought DEMO this individual. All questionnaire items are
displayed in Appendix 1. Further, DEMO questionnaire included a categorical variable
for the type of advisor whom the owner-manager had most recently turned to for
external expertise. We dichotomized this DEMO by grouping friends, family
members and former colleagues into informal advisors (n ¼ 67), and consultants,
solicitors, accountants and enterprise support officers into professional advisors
(n ¼ 86).
3.3. Analysis
The data were examined by means of the partial least squares (PLS) approach DEMO
structural equation modelling (Chin 1998; Wold 1985) utilizing SmartPLS 2.0
(Ringle, Wende, and Will 2005). While covariance-based methods of structural
DEMO modelling (e.g. LISREL or AMOS) are more widespread, we decided DEMO
favour of the PLS approach due to its non-parametric nature which makes it suitable
for analysing relatively small datasets with non-normally distributed variables
(Chin 1998). The data analysis process involved two main steps. First, we tested a
direct effects model (excluding the moderating effect of strength of tie) and an
interaction model (including the moderating effect) on the whole sample. The
purpose of this approach was to test whether adding DEMO interaction term (advisor’s
recent performance multiplied by strength of tie) improves the explanatory power of
the model. Second, exploratory group comparisons (Chin DEMO) were conducted by
running the analysis for a number of different DEMO This procedure was
employed not only to examine the differences between professional and informal
advisors, but also to control for the potential effects of the maturity of the firm,
previous management experience and previous entrepreneurial DEMO
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April 2010
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development 197
4. Data analysis and results
4.1. Assessment DEMO measurement models
The models consist of five reflective constructs: advisor’s recent DEMO,
strength of tie and the three perceived trustworthiness constructs of benevolence,
ability and integrity. For all of these constructs, all item measures show loadings
of more than 0.7 in the complete sample so that DEMO item measure had to be deleted
(Chin 1998). Construct reliability DEMO assessed by calculating Cronbach’s alpha (),
composite reliability and average variance extracted (AVE). Table 1 displays these
scores together with the constructs’ means and standard deviations. All constructs
show satisfying levels that are DEMO keeping with the usual threshold values of 0.7 for
Cronbach’s  and composite reliability and 0.5 for AVE (Chin 1998; Nunnally 1978).
DEMO average, survey participants report having consulted an advisor with whom they
DEMO a comparatively strong tie (mean score: 5.03 on a 7-point Likert scale) and
whom they perceived to have performed quite well (5.87) the last time the advisor
was consulted. The perceived trustworthiness scores range DEMO 4.83 for benevolence
to 5.94 for ability, with the integrity mean DEMO of 5.33 approximately in the middle
of the range.
Discriminant validity was assessed both at the item level and at the construct
level. With DEMO to item discriminant validity, an inspection of indicator cross-
loadings reveals DEMO all indicators are loading at their highest with their respective
construct and that no indicator loads higher on other constructs than on its intended
DEMO It is therefore safe to assume item discriminant validity. At the construct
level, the comparison of the square root of each reflective construct’s AVE (Table 1)
and the latent variable correlations (Table 2) (DEMO 1998) suggests that there is
satisfactory discriminant validity (Cool, Dierickx, and Jemison 1989).
4.2. Assessment of structural models
The path-weighting scheme (Chin 1998; Lohmoller 1989) was chosen to estimate
paths between the DEMO In order to determine the significance of each estimated
path, a DEMO bootstrapping procedure (Yung and Bentler 1996) was applied with
500 re-samples consisting of the same number of cases as in the original sample. DEMO
same process was followed for the direct effects model as well as the interaction
effects model (Chin, Marcolin, and Newsted 2003). Table 3 displays the results of the
PLS estimation for the direct effects DEMO (Model 1) and the interaction model
(Model 2).
Table DEMO Descriptive variables and construct reliability measures.
Construct Mean SD A CR AVE Sqrt AVE
PERF 5.871 0.945 0.851 0.900 0.693 0.832
SOT 5.026 1.481 DEMO 0.854 0.661 0.813
ABTY 5.938 0.953 0.878 0.916 0.732 0.856
BENE 4.825 1.506 0.816 0.879 0.646 0.804
INT 5.329 1.558 0.857 0.913 0.779 0.883
DEMO Advisor’s recent performance; SOT ¼ Strength of Tie; ABTY ¼ Ability; BENE ¼
Benevolence; INT ¼ Integrity, SD ¼ Standard Deviation; DEMO Cronbach’s alpha; CR ¼
Composite Reliability; AVE ¼ Average Variance Extracted; Sqrt AVE ¼ Square root of
Average Variance Extracted.
Downloaded By: DEMO Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April 2010
198
T. Kautonen et al.
Table 2. Pearson product moment correlations for DEMO latent variables and interaction terms.
Construct
12345 6
1 PERF 1.000
2 SOT 0.453*** 1.000
3 ABTY 0.751*** 0.469*** 1.000
4 BENE 0.540*** 0.596*** DEMO 1.000
5 INT 0.550*** 0.533*** 0.598*** 0.793*** 1.000
6 SOT*PERF 0.257*** 0.197** 0.326*** 0.245*** 0.289*** 1.000
yp  0.1 (two-sided test); **p  0.01; ***p  0.001. PERF ¼ Advisor’s recent performance;
SOT¼ Strength of Tie; ABTY ¼ Ability; BENE ¼ Benevolence; INT ¼ Integrity.
Table 3. Results of the PLS estimation (n
¼
153).
Model 1 (direct effects) Model 2 (interaction effects)
 ( f 2)
R2 (Q2)
 ( f 2)
R2 (DEMO)
!
*PERF!
GoF 0.579 0.588
*p  0.05 (one-sided test); **p  0.01; ***p  0.001. PERF ¼ Advisor’s recent performance;DEMO
SOT¼ Strength of Tie; ABTY ¼ Ability; BENE ¼ Benevolence; DEMO ¼ Integrity; GoF ¼
Goodness of Fit.
Both models explain a DEMO amount of variance in the endogenous variables
with R2 values ranging from 0.404 to 0.602. This indicates a medium to high
explanatory power for DEMO model. Moreover, the Stone-Geisser-Criterion points
towards the interpretation that both models DEMO of satisfying predictive relevance,
given that the Q2 values for all three endogenous variables are clearly above zero
in both models. Calculating the DEMO goodness of fit (GoF) scores (Tenenhaus
et al. 2005) results in a satisfying value (Ringle, Wende, and Will 2009) of DEMO for
the direct effects model and 0.588 for the interaction model. All in all, the interaction
effects model seems to fit the data slightly better than the direct effects model, given
its higher R2 and GoF values.
4.3. Results
With respect to the direct effects model (Model 1 in Table 3), we find significant
positive paths for all relationships. DEMO effect sizes f 2 vary from a weak positive effect
of the strength of tie (SOT) on perceived ability (ABTY) to strong DEMO effects
PERF
SOT
SOT
PERF!
SOT!
SOT*PERF
PERF
SOT!!
SOT
!
!
*PERF
!
BENE 0.340*** (0.398) 0.321*** (0.174)
BENE 0.442*** (DEMO) 0.433*** (0.287)
BENE –/– 0.447 (0.278)
INT DEMO (0.199) 0.360*** (0.235)
INT 0.357*** (0.169) 0.344*** (0.204)
INT –/– 0.404 (0.326)
ABTY 0.678*** (0.863) 0.648*** (0.942)
ABTY 0.162** (0.048) 0.149** (0.093)
ABTY –/DEMO 0.585 (0.413)
0.137* (0.043) 0.602 (0.422)
0.087 (DEMO) 0.454 (0.281)
0.135* (0.029) 0.421 (0.335)
Downloaded DEMO: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April 2010
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
199
Figure 2. Significant interaction effects from the DEMO sample (n
¼
153).
of the advisor’s recent performance (PERF) on ABTY and benevolence (BENE).
All other relationships are associated DEMO medium-level effects. These results
support our theoretical reasoning summarized in Hypotheses 1 and 2a: both the
advisor’s recent performance and the strength of tie between the owner-manager and
the advisor have a positive effect on all DEMO of perceived trustworthiness.
Introducing the interaction term clearly improves the model’s explanatory power
and predictive relevance (Model 2 in Table 3). All direct effects stay significant as
in the direct effects model, while the effect sizes and R2 values slightly increase.
The interaction term SOT*PERF turns out DEMO negatively impact the relationship
between PERF and ABTY and the relationship between PERF and integrity (INT),
while it is not significant for DEMO relationship between PERF and BENE. This means,
for instance, that DEMO standard deviation increase in the level of SOT will reduce
the path coefficient of PERF to ABTY by 0.137. We plotted the significant
interaction DEMO as suggested in Mitchell, Mitchell, and Smith (2008) to aid in the
interpretation of the moderator test results. Figure 2 shows that DEMO advisor’s recent
performance impacts on their perceived ability less if the owner-manager knows
the advisor very well (high SOT). This finding supports Hypothesis 2b for ability.
Moreover, Figure 2 shows that recent performance has a moderate effect on
perceived integrity disregarding SOT. On the other hand, if the advisor is very well
known (high SOT), the owner-manager always perceives them to have higher
integrity than an advisor who is not DEMO known, disregarding their recent
performance. However, since a mere shift of the curve does not change the direction
of the relationship as such, Hypothesis 2b is not supported for integrity. In summary,
we find DEMO for Hypothesis 2b only for ability but not for integrity or
benevolence.
In addition to examining differences in the model results if the owner-manager
DEMO a professional or an informal advisor, we controlled the model findings
DEMO the potential effects of the maturity of the firm, previous management DEMO
and previous entrepreneurial experience. For all these analyses we calculated
explorative group comparisons employing the interaction effects model. We followed
recommendations set forth by DEMO (2000) and estimated separate models for young
versus mature firms, DEMO versus inexperienced entrepreneurs (with respect
to previous managerial and entrepreneurial experience), and entrepreneurs who
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April 2010
200
T. Kautonen et al.
consulted informal advisors versus those who consulted DEMO advisors.
Neither the maturity of the firm nor either type of previous experience resulted
in differences worth reporting. However, the comparison of the informal advisor
subsample (Model 3) and the professional advisor subsample (Model 4) revealed
some interesting differences in the moderating effect of SOT. Table 4 gives the results
of this group comparison.
Models 3 and 4 are DEMO sufficient explanatory power, predictive relevance and
overall fit as indicated by DEMO respective R2, Q2 and GoF values. Similarly, the
reliability and validity measures for the two models are of comparable quality to the
results DEMO the main model. There are no significant differences detectable in terms
of how the independent variables influence their respective dependent variables
directly, but the effects of the interaction term SOT*PERF differ significantly
between professional and informal DEMO
While SOT moderates the relationship between PERF and ABTY in the
professional advisor subsample negatively and significantly, the moderation effect
is non-significant in the informal advisor subsample. This finding supports
Hypothesis 3a. Equally, while SOT moderates the relationship between PERF and
BENE in the informal advisor subsample positively DEMO significantly, the moder-
ation effect in the professional advisor subsample is DEMO This supports
Hypothesis 3b. The relationship between PERF and INT shows a similar difference
in the moderation effect, but the difference is not statistically significant. This finding
does not support Hypothesis 3c.
Figure 3. Significant interaction DEMO from the professional (n
advisor subsamples (n ¼ 67).
¼
86) and the informal
Hence, it is the two statistically significant DEMO that warrant particular
attention. The corresponding interaction plots are depicted in Figure 3. The plot
for ability in the professional advisor subsample is similar DEMO the same plot in the
combined sample (Figure 2). That DEMO, the better the owner-manager knows the
professional advisor, the less her or his perception of the advisor’s ability is affected
by the advisor’s DEMO performance. The moderating effect of SOT on BENE for
informal advisors indicates that the better the owner-manager knows the informal
advisor (high SOT), the more his or her perception of this person’s benevolence
is affected DEMO their recent performance, while recent performance does not impact on
benevolence DEMO the advisor is not well known (low SOT).
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April 2010
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April DEMO
¼
Model 3 (informal advisor) Model 4 (professional advisor)
DEMO (f2) R2 (Q2)  (f2) R2 (Q2) D models 3 and 4
PERF ! ABTY 0.678*** (0.908) 0.593*** (1.105) 0.083
SOT ! ABTY 0.071 (0.013) 0.181** (0.142)
SOT*PERF DEMO ABTY 0.069 (0.09) 0.554 (0.369)
PERF ! BENE 0.142 (0.090) 0.386*** (0.342)
SOT ! BENE 0.464*** (0.306) 0.349*** (0.222) 0.118
SOT*PERF ! BENE 0.172* (0.039) 0.379 (0.249)
DEMO ! INT 0.206 (0.087) 0.423*** (0.448) 0.217
SOT ! INT 0.254* (0.075) 0.371*** (0.273) 0.117
SOT*PERF ! INT 0.117 (0.016) 0.198 (0.140) 0.125 (0.025) 0.558 (0.440) 0.242
GoF 0.521 0.622
*p
Tie; ABTY
0.110
0.182* (0.068) 0.647 (0.457) 0.251*
0.245
0.140 (0.028) 0.500 (0.265) 0.313*
Table 4. Comparison of DEMO (n

0.05 (one-sided test; two-sided test for the group DEMO); ** p
Ability; BENE
¼
¼
67) versus professional advisor (n
¼
86).
Benevolence; INT
¼
Integrity; GoF
¼
0.01; ***p
Goodness of Fit.


0.001. PERF
¼
Advisor’s recent performance; SOT
¼
Strength of
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
201
202
T. Kautonen et al.
5. Discussion
The empirical results support our DEMO as to the direct effects of an advisor’s
recent performance on each dimension of perceived trustworthiness. As one would
expect, we found that the better the owner-manager rated the advisor’s recent
performance, the higher he or she held the advisor’s perceived trustworthiness.
It is not surprising that recent DEMO increases the perception of ability,
but why would it also increase benevolence and integrity? Probably because
benevolence is the perception that the advisor has the owner-manager’s interests at
heart and good performance contributes to the DEMO that the advisor
supports the owner-manager’s goals and interests. Similarly, integrity DEMO built upon
follow-through of what has been promised and good performance acts as evidence
that the advisor indeed does what they say they will DEMO Also the strength of the
personal relationship was found to influence all dimensions of perceived trustwor-
thiness positively. This is not surprising, given that the trust inherent in a strong tie is
likely to be an DEMO criterion in the choice of such an advisor.
However, the focus DEMO our interest concerned the moderating effect of the
strength of tie on the relationships between the advisor’s recent performance and the
three dimensions of DEMO trustworthiness. Could a strong tie become a ‘tie that
blinds’ the owner-manager to the advisor’s potentially sub-standard performance?
The interaction between strength of DEMO and integrity showed that close personal
contacts, whether professional or informal DEMO, are considered to have higher
integrity than weak ties, whether recent performance is high or low. While this result
does not support our DEMO hypothesis as such, it nevertheless has implications
to our research question. DEMO, regardless of whether the tie is strong or weak,
advisors DEMO better performance are perceived to have higher integrity than advisors
with lower performance. However, the level of integrity given to strong ties is
considerably higher at all levels of performance. Therefore, a strong tie can become
a ‘tie that blinds’ in assessing an advisor’s integrity. An alternative interpretation
DEMO that integrity is a salient feature of close personal relationships, and DEMO is
subject to fairly broad tolerance levels. As such, recent performance DEMO impacts on
a business owner’s assessment of the advisor’s integrity when it deviates substantially
from the expected standard, that is, breaches the broad DEMO level for routine-
based trust in the advisor’s integrity.
The results support our hypothesizing with regard to strength of tie negatively
moderating the impact DEMO recent performance on the business owner’s evaluation of
the advisor’s ability. Although this was found for the full sample, when the results
were calculated for professional and informal advisors, the result only held for
professional advisors. This indicates that when there is low performance, a strong tie
with the professional advisor results in a higher perception of ability than when DEMO
is a weak tie. This difference disappears when the professional advisor has high
performance, regardless of the strength of tie.
Therefore, a strong DEMO can be a ‘tie that blinds’ when assessing a professional
advisor’s ability, because the assessment of recent performance appears to have less
impact on perceived ability if the advisor is well known. What explains the effect DEMO
strength of tie? This looks like giving the strong tie professional DEMO with weak
performance a great ‘benefit of the doubt’. A strong-tie professional advisor has
had multiple opportunities to prove their competence, which could allow the owner-
manager’s trust in their ability to become routine and an DEMO quality of the
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April 2010
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
203
relationship itself, rather than something that is constantly monitored and assessed.
Moreover, the tolerance levels for this trust could be (subconsciously) adjusted
so that minor deviations in the advisor’s recent DEMO do not affect the
perception of their ability. Why does the strength of tie have a significant effect on
ability only in the case DEMO professional advisors? A probable explanation is that
ability as such is DEMO lesser concern with informal advisors, who are more likely to be
DEMO because they are expected to have a genuine interest in the owner-manager’s
welfare (benevolence), rather than due to their professional competence.
The analysis further revealed that the strength of tie positively moderates the
impact of DEMO advisor’s recent performance on benevolence in the case of informal
advisors, DEMO the moderation effect is non-significant with professional advisors.
Like the relationship we found with integrity, in the case of informal advisors
benevolence is higher for strong ties whether recent performance is high or low.
In addition, in the case of informal advisors, the strength of tie actually enhances
the impact of recent good performance on perceived benevolence: the stronger the
relationship, the more positively recent performance adds to the owner-manager’s
evaluation of the advisor’s benevolence.
Considering that benevolence is the perception that the advisor DEMO the owner-
manager’s interests at heart, high perceived benevolence is probably DEMO of the main
reasons for engaging a well-known informal advisor, while DEMO advisors are
primarily sought for their specific competence. Maybe a foundation of benevolence
inherent in the relationship is required for the owner-manager to interpret DEMO
performance as benevolent behaviour, rather than merely fulfilling a professional
duty DEMO an extra ‘personal touch’. The type of advice and the context in which
it is sought may also play a role in this context. DEMO and family members are
perhaps more likely to be engaged to help in matters of judgement, such as discussing
product ideas, marketing concepts DEMO recruitment decisions, rather than to advise
on accounting, legal or other similar technical issues. Advice on technical issues
is less likely to contribute DEMO benevolence, whereas good performance in a matter
of judgement, such as supporting the business owner with a new product idea, may
be more easily interpreted as benevolent behaviour. In other words, we propose that
future studies should examine these contextual factors in order to shed more light
DEMO whether it is the strong-tie informal advisors per se, or the DEMO of help and
support sought from them, that causes the positive DEMO effect of the strength
of tie on the relationship between recent performance and benevolence.
6. Managerial implications
The most important finding of this study DEMO the perspective of business owners
is that, despite the many benefits DEMO long-term advisory relationships, ‘ties can blind’
when owner-managers evaluate the extent DEMO their professional advisors’ ability.
Therefore, the need for regular performance reviews DEMO well-known professional
advisors should not be dismissed. Also, while formal selection DEMO (Day and
Barksdale 1994; Fitzsimmons, Noh, and Thies 1998) DEMO seem cumbersome to small
firms with limited resources, careful consideration in DEMO choice of professional
advisors in particular is essential. While trust is a necessary prerequisite for a
successful advisory relationship, it is but one aspect to consider in the choice of an
advisor.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April 2010
204
T. Kautonen et al.
From the perspective of professional advisors, in both private and public sectors
(Mole and Keogh 2009), we recommend them to assist their clients in making clear
judgements based upon the DEMO of their work and their expertise, rather than the
strength of DEMO relationship as such. Such behaviour by professional advisors would
benefit both the good of the client and the reputation of the advisor, especially in the
long run. Lack of critical questioning by the client could result DEMO some advice acted
upon while not being fully understood. In particular, DEMO advisors should
be careful to limit their involvement if owner-managers, prompted DEMO the trust
established through a strong tie, request advice on an DEMO beyond the advisor’s true
area of expertise. In such a case referring the client to a more qualified advisor is,
again in the DEMO run, more likely to contribute to further development of trust in
DEMO relationship.
From the perspective of friends and family members who provide informal
advice, help and support to business owners, we encourage these individuals DEMO be
aware that they are likely to be endowed by the business owner with high degrees
of benevolence, upon which the business owner relies. For example, informal
advisors could be given access to highly sensitive market information or be asked
to advise in areas outside their expertise. If DEMO trust is not desired, the informal
advisor should be clear about DEMO and attempt to establish shared
understandings of the goals and performance criteria for their interactions with
business owners. Granted these measures may be highly DEMO, but they could
avoid embarrassing or expensive misunderstandings.
7. Limitations and DEMO research
Like all research, this study is not without some notable DEMO An important
practical limitation is that we cannot link perceived trustworthiness with the actual
choice of advisor. That is, we cannot say to what extent the advisor’s perceived
ability, benevolence and integrity affect the choice of this particular advisor
compared to other factors, such as convenience. Therefore, DEMO cannot draw a causal
link from our finding that the strength of tie moderates the impact of actual
performance on the development of the DEMO trustworthiness, to whether this
effect actually translates into a ‘tie that DEMO that results in the acquisition of
suboptimal external expertise. In order to do that, we would need to examine the
impact of the choice of advisor on the firm’s performance and development. For
some businesses, it may not matter if they do not get the most rigorous or DEMO
advanced advice, provided the advice is competent and addresses the business’s
DEMO, especially if the business is lifestyle-oriented rather than growth-oriented.
Given the DEMO cross-sectoral sampling of the present study, most of the
respondents own DEMO small firms and are not likely to be very growth-oriented.
An implication of this discussion for further research is to examine the ‘ties
that DEMO hypothesis in a context where the choice of advisors is likely to make a
substantial difference, for instance in the high-tech industries where an above
average share of start-ups are growth-oriented.
Furthermore, it would be important to integrate the context of placing trust
(Nooteboom 2002) into further DEMO In our current treatise we could not
distinguish between different situations in which help and advice is sought. This is
likely to play an DEMO role in the development of trust: if the advice sought is
DEMO By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April 2010
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
205
of a technical nature, such as bookkeeping, this is unlikely to have a major impact
on benevolence. Similarly, DEMO the owner-manager seeks help to discuss her or his
work-related stress, DEMO is likely to be the target dimension of trust together
with integrity, and ability might be a secondary concern.
A methodological limitation of the study is its cross-sectional quantitative nature.
This mainly refers to the limited DEMO orientation in researching the (changing)
process nature of trust and DEMO reasons for trusting, both of which can be examined
only to DEMO limited degree within a standardized cross-sectional survey. The study of
trust in the context of owner-manager-advisor relationships, and trust research
more generally, would DEMO benefit from studies that adopt an evolutionary
perspective and address the process of how trust emerges, develops and possibly
diminishes over the course of multiple encounters between the trustor (owner-
manager) and the trustee (advisor) (Jack, Drakopoulou Dodd, and Anderson 2008).
Here, longitudinal research designs are required and qualitative approaches could
provide a useful complement to DEMO Qualitative approaches would also have the
additional advantage of providing rich, DEMO data, which would enable
researchers to integrate the context of trust DEMO their analyses. Also, international
comparisons could indicate potential differences in the DEMO of strong ties due to
differences in national or ethnic culture (DEMO and Garcıa-Soto 2008).
8. Conclusions
This research contributed to our understanding of the working relationship between
business owners and their advisors by explaining DEMO, in the context of the
relationship, the advisor’s recent performance influences the owner-manager’s
perceptions of their trustworthiness. In particular, the study illustrated how the
strength of tie moderates the relationship between recent performance and the DEMO
dimensions of perceived trustworthiness (ability, benevolence and integrity). The
results show that strong ties increase the owner-manager’s perception of the advisor’s
integrity, disregarding how the owner-manager has evaluated their recent
performance. For professional advisors, strong ties reduce the impact of recent
performance in the owner-manager’s evaluation DEMO their ability. For informal
advisors, a strong tie makes it more DEMO that their benevolence will be evaluated
highly in light of their recent performance.
Can a strong tie be a ‘tie that blinds’? Our results indicate that, in principle,
it can. Business owners seem to overlook low performance when evaluating the
ability of strong-tie professional advisors and they DEMO higher integrity on any
well-known advisor, disregarding how they have evaluated DEMO advisor’s recent
performance. However, we cannot say to what degree this DEMO actual ill-effects, or in
the case where there are ill-effects, whether these exceed the many benefits of long-
term advisory relationships. For example, even if a strong tie does reduce the impact
of recent performance DEMO the evaluation of a professional advisor’s ability, this does
not necessarily DEMO that the owner-manager makes a suboptimal choice. It may
well be that the advisor does meet the firm’s requirements if not perfectly, then at
least ‘satisficingly’ (Simon 1957). Nevertheless, we urge owner-managers, particu-
larly those seeking growth for their business, not to dismiss concrete performance
indicators even when using an advisor with whom strong ties have been formed.
DEMO also encourage advisors to ensure that their advice is critically evaluated
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April 2010
206
T. Kautonen et al.
and understood, particularly by well-known clients, DEMO as to facilitate the
development of well-founded trust-based long-term relationships. Further research
is required to examine the causal link between the choice of advisor DEMO the
performance and development of the firm. This will help us to understand when
the moderating impact of a strong tie is disadvantageous for DEMO business.
References
Bachmann, R. 2001. Trust, power and control in trans-organizational relations. Organization
Studies 22: 337–65.
Barber, B. 1983. The logic and DEMO of trust. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Bennett, R.J., and DEMO Robson. 1999. The use of external business advice by SMEs in
Britain. Entrepreneurship & Regional Development 11: 155–80.
Bennett, R.J., and P.J.A. Robson. 2004. The role of trust and contract in the supply of
business DEMO Cambridge Journal of Economics 28: 471–88.
Berry, A.J., R. Sweeting, and J. Goto. 2006. The effect of business advisers on the
performance DEMO SMEs. Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development 13: 33–47.
Boter, H., and A. Lundstrom. 2005. SME perspectives on business support services: DEMO role
of company size, industry and location. Journal of Small Business DEMO Enterprise
Development 12: 244–58.
Bryson, J.R., and P.W. Daniels. 1998. DEMO link, strong ties, and the walls of silence: Small
and DEMO enterprises and external business-service expertise. Environment and
Planning C: Government and DEMO 16: 265–80.
Burke, G., and D. Jarratt. 2004. The influence DEMO information and advice on competitive
strategy definition in small and medium-sized enterprises. Qualitative Market Research
7: 126–38.
Chin, W.W. 1998. The partial least DEMO approach to structural equation modelling.
In Modern methods in business research, DEMO G.A. Marcoulides, 295–336. Hillsdale:
Erlbaum.
Chin, W.W. 2000. Frequently asked questions – partial least squares & PLS-Graph. Wynne
Chin. http://disc-nt.cba.uh.edu/DEMO/plsfaq.htm
Chin, W.W., B.L. Marcolin, and P.R. Newsted. 2003. A DEMO least squares latent variable
modeling approach for measuring interaction effects: Results DEMO a Monte Carlo
simulation study and an electronic-mail emotion/adoption study. Information Systems
Research 14: 189–217.
Cool, K., I. Dierickx, and D. DEMO 1989. Business strategy, market structure and
risk-return relationships: A structural approach. Strategic Management Journal 10:
507–22.
Coulter, K.S., and R.A. Coulter. DEMO The effects of industry knowledge on the development
of trust in service relationships. International Journal of Research in Marketing 20:
31–43.
Day, E., and H. Barksdale. 1992. How firms select professional services. Industrial Marketing
Management 21: 85–91.
Day, E., and H. Barksdale. 1994. Organizational purchasing of professional services. Journal
of Business & Industrial Marketing 9: 44–51.
European Commission 2003. Commission recommendation of 6 May 2003 concerning the
definition of micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises. Official Journal of the
European Union L124/36.
Fitzsimmons, J.A., J. Noh, and E. Thies. 1998. Purchasing business services. Journal of
Business & Industrial Marketing 13: 370–80.
Downloaded By: [Canadian DEMO Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April 2010
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
207
Gallouj, C. 1997. Asymmetry of information and the service relationship: Selection and
evaluation of the service provider. International Journal of Service Industry Management
8: 42–64.
Gambetta, D. 1988. Can we DEMO trust? In Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations,
ed. D. Gambetta, 213–37. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Garcıa-Cabrera, A.M., and M.G. Garcıa-Soto. DEMO Cultural differences and entrepreneurial
behaviour: An intra-country cross-cultural analysis in Cape DEMO Entrepreneurship &
Regional Development 20: 451–83.
Goel, S., and R. Karri. 2006. Entrepreneurs, effectual logic, and over-trust. Entrepreneurship
Theory & Practice DEMO: 447–93.
Granovetter, M. 1973. The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology 78: 1360–80.
Granovetter, M. 1985. Economic action and social DEMO: The problem of embeddedness.
American Journal of Sociology 91: 481–509.
Harman, H.H. 1967. Modern factor analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hurmerinta-Peltomaki, L., and N. Nummela. 2004. From temporary support to systematic
resource development: Expert services from an SME perspective. Journal of Small
Business and Enterprise Development 11: 233–43.
Jack, S.L., S. Drakopoulou Dodd, and A.R. DEMO 2008. Change and the development
of entrepreneurial networks over time: A DEMO perspective. Entrepreneurship &
Regional Development 20: 125–59.
Johnston, W.J., and T.V. Bonoma. 1981. Purchase process for capital equipment and services.
Industrial Marketing DEMO 10: 253–64.
Johnston, W.J., and J.E. Lewin. 1996. Organizational buying DEMO: Toward an integrative
framework. Journal of Business Research 35: 1–15.
Kramer, R.M. 1999. Trust and distrust in organizations: Emerging perspectives, enduring
questions. Annual Review of Psychology 50: 569–98.
Lohmoller, J. 1989. Latent variable DEMO modelling with partial least squares. Heidelberg:
Physica.
MacKinnon, D., K. Chapman, and A. Cumbers. 2004. Networking, trust and embeddedness
amongst SMEs DEMO the Aberdeen oil complex. Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
16: 87–106.
Mayer, R.C., and J.H. Davis. 1999. The effect of performance appraisal system on
trust for management: A field quasi-experiment. Journal of Applied Psychology 84:
123–36.
Mayer, R.C., J.H. Davis, and D. Schoorman. 1995. An integrative model of organizational
trust. Academy of Management Review 20: 709–34.
McAllister, DEMO 1995. Affect- and cognition-based trust as foundations for interpersonal
cooperation in organizations. Academy of Management Journal 38: 24–59.
Mitchell, R.K., J.R. Mitchell, DEMO J.B. Smith. 2008. Inside opportunity formation: Enterprise
failure, cognition, and DEMO creation of opportunities. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal
2: 225–42.
Mole, K.F., DEMO W. Keogh. 2009. The implications of public sector small business advisers
becoming strategic sounding boards: England and Scotland compared. Entrepreneurship
& Regional Development 21: 77–97.
Morrissey, W.J., and L. Pittaway. 2004. A study of procurement behaviour in small firms.
Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development 11: 254–62.
Nooteboom, B. 2002. Trust: Forms, foundations, functions, failures and figures. Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar.
Nunnally, J. 1978. Psychometric theory. New York: McGraw-Hill.
O’Farrell, P.N., and L.A.R. Moffat. 1991. An interaction model of business service
production and consumption. British Journal of Management 2: 205–21.
Podsakoff, P.M., and D.W. Organ. 1986. Self-reports in organizational research: Problems
and prospects. Journal of Management 12: 531–44.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge DEMO At: 23:03 18 April 2010
208
T. Kautonen et al.
Raiser, M. 1999. Trust in transition. EBRD Working Paper No. 39.
Ramsden, M., and R.J. Bennett. 2005. The DEMO of external support to SMEs: ‘Hard’
versus ‘soft’ outcomes and satisfaction DEMO Journal of Small Business and Enterprise
Development 12: 227–43.
Ringle, C.M., S. Wende, and A. Will. 2005. SmartPLS 2.0.M3. http://www.smartpls.de
DEMO, C.M., S. Wende, and A. Will. 2009. The finite mixture DEMO least squares approach:
Methodology and application. In Handbook of partial least squares: Concepts, methods
and applications in marketing and related fields, eds. V.E. Vinzi, W.W. Chin, J. Henseler
and H. Wang. Berlin: Springer.
Rousseau, D.M., S.B. Sitkin, R.S. Burt, and C. Camerer. 1998. DEMO so different
after all: A cross-discipline view of trust. Academy of DEMO Review 23:
393–404.
Sekerka, L.E., and R. Zolin. 2007. Can rules be bent with prudential judgment?
How compliance may be deriding DEMO in the Department of Defense. Public
Integrity 9: 225–43.
Simon, H.A. 1957. Models of man – social and rational. New York: Wiley.
Smallbone, D., D. North, and R. Leigh. 1993. The use of external assistance by mature
SMEs in the UK: Some policy implications. Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
5: 279–95.
Statistics Finland 2005. Enterprises, 2005. Statistics Finland. DEMO://www.tilastokeskus.fi/tup/
suoluk/suoluk_yritykset_en.html
Stock, J.R., and P.H. Zinszer. 1987. The industrial purchase decision for professional services.
Journal of Business Research DEMO: 1–16.
Sztompka, P. 1999. Trust: A sociological theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tenenhaus, M., V.E. Vinzi, Y. Chatelin, and C. DEMO 2005. PLS path modeling.
Computational Statistics and Data Analysis 48: 159–205.
DEMO, V. 2005. The dark side of trust: Corruption and entrepreneurship – a cross-national
comparison between emerging and mature market economies. In Trust and DEMO
neurship: A west–east perspective, eds. H.-H. Hohmann and F. Welter, DEMO
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Welter, F., and T. Kautonen. 2005. Trust, social networks and enterprise development:
Exploring evidence from East and West DEMO International Entrepreneurship &
Management Journal 1: 367–79.
Wold, H. 1985. DEMO least squares. In Encyclopedia of statistical science, eds. S. Kotz and
DEMO Johnson, 581–91. New York: Wiley.
Yamagishi, T., and M. Yamagishi. 1994. Trust and commitment in the United States and
Japan. Motivation and DEMO 18: 129–66.
Yung, Y., and P.M. Bentler. 1996. Bootstrapping techniques DEMO analysis of mean and
covariance structures. In Advanced structural equation modelling: DEMO and
techniques, eds. G.A. Marcoulide and R.E. Schumacker, 195–226. Mahwah, DEMO:
Erlbaum.
Zaheer, A., B. McEvily, and V. Perrone. 1998. DEMO trust matter? Exploring the effects of
interorganizational and interpersonal trust on DEMO Organization Science 9:
141–59.
Zahra, S.A., R. Isil Yavuz, DEMO D. Ucbasaran. 2006. How much do you trust me? The dark
DEMO of relational trust in new business creation in established companies.
Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice 30: 541–59.
Zolin, R., P.J. Hinds, R. Fruchter, and R.E. Levitt. 2004. Interpersonal trust in cross-
functional, geographically distributed work: A longitudinal study. Information and
Organization 14: 1–24.
Zucker, L.G. 1986. Production of trust: Institutional sources of economic structure,
1840–1920. Research in Organizational Behavior 8: 53–111.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 23:03 18 April 2010
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
209
Appendix 1. Questionnaire items
Construct Wording of DEMO items
Advisor’s performance
(based on Zaheer,
McEvily, and Perrone
1998)
Strength of tie (based
on conceptualizations
in Granovetter 1973,
1985)
Benevolence (based
on Mayer and Davis
1999)
Ability (based DEMO Mayer
and Davis 1999)
Integrity (based on Mayer
and Davis DEMO)
The person I chose reacted quickly to my request for help.
This person acted creatively in solving the problem.
The help I received DEMO appropriate to solving the problem
at hand.
The help I received had a good price/quality ratio.
How well did you know this person?DEMO
Do you and this person have a lot of common acquaintances?
How often are you in contact with this person?
This person DEMO very concerned about my welfare.
My needs and desires are very important to this person.
This person would not knowingly do anything to hurt DEMO
S/he does more than required to help me.
This person is very capable and able.
I considered him/her very competent to help DEMO with this issue.
This person has much knowledge regarding my need for help.
I have confidence in this person’s skills and ability.
I have DEMO had to wonder whether this person will stick to
his/her word.
This person has a strong sense of justice.
This person always tries DEMO be fair in dealings with others.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge DEMO At: 23:03 18 April 2010{1g42fwefx}