Relation of Dominant Problems to Stages of Growth in Technology-Based New
Ventures
DEMO K. Kazanjian
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 31, No. 2. (Jun., 1988), pp. 257-279.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/DEMO?sici=0001-4273%28198806%2931%3A2%3C257%3ARODPTS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-I
The Academy of Management Journal is currently published by Academy of Management.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR'DEMO Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/DEMO JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher DEMO information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/aom.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright DEMO that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and DEMO to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. DEMO is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission DEMO help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Tue Oct 23 10:56:56 2007
Q Academy of Management Journal
1988, Vol 31, No. 2, 257-279.
RELATION OF DOMINANT PROBLEMS
TO STAGES OF GROWTH
IN TECHNOLOGY-BASED NEW VENTURES
DEMO K. KAZANJIAN
University of Michigan
Two studies investigating the growth patterns of new ventures are
presented. In the first study, a stage-of-growth model theorized to apply
specifically to technology-based new ventures was developed from two
cases. DEMO are described as a configuration of organizational design
variables representing a firm's response to the sets of dominant prob-
lems it faces at DEMO times. The second study explored relation-
ships between stages of growth and a theorized pattern of dominant
problems using a data base of 105 DEMO Partial support emerged for the
link between dominant problems and stages of growth.
Technology-based new ventures play an increasingly important role in
the development DEMO commercialization of new products, processes, and
technologies. In fact, such DEMO have been instrumental in the cre-
ation of entire industries such as personal computers, genetic engineering,
machine vision, and robotics. The popular DEMO has given considerable
attention to the growth-related strategic and managerial problems of such
firms. Articles about the computer industry alone have addressed internal
organizational DEMO and transitions (Uttal, 1985), loss of market share
attributed to a hesitancy to embrace new technologies (Wiegner, 1986), and a
DEMO of focus on manufacturing efficiency (Wiegner, 1986).
However, little DEMO known about how the models of organizational growth
and development found in the management literature and typically theo-
rized to hold for all organizations DEMO to technology-based new ventures.
A better understanding of the growth patterns of such firms will sharpen the
descriptive power of management theories and ultimately DEMO our abil-
ity to influence organizational performance.
REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
Traditionally, scholars have used a biological analog to explain the growth
patterns of organizations. The most recent examples are life-cycle perspec-
tives on individual organizations (Kimberly & Miles, 1980) and on groups of
organizations (Hannan & Freeman, 1984; McKelvey & Aldrich, 1983).
-
.
Robert Drazin. Kim Cameron, and several anonynlous reviewers provided valuable cam-
ments on earlier versions of this article. Jay Galbraith strongly influenced the early stages of DEMO
work and facilitated data acquisition. The School of Business Administration of the University
of Michigan provided support for the research.
258
Academy oj Management Journal
June
A rlulnber of multistage models have DEMO proposed in which predicta-
ble patterns in the growth of organizations are assumed to exist and to unfold
as discrete time periods best thought DEMO as stages (Scott, 1970; Smith, Mitchell,
& Summer, DEMO). Examples range from three-stage models (Blake, Avis, &
Mouton, 1966: Cooper, 1979; Smith et al., 1985) and four-stage DEMO
(Hosmer, Cooper, & Vesper, 1977; Rhenman, 1973), to models of five or more
stages (Adizes, 1979; Miller 8r Friesen, 1984; Van de Ven, Hudson, &
Schroeder, 1984). DEMO much of this literature, Quinn and Cameron
(1983) integrated nine DEMO models into a summary model with four
major stages. A major strength of the literature on life-stage models is that it
adds to our DEMO of the rather complex phenomenon of growth,
describing how growth happens and the effect that it has on organizations.
As it presently stands, however, work on growth has several shortcomings.
All stage-of-growth models can be seen as what Starbuck (1971) termed
metamorphosis models, in that they describe problems organizations in
differing circumstances are likely to encounter and the DEMO or-
ganizational forms likely to result. As its problems change, an DEMO
must alter its form accordingly. For example, Greiner (1972) explicitly DEMO
the growth of organizations as a series of evolutions and revolutions precipi-
tated by crises related to leadership, control, and coordination. Alternatively,
DEMO (1962) viewed stages of growth as responses to a firm's search for
new growth opportunities. In other metamorphosis models, an underlying
theory is implicit, but many such models lack theoretical explicitness and
rigor and offer little explanation of why the characteristics of a particular
stage of DEMO emerge. The determinants of a firm's position in a particular
stage of growth and the factors that precipitate a shift from one stage DEMO
another are at best implied. This deficiency limits the ability of researchers
to conduct empirical tests and to explore the constructs further.
Second, as Kimberly noted, "there is no inevitable linear sequence of
stages in DEMO life, although there may be remarkable similarities
among the developmental patterns DEMO certain clusters of organizations" (1980:
7). Yet most models do not take into account the role of industry, technology,
and other situational variables. Their proponents seem to have postulated
them as applying DEMO all organizations, regardless of context.
Finally, the work related to stage of growth has been overwhelmingly
conceptual and subject to challenge. For example, some scholars have seen
the concept of an organization developing through a DEMO of predictable
stages as an overly simplistic view (Tornatsky et al., 1983). Miller (1981)
found that firms do not necessarily demonstrate an inexorable movement
through a linear sequence of stages but rather attain DEMO or patterns of
strategy, structure, and environment that may emerge for any number of
reasons. Romanelli and Tushman (1986) argued that firms DEMO through
periods of convergence and divergence related more to technological shifts
in their industry than to issues of growth. Further, several authors have
proposed typologies that categorize organizations into a number of profiles
1988 Kazanjian 259
but suggest no developmental sequence among types (Gartner, DEMO; Hosmer
et al., 1977).
The literature on stages of growth has little empirical basis for countering
such criticisms. The empirical work that DEMO emerged in recent years (Miller
& Friesen, 1984; Smith et DEMO, 1985; Van de Ven et al., 1984) has focused
primarily on differences in internal organizational characteristics across the-
orized stages. However, the researchers seem to have assumed a priori the
existence of stages.
To DEMO the growth and developmental patterns of technology-
based new ventures, I DEMO a multimethod research design intended to
address several criticisms of the literature on stages of growth.
STUDY ONE: DEVELOPING A GROUNDED BASE
FOR THEORY BUILDING
My initial step in studying the growth patterns of technology-based new
DEMO was undertaking two case studies. In general, the theory-building
process associated DEMO this research can most accurately be described as
inductive; it was DEMO in some respects to what Glaser and Strauss (1967)
termed DEMO theorizing.
Methods
Both of the firms studied were manufacturers of computer-based office
products. After initial contact with the firms through a consultant, I defined
a research project to describe the growth experiences of each firm. One DEMO
was in a small town in rural eastern Pennsylvania. The other had operations
in central Florida. I collected all data. The case studies cover DEMO histories of
the ventures from their creations through August 1979, when DEMO interviews
were conducted. Considerable time was spent at each company in inter-
views with the chief executive, all managers who reported directly to him,
and the heads of each function and selected subunits. People who DEMO early
employees of the firms and were still with them were also interviewed. To
provide balance, I also interviewed several employees of less than three
months and some individuals who had recently left the companies. In DEMO,
over 60 managers and employees were interviewed at the two ventures. To
fully capture the richness of the data and to avoid biasing DEMO findings
toward one theoretical construct or another, interviews were unstructured
and DEMO ended. Inquiries centered around decisions, actions, problems,
and patterns of growth since the inception of the firms. Particular attention
was paid to DEMO and why each organization took the form that it did over
time.
Detailed notes were kept from each interview and were regularly re-
viewed DEMO later interviews to validate assertions across interviewees. I
gathered additional data from an archival review of documents like business
plans, organization charts, employee DEMO, and internal memoranda. I then
integrated the interview notes and other DEMO into histories, each approxi-
mately 50 typed pages in length. Each DEMO's CEO reviewed its history for
260
Academy of Management Journal
June
accuracy. Interpretative disagreements between the CEOs, the other managers,
and me did emerge and were noted. In DEMO instances I put both interpreta-
tions in the case study. Burgelman (DEMO) and Dean (1987) used a similar
method of data collection.
DEMO following synopses of the cases provide some flavor of the firms'
experiences. The names of the organizations and of individuals have been
disguised DEMO the request of the participating firms.
Alpha
The origins of Alpha are traced to 1974 and to Tom Kiley, the founder
and driving force of the firm. Working with semiconductor technology, he
developed what became one of the first commercial electronics-based of-
fice products in a market then DEMO on mechanical technologies.
By early 1976, the firm was primarily concerned DEMO developing and
refining the product idea. In August, the firm had DEMO to 40 employees
and had completed a prototype of the product. It began manufacturing and
marketing efforts. At this point, little structure or formality existed and plan-
ning was limited to budgeting and financial forecasting.
Most DEMO 1977 was dedicated to preparation for launching the product,
which entailed finalizing the marketing strategy and building a sales and
support organization. The DEMO announced and offered the product in Janu-
ary 1978, by which DEMO it had about 500 employees. Initial demand ex-
ceeded projections, and DEMO in both revenues and the number of employ-
ees picked up markedly.
From January 1978 to April 1979, the number of employees increased
from approximately 500 to 1,000. The firm hired many of those individuals
DEMO response to specific pressures and needs in functional areas. Each func-
tion faced a series of problems related to its specific tasks, which served as a
precipitating factor for the introduction of greater structure and rationality,DEMO
typically in the form of increased specialization or the addition of new
integrating and planning processes. At the end of this research, Alpha had
about 1,400 employees, three products, and five plants, all in the eastern
United States.
Beta
The genesis of the firm's low-cost DEMO product can be
traced to John Thomas, developer of the product DEMO first president of Beta.
Starting in 1969 with a series of small seed grants, the evolution of the
product from initial conception to the first contracted development work
took approximately two years and represented a transition DEMO very infor-
mal product experimentation to the beginnings of the organization. In 1971,
Thomas developed a working prototype of the product on his DEMO Shortly
thereafter, after several rejected proposals, he gained financial backing, DEMO
cated himself full-time to the firm, and hired several engineers. During DEMO
prolonged start-up period, requiring several funding proposals, consultants
1988
Kazanjian
261
handled the marketing, financial, and administrative functions on DEMO contrac-
tual basis.
The product was announced and offered for sale in late 1973, and by
May 1974 demand exceeded manufacturing capacity. This was a period of
rather intense growth in which the firm experienced some DEMO focused
internal organizational problems. During this time many new positions were
created and filled.
In June 1977 a new president was brought on board DEMO a result of pres-
sures from investors concerning performance, and Thomas DEMO appointed
chairman of the board. A gradual transfer of authority and responsibility
transpired over the next six months. By January 1978 the new president DEMO
completed some consolidation, mostly within the marketing function, and
had created new functions in planning, international sales, and marketing
through outside appointments. DEMO the end of this research, Beta had over
1,000 employees.
DEMO Stage-of-GrowthModel
The growth histories of Alpha and Beta strongly suggest a stage develop-
mental pattern. Managers at both firms described their experiences and the
DEMO of their growth in terms of stages without my referring to the
construct. Much of the discussion of stages, however, emphasized the role
DEMO by problems the firms faced.
The managers of these technology-based new ventures faced strategic
and operational problems from the time of product conceptualization through
DEMO maturity. Further, some of those problems seem to have been
more DEMO than others at times, and a sequential pattern of dominance
seemed DEMO exist. The particular problems faced at a given time appeared to be
strongly associated with a venture's position in a particular stage of DEMO
(Block & MacMillan, 1985; Galbraith, 1982). As the dominant problems
change, an organization's configuration of organizational design variables
changes in response. Figure 1 shows the proposed associations. Although
previous research (Miller & Friesen, 1984; Rhenman, 1973) and the grounded
case examples (Kimberly, 1979) generally support the model, it is not pro-
posed as universally generalizable. Both Penrose (1952) and Rhenman (1973)
argued that there is no life cycle or phased sequence applicable to all organi-
DEMO and that the recurrent cycles and patterns in organizations that can
be observed are a product of specific environments. Influential environmen-
tal factors include DEMO discontinuities that introduce radically new
technologies to existing industries (Tushman & DEMO, 1986), the emer-
gence of new industries, and shifts in demand patterns.
This research should be seen as generating a midrange theory (Pinder &
Moore, 1979) of growth, applicable only to certain DEMO Specifically,
the assumptions of this model are: (1)it holds only for technology-based new
ventures, (2) it explains only internally generated growth, not growth by
acquisition or merger, (3) for its DEMO population of firms, a market segment
or niche exists such that DEMO conditions are not limiting, and (4) the
Academy of Management Journal
FIGURE 1
Relation of Dominant Problems to Stages DEMO Growth
Resource acquisition
and technology
development
Production related
start-up
Salesimarket share
growth and
organizational issues
Profitability, internal
controls, and future
growth base
Stage DEMO:
Conception and
Development
Stage 2:
Commercialization
Stage 3:
Growth
Stage 4:
Stability
population's focus is on initial growth within DEMO single product-technology
base.
The third assumption is not unreasonable for firms in an emerging indus-
try experiencing extraordinary growth. Firms in some computer components
DEMO and those in the personal computer, genetic engineering, and robot-
ics and related markets have seen times when demand was not a limiting
DEMO New firms in such environments attempt to increase their customer
base with the growth of the market. Additionally, the short and overlapping
product life cycles characteristic of such technology-intense industries tend
to fuel growth further, because products frequently become obsolete.
Although consistent with several models found elsewhere in DEMO litera-
ture (Blake et al., 1966; Galbraith, 1982; Normann, 1977; Rhenman, 1973;
Quinn & Cameron, 1983), this model, grounded in the experiences of two
firms, differs in that it DEMO describes stages as linked to dominant
problems. The four-stage model, presented DEMO additional supporting case
data is as follows.
Stage 1:Conception and development. Before their formal creation, as
signified by incorporation or by gaining a major source of financial backing
that goes beyond initial seed grants, virtually all ventures go through a pe-
riod during which the primary focus DEMO the entrepreneur and possibly of
several others is on the invention and development of a product or a
technology. In 1974, Riley, the DEMO of Alpha, developed the idea of an
electronic typewriter with memory DEMO working with semiconductor
technology. Initial attempts to gain financial backing were rejected because
he lacked proprietary technology. Continued proposals to several potential
backers resulted DEMO an initial seed grant. At Beta, Thomas traced his interest
and DEMO on the product that ultimately launched the venture back to 1965.
He worked on the project on his own time until late 1971, when he devel-
oped a workable prototype design. After several attempts, he finally con-
vinced a backer of the strength of his idea. It was DEMO until July 1972 that Beta
1988
Kazaniian
263
was incorporated, with Thomas as the first employee. Such activities are
associated with the creation of the idea for a new DEMO (Normann, 1977;
Sarason, 1972; Van de Ven et al., 1984).
Structure and formality are nonexistent during this stage, with DEMO all
activity focused on technical issues as defined and directed by the founding
entrepreneur(s). With Alpha's initial venture capital, Riley proceeded to
overcolne several key technical hurdles, build prototypes, and hire engineer-
DEMO support. During the early days of the firm, activities were implicitly DEMO
informally organized around project management principles, with all em-
ployees working DEMO one room.
Major problems of organizations at this point include construction of a
product prototype (Block & MacMillan, 1985) and selling the product and
business idea to financial backers (Timmons, Smollen, & Dingee, DEMO).
Working prototypes were developed by early 1972 at Beta, leading DEMO the
acquisition of additional, Inore significant funding and a movement toward
DEMO The major milestones associated with the technical de-
velopment were initial development, building a so-called proof-of-principle
machine, testing and debugging, constructing 2 prototypes, and constructing
10 to 20 prototypes for test and evaluation. Alpha made several unique
technological advances over a six-month period, using several engineers
who were hired on a short-term contract with a promise of a position DEMO
feasibility could be established. It was not until February 1976 that Alpha
became an incorporated entity with full-time employees other than the
founder.
Stage DEMO: Commercialization. Given financial backing, new ventures go
through a period during which their major focus is on developing the prod-
uct or technology DEMO commercialization. At this point, the organization largely
resembles a new product-development DEMO, with its problems and compe-
tence~ largely being technical. The focus DEMO primarily on learning how to
make the product work well and on how to produce it beyond the model
shop prototype approach of the DEMO stage (Galbraith, 1982). At Alpha, about
two years passed DEMO incorporation with full-time employees to the
company's public announcement of its first product, in early 1978. In May
1976, the firm hired DEMO director of manufacturing to plan manufacturing facili-
ties and to begin to identify suppliers. At the time of product launch, all
employees still worked in one room with desks lined up against each other
and eight DEMO lines for all 175 people. Under such an arrangement
communication was face-to-face, and employees were either directly in-
volved with or witnessed all decisions.
In this stage, building an organizational task system becomes a con-
sideration. By this time, discrete organizational functions like manufactur-
ing and engineering have been formally created, and others are embryonic.
At Alpha in early 1977, the primary focus was preparing to launch the
product. The start of the marketing function began early in the year with the
hiring of DEMO to work on software specifications and design. By mid-
year the marketing field organization began to evolve with the hiring of field
264
Academy of Management Iournal
June
managers, salespeople, new trainers, and technical support people. The fi-
nancial and administrative systems also emerged at DEMO time with the ap-
pointment in April of a full-time director of finance to replace an outside
consultant who had set up the systems DEMO to that point. Shortly thereafter,
a full time bookkeeper was hired as well.
Some critical functions may be assigned to part-time employees or DEMO
tracted out. During this time at Beta, one consultant conducted market
DEMO, and another structured basic administrative systems. The two con-
sultants later DEMO the firm as full-time employees.
In this period, a single owner DEMO a small number of partners will domi-
nate the venture. Toward the end of this stage, the venture's product is
publicly announced or made available for sale.
Stage 3: Growth. If a product is technically feasible and achieves market
acceptance, a period of high growth will typically result. The major prob-
lems of a new venture at this point DEMO to produce, sell, and distribute its
product in volume and to avoid being shaken out of the market as ineffective
or inefficient (Abernathy & Utterback, 1982; Moore & Tushman, 1982). Un-
der pressure to attain profitability, a venture must carefully balance profits
against future growth.
Many ventures experience a sequence of functionally localized prob-
lems as each DEMO faces the difficulty of building an efficient and effec-
tive task system. At Alpha, from mid-1977 to late 1979 could be considered a
transition period characterized by a series of organizational problems with a
clear dominant DEMO The first of those was an engineering crisis from
mid-1977 to early 1978. The difficulty was to get the product to work reliably
and DEMO function as promised. The second crisis, following shortly thereafter
in the DEMO half of 1978, was in manufacturing. The problem was to over-
DEMO "manufacturing constipation"-to get more machines off the end of the
DEMO A third crisis emerged in early 1979 within the marketing function. The
problem was an inadequate selling capacity that constrained the selling of
more DEMO At the time of this research, several sources suggested the
emergence DEMO problems in the areas of product reliability, service within
marketing, and financial controls. Most of the crises, and certainly those in
manufacturing and marketing, were overcome by expanding numbers and
types of employees and by creating and formalizing new positions and
systems. Many interviewees thought, however, DEMO the financial crisis re-
quired an emphasis not on the size of the personnel, but on the nature and
quality of information and internal decision processes.
At Beta, a series of problems also characterized the transition from an
early start-up organization to a high-growth, high-volume company. The first
two came close together. By early 1977, it became apparent that Beta was not
meeting its sales goals. The marketing crisis resulted in the DEMO's hiring a
person with an extensive marketing background to serve as a general man-
ager under Thomas, who continued as chairman of the firm. Also recognized
at about the same time was a financial and DEMO crisis centering on
the gross inadequacy of the company's billing procedures and inventory
1988
Kazanjian
265
controls. The firm did not focus on those problems DEMO 1979 because the
marketing problems were more pressing, but it devoted DEMO of 1979 to
financial and accounting systems and controls, management information
DEMO, and planning and budgeting.
In stage 3, a new venture experiences an almost constant state of change.
The original general manager may remain DEMO to all decision making, but
through this stage there is a DEMO of hierarchy, an advent of functional
specialization, and a move toward adding professionally trained, experi-
enced people.
In January 1978 Alpha announced and offered its first product. With
commercialization and strong product demand, the number of employees
increased dramatically. Although some staff was in place for each DEMO,
it was becoming necessary to flesh out the functional organizations as Alpha
built depth in engineering, brought additional plant capacity on line, DEMO
tioned a national field sales force, and structured administrative systems and
DEMO capabilities. With the increase in personnel, it was necessary to
establish DEMO formalized structures and reporting mechanisms. Everyone
no longer knew everyone else by name, and not everyone could report di-
rectly to Riley, as DEMO been the case. Therefore, the first formalization of
structure was instituted DEMO a functional organization design.
As at Alpha, at Beta most organizational DEMO and internal system
developments were initiated at the functional level. Here again, each func-
tion changed from an informal, nonspecialized activity to a DEMO,
specialized, and formalized organization, typically as a result of the precipi-
tating problems discussed in this section.
Stage 4: Stability. As the growth rate slows to a level consistent with
market growth, a venture enters a new stage. Its major problems at this point
are to DEMO growth momentum and market position (Moore & Tushman,
1982). DEMO typical focus becomes the development of a second-generation
product. A professional, DEMO manager or team of managers may have
replaced or may be supporting the original owner (Gupta, 1984; Kerr, 1982).
In January DEMO the general manager became the president of Beta. Shortly
after assuming his new duties, he uncovered what might be described as
another crisis-an "DEMO and product planning void." The main prob-
lem was that no DEMO at Beta was concerned about new products or even
subsequent generations of existing products. His initial actions included a
comprehensive reorganization of the marketing DEMO engineering areas.
By this time, a venture has evolved from an DEMO technology-product
development group into a stable, functional, operating company character-
ized by bureaucratic principles across the organization. It has and adheres
to a DEMO structure and has correspondingly standardized and formalized
rules and procedures. During 1978 at Beta, deepening and strengthening
functional marketing and R&D capability through an influx of new talent
were focal. In engineering, a new director who instituted formal project-
planning activity and project management systems was hired. DEMO
second- and third-generation products had high priority, an emphasis initi-
266
Academy of Management journal
June
ated with the creation of an DEMO product-planning group within R&D,
headed by a director, also DEMO hired from outside. By this time, Beta had
over 1,000 DEMO, many of whom were highly specialized,
By April 1979, the number of employees at Alpha exceeded 1,000. With
this growth came DEMO need to modify the structure specifically to reduce Riley's
span of control. With even greater growth at an increasing rate projected for
the DEMO year, it was no longer possible to have over ten individuals DEMO
ing directly to the chief executive. Therefore, Riley consolidated his organiza-
DEMO under vice-presidents for marketing, operations, administration, and
international sales.
STUDY DEMO: THE RELATION OF
DOMINANT PROBLEMS TO STAGES OF GROWTH
Review of DEMO Literature
The literature on stages of growth typically implies that problems influ-
ence internal organization. However, the findings from the field study sug-
gested that problems played a central role in the growth patterns of new
DEMO and so deserved additional theoretical development. Several stud-
ies have discussed the role of dominant problems as contextual factors. The
literature on product life DEMO (Midgley, 1981; Moore & Tushman, 1982;
Porter, 1980) has long proposed that there is a pattern of primary tasks or
DEMO that firms face for each theorized stage. They may be either func-
tional tasks or strategic positioning issues. This idea is relevant because
technology-based DEMO ventures typically experience their initial growth
around a single new product.
The work of Miles and Snow (1978) also offers support. Although not
DEMO directly on small, emerging firms, they outlined a pattern of growth
for mature firms facing a change of domain. Their adaptive cycle outlines
"the three major problems which management must continually solve:
entrepreneurial, engineering, and administrative" (1978: 21). The entrepre-
neurial problem concerns DEMO of a firm's domain by the modifica-
tion of products or market offerings. The engineering problem focuses on the
creation of a systems DEMO capability for changes. Finally, the administra-
tive problem requires rationalizing and DEMO solutions instituted in
earlier stages.
More recently, Block and MacMillan (1985) discussed the role of prob-
lems with a specific reference to new ventures. They listed ten milestones
that a new venture must pass as DEMO evolves from an idea to a viable business
entity. Milestones include such tasks as the completion of concept- and
product-testing, completion of the prototype, production start-up, and first
redesign and redirection. Galbraith (1982) offered DEMO stage-of-growth model
similar to the present model and consistent with Block and MacMillan's
(1985) research, in which certain tasks (problems) are associated with each
stage of growth. Storey (1985), in the only empirical study of the problems of
new ventures found in the literature, investigated problems facing new firms
1988 Kazanjian 267
in the United Kingdom. He found that the problems DEMO by industry as
well as by the age of firms.
Propositions
If empirically supportable, the four stages of growth would constitute
distinct contexts for managerial focus and decision making. My empirical
research assessed the validity of DEMO stage-of-growth model by investigating
the relation of dominant problems to stage. A strong association between the
problems a firm faces and its stage of DEMO would support the model
presented, providing a better understanding of how DEMO why stages emerge.
Therefore, I expected four primary patterns of association DEMO investigated
them with a large number of firms.
Proposition 1: Stage DEMO will rate problems associated
with resource acquisition and technology development
higher than will firms in other stages.
Proposition 2: Stage 2 firms will rate problems associated
with production start-up, vendor relations, facilities, and
field support of the product higher than will firms in other
stages.
Proposition 3: Stage 3 firms will rate problems associated
with sales growth, market share growth, and internal or-
ganizational mechanisms higher than will firms in other
stages.
Proposition 4: Stage 4 firms will rate problems associated
with profitability, internal controls, and future sources of
growth higher than will firms DEMO other stages.
Methods
Four venture capitalists provided a portfolio of firms from which to
select and provided entree to firms that otherwise might not DEMO responded.
Data were collected in late 1982 through a questionnaire. The venture capital-
ists provided names and addresses of the firms and a cover DEMO to the
potential respondents supporting the research project. To be included, DEMO
venture had to have been created since 1970, be in a DEMO considered
high technology, such as computers and related electronics products, and be
autonomous and free-standing. No intracorporate start-ups or joint ventures
were included. DEMO the 225 firms contacted, 105 (46%) responded. The chief
executive DEMO served as the respondent in each firm.'
Measurements.Each problem was measured by asking a venture's CEO to
rate problems on a 1 DEMO 7 scale in terms of their current dominance to the
firm. The Appendix lists the dominant problems.
' For a discussion of the advantages DEMO disadvantages of using self-categorization measures
with CEOs as respondents, see Hambrick (1980).
268
Academy of Management JournoI
June
The measure of stage of growth DEMO a self-categorization, CEOs were
asked to select the one of four DEMO descriptions of a firm and its
situation that most closely described their own firm.' The descriptions cor-
responded to the stages of growth outlined in the present model. The Appen-
dix gives the four descriptions. The DEMO measure preceded the problem
measure in the questionnaire.
The construct validity of the self-categorization measure was assessed
through investigating the relationship of stage with DEMO external variables. I
collected data on the age of firms (years), their size (total number of em-
ployees), and their rate DEMO growth (a factor of actual sales for the previous
year). DEMO 1 presents the means for each variable within each stage. As
expected, the means for age and size increase with each subsequent stage, DEMO
gesting a movement of firms through stages. Also as expected, growth DEMO
creased from stage 1 through 3, with stage 3 showing the DEMO rate of
growth, and then decreased. These findings offer support for DEMO validity of
the stage model. Like data from a cohort analysis, DEMO cross-sectional data
are an imperfect substitute for longitudinal data but do suggest the order in
which firms move from stage to stage.
Analysis and DEMO
Initially, I performed a multivariate analysis of variance (MAKOVA)
grouping firms on the stage variable to see if significant differences existed
on DEMO ratings of the 18 problems. The analysis resulted in an overall signifi-
cant finding (F54,248 = 1.59, p < .01),suggesting that there are significant
TABLE 1
Results of ANOVA
for External Variables and DEMO
Stage 1:
Conception Stage 2:
and Commerciali- Stage 3:
variablesb Development zation Growth
Size 58.1 68.1 345.6
Age of firm 4.3 DEMO 7.1
Rate of sales growth 3.7 4.2 6.4
a For stages 1-4, N = 23, 26, 18, and 37, respectively.
Size = number of employees; age was in years; growth
year's sales.
DEMO p < ,001
Stage 4:
Stability
423.4
9.4
1.8
F
DEMO
17.41*
10.53*
w2
.06
.24
,005
= current pear's salesiprevious
DEMO a discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of the use of self-categorization
measures by chief executives, see Snow and Hambrick (1980).
1988
Kazanjian
269
differences in problem ratings across stages. I then performed DEMO factor analy-
sis to better reveal the factorial structure among the 18 problems ratedG3
Principal components analysis with varimax rotation was chosen be-
cause DEMO requires no prior assumptions about the structure of data and is
widely accepted as an appropriate procedure for identifying meaningful
dimensions in a multivariate DEMO (Cooley & Lohnes, 1971). Six interpret-
able factors, presented DEMO Table 2, resulted.
The factor loadings suggest a grouping of problems DEMO with the
model. The first factor, which loads heavily with problems DEMO to inter-
nal administrative systems and concerns-management information systems,
cost control, financial information systems, and the general level of red
tape-is an DEMO construct. Factor 2, which includes
such concerns as meeting sales targets, attaining profit and market-share
goals, penetrating new geographic markets, and maintaining DEMO quality of
product support and customer service, is related to critical DEMO
for success in the marketplace and can be interpreted as a sales and marketing
factor. Only two variables, attracting capable employees and management
depth and talent, load on factor 3, which can be termed a DEMO construct.
Factor 4, which also includes only two variables, the ability to produce in
volumes adequate to meet demand and the development of DEMO network of
reliable vendors and suppliers, is a production construct. Factor DEMO includes a
firm's position in a new product-market segment and the development of a
new product or technology application and is therefore a DEMO position-
ing factor. Finally, the two problems that loaded on the DEMO factor were
securing financial resources and backing and acquiring key outside advisers
or board members, which makes this an external relations factor.
After factor analysis, an alpha coefficient was calculated for the items
defining each factor. Coefficients ranged from .51 to .79, reinforcing the
reliability of the constructs (Nunnally, 1970). I then calculated scale scores
using a unit DEMO of the means of the associated problem ratings. To
investigate the relationship of the factors and stages, I then conducted a
one-way ANOVA with each of the factor variables against stage. Table 3
presents the results, which are significant for four of the six factors.
To facilitate examination DEMO interpretation of the problem factors' means
across and within stages, the results shown in Table 3 have been plotted in
Figure 2. It DEMO interesting that several of the problem factors-strategic
positioning, sales-marketing, and people-are more dominant than the other
factors in all stages.
Post hoc comparisons DEMO on a Scheff6 test were conducted for the
four factors with significant mean differences (Table 3). I compared factor
ratings for firms in specific stages with those of firnis in other stages to test
for DEMO hypothesized differences. The organizational factor demonstrated
" Both Kim and Mueller (DEMO: 76) and Lawley and Maxwell (1971: 20) suggested that DEMO
adequate sample size exists for factor analysis if n-p-1 >
tions DEMO p = the number of variables. In this case, n --p DEMO 1 = 85,
50, where n = the number of DEMO
suggesting an adequate size.
TABLE 2
Results of Rotated Principal Components Factor Analysisa
Dominant Problems
Develop DEMO
information systems
Control costs
Define organizational roles,
responsibilities, policies
Develop DEMO systems
and internal controls
Cut administrative
burden and red tape
Meet sales target
Attain profit and
market-share goals
Penetrate new
geographic territories
Provide product DEMO
and customer service
Attract capable personnel
Achieve management depth
and find talent
Produce in volumes
that meet demand
Develop network of reliable
vendors and DEMO
Establish firm position in
new product market
segments
Factor 1:
Organizational
Systems
.78
.74
.69
.69
.60
.OO
.37
.Oo
.OO
.OO
.39
DEMO
.00
.OO
Factor 2:
Sales1
Marketing
.OO
.OO
.00
.OO
.OO
.82
.75
.74
.56
.OO
.OO
.OO
.OO
.26
Factor 3:
DEMO
.OO
.OO
.29
.OO
.26
.OO
.OO
.OD
.00
.81
.69
.OO
.31
.OO
Factor 4:
Production
.OO
.OO
.OO
.28
.00
.OO
DEMO
.oo
.SO
.26
.OO
.76
.75
.OO
Factor 5:
Strategic
Positioning
.OO
.OO
.00
.OO
.28
.OO
.00
.oO
.OO
.OO
.00
.00
DEMO
.78
Factor 6:
External
Relations
.OO
.OO
.OO
.OO
.OO
.OO
.OO
.Oo
.OO
.OO
.OO
.OO
.00
.OO

TABLE 3
Results of ANOVA for Factors and stagesayb
Factors
Stage 1:DEMO
Conception and
Development
Stage 2:
Commercialization
Stage 3:
Growth
3.7556t
5.5972t
4.8611
3.6296
5.1389tt
2.7500t
Stage 4:
Stability
3.6324t
4.8784tt
4.4459
DEMO
5.8784t
2.8108t
F
w
1. Organizational
systems
2. Salesimarketing
3. People
4. Production
5. Strategic positioning
6. External relations
3.0696tt
4.3696tt
4.7174
2.9567
5.7174t
DEMO
3.0154tt
4.7212tt
4.1346
3.6026
4.9615l-t
3.7885tt
2.9878*
3.3778*
1.4000
1.3117
3.2730*
2.7775*
.05
.08
.01
.01
.06
.05
a For stages 1-4, N = 23, 26, 18, and 37, respectively.
Superscripts show the results DEMO post-hoc comparisons based on a Scheffe test. For each factor with an overall significant ANOVA,
a t indicates a mean significantly greater than DEMO mean with a tt (p < ,011.
* p < .05
$
a
Y $
%
5
0
m
--.
9
2
C
DEMO
e
1988
Kazanjian
273
FIGURE 2
Plot of Means of Dominant Problem Factors DEMO Stages of Growth
Means
7 t
6
-.---
--
-
2
Commercialization
3
Growth
Stage of Growth
Strategic
Positioning
-
Production
- -----.External
Relations
DEMO
Stability
-
5
4
3
2
1
1
Conception
and
Development
significantly higher means for firms in stages 3 and 4 than for firms DEMO stages
1 and 2. The sales-marketing factor showed significance with stage as well,
with stage 3 firms clearly rating these problems as more DEMO than did
firms in other stages. The strategic positioning factor was rated higher by
stage 1and stage 4 firms than by firms in stages DEMO and 3. The final significant
result was for the external relationship factor, which was rated more domi-
nant by stage 1 and stage 2 firms than by stage 3 and stage 4 firms.
Omega-squared values were DEMO calculated (Tables 1and 3). The omega-
squared coefficient, which is analagous to RZ,can be used as a goodness-of-fit
measure as it DEMO an estimate of a treatment's effects on the variation of
the response variable (Green, 1978). In the tables, these values are equivalent
to R values of .07-.48.
DISCUSSION AND INTEGRATION
It would seem DEMO dominant problems, the increase or decrease of their
influence, and the relations among them might in themselves be valuable
274
Academy of Management Journal
June
constructs deserving of additional study. The DEMO of this research serve
as a useful starting point in this regard.
The theoretical role of dominant problerns is important, not only in
defining and measuring discrete stages, but also in understanding the transi-
tion from stage to stage, which I viewed as an organizational learning process
(DEMO, 1977; Rhenman, 1973). Miles noted that "organizational learning
occurs in response to immediate problems, imbalances or difficulties, in
what Downs (1967) has referred to as performance gaps . . . . The intra-
organizational conflicts and tensions created by these immediate problems
serve a DEMO function in stimulating search behaviors that lead to
organizational learning" (1982: 157-158).
The particular problems it faces at a given time define a venture's posi-
tion in a particular stage of growth. The DEMO will then undergo some
search for knowledge and competence and, if DEMO, will resolve those
problems. The problem-search-resolution process will recur in subsequent
DEMO cycles, since the venture will again face the same problems (Miles &
Snow, 1978).
This process will constitute organizational learning if DEMO new venture can
map solutions onto its organization in terms of specific functions, structures,
and positions, as well as information, decision, DEMO planning processes.
Solutions to problems should not be tied to specific individuals because
they would then have to be reinvented in the absence of DEMO people (Jelinek,
1979). In other words, if learning occurs, an organization institutionalizes
the solutions to these recurring problems so that it can replicate those solu-
tions when they are needed.
Such an organizational DEMO cycle explains how a successful new
venture makes the transition from one stage of growth to the next and sug-
gests why some fail. DEMO Alpha had not gained initial funding or demonstrated
its product's technical feasibility, it would not have become a stage 2 firm
concerned with developing the capacity to launch the product. Mad Beta not
resolved its DEMO and administrative control problems, it might not have
continued to grow DEMO might not have made the transition to stage 4 and the
concerns of new product development and long-term viability.
Thus, the transition from stage to stage is effected in two ways. First,
structures and processes DEMO were not previously required are institu-
tionalized. Second, elements of the DEMO may be radically altered; for
example, types of employees or reward systems may change.
The findings from studying 105 technology-based new ventures offer
DEMO support for a link between dominant problems and stages of growth.
The predicted dominant problems for stage 1firms were product or technol-
ogy development DEMO resource acquisition, and firms in this stage rated the
development of DEMO product or technology applications higher than other
problems. The problem is apparently a prime concern of both stage 1 firms
attempting to establish their DEMO product and stage 4 firms looking to
develop second-generation or completely new products to spur further growth.
Since firms move from initial development through DEMO growth or
1988
Kazanjian
275
adaptive cycles (Miles & Snow, 1978), such DEMO U-shaped relationship should
be expected to emerge. The problem of securing financial resources and
backing demonstrated significantly higher mean ratings for stage 1 and DEMO
firms than for stage 3 and 4 firms.
Little support emerged for a link between the hypothesized dominant
problems and stage 2. Production-related problems DEMO no signifi-
cant differences across stage. Interestingly, firms in this stage DEMO acquisi-
tion of resources highest. Additionally, sales and marketing problems were
DEMO noticeably higher in stage 2 than in stage 1.
Results for stage 3 firms strongly supported the model. Sales and market-
ing were significantly DEMO important to firms in this stage than to firms in
other stages. Also, organization was significantly more important for stage 3
and 4 firms than for firms in stages 1 and 2.
Finally, only moderate support emerged for the relationships theorized
for stage 4. Strategic positioning was important DEMO stage 1 and 4 firms, and
organization and administration were also DEMO problem for stage 4 as well as
stage 3 firms, consistent DEMO a need for increased control in a large
organization.
Examining the plots of dominant problem factors across stages (Figure 2)
yields further insights. The strategic positioning factor ranks first in three
stages and second in DEMO stage. The people factor ranks second or third in all
four stages. It seems that technology is a continual focus for any technology-
based DEMO Also, since technology is embodied in the skill sets of individuals,DEMO
people are also of regular concern. Managerial depth is typically a concern
when firms are growing rapidly, as were most of the firms studied, regardless
of stage. Finally, the sales-marketing factor ranks first or second DEMO three
stages and third in one, which may also be a DEMO of the high rates of
growth attained and expected by these ventures.
CONCLUSIONS
Several conclusions concerning the model can be drawn. Support for the
DEMO relationships emerged for firms in stages 1 and 3. However, an
DEMO examination of the relative dominance of problem factors within
stages suggests a need to modify the model. Even though problems increased
or decreased in DEMO over time, some were simply more dominant
than others all of DEMO time. One implication of that finding is that there could
be a hierarchical ordering of the problem factors not envisioned in the model,
DEMO the result of the prominence of growth and technology in the firms
for which the model was developed. The second implication is that prob-
DEMO may influence stage characteristics not only by their absolute impor-
tance to a firm at one time, but also according to their relative importance
across stages. That is, a problem could be less dominant than others in all
stages and yet increase or decrease in importance from one DEMO to another.
It could thus still be enough of a focus to trigger an organizational learning
cycle.
276
Academy of Management Journal
June
Another conclusion is that this research DEMO the conceptual argu-
ment that stages are not tight, discrete packages DEMO internal characteristics
that develop in response to dominant problems, but are DEMO somewhat
fluid, with problems overlapping in adjacent stages (Normann, 1977: 46). In
three of four cases where significant differences were found, problems were
of equal concern to firms in adjacent stages. The fourth DEMO, the strategic
positioning factor, demonstrates the U-shaped relationship discussed above.
Reexamination of Table 1, where it can be seen that size and age are more
similar for firms in stage 1 and 2 and for DEMO in stage 3 and 4, supports this
conclusion. Interestingly, comparing rate of growth for firms in stages 3 and
4 suggests strong differences DEMO well.
It is important to bound the conclusions regarding the model with an
understanding of the limitations of this research. A bias may exist DEMO the data
base because the firms that responded were largely successes. They were
still in business, and continued existence is a critical measure of performance,
especially for early-stage firms. There were no firms that had DEMO to make a
transition from one stage to another. The fact that the firms studied were
venture-capitalist backed heightens this effect; experienced investors had
seen them as having a high potential for success. Such investors review DEMO
only products and business plans, but management talent and organizational
issues DEMO well.
The current analyses provide only a cross-sectional view of the firms in
their current stage. Their developmental movement and the ultimate success
of DEMO framework can only be assessed through longitudinal analyses of
multiple waves of data. Even so, the analyses presented provide interesting
insights into the growth patterns of technology-based new ventures.
In summary, there is partial support for the contention that the develop-
ment of such ventures proceeds through a DEMO pattern that can be
related to the problems a firm finds pressing at sequential times. Results did
not, however, completely support the expected DEMO Some problems were
more important than others across all stages, and DEMO and stage charac-
teristics appeared to overlap.
REFERENCES
Abernathy, W. J., & Utterback, J. M. 1982. Patterns in industrial innovation. In M. L. Tushman &
W. L. Moore (Eds.), Readings in the management DEMO innovation: 131-150. Boston: Pitman
Press.
Adizes, I. 1979. Organizational passages-Diagnosing DEMO treating lifecycle problems of
organizations. Organizational Dynamics, 8(1): 3-25.
DEMO, R. R., Avis, W. E., &Mouton,J. S. 1966. DEMO Darwinism. Houston: Gulf Publications.
Block, Z., & MacMillan, I. C. 1985. Milestones for successful venture planning. Harvard Busi-
ness Review, 63(5): 184-196.
Burgelman, R.A. 1983. A process model of internal corporate venturing in the diversified major
firm. Administrative Science Quarterly, 28: 223-244.
Chandler, A. D., Jr. 1962. Strategy and structure. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press
1988 Kazanjian
Cooley, W. W., & Lohnes, P. R. 1971. Multivariate data analysis. New York: Wiley.
Cooper, A. 1979. Strategic management: New ventures and small business. In D.Schendel & C.
Hofer (Eds.), StrategicmanagementeAnewview of businesspolicy andplanning: 316327.
Boston: Little, Brown & Co.
Dean, DEMO W. 1987. Building the future: The justification process for new technology. DEMO J. M.
Pennirlgs & A. Buitendam (Eds.), New technology as DEMO innovation: 35-58.
Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger Publishing Co.
Galbraith. J. R. DEMO Stages of growth. Journal of Business Strategy, 3(1): 70-79.
DEMO, W. B. 1985. A conceptual framework for describing the phenomenon of DEMO venture
creation. Academy of Management Review, 10: 696-706.
Glaser, B. DEMO, & Strauss, A. L. 1967. The discovery of grounded theory: DEMO for qualita-
tive research. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Co.
Green, P. E. 1978. Analyzing multivariate data. Hinsdale, Ill.: Dryden Press.
Greiner, L. E. 1972. Evolution and revolution as organizations grow. HarvardBusiness Review,
50(4): 37-46.
Gupta, A. 1984. Contingency linkages between strategy and general manager DEMO
Academy of Management Review, 9: 399-412.
Hambrick, D.C. 1980. Operationalizing DEMO concept of business-level strategy in research.
Academy of Management Review, 5: 567-575.
Hannan, M.. & Freeman, J. 1984. Structural inertia and organizational DEMO American Socio-
logical Review, 49: 149-164.
Hosmer, L. T., Cooper, A., & Vesper, K. 1977 The entrepreneurial function. Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Jelinek, M. 1979. Institutiorializing innovations: A study of organizational learning systems.
New York: Praeger.
Kerr, J. 1982. Assigning managers on DEMO basis of the life cycle. Journal of Business Strategy,
2(4): 58-65.
Kim, J., & Mueller, C. Mr. 1985.An introduction to factor analysis: What it is and how to do it.
Sage University paper series on quantitative applications in the social sciences, 07-013.
Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage Publications.
Kimberly, J. R. 1979. Issues in the creation of organizations: Initiation, innovation, and
institutionalization. Academy of Manczgement Journal, DEMO: 435-457.
Kimberly, J. R. 1980. The life cycle analogy and the study of organizations: Introduction. In J. R.
Kimberly & R. H. Miles (Eds.), The organizational life cycle: 437-457. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
DEMO, J. R., & Miles, R. H. 1980. The organizational life DEMO San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Lawley, D. N., & Maxwell, A. E. 1971. Factor analysis as a statistical method (2d ed.). New
York: American Elsevier Publishing Co.
McKelvey, B., & Aldrich. H. 1983. Populations, natural selection, and applied organizational
science. Administrative Science Quarterly, 28: DEMO
Midgley, D.F. 1981. Toward a theory of the product life cycle: Explaining diversity. Journal of
Marketing, 45(4): 109-115.
Miles, R. DEMO Coffin nails and corporate strategies. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Miles, DEMO E., & Sno~l,C. C. 1978. Organizational strategy, structure, andprocess. DEMO York:
McGraw-Hill Book Co.
278
Academy of Management Journal
June
Miller, D. 1981. Toward a new contingency approach: The search for organizational gestalts.
Journal of Management Studies, DEMO: 1-26.
Miller, D., & Friesen, P. H. 1984. A longitudinal study of the corporate life cycle. Management
Science, 30: 1161-1183.
Moore, W. L., & Tushman. M. L. 1982. Managing innovation over the product life cycle, In M. L.
Tushman & W. L. Moore (Eds.), Readings in the management of innovation: 131-150.
Boston: Pitman Press.
Normann. R. 1977. Management for growth. New York: M'iley
Nunnall~, C. DEMO Introduction to psychological measurement. New York: McGraw-Hill
Book Co.
Penrose, E. T. 1952. Biologiral analogies in the theory of the firm. American Economic DEMO,
42: 804-819.
Pinder, C. C., & Moore, L. F. 1979. The resurrection of taxonomy to aid the development of
middle range DEMO of organizational behavior. Administrative Science Quarterly, 24:
99-118.
Porter, M. 1980. Competitive strategy. New York: Free Press.
Quinn, R. E., & Cameron, K. 1983. Organizational life cycles and shifting criteria of effectiveness:
Some preliminary evidence. Management Science, 29: 33-51.
Rhenman, E. 1973. Organization theory for long range planning. London: Wiley
Romanelli, E., & Tushman, M. L. 1986. Inertia, environments, and strategic choice: A quasi-
DEMO design for comparative longitudinal research. Management Science, 32:
608-621.
Sarason, S. F. 1972. The creation of settings. New York: Wiley.
Scott, DEMO 1970. Stages of corporate development (Parts 1 & 2). Working DEMO, Harvard Business
School, Boston.
Smith, K. G., Mitchell, T. DEMO, & Summer, C. E. 1985. Top-level management priorities in different
stages of the organizational life cycle. Academy of Management Journal, 28: 799-820.
DEMO, C. C., & Hambrick, D. C. 1980. Measuring organizational strategies: Some theoretical and
methodological problems. Academy of Management Review, 5: 527-538.
DEMO, W. 1971. Organizational growth and development. London: Penguin Books.
Storey, DEMO J. 1985. The problems facing new firms. Journal of Management Studies, DEMO: 269-291.
Timmons, J. A., Smollen, L. E., & Dingee, A. 1977. New venture creation: A guide to small
business development. Homewood, Ill.: Richard D. Irwin.
Tornatzky, L. G., Eveland, J. D., Boyland, M. G., Hetzner, W. A., Johnson, E. C., Roitman, D., &
Schneider, J. 1983. The process of technological DEMO: Reviewing the literature.
Washington, D.C.: National Science Foundation.
Tushman, M. L., & Anderson, P. 1986. Technological discontinuities and organizational
environments. Administrative DEMO Quarterly, 31: 439-465.
Uttal, B. 1985. Behind the fall. Fortune, August 5: 20-24
Van de Ven, A. H., Hudson, R., & Schroeder, D. 1984. Designing new business start-ups:
Entrepreneurial, organizational, and ecological considerations. Journal of Management,
lO(1): 87-108.
Wiegner, K. K. 1986. Manufacturing was an afterthought. Forbes, January 27: 34-35.
DEMO
1988
Kazaniian
APPENDIX
Self-categorized Stage-of-Growth
Measures
CEOs were asked to select the DEMO that most closely matched their own firm. De-
scriptions were not labeled.
Stage 1. Within this company, the primary focus of our activities is on product develop-
ment and design, securing adequate financial resources and developing a market. Most of our
employees have technical tasks but could be DEMO more as generalists than specialists as
we all perform multiple tasks. We more closely resemble a task group than an organization.
Formality and procedures DEMO almost non-existent at this firm, but the presidentientrepreneur is
central to DEMO functions and commui~ications.
Stage 2. The company has a product that performs well and meets a need in the marketplace.
We have the capability DEMO produce and sell but we have yet to firmly establish the company in
the market. The presidentientrepreneur is central to all functions and communications. DEMO
firm has some revenues and some backlog of orders.
Stage 3. The company is characterized by high growth rates in both sales and number DEMO
employees. The major internal focus is around issues of how to produce, sell and distribute the
products in volume while attaining profitability. Internal structure and communication is be-
coming more formal and increasingly individuals are assuming DEMO roles. The company
has a single product line.
Stage 4. Within this company, the major internal activities include: (a) development of
2nd, 3rd generation products andior totally new product lines; (b) securing growth funding; (c)
securing or growing market share; (d) penetrating new geographic territories. The firm has a
formality of organization structure, rules and procedures. A top management team composed of
some individuals with broad DEMO experience is in place or being built.
Dominant Problem Ratings
CEOs were asked the degree to which the following problems were currently the focus DEMO
management attention and resources. Responses were captured on a 7-point scale, DEMO 1 =
minor issue of concern at this time, 4 = DEMO of an issue of concern at this time, and 7 -
DEMO dominant issue at this time.
1. Developing a new product or technology application
2. Securing financial resources and backing
3. Acquiring key outside advisors DEMO board members
4. Product suppolt or customer service
5. Attracting capable personnel
6. Adequate facilities andior space
7. Developing a network of reliable vendors DEMO suppliers
8. Produce in volumes adequate to meet demand
9. Meet sales targets
10. Management depth and talent
11. Cost control
12. Definition of DEMO roles, responsibilities and policies
13. Management information systems
14. Attaining profitability DEMO market share goals
15. Penetrating new geographic territories
16. Administrative burden and red tape
17. Development of financial systems and internal controls
18. Establishing DEMO firm position in productimarket segments
a
Robert K. Kazanjian received M.B.A. and Ph.D. degrees from the Wharton School of the
University of Pennsylvania. He DEMO currently an assistant professor of corporate strategy
at the University of Michigan. His current research interests include the study of tech-
nology and its DEMO to both the strategy and the organization of firms.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 4 -
You DEMO printed the following article:
Relation of Dominant Problems to Stages of Growth in Technology-Based New Ventures
Robert K. Kazanjian
The Academy of Management DEMO, Vol. 31, No. 2. (Jun., 1988), pp. 257-279.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28198806%2931%3A2%3C257%3ARODPTS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-I
This article references the following DEMO citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR. Please
visit your library's website or contact a DEMO to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.
[Footnotes]
1 Operationalizing the Concept of Business-Level Strategy in Research
Donald C. Hambrick
The Academy DEMO Management Review, Vol. 5, No. 4. (Oct., 1980), pp. 567-575.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28198010%295%3A4%3C567%3AOTCOBS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-A
2 Measuring Organizational DEMO: Some Theoretical and Methodological Problems
Charles C. Snow; Donald C. Hambrick
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 5, No. 4. (Oct., DEMO), pp. 527-538.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28198010%295%3A4%3C527%3AMOSSTA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-A
References
A Process Model of Internal Corporate Venturing in the Diversified Major Firm
DEMO A. Burgelman
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 28, No. 2. (Jun., 1983), pp. 223-244.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198306%2928%3A2%3C223%3AAPMOIC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-H
DEMO: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this DEMO list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 2 of 4 -
A DEMO Framework for Describing the Phenomenon of New Venture Creation
William B. Gartner
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 10, No. 4. (Oct., DEMO), pp. 696-706.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28198510%2910%3A4%3C696%3AACFFDT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Z
Contingency Linkages between Strategy and General Manager Characteristics: A Conceptual
Examination
Anil K. Gupta
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 9, No. 3. (Jul., 1984), pp. 399-412.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28198407%299%3A3%3C399%3ACLBSAG%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
Operationalizing the Concept of Business-Level Strategy in Research
Donald C. Hambrick
The DEMO of Management Review, Vol. 5, No. 4. (Oct., 1980), pp. 567-575.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28198010%295%3A4%3C567%3AOTCOBS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-A
Structural Inertia DEMO Organizational Change
Michael T. Hannan; John Freeman
American Sociological Review, Vol. 49, No. 2. (Apr., 1984), pp. 149-164.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-1224%28198404%2949%3A2%3C149%3ASIAOC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-R
Issues in the Creation of Organizations: Initiation, Innovation, and Institutionalization
John R. Kimberly
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 22, No. 3. (Sep., 1979), pp. 437-457.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28197909%2922%3A3%3C437%3AIITCOO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-5
Populations, Natural Selection, and Applied DEMO Science
Bill McKelvey; Howard Aldrich
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 28, DEMO 1. (Mar., 1983), pp. 101-128.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198303%2928%3A1%3C101%3APNSAAO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Z
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 3 of 4 -
A DEMO Study of the Corporate Life Cycle
Danny Miller; Peter H. Friesen
DEMO Science, Vol. 30, No. 10. (Oct., 1984), pp. 1161-1183.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0025-1909%28198410%2930%3A10%3C1161%3AALSOTC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-2
Biological Analogies in the DEMO of the Firm
Edith Tilton Penrose
The American Economic Review, Vol. DEMO, No. 5. (Dec., 1952), pp. 804-819.
Stable URL:
DEMO://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28195212%2942%3A5%3C804%3ABAITTO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-H
The Resurrection of Taxonomy to Aid the Development of Middle Range Theories of
Organizational Behavior
Craig C. Pinder; Larry F. Moore
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 24, No. 1. (Mar., 1979), pp. 99-118.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28197903%2924%3A1%3C99%3ATROTTA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-N
Organizational Life Cycles and Shifting Criteria of Effectiveness: Some Preliminary Evidence
Robert E. Quinn; Kim Cameron
Management Science, Vol. 29, No. 1. (Jan., 1983), pp. 33-51.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0025-1909%28198301%2929%3A1%3C33%3AOLCASC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-H
Inertia, Environments, and Strategic Choice: A Quasi-Experimental Design for
Comparative-Longitudinal Research
Elaine DEMO; Michael L. Tushman
Management Science, Vol. 32, No. 5, Organization Design. (May, 1986), pp. 608-621.
Stable URL:
http://DEMO/sici?sici=0025-1909%28198605%2932%3A5%3C608%3AIEASCA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-T
Top Level Management Priorities in Different Stages of the Organizational Life Cycle
Ken G. Smith; Terence R. Mitchell; Charles E. Summer
DEMO Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 28, No. 4. (Dec., 1985), pp. 799-820.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28198512%2928%3A4%3C799%3ATLMPID%3E2.0.CO%3B2-U
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation DEMO
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 4 of 4 -
Measuring DEMO Strategies: Some Theoretical and Methodological Problems
Charles C. Snow; Donald C. Hambrick
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 5, No. 4. (Oct., 1980), pp. 527-538.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28198010%295%3A4%3C527%3AMOSSTA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-A
Technological Discontinuities and Organizational Environments
Michael L. Tushman; Philip Anderson
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 31, No. 3. (Sep., 1986), pp. 439-465.
DEMO URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198609%2931%3A3%3C439%3ATDAOE%3E2.0.CO%3B2-L
NOTE: The reference numbering DEMO the original has been maintained in this citation list.{1g42fwefx}