Conceptual and Methodological Considerations in the Study of Trust and Suspicion
Herbert DEMO Kee; Robert E. Knox
The Journal of Conflict Resolution, Vol. 14, No. 3. (Sep., 1970), pp. 357-366.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-0027%28197009%2914%3A3%3C357%3ACAMCIT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-2
The Journal of Conflict Resolution is currently published DEMO Sage Publications, Inc..
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your DEMO of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, DEMO part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your DEMO, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of DEMO work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/sage.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain DEMO same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is an independent not-for-profit organization dedicated to and preserving DEMO digital archive of scholarly journals. For
more information regarding JSTOR, please DEMO support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Tue Jun 5 14:50:31 2007
Conceptual and methodological considerations
in the study of trust and suspicion1
HERBERT DEMO KEE
Department of Psychology, Northwesiern University
and ROBERT E. KNOX
Department DEMO Psychology, University of British Columbia
Trust and suspicion appear to underlie
DEMO social interactions. Thus it is not sur-
prising that they occupy an important role in
various efforts to account for the stability or
instability DEMO a wide variety of human rela-
tionships. One of the earliest systematic for-
mulations of these concepts appeared in this
journal over a decade DEMO (cf. Deutsch, 1958).
Yet little progress has been made since then
toward a more satisfactory conceptualization
of trust and suspicion. This paper DEMO devoted
to the examination of both the theoretical
and the methodological considerations rele-
vant to the empirical study of trust and
suspicion.
Conceptual Considerations
DEMO in defining and conceptualizing
trust and suspicion. Explicit definitions of
trust and suspicion are, on the one hand,
conspicuously scarce. On the other hand, a
diversity of terms is frequently used synony-
mously with trust and suspicion. Coopera-
tion, faith, and confidence are often used
'Support for this paper was provided by a grant
from the Institute of DEMO Relations at the
University of British Columbia to Robert E. Knox,
and by a predoctoral fellowship from the Canada
Council to Herbert Kee. DEMO is now with HO Sta-
tistical, Bell Canada, in Montreal.
synonymously with trust, while competition,
resistance, and defensiveness are sometimes
used DEMO with suspicion. Existing
definitions of trust and suspicion are rather
limited and almost peculiar to particular
studies. This is understandable if one con-
siders DEMO of the problems in defining trust
and suspicion.
Popular notions-however vague or un-
specified-and more sophisticated noti~ns
trust and suspicion seem to enter into DEMO
gamut of relationships ranging from the in-
trapersonal to the interpersonal, DEMO from
primitive intertribal relationships to corn-
plex international contexts. However, the
DEMO connotations implied when the terms
trust and suspicion are employed in these
various instances are not identical from one
instance to the next. For DEMO, a mother
is said to "trust" the baby-sitter just as DEMO
parishioner is said to "trust" the priest during
confession. Similarly, DEMO Akka pygmies of
Africa may be said to "trust" the neighboring
agricultural tribes in their silent trade rela-
tionships just as Britain may DEMO be said
to "trust" the United States in their political
and economic relationships. Yet the exact
notion of trust involved in each of DEMO ex-
amples is different. If there is some thread
of commonality running through the range
of
358
of such diverse applications, then it is neces-
sary that adequate definitions attempt to
extract or specify the common dimensions or
elements that DEMO trust and suspicion
in those diverse applications.
Another problem in defining trust and
suspicion concerns, to a certain extent, how
trust and suspicion DEMO conceptualized. For
example, is only one dimension involved in
which trust DEMO suspicion represent the ex-
tremes of a continuum? And is distrust DEMO
"opposite" of trust, or are distrust and sus-
picion in DEMO the same?
It is tempting to regard trust and suspicion
as polar opposites; but in terms of function,
this is not so easily the case. Ordinarily trust
is regarded as having positive, desirable con-
sequences, while suspicion is depicted as hav-
ing disruptive, dysfunctional effects. DEMO
ever, extreme trust-what Deutsch calls
"pathological trust," and characterized by
such terms as "gullible" and "credulous"
(Deutsch, 1958, DEMO 278)-may also be dys-
functional just as extreme suspicion--a sort of
paranoid state-may be dysfunctional. On
the other hand, Deutsch does not acknowl-
edge the possibility that a slight amount of
suspicion (however that is determined)-a
kind of alert but not distracting guardedness
--may be facilitative. DEMO is evident that trust
and suspicion are complex concepts which
probably require a considerable amount of
qualification.
In the next section, a definition and con-
ceptualization of trust and suspicion will be
proposed. For the purpose DEMO comparison,
however, definitions of trust and suspicion
advanced by Deutsch (1962) will first be
presented.2
The essential features of a situation confronting
the individual with a choice to trust or not in the
behavior DEMO another person are,. . . (a) the individ-
-
% critical review of other definitions by Gar-
finkel (1963), Meliinger (DEMO), Solomon (1960),
Pruitt (1965), and Lieberman (1964) has been made
by Kee (1967).
HERBERT W~KEE and ROBERT DEMO KNOX
ual is confronted with an ambiguous path, a path
that DEMO lead to an event perceived to be beneficial
(Va+) or to an event perceived to be harmful
(Va-); (b) he perceives that the occurrence of
Va+ or Va- is contingent upon the behavior DEMO
another person; and (c) he perceives the strength
of Va- DEMO be greater than the strength of Va t. If
he chooses to take an ambiguous path with such
properties, I shall say that he makes a trusting
choice; if he chooses not to take the path, he rnakes
a distrustful choice.
The essential features of a situation confronting
the individual with a choice to be sus~icious or
not are, . . . (a) the individual is confronted with
the possibility that DEMO potentially harmful event
(Va-) will occur; (b) he perceives DEMO the occur-
rence of Va- is contingent upon the behavior of
another person; and (c) he perceives the possibility
of engaging in behavior that will prevent or reduce
the harmful consequences of the other person'DEMO
behavior, should it occur. In effect, then, a sus-
picious DEMO is a choice to engage in behavior to
prevent or reduce the harmful consequences of
another person's behavior. A choice not to take
DEMO ambiguous path may be considered to be a
suspicious one [Deutsch, DEMO, pp. 303-3041.
These definitions are, in effect, operational
definitions of DEMO and suspicion and do not
constitute definitions of trust and suspicion
as concepts. That is, Deutsch delineates the
situations in which trust and suspicion arc
assumed to occur, and, from the behavior
observed in these DEMO, he infers that an
individual has made his choice on the DEMO of
trust or suspicion. Unfortunately, as will be
evident in a DEMO section, the behavior of in-
dividuals in the situations delineated by
DEMO is subject to other interpretations.
A definition and conceptualization of trust
and suspicion. In order to facilitate the defi-
nition, those features which distinguish some
situations from others as involving trust and
suspicion will first be DEMO In the sim-
plest and perhaps the most common case, a
DEMO situation involves two parties which are
to a certain extent interdependent with respect
to the outcomes defined by their joint choices,
and one DEMO the parties (P) is confronted with
the choice between trubting or not trusting
CONFLICT RESOLUTION VOLUME XIV NUMBER 3
THE STUDY OF TRUST AND SUSPICION
the other (0). If P's choice is to manifest trust
toward 0, then 0, in DEMO, has the choice of
being either trustworthy or untrustworthy.
However, P's choice not to manifest trust
toward 0 will preclude betrayal, leaving 0
usually with no further option with respect
to the particular situation. DEMO is important
to note that both P and 0 are cognizant of the
risk to which P exposes himself in his deci-
sion to DEMO 0. ("Risk" here refers to the
possibility that 0 can-but DEMO that he neces-
sarily will-betray P's trust.) That is, P knows
0 can betray him and 0 knows that P has ex-
DEMO his (P's) trust even in the face of that
risk. Therefore, even where the risk is per-
ceived to be negligible, DEMO situation still in-
volves trust, as long as the possibility of DEMO
trayal by 0 exists.
So far, statements about trust and suspicion
DEMO referred to manifest behaviors but not
to the underlying theoretical states. This dis-
tinction, rarely made explicit in other formu-
lations, is extremely DEMO for two rea-
sons, both of which relate to the fact DEMO
observed choice behavior in the Prisoner's
Dilemma game (PD) has been almost the only
means by which trust and suspicion have
been DEMO, defined, and measured. First,
the choice behavior in the simultaneous-play
PD game is not solely attributable to the con-
cepts of trust DEMO suspicion, but is subject to
other interpretations that do not necessarily
DEMO trust and suspicion. Secondly, the
dichotomous choice behavior presently uti-
lized DEMO not sensitive to theoretically-important
variations in the subjective state. While both
of these assertions will be developed more
extensively in the next section, the nature
and the role of the underlying states will now
be specified DEMO greater detail in the process of
defining trust and suspicion.
Subjective trust and suspicion can be de-
fined in terms of P's certainty DEMO uncertainty
about 0's trustworthiness. Certainty might be
measured, for example, by P's subjective
probability that, given the opportunity (i.e.,
DEMO
if P were to manifest trust toward 0), 0 will
be trustworthy or untrustworthy. The rela-
tionship between subjective trust (or suspi-
cion) and the manifest act of trust (or sus-
picion) can be described by a variety of
functions, some of which are presented in
Figures 1-3.
Figure 1 depicts the full manifestation of
trust through some DEMO of uncertainty. P,
for example, may leave himself fully vulner-
DEMO to 0 while still harboring some mild
doubts about 0's integrity or competence.
Many legal contracts are probably signed
under these conditions, and a patient who
voluntarily undergoes surgery manifests total
trust while, in many instances, still experi-
encing some uncertainty. When some critical
level of uncertainty is reached, however, P
will begin to withhold full manifest trust DEMO
order to protect himself against the possible
untrustworthiness of 0.An escape clause may
be written into contracts, or the patient may
demand additional consultations. At another
point, which may or may not coincide with
maximum uncertainty, there will be with-
drawal of all manifest trust in 0 by P. In wage
negotiations, for example, labor and manage-
ment may DEMO off bargaining altogether.
P's subi . prob. that 0
wi
II be untrustworthy
FIG. 1. Hypothetical relationship between sub-
jective trust (defined in terms of certainty) and
manifest trust.
HERBERT W. KEE and ROBERT E. KNOX
0 I \
0 .O DEMO 1 .O
P's subi . prob. that 0
will be untrustworthy
FIG. 2. Manifest trust persisting under great
uncertainty.
P's subi . DEMO that 0
will be untrustworthy
FIG. 3. Manifest trust limited to near
tainty that other player (0)
will be trustworthy.
cer-
Figure 2 is an example of full manifest
trust persisting under conditions of great DEMO
certainty. It typifies the whole life of Charlie
Brown, the "Peanuts" character, and of or-
dinary persons when there is much to DEMO
from trusting behavior, but little attendant
risk. Figure 3 may represent DEMO case of a
paranoid credit manager in a conservative
bank or, DEMO the ordinary person, conditions
where risk is great for the sake DEMO a small gain.
The way in which trust and suspicion are
basically conceptualized is depicted in Figure
4. It is suggested that, in addition to the fac-
tors associated with previous experience (cor-
responding to (DEMO) of Figure 4), most of the
independent variables can be DEMO into
two other broad categories: structural and
situational factors (corresponding to (b) of
Figure 4) and dispositional factors (corre-
sponding to (c) of Figure 4). It is important
to note that in addition to acting directly to
influence P's perception of 0's DEMO and/
or competence (corresponding to (d) of Figure
4), previous experience itself can influence
the structural and dispositional factors.
Each of the three classes of independent
variables may act directly to influence P'DEMO per-
ception of 0's motives and/or competence.
Then, depending DEMO how P does perceive 0's
motives and/or competence, P DEMO experience
some corresponding degree of subjective trust
(or suspicion) which may or may not be mani-
fest as trust (or suspicion). Essentially, the
effects of such observable "inputs" as incen-
tive and power upon the observable "output"
of manifest trust or suspicion are therefore
mediated by two hypothetical states-first,
P's perception of 0's DEMO and/or compe-
tence and, secondly, P's certainty or uncer-
tainty about 0's untrustworthiness.
Methodological Considerations
Most studies of trust and DEMO are
characterized by the use of a replicated, si-
multaneously-played, dichotomous choice
PD game as the means by which trust and
suspicion are DEMO or measured. A
typical PD game payoff matrix is as follows
(DEMO's payoffs are the first number in each
cell):
Player DEMO (other)
01
02
Player P
PI
3,3
5,O
DEMO,5
1,l
Pz
The choices pl and ol are usually labelled
CONFLICT RESOLUTION VOLUME XIV NUMBER 3
THE STUDY OF TRUST AND SUSPICION
Independent Variables
Hypothetical Intervening
States
(a)
PREVIOUS
EXPERIENCE
STRUCTURAL and
SITUATIONAL
FACTORS
- incentive
- power
- DEMO
- r
i
s
-
(d1
PERCEPTION of
(e1
SUBJECTIVE
k)
DISPOSITIONAL
FACTORS
- motivational
orientation
- personality
factors
- attitudes
-r
DEMO's MOTIVES ---, TRUST or .-p
7
and/or
COMPETENCE
SUSPICION
(i .e ., subjective
probability or
certainty about
0's trustworthiness
(DEMO)
BE HAVl ORAL
TRUST or
SUSPICION
FIG. 4. Basic conceptualization of trust and suspicion. (The factors represented above pertain to
P's trust or suspicion vis-2-vis the other player, 0.)
as being "cooperative" choices while pz and
o2 are usually labelled as being "competitive."
The outcomes (choice-combinations) are such
that if both select their second DEMO
(pz, oz), i.e., if both compete, both receive
only the small payoff indicated in the lower
right quadrant of the matrix. DEMO the other
hand, if both select the first alternative (PI,
o,), i.e., if both cooperate, both receive the
relatively larger, but nevertheless moderate,
amount indicated in the upper left quadrant.
However, where one competes while the other
cooperates, the one who competes DEMO the
largest payoff while the one who cooperates
receives the smallest, DEMO is evident in either
the upper right or the lower left quadrants in
the matrix. There may be, then, a temptation
to choose DEMO in the hope that the
other will choose cooperatively.
To account for the underlying motivation
to cooperate, Deutsch (1962, p. 309) postu-
DEMO the notion of trust:
The essential psychological feature of the game
is that there is no possibility for "rational" indi-
vidual behavior DEMO it unless the conditions for
mutual trust exist. If each player chooses to ob-
tain either maximum gain or minimum loss for
himself, each will lose. But it makes no sense to
choose the other alternative, which could result
in maximum loss, unless one can trust the other
player. If one cannot trust, it is, of course, safer
to choose so as to suffer minimum rather than
maximum loss, but it is even better not to play
the game. If one cannot avoid DEMO the game
and if one cannot trust, there may be no DEMO
able alternative except to choose "the lesser of
two evils" and/or attempt to develop the condi-
tions that will permit mutual trust.
DEMO effect, Deutsch is inferring trust and sus-
picion from the observation DEMO cooperation
and competition, respectively, in the PD
game. However, the DEMO of such an ap-
proach is quite tenuous for a number of
reasons.
Since these reasons have important impli-
cations for the sorts of DEMO which
362
might be made about trust and suspicion
from observing game behavior, a careful ex-
amination of certain methodological ques-
tions is highly warranted. DEMO examination
will concern three methodological questions
in particular: (a) meaningfulness DEMO incen-
tives and payoffs, (b) validity of inferences,
and (c) defining and measuring trust and
suspicion.
(a) Meaningfulness of incentives and pay-
offs: One of the distinguishing aspects of
real-life situations involving trust and sus-
picion is that there is something at stake, and
in many cases, the stakes are incalculable.
Yet most of the laboratory studies that have
purportedly dealt with trust and suspicion
have employed points DEMO imaginary money as
the payoff units. It is possible, however, that
real and more meaningfully large amounts of
money might have yielded different DEMO
As Mess6 and Sawyer (1966, p. 16) reason,
When DEMO are smaller, and their motivating
ability less, other motivations more easily enter.
. . . Small rewards do not make behavior unlaw-
ful, of course; they simply multiply the potential
causes, making it more DEMO to verify theories
based upon responses to the rewards themselves
(and DEMO more difficult to understand alto-
gether).
Evidence for this position has been found in
recent studies by Gallo (1966), Knox and
Douglas (1968), McClintock and McNeel
(1966), Mess6 and Sawyer (1966), and Os-
kamp and Perlman (1965).
Although these studies are not entirely
conclusive, they do leave many of the existing
conclusions about cooperation and trust (e.g.,
Deutsch's) open to criticism. The DEMO
concern here is not so much with the strictly
monetary aspects of the larger payoffs, but
with the fact that we are interested in be-
havior (in this case, the behavior which
trust and suspicion DEMO) in which the
stakes, whether materially large or small, are
DEMO
Essentially, the problem of meaningfulness
HERBERT W. KE'E and ROBERT DEMO KNOX
reduces to a problem of utilities and, in this
respect, implies that perhaps other sorts of
utility units (e.g., prestige) might be studied.
It is difficult, however, to scale other possible
units. DEMO it might be profitable to
explore other possibilities, even if the DEMO
ulations are rather gross and can only be
placed on an ordinal scale.
Results from the isolated attempts to em-
ploy shock as an DEMO to monetary pay-
offs (Bixenstine and O'Reilly, 1966, and
DEMO, 1967) have not been very different
from the results of studies using monetary
payoffs. Another approach is suggested by
the fact that, in true-life situations involving
trust and suspicion, meaningfulness is usually
derived from a considerable amount of per-
sonal investment and involvement on the
part of DEMO participants. If subjects could,
for example, be made to perceive DEMO they
were actually risking the loss of their own
money (and DEMO such a procedure were ethical),
then the situation would be DEMO apt to take
on a different and more meaningful per-
spective.
This contention is, to a certain extent, sup-
ported in a recent DEMO in which Tversky
(1967) found that subjects were willing to
pay more than the expected value of a nega-
tive gamble in order DEMO avoid the risk of loss
associated with that gamble. Thus, while DEMO
tive payoffs (i.e., positive expected values
from a gamble) were DEMO by linear
utility functions, negative payoffs had non-
linear (concave) DEMO functions. Unfortu-
nately (in relation to the present discussion),
the subjects in Tversky's study did not actu-
ally have to risk DEMO own money, since they
were given an advance for use during DEMO ex-
periment. Even then they were not required to
undertake the risk of real money transactions
until the last two of 82 trials.
(b) Validity of inferences: Validity is one
of the most important considerations DEMO any
experimental undertaking. Here it deals with
the question of whether or not the PD game
CONFLICT RESOLUTION VOLUME XIV NUMBER 3
THE STUDY OF TRUST AND SUSPICION
can be used to study trust DEMO suspicion. If
the PD game is a valid tool for the study of
these concepts, then, ideally, it ought to be
possible to make reasonably unambiguous
inferences about trust and suspicion on the
basis of DEMO observed in that game. For
all intents and purposes, Deutsch and DEMO
equate the observation of cooperation with
trust and the observation of competition
with the occurrence of suspicion. But, as will
be evident from the remainder of this section,
a strong case may be mounted against DEMO
an equation.
There are two related questions which
express possible approaches to this particular
problem of validity. First, in what important
respects does the PD game fail to represent
real-life trust situations? Secondly, can other
DEMO (in addition to trust and suspicion)
be inferred from the DEMO of coopera-
tion and competition in the PD game?
A moment's reflection upon the temporal
aspects of acts involving trust and suspicion
DEMO that the majority of those situations
are characterized by a sequence of events in
which the act of trust or suspicion is made
unilaterally. DEMO party that manifests trust
or wants to demonstrate trust makes his move
first and in effect places his own fate, to the
extent that he trusts, squarely in the hands
of the other. P, in DEMO act of trusting 0, leaves
himself vulnerable to 0, and both are usually
aware of this vulnerability. Where P suspects
0, i.e., DEMO P has a strong expectation of
an undesirable outcome that results from 0's
choice, then P moves first so as to preclude or
at least reduce the possibility of the negative
outcome. The contention here, then, is that
acts involving trust and suspicion are usually
sequential in nature.
If this analysis is accurate and fairly gen-
eral, then the element of sequentialness must
be represented in an experimental situation
designed to DEMO trust and suspicion. There
is, however, another reason for asserting that
the notion of sequentialness is important,
and this reason relates directly DEMO the game
situations used to study trust and suspicion.
When P makes a competitive choice in a
condition of simultaneous play, it is difficult
to know if his choice arises out of suspicion,
i.e., out of an attempt to guard against the
worst outcome, or if he is in fact trying to
maximize his own payoff in the event DEMO 0
chooses cooperatively. Although the observed
choice is the same, the DEMO reasons
are different. In a sequential play situation,
the maximization explanation is ruled out
and it is more likely, but not necessary, DEMO
P's choice can be attributed to the concept
of suspicion.
With regard to a cooperative choice in this
discussion of sequential versus simultaneous
DEMO, the focus shifts to 0's selection when
0 is either DEMO or uncertain about P's
choice. In simultaneous play he is uncertain,
while in sequential play he is certain. In se-
quential play DEMO is no doubt that, when P
is first and chooses cooperatively, 0 may be
characterized as being either trustworthy-if
he also chooses cooperatively DEMO that
P is vulnerable-or untrustworthy, if he
chooses competitively and takes DEMO of
P's vulnerability. In contrast, such imputa-
tions about 0'DEMO behavior in the simultaneous
play situation are more ambiguous.
Studies of trust and suspicion employing
sequentially-played games are not, of course,
entirely novel. Although constituting only a
small proportion of the total, studies by
Deutsch (1960a and 1960b), Solomon (1960),
and Swinth (1967) used sequential moves.
However, in contrast to the position taken
in this paper, Deutsch (1960a) hypothesized
that psychological simultaneity is an im-
portant factor in determining trust, and that
even if there is no existing socialized basis
for trust, trust can occur if there is full psy-
chological simultaneity. (Psychological simul-
taneity, defined as "the mutual awareness of
what the other is doing as one decides what to
do," DEMO differentiated from physical simul-
364
taneity, "the occurrence of decisions at the
samephysical time" [Deutsch, 1960a, p. 1271.)
Apart from the objection that the distinction
DEMO psychological and physical simul-
taneity is both ambiguous and questionable,
it is perhaps more important to recognize that
simultaneity is not a necessary DEMO for
trust. In fact, it seems more the case that,
DEMO simultaneity is required in order for
an exchange to occur, suspicion DEMO more
likely to be operating than trust.
Swinth's study on the establishment of the
trust relationship is especially noteworthy
since he compared simultaneous DEMO sequen-
tial play. He found that there was a tendency,
although not quite statistically significant,
for the establishment of trust to be DEMO
when play was sequential. His measure of
trust, however, was a simultaneous play of a
PD game.
Solomon's study was also noteworthy DEMO
that he used sequential choice and asked the
subjects to indicate the choice they expected
0 to make. Thus Solomon was able to make
DEMO important distinctions between or among
cooperative choice and trusting behavior, on
DEMO one hand, and competitive choice or sus-
picious behavior and exploitive DEMO on
the other hand.
This discussion of simultaneity has antici-
pated somewhat the question as to whether
other motives might underlie manifest co-
operative DEMO competitive choices. According
to McClintock and others, there are at least
DEMO motives that influence a subject's re-
sponse in the PD game: (1) maximization of
one's own gain regardless of the other per-
son's outcome, which is more or less equiv-
alent to what Deutsch has called an individ-
ualistic motivational orientation; (2) maximi-
zation of joint gain, i.e., the total gain for
both oneself DEMO the other, which is approxi-
mately equivalent to a cooperative orienta-
DEMO; and (3) maximization of the difference
between one's own DEMO and the other per-
son's outcome, which is roughly equivalent DEMO
HERBERT W. KEE and ROBERT E. KNOX
a competitive orientation (Becker DEMO Mc-
Clintock, 1967; McClintock and McNeel,
1966; McClintock and DEMO, 1967; and
Minas, Scodel, Marlowe, and Rawson, 1960).
There may, of course, be other motives.
For example, a punishment or "vindictive-
ness" motive may be operating, wherein the
subject wants to minimize the other person's
payoff at any cost to himself. DEMO there may
be a motive to outwit the other person. This
would not involve the pattern of solely com-
petitive responses observed for a DEMO
orientation, but might consist of a series of
cooperative responses that DEMO set the stage
for periodic or eventual defection. Such a
motive might be salient where, for example,
the esteem of a third party or onlooker, such
as a prestigious experimenter, is valued.
It has DEMO argued in this section that a
problem exists with respect to the validity of
inferences which might be made on the basis
of the DEMO use of the PD game. It is nec-
essary to conclude that, because subjects may
perceive and be motivated by factors other
than those related to trust and suspicion,
caution must be exercised in making DEMO
ences about these concepts on the basis of
observed cooperation and competition. This
is not to say that the PD game is necessarily
invalid DEMO the study of trust and suspicion,
but rather that a more refined and qualified
application of that game is necessary.
(c) Defining DEMO measuring trust and suspi-
cion: Related to the question of inferences DEMO
the problem of defining and measuring trust
and suspicion. It was earlier postulated that
in situations that call for a decision to trust
or DEMO (herein termed "test situations"),
there is (1) an observed behavior that is usu-
ally of a dichotomous nature-P manifests
trust DEMO 0 or he doesn't-and (2) a hy-
pothetical concomitant subjective state of
trust or suspicion that may be assumed to be
of DEMO continuous nature. If this is the case,
then the dependent variable measure afforded
by the dichotomous-choice game is not ade-
CONFLICT RESOLUTION VOLUME DEMO NUMBER 3
THE STUDY OF TRUST AND SUSPICION
quate for a particular test situation. DEMO
replicated PD game trials provide an experi-
mental analogue only of replicated test situ-
ations, or possibly of the steps that precede a
test situation, and do not allow for an esti-
mate or measure of P's subjective state. The
subjective state (measured, for example, by
P's subjective probability that 0 will be trust-
worthy or untrustworthy, given that P has
already made a trusting choice) is important
since it would be of interest to know at which
point or threshold DEMO trust becomes
manifest as behavioral trust, i.e., to what ex-
tent P must "feel" that he trusts 0 before he
will in DEMO make a trusting decision. Even
more interesting, the threshold will undoubt-
DEMO vary with a variety of situational, struc-
tural, and/or dispositional factors, e.g., in-
centives of P's own trustworthiness.
Summary and DEMO
Although the importance of trust and suspi-
cion in accounting for many aspects of inter-
personal relationships is widely acknowledged,
there is little DEMO regarding the mean-
ing and the nature of these concepts. This
lack of theoretical and methodological devel-
opment has thereby detracted from their
potential DEMO in attempts to explain or de-
scribe various aspects of behavior in a more
rigorous manner.
In this paper, both trust and suspicion have
been postulated as having two related
components-(1) the observable choice be-
havior, and (2) a subjective state which un-
derlies the manifest choice behavior-and
on this basis, a conceptual model has been
proposed. In addition, methodological con-
siderations germane to the game-theoretic
approach of studying trust and suspicion
have been discussed. From this discussion, it
would appear that if the PD game or some
other non-zero-sum game is to be DEMO in
the study of trust and suspicion, it should
involve sequential DEMO with meaningful
365
incentives at stake, and should either itself
provide, or be supplemented with, a contin-
uous measure of the underlying subjective
state
REFERENCES
Becker, G. M., and C. G. McClintock. Value: be-
havioral decision theory, Annual Review of Psy-
chology, 1967,18, 239-86.
Bixenstine, V. E., and E. F. O'Reilly. Money ver-
sus DEMO shock as payoff in a Prisoner's Dilem-
magame, Psychological Record, 1966, 16, 251-64.
Deutsch, M. Trust and suspicion, Journal of DEMO
flict Resolution, 1958,Z. 265-79.
The effect of motivational orientation
upon DEMO and suspicion, Human Relations,
1960a, 13, 123-39.
----. Trust, trustworthiness, and the F scale,
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
1960b. 61, 138-40.
Cooperation and trust: some notes. In
M. DEMO Jones (ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Mo-
tivation, 1962. Lincoln: DEMO of Nebraska
Press, 1962.
Douglas, R. D. The use of shock as payoffs in the
Prisoner's Dilemma. Unpublished paper, 1967.
Gallo, DEMO S. Effects of increased incentive upon the
use of threat in bargaining, Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 1966,4, 14-20.
Garfinkel, H. A conception of, and experiments
with "trust" as a DEMO of stable concerted
actions. In 0. J. Harvey (ed.), Motivation DEMO
Social Interaction-Cognitive Determinants. New
York: Ronald Press, 1963.
Kee, H. DEMO Trust and suspicion. Qualifying paper,
University of British Columbia, 1967.
DEMO, R. E., and R. D. Douglas. Low payoffs and
marginal comprehension: possible constraints
upon behavior in the Prisoner's Dilemma. Pa-
per presented at the Western Psychological As-
sociation meeting, San Diego, 1968.
Lieberman, B. i-Trust: a notion of trust in three-
person games and international affairs, Journal
of Conflict Resolution, 1964,8, 271-80.
McClintock, C. DEMO, and S. P. McNeel. Reward
level and game playing behavior, Journal of Con-
flict Resolution, 1966, 10, 98- 102.
-. , and D. M. Messick. The development of
cooperative and competitive motives in children.
DEMO research proposal, 1967.
Mellinger, G. D. Interpersonal trust as a factor in
communication, Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 1956,52, 304-309.
366
Mess6, L. A,, and J. Sawyer. Unexpected coop-
eration: DEMO Prisoner's Dilemma resolved? Un-
published paper, University of Chicago, DEMO
Minas, J. S., A. Scodel, D. Marlowe, and H. Raw-
son. Some descriptive aspects of two-person non-
zero-sum games, 11, Journal DEMO Conflict Resolu-
tion, 1960,4, 193 -97.
Oskamp, S., and D. Perlman. Factors affecting
cooperation in a Prisoner's Dilemma game,
DEMO of Conflict Resolution, 1965, 9, 359-74.
Pruitt, D. G. Definition of the situation as a de-
terminant of international action. In H. DEMO
Kelman (ed.), International Behavior: A Social-
HERBERT W. KEE and ROBERT E. KNOX
Psychological Analysis. New York: Holt, Rine-
hart and DEMO, 1965.
Solomon, L. The influence of some types of power
relationships and game strategies upon the de-
velopment of interpersonal trust, Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1960, 61,
223-30.
Swinth, R. L. The establishment of the trust re-
lationship, Journal of Conflict Resolution, DEMO,
11,335-44.
Tversky, A. Utility theory and additivity analysis
of DEMO choices, Jotrrnal of Experimental Psy-
chology, 1967, 75.27-36.
CONFLICT RESOLUTION DEMO XIV NUMBER 3{1g42fwefx}