Journal of Conflict Resolution
http://jcr.sagepub.com/
Conceptual and methodological considerations DEMO the study of trust and suspicion
Herbert W. Kee and Robert E. Knox
Journal of Conflict Resolution 1970 14: 357
DOI: 10.1177/002200277001400307
DEMO online version of this article can be found at:
http://jcr.sagepub.com/content/14/3/357
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
On DEMO of:
Peace Science Society (International)
Additional services and information DEMO Journal of Conflict Resolution can be found at:
Email Alerts: DEMO://jcr.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://jcr.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations: http://DEMO/content/14/3/357.refs.html
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 25, 2010
Conceptual and methodological considerations
in the study of trust and 1suspicion
HERBERT DEMO KEE
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
and ROBERT E. KNOX
Department DEMO Psychology, University of British Columbia
Trust and suspicion appear to underlie
DEMO social interactions. Thus it is not sur-
prising that they occupy an important role in
various efforts to account for the stability or
instability DEMO a wide variety of human rela-
tionships. One of the earliest systematic for-
mulations of these concepts appeared in this
journal over a decade DEMO (cf. Deutsch, 1958).
Yet little progress has been made since then
toward a more satisfactory conceptualization
of trust and suspicion. This paper DEMO devoted
to the examination of both the theoretical
and the methodological considerations rele-
vant to the empirical study of trust and
suspicion.
Conceptual Considerations
DEMO in defining and conceptualizing
trust and suspicion. Explicit definitions of
trust and suspicion are, on the one hand,
conspicuously scarce. On the other hand, a
diversity of terms is frequently used synony-
mously with trust and suspicion. Coopera-
tion, faith, and confidence are often used
Support DEMO for this paper was provided by a grant
from the Institute of Industrial Relations at the
University of British Columbia to Robert E. Knox,DEMO
and by a predoctoral fellowship from the Canada
Council to Herbert Kee. Kee is now with HQ Sta-
tistical, Bell Canada, in Montreal.
DEMO with trust, while competition,
resistance, and defensiveness are sometimes
used interchangeably with suspicion. Existing
definitions of trust and suspicion are rather
limited DEMO almost peculiar to particular
studies. This is understandable if one con-
siders some of the problems in defining trust
and suspicion.
Popular notions-however vague DEMO un-
specified-and more sophisticated notions of
trust and suspicion seem to enter into a
gamut of relationships ranging from the in-
trapersonal to the DEMO, and from
primitive intertribal relationships to com-
plex international contexts. However, the
precise connotations implied when the terms
trust and suspicion are employed DEMO these
various instances are not identical from one
instance to the next. For example, a mother
is said to &dquo;trust&dquo; the baby-sitter just as a
parishioner is said to &dquo;trust&dquo; DEMO priest during
confession. Similarly, the Akka pygmies of
Africa may be DEMO to &dquo;trust&dquo; the neighboring
agricultural tribes in their silent trade rela-
tionships just as Britain may usually be said
to &dquo;trust&dquo; the United States in their political
and economic relationships. Yet the exact
notion of trust involved in each of these ex-
amples DEMO different. If there is some thread
of commonality running through the range
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 25, 2010
358
of such diverse applications, then it is neces-
sary that adequate definitions attempt to
extract or specify the common dimensions or
elements that DEMO trust and suspicion
in those diverse applications.
Another problem in defining trust and
suspicion concerns, to a certain extent, how
trust and suspicion DEMO conceptualized. For
example, is only one dimension involved in
which trust DEMO suspicion represent the ex-
tremes of a continuum? And is distrust DEMO
&dquo;opposite&dquo; of trust, or are distrust and sus-
DEMO in fact the same?
It is tempting to regard trust and suspicion
as polar opposites; but in terms of function,
this is not so easily the case. Ordinarily trust
is regarded as having positive, desirable con-
sequences, while suspicion is depicted as hav-
ing disruptive, DEMO effects. How-
ever, extreme trust-what Deutsch calls
&dquo;pathological trust,&DEMO; and characterized by
such terms as &dquo;gullible&dquo; and &dquo;credulous&dquo;
(Deutsch, 1958, p. 278)-may also be dys-
functional just as extreme suspicion-a sort of
paranoid state-may be dysfunctional. DEMO
the other hand, Deutsch does not acknowl-
edge the possibility that DEMO slight amount of
suspicion (however that is determined)&horbar;a
kind of alert but not distracting guardedness
-may be facilitative. It is evident DEMO trust
and suspicion are complex concepts which
probably require a considerable amount of
qualification.
In the next section, a definition and con-
ceptualization of trust and suspicion will be
proposed. For the purpose of comparison,
DEMO, definitions of trust and suspicion
advanced by Deutsch (1962) will DEMO be
presented.’
The essential features of a situation confronting
the individual with a choice to trust or not in the
behavior of another person DEMO,... (a) the individ-
2A critical review of other definitions by Gar-
finkel (1963), Mellinger (1956), Solomon (1960),
DEMO (1965), and Lieberman (1964) has been made
by Kee (1967).
ual is confronted with an ambiguous path, a path
that can lead to an event perceived to be beneficial
(Va+) or DEMO an event perceived to be harmful
(Va-); (b) he DEMO that the occurrence of
Va+ or Va- is contingent upon the behavior of
another person; and (c) he perceives the strength
of Va- to be greater than the strength of Va+. If
he chooses to DEMO an ambiguous path with such
properties, I shall say that he DEMO a trusting
choice; if he chooses not to take the path, he makes
a distrustful choice.
The essential features of a situation confronting
DEMO individual with a choice to be suspicious or
not are, (a) the individual is confronted with
the possibility that a potentially harmful event
(Va-) will occur; (b) he perceives that the occur-
rence of Va - is contingent upon the behavior of
another person; and (c) he perceives the possibility
of engaging in behavior that will DEMO or reduce
the harmful consequences of the other person’s
behavior, should DEMO occur. In effect, then, a sus-
picious choice is a choice to engage in behavior to
prevent or reduce the harmful consequences of
DEMO person’s behavior. A choice not to take
an ambiguous path may be considered to be a
suspicious one [Deutsch, 1962, pp. 303-304].
...
DEMO definitions are, in effect, operational
definitions of trust and suspicion and do not
constitute definitions of trust and suspicion
as concepts. That is, Deutsch delineates the
situations in which trust and suspicion are
assumed to DEMO, and, from the behavior
observed in these situations, he infers DEMO an
individual has made his choice on the basis of
trust or suspicion. Unfortunately, as will be
evident in a later section, the DEMO of in-
dividuals in the situations delineated by
Deutsch is subject to other interpretations.
A definition and conceptualization of trust
and suspicion. In order DEMO facilitate the defi-
nition, those features which distinguish some
situations from DEMO as involving trust and
suspicion will first be identified. In the sim-
plest and perhaps the most common case, a
trust situation involves two parties which are
to a certain extent interdependent with respect
to the DEMO defined by their joint choices,
and one of the parties (DEMO) is confronted with
the choice between trusting or not trusting
Downloaded DEMO jcr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 25, 2010
359
the other (0). If P’s choice is to manifest trust
toward 0, then 0, in turn, has the choice of
being either trustworthy or untrustworthy.
However, P’s choice not to manifest trust
toward 0 will preclude betrayal, leaving 0
usually with no further option with respect
to the particular situation. It is important
to note that both DEMO and 0 are cognizant of the
risk to which P exposes himself in his deci-
sion to trust O. (&dquo;Risk&dquo; here refers to the
possibility that 0 can-but not that he neces-
sarily DEMO P’s trust.) That is, P knows
O can betray him and 0 knows that P has ex-
tended his (P’s) trust even DEMO the face of that
risk. Therefore, even where the risk is DEMO
ceived to be negligible, the situation still in-
volves trust, as long as the possibility of be-
trayal by 0 exists.
So far, statements about trust and suspicion
have referred to manifest behaviors but not
DEMO the underlying theoretical states. This dis-
tinction, rarely made explicit in DEMO formu-
lations, is extremely important for two rea-
sons, both of which relate to the fact that
observed choice behavior in the Prisoner’s
DEMO game (PD) has been almost the only
means by which trust and suspicion have
been inferred, defined, and measured. First,
the DEMO behavior in the simultaneous-play
PD game is not solely attributable to the con-
cepts of trust and suspicion, but is subject to
other interpretations that do not necessarily
involve trust and suspicion. Secondly, the
dichotomous choice behavior presently uti-
lized is not sensitive to theoretically-important
variations in the DEMO state. While both
of these assertions will be developed more
extensively in the next section, the nature
and the role of the underlying states will now
be specified in greater detail in the process of
defining DEMO and suspicion.
Subjective trust and suspicion can be de-
fined in terms of P’s certainty or uncertainty
about O’s trustworthiness. Certainty might be
measured, for example, by P’s subjective
probability that, given the opportunity (i.e.,
if P were to manifest trust toward 0), 0 will
DEMO trustworthy or untrustworthy. The rela-
tionship between subjective trust (or suspi-
DEMO) and the manifest act of trust (or sus-
picion) can DEMO described by a variety of
functions, some of which are presented DEMO
Figures 1-3.
Figure 1 depicts the full manifestation of
trust through some degree of uncertainty. P,
for example, may leave himself fully vulner-
able to 0 while still harboring some mild
doubts about O’s integrity DEMO competence.
Many legal contracts are probably signed
under these conditions, and DEMO patient who
voluntarily undergoes surgery manifests total
trust while, in many DEMO, still experi-
encing some uncertainty. When some critical
level of uncertainty DEMO reached, however, P
will begin to withhold full manifest trust in
order to protect himself against the possible
untrustworthiness of O. An escape DEMO may
be written into contracts, or the patient may
demand additional DEMO At another
point, which may or may not coincide with
maximum DEMO, there will be with-
drawal of all manifest trust in 0 DEMO P. In wage
negotiations, for example, labor and manage-
ment may break off bargaining altogether.
FIG. 1. Hypothetical relationship between sub-
jective trust (defined in terms of certainty) and
manifest trust.
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 25, 2010
360
FIG. 2. Manifest trust persisting under great
uncertainty.
FIG. 3. Manifest DEMO limited to near cer-
tainty that other player (0) will be trustworthy.
Figure 2 is an example of full manifest
trust persisting under DEMO of great un-
certainty. It typifies the whole life of Charlie
Brown, the &dquo;Peanuts&dquo; character, and of or-
dinary persons DEMO there is much to gain
from trusting behavior, but little attendant
DEMO Figure 3 may represent the case of a
paranoid credit manager in a conservative
bank or, for the ordinary person, conditions
where risk DEMO great for the sake of a small gain.
The way in which trust and suspicion are
basically conceptualized is depicted in Figure
4. It DEMO suggested that, in addition to the fac-
tors associated with previous DEMO (cor-
responding to (a) of Figure 4), most of DEMO
independent variables can be grouped into
two other broad categories: structural DEMO
situational factors (corresponding to (b) of
Figure 4) and dispositional factors (corre-
sponding to (c) of Figure 4). It is important
to note that in addition to acting directly to
influence P’s DEMO of O’s motives and/
or competence (corresponding to (d) DEMO Figure
4), previous experience itself can influence
the structural and dispositional factors.
Each of the three classes of independent
variables may act directly DEMO influence P’s per-
ception of O’s motives and/or competence.
Then, DEMO on how P does perceive O’s
motives and/or competence, P DEMO experience
some corresponding degree of subjective trust
(or suspicion) which may or may not be mani-
fest as trust (or suspicion). Essentially, the
effects of such observable &dquo;inputs&dquo; as incen-
tive and power upon the observable &dquo;output&dquo;
of manifest trust or suspicion are therefore
mediated by two hypothetical states-first,
P’s perception DEMO O’s motives and/or compe-
tence and, secondly, P’s certainty or uncer-
tainty about O’s untrustworthiness.
Methodological Considerations
Most studies of trust and DEMO are
characterized by the use of a replicated, si-
multaneously-played, dichotomous choice
PD game as the means by which trust and
suspicion are DEMO or measured. A
typical PD game payoff matrix is as follows
(DEMO payoffs are the first number in each
cell):
The choices DEMO and 01 are usually labelled
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 25, 2010
361
FIG. 4. Basic conceptualization of trust and
P’s trust or suspicion DEMO the other player, 0.)
as being &dquo;cooperative&dquo; DEMO while p2 and
02 are usually labelled as being &dquo;competitive.&DEMO;
The outcomes (choice-combinations) are such
that if both select their second alternative
(pz, 02), i.e., if both compete, both DEMO
only the small payoff indicated in the lower
right quadrant of the matrix. On the other
hand, if both select the first alternative (DEMO,
01), i.e., if both cooperate, both receive the
relatively larger, but nevertheless moderate,
amount indicated in the upper left quadrant.
However, where one competes while the other
cooperates, the one who DEMO receives the
largest payoff while the one who cooperates
receives the smallest, as is evident in either
the upper right or the lower left quadrants in
the matrix. There may be, then, a temptation
to DEMO competitively in the hope that the
other will choose cooperatively.
To account for the underlying motivation
to cooperate, Deutsch (1962, p. 309) DEMO
lates the notion of trust:
suspicion. (The factors represented above DEMO to
The essential psychological feature of the game
is that there is no possibility for &dquo;rational&dquo; indi-
vidual behavior in it DEMO the conditions for
mutual trust exist. If each player chooses to ob-
tain either maximum gain or minimum loss for
himself, each will lose. But it makes no sense to
choose the other alternative, which could result
in maximum loss, unless one can trust the other
player. If one cannot trust, it is, of course, safer
to choose so as to suffer minimum rather than
maximum loss, but it is even better not to play
the game. If one cannot avoid playing the DEMO
and if one cannot trust, there may be no reason-
able DEMO except to choose &dquo;the lesser of
two evils&dquo; and/or attempt to develop the condi-
tions that will permit mutual trust.
DEMO effect, Deutsch is inferring trust and sus-
picion from the observation DEMO cooperation
and competition, respectively, in the PD
game. However, the DEMO of such an ap-
proach is quite tenuous for a number of
reasons.
Since these reasons have important impli-
cations for the sorts of DEMO which
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 25, DEMO
362
might be made about trust and suspicion
from observing game behavior, a careful ex-
amination of certain methodological ques-
tions is highly warranted. DEMO examination
will concern three methodological questions
in particular: (a) meaningfulness DEMO incen-
tives and payoffs, (b) validity of inferences,
and (c) defining and measuring trust and
suspicion.
(a) Meaningfulness of incentives and pay-
offs: One of the distinguishing aspects of
real-life situations involving trust and sus-
picion is that there is something at stake, and
in many cases, the stakes are incalculable.
Yet most of the laboratory studies that have
purportedly dealt with trust and suspicion
have employed points DEMO imaginary money as
the payoff units. It is possible, however, that
real and more meaningfully large amounts of
money might have yielded different DEMO
As Messe and Sawyer (1966, p. 16) reason,
When DEMO are smaller, and their motivating
ability less, other motivations more easily enter.
Small rewards do not make behavior unlaw-
ful, of course; DEMO simply multiply the potential
causes, making it more difficult to verify DEMO
based upon responses to the rewards themselves
(and hence more difficult DEMO understand alto-
gether).
...
Evidence for this position has been found in
recent studies by Gallo (1966), Knox and
Douglas (1968), McClintock and McNeel
(1966), Messe and Sawyer (1966), and Os-
kamp and Perlman (1965).
Although these studies are not entirely
conclusive, they do leave many of the existing
conclusions about cooperation and trust (e.g.,
Deutsch’s) open to criticism. The principal
concern here DEMO not so much with the strictly
monetary aspects of the larger payoffs, but
with the fact that we are interested in be-
havior (DEMO this case, the behavior which
trust and suspicion underlie) in which the
stakes, whether materially large or small, are
meaningful.
Essentially, the problem of meaningfulness
reduces to a problem of utilities and, in this
respect, implies that perhaps other sorts of
utility units (e.g., prestige) might be studied.
It is difficult, however, to scale other possible
units. Nevertheless it might be profitable to
explore other possibilities, even if the manip-
ulations are rather gross and can only be
placed on DEMO ordinal scale.
Results from the isolated attempts to em-
ploy shock as an alternative to monetary pay-
offs (Bixenstine and O’Reilly, 1966, and
Douglas, 1967) have not been very different
from the results of DEMO using monetary
payoffs. Another approach is suggested by
the fact that, DEMO true-life situations involving
trust and suspicion, meaningfulness is usually
derived from DEMO considerable amount of per-
sonal investment and involvement on the
part of the participants. If subjects could,
for example, be made to perceive that they
were actually risking the loss of their own
money (and if such a procedure were ethical),
then the situation would be more apt to take
on a different and more meaningful per-
spective.
DEMO contention is, to a certain extent, sup-
ported in a recent study in which Tversky
(1967) found that subjects were willing to
DEMO more than the expected value of a nega-
tive gamble in order to avoid the risk of loss
associated with that gamble. Thus, while posi-
tive payoffs (i.e., positive expected values
from a gamble) were characterized by linear
utility functions, negative payoffs had non-
linear (concave) utility functions. Unfortu-
nately (in relation to the present discussion),
DEMO subjects in Tversky’s study did not actu-
ally have to risk their own money, since they
were given an advance for use during the ex-
periment. Even then they were not required to
undertake the risk DEMO real money transactions
until the last two
of 82
trials.
(b) Validity of inferences : Validity is one
of the most important considerations DEMO any
experimental undertaking. Here it deals with
the question of whether or not the PD game
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on DEMO 25, 2010
363
can be used to study trust and suspicion. If
the PD DEMO is a valid tool for the study of
these concepts, then, ideally, it ought to be
possible to make reasonably unambiguous
inferences about trust and suspicion on the
basis of behavior observed in that game. DEMO
all intents and purposes, Deutsch and others
equate the observation of DEMO with
trust and the observation of competition
with the occurrence of suspicion. But, as will
be evident from the remainder of this section,
a strong case may be mounted against such
an equation.
There are DEMO related questions which
express possible approaches to this particular
problem of validity. First, in what important
respects does the PD game fail to represent
real-life trust situations? Secondly, can other
factors (in addition to trust and suspicion)
be inferred from the observation of coopera-
tion and DEMO in the PD game?
A moment’s reflection upon the temporal
aspects of acts involving trust and suspicion
suggests that the majority of those DEMO
are characterized by a sequence of events in
which the act of trust or suspicion is made
unilaterally. The party that manifests trust
or DEMO to demonstrate trust makes his move
first and in effect places his own fate, to the
extent that he trusts, squarely in the DEMO
of the other. P, in the act of trusting 0, leaves
himself vulnerable to 0, and both are usually
aware of this vulnerability. Where P suspects
0, i.e., where P has a strong expectation DEMO
an undesirable outcome that results from O’s
choice, then P moves DEMO so as to preclude or
at least reduce the possibility of the negative
outcome. The contention here, then, is that
acts involving trust DEMO suspicion are usually
sequential in nature.
If this analysis is accurate and fairly gen-
eral, then the element of sequentialness must
be represented in an experimental situation
designed to study trust and suspicion. There
is, however, another reason for asserting that
the notion of sequentialness is important,
and this reason relates directly to the game
situations used to study DEMO and suspicion.
When P makes a competitive choice in a
condition of simultaneous play, it is difficult
to know if his choice arises out of suspicion,
i.e., out of an attempt to guard against the
worst outcome, or if he is in fact trying to
maximize his own payoff in the event that 0
chooses cooperatively. Although the observed
DEMO is the same, the underlying reasons
are different. In a sequential DEMO situation,
the maximization explanation is ruled out
and it is more likely, but not necessary, that
P’s choice can be attributed to DEMO concept
of suspicion.
With regard to a cooperative choice in this
discussion of sequential versus simultaneous
play, the focus shifts to O’s selection when
O is either certain or uncertain about P’s
choice. In simultaneous play DEMO is uncertain,
while in sequential play he is certain. In se-
quential play there is no doubt that, when P
is first and chooses cooperatively, 0 may be
characterized as being either trustworthy-if
he also chooses cooperatively knowing that
P is vulnerable-or untrustworthy, if he
chooses competitively and takes advantage of
P’s vulnerability. In contrast, such imputa-
tions about O’s behavior in the simultaneous
play situation are more ambiguous.
Studies of DEMO and suspicion employing
sequentially-played games are not, of course,
entirely DEMO Although constituting only a
small proportion of the total, studies by
DEMO ( 1960a and 1960b), Solomon ( 1960),
and Swinth (1967) used sequential moves.
However, in contrast to the position taken
DEMO this paper, Deutsch ( 1960a) hypothesized
that psychological simultaneity is an im-
portant factor in determining trust, and that
even if there is no existing socialized basis
for trust, trust can occur if there is full psy-
chological simultaneity. (Psychological simul-
taneity, defined as &dquo;the mutual awareness of
what the other is doing as one decides what DEMO
do,&dquo; was differentiated from physical simul-
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 25, 2010
364
taneity, &dquo;the occurrence of decisions at the
same physical DEMO&dquo; [Deutsch, 1960a, p. 127].)
Apart from the objection DEMO the distinction
between psychological and physical simul-
taneity is both ambiguous and questionable,
it is perhaps more important to recognize that
simultaneity is DEMO a necessary condition for
trust. In fact, it seems more the DEMO that,
where simultaneity is required in order for
an exchange to occur, suspicion is more
likely to be operating than trust.
Swinth’s study on the establishment of the
trust relationship is especially noteworthy
since he DEMO simultaneous and sequen-
tial play. He found that there was a tendency,
although not quite statistically significant,
for the establishment of trust DEMO be easier
when play was sequential. His measure of
trust, however, was a simultaneous play of a
PD
game.
Solomon’s study was also DEMO in
that he used sequential choice and asked the
subjects to indicate the choice they expected
O
to make. Thus Solomon was able to DEMO
the important distinctions between or among
cooperative choice and trusting behavior, DEMO
the one hand, and competitive choice or sus-
picious behavior and DEMO behavior on
the other hand.
This discussion of simultaneity has antici-
pated somewhat the question as to whether
other motives might underlie manifest co-
DEMO and competitive choices. According
to McClintock and others, there are at DEMO
three motives that influence a subject’s re-
sponse in the PD game: (1) maximization of
one’s own gain regardless of the other per-
son’s outcome, which is more or less equiv-
alent to what Deutsch has called an individ-
ualistic motivational orientation; (2) maximi-
zation of joint gain, i.e., the total gain for
both oneself and the DEMO, which is approxi-
mately equivalent to a cooperative orienta-
tion ; DEMO (3) maximization of the difference
between one’s own gain and the other per-
son’s outcome, which is roughly equivalent to
a competitive orientation (Becker and Mc-
Clintock, 1967; McClintock and McNeel,
1966; DEMO and Messick, 1967; and
Minas, Scodel, Marlowe, and Rawson, 1960).
There may, of course, be other motives.
For example, a punishment or &dquo;vindictive-
ness&dquo; motive may be operating, wherein the
subject wants to minimize the other person’s
payoff at any DEMO to himself. Or there may
be a motive to outwit the other person. This
would not involve the pattern of solely com-
petitive responses DEMO for a competitive
orientation, but might consist of a series of
DEMO responses that would set the stage
for periodic or eventual defection. Such a
motive might be salient where, for example,
the esteem of a third party or onlooker, such
as a prestigious experimenter, is DEMO
It has been argued in this section that a
problem exists with respect to the validity of
inferences which might be made on the DEMO
of the present use of the PD game. It is nec-
essary to conclude that, because subjects may
perceive and be motivated by factors other
than those related to trust and suspicion,
caution must be DEMO in making infer-
ences about these concepts on the basis of
observed cooperation and competition. This
is not to say that the PD game DEMO necessarily
invalid for the study of trust and suspicion,
but rather that a more refined and qualified
application of that game is necessary.
(c) Defining and measuring trust and suspi-
cion : Related to the question of inferences is
the problem of defining and measuring trust
and DEMO It was earlier postulated that
in situations that call for a decision to trust
or not (herein termed &dquo;test situations&dquo;),DEMO
there is (1) an observed behavior that is usu-
ally of a dichotomous nature-P manifests
trust toward 0 or he doesn’t-and (2) DEMO hy-
pothetical concomitant subjective state of
trust or suspicion that may be assumed to be
of a continuous nature. If this is the case,DEMO
then the dependent variable measure afforded
by the dichotomous-choice game is not ade-
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 25, 2010
365
quate for a particular test situation. Perhaps
replicated PD game trials DEMO an experi-
mental analogue only of replicated test situ-
ations, or DEMO of the steps that precede a
test situation, and do not DEMO for an esti-
mate or measure of P’s subjective state. The
subjective state (measured, for example, by
P’s subjective probability that 0 will be trust-
worthy or untrustworthy, given that P has
already made a trusting choice) is important
since it would be of interest to know at which
point or threshold subjective trust becomes
manifest as behavioral trust, i.e., to what ex-
tent P must &dquo;feel&dquo; that he trusts 0
before he
will in fact make a trusting decision. DEMO
more interesting, the threshold will undoubt-
edly vary with a variety DEMO situational, struc-
tural, and/or dispositional factors, e.g., in-
centives of P’s own trustworthiness.
Summary
and
Conclusions
Although the importance of trust DEMO suspi-
cion in accounting for many aspects of inter-
personal relationships is widely acknowledged,
there is little consensus regarding the mean-
ing and DEMO nature of these concepts. This
lack of theoretical and methodological devel-
opment has thereby detracted from their
potential value in attempts to explain or DEMO
scribe various aspects of behavior in a more
rigorous manner.
In this paper, both trust and suspicion have
been postulated as having two related
components-(1) the observable choice be-
havior, and (2) a DEMO state which un-
derlies the manifest choice behavior-and
on this basis, DEMO conceptual model has been
proposed. In addition, methodological con-
siderations germane DEMO the game-theoretic
approach of studying trust and suspicion
have been discussed. From this discussion, it
would appear that if the PD game or some
other non-zero-sum game is to be used in
the study of trust DEMO suspicion, it should
involve sequential choices with meaningful
incentives at stake, and should either itself
provide, or be supplemented with, a contin-
DEMO measure of the underlying subjective
state.
REFERENCES
Becker, G. M., and C. G. McClintock. Value: be-
havioral decision theory, Annual Review of DEMO
chology, , 239-86.181967,
Bixenstine, V. E., and E. F. DEMO Money ver-
sus electric shock as payoff in a Prisoner’s Dilem-
ma game, Psychological Record, , 251-64.161966,
Deutsch, M. Trust and suspicion, Journal of Con-
flict Resolution, , 265-79.21958,
&mdash;. The effect of motivational orientation
upon trust and suspicion, Human Relations,
, 131960a, 123-39.
&mdash;. Trust, trustworthiness, and the F scale,DEMO
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
, 611960b, 138-40.
&mdash;. Cooperation and trust: some notes. In
M. R. Jones (ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Mo-
tivation, . 1962 Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press, 1962.
Douglas, R. D. The use of shock as payoffs DEMO the
Prisoner’s Dilemma. Unpublished paper, 1967.
Gallo, P. S. Effects of increased incentive upon the
use of threat in bargaining, Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 4, 1966, 14-20.
Garfinkel, H. A DEMO of, and experiments
with "trust" as a condition of stable DEMO
actions. In O. J. Harvey (ed.), Motivation and
Social Interaction&DEMO;Cognitive Determinants. New
York: Ronald Press, 1963.
Kee, H. W. DEMO and suspicion. Qualifying paper,
University of British Columbia, 1967.
Knox, R. E., and R. D. Douglas. Low payoffs and
marginal comprehension: DEMO constraints
upon behavior in the Prisoner’s Dilemma. Pa-
per presented at the Western Psychological As-
sociation meeting, San Diego, 1968.
Lieberman, B. -Trust: i a notion of trust in three-
person games and international affairs, Journal
of Conflict Resolution, , 271-80.81964,
McClintock, C. G., DEMO S. P. McNeel. Reward
level and game playing behavior, Journal of DEMO
flict Resolution, 98-102.10, 1966,
&mdash;, and D. M. DEMO The development of
cooperative and competitive motives in children.
A research proposal, 1967.
Mellinger, G. D. Interpersonal trust as a factor in
communication, Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, , 304-309.521956,
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 25, 2010
366
Mess&eacute;, L. A., and J. Sawyer. Unexpected coop-
eration : the Prisoner’s Dilemma resolved? Un-
published paper, University of Chicago, 1966.
Minas, J. S., A. Scodel, D. Marlowe, and H. DEMO
son. Some descriptive aspects of two-person non-
zero-sum games, II, Journal of Conflict Resolu-
tion, 4, 1960, 193-97.
Oskamp, S., and D. Perlman. Factors affecting
cooperation in a Prisoner’s Dilemma game,
Journal DEMO Conflict Resolution, 1965, , 9 359-74.
Pruitt, D. G. Definition DEMO the situation as a de-
terminant of international action. In H. C.
Kelman (ed.), International Behavior: A Social-
Psychological Analysis. New York: Holt, Rine-
hart and Winston, 1965.
Solomon, L. The influence of some types of power
relationships and game strategies upon the de-
velopment DEMO interpersonal trust, Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1960, ,61
223-30.
Swinth, R. L. The establishment of the trust re-
lationship, DEMO of Conflict Resolution, 1967,
, 335-44.11
Tversky, A. Utility theory and additivity analysis
of risky choices, Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology, , 27-36.751967,
Downloaded from jcr.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 25, 2010{1g42fwefx}