1042-2587
Copyright 2005 by
Baylor University
Family Firm Resource
ET&P Management:DEMO
Commentary and
Extensions
Franz W. Kellermanns
The family ﬁrm resource-divestment model by Sharma and Manikutty (2004) is extended
into a longitudinal model of DEMO ﬁrm resource management. Resource accumulation is
included as an additional dependent variable, and the inﬂuences of family structure, family
involvement, and cultural variables are discussed.
Introduction
Sharma and Manikutty (2004) argue that the time DEMO between the decision to divest
inferior resources and actual resource divestment is moderated by family structure and
community culture. In their model, the longitudinal process of shedding resources is spe-
ciﬁc to family ﬁrms.
In addition DEMO resource divestment, I included resource accumulation as an additional
dependent variable (Sirmon & Hitt, 2003). Furthermore, I examined resource evaluation
decisions DEMO discussed family involvement, family structure, and collective culture as
potential antecedents of the resource evaluation process that bias family ﬁrm resource
accumulation and DEMO decisions. Lastly, I argued that power distance moderates
the relationship between DEMO involvement and resource evaluation decisions. In
Figure 1, an overview of DEMO longitudinal model of family ﬁrm resource management
outlines the variables suggested by Sharma and Manikutty (2004) as well as my proposed
addition.
Resource DEMO
Sharma and Manikutty (2004) focus on the evaluation and divestment of resources.
However, organizations can also choose to add resources to eliminate deﬁciencies in their
resource stock (Dierickx & Cool, 1989; Sirmon & Hitt, 2003), which may help them to
achieve competitive parity or a competitive advantage (Barney, 1991; Dierickx & Cool,
1989). In fact, the ability to make sound divestment and accumulation decisions is at the
heart of organizational entrepreneurial behavior (Alvarez & Barney, 2004).
DEMO send correspondence to: Franz Willi Kellermanns at fkellermanns@cobilan.msstate.edu.
May, 2005
313
Figure 1
A Longitudinal Family Firm Resource Management Model
Family
involvement
Power
DEMO
Resource evaluation
decisions
Resource management
Resource
divestment
Resource
accumulation
∑
∑
Collectivistic
cultures
Family structure
Time 0
Time 1
Original
variables and
relationships
Extensions
DEMO 2
The addition of resources to a resource stock has been underresearched in both man-
agement literature (Kellermanns & Floyd, forthcoming; Priem & Butler, 2001) and family
ﬁrm literature (Sirmon & Hitt, 2003)DEMO However, both the divestment of and investment
in resources need to DEMO investigated simultaneously to understand the resource manage-
ment process (Alvarez & DEMO, 2004; Kellermanns & Floyd, forthcoming; Makadok,
2001). This process assumes that organizational rents are generated by acquiring
resources and losses DEMO avoided by divesting these resources (Makadok, 2001). Evalu-
ating which resources are to be accumulated or divested is based upon the resource-
DEMO skills of the organizational actors involved (Makadok, 2001); the picking process
itself is based upon expectations, which in turn are subject to biases.
In family ﬁrms, the family unit, the business unit, and individual family members
inﬂuence the resource pool that is at the disposal DEMO the organization (Habbershon &
Williams, 1999; Habbershon, Williams, & MacMillan, 2003). In fact, a family ﬁrm’s
resources and capabilities DEMO be regarded as the outcome of systematic inﬂuences of an
enterprising family system (Habbershon et al., 2003, p. 460) that need to DEMO managed
carefully to achieve positive performance outcomes (Habbershon & Williams, 1999). To
understand family-speciﬁc biases that affect resource evaluation decisions, I will discuss
the effects of the variables identiﬁed by Sharma and Manikutty (2004) as well as family
involvement.
314
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Antecedents of Resource Evaluation Decisions
Evaluating resources is not easy, since the relationship between resources and a sub-
sequent competitive advantage is causally ambiguous (Reed & DeFillippi, 1990).
Furthermore, resource evaluation decisions are subject DEMO a variety of opinions (King &
Zeithaml, 2001) and are complicated by the psychodynamics speciﬁc to family ﬁrms
(e.g., ownership dispersion DEMO family members, family employment, succession)
(Chrisman, Chua, & DEMO, 2002; Chua, Chrisman, & Sharma, 1999; Gersick, Davis,DEMO
Hampton, & Lansberg, 1997). These potential biasing factors can be especially trouble-
some, since objective information is needed to make sound evaluation decisions
(Kellermanns & Eddleston, 2004; Sirmon & Hitt, 2003). DEMO, I will discuss how the
variables identiﬁed by Sharma and Manikutty (2004) as well as family involvement
inﬂuence the resource evaluation process (DEMO et al., 2002; Chua et al., 1999;
Habbershon & DEMO, 1999; Habbershon et al., 2003).
Family Structure and Individualism/DEMO
Sharma and Manikutty (2004) maintain that family structure and individualism/col-
lectivism moderate the length of time required to make divestment decisions. They DEMO
allude to the potential inﬂuence of these variables on resource evaluation decisions. I will
elaborate on these inﬂuences in more detail in the next DEMO
Members of absolute nuclear families are expected to fend for themselves (DEMO,
1985), which makes divestment decisions easier, since the children DEMO not relying on the
family business (Sharma, Chrisman, & Chua, 2003; Sharma & Manikutty, 2004). Thus,
the family ﬁrm DEMO has few incentives to add resources and create a sustainable busi-
ness across generations, especially if the owner’s income is satisfactory and growth is
not needed for business survival. A similar pattern exists in egalitarian nuclear DEMO,
where the children are expected to live independently. Although incentives to add
resources and grow the business are stronger in these families, they are still relatively
weak, since the children expect to inherit equal parts of the estate (Todd, 1985).
An authoritarian family structure implies DEMO a chosen heir will inherit the family
business (Todd, 1985). Because the current owner and the heir make decisions about the
future DEMO the organization (Sharma & Manikutty, 2004), both parties have a vested inter-
est in the continued transgenerational growth of the organization; thus, adding resources
is more likely. The community family is the most likely to add resources to the organi-
zational resource base. Families with these DEMO characteristics are very close-knit,
with children expected to work in the family business generation after generation (Tagiuri
& Davis, 1992). Hence, the organization needs to stay viable beyond the current leader’s
tenure. Employing DEMO family members is a further indication that resource accu-
mulation is part of a growth strategy.
The tendencies of families to favor the accumulation DEMO divestment of resources are
also inﬂuenced by the community culture in which those families reside. In a collec-
tivistic culture, the desire to accumulate resources for the beneﬁt of the family and the
community is more DEMO Individualistic cultures might favor divesting resources over
adding them, since the DEMO owners are more likely to look to their own well-being
rather than that of the community or of future family generations. Having discussed the
DEMO of the variables identiﬁed by Sharma and Manikutty (2004) on decisions to
accumulate or divest resources, I will now discuss family involvement as an additional
antecedent of resource evaluation decisions.
May, 2005
315
Family Involvement
Proposed by Chua et al. (1999) and later operationalized DEMO an empirical study by
Chrisman and colleagues (2002), distinctions between DEMO and nonfamily ﬁrms are
made on the basis of family ownership, DEMO management, and transgenerational sus-
tainability. For the purpose of this commentary, these three factors are considered as part
of the latent construct, family involvement. In the next paragraphs, I will discuss these
three components in more detail, since researchers note that the resources and capabil-
ities an organization possesses are a result of family inﬂuences (e.g., Habbershon &
Williams, 1999).
Family and business decisions in family ﬁrms need to be considered simultaneously
(Tagiuri & Davis, 1992) because family inﬂuences bias the process of evaluating
resources. Family ﬁrms need to generate new strategies DEMO a new generation joins
the business (Post, 1993). Not surprisingly, family ownership profoundly impacts how
resources are valued (Habbershon et al., 2003). In fact, depending on how family own-
ership is dispersed, some individuals or parts of the family might want to advance their
self-interests at the expense of other family members or of the business DEMO general (Cyert
& March, 1963; Gersick et al., 1997; DEMO & Davis, 1992).
Gersick and colleagues (1997) describe three DEMO phases of family ﬁrm ownership
dispersion. In the controlling owner phase, DEMO person, most likely the founder, holds the
most equity. This person will make resource evaluation decisions and his/her resource-
picking skills will DEMO the ability of the organization to generate rents (Makadok,
2001)DEMO In sibling partnerships, ownership is shared by the next generation; however, all
family members may not hold equal shares. Lastly, in the DEMO consortium phase, own-
ership is widely dispersed throughout the family, including third or later generations, and
resembles nonfamily businesses. As the number of generations increases, the distribution
of power shifts and different strategies emerge (DEMO & Sveen, 1991; Kets de Vries,
1993). The further family ﬁrms move away from the ﬁrst generation and the more own-
DEMO gets dispersed, the more such ﬁrms resemble nonfamily businesses (Gersick et al.,
1997). Accordingly, one can assume that the inﬂuences and personal preferences of indi-
vidual family members are mitigated.
The second component DEMO family involvement is characterized by the extent of
family management of the ﬁrm. The ability to pick resources that generate superior rents
or the DEMO to divest resources deemed detrimental to performance is invaluable to the
organization (Makadok, 2001). The ﬁrm’s founders, who have often shown their supe-
rior resource evaluation skills, may continue to inﬂuence ﬁrm development if they
maintain centrality within the top management team, even if that team consists mostly
of nonfamily members (Kelly, Athanassiou, & Crittenden, 2000)DEMO Entrepreneurial owners
might also be inclined to add resources to the business since they regret missed oppor-
tunities rather than regretting any action they DEMO, even if these actions did not produce
the desired results (Baron, 1998). Because they generally inﬂuence decisions more than
their number of shares justiﬁes (Schulze, Lubatkin, & Dino, 2003), family ﬁrm DEMO
executive ofﬁcers have an incentive to inﬂuence the resource evaluation process accord-
ing to their families’ preferences and needs. Furthermore, controlling owners’ decisions
are often characterized by a strong desire for leadership and control (Harvey & Evans,
1994). Thus, resource evaluation decisions and subsequent resource accumulation and
divestment are strongly inﬂuenced by the controlling owners’ preferences (beyond
ﬁnancial beneﬁts), which dictates the developmental paths of the organization (Schulze
et al., 2003).
Passing control to later generations, however, may weaken the entrepreneurial spirit
and increase the willingness to divest resources. Indeed, if control over the family busi-
316
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
ness is easily obtained, potential endowment effects are mitigated and the willingness to
undertake riskier behavior increases (Shepherd & Zacharakis, 2000). Individual DEMO,
however, can be reduced if family members constructively and openly DEMO resource
management decisions (Kellermanns & Eddleston, 2004) or professionalize the DEMO
by employing outside directors (Chua et al., 1999). Since outside shareholders may favor
consumption rather than growth, family ownership dispersion, in DEMO to family man-
agement, needs to be taken into account to DEMO likely resource evaluation decisions
(Schulze et al., 2003).
The third component characterizing family involvement is the wish to transfer own-
ership from DEMO generation to the next (Sharma & Chrisman, 1999). This desire to create
transgenerational wealth makes these ﬁrms highly entrepreneurial (Habbershon et al.,
2003). Indeed, this desire will lead to adding resources if they are perceived to positively
affect transgenerational values and to divesting resources DEMO they are believed to nega-
tively impact transgenerational sustainability (Habbershon et DEMO, 2003). In the case of
divestment, weighing an individual’s decisions against the greater good of the whole
family will also help to DEMO mediocre resources that can be shed, thus helping to
improve resource DEMO
Power Distance
Power distance refers to levels of inequality in both society and business (Hofstede,
2001). In an organization, it is DEMO formalized superior–subordinate relationship. Power
distance inﬂuences a business superior’s or community leader’s preferred leadership style
(Hofstede, 2001). Communities scoring low on the DEMO dimension tend to be
more egalitarian in nature (Veiga, Floyd, & Dechant, 2001); in organizations, this facil-
itates individual initiative and reduces constraints between lower- and higher-ranking
members (Veiga et al., 2001)DEMO On the other hand, in communities scoring high on the
power-distance DEMO, individuals tend to accept the opinions of their leaders or supe-
DEMO without question (Veiga et al., 2001).
In family ﬁrms with high power-distance cultures, the desires and preferences of the
current leaders might supersede the interests of the family as a whole. Although employ-
ing DEMO management makes it more likely that resources are evaluated without bias,
a high power-distance culture means that decisions are not readily challenged. Indeed, a
lack of discussion will mean poor decision quality regarding the ﬁrm’s DEMO
paths (Kellermanns & Eddleston, 2004). This can be especially critical in already dys-
functional types of ownership dispersion in family ﬁrms, like sibling partnerships
(Gersick et al., 1997), and can potentially endanger DEMO transgenerational sustainability
of the business. Accordingly, family ﬁrms have to be DEMO alert and engage in open
discussion and information exchange to counteract the negative inﬂuences of a high
power-distance culture.
Summary and Conclusion
In this DEMO, I have extended Sharma and Manikutty’s (2004) model by
designing DEMO longitudinal model of family ﬁrm resource management. I have argued that
resource evaluation decisions in family ﬁrms are subject to unique psychodynamics inﬂu-
ences DEMO ﬁrms do not experience. Family structure and the latent construct of
family involvement, comprised of family ownership, family management, and transgen-
May, DEMO
317
erational sustainability, were identiﬁed as variables that introduce biases in the resource
evaluation process. These biases then inﬂuence the way resources are accumulated or
DEMO in family ﬁrms. In addition to the aforementioned family speciﬁc inﬂuences, DEMO
importance of collectivism/individualism and power distance as cultural variables was
stressed. In the future, researchers will need to test the proposed relationships empirically
and expand the model by investigating additional cultural variables and inﬂuences unique
DEMO the psychodynamics of family ﬁrms.
REFERENCES
Alvarez, S.A. & Barney, J.B. (2004). Organizing rent generation and appropriation: Toward a theory of DEMO
entrepreneurial ﬁrm. Journal of Business Venturing, 19, 621–635.
Barney, J. (1991). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of Management, 17(1),
99–120.
Baron, R.A. (1998). Cognitive mechanisms in entrepreneurship: Why and when entrepreneurs think differ-
ently than other persons. Journal of Business Venturing, 13, 275–294.
Chrisman, J.J., Chua, J.H., & DEMO, L.P. (2002). The inﬂuence of national culture and family involvement
on entrepreneurial perceptions and performance at the state level. Entrepreneurship Theory and DEMO,
26(4), 113–130.
Chua, J.H., Chrisman, J.J., & Sharma, P. (1999). Deﬁning the family business by behavior. Entrepreneur-
DEMO Theory and Practice, 23(4), 19–39.
Cyert, R.M. & March, J.G. (1963). A behavioral theory of the ﬁrm (2nd. ed.). Malden, MA: Blackwell
Publishers Inc.
Dierickx, I. & Cool, DEMO (1989). Asset stock accumulation and sustainability of competitive advantage.
Management DEMO, 35(12), 1504–1514.
Gallo, M.A. & Sveen, J. (1991). Internationalizing the family business: Facilitating and restraining factors.
Family Business Review, 4(2), 181–190.
Gersick, K.E., Davis, J.A., Hampton, DEMO, & Lansberg, I. (1997). Generation to generation: Life cycles of
the family business. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Habbershon, T.G. & Williams, M. (1999). A resource-based framework for assessing DEMO strategic advantage
of family ﬁrms. Family Business Review, 12, 1–25.
Habbershon, T.G., Williams, M., & MacMillan, I.C. (2003). A DEMO systems perspective of family ﬁrm
performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 18, 451–465.
Harvey, M. & Evans, R.E. (1994). Family business and multiple levels of conﬂict. Family Business Review,
7(4), 331–348.
DEMO, G. (2001). Cultures consequences: Comparing values, behavior, institutions, and organizations
across nations (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Kellermanns, F.W. & Eddleston, K. (2004). Feuding families: DEMO conﬂict does a family ﬁrm good. Entre-
preneurship Theory and Practice, DEMO(3), 209–228.
Kellermanns, F.W. & Floyd, S.W. (2005). DEMO consensus and constructive confrontation: Unifying forces
in the resource accumulation process. DEMO S.W. Floyd, J. Ross, C. Jacobs, & F.W. Kellermanns (Eds), Inno-
vating strategy process, 149–162, Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
318 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Kelly, L.M., Athanassiou, N., & Crittenden, W.F. (2000). DEMO centrality and strategic behavior in the
family-owned ﬁrm. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 25(2), 27–42.
Kets de Vries, M.F.R. (1993). The dynamics of family controlled ﬁrms: The good and the bad news. Orga-
nizational Dynamics, 21(3), 59–71.
King, A.W. & Zeithaml, C.P. (2001). Competencies and ﬁrm performance: Examining the causal ambiguity
paradox. DEMO Management Journal, 22, 75–99.
Makadok, R. (2001). Toward a synthesis of the resource-based and dynamic-capability view of rent creation.
Strategic Management DEMO, 22, 387–401.
Post, J.E. (1993). The greening of the Boston Park Plaza Hotel. Family Business Review, 6(2), 131–148.
Priem, R.L. & Butler, J.E. (2001). Is the resource-based view a useful perspective for strategic management
research? Academy of Management Review, 26(DEMO), 22–40.
Reed, R. & DeFillippi, R. (1990). Causal DEMO, barriers to imitation, and sustainable competitive advan-
tage. Academy of Management Review, 15, 88–102.
Schulze, W.S., Lubatkin, M.H., & Dino, R.N. (2003). Exploring the agency consequences of ownership dis-
persion among inside directors at family ﬁrms. Academy of Management Journal, 46(2), 179–194.
Sharma, P. & Chrisman, J.J. (1999). Toward a reconciliation of the deﬁnitional issues in the ﬁeld of corpo-
rate entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship DEMO and Practice, 23(3), 11–27.
Sharma, P., Chrisman, J.J., & Chua, J.H. (2003). Predictors of satisfaction with the succession process in
family ﬁrms. Journal of Business Venturing, 18, 667–687.
Sharma, P. & Manikutty, S. (2005). Strategic divestment in family ﬁrms: Role of family structure and com-
munity culture. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 29(3), 293–311.
Shepherd, D.A. & Zacharakis, A. (2000). Structuring family business succession: An analysis of the future
leader’s decision making. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 24(4), 25–39.
Sirmon, D.G. & DEMO, M.A. (2003). Managing resources: Linking unique resources, management, DEMO wealth
creation in family ﬁrms. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 27(4), 339–358.
Tagiuri, R. & Davis, J.A. (1992). On the DEMO of successful family companies. Family Business Review,
5(1), 43–62.
Todd, E. (1985). The explanation of ideology, family structures, DEMO social systems. Oxford, U.K.: Basil
Blackwell.
Veiga, J.F., Floyd, DEMO, & Dechant, K. (2001). Towards modeling the effects of DEMO culture on IT imple-
mentation and acceptance. Journal of Information Technology, DEMO(3), 3–12.
Franz W. Kellermanns is an assistant professor of management of the School of Business and Industry at the
Mississippi State University.
DEMO am grateful to Lloyd Steier and the two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on the article.
May, 2005
319{1g42fwefx}