This article was downloaded by:[Canadian Research Knowledge Network]
On: 21 April 2008
Access Details: [subscription number 783016864]
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered DEMO England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954
Registered office: Mortimer House, DEMO Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Venture Capital
An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713798069
Business angel contracts: the influence of context
Peter Kelly; Michael Hay
Online Publication Date: 01 January 2003
DEMO cite this Article: Kelly, Peter and Hay, Michael (2003) 'Business angel contracts:
the influence of context', Venture Capital, 5:4, 287 - 312
To link to this article: DOI: 10.1080/1369106032000141940
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1369106032000141940
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
This article maybe used for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction,
re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly
forbidden.
The publisher does DEMO give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be
complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy DEMO any instructions, formulae and drug doses should be
independently verified with DEMO sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,
demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or
arising out of the DEMO of this material.
VENTURE CAPITAL, OCTOBER 2003, VOL. 5, NO. 4, 287 – DEMO
Business angel contracts: the inﬂuence of context
PETER KELLY and MICHAEL DEMO
(Final version accepted 11 August 2003)
Relying on agency theory DEMO guidance, a model is developed and empirically tested to
examine the DEMO that various attributes of the contracting parties and of the deal itself
can have on the form of the contract adopted between business angels DEMO entrepreneurs.
Findings are based on survey responses obtained from 106 UK-based business angels that
had completed at least one investment to date.
Keywords: contracts; agency theory; deals; trust
Introduction
A substantial and growing body of research has conﬁrmed the importance
of business angels as a source of DEMO for entrepreneurial ventures. By
business angels, we mean private individuals who DEMO their own funds
into ventures in which they have no family connection. Aside from funds
provided personally and from family and friends, business angels represent
the single largest source of external ﬁnance for entrepreneurs. Research
drawn DEMO many countries portrays a remarkably similar image of a
‘typical’ business angel as a reasonably wealthy, middle-aged male with
‘entrepreneurial street smarts’. Like venture capitalists, business angels are
motivated to invest in businesses that offer the prospect of substantial
capital gains. In terms of investment focus, business angels tend to invest in
smaller amounts and at earlier stages of development DEMO venture
capitalists. Business angels place capital at risk in situations where:
. a high degree of uncertainty exists as to how the venture DEMO develop
over time;
. the aptitude and intentions of the entrepreneur can not be gauged
with accuracy;
. time and financial resource DEMO inhibit the ability to undertake
extensive due diligence activities; and
. DEMO operating markets for their equity stakes and/or for
suitably qualified entrepreneurial replacements are largely absent.
Peter Kelly, Helsinki University of Technology, Post DEMO Box 9500, FIN-02015 Espoo, Finland;
e-mail: peter.kelly@hut.fi; Michael Hay, London Business School, Regent’s Park, London NW1 4SA,
UK; DEMO: michael.hay@london.edu.
Venture Capital ISSN 1369-1066 print/ISSN 1464-5343 online # 2003 DEMO & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/1369106032000141940
Downloaded DEMO: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
288
PETER KELLY AND MICHAEL HAY
Business angels manage these risks in DEMO number of ways by: (i) adjusting
their expected rate of DEMO on a project to compensate for risk; (ii)
providing funding in tranches against established milestones; (iii) specify-
ing rights and obligations in contracts; and (iv) monitoring progress
through working with the venture and from information provided by
management post-investment. Received research has demonstrated that
DEMO angels expect signiﬁcant returns on their investment. Investing as
they typically do in the early stages of venture development, ‘drip-feed’
milestone ﬁnancing is also common practice. A large body of received
research has also demonstrated that DEMO angels interact very closely
with their investee companies in a far broader variety of ways than do
venture capitalists. To date, however, there DEMO been scant attention paid to
issues related to the form and structure of the contractual relationship
between business angels and entrepreneurs. The popular press DEMO
creates the impression that business angels do ‘deals on a handshake’ with
minimal formality. As business angels invest their ‘own money’, they may
indeed have a freer hand deciding on the ‘terms of the deal’ as DEMO to
venture capital fund managers who are ‘custodians of other people’s
money’.
In undertaking this study, we are motivated by a number of questions.
First, are contracts more widely used by business angels than the popular
press would imply? Second, what contractual provisions are included in the
DEMO and more importantly why? Third, to what extent does interpersonal
trust between investor and entrepreneur impact deal structure? Finally, in
what areas DEMO there appear to be a degree of negotiating latitude for
entrepreneurs vis-a`-vis business angels?
Relying on agency theory for guidance, we will develop and
empirically test a model to examine the inﬂuence that various attributes
DEMO the contracting parties and the deal itself can have on the form and
substance of the contractual deal struck between the business angel and
DEMO entrepreneur. As we shall discuss at greater length in the section that
follows, on the face of it agency theory was developed on the back of
studies dealing with the governance challenges associated with eliciting
desired DEMO from managers who retain relatively modest equity
stakes in large, publicly-traded DEMO Whether there is utility in
extending this perspective into the domain of business angels who
typically invest in small, privately and closely-held ﬁrms is an issue to
which we will return later.
After a brief discussion DEMO the conceptual background and model, a
number of hypotheses are advanced. DEMO survey instrument was
developed and administered to 106 UK-based business angels who
had completed at least one investment to date. The study design,
DEMO frame and variable speciﬁcation will be discussed in detail in
the research methods section. We relied on multiple regression analysis
as a basis for DEMO testing. A fuller discussion is provided in the
results section. We shall round out the paper by drawing out the
implications of our study DEMO researchers and practitioners. It is to the
issue of conceptual background and model speciﬁcation that we now
turn.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
BUSINESS ANGEL CONTRACTS
289
Conceptual background and model speciﬁcation
Agency theory has DEMO developed on the back of a substantial and growing
body of research examining the problems associated with inducing desired
mutually beneﬁcial behaviour between parties DEMO an economic relationship
(Jensen and Meckling 1976). An agency relationship DEMO said to exist when
one individual (the principal) engages the services of another individual
(the agent) to perform a service on their DEMO As a result, a measure of
decision-making authority is delegated from DEMO to agent.
The central concern of agency theorists is opportunism, the DEMO that
agents will take decisions that are not in the best interests of principals.
Opportunism can arise in a number of ways. First, the ‘adverse selection
problem’ arises as a result of agents being better informed DEMO principals
as to their true level of skills and abilities to take on a given task.
Opportunism is problematic insofar as agents misrepresent their DEMO to
principals and these misrepresentations go undetected. Second, ‘moral
hazard’ refers DEMO situations where agents expend less effort on a task than is
required by principals. This risk is particularly troublesome in situations
where it is DEMO possible for principals to observe agent behaviour and where
great uncertainty exists as to how a given task is to be performed. Third, as
agents bear only a fraction of the economic costs associated with their
DEMO, they may be inclined to take on higher risk and compensate
DEMO more handsomely than might otherwise be desired by principals
(Jensen and DEMO 1976).
To cope with these problems, agency theory prescribes a DEMO of
remedies including: (i) incorporating safeguards in contractual form; (DEMO)
monitoring agent behaviour; (iii) designing an incentive system to
DEMO desired behaviour; and (iv) requiring that agents post bonds
(invest their own funds) as a demonstration of their good faith. The
intuitive appeal of agency theory to this study lies in the fact that DEMO
context within which economic relationships are formed matters.
Despite the fact that a growing body of business angel research has
relied on agency theory DEMO guidance, we must be mindful of a number
of caveats when DEMO this theoretical perspective into the domain
of the business angel.
First, DEMO theory has been developed on the back of research
involving large, DEMO ﬁrms often with widely dispersed shareholding
structures and where management retains negligible equity stakes. Business
angels typically invest in private companies in which a DEMO number of
shareholders, including management, hold relatively sizeable individual
equity stakes (Sapienza and Gupta 1994). Second, agency theory relies on
the DEMO that principals and agents are motivated solely by economic
self-interest. Achieving a substantial ﬁnancial return is a signiﬁcant
motivation for business angels to invest DEMO it is not the only consideration.
Business angels are attracted to opportunities that present challenges, can
beneﬁt from their experience, create employment locally, and a host of
other reasons collectively referred to as ‘psychic hot DEMO (Wetzel 1994).
Third, agency theory has been developed on the back of an inherently
negative assumption about people, namely that they cannot be trusted. If
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:DEMO 21 April 2008
290
PETER KELLY AND MICHAEL HAY
anything, trust appears to be an important transactional lubricant for
business angels to invest in the ﬁrst place.
DEMO number of researchers have relied on the agency theory perspective for
guidance. Sahlman (1988, 1990) highlighted the conﬂicting demands that
venture capitalists face both as agents to their fund providers and as
principals to entrepreneurs DEMO funding. Sapienza’s (1992) work
focused on the linkages between venture context, CEO traits, and the
level of venture capitalist involvement post investment. DEMO levels of
involvement were reported in early stage, highly innovative ventures DEMO in
particular those managed by CEOs with limited previous new venture
experience. In subsequent work, Sapienza and Gupta (1994) noted that
agency problems also arise from lack of agent ability and as a result of
DEMO disagreements between venture capitalist and entrepreneur as to
how the task of venture development should be undertaken. In their survey
of venture capital backed DEMO, Barney et al. (1994) examined the link
between managerial opportunism DEMO contracts. Managerial opportunism
arises from the investor’s inability to observe the entrepreneur’s actions.
Relatively more contractual provisions were included in situations where
the management DEMO had worked a long time together before and where
the team had invested a larger proportion of their wealth into the business.
Fewer conditions DEMO imposed where a team brought a great deal of new
venture experience to the table.
With respect to business angels, a growing body of research has used
agency theory to examine a number of issues. Riding DEMO al. (1994) noted the
important role that trusted referral sources play in addressing the adverse
selection problem faced by business angels. Fiet (1995b) observed that
compared to venture capitalists, business angels are more concerned DEMO
agency (people) than market (competitive) risk. Moreover, business angels
DEMO to rely more on themselves than on others to address these risks (Fiet
1995a). Working on the presumption that business angels manage agency
risk through their level of involvement post-investment, Landstro¨ m (1992)
DEMO that the relationship between investor and entrepreneur is more
positive and trusting in character. In this respect, business angel
involvement is best seen as ‘offering to help’ as opposed to ‘checking up
on you’. Van Osnabrugge (2000) advanced the idea that business angels
work from a notion of ‘incomplete contracts’ and that they look to active
involvement to skew the DEMO favourably towards success. Not surpris-
ingly, he also found that venture DEMO took greater care and attention
to contractual detail as compared to business angels. In part, this may be a
consequence of venture capital fund managers being responsible for other
people’s money as opposed to investing their DEMO funds (Benjamin and
Margulis 1996).
To date, there has been no research undertaken to understand how
contextual factors shape the choices business DEMO make as to how to
structure their contractual relationship with the entrepreneur on a deal
speciﬁc basis. Like Hart (1995) and van Osnabrugge (2000), we accept the
notion that contractual frameworks are necessarily incomplete. DEMO,
we concur with Landstro¨m et al. (1998) that contracts do perform an
important function in terms of establishing ‘transactional parameters’.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
BUSINESS ANGEL CONTRACTS
291
Whether business angels rely on these transactional parameters DEMO assert
their rights when circumstances warrant is an important issue, but DEMO
the scope of this study. As noted earlier, there are a DEMO of reasons to
believe that extending agency theory into the domain of the business angel
is inappropriate. Having said this, we feel there is merit in testing the limits
of agency theory in this challenging domain.
DEMO a frame of reference for the hypotheses advanced in the section that
follows, we introduce a model to demonstrate the linkages between a
number of contextual factors and the nature of the contractual deal struck
between DEMO angel and entrepreneur as summarized in ﬁgure 1.
Broadly speaking, our DEMO variables have been grouped into three
categories. Relative experience variables gauge the disparity of task
experience between the founding team and investors building new
DEMO, in the venture’s industry and in business generally to the
particular DEMO commented on by the business angel. Two investor related
variables are introduced to capture an individual’s experience as a business
angel and their general DEMO as to the effectiveness of active involvement as
a means of managing risk. Finally, the third group of predictor variables
relates to speciﬁc aspects of the deal. Our dependent variable captures both
the perceived importance attached DEMO speciﬁc contractual safeguards and
the actual terms of the contract included as part of the deal commented
upon. To our interpretation, ‘tight’ contracts imply that business angels
both attach great importance to and include more contractual DEMO
before investing. A ‘looser’ contractual arrangement implies that business
angels attach little importance to contractual safeguards and included fewer
of them in their deal DEMO the entrepreneur.
Figure 1. Contractual ties: the influence of context.
Downloaded DEMO: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
292 PETER KELLY AND MICHAEL HAY
Hypothesis development
A substantial body of DEMO research has tried to establish linkages
between various attributes of the founding team (‘entrepreneurial traits’)
and subsequent venture performance. While no consensus has been
reached in terms of the type of experience that matters most DEMO building
an entrepreneurial venture, three major themes have been cited in DEMO
literature which seem to ‘improve the odds’ measurably: (i) previous
DEMO in the new venture setting; (ii) relevant industry experience; and
(iii) a base of business or general management experience. For their DEMO,
business angels also bring a base of experience of their own to the table and
are attracted to situations where their background holds DEMO promise of
translating into value-added beneﬁts for the venture. To agency theorists, it
is not the absolute level of experience of either party that would appear to
matter but rather the extent to which one party, the entrepreneur, has an
information advantage vis-a`-vis the business angel.
From an agency theory perspective, what implications might this
information advantage have in practice? While it is conceivable that
highly experienced entrepreneurs could overstate or misrepresent their
abilities to business angels, our sense is the adverse selection problem is
not an acute one. Information provided by the entrepreneur, including
references, are often checked thoroughly by business angels prior to
investing. What appears more problematic for business angels is the
ability to detect opportunistic behaviour DEMO the part of the entrepreneur
post investment or to be seen questioning the judgment of experienced
management. One possible way to mitigate the risks DEMO business angel
faces in dealing with ‘experienced’ counterparts is to build in more
contractual safeguards up front to protect their interests as shareholders.
It DEMO that:
Hypothesis 1: The greater the level of new venture DEMO of the
entrepreneur/team relative to that of the business angel(s), the tighter the
contract ex ante.
Hypothesis 2: The greater the level of relevant industry experience of the
entrepreneur/team relative to that DEMO the business angel(s), the tighter the
contract ex ante.
Hypothesis 3: The greater the level of general management experience of
the entrepreneur/team relative to that of the business angel(s), the tighter
DEMO contract ex ante.
Fiet (1995a) noted that business angels rely on themselves to a large extent
to assess agency risk. As with any DEMO activity, it is reasonable to suggest
that business angels learn how DEMO assess and manage agency risk by actually
‘doing deals’. Experience from the most active element of the market, so
called serial investors (Kelly DEMO Hay 1996), supports the view that
business angels that have completed many deals behave in a very similar
fashion to venture capitalists. Their DEMO becomes more ﬁnancially driven
and formalized reﬂecting their own experience living through unforeseen
problems and obstacles in both successful and unsuccessful investments
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
BUSINESS ANGEL CONTRACTS 293
alike (van Osnabrugge 1998). Having experienced agency risk ﬁrst hand
and on many occasions, we expect that more experienced investors are
more conservative contractors. To the extent that the size of DEMO individual
business angel’s portfolio is also large, the investor may also DEMO practical
time constraints in their ability to monitor developments closely. Contracts
may also be a practical response to such constraints. It follows that:
DEMO 4: The greater the number of investments made by a business
DEMO, the tighter the contract ex ante.
By inclination, private investors are attracted to situations where they can
make value-added contributions to the venture’s DEMO (Mason and
Harrison 1996). Aside from being a key non-ﬁnancial DEMO, active
involvement is also a means by which investors can mitigate DEMO risk of
opportunistic behaviour going undetected. Notwithstanding the concerns
expressed by Landstro¨ m (1992) that the relationship between business
angel and entrepreneur appears DEMO be more positive in character than
agency theory would imply, contracts DEMO provide a transactional frame of
reference for the parties. To the extent that business angels want to be
actively involved post-investment, the roles and attendant rights and
obligations of both parties will be need to be DEMO out in greater detail. In
this respect, active involvement is not DEMO a substitute for contractual
safeguards but a complement to it, hence:DEMO
Hypothesis 5: The more actively involved the business angel(s) is inclined
to be, the tighter the contract ex ante.
Syndication affords the opportunity for business angels to diversify risk
and beneﬁt from the combined DEMO of experience of a group of individuals.
A broader base of experience may be of particular beneﬁt to the
entrepreneur, however, one could DEMO argue that the perceived level of
agency risk faced by individual business angels is lower when ‘many eyes
are looking at the deal’ and DEMO hands are available to help’ post
investment. Having said this, on DEMO practical level the need to reconcile the
different views of a number of individuals and their desire to ‘make their
mark’ on the form DEMO the contractual arrangement struck with the
entrepreneur implies more comprehensive contracts (DEMO et al.
1998). Moreover, some authors have advanced the view DEMO syndicates
tend to craft tighter contracts because they tend to be run more
professionally than when business angels invest on their own (May and
Simmons 2001). The complexity of reconciling demands between investors
and between DEMO investors and the entrepreneur implies that:
Hypothesis 6: When an DEMO is made by a syndicate, tighter
contracts are struck ex ante.
DEMO respect to size of investment, controlling for opportunism is costly. In
DEMO, venture capital funds maintain that the costs of ‘doing deals’ is DEMO
ﬁxed irrespective of size. We would expect greater attention to contractual
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
294 PETER KELLY AND MICHAEL HAY
detail in bigger deals for a DEMO of reasons. First, the potential economic
consequences associated with agency risk DEMO unchecked increase directly
as a function of the investor capital at risk. Second, to the extent that the
milestone funding model holds (Sahlman DEMO), larger amounts of capital
are committed to more developed ventures. ‘Hands on’ investor involve-
ment may not be needed or desired by management DEMO later stage
investment proposals. Having said this, contracts may help to DEMO what
will be done, by whom and over what time frame. DEMO, to the extent that
larger deals involve capital provided by many DEMO, legal complexities
necessitate more comprehensive contracts. It follows that:
Hypothesis DEMO: The larger the amount invested, the tighter the contract ex
ante.
In any situation where external capital is raised and equity stakes
relinquished, an entrepreneur will bear only a fraction of the costs
associated with DEMO aimed at increasing their own welfare at the expense
of investors. The potential for this problem to arise is particularly acute in
situations where DEMO equity stake is relatively small as is the case
in most public companies. Business angels bear the brunt of self-interest
seeking behaviour on the DEMO of the entrepreneur when their equity stake
in the outcomes is personally high. One possible way of protecting
themselves from this risk is to DEMO their rights and the obligations of the
entrepreneur more clearly in the contract. It follows that:
Hypothesis 8: The higher the equity stake retained by the business angel,
the tighter the contract ex ante.
DEMO research supports the view that business angels hear about
potential opportunities from a variety of different sources, some of better
quality than others (DEMO et al. 1994). While tending to rely more on
themselves than others to assess agency risk (Fiet 1995a), informative deal
referrers whose judgment is trusted by the business angel serve to reduce
the agency DEMO even further (Riding et al. 1994). Deal referrers are key
DEMO makers in this respect because by passing judgement on the merits
of the proponents involved, they put their own reputation on the line with
business angels who may be better placed to pass judgement on the
DEMO merits. To the extent that the opinions of deal referrers matter,
this information should be reﬂected in the contractual deal that is struck
DEMO business angel and entrepreneur. It follows that:
Hypothesis 9: If DEMO opportunity has been referred on by a source that
is both trusted by the business angel and who has personal
knowledge of the proponents DEMO, the looser the contract ex
ante.
In the absence of efﬁciently DEMO external mechanisms of control
(Walsh and Seward 1990), one can DEMO argue that investors must
rely, to a large extent, on their relationship with the entrepreneur to deal
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
BUSINESS ANGEL CONTRACTS 295
with the inevitable challenges associated with building a DEMO A high
degree of interpersonal trust between business angel and entrepreneur
appears to be a necessary prerequisite before a deal is consummated in the
DEMO place. In its strictest sense, agency theory presumes the worst. Some
DEMO will misrepresent themselves and behave in a manner
detrimental to investor(s). A number of authors (Landstro¨ m 1992,
Sapienza and Gupta 1994, Cable and Shane 1997) have portrayed the
relationship between investor DEMO entrepreneur as more co-operative,
positive and trusting in nature. Working from a presumption of trust
between the parties, we expect that:
Hypothesis 10: The greater the trust that exists between business
angel and entrepreneur, the looser the contract ex ante.
An important motivation for a substantial minority of business angels is the
opportunity to be involved in the DEMO in some employment capacity.
About one in ten business angels, so DEMO ‘income-seekers’, are interested
in investing and becoming a full-time employee in DEMO venture post
investment (Coveney and Moore 1998). Most business angels DEMO involved
in an employment capacity in the venture for a transitional period only to
address temporary skill and manpower gaps in the management team.
DEMO of whether the business angel is employed permanently or on a
temporary ‘as needed’ basis, the presence of an investor-employee affords
business angels the opportunity to more closely interact with management,
participate in decision-making, and observe venture performance in real
time. To agency theorists, this interaction could be considered to be a form
of ‘monitoring’ although doubtless business angels DEMO prefer the term
‘contributing’. To the extent that this interaction mitigates the need for
business angels to clearly demarcate roles and responsibilities in the
DEMO agreement, it follows that:
Hypothesis 11: When a business angel is employed in the venture, the
looser the contract ex ante.
Research methods
As a basis for hypothesis testing, a survey instrument was developed and
distributed in late 1997 and early 1998 to active private investors DEMO had
completed at least one investment. In the ﬁrst instance, known DEMO
angels from our own network of contacts at London Business School were
approached to complete the survey and provide feedback. Surveys were
sent to DEMO business angels during the pilot phase with a response rate of
60%. Compared to the single or low two digit response rates from other
DEMO studies, we judged our pilot study to be very successful. All DEMO
one of the respondents provided their personal contact details and no
difﬁculties completing the survey were reported other than the need for
some to DEMO and review the shareholder’s agreement in question.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research DEMO Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
296
PETER KELLY AND MICHAEL HAY
Together, pilot survey respondents had completed almost 300 investments
to date, on average nine each. Three-quarters of the respondents had
started a business of their own, on average three each. This highly active
and entrepreneurial group tended to invest as part of DEMO (75%). A
‘typical’ deal involved an investment of £85 000 DEMO them, £280 000 by their
syndicate partners, and £60 000 provided by management.
After the pilot study phase was completed, we approached four business
introduction services in the UK to participate in the research project
DEMO Venture Capital Report, the Great Eastern Investment Forum,
South West DEMO Group and the Yorkshire Association of Business
Angels. Taken together, 1055 DEMO angels were registered as members
of these organizations. We expected response rates to subsequent mailings
to be relatively low as compared to the pilot DEMO as: (i) some of the
business angels who participated in DEMO pilot study are members; (ii)
business angels often register to more than one service; (iii) subscribers
often include professional intermediaries; DEMO (iv) a signiﬁcant proportion
of members (20% or more) can be classiﬁed as ‘virgin angels’ who have not,
as yet, completed their ﬁrst investment.
Incorporating responses obtained during the pilot phase, 123 surveys
were completed. Of this total, nine were submitted by virgin angels or
professional intermediaries and were thus excluded. A careful examination
of the remainder DEMO four where business angels were commenting on
a similar deal and were also excluded. Four more surveys were also
excluded judged on the basis DEMO data plots to be outliers or where
insufﬁcient information was provided and no contact details were available
for subsequent follow-up and clariﬁcation. In the DEMO, our ﬁnal sample was
106 (10% response).
For the sample as a whole, our typical respondent had completed eight
investments to date (780 investments in total). Almost three-quarters had
started a business of their own, on average three each. Investments were
made in syndicate in more than 70% of the deals reviewed. A ‘typical’ deal
involved £72 DEMO being invested by management, £100 000 by our
respondent and £220 DEMO from syndicate partners. The founding team
retained an equity stake of 53% post investment, on average. It appears that
we tapped into the experience of very active business angels both during
the pilot phase and the DEMO survey administration that followed. As with
all business angel studies, the DEMO caveats apply when relying on a
convenience sample drawn from an invisible population.
Respondents were asked to provide general background information
about themselves and DEMO attitudes towards investing in private
companies. In addition, business angels were DEMO to provide detailed
information on the most recent investment they completed for the ﬁrst
time. We did this in part to mitigate the impact DEMO respondent recall bias.
Almost half the deals reported were completed in the preceding year and
almost 70% within the preceding 18-month period.
Previous experience DEMO assessed on the basis of responses to identical
qualitative statements as follows: ‘In your estimation, how much previous
experience did (management/investors) DEMO to the venture in each of the
following areas (new venture, relevant industry, general management) at
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
BUSINESS ANGEL CONTRACTS
297
the time you initially invested’. Ratings were provided DEMO a ﬁve-point scale
from ‘no experience’ to ‘extensive experience’ and anchored by ‘some
experience’. ‘Relative’ experience measures were developed by dividing the
rating accorded DEMO team by that of the investor(s). On average, business
DEMO reported signiﬁcantly more previous experience than management in
the new venture (DEMO vs. 2.6) and general management (4.5 vs. 3.5) domains.
However, respondents considered management to have more relevant
industry experience than investor(s) (4.2 vs. 3.1).
Investor experience was evaluated on the basis of number of investments
completed lifetime to date. The sample mean is almost DEMO
the one business angel who had completed 50 investments to date—and our
typical respondent had completed seven deals to date. To gauge the merit
DEMO close investor involvement, respondents were asked to indicate their level
of DEMO on a ﬁve-point scale to the statement: ‘Frequent and informal
interaction DEMO the management is a very effective way to manage risk.’
For the most part, our respondents strongly agreed with this statement
(mean = DEMO) and this measure was statistically signiﬁcantly related to the
level of DEMO they maintained with the venture about which they
commented in detail (DEMO 5 0.05).
Investment style was classiﬁed on the basis of how the equity was
invested and measured on an ordinal scale as follows: on my own, as part of
a syndicate of private investors, DEMO as part of a syndicate including a venture
capital fund. Our analysis revealed that 70% of the deals involved
syndicates of which 12 also DEMO venture capital fund participation.
Respondents were also asked to provide details of the distribution of capital
contributions and equity stakes in the venture. A DEMO deal involved the
respondent investing £100 000, syndicate partners £220 000 DEMO entrepre-
neurs retaining an equity stake of 53% post investment albeit with
correspondingly large standard deviations.
To assess the nature of the referral source DEMO, investors were asked to
indicate their level of agreement on a DEMO scale to the statement:
‘This opportunity was referred to me by a trustworthy source who knew of
the individuals involved’. For the sample DEMO a whole, the mean rating
reported was 3.7 for this measure.
DEMO multi-dimensional construct of interpersonal trust was developed
incorporating the dimensions of integrity, competence and openness
(Mayer et al. 1995). Based on a DEMO scale, investors were asked to
indicate their level of agreement to DEMO following statements: (i) ‘The
entrepreneur/team was open and honest DEMO disclosing all relevant
information to investors’ (openness); (ii) ‘I DEMO this entrepreneur/team
to deliver on their promises’ (competence); and (iii) ‘I trusted this
entrepreneur/team would take decisions in the best interests of all
shareholders’ (integrity). To assess internal consistency, we DEMO
Cronbach alpha (0.81) which meets the minimum criteria (0.80) for internal
reliability for a multi-indicator scale (Bryman 1989). On all three measures,
strong agreement was observed with reported means all in excess DEMO four
measured on a ﬁve-point scale.
Respondents were asked if any of the investor(s) were employed in the
venture in a full- or part-time capacity coded as a dummy variable. In 40%
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
298
PETER KELLY AND MICHAEL HAY
of the deals reviewed, an investor was employed in the business. The
dependent variable, contract, was measured DEMO the basis of a prescribed list
of twelve contractual provisions developed in consultation with investors,
network administrators and a lawyer who is actively DEMO in private
equity transactions and presented in ﬁgure 2. Prescribing a list of
provisions was determined to be the most efﬁcient and time effective DEMO
to gather deal speciﬁc data from respondents short of being provided with
copies of relevant legal agreements that were not forthcoming in any event.
DEMO all of the provisions, respondents were asked to indicate on a DEMO
point scale the perceived importance of including each as part of the
shareholder’s agreement and a dummy variable was created to indicate
whether the DEMO was actually included in the deal that they were
commenting upon. Our dependent variable measure was calculated by
assigning arbitrary weights to the importance DEMO (‘irrelevant’ = 0.25;
Figure 2. Contractual provisions (survey question).
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April DEMO
BUSINESS ANGEL CONTRACTS
299
‘somewhat important’ = 0.50; ‘very important’ = 1.00) and multiplying each
by the value of the dummy variable that captured inclusion. On this basis,
the measure could range from 0 (no provisions) to 12 (all provisions
included and all rated ‘very important DEMO include’).
The correlation matrix for the predictor variables is summarized in table
1. Not surprisingly, the relative experience variables are all positively
associated. A very strong correlation is noted between general management
and new venture DEMO To many, building a new business from
scratch is the ultimate DEMO to hone general management skills. It also
appears that an extensive base of founding team experience in business and
new ventures are important bases DEMO which trust develops between
business angel and entrepreneur. More experienced investors tend to
participate in bigger deals likely as a result of successfully exiting DEMO
investment(s) and from their reputation as a market deal maker (Kelly and
Hay 2000). Larger deals tend to also involve syndicates DEMO business angels
and imply relatively smaller stakes being taken for individual participants
in the syndicate as evidenced by the highly statistically signiﬁcant negative
correlation DEMO STYLE and INVEQUITY. Informative and trust-
worthy deal referrers interestingly appear to positively impact the amount
of external capital raised by an entrepreneur. The DEMO positive
association (p 5 0.05) between TRUST and INVEQUITY lends support
for the assertion that interpersonal trust is a necessary ingredient for the
DEMO to happen at all. This may be particularly so in the precarious early
stages of venture development when a business angel is typically investing
DEMO their own, in small amounts, and retaining a relatively larger equity
stake until such time as follow-on capital (and associated dilution) is
DEMO As expected, deal referrers appear to impact positively on the level
DEMO trust reported by the business angel towards the founding team.
Results
We relied on multiple regression analysis and observed standardized beta
coefﬁcients as a DEMO for hypothesis testing. In an effort to aid subsequent
analysis, two DEMO variables were introduced into the model (travel time
to venture and DEMO of development). Aside from the usual caveats on our
ability to generalize from results obtained from a sample drawn from an
invisible population, we sought to contain the effects of self-selection, self-
rating and respondent recall biases by employing a broadly inclusive
sampling approach, building in checks in the instrument itself to identify
rating irregularities and by having respondents DEMO on their most
recent deal.
In table 2, we present the DEMO of regressing eleven predictor and two
control variables against the dependent variable, CONTRACT. Seven of
the eleven standardized beta coefﬁcients have the expected signs, and of
these, ﬁve were also statistically signiﬁcant. Our model explains DEMO of the
observed variance in the dependent variable.
Of the three relative experience variables only one, relevant industry
experience, exhibits the expected sign DEMO is statistically signiﬁcant
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
Table 1. Predictor variable correlation matrix (n = 106).
1 2345 6789 10
1 EIGMEXP
2 EIINDEXP .115
3 EINVEEXP 417*** .136
4 DEMO 7.153 7.209* 7.101
5 ACTIVISM .117 .131 .035 7.020
6 STYLE 7.110 7.039 7.079 7.171 + 7.167*
7 EXTINV 7.001 7.145 7.136 .193* 7.063 DEMO
8 INVEQUITY 7.035 .059 7.180 + 7.072 .163 + 7.530*** 7.042
9 REFERRAL 7.020 7.012 .120 7.091 .044 7.004 .220* 7.056
10 TRUST .226* DEMO .215* .045 .109 7.052 7.024 .231* .187*
11 FULLTIME .193* .017 .132 7.156 .032 .167 + .055 7.147 .070 .112
Two-tailed test significance – DEMO variables:
+ p5 0.10 Venture stage of development (STAGE)
DEMO p5 .05 Travel time to venture from investor’s home base (DISTANCE)DEMO
** p5 0.01
*** p5 0.001
EIGMEXP = general management experience base of management relative to investors
EIINDEXP = industry experience base of management DEMO to investors
EINVEEXP = new venture experience base of management relative to investors
INVEXP = number of investments made in privately-held, unquoted companies
ACTIVISM = extent to which investors view active involvement as an effective means DEMO managing risk
STYLE = form of investment participation (solo or in DEMO with others)
EXTINV = total amount of capital provided by outside investors other than management
INVEXP = number of investments made in privately-held, unquoted companies
INVEQUITY = respondent’s personal equity stake in the venture
REFERRAL DEMO opportunity was referred on by a source trusted by investor and who knew the entrepreneur involved
TRUST = multidimensional construct of level of interpersonal DEMO between respondent and entrepreneur
FULLTIME = investor(s) employed in the DEMO (dummy variable)
300
PETER KELLY AND MICHAEL HAY
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
Table 2. Contractual ties: the influence of context.
Predictor variables Standardized beta Hypothesis Prediction
Relative experience variables
New venture experience 7.010 H1 +
Relevant DEMO experience .155 + H2 +
General management experience 7.064 H3 +
Investor related variables
Investor experience .073 H4 +
Active involvement .333*** H5 +
DEMO attribute variables
Investment style .351** H6 +
Investment size .079 H7 +
Respondent equity stake .360** H9 +
Nature of referral source 7.345** H10 DEMO
Interpersonal trust .161 H11 7
Presence of investor-employee .087 H12 7
Control variables
Stage of development .005
Distance from venture .153*
R2 = .407
DEMO = 4.857***
One tailed test of significance
+p5 0.10
*p5 0.05
**p5 0.01
***p5 0.001
BUSINESS ANGEL CONTRACTS
301
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
302
PETER KELLY AND MICHAEL HAY
(p 5 0.10). Backing an entrepreneur with an extensive base of relevant
industry experience is often cited DEMO a major reason why business angels
choose to invest (Benjamin and DEMO 1996). It is also precisely in this
area that in the view of our respondents, entrepreneurs typically bring more
experience than they do to the table. For this reason, it appears that
business angels choose to spell out more clearly their rights and obligations
in contractual form. DEMO domains where business angels bring relatively
more experience than management, contractual DEMO appears not to be
a concern as evidenced by the negative (DEMO small) coefﬁcients for the new
venture and general management relative experience DEMO In short, we
ﬁnd modest support for the notion that tighter DEMO are struck with
entrepreneurs who bring relatively more relevant industry experience to
the table than business angel(s).
We expected to ﬁnd that DEMO experienced investors, based on the
number of deals completed to date, would be more cautious contractors.
While the observed coefﬁcient is positive as DEMO, it is statistically
insigniﬁcant. Consistent with a body of received evidence (Mason and
Harrison 1996), our respondents considered active involvement to be DEMO
especially effective means of managing risk. A clear implication of the
desire to be actively involved is that transactional parameters need to be
spelled DEMO very clearly in the contract struck up front as evidenced by the
highly statistically signiﬁcant (p 4 0.001) positive beta coefﬁcient. We ﬁnd
DEMO support for the need to specify roles and responsibilities in
contractual form when investors intend, as they almost always want, to
make value-added DEMO on contributions to the development of the
business in which they invest.
Deals involving a syndicate appear to be much more explicit in nature
DEMO respect to the contract developed with the entrepreneur on the basis of
the observed positive and highly signiﬁcant beta coefﬁcient (p 5 0.01) DEMO
expected. Our ﬁndings support the view advanced by Landstro¨m et al.
(DEMO) that syndicated deals can become quite complex in nature as each
DEMO in the syndicate seeks to ‘make their mark’ on the form and
content of the contractual deal. The results are also consistent with the DEMO
of reasoning advanced by May and Simmons (2001) that business angel
syndicates tend to operate in a more professional manner. We ﬁnd strong
DEMO (p 5 0.01) for the notion that tighter contracts are struck with
syndicates than when entrepreneurs raise capital from a business angel
investing DEMO their own.
Interestingly, we did not ﬁnd support, other than in sign, for the
notion that bigger deals result in tighter contracts. This is particularly
puzzling given the positive and statistically signiﬁcant correlations
reported earlier DEMO investment size, syndication and investor
experience variables (see table 1). In situations where the business angel
bears more of the potential costs DEMO with opportunistic
behaviour on the part of the entrepreneur, more attention DEMO paid to
contractual detail. Strong support (p 5 0.01) was found for the notion
that tighter contracts are struck by business angels that DEMO
proportionately larger equity stakes in the businesses in which they
choose to invest.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 DEMO 2008
BUSINESS ANGEL CONTRACTS
303
How investors hear about deals appears to be DEMO important inﬂuence on
the eventual structure of the contractual arrangement between investor(s)
and entrepreneur. In situations where a deal has been referred DEMO to
business angels by a source that knows of the proponents involved and
whose judgment is trusted by them, fewer contractual safeguards were
included ex ante. We ﬁnd strong support (p 5 0.01) for the DEMO that
deal referrers do really matter insofar as entrepreneurs appear to be able to
extract looser contracts from business angels than might otherwise be DEMO
case if the deal had not been referred on by an informative and trustworthy
source.
Our multidimensional trust construct captured our respondent’s
perceptions of DEMO honesty, openness and integrity of the founding team.
In terms of DEMO consistency, our measure proved to be robust
(Cronbach a = 0.81) with strong agreement being reported by respondents
on all three dimensions. Trust does appear to be a necessary prerequisite
for the deal to be DEMO at all. Surprisingly, however, higher
levels of trust do not manifest themselves as looser contractual deals,
rather the reverse. A visual inspection DEMO the correlation matrix in table 1
reveals that two important bases of trust for investors appear to be
situations in which management brings extensive DEMO and new
venture experience to the table than do investors. However, DEMO is in
precisely these domains where business angels consider themselves to be
much more experienced than the teams that seek their backing. More
detailed DEMO appear to ﬁll the void in situations where the venture
need for close investor interaction post investment is mitigated by the
presence of highly DEMO managers.
The presence of an investor in an employment capacity does not appear
to reduce the need for contractual speciﬁcity up front as evidenced DEMO the
positive beta coefﬁcient contrary to expectations. It appears that attention
needs to be paid to separate the roles of ‘investor’ and ‘entrepreneur’
particularly DEMO situations where a syndicate is involved.
Discussion
In some important respects, DEMO need to establish more elaborate
contractual frameworks between business angel and entrepreneur is driven
by practical considerations. Participating as they do in a ‘full DEMO sport’
(Benjamin and Margulis 1996), business angels appear to want DEMO spell out
quite clearly what the rights, roles and responsibilities of DEMO and
investor are. Contractual frameworks also become quite complex when
there is a need for several investors to come to agreement both amongst
themselves DEMO with the entrepreneur. Contractual protection also appears
to be sought in instances where business angels back people with extensive
prior industry experience. A signiﬁcant DEMO of contractual comfort is
also sought in instances where the business angel bears a higher
proportional share in the business. Moreover, business angels appear to
rely heavily on deal referrers to provide some gauge as to DEMO bona ﬁdes of
the people seeking backing from them.
Downloaded By: DEMO Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
304
PETER KELLY AND MICHAEL HAY
The popular press has created the DEMO that capital can be raised
from a business angel with ‘few strings attached’ and ‘on a handshake’. In
view of the uncertainties involved, the costs associated with undertaking
extensive due diligence, and the legal and professional fees to document
deals, one could argue that it makes little sense to craft comprehensive
contractual arrangements up front in any event. Unlike the DEMO of one
study (Mason and Harrison 1996) where a signiﬁcant minority of
respondents (30%) reported that no investment agreement was drawn up
DEMO the time of investment, our study supports the view that business DEMO
do draw up contracts as a matter of course. In our study, only one of our
respondents reported including none of the speciﬁed contractual safeguards
and an additional six others had incorporated fewer than three as DEMO of
their contractual deal with the entrepreneur. In table 3, we DEMO a
summary of the mean importance rating for each speciﬁed contractual
provision together with the proportion of respondents that actually did
incorporate it as DEMO of the deal with the entrepreneur.
With remarkable consistency, the greater DEMO of importance an
investor attaches to including a given safeguard, the DEMO likely it will be
included as part of the shareholder’s agreement. As Landstro¨m et al.
(1998) observed, one of the major uses for written contracts is to establish
the ‘transactional parameters’ of the deal. From DEMO analysis, there
appears to be ﬁve issues that are ‘non-negotiable’ in DEMO, uniformly
considered as very important control mechanisms to direct the entrepre-
DEMO behaviour, and almost always included by investors as a
‘transactional parameter’ DEMO the deal: (i) veto rights over acquisitions/
divestitures; (DEMO) prior approval for strategic plans and budgets; (iii)
restrictions DEMO management’s ability to issue share options; (iv) non-
compete contracts DEMO from entrepreneurs upon termination of
employment in the venture; and (v) restrictions on the ability to raise
additional debt or equity ﬁnance. For the most part, these ‘non-
negotiable’ contractual safeguards give investors a say in material
decisions that could impact the nature of the business or DEMO level of
their equity holding in the venture. Non-compete contracts are, DEMO effect,
a means of maintaining a tie between the entrepreneur and the venture,
thus protecting investors from what has been termed ‘competitive
DEMO (Barney et al. 1994).
On the other hand, there appear to be a number of contractual provisions
to which investors attach relatively DEMO importance and thus might be
considered ‘negotiable’ in nature including: (i) forced exit provisions; (ii)
investor approval required for senior personnel hiring/ﬁring decisions; (iii)
the need for investors to countersign DEMO cheques; (iv) management equity
ratchet provisions; and (v) the speciﬁcation of a dispute resolution
mechanism in writing up front. Each of DEMO ‘negotiable’ contractual
safeguards was included in fewer than 40% of the deals reviewed. It appears
that investors build in a measure of managerial discretion DEMO tolerate a
degree of contractual ambiguity with respect to the timing of exit and the
manner in which future disputes are resolved. Interestingly, a little over
one-third of the deals included ratchets (38.7%) or dispute DEMO
mechanisms (36.8%). To the extent that ratchets are viewed as DEMO means for
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
Table 3. Contractual terms: ties that bind.
Average importance Deals that included provision
Contractual provision rating (rank) (rank) (%)
Investor veto rights over acquisitions and/or divestiture activity 2.56 (2) 78.3 (T2)
Investor approval required for strategic plans and/or budgets 2.53 (3) 78.3 (T2)
Management can be forced to seek exit if DEMO by investors 1.83 (11) 31.1 (11)
Investor approval required DEMO hire or fire senior personnel 1.90 (9) 39.6 (8)
DEMO compensation must be approved by investors 2.17 (6) 61.3 (6)DEMO
Share options may not be issued without investor approval 2.34 (4) 76.4 (4)
Non-compete contracts required of management upon termination 2.33 (DEMO) 74.5 (5)
Investor veto rights over capital expenditure plans 2.12 (7) 54.7 (7)
Investor(s) must countersign bank cheques DEMO a certain amount 1.49 (12) 21.7 (12)
Restrictions on DEMO to raise additional debt or equity finance 2.73 (1) 88.7 (DEMO)
Management equity ratchet provisions are included as part of the deal 1.87 (10) 38.7 (9)
A specific dispute resolution mechanism is agreed in writing 2.01 (8) 36.8 (10)
BUSINESS ANGEL CONTRACTS
305
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 DEMO 2008
306
PETER KELLY AND MICHAEL HAY
‘tying an entrepreneur to a set DEMO projections’, it appears that most investors
prefer to establish a clear DEMO split up front and thereby avoiding
possible future arguments about whether or not performance does indeed
exceed or fails to meet established targets and, for that matter, the basis of
calculation of the benchmarks themselves. The importance of the working
relationship between the parties is also evident in DEMO relatively low number
of deals that incorporate a speciﬁed means for resolving future disputes up
front.
To gain additional insights, we partitioned the sample into three groups
based on the number of investments completed to date. DEMO proﬁle of each
sub-group is provided below:
Deal attributes 3 or less 4– 9 10 or more
investments investments investments
(n = 37) (n = 44) (n = 25)
Average external capital DEMO £178,000 £265,000 £638,000
Deals that were early stage (DEMO) 78 75 68
Deals that involved syndicates (%) 73 71 DEMO
Deals where investor employed (%) 43 39 32
A number of observations are worth noting. First, it appears that as
business angels become more active market participants, they are
involved in much bigger deals. Second, despite the tendency to focus
on later stage deals as business angels complete more investments, there
is a remarkable degree of conviction to early stage investing across all
sub-groups. Third, it appears that the conﬁdence of business angels to
underwrite deals on their own increases as the number DEMO completed
investments grows. As established dealmakers (Kelly and Hay 2000),
the most active group might be introduced to potential investment
opportunities that DEMO not widely circulated. Finally, fourth, the
practical time constraints faced by those business angels with larger
portfolios manifests itself in the form of DEMO proportion of deals that
involve a business angel assuming an employment position in the
venture.
In table 4, we provide a sub-group breakdown on the attitudes and
approach with regard to how to structure the contractual DEMO with
the entrepreneur. It appears that less experienced business angels place
relatively greater importance on the need to include a broader array of
contractual DEMO to protect and promote their interests as share-
holders. There appears to be widespread similarity across the sub-groups
on four ‘non-negotiable’ clauses: (i) veto rights over acquisitions/
divestitures; (ii) approval for strategic plans and budgets; (iii) non-compete
contracts; and (iv) restrictions on DEMO to raise additional debt or equity
ﬁnance. However, speciﬁc provisions that DEMO impact the level of investor
equity stake (share options, ratchets) DEMO the timing of exit (forced exit
provisions) feature more prominently in deals that involve more experi-
enced business angels. It would appear that DEMO experience, business
angels become more focussed on elements that can impact DEMO ﬁnancial
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
Table 4. Contractual terms: sub-group profiles.
Percentage rated ‘very important to include’ (% deals where provision
included)
3 or less investments 4 – 9 investments 10 or more
Contractual provision (n = 37) (n= 44) investments (n = 25)
Investor veto rights over acquisitions DEMO/or divestiture activity 68 (81) 61(75) 60 (80)
Investor approval required for strategic plans and/or budgets 73 (81) DEMO (82) 48 (68)
Management can be forced to seek DEMO if required by investors 19 (22) 30 (36) 24 (DEMO)
Investor approval required to hire or fire senior personnel 38 (DEMO) 11 (31) 12 (40)
Management compensation must be approved by investors 49 (76) 32 (52) 36 (56)
Share options may not be issued without investor approval 60 (70) 48 (73) 64 (92)
Non-compete contracts required of management upon termination DEMO (70) 50 (75) 52 (80)
Investor veto rights DEMO capital expenditure plans 46 (65) 34 (50) 32 (48)DEMO
Investor(s) must countersign bank cheques above a certain amount 14 (22) 21 (30) 8 (8)
Restrictions on ability to DEMO additional debt or equity finance 81 (87) 75 (84) 84 (100)
Management equity ratchet provisions are included as part of the deal 19 (24) 27 (43) 36 (52)
A specific dispute resolution mechanism is agreed in writing 38 (38) 21 (34) 28 (40)
BUSINESS ANGEL CONTRACTS
307
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
308
PETER KELLY AND MICHAEL HAY
return, namely their stake in the outcome and the timing of such value
realization.
While contractual safeguards may DEMO some measure of comfort for
investors that the entrepreneur will act in their best interest, considering a
provision as ‘important to include’ is not the same thing as ‘willingness to
invoke it’ as a means of DEMO one’s interest. Strict formality would
imply that an investor would look primarily to the agreement to assert their
rights when problems are encountered with DEMO entrepreneur ex post. The
ﬁndings of this study, like much of DEMO received work in the informal
venture capital ﬁeld, portrays a much DEMO positive, proactive and ‘hands
on’ commitment made by investors to the DEMO of the business in
which they invest (Landstro¨ m 1992). DEMO the outset, investors want to be
actively involved in situations where DEMO can make a value-added
contribution and in so doing, manage risk. DEMO, it appears that
investors are looking to the relationship with the DEMO to deal with
the inevitable setbacks and problems to be encountered in the future.
Rather than being viewed as a protection mechanism per se, contractual
safeguards appear to be a means by which mutual behavioural expectations
DEMO all parties to the transaction can be clariﬁed (Landstro¨m et al. DEMO).
Having said this, of what utility is agency theory in DEMO domain of the
business angel? It is to this issue that DEMO now turn our attention.
Assessing the utility of agency theory
On the face of it, agency theory holds an intuitive appeal with its focus on
developing a structure for economic transactions that promotes the
interests of DEMO parties to the exchange while curbing the potential for
opportunistic behaviour to occur. Agency theory prescribes the use of
contracts, monitoring agent behaviour and designing the incentive system
to elicit desired behaviour from agents as means DEMO which business angels
can protect and promote their interests. Having said this, we highlighted
potential problems associated with extending this perspective into the
domain of the business angel. First, agency theory is built around a
presumption of ‘distrust’ between investor and entrepreneur. If anything,
trust between the DEMO is a necessary ingredient for deals to be concluded
at all. Second, agency theory assumes that principals and agents are
motivated solely by economic considerations. Third, the theoretical
perspective has developed on the back of studies of large publicly-listed
companies in which management holds relatively negligible equity stakes.
DEMO did agency theory measure up?
Crafting a contractual arrangement that is highly speciﬁc in nature, covers
all possible contingencies, outlines a formal DEMO for resolving disputes
going forward, is legally enforceable and inexpensive for DEMO transacting
parties is no small order when talking about private equity transactions. Our
sense is that such an approach is best suited to transactions DEMO short duration,
where tangible product is exchanged and suitable replacement options can
be identiﬁed. In all respects, private equity transactions do not display these
attributes. On the basis of our study, the underlying purpose for a contract
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 DEMO April 2008
BUSINESS ANGEL CONTRACTS
309
appears to be in establishing a framework for DEMO the parties will work
together going forward as opposed to strictly being a mechanism for
business angels to protect their interest as shareholders.
Our DEMO is that business angels intend to be and are more actively
involved with their investee companies in a broader range of capacities than
is DEMO the case for shareholders in publicly-traded ﬁrms. Clarifying
roles and responsibilities from the outset appears to be a major motivation
for developing the contract DEMO the ﬁrst place. Moreover, we observed that a
degree of contractual DEMO appears to be tolerated up front by
business angels, notably in DEMO of the manner in which future disputes
are resolved. From the outset, the relationship between the business angel
and entrepreneur appears to be more positive and trusting in character than
the inherently adversarial one implied by DEMO theorists consistent with
the line of argument of Landstro¨ m (1992)DEMO Whether business angels rely on
contractual safeguards and enforce their rights legally when a rough patch
is experienced was beyond the scope of this DEMO Our sense, however, is
that private investors look to the relationship that develops between them
and the entrepreneur to resolve difﬁculties as they DEMO encountered.
Designing an incentive system in such a way that all parties to the
exchange will behave in a manner that promotes the interests DEMO all
shareholders does resonate quite strongly with entrepreneurial ventures.
However, agency DEMO portray the relationship between the parties as
inherently adversarial in nature, DEMO it is difﬁcult to ascertain the veracity of
claims made by entrepreneurs about their level of competence and
behavioural intentions towards the business angel. DEMO, there is an
assumed hierarchy of power that always favours the DEMO angel over the
entrepreneur. We did ﬁnd strong support for a central tenet of agency theory
namely a positive relationship between investor equity stake DEMO attention to
contractual detail. We also found that a great deal of importance is attached
to contractual safeguards that in some manner may have DEMO bearing on the
relative equity stakes of the parties to deal going forward. Importantly, deal
referrers appear to be especially well placed to reduce the perceived level of
agency risk associated with a given deal if DEMO can provide investors with
assurances about the proponents involved and investors trust their
judgment. Having said this, contractual arrangements appear to be
necessarily incomplete and a degree of contractual ambiguity is tolerated
by investors. Based on DEMO study, we would submit that one particular
strand of agency theory DEMO, the incomplete contracts approach (Hart
1995), appears to be very well suited to the domain of informal venture
capital. In this respect, we agree with the conclusion of van Osnabrugge
(2000) that more DEMO should be initiated relying on this particular
stream of agency theory. Future research efforts can build upon this study in
a number of ways. DEMO is to this issue that we now turn our attention.
Direction for future research
There are a number of potentially fruitful directions for future DEMO
that arise from this study. First, the survey instrument developed could DEMO
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
310
PETER KELLY AND MICHAEL HAY
used as a basis for replicating DEMO study on different samples within the UK
and, importantly, from other countries. Second, this study proceeded on
the basis of an important implied assumption, that the views of investors
matter more. While investors can choose whether to invest or not, there is
reason to believe that serial entrepreneurs may be especially well placed to
negotiate equity ﬁnance ‘on their DEMO Moreover, some authors
(Sapienza and Gupta 1994) have maintained that DEMO should
actively take steps to protect their interests as in some respects they
effectively take on the role of principals themselves with respect to DEMO
relationship with the business angel(s). Third, by their very DEMO it
appears that syndicated deals are inherently complex. More research is
needed to better understand the dynamics of syndication and the
underlying process by DEMO participants reconcile their views in
determining the form and content of the contractual deal. Fourth,
longitudinal research is required to determine how parties DEMO a private
equity transaction cope with adversity post investment. When do business
angels ﬁnd it necessary to assert their rights and how do they DEMO do so?
Fifth, private equity transactions imply a strong relational DEMO;
future research efforts should seek to integrate insights from other
theoretical approaches such as procedural justice (Sapienza and Korsgaard
1996).
Implications
For the less active and, in particular, the substantial pool of business
DEMO who have yet to complete their ﬁrst equity transaction, this study
DEMO afforded a number of signiﬁcant insights. By tapping into a
reasonably large base of deals, we were able to provide a reference
point for individuals to ‘benchmark’ their approach to deal structuring
with that of their DEMO peers in the market. In so doing, we discovered,
however, some fundamental differences in approach dependent on ‘who’
was investing and ‘how’ DEMO capital was invested. The most active
element of the market were signiﬁcantly more concerned about and
contractually controlled for management actions that could impact DEMO
size of their equity stake in the venture and, to a DEMO extent, the
timing of exit, than their less experienced counterparts. Moreover, as a
negotiating tactic, the most active investors appear to favour DEMO use of
ratchet mechanisms to tie the entrepreneur’s stake to a set of projections
and are more inclined to tie them to the business DEMO way of a non-
compete contract. If there was a lesson to be learned from this study it
is this, less active business angels appear not to have drawn as clear a
distinction between the roles DEMO ‘investor’ and ‘manager’ and tended to
seek contractual control over what might be considered more operational
issues up front. Participating in syndicates does appear DEMO afford the
opportunity to participate in larger and more deals, however, there
appears to be a challenge for business angels to reconcile their DEMO
vis-a`-vis each other in addition to that between themselves and the
entrepreneur.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April DEMO
BUSINESS ANGEL CONTRACTS
311
For entrepreneurs, this study begins to highlight the importance of
some of the factors business angels take into account in DEMO how
to structure their contractual relationship with you. Raising money from a
business angel does come with ‘strings attached’. In part, the contract
between you and the business angel should be viewed as a framework for
DEMO between the parties particularly as business angels are
inclined to be very actively involved in the development process in any
event. Approaching more experienced DEMO angels and/or syndicates
implies a tighter focus being placed on issues related to ownership
structure and team composition. In such situations, entrepreneurs appear
to have little negotiating latitude vis-a`-vis investors; however, they are
afforded DEMO greater zone of managerial discretion by them. The shape of
the contractual deal also appears to be inﬂuenced by what we might term
the DEMO paradox’. On the one hand, business angels seek to back
people DEMO relevant industry experience, but, on the other hand, their
own DEMO of experience in the same industry is a primary source of
concern for them to control for contractually. ‘Which business angel to
approach’ appears DEMO be not nearly as important an inﬂuence on the
structure of the contractual deal as ‘how to approach them’. This study
has highlighted the DEMO of making the approach through a referral
source that knows you and whose opinions and judgments are trusted by
the business angel being approached. DEMO key question for entrepreneurs
when deciding how to approach is not ‘who do you know’ but rather ‘who
trusts you’.
For policy-makers and, by extension, managers of business introduc-
tion services and other facilitating organizations, DEMO study has tapped
into the experience of a broad range of respondents on a deal speciﬁc
basis. By enhancing our understanding of how the DEMO between
business angel and entrepreneur is structured and more importantly by
identifying some of the key factors that shape these choices, we are better
placed to develop educational and training materials for two signiﬁcant
groups, business angels who have yet to complete their ﬁrst deal (‘virgin
investors’) DEMO entrepreneurs who are contemplating raising equity
ﬁnance. Learning from experience may inspire some virgin investors to
make their ﬁrst investment, particularly if they are able to learn from
experience ﬁrst hand by investing as part of DEMO syndicate with experienced
business angels. We are under no illusion, however, that providing deal
speciﬁc information to entrepreneurs will, in and of itself, redress the
widely-held perception that the terms of exchange are ‘inherently
unfavourable’ for entrepreneurs. Finally, the ﬁndings of this study raise
the question of what the role of business introduction services should be.
It appears that DEMO angels especially value deal referrers who, in
some way, can reduce the agency risk they face with respect to a
particular deal through DEMO knowledge of the proponents involved and
who can inspire conﬁdence among business angels as to their abilities to
pre-screen deal ﬂow for them. In DEMO of the sheer volume of deal ﬂow,
many business introduction services are exposed to and resource
constraints that impair the ability of many DEMO develop and retain a
sufﬁcient base of managerial talent, this is DEMO tall order indeed.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April 2008
312
References
PETER KELLY AND MICHAEL HAY
Barney, J.B., Busenitz, L., Fiet, J.O. and Moesel, D., 1994, The relationship between venture
capitalists and managers in new ﬁrms: determinants of contractual covenants. Managerial
Finance, 20(1), 19 – 30.
Benjamin, G.A. and Margulis, J., 1996, Finding Your Wings (New York: Wiley).
Bryman, A. 1989, Research Methods and Organizational Studies (London: Unwin Hyman).
Cable, D.M. and Shane, S., 1997, A prisoner’s dilemma approach to DEMO capitalist
relations. Academy of Management Review, 22(1), 142 – DEMO
Coveney, P. and Moore, K., 1998, Business Angels: Securing DEMO Finance (Chichester: Wiley).
Fiet, J.O., 1995a, Reliance upon DEMO in the venture capital industry. Journal of Business
Venturing, 10, 195 – 223.
Fiet, J.O., 1995b, Risk avoidance strategies in venture capital markets. Journal of Management Studies,
32(4), 551 – 574.
DEMO, J., Sohl, J.E. and Wetzel, W.E., 1994, The private investor market for venture capital. The
Financier, 1(2), 7 – 15.
Hart, O., 1995, Firms, Contracts and Financial Structures (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Jensen, M.C. and Meckling, W.H., 1976, Theory of the ﬁrm: managerial behavior, agency costs and
ownership structure. DEMO of Financial Economics, 3, 305 – 360.
Kelly, P. and DEMO, M., 1996, Serial investors: an exploratory study. Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research, 329 – 343.
Kelly, P. and Hay, M., 2000, Deal-makers: reputation attracts quality. Venture Capital, 2(3), 183 – DEMO
m, H., 1992, The relationship between private investor and small DEMO: an agency theory
approach. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 4, 199 DEMO 223.
m, H., Manigart, S., Mason, C.M. and Sapienza, H.J., 1998, Contracts between entrepreneurs
and investors: terms and negotiation processes. Paper presented at Babson Entrepreneurship
Research Conference, Ghent.
Mason, C.M. and DEMO, R.T., 1996, Informal venture capital: a study of the investment process, the
post-investment experience and investment performance. Entrepreneurship and Regional
Development, DEMO, 105 – 125.
May, J. and Simmons, C., 2001, DEMO Business Needs An Angel: Getting The Money You Need To Make
DEMO Business Grow (Victoria: Crown Publications).
Mayer, R.C., Davis, DEMO and Schoorman, F.D., 1995, An integrative model of organizational trust.
DEMO of Management Review, 20(3), 709 – 734.
Riding, A.L., Duxbury, L. and Haines, G., 1994, Financing enterprise development: DEMO
by Canadian angels. Monograph.
Sahlman, W.A., 1988, Aspects of ﬁnancial DEMO in venture capital. Journal of Applied Corporate
Finance, 1, 23 – 36.
Sahlman, W.A., 1990, The structure and governance of venture capital organizations. Journal of
Financial Economics, 27, 473 – 521.
Sapienza, H.J., 1992, When do venture capitalists add value? Journal of Business Venturing, 7, 9 – 27.
Sapienza, H.J. and Gupta, A.K., 1994, Impact of agency risks and task uncertainty on venture
capitalist – CEO interaction. Academy of Management Journal, 37(6), 1618 – 1632.
Sapienza, H.J. and Korsgaard, M.A., 1996, Procedural justice in entrepreneur – DEMO relations.
Academy of Management Journal, 39(3), 544 – 574.
DEMO Osnabrugge, M., 1998, Do serial investors and non-serial investors behave DEMO? An
empirical and theoretical analysis. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 22(4), 23 – 42.
van Osnabrugge, M., 2000, A comparison of business angels and venture capitalist investment
procedures: an agency theory-based analysis. Venture Capital, 2(2), 91 – 109.
Walsh, J.P. and Seward, J.K., 1990, On the efﬁciency of internal and external control mechanisms.
DEMO of Management Review, 15(3), 421 – 458.
Wetzel, W.E., 1994, Venture capital. In W.D. Bygrave (ed.) The Portable MBA DEMO Entrepreneurship
(New York: Wiley), pp. 172 – 194.
Landstro¨
Landstro¨
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 18:12 21 April DEMO{1g42fwefx}