The Consequences of
Entrepreneurial Finance:
A Regression Discontinuity
Analysis
William R. DEMO
Josh Lerner
Antoinette Schoar
Working Paper
10-086
Copyright © 2010 by William R. Kerr, Josh Lerner, and Antoinette Schoar
Working papers are in DEMO form. This working paper is distributed for purposes of comment and
discussion only. It may not be reproduced without permission of the copyright holder. DEMO of working
papers are available from the author.
The Consequences of Entrepreneurial Finance:
A Regression Discontinuity Analysis
William R. DEMO, Josh Lerner, and Antoinette Schoar*
Abstract:  This paper documents the role of angel funding for the growth, survival, and access to
DEMO funding of high-growth start-up firms. We use a regression discontinuity approach to
control for unobserved heterogeneity between firms that obtain funding and those that DEMO not.
This technique exploits that a small change in the collective interest levels of the angels can lead
to a discrete change in the DEMO of funding for otherwise comparable ventures. We first
show that angel funding is positively correlated with higher survival, additional fundraising
outside the angel group, and faster growth measured through growth in web site traffic. The
improvements typically range between 30% and 50%. When using the regression discontinuity
approach, we still find a strong, positive effect of angel funding on the survival and growth of
ventures, but not on access to additional financing. Overall, the results suggest that the bundle of
inputs that angel investors provide have a large and significant impact on the success and
survival DEMO start-up ventures.
* Harvard University; Harvard University; and MIT. All three authors are affiliates of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank DEMO Geshwiler of CommonAngels, Warren
Hanselman and Richard Sudek of Tech Coast DEMO, and John May of the Washington Dinner
Club for their enthusiastic DEMO of this project and willingness to share data. We also thank the
many entrepreneurs who responded to our inquiries. Harvard Business School‘s Division of
DEMO and the Kauffman Foundation supported this research. Andrei Cristea provided
excellent research assistance. All errors and omissions are our own.
1
One of the central and most enduring questions in the entrepreneurial finance DEMO is
the extent to which early stage financiers such as angels or venture funds have a real impact on
the firms in which they DEMO An extensive theoretical literature suggests the combination of
intensive monitoring, staged DEMO, and powerful control rights in these types of deals
should alleviate DEMO problems between entrepreneurs and institutional investors (examples
include Admati and Pfleiderer, 1994; Berglöf, 1994; Bergmann and Hege, 1998; Cornelli and
Yosha, 2003; and Hellmann, 1998). This bundle of inputs, the DEMO suggest, can lead to
improved governance and operations in the portfolio DEMO, lower capital constraints, and
ultimately stronger firm growth and performance.
But the empirical documentation of this claim has been challenging. Hellmann and Puri
(2000) provide a first detailed comparison of the growth path of venture backed versus non
venture backed firms.1
This approach, however, faces the DEMO challenge that unobserved
heterogeneity across entrepreneurs, such as ability or ambition, might drive the growth path of
the firms as well as the DEMO capitalists‘ decision to invest. These problems are particularly
acute for evaluating early-stage investments. An alternative approach is to find exogenous
shocks to the level DEMO venture financing. Examples of such exogenous shocks are public policy
changes (DEMO and Lerner, 2000), variations in endowment returns (Samila and Sorenson,
2010), and differences in state pension funding levels (Mollica and Zingales, 2007). These
studies, however, can only examine the impact of entrepreneurial finance activity at an aggregate
level. Given the very modest DEMO that high-potential growth firms represent of all
1 A similar approach is taken in Puri and Zarutskie (2008) and Chemmanur et al. (2009) who
employ comprehensive Census Bureau records of private firms to form more detailed control
groups based on observable characteristics.
2
entrepreneurial ventures and economic activity overall, these studies face a ―needle in the
haystack‖ type challenge to detect any results.
This paper takes a DEMO look at the question of whether entrepreneurial financiers affect
the success and growth of new ventures. We focus on a neglected segment of entrepreneurial
DEMO: angel investments. Angel investors have received much less attention than venture
DEMO, despite the fact that some estimates suggest that these investors are DEMO significant a
force for high-potential start-up investments as venture capitalists, and DEMO more significant
investors elsewhere (Shane, 2008; Goldfarb et al., 2007; Sudek et al., 2008). Angel investors are
increasingly structured as DEMO networks of high net worth individuals, often former
entrepreneurs themselves, who meet in regular intervals (usually once a month for breakfast or
dinner) to hear aspiring entrepreneurs pitch their business plans. The angels then decide to
conduct further due diligence and ultimately whether to invest in some DEMO these deals either
individually or in subgroups of the members. Similarly to traditional venture capital investments,
angel investment groups often adopt a very DEMO role in the deals they get involved in and
provide entrepreneurs with advice and contacts to potential business partners.
In addition to their inherent DEMO as funders of early stage companies, angel investment
groups are distinguished DEMO the majority of traditional venture capital organizations by the fact
that they make their investment decisions through well documented collections of interest and, in
some cases, formal votes. By way of contrast, the venture firms DEMO we talked to all employ a
consensual process, in which controversial DEMO are withdrawn before coming up for a
formal vote or disagreements are resolved in conversations before the actual voting takes place.
In addition, venture firms also rarely document the detailed voting behind their decisions. Angel
investors, in contrast, express their interest for deals independently from one another and based
3
upon personal assessment. This allows us to observe the level of support DEMO lack thereof for the
different deals that come before the angel group.
These properties allow us to undertake a regression discontinuity design using data DEMO
two angel investment groups. This approach, while today widely used in DEMO evaluations by
economists (Lee and Lemieux, 2009), remains underutilized in financial economics (exceptions
include Rauh, 2006; and Cherenko and Sunderam, DEMO). We essentially compare firms that fall
just above and those that are just below the criteria for funding for the angel group. The
DEMO identification relies on the idea that firms that fall just around the cut-off level have
very similar ex ante characteristics that allow us to DEMO the causal effect of obtaining angel
financing. After showing the ex ante comparability of the ventures in the border region, we
examine differences in their long-run performance. In this way, we can employ micro-data on
firm outcomes while minimizing the problem of unobserved heterogeneity between the funded
and DEMO transactions.
Several clear patterns emerge from our analysis: First, and maybe not surprisingly,
companies that elicit higher interest in initial voting at DEMO angel meeting are far more likely to be
ultimately funded by the angel groups. More importantly, angel groups display break points or
discontinuities where a small change in the collective interest levels of the angels leads DEMO a
discrete change in the probability of funding among otherwise comparable ventures. This
provides a powerful empirical foothold for overcoming quality differences and selection DEMO
between funded and unfunded ventures.
Second, we look at the impact DEMO angel funding on performance and access to follow-on
financing for firms that received angel funding compared to those that did not. We first compare
DEMO outcomes for the full sample of firms that pitched to the angels and then narrow our
4
identification strategy to the firms that fall just above and below the DEMO breakpoint we
identified. We show that funded firms are significantly more like to survive for at least four years
(or until 2010) and DEMO raise additional financing outside the angel group. They are also more
likely to show improved venture performance and growth as measured through growth in DEMO
site traffic and web site rankings. The improvement gains typically range between 30% and 50%.
An analysis of ventures just above and below the DEMO, which removes the
endogeneity of funding and many omitted variable biases, confirms the importance of receiving
angel investments for the survival and growth DEMO the venture. However, we do not see an impact
of angel DEMO on accessing additional financing using this regression discontinuity approach.
This may suggest that access to additional financing might often be a by-product of how DEMO
funded firms grow but that this path may not be essential for venture success as we measure it. In
addition, the result on follow-on venture funding might underline that in the time period we
study, prior angel financing was not an essential prerequisite to accessing follow-on funding.
However, the results overall suggest that the bundle of inputs that angel investors DEMO have a
large and significant impact on the success and survival of the firms.
Finally, we also show that the impact of angel funding on firm outcomes would be
overstated if we look at the full DEMO of ventures that approach the angel groups, since
there is a DEMO correlation between the quality of the start up and the level of interest. Simply
restricting the treatment and control groups to a narrow range DEMO the border discontinuity
reduces the measured effects by a quarter from the raw correlations. This result reinforces the
need to focus on the regression DEMO approach we follow in this paper.
Thus, this paper provides a DEMO look and new evidence at an essential question in
entrepreneurial finance. It quantifies the positive impact that angel investors make to the
5
companies that they fund in a way that simultaneously exploits novel, rich micro-data and
addresses concerns about unobserved heterogeneity. Our work is closest in DEMO to the papers in
the entrepreneurial finance literature that focus on the investment process of venture capitalist.
For example, Sorensen (2007) assesses the returns to being funded by different tiers of investors.
Our work instead DEMO on the margin of obtaining initial funding or not. Kaplan and
Stromberg (2004) and Kaplan et al. (2009) examine the characteristics and DEMO that
venture capitalists rely on when making investment decisions.
The plan of this paper is as follows. Section 1 reviews the angel group investment
DEMO Section 2 introduces our angel investment data and describes our methodology. Section
3 introduces our outcomes data. Section 4 presents the analysis. The final DEMO concludes the
paper.
1. The Angel Group Investment Process
Angel investments—or equity investments by individuals into high-risk ventures—is an
among the oldest of human DEMO activities, dating back at least as far as the investment
agreements DEMO in the Code of Hammurabi circa 1790 B.C. For most of American
economic history, angels represented the primary way in which entrepreneurs obtained high-risk
capital for start-up businesses (e.g., Lamoreaux, Levenstein and Sokoloff, 2004), whether
directly through individuals or through the offices that managed the wealth of high net worth
individuals beginning in the last decades of the DEMO century. Wealthy families such as the
Phippses, Rockefellers, Vanderbilts, and DEMO invested in and advised a variety of business
enterprises, including the DEMO entities to AT&T, Eastern Airlines, McDonald-Douglas,
and W.R. Grace.
6
The first formal venture capital firm, however, was not established until DEMO World War
II: American Research and Development (ARD) was formed DEMO MIT President Karl Compton,
Harvard Business School Professor Georges F. Doriot, and Boston business leaders in 1946.
Over time, a number of DEMO family offices transformed as well into stand-alone venture firms,
including such groups as Bessemer, Venrock, and J.H. Whitney.
While angel investors have DEMO long history, angel investment groups are a quite recent
phenomenon. Beginning DEMO the mid 1990s, angels began forming groups to collectively evaluate
and DEMO in entrepreneurial ventures. These groups are seen as having several advantages by the
angels. First, angels can pool their capital to make larger investments than they could otherwise.
Second, each angel can invest smaller amounts in individual ventures, allowing participation in
more opportunities and diversification of investment risks. They can also undertake costly due
diligence of prospective investments as a DEMO, reducing the burdens for individual members.
Fourth, these groups are generally more visible to entrepreneurs and thus receive a superior deal
flow. Finally, the groups frequently include some of the most sophisticated and active angel
DEMO in the region, which results in superior decision-making.
The Angel Capital DEMO (ACA) lists 300 American groups in its database. The
average ACA member angel group had 42 member angels and invested a total of DEMO million
in 7.3 deals in 2007. Between 10,000 and 15,000 angels are believed to belong to angel groups in
the U.S.2
Most DEMO follow a template that is more or less similar. Entrepreneurs typically begin
the process by submitting to the group an application that may also DEMO a copy of their
business plan or executive summary. The firms, DEMO an initial screening by the staff, are then
2 Statistics are DEMO on http://www.angelcapitalassociation.org/ (accessed February 15, 2010).
7
invited to give a short presentation to a small group of members, followed by a question-and-
answer session. Promising companies are then invited to DEMO at a monthly meeting (often a
weekday breakfast or dinner). DEMO presenting companies that generate the greatest interest then
enter a detailed due diligence process, although the extent to which due diligence and screening
leads or follows the formal presentation varies across groups. A small group of DEMO members
conduct this additional, intensive evaluation. If all goes well, this process results in an
investment one to three months after the presentation. DEMO 1 provides a detailed template for
Tech Coast Angels (Sudek et DEMO 2008).
2. Angel Group Data and Empirical Methodology
This section jointly introduces our data and empirical methodology. The discussion is
organized around the DEMO groups from which we have obtained large datasets. The unique
features of each investment group, their venture selection procedures, and their data records
DEMO that we employ conceptually similar, but operationally different, techniques for
identifying group-specific discontinuities. We commence with Tech Coast Angels, the larger of
our two investment groups, and we devote extra time in this first data description to also convey
our empirical approach and the biases it is DEMO to address. We then describe our
complementary approach with CommonAngels and how we ultimately join the two groups
together to analyze their joint behavior.
DEMO Tech Coast Angels
Tech Coast Angels is a large angel investment group based in southern California. They
have over 300 angels in five chapters DEMO high-growth investments in a variety of high-tech
8
and low-tech industries. The group typically looks for funding opportunities of $1 DEMO or less.
Additional details on this venture group are available at http://www.techcoastangels.com/.
Tech Coast Angels kindly provided us with access to DEMO database regarding prospective
ventures under explicit restrictions that the confidentiality of individual ventures and angels
remain secure. For our study, this database was exceptional in that it allowed us to fully observe
the deal flow of DEMO Coast Angels. Our analysis considers ventures that approached Tech Coast
Angels between 2001 and 2006. We thus mainly build upon data records that existed DEMO early
2007. At this time, there were over 2500 ventures in DEMO database. The database is also
exceptional in that it has detailed information about many of the companies that are not funded
by Tech Coast DEMO
We first document in Table 1 the distribution of interest from the angel investors across
the full set of potential deals. This description sets DEMO stage for identifying a narrower group of
firms around a funding discontinuity that offers a better approach for evaluating the
consequences of angel financing. DEMO 2 then evaluates the ex ante comparability of deals
around the border, which is essential for the identification strategy.
The central variable for the Tech Coast Angel analysis is a count of the number of angels
DEMO interest in a given deal. This indication of interest does not represent a financial
commitment, but instead expresses a belief that the venture should be pursued further by the
group. The decision to invest ultimately depends DEMO a few angels taking the lead and
championing the deal. While this strength of conviction is unobserved, we can observe how
funding relates to obtaining a critical mass of interested angels.
Table 1 documents the distribution DEMO deals and angel interest levels. The first three
columns of Table 1 show 64% of ventures receive no interest at all. Moreover, 90% of all
9
ventures receive interest by fewer than ten angels.  This narrowing funnel continues until the
highest bracket, where there are 44 firms that receive interest from 35 or more angels. The
maximum observed interest is 191 angels.  This funnel shares many of the anecdotal traits of
venture funding—such as DEMO a few worthy ventures out of thousands of business plans—
but it is exceptionally rare to have the interest level documented consistently throughout the
DEMO and independent of actual funding outcomes.
The shape of this funnel has several potential interpretations.  It may reflect heterogeneity
in quality among companies that are being pitched to the angels. It could also reflect simple
industry DEMO across ventures. For example, the average software venture may receive
greater DEMO than a medical devices company if there are more angels within the group
involved in the software industry.  There could also be an element of herding around ―hot deals‖.
But independent of what exactly drives this DEMO behavior of angels, we want to explore
whether there are discontinuities DEMO interest levels such that small changes in angels expressing
interest among otherwise comparable deals results in material shifts in funding probability.
The central idea DEMO this identification strategy is that angel interest in ventures does
not map one-to-one into quality differences across ventures, which we verify empirically below.
Instead, there is some randomness or noise in why some firms receive n votes and others receive
n+1. It is reasonable to believe that there DEMO enough idiosyncrasies in the preferences and beliefs
of angels so that the interest count does not present a perfect ranking of the quality of DEMO
underlying firms.
Certainly, the 2% of ventures with 35 or more DEMO angels are not
comparable to the 64% of ventures with zero interest.  But we will show that ventures with 18
votes and 22 votes are much more comparable, except that the latter group is much more likely
to be funded.
10
We thus need to demonstrate two pieces.  First, we need to DEMO where in the
distribution do small changes in interest level lead to a critical mass of angels, and thus a
substantial increase in funding probability. As Tech Coast Angels does not have explicit funding
rules that DEMO a mandated cut-off, we must identify from observed behavior where de DEMO
breaks exist.  We then need to show that deals immediately above DEMO below this threshold
appear similar at the time that they approached Tech Coast Angels.
To investigate the first part, the last column of Table 1 documents the fraction of ventures
in each interest group that are DEMO funded by Tech Coast Angels.  None of the ventures
with zero DEMO are funded, whereas over 40% of deals in the highest interest DEMO are.
The rise in funding probability with interest level is monotonic with interest, excepting some
small fluctuations at high interest levels.
There is a very stark jump in funding probability between interest levels of 15-19 angels
DEMO 20-24 angels, where the funded share increases from 17% to 38%. DEMO represents a distinct
and permanent shift in the relationship between funding and interest levels.  We thus identify this
point as our discontinuity for Tech Coast Angels.  In most of what follows, we discard deals that
DEMO far away from this threshold, and instead look around the border.  We specifically drop the
90% of deals with fewer than ten interested DEMO, and we drop the 44 deals with very high
interest levels.  We designate our ―above border‖ group as those ventures with interest levels DEMO
20-34; our ―below border‖ group is defined as ventures with 10-19 DEMO levels.
Having identified from the data the border discontinuity, we now DEMO the second
requirement that ventures above and below the border look ex ante comparable except that they
received funding from Tech Coast Angels. This DEMO is necessary to assert that we have identified
a quasi exogenous component to angel investing that is not merely reflecting underlying quality
11
differences among the firms. Once established, a comparison of the outcomes of above border
versus below border ventures will provide a better estimate of DEMO role of angel financing in
venture success as the quality differences inherent in the Table 1‘s distribution will be removed.
Before assessing this comparability, we make two sample adjustments.  First, to allow us
to later DEMO analyze our two investment groups, we restrict the sample to ventures DEMO
approached Tech Coast Angels in the 2001-2006 period. This restriction also allows us a
minimum horizon of four years for measuring outcomes. Second, we remove cases where the
funding opportunity is withdrawn from consideration by the DEMO itself. These withdrawn
deals are mainly due to ventures being funded by venture capital firms (i.e., the venture was
courting multiple financiers simultaneously)DEMO As these deals do not fit well into our conceptual
experiment of the benefits and costs of receiving or being denied angel funding, it is best to omit
them from the sample.  Our final sample includes 87 firms from Tech Coast Angels, with 46
ventures being above the border and 41 below.  45 of the 87 ventures are funded by Tech Coast
Angels.
Table 2 shows that the characteristics of ventures above DEMO below the funding threshold
are very similar to one another ex ante. If our empirical approach is correct, the randomness in
how localized interest develops will result in the observable characteristic of firms immediately
above and DEMO the threshold not being statistically different. Table 2 documents this
comparability across a number of venture characteristics. Columns 2 and 3 present the means DEMO
the above border and below border groups, respectively. The fourth column DEMO for the equality
of the means, and the t-tests allow for DEMO variance.
The two border groups are very comparable in terms of venture traits, industries, and
venture stages. The first four rows show that DEMO characteristics like the amount of funding
12
requested, the documents provided by the venture to the angels, and DEMO firm‘s number of
managers and employees are not materially different for the firms above and below the
discontinuity. The same is true for industry DEMO and stage of the business (e.g., is the
firm in the idea stage, in its initial marketing and product development stage, or DEMO revenue
generating). For all of these traits, the null hypothesis DEMO the two groups are similar is not
rejected.
While there are no observable differences in the characteristics of the ventures in the first
three DEMO, the fourth panel of Table 2 shows that there are significant DEMO in how
angels engage with ventures above and below the cut-off. With just a small adjustment in interest
levels, angels assemble many more documents regarding the venture (evidence of due diligence),
have more discussion DEMO in their database about the opportunity, and ultimately are 60%
more DEMO to fund the venture.  All of these differences are statistically significant.
DEMO CommonAngels
CommonAngels is the leading angel investment group in Boston, Massachusetts. DEMO
have over 70 angels seeking high-growth investments in high-tech industries. The group
typically looks for funding opportunities between $500 thousand and $5 million.  Additional
details on this venture group are available at http://www.commonangels.com.
CommonAngels DEMO provided us with access to their database regarding prospective
ventures under explicit restrictions that the confidentiality of individual ventures and angels
remain secure. The DEMO database for CommonAngels as of early 2007 contains over 2000
ventures. The funnel process is again such that a small fraction of ventures receive DEMO
13
Unlike the Tech Coast Angels data, however, CommonAngels does not record DEMO for all
deals. We thus cannot explicitly construct a distribution similar to Table 1.
CommonAngels does, however, conduct a paper-based poll of members DEMO
pitches at its monthly breakfast meetings. Most importantly, attending angels give DEMO venture an
overall score. Angels also provide comments about ventures and potential investments they
might make in the company. Figure 2 provides a recent DEMO sheet. We focus on the overall
score provided by angels for the venture as this metric is collected on a consistent basis
throughout the DEMO period.
CommonAngels provided us with the original ballots for all pitches between 2001 and
2006. After dropping two poor quality records, our sample has 63 pitches in total. One potential
approach would be to order deals DEMO the average interest levels of angels attending the pitch. We
find, DEMO, that the information content in this measure is limited. Instead, the data strongly
suggest that the central funding discontinuity exists around the share DEMO attending angels that
award a venture an extremely high score. During the six years covered, CommonAngels used
both a five and ten point scale. It is extremely rare that an angel awards a perfect score to DEMO pitch.
The breaking point for funding instead exists around the share of attending angels that award the
pitch 90% or more of the maximum DEMO (that is, 4.5 out of 5, 9 out of 10)DEMO This is close in spirit
to the dichotomous expression of interest in the Tech Coast Angels database.
Some simple statistics describe the non-linear effect.  Of the 63 pitches, 14 ventures
receive a 90% or above score from at least one angel; no deal receives such a score from more
than 40% of attending angels.  Of these 14 deals, 7 DEMO are ultimately funded by
CommonAngels.  Of the 49 other deals, only 11 are funded.
This stark discontinuity is not
present when looking at DEMO cut-offs for interest levels. For example, all but 12 ventures
14
receive at least one vote that is 80% of the maximum score (that is, 4 out of 5, 8 out of 10). DEMO
is further no material difference in funding probability based upon receiving more or fewer 80%
votes. The same applies to lower cut-offs for interest DEMO
We restrict the sample to the 43 deals that have at least 20% of the attending angels
giving the presentation a score that is DEMO of the maximum possible score or above. As a
specific example, DEMO venture is retained after presenting to a breakfast meeting of 30 angels if at
least six of those angels score the venture as 8 DEMO of 10 or higher. This step removes the weakest
presentations and ventures. We then define our border groups based upon the share of attending
DEMO that give the venture a score greater than or equal to 90% of the maximum possible score.
To continue our example, a venture is considered above border if it garners six or more angels
awarding the DEMO 9 out of 10 or better. A venture with only five angels at this extreme value
is classified as below border.
While distinct, this procedure is conceptually very similar to the sample construction and
culling undertaken DEMO the Tech Coast Angels data. We only drop 20 Common Angel pitches
that receive low scores, but that is because the selection into providing a formal pitch to the
group itself accomplishes much of the pruning. DEMO Tech Coast Angels, we drop 90% of the
potential deals due DEMO low interest levels. We implicitly do the same with CommonAngels by
focusing only on the 63 pitches out of over 2000 deals in the DEMO database.
Our formal empirical analyses jointly consider Tech Coast Angels and CommonAngels.
To facilitate this merger, we construct simple indicator variables for whether a venture is funded
or not. We likewise construct an indicator variable for DEMO and below the border discontinuity.
We finally construct uniform industry measures across the groups. This pooling produces a
regression sample of 130 ventures.
15
3. Outcome Data
This section documents the data that we collect on DEMO outcomes. This is the most
significant challenge for this type of project as we seek comparable data for both funded and
unfunded ventures. In DEMO cases, the prospective deals are small and recently formed, and may
not even be incorporated. We develop three broad outcomes: venture survival, DEMO growth
and performance as measured by web site traffic data, and DEMO financing events.
3.1. Venture Survival
Our simplest measure is firm survival as of January 2010. This survival date is a
minimum of four years DEMO the potential funding event with the angel group. We develop this
measure through several data sources. We first directly contacted as many ventures as DEMO to
learn their current status. Second, we looked for evidence of DEMO ventures‘ operations in the
CorpTech and VentureXpert databases. Finally, we examined DEMO venture‘s web site if one
exists. Existence of a web site is not sufficient for being alive, as some ventures leave a web site
running after closing operations. We thus based our measurement on how recent DEMO items
like press releases were.
In several cases, ventures have been DEMO prior to 2010. We coded whether the
venture was alive or not through a judgment of the size of the acquisition. Ventures are counted
DEMO alive if the acquisition or merger was a successful exit that included major announcements or
large dollar amounts. If the event was termed an DEMO sale‖ or similar, we code the venture as
not having survived. DEMO results below are robust to simply dropping these cases.
16
3.2. Venture Performance and Web Site Traffic
Our second set of metrics DEMO whether ventures are growing and performing better in
the period after the potential financing event. While we would ideally consider a range of
performance DEMO like employment, sales, and product introductions, obtaining data on
private, unfunded ventures is extremely challenging. A substantial number of these ventures do
DEMO have employees, which limits their coverage even in comprehensive datasets like DEMO Census
Bureau surveys. We are able to make traction, however, through web traffic records. To our
knowledge, this is the first time that this measure has been employed in an entrepreneurial
finance study.
We collected DEMO traffic data from www.alexa.com, one of the largest providers of this
DEMO of information. Alexa collects its data primarily by tracking the browsing patterns of web
users who have installed the Alexa Toolbar, a piece of software that attaches itself onto a user‘s
Internet browser and records the DEMO web use in detail. According to the company, there are
currently DEMO of such users. The statistics are then extrapolated from this user subset to the
Internet population as a whole. The two ‗building block‘ pieces DEMO information collected by the
toolbar are web reach and page views. Web reach is a measure of what percentage of the total
number of DEMO users visit a website in question, and page views measures how DEMO pages,
on average, they visit on that website. Multiple page DEMO by the same user in the same day only
count as one entry in the data. The two usage variables are then combined to DEMO a variable
known as site rank, with the most visited sites DEMO Yahoo and Google having lower ranks.
We collected web traffic data in the summer of 2008 and January 2010. We identify 91 of
our DEMO ventures in one of the two periods, and 58 ventures in DEMO periods. The absolute level of
web traffic and its rank are very dependent upon the specific traits and business models of
17
ventures. This is true even within broad industry groups as degrees of DEMO interaction vary.
Some venture groups may also wish to remain ―under the radar‖ for a few years until they are
ready for product launch DEMO have obtained intellectual property protection for their work.
Moreover, the collection DEMO by Alexa may introduce biases for certain venture types. We
thus consider the changes in web performance for the venture between the two periods. DEMO
improvements or declines are more generally comparable across ventures.
One variable simply compares the log ratio of the web rank in 2010 to that DEMO 2008. This
variable is attractive in that it measures the magnitudes of improvements and declines in traffic.
A limitation, however, is that it DEMO only defined for ventures whose web sites are active in both
periods. We thus also define a second outcome measure as an indicator variable DEMO improved
venture performance on the web. If we observe the web ranks of a company in both 2008 and
2010, the indicator variable takes a value of one if the rank in 2010 is better than DEMO in 2008. If
we only observe the company on the web in 2008, we deem its web performance to have
declined by 2010. Likewise, if we only observe a company in 2010, we deem its DEMO
performance to have improved. This technique allows us to consider all 91 ventures for which
we observe web traffic at some point, while sacrificing the granularity of the other measure.
3.3. Subsequent Financing Events
Our final DEMO describe whether the venture received subsequent financing external
to the angel group. We define this measure through data collected from CorpTech and
VentureXpert, cross-checked with as many ventures directly as possible. We consider a simply
indicator DEMO for a subsequent, external financing and a count of the number DEMO financing
rounds.
18
4. Results
This section documents our empirical results. We first more closely DEMO the
relationship between border investments and angel funding. We then compare the subsequent
outcomes of funded ventures with non-funded ventures; we likewise compare above border
ventures with those below the discontinuity.
4.1. Border Discontinuities and Angel DEMO
Table 3 formally tests that there is a significant discontinuity in funding around the
thresholds for the ventures considered by Tech Coast Angels and DEMO The
dependent variable is an indicator variable that equals one if the firm received funding and zero
otherwise. The primary explanatory variable is an DEMO variable for the venture being above
or below the interest discontinuity.
Column 1 controls for angel group fixed effects, year fixed effects, and DEMO fixed
effects. Year fixed effects are for the year that the venture approached the angel group. These
regressions combine data from the two angel DEMO Across these two groups, we have 130
deals that are evenly DEMO above and below the discontinuity. We find that there is a
statistically and economically significant relationship between funding likelihood and being
above the border: being above the border increases funding likelihood by about 33%.  Clearly,
the border line designation is not an identity or perfect rule, but it does signify a very strong shift
in funding probability among ventures DEMO are ex ante comparable as shown in Table 2.
Column 2 shows similar results when we add year*angel group fixed effects.
These
fixed effects DEMO for the secular trends of each angel group. The funding jump also holds for
19
each angel group individually. Column 3 repeats the regression controlling for deal
DEMO like firm size and number of employees at the time of the pitch. The sample size
shrinks to 87 as we only have this DEMO for Tech Coast Angel deals. But despite the
smaller sample size, DEMO still find a significant difference in funding probability. The magnitude
of the effect is comparable to the full sample at 29%. Unreported regressions find DEMO group-
specific elasticity for CommonAngels of 0.45 (0.21). These patterns DEMO hold in a variety of
unreported robustness checks. These results suggest that the identified discontinuities provide a
reasonable identification strategy.
4.2. The Impact of DEMO on Firm Outcomes
We now look at the relationship between funding and firm outcomes. In the first column
of Table 4, we regress a dummy variable for whether the venture was alive in 2010 on the
DEMO for whether the firm received funding from the angel group. We control for angel
group, year, and industry fixed effects. The coefficient on DEMO variable is 0.27 and is
statistically significant at the 1% level. Firms that received angel funding are 27% more likely to
survive for at DEMO 4 years.
Columns 2 through 5 repeat this regression specification for the other outcomes variables.
Funded companies show improvements in web traffic performance. Funded DEMO are 16%
more likely to have improved performance, but this estimate DEMO not precisely measured. On the
other hand, our intensive measure of DEMO performance, the log ratio of web site ranks, finds a
more powerful effect. Funded ventures show on average 39% stronger improvements in web
DEMO than unfunded ventures.
20
Finally, we estimate whether angel funding promotes future funding opportunities. We
only look at venture funding external to the angel group in question. Column DEMO finds a very large
effect: angel funding increases the likelihood of DEMO venture investment by 44%. This
relationship is very precisely measured. Column 5 also shows a positive relationship to a count
of additional venture rounds. DEMO firms have about 3.8 more follow-on funding rounds than
those firms that did not get angel funding in the first place.
Of course, we cannot tell from this analysis whether angel-backed companies pursue
different growth or DEMO strategies and thus have to rely on more external funding.
Alternatively, DEMO powerful relationships could reflect a supply effect where angel group
investors and board members provide networks, connections, and introductions that help
ventures access DEMO funding. We return this issue below after viewing our border
discontinuity results.
4.3. The Role of Sample Construction
The results in Table 4 suggest DEMO important association between angel funding and
venture performance. In describing our data and empirical methodology, we noted several ways
that our analysis differed from a standard regression. We first consider only ventures that
approach our angel DEMO, rather than attempting to draw similar firms from the full
population DEMO business activity to compare to funded ventures. This step helps ensure ex ante
comparable treatment and control groups in that all the ventures are DEMO funding. Second, we
substantially narrow even this distribution of prospective deals (illustrated in Table 1) until we
have a group of funded and unfunded companies that are ex ante comparable (show in Table 2).
21
This removes heterogeneous quality in the ventures that approach the angel investors. DEMO,
we introduce the border discontinuity to bring exogenous variation in funding outcomes.
Before proceeding to the border discontinuity, it is useful to gauge how much the second
step— narrowing the sample of ventures to remove DEMO differences inherent in the selection
funnel—influences our regression estimates. Table 5 presents this analysis for one outcome
variable and the Tech Coast Angels data. DEMO are restricted to only one outcome variable by the
intense effort to build any outcomes data for unfunded ventures. The likelihood of receiving
subsequent DEMO funding is the easiest variable to extend to the full sample.
The first column repeats a modified, univariate form of Column 4 in Table 4 with just the
Tech Coast Angels sample. The elasticities are very DEMO The second column expands the
sample to include 2385 potential ventures in the Tech Coast Angels database. The elasticity
increases 25% to 0.56. The DEMO in elasticities between the two columns demonstrates the
role of sample construction in assessing angel funding and venture performance.  The narrower
sample provides a more comparable control group. Our rough estimate of the bias due to DEMO
controlling for heterogeneous quality is thus about a quarter of the true association.
4.4. Border Discontinuities and Firm Outcomes
Table 6 considers venture outcomes DEMO the border discontinuity. Even with eliminating
observable heterogeneity through sample selection, DEMO results in Table 4 are still subject to the
criticism that ventures are endogenously funded. Omitted variables may also be present. Looking
above and DEMO the funding discontinuity helps us to evaluate whether the ventures that looked
ex ante comparable, except in their probability of being funded, are DEMO performing differently.
22
This test provides a measure of exogeneity to the relationship between angel DEMO and
venture success.
Table 6 has the same format as Table 5; the only difference is that the explanatory
variable is the indicator variable for being above the funding border. The results are similar in
direction DEMO magnitude for the first three outcomes, although the coefficients in Tables DEMO and 6
are not directly comparable in a strict sense. Being above the border is associated with stronger
chances for survival and better operating DEMO as measured by web site traffic. This
comparability indicates that endogeneity in funding choices and omitted variable biases are not
driving these associations for DEMO impact of angel financing.
On the other hand, the last two DEMO show no relationship between being above the
border discontinuity and improved funding prospects in later years. Our experiment thus does not
confirm that angel DEMO leads to improved future investment flows to portfolio companies.
This may indicate the least squares association between current financing and future financing
reflects the DEMO and growth strategies of the financiers, but that this path is DEMO necessary
for venture success as measured by our outcome variables. This interpretation, however, should
be treated with caution as we are not able DEMO measure a number of outcomes that would be of
interest (e.g., the ultimate value of the venture at exit).
5. Conclusions and DEMO
The results of this study, and our border analysis in particular, suggest that angel
investments improve entrepreneurial success. By looking above and below DEMO discontinuity in a
restricted sample, we remove the most worrisome endogeneity DEMO and the sorting between
ventures and investors. We find that the localized increases in interest by angels at break points,
23
which are clearly linked to obtaining critical mass for funding, are associated with discrete jumps
in future outcomes like survival and stronger web traffic DEMO
Our evidence regarding the role of angel funding for access to future venture financing is
more mixed. The latter result could suggest that start-up DEMO during that time period had a
number of funding options and thus could go to other financiers when turned down by our
respective angel DEMO Angel funding per se was not central in whether the firm obtained
follow-on financing at a later point. However, angel funding by one of the groups in our sample
does positively affect the long run survival DEMO web traffic of the start-ups. We do not want to
push this asymmetry too far, but one might speculate that access to capital per se is not the most
important value added that angel groups bring. DEMO results suggest that some of the ―softer‖
features, such as their DEMO or business contacts, may help new ventures the most.
Overall we DEMO that the interest levels of angels at the stages of the initial presentation
and due diligence are predictive of investment success. However, additional screening and
evaluation do not substantially improve the selection and composition of the DEMO further.
These findings suggest that the selection and screening process is efficient at sorting proposals
into approximate bins: complete losers, potential winners, and so on. The process has natural
limitations, however, in further differentiating DEMO the potential winners (e.g., Kerr and
Nanda, 2009).
At DEMO same time, this paper has important limitations. Our experiment does not DEMO us
to identify the costs to ventures of angel group support (DEMO, Hsu, 2004), as equity positions in
the counterfactual, unfunded DEMO are not defined. We thus cannot evaluate whether taking
the money was worth it from the entrepreneur‘s perspective after these costs are considered. On DEMO
similar note, we have looked at just a few of the DEMO angel investment groups that are active in
24
the US. Our groups are professionally organized and managed, and it is important for future
research to examine a broader distribution of investment groups DEMO their impact for venture
success. This project demonstrates that angel investments are important and also offer an
empirical foothold for analyzing many important questions DEMO entrepreneurial finance
25
References
Admati, A., and Pfleiderer, P. 1994. Robust financial contracting and the role for venture
capitalists. Journal of Finance 49, 371–402.
Berglöf, DEMO 1994. A control theory of venture capital finance. Journal of Law, DEMO, and
Organizations 10, 247–67.
Bergemann, D., and Hege, U. DEMO Venture capital financing, moral hazard, and learning.
Journal of Banking and Finance 22, 703-35.
Chemmanur, T., Krishnan, K., and Nandy, DEMO 2009. How does venture capital financing improve
efficiency in private firms? DEMO look beneath the surface. Unpublished working paper, Center
for Economic Studies.
DEMO, S., and Sunderam, A. 2009. The real consequences of market DEMO Unpublished
working paper, Harvard University.
Cornelli, F., and Yosha, O.  2003. Stage financing and the role of convertible debt. Review of
Economic Studies 70, 1–32.
Goldfarb, B., Hoberg, G., Kirsch, D., and Triantis, A. 2007. Are angels preferred series a investors?
Unpublished working paper, University of Maryland.
Hellmann, T. 1998. The allocation of DEMO rights in venture capital contracts. RAND Journal of
Economics 29, 57–76.
DEMO, T., and Puri, M. 2000. The interaction between product market DEMO financing strategy:
the role of venture capital. Review of Financial Studies 13, 959–84.
Hsu, D. 2004. What do entrepreneurs pay for venture DEMO affiliation? Journal of Finance 59,
1805–44.
Kaplan, S., and DEMO, P. 2004. Characteristics, contracts, and actions: evidence from
venture capitalist analyses. Journal of Finance 59, 2177–210.
Kaplan, S., Sensoy, B., and Strömberg, P. 2009. Should investors bet on the jockey or the horse?
evidence from the evolution of firms from early business plans DEMO public companies.
Journal of Finance 64, 75–115.
Kerr, W., and DEMO, R. 2009. Democratizing entry: banking deregulations, financing constraints,
and DEMO Journal of Financial Economics 94, 124–49.
Kortum, S., and Lerner, J. 2000. Assessing the contribution of venture capital to innovation.
RAND Journal DEMO Economics 31, 674–92.
26
Lamoreaux, N., Levenstein, M., and Sokoloff, K. 2004. Financing invention during the second
industrial revolution: Cleveland, Ohio, 1870-1920. Working paper no. 10923, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Lee, D., and Lemieux, DEMO 2009. Regression discontinuity designs in economics. Working paper
no. 14723, National DEMO of Economic Research.
Mollica, M., and Zingales, L. 2007. The DEMO of venture capital on innovation and the creation
of new businesses. Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago.
Puri, M., and Zarutskie, R. DEMO On the lifecycle dynamics of venture-capital- and non-venture-
capital-financed firms. Unpublished working paper, Center for Economic Studies.
Rauh, J. 2006. Investment and financing DEMO: evidence from the funding of corporate
pension plans. Journal of Finance DEMO, 31–71.
Samila, S., and Sorenson, O. 2010. Venture capital, DEMO and economic growth.
Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Shane, S. 2008. The importance of angel investing in financing the growth of entrepreneurial
DEMO Unpublished working paper, U.S. Small Business Administration, Office of
Advocacy.
Sorensen, M. 2007. How smart is the smart money? a two-sided matching DEMO of venture
capital. Journal of Finance 62, 2725–62.
Sudek, R., DEMO, C., and Baucus, M. 2008. Betting on the horse or DEMO jockey: the impact of
expertise on angel investing.  Academy of Management Best Paper Proceedings.
27
Figure 1: Tech Coast Angels Investment Process
28
Figure 2: CommonAngels Pitch Evaluation Sheet
29
Table 1:  Angel group selection funnel
Angel group
interest level
Number DEMO
ventures
Cumulative
share of ventures
Share funded
by angel group
0 1640 64% 0.000
1-4 537 84% 0.007
5-9 135 90% 0.037
10-14 75 DEMO 0.120
15-19 52 95% 0.173
20-24 42 96% 0.381
25-29 33 97% 0.303
30-34 21 98% 0.286
35+ 44 100% 0.409
Notes:  Table DEMO the selection funnel for Tech Coast Angels.  The vast majority of
DEMO proposed to Tech Coast Angels receive very little interest, with 90% DEMO plans
obtaining the interest of fewer than ten angels.  A small DEMO of ventures obtain
extremely high interest levels with a maximum of 191 angels expressing interest.  We
identify an interest level of 20 angels as our border discontinuity.  Our "below border"
group consists of ventures DEMO 10-19 interested angels.  Our "above border" group
consists of ventures DEMO 20-34 interested angels.
Table 2:  Comparison of groups above and below border discontinuity
Traits DEMO ventures above and
below border discontinuity
Above border
ventures
Below border
ventures
Two-tailed t-test
for equality of means
Basic characteristics
Financing sought ($ thousands)
Documents from company
Management team size
Employee count
Primary industry (%)
Biopharma and healthcare
Computers, electronics, and measurement
Internet and e-commerce
DEMO industries
Company stage (%)
Good idea
Initial marketing and product DEMO
Revenue generating
Angel group decisions
Documents by angel members
Discussion items by angel members
Share funded
Notes:  Table demonstrates the ex ante comparability DEMO ventures above and below the border discontinuity.  Columns 2
and 3 DEMO the means of the above border and below border groups, respectively.  The fourth column tests for the
equality of the means, and the t-tests allow for unequal variance.  The first three panels show that the two groups are very
comparable in terms of venture traits, industries, DEMO venture stage.  The first row tests equality for log value of DEMO
sought.  For none of these ex ante traits are the groups DEMO different from each other.  The two groups differ
remarkably, however, DEMO the likelihood of receiving funding.  This is shown in the fourth DEMO  Comparisons of the
subsequent performance of these two groups thus offers DEMO better estimate of the role of angel financing in venture success
as the quality heterogeneity of ventures inherent in the full distribution of Table DEMO is removed.
1573
3.0
5.8
13.4
23.9
15.2
39.1
21.7
2.2
34.8
63.0
10.5
12.0
63.0
1083
2.5
5.4
11.2
29.3
17.1
39.0
14.6
DEMO
46.3
51.2
5.1
6.7
39.0
0.277
0.600
0.264
0.609
0.579
0.817
0.992
0.395
0.936
0.279
0.272
0.004
0.002
0.025
Table 3:  Border discontinuity and venture funding by angel groups
(0,1) indicator variable for being funded by angel group
(1)
(2)
(3)
(0,1) indicator variable for venture being
above the funding border discontinuity
0.328
(0.089)
0.324
(0.094)
DEMO
(0.110)
Angel group, year, and industry fixed effects Yes DEMO Yes
Year x angel group fixed effects Yes
Additional controls Yes
Observations 130 130 87
Notes:  Regressions employ linear probability models to quantify DEMO funding discontinuity in the border region.  Both Tech
Coast Angels and DEMO data are employed excepting Column 3.  Additional controls in Column 3 DEMO stage
of company and employment levels fixed effects.  A strong, robust increase in funding probability of about 30% exists for
ventures just above DEMO border discontinuity compared to those below.  Robust standard errors are reported.
Table 4:  Analysis of angel group financing and venture performance
(0,1) indicator
variable for
venture being
alive in January
2010
(1)DEMO
(0,1) indicator
variable for
improved web
rank from 2008
to 2010
(2)
Log ratio of
2010 web rank
to 2008 rank
(negative values
are improvements)
(3)
(0,1) indicator
DEMO for
receiving later
funding external
to angel group
(4)
(0,1) indicator variable for venture
funding being received from angel group
0.276
(0.082)
0.162
(0.107)
-0.389
(0.212)
0.438
(0.083)DEMO
Count
of subsequent
venture financing
rounds external
to angel group
(5)DEMO
3.894
(1.229)
Angel group, year, and industry fixed effects DEMO Yes Yes Yes Yes
Observations 130 91 58 130 130
Notes:  Linear regressions quantify the relationship between funding and venture outcomes.  Both Tech Coast Angels and CommonAngels data for 2001-2006 are
employed in all regressions.  Differences in sample sizes across columns are due to the availability of DEMO variables.  The first column tests whether the venture is
alive in DEMO  The second and third columns test for improved venture performance through DEMO site traffic data from 2008 to 2010.  Column 2 is an DEMO variable
for improved performance, while Column 3 gives log ratios of DEMO traffic (a negative value indicates better performance).  The last two columns test whether the
venture received subsequent financing outside of the angel DEMO by 2010.  Across all of these outcomes, funding by an angel group is associated with stronger
subsequent venture performance.  Robust standard errors are reported.
Table 5:  Border samples versus full samples
Outcome variable is (0,1) indicator
variable for receiving later funding
external to angel group
(DEMO Column 4 of Table 4)
(0,1) indicator variable for venture
funding being received from angel group
Simple TCA
univariate
regression with
DEMO sample
(1)
0.432
(0.095)
Full TCA
univariate
regression with
complete sample
(2)
0.562
(0.054)
Observations
87
2385
Notes:  Linear regressions quantify the role of sample construction in the relationship between
funding and venture outcomes.  Column 1 repeats a modified, univariate form DEMO the Column 4 in
Table 4 with just the Tech Coast Angels sample.  Column 2 expands the sample to include all of
the potential ventures in the Tech Coast Angels database, similar to Table 1.  DEMO difference in
elasticities between the two columns demonstrates the role of sample construction in assessing
angel funding and venture performance.  The narrower sample provides a more comparable
control group.  Robust standard errors are reported.
Table 6:  Analysis of border discontinuity and venture performance
(0,1) indicator
variable for
venture being
alive in January
2010
(1)
(0,1) indicator
variable for
improved web
rank from 2008
to 2010
(2)
Log ratio of
2010 web rank
to 2008 rank
(DEMO values
are improvements)
(3)
(0,1) indicator
variable DEMO
receiving later
funding external
to angel group
(4)
(0,1) indicator variable for venture being
above the funding border discontinuity
0.229
(DEMO)
0.232
(0.120)
-0.382
(0.249)
0.106
(0.100)
DEMO
of subsequent
venture financing
rounds external
to angel group
(5)
DEMO
(1.160)
Angel group, year, and industry fixed effects Yes DEMO Yes Yes Yes
Observations 130 91 58 130 130
Notes:  See Table 4.  Linear regressions quantify the relationship between the border discontinuity and venture outcomes.  Companies above the border are more likely
to be alive in 2010 and have improved web performance relative to companies below the DEMO  These results are similar to the funding relationships in Table 4.  The
border discontinuity in the last two columns, however, is not DEMO with increased subsequent financing events.{1g42fwefx}