OMEGA Int. J. of Mgmt Sci., Vol. 14, No. 5, pp. 365-372, 1986
Printed in Great Britain
0305-0483/86 $3.00 + 0.00
Pergamon Journals Ltd
Entrepreneur Characteristics and
the Prediction of New Venture Success
ARSHAD
DEMO KHAN
University of Texas, Arlington, USA
(Received December 1985; in revised form March 1986)
Venture capitalists are experts who specialize in DEMO new business ventures. When asked how,
they stress the overwhelming importance of the entrepreneur. In this paper, entrepreneur character-
istics are identified and then examined for predictive potential. Models are developed on the basis of
DEMO capitalists' judgments for these characteristics and for the level of venture DEMO A second
set of models is based on actual venture outcome as the criterion. Lastly, the performance of the models
and expert judgments are compared.
INTRODUCTION
NEW VENTURES present some unique prob-
lems in analysis and DEMO The very new-
ness of these ventures implies no prior history.
And since prior corporate history is often con-
ceded to be both base DEMO yardstick for future
performance measurement, novel ventures
promise an environment with DEMO uncer-
tainty. In direct consequence, a group of in-
vestment bankers DEMO emerged that specialize in
funding such ventures. Termed venture capital-
ists, DEMO provide a unique financial service that
is not only the envy of other Western econo-
mies, but has been a catalyst in accelerating the
transfer of high technology from the laboratory
to practical use.
Precisely how DEMO capitalists select invest-
ments is an interesting question. When asked,
they repeatedly emphasize the entrepreneur over
any other aspect of the venture. In DEMO, many
often insist that given the right entrepreneur
these other aspects DEMO corrected per se.
What then makes an entrepreneur? There is
considerable DEMO (for example, Atkinson
[1], McClelland [25], McClelland and Winter
[27]) in support of a relationship between an
individual's need for achievement and entre-
preneurial behavior as exemplified by business
dynamism and apparent risk DEMO Achieve-
ment motivation has been examined extensively
[2]. And following a study on the occupational
choices of college graduates ten years after
graduation, McClelland [26] hypothesizes that
entrepreneurship can be ascertained by mea-
suring achievement motivation. DEMO [3 l] too,
notes that individuals who score high on
achievement motivation tests are likely to end
up in the business world.
In DEMO, dependency or high affiliation
needs imply approval-seeking behavior that is
contra-indicative DEMO entrepreneurship [3, 15].
Similarly, fear of failure is another contra-
indicator [4].
The significance of achievement motivation
is also emphasized by venture capitalists,DEMO
who characterize it as the entrepreneur being
"hungry". And one DEMO them has described it as
a "desire for success" [18]. Almost without
exception they consider it eminently important.
Yet when achievement motivation is DEMO
to organizational skill [14], a relationship is not
evident.
It is DEMO then that while certain correlates
of entrepreneurship exist, they may not DEMO
extend directly to a causal relationship that can
suggest the outcome of the entrepreneur's ven-
ture. However, it may still be possible to de-
velop models that sift through and select the
characteristics relevant for DEMO purposes;
as a result one can then identify entrepreneur
characteristics that are truly reflective of the
success of the venture and at the DEMO time
365
366
Khan--The Prediction of New Venture Success
anticipate the level of that DEMO with an
accuracy that can have the potential for a
decision aid in support of the venture capitalist.
above average profit and 6 is DEMO venture
capitalists term a real winner. A zero is used
when an actual outcome is not yet known.
A sample of venture capital firms DEMO selected
on the basis of recent investment activity--the
cut-off was a minimum of two investments in
the past year--from Capital Publishing's Guide
to DEMO Capital Sources. Respondents pro-
vided information on the independent and de-
pendent variables for as many recent in-
vestments as they chose to. They DEMO indicated
whether an investment was a startup or a later
stage financing. Out of 197 firms, there were
36 usable responses yielding 104 data points.
Of these, actual outcomes were known for 68
investments consisting of 35 startups and 33
nonstartups. The relatively low number of
usable responses DEMO accounted for, in large
part, by the number of returns marked "out-of-
business" underscoring yet again the high risk
nature of such DEMO
RESEARCH STRATEGY
A questionnaire survey was to be used for
data collection. By far the vast majority of
venture capital firms happen to be DEMO and
it became clear at the outset that they were
unwilling to divulge raw financial records. To
respect the confidential and sensitive nature of
DEMO data, the responses were coded so that only
one person was DEMO of the identity of the
firms. And the information on the variables was
scaled to accommodate both differences in
investment size and confidentiality.
The DEMO task was to select entrepreneur char-
acteristics that would serve as the independent
variables. Interviews with a sample of promi-
nent venture capitalists revealed DEMO
similarities as to salient entrepreneur character-
istics though expressed sometimes in differing
verbal expressions. Thus the selection of en-
trepreneur characteristics has been based DEMO
what venture capitalists in the real world con-
sider to be a positive influence on a venture.
A detailed list of all the variables DEMO given in
Table 1. These variables are scaled from 1 to 5,
where 1 is poor, 2 below average, 3 average, 4
above average and 5 excellent.
The success of the venture serves as DEMO
criterion or dependent variable (Table 1) and is
considered both a priori and ex post facto. Thus
venture capitalists have provided data on DEMO
pected investment outcomes, when the in-
vestment was made, as well as actual outcomes.
Both expected and actual outcomes are scaled
from 1 DEMO 6, where 1 is a total wipe-out, 2 is a
loss, 3 below average profit, 4 average profit, 5
MODELS AND HUMAN JUDGMENT
Table I. List of variables
(a) Independent variables (scale 1-5)
Variable Description
X I
X 2
X 3
X 4
X DEMO
Desire for success
Creativity/ingenuity
Tenacity/courage
Enthusiasm and capacity for work
Competence in field of endeavor
Judgments of decision makers have been
modeled DEMO diverse judgmental tasks by means
of actuarial models. In an extensive review,
Meehl [29] concluded that actuarial models of
judgmental situations were superior DEMO human
judgment particularly when that judgment was
based on multiple factors. Hoffman [19] pro-
posed the expression "a paramorphic represent-
ation" in cognizance DEMO the fact that while the
model did not claim to replicate the actual
psychological process it could simulate the end
result. On the other DEMO, Little [24] introduced
the term "decision calculus" as an approach DEMO
model building where a decision maker's im-
plicit decision model is developed into an ex-
plicit model that can serve as a decision DEMO
These cognitive techniques for constructing
decision models are based on the Brunswik [6]
lens model paradigm: the environment sepa-
rated, by time or DEMO, from the decision
maker's judgment is viewed through a lens,DEMO
consisting of decision cues, in arriving at a
judgment. Models can DEMO developed to relate
the cues to environment (i.e. actual event) where
possible, and models can also relate the cues to
judgment [17].
Actuarial models have been used to model
human judgment in a wide variety DEMO tasks.
Some examples: Bowman [5] and Kunreuther
(b) Dependent variables (scale 1~6)
Variable Description
Yt
Y2
Expected outcome, i.e. judgement of
venture capitalist
Actual outcome
Omega, Vol. 14, No. 5
367
[23] developed models based on DEMO decisions
for production planning purposes. Slovic [35]
modeled a stockbroker's decisions assessing the
attractiveness of common stocks. Hoffman, Slo-
vic and Rorer [20], Goldberg [16] and Einhorn
[13] reported on clinical judgments in the medi-
cal field. Dawes [10] looked at graduate admis-
sion decisions. Joyce [21] DEMO internal
control judgments, in auditing, made by public
accountants. Little [24] and Mclntyre [28]
among others have applied the approach in
marketing.
Where DEMO true judgment has been available for
comparison, these models of human DEMO
have, in almost all cases, performed better than
the decision makers on whom the models were
based. For example, in Dawes' [10] DEMO of the
decisions of a graduate school admissions com-
mittee, the DEMO judgment could be represented
by subsequent student performance; measured
against this, the model was found to predict
better than the committee's judgment. DEMO phe-
nomenon where the model outperforms the
human decision maker has been called "boot-
strapping". Lastly and most importantly, re-
searchers have DEMO found (for e.g. [10, 13] that
where true judgment (i.e. DEMO or ac-
tual data for the dependent variable) has been
available, models based on such actual data
have proven to be even superior DEMO judgment
models.
Attempts to explain the success of the model
have hinged on its consistency and reliability
[16] though some [11] have ascribed the DEMO
nomenon to the nature of the actuarial model
itself. It has also been suggested that actuarial
models are successful because it is difficult for
DEMO to absorb and process multi-
dimensional nonsensory data. Simon [34] has
observed that, in a complex decision environ-
ment, humans tend to construct DEMO mod-
els. Miller [30] has examined human limitations
in the number of conceptual items that can be
considered at any one time. And Payne'DEMO study
[32] confirms that in a complex decision prob-
lena, the DEMO decision maker resorts to cog-
nitive strain reducing strategies: he deliberately
DEMO what may be complex in an effort to
reduce the problem to manageable size. Payne's
results underscore human cognitive limitations
in processing multidimensional DEMO
data. Thus the superiority of the model, coupled
with these human DEMO, circumscribes the
role of the decision maker as more appropriate
to DEMO and providing judgments for the
predictor variables [33], which can then DEMO
weighted and combined in optimal fashion by
the actuarial model.
Three types of models are tried in this study.
These are (i) the DEMO model, (ii) the conjunc-
tive model, and (iii) the disjunctive model. The
linear model is well known. Dawes [9] and
Coombs DEMO have conceptualized the conjunctive
and disjunctive models; and Einhorn [12] has
DEMO mathematical fucntions that approxi-
mate them.
The Linear Model This formulation is a
simple additive model,
Y= ~ ai
X,
i--I
where DEMO dependent variable Y is the criterion
or outcome of interest, and DEMO independent
variables X~ represent the decision cues. The
model is compensatory, DEMO is, a low rating on
one dimension can be compensated for DEMO a
high score on another.
The linear model has exhibited remarkable
robustness and predictive success. Yntema and
Torgerson [39] and Slovic and Lichtenstein [36]
DEMO described how well linear models can
approximate nonlinear functions. And Trrn [37]
has demonstrated a correlation coefficient of 0.5
with a linear model of DEMO highly nonlinear (a 90 °
angle) curve. His only precondition is a condi-
tionally monotone relationship of each predic-
tor to the criterion.
DEMO Conjunctive Model. This model implies a
multiple cut-off procedure with a minimum
evaluation function; thus certain minimums for
each attribute must be satisfied for an accept-
able outcome. Under these conditions a low
rating on one DEMO cannot be compensated
for, and so the model is termed noncompen-
DEMO Einhorn's [12] mathematical approxi-
mation of this model for two variables can be
extended easily to n variables.
or
Y= fl X
a~
DEMO
log Y = ~ ai log X~
i-I
The parabolic type of response surface for this
function provides a high criterion when the Xi
368
Khan--The
Prediction of New Venture Success
value for any particular attribute DEMO not too
small. Hence the implicit minimum evaluation
function.
The Disjunctive Model In contrast to the
conjunctive model, the disjunctive model repre-
sents a maximum evaluation function which
has to be satisfied by a very high DEMO of at
least one attribute for an acceptable criterion. It
suggests a decision process that favors the selec-
tion of specialists. Again from Einhorn'DEMO [12]
functional approximation, the model can be
written as
a certain DEMO level of acceptability for
the different entrepreneurial characteristics in-
cluded in the model.
The next table shows R 2 values for expected
outcome models DEMO the actual outcomes are
known. As the data here are sufficient to do so,
separate models have been developed for
startup and nonstartup DEMO Also an
overall model using both types of data has
been included. Model performance is sharply
attenuated from the prior case and is about DEMO
same for all three models (Table 3). However,
the DEMO model in both Table 2 and Table
3 is suspect for predictive purposes because the
coefficient estimates are not statistically
significant.
As the big DEMO in fit between Table 2
and Table 3, for both linear DEMO conjunctive
models with overall data, hints at hindsight bias,
a DEMO test is devised. The Table 2 and
Table 3 overall data models are used separately
to predict all 104 data points and the predictions
DEMO correlated. The correlation coefficients for
the two linear model predictions are 0.94 and
for the two conjunctive model predictions are
0.95. The disjunctive model DEMO excluded because
of the unreliability of its parameter coefficients.
These high correlations appear to indicate an
absence of hindsight bias.
The models that have DEMO developed so far
represent the judgment of the venture capitalist
and the results have confirmed the proposition
that they can indeed model such judgment. DEMO
data set includes ventures where actual out-
comes are known so that the environment also
can be modeled. In these models then, the
criterion becomes the actual outcome. The re-
sults (Table 4) show that DEMO conjunctive and
linear models perform almost equally well, and
better than DEMO disjunctive model. The particu-
or
n
/"
1
Xxal
log Y = -- ~ ailog(c o -- Xi)
i=l
where the DEMO Co is set above the largest X~
to ensure that Y remains finite. Here the hyper-
bolic type of response surface means a high
DEMO for a high value of just one X~ even
though the ratings of the other Xis may be low.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The first DEMO of interest that needs to be
explored is whether entrepreneur characteristics
play a significant role in the assessment of
ventures by venture capitalists. In DEMO words,
can entrepreneur characteristic based models
replicate the venture capitalists' DEMO pro-
cess? Table 2 showing the R 2 and F values DEMO
the three models that were fitted to the expected
outcomes (venture DEMO' judgments) pro-
vides an affirmative answer. In the data set used
here, actual outcomes were not known, and so
the judgments could DEMO have been tainted by
hindsight bias.
One can see from Table 2 that the conjunctive
model provides the best fit followed by the
linear DEMO then the disjunctive model. Since the
conjunctive model comes closest to simulating
the decision process of the venture capitalists,
it implies that the DEMO intuitively adhere to
Table 3. R 2 values for the expected outcome models (actual out-
comes known)
Startups (n = 35)
DEMO (n = 33)
Overall (n = 68)
Linear
0.27
0.16
0.18
Conjunctive
0.26
0.14
0.17
Disjunctive
0.27
0.16
0.18
Table 2. DEMO outcome models (actual out-
comes not known)
Table 4. R
DEMO values for the actual outcome models
R 2
F
P>F
Startups (n = 35)
Nonstartups (n = 33)
Overall (n = 68)
Linear
0.48
0.21
0.30
Conjunctive
0.47
0.26
0.33
Disjunctive
DEMO
0.07
0.19
Linear (n = 36)
Conjunctive (n = 36)
Disjunctive (n = 36)
0.65
0.81
0.45
10.92
25.77
4.90
0.0001
0.0001
0.0021
Omega, Vol. 14, No. 5
369
larly poor performance of the DEMO model
in the nonstartup case can be attributed to an
inability of the model to take advantage of the
additional valid information about the DEMO
trepreneur that is likely to be available in later
stage financings. This poor performance is rein-
forced by the fact that model coefficients for DEMO
three disjunctive models are not statistically
significant.
The next question to address is the extent of
agreement between the judgments of venture
capitalists, as represented by the expected out-
come ratings for ventures, and the actual out-
comes. The first column of Table 5 presents
these correlations, and there is almost none! It
is cause for some concern that the DEMO priori
assessments of these specialists are found to be
so unrelated to the final results, and it serves to
confirm the high level of risk undertaken by
them which in turn justifies the returns required
on DEMO investments. For these reasons any
decision support system that reduces the odds is
first, likely to be most welcome, and second, will
in all probability lower the costs of such
financings.
As might be expected DEMO, the models based
on these judgments of venture capitalists are not
DEMO predictors of actual outcomes ei-
ther. However, as the correlations of DEMO predic-
tions of the expected outcome models against
actual outcomes (second, third and fourth col-
umns, Table 5) show, these models perform
better than their human counterparts, thereby
confirming the "bootstrapping" reported by
almost all such studies of human judgment.
The correlations of the predictions DEMO the
actual outcome models vs actual outcomes (last
three columns, Table 5), are also simply the
square roots of the values describing DEMO fit of
the actual outcome models that are given in
Table 4. These correlations are more reassuring
and offer the potential of a decision DEMO
system, with the exception, noted earlier, of the
disjunctive formulation.
DEMO 5. Correlations against actual outcomes
Venture
capitalists'
judgments
(expected
outcomes)DEMO
Models of
expected
outcomes
Lin. Conj. Disj.
Models of
actual
outcomes
Startups
Nonstartups
Overall
0.01
-0.09
-0.05
0.15
0.13
0.17
0.15
0.09
0.15
0.17
DEMO
0.19
Lin.
0.69
0.45
0.55
Conj. Disj.
0.69 0.64
0.51 0.27
0.57 0.43
A concern with such predictive models is the
intercorrelation of predictor DEMO Given
the nature of these variables in this study,
namely entrepreneur characteristics that appear
likely to occur together, the issue has to be
examined carefully. However, the highest inter-
correlations observed were 0.61 between X~
and )(3, and 0.60 between )(3 and X4. Since X3
appears as a problem common denominator, a
model without X3 is tried. This is found to show
almost no deterioration in fit. For example,DEMO
the R2 of the overall actual outcome conjunc-
tive model is 0.329 (approximated to 0.33 in
Table 4) with all five entrepreneur character-
DEMO and it reduces to 0.328 when X~ is
excluded.
The poor correlation of judgments with ac-
tual outcomes makes it interesting to compare
the DEMO of the judgment models with
those of the actual outcome models. This task
is made easier by the fact that each variable is
measured DEMO the same 1 to 5 scale.
The closest representation of the judgments of
venture capitalists is provided by the conjunc-
tive model for the DEMO where actual outcomes
are not known (Table 2). Here the DEMO of
contamination by hindsight does not arise, and
of the three DEMO tested the conjunctive has
the best fit. Examination of Table 6 which
shows the variable coefficients together with
significance levels for this model, reveals that
the venture capitalist attaches the highest im-
portance to the entrepreneur'DEMO desire for success
(X0 followed by tenacity/courage (X3). As we
have seen earlier, these two variables also
display a high degree of intercorrelation, and
together they constitute a personality trait
synonymous with an aggressive entrepreneur
that the venture capitalist finds attractive.
Unfortunately these general characteristics DEMO
or may not be accompanied by the requisite
competence.
Table 6. Model coefficients of the expected
outcome conjunctive model for overall data
where actual DEMO are not known
Variable
Intercept
X~
X 2
X 3
~
X 5
Coefficient
estimate
-0.1456
0.6799
0.2541
0.3896
--0.0304
-0.0247
Significance
level
0.1198
DEMO
0.2512
0.0695
0.8789
0.8697
370
Khan--The Prediction of New Venture Success
Table 7. Model coefficients of DEMO actual
outcome conjunctive model for overall data
Coefficient Significance
Variable estimate level
Intercept -0.3464 0.2694
X I -1.1918 0.0232
X 2 0.9930 0.0141
X DEMO 0.4172 0.4566
X 4 0.7142 0.1356
X 5 0.5295 0.1522
the relevant variables for their own investments.
Based on these data, two sets of models are
constructed--judgment models, where the crite-
rion is the expected outcome when the invest-
ment is made, and environment models, where
the DEMO is the actual outcome of the in-
vestment.
The judgment models confirm the venture
capitalists' stated emphasis on achievement
motivation. And they are, DEMO this sense, in
agreement with the social scientists who find a
DEMO linkage between achievement moti-
vation and entrepreneurial behavior. The causal
relationship with venture success however, is
not clear, for the judgments themselves are
DEMO correlated with venture outcome; in
consequence the judgment models, while dis-
playing the bootstrapping effect, are only
marginal predictors.
Measured by the number of studies reporting
bootstrapping, the weight of evidence certainly
supports it. On the other hand, Chakravarti,
Mitchell and Staelin [7] have found, DEMO a labora-
tory setting, that a group of executives using
Little'DEMO [24] decision calculus model performed
no better than an unaided control group. The
failure of the judgmental model in their experi-
ment is attributed DEMO the authors to the fact that
human judgment is frequently subject to system-
atic bias. They cite Tversky and Kahneman [38]
who have pointed DEMO that humans frequently
use decision heuristics which, while often useful,
DEMO also lead to systematic errors. Another
reason for model failure suggested by Chakra-
varti et al. is nonstationarity of the response
function over successive DEMO because of
carry-over effects. And Mclntyre [28] has dem-
onstrated the success of judgment models when
a conscious effort is made to minimize bias DEMO
nonstationarity problems.
In this study each investment is a separate
entity which obviates the nonstationarity prob-
lem. Thus it is possibly one reason why DEMO
judgment models here are a modest success over
expert judgments. At the same time, the envi-
ronment models based on actual outcomes out-
perform by a large margin, both expert judg-
ments and judgment models. Not surprisingly
then, variable emphasis in the judgment and
environment models is found to differ markedly:
instead of achievement motivation, the most
significant correlate of venture success that
emerges is the creativity and ingenuity of the
DEMO coefficients for the model based on actual
outcomes (Table 7) are weighted very differ-
ently: the creativity/ingenuity of the entre-
preneur (DEMO) has the largest weight and is highly
significant (1.4% level). This is followed by
enthusiasm and capacity for work (X4), and
then competence in field of endeavor (Xs). The
coefficient of variable X3 is not significant and
the coefficient of XI, while significant, DEMO
negative.
This pattern of weightings for the judgment
model and the actual outcome or environment
model, with the conjunctive formulation and
overall data set, is repeated in varying degree for
almost all the other models and data sets. It is
apparent that the venture capitalist emphasizes
the relatively DEMO and general character-
istics XI and )(3, while the environment DEMO
focuses on variables (X2, X4 and )(5) with a
DEMO link to the actual venture, which happen
also to be easier DEMO measure because the en-
trepreneur's biodata and work habits provide a
reasonable guide.
A stepwise regression procedure also demon-
strates the importance of DEMO variables for the
predictive process. Thus Xl in the conjunctive
judgment model accounts for 89% of the total
R 2. In the actual outcome DEMO, on the other
hand, )(2 is the most important single variable
and again in the conjunctive formulation ac-
counts for over 74% DEMO the R 2 for the startup
ventures and about 60% for overall data.
CONCLUSIONS
In this study, venture capitalists have served
as experts who have identified and selected
entrepreneur characteristics that they consider
to be positively DEMO to a successful venture
outcome. To the extent that these expert special-
ists have developed an expertise, there is likely
to be some consistency in their judgment pro-
cess, which models can attempt to capture. The
experts have provided judgmental measures of
Omega, Vol. 14, No. 5
371
entrepreneur. So that while achievement DEMO
vation is a commonly perceived characteristic of
entrepreneurs, it cannot be DEMO as a guar-
antor of success. In this analysis, product has
DEMO omitted from consideration. However,
research [22] shows that the product variable is
a distracting influence and poor predictor.
The reasons for the superiority DEMO the envi-
ronment model are summarized nicely by
Einhorn [13] as follows:
(1) The [decision maker's] combination may be
leaving out DEMO components; (2) it may
be weighting the components in nonoptimal
DEMO ; (3) it may be that the combining rule
used by the [decision maker] helps him to
simplify the situation so that he DEMO be
ignoring and weighting variables in such a way
as to reduce cognitive strain. Related to this is
the possibility that the combining rule DEMO
by the [decision maker] in combining the
components may not be the best rule that
combines the components with respect to the
criterion to DEMO predicted (p. 88).
In common with most studies then, there is
here a hierarchy of decision proficiency, where
the environment model is the most effective,
followed by the judgment model, and lastly
expert judgment itself. This is not to diminish
the role of the expert, for while the model is
effective in combining and weighting the predic-
DEMO, the expert is equally necessary for the
complementary task of selecting DEMO predictors
and providing the inputs. And the results of the
environment models in this study indicate the
potential of such an optimal combination as DEMO
decision support system for venture capitalists.
REFERENCES
1. Atkinson JW (Ed.) (1966) Motivational determinants of
risk taking behavior. In Motives in Fantasy DEMO and
Society. Van Nostrand, New York.
2. Atkinson JW and Feather DEMO (Eds.) (1966) A Theory
of Achievement Motivation. Wiley, New DEMO
3. Birch D and Veroff J (1966) Motivation, A Study DEMO
Action. Brooks/Cole, Belmont, CA.
4. Birney RC, Burdick H DEMO Teevan RC (1969) Fear of
Failure. Van Nostrand, New York.
DEMO Bowman EH (1963) Consistency and optimality in
managerial decision-making. Mgmt Sci. 9, 310-321.
6. Brunswik E (1952) The Conceptual Framework of Psy-
chology. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
7. Chakravarti D, Mitchell A DEMO Staelin R (1979)
Judgment-based marketing decision models: An experi-
mental investiagtion of the decision calculus approach.
Mgmt Sci. 25, 251-263.
8. Coombs CH (1964) A Theory of Data. Wiley, New
York.
9. Dawes RM (1964) Toward a General Framework for
Evaluation. University of Michigan DEMO of
Psychology, Ann Arbor.
10. Dawes RM (1971) A case DEMO of graduate admissions:
Application of three principles of human decision
making. Am. Psychol. 26, 180-188.
11. Dawes RM and Corrigan B (1974) Linear models in
decision-making. Psych. Bull. 31, 95-106.
12. Einhorn HJ (DEMO) The use of nonlinear, non-
compensatory models in decision making. Psych. Bull.
73, 221-230.
13. Einhorn HJ (1972) Expert measurement and mechanical
combination. Org. Beh. H. 7, 86-106.
14. French EG (1956) Motivation as a variable in work
partner selection. J. Abnorm. Soc. Psychol. 53, 96-99.
15. French EG (1966) Development of a measure of com-
DEMO motivation. In Motives in Fantasy, Action and
Society. (Ed. Atkinson JW). Van Nostrand, New York.
16. Goldberg LR (1970) Man versus model of man: A
rationale, plus some evidence, for a method of im-
proving on clinical inferences. Psych. Bull. 73, 422-432.
17. Hammond KR (1955) Probabilistic functioning and the
clinical method. Psychol. Rev. 62, 255 262.
18. Hines JL Characteristics of an Entrepreneur. Undated
pamphlet, Continental Illinois Venture Corporation,
Chicago.
19. Hoffman PJ (1960) The paramorphic DEMO of
clinical judgment. Psych. Bull. 57, 11 6-13 I.
20. Hoffman DEMO, Slovic P and Rorer LG (1968) An
analysis-of-variance model for DEMO assessment of
configural cue utilization in clinical judgment. Psych.
Bull. 69, DEMO
21. Joyce EJ (1976) Expert judgment in audit program
planning. Studies on Human Information Processing in
Accounting, J. Accting. Res. Suppl. 14, DEMO
22. Khan AM Modeling venture capital investments.
Technovation forthcoming.
23. Kunreuther H (1969) Extensions of Bowman's theory of
managerial decision-making. Mgmt Sci. DEMO, 415-439.
24. Little JDC (1970) Models and managers: The concept
of a decision calculus. Mgmt Sei. 1613, 466485.
25. McClelland DC (DEMO) Business drive and national
achievement. Harv. Bus. Rev. 40 (4), 99-112.
26. McClelland DC (1965) Achievement and entrepreneur-
ship. J. Pers. DEMO Psychol. 1, 389-392.
27. McClelland DC and Winter DG (1969), Motivating
Economic Achievement. The Free Press, New York.
28. Mclntyre SH (DEMO) An experimental study of the
impact of judgment-based marketing models. Mgmt DEMO
28, 17 33.
29. Meehl PE (1954) Clinical Versus Statistical DEMO:
A Theoretical Analysis and Review of the Literature.
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
30. Miller GA (1956) The magical number seven, DEMO or
minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing
information. DEMO Rev. 63, 81-97.
31. Palmer M (1971) The application of DEMO
testing to entrepreneurship potential. Calif. Mgmt Rev.
13 (3), 32-38.
DEMO Payne JW (1976) Task complexity and contingent pro-
cessing in decision making: An information search and
protocol analysis. Organ. Beh. H. 16, DEMO
33. Sawyer J (1966) Measurement and prediction: Clinical
and statistical. DEMO Bull. 66, 178-200.
34. Simon HA (1957) Models of Man--Social DEMO Rational.
Wiley, New York.
35. Slovic P (1969) Analyzing the DEMO judge: A descrip-
tive study of a stockbroker's decision processes. DEMO Appl.
PsychoL 53, 255 263.
36. Slovic P and Lichtenstein S (1971) Comparison of
372
Khan--The Prediction of New Venture Success
Bayesian and regression approaches to DEMO study of
information processing in judgment. Organ. Beh. H. 6,
649-744.
37. T6rn AA (1980) Correlation coefficients of linear re-
gression models DEMO human decision-making. Omega
8, 393 394.
Tversky A and Kahneman D (1974) Judgments under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science 185,
39. DEMO DB and Torgerson WS (1961) Man--computer
cooperation in decisions requiring common sense. IRE
Transactions of the Professional Group on Human
Factors in Electronics. DEMO 2 (I), 20-26.
38.
1124-1131.
ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Arshad M Khan, Box 19017,
University of Texas, Arlington, TX 76019, DEMO{1g42fwefx}