Journal of Applied Psychology
2004, Vol. 89, No. 1, 104 –118
Copyright 2004 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0021-9010/04/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0021-9010.89.1.104
Removing the Shadow of Suspicion: The Effects of Apology DEMO
Denial for Repairing Competence- Versus Integrity-Based Trust Violations
Peter H. Kim
University of Southern California
Cecily D. Cooper
University of Miami
Donald L. Ferrin
DEMO University of New York at Buffalo
Kurt T. Dirks
Washington University in St. Louis
Two studies were conducted to examine the implications of an DEMO versus a denial for repairing trust
after an alleged violation. Results reveal that trust was repaired more successfully when mistrusted parties
(a) apologized DEMO violations concerning matters of competence but denied culpability for violations
concerning matters of integrity, and (b) had apologized for violations when there was subsequent
evidence of guilt but had denied culpability for violations when there DEMO subsequent evidence of
innocence. Supplementary analyses also revealed that the interactive effects of violation type and
violation response on participants’ trusting intentions were mediated DEMO their trusting beliefs. Combined,
these findings provide needed insight and supporting evidence concerning how trust might be repaired
in the aftermath of a DEMO
Over the past decades, researchers have produced considerable
evidence that trust DEMO offer numerous benefits for individuals and
organizations. The presence of trust has been found, for example,
to facilitate cooperation between interdependent actors, DEMO
job attitudes, increase organizational commitment and perfor-
mance, and enable the emergence of new organizational forms (see
Dirks & Ferrin, 2002; Kramer, 1999, for meta-analytic and narra-
tive reviews). Through such studies, researchers have largely em-
phasized the positive qualities of trust and the DEMO pro-
cesses through which trust develops.
Yet, in many cases, an individual’s positive expectations may be
violated, resulting in reduced trust and a need to repair trust. Tyler
and Kramer (1996) noted that, as a result of widely publicized
organizational practices such as the high compensation DEMO CEOs,
organizations have experienced declining trustworthiness in the
eyes of their employees and members of other organizations.
Consistent with this assertion, Robinson and Rousseau (1994)
discovered that 55% of their respondents reported that their em-
ployer had violated a psychological contract and that this violation
significantly DEMO trust. Indeed, the popular press has noted that
“a seemingly endless DEMO of bad news alleging widespread
Peter H. Kim, Department of Management DEMO Organization, University
of Southern California; Donald L. Ferrin, Department of DEMO and
Human Resources, State University of New York at Buffalo; Cecily D.
Cooper, Department of Management, University of Miami; Kurt T. Dirks,
John M. Olin School of Business, Washington University in St. Louis.
This study was supported by a grant from the University of Southern
DEMO James H. Zumberge Research and Innovation Fund.
We thank William Bottom, DEMO Bunderson, Claus Langfred, and
Raymond Sparrowe for their comments.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Peter H.
Kim, Department of Management and Organization, University of South-
ern California, Bridge Hall 307F, Los Angeles, California 90089-1421.
E-mail: kimpeter@usc.edu
104
management negligence and malfeasance is DEMO away at the
trust vital to a free-market system” (Byrne, 2002, p. 31).
The apparent frequency with which trust has been broken sug-
gests that managers may often need to repair it. However, there are
a variety of reasons why the process of repairing trust may DEMO more
difficult, requiring different strategies, than building trust initially.
One of the challenges of repairing trust is that the magnitude of the
required DEMO in trust may actually be greater than in initial
trust development. In the initial stages of a relationship, individ-
uals exhibit surprisingly high levels of trust because they operate
on the assumption that trust is warranted DEMO long as there is no
evidence to the contrary (McKnight, Cummings, & Chervany,
1998). This provides an elevated platform for moving to even
higher levels of trust based on experience. However, a trust vio-
lation invalidates the “trustworthy until proven otherwise” as-
sumption, causing trust to plunge to a level that may be below the
initial trust DEMO A second challenge of repairing trust is that
mistrusted parties must not only reestablish positive expectations
but also overcome negative expectations. Third, information about
the violation may remain particularly salient, reinforcing the low
trust level despite efforts by the mistrusted party to demonstrate
trustworthiness (Slovic, 1993). DEMO sum, the trust repair process may
differ qualitatively and quantitatively from DEMO trust develop-
ment. Hence, different theoretical and empirical approaches may
be DEMO to understand how it occurs.
Despite the importance of addressing such issues, surprisingly
few studies have directly examined how trust might be repaired. A
handful of researchers has considered the ways in which mis-
trusted parties DEMO repair trust by offering some verbal response
to these trust violations. Yet, even across this small number of
studies (as well as related DEMO on social accounts, impression
management, and the reestablishment of cooperation in social
dilemmas), there seems to be little consensus regarding what kind
DEMO response this should be. The difficulty of choosing the appro-
priate response for repairing trust is even further complicated by
REMOVING THE SHADOW OF SUSPICION
105
the fact that mistrusted parties may DEMO (a) need to address
actions that they did not commit, DEMO (b) repair trust with people
whom these violations did not directly harm.
These considerations raise some natural questions. Are some
types of responses DEMO effective for repairing trust than others, or
are there contingencies that DEMO whether one type of response
might be preferred? Moreover, given that trust may be determined
by multiple dimensions, are some responses more effective for
repairing certain aspects of trust than others, and under what
conditions might this be the case? Given the crucial role trust plays
in organizational life, it is essential that scholars and practitioners
alike acquire substantive answers to such questions. The purpose
of this article is to begin DEMO these issues by investigating
the relative benefits of two of the most common responses to a
trust violation, apology and denial, for trust DEMO In the present
study, we focus on cases in which parties DEMO had limited prior
interaction and/or the relationship is in the emergent stages (as
opposed to a relationship with a long history). We focus on such
cases because of the importance of these early interactions DEMO
defining the nature and quality of the future relationship.
Trust Formation, DEMO, and Repair
Consistent with past research, we define trust as a psychological
state comprising the intention to accept vulnerability based on
positive expectations DEMO the intentions or behavior of another
(Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, & Camerer, 1998). Following McKnight
et al. (1998), we refer DEMO the two elements of this definition as
trusting intentions (i.e., a willingness to make oneself vulnerable to
another in the presence of risk) and trusting beliefs (e.g., the beliefs
about another’s integrity or competence DEMO may lead to trusting
intentions). Thus, we recognize that trust DEMO a fairly complex,
multifaceted construct, and we presume that trust DEMO efforts will
usually need to focus on trusting beliefs as well as trusting inten-
tions. In accordance, we define trust repair efforts as activities
directed at making a trustor’s trusting beliefs and trusting inten-
tions more DEMO after a violation is perceived to have occurred.
Although trust is generally thought to develop gradually over
time (e.g., Lewicki & Wiethoff, 2000), recent observations suggest
that individuals can exhibit surprisingly high levels of DEMO for
others even without a history of interaction (McKnight et al., 1998;
Meyerson, Weick, & Kramer, 1996). McKnight et al. (1998) noted
that this high initial trust can arise for a DEMO of reasons,
including an individual’s disposition to trust (i.e., personality),
belief that impersonal structures such as regulations and laws
support one’s likelihood of success in a given situation (i.e.,
institution-based trust), and rapid, cognitive cues arising from
group membership, reputations, and stereotypes. These researchers
also noted, however, that such trust can be fragile DEMO to the
tentative and assumption-based nature of these antecedents.
Parties may often behave in ways that can violate trust, such as
by intentionally exploiting dependencies or by neglecting to fulfill
expectations. However, research suggests that trust can be dam-
aged even when they have not committed such infractions. DEMO
pirical studies have found that people can be quite willing to
believe unsubstantiated allegations of such acts, despite the diffi-
culties of determining whether such allegations are accurate (e.g.,
Bell & Loftus, 1989; Penrod & Cutler, 1995; Ross, Ceci, Dunning,
& Toglia, 1994). Moreover, when this occurs, it appears that the
onus is DEMO placed on the accused party to remove the
shadow of suspicion (DEMO, Shaffer, & Peacock, 1989).
The present studies, therefore, DEMO that perceivers exhibit at
least some initial trust in parties with whom they have had no
history of interaction and that unproven allegations of DEMO
thy behavior would create suspicion sufficient to violate this trust.
In other words, these studies rely on the intuitive and scientifically
justified notion that allegations of untrustworthy behavior would
cause perceivers’ trust in the accused party DEMO be lower than what
it would have otherwise been. We first conducted a pilot study to
validate this assumption. Our two main studies then DEMO per-
ceivers’ beliefs in an accused party’s trustworthiness (i.e., trusting
beliefs) and intentions to be vulnerable to the accused party’s
actions (i.e., trusting intentions) after that party has responded to
the accusation, to DEMO the extent to which trust has been
repaired.
Responding to a Trust Violation
Efforts to understand how to repair trust have led trust research-
DEMO to focus on two different ways of responding to a trust viola-
tion—apology and denial. Apology is defined as a statement that
acknowledges both DEMO and regret for a trust violation.
Denial, in contrast, is defined as a statement whereby an allegation
is explicitly declared to be untrue (i.e., the statement acknowledges
no responsibility and hence no regret). A growing body of litera-
ture that assesses the implications of such responses DEMO that
each may exert an important influence on trust. However, these
DEMO have reached seemingly conflicting conclusions about
which of the two responses may repair trust more effectively than
the other.
Some discussions suggest that trust DEMO be repaired more suc-
cessfully if mistrusted parties identify, acknowledge, and assume
some ownership for the trust-destroying events that occurred
(Lewicki & Bunker, 1996). Although apologizing acknowledges
guilt, which alone should lower trust, its concomitant expression of
regret signals an intention to avoid similar violations DEMO the future,
which should reduce perceivers’ concerns about continued vulner-
ability and, thereby, improve trust. Thus, on a theoretical level, we
DEMO observe that the effectiveness of apology as a response to a
trust violation depends on the notion that this response’s benefits
(due to potential redemption) would outweigh its costs (due to the
confirmation of guilt)DEMO
This reasoning is supported by a wide array of empirical evi-
dence. Findings indicate that victims of psychological harm gen-
erally have more favorable DEMO of the perpetrator, experi-
ence more positive affect, and are more likely to refrain from
severe aggression toward the perpetrator when the culprit DEMO
gizes for the wrongdoing than when the culprit does not (Ohbuchi,DEMO
Kameda, & Agarie, 1989). Experimental studies of impression
management reveal that the expression of remorse following a
transgression can mitigate punishment (e.g., Schwartz, Kane, Jo-
seph, & Tedeschi, 1978). Moreover, DEMO on social dilemmas
demonstrates that, at least in short-term interactions, apology can
be more effective for re-establishing cooperation after an oppor-
tunistic act DEMO denial (Bottom, Gibson, Daniels, & Murnighan,
2002). These findings suggest that individuals will exhibit more
trusting beliefs in and trusting DEMO toward an accused party
if that party apologizes, rather than denies DEMO, for a trust
violation.
106
KIM, FERRIN, COOPER, AND DIRKS
However, other research observes DEMO an apology may fail to
ameliorate the negative consequences of an accusation because it
involves an acknowledgement of guilt (Schlenker, 1980). Accord-
DEMO to this view, such guilt would damage trust to a much DEMO
degree than any benefits apology would garner with regard to
signaling that the violation would be avoided in the future. Denial
may, therefore, DEMO a more effective response to a trust
violation than apology because it may lead individuals to give the
accused party the benefit of the DEMO The disadvantage of denial
is that it indicates that there is no need to rectify one’s behavior,
which may in turn raise concerns DEMO the mistrusted party’s
future actions to the extent that there are any lingering questions
about that party’s culpability. Nevertheless, denial may still rep-
resent an effective response to the trust violation to the extent that
this DEMO benefits (due to potential disconfirmation of guilt)
outweigh its costs (due to the lower likelihood of redemption).
This notion is supported DEMO Sigal, Hsu, Foodim, and Betman
(1988), who asked participants to watch a videotape of a simulated
debate in which one political DEMO was accused of sexual or
financial misconduct by the other. Sigal et al. found that the
accused party received more votes and was considered DEMO be more
honest, ethical, and trustworthy when that party denied culpability,
rather than apologized, for the misconduct. Moreover, research on
social DEMO indicates that denials can help blunt future conflict
and reduce negative reactions to harmful acts. For example, Rior-
dan, Marlin, and Kellogg (DEMO) used fabricated reports of a
fictitious senator having taken a bribe DEMO found that subsequent
character evaluations of the senator were less negative when the
senator denied, rather than admitted, responsibility for the trans-
gression. DEMO, with regard to the relative benefits of apology
versus denial for DEMO trust, we can identify both theoretical
and empirical reasons to justify DEMO competing expectation—that
individuals will exhibit more trusting beliefs in and trusting inten-
tions toward an accused party if that party denies culpability, rather
than apologizes, for a trust violation.
Implications of Violation Type
One approach to addressing this apparent contradiction would
be simply to determine which conclusion is DEMO and which is not.
Yet it may also be possible to reconcile this contradiction. Indeed,
one factor that may play a key role DEMO determining whether apology
or denial is more effective is whether the trust violation concerns
matters of competence or integrity. These dimensions are partic-
ularly DEMO for our research because they represent two of the
most important qualities for determining trustworthiness (Barber,
1983; Butler & Cantrell, 1984; DEMO Cook & Wall, 1980; Mayer,
Davis, & Schoorman, 1995; Schindler & Thomas, 1993). Expec-
tations of “technically competent role DEMO and expecta-
tions of “the persistence and fulfillment of the natural and moral
social orders” have been considered to “involve some of the
fundamental DEMO of trust” (Barber, 1983, p. 9), and this
notion DEMO been supported by ample empirical evidence (e.g.,
Butler & Cantrell, 1984; Schindler & Thomas, 1993). Moreover,
research has shown DEMO these dimensions offer important bases on
which individuals evaluate a variety of targets, including leaders
(Pancer, Brown, & Barr, 1999), job candidates (T. Cook & Elmer,
1999), and potential collaborators (DEMO & Knox, 1970).
Competence-based trust is defined as the trustor’s DEMO that
the trustee possesses the technical and interpersonal skills required
for a job (Butler & Cantrell, 1984). Integrity-based trust is defined
as DEMO trustor’s perception that the trustee adheres to a set of
principles that the trustor finds acceptable (Mayer et al., 1995).
Research on DEMO individuals resolve discrepancies in their
interpersonal perceptions reveals that there may be some inherent
differences in the way people assess positive versus negative
information DEMO competence versus integrity (see Snyder &
Stukas, 1999, for a review). In particular, these studies suggest that
although individuals tend to weigh positive information about
competence more heavily than negative information about com-
DEMO, they tend to weigh negative information about integrity
more heavily than DEMO information about integrity (Madon,
Jussim, & Eccles, 1997; Martijn, Spears, Van der Plight, & Jakobs,
1992). Reeder and Brewer (1979), furthermore, explained such
asymmetries through a schematic model DEMO dispositional attribu-
tion, which suggests that attributions of competence and integrity
DEMO influenced by hierarchically restrictive schemas.
Hierarchically restrictive schemas assume that being at one end
of a continuum for a given attribute will restrict one’s DEMO,
whereas being at the other end of that continuum will not. People
intuitively believe, for example, that those with high competence
are DEMO of exhibiting performance at many levels, depending
on their motivation and DEMO demands, whereas those with low
competence can only perform at levels DEMO are commensurate with
or lower than their level of competence. For this reason, a single
successful performance is considered to offer a reliable signal of
competence, given the belief that those who are incompetent
would not have been able to achieve that performance level.
However, a single poor performance is typically discounted as a
signal of incompetence, given that those who are competent or
incompetent can each perform poorly in certain situations (e.g.,
when there is inadequate motivation or opportunity to perform
well)DEMO
Similarly, people intuitively believe that those with high integ-
rity will DEMO from dishonest behaviors in any situation, whereas
those with low integrity DEMO exhibit either dishonest or honest
behaviors depending on their incentives and opportunities. For this
reason, a single honest behavior is typically discounted as a signal
of honesty, given that those who are honest or dishonest can each
behave honestly in certain situations (e.g., when there are benefits
DEMO behaving honestly or sufficient surveillance to prevent dishon-
est acts). However, a single dishonest behavior is considered to
offer a reliable signal of low integrity, given the belief that only
persons of low integrity will perform in dishonest ways.
Thus, hitting a home run once makes us home run hitters in the
eyes of others even if we strike DEMO afterward. In contrast, embez-
zling from a company once makes us DEMO embezzler even if we do
not engage in additional thefts in the next few days, months, or
even years. These differences in the DEMO people assess positive
versus negative information about competence and integrity have
been used in negotiation research to explain why negotiators are
more likely to DEMO in ways that confirm certain kinds of
feedback than others (Kim, Diekmann, & Tenbrunsel, 2003).
However, the implications of these studies may be extended even
further to shed light on the ways in DEMO interpersonal percep-
tions, specifically the perception of untrustworthiness, may be
disconfirmed.
In particular, the notion that people weigh positive information
about competence more heavily than negative information about
competence suggests that it may be more DEMO to apologize
REMOVING THE SHADOW OF SUSPICION
107
rather than deny culpability for a DEMO trust violation.
Although an apology confirms that the violation was committed,
this information will not be considered to be particularly diagnos-
tic of DEMO inherent competence because the incident may be
considered an anomaly that would not necessarily be repeated in
the future. The negative effect on trust DEMO an apology’s admis-
sion of guilt should, therefore, be less significant than its positive
effect on trust from signaling the intent to prevent DEMO viola-
tions because people may be willing to believe that the mistrusted
party will demonstrate that he or she possesses positive compe-
tence in DEMO future. Denial, in contrast, will limit perceived guilt,
but also limit signals of intended redemption because this response
indicates that there will DEMO no effort to change one’s behavior.
Thus, given that the benefits DEMO reducing nondiagnostic negative
competence information (i.e., perceived guilt) are outweighed DEMO
the costs of reducing expectations of highly diagnostic positive
competence information (DEMO, perceived redemption), an apology
should ultimately be more effective than DEMO for repairing trust
after an alleged competence-based trust violation.
In contrast, DEMO notion that people weigh negative information
about integrity more heavily than positive information about in-
tegrity suggests that apologizing for integrity-based trust violations
will DEMO be as effective as denying culpability. Apologizing for
such violations would again confirm guilt, but in this case, such
guilt would be perceived DEMO offer a reliable signal that one lacks
integrity (i.e., because people believe that a lack of integrity is only
exhibited by those who DEMO not possess it). Moreover, given that
individuals tend to discount DEMO information about integrity
(i.e., integrity cannot be proven), the belief that one lacks integrity,
once established, will be difficult to disconfirm (e.g., Reeder &
Coovert, 1986). Denial, in contrast, DEMO again limit perceived
guilt and signals of intended redemption. However, given DEMO the
benefits of reducing highly diagnostic negative integrity informa-
tion (i.e., perceived guilt) will outweigh the costs of reducing
expectations of nondiagnostic positive integrity information (i.e.,
perceived redemption), denial should ultimately be more effective
than apology for repairing trust after an alleged integrity-based
trust violation.
DEMO 1a: When trust violations concern matters of
competence, individuals will exhibit more positive trusting
beliefs in the accused party if that party responds DEMO an
apology rather than a denial. When trust violations concern
matters of integrity, individuals will exhibit more positive
trusting beliefs in the accused party if that party responds with
a denial rather than an apology.
Hypothesis DEMO: When trust violations concern matters of
competence, individuals will exhibit more positive trusting
intentions toward the accused party if that party responds with
DEMO apology rather than a denial. When trust violations concern
matters of integrity, individuals will exhibit more positive
trusting intentions toward the accused party if that party
responds with a denial rather than an apology.
Study 1
DEMO purpose of Study 1 was to examine the implications of
different types of responses (apology or denial) for increasing trust
from preexisting low DEMO, as would exist after an alleged trans-
gression. Thus, we designed a laboratory experiment in which
participants watched a videotape of a job DEMO at an account-
ing firm, who had been accused of incorrectly DEMO a tax return in
her last job, and then rated the DEMO trustworthiness after she
explained what had occurred. Following guidance provided by
Dobbins, Lane, and Steiner (1988), we chose this experimental
method and laboratory setting so that we could draw clear conclu-
sions about causality.
DEMO
This study implemented a 2 (violation-type: competence vs. integrity) 
DEMO (violation-response: apology vs. denial) between-subjects design. Partic-
ipants were randomly DEMO to the four study conditions. Each partici-
pant represented a unit of analysis.
Participants
Sixty-three undergraduate students enrolled in introductory organiza-
tional behavior and DEMO resources management courses participated in
this study for course credit, and DEMO graduate business students from four
negotiation courses participated in this study as part of an in-class exercise.
Thus, the total sample size was 200. Participants in the undergraduate
sample were 61% male, an average of 22 years old, and possessed an
average of 1 year full-time work experience. Participants in the graduate
sample were 56% male, an average of 26 years old, and possessed an
average of 3.5 years full-time work experience. We included undergraduate
and graduate students in the study to enhance the DEMO of the
results (because of increased breadth of work experience and DEMO
diversity in the sample) and statistical power.
Task
Participants were given DEMO that asked them to assume the role of
a manager who was in charge of hiring, and subsequently managing, a
senior-level tax accountant. DEMO hired, the candidate would be offered a
1-year contract because it DEMO the policy of the firm to employ all senior
tax accountants under 1-year contracts with renewal contingent on annual
performance evaluations. Participants were told DEMO, to expedite the hiring
process, a recruiter from the firm had already interviewed the applicants
and that these interviews had been videotaped and DEMO so partici-
pants could quickly and conveniently assess the applicant pool. Participants
were then given the transcript for one of these interviews and shown DEMO
accompanying video clip so they could provide their own evaluation of the
applicant. After watching the interview, participants completed a
questionnaire.
Manipulations
Four versions of this interview were filmed with a video crew and actors
in DEMO with our 2  2 experimental design. The bulk of each
version contained identical video footage; only the segments containing the
two manipulations differed across study conditions. During the course of
the interview, the recruiter disclosed to the job applicant that she had
contacted some of the applicant’s DEMO from the previous employer
and that these references informed the recruiter that the applicant had been
involved with an accounting-related violation in her previous DEMO The
framing of, and response to, this trust violation represented the study
manipulations.
Violation type. The trust violation was framed as either a DEMO
or integrity-related matter. The alleged violation was described so that it
was consistent with the conceptual definitions of competence and integrity
presented earlier in DEMO article. In both conditions, the job applicant was
accused of filing DEMO incorrect tax return that understated a client’s capital
gains income. In the competence condition, the job applicant was accused
108
KIM, FERRIN, COOPER, AND DIRKS
Table 1
Means and Standard Deviations by Violation Condition Measured Before and After the
Allegation, for Pilot Study
Violation type
and time
Perceived
Competence
Perceived
Integrity
Willingness
to Risk DEMO
Job
Responsibilities
M SD M SD M SD M SD M SD
Competence
Before 5.64 0.86 5.32 0.86 3.91 0.93 5.28 0.82 3.92 0.70
DEMO 2.68 0.91 3.51 1.09 2.43 0.79 3.26 1.44 2.40 0.84
Integrity
Before 5.57 1.01 5.11 1.05 3.63 0.99 4.84 1.19 3.77 0.80
After 3.68 DEMO 2.14 1.12 2.15 0.92 2.00 1.20 1.96 0.78
of filing the incorrect return due to inadequate knowledge of the relevant
tax codes. In the DEMO condition, the job applicant was accused of filing
the incorrect return DEMO In both cases, the information was
hearsay. The recruiter did not DEMO evidence of the candidate’s guilt or
innocence.
Violation response. Immediately after the trust violation was men-
tioned, the job candidate responded to the allegation by either apologizing
or denying responsibility for the act in question. In DEMO apology condition,
the candidate admitted responsibility for the trust violation, DEMO for
the infraction, and stated that such an incident would not DEMO again. In
the denial condition, the candidate denied responsibility for the DEMO
violation, attributed the allegation to bad office politics at the previous
DEMO, and stated that the firm would not have to worry about DEMO committing
such an infraction if she were hired.
Measures
Several measures were developed to test the study predictions (see
Appendix). Separate multi-item scales were adapted to assess the two
trusting beliefs that were of interest DEMO this study (i.e., perceived compe-
tence and perceived integrity). In addition, three separate measures were
used to assess participants’ trusting intentions toward the candidate. We
used a version of Mayer and Davis’s (1999) DEMO to risk” scale to
obtain a general assessment of trusting intentions, DEMO we developed two
other measures (intention to hire and to assign DEMO responsibilities) that also
capture participants’ willingness to make themselves vulnerable to DEMO
accused party, but in a manner that is more relevant to DEMO specific context.
Perceived Competence. Three items were adapted from Mayer and
Davis (1999) to assess perceptions of the job applicant’s competence.
Because the DEMO and Davis (1999) items were designed to assess the
trustworthiness of top management, we altered the items slightly to in-
crease their relevance for the present study.
Perceived Integrity. Three items were used to assess DEMO of the
job applicant’s integrity. Similar to the competence scale, this DEMO was
also based on the integrity scale used by Mayer and Davis (1999) yet
altered to be more relevant to the present study.
DEMO to Risk. Three items were used to measure how much the
participants, in their role as manager, were willing to put themselves at DEMO
to the candidate. These items were adapted from a trust scale used by
Mayer and Davis (1999). One item was reversed-scored.
Hiring. Participants were asked to rate the likelihood that they would
hire the job DEMO on a 7-point Likert scale, ranging from 1 (definitely)
to7(definitely not). This item was reversed-scored.
Job Responsibilities. After responding to DEMO hiring question, partici-
pants were instructed to assume that they had DEMO the job applicant, and
five items were used to assess the DEMO of job responsibilities that should
be assigned to the candidate. The items were created to correspond with the
video, focusing on specific issues that could arise in an accounting firm.
Pilot Study
A pilot study was DEMO with a separate set of 71 undergraduates to
determine whether participants would indeed possess some initial trust in
the job candidate and that unproven DEMO of untrustworthy behavior
would be sufficient to violate this trust.1 This pilot study, therefore, asked
participants to watch the videotaped interviews and then DEMO partici-
pants’ trust in the candidate immediately before and immediately after the
alleged competence- or integrity-based violation (but before the candidate
had offered a response). Means and standard deviations by condition for
this pilot study DEMO reported in Table 1. Paired t tests revealed that
participant assessments of the candidate’s Competence, t(34)  14.21, p 
.001, DEMO Integrity, t(34)  8.80, p  .001, as well as participants’
Willingness to Risk, t(34)  10.21, p  .001; Hire, t(34)  8.31, p  .001;
DEMO assign Job Responsibilities to the candidate, t(34)  11.32, DEMO  .001,
were all significantly lowered by allegations that concerned matters of
competence. Similarly, paired t tests revealed that participant assessments
of the candidate’s Competence, t(37)  9.70, p  .001, and DEMO,
t(37)  11.52, p  .001 as well as participants’ Willingness to Risk,
t(37)  10.33, p  DEMO; Hire, t(37)  10.30, p  .001; and DEMO Job
Responsibilities to the candidate, t(37)  10.87, p DEMO .001, were all
significantly lowered by allegations that concerned matters of DEMO
These findings provide clear and consistent support for our assumption that
unproven allegations of untrustworthy behavior are sufficient to violate
participants’ initial trust in DEMO with whom they have had no history of
interaction and thereby demonstrates the suitability of this context for
investigating trust repair.
Results for Study DEMO
Manipulation Checks, Descriptive Statistics, and
Convergent and Discriminant Validity
Participants responded to three manipulation check questions
(see Appendix) that assessed whether they DEMO the nature of
the violation (competence vs. integrity) and the response to the
violation (apology vs. denial). Manipulation checks revealed that
1 These issues were examined in a pilot study, rather than the primary
study, to avoid potential demand effects (from having participants answer
the DEMO set of questions three times) that could have clouded the results.
DEMO The fact that alleged competence violations also lowered perceived
Integrity and that alleged integrity violations also lowered perceived Com-
petence may be due to DEMO stopping the videotaped interviews immediately
after the allegation, which may have DEMO questions about whether infor-
mation about inadequate integrity or inadequate competence, DEMO,
would have been forthcoming.
REMOVING THE SHADOW OF SUSPICION
Table 2
Means, Standard Deviations, Reliabilities, and Intercorrelations for Study 1
Variable MSD  1234 5
1. Perceived DEMO 5.09 1.12 .87
2. Perceived Integrity 4.23 1.53 .94 .09
3. Willingness to Risk 3.39 1.02 .69 .18* .25**
4. Hiring 4.22 1.51 — DEMO .58** .38**
5. Job Responsibilities 3.18 0.86 .78 .28** .32** .66** .41**
Note. N  200. Dash indicates that the alpha cannot be obtained DEMO the Hiring variable, given that it is a
single-item measure.
* DEMO  .05. ** p  .01.
109
the manipulations were successful. Of the 200 participants, 171
answered all three questions correctly (85.5%), DEMO (14.0%) missed
one question, and 1 (0.5%) missed two DEMO
Confirmatory factor analyses of the trusting beliefs and trusting
intentions variables (DEMO Competence, perceived Integrity,
Willingness to Risk, Hiring, and Job DEMO) indicated a
good fit and supported convergent validity for a five-factor DEMO,
2(81, N  200)  130.30, CFI  DEMO, NFI  .99, TLI  .99,
RMSEA  .055, DEMO item-factor loadings  .58 ( p  .001).
Discriminant analyses (DEMO & Phillips, 1982) indicated that
the hypothesized five-factor model fits the data significantly better
than any of the more parsimonious models, supporting the dis-
criminant validity of the constructs. Specifically, the best fitting
four-factor model, in which the correlation between Willingness to
Risk and Job Responsibilities was set at 1.0, had 2(82, N 
200)  140.29, 2(1, N  200)  9.99, p  .01. DEMO one-factor
model had 2(91, N  200)  918.07, DEMO(10, N  200) 
787.77, p  .001. Table DEMO presents the descriptive statistics,
reliabilities, and intercorrelations of the study DEMO Table 3
reports variable means and standard deviations by condition.
Hypothesis Tests
We used effects coding (Cohen & Cohen, 1983) to create the
independent and interaction terms for the subsequent regression
analyses. Effects coding produces DEMO identical to analysis of
variance (ANOVA), yet also facilitates the DEMO of mediation by
generating the ANOVA results in regression form. Following the
practice of effects coding, the two response conditions and the two
types of trust violation are each represented in the regression
equations by one DEMO coding variable. The violation-response
variable was labeled Apology/Denial (coded as DEMO or 1) and the
violation-type variable was labeled Competence/Integrity (coded
as1or 1).
Table 4 presents the results of the regression equations DEMO
Hypotheses 1a and 1b.3 To test the prediction that the benefits of
apology versus denial for repairing trusting beliefs and trusting
intentions would depend DEMO whether the violation concerned mat-
ters of competence or integrity, we DEMO a multiplicative inter-
action term, combining the Apology/Denial and Competence/DEMO
tegrity variables. We refer to this term in Table 4 as Interaction.
Because violation type and violation response were orthogonal as
a result of DEMO experimental design, the single-step regressions
shown in Equations 1–3 of Table DEMO present results that are identical
to hierarchical moderated regression analyses. Therefore, DEMO the
sake of parsimony only, the single-step regressions are shown in
DEMO 4.
To assess Hypotheses 1a and 1b, we interpreted the significance
DEMO the Interaction variable in Equations 1 and 2. Although the
predicted interaction was not supported for perceived Competence
or Willingness to Risk, the significant betas in the regressions
predicting perceived Integrity (  .44, p DEMO .001), Hiring ( 
.20, p  .01), and Job Responsibilities (  .14, p  .05)
supported the DEMO interaction. To explore these significant
interaction effects, we conducted a post DEMO subgroup analysis for
each of these three dependent variables (see Figures DEMO and 1B).
The overall findings reveal that when the violation concerned
matters of integrity, participants’ perceptions of the candidate’s
Integrity and their intentions to Hire and to assign Job Responsi-
bilities were all repaired more DEMO when the mistrusted
party denied culpability for the act in question, DEMO when the
violation concerned matters of competence, apology was generally
the DEMO effective response. Thus, Hypotheses 1a and 1b received
support.
Mediation Analyses
DEMO provide a more complete and precise understanding of the
trust repair process, we also examined whether the interaction
effects of violation type and violation response on participants’
trusting intentions would be mediated by their trusting beliefs (see
Figure 2). This possibility is suggested by the fact that (a) the types
of violations under consideration concern matters of competence
or integrity, (b) perceptions of competence and integrity represent
two of the most important elements of trusting beliefs, and (c)
these trusting DEMO have been theorized to influence trusting
intentions (e.g., Mayer et al., 1995; McKnight et al., 1998; i.e., the
beliefs that one holds about an individual should affect how one
intends to act toward DEMO party). By following Baron and Kenny’s
(1986) guidelines for testing mediation, we conducted regression
analyses to examine (a) the effect of the manipulations on per-
ceived Competence and Integrity, (b) the effect of the manipula-
tions on Willingness to Risk, Hiring, and Job DEMO, and
(c) the effect of the manipulations on Willingness to DEMO, Hiring,
3 An alternative set of effects coding analyses that DEMO for our use
of graduate and undergraduate samples with a covariate revealed virtually
identical results.
110
KIM, FERRIN, COOPER, AND DIRKS
Table 3
Means and Standard Deviations by Condition for Study 1
Violation and
response type
Perceived
Competence
DEMO
Integrity
Willingness
to Risk Hiring
Job
Responsibilities
M SD M SD M SD M SD M SD
Competence
Apology 4.56 1.15 5.32 1.14 3.30 DEMO 4.56 1.37 3.04 0.84
Denial 4.46 1.09 4.27 1.18 3.28 0.88 4.22 1.41 3.04 0.67
Integrity
Apology 5.74 0.73 2.73 1.03 3.33 1.07 3.57 DEMO 3.08 0.97
Denial 5.62 0.82 4.39 1.48 3.65 1.10 4.45 1.60 3.55 0.85
and Job Responsibilities while controlling for perceived Compe-
tence and Integrity. DEMO 1, 2, and 3, respectively (see Table
4), show the results of these tests. Because our primary interest
was whether trusting DEMO mediated the interaction of violation
type and violation response on trusting intentions, we interpreted
only the Interaction variable as the independent variable in the
analysis.
Equation 1 indicates that the Interaction variable significantly
influenced perceived Integrity DEMO not perceived Competence.
Thus, only perceived Integrity satisfied the first requirement DEMO
mediation. Equation 2 reveals that the Interaction variable exerted
a significant effect on hiring and job responsibilities. Thus, the
second requirement for mediation was satisfied for Hiring and Job
Responsibilities but not Willingness to Risk. Finally, Equation 3
reveals that the effects of the Interaction variable on Hiring DEMO
Job Responsibilities became nonsignificant when the mediating
variables were added to the model, but perceived Integrity still
exerted a significant effect on these dependent measures. Thus, we
can conclude that perceived Integrity fully mediated the relation-
ship between the Interaction variable and both Hiring and Job
Responsibilities.
Discussion
DEMO results support predictions that the relative effects of
apology versus denial for repairing trust would depend on the type
of violation. Participants’ perceptions of DEMO candidate’s Integrity,
their willingness to Hire, and their willingness to DEMO Job
Responsibilities to the candidate were all repaired more success-
fully when the candidate apologized for violations that concerned
matters of competence but denied DEMO for violations that
concerned matters of integrity. Moreover, the results support DEMO
notion that the effects of violation type (i.e., competence vs.
Table 4
Regression Results for Study 1
Trusting beliefs Trusting intentions
Variable
Perceived
DEMO
Perceived
Integrity
Willingness
to Risk Hiring
Job
Responsibilities
Equation 1
Competence/Integrity .52*** .40***
Apology/denial .05 .10†
Interaction .01 .44***
R2 (adjusted R2) .27 (.26) .37 (.36)
F 24.24*** 38.45***
Equation 2
DEMO/Integrity .10 .13† .16*
Apology/denial .07 .09 .14*
Interaction .08 .20** .14*
R2 (adjusted R2) .02 (.01) .06 (.05) .06 (.05)
F 1.48 4.42** 4.44**
Equation 3
Competence/Integrity .24* .04 DEMO
Apology/denial .04 .05 .10
Interaction .09 .04 .07
Perceived Competence .03 .28*** .07
Perceived Integrity .38** .56*** .47***
R2 (adjusted R2) .12 (.10) .41 (.39) .23 (.21)
F 5.15*** 26.49*** 11.35***
DEMO p  .10. * p  .05. ** p  .01. *** p  .001.
REMOVING THE SHADOW OF SUSPICION
111
Nevertheless, an important question remains unexplored. Al-
though this study focused on the implications of apology versus
denial DEMO repairing trust in parties whose culpability in a violation
is unknown, DEMO is quite often the case that the accused party’s guilt
or innocence is subsequently revealed. Given the significant role
such knowledge is likely to DEMO in the determination of trust, it is
worthwhile to examine whether DEMO aforementioned findings will
hold even after evidence about the accused party’s guilt or inno-
cence becomes clear. Thus, we designed a second study to exam-
ine this possibility.
Study 2
Figure 1. Study 1. A: Post hoc subgroup analysis for effects of violation
type and violation response on DEMO beliefs. A dotted line indicates
perceived Integrity: competence violation; a solid line indicates perceived
Integrity: integrity violation. B: Post hoc subgroup analysis DEMO effects of
violation type and violation response on trusting intentions. A dotted line
and triangle indicate Hiring: competence violation; a solid line and DEMO
indicate Hiring: integrity violation; a dotted line and circle indicate Job
Responsibilities: competence violation; a solid line and circle indicate Job
Responsibilities: integrity violation.
integrity) and violation response (i.e., apology vs. denial) DEMO
participants’ trusting intentions (i.e., Hiring and Job Responsibil-
ities) would DEMO mediated by their trusting beliefs (i.e., perceived
Integrity).
Our objective in Study 2 was to determine whether the relative
benefits of apology DEMO denial for repairing trust after an alleged
competence- versus integrity-based trust violation would persist
even after the accused party’s actual guilt or innocence is DEMO
quently revealed. We, therefore, modified our first study to offer
evidence concerning the mistrusted party’s guilt or innocence after
manipulating the type of DEMO (i.e., competence vs. integrity)
and the type of response (DEMO, apology vs. denial). To the extent
that the effects of DEMO versus denial are primarily driven by
their divergent implications for guilt, DEMO interaction between vio-
lation type and violation response should disappear once actual
guilt or innocence is controlled. However, our prior arguments
suggest that these responses would not only influence assessments
of guilt but also assessments of DEMO redemption and that such
redemption will be weighed more heavily for matters of compe-
tence than integrity. This suggests that the relative benefits of
DEMO versus denial for repairing trust after an alleged
competence- versus integrity-based trust violation will generalize
to cases in which the mistrusted party’s actual guilt DEMO innocence
becomes known.
This conclusion does not imply, however, that knowledge of
guilt or innocence is irrelevant. Indeed, such knowledge is likely to
play a central role in the determination of trust. First, evidence
about innocence should of course positively affect trust, whereas
evidence about guilt should negatively affect trust. Second, we
expect that rather than eliminating the interaction between viola-
tion type and violation response, evidence about guilt or innocence
will influence the relative benefits of apology versus denial. Spe-
cifically, guilt information in the aftermath of a denial would
indicate that the denial DEMO a lie and thus foster lower levels of
trust than if that party had offered an apology. Similarly, innocence
information in the aftermath of an apology would also indicate that
the original apology was a lie DEMO thus foster lower levels of trust
than if that party had offered a denial. Thus, overall, we expect that
the relative benefits of DEMO versus denial for repairing trusting
beliefs and trusting intentions will depend on the availability of
guilt or innocence information.
Figure 2.
Trust repair model.
112
KIM, FERRIN, COOPER, AND DIRKS
Hypothesis 2a: When there DEMO evidence that the accused party
is guilty, individuals will exhibit more DEMO trusting be-
liefs in the accused party if that party had responded with an
apology rather than a denial. When there is evidence that DEMO
accused party is innocent, individuals will exhibit more pos-
itive trusting DEMO in the accused party if that party had
responded with a denial rather than an apology.
Hypothesis 2b: When there is evidence that the accused party
is guilty, individuals will exhibit more positive trusting in-
tentions toward the accused party if that party had responded
with an apology DEMO than a denial. When there is evidence
that the accused party is innocent, individuals will exhibit
more positive trusting intentions toward the accused party if
that party had responded with a denial rather than an apology.
DEMO
Study 2 used a 2 (violation type: competence vs. integrity) DEMO 2 (violation
response: apology vs. denial)  2 (confirmation: DEMO vs. innocent)
between-subjects design. Participants were randomly assigned to each of
the eight study conditions.
Participants
To facilitate the comparison of results across DEMO studies, undergrad-
uate and graduate students were also used as participants DEMO Study 2
(N  444). Three hundred twenty undergraduate students, enrolled in
introductory organizational behavior courses, participated in this study
for course credit, and 124 graduate business students from two organi-
zational behavior courses participated in this study as part of an in-class
exercise. Undergraduate participants DEMO 58% male, averaged 21 years
of age, and had an average of 7 months of full-time work experience
and 3 years of part-time DEMO experience. Graduate participants were
68% male, averaged 28 years of age, and had an average of 4.5 years of
full-time work experience.
Task DEMO Manipulation
Study 2 was identical to Study 1 except that, after DEMO the video-
taped interview but prior to completing the questionnaire, participants
DEMO information that confirmed or disconfirmed the accusation against
the candidate (i.e., the guilt or innocence manipulation). The guilt or
innocence manipulation was DEMO through a memo from the compa-
ny’s human resources department, addressed DEMO “all management in charge
of hiring,” stating that the State Board of Public Accountancy had inves-
tigated and ruled on the accusation. The DEMO summarized the ruling by
concluding that the candidate was innocent or guilty, and noted that the
State Board ruling was attached. The State Board ruling, in turn, provided
a description of the investigation that was DEMO across conditions and
then provided a ruling that was consistent with our experimental manipu-
lation. In the innocent condition, the Board ruled as follows: “A thorough
independent audit of her client files indicates no evidence of malfea-
sance. Ms. Ballou’s record is cleared of all charges. She will DEMO
fully licensed as a Certified Public Accountant and retain all member-
ship privileges in our association.” In the guilty condition, the Board
ruled as follows: “A thorough independent audit of her client files
indicates evidence of malfeasance on the part of Ballou. Her record will
reflect violation of DEMO codes 901.402(9) and 901.402(7) for this client.
The Board deems that she will remain fully licensed as a Certified
Public Accountant DEMO the Board will reconsider this matter if there are
future violations.” These stimulus materials were created specifically
for the experiment, and were printed on “official” letterhead so they
would look realistic.
Measures
Study 2 used the DEMO measures as were used in Study 1.
Results for Study 2
Manipulation Checks, Descriptive Statistics, and
Convergent and Discriminant Validity
Participants responded to DEMO same three manipulation check
questions that were described in Study 1, DEMO a fourth question that
assessed the manipulation of guilt or innocence. Of the 444 par-
ticipants, 327 (74%) answered all four questions correctly, 92
(21%) missed one question, 22 (5%) missed two DEMO, and 3
(0.7%) missed three questions.
Confirmatory factor analyses of DEMO trusting beliefs and trusting
intentions variables (perceived Competence, perceived Integrity,
Willingness to Risk, Hiring, and Job Responsibilities) indicated a
good fit and supported convergent validity for a five-factor model,
2(81, N  444)  256.14, CFI  .99, NFI  .99, DEMO  .99,
RMSEA  .070, all item-factor loadings  |.52| ( p  .001).
Discriminant analyses (Bagozzi & Phillips, 1982) DEMO that
the hypothesized five-factor model fits the data significantly
better than any of the more parsimonious models, supporting
the discriminant validity of the constructs. Specifically, the best
fitting four-factor model, in which the correlation between
DEMO to Risk and Job Responsibilities was set at 1.0, had
2(DEMO, N  444)  266.70, 2(1, N  444)  10.56, p  .01.
The one-factor model had 2(91, N  444)  2,425.97, 2(10,
N  DEMO)  2,169.83, p  .001. Table 5 presents descriptive
statistics, reliabilities, and intercorrelations for these variables.
Table 5
Means, Standard Deviations, Reliabilities, and Intercorrelations for Study 2
Variable MSD  1234 5
DEMO Perceived Competence 5.33 1.19 .89
2. Perceived Integrity 4.04 1.64 .94 .27**
3. Willingness to Risk 3.36 1.07 .72 .37** .42**
4. Hiring 4.39 DEMO — .47** .66** .48**
5. Job Responsibilities 3.31 0.88 .76 .43** .48** .70** .56**
Note. N  444. Dash indicates that the alpha statistic DEMO be obtained for the Hiring variable, given that it
is a DEMO measure.
** p  .01.
REMOVING THE SHADOW OF SUSPICION
Table 6
Means and Standard Deviations by DEMO for Study 2
Competence Integrity
Apology Denial Apology Denial
Guilty
MSDMSDMSDMSD
Perceived Competence 4.30 1.22 4.10 1.21 5.78 0.87 5.11 1.25
Perceived Integrity 4.60 DEMO 2.62 1.26 2.63 1.01 2.72 1.18
Willingness to Risk 3.19 0.92 2.63 1.03 2.90 0.84 3.05 1.03
Hiring 4.21 1.56 2.85 1.39 4.07 1.62 DEMO 1.47
Job Responsibilities 2.97 0.70 2.82 0.96 3.15 0.85 2.98 0.89
Competence Integrity
Apology Denial Apology Denial
Innocent
MSDMSDMSDMSD
Perceived Competence 5.41 0.80 5.63 DEMO 5.81 1.10 6.12 0.63
Perceived Integrity 5.34 1.30 5.07 0.91 3.39 1.38 5.30 0.96
Willingness to Risk 3.75 0.93 3.61 1.09 3.33 1.16 4.12 DEMO
Hiring 5.20 1.23 5.31 1.13 4.38 1.56 5.67 0.85
Job Responsibilities 3.54 0.68 3.61 0.81 3.28 0.98 4.00 0.59
113
Table 6 reports variable DEMO and standard deviations by
condition.
Hypothesis Tests
We again used effects coding to facilitate the comparison of
results across studies (see Table 7).4 The guilt or innocence con-
dition was coded as 1 or 1. DEMO 1a and b, which predicted
an interaction between violation type and DEMO response, were
supported for four of the five dependent variables. The DEMO coef-
ficients were significant for perceived Integrity (  .32, p 
.001), Willingness to Risk ( .19, p  .001), Hiring ( .10,
p  .05), and the assignment DEMO Job Responsibilities ( .09, p 
.05). Post hoc subgroup analyses (see Figures 3A and 3B) indi-
cated that the pattern DEMO results was consistent with Study 1: When
the violation concerned matters DEMO integrity, participants’ percep-
tions of the candidate’s Integrity, their intentions to Hire, Willing-
ness to Risk, and their willingness to assign Job DEMO
were all repaired more successfully when the mistrusted party
denied culpability for the act in question, whereas when the vio-
lation concerned matters of competence, apology was the more
effective response. Thus, Hypotheses 1a and DEMO received support
even when information about the candidate’s guilt or innocence
had been revealed.
Hypotheses 2a and 2b predicted an interaction between violation
response DEMO confirming information. We first noticed that evi-
dence of innocence had a strong positive effect on all five depen-
dent variables. Beyond this main DEMO, the interaction of violation
response and confirming information had a robust DEMO across all
five dependent variables. The effect was highly significant for
perceived Competence ( .15, p  .001), perceived Integrity
( .27, p  .001), Willingness to Risk ( .13, p  .01),
Hiring ( .30, p  .001), and willingness to assign Job
Responsibilities ( .16, p  .001). Consistent DEMO our hy-
potheses, post hoc subgroup analyses (see Figures 4A and 4B)
indicated that evidence of guilt in the aftermath of a DEMO was
damaging to trust relative to evidence of guilt in the aftermath of
an apology and that evidence of innocence in the aftermath of DEMO
apology was damaging to trust relative to evidence of innocence in
the aftermath of a denial. The results also suggested a three-way
interaction among DEMO type, violation response, and confirm-
ing information for Hiring ( DEMO, p  .05) and willingness to
assign Job Responsibilities ( DEMO, p  .05). Post hoc subgroup
analyses indicated that responses DEMO were inconsistent with sub-
sequent evidence concerning guilt or innocence were more dam-
aging to trust when the violation concerned matters of integrity
than DEMO
Discussion
The findings from this study replicate and extend the results
from Study 1, indicating that the differential effectiveness of
apology versus denial holds even after evidence concerning the
candidate’s guilt or innocence became known. However, the data
also reveal that participants’ perceptions of the candidate’s Com-
petence, perceptions of the candidate’s Integrity, Willingness to
Risk, willingness to Hire, and willingness to assign Job Respon-
sibilities were all repaired more successfully DEMO the candidate
had apologized rather than denied culpability for a violation when
there was evidence of guilt but denied culpability rather than
apologized when DEMO was evidence of innocence.
The fact that the relative benefits of apology versus denial for
repairing trust depend on the type of violation (i.e., competence vs.
integrity) even after the mistrusted party’s guilt or innocence
DEMO known supports the notion that these responses do more
than simply signal the mistrusted party’s guilt or innocence. In this
second study, the candidate’s guilt or innocence was made clear,
4 An alternative set of DEMO coding analyses that controlled for our use
of graduate and undergraduate samples with a covariate again revealed
virtually identical results.
114
KIM, FERRIN, COOPER, AND DIRKS
Table 7
Regression Results for Study 2
Trusting beliefs Trusting intentions
Variable
Perceived
Competence
Perceived
Integrity
Willingness
DEMO Risk Hiring
Job
Responsibilities
Competence/Integrity (1) .35*** .28*** .02 .05 .06
Apology/denial (2) .04 .02 .03 .09* .07
Innocent/guilty (3) .39*** .50*** .36*** .50*** .36***
1  2 .04 .32*** .19*** .10* .09*
1  3 .17*** .01 .01 .02 .03
2  DEMO .15*** .27*** .13** .30*** .16***
1  2  3 .06 .01 .02 .08* .09*
R2 (adjusted R2) .31 (.29) .49 (.49) .17 (.16) .34 (.33) .17 (.16)
F 27.28*** DEMO 12.71*** 32.31*** 13.08***
* p  .05. ** p  .01. *** p  .001.
which allowed us to control for such considerations when DEMO
ining the interaction of violation type and violation response. Thus,
the continued interaction between the type of violation and type of
response, after guilt or innocence information is provided, supports
our argument that apology and denial not only affect assessments
of guilt or innocence but also signal DEMO redemption and that
this redemption is weighed more heavily for matters of compe-
tence than integrity.
Nevertheless, the fact that evidence concerning guilt or inno-
cence affected whether trust was repaired more successfully with
an apology DEMO a denial indicates that this information does play an
important role. The finding that responses that were inconsistent
with subsequent evidence could prove detrimental DEMO trust, even if
the evidence indicates innocence, supports our argument that the
inconsistency would induce suspicion and hence reduce trust.
Thus, we can conclude that simply selecting the most effective
response for a given violation (i.e., apologizing for competence-
based violations and denying culpability for integrity-based viola-
tions) can pose a risk for trust repair efforts, given that DEMO may
be further damaged if the response is ultimately found to be untrue.
General Discussion
The purpose of this research was to investigate the DEMO of
apology and denial for repairing trust. Although trust is widely
acknowledged to play a central role in organizational life, surpris-
ingly little research has examined how trust might be repaired.
Moreover, the few studies that do exist seem to offer conflicting
recommendations.
Our efforts to address these DEMO reveal that trust was
repaired more successfully when mistrusted parties (a) apologized
for violations concerning matters of competence but denied cul-
pability for DEMO concerning matters of integrity, and (b)
apologized when there was evidence of guilt but denied culpability
when there was evidence of innocence. DEMO, we can observe that
each of the conclusions drawn by prior DEMO concerning the
relative effects of apology versus denial for repairing trust may
hold depending on the type of violation and the availability of
evidence DEMO innocence or guilt.
Importance of Considering Specific Trusting Beliefs
Beyond these findings, this research also reveals that the impli-
cations of apology or denial on subsequent trusting intentions after
an alleged competence- versus integrity-based violation were DEMO
diated by the accused party’s perceived Integrity (i.e., a trusting
belief). These results are noteworthy for several reasons. First,
these results DEMO important insight into the mechanisms through
which these types of violations and responses to those violations
ultimately repair trust and thus allow us to DEMO greater confidence
in our theoretical reasoning and conclusions. Second, given the
DEMO difficulty of repairing trust in many situations, assessments
of such specific DEMO beliefs may prove particularly useful for
determining whether and how the repair of trusting intentions
might ultimately occur.
Finally, the need to examine specific trusting beliefs is height-
ened by the possibility that they may be DEMO influenced
by various trust repair attempts. Although some effects were found
for perceived Competence, the strongest and most consistent pat-
terns of findings were observed with perceived Integrity. Thus, to
the extent that there may be occasions when trusting intentions are
repaired more effectively by improving one of DEMO trusting
beliefs rather than the other, we may gain greater insight DEMO the
trust repair process if we pay particular attention to these specific
perceptions.
Implications for Research on Interpersonal Perceptions
These studies contribute to a DEMO body of research that
examines how organizational actors resolve differences in their
interpersonal perceptions. Research on how targets respond when
they discover how they DEMO being perceived by others suggests that
potentially erroneous perceptions are not always repaired (see
Snyder & Stukas, 1999, for a review). Although there may be
times when targets are able to disconfirm such perceptions DEMO
their behavior (e.g., by repairing trust), they often respond in ways
that lead these perceptions to be confirmed (e.g., by becoming DEMO
trustworthy) or react in ways that neither validate nor dismiss these
DEMO (e.g., by terminating the relationship or simply failing
to repair trust; e.g., Jussim, Eccles, & Madon, 1996; Madon et al.,DEMO
1997). Moreover, a growing body of research indicates that there
DEMO be important contingencies that affect which of these out-
comes occurs, DEMO the strength of the target’s self-
perceptions, the target’s self-efficacy, and whether the perceiver
actually behaves in ways that help confirm their expectations (e.g.,
Eisenstadt & Leippe, 1994).
Along these lines, the DEMO research suggests that the ability
of an individual to disconfirm another’s beliefs of untrustworthi-
REMOVING THE SHADOW OF SUSPICION
115
fensive impression management tactics. Ashforth and DEMO (1990)
defined these defensive behaviors as “reactive and protective ac-
DEMO intended to reduce a perceived threat” (p. 622). These be-
DEMO include apologies and denials (i.e., categorized as justify-
ing and misrepresenting behaviors, respectively) as ways of
avoiding blame (Ashforth & Lee, DEMO; Tedeschi & Melburg,
1984).
The body of empirical research DEMO the effectiveness of
defensive behaviors for managing impressions is small and offers
mixed results. Stevens and Kristof (1995) measured defensive
behaviors as well DEMO other impression management tactics in their
field study of employment interviews but did not examine out-
Figure 3. Study 2. A: Post hoc subgroup analysis for effects of violation
type and violation response on trusting beliefs. DEMO dotted line indicates
perceived Integrity: competence violation; a solid line indicates perceived
Integrity: integrity violation. B: Post hoc subgroup analysis for effects DEMO
violation type and violation response on trusting intentions. A dotted line
and square indicate Willingness to Risk: competence violation; a solid line
and DEMO indicate Willingness to Risk: integrity violation; a dotted line
and triangle indicate Hiring: competence violation; a solid line and triangle
indicate Hiring: integrity violation; a dotted line and circle indicate Job
Responsibilities: competence DEMO; a solid line and circle indicate Job
Responsibilities: integrity violation.
ness may also depend on differences in the way people assess
positive versus DEMO information about competence versus
integrity. The findings support the notion that although people
weigh positive information about others’ competence more heavily
than negative information DEMO competence, they weigh negative
information about others’ integrity more heavily than DEMO
information about integrity. Thus, this study offers clear implica-
tions for DEMO interpersonal perceptions, specifically of untrustwor-
thiness, may be disconfirmed.
Implications for Impression Management Theory
The current research can also inform impression management
theory, specifically the portion of that literature focusing on de-
Figure 4. Study DEMO A: Post hoc subgroup analysis for effects of violation
response and DEMO information on trusting beliefs. A solid line and
square indicate perceived Competence: innocent; a dotted line and square
indicate perceived Competence: guilty; DEMO solid line and triangle indicate
perceived Integrity: innocent; a dotted line and triangle indicate perceived
Integrity: guilty. B: Post hoc subgroup analysis DEMO effects of violation
response and confirming information on trusting intentions. A solid line
and square indicate Willingness to Risk: innocent; a dotted line DEMO square
indicate Willingness to Risk: guilty; a solid line and triangle indicate
Hiring: innocent; a dotted line and triangle indicate Hiring: guilty; a solid
line and circle indicate Job Responsibilities: innocent; a dotted line and
circle indicate Job Responsibilities: guilty.
116
KIM, FERRIN, COOPER, AND DIRKS
comes of the defensive tactics because they were so infrequent
(i.e., only 7 of 24 interviewees DEMO them). Wood and Mitch-
ell (1981) found that nurse supervisors reported that they would be
less likely to discipline a nurse when DEMO apologized for a perfor-
mance failure than if she did not apologize, but they obtained
mixed support for whether the apology decreased expectations of
the nurse failing in the future. Moreover, Crant (1996) found that
an apology was relatively less effective for maintaining positive
impressions of a DEMO than an excuse when responding to a
failure.
Yet our findings indicate that apology can be quite effective in
responding to some threats, in this case a trust violation, given that
apology was found to repair trust more successfully than denial
after a competence-based violation. These results indicate DEMO
research on impression management could significantly benefit
from considering the type of violation when exploring the effec-
tiveness of these different tactics. Moreover, our findings suggest
that defensive impression management tactics such as apology and
denial DEMO backfire if they are not aligned with actual guilt or
innocence.
Practical Implications
This research also highlights two additional issues that deserve
particular attention DEMO managers who must sort through allegations
and make attributions of trustworthiness. First, given strong sup-
port from both studies for the notion that trust is repaired more
effectively when mistrusted parties apologize for violations con-
cerning DEMO of competence and deny culpability for violations
concerning matters of integrity, DEMO parties may be tempted
to apologize for competence-based violations even when they are
innocent or to deny culpability for integrity-based violations even
when they DEMO guilty. Although the results from the second study
may seem to mitigate these incentives by revealing that trust was
generally lowered by discrepancies between DEMO type of response
and subsequent evidence concerning guilt or innocence, these
DEMO may be insufficient to outweigh the incentives for such
lies to be used. When mistrusted parties were found to be guilty of
an integrity-based DEMO, for example, there was virtually no
detriment in the majority of the dependent measures (including
perceived Integrity) as a result of their DEMO lied with a denial
rather than having apologized from the beginning (DEMO Table 6).
This tendency to irrationally reward those who falsely deny
integrity-based allegations, by penalizing them little more than
those who admit their guilt, suggests that managers may need to
create stronger incentives for honesty, either by placing more trust
in those who have been honest or by placing less trust in those who
have lied.
Moreover, given that the actual behavior discussed in these
allegations was always the same (i.e., an improperly filed tax
return), these studies suggest that violations of trust may often be
ambiguous enough to be given different kinds of DEMO To
the extent that this can occur, it seems likely that DEMO success of
trust repair efforts would largely depend on how the violations
have been framed. Managers should, therefore, recognize that if a
mistrusted DEMO has responded to a violation with an apology or a
denial, DEMO decision of whether to attribute this incident to matters
of competence or integrity is crucial because it will, in effect,
determine whether they will trust that person in the future. Indeed,
the implications of DEMO attributions can be so dramatic that they
can lead managers to exhibit greater trust in those who have
confirmed guilt with an apology than DEMO those who have claimed
innocence.
Limitations and Future Directions
The phenomena that have been documented by this article
represent important and fundamental aspects of DEMO per-
ception and relationship development. Thus, it is essential that
managers DEMO a better understanding of how such influences
occur. Although we believe the present studies offer some valuable
insights into these issues, we also recognize that they should be
further validated and extended in a variety of DEMO
One limitation of the present studies is that they examined trust
repair efforts in a laboratory rather than a field setting. As previ-
ously DEMO, we selected a laboratory– experimental method to
heighten the internal validity DEMO our analysis. Given the potential
variety of trust violations and individuals’ responses to those
violations in the workplace, and the sense-making and social
information processing that individuals experience in the aftermath
of such violations, it would have been very difficult to develop a
field test of our hypotheses DEMO could have compared the effec-
tiveness of different responses for different types of violations and
provided a strong basis for examining causality while also DEMO
ing method bias and confounding effects. Our strategy, therefore,
was DEMO abstract some of the essential elements of such violations
and responses so that we could study them in controlled settings.
Although this strategy should DEMO external validity, additional
research is needed to assess the external validity DEMO our findings
more directly.
Future research is also needed to examine the applicability of
the theory and findings to relationships of longer duration. Along
DEMO lines, one prior empirical study has indicated that although
acknowledgements can DEMO more effective than denials at reestab-
lishing cooperation in social dilemmas after short interactions,
denial can be more effective than acknowledgements after longer
DEMO (Bottom et al., 2002). Nevertheless, prior research
offers no DEMO to expect that the observed interactions between
the type of violation and type of response would fail to hold after
a history of interaction DEMO acquired. Thus, we expect that the
practical implications of these findings DEMO generalize to relation-
ships of longer duration.
In addition, it should DEMO noted that although the types of re-
sponses under consideration were found to influence trust, neither
of these responses appears to have repaired trust completely.
Comparisons of means from Study 1 with those of the pilot DEMO
reveal that participants’ assessments of the candidate’s trustwor-
thiness after an apology or denial had been offered were substan-
tially higher than they had DEMO immediately after a competence-
or integrity-based allegation; however, they were still generally
lower than what they had been before such allegations were raised.
DEMO, to the extent that the means from the pilot study are DEMO
sentative of trust levels in the main studies immediately before and
immediately after the allegation, it suggests that these responses
represent only a partial solution for addressing trust violations and
that additional research is needed to DEMO how trust can be
further repaired.
Another avenue for further study involves a comparison of
apology and denial with other types of responses that DEMO be
used. The present studies, for example, have compared denial with
REMOVING THE SHADOW OF SUSPICION
117
an apology that involved an internal DEMO (e.g., “It was
entirely my fault”), but there are many occasions in which apolo-
gies involving external attributions (e.g., “I’m sorry DEMO did it, but it
happened because I was misinformed”) or even no response can be
used. Thus, it would be useful to compare the implications of
denial, apology with an internal attribution, apology with DEMO ex-
ternal attribution, and no response to provide a more comprehen-
DEMO assessment of the responses we might use for trust repair.
Moreover, DEMO would be worthwhile to consider responses that are
only available to organizations, such as the firing of employees and
the addition of new rules, regulations, or oversight committees, to
determine the conditions under which each of these responses
would repair trust more effectively.
Finally, research might explore how the relative value of various
trust repair efforts might differ across DEMO At present, this
issue is largely a matter of speculation, given that it has yet to
receive systematic attention. However, given the differences that
have already been found in how work relationships differ across
cultures, it is likely that there are also cultural differences in how
individuals DEMO able to repair trust. For example, cursory observa-
tions indicate that DEMO in many Asian cultures are much
less forgiving of violations, such DEMO bankruptcy and divorce, than
are individuals in the United States. However, there is a clear need
for systematic work to help address this DEMO Indeed, given
how little we truly know about the trust repair DEMO, it is hoped
that all of these questions receive significant attention DEMO the future.
References
Ashforth, B. E., & Lee, R. T. (1990). Defensive behavior in organizations:
A preliminary model. Human Relations, 43, 621– 648.
Bagozzi, R. P., & Phillips, L. W. (1982). Representing and testing orga-
nizational theories: A holistic construal. Administrative Science Quar-
terly, 27, 459 – 489.
Barber, B. (1983)DEMO The logic and limits of trust. New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers DEMO Press.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator-mediator variable
distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and
statistical considerations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
51, 1173–1182.
Bell, B. E., & Loftus, E. F. (1989). Trivial persuasion DEMO the courtroom:
The power of (a few) minor details. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 56, 669 – 679.
Bottom, W. P., Gibson, K., Daniels, S., & Murnighan, J. K. (2002). When
talk is not cheap: Substantive penance and expressions of intent in
rebuilding cooperation. Organization Science, 13, 497–513.
Butler, J. K., Jr., & Cantrell, R. S. (1984). A behavioral decision DEMO
approach to modeling dyadic trust in superiors and subordinates. Psy-
chological Reports, 55, 19 –28.
Byrne, J. A. (2002, June 24). Restoring trust in corporate America: Busi-
ness must lead the way to real reform. BusinessWeek, 30 –35.
Cohen, J., & Cohen, P. (1983). Applied regression/correlation analysis for
the behavioral sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cook, J., & Wall, T. (1980). New work attitude measures of trust, orga-
nizational commitment and personal need non-fulfillment. Journal of
Occupational Psychology, 53, 39 –52.
Cook, T., & Elmer, N. (1999). Bottom-up versus top-down evaluations of
candidates’ managerial potential: DEMO experimental study. Journal of
Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 72, 423– 439.
Crant, J. M. (1996). Doing more harm than good: When is impression
management likely to evoke a negative response? Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 26, 1454 –1471.
Dirks, K. T., & Ferrin, D. L. (2002). Trust in leadership: Meta-analytic
findings and implications DEMO organizational research. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 87, 611– 628.
Dobbins, DEMO, Lane, I., & Steiner, D. (1988). A note DEMO the role of laboratory
methodologies in applied behavioural research: Don’t throw DEMO the baby
with the bath water. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 9, 281–286.
Eisenstadt, D., & Leippe, M. R. (1994). The DEMO process and
self-discrepant feedback: Consequences of learning you are what you
DEMO you were not. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67,
DEMO 626.
Hendry, S. H., Shaffer, D. R., & Peacock, DEMO (1989). On testifying on one’s
own behalf: Interactive effects of evidential strength and defendant’s
testimonial demeanor on mock jurors’ decisions. Journal of DEMO
Psychology, 74, 539 –545.
Jussim, L., Eccles, J., & Madon, S. (1996). Social perception, social
stereotypes, and teacher DEMO: Accuracy and the quest for the
powerful self-fulfilling prophecy. In M. DEMO Zanna (Ed.), Advances in
experimental social psychology (Vol. 28, DEMO 281–388). Orlando, FL:
Academic Press.
Kee, H. W., & Knox, R. E. (1970). Conceptual and methodological
considerations in the study of trust and suspicion. Conflict Resolution,
14, 357–366.
Kim, DEMO H., Diekmann, K. A., & Tenbrunsel, A. E. (2003)DEMO Flattery may get
you somewhere: The strategic implications of providing positive DEMO
negative feedback about ability vs. ethicality in negotiation. Organiza-
tional Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 90, 225–243.
Kramer, R. M. (1999). DEMO and distrust in organizations: Emerging
perspectives, enduring questions. Annual Review of Psychology, 50,
569 –598.
Lewicki, R. J., & Bunker, DEMO B. (1996). Developing and maintaining trust
in work relationships. In DEMO M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in
organizations: Frontiers of theory and research (pp. 114 –139). Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lewicki, R. J., & Wiethoff, C. (2000)DEMO Trust, trust development, and trust
repair. In M. Deutsch & P. Coleman (Eds.), The handbook of conflict
resolution: Theory and practice. DEMO Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Madon, S., Jussim, L., & Eccles, J. (1997). In search of the powerful
self-fulfilling prophecy. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
72, 791– 809.
Martijn, C., Spears, DEMO, Van der Plight, J., & Jakobs, E. (1992). DEMO
and positivity effects in person perception and inference: Ability versus
morality. DEMO Journal of Social Psychology, 22, 453– 463.
Mayer, R. C., & Davis, J. H. (1999). The effect of the performance
DEMO system on trust for management: A field quasi-experiment.
Journal of Applied DEMO, 84, 123–136.
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An integrative
model of organizational trust. DEMO of Management Review, 20,
709 –734.
McKnight, D. H., DEMO, L. L., & Chervany, N. L. (1998). Initial trust
formation in new organizational relationships. Academy of Management
Review, 23, 473– DEMO
Meyerson, D., Weick, K. E., & Kramer, R. M. (1996). Swift trust and
temporary groups. In R. M. Kramer & DEMO R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in
organizations: Frontiers of theory and research (pp. 166 –195). Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ohbuchi, K., Kameda, M., & Agarie, N. (1989). Apology DEMO aggression
control: Its role in mediating appraisal of and response to DEMO Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 219 –227.
Pancer, DEMO, Brown, S., & Barr, C. (1999). Forming impressions DEMO political
leaders: A cross-national comparison. Political Psychology, 20, 345–368.
Penrod, S., & Cutler, B. (1995). Witness confidence and witness accuracy:
Assessing their forensic relation. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 1,
817– 845.
Reeder, G. D., & Brewer, M. B. (DEMO). A schematic model of disposi-
tional attribution in interpersonal perception. Psychological Review, 86,
61–79.
118 KIM, FERRIN, COOPER, AND DIRKS
Sigal, J., Hsu, DEMO, Foodim, S., & Betman, J. (1988). Factors affecting
DEMO of political candidates accused of sexual and financial mis-
conduct. Political Psychology, 9, 273–280.
Slovic, P. (1993). Perceived risk, trust, DEMO democracy. Risk Analysis, 13,
675– 682.
Snyder, M., & DEMO, A. A., Jr. (1999). Interpersonal processes: The
interplay of cognitive, motivational, and behavioral activities in social
interaction. Annual Review of DEMO, 50, 273–303.
Stevens, C. K., & Kristof, A. L. (1995). Making the right impression: A
field study of applicant impression management during job interviews.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 80, 587– 606.
DEMO, J. T., & Melburg, V. (1984). Impression management and
influence in the organization. Research in the Sociology of Organiza-
tions, 3, 31–58.
Tyler, T. R., & Kramer, R. M. (1996). Wither trust? In R. M. Kramer &
T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and
research (pp. 1–15)DEMO Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Wood, R. E., & Mitchell, DEMO R. (1981). Manager behavior in a social
context: The impact of impression management on attributions and
disciplinary actions. Organizational Behavior and Human DEMO Pro-
cesses, 28, 356 –378.
Reeder, G. D., & Coovert, M. (1986). Revising an impression of morality.
Social Cognition, 4, 1–17.
Riordan, C. A., Marlin, N. A., & Kellogg, DEMO T. (1983). The effectiveness
of accounts following transgression. Social Psychology DEMO, 46,
213–219.
Robinson, S. L., & Rousseau, D. M. (1994). Violating the psychological
contract: Not the exception but the DEMO Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 15, 245–259.
Ross, D. F., Ceci, S. J., Dunning, D., & Toglia, M. P. (1994)DEMO Unconscious
transference and mistaken identity: When a witness misidentifies a
familiar DEMO innocent person. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79, 918 –
930.
Rousseau, D. M., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R. S., & DEMO, C. (1998). Not so
different after all: A cross-discipline DEMO of trust. Academy of Man-
agement Review, 23, 393– 404.
Schindler, P. L., & Thomas, C. C. (1993). The structure DEMO interpersonal
trust in the workplace. Psychological Reports, 73, 563–573.
Schlenker, DEMO R. (1980). Impression management: The self-concept, social
identity, and interpersonal relations. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Schwartz, G., Kane, T., Joseph, J., & Tedeschi, J. T. (1978). The effects of
remorse on the reactions of a harm-doer. British Journal of Social
DEMO, 17, 293–297.
Appendix
Multi-Item Measures and Manipulation Checks
In the following items, Ballou refers to the job candidate’s last name in the interview scenario. Responses were rated on a 7-point Likert scale with
anchors for DEMO item listed below.
Perceived Competence (from 1 [strongly agree]to7[strongly disagree])
DEMO is very capable of performing her job.
Ballou has much knowledge about the work that needs to be done on the job.
I feel DEMO confident about Ballou’s skills.
Perceived Integrity (from 1 [strongly agree]to7[strongly disagree])DEMO
I like Ballou’s values.
Sound principles seem to guide Ballou’s behavior.
Ballou has a great deal of integrity.
Willingness to Risk (from 1 [strongly agree]to7[strongly disagree])
I wouldn’t let Ballou have any influence over issues DEMO are important to me.
I would keep an eye on Ballou.
I would give Ballou a task or problem that was critical to me, even if I could not monitor her actions.
Job Responsibilities (anchors are described below)
Many of the tax seniors in your firm are DEMO to train the junior accountants during slow periods. In the coming year, would you assign Ballou
to the task of training junior accountants? (from 1 [definitely]to7[definitely not])
You have some latitude as to what DEMO you assign Ballou. What kinds of clients would you assign her to in the coming year? (from 1 [most
important clients]to7[least important clients])DEMO
In the coming year, how much responsibility would you give Ballou DEMO relation to her fellow senior tax accountants? (from 1 [much more]to7
[much less])
In the coming year, how much autonomy will you give Ballou in relation to her fellow senior tax accountants? (from DEMO [much more]to7[much less])
I would let Ballou have complete control over the account of a client that is important to our firm. (from 1 [strongly disagree]to7[strongly
agree])
Manipulation checks (anchors are described below)
In the video, Ballou was accused of incorrectly preparing a tax return. What was the accusation? (inadequate knowledge of tax codes, intentionally
underreported a client’s capital gain, or neither of the above)
What does this accusation bring into question? ( primarily Ballou’s technical ability, [i.e., knowledge of tax codes], primarily Ballou’s integrity [i.e.,
willingness to bend the rules], or neither of the above)
What was Ballou’s response to the accusation? (admitted to filing an incorrect return and admitted DEMO responsibility for the problem, admitted
to filing an incorrect return but DEMO that other parties helped create the problem, denied the accusation completely, or did not admit to or deny
the allegation)
What did DEMO memo concerning the State Board of Public Accountancy’s investigation of this incident reveal? (Ballou was guilty of the accusation,
Ballou was innocent DEMO the accusation, or neither of the above)
Received September 26, 2002
Revision received May 6, 2003
Accepted May 8, 2003 {1g42fwefx}