Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience
2008, 8 (4), 509-524
DEMO:10.3758/CABN.8.4.509
Time and decision making in humans
FLORIAN KLAPPROTH
Berlin Institute of Technology, Berlin, Germany
Decision making requires evaluating alternatives that differ DEMO a number of attributes. During this evaluation
process, selection of options DEMO on the duration of the options, the duration of the expected DEMO for real-
izing the options, and the time available to reach DEMO decision. This article reviews the relationship between time
and decision making in humans with respect to this evaluation process. Moreover, the role of psychological
time, as compared with physical time, is accentuated. Five topics have DEMO selected that illustrate how time and
mental representations of time affect decision making. These are (1) the duration of options, (2) temporal deci-
sion making, (3) the time between having made a decision and experiencing the consequences of that decision,
(4) the temporal DEMO of decision makers, and (5) the duration of the decision DEMO The discussion
of each topic is supplemented by suggestions for further research. It is shown that psychological time is often
neglgg pyp gected in DEMO decision making but seems to play an important role in the making of choices.
This article was written to highlight the role that time
DEMO mental representations of time play in decision mak-
ing. Making decisions usually requires evaluating at least
two alternatives that differ on a number of DEMO (Reed,
2004). When alternatives are evaluated, three aspects of
duration matter. First, the alternatives from which a person
is forced to choose the “right” one differ, among other
things, regarding their duration. DEMO is easy to imagine that
the alternatives’ durations might have a large impact on a
decision if, for example, one has to decide DEMO two
aversive events (let’s say, two dental treatments including
drilling) DEMO differ only on the duration dimension. In this
case, we would DEMO that short events will be preferred
over long events.
Second, part DEMO the evaluation of alternatives consists
of anticipating the expected time of their realization. The
effect of the delay between the commitment to an option
DEMO the occurrence of a consequence has stimulated a
broad range of research on so-called intertemporal deci-
sion making. Anticipating delays in realizing an option
DEMO only reduces the value of that option, but also alters its
DEMO representation. For example, consequences occur-
ring in the far future are DEMO with less detail than
are consequences occurring in the near future.
Third, the time available for making choices definitely
has an impact on both the amount of information that is
processed and the quality of the DEMO decision, particu-
larly when the duration of the decision process is DEMO
by external factors.
In order to make a beneficial decision, a DEMO maker
has to correctly gauge the durations of the options, the DEMO
rations of the expected delays in realizing the options, and
the DEMO available to reach a decision. In 2001, an article
written by DEMO and Zakay was published that reviewed
some issues relating time and decision making from a
rather general perspective. When making suggestions for
future research, they referred to the importance of per-
ceived time, as compared with physical time, in decision
making. Since publication of the Ariely and Zakay article,
new data have been reported that, in fact, stress DEMO role
that psychological time plays in the making of decisions.
Therefore, DEMO present article focuses on effects on deci-
sion making that have been suggested to be dependent on
the way decision makers represent time with DEMO to
both the options and the decision process itself.
In situations in which people are forced to make de-
cisions, particularly those realized in experimental con-
ditions, psychological time is either imagined time or
experienced time. Experienced time might lead people
to choose one option over another, if both are evaluated
retrospectively and are different in duration. Experienced
time is DEMO by the amount of attention that is allocated
to the processing of time,1 if people are aware that timing
is relevant, or by the number of contextual changes that
occur during a time period, if people do not know or sus-
pect that they will be asked DEMO judge duration until after
the time period has ended (Block, 2003; Block & Zakay,
1997).
Imagined time refers to either the time at which an out-
come is expected to occur or the DEMO of time for which
an outcome will last. There is evidence that imagined du-
ration relies, at least partially, on duration experienced
in DEMO past (Roy, Christenfeld, & McKenzie, 2005), and,
therefore, quantitative modeling of imagined time should
be possible (see, e.g., DEMO, Eisler, & Montgomery, 2004,
who modeled retrospective time judgments DEMO a psy-
chophysics approach). This means that choosing between
outcomes that differ in duration or choosing between out-
F. Klapproth, klapproth@gp.tu-berlin.de
509
Copyright 2008 Psychonomic Society, Inc.
510
KLAPPROTH
comes that differ in delay for realization might involve
relying DEMO a kind of numerical representation of that par-
ticular time. Taking this assumption for granted, one may
argue that choosing one alternative over the other is at
least partly dependent on how durations pertaining to the
DEMO problem are mentally represented. In particular,
one may ask whether or not decisions might be affected if
the pertinent durations are in some DEMO misrepresented.
There is ample evidence that representations of dura-
tion are biased regarding their means and their variability.
Mean judgments of long durations are DEMO shorter than
their corresponding physical durations, whereas short du-
rations tend DEMO be judged as longer than they really are, a
result that DEMO is described as Vierordt’s law (e.g.,
Predebon, 1995; Szelag, Kowalska, Rymarczyk, & Pöp-
pel, 2002; Wearden, 2003). Concerning the variability of
temporal judgments, an estimate of duration, like estimates
DEMO most other magnitudes, will become more variable (i.e.,
will deviate more from its mean), the longer the duration
to be estimated DEMO (e.g., Allan, 1998; Klapproth, 2007;
Wearden, 2003). This finding is a form of Weber’s law.
If duration matters in DEMO making and if the effect
of duration on decisions is due to the ability of an indi-
vidual to judge time with precision, the timely aspects of
decision making should be considered more thoroughly.
For example, how is duration taken into account (and by
which mechanisms) when DEMO of options is consid-
ered? Does an internal clock trigger the DEMO of decision
making under time pressure? How is time discounting re-
DEMO to time estimation? Does the anticipation of delays
in intertemporal choices DEMO on the individual’s time
perspective?
To address these questions, I DEMO in this review to
accentuate the relationship between decision making and
both aspects of time—the physical as well as the psycho-
logical aspect. Recent DEMO have revealed that internal
timing mechanisms might support people in making fast
decisions (Macar & Vidal, 2003, 2004; MacDonald &
Meck, DEMO; Praamstra, Kourtis, Kwok, & Oostenveld,
2006), that brain activity during delay discounting has
some resemblance to neural activation during time DEMO
mation (Wittmann, Leland, & Paulus, 2007), and that the
representation of time itself may influence intertemporal
choices (Berns, Laibson, & Loewenstein, 2007; Taka-
hashi, Oono, & Radford, 2008).
Time matters within the decision-making process at
least regarding the evaluation of alternatives DEMO with re-
spect to the process itself. Concerning these aspects of
decision making, I have subdivided this article into five
sections. Selection of these sections was further motivated
by the fact that recent findings regarding relationships DEMO
tween psychological time and decision making have been
made primarily with respect to these topics.
The first section will deal with the durations of DEMO al-
ternatives about which a person has to decide and how the
alternatives’ durations influence the choice in favor of one
alternative. The second DEMO will consider a special case
of the first section. It will illustrate choices for which du-
ration is the only relevant attribute of the DEMO, a form
of decision making that is documented in the literature DEMO
temporal decision making. The third section will be about
choosing between delayed outcomes, usually called inter-
temporal choices. It comprises four subsections that will
present (1) the description of a classical model of tempo-
ral DEMO, (2) differences between exponential and
hyperbolic delay discounting, (3) the relationship between
delay discounting and time perception, and (4) the con-
nection between delay discounting and the mental repre-
sentation of the DEMO In intertemporal choices, decision
makers have to anticipate delays that separate DEMO decision
from its consequences. The fourth section will relate de-
cision making to the traits of an individual that account
for his or her DEMO time perspective—that is, how he or
she anticipates personal future goals DEMO actions. As com-
pared with the paradigm for intertemporal choices, this
DEMO will provide alternative views on how future out-
comes are valued. The fifth and last section will consider
the duration of the decision process, which has often been
reported to influence the decision outcome. This section
DEMO be subdivided into two parts, one referring to decision
making under DEMO time resources, the other present-
ing literature with respect to choice DEMO time tasks.
Making decisions under time pressure might require that
decision makers engage in estimating the time available
for the decision.
At the end DEMO each section, the main findings will be
summarized, conclusions will be offered, and questions or
suggestions for future research will be presented.
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN TIME AND
DECISION MAKING IN HUMANS
Duration of Options
This section DEMO literature bearing on the impact
that the durations of alternatives has on choosing between
those alternatives.
Review of the Literature
On the basis of DEMO fact that decision makers usually
resort to nontemporal features of an experience (such as
slope, end, and peak) when evaluating it, Kahneman and
co-authors (e.g., Kahneman, Fredrickson, Schreiber, &
Redelmeier, 1993; Redelmeier & Kahneman, 1996) sug-
gested that people ignore or severely underweight the
duration of consequences, which they called duration ne-
glect. They found in several studies that evaluation of ex-
periences was based primarily DEMO the intensities of the ex-
periences, rather than on the durations DEMO the experiences.
For example, Varey and Kahneman (1992) presented sub-
DEMO with hypothetical experiences that differed in dura-
tion and in intensity over time and asked them to provide
a global evaluation of each experience DEMO a 0–100 scale.
They found that ratings of these experiences were based
on the maximum and final intensities of the experiences,
with little DEMO on duration. Fredrickson and Kahneman
(1993) focused on the role of duration in overall retrospec-
tive ratings of affective episodes. In one experiment, the
authors showed subjects long and short movie clips that
were either DEMO or unpleasant and asked them to pro-
vide a global rating of the pleasantness of the experience.
They found that duration had little impact on these overall
evaluations. Redelmeier DEMO Kahneman (1996) conducted
a study with patients who underwent colonoscopy or litho-
tripsy. The patients were then asked to report the total pain
DEMO had experienced, on a 10-point scale. The treatments
in their study DEMO in the amount of time they took. Nev-
ertheless, the results DEMO no significant correlation be-
tween the duration of the procedure and its retrospective
evaluation. Hands and Avons (2001) conducted a series of
experiments DEMO which participants were asked to evaluate
television sequences that were affected by transient pic-
ture impairments. Rating of the quality of the television
sequences DEMO dependent mainly on the peak impairment
intensity, but the duration of DEMO impairment was found to
have little impact on quality ratings.
However, DEMO studies have obtained less support for
duration neglect, at least with DEMO stimuli. For in-
stance, Schreiber and Kahneman (2000) found that DEMO
unpleasant sounds were evaluated as worse than shorter
sounds. Another factor that seems to attenuate duration
neglect is the focus of the subjects’ attention. DEMO and
Zakay (1999) let some subjects evaluate the overall an-
noyance they experienced from each sound in a series of
annoying sounds and DEMO others evaluate both the over-
all annoyance and the duration of each experience. The
overall evaluations in the latter condition were more sensi-
tive DEMO duration than were those in the former condition.
Read and Loewenstein (DEMO) investigated their subjects’
willingness to experience different durations of pain in
DEMO for payment. They revealed that willingness to
accept (WTA) pain depended strongly on the duration of
the pain and that this relationship was DEMO nonlinear—
that is, the increase of WTA was larger at short DEMO
than at long durations.
There is mixed evidence that duration plays a role when
people select among alternative courses of action in order to
DEMO time. Time-saving decisions are characterized mainly
by the attempt to choose options that have the shortest
duration—for example, when deciding whether to drive to
the university by car (which will take about 30 min) or DEMO
take the bus (which will last 15 min longer). However, the
decision for a certain amount of time loss is confounded
with DEMO probability with which the time loss is expected
to occur. In a series of studies, Leclerc, Schmitt, and Dubé
(1995) presented their subjects with various scenarios that
involved a selection between two alternatives carrying DEMO
identical expected loss of time. In each scenario, subjects
were required DEMO choose between a certain time loss and
a variable time loss (DEMO, having to wait 60 min for sure,
or a 50% DEMO of waiting 30 min and a 50% chance of
waiting 90 min). In most cases, the subjects selected the
certain loss rather than the variable loss, hence ignoring
the durations of the options. Krishnamurthy and Kumar
(2002) could furthermore show that risk aversion to wait-
ing DEMO was stronger when people imagined themselves
as being confronted with a scenario than when they imag-
ined other people making the choice.
Indeed, evaluation of waiting time has been shown to
be better when people are DEMO about the expected
length of the wait than when no information is provided
TIME AND DECISION MAKING IN HUMANS
regarding the wait duration, independently of the actual
duration of the wait (Dellaert & Kahn, 1999; Hui & Tse,
1996; Hui & Zhou, 1996). Thus, a wait appears to be less
aversive the more predictable its duration DEMO
A different pattern of results, however, has been found
when decisions are made from experience. Whereas
scenario-based studies of time-saving decisions tend to
DEMO risk aversion (Krishnamurthy & Kumar, 2002;
Leclerc et al., DEMO), Munichor, Erev, and Lotem (2006)
found that time-saving DEMO reflected a tendency to
prefer options that led to the best outcomes (i.e., the short-
est durations) when decision makers had to rely on per-
sonal experiences.
Ariely and Loewenstein (2000) examined the impact
DEMO different evaluation methods on the role of duration
in evaluations. They used a range of procedures, such as
ratings, willingness to pay, and a graded-choice proce-
dure in which subjects repeatedly chose between annoying
sounds. DEMO these evaluation methods, they found
that the rating procedures commonly used DEMO previous re-
search elicited the least sensitivity to duration. However,
decisions or comparative ratings corresponded with an
increased weight that people placed on DEMO
Summary, Conclusion, and
Suggestions for Future Research
The majority of experiments being reviewed have shown
that the durations of options played only a DEMO role in
decision making. However, there are some cases in which
DEMO seems to be considered for judgment: (1) when
choices have DEMO be made between aversive stimuli; (2) when
decision makers pay DEMO to the durations of the op-
tions; (3) when durations DEMO certain, rather than uncertain;
(4) when durations are experienced, rather than imagined
as part of a scenario; and (5) when people choose between
options, rather then evaluating them.
Ariely and Loewenstein (DEMO) picked up the latter point
and argued that the role of DEMO should be considered
separately in two aspects of behavior: encoding and DEMO
ing choices. They suggested that when the goodness and
badness of experiences are encoded, ignoring duration is
not necessarily a mistake and can even be desirable. The
idea here is that, in many cases, overall DEMO are
used to classify events into classes of desirable and non-
desirable objects, and their duration is often a separate
factor that can be considered later (at the choice stage). In
the case of making choices, however, the role of duration
should be very different. When DEMO, it would be a
mistake not to take duration into account, since this could
cause a wrong allocation of time to different activities.
DEMO duration sometimes matters and sometimes does
not has not been clarified yet. Presumably, encoding of
duration is impaired when duration is of minor importance
for the decision maker or when attention is distracted from
duration. It DEMO well known from timing experiments that
timing becomes less accurate when attention is devoted
mainly to nontemporal information processing (e.g.,
Brown, 1997)DEMO
A possible attempt to examine more directly whether and
how duration matters in choice is to systematically vary
511
512
KLAPPROTH
Choice in favor of Option A
Choice in favor of DEMO B
Duration of Option A
Figure 1. Possible relationship between the duration of Op-
tion A and the duration of Option B. The area DEMO the solid line
represents the choices in favor of Option A; DEMO area under the
line, the choices in favor of Option B.
DEMO duration while keeping any other stimulus attri-
bute constant. Suppose that there are two options: Option A
is a very unpleasant event, and DEMO B is a less unpleasant
(yet not pleasant) event. Holding the duration of Option A
constant while varying the duration values of Option DEMO
would yield a particular duration of B at which the prefer-
ence for Option A equals the preference for Option B. For
example, a 10-sec surge with high intensity might corre-
spond to a 60-sec surge DEMO low intensity. In this example,
the high-intensity surge equals in preference a low-intensity
surge with a duration six times higher than that of DEMO high-
intensity surge. However, selecting durations for Option A
other than DEMO one used in this example would yield other
values of duration that belong to Option B.
Figure 1 illustrates the subjective equivalence between
both DEMO durations. Assuming that there would be a lin-
ear relationship, Option DEMO would be chosen with the same
frequency as Option B multiplied by a constant factor.2
However, nonlinear relationships are also conceivable (as
is DEMO in the figure). Deviations from linearity would
imply that the duration of options is not a constant weight-
ing factor of intensity when DEMO are made.
Temporal Decision Making
Temporal decision making is treated here as a special
case of choices made between alternatives differing in
duration.
Review DEMO the Literature
When people choose between options of different dura-
tion, DEMO best alternative is usually one that is evaluated
as being most pleasant or as having the highest utility.
However, decisions are conceivable where people do not
care about the pleasantness or the utility of experiences
but DEMO on duration as the only relevant attribute of an
experience. For example, an individual must decide when
to switch off the oven in order to prevent the cookies from
baking too long and getting burnt. Essentially, and pro-
vided that no external clock aids the process of time DEMO
ing, he or she must estimate the passage of time to DEMO
to an appropriate decision.
What makes a decision a temporal decision? DEMO answer
this question, I will present a very simple example of DEMO time
estimation task that is frequently used in time research labo-
ratories, called temporal generalization (see, e.g., Klapp-
roth, 2002; Wearden, 1992; Wearden, Denovan, Fakhri, &
Haworth, 1997). In DEMO task, a person is initially exposed to
a standard duration (e.g., a tone of 400 msec duration). After
a few exposures to the standard, comparison durations are
presented that are longer than, shorter DEMO, or equal to the
standard duration. The subject has to judge DEMO each
of the comparisons is the standard or not, simply by DEMO
a yes or a no response (usually via a keypress). DEMO most of
the studies reported in the literature, feedback as to DEMO
mance accuracy is given to the subjects.
What does the subject have to do when judging the du-
ration of the stimulus? First, DEMO or she has to encode the
duration of the standard being presented at the beginning.
This might be done by an internal device that DEMO in
a way similar to an oscillating neuron that emits pulses
with regular frequency. Then the standard duration must
be stored into memory for DEMO purpose of later compari-
sons. The comparison durations presented as test stimuli
likewise need to be encoded, and, finally, both the internal
representation of the standard and the internal representa-
tion of the comparison have DEMO be checked regarding their
equality. Even if the comparison and standard durations
were physically the same, it seems unlikely (due to noise
in DEMO processing) that they will be exactly sub-
jectively equal. Therefore, the subject needs a criterion
that allows him or her to decide whether DEMO two durations
are subjectively close enough to elicit a yes response.
Even this simple task involves at least three mental op-
erations: the encoding of stimulus duration, memorization
of stimulus duration, and a decision process DEMO is needed
to generate the similarity decision.
Gibbon, Church, and Meck (1984), who conducted
temporal generalization experiments with rats, proposed
an DEMO model of temporal discrimina-
tion, the scalar timing theory. The scalar DEMO theory
was initially developed to explain regularities in the tim-
ing behavior of rats and pigeons (Church & DeLuty, 1977;
Church & DEMO, 1982) and was then extended to human
timing performance (Wearden & McShane, 1988). The
key assumptions of this theory are (1) that estimates of
real duration are, on average, accurate and (DEMO) that stan-
dard deviations of time estimations grow proportionally
with the DEMO of time estimations. The latter relationship
is a form of Weber’s law. Scalar timing theory assumes
three levels for the processing of temporal information
(see Figure 2). The highest level is the clock level, consist-
ing of a pacemaker–accumulator device. The pacemaker
generates pulses that are recorded DEMO added by an accu-
mulator. The content of the accumulator is then transferred
into memory (the next level). Finally, there is a DEMO
level, at which the comparison is made between a sample
of DEMO standard drawn from memory and the duration of
a comparison stimulus represented in the accumulator.
(Note that some authors distinguish between working
memory and the accumulator. For the sake of simplicity,
both instances are treated DEMO as being identical.)
Duration of Option B
Pacemaker Switch Accumulator
Threshold
t
Reference
Memory
b
s
Comparator
|s – DEMO
s
< b ?
“No”
“Yes”
Figure 2. An information-processing model DEMO scalar timing.
The clock consists of a pacemaker, a switch, and an accumula-
tor. The value in the accumulator (t) is compared DEMO a sample
of a value in the reference memory (s) according to a ratio rule
on the basis of a sampled threshold value (b). The output of the
comparison is a decision indicating either DEMO sameness
(“yes”) or difference (“no”) of two presented intervals. From
“Application of Scalar Timing Theory to Individual Trials,” by
R. M. DEMO,W. H. Meck, and J. Gibbon, 1994, Journal of Experr-
DEMO Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 20, p. 136. Copy-
right 1994 DEMO the American Psychological Association. Adapted
with permission.
Decision processes seem to be an essential part of the
timing system, and different decision processes have been
proposed for different sorts of timing tasks, but most vari-
ants of timing tasks seem to encourage a form of decision
making that DEMO called the thresholded normalized difference
model (Wearden, 2004). This means that judgments of the
similarity or identity of durations appear to be DEMO by cal-
culating the absolute difference between a to-be-judged
duration (comparison) and some kind of standard dura-
tion and then normalizing this difference DEMO some quantity
(e.g., the standard or the comparison duration). This result
is then compared with a certain threshold value.
Modeling temporal generalization DEMO illustrates how
hypothetical decision processes with respect to stimu-
lus duration might work in humans. A temporal gener-
alization task begins with a number DEMO presentations of
the standard, s, which is assumed to reside in memory.
The memory is assumed to be represented as a Gaussian
distribution DEMO an accurate mean and some coefficient
of variation (standard deviation/mean)DEMO On each trial, a
random sample, s*, is drawn from DEMO of s, and the
subject identifies a comparison duration, t, DEMO the standard
if abs(s*  t)/t b*, where s* is a sample from the stan-
dard represented in memory, t is the representation of the
comparison duration, and b* is a threshold variable from
trial to trial with a constant mean.3
Among the various manipulations DEMO have led to
changes in timing performances of humans, only a DEMO
number of factors that might affect decision processes
alone have been reported. These are (1) task difficulty,
(2) the payoff structure, and (3) time pressure.
TIME AND DECISION MAKING IN HUMANS
Ferrara, Lejeune, and Wearden (1997) let two groups
conduct a temporal generalization task and varied the
spacing of comparison durations between them. One group
DEMO comparison durations spaced in 150-msec steps
(the easy group), whereas DEMO other group had comparison
durations spaced in 75-msec steps (the difficult DEMO).
Ferrara et al. found that discrimination between the com-
parisons and the standard was better in the group with the
75-msec spacing. This DEMO was replicated by Wearden
and Grindrod (2003), who again found DEMO greater
timing sensitivity when discrimination was more difficult.
Ferrara et al., DEMO well as Wearden and Grindrod, offered
a possible explanation by assuming DEMO lower value of the
threshold b (i.e., a stricter threshold) DEMO the difficult condi-
tion, as compared with the easy condition.
In DEMO same study, Wearden and Grindrod (2003) ma-
nipulated the temporal DEMO process by encouraging
or discouraging people to make yes responses in a tempo-
ral generalization task by awarding or deducting points.
Encouraging identifications of DEMO standard increased the
proportion of identifications of the standard, whereas the
DEMO manipulation decreased identifications of
the standard. Modeling showed that the main theoretical
difference between the two conditions was due to a change
in the DEMO threshold.
In a recent article, Klapproth and Müller (2008) used
DEMO times to detect not only which temporal decisions
were made, but DEMO when they were made. They required
subjects within a temporal generalization task to make time
judgments either normally, taking as much time as they
wanted, or as quickly as possible, regardless of whether all
the DEMO judged had actually been terminated. Perfor-
mance was different in the two conditions, and strong evi-
dence was found from reaction time measures that people
could make timing decisions before the stimuli had fin-
ished. This DEMO indicated how much temporal informa-
tion was needed to make temporal decisions.
Summary, Conclusion, and
Suggestions for Future Research
Decision processes play an DEMO role in timing, as is
suggested by one of the most DEMO theories of tem-
poral processing, the scalar timing theory, and its modi-
fications. Decision processes in timing can be modeled
by assuming that DEMO differences of durations are
normalized and then compared with a decision threshold.
Decision processes are subject to manipulation by varying
(1) task difficulty, (2) the payoff structure of the task, and
(3) the time available for the decision. Whereas manipu-
lating task difficulty will lead DEMO changes in the variance
of time estimations, variations of both the DEMO struc-
ture and time pressure will change the mean of temporal
judgments.
To conclude, the effects of manipulating the decision
process in temporal decision making are compatible with
assumptions derived from scalar timing theory.
Much work DEMO been done to model decision processes
in timing tasks, such as DEMO generalization and tem-
poral bisection. However, tasks remain that are still DEMO
understood in terms of the mental processes underlying
513
514 KLAPPROTH
these tasks: for example, the production and reproduc-
tion DEMO temporal intervals, as well as verbal estimations of
experienced periods of DEMO Future research should
investigate to what extent existing models of temporal de-
cision making can explain timing behavior elicited by the
latter tasks. Some DEMO steps have been taken: Wearden
(2003), for instance, applied DEMO of scalar timing
theory to the method of temporal reproduction; in DEMO
article (Wearden, 2004), the process of verbal estimation
was analyzed in some detail.
Moreover, the time course of temporal decision making
should be looked at more thoroughly, since it might give
more insight into what is actually processed in temporal
processing. Analyzing real-time processes in temporal DEMO
cision making by using quantitative decision models has
been discussed by Klapproth (2003b) and Klapproth and
Müller (2008).
Time Between Decisions and Consequences
Anticipating delays that separate a decision from its
consequences has been DEMO to have a large impact on
the outcome of a decision. The next section will review the
literature pertaining to this issue.
Review of DEMO Literature
The discounted utility model. The time span between
the instant when a decision is made and the realization of
its outcomes is an DEMO factor that alters the decision-
making process substantially. An immediate reward is, on
average, more attractive than the same reward paid out
after DEMO weeks have elapsed. This phenomenon, known
as temporal discounting, was first described by the dis-
counted utility (DU) model (Samuelson, 1937), according
to which the utility of a consequence exponentially de-
creases as the delay for the consequence increases.
Experimental research on temporal discounting in-
DEMO both real consequences and delays, as well as
hypothetical choice scenarios. DEMO the latter allow the
study of a much broader range of delays, they have usu-
ally been preferred by researchers. In many studies, DEMO
consequences under consideration are amounts of money.
Data typically are collected individually, with the goal of
depicting each individual’s tendency to discount delayed
outcomes by means of an empirical discounting function.
On each trial, subjects choose between a small reward that
is available immediately (or in the near future; see, e.g.,
Green, Myerson, & Macaux, 2005) DEMO a large reward
that is available in the far future. Across many trials, the
delay for the large reward and the amount of the small
reward are varied. The goal is to identify the current sub-
DEMO value of outcomes of various delays, with subjec-
tive value defined DEMO the magnitude of the small reward
that generates indifference in a choice against the large
reward. This subjective value suggests the extent to which
DEMO large reward has been discounted because of delay. An
example might illustrate the experimental procedure typi-
cally applied. In one experimental condition, the amount
and delay of the large reward may remain constant (e.g.,
€1,000 to be given in 1 year), whereas the amount of DEMO
small reward varies across trials from near zero to equal
to that of the large reward. If the small reward values are
presented in DEMO order, initially, the large reward is
likely to be preferred (DEMO, €1,000 in 1 year instead of €1
now). As DEMO small reward grows larger (e.g., €1,000 in
1 year as opposed to €990 now), preference shifts to the
small reward. The DEMO of the small reward at which the
preference switches defines the current subjective value
of the large reward or, in other words, the DEMO of dis-
counting of the large reward due to delay. A discounting
function can be derived for any individual subject when
subjective values have DEMO estimated for the same large
reward at several delays. This discounting function shows
the extent to which subjective value changes under delay.
Usually, discounting functions are decelerating—that is,
the more temporally distant an expected consequence, the
weaker its impact on current behavior.
A central assumption of the DEMO model is that intertem-
poral choice can be expressed by a single parameter, the
discount rate (Frederick, Loewenstein, & O’Donoghue,
2002)DEMO In its original form, the DU model assumed a con-
stant DEMO rate. The intertemporal utility function in the
DU model can be described by the following equation:
T
t
Ut(ct, . . . , cT )  £ D(k)u(ct  k),
k 0
with D(k)  [1/(1 ¼)]k.
In DEMO equation, u(ct  k) is the utility function (ex-
DEMO the utility of a reward c at the instance t  k), T is
the time horizon, and D(k) is the DEMO discount func-
tion (expressing the relative weight of a reward at DEMO  k, as
compared with its weight at t); ¼ DEMO the discount
rate—that is, the amount by which a future reward DEMO dis-
counted, as compared with an immediate reward.
Exponential versus hyperbolic DEMO Con-
stant discount rates imply exponential discounting. How-
ever, the most DEMO described discounting behav-
ior is hyperbolic, which means that delayed rewards DEMO
discounted by functions that are inversely proportional to
delay (e.g., Glimcher, Kable, & Louie, 2007; Green & My-
erson, 1996; DEMO & Rachlin, 2006; Myerson & Green,
1995; Rohde, 2005). Hyperbolic discount functions decay
at a more rapid rate for short DEMO periods than for long
time periods, which means that a hyperbolic DEMO is
more impatient when short-run trade-offs are made than
when trade-offs for the long run are made (Berns et al.,
2007). Hyperbolic discounting is also consistent with the
finding that humans can change their DEMO between
two delayed rewards in favor of the more proximate reward
as the time to both rewards decreases (Green, Fristoe, &
Myerson, 1994; Kirby & Herrnstein, 1995).
Although human delay discounting, for the most part, is
best explained by a hyperbolic discounting function, DEMO
is some evidence that humans can be less impulsive than
is predicted by hyperbolic discounting and can behave in a
more rational manner. Forzano DEMO Logue (1992) showed
that subjects are more impulsive in conditions when, after
each choice, juice is given during the experiment, as com-
pared with conditions in which subjects are provided with
TIME AND DECISION MAKING IN HUMANS
515
money or points exchangeable for DEMO at the end of the
experiment. Loewenstein (1996) found that visceral factors,
such as hunger, thirst, and sexual desire, might increase im-
pulsivity but that controlling for these factors will result in
less DEMO behavior. Montague and Berns (2002) pro-
posed that uncertainty in decision situations will encour-
age a steeper (i.e., hyperbolic) discounting than will occur
when there is no uncertainty, the latter condition leading,
rather, to exponential discounting. Recently, Schweighofer
et al. (2006) let subjects DEMO a delay-discounting task
in which the time to gain maximal reward was limited and
delays were experienced rather than imagined. They found
that their DEMO adopted exponential discounting, which,
in effect, maximized reward at the end of the experiment.
Delay discounting and time perception. Recently,
Takahashi DEMO al. (2008) suggested that human intertem-
poral choice is strongly influenced by the psychophysics
of time perception. They proposed that time perception
follows DEMO Weber–Fechner law (i.e., assuming a logarith-
mic relationship between subjective and objective time)
and tried to combine the psychophysics of time percep-
DEMO with the classical DU model (exponential discount-
ing). This was DEMO by replacing the physical duration of
delay in the DU model by the subjective delay, expressed
as É  a ln (1  DEMO), where É is the subjective delay, D is
the physical DEMO, and a and b are free parameters. Taka-
hashi and co-workers DEMO show that the behavioral data
yielded by a delay-discounting task were fit best by the
Weber–Fechner discounting function, as compared with
hyperbolic discounting and exponential discounting.
The assumption that temporal discounting is related to
time perception DEMO also been confirmed by studies with
subjects who showed both impulsivity in delay discounting
and impairments in time estimations. For example, drug
addicts are supposed to be more impulsive than nonaddicts
(Fillmore & Rush, 2002; Leland & Paulus, 2005). They
show less self-control in decision-making tasks, since they
discount future rewards more strongly than do control sub-
jects; that is, they tend to prefer smaller and sooner over
larger DEMO later rewards (Hoffman et al., 2006; Kirby &
Petry, DEMO). Stimulus-dependent subjects also show im-
pairments in time perception and sensorimotor timing
(e.g., Sayette, Loewenstein, Kirchner, & Travis, 2005). DEMO
a study conducted recently by Wittmann, Leland, Churan,
and Paulus (2007), drug addicts and nonaddicts were com-
pared regarding their ability to estimate time and to tap in
synchrony with a regular tone DEMO They found that
drug addicts needed larger time differences for effective du-
ration discrimination than did control subjects, particularly
for intervals around 1 sec. Moreover, drug addicts acceler-
ated finger tapping when the tone sequence was removed
and they still had to tap with the same rhythm. In DEMO,
drug addicts overestimated long intervals. The authors
concluded that the differences in time processing could be
attributed to the larger impulsivity of addicts, as compared
with nonaddicts, and that these differences might explain
why addicts have difficulty in delaying gratification.
Similar results were obtained with patients who DEMO
fered from damage to the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC).
These patients DEMO generally been supposed to be more
impulsive than controls, and it DEMO be shown that OFC
patients also overestimated time intervals verbally and un-
derestimate time intervals by the method of time produc-
tion (Berlin, DEMO, & Kischka, 2004).
Impulsivity and strong temporal discounting of delayed
rewards have also been observed in adolescents with at-
tention deficit hyperactivity DEMO (ADHD). As com-
pared with control subjects, ADHD patients discounted
delayed monetary rewards more strongly and made larger
errors of reproduction (i.e., absolute difference from the
objective duration; Barkley, Edwards, Laneri, Fletcher, &
Metevia, 2001).
Wittmann, Leland, and Paulus (2007) found different
levels of brain activity during a delay-discounting task
when choices DEMO between immediate and delayed re-
wards and when the delays varied between less than a year
and 1 year or longer. They concluded that DEMO of
whether to opt for a sooner or later reward require cog-
nitive processing of time and that this processing corre-
sponds to neural DEMO (e.g., in the striatum) that also
plays a role in DEMO estimation.
Delay discounting and the representation of the fu-
ture. The core assumption of temporal discounting is that
the value of an outcome is DEMO as temporal distance
from the outcomes increases. However, Trope and Liber-
DEMO (2003) showed that the effect of temporal distance
on the attractiveness of an option depends on the value as-
sociated with the option. DEMO decisions in the near future,
practical aspects should be more heavily weighted, and for
decisions far in the future, desirability aspects should DEMO
more important. In their construal level theory, Liberman
and Trope (1998) proposed that temporal distance system-
atically changes people’s mental representations of future
events and that these changes determine the value of those
events (Trope & Liberman, 2003). They distinguished
between high-level construals and low-level construals.
High-level construals involve the abstract representation
of events, basically comprising global features, whereas
low-level construals include rather peripheral, concrete,
and local features. DEMO level theory suggests that
the representation of distant future events will be more
abstract, broad, and structured (high level) than the repre-
DEMO of near future events (low level).
Temporal distance should increase DEMO weight of high-
level value and decrease the weight of low-level value. As
a result, temporal distance should shift the overall attrac-
tiveness of an option closer to its high-level value than to
its low-level value. DEMO, when the low-level value
of an option is more positive than DEMO high-level value, the
option should be more attractive in the near DEMO, which
is also proposed by time-discounting theories. However,
when the DEMO value of an option is more positive,
the option should be more attractive in the distant future.
For example, temporal distance should increase the pref-
erence for gambles with a low probability of winning a
DEMO prize but decrease the preference for gambles with
a high probability of winning a small prize (Sagristano,
Trope, & Liberman, 2002).
Moreover, many decisions are seen in a different light as
the time approaches to put them into practice, since people
516
KLAPPROTH
place greater weight on concrete and practical consider-
ations, relative to more vague and abstract dimensions,
for desirability. For instance, people may revise a decision
already made when the moment to implement it DEMO
(for an overview, see Loewenstein, Weber, Hsee, & Welch,DEMO
2001). In a study of Welch (1999), for example, students
were offered a payment of $1 in exchange for telling a DEMO
in front of a class the following week. When the appoint-
ment came closer, both the students who had agreed to tell
the joke and those who had declined to do so were given
the opportunity DEMO change their minds. It was shown that
67% of those who initially volunteered decided not to tell
the joke, whereas none of those who had initially declined
the offer changed their minds and decided to tell DEMO joke
at the last minute.
There is evidence showing that events occurring at rela-
tively closer temporal proximities are processed differently
than events occurring DEMO more distant proximities (Sanna
& Chang, 2006). When events are presented as occurring
at more distant temporal proximities, individuals are more
susceptible to fallacies (Sanna, Parks, Chang, & Carter,
2005), DEMO information (Liberman, Sagristano, &
Trope, 2002), and optimistic DEMO (Gilovich, Kerr, & Med-
vec, 1993), relative to when events are occurring at close
temporal proximity. McElroy and Mascari (2007) DEMO
gated how temporal proximity of options influences deci-
sion task processing and, in turn, the likelihood of framing
effects.4 They proposed that events DEMO at more dis-
tal temporal points will be perceived as less relevant than
events occurring at more proximal points. Hence, events
occurring in close temporal proximity should also be pro-
cessed using a more effortful, analytic processing style.
Under these conditions, decision makers should rely on
the numeric magnitude of the alternatives, rather than on
the presentational frame. However, DEMO the individuals per-
ceive the event as occurring in relatively distant temporal
proximity, they should perceive the event as less relevant
and should be more likely to use the less effortful, ho-
listic processing style, DEMO in more robust framing
effects. McElroy and Mascari confirmed their hypotheses
by manipulating both the temporal proximity of alterna-
tive options and the framing DEMO options as either gains or
losses. Framing effects were more attenuated if the event
was expected to occur in relatively close proximity than if
DEMO was expected to occur at a distant point of time.
Read, DEMO, Orsel, and Rahman (2005) found that
discount rates were markedly lower when delays were
described as calendar dates (e.g., on October DEMO) than
when they are described in terms of time intervals (e.g.,
in 6 months). This date/delay effect might be attributed
DEMO the way time is represented in either condition. Read
et al. presented some explanations for the results they ob-
tained, which refer to the mental representation of time.
For example, they assumed that the date framing might
have caused the temporal interval to be underestimated,
since the DEMO presumably did not realize the “real”
temporal distance between two successive dates. Although
there are certainly other accounts that might explain the
results as DEMO without particularly considering time rep-
resentation, it has become clear that DEMO about the
future strikingly depends on the description of temporal
intervals. Thus, the framing within which temporal inter-
vals are described might lead to different representations
of time and, hence, to different temporal judgments.
Indeed, there is good reason to assume that there are
multiple ways of DEMO time. Friedman (1990),
for example, distinguishes between (1) DEMO images of
temporal intervals (e.g., the distance between June and
September represented as the spatial distance between two
numerals lying on a ruler), (2) verbal coding of temporal
order (e.g., representing the order of months as a chain of
names), and (3) the DEMO of time (e.g., July might be
associated with hot and beach).
Summary, Conclusion, and
Suggestions for Future Research
Preferring outcomes that DEMO now, as compared with
outcomes that will occur in the future, has been explained
by models that assume that the value of future DEMO is
discounted. Quantitative models exist that relate the dis-
counted outcome to the delay of its realization. Psycho-
logical motives that could account for DEMO discounting
are, among others, visceral influences, uncertainty about
future outcomes, and impulsivity. However, the myopia
for the future may also be a product of the way the future
is mentally represented. Representing future events DEMO
abstractly than temporally nearer events might lower the
value of future events. Thinking in dates, rather than in
intervals, might lead to underestimations DEMO the delays.
Reduced abilities to correctly estimate time intervals
might cause people to discount the future more than they
do when they succeed in DEMO estimation.
Apparently, there is a lack of a global account that DEMO
porates the different effects of subjective time on discount-
ing the future. Presumably, this might be the case because
subjective time is a heterogeneous construct, ranging from
the quantitative representation of intervals between milli-
seconds and minutes to the qualitative and meaningful con-
cept of time (see, DEMO, Klapproth, 2003a; Pöppel, 1998).
Thus, it seems necessary DEMO examine more closely how
subjective time affects temporal discounting. One prom-
ising possibility might lie in investigating the connection
between time estimates and discount DEMO experimentally.
Another approach involves the assessment of the time per-
spective of individuals and relating this time perspective
to the selection of options in DEMO decision tasks. The
next section will deal with this issue.
Decision Making and the
Future Temporal Perspective
As compared with the paradigm for intertemporal
DEMO, this section will provide alternative views on how
future outcomes are DEMO
Review of the Literature
Delay discounting means that rewards that will be de-
livered in the far future will be devalued more than re-
DEMO that will be delivered in the near future. This effect,
commonly obtained when using a delay-discounting task,
might be traced back to DEMO least two possible reasons. First,
TIME AND DECISION MAKING IN HUMANS
517
the delay might be perceived DEMO decision makers as a bar-
rier leading to psychological or monetary costs (see, e.g.,
Leclerc et al., 1995; Osuna, 1985) DEMO will exceed the
benefits of the potential outcomes. Second, decision mak-
DEMO who strongly devalue future outcomes might be more
myopic regarding the future than are decision makers who
do not or just mildly devalue future DEMO Accord-
ing to this argument, people who are not able to DEMO
the far future will also disregard consequences that might
occur in the far future. Therefore, due to their myopia with
respect to events that might happen in the distant future,
they prefer to choose consequences DEMO will appear im-
mediately or at least in the proximal future (DEMO, Hodgins
& Engel, 2002; Lilienfeld, Hess, & Rowland, 1996). This
second argument suggests that people who have a strong
propensity DEMO delay discounting might also suffer from a
short temporal perspective on the future.
Future temporal perspective is commonly defined as
the present anticipation of DEMO goals (Simons, Van-
steenkiste, Lens, & Lacante, 2004). DEMO with a rather
short future temporal perspective set most of their goals
in the near future, whereas people with a rather long or
deep temporal perspective are striving toward goals that
are situated in the more DEMO future. It has been found
with several investigations that the anticipated value of a
future goal decreases the more the future goal is delayed
DEMO time (e.g., Ainslie, 1992; Rachlin, 1995). Since psy-
DEMO distance toward goals in the distant future is
shorter for people with a long future temporal perspective
than for those with a short future DEMO perspective,
the decrease in anticipated value as a function of temporal
delay is less steep for them (Simons et al., 2004).
DEMO have been several attempts, reported in the litera-
ture, to assess the time perspective of individuals. Some
researchers conceive time perspective as a DEMO trait
(e.g., Strathman, Gleicher, Boninger, & Edwards, 1994;
Zaleski, 1996). These authors developed questionnaires
whose aim was to measure the extent to which an individ-
ual’s behavior is guided by future DEMO A comprehen-
sive measure that captures all three dimensions of tempo-
ral perspective (past, present, and future) is the Zimbardo
Time Perspective DEMO (Zimbardo & Boyd, 1999).
This questionnaire comprises five factors (DEMO,
past–negative, present–hedonistic, present–fatalistic, and
future orientation), of which DEMO the present and the fu-
ture perspective factors serve as predictors of immediate,
pleasure-oriented goals versus long-term goals (Henson,
Carey, Carey, & Maisto, 2006). Others have sought pri-
marily to assess the extension of the time horizon. Exten-
sion has been examined, for example, by the length of
time (in years) between the participant’s actual age and
the age at which the most distant event would occur (e.g.,
Greene, 1986; Lessing, 1972; Wallace, 1956).
Wilson and Herrnstein (1985) already associated the
behavioral measure of time discounting DEMO the construct
of temporal perspective (here, the time horizon). They as-
sumed that individuals who discount time at rapid rates
also have DEMO short future time horizon. Shortened time ho-
rizons have been demonstrated in persons with substance
addictions as well and are hypothesized to provide an DEMO
planation for the persistence of substance use by addicted
persons despite the clear risk of negative consequences
(Petry, Bickel, & Arnett, 1998; Smart, 1968; Wills, Sandy,
& Yaeger, 2001). For DEMO, Petry et al. (1998) exam-
ined time orientation in heroin DEMO and demonstrated
that addicts were less future oriented than matched con-
trol subjects without addiction problems. Heroin addicts
were also likely to choose small, immediate rewards over
large, delayed ones in a card game. Similar findings were
reported with social drinkers (Smart, 1968). Hodgins and
Engel (2002) examined whether pathological gambling
was associated with shortened time horizons by adminis-
tering the Zimbardo Time Perspective Inventory and the
Future Time Perspective DEMO (Wallace, 1956) to a
group of pathological gamblers, a group of psychiatric
day patients, and a group of social gamblers. They found
significantly shorter time horizons in pathological ver-
sus social gamblers but only DEMO differences between
pathological gamblers and psychiatric patients, which in-
dicated that DEMO time horizons were not restricted to
addicted people.
Time perspective seems to correlate with many aspects
of everyday behavior. In general, people with a high de-
gree of future orientation exhibit more thoughtful behav-
ior, whereas people with a rather low degree of future
orientation tend to engage DEMO more risky and unhealthy be-
haviors (Zimbardo, Keough, & Boyd, 1997). People who
give more consideration to the consequences of future
DEMO reported fewer behaviors that would have negative
long-term effects on their health, such as drinking alcohol
and smoking, than did those who were DEMO aware of the
future (Keough, Zimbardo, & Boyd, 1999).
Despite all the results mentioned above, until now, little
research has DEMO done on the question of whether there
is a direct relationship between the discounting of future
rewards and the way individuals mentally represent their
DEMO future. It might be hypothesized that people having
a strong propensity for delay discounting should also
have a less extended time horizon or should DEMO lower
on a future time perspective scale than will people with a
rather weak propensity for delay discounting. To exam-
ine this question, Fellows and Farah (2005) investigated
the effects of dorsolateral frontal (DLF) DEMO ventromedial
frontal (VMF) lobe damage on two aspects of temporal
foresight—namely, temporal discounting and the future
time perspective (measured by an adaptation DEMO Wallace’s
[1956] list of future life events). The subjects were pa-
tients with DLF damage who were reported to be myo-
pic for DEMO future (e.g., Bechara, Dolan, & Hindes, 2002),
patients with VMF damage, patients with brain lesions
outside the frontal lobes, DEMO normal individuals. Delay
discounting did not substantially differ among the four
groups. Moreover, subjects also did not differ regarding
the number of future events generated within the Wallace
task. However, the extension of future time perspective
(i.e., the maximum temporal distance of a future event
generated by DEMO subject) was highest for the controls
and lowest for the VMF DEMO, with DLF patients and
patients with lesions outside the frontal lobes DEMO in be-
tween. The surprising fact that VMF damage did not in-
518 KLAPPROTH
fluence temporal discounting rates but did affect personal
future time DEMO let the authors speculate that the
discounting task was presumably less sensitive than the
future time perspective task.
Summary, Conclusion, and
Suggestions for DEMO Research
Some researchers have argued that people can be dif-
ferentiated regarding their proneness and their ability to
look into the future. Different approaches DEMO to examine
this ability, ranging from questionnaires to listing personal
future DEMO Short time horizons and little future orienta-
tion have been shown to correspond to preferring immedi-
ate rewards over remote rewards. However, studies in this
area are rare, and further research is strongly needed.
In conclusion, it can be said that whether future tempo-
ral perspective is a trait or is subject to manipulation is still
an open question. Moreover, it is a matter of debate how a
present-oriented time perspective relates DEMO impulsiveness
obtained with delay discounting tasks.
Therefore, examining the diverse interrelationships DEMO
tween decision making and the future time perspective
might involve correlational analyses of measures of delay
discounting—for example, the discount rate—and the
temporal perspective obtained from different measures
and in various contexts. Since temporal perspective also
DEMO on the specification of the anticipated aspects of
the future (Stern & Koerber, 2000), I furthermore suggest
assessing the subjects’ time perspective DEMO the evalu-
ation of personal events that they expect to occur in sev-
eral successive years. Evaluation can be done regarding
the vividness and DEMO of reported events (cf. Brandt-
städter & Wentura, 1994).
Moreover, since temporal perspective usually is con-
ceived as a trait factor and, hence, might be rather unaf-
fected by environmental stimulations, it should be exam-
ined whether temporal perspective causes an individual’s
proneness to devaluate DEMO rewards. Causal interpre-
tations of significant relationships between trait factors
and behavioral measures should be treated with caution.
However, dividing individuals into groups of high and low
scorers on a future time perspective scale and then DEMO
viding each group with a delay-discounting task should
reveal differences between both groups regarding the dis-
count rate, which, in turn, may have been caused by dif-
ferences in the trait factor.
The Duration of DEMO Decision Process
This section will deal with the effects of limited time on
the making of decisions.
Review of the Literature
Any decision needs DEMO for the processing of rel-
evant information. Some decisions are very fast and are
supposed not to be based on extensive information pro-
cessing (Russo & Schoemaker, 1989). Processing more
information and changing the processing style from in-
tuitive processing to analytic and algorithmic processing
will require DEMO time for making a decision. The time
someone invests while he or she is making a decision is
certainly dependent on a number of DEMO of the situa-
tion surrounding the decision—for example, on the nature
DEMO complexity of the problem, on the subjective risk in-
volved, on personal habits and experiences, and the like
(McGrath & Tschan, 2004).
Decision making under limited time resources.
The amount of information processed DEMO a decision is
made certainly influences the time taken before a decision
is reached. However, there is a norm for making decisions
as soon as they can be made (McGrath & Tschan, 2004).
Thus, decision makers often adopt strategies to abbrevi-
ate information processing and the DEMO pro-
cess. One well-known strategy is labeled the satisficing
heuristic (Simon, 1955). That is, people search only until
they find a solution that meets their minimal requirements
and then adopt that solution without further DEMO An-
other strategy for abbreviating the decision process is to
consider and eliminate alternatives in a sequential order
(Russo & Dosher, 1983). DEMO this strategy, one compares
each alternative with the previously considered one, and
once an alternative has been eliminated, it is not recon-
sidered again. All of these heuristics certainly shorten the
time until a decision DEMO reached.
In many real-life situations (e.g., traffic control, emer-
gency DEMO), shortage of time, or the existence of an
external deadline, is a natural characteristic of the deci-
sion environment. This deadline, which limits or reduces
the time available to make an optimal decision, shall de-
fine the term time pressure, and its effects on decision
making will be reported within the following paragraphs.
High levels of time pressure DEMO lead to perceptual nar-
rowing and, thus, to a reduced utilization of available cues,
decreased vigilance, and reduction in working memory
capacity (Klein, 1997; Orasanu, 1997; Orasanu & Fischer,
1997; DEMO, Barnett, & Wickens, 1987). In high-tempo
event-driven environments, operators may have neither the
time nor the attentional resources that are required DEMO ex-
amine and evaluate multiple possible hypotheses (Maule,
1997; Orasanu & Fischer, 1997; Wickens & Flach, 1988).
Staw, Sandelands, and Dutton (1981) posited that decision
makers under time pressure have DEMO tendency to show more
rigid behavior, described as the failure to DEMO and adapt
behavior to a new situation. This rigidity is a consequence
of two effects of time pressure. First, information pro-
cessing is altered. Less information is processed because
there is a narrowing of the field DEMO attention, and there is
a simplification in information processing. Second, there
is a constriction in the control system. For individuals,
this manifests DEMO as a tendency toward dominant, well-
learned, and habituated behavior, DEMO of the needs
of the specific situation. Both of these effects together may
lead to a fixation of behavior (see also Betsch, Fiedler, &
Brinkmann, 1998). However, individuals who succeed in
choosing a simplifying strategy that is well adapted for a
given task perform better (Payne, Bettman, & Johnson,
1993).
Time pressure might keep DEMO makers from choos-
ing the best alternative since, it has been DEMO, they
divide their attention between estimating the elapsed
time and selecting DEMO alternative (Zakay, 1993; Zakay &
TIME AND DECISION MAKING IN HUMANS
519
Wooler, 1984). Moreover, DEMO probabilities can change
if time limits are imposed (e.g., Busemeyer, DEMO; Buse-
meyer & Townsend, 1993). For instance, Goldstein and
DEMO (1992) studied performance in a task in which
the participants had to choose between a small but certain
loss and an unpredictable gamble DEMO was equally likely
to produce a loss or a win. When decision time was limited
to 1 sec, the gamble was chosen more often than the cer-
tain loss. However, at longer decision times (up DEMO 3 sec),
preferences were reversed, so that the certain loss became
the more frequent choice.
However, a decision that takes longer is not necessarily
better. Eisenhardt (1989) found that decisions of top man-
DEMO teams made more quickly were of higher qual-
ity than decisions that took a longer time. In her study,
fast decisions of management DEMO took between 1.5 and
4 months, whereas longer decisions took between DEMO and
18 months. The fast decisions reflected more frequent
meetings within the company, more real-time information
being available, more experienced advisors, and a more
integrative way of dealing with disagreements and con-
flicts. The fast DEMO apparently did not suffer from the
processes found in experimental research. On the contrary,
fast decisions were made on the basis of more DEMO
tion; several alternatives were elaborated simultaneously,
and these decisions were DEMO successful.
Time pressure may enhance effort and lead to faster
processing of information (Kerstholt, 1994; Maule,
Hockey, & Bdzola, 2000; DEMO et al., 1993). Although
many studies have shown that faster DEMO of infor-
mation do sometimes correspond to less careful consider-
ation of alternatives (Benson & Beach, 1996), time pres-
sure could, on the other hand, encourage the application of
simplified and even more effective strategies (Staw et al.,
1981). Payne et al. found that under moderate time pres-
sure, people accelerated their processing and tried to work
faster, but without changing their pattern of processing. As
time pressure increased, shifts in the pattern of process-
ing were observed; for DEMO, subjects switched from
alternative-based processing, in which they compared
two alternatives and discarded the losing one, to attribute-
based processing, in which DEMO discarded any alternative
that did not fulfill the most important attribute. Because
attribute-based decision making looks at all alternatives,
but not at all DEMO of each alternative, it is generally
less time consuming.
Time pressure DEMO not have uniform effects on all types
of decisions and under all circumstances. Kelly and Karau
(1999) showed that initial preferences and task DEMO
istics, as well as expertise, may mediate its effects. Time
pressure affects novice and expert decision makers differ-
ently. The latter take time DEMO account more explicitly than
novices do. Expert decision makers more often ask explic-
itly about how much time they have left before they must
DEMO to a decision. Moreover, they estimate the available
time more precisely (Cohen, Freeman, & Wolf, 1996).
Choice reaction time tasks. It has been shown that
when the decision horizon is infinite (i.e., DEMO is no
deadline), the optimal strategy for decision making is to
accumulate sensory evidence for one alternative over the
other until a fixed DEMO is reached. It appears that
humans (and animals) accumulate information and make
perceptual decisions in a manner close to this optimal strat-
egy (Bogacz, Brown, Moehlis, Holmes, & Cohen, 2006;
Luce, DEMO; Ratcliff & Rouder, 1998). However, in most
forced choice DEMO, as well as in many situations
in a natural environment, decisions must be made before
a certain deadline has approached. Rapidly responding
within DEMO decision task might require a trade-off between
the time needed for the decision maker to make a choice
and the correctness of the choice. DEMO theoretical at-
tempts deal with the nature of such speed–accuracy rela-
tions. One of the simplest conceptions of speed–accuracy
relations has been presented by DEMO (1971). This model
states that the decrement in accuracy produced DEMO em-
phasizing speed is due to a failure of stimulus processing
on some proportion of trials. These responses are called
fast-guess responses, since they are initiated without any
stimulus processing. These responses are much faster than
DEMO responses, but they will have only a chance prob-
ability of DEMO correct.
There exist numerous sequential-sampling models as
alternatives to simple fast guessing (see, e.g., Dror, Buse-
meyer, & Basola, 1999; Link, 1992; Nosofsky & Palmeri,
1997; Ratcliff & Smith, 2004)DEMO Although some authors
have proposed a deterministic accumulation process (e.g.,
DEMO & Heathcote, 2005) in which the integration of
information occurs in a ballistic manner, most models are
based on the premise that the mental representation of
stimuli is inherently noisy, and to make a decision about a
stimulus, one must accumulate successive samples of this
noisy stimulus representation until a certain criterion is
obtained. The criterion determines which of DEMO responses
is made, and the time needed to attain the criterion DEMO
termines the response time. The amount of information
required for a response can be controlled by the subject,
who can adjust the decision DEMO Trade-offs between
speed and accuracy are made within these models with
respect to the amount of evidence needed for a response,
and changes DEMO the values of the decision criteria alter the
trade-off either to faster responses or to more accurate
responses (Diederich, 2003). Time pressure DEMO lower
the decision criteria, which in turn will lead to shorter
DEMO times and higher error rates (e.g., Laver, 2000;
Pachella & Pew, 1968; Ruthruff, 1996).
Response time in choice tasks DEMO be governed by
an internal pacemaker, as Laming (1979) suggested. DEMO
claimed that people engage in premature stimulus sam-
pling and that the onset of stimulus sampling occurs after
a certain time interval has passed DEMO a warning signal
(or preceding reactions) in choice reaction time tasks.
Dehaene (1993) proposed that perceptual information is
transmitted by packets at DEMO moments in time. For
each packet, a decision is made, either to respond imme-
diately or to wait for the next packet in DEMO to transmit
more complete information to the response system. Several
other studies have confirmed the hypothesis that internal
timing is used to aid the DEMO of decision making (e.g.,
Grosjean, Rosenbaum, & Elsinger, 2001; Lupker, Brown,
& Colombo, 1997; Snodgrass, 1969). For example, Burle
520 KLAPPROTH
and Bonnet (2000) let their subjects work on a DEMO
memory-scanning task. They could show that varying the
speed of a hypothetical internal clock by means of audi-
tory clicks altered the time to DEMO as to whether a just-
presented stimulus belonged to the set of stimuli previ-
ously memorized. They concluded that the probability that
a response DEMO be given is not regular in time and that there
are some particular moments after stimulus presentation
at which the response to this stimulation DEMO more likely to
occur (Burle, Macar, & Bonnet, 2003). Other authors also
have suggested that decision time is determined not only
DEMO the way information is accumulated and a decision is
reached, but DEMO by timing mechanisms (MacDonald &
Meck, 2004). People decide DEMO quickly when the deci-
sion task has a predictable, temporally regular DEMO
This improvement in performance is typically attributed to
the preparation of the motor system (Grosjean et al., 2001;
Müller-Gethmann, Ulrich, & DEMO, 2003), but tem-
poral preparation may also be mediated by DEMO
association (Janssen & Shadlen, 2005) or sensory pro-
cesses (Ghose & Maunsell, 2002). An example of a tempo-
rally structured decision task was used by Praamstra et al.
(2006). In that study, subjects had to indicate as quickly as
possible whether subsequently presented arrows pointed
to the left or to the right. The stimulus onset asynchrony
(SOA) between two stimuli was held constant but was
changed for the last stimulus, which was presented either
earlier or later than the preceding SOAs. It could be shown
that reaction times were longer when the DEMO SOA devi-
ated from the preceding ones. Moreover, this behavioral
finding DEMO supported by the development of a slow prepa-
ratory brain potential between successive stimuli, the (con-
tingent negative variation) CNV. The CNV develops when
people are engaged in time estimation (Macar & Vidal,
2003, 2004; Pfeuty, Ragot, & Pouthas, 2003; Pouthas,
Garnero, Ferrandez, & Renault, 2000), and its latency and
amplitude correlate DEMO the duration to be judged. In the
Praamstra et al. study, DEMO CNV reached its peak amplitude
around the time of the expected stimulus onset.
Summary, Conclusion, and
Suggestions for Future Research
The duration of DEMO decision process is a variable mag-
nitude, certainly depending on characteristics DEMO the con-
sequences that will follow, but also due to limited DEMO
resources (deadlines) and internal processes that initiate
the selection for an option. The effect of time pressure
on decision making is ambivalent, leading to both nega-
tive and positive consequences, depending on how many
cognitive resources are still available for making “good”
decisions. The instant at which DEMO decision is finally made
is determined by both the amount of information gathered
during the decision-making process and an internal timing
mechanism that triggers DEMO response.
Beneficial effects of time pressure on decision making
were usually explained either by the application of sim-
plified strategies or by faster stimulus DEMO How-
ever, a possible unifying framework that might account for
the DEMO that occurs with time pressure is time
management. Time management means setting and pri-
oritizing goals, scheduling tasks, and monitoring progress
under limited DEMO resources (e.g., Francis-Smythe, 2006),
and its effectiveness depends partially on how precisely
people are able to predict and judge the durations DEMO tasks
to be done (Francis-Smythe & Robertson, 1999).
Even with decision making in choice reaction time tasks,
it seems worthwhile to DEMO examine how the timing of
information processing is related to the time and outputs
of decision making. Neuropsychological analyses might
help in finding neuronal DEMO and antecedents of the
interconnections of both processes, which could be DEMO
porated into current models of fast decision making.
CONCLUSION
Decision making and time are closely related, as can be
seen by the five time-related topics that were identified and
selected for this article. These were (1) the time that an op-
tion takes, (2) the time DEMO that individuals may dis-
criminate by means of a hypothesized decision rule, (3) the
time between having made a decision and experiencing the
consequences of that decision, (4) the temporal perspec-
tive of decision makers, and (5) the time that the decision
process requires in order to be executed. Concerning each
topic, seminal and recent literature was reviewed, and at
the end of each section, the main results DEMO summarized
and suggestions for further research were made.
As this review suggests, time or duration plays a two-
fold role in decision making. On the one hand, physical
(objective) time matters and has been related to decision
making often and extensively, particularly in the domain
of intertemporal choices. On the other hand, psychologi-
cal (subjective) time has been shown to affect decisions.
However, psychological time has received less attention in
studies of decision making. One aim of this review was,
therefore, to sensitize scientists to this lack of knowledge
and to stimulate research DEMO this issue.
AUTHOR NOTE
This article was written as part of the “European Platform for Life Sci-
ences, Mind Sciences, and the Humanities” DEMO of the Volkswagen
Foundation. Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed
to F. Klapproth, Institute of Psychology and Working Science, Berlin
Institute of DEMO, Franklinstrasse 28/29, 10587 Berlin, Germany
(e-mail: klapproth@gp.tu-berlin.de).
DEMO
Ainslie, G. (1992). Picoeconomics: The strategic interaction of succes-
DEMO motivational states within the person. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Allan, L. G. (1998). The influence of the scalar timing model on human
timing research. Behavioural Processes, 44, 101-117.
Ariely, D., & Loewenstein, G. (2000). The importance of duration in
judgment and decision making. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 129, 508-523.
Ariely, D., & Zakay, D. (2001). A timely account of the role of duration
in decision making. Acta Psychologica, 108, 187-207.
Barkley, R. A., Edwards, G., Laneri, M., Fletcher, K., & Metevia, DEMO
(2001). Executive functioning, temporal discounting, and sense of time
DEMO adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
and oppositional defiant DEMO (ODD). Journal of Abnormal Child
Psychology, 29, 541-556.
Bechara, A., Dolan, S., & Hindes, A. (2002). Decision-making and
TIME AND DECISION MAKING IN HUMANS
521
addiction (part II): Myopia for the future of hypersensitivity to re-
ward? Neuropsychologia, 40, 1690-1705.
Benson, L., & Beach, L. R. (1996). The effects DEMO time constraints on
the prechoice screening of decision options. Organizational Behavior
& Human Decision Processes, 67, 222-228.
Berlin, H. A., Rolls, E. T., & Kischka, U. (2004). Impulsivity, time
perception, emotion and reinforcement sensitivity in patients with
orbitofrontal cortex lesions. Brain, 127, DEMO
Berns, G. S., Laibson, D., & Loewenstein, G. (2007). Intertemporal
choice—toward an integrative framework. Trends in Cognitive Sci-
ences, 11, 482-488.
Betsch, T., Fiedler, K., & Brinkmann, J. (1998). Behavioral routines
in decision making: The effects of novelty in task presentation and
time pressure on routine maintenance and deviation. European Jourr-
nal DEMO Social Psychology, 28, 861-878.
Block, R. A. (2003). Psychological timing without a timer: The roles
of attention and memory. In H. Helfrich (Ed.), Time and mind II: In-
formation processing perspectives (pp. 41-59). Göttingen: Hogrefe
& Huber.
Block, R. A., & Zakay, D. (1997). Prospective and retrospective du-
ration judgments: A meta-analytic review. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 4, 184-197.
Bogacz, R., Brown, E., Moehlis, J., Holmes, P., & Cohen, J. D.
(2006). The physics of optimal decision making: A formal DEMO of
models of performance in two-alternative force choice tasks. Psycho-
logical Review, 113, 700-765.
Brandtstädter, J., & Wentura, D. (1994). DEMO der Zeit-
und Zukunftsperspektive im Übergang zum höheren Erwachsenen-
alter: Entwicklungspsychologische DEMO differentielle Aspekte.
Zeitschrift für Entwicklungspsychologie & Pädagogische Psycholo-
gie, 26, 2-21.
Brown, S. W. (1997). Attentional resources in timing: Interference ef-
fects in concurrent temporal and nontemporal working memory tasks.
Perception & Psychophysics, 59, 1118-1140.
Brown, S. [W.], & Heathcote, A. (2005). A ballistic model of choice
response time. Psychological Review, 112, 117-128.
DEMO, B., & Bonnet, M. (2000). High-speed memory scanning: DEMO
behavioral argument for a serial oscillatory model. Cognitive Brain
Research, 9, 327-337.
Burle, B., Macar, F., & Bonnet, M. (2003)DEMO Behavioral and electro-
physiological oscillations in information processing: A tentative syn-
DEMO In H. Helfrich (Ed.), Time and mind II: Information processing
perspectives (pp. 209-232). Göttingen: Hogrefe & Huber.
Busemeyer, J. R. (1985). Decision making under uncertainty: A com-
parison of simple DEMO, fixed-sample, and sequential-sampling
models. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 11, 538-564.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field theory:
A dynamic-cognitive approach to decision making in an uncertain
environment. Psychological Review, 100, 432-459.
Church, R. M., & DeLuty, M. Z. (1977). Bisection of temporal in-
tervals. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Pro-
cesses, 3, 216-228.
Church, R. M., & Gibbon, J. (1982). Temporal DEMO Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 8, 165-186.
Cohen, M. S., Freeman, J. T., & Wolf, S. (1996). Meta-recognition in
time-stressed decision making: Recognizing, critiquing, and correcting.
Journal of the Human Factors & Ergonomics Society, 38, 206-219.
Dehaene, S. (DEMO). Temporal oscillations in human perception. Psy-
chological Science, 4, 264-270.
Dellaert, B. G. C., & Kahn, B. E. (1999). DEMO tolerable is delay?
Consumers’ evaluations of Internet Web sites after waiting. Journal of
Interactive Marketing, 13, 41-54.
Diederich, A. (2003). DEMO account of decision making under time
pressure. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, DEMO, 157-166.
Dror, I. E., Busemeyer, J. R., & Basola, B. (1999). Decision mak-
ing under time pressure: An independent DEMO of sequential sampling
models. Memory & Cognition, 27, 713-725.
Eisenhardt, DEMO M. (1989). Making fast strategic decisions in high-velocity
environments. Academy DEMO Management Journal, 32, 543-576.
Eisler, D. A., Eisler, H., & Montgomery, H. (2004). A quantitative
model for retrospective subjective DEMO Neuroquantology, 4, 263-
291.
Fellows, L. K., & Farah, DEMO J. (2005). Dissociable elements of human
foresight: A role for the ventromedial frontal lobes in framing the
future, but not in discounting future rewards. Neuropsychologia, 43,
1214-1221.
Ferrara, A., Lejeune, H., & Wearden, J. H. (1997). Changing sen-
sitivity to duration DEMO human scalar timing: An experiment, a review,
and some possible explanations. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 50B, 217-237.
Fillmore, M. T., & Rush, C. R. (2002). Impaired inhibitory control
of behavior in chronic cocaine users. Drug & Alcohol Dependence,
66, 265-273.
Forzano, L. B., & Logue, A. W. (1992). Predictors of DEMO humans’ self-
control and impulsiveness for food reinforcers. Appetite, 19, 33-47.
Francis-Smythe, J. A. (2006). Time management. In J. Glicksohn &
M. S. Myslobodsky (Eds.), Timing the future. The case for a time-
based prospective memory (pp. 143-170). Hackensack, NJ: World
Scientific.
Francis-Smythe, J. A., & Robertson, I. T. (1999). On DEMO relationship
between time management and time estimation. British Journal of
Psychology, DEMO, 333-347.
Frederick, S., Loewenstein, G., & O’Donoghue, T. (DEMO). Time
discounting and time preference: A critical review. Journal of DEMO
nomic Literature, 40, 351-401.
Fredrickson, B. L., & Kahneman, DEMO (1993). Duration neglect in ret-
rospective evaluations of affective episodes. DEMO of Personality &
Social Psychology, 65, 44-55.
Friedman, W. (DEMO). About time: Inventing the fourth dimension. Cam-
bridge, MA: DEMO Press.
Ghose, G. M., & Maunsell, J. H. (2002). Attentional modulation in
visual cortex depends on task timing. Nature, 419, DEMO
Gibbon, J., Church, R. M., & Meck, W. H. (1984). Scalar timing in
memory. In J. Gibbon & L. Allan (Eds.), Timing and time perception
(Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, Vol. 423, pp. 52-77).
New York: New York Academy of Sciences.
Gilovich, T., Kerr, M., & Medvec, V. H. (1993). Effect of temporal
perspective on subjective confidence. Journal of Personality & Social
Psychology, 64, 552-560.
Glimcher, P. W., Kable, J., & Louie, K. (2007). Neuroeconomic stud-
ies of impulsivity: Now or just as soon as possible? American Eco-
nomic Review, 97, 142-147.
Goldstein, W. M., & Busemeyer, J. R. (1992). The effect of “irrel-
evant” variables on decision making: Criterion shifts in preferential
choice? Organizational Behavior & Human Decision Processes, 52,
DEMO
Green, L., Fristoe, N., & Myerson, J. (1994). Temporal discounting
and preference reversals in choice between delayed outcomes. Psy-
chonomic DEMO & Review, 1, 383-389.
Green, L., & Myerson, J. (1996). Exponential versus hyperbolic dis-
counting of delayed outcomes: Risk and waiting time. American Zo-
ologist, 36, 496-505.
Green, L., Myerson, J., & Macaux, E. W. (2005). Temporal discounting
when the choice is between two delayed rewards. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 31, 1121-1133.
Greene, A. L. (1986)DEMO Future-time perspective in adolescence: The pres-
ent of things future revisited. DEMO of Youth & Adolescence, 15,
99-113.
Grosjean, M., Rosenbaum, D. A., & Elsinger, C. (2001). Timing and
reaction time. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130,
256-272.
Hands, D. S., & Avons, S. E. (2001). Recency and duration neglect in
subjective assessment of television picture quality. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 15, 639-657.
DEMO, J. M., Carey, M. P., Carey, K. B., & Maisto, S. A. (2006).
Associations among health behaviors and time DEMO in young
adults: Model testing with boot-strapping replication. Journal of Be-
DEMO Medicine, 29, 127-137.
Ho, M.-Y., Mobini, S., Chiang, DEMO, Bradshaw, C. M., & Szabadi, E.
(1999). Theory DEMO method in the quantitative analysis of “impulsive
choice” behavior: Implications for DEMO Psycho-
pharmacology, 146, 362-372.
Hodgins, D. C., & Engel, DEMO (2002). Future time perspective in
pathological gamblers. Journal of Nervous & Mental Disease, 190,
775-780.
522
KLAPPROTH
Hoffman, W. F., Moore, M., Templin, R., DEMO, B., Hitze-
mann, R. J., & Mitchell, S. H. (2006). Neuropsychological function
and delay discounting in methamphetamine-dependent individuals.
Psychopharmacology, 188, 162-170.
Hui, M. K., & Tse, D. K. (1996). What to tell consumers in waits of
different lengths: An integrative model of service evaluation. Journal
of Marketing, 60, 81-90.
Hui, M. K., & Zhou, L. (1996). How does waiting duration information
influence customers’ reactions to waiting for services? Journal of Ap-
plied Social Psychology, 26, 1702-1717.
Janssen, P., & Shadlen, M. N. (2005)DEMO A representation of the hazard
rate of elapsed time in macaque area LIP. Nature Neuroscience, 8,
234-241.
Jones, B., & Rachlin, DEMO (2006). Social discounting. Psychological
Science, 17, 283-286.
Kahneman, D., Fredrickson, B. L., Schreiber, C. A., & Redel-
meier, DEMO A. (1993). When more pain is preferred to less: Adding a
better end. Psychological Science, 4, 401-405.
Kahneman, D., & DEMO, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of
decision under DEMO Econometrica, 47, 263-291.
Kelly, J. R., & Karau, S. DEMO (1999). Group decision making: The effects
of initial preferences and time pressure. Personality & Social Psychol-
ogy Bulletin, 25, 1342-1354.
Keough, K. A., Zimbardo, P. G., & Boyd, J. N. (1999). Who’s smok-
ing, drinking, and using drugs? Time perspective as a predictor of
substance use. Basic & Applied Social Psychology, 21, DEMO
Kerstholt, J. (1994). The effect of time pressure on decision-making
behavior in a dynamic task environment. Acta Psychologica, 86,
89-104.
Kirby, K. N., & Herrnstein, R. J. (1995). Preference reversals DEMO
to myopic discounting of delayed reward. Psychological Science, 6,
83-89.
DEMO, K. N., & Petry, N. M. (2004). Heroin and cocaine abusers have
higher discount rates for delayed rewards than alcoholics or DEMO
using controls. Addiction, 99, 461-471.
Klapproth, F. (2002). The effect of study–test modalities on the re-
membrance of subjective duration from DEMO memory. Behav-
ioural Processes, 59, 39-48.
Klapproth, F. (2003a). Das modale Zeitgedächtnis. Untersuchungen
zur Abhängigkeit der Gedächtnisleistung für kurze Zeitintervalle
von DEMO Reizmodalität. Doctoral dissertation. Available at web1.bib
.unihildesheim.de/edocs/2003/372146562/meta/.
Klapproth, F. (2003b). Notable results regarding temporal memory and
modality. DEMO H. Helfrich (Ed.), Time and mind II: Information process-
ing perspectives (pp. 79-96). Göttingen: Hogrefe & Huber.
Klapproth, F. (DEMO). Time perception, estimation paradigm, and tem-
poral relevance. Perceptual & Motor Skills, 104, 749-757.
Klapproth, F., & Müller, M. (DEMO). Temporal generalization under
time pressure in humans. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy, 61, 588-600.
Klein, G. (1997). The recognition-primed DEMO (RPD) model: Look-
ing back, looking forward. In C. Zsambok & G. Klein (Eds.), Natural-
istic decision making (pp. 285-292)DEMO Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Krishnamurthy, P., & Kumar, P. (2002). Self–other discrepancies in
waiting time decisions. Organizational Behavior & Human Decision
DEMO, 87, 207-226.
Kühberger, A. (1998). The influence of framing on risky decisions:
A meta-analysis. Organizational Behavior & Human Decision Pro-
DEMO, 57, 23-55.
Laming, D. (1979). Autocorrelation of choice-reaction times. Acta Psy-
chologica, 43, 381-412.
Laver, G. D. (2000). DEMO speed–accuracy analysis of word recognition in
young and older adults. Psychology & Aging, 15, 705-709.
Leclerc, F., Schmitt, B. H., & DEMO, L. (1995). Waiting time and
decision making: Is time DEMO money? Journal of Consumer Research,
22, 110-119.
Leland, D. DEMO, & Paulus, M. P. (2005). Increased risk-taking decision-
making DEMO not altered response to punishment in stimulant-using
young adults. Drug & Alcohol Dependence, 78, 83-90.
Lessing, E. E. (1972). Extension of DEMO future time perspective,
age, and life satisfaction of children and DEMO Developmental
Psychology, 6, 457-468.
Levin, I. P., Schneider, S. DEMO, & Gaeth, G. J. (1998). All frames are not
DEMO equal: A typology and critical analysis of framing effects. Or-
ganizational DEMO & Human Decision Processes, 76, 149-188.
Liberman, N., Sagristano, DEMO D., & Trope, Y. (2002). The effect of
temporal DEMO on level of mental construal. Journal of Experimen-
tal Social Psychology, DEMO, 523-534.
Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (1998). The DEMO of feasibility and desir-
ability considerations in near and distant future decisions: A test of
temporal construal theory. Journal of Personality & Social Psychol-
ogy, 75, 5-19.
Lilienfeld, S. O., Hess, T., & DEMO, C. (1996). Psychopathic
personality traits and temporal perspective: A DEMO of the short time
horizon hypothesis. Journal of Psychopathology & Behavioral As-
sessment, 18, 285-314.
Link, S. W. (1992). The wave DEMO of difference similarity. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Loewenstein, G. (1996)DEMO Out of control: Visceral influences on be-
havior. Organizational Behavior & DEMO Decision Processes, 65,
272-292.
Loewenstein, G., Weber, E., DEMO, C., & Welch, E. (2001). Risk as
feelings. Psychological Bulletin, 127, 267-286.
Luce, R. D. (1986). Response times: Their role in inferring elementary
mental organization. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lupker, S. J., Brown, P., & Colombo, L. (1997). DEMO control
in a naming task: Changing routes or changing deadlines? Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 23,
570-590.
DEMO, F., & Vidal, F. (2003). The CNV peak: DEMO index of decision
making and temporal memory. Psychophysiology, 40, 950-954.
Macar, F., & Vidal, F. (2004). Event-related potentials as indices DEMO
time processing: A review. Journal of Psychophysiology, 18, 89-104.
MacDonald, C. J., & Meck, W. H. (2004). Systems-level integration
of interval timing and reaction time. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
Reviews, 28, 747-769.
DEMO, A. J. (1997). Strategies for adapting to time pressure. In R. Flin,
E. Salas, M. Strub, & L. Martin (Eds.), Decision-making under stress:
Emerging themes and applications (pp. 271-279). Brookfield, VT:
Ashgate.
Maule, A. J., Hockey, G. R. DEMO, & Bdzola, L. (2000). Effects of time-
pressure on DEMO under uncertainty: Changes in affective
state and information processing strategy. Acta DEMO, 104,
283-301.
McElroy, T., & Mascari, D. (2007)DEMO When is it going to happen? How
temporal distance influences processing DEMO risky-choice framing
tasks. Social Cognition, 25, 495-517.
McGrath, J. E., & Tschan, F. (2004). Temporal matters in social psy-
chology. DEMO, DC: American Psychological Association.
Montague, P. R., & Berns, DEMO S. (2002). Neural economics and the
biological substrates of valuation. DEMO, 36, 265-284.
Müller-Gethmann, H., Ulrich, R., & Rinkenauer, DEMO (2003).
Locus of the effect of temporal preparation: Evidence from the lateral-
ized readiness potential. Psychophysiology, 40, 597-611.
Munichor, N., DEMO, I., & Lotem, A. (2006). Risk attitude in small
timesaving decisions. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied,
12, 129-141.
Myerson, J., & Green, L. (1995). Discounting of delayed rewards:
Models of individual choice. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of
Behavior, 64, 263-276.
Nosofsky, R. M., & Palmeri, T. J. (1997). An exemplar based random
walk model of speeded classification. Psychological Review, 104,
266-300.
Orasanu, J. (1997). Stress and naturalistic decision making: Strength-
ening the weak links. In R. Flin, E. Salas, M. DEMO, & L. Martin
(Eds.), Decision-making under stress: Emerging themes DEMO applica-
tions (pp. 43-66). Brookfield, VT: Ashgate.
Orasanu, J., & Fischer, U. (1997). Finding decisions in natural en-
vironments: The view from the cockpit. In C. Zsambok & G. Klein
(DEMO), Naturalistic decision making (pp. 343-357). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Osuna, E. E. (1985). The psychological cost of waiting. Journal DEMO
Mathematical Psychology, 29, 82-105.
Pachella, R. G., & Pew, DEMO W. (1968). Speed–accuracy trade-off in re-
action time: Effect of discrete criterion times. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 76, 19-24.
TIME AND DECISION MAKING IN HUMANS
523
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993). The use of
multiple strategies in judgment and choice. In N. J. Castellan (Ed.),DEMO
Individual and group decision makingg (pp. 19-39). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Petry, N. M., Bickel, W. K., & Arnett, M. (1998). Shortened time
horizons and insensitivity to future consequences in heroin addicts.
Addiction, 93, 729-738.
Pfeuty, M., Ragot, R., & DEMO, V. (2003). When time is up: CNV
time course DEMO the roles in the hemispheres in the discrimi-
nation of short tome durations. Experimental Brain Research, 151,
372-379.
Pöppel, E. (1998). Erlebte Zeit und die Zeit überhaupt: Ein Versuch der
Integration. In J. Aschoff, J. Assmann, & J.-P. Blaser (Eds.), Die Zeit:
Dauer und Augenblick (4th ed., pp. 369-382). München: Piper.
Pouthas, V., Garnero, L., Ferrandez, A. M., & Renault, B. (2000).
ERPs and PET analysis of time perception: Spatial and DEMO brain
mapping during visual discrimination tasks. Human Brain Mapping,
10, DEMO
Praamstra, P., Kourtis, D., Kwok, H. F., & Oostenveld, R. (2006).
Neurophysiology of implicit timing in serial choice reaction-time DEMO
formance. Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 5448-5455.
Predebon, J. (1995). Prospective and retrospective time estimates as a
function of clock duration. Perceptual & Motor Skills, 80, 941-942.
Rachlin, H. (1995). The value of temporal patterns in behavior. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 4, DEMO
Ratcliff, R., & Rouder, J. N. (1998). Modeling response times for
two-choice decisions. Psychological Science, 9, 347-356.
Ratcliff, R., & Smith, P. L. (2004). A comparison of sequential sam-
pling models for two-choice reaction time. Psychological Review,
111, 333-367.
Read, DEMO, Frederick, S., Orsel, B., & Rahman, J. (2005)DEMO Four score
and seven years from now: The date/delay effect DEMO temporal discount-
ing. Management Science, 51, 1326-1335.
Read, D., & Loewenstein, G. (1999). Enduring pain for money: Deci-
sions based on the perception and memory of pain. Journal of Behav-
ioral Decision DEMO, 12, 1-17.
Redelmeier, D. A., & Kahneman, D. (1996). Patient’s memories of
painful medical treatments: Real-time and retrospective evaluations
of two minimally invasive procedures. Pain, 66, 3-8.
Reed, S. K. (DEMO). Cognition: Theory and applications. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth/Thomson.
Rinot, M., & Zakay, D. (1999). Attending to duration (Tech. Rep.). Tel
Aviv: Tel Aviv University, Department of Psychology.
Rohde, K. I. M. (2005). The hyperbolic factor: A measure of DEMO
ing impatience (Research Memoranda 044). Maastricht: Maastricht
Research School of Economics of Technology and Organization.
Roy, M. M., Christenfeld, N. J. S., & McKenzie, C. R. M. (2005).
Underestimating the duration of future events: Memory incorrectly
used or memory bias? Psychological Bulletin, 131, 738-756.
Russo, J. E., & Dosher, B. A. (1983). Strategies for multiattribute bi-
nary choice. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition, 9, 676-696.
Russo, J. E., & Schoemaker, J. H. (1989). Decision traps. New York:
Simon & Schuster.
Ruthruff, E. (1996). A test of the deadline model for speed–accuracy
tradeoffs. Perception & Psychophysics, 58, 56-64.
Sagristano, M. D., Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2002). Time-dependent
gambling: DEMO now, money later. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: General, 131, 364-376.
Samuelson, P. (1937). A note on measurement of utility. DEMO of Eco-
nomic Studies, 4, 155-161.
Sanna, L. J., & Chang, E. C. (EDS.) (2006). Judgments over time: The
interplay of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Sanna, L. J., Parks, C. D., Chang, E. C., & Carter, S. E. (2005). The
hourglass is half full or half empty: Temporal framing and the group
planning fallacy. Group Dynamics: DEMO, Research, & Practice, 9,
173-188.
Sayette, M. A., DEMO, G., Kirchner, T. R., & Travis, T.
(2005). Effects of smoking urge on temporal cognition. Psychology
of Addictive Behavior, 19, 88-93.
Schreiber, C. A., & Kahneman, D. (2000). Determinants of the re-
membered utility of aversive sounds. Journal of Experimental Psy-
DEMO: General, 129, 27-42.
Schweighofer, N., Shishida, K., Han, C. E., Okamoto, Y., Tana-
ka, S.C., Yamawaki, S., & Doya, K. (2006). Humans can adopt op-
timal discounting DEMO under real-time constraints. PLoS Compu-
tational Biology, 2, 1349-1356.
Simon, DEMO A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational choice. Quarterly
Journal DEMO Economics, 69, 99-118.
Simons, J., Vansteenkiste, M., Lens, DEMO, & Lacante, M. (2004).
Placing motivation and future time DEMO theory in a temporal
perspective. Educational Psychology Review, 16, 121-139.
Smart, R. G. (1968). Future time perspectives in alcoholics and social
DEMO Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 73, 81-83.
Snodgrass, J. G. (1969). Foreperiod effects in simple reaction time:
Anticipation or expectancy? Journal of Experimental Psychology
Monographs, 79(3, Pt. 2), 1-19.
Staw, B. M., Sandelands, L. E., & Dutton, J. E. (1981). Threat-
rigidity effects in organizational behavior: A multilevel analysis. Ad-
ministrative Science Quarterly, 26, 501-524.
Stern, E., & Koerber, S. (DEMO). Mentale Modele von Zeit und Zu-
kunft. In J. Möller, DEMO Strauß, & S. M. Jürgensen (Eds.), Psychologie
und Zukunft (DEMO 15-29). Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Stokes, A. F., Barnett, B. J., & Wickens, C. D. (1987). Modeling stress
and bias in pilot decision-making. In Proceedings of the 20th Annual
Conference of the Human DEMO Association of Canada (pp. 45-48).
Mississauga, ON: Human Factors DEMO of Canada.
Strathman, A., Gleicher, F., Boninger, D. S., & Edwards, C. S.
(1994). The consideration of future consequences: Weighing immedi-
ate and distant outcomes of behavior. Journal of Personality & DEMO
Psychology, 66, 742-752.
Szelag, E., Kowalska, J., Rymarczyk, DEMO, & Pöppel, E. (2002).
Duration processing in children as DEMO by time reproduction:
Implications for a few seconds temporal window. Acta Psychologica,
110, 1-19.
Takahashi, T., Oono, H., & Radford, M. H. B. (2008). Psychophysics
of time perception and intertemporal DEMO models. Physica A, 387,
2066-2074.
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2003). Temporal construal. Psychological
Review, 110, 403-421.
Varey, DEMO A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Experiences extended across
time: Evaluation of moments and episodes. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 5, DEMO
Wallace, H. (1956). Future time perspective in schizophrenia. Journal
of Abnormal Social Psychology, 52, 240-245.
Wearden, J. H. (1992). DEMO generalization in humans. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 18, 134-144.
Wearden, J. H. (2003). Applying the scalar timing model to human time
psychology: Progress and challenges. In H. Helfrich (Ed.), Time and
mind II: Information processing perspectives (pp. 21-39). Göttingen:
Hogrefe & Huber.
Wearden, J. H. (2004). Decision processes DEMO models of timing. Acta
Neurobiologiae Experimentalis, 64, 303-317.
Wearden, J. DEMO, Denovan, L., Fakhri, M., & Haworth, R. (1997)DEMO
Scalar timing in temporal generalization in humans with longer stimu-
lus durations. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior
Processes, 23, 502-511.
Wearden, DEMO H., & Grindrod, R. (2003). Manipulation decision pro-
cesses DEMO the human scalar timing system. Behavioural Processes,
61, 47-56.
Wearden, J. H., & McShane, B. (1988). Interval production as an ana-
logue of the peak procedure: Evidence for similarity of human and
animal timing processes. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy, 40B, 363-375.
DEMO, E. (1999). The heat of the moment. Unpublished doctoral dis-
sertation, Carnegie Mellon University: Department of Social and De-
cision Sciences.
DEMO, C. D., & Flach, J. M. (1988). Information processing. In
E. Wiener & D. Nagel (Eds.), Human factors in aviation (pp. 111-
155). London: Academic Press.
Wills, T. A., DEMO, J. M., & Yaeger, A. M. (2001). Time perspective
and early-onset substance use: A model based on stress-coping theory.
Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 15, 118-125.
524
KLAPPROTH
Wilson, J. Q., & Herrnstein, R. J. (1985)DEMO Crime and human nature.
New York: Simon & Schuster.
Wittmann, M., Leland, D. S., Churan, J., & Paulus, M. P. (2007).
Impaired time perception and motor timing in stimulant-dependent
subjects. Drug & Alcohol Dependence, 90, 183-192.
Wittmann, M., Leland, D. S., & Paulus, M. P. (2007). Time and deci-
sion making: Differential contribution of the posterior insular cortex
and the striatum during a DEMO discounting task. Experimental Brain
Research, 179, 643-653.
Yellot, J. I. (1971). Corrections for fast guessing and speed–accuracy-
tradeoff in choice reaction DEMO Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
8, 159-199.
Zakay, D. (1993)DEMO The impact of time perception processes on decision
making under time stress. In O. Svenson & A. J. Maule (Eds.), Time
pressure and stress in human judgment and decision makingg (pp. 59-
72). New York: Plenum.
Zakay, D., & Wooler, S. (1984). Time pressure, training and decision
effectiveness. Ergonomics, 27, 273-284.
Zaleski, Z. (1996). Future anxiety: Concept measurement and prelimi-
nary research. Personality & Individual Differences, 21, 165-174.
Zimbardo, P. G., & Boyd, J. N. (1999). Putting time in perspective: A
valid, reliable individual-differences metric. Journal of Personality &
Social Psychology, 77, 1271-1288.
Zimbardo, DEMO G., Keough, K. A., & Boyd, J. N. (1997)DEMO Present time
perspective as a predictor of risky driving. Personality & Individual
Differences, 23, 1007-1023.
NOTES
1. Block (2003) used the term DEMO duration only for prospec-
tive time judgments—that is, judgments occurring after DEMO subjects
had been told to be aware of the duration of the stimuli. However, I
prefer using this term for both prospective and retrospective temporal
judgments, since both involve the real experience of time, as DEMO
with imagined duration, which does not require the real experience of
DEMO
2. Similar figures, derived from a delay-discounting task and illus-
trating DEMO choices as a function of the delay of the small reward,
plotted against the delay of the large reward, were presented in Ho, Mo-
bini, Chiang, Bradshaw, and Szabadi (1999) and in DEMO et al.
(2006).
3. In its original version (Church & Gibbon, 1982), abs(s*  t) was
divided by s. DEMO, applying temporal generalization to humans re-
vealed that changing s to DEMO as the denominator fitted the empirical data
of humans better.
4. The presentation of alternatives as either positive or negative will
substantially influence a DEMO maker’s choice (Kahneman & Tversky,
1979; for reviews, see DEMO Kühberger, 1998; Levin, Schneider, & Gaeth,
1998). This effect, which is based solely on the presentational frame, is
called DEMO framing effect.
(Manuscript received March 1, 2008;
revision accepted for publication July 16, 2008.){1g42fwefx}