The Consequences of Entrepreneurial Finance:
Evidence from Angel Financings
William R. DEMO, Josh Lerner, and Antoinette Schoar*
Abstract:  This paper documents that ventures that are funded by two successful angel groups
experience superior outcomes DEMO those that are rejected: they have improved survival, exits,
employment levels, patenting, web traffic, and financing. We use strong discontinuities in the
funding behavior of angels over small changes in their collective interest DEMO to implement a
regression discontinuity approach. We confirm the positive effect of angel financing on most
operations of the venture, with qualitative support for a higher likelihood of successful exits. On
the other hand, there is no difference in access to additional financing around the discontinuity.
This might DEMO that financing is not a central input of angel groups.
* Harvard University; Harvard University; and MIT. All three authors are affiliates of DEMO
National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank James Geshwiler of CommonAngels, DEMO
Hanselman and Richard Sudek of Tech Coast Angels, and John May DEMO the Washington Dinner
Club for their enthusiastic support of this project and willingness to share data. We also thank the
many entrepreneurs who responded DEMO our inquiries. We thank Paolo Fulghieri, Jean Helwege,
Thomas Hellmann, Hans Hvide, Alexander Ljungqvist, Ramana Nanda, Debarshi Nandy, Manju
Puri, Jie Yang, and seminar participants at the American Economic Association Meetings,
American Finance Association Meetings, Bank of Finland, Carnegie-Mellon University,
Kauffman DEMO Entrepreneurial Finance and Innovation Conference, Harvard University,
MIT, NBER Entrepreneurship Group, Norwegian School of Economics and Business
Administration, Tilburg University, and York University for helpful comments. Harvard
Business School’s Division of Research and DEMO Kauffman Foundation supported this research.
Kerr is a research associate of the Bank of Finland and thanks the Bank for hosting him during a
DEMO of this research. An earlier version of this paper is released as NBER Working Paper
15831: “The Consequences of Entrepreneurial Finance: A Regression DEMO Analysis”.
Alexis Brownell, Jin Woo Chang, and Andrei Cristea provided excellent research assistance. All
errors and omissions are our own.
1
One of the central and more enduring questions in the entrepreneurial finance DEMO is
to what extent early-stage financiers such as angels or venture funds have a real impact on the
firms in which they invest. An DEMO theoretical literature suggests the combination of
intensive monitoring, provision of value DEMO services, and powerful control rights in these
types of deals should DEMO agency problems between entrepreneurs and institutional
investors.1 This bundle of inputs, DEMO is argued, leads to improved governance and operations in
portfolio firms, lower capital constraints, and ultimately stronger firm growth and performance.
The empirical documentation of this impact, however, has been challenging. Hellmann
and Puri (2000) provide a first detailed comparison of the growth path of firms backed by
venture financing with those that are not.2 This approach, however, faces the natural challenge
that unobserved heterogeneity across entrepreneurs, such as DEMO or ambition, might drive the
growth path of the firms as DEMO as the venture capitalists‘ decisions to invest. The question
remains whether seed-stage investors have a causal impact on the performance of start-ups or
whether DEMO main role is to select firms that have better inherent growth opportunities. These
problems are particularly acute for evaluating early-stage investments that are opaque DEMO their
very nature.
An alternative approach has been to find exogenous shocks to venture financing at the
industry or regional levels. Examples of such DEMO are public policy changes (Kortum and
Lerner, 2000), variations in endowment returns (Samila and Sorenson, 2010), and differences in
state DEMO funding levels (Mollica and Zingales, 2007). These studies, however, can only
examine the impact of entrepreneurial finance at an aggregate level, which resembles a ―needle
1 Examples include Admati and Pfleiderer (1994), Berglöf (1994), Bergemann and Hege (1998), Hellmann (1998),DEMO
and Cornelli and Yosha (2003).
2 A similar approach is DEMO in Puri and Zarutskie (2008) and Chemmanur et al. (2009) who employ comprehensive
Census Bureau records of private firms to form more DEMO control groups based on observable characteristics.
1
in the haystack‖ challenge, given the very modest share that high-potential firms represent of all
economic activity.
This paper takes a fresh look at DEMO question of whether entrepreneurial financiers affect
the success and growth of new ventures. We focus on a neglected segment of entrepreneurial
finance: angel investments. Angel investors have received much less attention than venture
capitalists, despite the fact that some estimates suggest that these investors are as important for
DEMO start-up investments as venture capital firms (Goldfarb et al., 2007; DEMO, 2008;
Sudek et al., 2008). Angel investors are increasingly structured as semi-formal networks of high-
net-worth individuals, often former entrepreneurs themselves, who meet in regular intervals
(often over a monthly breakfast or DEMO) to hear aspiring entrepreneurs pitch their business
plans. The angels then DEMO whether to conduct further due diligence and ultimately whether to
invest in some of these deals as subgroups of members. Similar to venture capitalists, angel
groups often adopt a very hands-on role in the deals they DEMO in and provide entrepreneurs
with advice and contacts.
In addition to their inherent interest as funders of early-stage companies, angel
investment groups have an advantage for researchers over other venture funders in that they
make their DEMO decisions through well-documented processes and, in some cases, formal
votes.3 This allows us to observe the level of support or lack thereof for DEMO deals that come
before the angel groups.4
3 By way of contrast, the venture firms that we talked to all employ a consensual process, in which controversial
proposals are withdrawn before coming up for a formal vote or disagreements are resolved in conversations before
the actual voting takes DEMO In addition, venture firms also rarely document the detailed voting behind DEMO
decisions. Angel group members, in contrast, often express their interest for deals independently from one another
and based upon personal assessment.
4 Our DEMO is closest in spirit to work in the entrepreneurial finance literature on the investment selection process
and returns of venture capitalists. Sorensen (2007) DEMO the returns to being funded by different tiers of investors.
Our work instead focuses on the margin of obtaining initial funding or not. Kaplan DEMO Strömberg (2004) and
2
Our analysis exploits very detailed, deal-level data of startups that pitched to two
prominent angel investment groups (Tech Coast Angels and CommonAngels) during DEMO 2001-
2006 period. These organizations generously provided us access to confidential records of the
companies who approached them, the level of angel interest, DEMO financing decisions made, and
the subsequent venture outcomes. The dataset allows DEMO to compare funded and unfunded
ventures that approached the same investor. Furthermore, we use the interest levels expressed by
the angels to form specialized treatment and control groups that have similar qualities.5
In addition, our data allow us to go further towards confirming a causal relationship by
using DEMO regression discontinuity approach (Lee and Lemieux, 2010).6 Within the quality ranges
that we analyze, there exists a discrete jump in the probability of venture funding as interest
accumulates around a deal. This discontinuity is DEMO to how critical mass develops within angel
groups around prospective deals.
We identify from the data the threshold where a critical mass of angels DEMO around a
deal. Our approach compares firms that fall just above this threshold with the firms that fall just
below. The underlying identification relies DEMO firms around the cut-off level having very similar
ex ante characteristics, DEMO which case we can confirm the causal effect of obtaining angel
financing. After showing the ex ante comparability of the ventures in the border DEMO, we
examine differences in their long-run performance. In this way, we can employ micro-data on
Kaplan et al. (2009) examine characteristics and DEMO that venture capitalists rely on when making investment
decisions. Goldfarb et al. (2007) and Conti et al. (2010) consider choices between angels DEMO venture investors.
5 Thus, our work encompasses many of the matching DEMO used by prior work—industry, employment levels and
growth rates, age, DEMO also captures better the motivations of entrepreneurs (i.e., the control group also
approached the investor at the same time as the treatment group) and the underlying qualities of the ventures (i.e.,
the angels rated the ventures comparably at the time of their pitch). To illustrate DEMO gains more graphically,
consider the case of Twitter (which is DEMO part of our sample). Researchers can observe that Twitter is four years old,
has approximately 300 employees (http://twitter.com/about, DEMO December 20, 2010), is growing rapidly in
terms of employment DEMO not revenue, is located in Silicon Valley, and so on. But even with this information set, it is
very hard to identify companies to which one should compare Twitter. Our data allow us to compare DEMO
ventures to others that the same sophisticated investors thought comparable at the time of the investment pitch.
6 While common in economics, this approach is underutilized in finance. Exceptions include Rauh (2006),
Chernenko and DEMO (2009), and Bakke and Whited (2010).
3
firm outcomes, while further minimizing the problem of unobserved heterogeneity between the
funded and rejected transactions.
Several clear patterns emerge from our analysis: first, and not surprisingly, the interest
levels expressed by angels in deals DEMO a substantial factor in funding decisions. Second, when
we compare firms DEMO received funding to those that did not within a narrow quality range, the
funded firms overall look more successful than those that pitched to the angel group but did not
receive financing: they are 20%-25% more likely to survive for at least four years (or until
December 2010, the last date of our data). They are also 9%-11% more likely to undergo a
successful exit (IPO or acquisition) and 16%-19% DEMO likely to have either reached a successful
exit or grown to 75 employees by December 2010. Funded companies have 16-20 more
employees as of DEMO, are 16%-18% more likely to have a granted patent, and are growing faster
as measured through web traffic performance between 2008 and 2010. DEMO addition, funded
companies are better financed. Overall, they have a 70% higher likelihood of obtaining
entrepreneurial finance and have on average a little DEMO than two additional financing rounds.
These subsequent deals are often syndicated by the angel group with other venture financiers.
These results are developed using DEMO that fall within a narrow quality range. We
also demonstrate that the impact of angel funding on firm outcomes would be overstated if we
DEMO at the full distribution of ventures that approach the angel groups, DEMO there is a clear
correlation between initial venture quality and likelihood of funding. Using several techniques
(e.g., matched samples, modeling angel interest as a covariate), we estimate that one would
overstate the measured effects DEMO about 25% if using the full distribution of deals that
approached the investors. This emphasizes the importance and challenge of creating proper
control groups DEMO entrepreneurial finance studies.
4
Our third set of findings considers ventures just above and below the DEMO threshold
using the regression discontinuity methodology, which removes the endogeneity of DEMO and
other omitted variable biases if ventures just below and above the funding threshold are
otherwise very similar. We confirm several of our prior DEMO: ventures just above the
threshold are more likely to survive, and they have superior operations in terms of employee
counts, patenting, and DEMO traffic growth. We also find qualitative support that funded ventures
achieved a successful exit by December 2010, but these results are not statistically significant.
This latter difference may suggest that the angel groups select on ventures DEMO quicker exit
prospects, which are not captured in our initial interest DEMO
Interestingly, we do not find an impact of angel funding on DEMO financing when
using the regression discontinuity approach. This difference to the estimates based on a simple
comparison between funded and non-funded firms may suggest DEMO access to additional
financing is not essential for the success of angel-funded firms just above the threshold. But
when looking at the full distribution DEMO funded versus non-funded ventures, the positive selection
bias of receiving angel DEMO translates into a higher likelihood of follow-on funding. This
result might also underline that, in the time period we study, prior angel financing DEMO not an
essential prerequisite to accessing follow-on funding.
In a final step, we compare the returns of the venture capital industry to that of one of the
angel groups. A natural concern is that these investments DEMO by angels who are not professional
investors, and thus their decisions DEMO voting may be shaped by factors other than economic
considerations (e.g., the joy of working with start-up companies). While our project focuses DEMO
the consequences of financing for start-up ventures, this additional analysis helps DEMO that
5
the investments were warranted for the angel group as a whole. We DEMO that the angel group
performed as well as the venture capital industry overall during the period of study.
Thus, this paper provides new evidence about an essential question in entrepreneurial
finance. We quantify the positive impact DEMO these two angel groups had on the companies that
they funded by simultaneously exploiting novel, rich micro-data and addressing concerns about
unobserved heterogeneity. We should note, however, that the angel groups that we worked with
DEMO this project are two of the largest and most established groups in the country. They are both
professionally managed, and at least one group performed as well as the venture industry as a
whole during the DEMO we study. Given the substantial heterogeneity across angel investors, the
magnitude DEMO the impact that we estimate is likely to be at the upper end of the angel population.
We hope that future research can further DEMO the extent to which other angel investment
groups and individual investors aid start-up ventures.
The plan of this paper is as follows. Section 1 DEMO the angel group investment
process. Section 2 introduces our angel investment data and describes our methodology. Section
3 introduces our outcomes data. Section 4 DEMO the analysis. Section 5 evaluates the portfolio
returns for one of the angel groups. The final section concludes the paper.
1. The Angel Group DEMO Process
Angel investors are high-net-worth individuals that make private investments in start-up
companies with their own money. While angel investors have a long history (e.g., Lamoreaux et
al., 2004), angel groups are a quite DEMO phenomenon. Beginning in the mid-1990s, angels
began forming groups to collectively DEMO and invest in entrepreneurial ventures. These
groups are seen as having several advantages by the angels. First, angels can pool their capital to
6
make larger investments than they could otherwise fund alone. Second, each angel can invest
smaller amounts in individual ventures, allowing participation in more opportunities and the
diversification of investment risks. They can also undertake costly due DEMO of prospective
investments as a group, reducing the burdens for individual DEMO Fourth, these groups are
generally more visible to entrepreneurs and thus DEMO a superior deal flow. Finally, the groups
frequently include some of DEMO most sophisticated and active angel investors in a given region,
which results in superior decision-making.
The Angel Capital Association (ACA) lists 300 DEMO groups in its database. The average
ACA angel group had 42 member angels and invested a total of $1.94 million in 7.3 deals in
DEMO Between 10,000 and 15,000 angels are believed to belong to angel groups in the U.S.7
Angel groups follow mostly similar templates. Entrepreneurs DEMO begin the process
by submitting to the group an application that may also include a copy of their business plan or
executive summary. The DEMO, after an initial screening by the staff, are then invited to give a
short presentation to a small group of members, followed by a question-and-answer session.
Promising companies are then invited to present at a DEMO meeting (often a breakfast or
dinner). The presenting companies that DEMO the greatest interest then enter a due diligence
review process by a smaller group of angel members, although the extent to which due diligence
and screening leads or follows the formal presentation varies across groups. If DEMO goes well, this
process results in an investment one to three DEMO after the presentation. Figure 1 provides a
detailed template for Tech Coast Angels (Sudek et al., 2008).
7 Statistics are based on DEMO://www.angelcapitalassociation.org/ (accessed February 15, 2010).
7
2. Angel Group Data and Empirical Methodology
This section jointly introduces our DEMO and empirical methodology. The discussion is
organized around the two groups from which we have obtained large datasets. The unique
features of each investment DEMO, their venture selection procedures, and their data records
require that we employ conceptually similar, but operationally different, techniques for
identifying group-specific discontinuities. DEMO commence with Tech Coast Angels, the larger of
our two investment DEMO, and we devote extra time in this first data description to DEMO
conveying our empirical approach and the biases it is meant to address. We then describe our
complementary approach with CommonAngels and how we ultimately DEMO the two groups
together to analyze their joint behavior.
2.1. Tech Coast Angels
Tech Coast Angels is a large angel investment group based in DEMO California. They
have over 300 angels in five chapters and seek high-growth investments in a variety of high-tech
and low-tech industries. The group typically DEMO for funding opportunities of $1 million or less.
Additional details on this venture group are available at http://www.techcoastangels.com/.8
Tech Coast Angels DEMO provided us with access to their database regarding prospective
ventures under explicit restrictions that the confidentiality of individual ventures and angels
remain secure. For DEMO study, this database was exceptional in that it allowed us to DEMO observe
the deal flow of Tech Coast Angels: it has detailed DEMO about many of the companies that
were and were not funded by Tech Coast Angels. Our analysis considers ventures that
8 Tech Coast Angels DEMO from two to four chapters during our period of study, with DEMO active angels on
average per chapter. Appendix Table 1 provides additional details.
8
approached Tech Coast Angels between 2001 and 2006: as of early 2007, there were over 2500
ventures in the database.
We first document in Table 1 the distribution of interest from the angel investors across
the DEMO set of potential deals. This description sets the stage for identifying a narrower group of
firms around a funding discontinuity that offers a better DEMO for evaluating the
consequences of angel financing. Table 2 then evaluates the ex ante comparability of deals
around the border, which is essential for the identification strategy.
The central variable for the Tech Coast Angel analysis DEMO the count of the number of
angels expressing interest in a given deal. This indication of interest does not represent a
financial commitment, but instead expresses a belief that the venture should be pursued further
by DEMO group. The decision to invest ultimately depends upon three factors: one DEMO more angels
being strong champions of the deal, the support of DEMO professional manager, and a critical mass
of angels being willing to DEMO the venture as a group. While we do not observe the champions
of the deals, we do have a unique window into how funding relates to obtaining a critical mass of
interested angels.
Table 1 documents DEMO distribution of deals and angel interest levels. The first three
columns of Table 1 show 64% of ventures receive no interest at all. Moreover, 90% of all
ventures receive interest from fewer than ten angels. This DEMO funnel continues until the
highest bracket, where there are 44 firms DEMO receive interest from 35 or more angels. 15
ventures receive the interest of 50 angels or more. This funnel shares many of the anecdotal DEMO
of venture funding—such as selecting a few worthy ventures out of thousands of business
plans—but it is exceptionally rare to have the interest level DEMO consistently throughout
the distribution and independent of actual funding outcomes.
9
The shape of this funnel has several potential interpretations. It may reflect DEMO
in quality among companies that are being pitched to the angels. It could also reflect simple
industry differences across ventures. For example, the average software venture may receive
greater interest than a medical devices company if DEMO are more angels within the group
involved in the software industry. There could also be an element of herding around ―hot deals‖.
But independent DEMO what exactly drives this investment behavior of angels, we want to DEMO
whether there are discontinuities in interest levels such that small changes in the number of
angels expressing interest among otherwise comparable deals results in DEMO shifts in the
probability of funding.
The central idea behind this identification strategy is that angel interest in ventures does
not map one-to-one into DEMO differences across ventures, which we verify empirically below.
Instead, there is some randomness or noise in why some firms receive n votes and DEMO receive
n+1. It is reasonable to believe that there are enough idiosyncrasies in the preferences and beliefs
of angels that the interest count does DEMO present a perfect ranking of the quality of the
underlying firms. Certainly, the 2% of ventures with 35 or more interested angels are not
comparable to the 64% of ventures with zero interest. But, we will show that ventures with 18
votes and 22 votes are much more DEMO, except that the latter group is much more likely
to be DEMO
We thus need to demonstrate two patterns. First, we need to DEMO where in the
distribution small changes in interest level lead to a critical mass of angels, and thus a substantial
increase in funding probability. As Tech Coast Angels does not have explicit funding rules that
yield DEMO mandated cut-off, we must identify from observed behavior where de facto DEMO exist.
10
We then need to show that deals immediately above and below this DEMO appear similar at
the time that they approached Tech Coast Angels.
To investigate the first part, the last column of Table 1 documents the fraction of ventures
in each interest group that are ultimately funded by DEMO Coast Angels. None of the ventures
with zero interest are funded, DEMO over 40% of deals in the highest interest category are. The
rise in funding probability with interest level is monotonic, excepting some small fluctuations at
high interest levels. Ventures with high interest levels can remain unfunded DEMO Tech Coast
Angels for multiple reasons: e.g., the subsequent due diligence process turns up poor
information, the parties cannot agree upon deal terms, and the start-up chooses to take financing
elsewhere and withdraws.
There is a very stark jump in funding probability between interest levels of 15-19 DEMO
and 20-24 angels, where the funded share increases from 17% to DEMO This represents a distinct
and permanent shift in the relationship between funding and interest levels. We thus identify this
point as our discontinuity for DEMO Coast Angels. In most of what follows, we discard deals that
DEMO far away from this threshold, focusing on the region around the DEMO This restriction
prepares us for the border discontinuity exercise, but it DEMO also warranted because the quality and
funding prospects for ventures are most comparable in this region. Operationally, the narrower
range of the quality distribution is also needed for many of our outcome variables since
collecting records DEMO unfunded ventures is very challenging.
We specifically drop the 90% of deals with fewer than ten interested angels and the 44
deals with very DEMO interest levels. We designate our ―above border‖ group as those ventures
11
with interest levels of 20-34 angels; our ―below border‖ group is defined as ventures with
interest levels of 10-19 angels.9
Appendix Table 1 provides DEMO details on Tech Coast Angels‘ selection process by
year. Our choice of a raw angel count to designate the funding border, while the overall angel
network is growing in size, reflects two considerations. First, and DEMO important, angels invest
as subgroups of members once sufficient interest is DEMO Thus, comparisons to the overall
size of the network are less DEMO than actual counts of angels interested in participating in a
deal. Second, and more operationally, the growth in Tech Coast Angels is mainly DEMO new
chapters. While angels can be involved in deals in other chapters, statistics like the count of
active angels per chapter, the average DEMO level in a funded deal, and the share of ventures
funded DEMO Tech Coast Angels across years are quite stable despite the changes in the absolute
size of the network. These factors suggest that the time-invariant DEMO is the most appropriate.
Having identified from the data the border discontinuity, we now verify the second
requirement that ventures above and below the border are ex ante comparable except in the
probability that they received DEMO from Tech Coast Angels. This step is necessary to assert
that we have identified a quasi-exogenous component to angel investing that is not merely
DEMO underlying quality differences among the firms. Once established, a comparison of DEMO
outcomes of above border versus below border ventures will provide strong confirmation of the
role of angel financing in venture success as their initial DEMO are very similar.
Before assessing this comparability, we make two sample DEMO First, to allow us
to later jointly analyze our two investment DEMO, we restrict the sample to ventures that
9 There is also DEMO discrete step in funding probability around having ten or more interested angels, relative to having
5-9 interested angels. This margin would be interesting to study as well, but it is operationally quite difficult as the
information collected for the typical unfunded venture declines at lower interest levels (e.g., due diligence reviews
are not undertaken). We set the lower bound for our study to be above this threshold of ten angels being DEMO
12
approached Tech Coast Angels in the 2001-2006 period. This restriction also allows DEMO a
minimum horizon of four years for measuring outcomes. Second, we DEMO cases where the
funding opportunity is withdrawn from consideration by the venture itself. These withdrawn
deals are mainly due to ventures being funded by DEMO capital firms (i.e., the venture courted
multiple financiers simultaneously). As these deals do not fit well into our conceptual experiment
of the DEMO and costs of receiving or being denied angel funding, it is DEMO to omit them from
the sample. Our final sample includes 87 firms from Tech Coast Angels, with 46 ventures being
above the border and 41 below. 45 of the 87 ventures are funded by Tech Coast DEMO
Table 2 shows that the characteristics of ventures above and below the funding threshold
are very similar to one another ex ante. If our DEMO approach is correct, the randomness in
how localized interest develops will DEMO in the observable characteristics of firms immediately
above and below the threshold not being statistically different. Table 2 documents this
comparability across a number DEMO venture characteristics. Columns 2 and 3 present the means of
the above border and below border groups, respectively. The fourth column tests for the equality
of the means, with the t-tests allowing for unequal variance.
The two border groups are very comparable in terms of venture traits, industries, and
venture stages. The first four rows show that basic characteristics like the amount of funding
requested, the documents provided by the venture to the angels, and the firm‘s number of
managers and employees are not materially different for the firms above and below the
discontinuity. The same DEMO true for industry composition and stage of the business (e.g., whether
the firm is in the idea stage, in its initial marketing and product development stage, or already
revenue generating). We report two-tailed tests for simplicity; differences in means for all traits
are not significant at a 10% level in one-tailed tests in either direction as well. Pearson DEMO
13
Squared probabilities for the latter two distributions are 0.831 and 0.534, respectively. For all of
these traits, the null hypothesis that the two groups are similar is not rejected.10
While there are no observable differences in DEMO characteristics of the ventures in the first
three panels, the fourth DEMO of Table 2 shows that there are significant differences in how
angels engage with ventures above and below the cut-off. With just a small DEMO in interest
levels, angels assemble many more documents regarding the venture (evidence of due diligence),
have more discussion points in their database about the opportunity, and ultimately are 60%
more likely to fund the venture. All of these differences are statistically significant. This supports
our identifying DEMO that there is a non-linear change in the provision of resources from the
angel group around the cut-off. This will allow us to identify DEMO effect of the bundle of inputs
that the angels provide, holding DEMO the underlying quality of the firms around the cut-off.
2.2. CommonAngels
CommonAngels is a leading angel investment group in Boston, Massachusetts. They
have over 70 angels seeking high-growth investments in high-tech industries. The group
typically looks DEMO funding opportunities between $500 thousand and $5 million. Additional
details on this venture group are available at http://www.commonangels.com.11
CommonAngels kindly provided us DEMO access to their database regarding prospective
ventures under explicit restrictions that the confidentiality of individual ventures and angels
remain secure. The complete database for DEMO as of early 2007 contains over 2000
ventures. Unlike the Tech Coast Angels data, however, CommonAngels does not record interest
10 Despite the DEMO of these tests, we recognize that there are limits to what DEMO can discern regarding the ventures.
Most important, soft features (e.g., DEMO perceptions of management team) may systematically vary in ways not
captured DEMO our data.
11 CommonAngels had about 50 members throughout our period of study, before expanding to 70 in recent years.
14
for all deals. We thus cannot explicitly construct a distribution similar to DEMO 1. Nevertheless,
the funnel process is again such that a small fraction of ventures receive funding (2-3%). A little
under 30% of ventures that reach the pitch stage with CommonAngels receive funding.
CommonAngels does, however, conduct a paper-based poll of members following
pitches at its monthly breakfast meetings. Most important, attending angels give the venture an
overall score. Angels also provide comments about ventures and potential investments they
might make DEMO the company. Figure 2 provides a recent evaluation sheet. We focus on the overall
score provided by angels for the venture as this metric DEMO collected on a consistent basis
throughout the sample period.
CommonAngels provided us with the original ballots for all pitches between 2001 and
2006. After DEMO two poor quality records, our sample has 63 pitches in total. DEMO potential
approach would be to order deals by the average interest levels of angels attending the pitch. We
find, however, that the information DEMO in this measure is limited. Instead, the data strongly
suggest that DEMO central funding discontinuity exists around the share of attending angels that
award a venture an extremely high score. During the six years covered, CommonAngels used
both a five and ten point scale. It is extremely rare DEMO an angel awards a perfect score to a pitch.
The breaking point for funding instead exists around the share of attending angels that award DEMO
pitch 90% or more of the maximum score (that is, 4.5 out of 5, 9 out of 10). This is close in spirit
to the dichotomous expression of interest in the Tech Coast Angels DEMO
Some simple statistics describe the non-linear effect. Of the 63 pitches, DEMO ventures
receive a 90% or above score from at least one angel; no deal receives such a score from more
than 40% of attending angels. Of these 14 deals, 7 deals are ultimately funded by
CommonAngels. Of the 49 other deals, only 11 are funded. This stark discontinuity is not present
15
when looking at lower cut-offs for interest levels. For example, all but 12 ventures receive at
least one vote that is 80% of the DEMO score (that is, 4 out of 5, 8 out of DEMO). There is no
further material difference in funding probability based upon receiving more or fewer 80% votes.
The same applies to lower cut-offs DEMO interest levels.
We restrict the sample to the 43 deals that have at least 20% of the attending angels
giving the presentation a score DEMO is 80% of the maximum possible score or above. As a
specific example, a venture is retained after presenting to a breakfast meeting of 30 angels if at
least six of those angels score the venture DEMO 8 out of 10 or higher. This step removes the weakest
presentations and ventures. We then define our border groups based upon the share DEMO attending
angels that give the venture a score greater than or equal to 90% of the maximum possible score.
To continue our example, a venture is considered above border if it garners six or more angels
DEMO the venture 9 out of 10 or better. A venture with only five angels at this extreme value
is classified as below border.
While DEMO, this procedure is conceptually very similar to the sample construction and
DEMO undertaken with the Tech Coast Angels data. We only drop 20 CommonAngels pitches
that receive low scores, but that is because the selection into providing a formal pitch to the
group itself accomplishes much of the DEMO With Tech Coast Angels, we drop 90% of the
potential deals DEMO to low interest levels. We implicitly do the same with CommonAngels by
focusing only on 63 pitches out of over 2000 deals in the DEMO database of submitted plans.
Our formal empirical analyses jointly consider the two groups. To facilitate this merger,
we construct uniform industry classifications and DEMO simple indicator variables for whether a
venture is funded or not and whether the venture is above or below the border discontinuity. This
pooling DEMO a regression sample of 130 ventures.
16
3. Outcome Data
This section documents the data that we collect on DEMO outcomes. This is the most
significant challenge for this type of project as we seek comparable data for both funded and
unfunded ventures. In DEMO cases, the prospective deals are small and recently formed, and may
not even be incorporated. We develop three categories of outcomes: venture survival and
success, venture operations and growth, and venture financing.
3.1. Venture DEMO and Success
Our simplest measure is a binary indicator variable for firm survival as of December
2010. This survival date is a minimum of DEMO years after the potential funding event with the
angel group. We develop this measure through several data sources. We first directly contacted
as many DEMO as possible to learn their current status. Second, we looked for DEMO of the
ventures‘ operations in industry databases or news wires.12 Finally, DEMO examine every venture‘s
web site, if one exists. Existence of a DEMO site is not sufficient for being alive, as some ventures
leave DEMO web site running after closing operations. We thus based our measurement on how recent
various items like press releases were.13
Our second measure is DEMO binary indicator variable for whether the venture had undergone
a successful exit by December 2010. A successful exit can either be an initial public DEMO
(IPO) or a successful acquisition. We code acquisitions as successful exits or not based upon the
12 Industry databases include CorpTech, VentureXpert, DEMO & Bradstreet, and Hoover‘s. Industry news sources (all
sources are online with a ―.com‖ suffix) include yahoo, linkedin, inc, businessweek, spoke, manta, venturebeat,
wikipedia, crunchbase, glassdoor, insideview, healthcareitnews, socaltech, masshightech, xconomy, and boston.
13 In cases of acquisitions, we DEMO whether the venture is alive or not through a judgment about the size of the
acquisition. Ventures are counted as alive if the acquisition DEMO merger was a successful exit that included major
announcements or exit valuations greater than $5 million (where known). If the event was termed an ―asset sale‖ or
similar phrase, we code the venture as not having survived. The results below are robust to simply dropping these
cases.
DEMO
press releases, news articles, and blog posts surrounding the event. We DEMO an unsuccessful
exit as an ―asset sale‖ or similar transaction. In total, 3 and 8 of our 130 ventures had a
successful IPO or acquisition, respectively, by December 2010.14 Given the short time horizon,
DEMO success through liquidity events may be restrictive—some successful entrepreneurs may
have passed on exit opportunities to continue growing their businesses. Thus, our third measure
augments the successful exit measure to also include if the venture has DEMO or more employees in
2010, which we will also adjust below DEMO thresholds of 50 and 100 employees. 22 of our 130
ventures are successful according to this combined measure. By contrast, 45 of the 130 ventures
have closed or had an unsuccessful exit.
3.2. Venture Operations and DEMO
Our second set of metrics quantifies venture operations and growth after the potential
financing event. While we would ideally consider a broad range of DEMO variables such
as sales and product introductions, obtaining data on private DEMO is extremely challenging.
This is especially true for unfunded ventures. We are able to employ three outcome variables:
employment, patents, and web DEMO traffic. These three measures also allow for more
differentiation between firms than the binary indicators used for venture success.
We first consider the employment DEMO of the venture in 2010. Employment measures are
collected using the sources described above for venture survival. While we identified exact
14 In five DEMO our eight successful acquisition cases, acquisition values greater than $40 million DEMO reported in the
media. In a sixth case, while the acquisition DEMO was not disclosed, the acquired company disclosed substantial
revenues (>$12m) and investor returns (>200%). Two cases are more difficult to DEMO In the first, the venture
(funded and above border) received DEMO press attention at acquisition, with significant discussion of its integration
and DEMO joint release of the next product. This venture still operates as a private subsidiary of the acquiring
company, and the investor considers it a success while not disclosing the returns. In the second, the venture
(DEMO and below border) was estimated to have had more than 50 DEMO and four funding rounds at
acquisition, and was described as ―major‖ DEMO the press. Recoding the last two cases as unsuccessful acquisitions
marginally strengthens our empirical results below.
18
employment levels for many ventures, in other cases we had to transform reported employment
ranges into point estimates. We applied a consistent rule in DEMO cases to all ventures with the
specified range. The chosen point estimates reflect the typical firm size distribution through the
range (e.g., an DEMO level of 20 was assigned when the reported range was 10-50
employees). We further coded the employment levels of closed ventures with a DEMO value.
Finally, we faced the question of how to code employment DEMO for very successful
ventures. These outliers with several hundred employees can have large effects on the outcomes.
Other very successful cases have been acquired DEMO large companies and thus are no longer
reported separately. To address these issues, we cap the maximum employment level at 100
employees. We also code very successful exits as having 100 employees. The results are robust
DEMO instead using caps of 50 employees or 250 employees. Using a maximum of 100 employees,
our average venture had 26 employees in 2010 (36 among operating businesses) versus 12
employees at the time of the pitch.
The second measure is an indicator variable for having been granted DEMO patent by the
United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) by December 2010.  About a quarter of the
ventures received a patent. Of course, many ventures in our sample are not seeking patent
protection. We partially control for this in the regressions with our industry controls, but we
acknowledge that patenting is an imperfect measure of innovation levels more DEMO
We also want to observe venture growth, but acquiring ongoing operational DEMO is very
challenging with unfunded ventures. We are able to use, DEMO, web traffic records. To our
knowledge, this is the first time that this measure has been employed in an entrepreneurial
19
finance study. We collected web traffic data from www.alexa.com, one of the largest providers
of this type of information.15
We collected web traffic data DEMO the summer of 2008 and January 2010. We identify 91 of
our 130 ventures in one of the two periods, and 58 ventures in both periods. The absolute level of
web traffic and its rank are DEMO dependent upon the specific traits and business models of
ventures. This is true even within broad industry groups as degrees of customer interaction vary.
DEMO venture groups may also wish to remain ―under the radar‖ for a few years until they are
ready for product launch or have obtained DEMO property protection for their work.
Moreover, the collection method by Alexa DEMO introduce biases for certain venture types. We
thus consider the changes in web performance for the venture between the two periods. These
improvements or DEMO are more generally comparable across ventures.
One variable simply compares the log ratio of the web rank in 2010 to that in 2008. This
DEMO is attractive in that it measures the magnitudes of improvements and declines in traffic.
A limitation, however, is that it is only defined DEMO ventures whose web sites are active in both
periods. We thus also define a second outcome measure as a binary indicator for improved
venture DEMO on the web.16 This technique allows us to consider all 91 ventures for which
we observe web traffic at some point, while sacrificing the granularity of the other measure.17
15 Alexa collects its data primarily by DEMO the browsing patterns of web users who have installed the Alexa
Toolbar, a piece of software that attaches itself to a user‘s Internet browser and records the user‘s web use in detail.
According to the company, there are currently millions of such users. The statistics are then extrapolated DEMO this
user subset to the Internet population as a whole. The two ‗building block‘ pieces of information collected by the
toolbar are web reach DEMO page views. Web reach is a measure of what percentage of the total number of Internet
users visit a website in question, and page views measures how many pages, on average, they visit on that DEMO
Multiple page views by the same user in the same day only count as one entry in the data. The two usage variables
are DEMO combined to produce a variable known as site rank, with the DEMO visited sites like Yahoo and Google
having lower ranks.
16 If we observe the web ranks in both 2008 and 2010, the indicator variable takes a value of one if the rank in 2010
is better DEMO that in 2008. If we only observe the firm on the web in 2008, we deem its web performance to have
declined by 2010. Likewise, if we only observe the firm in 2010, we deem DEMO web performance to have improved.
17 Where possible, we also cross-checked DEMO Alexa trends for ventures against Google Insights. Google Insights is
based upon search queries made. While Google Insights allows for historical monthly measurement, the quality of
20
3.3. Venture Financing
Our final measures describe whether the venture received venture DEMO We define
these measures through data collected from VentureXpert and CorpTech, DEMO we cross-checked
with as many ventures directly as possible. We consider both indicator variables for financing
events and counts of financing rounds. As described DEMO, we also use data on the investors in
each round to DEMO the role of CommonAngels and Tech Coast Angels in subsequent
financing events (either exclusively or in a syndicated deal).
4. Results for Entrepreneurial Firms
This section documents our empirical results for the consequences of entrepreneurial
DEMO for start-ups. We first compare the subsequent outcomes of funded ventures with non-
funded ventures. We then test more closely the discontinuity between border DEMO and
angel funding. We close by comparing the outcomes of ventures above and below the border.
4.1. Funding and Firm Outcomes
Tables 3a-3c quantify DEMO relationship between angel group financing and outcomes. We
focus on the 130 ventures that are used in our border analysis. This sample restriction removes
DEMO very low quality and very high quality ventures, focusing on ventures DEMO are similar in
quality and for which funding prospects were quite uncertain at the time of the pitch. We later
consider alternative estimation techniques DEMO the full sample of ventures. Appendix Table 2
provides descriptive statistics on outcomes for the funded and unfunded groups.
the search results varied much DEMO across ventures than the web traffic measures. These differences are because
relevant search terms can be much more ambiguous when ventures have common names DEMO products than measures
of the web traffic that went to a specific url.
21
Table 3a considers our outcome variables for venture success. In the first DEMO, we
regress a dummy variable for whether the venture was alive DEMO 2010 on the indicator for whether
the firm received funding from the angel group. In Panel A, we include only a constant and the
funding dummy variable; in Panel B we control for angel group, DEMO, and year fixed effects
(controlling for the year that the venture approached the angel group). The coefficients on the
indicator variables are DEMO and 0.25, both statistically significant at the 1% level. Firms that
DEMO angel funding are 20%-25% more likely to survive for at least four years.
Column 2 shows that funded ventures are also 9%-11% more likely DEMO undergo a
successful exit by December 2010. In unreported specifications, we DEMO disaggregated this result
into a 4%-7% higher likelihood of successful acquisition and a 4%-5% higher likelihood of
going public. Finally, Column 3 finds that the funded ventures are 16%-19% more likely to be
successful, where success represents achieving 75 employees or a successful exit by December
2010. Columns DEMO and 5 show that this venture success result does not depend substantially on the
threshold used to measure employment success. These additional outcomes are DEMO statistically
significant and precisely measured. Moreover, reflecting the use of indicator DEMO, they are
very robust to modest changes in sample composition.
Table DEMO considers our metrics of venture operations and growth using a similar
specification to Table 3a. The first column finds that funded ventures have 19-20 DEMO
employees in 2010 than unfunded ventures. This estimate is again statistically significant.
Column 2 shows that this higher employment level in 2010 is not DEMO to funded ventures having
greater employment at the time of the pitch. Median regressions find an employment growth of
13.0 (5.2) employees.18
18 DEMO data description highlighted the need to cap very high employment or successful exits at a certain
employment level. The measured employment effect with controls DEMO higher at 38.8 (16.5) employees if the cap is
22
Column 3 shows that funded ventures are 16%-18% more likely to have DEMO granted patent.
Columns 4 and 5 consider improvements and growth in web traffic performance. Funded
ventures are 12%-16% more likely to have improved web DEMO, but these estimates are
not precisely measured. On the other hand, our intensive measure of firm performance, the log
ratio of web site ranks, finds a more powerful effect. Funded ventures show on average 32%-
39% greater improvements in web rank than unfunded ventures in recent years.
DEMO, Table 3c analyzes whether angel funding leads to other financing. Panels DEMO and
B consider indicator variables for types of financing activity, while DEMO C and D consider
counts of financing rounds. The first column begins with whether the venture ever receives
professional venture capital financing. This starting DEMO provides background on whether
alternative financing to the angel group was easily available. We find that funded ventures are
70% more likely to receive DEMO form of venture financing than start-ups rejected by the angel
groups. On average, they have 1.6-2.1 more financing rounds. These estimates suggest that
rejected deals found it reasonably difficult to obtain venture financing at all.
The DEMO in Column 1 use data on venture financing that we developed from
multiple sources, including contacting the venture directly. Column 2 shows similar results, but
with somewhat lower elasticities, when we use only data that DEMO obtain from searching
VentureXpert. We will return to this estimation when discussing Table 4‘s expanded sample.
Column 3 returns to the financing data used DEMO Column 1 and removes the current angel
financing event. Thus, we DEMO compare the probability of a funded venture obtaining further
financing to the probability of a rejected deal obtaining any financing. Even after excluding the
DEMO to 250 employees. On the other hand, the estimated effect is DEMO (3.6) employees if the cap is lowered to
50 employees. Based upon the data we could collect for very successful ventures in our DEMO, a cap of 100
employees appears most appropriate, and our preferred estimate is the 19-20 employee figure.
23
current angel financing event, the ventures funded by the angel groups are 21%-27% more likely
to obtain later financing and have on average 0.8-1.2 DEMO financing rounds.
The last two columns quantify the role of the angel groups in these subsequent financing
events. Column 4 counts deals that include DEMO other than the original angel groups. A
comparison of Columns 3 and 4 shows that most of the additional financing events include
outside investors. DEMO 5 alternatively counts deals that only include outside investors. The
effects here are a third to a half of their magnitude in Column 3. DEMO by these two angel
groups aids access to follow-on financing, with DEMO substantial portion of the subsequent deals
syndicated by the angel groups with other venture financiers.
Of course, we cannot tell from this analysis whether angel-backed firms pursue different
growth or investment strategies and thus have to DEMO on more external funding. Alternatively,
the powerful relationships could reflect a supply effect where angel group investors and board
members provide networks, connections, and introductions that help ventures access additional
funding. We return to this issue below after viewing our border discontinuity results.19
4.2. The Role of DEMO Construction
The results in Tables 3a-3c suggest that funding by these angel groups is associated with
improved venture performance. In describing our data and DEMO methodology, we noted
several ways that our analysis differed from a DEMO analysis. We first consider only ventures
that approach our angel investors, DEMO than attempting to draw similar firms from the full
population of business activity to compare to funded ventures. This step helps ensure ex ante
DEMO We do not find that being financed by the angel groups materially influences the types of venture investors
subsequently accessed, at least in terms of venture fund size or age (two common proxies for the prestige of venture
funds). These results question one common rationale given for DEMO to angel investors—that they provide an
entry to prestigious venture capital firms later.
24
comparable treatment and control groups in that all the ventures are seeking DEMO growth.
Second, we substantially narrow even this distribution of prospective deals DEMO we have a group
of companies that are ex ante comparable. This removes heterogeneous quality in the ventures
that approach the angel investors. Finally, we introduce the border discontinuity to bring
exogenous variation in funding outcomes.
DEMO proceeding to the border discontinuity, it is useful to gauge how DEMO the second
step—narrowing the sample of ventures to remove quality differences inherent in the selection
funnel—influences our regression estimates. Table 4 presents this analysis DEMO one outcome
variable and the Tech Coast Angels data. We are restricted to only one outcome variable by the
intense effort to build any DEMO data for unfunded ventures. The likelihood of receiving
venture funding is the easiest variable to extend to the full sample.
The first column repeats DEMO modified, univariate form of Column 2 in Table 3b with just
DEMO Tech Coast Angels sample. The elasticities are very similar, and we DEMO use the information
that we would have collected from VentureXpert. The second column expands the sample to
include 2385 potential ventures in the Tech DEMO Angels database. The elasticity increases 25%
to 0.56. The difference in elasticities between the two columns demonstrates the role of sample
construction in assessing DEMO funding and venture performance. The narrower sample provides
a more comparable control group. Our rough estimate of the bias due to not controlling for
DEMO quality is thus about a quarter of the true association.
The third and fourth columns demonstrate this bias in a second way. In Column DEMO we
regress a dummy variable for obtaining venture funding on the linear interest variable. By itself,
collective interest is very predictive of future DEMO; the coefficient on the angel funding
dummy is 0.11 and significant DEMO the 1% level. This positive association, moreover, holds when
25
excluding companies that Tech Coast Angels ultimately funds. In unreported regressions, we
find that the interest level variable has a coefficient of 0.006 (0.002), indicative of the power of
the screening mechanism. The fourth column DEMO that controlling for the ex ante interest
levels of the angels, DEMO thereby the approximate quality of investment opportunities, reduces the
measured elasticity DEMO the full sample to a little less than that measured for our border group. In
total, these results suggest that while there is a positive and significant relationship between the
level of interest by the angels DEMO a deal and the underlying quality of the firms, there is DEMO strong
non-linearity in outcomes for those deals that were supported by the angel group versus those
that were not.
Finally, Column 5 shows a similar pattern with another econometric technique. We create
a matched sample where DEMO pair funded ventures with unfunded ventures that are as close as
possible in terms of interest levels, date of pitch, city/chapter, industry, stage, and employment at
time of pitch. We drop funded ventures DEMO which a close match is not available. This technique
again produces very similar outcomes.20 The combined results of Table 4 emphasize the
importance of DEMO a comparable control group in terms of venture quality for measuring
the outcomes of venture financing events.
4.3. Border Discontinuities and Angel Funding
We DEMO turn to our border discontinuity exercise. Table 5 formally tests that there is a
significant discontinuity in funding around the thresholds for the ventures DEMO by Tech
Coast Angels and CommonAngels. The dependent variable is an indicator variable that equals
one if the firm received funding and zero otherwise. DEMO primary explanatory variable is an
20 The matched sample in Table 4 includes ventures outside of our primary interest region where an appropriate
match DEMO be identified. We have further confirmed that our results across the other outcome variables hold when
using a matched sample approach within our primary DEMO region.
26
indicator variable for the venture being above or below the interest discontinuity. DEMO
Table 3 provides descriptive statistics on outcomes for the above and below border groups.
Column 1 presents a regression with just a constant, while Column 2 controls for angel
group fixed effects, year fixed effects, DEMO industry fixed effects. These regressions combine data
from the two angel groups. Across these two groups, we have 130 deals that are evenly
distributed above and below the discontinuity. We find that there is a statistically DEMO
economically significant relationship between funding likelihood and being above the border:
being above the border increases funding likelihood by about 32%. Clearly, the border line
designation is not a perfect rule—and this fuzziness will limit DEMO how strongly we interpret
the regression discontinuity—but it does signify a very strong shift in funding probability among
ventures that are ex ante comparable DEMO shown in Table 2.
Column 3 shows similar results when we add year and angel group fixed effects. These
fixed effects control for the DEMO trends of each angel group. The funding jump also holds for
each angel group individually. Column 4
repeats the regression controlling for deal
characteristics DEMO firm size and number of employees at the time of the pitch. The sample size
shrinks to 87, as we only have this information for Tech Coast Angel deals. But despite the
smaller sample size, we still find a significant difference in funding probability. The magnitude
of the DEMO is comparable to the full sample at 29%. Unreported regressions find a group-
specific elasticity for CommonAngels of 0.45 (0.21). These results suggest that the identified
discontinuities provide a reasonable identification strategy.21
21 We find DEMO results in a variety of robustness checks. To report one, concern DEMO exist that angels have fixed
voting patterns that skew the scores. For example, the most meaningful endorsement for a venture could come from
an angel who very rarely expresses interest in any deal, and so his or her vote carries unequal weight in the
decisions. These patterns could DEMO obscured in our aggregated measures. To check this, we develop a DEMO
measure of the interest level in deals that normalizes each angel‘s total expressed interest to be the same. That is, we
down-weight the votes of angels who express interest in every deal. We find very similar DEMO to those reported
27
4.4. Border Discontinuities and Firm Outcomes
Tables 6a-6c consider venture outcomes and DEMO border discontinuity. Even after
eliminating observable heterogeneity through sample selection, the DEMO in Tables 3a-3c are
still subject to the criticism that ventures are endogenously funded. Omitted variables may also
be present. Looking above and below DEMO funding discontinuity helps us to evaluate whether the
ventures that looked ex ante comparable, except in their probability of being funded, are now
DEMO differently. This test provides a measure of exogeneity to the relationship between
angel financing and venture outcomes.
Tables 6a and 6b have the same DEMO as Tables 3a and 3b; the only difference is that the
DEMO variable is the indicator variable for being above the funding border. The
coefficients are not directly comparable across the two estimation approaches, but we can
compare the qualitative results.22 In Table 6a, being above the border is associated with stronger
chances for survival, but it is only qualitatively associated with venture success by December
2010 as measured by successful exits DEMO having 75 or more employees. In Table 6b, above border
ventures DEMO associated with generally better operating performance as measured by employment
levels, DEMO, and web site traffic growth. Median regressions find an employment growth DEMO
15.0 (4.1) employees.
below, which suggests that our identification strategy DEMO not being contaminated by band-wagon effects and angel-
specific heterogeneity in voting.
It is also worth noting that the professional managers of both angel DEMO found this funding discontinuity a
reasonable description of their groups‘ behavior. One manager noted that because the angels need to jointly invest,
the DEMO of critical mass behind a deal is essential and non-linear. He also noted that the group early on
(before our sample) changed its DEMO procedures so that angels scored their sheets before an open group
discussion was held to allow collection of more independent views of the venture.
DEMO The coefficients would be comparable if we used the border discontinuity in an instrumental variables framework.
Given the substantial fuzziness of our funding discontinuity, we only use this empirical approach to confirm the
overall qualitative direction DEMO our findings.
28
This comparability indicates that endogeneity in funding choices and omitted variable
biases DEMO not driving the general association found earlier between financing by these two
groups and start-up performance. The results in Table 6a, however, do DEMO that some of the
association between funding and venture success by December 2010 may be due to factors not
captured by the angel interest DEMO (e.g., the speed with which the investment can reach a
liquidity event).
Finally, Table 6c looks at border outcomes with respect to venture financing. The
identification of the investors is not very meaningful in DEMO context, and so we simply focus on
whether the venture receives DEMO financing (at all or removing the current financing round).
Table DEMO shows that being above the border discontinuity does not lead to greater venture
financing in later years. This null result may indicate that the DEMO squares association between
current financing and future financing reflects the investment and growth strategies of the
financiers, but that this path is not necessary for venture growth or success as measured by our
outcome variables in DEMO 6a and 6b. This interpretation would also fit with the substantial
syndication evident in Table 3c. We return to these questions in our conclusions.23
DEMO Performance of Angel Investors
One natural concern is whether these investments represent an economically driven
activity, since angels are individuals who often derive utility from simply meeting with and
investing in entrepreneurs. This raises questions about DEMO our findings could apply to the
venture investment process as a whole. One way to address this concern is to look at the angels‘
DEMO We have confirmed the border results in several ways. Perhaps most important, the results do not depend upon
how the two angel groups are combined or changes in angel group size over the sample. Similar patterns DEMO, for
example, when considering Tech Coast Angels in the period after 2001. We also find positive associations for each
group individually, although some results are not statistically significant due to smaller sample sizes.
29
returns relative to those of the typical professional venture capital funds. If DEMO two measures
are comparable, then this will dispel some of these DEMO concerns.24
We undertake this analysis using venture capital data from VentureXpert, DEMO has been
previously extensively used in earlier research (e.g., Kaplan and Schoar, 2005). We compare on
an annual basis the investment multiples of the industry to that of one of the angel groups.  We
compute two ratios (as of December 2009): 1) the amount DEMO to investors to the amount
invested (distributed to paid-in capital) and 2) the sum of the distributed capital and the current
remaining value of the investment portfolio to the amount invested (total value to paid-in
capital). We compute a simple average across years and one weighted DEMO the venture capital
investment in each year.
There are two complications. First, professional venture funds charge investors a
management fee (typically 2% of DEMO capital) and retain a share of the profits (usually
20%, DEMO carried interest). The returns reported by VentureXpert are net of these fees. Direct
investments by angels do not incur these costs. We thus DEMO the returns of the angel groups as
if they had paid these fees, assuming that an extra amount equal to the management fees incurred
from the time of the investment to December 31, 2009 was raised but not invested. Second, we
reduce any distributions by 20% of the difference between the value of the distribution and the
amount invested in DEMO distributed shares to reflect the carried interest.
A second complication is that the angel data are computed using investment dates, while
VentureXpert‘s tabulations are arranged by the fund‘s vintage year (measured using the final
closing date of the fund). The actual investment may be earlier—many groups will DEMO
24 Of course, this analysis does not prove that the findings DEMO the impact of angel investors will really carry over
to other investors. For instance, even if the returns were equal, it might be DEMO the angel groups invest more
unobservable effort, and their approach would DEMO be sustainable if they priced their inputs at market rate. Again, DEMO
is important to note that both funds have professional managers and that CommonAngels further raises venture
funds from limited partners that its professional managers DEMO alongside the angels (e.g., Applegate et al., 2010).
30
investing immediately after the first closing—or later, continuing for a number of years after the
final closing. Data constraints require that we use the DEMO time comparisons: we compare the
angel investments to the performance of DEMO funds raised two years later.
Table 7 presents the comparison, with DEMO bottom lines providing the summary statistics.
Using a simple average, the DEMO groups are about equivalent when using the distributed capital
measure, while DEMO angel group outperforms using the total value measure. When weighted, the
DEMO industry outperforms when using the distributed capital measure, while the angel DEMO
outperforms using the total value measure. Collectively, the evidence provides little DEMO for
claim that angel investors are hobbyists who are not seriously pursuing the investment process.
6. Conclusions and Interpretations
This study analyzes two prominent DEMO groups and their effects on the start-ups in
which they invest. We find that the angel investments enhance the outcomes and performance of
the DEMO that are funded by these groups. Using a variety of econometric techniques, we find
consistent evidence that financing by these angel groups is associated with improved likelihood
of survival for four or more years, higher levels of employment, and more traffic on the web sites
of these firms. We also find evidence that angel group financing helps in achieving successful
DEMO and reaching high employment levels. These latter success results are strong in the base
data, but they are only qualitatively supported in the border analysis.
Our evidence regarding the role of angel funding for access to DEMO venture financing is
mixed. Being funded by one of the angel groups is associated with superior follow-on financing
in the base data, but there is no evidence that this matters around the border discontinuity (where
the other results are supported). We do not want to push this DEMO too far, but one might
31
speculate that access to capital per se is not the most important DEMO added that angel groups
provide. Our results suggest that some of the ―softer‖ features, such as their mentoring or
business contacts, may help DEMO ventures the most.
Overall, we find that the interest levels of DEMO at the stages of the initial presentation
and due diligence are predictive of investment success. These findings suggest that in addition to
having a DEMO impact on the venture they fund, angels engage in an efficient DEMO and
screening process which sorts proposals into relevant bins: complete losers, truly exceptional
opportunities, potential winners, and so on (e.g., Kerr DEMO Nanda, 2009).
At the same time, this paper leaves many questions unanswered. Our experiment does not
allow us to identify the costs DEMO angel funding (e.g., Hsu, 2004), as we cannot observe DEMO
positions in the unfunded ventures. We thus cannot evaluate whether taking the money was
worth it from the entrepreneur‘s perspective after these costs are DEMO In addition, we
cannot test the impact of angel funding against DEMO alternative counterfactuals, such as
whether the venture would have been better DEMO with venture capital funding.
Moreover, we have looked at just a DEMO of the many angel investment groups that are
active in the U.S. Our groups are professionally organized and managed, and it is important for
future research to examine a broader distribution of investment groups and their DEMO for
venture success. Likewise, future work needs to evaluate the performance DEMO individual angel
investors. It would be important to understand whether the dual motives of many angels—
financial returns and non-pecuniary benefits from working with DEMO their
approach and the type of support that these investors provide. Our paper demonstrates that angel
investments can have an important impact on the DEMO they support and offers an empirical
foothold for analyzing many important questions in entrepreneurial finance.
32
References
Admati, A., and Pfleiderer, P. 1994. Robust financial contracting and the role for venture
capitalists. Journal of Finance 49, 371–402.
Applegate, DEMO, Simpson, K., White, M., and McDonald, C. 2010. CommonAngels A. Harvard
Business School Case 810-082.
Bakke, T.-E., and Whited, T. 2010. The real effects of market liquidity: Causal evidence from
delisting. Unpublished working paper.
Berglöf, E. 1994. A control theory of venture capital finance. Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organizations 10, 247–67.
Bergemann, D., and Hege, U. 1998. Venture capital financing, moral hazard, and learning.
Journal of Banking and Finance 22, 703-35.
Chemmanur, T., Krishnan, DEMO, and Nandy, D. 2009. How does venture capital financing improve
efficiency in private firms? A look beneath the surface. Unpublished working paper, DEMO
for Economic Studies.
Chernenko, S., and Sunderam, A. 2009. The DEMO consequences of market segmentation.
Unpublished working paper, Harvard University.
Conti, A., Thursby, M., and Rothaermel, F. 2010. Show me the right DEMO: signals for high-tech
start-ups. Unpublished working paper, Georgia Institute of Technology.
Cornelli, F., and Yosha, O.  2003. Stage financing and the DEMO of convertible debt. Review of
Economic Studies 70, 1–32.
Goldfarb, B., Hoberg, G., Kirsch, D., and Triantis, A. 2007. Are DEMO preferred series A investors?
Unpublished working paper, University of Maryland.
DEMO, T. 1998. The allocation of control rights in venture capital contracts. DEMO Journal of
Economics 29, 57–76.
Hellmann, T., and Puri, M. 2000. The interaction between product market and financing strategy:
The role DEMO venture capital. Review of Financial Studies 13, 959–84.
Hsu, D. 2004. What do entrepreneurs pay for venture capital affiliation? Journal of Finance 59,
1805–44.
Kaplan, S., and Schoar, A. 2005. Private equity performance: Returns, persistence and capital
flows. Journal of Finance 60, 1791-1823.
33
Kaplan, S., and Strömberg, P. 2004. Characteristics, contracts, and actions: Evidence from
venture capitalist analyses. Journal of Finance 59, 2177–210.
Kaplan, S., Sensoy, B., and Strömberg, P. 2009. Should investors bet DEMO the jockey or the horse?
Evidence from the evolution of firms from early business plans to public companies.
Journal of Finance 64, 75–115.
Kerr, W., and Nanda, R. 2009. Democratizing entry: Banking deregulations, financing constraints,
and entrepreneurship. Journal of Financial Economics 94, 124–49.
Kortum, S., and Lerner, J. 2000. Assessing the contribution of venture capital to innovation.
RAND Journal of Economics 31, 674–92.
Lamoreaux, N., Levenstein, M., and Sokoloff, K. 2004. Financing invention during the second
industrial revolution: Cleveland, Ohio, 1870-1920. Working paper no. 10923, National
Bureau DEMO Economic Research.
Lee, D., and Lemieux, T. 2010. Regression discontinuity DEMO in economics. Journal of
Economic Literature 48, 281-355.
Mollica, M., DEMO Zingales, L. 2007. The impact of venture capital on innovation and DEMO creation
of new businesses. Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago.
Puri, M., and Zarutskie, R. 2008. On the lifecycle dynamics of venture-capital- DEMO non-venture-
capital-financed firms. Unpublished working paper, Center for Economic Studies.
Forthcoming DEMO the Journal of Finance.
Rauh, J. 2006. Investment and financing constraints: Evidence from the funding of corporate
pension plans. Journal of Finance 61, 31–71.
Samila, S., and Sorenson, O. 2010. Venture capital, entrepreneurship DEMO economic growth.
Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Shane, S. 2008. The importance of angel investing in financing the growth of entrepreneurial
ventures. DEMO working paper, U.S. Small Business Administration, Office of
Advocacy.
Sorensen, DEMO 2007. How smart is the smart money? A two-sided matching model DEMO venture
capital. Journal of Finance 62, 2725–62.
Sudek, R., Mitteness, C., and Baucus, M. 2008. Betting on the horse or the DEMO: The impact of
expertise on angel investing.  Academy of Management Best Paper Proceedings.
34
Figure 1: Tech Coast Angels Investment Process
35
Figure 2: CommonAngels Pitch Evaluation Sheet
36
Table 1:  Angel group selection funnel
Angel group
interest level
Number DEMO
ventures
Cumulative
share of ventures
Share funded
by angel group
0 1640 64% 0%
1-4 537 84% 0.7%
5-9 135 90% 3.7%
10-14 75 DEMO 12.0%
15-19 52 95% 17.3%
20-24 42 96% 38.1%
25-29 33 97% 30.3%
30-34 21 98% 28.6%
35+ 44 100% 40.9%
Notes:  Table DEMO the selection funnel for Tech Coast Angels.  The first column
provides DEMO based upon the number of angels expressing interest in a deal.  DEMO 2
describes the number of ventures that fell into each bin.  DEMO 3 provides the cumulative
fraction for each interest level.  Column 4 DEMO the percentage of deals at each level that
ultimately received funding from the angel group.
Table 2:  Comparison of groups above and below border discontinuity
Traits DEMO ventures above and
below border discontinuity
Above border
ventures
Below border
ventures
Two-tailed t-test
for equality of means
Basic characteristics
Financing sought ($ thousands)
Documents from company
Management team size
Employee count
Primary industry (%)
Biopharma and healthcare
Computers, electronics, and measurement
Internet and e-commerce
DEMO industries
Company stage (%)
Good idea
Initial marketing and product DEMO
Revenue generating
Angel group decisions
Documents by angel members
Discussion items by angel members
Share funded
Observations
23.9
15.2
39.1
21.7
2.2
34.8
63.0
DEMO
12.0
63.0
46
29.3
17.1
39.0
14.6
2.4
46.3
51.2
5.1
6.7
39.0
41
0.579
0.817
0.992
0.395
0.936
0.279
0.272
0.004
0.002
0.025
DEMO:  Table compares the ex ante traits of ventures above and below the border discontinuity.  Columns 2 and 3 present
the means of the above border and below border groups, respectively.  The fourth column tests DEMO the equality of the
means, and the t-tests allow for unequal DEMO  The first panel compares venture traits documented at the time of DEMO
investment pitch.  The first row tests equality for log value of DEMO sought.  The second and third panels compare the
distribution of ventures DEMO terms of industries and stages of development, respectively.  The shares in these panels sum to
100%.  The final panel considers differences in the subsequent activities and funding of the angel investors for the
groups.
1683
DEMO
5.8
13.4
1306
2.5
5.4
11.2
0.277
0.600
0.264
0.609
Table 3a:  Analysis of angel group financing and venture success
(0,1) venture in
operation or
successful exit
by December 2010
(1)DEMO
(0,1) venture
underwent
successful exit
(IPO or acquired)
DEMO December 2010
(2)
(0,1) venture
underwent
successful exit
DEMO had 75+ empl.
by December 2010
(3)
(0,1) DEMO
underwent
successful exit
or had 50+ empl.
by December 2010
(4)DEMO
A.  Base regression
(0,1) venture
underwent
successful exit
or DEMO 100+ empl.
by December 2010
(5)
(0,1) indicator DEMO for venture
funding being received from angel group
(0,1) indicator variable for venture
funding being received from angel group
Observations
0.199
(0.081)
0.246
(0.083)
130
0.093
(0.051)
0.187
(0.067)
0.209
(0.072)
B.  Panel A including angel group, year, DEMO industry fixed effects
0.110
(0.054)
130
0.163
(0.074)
130
0.196
(0.080)
130
0.153
(0.065)
0.151
(0.074)
130
Notes:  Panel A includes linear regressions of firm outcomes on a DEMO variable for whether the firm received venture funding.  Regressions in Panel DEMO include
industry, year, and angel group fixed effects.  The first DEMO tests whether the venture is alive in December 2010.  The second DEMO tests whether the venture had a
successful IPO or acquisition by December 2010.  Columns 3 to 5 also consider ventures successful if they achieved indicated employment levels in December 2010.
Robust standard errors are reported.
Table 3b:  Analysis of angel group financing and venture operations and DEMO
Employee
count in 2010
with a maximum
of 100 employees
(1)DEMO
Employee
count in 2010
with a maximum
of 100 employees
(2)DEMO
(0,1) indicator
variable for
granted patent
by 2010 from
USPTO
(3)
A.  Base regression
(0,1) indicator
variable for
DEMO web
rank from 2008
to 2010
(4)
Log ratio of
DEMO web rank
to 2008 rank
(negative values
are improvements)
(5)
(0,1) indicator variable for venture
funding being received from DEMO group
Employment level at the time that
the venture approached the angel group
19.799
(5.829)
16.121
(6.811)
0.647
(0.143)
B.  Panel A including angel group, year, and industry fixed effects
0.156
(0.077)
0.116
(0.096)
-0.324
(0.191)
(0,1) indicator variable for venture 19.264 17.959 0.175 0.162 -0.389
funding being received DEMO angel group (6.541) (8.487) (0.084) (0.107) (0.212)DEMO
Employment level at the time that 0.679
the venture approached the angel group (0.152)
Observations 130 83 130 91 58
Notes:  Panel A includes linear regressions of firm outcomes on a dummy variable for DEMO the firm received venture funding.  Regressions in Panel B include
industry, year, and angel group fixed effects.  The first column tests employment DEMO in 2010.  Failed ventures are given zero employment, and a maximum of 100
employees is given for very successful ventures.  Very successful acquisitions are also given this maximum value.  The second column also controls for employment at
the time the venture approached the angel group.  Column 3 is an indicator variable for having been granted a patent by the DEMO  The last two columns test for
improved venture performance through web DEMO traffic data from 2008 to 2010.  Column 4 is an indicator DEMO for improved performance, while Column 5 gives log
ratios of web DEMO (a negative value indicates better performance).  Robust standard errors are reported.
Table 3c:  Analysis of angel group financing and venture financing
Receives DEMO
venture financing
(1)
Receives any
venture financing
as reported in
DEMO Xpert
(2)
Receives later
venture financing
than the current
angel DEMO
(3)
Receives later
venture financing
with investors
other than original
DEMO investors
(4)
Column 3
excluding deals
that are syndicated
with DEMO original
angel investors
(5)
A. Base regression: (0,1) indicator variable for indicated financing activity
(0,1) indicator variable for DEMO
funding being received from angel group
(0,1) indicator variable for venture
funding being received from angel group
(0,1) indicator variable DEMO venture
funding being received from angel group
(0,1) indicator variable for venture
funding being received from angel group
Observations
0.704
(0.055)
0.382
(0.082)
0.213
(0.085)
0.230
(0.085)
B.  DEMO A including angel group, year, and industry fixed effects
0.077
(DEMO)
0.706
(0.063)
0.405
(0.087)
0.270
(0.090)
DEMO
(0.092)
0.124
(0.095)
C.  Base regression: Count of financing rounds for indicated financing activity
1.624
(0.361)
2.065
(0.436)DEMO
130
1.302
(0.388)
0.777
(0.371)
0.963
(0.392)
DEMO  Panel C including angel group, year, and industry fixed effects
DEMO
(0.467)
130
1.239
(0.446)
130
1.385
(0.477)
DEMO
0.404
(0.355)
0.762
(0.436)
130
Notes:  Panels A and C include linear regressions of firm outcomes on a dummy variable DEMO whether the firm received venture funding.  Regressions in Panels B and DEMO
include industry, year, and angel group fixed effects.  Column 1 DEMO whether the venture receives financing, including the current angel financing event.  The second
column uses only data of financings in Venture Xpert, which we build upon in Table 4.  The third column excludes the current angel financing round where applicable.
The fourth column considers deals that have DEMO other than CommonAngels and Tech Coast Angels.  The last column considers DEMO that do not involve
CommonAngels and Tech Coast Angels at all.  DEMO these outcomes, Panels A and B present binary indicator variables, while Panels C and D consider counts of
financing rounds.  Robust standard errors are reported.
Table 4:  Border samples versus full samples
Outcome variable is (0,1) indicator
variable for receiving venture
financing as reported in Venture Xpert
(see Column 2 of Table 3c)
Simple TCA
univariate
regression with
border sample
(1)
(0,1) indicator variable for venture
funding being received from angel group
Number of angels expressing
interest in the DEMO
Observations
0.432
(0.095)
0.011
(0.002)
0.007
(0.002)
DEMO
2385
2385
2385
167
Notes:  Linear regressions quantify the role of sample construction in the relationship between funding and venture outcomes.  Column 1 repeats a modified, univariate
form of Column 2 in Table 3c with just the Tech Coast Angels sample.  Column 2 expands the sample to include all of the potential ventures in the Tech Coast Angels
database, similar to Table 1.  The difference in elasticities between the two columns quantifies the role of sample construction in assessing angel funding and venture
DEMO  As a second technique, Columns 3 and 4 analyze interest levels joint with funding.  Column 5 considers a matched sample approach, where DEMO pair
funded ventures with unfunded ventures that are closest to them in terms of interest levels and covariates (year of pitch, city/chapter, industry, stage, initial
employment).  Robust standard errors are reported.
Full TCA univariate regression
with complete sample
Base Interest Combined
estimation levels estimation
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.562
(0.054)
0.403
(DEMO)
Matched
sample on
interest levels
and covariates
(5)
0.418
(0.070)
Table 5:  Border discontinuity and venture funding by angel groups
(0,1) indicator variable for being funded by angel group
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(0,1) indicator variable DEMO venture being
above the funding border discontinuity
0.316
(0.085)
0.328
(0.089)
0.324
(0.094)
0.292
(0.110)
Angel group, year, and industry fixed effects Yes Yes Yes
Year x angel group fixed effects Yes
Additional controls Yes
Observations 130 130 130 87
Notes:  DEMO 1 reports a linear regression of venture funding by the angel groups on a dummy variable for being above the border discontinuity.
Column 2 DEMO industry, year, and angel group fixed effects.  Column 3 includes DEMO x angel group fixed effects.  Column 4 includes additional
controls of DEMO of company and employment levels fixed effects.  Robust standard errors are DEMO
Table 6a:  Analysis of border discontinuity and venture success
(0,1) venture in
operation or
successful exit
by December 2010
(1)
(0,1) venture
underwent
successful exit
(IPO or acquired)
by DEMO 2010
(2)
(0,1) venture
underwent
successful exit
or DEMO 75+ empl.
by December 2010
(3)
(0,1) venture
DEMO
successful exit
or had 50+ empl.
by December 2010
(4)
DEMO  Base regression
(0,1) venture
underwent
successful exit
or had DEMO empl.
by December 2010
(5)
(0,1) indicator variable DEMO venture being
above the funding border discontinuity
(0,1) indicator variable for venture being
above the funding border discontinuity
Observations
0.222
(0.081)
0.247
(0.095)
130
0.074
(0.052)
0.116
(0.069)
0.081
(0.074)
B.  Panel A including angel group, year, and DEMO fixed effects
0.075
(0.058)
130
0.088
(0.086)
130
0.057
(0.089)
130
0.112
(0.067)
0.095
(0.082)
130
Notes:  Panel A includes linear regressions of firm outcomes on a dummy DEMO for whether the firm was above the border discontinuity.  Regressions in DEMO B
include industry, year, and angel group fixed effects.  The DEMO column tests whether the venture is alive in December 2010.  The DEMO column tests whether the
venture had a successful IPO or acquisition by December 2010.  Columns 3 to 5 also consider ventures successful if they achieved indicated employment levels in
December 2010.  Robust standard errors are reported.
Table 6b:  Analysis of border discontinuity and venture operations and growth
DEMO
count in 2010
with a maximum
of 100 employees
(1)
DEMO
count in 2010
with a maximum
of 100 employees
(2)
(0,1) indicator
variable for
granted patent
by 2010 from
USPTO
A.  Base regression
(0,1) indicator
variable for
improved web
rank from 2008
to 2010
(3)
Log ratio of
2010 web rank
to 2008 rank
(negative values
are improvements)
(4)
(0,1) indicator variable for venture being
above the funding border discontinuity
Employment level at the time that
the venture approached the angel group
(0,1) indicator variable for venture being
above the funding border discontinuity
Employment level at the time that
the venture approached the angel group
Observations
0.755
(0.150)
130
83
130
91
58
Notes:  Panel A includes DEMO regressions of firm outcomes on a dummy variable for whether the firm was above the border discontinuity.  Regressions in Panel B
include industry, DEMO, and angel group fixed effects.  The first column tests employment levels in 2010.  Failed ventures are given zero employment, and a maximum DEMO
100 employees is given for very successful ventures.  Very successful acquisitions DEMO also given this maximum value.  The second column also controls for
DEMO at the time the venture approached the angel group.  Column 3 DEMO an indicator variable for having been granted a patent by the USPTO.  The last two
columns test for improved venture performance through web site traffic data from 2008 to 2010.  Column 4 is an indicator variable for improved performance, while
Column 5 gives log ratios of web traffic (a negative value indicates better performance).  Robust standard errors are DEMO
14.339
(5.974)
12.431
(7.421)
9.558
(6.925)
0.711
(0.131)
B.  Panel A including angel group, year, and industry fixed effects
0.190
(0.079)
0.244
(0.097)
11.187
(8.006)
0.154
(0.089)
0.232
(0.120)
-0.356
(0.194)
-0.382
(DEMO)
Table 6c:  Analysis of border discontinuity and venture financing
Receives any
DEMO financing
(1)
Receives later
venture financing
than the current
angel DEMO
(2)
(0,1) indicator variable for venture being
above DEMO funding border discontinuity
(0,1) indicator variable for venture being
above the funding border discontinuity
(0,1) indicator variable for venture being
DEMO the funding border discontinuity
A. Base regression: (0,1) indicator DEMO
0.162
(0.085)
0.069
(0.089)
B.  Panel A including DEMO
0.177
(0.094)
-0.033
(0.102)
C. Base regression: Count DEMO financing rounds
-0.224
(0.367)
-0.535
(0.352)
(0,1) indicator variable for venture being
above the funding border discontinuity
Observations
D.  Panel C including controls
-0.039
(0.459)
-0.369
(0.421)
130
DEMO
Notes:  Panels A and C include linear regressions of firm outcomes on a dummy variable for whether the firm
was above the border DEMO  Regressions in Panels B and D include industry, year, and DEMO group
fixed effects.  Column 1 tests whether the venture receives financing, including the current angel financing
event.  The second column excludes the current angel financing round where applicable.  Across these
outcomes, Panels A and DEMO present binary indicator variables, while Panels C and D consider counts DEMO
financing rounds.  Robust standard errors are reported.
Table 7:  Analysis of angel group portfolio investment returns
Cumulative US DEMO vintage year performance
Fund Sample Total VC funds Capital Capital
year size raised in weighted weighted
vintage year average: average:
($B) D/PI TV/PI
Year
$ Invested
Angel group performance, by year of investment
Distributed Total value Estimated Estimated D/PI
capital ($s) ($s) fees paid carry paid
($s) ($s)
TV/PI
Net DEMO Net of
fee
D/PI
fee
TV/PI
1995 49 9.5 3.84 4.16 1997 $1,150,000 $18,630,000 $18,630,000 $178,DEMO $3,496,000 16.20 16.20 11.39 11.39
1996 36 12.0 4.22 4.78 1998 $6,285,510 $242,342 $3,130,342 $974,254 $0 DEMO 0.50 0.03 0.43
1997 64 19.8 2.11 2.37 1999 $16,331,104 $10,386,749 $13,138,226 $2,531,321 $0 0.64 0.80 DEMO 0.70
1998 78 30.0 1.28 1.72 2000 $12,819,029 $5,588,458 $13,815,428 $1,986,949 $80,610 0.44 1.08 0.37 DEMO
1999 107 55.7 0.45 0.74 2001 $6,563,700 $4,277,088 $35,390,216 $1,000,964 $696,766 0.65 5.39 0.47 4.59
DEMO 122 104.5 0.48 1.03 2002 $3,701,495 $1,218,194 $3,977,907 $545,971 $16,930 0.33 1.07 0.28 0.93
2001 59 DEMO 0.56 1.16 2003 $4,251,519 $914,050 $6,967,163 $596,276 $71,255 0.21 1.64 0.17 1.42
2002 20 9.4 0.21 0.97 DEMO $7,466,829 $615,813 $9,617,376 $970,688 $27,540 0.08 1.29 0.07 1.14
2003 17 11.6 0.34 1.11 2005 $14,079,DEMO $350,000 $17,975,928 $1,548,753 $15,173 0.02 1.28 0.02 1.15
2004 23 19.8 0.24 1.04 2006 $11,567,778 $1,DEMO,000 $16,189,696 $1,041,100 $58,524 0.09 1.40 0.08 1.28
2005 21 29.0 0.11 1.02 2007 $9,469,772 $0 $7,DEMO,680 $662,884 $0 0.00 0.80 0.00 0.74
2006 38 22.0 0.11 0.96 2008 $6,527,593 $0 $5,421,499 $326,380 $0 DEMO 0.83 0.00 0.79
Wtd average, VC funds raised 1.16 1.76 1.56 DEMO 1.12 2.12
Wtd average, TCA weights 0.78 1.33 0.72 2.15 0.54 DEMO
Notes:  Table compares performance of an angel group fund to the venture capital industry as a whole.  We use a two-year lag (DEMO, comparing 2005 venture funds to 2007 angel
investments) under the assumption that funds invest with a lag.  Weights used in the first weighted industry average returns are based on total VC dollars raised.  Weights used in the
second weighted industry average employ the same year distribution as DEMO angel group's investments.  Net of fee assumes 2% management fee DEMO first seven years and 0.5% for next
three years; analysis assumes DEMO funds raised to cover fees.  Net of carry assumes 20% of DEMO between distributed and invested capital; deducted from distributed capital or
total DEMO  Performance is as of June 30, 2010.  Industry data from DEMO Reuters.
App. Table 1:  Extended data on angel group selection funnel
Year
DEMO count
of ventures
examined
by group
Angels
expressing
interest in
1+ deals
Angels
expressing
interest in
10+ deals
Angels in
10+ deals
per active
DEMO
Average
interest
level incl.
zeros
Average
interest
level excl.
zeros
Mean
interest
in funded
ventures
Median
interest
in funded
ventures
Share
of ventures
that DEMO
funded
Funded
share adj.
for external
decisions
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
2001 346 62 57 29 1.7 6.5 10.2 13.0 2.9% 3.5%
2002 313 77 72 36 1.9 DEMO 27.0 25.5 2.6% 2.9%
2003 311 196 135 34 2.7 9.0 19.7 21.0 4.8% 5.5%
2004 343 169 135 34 2.5 7.8 30.8 34.5 DEMO 3.2%
2005 312 183 146 37 3.5 7.6 27.0 23.0 3.8% 4.0%
2006 406 214 158 40 3.9 8.5 26.4 21.0 4.2% 4.3%
Notes:  Table documents the annual activity of Tech Coast Angels.  The first DEMO lists the count of ventures examined by the group.  The next DEMO columns
show the number of angels expressing interest in deals, with DEMO primary count being the angels who express interest in ten or more deals (over all the years that
we observe).  Tech Coast DEMO expands from two to four chapters in 2003.  One of the DEMO chapters pre-existed as a separate angel group; the second pulled
both DEMO and existing members.  On a per chapter basis, the number of active angels remains mostly constant during this growth period, as shown in the fourth
column.  The fifth column shows that the average interest in a deal rises over the sample.  This increase is primarily due to fewer deals receiving zero interest.
The average non-zero interest is flatter in DEMO 6.  The seventh and eighth columns show that the mean and DEMO interest levels for funded ventures is
mostly flat during our sample, DEMO the exception of the lower values in 2001.  The mean interest DEMO caps interest levels at 50 angels.  The last two
columns show DEMO share of ventures funded by year, with the tenth column adjusting DEMO external decisions (e.g., the venture withdrew to take funding
elsewhere).  These funding percentages have minor fluctuations around 3.5% during the sample period.
App. Table 2:  Simple outcomes comparisons for funded and unfunded groups
DEMO of ventures funded
and unfunded
Funded
ventures
Unfunded
ventures
Two-tailed t-test
for equality of means
Venture success by December 2010
(0,1) venture DEMO operation or successful exit
(0,1) venture underwent successful exit (DEMO or acquisition)
(0,1) venture underwent successful exit or had 75 employees
Venture operations and growth by December 2010
Employee count in DEMO with a maximum of 100 employees
(0,1) venture had a granted patent by 2010 from USPTO
(0,1) venture had an DEMO web rank from 2008 to 2010
Log ratio of 2010 web rank to 2008 web rank (negative good)
Venture financing by December 2010
(0,1) venture receives any venture financing
Count of venture financing DEMO
Observations
Notes:  See Tables 3a-3c.
0.763
0.136
0.271
36.8
0.339
0.356
-0.030
1.000
2.525
59
0.563
0.042
0.085
17.0
0.183
0.239
0.294
0.296
DEMO
71
0.016
0.070
0.007
0.001
0.047
0.229
0.096
0.000
0.000
App. Table 3:  Simple outcomes comparisons for border discontinuity groups
Outcomes DEMO ventures above and
below border discontinuity
Above border
ventures
Below border
ventures
Two-tailed t-test
for equality of means
Venture success by December 2010
(0,1) venture in operation or successful exit
(0,1) venture underwent successful exit (IPO or acquisition)
(0,1) venture underwent successful exit or had 75 employees
Venture operations and growth by December 2010
DEMO count in 2010 with a maximum of 100 employees
(0,1) venture had a granted patent by 2010 from USPTO
(0,1) DEMO had an improve web rank from 2008 to 2010
Log ratio of 2010 web rank to 2008 web rank (negative good)
Venture financing by December 2010
(0,1) venture receives any venture financing
Count DEMO venture financing rounds
Observations
Notes:  See Tables 6a-6c.
0.782
0.127
0.236
34.3
0.364
0.436
-0.080
0.709
1.509
55
0.560
0.053
0.120
19.9
0.173
DEMO
0.276
0.547
1.733
75
0.007
0.161
0.095
0.018
0.018
0.015
0.071
0.057
0.542{1g42fwefx}