Downloaded from rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 27, 2011
Neural correlates of economic game playing
Frank Krueger, Jordan Grafman and Kevin McCabe
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 2008 363, 3859-3874
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0165
References
Rapid response
Subject DEMO
Email alerting service
This article cites 113 articles, 27 of which DEMO be accessed free
http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/363/1511/3859.full.html#ref-list-1
Article cited in:
http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/363/1511/3859.full.html#related-urls
This article is DEMO to access
Respond to this article
http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/letters/submit/royptb;363/1511/3859
Articles on similar topics can be found in the DEMO collections
 neuroscience (437 articles)
 behaviour (1762 articles)
 cognition (436 articles)
Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the top
DEMO corner of the article or click here
To subscribe to Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B go to: http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/subscriptions
This journal is © 2008 The Royal Society
Downloaded from rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 27, 2011
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2008) 363, 3859–3874
doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0165
Published online 1 October 2008
Review
Neural correlates of economic game playing
Frank Krueger1,2, Jordan Grafman1 and Kevin McCabe2,*
1 Cognitive Neuroscience Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1440, USA
2 The Center for the Study of Neuroeconomics, George Mason University, 4400 University Drive,
MSN: 1G3, Fairfax, VA 22030, USA
The theory of games provides a mathematical formalization of strategic choices, which have been
studied in both economics and neuroscience, and more recently has become the focus of
neuroeconomics experiments with human and non-human actors. This DEMO reviews the results
from a number of game experiments that establish a unitary system for forming subjective expected
utility maps in the brain, and acting on these maps to produce choices. Social situations require the
brain DEMO build an understanding of the other person using neuronal mechanisms that share affective
and intentional mental states. These systems allow subjects to better predict DEMO players’ choices,
and allow them to modify their subjective utility maps to value pro-social strategies. New results for a
trust game are presented, which show that the trust relationship includes systems common to both
trusting DEMO trustworthy behaviour, but they also show that the relative temporal positions DEMO ﬁrst and
second players require computations unique to that role.
Keywords: DEMO; game theory; trust; reward; social;
functional magnetic resonance imaging; oxytocin
1. INTRODUCTION
Neuroeconomics brings together research in neuro-
science and economics to better understand how
actors make decisions by unifying mathematical con-
structs DEMO behavioural measurements (McCabe 2002;
Glimcher & Rustichini 2004; Camerer et al.2005).
Neuroeconomics research includes the study of social
decision making or DEMO actors make decisions when
other actors are affected by the outcome, DEMO/or other
actors are also making decisions, and uses techniques
such DEMO functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),
positron emission topography (PET), transcranial mag-
netic stimulation (TMS) and pharmacological interven-
tions. Game theory, formalized by von Neuman &
Morgenstern (1944), has been very useful in helping to
formulate experiments, and to interpret the decisions
that actors make, and the neural signatures of these
decisions in the brain. In studying decisions in an
experiment, neuroeconomists are interested in recover-
ing the neural computations/algorithm that subjects use
to choose actions that ultimately DEMO in outcomes. One
of the goals of neuroeconomics is to provide a consistent
biologically based connection between our functional
and computational understanding of strategic DEMO
Games can be analysed in different ways based on
ways that strategies end up being chosen. Strategies may
have evolved based on their ﬁtness DEMO the game ecology;
they may be learnt through repeated interactions, DEMO they
may be deduced from the logic of the game. Each of
* Author for correspondence (kmccabe@gmu.edu).
One contribution of 10 to a Theme Issue ‘Neuroeconomics’.
these approaches is likely to involve a differential
emphasis DEMO the computations performed by a unitary
neural system instantiated in the brain. For example,
evolved strategies are likely to be driven more by
DEMO from sensory systems to expected utility
maps and onto response systems, DEMO strategies will
add a reinforcement learning strategy over both the
probability that an event will occur and the contingent
action that produces the highest DEMO reward, while
deduced strategies are likely to involve more symbolic or
DEMO encodings and simulations of other people and
will require evaluative attention to intermediate results in
serial, what-if, computations. The human brain is likely
DEMO have evolved a functional capacity to choose strategies
using neural systems operating at all three levels.
In this paper, we ﬁrst brieﬂy summarize the
description and interpretation of neuroeconomics
games under game theoretic aspects including experi-
DEMO designs for the measurement and control of
expected utility. Then, we DEMO experiments
investigating primate behaviour in games against a
computer and with other primates, before we review
the literature on human economic game playing and its
neural correlates. Finally, we present new fMRI
ﬁndings regarding brain regions particularly involved
in trust and reciprocity during economic exchange.
(a) Describing DEMO interpreting
neuroeconomics games
The games that have been the focus of study so far by
neuroeconomics are all two-actor games that are either
competitive DEMO, such as matching pennies game
3859
This journal is q 2008 DEMO Royal Society
Downloaded from rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 27, 2011
3860 F. Krueger et al. Review. Economic game playing
(a)
P1
(c)
P1
W
DEMO
P2
H
T
I
P2
DI
2–C
2
1
–C
0
–2
(d )
P1
P1
C
D
2
C
0
0
31
DEMO
3
1
2
+1
H
+1
–1
–1 +1
T
+1
–1
1
2
–1
Figure 1. Matrix games: (a) matching pennies game (MPG: H, head; T, tail), (b) rock–scissor–paper game (RSPG: R, rock; S,
scissor; P, paper), (c) inspection game (ISG: W, work; S, shirk; I, inspect; DI, do not inspect; C, cost of inspection), and
(d ) Prisoner’s Dilemma game (PDG: C, cooperate; D, defect). P1, player 1; P2, player 2.
(MPG), rock–scissor–paper game (RSPG) and inspec-
tion game (ISG), or cooperative games, such as
Prisoner’s Dilemma game (PDG), equal split game
(ESG), ultimatum game (UG), dictator game (DG),
investment game (IG) and trust game (TG). In the
following, DEMO look at both how these games are formally
deﬁned and how game theory analyses these games.
The MPG, RSPG, ISG and PDG in DEMO 1 are
presented as strategic form games; each player has to
DEMO make a choice from a set of choices.
In particular, player DEMO must choose a row from the set
S1Z{r 1, ., r n}, where n is the number of rows in the
matrix. Call this choice player 1’s strategy or denote it
s12S1. At the same DEMO, player 2 must choose a
column from the set S2Z{c1, ., cm}, where m is the
number of columns in the matrix. DEMO this choice
player 2’s strategy or denote it s22S2. The pair of
strategies (s1, s2) is called a pure strategy proﬁle.
Strategy proﬁles determine a pay-off or utility for
each player, denoted U1(s1, DEMO) and U2(s1, s2). For
example, in the PDG (ﬁgure 1d ), the rows and
columns have been labelled cooperate and defect and
the pay-offs are displayed in the matrix so that U1
(cooperate, defect)Z0 and U2 (cooperate, defect)Z3.
In strictly competitive games, also known as zero-sum
games, each outcome has the property DEMO the sum of
pay-offs is zero. The only options are to draw (0, 0) or for
one player to win and the other to lose (x, Kx).
Examples of strictly competitive games include DEMO
MPG (ﬁgure 1a) and RSPG (ﬁgure 1b). In the DEMO,
row and column players simultaneously choose heads
(H) or tails (T). If they match, the row player wins (C1)
and the column player loses (K1). If they do not match,
the row player loses and the column player wins. The
RSPG DEMO similar except now players simultaneously
choose rock (R), scissors (S) or paper (P). If they choose
the same, they tie (0), but otherwise rock wins over
scissors, scissors wins over DEMO and paper wins
over rock. Optimal strategies involve randomization (or
unanticipated DEMO) resulting in uncertainty as to who
will actually win. We assume DEMO nature will favour
players who can ﬁnd any inherent advantage in these
games, and therefore the brains of these players will be
designed to ﬁnd and exploit these advantages. One well-
known system for exploiting advantages DEMO through
reinforcement learning (Sutton & Barto 1998).
In the ISG, the row player (acting as an employee)
must decide whether to work (W) or shirk (S)
(ﬁgure 1c). If DEMO employee works, he gains 1 no matter
what. But work is DEMO to the employee, who prefers to
shirk and gain 2, unless the employee gets caught by the
boss and gets 0. The column DEMO, acting as the boss,
must decide to inspect (I), the only way to detect
shirking, or the boss could choose not to inspect (DI).
The cost of inspection is KC. If the boss inspects (I)
when the employee works, the boss gains DEMO, but if
the boss inspects when the employee shirks the boss
DEMO KC. However, if the boss fails to inspect (DI)
when the employee shirks, the boss loses K2, but if the
boss DEMO not to inspect and the employee works,
the boss gains 2. As in the strictly competitive games
above, the optimal strategies for the employee and the
boss will involve randomization.
In the PDG, two players must simultaneously decide
to either cooperate or defect (Axelrod 1984; ﬁgure DEMO ).
If they both cooperate, they do better, with a DEMO
(2, 2) compared with (1, 1) when they both defect.
However, each player’s optimal strategy is to always
defect and get 3 if the other player cooperates and avoid
getting 0 if the DEMO player defects.
The ESG, UG, DG, IG and TG in DEMO 2 are
presented as extensive form games; each player has to
DEMO make a choice at each of the decision nodes,
n i, assigned to that player. The strategy sets, S1 and S2,
DEMO Trans. R. Soc. B (2008)
(b)P1
RS P
P2S
P
R
0
+1 0 –1
–1 0 +1
–1 +1 0
DEMO –1 0
0–1 +1
+1
–1
Downloaded from rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 27, 2011
Review. Economic game playing F. Krueger et al.
3861
(a
)(P1
b)
$2
n1
$5
P2
A
t1
$8
$2
n2
$P1
$P2
(c)
$0
t1
$10
$0
P2
RA
t2
$0 $5
$0 $5
t3
n3
= DEMO amount for player 1
$ amount for player 2
R
t4
$0
$0
n1
$10
y
$0
$10
t2
P1 P1(d
$0
t1
DEMO
$10
n1
y
$10
P2
$0
n2
t2
$0
$40
z
$30
t3
$30
$10
)P1
$0
t1
$10
$10
n1
$0
$10
t2
P2
n2
$0
$40
$0 ≤ y ≤ $10 amount sent and DEMO ≤ z ≤ $3y amount returned
A
(e)
$15
t3
DEMO
$25
$10
$0
Figure 2. Bargaining and trust games: (a) DEMO split game (ESG), (b) ultimatum game (UG), (DEMO) dictator game (DG),
(d ) investment game (IG), (e) trust game (TG). P1, player 1; P2, player 2; A, accept; R, reject; ni , decision nodes; ti ,
terminal nodes.
now consist of all the different combinations DEMO choices
that a player can make. It is still reasonable to think of
the strategy proﬁle (s1, s2) as being chosen simul-
taneously, but in making these choices players will take
into account the sequential order of the moves. In an
extensive form game, a strategy proﬁle picks a path
from an initial decision node through the game tree DEMO a
terminal node {t1, ., t k}, where k is DEMO number of
different outcomes in the game. Similar to the strategic
form games, players have preferences over the out-
comes in the extensive form games, or equivalently over
the strategy proﬁles that produce these outcomes.
In the ESG, player 1 is assigned to the decision node
n1 and player 2 to the decision nodes n2 and n3
(ﬁgure 2a). Player 1 decides whether to offer player 2
an equal split of ($5, $5) or an unequal split of ($8, $2).
DEMO 2 must then decide whether to accept or reject
the offer. A play through the game tree is a connected
path of branches through DEMO decision nodes that end at
one of the terminal (or outcome) nodes labelled as t 1
through t 4, with a resulting pay-off to player 1 of U1(t i )
and to player 2 of U2(t i ) for reaching the terminal node
t i. DEMO example, in the ESG, the choice of the branch
labelled R (reject) by player 1 and the branch labelled
A (accept) DEMO player 2 results in the terminal node t 4
and the pay-offs U1(t 4 )Z8 and U2( t 4 )Z2.
In the UG, player 1 must propose how to divide a
ﬁxed amount of money, say $10 (Gu¨ th et al. 1982;
ﬁgure 2b)DEMO Once player 1 proposes, player 2 can either
accept or reject. DEMO player 2 rejects the proposal, both
players earn zero; otherwise, DEMO players earn the split
proposed by player 1. The same logic applies to the
ESG (ﬁgure 2a), but now the offers are restricted to
either ($5, $5) or ($8, $2). Game theory predicts that
player 2 should accept any positive offer, and player 1,
reasoning this way, should offer player 2 some small
amount, DEMO as the proposal of ($8, $2) in the ESG.
Alternatively, the evolution of competitive instincts
may cause player 2 to reject unequal DEMO in favour of
more equal offers. While a rejection is costly, DEMO both
players get nothing, the threat of rejection often will
improve DEMO player’s terms of trade (Hoffman et al.1998).
Further evidence for DEMO evolution of inequity aversion
has been reported by Brosnan & De Waal (2003) in their
experiments with capuchin monkeys. Inequity aversion
may lead DEMO a willingness to engage in costly punishment
(or negative reciprocity) in order to protect one from
aggressive behaviour. Note, however, within the DEMO is
the implicit property right that allows player 2 to reject
the offer without the threat of retaliation. While both
players are clearly better DEMO getting something, competi-
tive instincts can cause them to get nothing. DEMO
suggests that an ability to deduce the mental state of the
other person may help players calibrate their decisions
to each other’s mental state DEMO order to avoid getting
nothing ( Frith & Frith 1999).
The DG was introduced as a means to control for
the effects of DEMO threats in the UG (ﬁgure 2c;
Forsythe et al. 1994)DEMO In this game, a person is given
$10 by the experimenter DEMO is asked how he/she would
like to divide the money between himself/herself and an
anonymous person.
In the IG, two players are given some amount of
money, say $10. Player 1 is then given the opportunity
to send none, some or all of his/her $10 to player 2
(Berg et al. 1995; ﬁgure 2d ). Whatever amount of
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2008)
P1
$0
n1
$10
P2
n2
t1
X
P2
RA
t2
$0
$0
$0
$10
DEMO
n3
$0 ≤ x ≤ $10 amount offered
R
t4
$0
$0
Downloaded from rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 27, 2011
3862 F. Krueger et al. Review. Economic game playing
money player 1 sends is increased by the DEMO
by some amount, say tripled, e.g. if player 1 sends all
$10, then player 2 will get $30. Player 2 then decides
how much of the tripled money to send back to player 1.
The DEMO is a simpler version of the IG where player 1
is restricted to the option of sending nothing or sending
all $10, and if the $10 is sent, then player 2 is restricted
to either send nothing back or send half of the tripled
amount, or $15, DEMO (ﬁgure 2e). Game theory predicts
that player 2 will send DEMO back, and that player 1
will realize this and send nothing DEMO well.
Alternatively, the evolution of reciprocity behaviours
may cause the second DEMO to feel a social obligation
towards player 1’s trust, i.e. by DEMO money. Note
that the terms of exchange can be explicit, negotiated
DEMO a previous game, or implicit, established by social
norms. Consequently, DEMO 2’s decision to cheat can
be against either an explicit or implicit standard of
reciprocity. While both players are clearly better off
by extending DEMO and being willing to reciprocate,
their competitive instincts can cause them to get
nothing. This again suggests that an ability to deduce
the DEMO state of the other person may help player
1’s decisions when to trust and may help player 2’s
decisions when to reciprocate.
U1ðs1
(b) Game theoretic analysis of neuroeconomics
games
Nash (1950) proposed a theory to predict player’s
behaviour in matrix games in terms of the Nash
DEMO (NE) of the game. A NE in pure strategies
for a two-person matrix game is a strategy proﬁle
; s2Þ that satisﬁes the DEMO conditions:
; 
s2
Þ
RU1ðs1;

s2
Þ
DEMO all s1 2S1
ðs1

ð1:1Þ
and
ð1:2Þ
Z defect is the
only NE in pure strategies for the PDG (ﬁgure 1d ).
Furthermore, there are no pure strategy proﬁles that
satisfy (i) and (ii) for the ISG or the MPG.
Nash (1950) recognized this problem and extended
his equilibrium concept to allow for mixed DEMO, or
probability distributions over S1 and S2. In two-person
games, with two choices each, we can deﬁne a mixed
strategy as follows. Let DS1Z{( p1, p2)R0: p1Cp2Z1},
where we interpret p1 as the probability of playing
the pure row strategy r 1, and p2 as the probability of
playing the pure row strategy r 2, then p2DS1 is a
mixed strategy for player 1 and, similarly, q2DS2Z
DEMO(q1, q2)R0: q1Cq2Z1} is a mixed strategy for player 2.
Given a mixed strategy proﬁle ( p, q), we can deﬁne the
expected utility for player 1 as follows:
U2ðs1 ; for DEMO s2 2S2:
It is easy to verify that sZ defect and s

s2
Þ
RU2ðs1 s2
Þ

;

EU1
Cp2q1U1ðr2; c1
Þ
Cp2q2U1ðr2; c2Þ:
ð1:3Þ
Similarly, the expected utility for player 2 is as follows:
ð
p; qÞ Zp1q1U1ðr1; DEMO
Þ
Cp1q2U1ðr1; c2
Þ
EU2
ð
p; qÞ Zp1q1U2ðr1; c1
DEMO; c1
Þ
Cp1q2U2ðr1; c2
Þ
Þ
Cp2q2U2ðr2; c2Þ:
ð1:DEMO
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2008)
1
2
A NE DEMO mixed strategies for a two-person game,
with each person having two pure strategies, is a
mixed strategy proﬁle ( p, q)that DEMO
following conditions:
EU1ðp; qÞREU1ðp; qÞ for all p 2DS1 ð1:5Þ
and
EU2
ð
p; q
Þ
REU2
ð
p; qÞ
DEMO all q 2DS2:
ð1:6Þ
Note that a pure strategy NE is a mixed strategy NE
with all the probability weight on one DEMO the pure
strategies. Nash (1950) proved that every strategic
game has a NE in mixed strategies and that every
pure strategy, which has a positive weight in a mixed
strategy NE, must have the same expected utility
for the player, for example EU1(W, q)ZEU1(DEMO, q).
Using this result, it is easy to solve for pZ(1KC, C )
and qZ(0.5, 0.5) for the DEMO, with 0!C!1,
pZ(0.5, 0.5) and qZ(0.5, 0.5) for the MPG, and
pZ(1/3, 1/3, 1/DEMO) and qZ(1/3, 1/3, 1/3) for the RSPG.
We can now write the pure strategy choices for a
player DEMO an extensive form game as a choice of branch
at each of his/her decision nodes. So, for example, in
the ESG, player 1 has the strategy set S1Z{E, wE }
while player 2 has the strategy set S2Z{(A, a), (A, r),
(R, a) and (R, r)}, where the ﬁrst element of each pair is
the choice made at n2 and the second DEMO is the
choice made at n3. We can deﬁne a mixed strategy
proﬁle ( p, q) and a NE proﬁle ( p, q) as before. Note
that, for the ESG, there are a number of NE proﬁles
including (E,(A, a), (E,(A, r)) and (wE,(R, a)).
Selten (1975) offered as reﬁnement of NE the subgame
perfect Nash equilibrium (or SPNE) of the game. In
the game shown in ﬁgure 2, we DEMO ﬁnd the SPNE of
thegamebyusing backward induction. So,for
example, in DEMO ESG, we can start with the nodes n2
and n3 and DEMO what player 2’s optimal choice is at each.
The answer is for player 2 to always accept or (A, a).
But given DEMO choice, player 1 should now play E
resulting in the SPNE DEMO (E,(A, a)). A similar
unique SPNE proﬁle holds for the UG, resulting in
player 1 asking and getting 10Ke, DEMO e is the
smallest divisible monetary unit.
If a game is repeated a number of times, this can lead
to new strategies by players, in particular, where the
strategy chosen for the current game is DEMO conditional
on previous plays of the game. For example, in the
DEMO, the tit-for-tat strategy studied extensively by
Axelrod (1984) has a DEMO who chooses to cooperate
in the ﬁrst play of the game and then in every play
thereafter it has the player play whatever his/DEMO
opponent played in the previous play. While tit-for-tat is
not a NE for a ﬁnitely repeated PDG, it can (when
played against similar DEMO strategies) result in
better pay-offs for long periods of play than DEMO
defecting in each period.
(c) Experimental design for the measurement
and control of expected utility
Any game can be turned into an experiment DEMO
assigning subjects (either human or non-humans) to
the role of one of the players in the game. Subjects
make decisions, either by choosing strategies or by
choosing an action at each decision node in these DEMO
Downloaded from rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 27, 2011
Review. Economic game playing F. Krueger et al.
3863
Finally, subjects are incentivized by paying them a
salient reward for each outcome reached. Treatment
conditions can then be varied DEMO observe their effect on
strategy choices. There are two important concerns in
designing a game theory experiment: the ﬁrst involves
the ability to control or measure individuals’ subjective
values over outcomes in the game, and the second is
the ability to control or account for the expansion of DEMO
strategy space due to repeated play of the game.
Generally, human DEMO are incentivized with a
monetary pay-off at each outcome while animals are
incentivized with food (or juice) pay-offs. This allows the
experimenter to DEMO a utility function over outcomes
that is sufﬁcient for studying pure strategy choices and
pure strategy NE. This induction procedure assumes
that subjects prefer DEMO of the pay-off to less and that
their decision costs of making a choice is low relatively
to reward (Smith 1976). If such an assumption is
suspected, pay-offs can be increased, through, for
example, food deprivation in animal experiments, and/
or explicit models of DEMO cost can be introduced to
examine the data (e.g. Smith & DEMO 1993).
When we consider mixed strategy NE, it is no DEMO
certain that paying money induces the right preferences,
since expected utility is a probabilistic weighting of the
subject’s true utility function. We can DEMO this problem
either by estimating a subject’s underlying utility
function (Holt & Laury 2005) or by inducing such
preferences by paying subjects in DEMO using the
lottery procedure (Berg et al. 1986). Both approaches
DEMO lead to problems. Estimating preferences makes
additional assumptions, which are routinely DEMO in
experiments and can lead to very different estimates of
expected utility based on the elicitation technique used
(Berg et al. 2005). Inducing preferences also makes
additional assumptions as it requires subjects to make
calculations DEMO are independent from their preferences,
thus changing the nature of their decision and increasing
their decision costs.
2. PRIMATES PLAYING ECONOMIC GAMES
While DEMO species of animals have been studied in
terms of games, the DEMO evolutionarily to humans
are the other primates. First, we consider some DEMO the
single-cell ﬁring studies that have been conducted
while primates played games against a computer, and
then we consider some of the experimental studies of
primate behaviour in games with other primates.
(a) Primate behaviour DEMO games against
a computer
Lee et al.(2004) examined the strategy DEMO of rhesus
monkeys while playing a computer opponent in the
MPG. The computer played three different strategies.
Strategy 1 played the NE strategy (1/2, 1/2), making the
monkey indifferent between playing H or T. Strategy 2
examined the monkeys play to see whether it could
DEMO any bias towards one of the choices, and if so
exploited DEMO bias. Strategy 3 extended strategy 2 by
looking for serial correlation in the monkeys’ choices
and exploiting this bias as well. When the monkeys
DEMO against strategy 1, they tended to be biased
towards one of DEMO target choices and did not play the
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2008)
NE strategy. When the monkeys played strategy 2 they
adjusted their strategies to play 50–50 as predicted by
NE, but their choices were serially correlated as they
tended to stick with a winning choice DEMO switch from a
losing choice. Finally, when the monkeys played strategy
DEMO they again adjusted their strategies to become less
serially correlated and thus predictable. In a follow-up
experiment, monkeys played the RSPG against a
computer again following the three strategies (Lee
2005). Again, the monkeys DEMO their strategies to
the strategy of the computer, although this time DEMO
playing against strategy 2, the monkeys tended to best
respond to DEMO computer’s last play of the game.
Lee and his colleagues found that neurons in the
dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and the
anterior DEMO cortex (ACC) were involved in
encoding strategic choices (Barraclough et DEMO 2004;
Seo & Lee 2007). The authors found that a reinforce-
ment learning model predicted the monkeys’
behaviour, but the adaptive feature of the monkeys’
responses to the different computer strategies was not
explained DEMO this model. Soltani et al. (2006) provided
a neuronal model of monkey choices for the MPG.
Their model adapts Wang’s (2002) attractor DEMO
model where recurrentexcitationwithinalocal
population of neurons together with an inhibitory
network between populations can implement a ramp-
ing-to-threshold decision process. Within their model,
DEMO et al. (2006) found that they can capture the
adaptive changes in strategy choices if they include a
belief-dependent learning rule that updates DEMO synap-
tic strengths of neurons selecting for both chosen and
unchosen actions. The demonstration of a biologically
feasible computational process that can explain the
DEMO choices of monkeys brings us one step
closer to understanding how strategies can be learned,
but it remains to be seen if the DEMO in this
case can be generalized to games with many or even a
continuum of strategies, or to strategies in extensive
form games. In particular, belief learning may have
to be combined with more explicit accounts of
decision costs.
Dorris & Glimcher (2004) examined the behaviour
of DEMO and humans playing the ISG as they vary
inspection costs and thus the mixed strategy of the
worker. They found very similar behaviour in DEMO
who played other humans, in humans playing a
computer strategy (similar to strategy 2 in Lee et al.
2004) and in monkeys playing the same computer
strategy. In every treatment, subjects’ average 20 trial
plays were predicted by the mixed strategy NE for
inspection costs of 0.5 DEMO above, but workers
(monkeys and humans) tended to shirk above DEMO
equilibrium prediction when inspection costs were 0.4
and lower. However, in DEMO neurons in the
anterior parietal cortex (LIP area) of the monkeys
using a choice design similar to Platt & Glimcher
(1999), they found that the average ﬁring rates of these
neurons encode the relative DEMO desirability of the
choices to shirk versus the choice to work. The authors
conclude that even when subjects’ strategies deviated
from the NE prediction DEMO still played according to
the relative expected utility calculations in LIP, DEMO
they now call physiological expected utility.
Downloaded from rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 27, 2011
3864 F. Krueger et al. Review. Economic game playing
(b) Primate behaviour in games with
other DEMO
A number of behavioural experiments involving
exchange type games have been run with monkeys.
De Waal (1997) found that capuchins would engage in
DEMO sharing through facilitated taking in a
delayed exchange task where monkeys had alternate
access to a source of food. In a related task, de Waal &
Berger (2000) showed that capuchins will increase
facilitated taking when they have been helped by
another monkey to acquire food in DEMO cooperative bar
pull. When capuchin monkeys are allowed to trade
tokens for food, Brosnan & De Waal (2003) demon-
strated that monkeys will reject an exchange with the
experimenter after they observe another monkey
getting DEMO better deal. Recently, Jensen et al. (2007)
looked at chimpanzees’ strategies in the ESG. The
authors found that monkey responders accepted any
DEMO no matter how unequal; however, monkey
proposers did not take maximal advantage of the
responders’ strategies. Why did not chimpanzees
show inequity aversioninthe DEMO? Brosnan &
de Waal (2004) argued that monkeys housed together
for 30 years do not exhibit inequity aversion, in the
trade for tokens task, and it may be that such long-term
groups have worked out repeated game strategies that
no longer require inequity responses. Overall, these
results suggest that monkeys will choose reciprocal
strategies to improve cooperative gains; while monkeys
show inequity aversion, it is less clear whether monkeys
will act on inequity aversion in bargaining games and
this may depend on DEMO or not they have had time
to develop alternative repeat game strategies.
3. HUMANS PLAYING ECONOMIC GAMES
Experiments on human subjects have focused on
DEMO two-person forms of classic social dilemma
games involving the conﬂict between self-interest and
mutual interest. The most well-known social dilemma
is the PDG, but from an economics perspective, more
interesting social dilemma games are those that capture
human exchange such as the UG, IG and TG. In
studying human exchange, it is important to have a
control condition, the DEMO, which can help sort out the
role of sympathy as compared DEMO reciprocity.
(a) Human behaviour in the Prisoner’s dilemma
game and its neural correlates
The PDG has been studied extensively with experi-
ments (Axelrod 1984, 1997) which report on experi-
ments where subjects submitted strategies DEMO play other
subjects’ strategies in a repeated PD game, and report
DEMO subsequent agent-based models of PD strategies. In
his tournaments, Axelrod (1984) found that a simple
strategy called tit-for-tat (submitted by Rapoport &
Chammah 1965) ﬁnished ﬁrst. This strategy was very
simple; itstartsbycooperating andthenmimics
DEMO its opponent did in the previous period.
Note that the worst-case scenario, if tit-for-tat plays the
always defect strategy, is the (C, DEMO) pay-off in the ﬁrst
period, but this is more than offset by tit-for-tat’s ability
to cooperate, and reach (C, C), with other cooperative
strategies. More recently, Bo (2005) has studied the
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2008)
subjects’ behaviour under more controlled conditions
in both one-shot and repeated play lasting either a ﬁnite
number of DEMO (ﬁnite horizon games), or when there
was a ﬁxed probability DEMO play will end on a given
round (inﬁnite horizon games). DEMO author found that
subjects cooperated only 10 per cent of the time in a
one-shot PDG, but ﬁrst-period cooperation increased
to roughly 35 per cent in games lasting four plays, but
fell back to 10 per cent by the fourth play. Finally, ﬁrst-
period cooperation started at 46 per cent in games with
a 3/4 chance of continued play, and stayed statistically
higher (approx. 30%) for all periods compared with DEMO
10 per cent rate found in one-shot or cooperative rates
of play in the last period of ﬁnite horizon games.
Neuroeconomics and social neuroscience DEMO
ments have begun to study some of the neural
underpinnings of economic game playing. Using
fMRI, Rilling et al. (2002) scanned the brains of
women who played other women (or a computer) for at
DEMO 20 rounds of a PDG. Subjects who experienced
continued (C, C) outcomes showed higher activation in
the ventral striatum, but subjects who DEMO cooperate
also showed a decrease in ventral striatum activity when
they saw that their opponent played defect. Activity in
the ventral striatum is consistent DEMO a reinforcement
learning model where subjects expect that cooperation
will result in the higher (C, C) pay-off. Orbitofrontal
cortex activity was correlated with the evaluation of
outcomes by post-scan interviews with peak magni-
tudes of DEMO BOLD responses the highest at CC
outcomes, reported by subjects as DEMO desirable, next
highest at CD outcomes, third highest at DC outcomes
and the lowest ﬁt DD outcomes, reported by subjects
as least desirable. Finally, activation in the rostral ACC
was more active when subjects choose to cooperate
after their partner cooperated; this is consistent with
the role of the ACC in the detection of cognitive
conﬂict (Carter et al. 2000). In a follow-up experiment
by Rilling et al. (2004b), subjects played repeated one-
shot PDGs with different counterparts. The fMRI
experiment DEMO the earlier ﬁndings and strength-
ened the conclusion that subjects in repeat PDGs learn
to cooperate by using neural-based reinforcement
learning strategies. Finally, Rilling et al. (2007) have
also looked at the effect of (C, D) outcomes on subjects
who played cooperatively only to be defected DEMO The
authors ﬁnd that male subjects who scored high on the
Levenson total psychopathy test showed less amygdala
activation when encountering a (C, DEMO) outcome, and
were less cooperative over all. It may be that amygdala
responses to (C, D) cause subjects to avoid behaviours
that can lead to this outcome by either defecting against
a cooperative partner (and thus inviting retaliation) or
cooperating against a non-cooperative partner.
In addition, a number of pharmacological inter-
ventions have been studied in subjects playing PDG- or
PD-like games. For example, Tse & Bond (2002a)
DEMO that a single dose of reboxetine, a noradrenaline
reuptake inhibitor that DEMO the extracellular
concentration of the neurotransmitter noradrenaline,
resulted in more cooperative play in subjects playing a
repeated PD-like game. In a follow-up study, Tse &
Bond (2002b) looked at the effects of a two-week
treatment with citalopram, a serotonin reuptake
Downloaded from rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 27, 2011
inhibitor, which also resulted DEMO subjects playing more
cooperatively in a PD-like game. Moreover, Wood et DEMO
(2006) found that subjects deprived of L-tryptophan,
and thus having lower serotonin levels in the brain,
were less cooperative in a DEMO PDG than subjects
who were not. However, lower cooperation was only
DEMO on the ﬁrst day of a two-day study, suggesting
that subjects DEMO are L-tryptophan depleted will ﬁnd
ways to adjust back to a more cooperative strategy.
(b) Human behaviour in the dictator game and its
DEMO correlates
In the DG, a person is given $10 by the DEMO
and is asked how he/she would like to divide the money
between himself/herself and an anonymous person
( Forsythe et al. 1994)DEMO When this game is run as an
experiment only 21 per cent of the subjects kept all the
money. The money that is sent DEMO sometimes seen as a
measure of altruism, or at least sympathy, that subjects
have to one another. Alternatively, Hoffman et al.
(1996) hypothesized that our evolved social brain
would be sensitive to the likelihood DEMO being seen as
and/or found out to be non-cooperative based on one’s
group behaviour. The authors called the inverse of this
likelihood ‘social DEMO and hypothesized that the
greater the social distance, the lower the DEMO of
being typed as non-cooperative, and the more likely a
subject DEMO keep all the money. In their double-blind
experiment, designed to maximize DEMO distance,
subjects were much more self-interested with a
majority, 64 DEMO cent, keeping all the money.
Both the Forsythe et al. (1994) and the Hoffman
et al. (1996) experiments can be criticized owing to the
use of ‘house money’. Cherry et al. (2002) examined
DEMO giving when the dictator had to earn their
money in the experiment, before deciding how much to
send. Using a double-blind control, they DEMO that 95
per cent of the dictators kept the money, suggesting
DEMO a subject’s sense of ownership or entitlement to the
money will affect how much they will give. In social
psychology, equity theory can be used to explain the
results from these and many similar experiments
(Adams 1965). Equity theory assumes that subjects
in an experiment assign subjective DEMO to the
contribution of themselves and others and expect to
receive earnings for themselves, and for other subjects,
to be proportional to their relative contributions. When
subjects fail to earn what they expect, or they see other
subjects failing to earn what they expect those subjects
should DEMO, this can cause a negative emotion, which
subjects may try to avoid or which may motivate
corrective action. When using house money, subjects
may view showing up for the experiment as the major
contribution, while earning money may shift subjects’
views to contributions made in the experiment.
DEMO a recent fMRI experiment, Spitzer et al. (2007)
investigated brain activities of dictators when there was
a possibility that they could be DEMO by recipients
compared with dictators who were safe from punish-
ment. Subjects were given an additional amount of
money each round, but, in DEMO punishment condition,
recipients were told they could either keep this money
or use it to reduce their dictator’s earning. In particular,
one DEMO of money spent by the recipient reduces the
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2008)
Review. Economic game playing F. Krueger et al.
dictator’s earning by ﬁve units. The threat of punish-
ment effectively provides an DEMO consequence to
getting caught, causing dictators to be signiﬁcantly
more generous. DEMO authors used the Machiavelli
instrument (Christie & Geis 1970) to predict how
selﬁsh subjects will be towards others. They found that
subjects with DEMO Mach scores showed the greatest
transfer differences between conditions. Furthermore,
the higher the subject’s Mach score was, the greater was
the amount of insula activity. Finally, the right DLPFC
and right caudate nucleus showed increased brain
activity as the average transfer difference between
conditions became larger. It DEMO be interesting to
see how these results change when dictators are able to
earn their money.
(c) Human behaviour in the ultimatum game DEMO
its neural correlates
When the UG was ﬁrst run with cash-motivated
subjects, Gu¨ th et al. (1982) observed that the modal
proposal was to split the money 50–50. This result has
been replicated dozens of DEMO For example, Forsythe
et al. (1994) compared offers in the DEMO with those in
the DG and showed that the 50–50 proposals in the
UG are largely a consequence of player 2’s ability to
reject DEMO 1’s proposal. Thus, to reduce the risk of
rejection, player 1 makes more conciliatory offers.
Hoffman et al. (1994) tested the predictions DEMO social
exchange theory in the UG. The authors included two
social exchange conditions. A contest in which subjects
earned the right to be player DEMO and a socially deﬁned
seller/buyer exchange roles for players 1 and 2 were
compared with a baseline condition with random
assignment to the DEMO player position and neutral role
deﬁnitions. In the baseline condition, half DEMO the offers
were at $5 with a mean offer to player 2 of $4.37. By
comparison, the property right assignments with buyer/
seller roles resulted in less than 10 per cent of the offers
at DEMO with a mean offer to player 2 of $3.08, which
was DEMO by authors to have the strongest equity
norm effect. In both cases, rejection rates were low, at
approximately 10 per cent, suggesting that ﬁrst players’
low offers were no more risky. This suggests further
that DEMO players implicitly recognized the right of
their counterpart to offer less when they had earned
the right to do so.
In an fMRI study, McCabe et al. (2001) studied
brain activation in humans who played DEMO two-
person simpliﬁed UGs and TGs for cash rewards. Half
of the time, subjects played as player 1, the other half as
player DEMO Each time they played, their counterpart was
either a computer playing DEMO ﬁxed probabilistic strategy
or a human who was recruited to play outside the
scanner. Subjects were told for each play whether they
were playing DEMO computer or the human. The authors
conjectured that subjects would use mentalizing
( Frith & Frith 1999) to infer the intentions of the
other player. Mentalizing would play an important
role in the binding of mutual DEMO information to
a cooperative event representation and thus invoke
cognitively strategies for delay of gratiﬁcation, and
therefore produce trust and reciprocity. Based on
their individual plays, seven out of the 12 subjects
were labelled as cooperators while ﬁve were labelled as
3865
Downloaded from rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 27, 2011
3866 F. Krueger et al. Review. Economic game playing
non-cooperators. In a conjunction analysis, the seven
cooperators all showed greater activations in the
anterior region of the rostral medial DEMO cortex
(arMFC). Recent research has shown that the arMFC
is DEMO only involved in representing our own thoughts,
feelings and beliefs, DEMO also in representing the mental
states of other people, and is DEMO in a variety of
social cognition tasks such as self-knowledge, person
DEMO and mentalizing (for a review see Amodio &
Frith 2006). The authors argue that the observed acti-
vation in cooperators is consistent DEMO shared
reciprocity intentions, resulting in the inhibition of
both individual reward DEMO by player 2 and risk-
avoiding behaviour by player 1.
In anotherfMRIstudy, Sanfey et al. (2003)
investigated the neural correlates of the DEMO player’s
behaviour in the UG. Subjects made 20 decisions,
while playing 10 games with other individuals and 10
games with the computer. In DEMO human counterpart
condition, subjects were told they would play once
against DEMO of 10 different humans, but, in fact, the
experimenters determined DEMO sequence of offers
subjects would face to ensure that the human and
computer offers were counterbalanced between ﬁve
50–50 (fair), one 70–30 (DEMO fair), two 80–20 (unfair)
and two 90–10 (unfair) DEMO Behaviourally, subjects
accepted all fair and most of the less-fair offers,DEMO
however rejected roughly 50 per cent of the unfair
offers by humans, while accepting roughly 80 per cent
of the unfair offers by the computer. The authors found
by contrasting unfair with fair offer activations in DEMO
ACC, bilateral DLPFC and bilateral anterior insula
(AI).Speciﬁcally,asthe activation of rightAI
increased, the more probably a subject rejected an
unfair offer. The authors argue that the ACC activation
reﬂects the motivational conﬂict between DEMO and
self-interest when facing unfair offers, the AI activation
the degree DEMO emotional resentment of unfair offers and
the DLPFC the cognitive control of the emotional
impulse to reject unfair offers. Importantly, Knoch et al.
(DEMO) found in a subsequent study that low-
frequency TMS of the DEMO DLPFC, but not of the
left DLPFC, increased the acceptance rate of unfair
offers relative to a placebo stimulation (from 9 to 44%).
The authors concluded that the right DLPFC is not
critical in DEMO the impulse to reject unfair offers.
It may be that DLPFC instead represents offers as fair
and unfair and that subjects with impaired DLPFC
DEMO accepted all offers.
Another fMRI study by Tabibnia et al. (2008)DEMO
investigated the neural correlates of the recipient’s
behaviour in the UG and found AI activation during
rejected trials. In addition, the authors found activation
in the right VLPFC (relative to a resting baseline) when
unfair DEMO were accepted, indicating that this region
might regulate the resentment associated DEMO unfair
offers down.
The Sanfey et al. (2003) experiment resulted in a
follow-up behavioural study by Xiao & Houser (2005),
who DEMO the emotional expressions of subjects
in the UG and found that subjects (second players)
who can express anger (or disgust) to their counterpart
(ﬁrst players) for an unfair offer are signiﬁcantly more
likely DEMO then accept the offer.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2008)
(d) Human behaviour in the investment/trust
game and its neural correlates
Berg et al. (1995) gave two players $10 as a show-up DEMO
in a double-blind IG. Player 1 was then given the
opportunity to send none, some or all of his/her $10 to
player 2. Whatever amount of money was sent was
tripled, e.g. if player 1 sent all $10, then player 2 would
get $30. Player 2 then decided how much of the tripled
money to send back to player DEMO The subgame perfect
equilibrium prediction is that player 2 should keep all
the money, and therefore player 1 should send nothing.
Alternatively, social DEMO may exist that interpret
sending money as an obligation for player 2 to
reciprocate. All but two of the 32 players sent some
amount DEMO money to the other player, with two-thirds
sending $5 or more, and about half of these high-trust
subjects got more sent back to DEMO than they originally
sent before tripling.
McCabe & Smith (2000) introduced the TG as a
simpliﬁedformofthe IG.The game hasonlytwo
choices for each player. DEMO 1 can choose to end the
game by moving left, giving DEMO player $10, or
choose to continue the game. If player 1 DEMO to
continue, player 2 can choose between either player 1
gets DEMO and player 2 gets $25 or player 1 gets $0 and
player 2 gets $40. The choice made by player 1 is risky
and DEMO be interpreted as trusting player 2, since
player 1 gave up DEMO and might end up with $0.
Similarly, the decision by player DEMO to choose that
player 1 gets $15 and player 2 gets $25 can be
interpreted as being trustworthy since player 2 gave
up $40 DEMO only received $25. When played as a one-
shot game, half DEMO the player 1’s were trusting and
three-quarters of the player 2’s, DEMO then get to move,
were trustworthy.
To test whether mentalizing may be important in
playing the TGs, McCabe et al. (2003) compared
behaviour in the standard TG with behaviour in an
involuntary TG where DEMO 1 is forced to move down
and player 2 was informed about it. The authors found
that player 2 is twice as likely to DEMO the trustworthy
decision in the TG compared with player 2 in the
involuntary TG. They argue that the increased
propensity to reciprocate player 1’s DEMO in the TG
occurred because player 2 inferred player 1’s intentions
to cooperate since player 1 has given up a sure thing,
i.e. DEMO, to make them both better off. This inference is
what leads DEMO a greater trustworthiness.
Repetition of the IG allows players to form a
reputation with respect to a behavioural type (such as
being a trusting or trustworthy individual). Using a
multiround version of the IG, King-Casas et al. (2005)
found that responses in the dorsal striatum (DEMO of
caudate nucleus) of player 2 were greatest when player
1 DEMO more in response to player 2’s previous
reciprocity. In addition, player DEMO intention to recipro-
cate was observed as a shift in peak activity in the
caudate nucleus from the time when player 2 saw player
DEMO decision to before player 1’s decision, suggesting
that player 2 learnt DEMO anticipate player 1’s trustworthi-
ness. It has been proposed that the caudate nucleus
may serve as a key component of an ‘actor–critic’
model processing DEMO contingent behaviour that led
to the feedback, with the purpose of DEMO future
Downloaded from rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 27, 2011
Review. Economic game playing F. Krueger et al.
3867
behaviour (O’Doherty et al. 2004; Tricomi et DEMO 2004).
Furthermore, Tomlin et al. (2006) applied fMRI
to DEMO two subjects’ brains simultaneously as they
played repeated interaction IG. These joint brain
measurements showed agent-speciﬁc responses along
the cingulate cortex for encoding decisions DEMO other
and oneself independently on metrical aspect of the
economic exchange.
In another iterated version of the IG, Delgado et al.
(2005) investigated whether prior social and moral
information about potential trading partners affects this
DEMO neural reward circuit. Subjects were
involved in two-person interactions and asked to make
risky decisions about whether to trust ﬁctitious trading
partners after they DEMO vivid descriptions of life
events that indicated either their neutral, praiseworthy
DEMO suspect moral character. Although all three ﬁctitious
partners repaid in the IG with the same frequency, the
caudate nucleus activated more strongly for repayment
outcomes from the neutral partner, but not from the
other partners. The authors argue that prior moral
beliefs can inﬂuence economic decision making. Since
DEMO neutral partner represents unpredictable outcomes
and there is more to learn, DEMO human caudate nucleus
presumably inﬂuenced the adjustment of choices based
on feedback mechanisms in the neural circuitry of trial-
and-error reward learning.
Furthermore, de Quervain et al. (2004) investigated
the neural basis of altruistic punishment DEMO defectors in
the context of the IG. Using PET, subject’s brains DEMO
scanned while they learnt about the defector’s abuse of
trust and determined the punishment. This experiment
demonstrated that the dorsal striatum (caudate
nucleus) DEMO activated in the contrast between effective
punishment (reduction of the defector’s DEMO ) and
symbolic punishment (non-reduction of the defector’s
pay-off ). Subjects with stronger activations in the
dorsal striatum were willing to incur greater DEMO to
punish. The authors argue that individuals derive
satisfaction from punishing norm violations and the
anticipated satisfaction from punishing defectors is
reﬂected in the DEMO striatum activations.
Krueger et al. (2007) investigated the neural cor-
relates of trust combining fMRI with a non-anonymous
repeated TG. The authors showed DEMO two different
brain systems may be used to develop the ﬁrst player’s
trust. A personal ‘unconditional’ trust system involved
early activation of the arMFC (mentalizing) followed
by later activation of the septal area, a limbic DEMO
that has been demonstrated to modulate various
aspects of social behaviour such as social attachment
( Numan 2000) by controlling anterior hypothalamic
functions and the release of the neuropeptides vaso-
pressin and oxytocin (Powell & Rorie 1967; Loup et al.
1991; Insel & Young 2001). Besides DEMO well-known
physiological functions of oxytocin in milk let-down
and during labour, DEMO is a key mediator in
facilitating various complex social behaviours, inclu-
DEMO maternal care (Insel & Young 2001), pair bonding
(Insel & Shapiro 1992) and social recognition (Choleris
et al. 2003) in animals and social attachment (Bartels &
Zeki 2004; Aron et al. 2005), generosity (Zak et al.
2007) and interpersonal trust (Zak et al. 2005)in
humans. The authors argue that repeated experience
Phil. Trans. DEMO Soc. B (2008)
with another player’s cooperation can lead to DEMO
evaluation of that player as a ‘trustworthy’ person,
resulting in an increased production of oxytocin and
allowing greater trust. A second ‘conditional’ trust
DEMO seems to be more situational and less personal.
This system does not use the mentalizing system early
on but does use the reinforcement learning DEMO
(ventral tegmental area) to build trust. In brains using
this system, mentalizing activation was observed in the
latter stages of play, but DEMO in early play, suggesting that
situational trust uses the mentalizing system DEMO ﬁne-
tune expectations over when a counterpart will defect.
There is recent evidence that greater ﬁrst player’s
trust can be induced in strangers by DEMO intranasal
administration of oxytocin during interpersonal
exchange. Kosfeld et al. (2005) showed that the effect
of oxytocin on trust is not due to DEMO general increase in
the readiness to bear risks, but it speciﬁcally DEMO an
individual’s willingness to accept social risks arising
through interpersonal interactions. In a follow-up
fMRI experiment, Baumgartner et al. (2008) found
that subjects who were given synthetic oxytocin
intranasally showed no change in their trusting
DEMO after they learned that their trust has been
betrayed several times. Differences in trust adaptation
were associated with reduction in activation in neural
systems DEMO fear processing (amygdala and
midbrain regions) and adaptation to feedback infor-
mation (dorsal striatum).
4. TRUST AND RECIPROCITY IN HUMANS: AN
DEMO INVESTIGATION
Previous analyses of the IG and TG games indicate the
importance of different systems such as mentalizing,
reward systems and social attachment DEMO the neuro-
biology of trusting and reciprocity. However, little
attempt has DEMO made so far to identify the differences
of underlying neural architecture for trusting and
reciprocating behaviour. We present here additional
analyses of the repeated DEMO experiment studied in
Krueger et al. (2007). In this experiment, two strangers
of the same sex—each in a separate MRI scanner—
interacted DEMO one another in a sequential reciprocal
TG while their brains were simultaneously scanned
(ﬁgure 3a). Subjects were asked to make sequential
decisions for monetary pay-offs (low, medium or high
in cents) presented in a binary game tree (ﬁgure 3b).
Player 1 can either quit the game by not trusting
player 2, resulting in a small equal pay-off for both,
or player 1 can continue the game by trusting DEMO 2,
hoping to receive a better pay-off. Player 2 can recipro-
cate the ﬁrst player’s trust, giving them both a higher
pay-off, DEMO defect on player 1’s trust, resulting in an
even higher pay-off DEMO player 2 and a pay-off of zero
for player 1. In the control games, partners followed
the same timeline as in the TGs, DEMO they did not have
to interact with one another and merely had to choose
between lower and higher monetary rewards. The
design of our DEMO allowed us to address the
question of which brain regions modulate trust and
reciprocity during economic exchange.
Downloaded from rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 27, 2011
3868 F. Krueger et al. Review. Economic game playing
(a)
role assignment decision making blank screen processing blank screen
scanner I
decision making
processing blank screen
P2
P1
DEMO
[5,5] [10,15] [0,25] [5,5] [10,15] [0,25]
time (s)
6s
4s
(b)
game
P1
non-trust
trust
DEMO
reciprocate
P2
defect
2–6s
jitter
blank screen
6s
[5,5] [10,15]
[0,25]
pay-offs in cents: cP1, cP2
low
: [5,5]
: [10,10]
: [15,15]
: [20,20]
: [25,25]
: [30,30]
medium
high
[10,15]
[15,25]
[25,40]
[30,50]
DEMO,65]
[45,75]
[0,25]
[0,40]
[0,65]
[0,80]
[0,105]
[0,120]
Figure 3. Experimental design. (a) Timeline for a DEMO trust game. Partners were introduced by seeing each other via webcam and
digital photographs were taken to be used for game trials. A 2 DEMO introductory screen informed partners of the role that they were
playing (DEMO or P2). P1 saw the game tree, had to make DEMO decision (non-trust or trust) within 6 s and waited 6 s for P2’s decision while
seeing a blank screen. P2 saw a blank DEMO for 6 s, saw the game tree with P1’s decision and DEMO to make a decision (reciprocate or
defect) within 6 s. If P1 had chosen not to trust P2, the game was over and P2 saw P1’s decision for 6 s. The partners saw the
outcome DEMO the game for 4 s followed by a blank screen with a jittered inter-stimulus interval of 2–6 s. (The partners played 36
voluntary trust games and 16 control games.) (b) Voluntary trust game. Partners made sequential decisions as ﬁrst player (P1) and
second player (P2) DEMO pay-offs in cents (c: [cP1,cP2]) presented in a binary DEMO tree. P1 can choose left (non-trust) and quit the
game with a small pay-off for P1 and P2 (e.g. [5,5]) or DEMO choose right (trust) to continue the game. P2 can then choose left
(reciprocate) giving them both a higher pay-off (e.g. [10,15]) or choose right (defect) resulting in an even higher pay-off to P2 and a
pay-off of zero to P1 (e.g. [0,25]). Pay-offs ( p10 –p60 ) were split into three types: low ( p10 –p20 ); medium ( p30 –p40 ); and high ( DEMO –p60 ).
(a) Shared networks for trust and reciprocity
Using DEMO general linear model analysis, we ﬁrst sought
brain regions whose BOLD DEMO were commonly
recruited for decisions to trust and reciprocate. We
identiﬁed two regions, the arMFC and the AI, by
performing a conjunction analysis DEMO decisions to
trust and reciprocate (ﬁgure 4a).
Converging evidence from DEMO over the
last decade suggests that the arMFC plays a critical role
in mentalizing, which is the ability to represent another
person’s psychological perspective (for a review see
Amodio & Frith 2006). It has been shown that
mentalizing is impaired in autism (Baron-Cohen et al.
1985), schizophrenia ( Frith & Corcoran 1996)and
cerebral lesions (Stone et al. 1998; Happe et al. 1999;
Stuss et al. 2001). A wide range of different paradigms
has shown consistently arMFC activation, ranging
from off-line tasks such as story and cartoon compre-
hension as well as DEMO of real-time interactions
(Gallagher et al. 2000; Frith & Frith 2003; Saxe et al.
2004) to online tasks such as playing economic DEMO
(McCabe et al. 2001; Gallagher et al. 2002; Rilling et DEMO
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2008)
P1
P1 P2
[5,DEMO [10,15] [0,25]
role assignment
P1 P2
2s
introduction
P1
P2
[5,5] [10,15] [0,25]
scanner II
Downloaded from rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 27, 2011
(a)
(b)
trust > control ∩ reciprocate > control
arMFC
AI
35
t(43)DEMO
FPC
trust > reciprocate
TPJ
Figure 4. Brain responses. (a) Conjunction analysis. The
anterior rostral medial prefrontal cortex (arMFC; BA 9/32; x,
y, z; 6, 47, 22) and the anterior insula (AI; BA 13; 28, 15, K4)
were commonly activated for trusting and reciprocating
behaviour. (b) Trust versus reciprocate. Decisions DEMO trust
compared with decisions to reciprocate activated the bilateral
frontopolar cortex (DEMO; BA 10; K18, 62, 10; 30, 59, 7) and
the temporoparietal junction (TPJ; BA 40; 48, K52, 34).
Statistical images were superimposed on a template structural
brain in Talairach DEMO and thresholded at p!0.005,
uncorrected, with an extent threshold of DEMO mm3 (tZ3.00,
random effects). A priori regions hypothesized to DEMO active
were tested for activity using a small volume correction of a
sphere of 10 mm and a false discovery rate (FDR) with
DEMO threshold of q(FDR)!0.05 (small volume corrected) and a
cluster size threshold of 100 mm3.
2004a; Fukui et al. 2006; Krueger DEMO al. 2007; Hampton
et al. 2008). We argue that mentalizing DEMO both
players to predict the behaviour of the other and to
engage successfully in a cooperative interaction by
recognizing that the other player has DEMO
experiences, beliefs and intentions. Both players have
to think about how DEMO other player thinks about them,
i.e. before they invest they have to decide not just
whether they trust their partner, but also whether their
partner will reciprocate their trust.
The AI region has been consistently DEMO with
empathy, which plays a fundamental social role
allowing the sharing DEMO experience, feelings and
goals across individuals (Preston & de Waal 2002).
Two major roles for empathy have been proposed
(de Vignemont & Singer 2006): an epistemological role
to provide information about the future DEMO of other
individuals and a social role to serve as the origin of the
motivation for cooperative and pro-social behaviour.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. DEMO (2008)
Review. Economic game playing F. Krueger et al.
Recent DEMO studies have shown that individ-
uals share the emotions of others, DEMO exposed to
their emotions by the observation or imagination, and
they DEMO parts of the same neuronal network as if
they would have processed the same state in themselves
( Wicker et al. 2003; Keysers et al. 2004; Singer et al.
2004b; Jackson et al. 2005).
DEMO a recent fMRI study, Singer et al. (2006) has
shown DEMO the empathic response can be modulated by
the reputation of the person we are observing. Subjects
ﬁrst played repeated PDGs to create good and DEMO
reputations for two previously unknown partners.
Afterwards, the brain activity of DEMO subjects was
measured while they observed that their confederates
received pain. An empathy-related activation was
observed in the AI and ACC, when the cooperative
player was in pain. On the contrary, less empathy-
related activation was observed for partners who had
acquired a bad reputation through defection in DEMO
game. In another study, Singer et al. (2004a) allowed
subjects DEMO face a series of cooperative and no-coo-
perative opponents in a sequential PDG. In a
subsequent sex assessment fMRI task, the authors
demonstrated that simply displaying the faces to these
cooperative partners in contrast to neutral DEMO
revealed activations in reward- and emotion-related
areas such as striatum, amygdala DEMO insula. This
ﬁnding suggests that trustworthy persons’ faces trigger
emotion and reward expectation.
We argue that empathy provides a more precise and
direct estimate DEMO other people’s future actions, since
shared emotional networks also directly elicit DEMO
activation of associated relevant motivational and
action systems (de Vignemont & DEMO 2006). Both
players are in a cooperative relationship and one knows
that the other person is the source of one’s own affective
state. DEMO sharing their empathy state, they also share
their emotional and motivational DEMO, enabling them
to make faster and more accurate predictions about the
DEMO future actions.
(b) Speciﬁc networks for trust and reciprocity
Because the psychology of trust is relevant for player 1,
whereas the psychology DEMO reciprocity is important for
player 2, we next explored which brain DEMO were
only involved in trusting behaviour and not in
reciprocating behaviour and vice versa.
Trusting is always risky given the unpredictability of
the intentions DEMO the partner in a social exchange ( Fehr &
Fischbacher 2003)DEMO Decisions to trust compared with
decisions to reciprocate revealed activations in the lateral
frontopolar cortex (FPC) and the right temporoparietal
junction (TPJ) (ﬁgure 4b). Accumulating neuroimaging
evidence indicates that the right TPJ plays DEMO critical role
in social cognition such as perspective taking (Ruby &
Decety 2003; Jackson et al.2006b), sense of agency
(Ruby & DEMO 2001; Farrer & Frith 2002; Decety &
Sommerville 2003; Farrer et al. 2003), empathy
( Jackson et al. 2006a; Lamm et al.2007)and
mentalizing (Saxe & Wexler 2005; Lawrence et al.
2006)DEMO However, a recent fMRI study by Mitchell
(2008) demonstrated that DEMO activity in the right TPJ is
not selective for mentalizing. Furthermore, DEMO &
Lamm (2007) demonstrated in a recent quantitative
3869
Downloaded from rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 27, 2011
3870 F. Krueger et al. Review. Economic game playing
neuroimaging meta-analysis that the right TPJ is not
DEMO speciﬁc to social cognition, but rather is a more
lower level DEMO mechanism involved in
generating, testing and correcting internal predictions
about external DEMO events (Blakemore & Frith
2003). We argue that mentalizing depends DEMO the
coordinated interaction of both domain-speciﬁc abilities
represented in the PFC and domain-general abilities
represented in the posterior cortex such as TPJ (Adolphs
2001; Decety & Grezes 2006). The TPJ helps us to
simulate another person’s experience and interpret
their actions within the context of their current DEMO
which is then decoupled from reality in the medial PFC
to provide an abstract encoding of the intentions of
another person.
The FPC encodes DEMO representations
that enable us to reﬂect on the long-term values linked
to the outcomes of our decisions ( Wood & Grafman
2003; Tanaka et al. 2004). A recent meta-analysis of the
functional specialization within the DEMO (Brodmann
area 10) revealed a functional variation between lateral
and medial subregions of the FPC (Gilbert et al. 2006).
Mentalizing was more likely to be associated with
activation in the caudal medial FPC, whereas acti-
vation in the lateral FPC supports high-level guidance
of task performance DEMO extended periods of time
(Christoff & Gabrieli 2000). Humans often DEMO
material beneﬁts to endorse or oppose societal causes
based on moral beliefs, which has been the target of
recent experimental economics studies (Moll DEMO al.
2005). Recently, Moll et al. (2006) used fMRI DEMO
investigate charitable donation behaviour while partici-
pants anonymously donated to or opposed real
charitable organizations related to major societal
causes. The authors demonstrated that DEMO more
anterior sectors of the PFC were distinctively recruited
when altruistic choices prevail over selﬁsh material
interests. We argue that to make an exchange, it is
necessary that ﬁrst players overcome the desire for
immediate gratiﬁcation DEMO favour of greater but
postponed gains from mutual cooperation. Based on
such a mechanism, we are able to balance immediate
motives against the long-term consequences of our
choices and long-term beneﬁts in real social
interactions ( DEMO & Grafman 2003).
In sum, our ﬁndings extend previous knowledge DEMO
the neural basis of trust and reciprocity in two-person
reciprocal exchange. Trusting and reciprocating
behaviour draw upon common neural systems of
mentalizing (arMFC and TPJ) and empathy (AI).
Both mentalizing (cognitive sharing with another
person) and empathy (affective sharing with another
person) involve an ability to simultaneously distinguish
between different possible perspectives during recipro-
cal exchange. In DEMO, trusting behaviour speci-
ﬁcally recruited an evaluation system for prospective
outcomes (FPC). This more recently evolved system
provides a mechanism that enables DEMO to
weight long-term rewards over immediate short-term
gains allowing, therefore, mutual cooperation. The
interplay of these neural systems supports reciprocal
exchange that operates DEMO the immediate spheres
of kinship, one of the distinguishing features of DEMO
human species.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2008)
5. SUMMARY
DEMO this paper, we reviewed the results from a number of
game DEMO that establish a unitary system for
forming subjective expected utility maps in the brain,
and acting on these maps to produce choices. Game
DEMO in humans involves two major systems: a
valuation-choice system for making DEMO and a
shared social system for understanding and sharing
mental states. The valuation-choice system has been
the target of numerous studies of both human DEMO non-
human subjects, resulting in a relatively uniﬁed model
of decision DEMO involving a reinforcement learning
system that calculates the expected utility of different
choices, an expected utility map that weights the
relative value of different choices and an all or nothing
competition to make the ﬁnal choice. DEMO, more
work needs to be done to better understand how
neuronal DEMO learn to construct the underlying
decision problems, and how neuronal systems DEMO
backward andforward inductioninamultistage
decision process such as those made in extensive form
games. For example, it is not clear whether strategies
themselves are choice variables in the brain or whether
strategies are simply stable constructs of DEMO choices
made at decision nodes.
The shared social system has also been the target of
numerous studies, but largely with human subjects.
These studies suggest that human subjects use both
empathy (shared affect) and mentalizing (shared
intentions) to better understand other players in the
game and that neural computations that allow shared
mental states affect the way games are DEMO in the
brain and, consequently, how experience in games is
encoded. While empathy and mentalizing clearly
affect the valuation-choice system, there does not exist
a biologically plausible computational model of how
this occurs.
Within the DEMO paradigms of single-cell record-
ing studies in monkeys and neuroimaging studies in
humans, more work needs to be done to develop games
that both monkeys and humans can play. So far, little
has been done along these lines, and the little that has
been done has not controlled for differences in how
monkeys or humans are trained or how they DEMO their
decisions. Yet, this is important to adequately deﬁne,
and DEMO, the homologous brain regions that are
assumed to exist between monkeys DEMO humans.
At the same time, more work needs to be done DEMO
develop better game controls for studying the different
neuronal computations involved in game play. For
example, Cox (2004) has reanalysed the IG using
separate controls for other regarding preferences. He
has found that some decisions DEMO labelled as
trusting and trustworthy are mislabelled, but are due
instead DEMO subjects’ altruism to their partners. It is also
important to explicitly account for repeated game
strategies by having subjects play ﬁnitely repeated
games with DEMO same partner but be repaired with a new
partner after each sequence.
Furthermore, future theory and research need to gain
a better understanding of how the dispositions and
behaviours of players affect how they think, feel and
behave in economic games. In addition, research should
explore how and why certain combinations of partner
Downloaded from rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 27, 2011
Review. Economic game playing F. Krueger et al.
3871
attributes promote or impede the development of social
DEMO ( Fehr & Camerer 2007). Nevertheless, for
the social neuroscience DEMO economics to advance, we
must gain a deeper understanding on how DEMO
disorders such as autism, Asperger’s and Williams’
syndrome, social phobias and antisocial personality
disorder are linked to differences in neural activation
during economic DEMO For example, Sally & Hill
(2006) compared the behaviour of DEMO with autistic
individuals in the UG and PDG. The authors showed
that autistic individuals were more likely to accept initial
low offers in the DEMO and had a more difﬁcult time
shifting strategy in the PDG. Moreover, comparing the
behaviour of patients with focal brain lesions with
healthy controls is also an important step in prooﬁng
the prerequisite of various brain DEMO for particular
game behaviours. For example, Koenigs & Tranel
(2007) DEMO the UG to investigate decision making
in patients with ventromedial PFC (DEMO) damage.
The authors demonstrated that the VMPFC group
showed a higher DEMO rate for each of the most unfair
offers, showing that the DEMO is a critical brain region
in normal economic decision making. Moreover,
temporary brain lesions induced by TMS might be
helpful to identify the DEMO processes involved in
decisions in which standard economic models predict
behaviour (DEMO Knoch et al.2006b).
By working together within the formal construct of
game theory to build experiments to study a positive
theory of game DEMO, neuroscientists and economists are
beginning to develop new insights that beneﬁt DEMO
disciplines (Sanfey 2007). One beneﬁt for economists
is that expected DEMO, the fundamental underpinning
of game theory, is operating as observable phenomena
in neurons. As a consequence, deviations from
maximizing behaviour may not be due to failures of
expected utility, but may more likely be due to how
subjects construct their understanding of the game
through both their DEMO and their shared mental
experience. A beneﬁt for neuroscientists is the math-
ematical formalism that the theory of games puts on
social decision making. DEMO particular, this leads to the
understanding that social strategies are not DEMO
functions of a single brain’s computation, but also a
function of DEMO equilibrium conditions, which
produce external computations, which end up shaping
how the brain decides.
The authors are grateful to N. Armstrong, J. Moll, M.
Strenziok and R. Zahn for their help in various stages of
the fMRI experiment. The work was supported in part
by a postdoctoral DEMO competitive fellowship award
to F.K. and the Intramural Research Program of the
CNS/NINDS/NIH.
REFERENCES
Adams, J. S. 1965 Inequity in social exchange. In Advances
in experimental social psychology (ed. L. Berkowitz),
pp. DEMO New York, NY: Academic Press.
Adolphs, R. 2001 The neurobiology DEMO social cognition. Curr.
Opin. Neurobiol. 11, 231–239. (doi:10.1016/S0959-4388
(DEMO)00202-6)
Amodio, D. M. & Frith, C. D. 2006 Meeting of minds: the
medial frontal cortex and social cognition. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 7, 268 –277. (doi:10.1038/nrn1884)
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. DEMO (2008)
Aron, A., Fisher, H., Mashek, D. J., Strong, G., Li, H. &
Brown, L. L. 2005 DEMO, motivation, and emotion
systems associated with early-stage intense romantic love.
J. Neurophysiol. 94, 327– 337. (doi:10.1152/jn.00838.
2004)
Axelrod, R. 1984 The evolution of cooperation. New York, NY:
Basic Books.
Axelrod, R. 1997 The complexity of cooperation. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University DEMO
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M. & Frith, U. 1985 Does the
autistic child have a “theory of mind”? Cognition 21,
37–46. (doi:10.1016/0010-0277(85)90022-8)
Barraclough, D. J., Conroy, DEMO L. & Lee, D. 2004 Prefrontal
cortex and decision making in DEMO mixed-strategy game. Nat.
Neurosci. 7, 404– 410. (doi:10.1038/nn1209)
Bartels, A. & Zeki, S. 2004 The neural correlates of maternal
DEMO romantic love. Neuroimage 21, 1155–1166. (doi:10.
1016/j.neuroimage.2003.11.003)
Baumgartner, T., Heinrichs, M., Vonlanthen, A.,
Fischbacher, U. & DEMO, E. 2008 Oxytocin shapes the
neural circuitry of trust and trust DEMO in humans.
Neuron 58, 639–650. (doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2008.04.009)
Berg, DEMO E., Daley, L. A., Dickhaut, J. W. & O’Brien, DEMO R.
1986 Controlling preferences for lotteries on units of
experimental exchange. Q. J. Econ. 101, 281–306.
(doi:10.2307/1891116)
Berg, J., DEMO, J. & McCabe, K. 1995 Trust, reciprocity,
and social DEMO Games Econ. Behav. 10, 122–142.
(doi:10.1006/game.1995.1027)
Berg, DEMO, Dickhaut, J. & McCabe, K. 2005 Risk preference
instability across DEMO: a dilemma. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci.USA102, 4209–4214. (doi:10.1073/pnas.0500333102)DEMO
Blakemore, S. J. & Frith, C. 2003 Self-awareness and action.
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 13, 219–224. (doi:10.1016/S0959-
4388(03)00043-6)
DEMO, P. 2005 Cooperation under the shadow of the future:
experimental DEMO form inﬁnitely repeated games.
Am. Econ. Rev. 95, 1591–1604. (doi:10.1257/0002828
05775014434)
Brosnan, S. F. & De Waal, F. B. DEMO Monkeys reject unequal
pay. Nature 425, 297–299. (doi:10.1038/nature01963)
Brosnan, S. F. & de Waal, F. B. 2004 Socially learned
DEMO for differentially rewarded tokens in the brown
capuchin monkey (Cebus apella)DEMO J. Comp. Psychol. 118,
133–139. (doi:10.1037/0735-7036.118.2.133)
Camerer, C., Loewenstein, G. & Prelec, D. 2005 Neuroeco-
nomics: how DEMO can inform economics. J. Econ.
Lit. XLIII, 9–64. (doi:10.1257/0022051053737843)
Carter, C. S., Macdonald, A. M., Botvinick, M., DEMO, L. L.,
Stenger, V. A., Noll, D. & Cohen, J. D. 2000 Parsing
executive processes: strategic vs. evaluative functions of
DEMO anterior cingulate cortex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97,
1944–1948. (DEMO:10.1073/pnas.97.4.1944)
Cherry, T. L., Frykblom, P. & Shogren, J. F. 2002 Hardnose
the dictator. Am. Econ. Rev. 92, 1218 –1221. (doi:10.
1257/00028280260344740)
Choleris, E., Gustafsson, J.-A., Korach, K. S., Muglia, L. J.,
Pfaff, D. W. & DEMO, S. 2003 An estrogen-dependent
four-gene micronet regulating social recognition: a
study with oxytocin and estrogen receptor-a and -b
knockout mice. Proc. Natl Acad. DEMO USA 100,
6192–6197. (doi:10.1073/pnas.0631699100)
Christie, R. & Geis, F. 1970 Studies in Machiavellianism. New
York, NY: Academic Press.
Christoff, K. & Gabrieli, D. E. 2000 The frontopolar cortex
and DEMO cognition: evidence for a rostrocaudal
hierarchical organziation within the human prefrontal
DEMO Psychobiology 28, 168–186.
Downloaded from rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 27, 2011
3872 F. Krueger et al. Review. Economic game playing
Cox, J. C. 2004 How to identify trust and reciprocity. Games
Econ. Behav. 46, 260–281. (doi:10.1016/S0899-8256(03)DEMO
00119-2)
Decety, J. & Grezes, J. 2006 The power of simulation:
imagining one’s own and other’s behavior. Brain Res. 1079,
DEMO (doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2005.12.115)
Decety, J. & Lamm, C. 2007 DEMO role of the right
temporoparietal junction in social interaction: how low-
DEMO computational processes contribute to meta-cogni-
tion. Neuroscientist 13, 580–593. (doi:10.1177/1073858
407304654)
Decety, J. & Sommerville, J. A. 2003 Shared DEMO
between self and other: a social cognitive neuroscience
view. Trends Cogn. DEMO 7, 527–533. (doi:10.1016/j.tics.
2003.10.004)
Delgado, M. R., Frank, R. H. & Phelps, E. A. 2005
Perceptions of moral DEMO modulate the neural
systems of reward during the trust game. Nat. Neurosci.
8, 1611–1618. (doi:10.1038/nn1575)
de Quervain, D. J., DEMO, U., Treyer, V.,
Schellhammer, M., Schnyder, U., DEMO, A. & Fehr, E.
2004 The neural basis of altruistic punishment. Science
305, 1254–1258. (doi:10.1126/science.1100735)
de Vignemont, F. & Singer, T. 2006 The empathic brain:
how, when and why? Trends Cogn. Sci. 10, 435 –441.
(doi:10.1016/j.tics.2006.08.008)
de DEMO, F. B. 1997 Food transfers through mesh in brown
capuchins. J. DEMO Psychol. 111, 370– 378. (doi:10.1037/
0735-7036.111.4.370)
de Waal, F. B. & Berger, M. L. 2000 Payment for labour in
DEMO Nature 404, 563. (doi:10.1038/35007138)
Dorris, M. C. & Glimcher, P. W. 2004 Activity in posterior
parietal cortex is correlated DEMO the relative subjective
desirability of action. Neuron 44, 365– 378. (doi:10.1016/
j.neuron.2004.09.009)
Farrer, C. & Frith, C. D. 2002 DEMO oneself vs
another person as being the cause of an action: DEMO neural
correlates of the experience of agency. Neuroimage 15,
596 –603. (doi:10.1006/nimg.2001.1009)
Farrer, C., Franck, N., Georgieff, DEMO, Frith, C. D.,
Decety, J. & Jeannerod, M. 2003 Modulating the
experience of agency: a positron emission tomography
study. Neuroimage 18, 324– 333. (doi:10.1016/S1053-
8119(02)00041-1)
Fehr, E. & Camerer, C. F. 2007 Social neuroeconomics: the
neural circuitry of DEMO preferences. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11,
419 – 427. (doi:10.1016/DEMO)
Fehr, E. & Fischbacher, U. 2003 The nature of human
altruism. Nature 425, 785–791. (doi:10.1038/nature
02043)
Forsythe, R., Horowitz, J. L., Savin, N. E. & Sefton, M. 1994
Fairness in simple bargaining experiments. Games Econ.
Behav. 6, 347– 369. (DEMO:10.1006/game.1994.1021)
Frith, C. D. & Corcoran, R. 1996 Exploring ‘theory of mind’
in people with schizophrenia. Psychol. Med. 26, 521–530.
Frith, C. D. & Frith, U. 1999 Interacting minds—a biological
basis. Science DEMO, 1692–1695. (doi:10.1126/science.286.
5445.1692)
Frith, U. & Frith, C. D. 2003 Development and neurophy-
siology of mentalizing. Phil. Trans. R. DEMO B 358,
459 – 473. (doi:10.1098/rstb.2002.1218)
Fukui, H., Murai, T., Shinozaki, J., Aso, T., Fukuyama, DEMO,
Hayashi, T. & Hanakawa, T. 2006 The neural basis of
social tactics: an fMRI study. Neuroimage 32, 913 –920.
(doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.03.039)
Gallagher, H. L., Happe, F., Brunswick, N., DEMO, P. C.,
Frith, U. & Frith, C. D. 2000 DEMO the mind in
cartoons and stories: an fMRI study of ‘theory DEMO mind’ in
verbal and nonverbal tasks. Neuropsychologia 38, 11–21.
(doi:10.1016/S0028-3932(99)00053-6)
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2008)
Gallagher, H. L., Jack, A. I., Roepstorff, A. & Frith, DEMO D.
2002 Imaging the intentional stance in a competitive
game. Neuroimage 16, 814–821. (doi:10.1006/nimg.2002.
1117)
Gilbert, S. J., Spengler, S., Simons, J. S., Steele, J. D., Lawrie,
S. M., Frith, C. D. & Burgess, P. W. 2006 Functional
specialization within rostral prefrontal cortex (Area 10): a
meta-analysis. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 18, 932– 948. (doi:10.
1162/jocn.2006.18.6.932)
Glimcher, P. W. & Rustichini, A. 2004 Neuroeconomics: the
consilience of brain and decision. DEMO 306, 447–452.
(doi:10.1126/science.1102566)
Gu¨ th, W., Schmittberger, R. & Schwarze, B. 1982 An
experimental analysis of ultimatum bargaining. DEMO Econ.
Behav. Organ. 3, 367– 388. (doi:10.1016/0167-2681(82)
90011-7)
Hampton, A. N., Bossaerts, P. & O’Doherty, J. DEMO 2008 Neural
correlates of mentalizing-related computations during
strategic interactions in humans. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA 105, 6741–6746. (doi:10.1073/pnas.0711099105)
Happe, F., Brownell, H. & Winner, E. 1999 Acquired ‘theory
of mind’ impairments following stroke. Cognition 70,
211–240. (doi:10.1016/S0010-0277(99)00005-0)
Hoffman, E., McCabe, K., Shachat, K. & Smith, DEMO 1994
Preferences, property rights, and anonymity in bargaining
games. Games Econ. Behav. 7, 346– 380. (doi:10.1006/
game.1994.1056)
Hoffman, E., McCabe, K. & Smith, V. 1996 Social distance
and other-regarding behavior in dictator games. Am. Econ.
Rev. 86, 653–660.
Hoffman, E., McCabe, K. & Smith, V. L. 1998 Behavioral
foundations of reciprocity: experimental economics and
evolutionary psychology. Econ. Inq. 36, 335– 352.
Holt, C. & Laury, S. 2005 Risk aversion and incentive effects:
new data DEMO order effects. Am. Econ. Rev. 53,
902–904.
Insel, T. R. & Shapiro, L. E. 1992 Oxytocin receptor
distribution reﬂects social organization in DEMO
and polygamous voles. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 89,
5981–5985. (DEMO:10.1073/pnas.89.13.5981)
Insel, T. R. & Young, L. J. 2001 The neurobiology of
attachment. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2, 129–136. (doi:10.1038/DEMO
35053579)
Jackson, P. L., Meltzoff, A. N. & Decety, J. 2005 How do we
perceive the pain of others? A window into the neural
processes involved in empathy. Neuroimage 24, 771–779.
(doi:DEMO/j.neuroimage.2004.09.006)
Jackson, P. L., Brunet, E., Meltzoff, A. DEMO & Decety, J. 2006a
Empathy examined through the neural mechanisms involved
DEMO imagining how I feel versus how you feel pain. Neuropsy-
chologia 44,752–761.(doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.
2005.07.015)
Jackson, P. L., Meltzoff, A. N. & Decety, J. 2006b Neural
circuits involved in imitation and perspective-taking.
Neuroimage 31, 429 –439. (doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.
2005.11.026)
Jensen, K., Call, J. & Tomasello, M. 2007 Chimpanzees are
rational maximizers in an ultimatum game. Science 318,
107–109. (doi:10.1126/science.1145850)
Keysers, C., Wicker, B., Gazzola, V., Anton, J. L., DEMO, L.
& Gallese, V. 2004 A touching sight: SII/PV DEMO
during the observation and experience of touch. Neuron
42, 335– 346. (doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(04)00156-4)
King-Casas, B., Tomlin, D., DEMO, C., Camerer, C. F.,
Quartz, S. R. & Montague, P. R. 2005 Getting to know
you: reputation and trust in DEMO two-person economic
exchange. Science 308, 78–83. (doi:10.1126/science.
1108062)
Knoch, D., Gianotti, L. R., Pascual-Leone, A., Treyer, V.,
Regard, M., Hohmann, M. & Brugger, P. 2006a
Downloaded from rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 27, 2011
Review. Economic game playing F. Krueger et al.
3873
Disruption of right prefrontal cortex by low-frequency
repetitive DEMO magnetic stimulation induces risk-
taking behavior. J. Neurosci. 26, 6469 –6472. (doi:10.
1523/JNEUROSCI.0804-06.2006)
Knoch, D., Pascual-Leone, A., Meyer, K., Treyer, V. & Fehr,
E. 2006b Diminishing reciprocal fairness DEMO disrupting the
right prefrontal cortex. Science 314, 829 –832. (doi:10.
1126/science.1129156)
Koenigs, M. & Tranel, D. 2007 Irrational economic DEMO
making after ventromedial prefrontal damage: evidence
from the ultimatum game. J. DEMO 27, 951–956.
(doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4606-06.2007)
Kosfeld, M., Heinrichs, DEMO, Zak, P. J., Fischbacher, U. &
Fehr, E. 2005 Oxytocin increases trust in humans. Nature
435, 673 –676. (doi:10.1038/DEMO)
Krueger, F., McCabe, K., Moll, J., Kriegeskorte, DEMO, Zahn,
R., Strenziok, M., Heinecke, A. & Grafman, J. 2007
Neural correlates of trust. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104,DEMO
20 084–20 089. (doi:10.1073/pnas.0710103104)
Lamm, C., Batson, C. D. & Decety, J. 2007 The neural
substrate of human empathy: effects of perspective-taking
and cognitive appraisal. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 19, 42–58.
(doi:10.1162/jocn.2007.19.1.42)
Lawrence, E. J., Shaw, P., Giampietro, V. P., Surguladze, S.,
Brammer, M. J. & David, DEMO S. 2006 The role of ‘shared
representations’ in social perception and empathy: an
fMRI study. Neuroimage 29, 1173 –1184. (doi:10.1016/
j.neuroimage.2005.09.001)
Lee, D. 2005 Neuroeconomics: making risky choices in the
brain. DEMO Neurosci. 8, 1129 –1130. (doi:10.1038/
nn0905-1129)
Lee, DEMO, Conroy, M. L., McGreevy, B. P. & Barraclough, D. DEMO
2004 Reinforcement learning and decision making in
monkeys during a competitive game. Brain Res. Cogn.
Brain Res. 22, 45–58. (doi:10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2004.
07.007)DEMO
Loup, F., Tribollet, E., Dubois-Dauphin, M. & Dreifuss, J. J.
1991 Localization of high-afﬁnity binding sites for
oxytocin and vasopressin in DEMO human brain. An
autoradiographic study. Brain Res. 555, 220–232.
(doi:10.1016/0006-8993(91)90345-V)
McCabe, K. 2002 Neuroeconomics. In Encyclopedia of
cognitive science (ed. L. Nadel). New York, NY: Nature
Publishing Group.
McCabe, K. & Smith, V. 2000 A two person trust game
DEMO by naive and sophisticated subjects. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 97, DEMO (doi:10.1073/pnas.
040577397)
McCabe, K., Houser, D., DEMO, L., Smith, V. & Trouard, T.
2001 A functional imaging study of cooperation in two-
person reciprocal exchange. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. DEMO 98,
11 832–11 835. (doi:10.1073/pnas.211415698)
McCabe, K., Rigdon, M. L. & Smith, V. L. 2003 Positive
reciprocity and intentions in trust games. J. Econ. Behav.
Organ. 1523,1–9.
Mitchell, J. P. 2008 Activity in right temporo-parietal junction
is not selective for theory-of-mind. DEMO Cortex 18,
262–271. (doi:10.1093/cercor/bhm051)
Moll, J., Zahn, R., de Oliveira-Souza, R., Krueger, F. &
Grafman, J. 2005 Opinion: the neural basis of human
moral cognition. Nat. DEMO Neurosci. 6, 799 –809. (doi:10.
1038/nrn1768)
Moll, DEMO, Krueger, F., Zahn, R., Pardini, M., de Oliveira-
DEMO, R. & Grafman, J. 2006 Human fronto-mesolimbic
networks guide decisions about charitable donation. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103, 15 623–15 628. (DEMO:10.1073/
pnas.0604475103)
Nash, J. F. 1950 Equilibrium points in DEMO games. Proc.
NatlAcad.Sci.USA 36,48–49.(doi:10.1073/pnas.36.1.48)
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2008)
Numan, R.(ed.) The behavioral neuroscience of the septal region.
New York: Springer.
O’Doherty, J., Dayan, P., Schultz, J., Deichmann, R.,
Friston, K. & Dolan, R. 2004 Dissociable roles of
ventral and dorsal striatum in instrumental conditioning.
Science DEMO, 452–454. (doi:10.1126/science.1094285)
Platt, M. L. & Glimcher, P. W. 1999 Neural correlates of
decision variables in parietal cortex. Nature DEMO, 233–238.
(doi:10.1038/22268)
Powell, E. W. & Rorie, D. K. 1967 Septal projections to nuclei
functioning in oxytocin release. Am. DEMO Anat. 120,
605–610. (doi:10.1002/aja.1001200310)
Preston, S. D. & de Waal, F. B. 2002 Empathy: its ultimate
and proximate DEMO Behav. Brain Sci. 25, 1–20.
(discussion 20–71)
Rapoport, A. & Chammah, A. M. 1965 Prisoner’s dilemma.
Ann Arbor, MI: University DEMO Michigan Press.
Rilling, J., Gutman, D., Zeh, T., Pagnoni, G., Berns, G. &
Kilts, C. 2002 A neural basis for social cooperation.
Neuron 35, 395 –405. (doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(02)DEMO
00755-9)
Rilling, J. K., Sanfey, A. G., Aronson, DEMO A., Nystrom, L. E. &
Cohen, J. D. 2004a The neural correlates of theory of
mind within interpersonal interactions. Neuroimage 22,
DEMO (doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.04.015)
Rilling, J. K., Sanfey, A. G., Aronson, J. A., Nystrom, L. E. &
Cohen, J. DEMO 2004b Opposing BOLD responses to
reciprocated and unreciprocated altruism in putative
reward pathways. Neuroreport 15, 2539 –2543. (doi:10.
1097/00001756-200411150-00022)
Rilling, J. K., Glenn, A. L., Jairam, M. R., Pagnoni, DEMO,
Goldsmith, D. R., Elfenbein, H. A. & Lilienfeld, S. O.
2007 Neural correlates of social cooperation and non-
cooperation as a DEMO of psychopathy. Biol. Psychiatry
61, 1260–1271. (doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.07.021)
Ruby, P. & Decety, J. 2001 Effect of subjective perspective
taking during DEMO of action: a PET investigation of
agency. Nat. Neurosci. 4, 546 –550.
Ruby, P. & Decety, J. 2003 What you believe versus DEMO you
think they believe: a neuroimaging study of conceptual
perspective-taking. Eur. DEMO Neurosci. 17, 2475 –2480.
(doi:10.1046/j.1460-9568.2003.02673.x)
Sally, D. & Hill, E. L. 2006 The development of interpersonal
strategy: autism, DEMO, cooperation and fair-
ness. J. Econ. Psychol. 27, 73– 97. (DEMO:10.1016/j.joep.
2005.06.015)
Sanfey, A. G. 2007 Social decision-making: insights from
game theory and neuroscience. Science 318, 598–602.
(doi:10.1126/science.1142996)DEMO
Sanfey, A. G., Rilling, J. K., Aronson, J. A., Nystrom, L. E. &
Cohen, J. D. 2003 The neural basis of economic decision-
making in the Ultimatum game. Science 300, 1755 –1758.
(doi:10.1126/science.1082976)
Saxe, R. & Wexler, A. 2005 Making sense of another mind:
the role of the right temporo-parietal junction. DEMO
chologia 43, 1391–1399. (doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.
2005.02.013)
Saxe, R., Carey, S. & Kanwisher, N. 2004 Understanding
other minds: linking developmental psychology and
functional neuroimaging. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 55,
87–124. (doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.55.090902.142044)
Selten, R. 1975 Reexamination of the perfectness concept for
equilibrium points in extensive games. Int. J. Game Theor.
4, 25–55. (doi:DEMO/BF01766400)
Seo, H. & Lee, D. 2007 Temporal ﬁltering of reward signals in
the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex during a mixed-
strategy DEMO J. Neurosci. 27, 8366 –8377. (doi:10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.2369-07.2007)
Downloaded from rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org on January 27, 2011
3874 F. Krueger et al. Review. Economic game playing
Singer, T., Kiebel, S. J., Winston, J. S., Dolan, R. J. & Frith,
C. D. 2004a DEMO responses to the acquired moral status
of faces. Neuron 41, 653–662. (doi:10.1016/S0896-
6273(04)00014-5)
Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J., Kaube, H., Dolan,
R. J. & Frith, C. D. 2004b Empathy for pain involves the
affective but not sensory components of pain. Science 303,
1157–1162. (doi:10.1126/science.1093535)
Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J. P., Stephan, K. E.,
Dolan, R. J. & Frith, C. D. 2006 Empathic neural
DEMO are modulated by the perceived fairness of
others. Nature 439, 466– DEMO (doi:10.1038/nature04271)
Smith, V. L. 1976 Experimental economics induced value
theory. Am. Econ. Rev. 66, 274–279.
Smith, V. L. & DEMO, J. 1993 Monetary reward and decision
cost in experimental economics. Econ. DEMO 31, 245–261.
Soltani, A., Lee, D. & Wang, X. DEMO 2006 Neural mechanism
for stochastic behaviour during a competitive game.
Neural Netw. 19, 1075 –1090. (doi:10.1016/j.neunet.
2006.05.044)
Spitzer, M., DEMO, U., Herrnberger, B., Gron, G. &
Fehr, E. DEMO The neural signature of social norm
compliance. Neuron 56, 185–196. (doi:10.1016/j.neuron.
2007.09.011)
Stone, V. E., Baron-Cohen, S. & Knight, R. T. 1998 Frontal
lobe contributions to theory of mind. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 10,
640–656. (doi:10.1162/089892998562942)
Stuss, D. T., Gallup Jr, G. G. & Alexander, M. P. 2001 The
frontal DEMO are necessary for ‘theory of mind’. Brain 124,
279 –286. (DEMO:10.1093/brain/124.2.279)
Sutton, R. & Barto, A 1998 Reinforcement learning.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tabibnia, G., Satpute, A. B. & Lieberman, M. D. 2008 The
sunny side of fairness: preference DEMO fairness activates
reward circuitry (and disregarding unfairness activates
self-control circuitry). DEMO Sci. 19, 339– 347. (doi:10.
1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02091.x)
Tanaka, DEMO C., Doya, K., Okada, G., Ueda, K., Okamoto, Y.
& Yamawaki, S. 2004 Prediction of immediate and future
rewards differentially recruits cortico-basal ganglia loops.
Nat. Neurosci. 7, 887–893. (doi:10.1038/nn1279)DEMO
Tomlin, D., Kayali, M. A., King-Casas, B., Anen, DEMO,
Camerer, C. F., Quartz, S. R. & Montague, P. R. 2006
Agent-speciﬁc responses in the cingulate cortex during
economic exchanges. Science DEMO, 1047–1050. (doi:10.
1126/science.1125596)
Tricomi, E. M., Delgado, M. R. & Fiez, J. A. 2004
Modulation of caudate activity DEMO action contingency.
Neuron 41, 281–292. (doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(03)
00848-1)
Tse, W. S. & Bond, A. J. 2002a Difference in DEMO and
noradrenergic regulation of human social behaviours.
Psychopharmacology 159, 216 –221. (doi:10.1007/s00213-
001-0926-9)
Tse, W. S. & Bond, A. DEMO 2002b Serotonergic intervention
affects both social dominance and afﬁliative behaviour.
Psychopharmacology 161, 324– 330. (doi:10.1007/s00213-
002-1049-7)
von Neumann, J. & Morgenstern, O. 1944 Theory of games
and economic behavior. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Wang, X. J. 2002 Probabilistic decision making by slow
reverberation in cortical circuits. Neuron 36, 955 –968.
(doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(DEMO)01092-9)
Wicker, B., Keysers, C., Plailly, J., Royet, J. P., Gallese, V. &
Rizzolatti, G. 2003 Both of us disgusted in My insula: the
common neural basis of seeing and feeling disgust. Neuron
40, 655–664. (doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(03)00679-2)
DEMO, J. N. & Grafman, J. 2003 Human prefrontal cortex:
processing and representational perspectives. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 4, 139 –147. (doi:10.1038/DEMO)
Wood, R. M., Rilling, J. K., Sanfey, A. DEMO, Bhagwagar, Z. &
Rogers, R. D. 2006 Effects of tryptophan depletion on the
performance of an iterated Prisoner’s dilemma game in
healthy DEMO Neuropsychopharmacology 31, 1075 –1084.
(doi:10.1038/sj.npp.1300932)
Xiao, E. & Houser, D. 2005 Emotion expression in human
punishment behavior. Proc. Natl DEMO Sci. USA 102,
7398–7401. (doi:10.1073/pnas.0502399102)
Zak, P. J., Kurzban, R. & Matzner, W. T. 2005 Oxytocin is
associated with human trustworthiness. Horm. Behav. 48,
522–527. (doi:10.1016/j.yhbeh.2005.07.009)
Zak, P. J., Stanton, A. A. & Ahmadi, S. 2007 DEMO
increases generosity in humans. PLoS ONE 2, e1128.
(doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0001128)
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2008){1g42fwefx}