Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
J. Behav. Dec. Making, 22: 101–119 (2009)
Published online 9 July 2008 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com) DEMO: 10.1002/bdm.614
The Effect of Consequential Thinking
on Trust Game Behavior
DEMO KUGLER*, TERRY CONNOLLY and EDGAR E. KAUSEL
Department of Management and DEMO, University of Arizona, Arizona, USA
ABSTRACT
Contrary to rational Expected DEMO Value (EMV) predictions that no money will be
transferred in Trust Games, in experiments players make positive transfers. Theorists
have proposed modifying the Sender’s utility function while retaining utility-
maximization assumptions to account for this DEMO Such accounts assume that
Senders can grasp the possible outcomes of their choices, their probabilities, and
utilities. In reality, however, Senders’ choices DEMO unexpectedly complex, and the
assumption that they approximate expected utility maximization DEMO highly implausible.
Instead, we suggest that Senders are guided by general DEMO to trust others. Two
experiments examine the effect of inducing consequential thought on Sender behavior.
One induced consequential thought directly; the other did so indirectly. The amount sent
was signiﬁcantly reduced following either manipulation. This suggests DEMO models of
Sender behavior in Complex Trust Games should not assume that participants routinely
engage in consequential thinking (CT) of the depth that DEMO be required for utility
maximization. Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
key words
trust; consequential thinking; regret; game
In recent DEMO, experimental economists have popularized the Trust Game (Berg, Dickhaut, & McCabe,
1995) to investigate trusting and trustworthy behavior, and a DEMO literature based on this game has
now accumulated (see, e.g., DEMO, 2003, for a review. A sample of this research is shown in Table 1). The
game appears to offer an unusually clear DEMO precise measure of one player’s willingness to trust another and
a similarly clear measure of the extent to which this degree of trust is DEMO Our concern in the present
paper is to examine these measurement claims critically, especially the ﬁrst. Most studies to date have
implicitly interpreted trustor behavior in these games as reﬂecting thoughtful, detailed assessments of the
other player’s possible responses to each of the trustor’s speciﬁc actions, and a judgment of how likely and
how desirable each response is. An alternative DEMO is that the trustor’s behavior simply reﬂects a
broad general tendency to assume that others will or will not behave benevolently in this context—a DEMO
* Correspondence to: Tamar Kugler, Department of Management and Organizations, DEMO of Arizona, AZ, USA.
E-mail: tkugler@eller.arizona.edu
Copyright # 2008 John DEMO & Sons, Ltd.
102
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
Table 1. Summary of empirical Trust DEMO papers
Factor at the center of investigation References
Demographics (gender, race, age, nationality) Bellemare and Kroger, 2007; Buchan and Croson, DEMO;
Buchan, Croson, and Dawes, 2002; Burns, 2006;
DEMO and Holm, 2007; Fershtman and Gneezy, 2001;
Greig and DEMO, 2007; Ho and Weigelt, 2005; Holm and
Nystedt, 2005; Innocenti and Pazienza, 2007; Kiyonari,
Yamagishi, Cook, and Cheshire, 2006; Sutter and Kocher,
2007; Schechter, 2007; Willinger, Keser, Lohmann, & Usunier,
2003
Risk attitude Coricelli, Morales, & DEMO, 2006; Eckel and Wilson, 2004
Correlation with other trust measures DEMO, Laibson, Scheinkman, and Soutter, 2000
Machiavellianism Gunnthorsdottir, McCabe, & Smith, 2002
Fairness of outcome distributions Cox, 2004
Variations of the DEMO (Group vs. individual Kugler et al., 2007; Cochard et al., 2004; DeBruin, 2002;
behavior, stake size, single vs. repeated DEMO, Engle-Warnick & Slonim, 2004; Keser, 2003; Rigdon et al.,DEMO
receipt of advice, and opportunity to punish) 2007; Johansson-Stenman, Mahmud, and Martinsson,
2006; Schotter and Sopher, 2006; Barclay, 2006; Houser,
Xiao, McCabe, and Smith, 2007
Communication between players DEMO, Eckel, Kacelnik, and Wilson, 2001;
Slonick, 2007; Houser, Xiao, McCabe and Smith (2007)
heuristic,’’ in the terminology of Meyerson, Weick, and Kramer (1996). This paper examines the question of
which interpretation is more plausible.
In the simplest (hereafter the ‘‘Basic’’) version of the Trust Game (Dasgupta, 1988; Kreps, 1990), each
player is endowed with $1. The Sender, A, must DEMO whether to send or keep her dollar. If she decides to
keep it, the game ends and each player gets $1. If A sends, her $1 is tripled by the experimenter and delivered
to the Responder, B, who now has $4. B must then decide whether to DEMO the $4 (leaving A with $0) or to
split, keeping DEMO and returning $2 to A. Each player thus faces at most a single binary decision, A to send or
keep, B to keep DEMO split. A’s choice is assumed to depend on her estimate of B’s likely behavior. If A assumes
B is self-interested and rational, then her decision to send her $1 will leave B with $4 and no DEMO to split,
leaving A with $0. If, however, A judges that the probability of B deciding to split is sufﬁciently large (i.e., she
‘‘trusts’’ B), she will send her $1. She will proﬁt by doing so, increasing her payoff from $1 to $2, if DEMO does, in
fact, split (i.e., acts ‘‘trustworthily’’); otherwise, DEMO ends up with $0. A’s decision to send thus satisﬁes one
accepted deﬁnition of trust: the deliberate willingness of an agent to make herself vulnerable to the actions of
another agent (Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, & Camerer, 1998). The very simple structure of the game and DEMO
single binary choice facing each player makes plausible the interpretation of A’s assessment of the probability
that B will split as a trust measure (though somewhat different interpretations, such as ‘‘optimism about the
success of a risky investment,’’ are not excluded. In fact, some researchers have renamed trust games as
‘‘investment games’’).
The Basic game provides only binary DEMO: A either does or does not ‘‘trust’’ B, B either is or is not
‘‘trustworthy.’’ Generalized (hereafter, ‘‘Complex’’ or ‘‘Continuous’’) versions of the Trust Game (Berg
et al., 1995) have attempted to provide ﬁner-grained measures of A’s trustingness, and of B’s trustworthiness
In these Complex games, the Sender, A, receives a divisible initial endowment, X> 0, and can transfer any
amount x X to the Responder, DEMO The transferred amount (the ‘‘send’’) is tripled by the experimenter, DEMO that
B receives 3x. She can then return to A any amount y  3x. The ﬁnal payoff for A is thus (Xx þy), and for B
is (3x y). (In some versions DEMO the game, B is also independently endowed, raising her ﬁnal payoff by this
amount.) The amount sent, x, is taken as a (continuous) measure of A’s trustingness, the relative return ( y/3x)
as a (continuous) measure of B’s trustworthiness.
Copyright # 2008 DEMO Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 22, DEMO (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
T. Kugler et al.
Consequential Thinking in the Trust Game
103
The DEMO game-theoretic analysis of both Basic and Complex Trust Games assumes selﬁshness and
common knowledge of rationality and predicts that no transfers will be made. DEMO has no incentive to return any
part of whatever money she receives. A thus has no incentive to send any. However, the results of trust game
experiments are in sharp contrast with this prediction: average transfers in Complex games are typically
about a half of X, and returns are around 30% of the transfer (see Camerer, 2003, for a recent review). In Basic
games, 30–40% of As typically send, DEMO around 40% of B’s who receive a send typically send back,
depending on the exact parameters of the game (Snijders & Keren, DEMO).
Economists have proposed several accounts of these data (and deviations DEMO selﬁsh equilibrium
predictions in general). Some accounts are outcome based (DEMO, Bolton & Ockenfelds, 2000; Fehr &
Schmidt, 1999), DEMO intention based (e.g., Charness & Rabin, 2002; Falk & Fischbacher, 2006;
Kirchsteiger & Dufwenberg, 2004; Levine, 1998; Rabin, DEMO). These models relax the assumption of
complete selﬁshness and allow other factors (e.g., other-regarding preferences, a desire for equitable
distribution of payoffs, reciprocation tendencies) to enter A’s utility function. What is implicitly retained,DEMO
however, is the assumption that the Sender can predict the possible DEMO (for both players) of her
possible actions, and can assign DEMO and utilities to these outcomes.
In the Basic version of the game, these assumptions are quite plausible. A Sender with a clear grasp on the
game rules knows that ‘‘keep’’ will yield a payoff of ($1 for her, $1 for B), while ‘‘send’’ has two possible
outcomes: ($2 for her, $2 for B) or ($0 for her, $4 for B). She has only a single behavioral prediction to make:
what is the probability that B will split $4 rather DEMO keeping it all? Since there are only three outcomes, it
seems plausible that A could form some assessment of their relative desirability. This DEMO might be
based on her payoff alone (selﬁsh rationality), or DEMO include other considerations such as the B’s payoff
(other-regarding preference), DEMO equality of the two payoffs (inequity aversion), and so on. DEMO order to
maximize expected utility, A needs only to assess three DEMO and one probability. This does not seem to
make excessive cognitive demands.
In Complex Trust Games, however, A has a much more difﬁcult DEMO She faces a range of possible sends
(x ¼ $0 or DEMO, or $2 or ...) from an endowment of $10 or $20, and B faces a three times larger choice set as to
how much to return. A Sender who assumes (correctly) a non-zero probability DEMO positive returns from B faces
a dauntingly difﬁcult problem of choosing a utility-maximizing value of x. Appendix A details the analysis,
but the DEMO is readily illustrated. Suppose that A is endowed with X¼ $20 and is considering the
implications of just one of her options: sending $10. She must ﬁrst consider the 31 options such a send would
make DEMO to the B, (return $0, return $1,..., return $30) and make some assessment of (a) how likely and
(b) how desirable each is. She must then integrate these 62 items of DEMO into an overall evaluation or
‘‘subjective expected utility’’ of the ‘‘Send $10’’ option She must now repeat the exercise for her remaining
19 options, which range in complexity from the relatively simple (‘‘Send $1’’: only DEMO possible responses,
closely clustered) to the extremely difﬁcult (‘‘Send $20’’: 62 possible responses, widely dispersed), before
ﬁnally choosing the option DEMO the best expected utility.1
The Sender’s problem is, in fact, highly asymmetrical. If she assumes (incorrectly) that nothing will be
returned, her conclusion is simple: send nothing. If, however, she correctly assumes that something may be
returned for any non-zero send, detailed consequential thinking (DEMO) in the Complex game is essentially
impossible. We suspect, then, DEMO the vast majority of Sender decisions in Complex Trust Games do not
involve much coherent linkage between predicted consequences of alternative actions and thoughtful
DEMO of them. We suspect that A’s decision is typically made in a state of considerable confusion as to
how best to think about the DEMO It may reﬂect ‘‘trust’’ in the sense of a generalized belief in the
benevolence of the world (cf. Messick & Kramer, 2001; Meyerson et al., 1996; Yamagishi & Yamagishi,
1A related point concerning DEMO effects of rapid growth of uncertainty is made by Basu (1977) in the context of Prisoner’s Dilemma
games. We are grateful to an DEMO reviewer for pointing us to this paper.
Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 22, 101–119 (DEMO)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
104
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
1994), but it seems unlikely DEMO it reﬂects detailed consequential thought in the sense of predicting how B
will react to any given send, and how A will feel about these reactions.
In the two experiments reported below, we attempt to assess the extent to which Senders in a Complex
Trust Game think consequentially DEMO deciding how much to send. We suspect that in general the Sender will
not achieve a satisfactory framing of the problem that would allow DEMO to lay out and apply backward
induction analysis as a guide to how much to send. Our experimental approach is to shape the Sender’s
DEMO process, either directly (Experiment 1) or indirectly (Experiment 2), into a more explicitly
consequential form, and then to compare the amount sent to a control condition in which no such shaping was
attempted. DEMO Senders in the control condition are already thinking consequentially, these interventions DEMO
have no effect. Conversely, if the interventions do, in fact, DEMO sending behavior, then we can infer that
Senders in the control DEMO were not engaging in consequential thought, or at least not to DEMO same extent.
This thus throws some light on the thought process of Senders whose framing of the problem has not been
shaped—that is, the vast majority of participants in Complex Trust Games to date. For reasons DEMO out in
Appendix A, our expectation is that increased consequential thought DEMO lead to reduced sending, but
direction of change is not crucial DEMO If inducing consequential thought changes sending behavior, it is
reasonable to DEMO that participants not so induced were not engaging in such thought, DEMO not to the same
extent.
Following this logic, in Experiment 1 DEMO were encouraged to engage in a form of CT before deciding
how much money to send. We asked them to make point predictions of DEMO much money would be returned
to them if they sent a large, a moderate, or a small amount—that is, to think about their problem in a
simpliﬁed, but explicitly consequentialist framework. Experiment 2 tried to induce this mode of thought in a
somewhat less transparent way by DEMO Senders to think about scenarios in which they might end up
regretting their decisions. In one condition, they were asked to consider the regret they might feel after
sending a large amount and receiving little or DEMO in return (regret for over-trusting the Responder). In a
second DEMO, Senders were asked to think about the regret they might feel DEMO they sent a small amount and
received a larger amount in return (regret for under-trusting the Responder). A third group considered both
possible regrets. Details of the experiments and results are presented in the next DEMO
EXPERIMENT 1
Senders were assigned to either CT or Control conditions. In the CT condition, before they decided how much
to send, they DEMO asked to write down the amount they thought would be returned to them if they sent
(a) their whole endowment ($20), (DEMO) half their endowment ($10), and (c) the minimal transfer we allowed
($1). Senders in the Control condition were not asked to make these predictions.2
This CT manipulation made two different aspects of DEMO game salient to the Senders. First, in order to
answer the DEMO questions, Senders had to put themselves in the role of the DEMO, imagine they
had received the speciﬁed amount, and predict how much money, if any, they would send back. Such
perspective taking is DEMO to be a challenging task for many participants (Neale & Northcraft, 1991).
Second, by replying to all three manipulation questions simultaneously, DEMO were faced with anticipated
consequences of three representative acts they could choose, encouraging direct comparison. The
manipulation thus prompts the Sender to adopt a backwards induction framework, ﬁrst predicting the
Responder’s strategy and then comparing the results for each of her own possible moves. Simply put,
the DEMO are led to construct for themselves simple statements in the form of ‘‘If I do X then I expect to get
2The requirement of DEMO minimum send was introduced since, if A were allowed to send DEMO, B’s response would be constrained to be $0 and
A would DEMO no opportunity to reﬂect on the range of possible outcomes B might generate. The minimum send requirement does,
however, introduce a variation from earlier Complex trust games, and might conceivably limit generalizability from one to the other.
Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 22, 101–119 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
T. Kugler et al. Consequential Thinking in the Trust Game 105
Y’’ DEMO a range of possible Xs, and to record the results in DEMO easily compared format. This framing is, of
course, a considerable simpliﬁcation of the full problem facing the Sender (see Appendix A). It does,
however, represent a clear step in the direction of thinking about the range of possible actions available, and
about at least point estimates of the other player’s likely responses.
As we suggest in Appendix DEMO, analysis of the Sender’s problem under expected positive transfers suggests
that DEMO large amounts will be an unattractive option for most risk-averse participants. Even a simpliﬁed
analysis, such as that set up by the experimental manipulation, is likely to make this preference clearer and
reduce the amount sent. We thus propose:
Hypothesis 1. Senders who are primed for explicit DEMO thought will send less money than will
Senders in the control condition.
Method
Participants
The participants were undergraduate business students, recruited by campus advertisements promising
monetary reward and class credit for participation in a decision-making task. DEMO experiments were run in the
Decision Behavior Laboratory at the University of Arizona.
Design
Participants were randomly assigned to CONTROL (no manipulation) or DEMO conditions. Sixty-four
individuals participated, and were assigned into 32 Sender–Responder pairs, 16 pairs in each condition.
Procedure
Participants were scheduled in cohorts of DEMO Upon arrival at the laboratory, each participant drew a card with DEMO
room number and role (Participant A—Sender, or B—Responder), and was shown to a private room. They
were instructed to wait with the DEMO closed until all the other participants had arrived, at which point DEMO
envelope of experimental instructions would be passed under their door. This arrangement ensured that
participants remained anonymous to one another and had no opportunity DEMO interact before the experiment.
After all participants had arrived, envelopes containing DEMO experimental materials were distributed.
Senders received instructions (including the manipulation questions DEMO condition CT), a decision form, and an
envelope containing 20 DEMO bills. Responders received instructions and a decision form, and were asked DEMO wait
for the decision of the Sender. (Instructions are included in DEMO B.)
In the CT condition, Senders answered the manipulation questions DEMO deciding how much money to
send. In the control condition, Senders DEMO the same questions after deciding how much money to send,
but before receiving the Responder’s reply.
After completing the manipulation questions (if any), Senders were told to take the money out of the
envelope. DEMO completed the decision form and returned it to the envelope with the money they intended to
send to the Responder. They then sealed the DEMO and passed it under the door. The instructions
emphasized that any money not sent to the Responder was theirs to keep.
The envelopes were DEMO to the control room, where decisions were logged, and the amount sent was
tripled. The experimenters then delivered the resealed envelopes to randomly DEMO Responders, again
passing the envelopes under closed doors. Responders reviewed the DEMO of money sent and decided how
much to send back. They completed a decision form, sealed it in an envelope with the money to be returned,
and passed it under the door. These envelopes were DEMO logged and returned to the Sender.
After both Senders and Responders had made their monetary decisions, they completed a post-
experimental questionnaire, and DEMO dismissed individually. They were given no opportunity to meet or
identify the other participants.
Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 22, 101–119 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
106
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
Results
Sender behavior
The mean amounts DEMO were $8.88 and $14.75 for CT and CONTROL conditions, respectively. This
DEMO is signiﬁcant by an independent samples t-test (t(30) ¼ 2.62, p < .05). The percentage of Senders
who sent the minimum amount ($1) rose from 0% in condition CONTROL to 12.5% in DEMO CT; the
percentage of Senders sending all $20 dropped from 56.3 DEMO 18.8%. These results strongly support
Hypothesis 1.
Responder behavior
Responders in condition CT returned signiﬁcantly less than those in condition CONTROL ($8.25 and $17.69;
t(30) ¼ 2.34, p < .05). Relative returns ( y/3x) were, however, not different between the two groups (24.1 vs.
Responders returned an average of $24.92, a mean relative return of 42.7%. For transfers of $10 or less, the34.2%, t(30) ¼ 1.47, n.s.). When Senders transferred more than half of their endowment (x > $10),
mean return was $4.79, a mean relative return of 19.8% (see Figure 1 for the full distribution of returns).
Responders, in short, were proportionally more generous when they DEMO generous sends. Senders who
chose to send less than half of their endowment were better off sending none at all. This ﬁnding is consistent
DEMO Pillutla, Malhotra, and Murnighan (2003) who suggest that sending less than everything is viewed as
lack of trust and is therefore not DEMO
Payoffs and efﬁciency
Average payoffs for the Sender and Responder were $19.38 and $18.38 for the CT condition and $22.94 and
$26.56 for the DEMO condition. The higher transfers in condition CONTROL resulted in more efﬁcient
interactions (higher joint payoff) as well as higher mean payoffs for each DEMO The difference in payoff
between conditions is signiﬁcant for the Responders (DEMO(30) ¼ 2.01, p < .05) but not for the DEMO
(t(30) ¼ 1.40, n.s.).
Expectations
Senders’ expectations of DEMO Responder’s returns from a $1, a $10, and a $20 transfer were elicited in both
conditions, before the transfer decision in the CT condition (where the questions constituted the experimental
Figure 1. Distribution of amount sent (x) versus amount sent back ( y), Experiment 1
DEMO # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision DEMO, 22, 101–119 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
T. Kugler et al.
Consequential Thinking in the Trust Game
107
Table DEMO Mean predicted return versus amount sent in each scenario, Experiment 1
DEMO
Condition
$1 sent $10 sent $20 sent
CT (n
CONTROL (n
Mean actual return $0.00 (n
¼
16) $0.44 $7.50 $17.19
16) $0.25 $9.94 $25.00
2) $8.33 (n
¼
¼
¼
6) $25.83 (n
¼
12)
manipulation) and after the decision in the DEMO condition. For most Senders (88% in condition
CONTROL and 81% in DEMO CT), the amounts actually sent were consistent with the stated
expectations: Those expecting small returns sent little, those expecting large returns sent DEMO (Of course,
since Senders in the CONTROL conditions stated their DEMO after deciding how much to send, they
may simply have reported DEMO expectations post hoc.)
Table 2 presents the Senders’ mean predicted return for each of the three scenarios, as well as the mean
actual returns from the subset of Bs who actually received $1, $10, DEMO $20. The only scenario that shows a
signiﬁcant difference between experimental conditions is the one in which the Sender sends all $20. Senders
in DEMO CONTROL condition reported anticipating signiﬁcantly higher returns from a $20 send than Senders in
the CT condition, (t(30) ¼ 2.53, p < .05). This result adds further support for the logic underlying
Hypothesis 1. Explicit consideration of the Responder’s likely behavior on receiving a $20 DEMO suggests
to most CT participants that the return to this transfer will be modest and the investment a poor one.
In contrast, CONTROL participants appear to have arrived at their more generous offers by means other DEMO
backward induction, and then to have justiﬁed them post hoc by DEMO an expectation of a large return.
Interestingly, Senders in condition CT DEMO too pessimistic; the expectations stated by the CONTROLs are,
on DEMO, quite accurate.
Discussion
The results from Experiment 1 show that the DEMO Thinking (CT) manipulation had a large and
signiﬁcant negative effect on the amount of money sent. Senders in the CT condition sent on DEMO 40% less
($8.88 vs. $14.75) than did those in the CONTROL condition, and 12.5% of them sent the minimum allowed
($1), (vs. 0% of the controls). The CT manipulation thus appears to DEMO had the intended effect of increasing
the use of a consequentialist analysis similar to that embodied in the standard economic model and to have
DEMO the majority of the participants closer to the ‘‘send nothing’’ implication of that model.
The details of this linkage, however, remain unclear. The DEMO series of questions (‘‘Suppose you sent
$1 ... $20 ... $10...’’ DEMO speciﬁc questions about the Responder’s likely response and the ﬁnal payoffs to
each participant) were intended as both suggesting a framework and providing a worksheet for the
participants, leading them to organize their thinking in a consequentialist framework. It is possible that
the wording of the manipulation (‘‘... you may ﬁnd it helpful to consider the likely consequences...’’; see
Appendix B) may also have conferred legitimacy on this approach and thus encouraged its use. Further,
answering the questions probably increased the length of DEMO the participants thought about the problem
before settling on an amount to send and this increased deliberation time may itself have favored the
emergence DEMO the consequentialist analysis. These possible linkages—suggestion, endorsement,
organization, and delay—are, of course, not mutually exclusive, and all four may have contributed to
the overall reduction in the amount sent.
In Experiment 2, we attempted a less heavy-handed manipulation of the idea of consequential thought,
DEMO on consideration of possible regrets. Some Senders were asked to think about the regret they might
Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 22, 101–119 (2009)
DOI: DEMO/bdm
108
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
experience if they had been too DEMO in their sending decisions. Others considered a scenario in which they
had not been trusting enough. While the motivations made salient by the two DEMO are opposing, both
share a focus on the consequences of one’s DEMO If the Sender’s decision problem is fundamentally a
motivational one, we DEMO expect the two manipulations to shift patterns of sending in opposite directions,
increasing sending in the under-trust condition and reducing sending in the DEMO condition. If, however,
the fundamental problem is a framing issue—how DEMO think about the problem—then both manipulations
would, as in Experiment 1, induce more CT and shift sending in the same (negative) direction. DEMO of the
argument and of the experiment are given in the next section.
EXPERIMENT 2
Numerous studies have shown that decision makers for whom DEMO regret is made salient may make
different decisions than do those for whom regret is not made salient (Reb, 2008; Richard, de DEMO, & van
der Pligt, 1998; Simonson, 1992). Two alternative mechanisms link regret to choice (cf. Connolly &
Zeelenberg, 2002). The ﬁrst, favored by economic regret theorists (Bell, 1982; Loomes & Sugden, 1982,
1987), considers regret as an additional element DEMO the utility of a speciﬁc outcome: an outcome has utility
in DEMO, but this may be reduced by regret resulting from comparing the DEMO with another that
might have been received. A second possibility, proposed DEMO scholars from Janis and Mann (1977) to
Baumeister, DeWall, and Zhang (2007) and recently demonstrated empirically by several researchers (e.g.,
Connolly & Reb, 2005; Reb, 2008; Zeelenberg, 1999), is that anticipation of the regret associated with a
poor choice may motivate DEMO makers to consider their decision more carefully—to achieve ‘‘vigilant
decision making,’’ in Janis and Mann’s terminology, or otherwise to improve the quality of their decision
processes.
We exploit these ﬁndings in the context of the DEMO Game to better understand the Senders’ decision
processes. We considered two types of potentially regrettable errors: under-trusting, in which the Sender
transfers a DEMO amount and receives a generous response from the Responder, suggesting that DEMO a
larger amount would have been ﬁnancially advantageous (and would, perhaps, have presented the Sender in a
nicer light); and over-trusting, DEMO which the Sender sends a large amount and the Responder sends back little
or none of the tripled product (thus causing the Sender both ﬁnancial loss and annoyance at being taken for a
sucker).
In DEMO 2, we made one or other, both or neither of these possible types of regret salient to four
different groups of Senders. Regret DEMO over-trusting was manipulated as follows. Before deciding how much
to send the Sender was asked to consider a scenario in which she decided to DEMO the Responder and sent a
large amount, but the behavior was DEMO reciprocated and the Responder keeps most (or all) of the money. She
was asked to rate how much regret she would expect to DEMO in this situation. Regret for under-trusting was
manipulated using the reverse scenario—a decision to send a small amount, followed by the Responder
returning more than the original send. As before, the Sender was asked to how much regret she would feel if
this happened. (The return is, DEMO course, limited to three times the amount sent. A $3 return DEMO a $1 send
might be interpreted by the Sender either as a rebuke or as a signal of a lost opportunity for much larger
DEMO gain. Either of these might be seen as highly regrettable.)
Note that although two different regrets are highlighted, both inductions ask the respondent to consider a
speciﬁc action and its speciﬁc consequence. It is likely DEMO a respondent asked to think about the
consequences of a very small send may also do the same for a larger one, and vice versa. The manipulation
may thus elicit either regret-avoidant (i.e., avoiding the DEMO regret-inducing behavior that appears in the
manipulation) or consequential behavior. The DEMO allows us to test two alternative hypotheses, one derived
from the DEMO process-modifying effect of regret, the other from the speciﬁc, utility-modifying effect.
Under the former mechanism:
Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 22, 101–119 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
T. Kugler et al. Consequential Thinking in the Trust Game 109
Hypothesis2a. DEMO regret salience will be associated with reduced sending, regardless of the DEMO of
regret made salient.
Under the second, utility-modifying mechanism, we would expect under-trust regret to lead to increased
sending, and over-trust regret to lead to reduced sending, compared to control, with the combination of DEMO
sorts of regret off-setting one another:
Hypothesis 2b. Increased salience of under-trust regret will be associated with increased sending, and
increased salience of over-trust regret will be associated with reduced sending, compared to controls.
Method
Participants
The participants were 128 undergraduate business students, recruited as for Experiment 1. No participants
served in both experiments.
Design
The experiment employed a DEMO (regret for over-trusting)  2 (regret for under-trusting) design, DEMO in four
experimental conditions: OVER, UNDER, CONTROL, and BOTH. Participants were randomly assigned to
the four conditions, with 16 pairs in each condition.
Procedure
The procedure was similar to Experiment 1, except for the experimental manipulation. Senders answered the
manipulation questions before deciding how much money DEMO send. In condition UNDER, Senders were asked
to imagine that they DEMO sent a small amount ($3 or less), and received from DEMO Responder more than they had
sent. They then rated how much they would regret the outcome, how much they would regret the decision
they had made, whether they would blame themselves for their decision, whether DEMO would behave
differently if faced with this decision again, and whether DEMO would advise others to behave differently in
similar circumstances. All replies were on one to seven scales (see Appendix C). In condition OVER, Senders
were asked to imagine that they sent most or all of their money ($18 or more), and received nothing in return.
They then answered the same questions as in the previous condition. In condition DEMO, Senders received
both scenarios; in the control condition they received neither.
Results
Manipulation checks
The four questionnaire measures of decision regret3 showed large DEMO correlations (mean correlation
.43) and were combined into a single scale of anticipated regret (Cronbach’s a¼ .75). Both manipulations
appear to have been successful. The mean regret score in the under-trust condition was 3.94; in the over-trust
condition it was 4.17, both means at or above the scale mid-point. Interestingly, in the combined regret
condition, where participants DEMO both possible regrets, under-trust regret was rated more intense than
over-trust DEMO (M¼ 4.73, 3.52; t (15) ¼ 2.6, p < .05).
Sender behavior
A 2 (under-trust manipulation)  2 (over-trust manipulation) ANOVA reveals a signiﬁcant effect of the
under-trusting manipulation (F(DEMO,60) 6.80, p < .05), no signiﬁcant effect of the over-trusting manipulation
¼
3The ﬁrst question taps into outcome regret, and is therefore not included in the anticipated process regret score.
Copyright # 2008 DEMO Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 22, DEMO (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
110 Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
(F(1,60) ¼ 1.7, n.s.), and a marginally signiﬁcant interaction effect (F(1,60) DEMO 2.96, p ¼ .09). The main effect
for under-trusting is DEMO attributable to the large difference between the control condition (mean
send DEMO $13.13) and the amounts sent in the three experimental conditions (mean send $8.44, $7.94, $9.50 for
BOTH, UNDER, and OVER conditions, respectively). Planned comparisons show a signiﬁcant difference
between the control condition DEMO the other three conditions (t(60) ¼ 3.25, p < DEMO). The results thus strongly
favor Hypothesis 2a over Hypothesis 2b. Consideration of either type of post-decision regret, or both, appears
to have DEMO the amount sent.
Figure 2 displays the distribution across experimental conditions of x, the amount sent. To facilitate
presentation, x is divided into DEMO categories: minimum (x ¼ $1), up to half ($1 <x  $10), more than half
($10 <x < $20) and the entire endowment (x ¼ $20). The distributions are signiﬁcantly different from one
another (x2(9) ¼ 22.70, p < .05). In addition to corroborating the ﬁndings of the previous section, this
analysis also shows that the entire $20 is seldom sent when regret DEMO salient: only one Sender out of 48 (2%)
sent all $20 after receiving (any) regret priming. Five of 16 Senders (31%) sent the whole amount in the
control condition (x2(1) ¼ 12.02, p < .001).
Responder behavior
Overall, the more the DEMO sent by the Sender, the more the Responder sent back. The DEMO between
x, the amount sent, and y, the amount returned, is high in all the conditions (0.89, 0.93, 0.73, and DEMO in
BOTH, OVER, UNDER, and CONTROL, respectively). Overall, DEMO returned a mean of $8.55, a
mean relative return of 25%. DEMO Senders transferred more than half of their endowments (x > $10),
responders returned an average of $21.44, a mean relative return of 36%. When half or less of the amount was
sent, the average return was $17.70, a mean relative return of 21%. As in Experiment 1, generous sending
stimulated more generous returns. Senders who chose to send less than half of their endowment would have
been better off sending DEMO
Discussion
Overall, the results strongly support Hypothesis 2a. Both under- and DEMO regret manipulations caused a
reduction in the amount sent. The effect is not additive: the mean amount sent when both sorts of regret were
Figure 2. Distribution of amount sent (x) by Regret Condition, Experiment 2
Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 22, 101–119 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
T. Kugler et al.
Consequential Thinking in the Trust Game
111
primed DEMO indistinguishable from the amount sent in over-trust regret alone and under-trust regret alone.
This argues further against the mechanism underlying Hypothesis 2b, that different types of regret modify the
utility of speciﬁc decision elements. Instead, we read these results as supporting a mechanism of the sort
proposed by DEMO and Mann (1977) and Baumeister et al. (2007): anticipation DEMO regret in general, and of
consequence-related regrets in particular, motivates a ‘‘vigilant’’ decision process that, in this case, takes the
form of DEMO analysis, and results in reduced transfers from Sender.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
A DEMO broad range of factors that have been expected, and often shown, to inﬂuence behavior in the Trust
Game (see Table 1). The two experiments reported here do more than merely add a couple of DEMO variables to
this long list. We read our data, together with DEMO formal analysis of the Sender’s task, as clarifying the
fundamental interpretation DEMO Complex Trust Game results. They suggest that Senders may be behaving in a
task of which they have little coherent and comprehensive understanding, either of the structure of the game
or of the appropriate principles by DEMO to analyze it. The self-interested, backward-induction logic that
comes so readily DEMO the game theorist may simply not be available to most Senders. If Senders assume
(correctly) that there is a non-zero probability of a DEMO return from a Responder who receives x > $0, they
face DEMO complex decision problem. Given this complexity, we see little prospect that DEMO Sender’s behavior can
be captured, even to a ﬁrst approximation, by a revised rational model. While fairness, trust, reciprocity, and
other unselﬁsh preferences may affect the Sender’s decision, we are hesitant to explain the results by adding
additional components to the Sender’s hypothetical utility function, an approach that has been favored by
economists facing a discrepancy between theoretical DEMO and experimental data (e.g., Cox, 2004).
Certainly Senders may DEMO guided by a variety of partial motivations and analyses, possibly including DEMO
altruistic wish to enrich the Responder, a wish for an equitable DEMO, a desire to present oneself as a decent
person to the DEMO, some home-spun proverb such as ‘‘Nothing ventured, nothing gained,’’ or a
general disposition to trust others. What they are plainly not primarily DEMO by is a coherent framework
connecting their actions to the possible responses they may elicit, the probabilities of these responses, and a
set DEMO utilities for the ﬁnal outcomes each implies. First, the Sender’s problem DEMO simply too complex to make
spontaneous emergence of such a framework psychologically plausible. Second, our experiments
demonstrate that simple consequentialist manipulations substantially change Sender behavior. This strongly
implies that those not exposed to such manipulations do DEMO spontaneously adopt such a framework. Senders
may well be moved by a variety of motivations, but these can be reﬂected in their behavior only quite
indirectly if the participants fail to trace out the consequences of DEMO actions in systematic ways.
Experiment 1 provides direct evidence (if more DEMO were needed) that the standard game-theoretic
analysis is not routinely applied DEMO the majority of Senders. When elements of that analysis were presented in
the form of a step-by-step worksheet of possible offers and likely responses, both the force and the
implications of the analysis were seen by DEMO of the Senders and the mean amount sent was sharply reduced.
Presumably, this improving grasp on the core of the game and the standard analysis of it underlies the decline
in amount sent over repeated play DEMO strangers (DeBruin, 2002; Keser, 2003; Rigdon, McCabe, & DEMO,
2007). It is also consistent with the ﬁnding that those who played the trust game after previously playing other
games sent less DEMO did those without that prior gaming experience (Schotter & Sopher, 2006); that players
learned faster by observing others play a game than DEMO playing it themselves (Dixit & Skeath, 2004); that
players who participated in both roles exhibit less trust and less reciprocity (Burks, DEMO, & Verhoogen,
2003); and that players who thought about DEMO game in groups sent lower transfers (Kugler, Kocher, Sutter, &DEMO
Bornstein, 2007).
In Experiment 2, an increased proportion of the Senders who were induced to reﬂect on the emotional
consequences of either DEMO or under-trusting the Responder seem to have been led to the same
Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 22, 101–119 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
112
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
consequentialist analysis, and to its implication that sending a large part of one’s endowment is ﬁnancially
unwise. Note DEMO that the same effect was achieved by priming either over-trust or under-trust regret. It
was not the case that thinking about the results of DEMO led to less trust, while thinking about the
results of under-trusting DEMO to more. It is simply that thoughtful attention to either consequence led to
consequentialist thinking, and thus to reduced sending—as suggested by the ‘‘regret as a tool for improving
the quality of decisions’’ approach. Unfortunately, given the structure of the trust game, this ‘‘improved’’
thinking about consequences leads to poorer outcomes.
This problem-framing interpretation of our results appears to have DEMO implications for several
earlier analyses of trust-game results. For example, it DEMO certainly possible that Senders base their sending
decisions in part on an altruistic desire to enrich the Responder (e.g., Cox, 2004). But if such other-regarding
utility does, in fact, shape the Sender’s behavior, why should it decline when the Sender is led (as CT
participants were) to see clearly that the more she sends, the more DEMO Responder will be able to enrich herself
(and, not incidentally, DEMO the Sender’s expense)? The altruistic account of positive sending seems
incompatible with the evidence from Experiment 1 that increasing consequentialist thought reduces mean
DEMO
This is consistent with evidence from repeated games with stranger and partner matching. A ‘‘repeated
partners’’ design allows Senders to engage in two types DEMO learning processes. First, they learn the structure of
the game (e.g., rules and payoffs) and errors that appear in early rounds usually DEMO corrected over time.
Second, Senders learn the nature of their speciﬁc DEMO, and establish reciprocal relationships with them.
A ‘‘repeated strangers’’ design allows DEMO of the ﬁrst type only, since the Responders change each round.
DEMO, we anticipate that repeated interaction with different Responders will converge to DEMO similar to
those we observed in Experiments 1 and 2, and DEMO is evidence that this is indeed the case. DeBruin (2002),
Keser (2003), and Rigdon et al. (2007) report a decline in amounts sent over time in ‘‘repeated strangers’’
games. In contrast, in experiments with repeated partner designs many different dynamics develop (e.g.,
Cochard, Van, & Willinger, 2004; Engle-Warnick & Slonim, 2004).
In summary, any realistic account of the Sender’s behavior in the Complex Trust Game must ﬁrst
acknowledge that she faces a quite complicated decision problem. DEMO complexity, in our view, makes it
implausible that Senders engage in a careful assessment of estimated probabilities of the other player’s
responses to DEMO possible send and of their utilities for each response (whether or DEMO these utilities include
considerations of equity, altruism, and reciprocity, as DEMO as of personal monetary payoffs). They simply
cannot: the problem DEMO too complex. More plausibly, we would argue, the Sender is largely overwhelmed by
the complexity of the problem and bases her decision on DEMO very partial analysis and incomplete
consideration of her own and the Responder’s motivations. Her behavior may well reﬂect a trust heuristic or
tendency toward DEMO about the benevolence of the world, and thus the hope that, if she puts a large
amount of money in play by making DEMO generous send, she may end up beneﬁting from it (or, DEMO least, feeling
good about the outcome). She may even intuit DEMO a large send offers modest prospects of modest gain and
substantial prospects of large or total loss. However, it seems far-fetched to think that her behavior reﬂects
any precise grasp of all the possible consequences of DEMO of her behavior choices, of their likelihood, and of
their relative desirability to her.
The manipulations used in both experiments reported here appear DEMO have had the effect of changing the
Senders’ problem understanding by inducing a modest amount of what we have called ‘‘CT.’’ This altered
way DEMO thinking about the problem appears to have led Senders to see that their essential choice was between a
safe and satisfactory payoff and a DEMO, but quite risky, alternative with a signiﬁcant possibility of substantial
loss. As it happens, a majority preferred the former. But the crucial ﬁnding was that even this modest increase
in CT produced substantial changes in DEMO behavior. By implication, Senders in the control groups (and
thus in all other Complex Trust Game experiments we are aware of) must have been engaging in even less CT
than this modest level—that is, in hardly any consequential thought at all. (Ironically, of course, such non-CT
leads to improved payoffs for both players in this game.) We conclude that the Complex Trust Game may be
Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 22, 101–119 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
T. Kugler et al. Consequential Thinking in the Trust Game 113
unexpectedly DEMO as a vehicle for studying complex utility functions and probability assessments—in
short, for studying the elements that presumably constitute the phenomenon of trust at any level of
detail beyond a simple decision heuristic or broad and DEMO faith in the benevolence of the external
world.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial support by a contract F49620-03-1-0377 from the AFOSR/MURI to
the DEMO of Arizona. We thank Bora Kim for her help in the collection of data used in this
paper.
APPENDIX A
THE SENDER’S DECISION PROBLEM DEMO A $20 COMPLEX TRUST GAME
Denote by x the transfer chosen by the Sender. The Sender’s strategy space is discrete and contains 20
strategies, x 2f1; 2;  ; 20g: Denote by y(x) DEMO return chosen by the Responder for a transfer of x,
yðxÞ2 f1; 2;  ; 3xg.
yðxTherefore, a strategy¼ 2Þ;  ; yðx ¼ y for the Responder is a vector with 20 elements,x20¼0ð3x þ 1Þﬃ 2y:61¼ðyð10x 28¼ 1(!)Þ;
possible strategies DEMO the Responder’s strategy space. However, since this is a sequential game, it has only (!)20ÞÞ. It is straightforward to show that there are Q
P Assume that the Sender is a rational, utility-maximizing player. Assume further that she believes
(correctly) that the Responder is not DEMO payoff maximizer, so that there is a non-zero probability of a DEMO
20
x¼0 ð3x þ 1Þ¼ 651 possible outcomes.
return from any Responder who receives a positive transfer. To maximize her utility, the Sender needs to
estimate the probability, for each strategy x, that each value DEMO y(x) (and thus each outcome) will be
realized. Since DEMO are 3x þ 1 such values, she needs to estimate 3x DEMO
pshe must now assess the utility of each of the (3ðyðxÞ¼ DEMO; pðyðxÞ¼ 1Þ;  ; pðyðxÞ¼ 3x  1ÞÞx . To arrive at an expected utility for this alternative, x,
appropriate probabilities to form an expected value (a ‘‘range of risk problem’’ requiring non-trivialþ 1) possible outcomes, and combine these utilities with the
computation for even DEMO approximate solution: see Behn & Vaupel, 1982, pp. 133–270). DEMO process must be
repeated for each strategy x. In total, before DEMO can select the value of x for which her expected utility is
greatest, the rational Sender would be required to estimate 631 probabilities, DEMO 651 outcome utilities, and
compute 20 expectations ranging in complexity from DEMO four-element set generated by a send of x ¼ $1 up to
the 61-element outcome set generated by a send of x ¼ $20.
DEMO is obviously not a plausible model of any actual Sender’s thought process, and it is unclear how a real
Sender could achieve any reasonable approximation to it. The CT manipulation used in Experiment 1, based
on thinking about the possible consequences of a small, moderate, and large DEMO, considers only a few
possible sends, and reduces the distribution of B’s response to each to a single point estimate. Further
complexity would DEMO needed to consider such elements of A’s utility function as a desire for equitable
outcomes, an altruistic pleasure in B’s payoffs, reference points DEMO as earning a return at least equal to the
initial send, DEMO premium for having exposed oneself to risk, B’s differential generosity in DEMO to large and
small sends, and so on. If A’s behavior DEMO to be interpreted as reﬂecting some or all of these utility elements,
we need some cognitively plausible way in which she might think DEMO them, at least in an approximate way.
A formal analysis of DEMO task does not suggest any obvious candidate.
Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 22, 101–119 (DEMO)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
114
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
We speculate that the actual cognitive DEMO of our participants are much less sophisticated than this.
We imagine the Control participants as thinking something like: ‘‘If I send $20, then DEMO will have $60 to play
with and, as a benevolent person, might share some of it with me so I could easily come DEMO ahead.’’ In
contrast, we imagine the CT participants as thinking a DEMO more hard-headedly: ‘‘B with $60 might well
think it would be DEMO to simply pay me back my $20 and keep the rest, DEMO I would be no better off for taking
the risk. He surely will not send back more than $30, but there’s some chance of a modest upside for me. But
equally, there is a real chance that he will send back less, maybe nothing at all. So sending $20 seems to offer
some chance at a modest gain, and some chance at a substantial or complete loss. Why risk it, when I can
guarantee getting $19 by sending the minimum?’’ This is, of course, pure speculation, and substantial further
research will be needed to DEMO out participants’ actual thought processes. We offer it here merely as an
illustration of the sort of ‘‘modestly consequential’’ thinking that might be stimulated DEMO the CT manipulation
of Experiment 1, without coming close to the DEMO analysis sketched in the ﬁrst part of this
Appendix.
APPENDIX B
EXPERIMENT 1—INSTRUCTIONS AND MATERIALS
Instructions—Participant A—Condition CT
Welcome to the experiment. In the DEMO few minutes, you will be making a signiﬁcant money decision. The
DEMO you earn for the experiment will be determined by the decision you make as well as the decisions other
people make. The cash you DEMO at the end of the experiment will be yours to keep.
Eight people are participating in this session (seven plus you). You have been randomly assigned to be
Participant A. You will be paired anonymously DEMO another Participant (B), but you will not learn, now or
later, who the other member of your pair is.
To start the experiment, you have been given $20. This money is in the envelope on the desk. Participant B
will receive nothing at the start of DEMO experiment. You must now decide how much money to send to B. You
can send any whole-dollar amount between $1 and $20. (Note: DEMO must send at least $1.) Any money you do
not send DEMO B is yours to keep.
The money you send will be tripled by the experimenter before B receives it. That is, if you send $1, B will
receive $3. If you send $9, B will DEMO $27. If you send $18, B will receive $54.
This tripled DEMO is B’s to keep or to split with you any way s/he wants. B has to decide how much of the
money received DEMO/he is going to send back to you. S/he can send none or all or any amount in between. (Note:
This amount will not be tripled!) B will keep any money s/he does not send back to you.
Please consider your decision carefully. If you DEMO any questions slide your ‘‘HELP’’ card under the door
and one of the experimenters will assist you.
WHEN YOU ARE SURE YOU UNDERSTAND HOW DEMO
EXPERIMENT WORKS, PLEASE TURN THE PAGE
Before you decide how much DEMO to send to B, you may ﬁnd it helpful to think DEMO the likely
consequences of what you do. Obviously, your outcomes from DEMO in this experiment depend both on
what you do and on what Player B does.
Please read each of the following hypothetical situations. In DEMO statement, please ﬁll the spaces with the
corresponding amounts of money DEMO on what you think B would send back.
Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 22, 101–119 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
T. Kugler et al.
Consequential Thinking in the Trust Game
115
a. DEMO you send $1 (so Player B receives $3). How much DEMO do you think Player B would send back
to you?
I think Player B would send $_____ back to me, so I’d end up with a total of $_____, and B would end up
with a total of $_____.
b. Suppose you send $20 (so Player B receives $60). How much money do you think Player B would DEMO
back to you?
I think Player B would send $_____ back to me, so I’d end up with a total of $_____, DEMO B would end up
with a total of $_____.
c. Suppose you send $10 (so Player B receives $30). How much money do you think Player B would send
back to you?
I think DEMO B would send $_____ back to me, so I’d end up DEMO a total of $_____, and B would end up
with a DEMO of $_____.
Please open the envelope if you haven’t already done so. You will ﬁnd $20 and a decision form in it.
Put back DEMO money you want to send to Participant B in the envelope. (DEMO, you must send at
least $1). The rest of the DEMO is yours to keep. We will triple the money you send before handing it to
Participant B. Remember to ﬁll in the amount you DEMO on the decision form, and put the form in the envelope
DEMO well. Slide the envelope under your door when you are ready and one of the experimenters will collect it.
We will contact you again DEMO the Participant B with whom you have been paired has made his or her
decision about how much money to return to you. Meanwhile DEMO remain in your room with the door
closed.
APPENDIX C
EXPERIMENT 2—INSTRUCTIONS AND MATERIALS
PARTICIPANT A—CONDITION BOTH
Welcome to the experiment. In the next DEMO minutes, you will be making a signiﬁcant money decision. The
money DEMO earn for the experiment will be determined by the decision you make as well as the decisions other
people make. The cash you have DEMO the end of the experiment will be yours to keep.
Eight people are participating in this session (seven plus you). You have been randomly assigned to be
Participant A. You will be paired anonymously with DEMO Participant (B), but you will not learn, now or
later, who the other member of your pair is.
To start the experiment, you have been given $20. This money is in the envelope on the desk. Participant B
will receive nothing at the start of the DEMO You must now decide how much money to send to B. You
can send any whole-dollar amount between $1 and $20. (Note: You DEMO send at least $1). Any money you do
not send to B is yours to keep.
The money you send will be tripled DEMO the experimenter before B receives it. That is, if you send DEMO, B will
receive $3. If you send $9, B will receive $27. If you send $18, B will receive $54.
This tripled money is B’s to keep or to split with you any way s/DEMO wants. B has to decide how much of the
money received s/he is going to send back to you. S/he can send DEMO or all or any amount in between. (Note:
This amount DEMO not be tripled!) B will keep any money s/he does DEMO send back to you.
Please consider your decision carefully. If you have any questions slide your ‘‘HELP’’ card under the door
and one of DEMO experimenters will assist you.
Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, DEMO
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 22, 101–119 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
116
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
WHEN YOU ARE SURE YOU UNDERSTAND DEMO THE
EXPERIMENT WORKS, PLEASE TURN THE PAGE
Before making your decision, try to imagine how you would feel if:
1. You sent DEMO most or all of your money ($18 or more) and B sent you back nothing.
I would regret this outcome 1 2 3 DEMO 5 6 7
Not at all a great deal
I would regret my decision 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Not at all DEMO great deal
I would blame myself for what I did 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Not at all a great deal
I DEMO behave differently if I were to participate in a similar 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
task again Deﬁnitely deﬁnitely
would not would
DEMO would advise others not to act like this in similar circumstances 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Deﬁnitely deﬁnitely
would not would
2. DEMO sent B a small amount ($3 or less) and B sent you back more than you had sent.
I would regret this outcome DEMO 2 3 4 5 6 7
Not at all a great deal
I would regret my decision 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
DEMO at all a great deal
I would blame myself for what I did 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Not at all a DEMO deal
I would behave differently if I were to participate in a similar 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
task again Deﬁnitely deﬁnitely
DEMO not would
I would advise others not to act like this in similar circumstances 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Deﬁnitely deﬁnitely
would DEMO would
PLEASE ANSWER ALL THESE QUESTIONS BEFORE YOU GO ON
Please open the envelope if you haven’t already done so. You will ﬁnd $20 DEMO a decision form in it. Put back
any money you want to send to Participant B in the envelope. (Remember, you must send DEMO least $1.) The rest
of the money is yours to keep. DEMO will triple the money you send before handing it to Participant B.
Remember to ﬁll in the amount you sent on the decision form, and put the form in the envelope as well. Slide
the envelope DEMO your door when you are ready and one of the experimenters will collect it. We will contact
you again when the Participant B with DEMO you have been paired has made his or her decision about how
much money to return to you. Meanwhile, please remain in your room with the door closed.
REFERENCES
Barclay, P. (2006). Reputational beneﬁts DEMO altruistic punishment. Evolution and Human Behavior, 27, 325–344.
Basu, K. (1977). Information and strategy in the iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma. Theory and DEMO, 8, 293–298.
Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
DEMO of Behavioral Decision Making, 22, 101–119 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
T. Kugler et al.
Consequential Thinking in the Trust Game
117
Baumeister, R. F., DeWall, C. N., & Zhang, L. (2007). Do emotions improve or hinder the decision making process? In
K.D. Vohs, R.F. Baumeister, & G. Loewenstein (Eds.), Do emotions help or hurt decision making? A hedgefoxian
perspective (pp. 11–31). New York: Russell Sage.
Behn, R. D., & Vaupel, J. W. (1982)DEMO Quick analysis for busy decision makers. New York: Basic Books.
Bell, D. E. (1982). Regret in decision making under uncertainty. Operations Research, 30, 961–981.
Bellemare, C., & Kroger, S. (2007). DEMO representative social capital. European Economic Review, 51, 183–202.
Berg, J., Dickhaut, J., & McCabe, K. (1995). Trust, reciprocity, DEMO social history. Games and Economic Behavior, 10,
121–142.
Bolton, G. E., & Ockenfels, A. (2000). ERC: A theory of DEMO, reciprocity and competition. American Economic
Review, 90, 166–193.
Buchan, N. R., & Croson, R. T. A. (2004). The boundaries of trust: own and others’ actions in the US and China. Journal
of Economic Behavior and Organization, 55, 485–504.
Buchan, N. R., Croson, R. T. A., & Dawes, R. M. (2002). Swift neighbors and persistent strangers: A cross-cultural
investigation of trust and reciprocity in social exchange. American Journal of Sociology, 108, 168–206.
Burks, S. V., DEMO, J. P., & Verhoogen, E. (2003). Playing both roles in the trust game. Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization, 51, DEMO
Burns, J. (2006). Racial stereotypes, stigma and trust in DEMO South Africa. Economic Modeling, 23, 805–
821.
Camerer, C. F. (2003). Behavioral game theory: Experiments in strategic interaction. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Charness, G., & Rabin, M. (2002). DEMO social preferences with simple tests. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
117, DEMO
Cochard, F., Van, P. N., & Willinger, M. (2004). Trusting behavior in repeated investment game. Journal of Economic
Behavior and DEMO, 55, 31–44.
Connolly, T., & Reb, J. (2005). Regret and the control of temporary preferences. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28,
653–654.
Connolly, T., & Zeelenberg, M. (2002). Regret DEMO decision making. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 11,
212–220.
Coricelli, G., Morales, L. G., & Mahlsted, A. (2006). The investment game with asymmetric information. Metroeco-
nomica, 57, 13–30.
Cox, J. C. (2004). How to identify trust and reciprocity. Games and Economic Behavior, 46, 260–281.
Danielson, A. J., & Holm, H. J. (2007). Do you trust your brethren? Eliciting trust attitudes and DEMO behavior in a
Tanzanian congregation. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organizations, DEMO, 255–271.
Dasgupta, P. (1988). Trust as a commodity. In DEMO Gambetta (Ed.), Trust, making and breaking cooperative relations
(pp. DEMO). Oxford, England: Basil Blackwell.
DeBruin, L. M. (2002). Facial resemblance enhances trust. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series
DEMO Sciences, 269, 1307–1312.
Dixit, A., & Skeath, S. (2004). Games of Strategy (2nd ed.). New York: W.W. Norton.
DEMO, C. C., & Wilson, R. K. (2004). Internet cautions: Experimental games with internet partners. Experimental
Economics, 9, 53–66.
Engle-Warnick, DEMO, & Slonim, R. L. (2004). The evolution of strategies DEMO a repeated trust game. Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, 55, 553–573.
Falk, A., & Fischbacher, U. (2006). A theory DEMO reciprocity. Games and Economic Behavior, 54, 293–315.
Fehr, E., & Schmidt, K. M. (1999). A theory of fairness, competition and cooperation. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
144, 817–868.
Fershtman, C., & Gneezy, U. (2001). Discrimination in a segmented society: An experimental approach. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 116, 351–377.
Glaeser, E. L., DEMO, D. L., Scheinkman, J. A., & Soutter, C. L. (2000). Measuring trust. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 115, 811–846.
DEMO, F. E., & Bohnet, I. (2007). Is there reciprocity in a reciprocal-exchange economy? Evidence from a slum in
Nairobi, Kenya. DEMO Working Paper No. RWP05-044, Retrieved 16 August 2007, from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id¼807364
Gunnthorsdottir, A., McCabe, K., & DEMO, V. (2002). Using the Machiavellianism instrument to predict trustworthiness
in a bargaining game. Journal of Economic Psychology, 23, 49–66.
Ho, T. H., & Weigelt, K. (2005). Trust building among strangers. Management Science, 51, 519–530.
Holm, H., & Nystedt, P. (2005)DEMO Intra-generational trust—A semi-experimental study of trust among different
generations. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 58, 403–419.
Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & DEMO, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 22, 101–119 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm
118
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
Houser, D., Xiao, E., DEMO, K., & Smith, V. (2007). When punishment fails: DEMO on sanctions, intentions, and
non-cooperation. Working Paper, George Mason University.
DEMO, A., & Pazienza, M. G. (2007). Altruism and gender in the trust game. Labsi Working Paper No. 5/2006,
Retrieved DEMO August 2007, from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id¼884378
Janis, I. L., & Mann, L. (1977). Decision making: A psychological DEMO of conﬂict, choice, and commitment.New
York: Free Press.
Johansson-Stenman, O., Mahmud, M., & Martinsson, P. (2005). Does stake size matter in trust games? Economics Letters,
88, 365–369.
Keser, C. (2003). Experimental games for the design of reputation management systems. IBM Systems Journal, 42,
498–506.
Kirchsteiger, G., & Dufwenberg, M. (2004). A theory of sequential reciprocity. Games and Economic Behavior, 47,
268–298.
Kiyonari, T., Yamagishi, T., Cook, K. S., & Cheshire, C. (2006). Does trust beget trustworthiness? Trust and
DEMO in two games and two cultures. Social Psychology Quarterly, 69, 270–283.
Kugler, T., Kocher, M., Sutter, M., & Bornstein, G. (2007). Trust between individuals and groups: Groups are less trusting
DEMO individuals but just as trustworthy. Journal of Economic Psychology, 28, 646–657.
Kreps, D. M. (1990). Corporate culture and economic theory. In DEMO E. Alt , & K. A. Shepsle (Eds.), Perspectives on
DEMO Political Economy (pp. 90–143). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
DEMO, D. (1998). Modeling altruism and spitefulness in experiments. Review of Economic Dynamics, 1, 593–
622.
Loomes, G., & Sugden, R. (1982). Regret theory: An alternative theory of rational choice under DEMO The
Economic Journal, 92, 905–924.
Loomes, G., & Sugden, DEMO (1987). Testing for regret and disappointment in choice under uncertainty. DEMO Economic
Journal, 97, 118–129.
Messick, D. M., & Kramer, DEMO M. (2001). Trust as a form of shallow morality. In DEMO Kramer , & K.S. Cook , (Eds.),
Trust in society (pp. 89–117). New York: Russell Sage.
Meyerson, D., Weick, K. E., & Kramer, R. M. (1996). Swift trust and temporary groups. In R.M. Kramer , & T.R. Tyler
(Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research (pp. 166–195). Thousand DEMO, CA: Sage.
Neale, M. A., & Northcraft, G. B. (1991). Behavioral negotiation theory: A framework for conceptualizing dyadic
bargaining. In L. Cummins, & B. Staw, (Eds.), Research in Organizational Behavior (Vol. 13, pp. 147–190).
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Pillutla, M. M., Malhotra, D., & Murnighan, J. K. (2000). Attribution of trust and the calculus of reciprocity. Journal of
Experimental Social DEMO, 39, 448–455.
Rabin, M. (1993). Incorporating fairness into game theory and economics. American Economic Review, 83, 1281–
1302.
Reb, J. (2008). Regret aversion and decision process quality: Effects of regret DEMO on decision process carefulness.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 105, 169–182.
Richard, R., de Vries, N. K., & van der DEMO, J. (1998). Anticipated regret and precautionary sexual behavior. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 28, 1411–1428.
Rigdon, M. L., McCabe, K., & Smith, V. (2007). Sustaining cooperation in trust games. Economic Journal, 117,
991–1007.
Rousseau, D. M., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R. S., & Camerer, C. F. (1998). Not so DEMO after all: A cross-discipline view of
trust. Academy of Management Review, 23, 393–404.
Scharlemann, J. P. W., Eckel, C. C., Kacelnik, A., & Wilson, R. K. (2001). The value of DEMO smile: Game theory with a
human face. Journal of Economic Psychology, 22, 617–640.
Schechter, L. (2007). Traditional trust measurement and the risk of confound: An experiment in rural Paraguay. Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, 62, 272–292.
Schotter, A., & Sopher, B. (DEMO). Trust and trustworthiness in games: An experimental study of intergenerational DEMO
Experimental Economics, 9, 123–145.
Simonson, I. (1992). The inﬂuence of anticipating regret and responsibility on purchasing decisions. Journal of Consumer
Research, 19, 1–14.
Snijders, C., & Keren, G. (1999). Determinants of trust. In D. V. Budescu, & I. Erev (Eds.), DEMO and human behavior:
Essays in honor of Amnon Rapoport (pp. DEMO). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Slonick, S. J. (2007). Cash and alternate methods of accounting in an experimental game. Journal of Economic DEMO
and Organization, 62, 316–321.
Sutter, M., & Kocher, M. DEMO (2007). Age and the development of trust and reciprocity. Working DEMO, University of
Innsbruck.
Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 22, 101–119 (2009)
DOI: DEMO/bdm
T. Kugler et al. Consequential Thinking in the Trust Game 119
Willinger, M., Keser, C., Lohmann, C., & Usunier, J. C. (2003). A comparison of trust and reciprocity between France and
Germany: Experimental investigation based on the investment game. Journal of Economic Psychology, 24, 447–
466.
Yamagishi, T., & Yamagishi, M. (1994). Trust and commitment in the United States and Japan. Motivation and Emotion,
DEMO, 129–166.
Zeelenberg, M. (1999). Anticipated regret, expected feedback and behavioral decision making. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 12, 93–106.
Authors’ DEMO:
Tamar Kugler is an Assistant Professor of Management and Organizations at the University of Arizona. Her research
focuses on interactive decision making, group decision making and the role of emotions in decision making.
Terry Connolly DEMO Eller Professor of Management and Organizations at the University of Arizona. Most of his
recent research has been concerned with the role of emotion DEMO decision making.
Edgar E. Kausel is a doctoral candidate in the Management and Organizations Department at the University of
Arizona. His research interests include DEMO role of emotions in decision making, judgmental biases, and decision
making in organizational entry.
Authors’ addresses:
Tamar Kugler, Terry Connolly and Edgar E. Kausel, Department of Management and Organizations, University
of Arizona, Arizona, USA.
Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Journal of DEMO Decision Making, 22, 101–119 (2009)
DOI: 10.1002/bdm{1g42fwefx}