Start-up Financing:
Banks vs. Venture Capital
Augustin Landier∗
MIT
November 19, 2001
Abstract
I develop a model in which entrepreneurs and investors can DEMO each
other once the venture is under way: investors can deny DEMO funding, and
entrepreneurs can withdraw from the venture. The entrepreneurs’ exit DEMO
determines which party needs protection. If the exit option is good, DEMO
capital ﬁnancingprotectstheinvestorthroughtechnologicalmonitoring,control
rights, and staged ﬁnancing. If the exit option DEMO bad, bank debt protects the
entrepreneurasitinvolveslittletechnologicalmonitoring,limitedcontrolrights,
and committed ﬁnance. DEMO exit option depends on the legal environment
and on the stigma of failure, endogenized in a career concern model. When
entrepreneurs can choose project risk, multiple equilibria arise with diﬀerent
ﬁnancial institutions. Venture capital prevails in the high-risk equilibrium and
bank debt in the low-risk equilibrium. The paper DEMO why the forms
of start-up ﬁnancing diﬀer across sectors, regions and DEMO It oﬀers an
explanationfor whyventure capital has beenmore prevalent in the US than in
Europe. The theoryhasimplications for policy, e.g., regardingthe eﬃciencyof
non-compete DEMO and bankruptcy law.
∗ DepartmentofEconomics,MIT,50Memorial Drive,CambridgeMA02142,USA.Emailaddress:
landier@mit.edu.
I thank my advisors Daron Acemoglu, Olivier Blanchard, Denis Gromb and DEMO Mullainathan.
For their useful comments, I amgrateful to Manuel Amador, Jessica Cohen, Matthias Dewatripont,
Andrew Hertzberg, Bengt Holmstrom, Simon Johnson, DEMO Scharfstein, Antoinette Schoar and
Jean Tirole. All remaining errors are mine.
DEMO
“Value-added VCs are few and far between, especially in Europe. Most
European VCs have learned their trade in management buy-outs. They
aren’tnurturingandeveryboardmeetingisaboutjustifyingyourexistence.
They are DEMO to sitting across from you and seeing if you’re meeting
yourmilestones. RealVCsareabouthelpingyouidentifyyourmilestones,
and then opening up relationships, exploring business models, and being
DEMO - that way they get you closer to meeting your milestones. Be
verycarefulwithpeoplewhoaretryingtoreinventthemselvesfromprivate
equity to venture capital.”
SoniaLo,founderandCEOofeZoka.com(FinancialTimes,June8,2000).
1 DEMO
Venturecapitalhasemergedasthemostcommonformof ﬁnancingforhigh-technology
start-ups in the US and is frequently referred to as an important factor in the tech-
nological leadership of the US economy. DEMO formof ﬁnancing diﬀers fromstandard
bank ﬁnanceinthreemajordimensions.1 First,venturecapitalistsusetheirhighlevel
of expertise to perform technological monitoring and to actively manage the compa-
nies they ﬁnance. Second, the capital infusions in the ﬁrms ﬁnanced by venture
capitalarestagedinseveralrounds. Third,venturecapitalistsusuallyhaveextensive
DEMO rights (e.g., board rights, voting rights). This formof ﬁnancing DEMO in contrast
with standard bank debt: banks traditionally performaccounting monitoring but DEMO
technological monitoring and, outside default, their control is limited to assets used
as collateral.
In Europe, the venture capital industry remains small and focusses primarily on
ﬁnancing buyouts rather than on early and expansion-stage ﬁnancing. DEMO,
European venture capitalists are less “hands-on” (they rarely play an DEMO role in
the management of the companies they ﬁnance) and have DEMO control rights than
their American counterparts. Such diﬀerences in ﬁnancingalsoexistwithintheUS.
Saxenian (DEMO) provides evidence that venture capitalists in Massachusetts are less
involvedinmanagement andbehavemorelikebankersthaninSiliconValley. DEMO
1 An extensive description of venture capital contracts can be found in Kaplan and Stromberg
(2001)
2
paper, I investigate the source of these variations in ﬁnancing forms. I formalize the
ideathatthesevariationsarerelatedtodiﬀerencesintheexitoptionofentrepreneurs,
which aﬀect their bargaining power.
Entrepreneursandinvestorscanholdupeachotheroncetheventureisunderway:
investorscandenyfurtherfunding,DEMO
The optimal form of ﬁnancing balances the terms of bargaining. The entrepreneurs’
exit option determines which party needs protection.
If the exit option is DEMO, the entrepreneur needs to be protected from ex-post
appropriation of rents DEMO the investor. This goal is achieved by standard bank debt,
as it involves little technological monitoring, limited control rights, and committed
ﬁnance. DEMO First,
theentrepreneurbehaveseﬃciently,maximizingthevalueoftheproject,andsecond,
the probability that reﬁnancing is needed is small, relaxing the hold-up problem.
If the exit option is good, the investor needs to be protected. Venture capital ﬁ-
nancing meets this goal through technological monitoring, control rights, and staged
ﬁnancing. The investor DEMO technological expertise, allowing him to perform
technological monitoring, which increases the liquidation value of the ﬁrm if the en-
trepreneur withdraws. The optimal DEMO infusion of cash in this context is smaller,
reﬂectingthetrade-oﬀ betweenincentivesandtheex-posthold-up. Theentrepreneur
cannot commit to high repayments. The level of repayments can be decreased DEMO
lowering the ﬁrst cash-infusion. The cost of this form of ﬁnancing are twofold. First
thelowerinitialinfusiondecreasestheincentivesoftheentrepreneurtoacteﬃciently.
Thesecondcostistheinvestor’stechnologicalexpertise. Bothcostslowertheexante
value of a given project.
Variations in DEMO outside option of entrepreneurs have two sources. First, they
are related DEMO the legal environment. We show how changes in bankruptcy rules
aﬀect ﬁnancial institutions and contracts. Second, and perhaps more interestingly,
the outside option depends on the stigma associated with failure in entrepreneurial
ventures. This “stigma DEMO failure” is endogenized by formalizing the relationship
between a project’s risk and the “stigma of failure”. The success of a given project
3
depends on luckand ability. Exante entrepreneurs do not have information on their
DEMO The more“normal”itis foragoodentrepreneurtofail, the lowerthestigma
of failure and therefore the stronger DEMO bargaining position of the entrepreneur.
Whenentrepreneurscanchoosebetweenriskyhighgrowthprojectsandsaferlow-
growth projects, two types of DEMO are possible and can coexist under certain
conditions. The riskiness of the strategies of other entrepreneurs determines in equi-
libriumtheextentofthestigmaoffailureand,therefore,aﬀectsthetrade-oﬀ between
growthandriskthatagivenentrepreneurfaces. DEMO
equilibriaandexplaincross-country(e.g. Europevs. US)orcross-regionaldiﬀerences
(e.g. Route 128 vs. Silicon valley) that have been so far described as the result of
exogenous diﬀerences DEMO corporate culture.
In the low risk equilibrium, entrepreneurs choose safe strategies. DEMO their abilityis
high,theyarerelativelyunlikelytofail. Therefore,thepooloffailedentrepreneursis
ofrelativelylowquality,makingthestigmaoffailurehigh. Thisreducestheneedfor
expertiseontheinvestor’ssidebecausethefearofbeingforcedtodefaultonthedebt
payment enforces the entrepreneur’s discipline. As a consequence, the optimal form
of ﬁnancinglooksmorelikebankdebt. Inturn, thehighstigmaoffailuremakessafe
strategies ex ante the most attractive choice.
On the contrary, DEMO the high-risk equilibrium, entrepreneurs choose aggressive
growth strategies. This means that DEMO entrepreneurs with high ability are likely
to fail. Therefore, the pool DEMO failed entrepreneurs is of high quality, leading to a
low stigma DEMO failure. This tilts the hold-up problem in a direction favorable to the
entrepreneur. Thereforetheoptimalformof ﬁnancinglookslikeventurecapital,with
high investor expertise and investment staging. The ineﬃciencies DEMO arise due to
the hold-up problem increase the cost of capital. In turn, due to the low stigma of
failure, the risky strategy DEMO the most attractive.
Which equilibrium is the most eﬃcient depends on the trade-oﬀ between growth
and hold-up ineﬃciencies: if the value of high-risk projects is large enough, it oﬀ-
sets thecostsgeneratedbythetechnologicalmonitoring, andtherefore, thehigh-risk
equilibrium is the most eﬃcient one.
4
This paper is related to two strands of literature. The ﬁrst is DEMO career concern
literatureinitiatedbyHolmstrom(1982,1999)wheremanagersareconcernedbyhow
theirreputationwillbeaﬀectedtheiractions. Second,thispaperisrelatedtothelarge
literatureontheprincipal-agentproblemin ﬁnancialcontracting. GrossmanandHart
(1986) and Hart and Moore (1990) build a theory of DEMO contracting under
renegotiation and study how the nature of the hold-up problem aﬀects contracting.
AghionandBolton(1992)showhowthedissociationbetweencontrolrightsandcash-
ﬂowrightscandecreaseineﬃcienciesduetothe expost misalignmentofobjectivesof
entrepreneurs and investors. Rajan (1992) considers the trade-oﬀ between informed
and non-informed ﬁnance in a set-up where ineﬃciencies arise due to the threat of
termination of informed creditors. DEMO related to our topic, Gompers (1995)
shows empirically that venture capitalists concentrate investment in early-stage and
high technology companies where informational asymmetries DEMO highest, and that
ﬁnancing rounds become more frequent when the intangibility DEMO assets is higher.
Several papers model the relationship between a venture capitalist and an investor,
such as Berglof (1994) or Repullo and DEMO (2000). Hellmann (1998) has a model
where control rights DEMO the investor from hold-up from the entrepreneur. These
modelsdonotlinkinvestmentstagingwithhold-upandthemisalignmentbetweenthe
twopartiesisduetoprivatebeneﬁts(asopposedtoendogenouscareerconcernsinour
model). The main contribution of my model is to oﬀer a capital DEMO equilibrium
perspective to the problem of the conﬂict between creditors and entrepreneurs: The
hold-upandmoral-hazardproblemstowhichanentrepreneurissubjectdependboth
on ﬁnancial institutions and on the choices of other entrepreneurs that prevail in
equilibrium. Gromb and Scharfstein (2001) have a model DEMO entrepreneurship where
managerialincentivesaredeterminedbythecareerprospectsintheeventofaproject’s
failure which in turn depends on the type of organization where the project failed
(intrapreneurial vs. entrepreneurial). Managers who fail an internal venture can be
redeployedbytheir ﬁrmsintootherjobswhichhascostsintermsofincentiveswhereas
failedentrepreneursmustseekemploymentatother ﬁrms. Incentiveproblemsdepend
the organizational DEMO of ﬁrms and, like in my model, on the equilibrium of the
labormarket. Whiletheirfocusisonwhetherprojectsaredoneinsideoroutsidelarge
5
ﬁrms, my model focusses on ﬁnancing institutions and project choice for start-ups.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the benchmark model and
DEMO for the equilibrium. Section 3 endogenizes the stigma of failure. Section 4
discussesthecross-sectorialimplicationsofthemodel. Section5studiestheconditions
formultipleequilibriatoariseanddiscussestheirrelativeeﬃciency. Section6presents
two case studies comparing the level and nature DEMO venture-capital ﬁnance in Europe
vs. the US and Silicon Valley vs. Route 128 respectively. Section 7 concludes. All
mathematical proofs are in the appendix.
DEMO A Model of Start-up Financing
InthissectionIpresentasimplemodelofstart-up ﬁnance. Themodelendogenizesthe
stagingofinvestmentasthesolutiontoanoptimalcontractingproblem. Icharacterize
investorsbytheirlevelofexpertise. Bank ﬁnancecorrespondstoanon-expertinvestor
andauniqueinfusionoffunds. Venturecapitalcorrespondstoanexpertinvestorand
a positive probability for more than one round of DEMO infusion to occur.
2.1 Model
Themodelhasfourperiods, t =0, 1, 2, 3. All agents are risk-neutral. There is no
discounting. The main trade-oﬀ DEMO we capture is the one between the costs of
technological monitoring and the time-inconsistent incentives of the entrepreneur to
minimize costs and repay debt.
DEMO t =0, there is a continuum of mass one of wealthless DEMO, each
with a project generating a cash-ﬂow V at t =3. DEMO entrepreneur matches with a
competitive investor with whom he enters a contract. The contract speciﬁes a cash
injection at t =0,I0,a ﬁnal DEMO D to the investor, and a level of expertise
of the DEMO H> 0. Expertise H has a unit cost γ.The role of DEMO investor’s
expertiseinourmodelistoaﬀectthetermsofbargaining.2 Ahigher H increasesthe
2 We could assume that H also aﬀectsthesurplus(V ), therefore providing another motive for
investor’s expertise. We want to isolate the impact of H on the hold-up problem.
6
ﬁrm value to the investor if the entrepreneur leaves, V (H) where V (H) is increasing
concave, V 0 (0)=+∞ DEMO limH→∞V (H) <V . Concretely, H is the eﬀective control
oftheinvestorontheproject: itrepresentsboththeabilityoftheinvestortoprocess
technological information relevant for pursuing the project (technological expertise)DEMO
and the possibility to have access to this information (control rights)DEMO
At t =1, the entrepreneur and the investor observe whether the DEMO
is competent to undertake the project. If he is not (this DEMO with probability
p), the project is liquidated, at a value DEMO to zero. If he is competent, the
entrepreneur chooses privately a DEMO of eﬀort e, at private cost e2/4.
At t =2, thecost C oftheprojectisrevealed. C, whichisobservabletoboththe
investorandtheentrepreneur,butnotcontractible.C isarandomvariable,distributed
uniformly on [0, 2C(e)],where C(e) is a decreasing, convex function of eﬀort e.We
also assume that −1/C(e) is convex and that continuation is eﬃcient for all levels
of e. The investment C DEMO spent on the project’s execution (if I0 <C, the investor
DEMO I1 = C −I0 ),afterwhichapayoﬀ V isproduced.
At t =3, DEMO Theexpectationsofthelabormarket
only depend on whether he was successful or not on his ﬁrst venture. He receives a
wage equal to his expected productivity: wf if he failedand ws if he succeeded, with
ws >wf . (The next section endogenizes wf and ws ). We note ∆ = ws − wf ,the
stigma of failure.
2.2 First-Best
The ﬁrst-best levels of eﬀort e and expertise H are determined by the maximization
of DEMO surplus:
max(1 −p)[V −C(e) −e2/2] −γH
DEMO,H
Therefore, the ﬁrst-best levels are:
H?
½ e? =0
= −C0(e?)
Theoptimallevelofexpertiseiszero,reﬂectingthefactthat H iscostlyanddoes
7
not increase the surplus in the absence of market ineﬃciencies. The wages DEMO and
wf have no impact on the ﬁrst-best values of eﬀort and expertise. This won’t be the
case any more in the presence of DEMO ineﬃciencies.
2.3 Hold-up
We now depart from the ﬁrst-best world by introducing a contract incompleteness:
we assume that each party can hold-up the DEMO at t =2. The investor can force
renegotiationwhenmorecashneedstobeinfusedat t =2, andtheentrepreneurcan
DEMO force renegotiation by threatening to quit the project. We assume symmetric
Nash-bargaining.
Iftheinvestordoesnotinjectthecashrequiredfortheprojectat t =2, theproject
stops and the entrepreneur gets wf , namely the wage of a failed entrepreneur3 .The
value functions of the entrepreneur (E), and of the investor (I ), when renegotiation
occurs DEMO:
E = wf
½ I = V (H
+ 1
DEMO
(1V +ws −V (H) −wf )
)+ 2(V DEMO −V (H) −wf )
Remarkthat E+I = V +ws ,whichisthesurplusfromcontinuationandthatthe
terms of bargaining do not depend on how much cash has to DEMO reinjected. In what
follows, wecall ∆ = ws −wf , the“stigmaof DEMO Wecanrewritetheoutcomeof
the bargaining as follows:
E
½ I =
= V
ws + 1
2(V −V (H) −∆)
(H)+ 1
V (H)+ ∆)
2(V −
Thisshowsthat,ceterisparibus,anincreaseofthestigmaoffailure(∆),improves
the bargaining position of the investor. When ∆ is large, the main problem tends
to be investor’s ability to appropriate rents ex post if he has the power to do so.
Conversely, forasmall ∆, themainproblemtendstobetheentrepreneur’sthreatto
leave the ﬁrm.
3 To be precise, we assume that DEMO market only observes if the project has been successfully
completed or not, i.e. if V has been produced. The market has no information on the reasons why
V “did not happen”.
8
There is an asymmetry between these two commitment problems. The threat
of DEMO appropriation by the investor can be remedied by injecting more cash (DEMO
equivalently oﬀering a deeper line of credit) at the beginning, which reduces the
states of the world where the entrepreneur has to ask DEMO further funding. Absent
default,theinvestordoesnothavecontrolandcannotthreattheentrepreneur. Such
a solution, however, does not exist for the entrepreneur’s commitment problem.
2.4 The Optimal Contract
We lookfor DEMO optimal contract. Inaddition to the hold-up assumption, we assume
that entrepreneurs DEMO credibly pledge the future incomes that they will get at
t =3 from the labor-market. We also assume perfect accounting monitoring: the
entrepreneur cannot divert cash injected by the investor outside the ﬁrm until the
completion DEMO the project. This implies that when the entrepreneur is incompetent,
the investor gets all his investment I0 back because the entrepreneur does not DEMO
any bargaining power4 : he cannot steal money and if he leaves, the investor gets
everything back. Last, we assume that continuation is DEMO eﬃcient at t =2.
Therefore it is not possible for the investor to commit to terminate the project.
Eachtimeanadditionalinjectionofcashisneeded,i.e. I0 >C ,thesharingofthe
DEMO isdeterminedbytheNash-bargainingsolution. Thereasonisthatforanyother
sharing rule, one of the two parties would ﬁnd DEMO attractive to renegotiate. It follows
thattheonlycasewherethesharingrulecanbediﬀerentfromthebargainingsolution
isthecasewherethe ﬁrst injection of cash can cover the costs (I0 >C)andthe
entrepreneurpreferstorepayhisdebtratherthanrenegotiate(ws +V +I0 −C−D>DEMO
E ). Inthiscase,theinvestorwouldliketorenegotiatebutcannotforcerenegotiation,
since the survival of the ﬁrm DEMO not rely on him injecting more cash.
When E is low enough, it is possible to implement the ﬁrst-best by a simple
debt contract: the investor does not invest in expertise, (H =0), an injection of
I0 =2C(e?) is made at the beginning. As DEMO as the repayment level D? required
4 We could alternatively assume DEMO the entrepreneur can threaten to burn the cash inside the
ﬁrm and can therefore extract ∆/2. This would however lead to a mechanical DEMO between the
risk of the project and ineﬃciency.
9
for the investor to break even is such that
ws +V −D? >E, (1)
theentrepreneurpreferstorepayhisdebtforanyvalueof C<2C(e?). Forthisreason,
DEMO fear of having to ask for more money plays the role of a discipline device which
induces the ﬁrst-best level of eﬀort. Assuming, that the entrepreneur always repay
his debt, the break-even condition writes simply: DEMO? =2C(e?). In turn, equation 1
rewrites :
ws −wf > 4C(e?) −V
(2)
Remark that for any ² ≥ 0, all contracts of the form I0 = C(e?)+ ², D = D? +²
have the same properties. In term of payoﬀs and of incentives, only the diﬀerence
I0 −D matters. Inwhatfollows,whenseveralcontractsareoptimal, wepicktheone
than minimizes I0 and D, a convention that DEMO comparisons possible5.
In brief, when the stigma of failure is high DEMO, the ﬁrst-best is implemented.
The investor does not invest in technological DEMO and the fear of failure is suf-
ﬁcient for the entrepreneur to commit to repay his debt and perform optimal eﬀort.
This type of DEMO has the essential characteristics of bank ﬁnance.
Proposition 1 There exists a threshold value ∆? =4C(e?) −V such that for ws −
wf > ∆?:
• Investor does not have technological expertise: DEMO =0.
• The optimal contract consists of an initial injection of cash I0 =2C(e?).
• There is no renegotiation.
• Firstbesteﬀort, DEMO? ,isimplemented.
5 Suchacontractwouldbetheoptimalcontractforanarbitrarysmallopportunitycostofinjecting
money at t =0 rather than t =2.
10
• There is no need for a second-stage injection of cash.
Entr. DEMO
V+ws-D*+I
0
V+ws-D*+I -2C(e*)
E
0
2C(e*)
C
Considernowwhathappenswhenthestigmaoffailurebecomessmall,i.e. ws −wf
justbelow ∆? . Implementingthe ﬁrst-bestbecomesimpossiblebecausethecondition
thattheentrepreneurdoesnot ﬁnditattractivetorenegotiatefor C<2C(e?) isnow
incompatiblewiththebreak-evencondition. Therearetwotoolsthatcanbeusedex
ante to solve the commitment problem DEMO the entrepreneur. First, the investor can
decrease I0, which has only a second-order impact on the surplus (through a ﬁrst-
order decrease in eﬀort) but relaxes the budget constraint to the ﬁrst-order. He can
also acquire technological expertise ex ante. Since V 0 (0) =+∞, both tools are used
at the optimum contract. We let the formal proof DEMO the appendix and try to go
further with an intuitive derivation of the optimal contract. Decreasing I0 decreases
incentives to perform eﬀort and leads DEMO a level of eﬀort e<e?, since the excess
of cash that the entrepreneur can try to keep is smaller. The positive relationship
DEMO eﬀort and I0 (which constitutes the incentive compatibility constraint) is:6
C(e)2
I0 =2s−C0(e) e.
Therefore, a larger I0 DEMO means a larger average cost, C(e) >C(e?). Since I0 <
2C(e?), thisimpliesthatwithapositiveprobability(1 −I0/2C(e)), theentrepreneur
doesnothavesuﬃcientcashfromthe ﬁrstinjectiontopursuetheprojectandhas to
6 Remark that e? is solution of this equation for I0 =2C(e?).
11
negotiateforasecondcash-injection. Whenthisoccurs,thesharingruleisdetermined
by the terms of bargaining. Now, when the realization of C is smaller than I0, as I
show in appendix, DEMO the optimal contract, the entrepreneur repays his debt7.
Proposition 2 For DEMO −wf < ∆? , optimal contracting results in:
• A DEMO level of technological expertise H,
• A ﬁrst injection I0 <DEMO(e?).Eﬀort is second-best, e?? <e?.
• There DEMO a positive probability that a second injection I1 occurs.
•
The cost of capital for a given project is higher than when ws − DEMO < ∆?,
reﬂecting undereﬀortandthecostofexpertise.
Entr. value
E+I0 e
E
I0
DEMO(e)
As the stigma of failure, ws − wf , DEMO, eﬀort decreases and expertise H
increases. The probability that a second DEMO injection is needed is now
whichincreases. Thelevelofthe ﬁrstcashinjectiondecreasesandtheaveragelevelof
thesecondone, C(e??2)−C? increases. Thetotalexpectedlevelofcashneededto ﬁnance
the venture, γH + C(e??), increases, due to the ineﬃcient underprovision of eﬀort.
I0
1 DEMO C(e??)
Thelossineﬃciencyduetothehold-upfrictionis L = γH +(1−p)(C(DEMO??) −C(e?)).
7 The repayment D is equal DEMO what would occur in case of renegotiation (but the investor does
DEMO have to make a complementary cash injection).
12
Proposition 3 In the second-best region (∆ < ∆? ), as the stigma of failure ∆ =
ws −wf decreases:
• The DEMO of technological expertise of investor increases.
•
Eﬀort decreases : The lower the stigma of failure, the more stringent the incen-
tive constraint is.
• The probability that a second-stage investment occurs increases as the level DEMO
eﬀort decreases. This probability is: 1 −(−e??/C0(e??))1/2.
• Theinitial cashinjectiondecreases, theaveragesecondcash-injectionincreases,
the total amount of cash needed increases.
The loss in eﬃciency with regard to the ﬁrst DEMO is decreasing with ∆ and
increasing with the cost of technological expertise H.
•
This benchmark model captures the main intuition of the paper:DEMO
Aslongasthestigmaof failure(ws −wf )is “highenough”simpledebtcontracts
aretheoptimalmodeof ﬁnancing. Theinvestordoesnotneedtoacquiretechnological
expertise: the fear to be forced to raise new funding operates as a discipline DEMO
and forces entrepreneurs to choose the ﬁrst-best eﬀort. In turn, the DEMO has no
power to exercise a threat on the entrepreneur as long as he repays his debt. This
kind of ﬁnancing has the characteristics DEMO bank debt.
Conversely, when the stigma of failure is low, the entrepreneur cannot commit
not to triggerrenegotiation. This leads to a loss in DEMO that is partlysolved by
havingtheinvestoracquiretechnologicalexpertise. Thisexpertise, byalleviatingthe
hold-upthreatoftheentrepreneur,rebalancesthetermsofbargaining. Thisimprove-
ment DEMO eﬃciencyofthetermsofbargainingrepresentsthe“value-enhancement”
of venture-capital as a style of ﬁnancing in our model. It however has costs, simply
those of high-skilled technological expertise. The model shows that an endogenous
staging of capital injection in two rounds occurs.
13
Proposition 4 A testable prediction of the model is the following:
DEMO,thehigherthestigmaoffailure,thehighertheratioofsecond-stage
infusion over ﬁrst-stage infusion.
3 Value Enhancing Investors
In our model, the value enhancement of investor’s expertise lies exclusively in the
resolution of a hold-up problem. As a consequence, whenever bank debt is possible,
it is also ﬁrst-best eﬃcient. This feature is not essential to DEMO model. For example,
when the technological knowledge of the investor adds value to the project (e.g., if
the payoﬀ is an increasing DEMO of H, V (H))itmightbe ﬁrst-best to have a
positive DEMO of H andalarge stigmaof failure wouldleadtoa level of technological
monitoringlowerthan H . Inthiscase,therelationshipbetweeneﬃciencyandstigma
might benon-monotonic. Venture capitalists are knownto add valuetotheventures
they ﬁnance,DEMO byhelpingtohireappropriatemanagements,orusingtheirnetwork
to help the entrepreneur to obtaining contracts.
4 The Stigma of Failure
Theframeworkwehavedevelopedallowsustoclarifythelinkbetweenthestigma
offailureandthenatureof ﬁnancial institutions and contracts. The determinants of
the DEMO can be both exogenous (institutions) or endogenous (informational).
4.1 DEMO Stigma
Assumethatbankruptcyrulesorliquidationrulesarethedeterminantsofthestigma:
ws = w, wf = w −∆. We DEMO that ∆ is pure waste for society (think to ∆ as DEMO
timeittakesfortheentrepreneurtobedischargedandabletogoonwithhiscareer).
We can use our model to describe how ∆ aﬀects ﬁnancial contracts and what level
of ∆ is eﬃcient. There is a DEMO between the disciplining eﬀect of ∆ and its cost
14
for society. A higher ∆ alleviates the commitment problem of the entrepreneur DEMO
diminishes the expected surplus by p∆.
Proposition 5 • Thereexistsathreshold p? < 1 suchthatfor p<p?, theoptimal
bankruptcy cost ∆ is positive and decreases with p.
• Investor’sexpertiseandtheprobabilityofsecond-stage ﬁnancingdecreaseweakly
with ∆ (strictly decrease for p<p?).
The ﬁrstpointshowsthatbankruptcyrulesareaneﬀectivewaytogivebargaining-
power to the investor and that the riskier the sector, the more distortionnary it is.
The second point shows that softer bankruptcy rules ask for an investor with higher
technological monitoring. Even DEMO bankruptcy rules vary across countries, they
arenottheonlycomponentofthestigmaoffailure. Asitisshowninthelastsection,
a crucial DEMO of the stigma of failure is the endogenous competent resulting
from the market’s inference about the ability of a failed entrepreneur.
4.2 Endogenous Stigma
DEMO now extend our model so as to endogenize the stigma of failure, ws − wf in a
simple career-concern set-up.8
Assumethattherearetwotypesofentrepreneurs: Goodtypes(G)DEMO
θ —andbadtypes(B ). Initially, the types are unknown to everyone, including the
entrepreneurs. The type of an entrepreneur matters for two distinct reasons: it
aﬀects the probability of being competent on the entrepreneurial project and the
entrepreneur’sproductivityonthelabor-market. High(low)typeshaveaprobability
pG (pB =1) to be DEMO to ﬁnish their project and therefore, the ex ante
probability for DEMO entrepreneur to fail on a project is p = θpG +(1 − θ). The wage
w will reﬂect inference conditional on the DEMO of the entrepreneur (competent or
not). Bad types have a DEMO normalized to zero on the labor market, while
hightypeshaveproductivity y.
8 DEMO formalization is related to Landier (2001).
15
Inference on productivity:
Sincethereisaproportion θ ofgoodtypesinthepopulation,theprobabilitythat
a“ﬁred” entrepreneur is of DEMO type is:
θpG .
πf = θpG +(1 −θ)
Since bad entrepreneurs never succeed, the probability that a “successful” entre-
preneur is of the good type is one: πs =1.
Thewageonthelabor-marketiscompetitiveandthereforeequaltotheexpectedof
theentrepreneurconditionalontheavailableinformation. Thewageistherefore ws =
πsy if the entrepreneur has been replaced and wf =(DEMO −πf )y if he has successfully
completed his project.
The stigma DEMO failure is:
Proposition 6 The “stigma of failure” is a decreasing function of pG and therefore
of p:
ws −wf = 1 DEMO = 1 −θ.
θpG +(1 −θ) p
We use this DEMO concern structure in two contexts: ﬁrst we want to study how
DEMO characteristics impact the “style of ﬁnancing”. Second, we show how com-
DEMO
equilibria and therefore to diﬀerences in lending styles in a given sector of similar
economies.
5 Start-up Finance and Sector Characteristics
In this section, we do comparative statics with regard to pG the probability that
a DEMO entrepreneur fails. When pG goes through [0, 1], theexanteriskoffailure
p = θpG +(1 − θ) goes through [1 − θ, 1].p DEMO be seen as an index of sectors, a
higher p meaningariskiersector. DEMO incaseofsuccessinsector p is V (p) and
thecostfunctionis C(p,e). As before, there are good and bad entrepreneurs. Bad
16
entrepreneursalwaysfailandgoodentrepreneursfailwithprobability pG(p)=1−1−p,
θ
which is increasing with sector-risk p. DEMO assume that entrepreneurs are randomly
aﬀected across sectors, justifying the fact DEMO θ is constant across sectors.
Assumption 1 Riskier sectors have higher payoﬀsincaseofsuccess:
If p<p0, Vp <Vp0 and Vp(H) <Vp0 (H) for all H>0.
Failinginalow-risksectorismoreinformativethanfailinginahigh-risksector: to
fail in a low-risk DEMO, “you really have to be bad”. As a consequence, the “stigma
of failure” decreases with the sector index p :
Lemma 1
• A failed entrepreneur is more likely to be of high type in DEMO riskier sector.
• The stigma of failure, ∆(p)= wsp DEMO =(1−pθ )y, decreases with the index p.
Now, we DEMO to compare the ways of ﬁnancing (contracts and institutions) in
these sectors. To do so, we need a normalization assumption. Speciﬁcally, we DEMO
the following homogeneity assumption:
Assumption 2 • (1 − p)DEMO(p,e) and (1 − p)V (p) are independent on p and the
private cost for project p is e2 .
DEMO(1−p)
• ∆?(1 −θ)=4C(1 −θ,e?) DEMO (1 −θ) is positive.
Under these assumptions, the level of DEMO eﬀort does not depend on p and
∆?(p)= ∆? (0) increases with p.
1−p
Therefore, ∆(p) −∆?(p) decreases with p, implying that the incentive constraint
becomes more stringent. DEMO a consequence, assuming that sectors are ﬁnanced with
theoptimalinstitution,thefollowingistruewhenwemovetowardsmoreriskysectors
(higher p):
17
Proposition 7 When p increases:
• Theleveloftechnologicalexpertise Hp? ishigherandthelevelofeﬀortdiminishes
(weakly)DEMO
• The cost of capital increases, due to the higher level DEMO expertise required from
the investor.
• The level of the ﬁrst cash injection decreases and the probability of a second
cashinjectiontooccurincreases. Theexpectedlevelofthissecondcashinjection
increasesaswell,whilethe DEMO cash injection decreases.
Moreover, if we assume that y> ∆?(DEMO −θ), the less risky project (p =0)canbe
ﬁnancedby“bankdebt” (i.e. with H =0) while themostriskyis inthe second-best
region, where renegotiation occurs DEMO positive probability, we have:
Proposition 8 There exists a cut-oﬀ DEMO p0 such that:
• If p<p0 ,sector p is DEMO by an investor without expertise (H? =0) and a
p
DEMO debt contract. In other words, traditional bank lending prevail in these
DEMO
• If p>p0 ,sector p is ﬁnancedbyaninvestorwithexpertise H? > 0, increasingin
p
p.Thistypeof ﬁnancing has the characteristics of venture capital (e.g. DEMO
in two rounds).
Bank debt
VC
p0
Risk index
6 Growth Strategies and Multiple Equilibria.
So far our model explains why diﬀerent sorts DEMO institutions and ﬁnancial contracts
mightemergeto ﬁnance entrepreneurship in diﬀerent sectors. It does not however
18
explainwhyventurecapitalwouldsucceedincertaineconomiesbutfailtobecomean
important source of start-up funding in otherwise similar economies.9 The explana-
DEMO we propose is based on multiple equilibria: Assume that entrepreneurs within DEMO
given sector can choose diﬀerent development strategies. They canchoose aggressive
business plans leading to “big hits” but likely to fail or they can choose DEMO secure
growth strategies, leading to smaller but more certain payoﬀs. Two DEMO can
exist.
• In a “high-risk” equilibrium, entrepreneurs choose “high-risk” strategies DEMO
their project (meaning the probability for the entrepreneur to be incompetent
DEMO high). Therefore the stigma of failure is low which ensures that low-risk
strategies do not look attractive.
• Conversely, in a “low-risk” equilibrium, the fact that all entrepreneurs choose
low-risk strategies makes the stigma of failure high. Therefore, “high-risk”
strategies are unattractive.
Wenowformalizethisidea. Theset-upisasinsectionone,exceptforthefactthat
the entrepreneur nowchooses irreversiblyat time zero among two possible strategies
(or business plans) DEMO the project: a risky one (p2,V2 ) and a low-risk one (p1,V1).
Thischoiceisobservablebytheinvestorbutcannotbecrediblysignaledtothelabor
market once the entrepreneur has failed.
There are two potential pure strategy equilibria in our model: one where entre-
preneurs all choose the low-risk strategy and one where they all choose DEMO high-risk
strategy.
We note ∆1? =4C1(e1?) − V1, ∆2? =4C2(e2?) − V2. The stigma of failure ∆ is
determined in each potential equilibrium by ∆i = 1p−iθ , therefore ∆1 > DEMO :the
stigma of failure is higher in a low-risk than in DEMO high-risk equilibrium..
Forbothtypesofprojects,wenote Bi =(1−pi )(Vi −Ci(ei?)DEMO?2/2), theexpected
ﬁrst-best value generated by project i.
9 More exactly, the only explanation it gives is that when the cost of technological expertise, γ,
is too high, the commitment problem cannot DEMO resolved.
19
We note Li(∆)=(1 − pi )(Ci(ei(∆)) − Ci(e? )+(ei(∆)2 − e?2)/DEMO)+ γHi(∆) the
i i
eﬃciency loss in equilibrium i. DEMO is a decreasing function of ∆.
The condition for project i to be preferred to project j in equilibrium (i)isthat:
−pi∆i +(Bi −Li(∆i )) > −pj∆i +(Bj −Lj(∆i ))
Proposition 9
• The low-risk equilibrium exists if
∆1 > B2 −B1 DEMO L1(∆1) −L2(∆1).
p2 −p1 p2 −p1
• The DEMO equilibrium (“high-risk”) exists if
∆2 < B2 −B1 + L1(∆2) −L2(∆2).
p2 −p1 p2 −p1
• Therefore, the condition DEMO the two equilibria to coexist is that:
∆2 + L2(∆2) −L1(∆2) < B2 −B1 < ∆1 + L2(∆1) −L1(∆1)
p2 −p1 p2 −p1 p2 −p1
To perform welfare analysis, since the investor makes zero proﬁt, we have to
compare the ex ante value of a project in each equilibrium, i.e.
Wi = Bi −Li(∆i)
The last expression rewrites:
∆2 + L1(∆1) −L1(∆2) < W2 −W1 < ∆1 + L2(∆1) −L2(DEMO)
p2 −p1 p2 −p1 p2 −p1
Using this criterion, we DEMO discuss the coexistence and the relative eﬃciency of
the equilibria:
Proposition 10 • The high-risk and low-risk equilibria can coexist.
• Dependingonparameters,eachequilibriumcanbemoreeﬃcientthantheother.
DEMO
• The high-risk equilibrium is the most eﬃcientifthediﬀerence in the value of
DEMO projects exceeds the higher costs of ﬁnancing, i.e.,
B2 −B1 >L2(∆2) −L1(∆1),
Tosummarize,wecomparethetworegimesofentrepreneurshipinthecasewhere
thediﬀerenceinstigmasinthetwoequilibriaislargeenoughsuchthat ∆1 < ∆1? and
∆2 > ∆2? (a condition under which the coexistence result DEMO holds).
Proposition 11 Compared to the low-risk equilibrium, the high-risk DEMO is
characterized by:
• investors with more technological expertise.
•
a higher probability of second-stage ﬁnancing, with this probability being zero in
thelow-riskequilibrium.
• a higher probability for the entrepreneur to fail.
• a lower DEMO of failure (ws −wf ).
• a higher cost of capital.
Proposition 12
• An increase in V2 increases the eﬃciency and the DEMO of the high-risk
equilibrium.
• An increase in the cost of technological expertise reduces the eﬃciency and the
likelihood of the high-risk equilibrium.
The DEMO,the
high-risk equilibrium tends to be both more likely and more eﬃcient. This is likely
tobethecaseinhigh-techsectors. Thepicturethatemergesfromthispropositionis
broadly the one of Europe vs. the DEMO:
21
• In Europe, young ﬁrmstendtohavestrategiesthatarenotveryaggressive.
This leads to few “ﬁrings” of entrepreneurs and a high-stigma of failure (you
have to be a bad manager to fail a conservative strategy), which in turn makes
aggressive strategies DEMO risky to be attractive. Financing does not require
ﬁnancial expertise of the investor: the stigma of failure plays the role of a
discipline device, making simple debt contracts possible.
• On the contrary, in the DEMO entrepreneurs choose risky, more aggressive strate-
gies,thatmakethemmorelikelytobeunsuccessful. Forthisreason,thestigma
of DEMO is low (having failed does not reveal much about your ability)DEMO This
in turn creates a hold-up problem, leading to:
— DEMO of expertise from the investor to rebalance the terms of bar-
gaining.
— Staging of the investment in two rounds.
— Ahighercostofproject’s ﬁnancing, reﬂecting the cost of investor’s skills
and the moral hazard problem (undereﬀort).
A quotation of Eric Benhamou, a french entrepreneur who emigrated to Silicon
Valley and is currently the CEO of 3Com summarizes this link between DEMO
choice and the stigma of failure:
“AsastudentatStanford,IrealizedhownaiveIhadbeentobelieveIcould
start a business in France.[...]in France, you keep all your life the stigma
of afailure. Here[inSiliconValley] it isthemarkof your entrepreneurial
spirit. In France, it is common practice to give up on growth in order to
limitrisk. Here,whenyoustartaventure,yourgoalistobecomenumber
DEMO of your sector”.
22
7 New Ventures: Europe vs. the US.
7.1 Financing
Venture Capital has played a prominent role in the technological leadership of the
US10 .Morethan70%of DEMO
capital backed. Giant companies such as Cisco, Cray, Genentech, Lotus, Apple and
Microsoft got started with venture capital.
In1999,theUSventurecapitalindustryraisesmorethanthreetimesmorecapital
thantherestoftheworldtakentogether. ThedevelopmentofVentureCapitalfunds
DEMO Europe has grown recently. However, it is diﬃcult to draw a DEMO between private
equity and venture capital. If we aggregate the two, DEMO ﬁnd that about $99.4 billion
ofprivateequityandVCwasinvestedinNorthAmerica($97.1raised)in1999,which
amounts to 1.01% of GDP, whereas only $26.8 billion was invested in Europe ($27.1
DEMO raised), i.e. 0.3% of the European GDP. While European countries have an
increasing amount of venture capital under management, most of it is dedicated to
buyouts of mature companies rather than seed or start-up ﬁnancing. DEMO 13%
of ﬁnancing went to seed and start-up in Europe against more than 30% in the US.
Restrictingoneselftothehightechindustrymakesthisoppositionevenmorestriking:
26% in Europe against 80% DEMO the US.
Characteristicsofventure-capitalcontractsintheUSincludestagingofinvestment
andahighlevelofcontrolrights. Thereplacementofthefounderofthecompanyby
a manager who is more able to accomplish the project occurs with high probability.
Moreover, venture capitalists spend a large amount of time learning about the tech-
nologicalaspectsoftheprojectofthe ﬁrmbothpreandpost ﬁrst-state ﬁnancing. DEMO
ourmodel,thisintensityoftechnologicalmonitoring—requiringahighlevelofexper-
tise on the investor’s side— and the staging of cash infusions are endogenous features
of venture-capital as a lending technology.
European venture DEMO are traditionally less “hands on” and less strategi-
10 Venturecapitalrivalsin-houseR&Dasamajorsourceoffundingforinnovation: DEMO
M.Mandel, based on a report of the NVCA, “in the ﬁrst quarter of 2000, Venture Capital equaled
one-third of all money spent on R&D compared to 3% in the 80s”.
23
cally involved than their American counterparts. In the context of our model, this
meansthattheyperformlesstechnologicalmonitoring. Sapienza, ManigartandVer-
meir (1996) provide empirical evidence that French venture capitalists spend much
less eﬀort than their American counterparts in monitoring DEMO ﬁrms they ﬁnance.
TheydescribeFrenchventurecapitalistsasclosertobankmanagersthanvalue-added
investors.
Historically, early-stage venture-capital funds in Europe DEMO produced relatively
low rates of return (as compared to buyout funds, for example). Investment appears
to be less high-tech in Europe. For DEMO, in Europe, less than 20% of all venture
capital investment was in high tech in 1998 compared with more than 60% for the
DEMO,Europeanventurecapitaldevotesamuchlargerpercentage
of venture ﬁnancing goes to manufacturing rather than High-tech.
7.2 The Stigma of Failure: Some Empirical Evidence
To quantify the “stigma of failure”, I use wage information in labor market data.
Two studies based on US data, Evans and Leighton (1989) and Hamilton (2000),
establish that American entrepreneurs returning to employment earn slightly higher
wages than DEMO workers with similar characteristics.11
To my knowledge, no such study exists DEMO France. I run my own regressions, us-
ingEnquête-Emploi, anannualsurveyof 1/300of theFrenchpopulation. I ﬁndthat
French entrepreneurs returning to paid employment earn signiﬁcantly lower DEMO
than other workers. To control for transitions between self-employment and employ-
ment, I construct a sequence of two-year panel data. Given year t and t +1,Iknow
the employment status of each individual for both years: employed, self-employed,
unemployed or out of the labor force. I also knowthe wage wt of employees, but not
11 Evans and Leighton (DEMO), relies on the National Longitudinal Survey of Young Men (1966-
DEMO) and ﬁnds that “workers who fail at self-employment return to wage DEMO at roughly the same
wages they would have received had they not tried self-employment”. Each additional year of self-
employmentexperienceincreasesthemeanwagesofmalesaged29-39by4.5%,ascomparedwithan
increaseof3.1%foranextrayearofwageexperience. Hamilton(2000)DEMO
Program Participation (1984) and ﬁnds that “entrepreneurs returning to paid employment actually
earn a higher wage than employees with the same observed characteristics”.
DEMO
theincomeoftheself-employed. Giventhisrestriction,Irunthefollowingregression12
in order to “estimate” the stigma of failure is:DEMO
ln(wt+1)= Xt0+1β +αSEt + ²,
where Xt+1 isthevectorofobservablecharacteristicsofemployedindividualsinyear
t +1, and SEt, a dummy variable equal to 1 if the DEMO is self-employed in
year t.Thecoeﬃcient α estimatesthepercentagewagepremiumforindividualswho
made the transition from self-employment in year t to employment in year t +1.I
run this regression DEMO 1990 to 2000. I ﬁnd that in contrast to what prevails in the
US,self-employedwhobecomeemployeesearnsigniﬁcantlylessthanotheremployees.
Thewagediscountis-13%onaverageovertheperiod.
This wage discount can reﬂect that leaving self-employment DEMO a bad signal to
the labor-market. Alternatively, however, it could reﬂect a selection eﬀect, i.e., self-
employed are of a relatively low DEMO with regard to the rest of the population, in a
way DEMO the market but not the econometrician observes. To control for this eﬀect,
I run the following regression on all paid employees of period DEMO:
ln(wt)= Xt0β +δSEt+1 + ²,
where SEt+1 isadummyvariableequalto 1 iftheindividualhasbecomeself-employed
at time t +1.Thecoeﬃcient δ estimates whether workers who make DEMO transition
frompaidemploymenttoself-employmenthaverelativelylowwagesvis-a-vistherest
of the population13 . Itturnsoutthatitisnotthecase: δ is only -0.017 DEMO average
over the period and insigniﬁcant for most years. This conﬁrm that the discount α is
not due to selection and thus can be DEMO as a proxy for the stigma of failure.
This estimation allows us to conclude that the wage discount α captures mostly the
“stigma of DEMO
In summary, the picture that emerges from these empirical results conﬁrms DEMO
theFrenchandUSlabormarketsreactdiﬀerentlytotheterminationofentrepreneur-
ialactivity. IncontrastwiththeUSlabormarket,theFrenchlabormarketpenalizes
heavily those who quit self-employment for employment.
12 on the set of individuals employed in year t.
13 before making DEMO transition and controlling by observable characteristics.
25
7.3 Route 128 vs. Silicon Valley
Saxenian (1994) describes how Silicon DEMO and Route 128 —two regions that had
similar innovative advantages in the early 1980’s— evolved diﬀerently. Route 128 lost
itscompetitiveedge,generatingthreetimeslessjobsinthehightechindustrybetween
1975 and 1990 DEMO Silicon Valley. Saxenian shows how this divergence is related to
diﬀerent social norms concerning job mobility and failure. While Route 128 has a
conservativeculture, valuingsaferprojectsandcareers, SiliconValleyhascreatedan
environmentthatencouragesriskandacceptsfailure. “Thereislittleembarrassment
or shame associated with business failure. In fact, the list of individuals who failed,
even repeatedly, only to DEMO later was well-known in the region.” The diﬀerent
performanceofthetworegionsisreﬂectedinthelevelsofventurecapitalinvestment.
For example, DEMO 1981, 38% of the US venture capital went to California, but only
12% to Massachusetts based companies. Interestingly, the nature of venture-capital
itself has been diﬀerent in the two regions. Saxenian gives the following quote DEMO
a top executive of DEC who became a consultant in Silicon Valley: “There is no
real venture capital in Massachussets. The venture capital community is a bunch of
very conservative bankers. They are radically diﬀerent from DEMO venture capitalists
in Silicon Valley.” This picture matches the multiple equilibria characteristic of the
model.
8Conclusion
This paper presents a model of entrepreneurial ﬁnance, where the outside option
of entrepreneurs in case of failure determines the DEMO of investment in diﬀerent
rounds and the choice of a monitoring technology. I show how, in turn, the outside
option depends on the DEMO parameters, on the legal environment and on the
coordination of agents. DEMO describe how these diﬀerent styles of ﬁnancing relate to
bankdebtvs. venturecapital. Ifagentscanchoosebetweenaggressiveorsafegrowth
strategies, I showthat two equilibria can arise with diﬀerent eﬃciencyconsequences.
In a low-risk equilibrium, entrepreneurs choose safe projects, failure is highly stig-
26
matizedand,therefore,theoptimalstyleof ﬁnancing is bank debt. In a high-risk
equilibrium, entrepreneurs choose riskier projects. In this equilibrium, failure is not
stigmatizedandtheoptimalformof ﬁnancingrequiresintensetechnologicalmonitor-
ing and investment staging, features which are characteristic of venture capital. The
theory explains why similar economies might be in diﬀerent entrepreneurial regimes,
characterized DEMO diﬀerent growth strategies and diﬀerent ﬁnancial institutions.
27
References
[1] Acemoglu Daron, Credit Market Imperfections and Persistent Unemployment,
MIT working paper (2000)
[2] Acs, Z.J. and Audretsch, D.B., DEMO and Small Firms, MIT Press, 1990.
[3] Admati, Anan, and Paul Pfeiderer [1994], ’Robust Financial Contracting and
the Role of Venture Capitalists,’ Journal of Finance, 49 (2) 371-402.
[4] PhilippeAghion,PatrickBolton,“AnIncompleteContractsApproachtoFinan-
cialContracting”, TheReviewofEconomicStudies, Vol.59, No.3.(Jul., 1992),
pp. 473-494.
[5] Philippe Aghion, Jean Tirole,“Formal and Real Authority in Organizations”,
The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105, No. 1. (Feb., 1997), pp. 1-29.
[6] Audretsch, D.B., 1991, New-ﬁrmsurvivalandthetechnologicalRegime, Review
of Economics and Statistics 73, 441-450.
[7] Audretsch, D.B., Innovation, Growth and DEMO, International Journal of In-
dustrial Organization 13, 1995.
[8] Baker, DEMO, Career Concerns and staged investment: evidence from the venture
capital industry, HBS mimeo, july 2000
[9] Becker R. and Hellmann, T., DEMO Genesis of Venture Capital: Lessons from the
GermanExperience,StanfordUniversity,GraduateSchoolofBusiness,Working
DEMO 1705
[10] Bergemann, Dirk, and Hulrich Hege [1998], ’Venture Capital DEMO, Moral
Hazard and Learning,’ Journal of Banking and Finance, 22 (2), 703-735.
[11] Berglof, E.,AControlTheoryofVentureCapitalFinance, Journal ofLaw, Eco-
DEMO and Organization, 10, 1994.
28
[12] Bidhe, Amar, The Origin and Evolution of New Businesses, Oxford Univ Press
(2000)
[13] Boot, A.W.A., Why hang on to losers?Divestitures and Takeovers. Journal of
Finance, september 1992.
[14] Blanchﬂower, DEMO, and Oswald, A.J., What makes an entrepreneur?, Journal
of DEMO Economics, 1998, vol. 16, issue 1, pages 26-60.
[15] Cornelli, Francesca, and OvedYosha [1998], ’Stage Financing and the Role of
ConvertibleDebt,’ mimeo, London Business School
[16] M. Dewatripont, E. Maskin, “Credit and Eﬃciency in Centralized and Decen-
tralized Economies”, The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 62, No. 4. (Oct.,
1995), pp. 541-555.
[17] Abstract
[18] Diamond,D.W.,ReputationAcquisitioninDebtMarkets,TheJournalofPolit-
ical Economy, Vol. 97, DEMO 4. (Aug., 1989), pp. 828-862
[19] Evans, David S. DEMO Linda S. Leighton, Some empirical Aspects of Entrepre-
neurship, AER (DEMO 1989): 462-83.
[20] EuropeanCommission, FosteringEntrepreneurshipinEurope: Priorities forthe
future.
[21] Friedman, E. and Johnson, S. , Tunneling and propping, MIT mimeo, DEMO
[22] Gale, Douglas, and Martin Hellwig [1985], ‘Incentive-Compatible Debt Con-
DEMO: The One-Period Problem,’ Review of Economic Studies, 52 (3), 647-63.
[23] Global Entrepreneurship monitor, Kaufmann center for entrepreneurship, 2001.
[24] Gertner R.H., Scharfstein D.S., and J. C. Stein, Internal versus external capital
markets, The Quaterly Journal of Economics, 1994
29
[25] Gompers, Paul A., Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Stages DEMO Venture
Capital, Journal of Finance 50 (1995): 1461-1489.
[26] Gompers, P. and Josh Lerner, The Venture Capital Cycle, MIT Press 1999.
[27] Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner [2001] ’TheVenture Capital Revolution,’ DEMO
nal of Economic Perspectives, 15 (2), 145-68.
[28] Gromb and Scharfstein, Entrepreneurship in Equilibrium, MIT mimeo 2001.
[29] Grossman, S. J., and Hart, O. D., The Costs and Beneﬁts of Ownership: DEMO
Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration, 1986, JPE
[30] Hamilton, DEMO, DoesEntrepreneurshippay? AnempiricalAnalysisof the
Returns to Self-Employment, Journal of Political Economy, 2000, vol 108, no 3.
[31] Hart, O.andMoore, J., PropertyRightsandtheNatureoftheFirm, Journalof
Political Economy, (98), 1990.
[32] Hart, Oliver, and John Moore [1998], ’Default and Renegotiation: A Dynamic
ModelofDebt,’QuarterlyJournalofEconomics,113(DEMO),1-41.
[33] Hellmann, T., The Allocation of Control Rights in DEMO Capital Contracts,
The Rand Journal of Economics, Vol. 29, 1, 57-76, Spring 1998
[34] Hellmann, T. and M. Puri, How DEMO Capital and the professionalization of
Start-up Firms: Empirical Evidence, GSB Research Paper #1661, September
2000.
[35] Hellmann, T. and M. Puri, “The Interaction between Product Market and Fi-
nancing Strategy: The Role of Venture Capital”, Review of Financial Studies,
Winter 2000, Vol. 13, No. 4, pp. 959-984
[36] Holmstrom, B. Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective. in
Essays in Economics and Management in Honor of Lars Wahlbeck, Helsinki:
Swedish School of Economics, 1982.
30
[37] Holmstrom,B.,ManagerialIncentiveProblems: ADynamicPerspective,Review
of Economic Studies, January 1999.
DEMO KaplanS.,andStrombergP.,Financialcontractingtheorymeetstherealworld:
Anempiricalanalysisofventurecapitalcontracts,ChicagoGSBWorkingPaper,
sept. 2001.
[39] Kaplan S., and Stromberg P., Venture Capitalists As Principals: Contracting,
Screening,andMonitoring(forthcoming,AmericanEconomicReview,AEAPa-
pers & Proceedings).
[40] Landier, A., Entrepreneurship DEMO the Stigma of Failure, Working Paper, MIT,
2001.
[41] Rajan R.G. , Insiders and Outsiders: the Choice between Informed and Arm’s-
length Debt, The Journal of Finance, vol 47, september1992.
[42] Repullo, DEMO, and JavierSuarez [2000], ’VentureCapital Finance: ASecurity
Design Approach,’ CEPR DEMO Paper 2097.
[43] Sahlman, W. A., The Structure and Governance of Venture Capital Organiza-
tions, Journal of Financial Economics, 27, 1990.
[44] Sapienza,Harry,SophieManigart,andWimVermeier[1996],’VentureCapitalist
GovernanceandValueAddedinFourCountries,’JournalofBusinessVenturing,
11, pp. 439-69.
[45] Winter, S.G., 1984, Schumpeterian Competition in Alternative Technological
Regimes, Journal DEMO Economic Behavior and Organization 5, 287-320.
[46] Zwiebel,J.,1995,Corporateconservatismandrelativecompensation,DEMO
Political Economy 103, 1-25
31
9 Appendix
Proofofprop.1:
Take H as given.
Eﬀortischosensuchastomaximize:
maxZ max(DEMO +I0 −D+ws −
Remark that only I0 − D is relevant for incentives. When several contracts are
0
2C(e)
e
optimal, we select the one that minimizes I0. This contract would be dominant for
DEMO arbitrarily small opportunity cost of injecting money at the beginning.
C,E) dC
2C(e) −e2/2.
Let C? be such that V +I0 −D+ws −C? = E.
• First assume that the optimization problem leads to a level of eﬀort e?? such
that C? >DEMO(e??). Thatmeansthattheentrepreneurwillnever ﬁnditattractive
to trigger renegotiation, and therefore, his maximization problem rewrites:
max(V +I0 −D+ws) −C(e) −e2/DEMO
e
which is the ﬁrst-best program. Therefore, e?? = e?DEMO The contract that minimizes
the level of D is an initial injection I0 =2C(e?) and a level of debt D? determined
by the break-even condition of the investor:
(1 −p)D? =2(DEMO −p)C(e?)+ γH
It follows that, as long as D? =2C(e?)+ γH veriﬁes :
1−p
i.e.
+ 1(V
V −D? +ws >E = wf 2 +ws −V (H) −wf ).
(ws −wf ) > 4C(e? )+2 γH −(V +V (H))= ∆?,
1 −p
then an initial injection I0 =2C(e?) leads to the implementation of the DEMO best
eﬀort e?.
32
Remarkthatinthisregion, higherbargainingpowerof theinvestordoesnotlead
to ineﬃcient outcomes, since as long as he DEMO his debt, the investor cannot hod-
up the entrepreneur. In this DEMO, the optimal level of H is zero, which is also the
ﬁrst-best level. Therefore, the threshold is:
∆? =4C(e?) DEMO V.
• Consider (ws − wf ) just below ∆?? DEMO level of eﬀort e?? is now such that
C? <C(e??), so that the optimization problem rewrites:
C? C?
maxµ2C(e)¶(E +C?)+ µ1 − 2C(e)¶E −e2/2
e
C?2
maxµC(e)¶−e2 = U(e)
DEMO
TheU is concave andﬁrst order condition writes:U0(e)= −³ ´
C? 2 C0(e)
C(e)
−2e
f(e??)= C(e??)2 e?? = C?2
−2 C0(DEMO??)
The function f increases with e?? (fromthe assumption DEMO 1/C(e) is concave).
Therefore, e?? decreases with C?.
Remarkthatfor C? = C(e?), thesolutionis e?? DEMO e? since e? = −C0(e?). Sincewe
look for DEMO contract that minimizes I0 , at the margin, the entrepreneur is DEMO able
to cover his costs, namely I0 = C?.
The DEMO choice of eﬀort and technological expertise is determined by the
maximization of the ex-ante surplus,
under the following constraints:
max−C(e) −e2/2 −γH
e,H
1. Threshold condition 1:
V −D+ws = DEMO
33
2. Threshold condition 2:
I0 = C?
3. Break-even condition:DEMO
C? (D
2C(e) −I )+ I
C? )(DEMO(e) −C? γH
≥ C? +(1 − 2C(e) 2
)+
1 −p
Remark that D−I =014, so this rewrites:DEMO
C? )(2C(e) −C?
C? +(1 − DEMO(e) 2
)+
γH
.
1 −p
V +ws −E ≥
i.e.,
C?
C?
+(1 − 2C(e)
)(2C(e) −C? γH ∆+V +V (H)
2 1 DEMO ≤ 2
)+
.
i.e.,
C? )(C(e) DEMO?
C? +(1 − C(e)
)+
γH
+2C(e?) ≤
1 −p
2
4. Incentive constraint:
C(e)DEMO e C?2
−2 C0(e) =
.
∆−∆? +V (DEMO)
2
.
Sincebyassumption,evenfor e =0, continuationiseﬃcient,andsince [ ∂ (e2/2)](e =
∂e
0)=0, there is an interior solution. It is solution of the reduced-form problem:
such that:
(
max−C(e) −e2/2 −γH
e,H
C? )(C(DEMO)−C? )+
C? +(1 − C(e) 2
C(e)2
−2 C0(e)
γH +2C(e?) ≤ ∆−∆?DEMO (H) .
C?2
1−p
e =
2
(3)
DEMO This is another way to write threshold contition one.
34{1g42fwefx}