Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2008, Vol. 34, No. 5, 1158 –1171
Copyright 2008 by the American Psychological DEMO
0278-7393/08/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/a0012857
Resting on Laurels: The Effects of Discrete Progress Markers as Subgoals
on Task Performance and Preferences
On DEMO
University of California, San Diego
Dan Ariely
Duke University
This article DEMO the influence of progress certainty and discrete progress markers (DPMs) on
performance and preferences. The authors suggest that the effects of DPMs depend DEMO whether progress
certainty is high or low. When the distance to the goal is uncertain, DPMs can help reduce uncertainty
and thus improve performance and increase preference. However, when the distance to the goal is certain,
DPMs may generate complacency, sway motivation away from the end goal, and decrease performance
in the task, as well as its appeal. DEMO, the addition of more information, feedback, or progress
indicators may DEMO always improve task performance and preference for the task. The authors validate
these claims in 4 experiments.
Keywords: progress information, effort, uncertainty, DEMO partitioning, goals
Much of human activity aims to achieve ends or DEMO (e.g.,
climbing mountains, saving money, solving math problems, run-
ning a marathon). Although the path to such achievement is not
DEMO rewarding in and of itself, people often embark on those
paths DEMO they lead to the reward of goal attainment. For
example, in DEMO climbing, many mountaineers report that the
daily experience is miserable but DEMO reaching the peak provides
meaning and satisfaction (see Loewenstein, 1999). Because reach-
ing such goals may be difficult, people often adopt subgoals that
break the overall task into smaller, more manageable parts (Newell
& Simon, 1972). For example, when trying to solve a mechanics
problem in physics, a student may first search and summarize the
forces acting on the system (Catrambone, 1998).
In this article, we investigate the effect of a special type of
subgoal on overall performance DEMO a task. In particular, we exam-
ine the effect of subgoals DEMO are meant to signify progress toward
an end. In general, any DEMO can be characterized by the amount of
progress information it embodies, DEMO here as external feed-
back about the distance to an end— or the degree of progress
toward completion. The actual amount of progress information DEMO
a task lies on the continuum between complete progress uncer-
tainty and complete progress certainty. Examples of tasks with
high progress certainty include traveling DEMO a global positioning
system or paying a mortgage; in these cases, the person knows the
exact distance from the goal. Examples of tasks DEMO low progress
certainty include courting a potential romantic partner or working
on a research paper; in these cases, the person can sense progress,DEMO
but the distance to the goal may be unclear. In this work, we look
On Amir, Rady School of Management, University of California, San
Diego; Dan Ariely, Fuqua School of Business, Duke University.
DEMO thank Drazen Prelec, without whom the idea would not have been,DEMO
and Shane Frederick, Nicholas Epley, Jonathan Levav, David Schkade, and
Mike Norton for their valuable comments.
Correspondence concerning this article should be DEMO to On Amir,
Rady School of Management, Otterson Hall, 9500 Gilman Drive, MC
0553, La Jolla, CA 92093-0553. E-mail: oamir@ucsd.edu
DEMO
at tasks in which the amount of progress or the distance to the goal
can be measured by a single monotonic dimension. We later
DEMO the potential implications and limitations when trying to
extend our findings to more complex situations.
In addition to the amount of progress information, tasks can be
characterized by another important attribute, namely, the fre-
quency DEMO progress indication, which ranges between complete
discreteness (e.g., an indication DEMO progress in the middle of the
task) and complete continuity (e.g., exact continuous indication of
distance to the end). The frequency attribute of progress infor-
mation is central to our thesis because we suggest DEMO when
progress information is discrete enough,1 it may acquire another
role and serve as a natural subgoal. We base this claim on
evidence DEMO research into problem solving that has suggested
people tend to form solution procedures that consist of steps
(i.e., subgoals), often tied to DEMO features of the problem
environment (Anazi & Simon, 1979; Catrambone, 1998; Newell
& Simon, 1972; Singley & Anderson, 1989). DEMO example,
solving the famous Tower of Hanoi problem, one might DEMO
the moving of each set of discs (subtower) resting on top of the
focal disc to be moved as a subgoal on the DEMO to moving the
entire tower to the other peg. Moreover, such DEMO has
shown that breaking tasks into steps can reduce the difficulty
and complexity of a solution and provide additional intrinsic
rewards on achieving each DEMO
The amount of progress information and its frequency influence
performance in several ways. The effect of progress certainty (i.e.,
the ability to know the distance to the goal) on performance is
relatively straightforward and pertains to its influence on motiva-
tion, which may be defined as the driving force of directed activity
or “something that causes a person to DEMO (“Motivation,” 2002). In
general, motivation increases as the distance to the goal decreases,
1 At high levels of frequency, progress information is less likely to serve
as a subgoal. In this work, we use two extreme cases of highly separable
(i.e., low frequency) and highly continuous (i.e., high frequency) indica-
tions of progress information.
EFFECTS OF DISCRETE PROGRESS MARKERS ON PERFORMANCE
1159
which is termed the DEMO effect (Hull, 1932, 1934; Kivetz,
Urminsky, & Zheng, 2005; See, Heath, & Fox, 2006). Given a
problem DEMO a level of effort, progress is a direct signal of the DEMO
or difficulty of the task. That is, the lesser the difficulty, the lower
the likelihood of aborting and trying a different route (Newell &
Simon, 1972). Therefore, when the task requires solving a prob-
lem, greater progress certainty should result in increased effort
directed toward the goal (Newell & Simon, 1972). As such, any
signals that provide information about a diminishing distance to
the reward likely increase DEMO performance (Locke & Latham,
1990; Pervin, 1989). A DEMO hypothesis is thus that performance
should be higher when progress is more apparent, that is, when
progress certainty is higher.
To analyze the DEMO of the frequency of progress indication,
we focus on two extreme cases: continuous progress indication and
discrete progress markers (DPMs). Continuous DEMO informa-
tion, by definition, generates progress certainty and yields the
above-mentioned predicted improvement in performance. In con-
trast, DPMs provide knowledge about the exact distance from the
goal only at specific points along the task (e.g., one-half com-
pleted). Because DPMs provide progress information, they DEMO
crease uncertainty about the distance to the goal. Although con-
ceptually DPMs are just a subset of a continuous stream of
progress information, there are theoretical reasons to suspect they
may have additional behavioral influences. In DEMO, DPMs
may serve as “mere subgoals,” or artificial landmarks that DEMO
sent “levels of performance that are not accompanied by an exter-
nal reward” (Heath, Larrick, & Wu, 1999, p. 80). As mentioned
previously, these structural features provide natural breaks in the
flow of task completion and are thus likely to be adopted as
subgoals (Anazi & Simon, 1979; Catrambone, 1998; Newell &
Simon, 1972; Singley & Anderson, 1989). As subgoals, DPMs can
reduce the DEMO and complexity of a solution, providing
intrinsic rewards on their achievement. DEMO, providing arti-
ficial landmarks, such as “You have reached 50% of your exercise
goal,” also may have negative effects. In this work, we focus on
two such negative influences: complacency caused by the mere
achievement of the subgoal and motivational distraction from the
ultimate goal.
The DEMO of our current work rests on the notion that the
conjunction of progress certainty and DPMs may generate coun-
terintuitive results. Simply put, if DPMs have both positive and
negative effects, the net effect of adding DPMs may be negative.
This negative effect might emerge when a progress DEMO
already is present because of ample progress certainty, which
renders the DEMO benefit accorded by the DPMs through
their provision of such an indication redundant. Our main
hypothesis in this work is that DPMs have a DEMO effect on
performance with progress uncertainty but may have a negative
effect with progress certainty. Note that because this prediction
relies on the sum DEMO two opposing forces (one of which depends
on the perceived progress DEMO), we can make only a
relative (i.e., interactive) prediction DEMO opposed to an absolute
claim that adding DPMs always will have a negative effect
under progress certainty. We describe the theoretical support
for our DEMO next and follow with four experiments that
test this prediction.
The “Dark Side” of Subgoals
Progress toward a goal, and in particular the achievement of
subtasks on the way to goal attainment, is both motivating and
rewarding (Brunstein, 1993; Locke & Latham, 1990; Newell &
DEMO, 1972; Pervin, 1989; Soman & Shi, 2003). However, other
effects emerge from attaining subgoals or reaching markers on the
way DEMO achieving a goal that may be less beneficial to the overall
attainment of the goal itself. Although these negative conse-
quences are not mutually DEMO, it may be helpful to categorize
them into two groups. One DEMO comprises those consequences
when the subgoal replaces the overall goal as the center of refer-
ence, and the second group consists of those caused by a motiva-
tional distraction or interference of the subgoal with the DEMO
ing goal. We discuss these two theoretical accounts next.
Subgoals as Substations
A goal is a reference value by its very definition, allowing a
person to assess success or failure, a particular level of achieve-
ment, or a relative position on some dimension (Carver & Scheier,
DEMO). It is the focal point of directed activity (Newell & DEMO,
1972). The idea of looking at goals as reference points suggests
that the motivational effect of a goal changes in a manner DEMO
to the shape of the value function in prospect theory (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1979). In other words, the goal gradient becomes DEMO
as one approaches goal attainment (i.e., a convex function) and
DEMO becomes less steep as the goal is reached (i.e., a concave
function); the level of motivation is captured by the slope of DEMO
function (Heath et al., 1999). Moreover, this effect is DEMO for each
subgoal in a task. In simple terms, approaching a DEMO may
motivate activity toward the subgoal, but as soon as the DEMO is
reached, overall motivation and performance level should de-
crease, creating a state of complacency. The net effect of the
subgoal thus depends DEMO the magnitude of two opposing forces:
motivation and complacency. When the two forces are present, the
complacency period may “win,” in which case a subgoal may lead
to an overall decrease in performance.
Notably, this prediction is consistent with “goals as reference
points” theory (Heath et al., 1999), which suggests that a focus on
the reference point in the domain of gains may decrease motiva-
tion. For example, consider a marathon runner who is approaching
a well-marked halfway point in the DEMO Seeing the halfway
point getting nearer and nearer may increase motivation, DEMO line
with most predictions (Heath et al., 1999). However, DEMO reaching
the halfway point, the runner might feel some sense of DEMO and
achievement, congratulating herself for coming this far. This may
be DEMO true if she planned a challenging time goal and
succeeded.2 She then might dwell on this achievement long
enough to lose focus on the DEMO goal of the run and consequently,
unintentionally, decrease her level DEMO effort. On balance, the de-
crease in effort may be greater DEMO the initial increase toward the
subgoal of the halfway point. In this case, the runner might have
been better off without seeing the half-distance mark altogether.
Note that this effect also can be captured by the DEMO model
(Newell & Simon, 1972) if the goal-stack operation is DEMO
2 More on planning in our General Discussion.
1160
AMIR AND ARIELY
instantaneous; that is, if completion of the DEMO causes the previ-
ous goal to take the focal position only after some delay, we can
expect a lapse in directed activity and a decrease in performance.
Negative consequences of progress information, such as DPMs,
are not intuitive. In measuring theories about the effects of sub-
goals, Heath and colleagues (1999) found that participants believe
that a runner DEMO partitions the total distance by setting progress
markers is more likely to run the complete distance than is a runner
who does not, presumably because of the motivating effects of
DPMs. However, such lay theories about the effects of DPMs may
fail to take into account the negative DEMO of the partition and
thus overestimate the positive impact of DPMs. We investigate
people’s ability to predict complacency and the negative effects of
DPMs DEMO our pilot study.
Subgoals as Goal Distracters
Humans are not alone in their pursuit of goals; most classical
research on motivation and end rewards focuses on animals and
their actions to attain food or water. The DEMO phenomenon un-
covered by such research reveals that the closer an organism is to
its goal, the greater is its motivation to achieve that goal (Hull,
1932, 1934). Researchers also have revealed great DEMO in
human behavior (Kivetz et al., 2005; See et al., 2006), though
research that examines discrete feedback rather than continuous
feedback DEMO progress toward the goal has produced results that
deviate from this basic pattern. In particular, research in which
animals receive DPMs has indicated that they may decrease both
performance (e.g., rate at which pigeons peck DEMO lever to obtain
food) and preferences (i.e., likelihood of animals DEMO the
same path in the future). For example, Duncan and DEMO (1972)
provided pigeons with signals in the form of light DEMO as
they got closer to a goal to receive a pellet of food. The overall task
length remained constant, but the number of lights used differed
across conditions (i.e., two or three equally spaced light DEMO
tors). In contrast to the general belief about the beneficial impact
of progress markers, the pigeons significantly underperformed
when they received more DPMs (i.e., they pecked at a slower rate,
which caused longer DEMO in receiving food rewards) and signif-
icantly preferred the task with DEMO (or no) DPMs when they
could choose between conditions.
In the case of more complex agents pursuing more complex
goals, a related theory also exists. According to models of limited
cognitive resources, different goals may compete for attentional
resources (Kruglanski et al., 2002; Shah & Kruglanski, 2002).
Similarly, means for attaining a goal, such as subgoals, may draw
attention away from the ultimate goal (Kruglanski et al., 2002). In
the domain of cognitive problem solving, goal management has
been modeled as a stack (Newell & Simon, 1972), such DEMO when
a subgoal may aid in the solution of the task, DEMO previous focal
goal gets put aside, in a stack; only when the current subgoal has
been either completed or deemed unreachable will the DEMO
end be drawn from the stack and become the goal of directed
activity. Thus, in cases in which goals (subgoals) are not rewarding
in and of themselves, we might find a decrease in overall motiva-
tion, because they may distract attention from the end itself.
Consistent with the straightforward implications of a goal-stack
model, we posit that while goals remain in the stack, they have
little power to direct activity.
A recent development in the study of goal pursuit dynamics
revealed that progress DEMO a goal may inhibit goal-congruent
behavior in favor of facilitating progress toward a competing goal
(Fishbach & Dhar, 2005). In other words, feedback about progress
toward a goal causes it to be replaced with DEMO competing goal that
rests atop the goal stack. Fishbach and Dhar (DEMO) further distin-
guished between goal commitment activities and goal progress
signals DEMO found that progress signals cause participants to bal-
ance their goal activities and decrease effort toward the focal goal.
This distinction has particular importance DEMO our work, because
DPMs by definition indicate goal progress, and if participants
entertain some other goal (e.g., resource preservation), reaching a
DEMO would cause them to decrease their effort and performance.
According to Fishbach and Dhar (2005), DPMs may decrease
performance toward the ultimate goal of the task in complex
cognitive tasks because progress toward a goal DEMO trigger the
replacement of the current goal with the goal in the stack.
In summary, subgoals and DPMs in particular may increase
motivation and improve performance because they simplify the
task and indicate progress toward an DEMO (i.e., increase progress
certainty). We expect this positive effect to be very prevalent when
progress indication is otherwise lacking (i.e., progress DEMO)
but weaker when ample progress indication already is present in
the task (i.e., progress certainty). In the latter case, the negative
implications of subgoals should loom larger than do their positive
influences. We DEMO predict an interaction between the level of
progress information toward the ultimate goal and the presence of
DPMs. In other words, DPMs can be either positive or negative,
depending on the level of progress certainty.
DEMO prediction stands in opposition to the hypothetical results
of Heath and colleagues (1999) and suggests that people may hold
erroneous beliefs about the DEMO of DPMs. Therefore, prior to
our main experiments, we conducted a pilot study aimed to repli-
cate Heath and colleagues’ (1999) results DEMO a context similar to
our experimental environments, which enables us to DEMO the
beliefs directly with actual behavior. We then describe four exper-
iments that test this thesis. Implicitly manipulating both DPMs and
progress uncertainty, Experiment 1 investigates the influence of
progress information on participants’ effort and willingness DEMO
repeat the task. Experiment 2 replicates the main results of Exper-
iment 1 and tests whether the distraction of attention can be an
alternative DEMO for our results. Experiment 3 extends the in-
vestigation by using explicit manipulations of both DPMs and
progress certainty in a more complex task DEMO accuracy as
well as effort. Finally, Experiment 4 extends the results DEMO to
a longer, more realistic task. We conclude with a discussion DEMO the
results, the interplay between motivation and cognition, and the
implications and limitations of the current investigation.
Pilot Study: Metacognition About DPMs
In comparing our predictions with the intuition experiments
(i.e., asking people how DEMO would behave) that Heath and col-
leagues (1999) reported, we find a puzzle. Participants in their
experiments seemed to predict only positive DEMO of DPMs,
suggesting that if our theoretical predictions hold, people DEMO
erroneous theories about DPMs. Because their experiments differ
from ours, in DEMO they featured intuition studies using a different
context, we first ensure DEMO their findings will hold in an intuition
EFFECTS OF DISCRETE PROGRESS MARKERS ON PERFORMANCE
1161
study in our experimental DEMO This study conceptually repli-
cates the experimental manipulations we describe for Experiment
1 and asks participants to predict behavior.
Method
Sixty graduate students participated DEMO the study as part of a
course requirement. We told participants about four antique deal-
ers who needed to walk to an auction house DEMO their cars had
malfunctioned. The auction house received daily fresh stock to
sell, such that the earlier the antique dealers arrived, the higher DEMO
the likelihood that they would receive more items and thus a larger
profit. The four antique dealers appeared in different progress cer-
tainty and DEMO conditions (see Figure 1). In the uncertainty condition
without DPMs (A in Figure 1), the dealer had no indication about the
DEMO to the auction house. In the uncertainty condition with DPMs
(B DEMO Figure 1), the road was divided into quarters by three major
intersections, so that the dealer could tell in which quarter of the path
he was walking. In the certainty condition without DPMs (C in
Figure 1), the road offered clear distance signs, and in the certainty
condition with DPMs (D in Figure 1), the road to the auction house
both offered distance signs and crossed the three major DEMO
tions. This fourth condition was the crucial one, because it featured
DEMO types of information. Participants estimated the walking
speed of the dealers at 1/16 intervals, assuming 4 miles per hour
(mph) is the average speed at which an antique dealer walks.
Results and Discussion
We DEMO the prediction results, depicted in Figure 2, on the
indicator variables for continuous progress information, DPMs,
and their interactions. Throughout the article we use dichotomous
coding (–1, 1) for binary variables to facilitate interpretations of
the interactions that are similar to analysis of variance (Irwin &
McClelland, 2001). In line with past results, people predicted an
overall positive effect of DPMs (B  0.242), t(56)  3.89, p 
.001; and no significant effect of progress certainty (B  0.064),
t(56)  1.03, p DEMO .309. More important to our current investiga-
tion, participants did not DEMO an interaction of DPMs and
Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the antique dealers and gold-mining
games. The black horizontal lines represent the visible path, and the shaded
horizontal lines represent the parts of the path in DEMO the gold miner or
antique dealer is invisible to the participant. The first letter in the naming of the
conditions refers to the level DEMO continuous feedback (y or n), and the second
letter refers DEMO the existence of progress markers (y or n).
progress certainty (B  – 0.015), t(56)  0.17, ns. In DEMO,
people seem to believe that more information is better, especially
DEMO the form of DPMs, whereas we propose that providing DPMs in
DEMO certain environment may yield negative effects.
Experiment 1: Gold Mining
To DEMO our basic interactive prediction with actual behavior, we
begin by manipulating DEMO two central constructs in our account:
progress uncertainty and DPMs. We predicted that progress un-
certainty should have an overall negative impact on DEMO
but that DPMs would have an interactive effect, such that their
DEMO would be positive when progress information is unavail-
able (high uncertainty) but negative when progress information is
available (low uncertainty). This interaction may attenuate the
overall positive impact of progress certainty and in some DEMO
lead to an overall negative effect of DPMs.
Method
Participants. One hundred ninety-six participants, mostly col-
lege students from the northeast United States, DEMO recruited
through advertisements and public announcements. We randomly
assigned participants to one of four progress–information condi-
tions and, before allowing them to begin the task, familiarized
them with the graphical interface for the condition to which they
had been assigned. At the end of the experiment, participants
received between $0.11 and $36.00, depending on their perfor-
mance on a computerized task.
Task. A computer game called “gold miner” was created for
the DEMO In this game, participants must press the z and m
keys DEMO to move a “gold miner” (a small red circle that
starts DEMO the leftmost corner of the screen) toward the “gold mine”
(a blue rectangle at the rightmost side of the screen). Each z–m DEMO
moves the miner one step. As we subsequently describe, the image
DEMO the terrain over which the gold miner travels differed among the
conditions (Figure 1). We informed participants that they would
earn money when their gold miner reached the mine and that their
reward would increase DEMO the gold miner reached the mine
faster. Unbeknownst to the participants, DEMO actual length of each
trial was 243 steps, which took participants DEMO min on average to
traverse. After participants reached the gold mine, DEMO informed
them of their reward and presented them with a choice of either
participating in another trial or terminating their participation in
the study DEMO receiving their cumulative earnings up to that point.
The reward magnitude for each trial was a linear function of the
time each trial took, determined by subtracting 2.2 times the
number of seconds from 155 to DEMO the number of cents gained
or lost (i.e., very poor performance could yield a negative amount).
There were no limits on the DEMO or number of trials that partici-
pants could play, and the DEMO payoff to each participant equaled
the sum of their individual trial rewards.
Design. The experiment used a 2 (progress certainty vs.
progress uncertainty) DEMO 2 (DPMs: present or absent) between-
participants design. We manipulated DEMO certainty according
to participants’ ability to see the exact location of the gold miner
on the screen. Thus, the gold miner walked either on a bridge, such
that the gold miner was visible at any moment, or in a tunnel, such
that participants could see the gold DEMO only entering or exiting.
1162
AMIR AND ARIELY
5.00
4.90
4.80
4.70
4.60
4.50
4.40
4.30
DEMO
4.10
4.00
Figure 2.
Predicted Walking Speed
High Uncertainty No DPMs
High Uncertainty With DPMs
Low Uncertainty No DPMs
Low Uncertainty With DPMs
123456789 DEMO 11 12 13 14 15
Location
Predicted walking speed (miles per DEMO) in the four conditions. DPM  discrete progress marker.
We manipulated DEMO by dividing the path to the gold mine into
four quarters, DEMO as either four bridges or four tunnels
depending on the level of progress certainty (see Figure 1). In the
uncertainty condition without DPMs (A in Figure 1), participants
received no information about their distance from the gold mine
(described as one long tunnel). In the uncertainty condition with
DPMs (B in Figure 1), the task consisted of quarters, so that
participants could see only when they had completed each quarter
of the path (described as four tunnels).3 In the certainty condition
without DPMs (C in Figure 1), participants could see how much
progress they had made at any point (clear background). Finally, in
the certainty condition with DPMs (D in Figure 1), participants
could see how much progress they had made at any point as well
as when they had completed each quarter of the path (described as
four bridges that the gold miner must traverse). Again, this fourth
condition represented the crucial one because it offered both types
DEMO information.
Dependent measures. The main dependent measure was per-
formance (effort), which we measured by the amount of time each
participant needed to complete a trial. As an additional measure,
we used the momentary DEMO, that is, the rate at which participants
clicked the two keys during any given time period. Finally, we
measured preference for the task, as indicated by the number of
trials each participant chose to play.
Results
Each participant completed as many trials as he or she chose, for
a total of 819 trials across all participants. The results we DEMO
reveal the same pattern for each individual trial (e.g., first, DEMO)
and for the aggregate data. Thus, we present the results DEMO the
aggregated data, followed by a similar analysis of only the DEMO
trial for each participant. We regressed the time that participants
needed to complete each trial on the DPMs, progress certainty, and
their interaction (see Table 1, top half).4 Consistent with the
goal-gradient hypothesis, DEMO analysis revealed a main effect of
progress uncertainty on task completion time (B  1.41), t(815) 
4.63, p  .0001. That is, participants took longer to complete the
task under progress uncertainty. However, DPMs in and of them-
selves had no main effect on performance (B  0.19), t(815) 
0.63, ns. Most important for the purpose of the current experiment,
the interaction between DEMO certainty and level of DPMs was
significant (B  –2.14), DEMO(815)  7.02, p  .0001, such that DPMs
decreased DEMO under progress certainty but increased per-
formance under uncertainty. An analysis of the simple effects
confirmed the predicted contrast: Providing DPMs to participants
improved their performance when progress was uncertain (B 
–3.899), t(343)  4.15, p  .0001; but decreased performance
(i.e., increased task completion time) when progress was certain
(B  4.668), DEMO(472)  6.02, p  .0001.
To exclude any possible effect created by multiple trials within
participants, we conducted a similar analysis with the first trial
from each participant. This analysis (Table 1, top DEMO, in paren-
theses) revealed a similar pattern: a main effect DEMO progress uncer-
tainty, by which performance decreases (B  2.37), t(191)  2.94,
p  .004; and no main DEMO for DPMs on performance (B 
–3.19), t(191)  0.4, ns. Again, the most important result for the
purpose of DEMO experiment was the negative and significant inter-
action between progress certainty and level of DPMs (B  –2.28),
t(191)  2.83, p  .005.
To obtain a proxy for the effects of progress certainty and DPMs
on participants’ preferences for the task (i.e., choice DEMO repeat the
task), we regressed the number of trials that participants played in
3 A pretest indicated that participants could not predict when DEMO gold
miner would emerge from a tunnel, which suggests a state DEMO progress
uncertainty in the tunnel conditions.
4 A more extensive model that controls for individual differences (ran-
dom effects) and learning between trials DEMO no difference in terms of
the effect of the trial number on performance across conditions (i.e.,
interactions between trial number and conditions were virtually nonexist-
ent); the expected positive relation occurred between trial numbers DEMO
performance (B  – 0.26), t(194)  6.95, DEMO  .0001, which could be due
to selection or learning. In DEMO, we find a nonsignificant effect for
uncertainty (B  0.99), t(194)  1.77, p  .076; no effect of DPMs (B 
– 0.74), t(194)  1.33, p  .18; and a significant interaction between DPMs
and uncertainty (B  DEMO), t(194)  2.69, p  .007. Thus, we DEMO the
more parsimonious model.
Speed
EFFECTS OF DISCRETE PROGRESS MARKERS ON PERFORMANCE
1163
Table 1
Experiment 1: Average Trial Length (in Seconds) and Average
Number of Trials Repeated
DEMO certainty
Progress marker
Uncertain Certain
Average trial length
None 57.6 (68.5) 50.5 (54.9)
Quarter 53.7 (59.1) 55.2 (58.9)
Average DEMO of trials repeated
None 3.81 6.12
Quarter 5.58 4.21
Note.
Results in parentheses are first-trial averages.
each condition (Table 1, bottom half) on certainty, DPMs, and
their interaction. We also attempted to control for DEMO effect of their
previous payoff on their preference to repeat the task by adding
each participant’s time (payoff) for the previous trial. The DEMO
revealed a negative effect of progress uncertainty (B  – 0.45),
t(627)  1.91, p  .057; and a nonsignificant effect of DPMs (B 
0.387), t(627)  1.67, p  .095. That is, progress uncertainty
slightly decreased the number of trials that participants chose to
play, whereas DPMs slightly increased them. More important, the
analysis revealed a significant interaction between uncertainty and
DPMs (DEMO  1.15), t(627)  4.85, p  .0001, DEMO the
performance results. When progress was uncertain, participants
chose to undertake DEMO additional trials in the condition with
DPMs than in the condition without DPMs. In contrast, when
progress was certain, participants chose to play DEMO trials in the
condition without DPMs than in the condition with DPMs. We also
found a main effect of performance in the previous trial DEMO per-
formance in the current trial (B  – 0.33), DEMO(627)  11.95, p 
.0001; that is, the shorter (more money) a participant took in the
previous trial, the greater was his or her likelihood to play the next
trial. However, as we mentioned previously, this additional control
did not change the nature of the results.
The results also allowed for an analysis of the momentary DEMO,
as captured by participants’ key pressing rate (presses per second)DEMO
In support of our predictions, participants reacted to the DPMs in
DEMO ways in the two progress marker conditions. Participants
in the uncertainty condition with DPMs regained some vigor after
each marker, whereas those in the certainty condition with DPMs
did not. In addition, the results showed that participants began with
vigor and then slowed down, which made the effects of the DPMs
more prominent as the task progressed (Figure 3).
The mean percentage increase in speed around the DPMs was
three times DEMO large with progress uncertainty (1.48%) compared
with that of progress certainty (0.57%). Regressing the momentary
acceleration in the area of the DPMs on the level of certainty
confirms the significance of this difference (B  0.99), t(16) 
3.62, p  .002. No DEMO effects appeared in the two conditions
without DPM. This result supports the idea that participants who
reach a marker under progress uncertainty increase their DEMO
more than they do under progress certainty; Figure 4 depicts the
DEMO or deceleration (rate of change in clicking speed,
logged to DEMO unbiased comparisons of accelerations and de-
celerations) at each point during DEMO task. Although participants
greatly accelerated in response to the DPMs when progress was
uncertain, they did so to a far lesser extent when progress was
certain. Moreover, participants decelerated after reaching the first
two DPMs, DEMO is consistent with our theoretical account of the
negative aspects of DPMs and the points at which they loom larger
than the positive aspects DEMO DPMs. We thus find evidence for both
sources of negative influences of DPMs. The lower average speed
along the path in the certainty plus DEMO condition suggests an
overall lower motivation and supports the motivational distraction
account (Figure 3); the differential effects of DPMs support the
reference-based complacency account (Figure 4). Although there
may be advantages to mere achievements, they may be relatively
outweighed by the lack of focus on the ultimate goal.
Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 confirm our predictions. Progress
DEMO decreases performance and the likelihood that the task
will be repeated. More important, we find that DPMs increase
performance when progress information is unavailable but de-
crease performance when progress information is available. We
5.05
4.85
DEMO
4.45
4.25
4.05
3.85
Average Gold-Miner Speed
DPM Location
Low Uncertainty No DPM
Low Uncertainty DPM
High Uncertainty DPM
High Uncertainty No DPM
1 DEMO 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1314151617 18192021 2223242526 2728293031 3233343536 3738394041 4243
Figure 3.
Gold miner momentary speeds (smoothed) in the four conditions. DPM  discrete progress marker.
Speed (1/DEMO)
1164
AMIR AND ARIELY
Figure 4. Acceleration/deceleration in the discrete progress DEMO (DPM) conditions with high and low
progress uncertainty (log ratios DEMO). Speed measured in pixels per second.
find the same result when we compare the likelihood of repeating
the task. Thus, we find evidence in support of the predicted
interaction between DPMs and overall progress uncertainty DEMO both
our performance measure and our preference measure. Note that
the latter measure represents a proxy for the overall appeal of the
task (after we control for prior payment). In addition, DPMs
significantly decrease the overall appeal of the task when progress
is certain, in additional support for the idea that DPMs decrease the
average motivation associated with the DEMO by defocusing moti-
vation from the end reward (Fishbach & Dhar, 2005; Kruglanski
et al., 2002; Newell & Simon, 1972).
DEMO predict this interaction between DPM and the level of
progress certainty because participants may consider progress
markers as subgoals. As such, DPMs shift motivational attention
away from the end goal, and when they do little to simplify the task
or increase motivation, they reduce the overall appeal of the task.
The analysis of momentary effort provides additional support for
this DEMO; that is, DPMs increase momentary effort much more
when progress is uncertain than when it is certain. The results also
confirm Heath and DEMO (1999) predictions that motivation
around a goal conforms to the shape of the prospect theory value
function (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). DEMO thus find evidence for
both complacency and a decrease in overall motivation toward the
task.
An alternative account we must address before continuing our
DEMO of the effects of DPMs relates to attention distraction.
If the DPMs in the progress certainty plus DPM condition distract
attention from the task DEMO the goal, performance should deteriorate
in the same basic way. This DEMO account suggests that the
effect of the DPMs occurs at the level of attention as opposed to
our account which centers at the level DEMO directed activity. To test
whether the effect of DPMs is caused by attention shifting away
from the task at hand, or by the deeper goal distraction that we
posit, we designed Experiment 2. In this experiment, we replicate
two important conditions from Experiment 1 but add a third
condition with a subtle attention distraction occurring at the same
progress points DEMO the DPMs. If the attention story holds, we
should observe deterioration DEMO performance, but if our motiva-
tional account holds, we should not.
Method
Experiment 2: Solar Eclipse
Participants. Two hundred ninety-one participants, belonging
DEMO an online participant pool, participated in the experiment and
were paid DEMO to their performance.
Task. We used the same general setup as in the gold miner
experiment, with a few modifications. We replicated the open road
condition (i.e., progress certainty), in which the gold miner DEMO
visible every step of the way, as well as the bridges DEMO (i.e.,
progress certainty plus DPMs), in which the road DEMO the gold mine
is divided into five equal-length background colors (rather DEMO
four in Experiment 1) and the gold miner is clearly visible DEMO the
way to the gold mine but also clearly passes each one-fifth marker.
The main modification to these two conditions included an image
of DEMO sun in the background. We then created a third condition, the
DEMO condition, based on the open road condition. Unlike
DPMs, in this condition, the distraction points were not an integral
part of the road and did not implicitly represent progress. To create
this distraction, after each fifth of the task (equivalent to a change
in background color in the bridges condition), the image of the sun
in the background DEMO, turned from yellow to orange, ex-
ploded, and then returned DEMO its original state. Each participant
became familiar with the graphical interface appropriate for his or
her condition prior to beginning the game. The game DEMO of
200 steps between the starting point and the gold mine.
Design. The experiment consisted of three conditions
(progress certainty, progress certainty plus DEMO, progress cer-
tainty plus distraction) in a between-participants design. We cre-
ated the DPMs, as in the previous experiment, by varying the
DEMO colors of the five bridges, and we implemented dis-
traction with DEMO solar eclipse graphic.
Dependent measures. The main dependent measure was over-
all performance (i.e., amount of time participants took to reach the
EFFECTS OF DISCRETE PROGRESS MARKERS ON PERFORMANCE
1165
gold mine). We DEMO measured several post-task items, including
participants’ ratings of task difficulty (10-point scale: 10  very
difficult and 1  not difficult); estimations of how many times the sun
eclipsed (open response question); and, for participants in the bridges
condition, the extent to which the DEMO colors of the bridges
helped or hurt their performance (5-point scale: 1 means the
bridges hurt performance, 3 was neutral, and 5 DEMO the bridges
helped performance).
Results
The main result replicated Experiment 1 because participants in
the certainty plus DPM condition performed worse (M  57.3 s,
SE  2.05) than did their counterparts who did not receive DPMs
(M 52.5 s, SE  1.16), t(DEMO)  3.64, p  .001. More important
to our current investigation, we found no effect of the attentional
distraction on performance because performance in the certainty
plus distraction condition (M  52.7 s, SE DEMO 1.55) did not differ
from performance in the condition without distraction, t(192) 
0.09, p  .924; but was markedly better than the condition with
DPMs, t(198)  3.79, p  .001. This was despite participants
clearly noticing and recalling the attentional distraction (they saw
a mean of 4.89 eclipses).5 We can thus infer DEMO participants in the
distraction condition attend to the eclipse but that this distraction
does not hurt their performance, and therefore, distraction is un-
DEMO to be the reason for the reduced performance caused by the
DPMs in the progress certainty condition. We also did not find any
evidence DEMO differences in the perceived task difficulty among
conditions. Participants rated both the DPM condition (M  3.54,
SE  0.23) and the DEMO condition (M  4.2, SE  0.70) as
easy as DEMO certainty condition (M  3.91, SE  0.23), without
significant differences either in comparison with each other or in
an absolute sense. DEMO, participants in the certainty plus DPM
condition indicated that the bridges DEMO helped nor hurt their
performance (M  2.98, SE  0.07).
Discussion
Experiment 2 replicated the negative effect of DPMs under
progress DEMO with different participants, five as opposed to
four DPMs, and a slightly different incentive scheme. Creating a
manipulation that distracts participants’ attention, but not their
goal directedness, also enabled us to disentangle two potential
explanations for the effects of DPMs. We found no decrease in
performance when DEMO distraction occurred at the level of attention,
even though it was clear participants paid attention to those dis-
tracters. Therefore, the effect of DPMs on performance in the task
likely stems from motivation as opposed DEMO attention, similar to
Fishbach and Dhar’s (2005) finding that only DEMO indication of
progress toward the goal, not level of commitment, prompts par-
ticipants to shift their resources and try to balance competing
goals.
DEMO 1 and 2 together demonstrate that human partici-
pants react to DPMs not unlike the way pigeons do. That is, when
DPMs appear in an environment that contains certainty about
progress, where one knows the distance to the goal, performance
decreases, as does the tendency to repeat DEMO task. However, these
two experiments may be limited in three different DEMO First,
Experiments 1 and 2 used a task that requires sheer effort but little
or no other skills. Will the results generalize to DEMO complex tasks
that involve accuracy and strategy rather than sheer physical
effort? Second, Experiments 1 and 2 manipulated certainty and
DPMs implicitly by DEMO constant progress feedback and
changing the background colors of the road to the gold mine.
Would the pattern of results remain, even if DPMs and progress
certainty were provided explicitly? Third, we termed the modera-
DEMO that we manipulate, that is, the ability to observe the distance
to the goal, progress certainty. Would explicitly manipulating
certainty about progress interact with the effect of DPMs, as we
predict? To answer these DEMO, we created a task that required
both effort and accuracy and DEMO participants explicit cues
relating to progress, specifically, a frequent cue indicating the
exact percentage completed and an infrequent (DPM) cue that
provides DEMO numeric indication of the task stage. We varied the
presence or absence of these cues in accordance with the condition
participants were in.
Experiment DEMO: Target Practice
Method
Participants. One hundred seventy participants, mostly col-
lege students from the Boston area, were recruited through adver-
tisements and public announcements to participate in an eye– hand
coordination laboratory study. Participants were DEMO on
the basis of their performance.
Task. We created a computer game called “target practice.”
The elements of the game consisted of a blue DEMO, which partici-
pants controlled with keyboard arrows, and a large red circle that
moved slowly in random directions on the screen. The partici-
DEMO goal was to center the blue dot in the red circle and maintain
that position for as long as possible while the red circle DEMO
to move. Keeping the dot centered in the moving circle sometimes
required not moving it (if correctly positioned) for several seconds.
Thus, the task required accuracy and strategy in addition to the
effort of moving DEMO dot. Every second the dot remained centered,
a red signal at the upper right-hand corner of the screen flashed,
and participants advanced DEMO step closer to the game’s end.
Participants were informed that the faster they reached the end, the
greater their reward would be. Unbeknownst to participants, the
game consisted of 100 such steps. At the end of each game,
participants reviewed the running sum of their earnings and DEMO
asked whether they wanted to play again, up to a maximum DEMO 10
trials. Finally, prior to beginning the game, participants became
familiar with the graphical interface corresponding to the condition
to which they were DEMO
Design. The experiment consisted of six conditions in a 2
(DPM: available vs. not available)  3 (level of progress certainty:
DEMO, low certainty, and uncertainty) between-participants de-
sign. We manipulated the DEMO markers by instructing partic-
ipants that the game consisted of five stages and by displaying an
indication of the current stage of the game (i.e., Stages 1–5). To
manipulate progress certainty, we varied the DEMO about
percentage of the task completed. The certainty condition dis-
played the exact percentage completed (from 0% to 100%).
5 Participants in the other conditions recalled seeing an eclipse signifi-
cantly fewer times (M  0.39, SE  0.08), t(192)  6.42, p  .001.
1166
AMIR AND ARIELY
Because the game consisted of 100 steps, the percentages signified
exact progress in the game. In the low-certainty conditions, no
progress information appeared, but participants had been told that
the game had a constant length. The uncertainty conditions were
similar to the low-certainty condition, but the actual length of each
game (and that of each of the five stages) was probabilistic (though
with the same expected length DEMO 20 steps per stage and 100 steps
per game). We designed this manipulation of progress uncertainty
to remove participants’ ability to predict the DEMO of each trial
and thereby provide a different test of the progress certainty
concept, in a sense making it extremely hard to know the distance
to the goal.
Dependent measures. The main dependent measure was over-
DEMO performance (i.e., amount of time participants spent on each
game). In this game, we could not measure momentary effort by
the rate at which participants clicked the keys because a more
accurate response sometimes DEMO fewer keystrokes. An addi-
tional measure we considered is the preference for the task, as
indicated by the number of trials that each participant chose to
play.
Results
Participants completed a total of 873 games across DEMO six
conditions. The average time for each game and the average
number of games played appear in Table 2. As in Experiment 1,
DEMO effect of adding DPMs to the task depended on their relative
information value (Table 2), as supported by the significant inter-
action between the availability of DPMs and progress certainty,
F(2, 867) DEMO 5.62, p  .004. The pattern of results implied that
when DEMO are added to the certainty condition, performance
decreased (time increased), F(1, 314)  9.99, p  .002; but when
DEMO appeared in the uncertainty condition, performance in-
creased, F(1, DEMO)  5.32, p  .022. In summary, as in Experiment
DEMO, DPMs increased performance with progress uncertainty but
decreased performance when they DEMO in the progress cer-
tainty condition.
The number of trials that participants chose to play followed a
pattern similar to that of Experiment 1. DEMO participants experi-
enced greater uncertainty about progress, DPMs increased their
preference DEMO the task, but when they had certainty, DPMs de-
creased their preference. In the intermediate condition, DPMs had
no effect on the number of games played, as verified by an analysis
Table 2
Experiment 3: Average Trial Length (in Seconds) and Average
Number of Trials Repeated
Condition Mean time
Performance
improvement
Mean number
of trials
Uncertain
Plus progress DEMO 166.05 19.32 6.40
No progress marker 185.37 4.50
Low certainty
Plus progress marker 165.30 11.89 4.96
No progress marker 177.19 4.97
Certain
Plus progress DEMO 180.14 17.85 4.50
No progress marker 162.29 5.61
of variance that revealed no main effect for DPMs or certainty but
a significant interaction, F(2, 163)  3.43, p  .035. Again, we
find DEMO the valance of the effect of DPMs depends on overall
certainty about progress.
Discussion
The results of Experiment 3 replicate those of Experiment 1. DEMO
particular, Experiment 3 demonstrates that DPMs can either in-
crease (if progress information is unavailable) or decrease (if
progress information is available) overall performance and prefer-
ences. The results further generalize the findings of DEMO 1
to a more complex task that involves accuracy and not just sheer
effort. Moreover, whereas the progress cues in Experiment 1 were
implicit (i.e., background colors and the ability to see the exact
position), in Experiment 3, progress information was more ex-
plicit, in that it displayed stage numbers and the exact percentages
of task completion. Furthermore, we manipulated progress cer-
tainty in two different ways: by omitting the direct measure of
progress and by making the actual length of the DEMO less predict-
able. Both types of progress certainty influence performance and
preferences in a similar direction. That these results largely repli-
cate Experiment 1 DEMO that the effects of progress information
on performance may be more general.
Experiment 4: Spelling Bee
To generalize our findings to more common tasks, as well as
replicate our explicit information manipulation, we turn to DEMO
ments of spelling correctness. We constructed an Internet task that
required participants to identify whether words are misspelled and
then to complete the task DEMO progress information conditions
that varied in the same vein as those in Experiment 3. We incen-
tivized the participants to complete the task as DEMO as they
could. Because a person either knows a word or does not (and the
words we chose were relatively easy), we expected greater moti-
vation in this task to lead to faster reactions but DEMO make little
difference for the overall level of accuracy. If our results hold, we
should find an interactive effect of adding DPMs to the task,
depending on whether progress information is available.
Method
Participants. Three DEMO fifteen participants from an on-
line participant pool participated in the experiment. Participants’
ages ranged from 18 to 73 years, and most were from the United
States. Participants were paid on the basis of their performance DEMO
the task.
Task. Participants logging onto the Web site viewed an initial
screen that explained the task as well as the graphical interface
appropriate DEMO the condition to which they had been assigned. The
task entailed reviewing one word per screen and judging whether
it was spelled correctly. In DEMO to the focal word, each screen
contained two buttons, one labeled Correct and the other Incor-
rect. Clicking on either button advanced participants DEMO the next
screen and a new word; they could not return DEMO a previous screen.
Participants were told they would be paid on the basis of the speed
and accuracy of their judgments. Unbeknownst to the DEMO,
the task included 100 such judgments. For each word judged
EFFECTS OF DISCRETE PROGRESS MARKERS ON PERFORMANCE
1167
correctly, participants earned $0.15, minus the number of seconds
required for the judgment. Pretests showed that participants take
between3sand5sto identify a word correctly. Next, we
calculated the participants’ earnings by summing the individual
word earnings, which could range between $0 and $15 for the
entire task. This reward structure ensured that participants DEMO
little incentive to click randomly. At the end of the experiment,
participants were shown their earnings and were paid.
Design. The experiment consisted DEMO four conditions in a 2
(DPM: available vs. not available) DEMO 2 (level of progress certainty:
certainty vs. uncertainty) between-participants design. Similar to
Experiment 3, we manipulated the progress markers by instructing
participants that the game consisted of five stages and displaying
an indication of DEMO current stage of the game (i.e., Stages 1–5). We
ensured progress certainty by displaying the percentage completed
(from 0% to 100%). Because the game consisted of 100 words, the
percentages signified exact progress in the game. In the uncertainty
condition, we provided no such display.
Dependent measures. The main dependent measure, overall
performance (i.e., amount of money participants earn), was equiv-
alent to the total time spent DEMO correct spelling judgments. We
measured the task time for each word to serve as a proxy for local
effort or motivation. We also observed DEMO level of accuracy across
conditions.
Results
Each participant completed one game, DEMO we had a total of 315
games across the four conditions. As predicted, the average level
of accuracy of spelling judgments was high (DEMO) and did not
differ across conditions. The main dependent measure, however,
was task performance, as measured by the total time participants
took to complete all correct judgments during the task (Figure 5).
Replicating our previous results, we found a nonsignificant posi-
tive effect of progress certainty, or the display of the exact per-
centage completed (B DEMO 27.22), t(311)  1.39, p  .16; and DEMO
DPMs (B  29.73), t(311)  1.51, p DEMO .13. More important, we
found a significant interaction between DPMs and DEMO cer-
tainty, whereby adding DPMs to a situation with ample progress
DEMO hinders performance in the task (B  – 41.51),
t(311)  2.11, p  .035. In Figure 6, we display the differential
effect of DPMs on the individual task completion time under DEMO
and high progress uncertainty. Replicating our previous results and
consistent with the proposed mechanism, responders seemed to
slow down much more after reaching the DPMs in the low uncer-
tainty condition than in the high uncertainty DEMO
Discussion
In addition to replicating the effects in Experiment 3 by using
explicit displays of progress information, Experiment 4 extends the
previous findings in another important way. That is, we confirm
the predicted interactive effects of DPMs in a more realistic task
with a heterogeneous participant population. As DEMO, we
find that reducing progress uncertainty by displaying the percent-
age DEMO the task completed increases motivation and decreases
participants’ task completion times, DEMO improves performance.
We further find that adding DPMs to a task with no progress
indication achieves the same effect. More important, adding DPMs
to an environment rich in progress information and certainty
hinders performance. Finally, it seems as though participants re-
duce their effort much more after reaching DEMO DPM under low
uncertainty than under high uncertainty, corroborating our account
DEMO the dual role of DPMs.
General Discussion
The goal of this article is to investigate the influence of DPMs
on performance in the pursuit DEMO a goal and the propensity to repeat
a task (i.e., preference for a task). In particular, we suggest that in
contrast to the allure of progress feedback (Early, Northcraft, Lee,
& Lituchy, 1990; Erez, 1977; Locke & Latham 1990), DPMs may
DEMO decrease overall performance. We further suggest that the
effect of this type of progress information depends on the level of
progress uncertainty in a DEMO, that is, on the ability to know the
distance to goal completion. This theory views DPMs as having a
dual role: They may provide progress information and reduce
uncertainty, but they also may serve as subgoals. The informative
role contributes to performance when there is high progress DEMO
certainty, but it adds little when there is progress certainty. The
DEMO 5.
Total time (in seconds) for correct judgments of word spelling. DPM  discrete progress marker.
1168
AMIR AND ARIELY
Figure 6. Task times (in seconds) in DEMO discrete progress marker (DPM) conditions with high and low progress
uncertainty, Experiment 4.
subgoal may enhance performance, consistent with the goal-
gradient DEMO, and simplify the task by breaking it into smaller,
more DEMO bits, but it may also shift motivational focus
away from the DEMO goal and thus hinder overall performance. Our
findings support these claims.
Experiment 1 demonstrated that DPMs improve performance
and preference for the task when DEMO is uncertain but that the
reverse may be true for tasks with ample progress information. In
the high progress feedback condition, providing DPMs decreased
both performance in the task and the likelihood that it would be
DEMO The momentary effort results combined with the prefer-
ence results suggest that DPMs influence behavior and decrease
overall motivation in the condition in which DEMO provide little
intrinsic reward (i.e., progress certainty). These effects contradict
common beliefs that the addition of more positive feedback, pos-
itive reinforcement, or information can only improve performance
in and enjoyment of a task. Experiment 2 replicated the negative
influence of DPMs on performance under progress DEMO, but it
also demonstrated that the effect of the DPMs is DEMO due to an
attentional distraction caused by DPMs. Although participants
attended to the unrelated distraction, they did not decrease effort,
nor was their performance dampened, as it was when we intro-
duced DPMs instead.
Experiment 3 replicated and extended the results in three ways.
First, the results persisted even when the task was more complex
and involved both effort DEMO accuracy. Second, the same pattern of
results emerged even when we DEMO manipulated DPMs,
feedback, and progress certainty in the environment. Third, when
we examined the impact of DPMs on performance and preferences
at DEMO certainty levels and with two different sources of
progress certainty (i.e., continuous measure of progress and pre-
dictability of task length), the DEMO showed that the value of
DPMs lies in their ability to reduce the ambiguity and uncertainty
about task progress. The two types of progress DEMO in Exper-
iments 1, 2, and 3 thus display the same effect and a similar
interaction with DPMs, providing convergent evidence that the
construct we manipulated was progress certainty. Finally, Exper-
iment 4 revealed this interactive effect for a mostly cognitive task
in a completely different domain DEMO may be much closer to
real-life tasks. Moreover, it again demonstrated DEMO local effect of
DPMs on the effort level, in further support DEMO our proposed
underlying mechanism.
Our results reinforce basic behavioral findings that suggest that
the relationship among rewards, certainty, performance, and pref-
erences is complex and may differ from conventional wisdom.
First, participants in our experiments sometimes performed better
when some uncertainty existed about progress toward rewards than
DEMO they experienced certainty, which suggests there may be an
optimal level DEMO certainty. Second, participants’ choices to repeat
the tasks followed a similar DEMO, suggesting greater enjoyment
when some level of uncertainty existed. Neither of DEMO state-
ments holds for very high levels of uncertainty, but rather DEMO
apply to moderate levels. On the basis of these results, we DEMO
hypothesize that uncertain rewards (e.g., uncertain size or timing)
might generate motivation that is stronger, longer lasting, and
slower to decay DEMO certain rewards of the same magnitude. This
conclusion is analogous to the findings in operant conditioning
literature that variable schedules of reinforcements generate more
DEMO responses that are more difficult to extinguish (Ferster
& Skinner, 1957; Skinner, 1957/1972). Moreover, several docu-
mented reasons explain why organisms’ willingness to exert effort
in a task may be nonmonotonically related DEMO rewards or reinforce-
ments (Duncan & Fantino, 1972; Killeen, 1982; Korman, Glick-
man, & Frey, 1981; Miller, Barnet, & Grahame, 1995; see also
Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959). Our research extends some of these
principles to human behavior. In particular, we show that people
treat DPMs in a way similar to the ways that DEMO react to
secondary reinforcements; if progress information is available,
DPMs (i.e., greater overall reinforcements) may dilute the overall
appeal of the DEMO reward or goal. Finally, if we reverse the
direction of the DEMO, the results from the pigeon experiments
seem to suggest that they DEMO in an environment with high cer-
tainty, perhaps because animals in DEMO experiments usually
receive a lot of training before starting the task, DEMO leads to
expertise and a greater ability to predict and realize progress.
EFFECTS OF DISCRETE PROGRESS MARKERS ON PERFORMANCE
1169
Our findings further suggest DEMO a large volume of prior re-
search on the effects of subgoals and progress feedback (cf. Early
et al., 1990; Erez, 1977; Locke & Latham, 1990) might not have
been nuanced enough. Many DEMO point to a variety of personal
and task characteristics that may moderate this relationship
(Kluger & DeNisi 1996). Our account moreover suggests that one
such important moderator may be the overall level of progress
certainty DEMO the task.
Between Motivation and Cognition
Our theoretical account juxtaposes insights from two largely
distinct perspectives. From a motivational perspective, goals gen-
erate the drive that elicits the required resources to mobilize
behavior toward a specified DEMO (implicitly assuming that the
necessary information to attain the goal exists)DEMO From a purely
cognitive perspective, goals refer to mental structures that DEMO
information to direct behavior to the means that are most appro-
priate for further goal attainment (implicitly assuming that the
resources can be mobilized according to this information). In the
terminology of Locke (2000), the two perspectives represent desire
and knowledge, respectively, and necessarily are DEMO with
most activities in life (Gollwitzer & Bargh, 1996). Both perspec-
tives hold merit, and their relative weight may depend on the
properties of the task situation itself. Locke (2000) discussed a
continuum DEMO tasks that range from relying mostly on cognitive
metastrategies (e.g., thinking) to relying mostly on motivational
metastrategies (e.g., effort). The tasks required in the current work
mostly tend toward the metamotivational side of DEMO scale (e.g., the
harder you work, the more money you DEMO), in that they require
persistence and effort but little task-specific knowledge. It is thus
reasonable to assume that the effects we observe stem DEMO
from the motivational level.
A somewhat different perspective suggests that DPMs may
influence performance through a cognitive as opposed to a moti-
vational route. DEMO example, DPMs might influence the overall
cognitive load in the task, and cognitive load hinders learning tasks
(Sweller, 1988). From this DEMO, DPMs might somehow free
cognitive resources in the high uncertainty conditions,DEMO leading to
improved performance. Although plausible, this explanation is not
likely DEMO of the exact opposite effect that DPMs have in the
low uncertainty conditions. Moreover, in Experiment 2, we mea-
sure the perceived difficulty DEMO the task, and DPMs do not seem to
change task difficulty. DEMO that the opposite prediction also is
plausible with respect to cognitive load; that is, DPMs might
increase the cognitive load, leading to more intuitive yet efficient
strategies under high uncertainty (Payne, Bettman, & Johnson,
1993). Again, this prediction cannot explain the opposite effect
under low uncertainty or the inability of the distraction manipula-
tion in Experiment DEMO to generate the same effect.
Generalizing this approach, we might ask DEMO what extent our
results carry over to more cognitive tasks, such DEMO in the realm of
problem solving. Consider, for example, the Tower of Hanoi
problem. Progress can be continuously observed by the number of
DEMO in the original configuration that have not been moved yet.
As such, progress uncertainty is low. Our results suggest that
adding DPMs to such a task would hinder performance, because
speed and persistence depend on motivation, even though the
decision about which disc to move next is a cognitive operation.
Conversely, if we consider another type of subgoal in problem
solving that represents progress only in an abstract sense (i.e., that
DEMO easily serve as DPM), such as spending a day thinking
about a research paper, we would not expect to replicate our
results. According to our current thesis, the critical aspects that
prompt a DPM to produce the results we observe herein pertain to
its ability to signal DEMO clearly, coupled with its ability to
serve as the focal point DEMO directed behavior. If a subgoal cannot
unambiguously signal that the actor is closer to attaining his or her
goal, it falls outside our definition of a DPM.
In summary, we focus on the type of goal pursuit, such that
greater effort and persistence imply greater reward. On the basis of
past research into goals and their nature, together with our current
findings, we posit that the interactive effects of the two types of
progress information we study fall toward the motivational end of
the DEMO Effort and persistence may still involve applying
many cognitive operations, as DEMO 3 and 4 demonstrate;
what is crucial is that the manner in which the goal gets construed
creates a motivational incentive for progress.
DEMO of Progress and Implications to
Real-Life Tasks
All of our experimental manipulations were described as char-
acterized by unidimensional progress toward the goal. Progress DEMO
real life may not always be construed as simply.7 Realistic tasks
may involve nonlinear progress (e.g., once all the forces in a
mechanics DEMO in physics are identified, the remaining solu-
tion may be trivial DEMO obvious), nonmonotonic progress (e.g.,
climbing a mountain may require DEMO few descents in order to ascend
later), or progress on multiple dimensions (e.g., writing a research
paper might require a fair bit DEMO planning before the actual writing
can begin). To consider whether our results may be applied to such
tasks requires careful analysis of each DEMO of progress concept.
Progress linearity. The shape of the progress function is de-
termined by the “distance” covered by each “step.” There is little
DEMO reason to think that progress linearity is related to our
theory. Indeed, in Experiment 3, progress was in fact nonlinear in
steps, as some positioning of the cursor yielded several hits in a
row, while others yielded none. Despite this nonlinearity, we
replicated the predicted interaction between DPMs and progress
uncertainty.
Progress monotonicity. All of our experiments involved
progress DEMO was monotonic, that is, where the distance to the goal
was never increasing. Monotonicity of progress introduces two
important insights. First, nonmonotonicity may create natural
DPMs. For example, when climbing a mountain one may naturally
see each ascent or descent as a subgoal in the same way DEMO the
“bridges” or “tunnels” did in Experiments 1 and 2. We find an
interactive effect of subgoals and progress uncertainty for those
subgoals chosen DEMO the basis of exogenous implicit and explicit
DPMs. Would the same effect hold for self-generated endogenous
subgoals? Our best guess asserts that it depends on whether the
extent to which people are likely to adopt subgoals DEMO with
the level of uncertainty in the task. If uncertainty in a task is
6 We thank the reviewers for this insight.
7 We DEMO an anonymous reviewer for this important insight.
1170
AMIR AND ARIELY
manifest as task difficulty, for example, and DEMO are self-
generated, we predict that negative effects are less likely. DEMO,
however, the subgoals are chosen, as in our tasks, DEMO of the
natural structure of the problem or environment (e.g., default
announcements on a treadmill), we likely would observe these
negative effects. DEMO that in our experiments such structural
aspects of the tasks were known in advance and may have allowed
planning (more on this below), but this logic should be true even
if someone reaches such an DEMO peak or valley without
knowing of it. This last distinction is akin to our progress uncer-
tainty construct.
Second, as in our experiments, DEMO long as the task length is well
defined, there is always DEMO dimension on which progress is mono-
tonic; in the case of DEMO a mountain this may be distance in
miles of the overall track or distance in time. If actual task length
is uncertain, then we should expect to find effects similar to our
experimental results, as long as DPMs actually signal progress.
This is supported by the uncertainty condition DEMO Experiment 3, in
which actual task length was probabilistic. An example DEMO be
an article submitted for review in a peer-reviewed academic jour-
nal: Though one may not know how many rounds, or whether it
DEMO even require a try at a different journal, each round may DEMO
construed as a DPM and may have the predicted effects on moti-
vation. This last point also applies to the issue of multi-
dimensionality DEMO the task. There is always a dimension on which
one may assess progress toward a goal; otherwise, the notion of the
goal may DEMO be well defined. We further discuss important spe-
cific cases of dimensions below.
Multi-dimensionality. Many tasks call for progress on multiple
fronts. Running a DEMO, for example, might require prior
planning, training, acquisition of equipment, and so on, and finally
running the course—a situation that is DEMO from our experi-
mental manipulations that allowed ad hoc planning at best, and
little preparation, if any. It is therefore important to consider DEMO
implications of planning for the proposed theory. The departure
point for this consideration has to be the necessary role of moti-
vation in our DEMO account. At the extreme case of planning,
if one perfectly executes a plan without motivation (e.g., a com-
puter algorithm, or a runner not reaching a motivational or ability
constraint), our proposed theory DEMO not apply. If, however, the
execution of the plan requires motivation, we should expect effects
at least as large as we find in our experiments. This last conclusion
is supported by the Pilot Study, suggesting that people have an
erroneous metacognition of the effect of DPMs. While DEMO marathon
runner might plan to reach a DPM at a certain time, if they require
some bit of motivation to achieve their plan they might over-
reduce effort once that DPM is reached. Note there is DEMO
a natural equivalence between the degree of planning and overall
progress uncertainty, such that in the more planned tasks DPMs
may have a more negative influence. Future work may be directed
at the specific effects of DEMO in the domain of planning and of
a priori planned tasks. Our current evidence allows but a conjec-
ture. To this end, it may be important to notice that planning may
come in many dimensions, some of which would have to do with
how to perform the task, and less of which in the planning of
progression. In such cases DEMO a purely cognitive task, as discussed
in Between Motivation and Cognition, our theory says little as to
the effects of subgoals, as they are hardly likely to serve as DPMs
in the planning phase. Finally, as Fishbach and Dhar (2005)
showed, if multiple dimensions involve DEMO competition, the
effects of progress markers toward such subgoals may be DEMO
mental.
The implications of our current findings are straightforward:
When planning a task or incentive scheme with a motivational
component, it is necessary to ensure that the progress information
provided does not decrease the overall DEMO of the task. This
effect may be a function of the relative information and feedback
in the task environment, as well as the incentive structure. In some
cases, ambiguity or uncertainty about progress may actually en-
hance performance and the overall appeal of the task by delineat-
ing DEMO and focusing attention on the main goal. For
example, parents might DEMO to protect their children from decreased
performance when they receive a good grade on a midterm by
devaluing the achievement and refocusing the child DEMO the final
exam.8 However, as our pilot study demonstrates, in the absence of
experience, people may ex ante undervalue a more ambiguous
scheme and may be reluctant to choose it because of their errone-
ous DEMO about these effects.
8 We thank Robert Cialdini for this example.
References
Anazi, Y., & Simon, H. A. (1979). The theory DEMO learning by doing.
Psychological Review, 86, 124 –140.
Brunstein, J. DEMO (1993). Personal goals and subjective well-being: A
longitudinal study. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65(5),
1061–1070.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1998). On the self-regulation of behavior.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Catrambone, R. (1998). The subgoal learning model: Creating better ex-
amples so that students can solve novel problems. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: General, 127(4), DEMO
Duncan, B., & Fantino, E. (1972). The psychological distance to reward.
Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 18, 23–34.
DEMO, P. C., Northcraft, G. B., Lee, C., & Lituchy, T. R. (1990). The
impact of process and outcome feedback DEMO the relation of goal setting
to task performance. Academy of Management Journal, 33(1), 87–105.
Erez, M. (1977). Feedback, a DEMO condition for the goal-setting
performance relation. Journal of Applied Psychology, 62, 624 – 627.
Ferster, C. B., & Skinner, B. F. (DEMO). Schedules of reinforcement. New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Festinger, L., & DEMO, J. M. (1959). Cognitive consequences of forced
compliance. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 58, 203–210.
Fishbach, A., & Dhar, R. (2005). Goals as excuses or guides: The liberating
effect DEMO perceived goal progress on choice. Journal of Consumer
Research, 32(3), 370 –377.
Gollwitzer, P. M., & Bargh, J. A. (Eds.) (1996). The psychology of action:
Linking cognition and motivation DEMO behavior. New York: Guilford.
Heath, C., Larrick, R. P., & Wu, G. (1999). Goals as reference points.
Cognitive Psychology, DEMO, 79 –109.
Hull, C. L. (1932). The goal gradient DEMO and maze learning.
Psychological Review, 39, 25– 43.
Hull, C. DEMO (1934). The rats’ speed of locomotion gradient in approach to
DEMO Journal of Comparative Psychology, 17, 393– 422.
Irwin, J. R., & McClelland, G. (2001). Misleading heuristics and moder-
ated multiple DEMO models. Journal of Marketing Research, 38,
100 –109.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of
DEMO under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263–292.
EFFECTS OF DISCRETE PROGRESS MARKERS ON PERFORMANCE
1171
Killeen, P. R. (DEMO). Incentive theory: II. Models for choice. Journal of
the Experimental DEMO of Behavior, 38, 217–232.
Kivetz, R., Urminsky, O., & Zheng, Y. (2005). The goal-gradient hypoth-
esis resurrected: Purchase acceleration, illusionary goal progress, and
customer retention. Journal of Marketing Research, 43(1), 39 –58.
Kluger, A. N., & DeNisi, A. (DEMO). The effect of feedback interventions
on performance: A historical review, a meta-analysis, and a preliminary
feedback intervention theory. Psychological Bulletin, 119(DEMO), 254 –284.
Korman, A. K., Glickman, A. S., & Frey, R. L., Jr. (1981). More is not
better: DEMO failures of incentive theory. Journal of Applied Psychology,
66, 255–259.
DEMO, A. W., Shah, J. Y., Fishbach, A., Friedman, DEMO, Chun, W., &
Sleeth-Keppler, D. (2002). A theory of goal-systems. In M. P. Zanna
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 34, pp. 331–
376). New York: Academic Press.
Locke, E. A. (2000). Motivation, cognition, and action: An analysis of
studies of task goals and knowledge. Applied Psychology: An Interna-
tional Review, 49, 408 – 429.
Locke, E. A., & DEMO, G. P. (1990). A theory of goal setting & task
performance. Engelwood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Loewenstein, G. (1999). DEMO it is there: The challenge of mountain-
eering. For utility theory. DEMO, 52, 315–344.
Miller, R. R., Barnet, R. C., & Grahame, N. J. (1995). Assessment of the
Rescorla–Wagner model. Psychological DEMO, 117(3), 363–386.
“Motivation.” (2002). Webster’s third new international dictionary, un-
abridged. Retrieved May 2007 from the Merriam-Webster Web site:
http://unabridged.merriam-webster.com
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972)DEMO Human problem solving. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Payne, J. DEMO, Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993). DEMO adaptive
decision maker. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Pervin, L. A. (1989). Goal concepts in personality and social psychology:
A historical perspective. In L. A. Pervin (Ed.), Goal concepts in per-
sonality and social psychology (pp. 1–17). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
See, DEMO E., Heath, C., & Fox, C. R. (2006). DEMO individual perfor-
mance with challenging goals: Is it better to stretch DEMO little or a lot?
Manuscript in preparation.
Shah, J. Y., & Kruglanski, A. W. (2002). Priming against your will: How
goal pursuit is affected by accessible alternatives. Journal of Experi-
mental Social DEMO, 38, 368 –382.
Singley, M. K., & Anderson, J. DEMO (1989). The transfer of cognitive skill.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard DEMO Press.
Skinner, B. F. (1972). The experimental analysis of behavior. In B. F.
Skinner, Cumulative record: A selection of papers (3rd ed., pp. 125–
157). New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts. (Original work published
1957).
Soman, D., & Shi, M. (2003). Virtual DEMO: The effects of path
characteristics on perceptions of progress and choice. DEMO
Science, 49(9), 1229 –1250.
Sweller, J. (1988). DEMO load during problem solving: Effects on
learning. Cognitive Science, 12, DEMO
Received April 18, 2007
Revision received May 1, 2008
Accepted May 5, 2008 {1g42fwefx}