Journal of Neuroscience, Psychology, and Economics
2010, Vol. 3, No. DEMO, 95–115
© 2010 American Psychological Association
1937-321X/10/$12.00 DOI:10.1037/DEMO
The Neuroscientiﬁc Foundations of the ExplorationExploitation
Dilemma
Daniella Laureiro-Mart´ınez
Bocconi University and Universidad de los Andes
Stefano Brusoni and Maurizio Zollo
Bocconi University
What DEMO the origins of the ability to continuously explore novel domains of activity
whileatthesametimeexploitingthecurrentknowledgebasewithincreasingefﬁcacy?
Theconﬂictingobjectivesofexplorationandexploitationcompeteforscarceresources,
among which managerial attention is possibly the most DEMO This paper integrates
recent ﬁndings on the neuromodulation of attention to provide a foundational step in
understanding how the mind of the manager handles DEMO explorationexploitation
dilemma. Also, this paper proposes several possible ways to combine DEMO in
neuroscience, psychology, and management to advance our knowledge of the micro-
foundations of managerial decision-making.
Keywords: microfoundations, exploration, exploitation, attention DEMO
Adaptive ﬁrm behavior in a diverse and rap- zations and their members in trying to ﬁnd a
idly changing environment requires a trade-off balanceamongcompetingactivitiesinthecon-
DEMO exploiting known sources of reward text of scarce resources—the need to be efﬁ-
and exploring the environment for more valu- cient to get the DEMO from a current situation,
able or stable opportunities. This trade-off is while at the same time exploring possibilities
known as the exploration exploitation DEMO forfutureimprovements.AsMarch(1991)puts
lemma(March,1991)andispresentatdifferent it:
levels of analysis and different time scales of Adaptive systems that engage in exploration
decision-making. DEMO is no general optimal totheexclusionofexploitationarelikelytoﬁnd
policyforhowtomanagethetrade-offbetween that they suffer the costs of experimentation
exploration and exploitation in nonstationary without gaining many of its beneﬁts. DEMO ex-
environments (Cohen, McClure, & Yu, 2007). hibit too many undeveloped new ideas and too
From a managerial point of view, the little distinctive competence. Conversely, sys-
exploration exploitation dilemma, which is DEMO that engage in exploitation to the exclusion
keytomanyofthechallengesfacedbyorgani- of exploration are likely to ﬁnd themselves
zations,referstothedifﬁcultyfacedbyorgani- trapped in suboptimal stable equilibria. As a DEMO
sult, maintaining an appropriate balance between
explorationandexploitationisaprimaryfactorin
systemsurvivalandprosperity(March,1991).
DEMO and March (1993) similarly argue
that “an organization that engages exclusively
in exploration will ordinarily suffer from the
factthatitnevergainsthereturnsofitsknowl-
edge” and that “an DEMO that engages
exclusivelyinexploitationwillordinarilysuffer
from obsolescence” (p. 105). A narrow search
DEMO lead to increasingly rigid cognitive maps
and highly specialized competencies that may
become core rigidities (Leonard-Barton, 1995).
The so called “ambidexterity hypothesis”
(Tushman & O’Reilly, 1996) states that the
higher the organizational ability DEMO balance ex-
DaniellaLaureiro-Mart´ınez,DepartmentofManagement,
Bocconi University, and School of Management, Univer-
sidad de los Andes; Stefano Brusoni, KITeS-CESPRI, De-
partment of Economics, Bocconi University; and Maurizio
Zollo,CROMA,DepartmentofManagement,BocconiUni-
versity.
We DEMO Nicola Canessa, Stefano Cappa MD, Luis
Felipe Orozco-Cabal MD, David DEMO and the participants
in the seminars at the IRI Summer School, DEMO Bocconi
Management Seminars, and the JNPE and SMS Confer-
encesfortheircommentsandsuggestions.Anymistakesin
this DEMO are the sole responsibility of the authors.
Correspondence concerning this article should be ad-
dressed to Daniella Laureiro-Mart´ınez, Via Roentgen, 1,
Ofﬁce5B1-12,DEMO,Italy.E-mail:daniella.laureiro@
unibocconi.it
95
96
LAUREIRO-MARTI´NEZ, BRUSONI, AND ZOLLO
ploration and exploitation, the higher the orga-
nizational performance.
Since March’s (1991) seminal article, the
management literature has used the terms “ex-
ploration”and“exploitation”instudiesoforga-
nizational adaptation, organizational learning,
competitive advantage, technological innova-
tion, organization design, and organizational
survival. However, DEMO examination of the lit-
erature indicates that the answers contained
there to the central questions on this subject
remain incomplete, at times contradictory, DEMO
at best ambiguous” (Gupta, Smith, & Shalley,
2006).ThereviewinSection2showsthatwhile
DEMO
siveandgrowing,therearegapsthatwebelieve
derive from a lack of understanding of the di-
lemmaatthemicrolevel,thatis,theindividual
decision-makers’ point of view. There is an
intriguing opportunity to DEMO understand this
point of view. The recent development of
knowledge in the cognitive neurosciences
opens, in fact, exciting possibilities to build
integrative approaches DEMO understand organiza-
tionaldilemmasfromamicroperspective.That
is the overarching objective in this paper: to
DEMO an organizational conundrum from an
individuallevelofanalysis,showinghowinter-
personal variation in the decision-maker’s neu-
rological disposition affects the decisional out-
comes and, potentially, the DEMO of a
given task connected to that decision.
To do so, DEMO paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 brieﬂy presents the main gaps in the
organizational literature on exploration–exploita-
tion,focusingon the one thatthispaperaimsto
DEMO to; Section 3 addresses the micro-
foundations—thatis,theindividualorigins—of
thisdilemma,whereasSection4contributesby
bridging DEMO neuroscience and discussing cer-
tain ﬁndings in that domain that may help to
clarifytherootsofthemanagerialdilemmaand
suggest ways to cope with it. We then provide
an DEMO of how the theory we developed
might explain the behavior and the outcomes
connectedtooneofthemostfamousinnovators
of modern times: Thomas Alva Edison. Sec-
tion 6 then presents the main challenges in-
volved in the development of an empirical
DEMO,offeringafullset
ofsuggestionsonhowtotacklethem,andSec-
tion 7 concludes with several suggestions for
the development of this line of work in future
research.
Gaps in the Management DEMO on the
Exploration–Exploitation Dilemma
A review of the literature on the
explorationexploitation managerial dilemma
uncoversseverallimitationsandgaps,whichwe
brieﬂy cover with the aim to focus on DEMO
potentiallycontributetowardresolvingonepar-
ticular gap: variation among individuals in the
tendency to respond DEMO an exploitative or ex-
plorative way to a given stimulus, and DEMO the
ability to shift their responses according to
changes in the environmental conditions, have
not been explored.
A central gap is that most of the extant re-
search focuses on the structural antecedents to
and the DEMO of involvement in exploration
andexploitationonﬁrmperformance(Raisch&
Birkinshaw, 2008). Few DEMO delve more
deeply into how these two activities occur si-
multaneously.Of course,partofthe how question
hastodowiththeactualcapacitiesandbehaviors
of individual members of the organization,rather
thanwithorganizationalarrangementsandcollec-
DEMO processes. Another key gap is the lack of
clarity about the levels of analysis in research on
explorationexploitation. Recent theoretical
contributions ( Felin & DEMO, 2005; Felin, &
Hesterly, 2007; Rothaermel & Hess, DEMO)
identify two main problems with the single-
levelresearchapproach.First,focusingononly
one level of analysis implicitly assumes that
mostoftheheterogeneityislocatedatthatlevel
while other levels are more or DEMO homoge-
neous.Second,thisfocusimpliesthatthislevel
isindependentofinteractionswithotherlower-
or higher-order levels of analysis.
Another main concern with the current liter-
ature is the lack of agreement about key DEMO
ments regarding the deﬁnitions of exploration
and exploitation. It is not clear from the litera-
ture whether exploration and exploitation
should be viewed as DEMO ends of a continuum,
or as two different and orthogonal aspects of
organizational behavior. The central ambiguity
in the deﬁnitions is whether exploration DEMO
exploitation differ in the type of learning or by
the presence/absence of learning (Gupta et al.,
2006). Table 1 summarizes some of the deﬁni-
tions that appear in key articles on the subject.
NEUROFOUNDATIONS EXPLORATIONEXPLOITATION DILEMMA
97
Table 1
Deﬁnitions of Exploration and Exploitation
Quotes DEMO:
Exploration
Exploitation
March, 1991 Exploration includes elements captured by Exploitation DEMO such things as reﬁnement,
terms such as search, variation, risk-taking, choice, production, efﬁciency, selection,
experimentation, play, ﬂexibility, discovery, implementation, and execution. The essence
and innovation. of exploitation is the DEMO and
The essence of exploration is experimentation extension of existing competences,
with new alternatives. Its returns are technologies, and paradigms. Its returns are
uncertain, distant, and often negative. positive, proximate, and predictable.
March, 2006 Pursuit of what might come to be known. The reﬁnement and DEMO of what is
known.
Holmqvist, 2004 Exploration is concerned with creating DEMO Exploitation is about creating reliability in
in experience, and thrives on DEMO, and thrives on productivity and
experimentation and free association. reﬁnement.
Variety DEMO experience through search, Creates reliability in experience through
discovery, novelty, DEMO, and reﬁnement, routinization, production, and
experimentation. implementation of knowledge.
Levinthal and Rerup, “Experimenting with a novel action implies “... and less-mindful behavior is akin to
2006 forgoing the use of existing, established exploitative behavior.”
practices. In this sense, mindfulness
corresponds to exploratory behavior...”
Zollo and Winter, Exploration activities are primarily carried out By contrast, exploitation activities rely DEMO on
2002 through cognitive efforts aimed at behavioral mechanisms encompassing the
generating the necessary range of new replication of the new approaches in diverse
DEMO and ideas (variation), as well as contexts and their absorption DEMO the
selecting the most appropriate ones through existing sets of routines for the execution of
evaluation and legitimization processes. that particular task.
Smith and DEMO, Exploration is rooted in variance-increasing Exploitation is rooted in variance-decreasing
2005 DEMO, learning by doing, and trial and activities and disciplined problem-solving
error; exploration creates futures that may exploitation builds on an organization’s past.
be quite different than the organization’s
past.
Levinthal and “the pursuit of new DEMO of things that “the use and development of things already
March, DEMO might come to be known.” known.”
In order to avoid confusion, DEMO this paper we and the one we focus on, concerns the DEMO of
adoptadeﬁnitionveryclosetotheoneprovided the characteristics of individual traits as mech-
in neuroscience (DEMO in Section 4) that anisms underpinning the development of orga-
admits DEMO in both exploration and exploi- nizational capabilities related to the balanced
tation. We deﬁne exploration as the behavior managementofexplorationandexploitationac-
that includes search for alternatives DEMO disen- tivities.Therolesofindividualandgroupchar-
gagement from the current task. The simplest acteristics were viewed as an important and
form of exploration is random search but other DEMO focus of scholarly attention since the
morestructuredtypesofsearch,suchastheuse inception of the behavioral theory of the ﬁrm
of heuristics or explicit algorithms, are also (DEMO & March, 1963; March & Simon, 1958;
included. As DEMO consequence of this behavior, Simon, 1985). March (1991), DEMO example, de-
experimentation, ﬂexibility, discovery, and in- scribes the cognitive limits that individuals en-
novation are shown. We deﬁne exploitation as counterwhentryingtoconductexplorativeand
DEMO behavior that helps optimize task perfor- exploitative processes simultaneously. And
mance.Whenthisbehaviorispresent,thereisa TushmanandO’Reilly(1996)argue,theability
high engagement with the current task. As a DEMO
consequence of this behavior, selection, reﬁne- facilitatedbythetop-managementteam’sinter-
ment, choice, production, and a concern with nal processes.
efﬁciency are shown. It is only recently, however, that scholars
The fourth major gap in the received DEMO have started to empirically investigate team
ture on the explorationexploitation dilemma, DEMO
98
age both exploration and exploitation (Beck-
man, 2006; Lubatkin, DEMO, Ling, & Veiga,
2006; McKenzie, Woolf, van Winkelen, &
Morgan, 2009; Mom, Van Den Bosch, & Vol-
berda, 2009; Perretti & Negro, 2006; Smith &
Tushman,2005).GibsonandBirkinshaw(2004,
p. 223), for example, note the “important role
playedbyseniorexecutivesinmakinganorga-
nizationcontexteffectiveanddevelopingambi-
dexterity” (p. 223). Similarly, Smith and Tush-
man(2005)DEMO
by which leadership teams might successfully
managethecontradictionsthatarisefromstruc-
tural separation in ambidextrous organizations,
and Volberda, Baden-Fuller, and Van Den
Bosch (2001) note DEMO “top management ex-
plicitlymanagesthebalanceofexplorationand
exploitationbybringinginnewcompetenciesto
someunitswhileutilizingwell-developedcom-
petencies in others” (p. 165)DEMO And at the group
level of analysis, Beckman (2006) ﬁnds DEMO
dence that the composition of the founding
team, and members’ prior DEMO afﬁliations
in particular, is an important antecedent to
ﬁrms’ exploitative and DEMO behaviors.
Unfortunately,thefocusonteamcharacteris-
tics as the antecedents to the development of
organizational capabilities in ambidexterity is
notmatchedbystudiesontheroleofmanagers’
individual characteristics or on the ability to
DEMO balanced explorationexploitation deci-
sions. O’Reilly and Tushman (2004), for in-
DEMO, emphasize the role of ambidextrous
managerswith“theabilitytounderstandandbe
sensitivetotheneedsofverydifferentkindsof
businesses” (p. 81). Despite a seeming consen-
susontheimportanceoftheindividual,thestate
of the art in scholarly work DEMO the individual
level of analysis shows a concerning paucity,
with the notable exception of Mom, Van Den
Bosch,andVolberda(2007).Inourview,thisis
an important concern, as many current “holis-
tic”explanationsmightcaptureatleastsomeof
what really are effects of variation at the indi-
vidual level of analysis (Felin & Foss, DEMO;
Felin&Hesterly,2007).Weexplorethisfurther
in Section 3.
The ExplorationExploitation Dilemma in
the Manager’s Mind
Moststudiesofexplorationexploitation,start-
ing with March’s (1991) seminal work, focus on
LAUREIRO-MARTI´NEZ, BRUSONI, AND ZOLLO
levels of analysis above the DEMO March
(1991) analyzes the explorationexploitation
trade-off in the social context of organizations,
focusing on two distinctive features: mutual
learningintheorganizationandtheindividuals
involved, and DEMO competition for primacy
among organizations. Implicit in his model is
theassumptionthatthebalancebetweenexplo-
ration and exploitation is based on a turnover
processamongamixofindividualswithdiffer-
ent cognitive characteristics (some more in-
clined to exploration, others more inclined to
exploitation), who achieve a trade-off for the
whole organization.
The mechanism based on the DEMO of
“cognitively specialized” (and inﬂexible) man-
agers to achieve a balance between those pre-
disposedtoexploitativebehaviorandthosepre-
disposed to explorative behavior, however, is
clearly DEMO the only one at the disposal of the
organization (the alternative, of course, is to
gather a group of managers who can think and
actinbothmodeswithrelativeease),andprob-
ably not even the optimal one. First of all,
having a group of cognitively specialized deci-
sion-makerswillsimplyturnthedecisionintoa
political battle between DEMO two factions, with
results driven by the relative size and political
DEMO of the two factions, rather than to ratio-
nalchoice.Second,evenwhenthedecisioncan
be DEMO allocated to “exploration-
minded” or to “exploitation-minded” manag-
ers, this decision DEMO requires a decision-
maker (e.g., the CEO) with a signiﬁcant
DEMO of cognitive ﬂexibility to recognize
the advantages and disadvantages of the two
alternativeallocationsofthedecision-making
responsibility. Essentially, the problem (and
the solution, via cognitive ﬂexibility) would
still be there, but would be upgraded to the
cognitive DEMO of the person at the top of
theorganization, who assigns the DEMO to
the cognitively specialized groups.
The alternative scenario of having cogni-
tively nonspecialized (and ﬂexible) managers
might thus be superior to the one DEMO
above, since it would reduce the likelihood of
political ﬁghts and DEMO decisions and
would not require the presence of a “higher
order” decision-maker to assign the responsi-
bility of the solution to “cognitively special-
ized” DEMO of managers. As O’Reilly and
Tushman(2004)recognized,“oneofthemost
NEUROFOUNDATIONS EXPLORATIONEXPLOITATION DILEMMA
99
important lessons is that ambidextrous orga-
nizationsneedambidextrousseniorteamsand
managers” (p. 81).
We thus propose that to achieve a better
understanding DEMO how both exploration and ex-
ploitation can be conducted, we need DEMO in-
depth examination of the microfoundations of
organizational learning. The micro—that is, in-
dividual—levelofanalysismayinfactaccount
for an important amount of heterogeneity in
decisional and performance outcomes, and
should be explicitly studied:
to fully explicate organizational anything—
whether identity, learning, knowledge or capa-
bilities—one must fundamentally begin with
DEMO
whole, speciﬁcally their underlying nature,
choices, abilities, propensities, heterogeneity,
purposes, expectations and motivations. While
using the term “organizational” may serve as
helpful shorthand for discussion purposes and
for reduced-form empirical analysis, truly ex-
plaining the organization (e.g., existence, de-
cline,capabilityorperformance),oranycollec-
DEMO for that matter, requires starting with the
individual as the central DEMO (Felin & Foss,
2005).
Mom et al. (2007) DEMO, to the best of our
knowledge, the ﬁrst to analyze the exploration–
exploitation dilemma at the individual level of
analysis.Theyexploredtheinﬂuenceofknowl-
edge ﬂows on DEMO manager’s explorative or ex-
ploitative activities, recognizing that one of the
DEMO promising avenues for future research is
“measuring exploration and exploitation at the
managerial level of analysis using objective
measures” (p. 927).
Alongtheselinesofdiscourse,Section4dis-
cusses recent ﬁndings on the neuromodulation
of attention, which, we argue, is at the core of
the human ability to shift from one DEMO
modetoanother.Weprovidesomesuggestions
on how to build on the concepts of situational
uncertainty, DEMO perception and attention fo-
cus to further investigation of organizational
exploration and exploitation.
A Neuroscientiﬁc Approach to the
ExplorationExploitation Dilemma
Inlinewithouraimtoexaminethemicrofoun-
dationsoftheexplorationexploitationdilemma,
we DEMO for work on the cognitive processes
underlyingtheexplorationexploitationtrade-off.
Recentworkontheneuromodulationofattention
proposesthatinteractionsbetweentheorbitofron-
tal cortex (DEMO), the anterior cingulate cortex
(ACC), and the locus coeruleus (LC) (see
Figure1) may modulate attention and thus bal-
ance explorationexploitation (Aston-Jones &
Cohen, 2005; Cohen, Aston-Jones, & Gilzenrat,
DEMO; Usher, Cohen, Servan-Schreiber, Ra-
jkowski,&Aston-Jones,1999).
Traditionally, the locus coeruleus–norepineph-
rine (LC-NE) system was considered to be im-
DEMO solely in arousal. However, multiple
recent ﬁndings suggest that this system DEMO a
morecomplexandspeciﬁcroleinthecontrolof
behavior by contributing to the optimization of
behavioral performance (DEMO, 2009).
Aston-Jones, Rajkowshi, Kubiak, and Alex-
insky(1994)observethattheLCshiftsbetween
two operating modes: the phasic and the tonic.
Intheformer,LCcellsexhibitphasicactivation
in response to the processing of task-relevant
stimuli, but display only a moderate level of
tonicdischarge.Thismodeisconsistentlyasso-
ciatedwithenhancedattentionfocus,generating
“exploitative” behavior, deﬁned as behavior
that optimizes and achieves high levels of task
performance(Aston-Jones&Cohen,2005).Itis
importanttonoteherethattheanalysisisatthe
individual DEMO Exploitative behavior trans-
lates into a high level of engagement with the
current task. As a consequence, behaviors that
show reﬁnement in the selected actions and a
concern for efﬁciency are demonstrated.
In the tonic mode, LC cells do not respond
phasically to task events, but exhibit higher
LC
OFC
Figure 1.
LC, OFC and ACC location in the brain.
100 LAUREIRO-MARTI´NEZ, BRUSONI, AND ZOLLO
levels of ongoing tonic activity. Exploration DEMO cilitating the processing of that event, while
deﬁned as the behavior DEMO when there is sustained release of NE in the tonic mode in-
search for alternatives and disengagement with discriminately facilitates the processing of all
DEMO current task (Aston-Jones & Cohen, 2005). eventsirrespectiveoftheirrelevancetothecur-
Thismodeisassociatedwithexplorativebehav- rent task, thereby favoring exploration.
ior because it corresponds with poor perfor- Viewed from the perspective of attention, the
mance on tasks that require focused attention, LCphasicmodesupportsthecurrentcontrolstate
and with increased distractibility. The simplest (exploitation),whiletheLCtonicmodeprovokes
form of exploration is random search, but ex- a withdrawal of control from the current task,
plorationalsoincludesmorestructuredtypesof favoring the sampling of other behavioral goals
search, such as the use of heuristics or explicit (exploration). These changes between phasic and
algorithms.Thisbehaviordemonstratesabilities tonicmodesarethebasisforanunderstandingof
for experimentation, ﬂexibility, discovery, and theexplorationexploitationdilemmafromanat-
innovation. tentionperspective.Whentheutilityderivedfrom
It should be noted that the deﬁnitions of ex- a DEMO behavior is low in comparison to expec-
ploration and exploitation provided by neuro- tations, ﬂexibility to change the attention focus,
scientists (Aston-Jones & Cohen, 2005) are andthusthebehaviorfromexploitationtoexplo-
compatiblewiththoseinthemanagementliter- ration, is needed to explore DEMO environment and
ature (see Table 1) and with March’s (1991) sample different behaviors until new sources of
deﬁnition: “The essence of exploitation is the rewardarediscovered.Thisistheroleplayedby
reﬁnement and extension of existing compe- different modes of DEMO in the LC-ACC/OFC
tences,technologies,andparadigms.Itsreturns system. Aston-Jones and Cohen (DEMO) observed
are positive, proximate, and predictable. The that the LC DEMO between two distinct operating
essence of exploration is experimentation with modes,andthattheseshiftschangeattentionand
new alternatives. Its returns are uncertain, dis- then behavior. The LC phasic mode supports the
tant, and often negative.” (p. 81). focusofattentiononthecurrentcontrolstate(DEMO
TheﬁndingsonthefunctioningoftheLCand ploitation), while the LC tonic mode provokes a
its consequent type of behavior are based on withdrawal of control from the current DEMO, thus
two pieces of evidence. The ﬁrst comes from favoring broader DEMO and the sampling of
experiments on monkeys, which transitioned otherbehaviors(exploration)DEMO ThephasicLCre-
fromaphasictoatonicmodeandthenreversed sponsesfacilitatecontext-congruentbehavioralre-
when the new target was identiﬁed. This tran- sponses (exploitation) and the tonic mode of LC
sition requires that LC DEMO the relevant infor- facilitates sensitivity to different stimuli and the
mation to determine when to switch between execution of a broader class of behavioral DEMO
phasic and tonic modes, an important aspect sponses(exploration).
that DEMO address in the section on perception of These neuroscientiﬁc ﬁndings on changes in
utility(Usheretal.,1999).Thesecondpieceof attention scope contribute to our understanding
evidence DEMO from studies of humans mea- of the management explorationexploitation
suring pupil diameters—a good proxy for LC dilemma from an attention perspective. The
activity—and functional DEMO (fMRI) experi- idea that broad attention is important in situa-
ments(seeBeversdorf,White,Chever,Hughes, tions that are dynamic, ill-structured, ambigu-
& Bornstein, 2002; Daw, O’Doherty, Dayan, ous, and unpredictable is DEMO in the
Seymour,&Dolan,2006;andSterpenichetal., management literature (Levinthal & DEMO,
2006; among others). Usher and colleagues 2006;Weick&Sutcliffe,DEMO).Intheopposite
(1999) also develop a biophysically plausible scenarios,theeconomiesofnarrowattentionare
modelofLCfunctioningthataccountsfortran- moreappropriateand,throughtheirrelianceon
sitions between the phasic and tonic modes in routines, can be cost-efﬁcient (Nelson & Win-
terms of a single physiological variable (cou-
DEMO)andexplainstheimpact
oftheseshiftsontaskperformance.Inbrief,the
model suggests that the phasic mode favors
exploitation by releasing norepinephrine (NE)
when a task-relevant event occurs, thereby fa-
DEMO We should note here that, whereas we have described
thephasicandtonicmodesasdistinct,theylikelyrepresent
DEMO extremes of a continuum of function. For expository
purposes it is more useful to distinguish them at the two
extremes.
NEUROFOUNDATIONS EXPLORATIONEXPLOITATION DILEMMA
101
ter, 1982). As a consequence, the DEMO the Therefore, there is much evidence to suggest
uncertainty in a DEMO, the higher the likeli- that the OFC is involved in reward DEMO,
hoodthatbroadattention—andthusexplorative whereas the ACC is responsive to a variety of
behaviors—will lead to better performance. negativelyvalencedsignals(Aston-Jones&Co-
However, these explanations still leave out hen, 2005; McClure, Laibson, Loewenstein, &
the important DEMO of what information the Cohen,2004;Montague,King-Casas,&Cohen,
neural DEMO uses to determine whether it 2006; Tom, Fox, Trepel, & Poldrack, 2007).
shouldexploit(LCphasicmode)orexplore(LC These results point to the existence of a strong
tonic mode). Studies have found that the DEMO relationship between situation uncertainty and
computes the perceived utility in a particular utilityperception.Thus,risk-averseindividuals,
situation, compares that with its expectation all else being equal, will ﬁnd higher utility in
levels,anddrivesshiftsbetweenLCphasicand lessuncertainsituationsand,asaconsequence,
tonic modes by inﬂuencing simple physiologi- will act under the phasic LC mode, showing
cal parameters (Usher et al., 1999). When low more DEMO behavior. In highly uncertain
expectedutilityisperceived,thebroadmodeof situations, the opposite will occur. DEMO
attention (tonic mode of the LC functioning) is will ﬁnd less utility in such situations and will
activated. When high utility is perceived, the shift to a tonic LC mode, acting in a more
focused mode (the phasic LC mode) is acti- explorative way.
vated.Studiesofhumans(andneuronalrecords DEMO perceiving a high utility reduces the
in primates) show that the DEMO cortex plays attentiontosearchandexploration,andthatthe
an important role in the evaluation of utility. perception of low utility promotes search and
Different areas of the brain DEMO found to be explorative behavior, are fundamental tenets of
related to DEMO assessment of rewards and costs. the behavioral school (Cyert & March, 1963;
A large number of neuroimaging studies, in- March & Simon, 1958), a departure from stan-
volving diverse experiments, have examined DEMO,whichassumescon-
brainresponsestorewardstimuli.Theyconsis- stant investment in search and exploration, in-
tentlyidentifyacommonsetofneuralstructures dependent DEMO the current task. The “satisﬁcing”
that are activated in response to these stimuli, behavior assumption has been widely tested in
mainly the OFC, DEMO ventral striatum, and the and supported by management studies over the
DEMO prefrontal cortex. The OFC has decades(see Gre`ve, 2003, for a recent review),
beenimplicatedinhedonicexperienceacrossall and by evidence on the impact of past perfor-
sensory modalities (Rolls, 2000). Of speciﬁc mance on investment DEMO attention and learning
interest are areas in the striatum and the OFC by ﬁrms (Bateman & Zeithmal, 1989; Simon,
that are particularly responsive to rewards and Houghton, & Aquino, 2000; Thomas, Clark, &
which change, accumulate, or are learned over Gioia, 1993)DEMO
time(Knutson,Fong,Bennett,Adams,&Hom- Inaddition,theperceptionofuncertaintyhas
mer, 2003; DEMO et al., 1998; Murray, been proposed as an important factor DEMO
O’Doherty, & Schoenbaum, 2007). the evaluation of a given situation (McClure,
Attemptshavealsobeenmadetoidentifythe Gilzenrat,&Cohen,2006;Yu&Dayan,2005).
brainareasactivatedbycost-relatedissues.The DEMO seems that our brains distinguish between
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is traditionally expected and unexpected uncertainty. Two im-
consideredtobedirectlyresponsivetoaversive portant neuromodulators—acetylcholine (ACh)
interoceptive and somatosensory stimuli, and and norepinephrine (NE), respectively—signal
particularly DEMO pain (e.g., (Peyron, Laurent, & expected and unexpected sources DEMO uncer-
Garc´ıa-Larrea, 2000). Recent neurophysiologi- tainty.Whenexploiting,ifpredictionerrorsare
cal studies on DEMO and on humans have higher than expected, the current strategy
consistently DEMO that ACC is strongly shouldberevisedandweshouldexplore.If,on
responsive to negatively valenced information, DEMO contrary, the prediction errors can be ac-
such as performance errors, negative feedback, counted for in terms of expected uncertainty,
monetary losses, and even social exclusion theexploitingstrategyshouldbemaintained.In
(Eisenberger, Lieberman, & Williams, 2003), general,takingintoaccountthatindividualsare
and also to task difﬁculty and decision-making risk-averse, then the higher the unexpected un-
conﬂicts (Botvinick, Cohen, & Carter, DEMO). certainty perceived in a situation or a problem,
102 LAUREIRO-MARTI´NEZ, BRUSONI, AND ZOLLO
themoredifﬁcultitwillbefortheindividualto
understand the outcome of the DEMO/
problem and so the less the utility from the
situation.
The neuroscientiﬁc ﬁndings summarized
aboveprovidethebasisforanunderstandingof
whatunderliestheexplorationexploitationdi-
lemma.Theseﬁndingsalsohelptobridgesome
of the gaps described in Sections DEMO and 3. The
neuroscientiﬁc deﬁnitions of exploration and
exploitation,andthediscoveryoftheneurological
mechanismsunderlyingtheshiftbetweenthetwo
attentional states, help to resolve the debate over
whether exploration and exploitation are to be
viewedaspositionsonacontinuumorasorthog-
onalsituations.Attheindividuallevelofanalysis,
they are clearly orthogonal, since at any given
momentanindividualcannotbeinboththephasic
andtonicmodesofLCfunctioning.Atthe orga-
nizational level, however, members of a group
DEMO
modes,whichmeansthatthegroupoverallwill
be working on a continuum between a com-
pletely phasic mode (all focused on the current
task,i.e.,purelyexploitativemode)andacom-
pletelytonicmode(allfocusedonexploration).
Ofcourse,anygrouptypicallyworksataposi-
tion on the continuum located somewhere be-
tween the DEMO extremes, but this position is
importanttothepredictionofcollectivebehav-
ior (see Figure 2). It is important that the (dis-
crete) shifts in LC operating DEMO of individ-
ualsinthegroupovertimewillcausethegroup
position on the continuum to constantly shift.
In the next section, we offer a managerial
illustration of how these neurological mecha-
nisms might inﬂuence the activities of groups
involved in research and development (R&D)
work.
ExplorationExploitation and the “Wizard
of Menlo Park”
How DEMO the ideas presented in this paper re-
ﬂectedinarealcase?Inthissection,wearguethat
an organizational process of strategic relevance,
such as a product innovation process, can be de-
composed in subactivities (explorative–exploit-
ative behaviors) that are largely DEMO by a
decision-maker’s attention focus (broad and nar-
row), which DEMO expect to in turn originate from
neuromodulatorymechanismsguidedbytheLC.
We will exemplify the ideas we propose us-
ing the well-documented case of Thomas Alva
Edison—one of DEMO most famous inventors of
all times—and the main events in one year
of work on the microphone at Menlo Park, one
of the ﬁrst facilities entirely dedicated to R&D
If the key decision-makers’
attention mode DEMO:
phasic
X
phasic
phasic
phasic
phasic
X
X
X
tonic
tonic
tonic
tonic
X
tonic
Figure 2.
their behavior will
more likely be:DEMO
exploitative
X
exploitative
exploitative
X
exploitative
exploitativeX
X
explorative
explorative
X
explorative
explorative
explorative
and the organizational
behavior
is more likely to be:
DEMO
Exploitative Explorative
Key decision-makers’ attention and organizational behavior.
NEUROFOUNDATIONS EXPLORATIONEXPLOITATION DILEMMA
103
activities. Edison serves as a good case for
DEMO the ideas presented in this paper
relating to micro- and macrolevels of analysis
sincehewasnotthe“lonegenius”butinsteada
“collective noun and means the work of many
men”(Lindgren,DEMO,p.17citedinSwedberg,
1993). While Edison was clearly at the head of
theMenloParkoperations,theyweretheresult
of the collaboration and work of many individ-
uals: the Park “apparatus” served to promote a
hugenumberofinventions(“aminorinvention
every10daysandabigthingeverysixmonths
orso”[Lindgren,1979,p.17citedinSwedberg,DEMO
1993]), generating more than 400 patents in
its 6 years of operation. There is agreement on
the fact that Edison was a relentless DEMO
or, closer to our argument, a “meta inventor.”
HemadeMenloParkthecornerstoneofmodern
industrial research. The Park was the ﬁrst in-
dustriallaboratoryconcernedwithbothcreating
knowledge and controlling new knowledge DEMO
plication. It is interesting to apply the ideas we
haveintegratedsofartothecontextofanR&D
lab, where not only research was done and
manynewinventionswerediscovered,butalso
thedevelopment,polishing,protection,andsell-
ing of the inventions was done.
Menlo Park demonstrated the ability DEMO suc-
cessfullycombinebothexplorativeandexploit-
ative activities. Different inventors inside
Menlo Park were involved in both explorative
and exploitative activities, with Edison leading
theirworkin both cases.Edison’shighinvolve-
ment in the different activities in Menlo Park
may have had some negative DEMO for
the development of the incubator. On the other
hand, his DEMO exempliﬁes how the way that
leaders attend to the particular problems of the
innovation process, facing the different deci-
sions required to handle both explorative and
exploitative challenges, contributes to the suc-
cess of the overall innovation process.
Not only was Edison working on many dif-
ferent projects DEMO once, requiring different
modes of operation in his attention system, but
healsoshowedtheabilitytocontinuouslyshift
between the two cognitive modes within the
contextofasingleprocess.Ontheonehandhe
couldbeveryfocusedonadvancingknowledge
developmenttowardthesolutionofaveryspe-
ciﬁcproblem.Ontheotherhand,DEMO
bined specialized knowledge from different
ﬁelds to generate new, broader subﬁelds DEMO
more general knowledge.
How did he switch from one mode to the
other? In different innovation cases there is
evidence of the importance of specialization as
domain-speciﬁc expertise (Kaufman & Baer,
2006). Speciﬁc expertise is usually the founda-
tion for building innovation. In addition, how-
ever,inEdison’scase(asinothercasesstudied
byKaufmanandBaer),generalexpertiseplayed
a key role, along with the ability DEMO recombine
knowledge from different ﬁelds, or to apply it
from one DEMO to another. As stated by Harga-
donandSutton(2000),Edisonandthepeoplein
hislabhadtheabilityto“moveeasilyinandout
of DEMO pools of knowledge, to keep learn-
ing new ideas, and to use ideas in novel situa-
tions” (p. 161). Like Alexander Graham Bell,
Samuel Morse, Henry Ford, and others, Edison
did not advance science in the way specialists
do. These scientists instead focused on DEMO de-
veloped an in-depth knowledge about the spe-
ciﬁc issues (problems, components, etc.) of
their inventions, while also broadening and
bringing different streams of scientiﬁc discov-
eries into practical devices and systems (Skra-
bec,2006).Theseserialinnovatorsweresome-
timesableto explore,broadentheirattention,be
creative,recombineandbringtogetherdifferent
ideasandalso exploit,narrowdowntheiratten-
tion, concentrate, and focus on solving a spe-
ciﬁc problem.
Toillustrate,adetailedstudybyCarlsonand
colleagues (Carlson, 2003, p. 155–156) shows
how Edison’s work on the DEMO (the
carbonbuttontransmitterforthetelephone)can
besummarizedasaseriesofcontrastingbehav-
iors in which “During certain periods, Edison
varied his lines of research, and then at partic-
ular moments, DEMO appears to have selected one
line for further development” (p.156). DEMO in-
ventivepatternscanbeseenascharacterizedby
“explorative” periods (when he played out dif-
ferent lines DEMO investigation) following by “ex-
ploitative” periods when he selected and fo-
DEMO by either choosing one of the lines or by
recombining the most promising lines.
Figure3summarizesthemainactivitiesEdi-
son undertook while developing the micro-
phoneforthetelephoneduring1877.Theovals
showthemomentswhenhechosewhichlineto
proceed DEMO (Diagram adapted from Carlson,
2003, p. 156). For example, in late April 1877,
104
LAUREIRO-MARTI´NEZ, BRUSONI, AND ZOLLO
Jan
Feb
Mar
Choosing a type DEMO telephone
Dragging
Rubbing
Switching
Induction
Squeezing
Figure 3.
Apr
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
The diagram summarizes the lines of research Edison
DEMO during 1877.
The ovals show the moments when he chose among
those lines which to proceed with (Diagram adapted
from Carlson, 2003, p.156).
Pressure
Choosing an appropriate material for a production model
Diaphragm
Resonance
DEMO
Springs
Fluff
Rubber
Further refinement and polishing of the design to be patented
Felt
Induction
Magneto
Battery
Transformer
Combin. Transmitter
Battery telephone
patented
Edison’s DEMO of research for developing the telephone.
Edison was experimenting with different lines
(i.e., dragging, rubbing, etc.). He then chose to
focus DEMO one option (i.e., the pressure tele-
phone)tofurtherimproveit.Again,inSeptem-
berofthatyear,afterhavingexperimentedwith
different production models (i.e., resonance,
reed,etc.),hedecidedtofocusononeoption.In
this case he did not actually chose one, instead
combiningthemostpromisingresultsfromdif-
ferentlinesandfocusingondevelopingarubber
tube production version.
AsdocumentedinCarlson(2003,p.152)this
particularsituationcanbeanalyzedasaspeciﬁc
case in point:
“Edison or his DEMO James Adams sub-
stituted points of plumbago (i.e., graphite) for
DEMO
phones seemed to work better than previous
versions,leadingEdisontothinkmorecarefully
about using points. In particular, he now con-
sidered using four high-resistance points press-
ing on the diaphragm with varying degrees of
force. Edison noted an inverse DEMO be-
tween the mechanical force and the electrical
resistance that the resistance increased as the
forcedecreased-anddrewonthisobservationto
construct a pressure telephone in April 1877.”
Aschemaforinterpretingthisexampleinthe
DEMO of the ideas proposed in this paper is
presented in the Figure 4. The concentric ovals
signal the different sublevels at which the
explorationexploitation DEMO can be seen
in the telephone example. At the center we
present the more micro level we have included
in our ideas (the LC mode), and the most ex-
ternal oval represents the more macro DEMO we
have presented (the behavior at the organiza-
tional level). DEMO the telephone example, Edison
started with an exploratory behavior searching
foralternatives(DEMO)
andexperimenting(addingthegraphitepoints).
Edisongotpositivefeedbackfromtheenviron-
ment,obtainingagoodoutcome(betterworking
telephones), which increased the utility and
lowered the uncertainty he perceived in the
problemathand.Perceivingahigherutility,the
DEMO(phasic)arose
(see ﬁrst central box to the left). Edison DEMO
focusing his attention (“think more carefully
aboutusingpoints...”p.156)ononealternative
to improve it. DEMO narrowed down from ﬁve
alternativestotheapparentlybestonetofurther
exploit the idea, develop and improve DEMO (“he
NEUROFOUNDATIONS EXPLORATIONEXPLOITATION DILEMMA
105
Picking one of the research
lines: the pressure telephone
“…drop four lines
in favour of the
pressure line”
“think more
DEMO about
using points…”
exploitative
exploitative
narrow
Behavior at
organizational level
Behavior at
individual level
Attention mode
LC mode
“not convinced”
“dissatisfied with
the volume DEMO
articulation of
these
telephones…”
phasic
tonic
broad
Experimenting with 5
different lines of research
“undertook a brief search for
an alternative…”
“undertaking intensive studies
DEMO the acoustic…”
“made a series of changes…
and they tested several…”
explorative
explorative
Figure 4.
Example: Edison and the telephone invention.
chosetodropfourlinesinfavorofthepressure ing-down process appeared in which Edison
line” p. 156). combined the most promising DEMO from the
This shifting between exploring and exploit- different lines of research to create the rubber
ingwasrepeatedseveraltimesinthetelephone tube production version of the telephone.
invention DEMO in several others. As can be seen If we think about applying the schema in
inFigure4,asaresultofthe“squeezing”alter- Figure 2 to interpret—somewhat liberally—
native,Edisonfocusedhisresearchonthepres- DEMO,wecanseethatifwetakeastatic
sure telephone. His shifts between exploring pictureatamomentwhenEdisonandhisasso-
and exploiting continued during the summer of ciates were exploring different lines, we may
1877 (DEMO Figure 4 see the box beginning with see how their broad attention (resulting from a
“notconvinced”).Afterdecidingtofocusonthe tonicLCmode)reﬂectedanexplorativebehav-
pressure telephone, Edison and DEMO associates iorattheindividuallevelandaggregatedalsoat
faced a different problem: the quality of the the DEMO level. At other moments (as,
acoustic components was not satisfactory DEMO e.g., when narrowing down to one option
them (low utility perceived). Consequently, he among the many explored) the more focused
decidedtoundertakeasearchforbettercompo- DEMO (resulting from a phasic LC mode)
nents(perceivingalowutility,hewasunderthe showed DEMO behaviors.
tonicLCmodeandsobroadenedhisattention). It is important, for our argument, there is no
The lab then extended their investigation to evidence that Edison relied DEMO different people
different acoustic components (material search, toallocateexploration-orexploitation-oriented
diaphragm, resonance DEMO, reeds, springs, tasks,butthatallthepeopleinvolvedinhislabs
ﬂuff) that were studied and tested (explorative tackled both types of challenges. Having indi-
behaviors).Oncehigherstandardswerereached viduals capable of shifting easily from exploi-
(andsoahighutilityperceived)againanarrow- tation to exploration and back also allows a
106
grouptodoso:aggregatedattheorganizational
level, the combination of explorative and ex-
ploitativebehaviorsismorelikelytoleadtoan
adaptive behavior that swiftly moves between
the exploringexploiting modes.
The Challenge of Measurement DEMO
Empirical Validation
Inapplyingneuroscientiﬁcﬁndingsandtech-
niquestomanagementproblems,weneedtobe
aware of some key epistemological differences
between these research programs. Neuroscien-
tists,andneuroeconomistsforthelargepart,are
interested in the average effects DEMO their exper-
imental manipulations in identifying the neural
correlates of a given process (e.g., a utility
evaluation) triggered by a homogeneous stimu-
lus (e.g., increased levels of uncertainty) and
producing a set of possible, observable, deci-
sional outcomes (e.g., a type of decision in DEMO
game-theoretic scenario). Consequently, the
pursuitofthesetypesofresearchquestionsand
the experimental designs generated tend DEMO ne-
glect individual variations around the mean re-
sponse to the stimulus, and in fact consider
them a nuisance (Frederick, 2005), since the
larger the variance the weaker are the mean-
based results.
However, as Lubinsk1 and Humphreys
(1997) note, a neglected aspect does not disap-
pear because it is neglected, and there is no
good reason for ignoring the individual varia-
tion around a mean response, especially if we
have good logic to expect an important causal
link between managerial DEMO and
organizationalperformance,or,asinthispaper,
between the allocation of attention as an ante-
cedentofdecision-makingbehavioranditscon-
sequences in organizational behavior and per-
formance.Asneuroscientistsdo,weshouldcare
about what DEMO the average to work in a
certain way, but our focus DEMO be on the
explanation of the differences: what might
lead certain DEMO and their organiza-
tions to display diverse reactions to similar
stimuli, DEMO consequently different levels of
performance? This basic difference in episte-
mological DEMO implies some chal-
lenges to management researchers who need
to adjust some of the traditionally adopted
neuroscience research methods in order to
comply with DEMO objectives.
LAUREIRO-MARTI´NEZ, BRUSONI, AND ZOLLO
Aﬁrstchallengeisthattestingfordifferences
requires a larger sample and implies higher
costs in terms of time, laboratory access, and
dataprocessing.Also,DEMO
different: many applications of neuroscience to
economics, marketing, and ﬁnance DEMO data
from college students. However, if we want to
understand differences DEMO managerial decision-
makingbehavior,itisnecessarytosampleman-
agers, executives, and entrepreneurs of differ-
ent kinds, with the aim of tracing differences
in the neural correlates that antecede their
behavior, and also to eventually be able to
correlate the results on individual character-
istics with those of the organizations or
groups DEMO which they exert signiﬁcant in-
ﬂuence. Differences in age and experience
may shape the brain structure and the activa-
tions that can be observed. DEMO interesting
setting for testing our ideas would be among
the entrepreneurs of small family enterprises.
In those organizations, as described by Bod-
mer and Vaughan (2009), the limited re-
sources will possibly increase the impact on
the organizational moves of what the entre-
preneur attends to and DEMO cognitive maps he
does develop. Finally, replication is espe-
cially important DEMO managerial studies since
contextual effects related to task features,
ﬁrm and sector characteristics, cultural traits
andinstitutionalconditionsmayaltertheway
individuals make decisions following the
samesetofstimuli,andthewayorganizations
consequently perform.
Another distinctive feature of management
scholarship requires researchers to go DEMO
uncovering what the effects of certain abilities
might be, and to DEMO to understand how
these cognitive abilities can be developed and
usedsuccessfullytoimproveorganizationalper-
formance, so that abilities—say the ﬂexibility
to shift attentional mode as soon as unex-
pecteduncertaintylevelschange—canbedif-
fusedtobeneﬁtorganizationaloutcomes.One
of the key principles of behavioral neuro-
science,infact,DEMO
brain structure long after brain development
is complete. Brain plasticity refers precisely
to the brain’s ability to change structure and
function. Experience is a DEMO stimulant of
brain plasticity and works by producing mul-
tiple, dissociable DEMO in the brain includ-
ingincreasesindendriticlength,increases(or
NEUROFOUNDATIONS EXPLORATIONEXPLOITATION DILEMMA
107
decreases) in spine density, synapse forma-
tion, increased glial activity and altered met-
abolic activity (Kolb & Whishaw, DEMO). Re-
search on humans produced the interesting
result that “the plasticity of the nervous sys-
tem remains throughout the life span and ex-
DEMO well into old age” (Taub, 2004). If the
antecedentstocertainmanagerialabilitiesare
identiﬁed, it may imply that it might be pos-
sibletomodifybrainstructurethroughdiffer-
ent types of exercises and training, and thus
gain abilities relevant to improving manage-
rial functioning following different experi-
ences and at different ages.
To design a DEMO for testing the neuroscien-
tiﬁcﬁndingsinamanagerialsettingitisneces-
sary to create or adapt experimental tasks that
cover a series of steps corresponding to the
different constructs illustrated DEMO the neurosci-
entiﬁc ﬁndings. An ideal option would be to
obtain direct measures of the managers’ atten-
tion focus while facing different real-life deci-
DEMO and to correlate such measures with the
performance obtained out of those decisions
(both at a purely individual level and at an
organizationallevel)bothintheshort-andthe
long-term. However, given the difﬁculty (or
impossibility) of measuring managers in the
real context with the actual brain imaging
tools, a good viable proxy would be to corre-
latetheperformanceobtained,forexample,in
managerial decision-making simulations fac-
DEMO the exploration–exploitation dilemma
with the precise attention focus measures ob-
tained while completing different neuropsy-
chological tasks in a lab context. There are
different DEMO that researchers could
follow to measure the ability of making deci-
sions regarding exploring–exploiting, some
of which are also compatible with brain im-
aging techniques that could allow researchers
to measure not only performance in the
DEMO exploitation decisions (the ob-
servedbehavior)butalsotheneuralcorrelates
of such decisions.
Wenowturntodiscusshoweachofthekey
constructs DEMO this paper could be actually ob-
served with the context of one speciﬁc task,
which can be administered using fMRI tech-
niques: the gambling task (Daw et al., 2006).
To understand the antecedents DEMO the deci-
sion-making ability related to managing the
exploration exploitation dilemma, DEMO have
proposed four constructs based on the ﬁndings
in neuroscience. The ﬁrst construct is the level
of uncertainty connected to a given decisional
situation. DEMO ﬁrst step in the experimental de-
signisthustoevaluatethemanager’spercep-
tion of the uncertainty of the outcomes in the
task.Thisperceptionofuncertaintytranslates
into a utility assessment, the second con-
struct.Differentpartsofthebrainintervenein
utilityassessmentand,aswehaveshown,the
ACC and OFC play important roles. Depend-
ing DEMO the manager’s assessment of utility in
the current task, an attention DEMO arises, the
third construct. As already explained, the LC
plays a fundamental role in modulating the
attention mode according to the perceived
utility. DEMO a consequence of the attention
mode,themanagerwillthenshowabehavior,
the fourth construct. In the case of broad
attention (LC active in tonic mode), explor-
ative behaviors arise and managers will act
(or will propose solutions) DEMO ways character-
ized by experimentation, ﬂexibility, discov-
ery, and innovation. DEMO the case of focused
attention(LCactiveinphasicmode),exploit-
ative behaviors will occur DEMO managers will
act selectively, according to reﬁnement of
currentprocessesandefﬁciencyinthecurrent
task. If DEMO behavior matches what the situa-
tion demand (e.g., high uncertainty matched
withexplorativebehaviorandlowuncertainty
with exploitative behavior), higher perfor-
mance can be expected.
It DEMO important that the ability to balance
explorationexploitationthroughﬂexibleman-
agement of the situational requirements to
achievetheappropriateattentionalresponsecan
only be assessed if the decision process is rep-
licated DEMO stable contextual conditions. This
adaptive process at the individual level can be
linked, and the link empirically tested, to the
organizational ability to DEMO the explora-
tion–exploitation dilemma.
The four constructs we propose can be mea-
sured in an experimental context. These exper-
iments involve two types of DEMO First, they
require data derived from behavioral measure-
mentsduringexperimentaltasks(e.g.,response
DEMO, performance, etc.) and from question-
nairesandinterviews.Second,theyrequiredata
on brain functioning, which can be obtained
108
LAUREIRO-MARTI´NEZ, BRUSONI, AND ZOLLO
during experiments by using brain imaging DEMO not require a measure for general attention;
techniques.2 rather, we DEMO to differentiate between two
The particular technique to be used can be types of attention—broad and focused. The at-
selected depending on the properties DEMO tention mode can be assessed by observing LC
brainbehavior association to be observed. If functioning using a brain imaging technique
the study requires a DEMO spatial resolution, (e.g., the participants can play the task while
DEMO and PET will be required. If the study lying in the MRI scan) or by measuring pupil
requireshightemporalresolution,EEGorMEG diameter, found to correlate DEMO well
would be suitable. A study that requires both with LC tonic activity (Gilzenrat, Cohen,
hightemporalandhighspatialresolutioncould Rajkowski, & Aston-Jones, 2003). DEMO diame-
use a combination of these techniques (such as terofanindividual’spupilschangesundervar-
fMRI DEMO PET with EEG/MEG). iousconditions.Forinstance,thepupildiameter
ofsomeonewhoisthinkingincreases;thepupil
of a tired person shrinks. These effects have
been proven through a number of psychology
(Shinoda & Kato, 2006) and neuroscience ex-
periments (Gilzenrat et al., 2003).
Finally, behavior can be observed based on
individualchoices.Inthisway,onetaskcouldbe
DEMO
when facing the exploration exploitation
tradeoff,andformanipulatingandmeasuringthe
different constructs that we have illustrated and
that affect such performance (uncertainty, per-
ceived utility, attention focus). Table 2 summa-
rizeshoweachconstructcanbedeﬁnedandmea-
suredinanexperimentsuchasthegamblingtask.
This gambling task could be DEMO
with other alternatives, such as simulation, de-
cision-making vignettes and self-reported
scales,tohaveamorereliablemeasure.Atreat-
mentofalltheavailablealternativesusingthese
techniquesisoutofthescopeofthisarticle,but
theauthorswillbepleasedtoprovideasynopsis
and an assessment of results from DEMO em-
pirical work to all interested scholars.
Gambling in the MRI Machine
An experimental task that could assess the
explorationexploitation dilemma at the indi-
DEMO level and is compatible with the brain
imaging techniques just exposed is the gam-
bling task as adapted by Daw et al. (2006). In
this experiment, participants play by choosing
among four slot machines, DEMO win as many
points as possible. They are faced with the
classicalexplorationexploitationdilemmaina
changing environment context. During the ex-
periment different characteristics on the ma-
DEMO are manipulated (payoff average, uncer-
tainty of returns, etc.) and participants must
choosewhethertocontinuetoplayonapartic-
ularmachineorexplorenewpossibilitiesinthe
hopeofearningmorepoints.Whiletheindivid-
ual is playing, her or his brain can be scanned
(e.g., using fMRI) to obtain measures for each
of the four constructs developed above. Of
course, the task could be done in a normal PC
and obtain only the behavioral performance
measuresofexplorationexploitationdecision-
DEMO,dependingonthestrategiesandpayoffs
obtainedbytheparticipant.Alsoimportant,the
software controlling the game allows a good
levelofmanipulationoftheuncertaintylevel.In
addition,theutilityperceptionandtheattention
mode can be measured using brain imaging
techniques.Mostmanagementstudiesproxyfor
attention by time DEMO to an activity (e.g.,
the famous study by Mintzberg, 1973, whose
results were conﬁrmed by Kurke and Aldrich,
1983). Other studies proxy for attention by the
number of times a person refers DEMO a certain
issue (e.g., the number of sentences in a share-
holder letter referring to a speciﬁc element
(D’AveniandMacMillan,1990;Barr,Stimpert,
& Huff, 1992). However, the ideas we propose
2 The DEMO set of techniques used to generate neurolog-
ical images is electroencephalography (DEMO), magneto en-
cephalography (MEG), positron emission tomography
(PET), and fMRI. There are many limitations to the use of
these techniques: they are expensive to operate and results
areopentosubjectiveinterpretation.Theyarealsointrusive
for subjects although to DEMO degrees. EEG and MEG
are considered the least intrusive, while fMRI DEMO cause
many subjects discomfort related to having to lie still in a
small space. Researchers must take the degree of intrusion
into account since DEMO affects data gathering, particularly if
the subjects are busy managers and DEMO decision-makers.
Nevertheless,thesetechniquesofferbyfarthebestphysical
evidence to date on the activation of speciﬁc parts of the
brain consequent to given stimuli.
NEUROFOUNDATIONS EXPLORATIONEXPLOITATION DILEMMA
109
Table 2
Example of How Constructs Could Be DEMO and Measured in a Multi-Armed Gambling Task
Construct
Deﬁnition
Possible measure
Situation uncertainty Itcanbe deﬁnedintermsofthefollowing:1.Frequency(# Payoffs change randomly from trial
timestaskisrepeatedduringxtime).2.Heterogeneity DEMO trial (manipulation of different
(degreeofnovelty);3.Causalambiguity(numberand situation characteristics)
DEMO;degreeof
simultaneityamongsubtasks)(ZolloandWinter,2002)
Perceived utility How much the individual DEMO the possible outcomes of
the present situation (taking into account the
DEMO of current outcomes and the memory of
past decisions) (Aston-Jones and Cohen, 2005)
(highlow on a scale depending on method)
DEMO mode What type of attention is devoted to a situation: broad DEMO
narrow (Aston-Jones and Cohen, 2005)
Behavior How much search for new alternatives is done (high
being exploration, low exploitation) (Aston-Jones DEMO
Cohen 2005)
ACC and OFC functioning using
fMRI
LC operation mode using fMRI or
proxy with pupil diameter
The observed strategy followed by
DEMO individual (i.e. her/his choice
in each trial)
Note. ACC DEMO anterior cingulate cortex; OFC  orbitofrontal cortex; fMRI  functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging;
LC  locus coeruleus.
Forthepurposeoftestingtheideasproposed literature.First,westillknowlittleabout“how”
in this DEMO,3 the ﬁrst best option is cer- exploration and exploitation are actually done.
tainly to correlate the direct measures of the Second, the appropriate level of analysis at
managers’ attention focus in different real-life which the DEMO tradeoff is
situations with the performance obtained in the solvedisnotclear.Third,inmanycaseswhatis
real decisions (both at a purely individual level meant by explorationexploitation is not very
andatanorganizationallevel)bothinshort-and clear.Fourth,variationamongindividualsinthe
long-term. However, given the difﬁculty (or DEMO to respond in an exploitative or ex-
impossibility) of measuring managers DEMO real plorative way to a given stimulus, and on the
situationswiththeactualbrainimagingtools,DEMO ability to shift their responses according to
good viable proxy would be to correlate atten- changes in the environmental conditions, have
tion focus measures obtained while performing notbeenexplored.Tostartaddressingthesekey
different neuropsychological tasks in a lab analytical gaps, we thus propose a framework
context,withforexample,managerialdecision- and a method which, in our view, contributes
making simulations facing the exploration– particularly to the microlevel problem of indi-
exploitation dilemma. The performance mea- vidual-levelvarianceinbehavior.Weprovidea
sures obtained DEMO these simulations can be deﬁnition that is compatible with the manage-
compared with the measures obtained in self- ment and the neuroscientiﬁc literature that DEMO
reported scales such as the cognitive ﬂexibility are using. We focus on the individual as the
scale(Martin&Rubin,1995)ortherecentscale fundamental unit of DEMO and study how
of explorationexploitation activities by Mom exploration and exploitation are done at the
et al. (2009). micro, neurological level in DEMO of the pro-
cessesgoingoninanindividual’smindandthe
ensuing behavior when faced with a given en-
vironmentalstimulus.Whydoesthisframework
matter? We believe there are at least four pos-
Conclusions
This paper addresses a dilemma common to
organizations. Managing the trade-off between
exploitation DEMO exploration is fundamental to
adaptive behavior and learning in increasingly
complex and rapidly changing contexts. Al-
though there has been much research on this
DEMO, there are still several key gaps in the
3 While at DEMO time of writing the study was still in its
infancy, at DEMO time of publishing the ideas were imple-
mentedalonglinesconsistentwiththoseherediscussedand
very promising preliminary results started to be obtained.
110
sible areas of contribution for the ideas put
forward in this DEMO
“How” the Tradeoff Is Solved—a Micro
Perspective
Asdiscussedearlierinthispaper,thereisstill
a remarkable lack of clarity as to what is the
appropriate level of analysis for DEMO
the trade-off between exploitation and explora-
tion. At the organizational level, DEMO have
focused on the attributes that make organiza-
tionsmoreorlessexplorative(e.g.,Tushman&
O’Reilly, 1996). Others have argued instead
(e.g., Papo, 2007) that individual-level pro-
cesses ought to play a more central role in
DEMO the origin of new ideas. Obvi-
ously, these issues are related. DEMO, we still
know very little about how microlevel pro-
cessesbuilduptoorganizationaloutcomes.We
used DEMO example of Menlo Park’s activities to
argue that the crucial issue here is not that of
allocating exploitative versus explorative tasks
to those individuals DEMO organizations which are
best suited to that task. Rather, our framework
DEMO to the idea that what matters to balance
thetradeoffisnotspecialization,buttheability
ofkeydecision-makerstoshiftseamlesslyfrom
one task to the other, as we illustrated with the
process Edison enacted in one of his key inno-
vations. At the organizational level, this argu-
ment is consistent with recent research on the
dynamics of innovation DEMO complex technical
systems, which has warned against the dangers
of strategic DEMO, often grounded in the
belief that exploitation and exploration are ac-
DEMO
to different types of organizations (e.g., Bru-
soni, Prencipe, & Pavitt, 2001). While there is
some evidence of the dangers of outsourcing
stemmingfromexcessivespecialization,micro-
founded explanations are in short supply. The
applicationofneurosciencetomanagerialdeci-
sion-making DEMO important opportunities for
this line of inquiry to be developed to include
the study of interactions among individuals en-
gaged in these high-level cognitive DEMO, and
the generation of collective results that go be-
yond the DEMO of individuals’ capacities. While
the “aggregation” of individual capacities and
behaviors into organizational ones remains a
main limitation from the neuroeconomics ﬁeld
(Papo, DEMO), this paper attempts, at least, to
LAUREIRO-MARTI´NEZ, BRUSONI, AND ZOLLO
identifysimilaritiesbetweenmicro-andorgani-
zation-levelprocesseswhichoughttobefurther
explored to generate sensible microfoundations
of macrobehaviors.
“How” the DEMO Is Solved—a Macro
Perspective
Domains that have traditionally focused on
macro-organizational analyses such as organi-
zation theory, strategy, and entrepreneurship
mightbeneﬁtfromthedevelopmentofatheory
of exploration DEMO exploitation based on the
neurological processes occurring within indi-
vidual managers’ brains.
For example, consider one of the basic in-
sightsinMarch’s(1991)seminalarticle,which
is related to the fact that exploration requires
heterogeneity in human capital, which disap-
pears without constant personnel turnover be-
cause the newcomers learn DEMO code and adapt
totheﬁrm’smodusoperandi.Marchconcludes
(somewhat paradoxically) that the slower the
learning of the code, the higher the exploration
in the ﬁrm. However, DEMO analysis in this paper
points to an alternative mechanism which does
not rely on personnel turnover to balance the
explorationexploitation dilemma, but rather
focuses on the organizational members’ neuro-
logical characteristics, that is, their propensity
DEMO function in tonic or phasic mode in the neu-
romodulation of their attention. It could be
speculatedthatabroadattentionspancausedby
the tonic activity of LC leads to DEMO relatively
slowersocializationprocess(i.e.,learningofthe
code) and thus more exploration at organiza-
DEMO level.
For scholars engaged in the study of entre-
preneurship, our DEMO offers the possibility to
theorize and empirically validate (with objec-
tive DEMO) insights related to the explana-
tionofexplorativedecisions,whichmightgen-
eratethefoundationofnewventuresinternalto
the ﬁrm (entrepreneurship) or outside it (spin-
offs or start-ups). The launch of DEMO novel enter-
prise can be viewed as the consequence of the
continuous allocation of attention to explor-
ative processes, and the development of neu-
rological foundations for such choices can be
particularly useful to this ﬁeld. DEMO similar
reasons, strategy scholars might be able to
build on a DEMO understanding of the neuro-
logical foundations of exploration–exploita-
NEUROFOUNDATIONS EXPLORATIONEXPLOITATION DILEMMA
111
tion decisions to develop models of strategic
choice DEMO on the idiosyncratic characteris-
tics of the strategy-makers, over and above
DEMO inﬂuence of the industry context and the
organizational endowment.
Enhancing Attention Modulation
Third, and more practically, the framework
we propose in this paper DEMO be used to de-
velop teaching tools to foster individuals’ abil-
ity to control and properly shift the focus of
theirattention.Thereisanelementofplasticity
in the neurological DEMO we discuss here,
whichcanbeleveragedtodeveloptrainingpro-
grams to improve individuals’ responses to
changing environmental circumstances. Since
attentionmodulationaffectstheabilitytoprop-
erly make decisions regarding exploration–
exploitation, it will be then possible to adapt
some instruments which have been developed
for DEMO the attentional control (Sohlberg
& Mateer, 1989, 2001). Very DEMO, for
example, the analysis of the modulation of at-
tention and its impact on decision-making
might open new venues in managerial and
entrepreneurial DEMO through the develop-
ment of tools and techniques which manage-
ment students and practitioners can use to en-
hance their attentional control. These tools DEMO
techniques can be very varied, ranging from
traditional in-class methods (e.g., for acquiring
awareness of perceptive biases) to mental con-
trol practices (as, e.g., neuroimaging studies
have demonstrated the positive impact of med-
DEMO practices on the improvement of func-
tional up-regulation of brain regions affecting
attentioncontrol.ForarecentreviewseeRubia,
2009). In addition, since many psychiatric dis-
orders of higher level cognition are thought to
be due to deﬁcits of attention (Posner & Pe-
tersen, 1990) researchers could adjust the tools
usedtotreatpatientsofattentiondisorderstobe
DEMO to managers aiming to improve their
attention control.
Reﬂection and Some Convergence Among
Different Domains
Onabroadernote,afourthcontributionaims
atreachingouttothenow-broadcrowdinsocial
sciencesinterestedinexploringtheneuroscien-
tiﬁc foundations of economic and DEMO
tional behavior. Social sciences are highly seg-
mented in different knowledge domains. The
ﬁndings of our work might foster a more inte-
grated discussion. DEMO example, mainstream
economists might consider it interesting to
movebeyondthereplicationofresultsbasedon
gametheory,thefocusofmostneuroeconomics
DEMO so far, to develop novel insights into the
neurologicalfoundationsofeconomicbehavior.
Also, the shift toward the explanation of vari-
anceacrossindividualtraitsandconsequentbe-
havior,asopposedtothecharacterizationofthe
mean tendency for DEMO population of decision-
makers,mightservetocorrectastandardbiasin
the discipline.
On the other side of the discipline’s fence,
evolutionary economists will appreciate our at-
tempttodevelopsomeofthemicrofoundations
of DEMO work related to how ﬁrms learn and
evolve. The appropriate balancing of explor-
ative and exploitative search is arguably a cor-
nerstone of their DEMO Depending on the
attentionmode,acertainwaytodecomposethe
problem will emerge and the search space will
be deﬁned accordingly. Search, therefore, is a
consequenceoftheattentionmode.Iftheatten-
tion focus DEMO broad, for example, problems will
be decomposed in broader modules, DEMO a
narrow attention focus will result in problems
being decomposed in ﬁner modules. Brusoni,
Marengo, Prencipe, and Valente (2007) show
that DEMO balance to this trade-off depends upon
the volatility of the problem environment. In
stationaryenvironmentsthereisanevolutionary
advantage to overmodularization, while in
highly volatile environments, contrary DEMO the
received wisdom, modular search is inefﬁcient
in the long run. DEMO, we propose that in
low-uncertainty tasks, exploitative behavior
(i.e.,derivingfromanarrowattentionmodeand
DEMO high decomposition of problems)
wouldbeadvantageous,whiletheoppositewill
be true in the case of highly uncertain tasks:
high decomposition is not efﬁcient and explor-
DEMO behavior derived from broad search will
lead to better performance.
The organizational behavior ﬁeld, with its
orientationtowardstudyingindividualbehavior
in ﬁrms, is the obvious audience DEMO the ideas
discussed here. The main value for scholars in
this ﬁeld is that our ﬁndings expand their re-
search agenda, which traditionally has been
112
LAUREIRO-MARTI´NEZ, BRUSONI, AND ZOLLO
built on the application of social DEMO cognitive subjectswhosebrainactivitydisplaysgoodco-
psychology, to include the novel insights and operation between DEMO limbic area of the brain
methodologies developed in the neurosciences (emotional DEMO) and the prefrontal cortex
which are applicable to the study of DEMO (thinkingarea)arethemostsuccessfulingames
tional behavior phenomena. While neurologi- based on experimentation (Bhatt & Camerer,
callyfoundedﬁndingsmightintheendconﬁrm 2005). Finally, future work could examine the
whatmanyhavealreadyarguedonthestrength tendency toward exploiting rather than balanc-
of sociometric surveys and psychological DEMO, ing exploringexploiting from an impatient
neurosciencesmightcontributebyofferingbet- behavior point of view, using the ﬁndings on
tertheoreticalfoundationstounderstandexactly the neural correlates of time discounting
why individuals DEMO in a certain way when (McClureetal.,2004).Aswellasempirically
isolated, and how organizational life is im- testing the model proposed here, these ideas
pacted by their responses. would provide a more complete understand-
Also, neuroscientists might ﬁnd of interest ing of the exploration exploitation dilemma
the application of DEMO ﬁndings about the at the micro level.
modulation of attention to the explanation of To conclude, it should be noted that the data
economic behavior and performance. The em- on brain functionality and the use of DEMO
piricalvalidationofconceptualadvancementin aging techniques have only begun to demon-
different decision-making settings and the strate their utility in complementing existing
search for differences among healthy DEMO data sources, deepening the microfoundations
engaged in real-life, high-level decisions might of managerial behavior and developing better
offergoodopportunitiesforthedevelopmentof tools for improving cognitive abilities. DEMO
furtherunderstandingoftheneuralcorrelatesof combination of novel empirical techniques and
some of the highest functions of the human the objective strength of neuroscientiﬁc evi-
brain:theabilitytosearchfornovelapproaches dence, free from typical limitations of subjec-
tothesolutionofunstructuredproblemsinnat- tive data collection processes, to ground the
ural settings. theories of managerial behavior, demand in-
creasing attention from management scholars.
This becomes even more important if we in-
clude DEMO potential to contribute to the ultimate
goal of social science—as proposed by Glim-
cherandRustichini(2004):thedevelopmentof
a uniﬁed theory of human behavior, without
DEMO
managerial behavior cannot progress.
Future Research
Of course, many other things DEMO impact
individuals’ ability to shift their focus of atten-
tion. The framework we have discussed here
emphasizes the cognitive, rational elements of
response to stimuli at a given point in time.
Future research might explore other DEMO to
approach the exploration–exploitation di-
lemma. For example, the balance between DEMO
plorationandexploitationseemstobesensitive
to time horizons, and humans show a greater
tendencytoexplorewhenthereismoretimeleft
for DEMO task, presumably because it allows sufﬁ-
cient time to enjoy the DEMO of those explora-
tions (Carstensen, Isaacowitz, & Charles,
1999)DEMO Besides, individuals’ impulsivity or dif-
ferences in perception of time inﬂuence DEMO
sion-making (Wittmann & Paulus, 2009), and
so it would be useful to take the dimension of
time into account as the exploration–exploita-
DEMO dilemma encompasses the anticipation of
future rewards. It would also be interesting to
explorehowemotionsaffectthemanagementof
the exploration–exploitation dilemma, since
References
Aston-Jones,G.,&Cohen,J.D.(DEMO).Anintegra-
tive theory of locus coeruleus–norepinephrine
function: Adaptive gain and optimal DEMO
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 28, 403–450.
Aston-Jones, G., Rajkowski, DEMO, Kubiak, P., & Alex-
insky, T. (1994). Locus DEMO neurons in the
monkeyareselectivelyactivatedbyattendedstim-
uli in a vigilance task. Journal of Neuro-
science, 14, 4467–4480.
Barr, P. S., Stimpert, J. L., & Huff, A. S. (1992).
Cognitive change, strategic action, and organiza-
tionalrenewal. Strategic Management Journal, 13,
15–36.
Bateman, T. S., & Zeithmal, C. P. (1989). The psy-
chologicalcontextofstrategicdecisions:Amodel
NEUROFOUNDATIONS EXPLORATIONEXPLOITATION DILEMMA
113
and convergent experimental ﬁndings. Strategic
Management Journal, 10, 59–74.
Beckman, C. M. (2006). The inﬂuence of founding
teamcompanyafﬁliationsonﬁrmbehavior. Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 49, 741–758.
Beversdorf, D. Q., DEMO, D. M., Chever, D. C.,
Hughes, J. D., & Bornstein, R. A. (2002). Central
B-adrenergic modulation of cognitive ﬂexibility.
Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuropsychology, 13,
2505–2507.
Bhatt, M., & Camerer, C. F. (2005). Self-referential
thinking and equilibrium as states of DEMO in
games:FMRIevidence. Games and Economic Be-
havior, 52, 424–459.
Bodmer, U., & Vaughan, D. R. (2009). Approaches
topreventingcrisesinfamilycontrolledsmallen-
terprises. DEMO of Neuroscience, Psychology,
and Economics, 2, 41–58.
Botvinick, M. M., Cohen, J. D., & Carter, C. S.
(2004). Conﬂict monitoring and anterior cingulate
cortex: An update. Trends in Cognitive Sci-
ences, 8, 539–546.
Brusoni, S., Luigi, M., Prencipe, A., & Valente, M.
(2007).Thevalueandcostsofmodularity:Aprob-
lem-solving perspective. European Management
Review, 4, 15–39.
Brusoni, S., Prencipe, A., & Pavitt, K. (2001).
Knowledgespecialisation,organizationalcoupling
and the boundaries of the ﬁrm: Why DEMO know
more than they make? Administrative Science
Quarterly, 46, 597–621.
DEMO,W.B.(2003).Inventionandevolution:The
case of Edison’s sketches of the telephone. In J.
Ziman (Ed.), Technological innovation as an evo-
lutionary process. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Carstensen, L. L., Isaacowitz, D., & Charles, S. T.
(1999). Taking time seriously: A theory DEMO socio-
emotional selectivity. American Psychology, 54,
165–181.
Cohen, J. D., Aston-Jones, G., & Gilzenrat, M. S.
(2004). A systems-level perspective on attention
and cognitive control, guided activation, adaptive
gating,conﬂictmonitoring,DEMO
exploration. In M. I. Posner (Ed.), Cognitive neu-
roscience of DEMO (pp. 71–90). New York:
Guilford Press Publications.
Cohen, J. D., McClure, S. M., & Yu, A. (2007).
ShouldIstayorshouldIgo?Howthehumanbrain
manages the trade-off between exploitation and
exploration. Philosophical Transactions of the
DEMO Society, 362, 933–942.
Cyert, R. M., & March, J. DEMO (1963). A behavioral
theory of the ﬁrm. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
D’Aveni,R.A.,&McMillan,I.C.(1990).Crisisand
the content of DEMO communications: A
studyofthefocusoftopmanagersinsurvivingand
failing ﬁrms. Administrative Science Quar-
terly, 35, DEMO
Daw, N. D., O’Doherty, J. P., Dayan, P., Seymour,
B., & Dolan, R. J. (2006). Cortical substrates for
exploratory decisions in humans. Nature, 441,
876–879.
Eisenberger, N. I., Lieberman, M. D., & Williams,
K.D.(2003).Doesrejectionhurt?AnfMRIstudy
of DEMO exclusion. Science, 302, 290–292.
Felin, T., & Foss, N. (2005). Strategic organization:
A ﬁeld in search of micro-foundations. Strategic
DEMO, 3, 441–455.
Felin,T.,&Hesterly,W.S.(2007).Theknowledge-
based view, nested heterogeneity, and new value
creation:Philosophicalconsiderationsonthelocus
of knowledge. Academy of Management Re-
view, 32, 172–202.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reﬂection DEMO deci-
sion making. Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives, 19, 25–42.
Gibson,C.B.,&Birkinshaw,J.(2004).Theanteced-
ents, consequences and mediating role of DEMO
zational ambidexterity. Academy of Management
Journal, 47, 209–226.
Gilzenrat, M. DEMO, Cohen, J. D., Rajkowski, J., &
Aston-Jones, G. (2003). Pupil dynamics predict
changes in task engagement mediated by locus
DEMO Society for Neuroscience Ab-
stracts No. 515.19.
Glimcher,P.W.,&Rustichini,A.(DEMO).Neuroeco-
nomics: The concilience of brain and decision.
Science, 306, DEMO
Gre`ve, H. R. (2003). Organizational learning from
performance feedback: DEMO behavioral perspective
on innovation and change.Cambridge,UK:Cam-
bridge University Press.
Gupta,A.K.,Smith,K.G.,&Shalley,C.E.(2006).
The interplay between exploration and exploita-
tion. Academy of Management Journal, 49, 693–
706.
Hargadon, A., & Sutton, R. I. (2000). Building and
innovation factory. Harvard Business Review,
May–June, 157–166.
Holmqvist, M. (2004). Experiential learning pro-
cesses of exploitation and exploration within and
between organizations: An empirical study of
product development. Organization Science, 15,
70–81.
Kaufman, J. DEMO, & Baer, J. (2006). Creativity and
reason in cognitive DEMO,UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Knutson, B., Fong, G. W., Bennett, S. M., Adams,
C. M., & Hommer, D. (2003). A region of mesial
prefrontalcortextracksmonetarilyrewardingout-
comes: Characterization with rapid event related
fMRI. NeuroImage, 18, 263–272.
Koepp, M. J., Gunn, R. N., Lawrence, A. D., Cun-
ningham,V.J.,Dagher,A.,Jones,T.,...Grasby,
114
LAUREIRO-MARTI´NEZ, BRUSONI, AND ZOLLO
P. M. (1998). Evidence for striatal dopamine re- down, bottom-up, and horizontal knowledge in-
leaseduringavideogame. Nature, 393, 266–268. ﬂows. Journal of Management Studies, 44, 910–
Kolb, DEMO, & Whishaw, I. Q. (1998). Brain plasticity 931.
and DEMO Annual Review of Psychology, 49, Mom,T.J.M.,VanDenBosch,F.A.J.,&Volberda,DEMO
43–54. H. W. (2009). Understanding variation in manag-
Kurke,L.B.,&Aldrich,H.E.(1983).Mintzbergwas ers’ ambidexterity; investigating direct and inter-
right! A replication and extension of the nature of action effects of formal structural DEMO personal
managerial work. Management Science, 29, 975– coordination mechanisms. Organization Sci-
984. ence, 20, 812–828.
Leonard-Barton, D. (1995). Wellsprings of DEMO Montague, P. R., King-Casas, B., & Cohen, J. D.
DEMO Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School (2006). Imaging valuation models DEMO human
Press. choice. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 29, 417–
Levinthal,D.A.,&March,J.G.(1993).TheMyopia 448.
of learning. Strategic Management Journal, 14, Murray, E. A., O’Doherty, J. P., & Schoenbaum, G.
95–112. (2007).Whatweknowanddonotknowaboutthe
Levinthal, D. A., & Rerup, C. (2006). Crossing an functionsoftheorbitofrontalcortexafter20years
apparent chasm: bridging mindful and less- of cross-species studies. Journal of Neuro-
mindful perspectives on organizational learning. science, 27, 8166 DEMO
Organization Science, 17, 502–513. Nelson,R.R.,&Winter,S.G.(1982). DEMO evolution-
Lubatkin,M.H.,Simsek,Z.,Ling,Y.,&Veiga,J.F. ary theory DEMO economic change. Cambridge, MA:
(2006). Ambidexterity and performance in small- Harvard University Press.
to medium-sized ﬁrms: The pivotal role of top O’Reilly, C. A., & Tushman, M. (2004, April). The
management team behavioral integration. Journal ambidextrous organization. Harvard Business Re-
of Management, 32, 646–672. view, 1–8.
Lubinski, D., & Humphreys, L. (DEMO). Intelligence. Papo, D. (2007). Where do ideas come from? Brain
Incorporating General Intelligence into Epidemi- activity and economic systems. European Journal
ology and the Social Sciences, 24, 159–201. of Economic and Social DEMO, 20, 163–186.
March, J. G. (1991). Exploration and exploitation in Perretti,F.,&Negro,G.(2006).Fillingemptyseats:
organizational learning. Organization Science, 2, How status and organizational hierarchies affect
71–87. explorationandexploitationinteamdesign. Acad-
March, J. G. (2006). Rationality, foolishness and emy of Management Journal, 49, 759–777.
adaptiveintelligence. Strategic Management Jour- Peyron, R., Laurent, B., & Garc´ıa-Larrea, L. (2000).
nal, 27, 201–214. Functional imaging DEMO brain responses to pain. A
March,J.G.,&Simon,H.A.(1958). DEMO review and meta-analysis (2000). Neurophysiolo-
New York: Wiley. gie Clinique/Clinical Neurophysiology, 30, 263–
Martin, M. M., & Rubin, R. B. (1995). A new mea- 288.
sure of cognitive ﬂexibility. Psychological Re- Posner,M.I.,&Petersen,S.E.(1990).Theattention
ports, 76, 623–626. system of the human brain. Annual Review of
McClure, S. M., Gilzenrat, M. S., & Cohen, J. D. Neuroscience, 13, 25–42.
(2006). An exploration–exploitation model based Raisch, S., & Birkinshaw, J. (DEMO). Organizational
on norepinephrine and dopamine activity. In Y. ambidexterity: Antecedents, outcomes, and mod-
Weiss,B.Sholkopf,&J.Platt(Eds.), Advances in erators. DEMO of Management, 34, 375–409.
neural information processing systems (Vol. 18, Rolls, E. (2000). The brain and emotion. Oxford,
pp. DEMO). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. UK: Oxford University Press.
McClure, S. M., Laibson, D. I., Loewenstein, G., & Rothaermel, DEMO T., & Hess, A. M. (2007). Building
Cohen,J.D.(DEMO).Separateneuralsystemsvalue dynamic capabilities: Innovation driven by indi-
immediate and delayed monetary DEMO Sci- vidual-, ﬁrm-, and network-level effects. Organi-
ence, 306, 503–507. zation Science, 18, 898–921.
McKenzie, J., Woolf, N., van DEMO, C., & Rubia, K. (2009). The neurobiology of Meditation
Morgan, C. (2009). Cognition in strategic deci- and its clinical DEMO in psychiatric disor-
sion-making: A model of nonconventional think- ders. Biological DEMO, 82, 1–11.
ingcapacitiesforcomplexsituations. Management Sara,S.J.(2009).Thelocuscoeruleusandnoradren-
Decision, 47, 209–232. ergic modulation of cognition. Nature Reviews
Mintzberg, H. (1973). DEMO nature of managerial Neuroscience, 10, 211–223.
work. New York: Harper & Row. Shinoda, T., & Kato, M. (2006, October). DEMO pupil di-
Mom,T.J.M.,VanDenBosch,F.A.J.,&Volberda, ameter measurement system for accident prevention
H.W.(2007).Investigatingmanagers’exploration systems, man and cybernetics. Paperpresentedatthe
and exploitation activities: the inﬂuence of top- IEEEInternationalConference,Taipei,Taiwan.
NEUROFOUNDATIONS EXPLORATIONEXPLOITATION DILEMMA
115
Simon, H. A. (1985). Human nature DEMO politics. Thomas, J. B., Clark, S. M., & Gioia, DEMO (1993).
American Political Science Review, 79, 293–304. Strategy sensemaking DEMO organizational perfor-
Simon, M., Houghton, S. M., & Aquino, DEMO (2000). mance: Linkages among scanning, interpretation,
Cognitivebiases,riskperception,DEMO action, and outcomes. Academy of Management
mation: How individuals decide to start compa- Journal, 36, 239–270.
nies. Journal of Business Venturing, 15, 113–134. Tom,S.M.,Fox,C.R.,Trepel,C.,&Poldrack,R.A.
Skrabec,Q.R.(DEMO). George Westinghouse: Gentle (2007). The neural basis of loss aversion in deci-
genius. New York: Algora Publishing. sion-making under risk. Science, 315, 515–518.
Smith, W. K., & Tushman, M. (2005)DEMO Managing Tushman, M., & O’Reilly, C. A. (1996). Ambidex-
strategiccontradictions:Atopmanagementmodel trous organizations: Managing evolutionary and
for managing innovation streams. Organization revolutionarychange. California Management Re-
Science, 16(5), 522–536. view, 38, 8–30.
Sohlberg, M., & Mateer, C. (1989). Introduction to DEMO, M., Cohen, J. D., Servan-Schreiber, D., Ra-
cognitive rehabilitation: Theory and practice. jkowski,J.,&Aston-Jones,G.(1999).Theroleof
New York: Guilford Press. the locus coeruleus in the regulation of cognitive
Sohlberg, M., & Mateer, C. (2001). Cognitive reha- performance. Science, 283, 549–554.
bilitation: An integrative neuropsychological ap- Volberda, H., Baden-Fuller, C., & Van Den Bosch,
proach. New York: Guilford Press. F. A. J. (2001). Mastering strategic renewal: Mo-
Sterpenich, V., D’Argembeau, A., Desseilles, M., bilizingrenewaljourneysinmulti-unitﬁrms. Long
Balteau, E., Albouy, G., Vandewalle, G., et al. Range Planning, 34, 159–178.
(2006). The locus ceruleus is involved in the suc- Weick,K.E.,&Sutcliffe,K.M.(2006).Mindfulness
cessful retrieval of emotional memories in hu- and the quality DEMO organizational attention. Orga-
mans. The Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 7416– nization Science, 17, 514–524.
7423. Wittmann, M., & Paulus, M. P. (2009). Temporal
Swedberg, R. (1993). Explorations in economic horizons in decision making. Journal of Neuro-
sociology. New York: Russell Sage Foundation science, Psychology, and Economics, 2, 1–11.
Publications. Yu, A., & Dayan, P. (2005). Uncertainty, neuro-
Taub, E. (2004)DEMO Harnessing brain plasticity through modulation and attention. Neuron, 46, 681–692.
behavioral techniques to produce new treatments Zollo, M., & Winter, S. G. (2002). Deliberate learn-
inneurorehabilitation. American Psychologist, 59, ing and the evolution of organizational capabili-
692–704. ties. Organization Science, 13, 339–352.
Showcase DEMO work in APA’s newest database.
Make your tests available to other researchers and students; get wider recognition for your work.
“PsycTESTS is going to be an outstanding resource for psychology,” said Ronald F. Levant,
DEMO “I was among the ﬁrst to provide some of my tests and was happy to do so. They will be
available for others to DEMO will relieve me of the administrative tasks of providing them to
individuals.”
Visit http://www.apa.org/pubs/databases/psyctests/call-for-tests.aspx
to learn more about DEMO and how you can participate.
Questions? Call 1-800-374-2722 or write to DEMO
Not since PsycARTICLES has a database been so eagerly anticipated!{1g42fwefx}