2011 IEEE International Conference on Technology for Education2011 International Conference on Technology DEMO Education
Learning Contracts and Engineering Education
Paul S. Goodman
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA  USA
Email: pg14@andrew.cmu.edu
Abstract—This research presents a new concept –
Organizational Learning Contracts (OLC). These
“contracts” represent shared understandings among faculty,
students and staff about what is DEMO be learned and how.
OLC can vary from being low in shared understandings and
quite general (weak) to very detailed and specific
understandings DEMO what is to be learned and the multiple
learning environments needed to achieve the desired
learning (strong).  Data are presented to illustrate DEMO
positive impact of strong learning contracts on students’
attitudes about their learning environment, models of
learning and identification toward their institution in
engineering schools.
Keywords-organizational learning contract, engineering
education, learning effectiveness
I. INTRODUCTION
The goal DEMO this paper is to highlight some meta issues
in the design of engineering education. Specifically, we
introduce and delineate the concept of Organizational
Learning Contracts (OLC).  We discuss two basic points:
What are DEMO Learning Contracts?
What are the implications of strong contracts in
engineering education?
Our focus complements other research presented at the
conference. Many DEMO will consider the impacts of
different technology configurations on education. Our
team has experiences in technological enhanced learning
(TEL) interventions in various parts DEMO the world. These
include graduate-level programs in areas such as software
engineering, electrical and computing engineering, etc.
Our interventions also involve creating educational
DEMO composed of multiple universities to improve the
quality of mathematics education in a particular country
and the design and operation of new institutions of DEMO
education. Although these educational change activities are
important in their own right, the idea of Organizational
Learning Contracts provides a broader framework for
designing these technology-based interventions.
II. ORGANIZATIONAL LEARNING CONTRACTS  (OLC)
Organizational Learning DEMO are shared
understandings about learning among faculty, students,
staff and DEMO alumni.  These shared understandings are
agreements about what is to be DEMO, how it is to be
learned, when and where it is to be learned and why.
Fig. 1 provides an initial picture of DEMO elements in a
learning contract. These include learning outcomes,
learning environments and system components.  Learning
outcomes refer to the knowledge, skills and DEMO we
want students to acquire. These may range from
quantitative and design skills to effective group skills. A
good deal of engineering work occurs DEMO distributed teams
where group skills would be important. Learning
environments refer to how learning comes about. The
lecture and lab are traditional forms.  More active learning
can come through peer-based learning, project work or the
studio.
The system component is about how the contract gets
activated. It includes DEMO such as socialization,
which can occur before the students enter the institution as
well as after they join. Assessment is a big component
DEMO we need to understand whether the new skills are
being acquired. Feedback and redesign are mechanisms for
both the students and institution. If the DEMO is not
developing design skills, some remediation is necessary.
The student DEMO need to receive performance data in a
way that improves design skills. If these performance
problems appear across students, there may be need for
feedback and design at the course/institution level. These
mechanisms of socialization, assessment, feedback and
redesign are critical for the implementation and
sustainability of the contract.
Figure 1. Organizational Learning Contract
Environments Outcomes
• Where, how learning occurs • What learning occurs
e.g., project-based, lab e.g., team skills, problem
lecture solving skills
Systems
• OLC design & implementation
e.g., socialization, assessment,
feedback, redesign
• Shared understanding regarding duties and
expectations of each party regarding learning
• Shared understanding of what, how, when and
where learning will occur
University leaders might assume we have an OLC. My
response is the following:  I talked with Deans DEMO some
leading engineering colleges in the U.S. They said they
follow the ABET learning outcomes in their schools. We
interviewed engineering students in these DEMO, which
are highly rated, and no students knew all the learning
outcomes; most knew one or two. I talked to another Dean
who claimed to have a learning contract, and one area of
978-0-7695-4534-9/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/T4E.2011.8
4
interest in the school was skills in global awareness. First,
there DEMO no delineation of global awareness. What does it
mean?  Second, DEMO reviewed all the courses and their
contents. There was no course in acquiring global skills
and little attention across the curriculum to developing
global DEMO
There are two key ideas about OLCs from these
examples. First, DEMO a real contract with shared
understandings is a complex and difficult task. Second and
most important, there are different kinds of contracts.
Some are weak, overly general, implicit and diffuse.
Others are strong, specific, DEMO, and reiterated
throughout course and non-course experiences.
Table 1 delineates the DEMO between weak and
strong contracts across outcomes, learning environments
and systems. DEMO basic assumption is that strong contracts
will facilitate learning (Anderson, 2011 [1]).  First, strong
contracts focus people’s attention on what they DEMO to
learn. If design or group skills are priorities in the contract,
faculty, students and staff will focus their attention on
these skills or outcomes. If all the relevant parties are
focused on a few DEMO held skills, the probability for
acquiring these skills increases. Similarly, strong contracts
lead to multiple different learning environments for
building skills in these DEMO Multiple environments (as
opposed to a single environment) are necessary to create
effective learning. If these different environments embrace
monitoring, feedback and redesign mechanisms, then the
power of the learning processes is in place. An
Organizational Learning Contract acknowledges there will
be obstacles in learning over time DEMO offers assessment,
feedback and redesign mechanisms to address the
obstacles and to changing the learning process over time.
TABLE I.
Outcomes
Learning
Environments
DEMO
Expectations
Socialization
Assessment/
Feedback
III.
METHODS
• Formal/Multiple,
Specific Methods
• Continual/Regular
To examine some of the ideas behind the DEMO, we
selected a small sample of engineering schools. For each
school, we selected a sample of freshmen and sophomores
in Time 1 and DEMO collected data from these individuals.
Redesign
OLC DISTINCTIVE FEATURES
(EXAMPLE)
DEMO with Weak
OLC
General
Implicitly assumed
Inconsistently
referenced
Lecture/discussion
Learning on your own
Some project work
Limited/
Diffuse/General
Informal
Diffuse/Vague
DEMO
Diffuse Monitoring
Feedback and Diffuse
Rewards
• Informal/Unspecified
• Periodic/Irregular
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Colleges DEMO Strong
OLC
• Specific
• Explicitly stated,
restated
• Reiterated at course
and non-course
levels
• Some lecture
• Learning in groups
• DEMO project work
• More variety
• Extensive/Specific
• Formal/Explicit
• Explicit Standards
• Focused Monitoring
• Feedback and
Explicit Rewards
5
In DEMO 2, one year later, we also collected data from these
students. All student participation was voluntary, and they
were paid.
The engineering schools (Table 2) were both located in
the U.S.; we did sample outside the U.S., but for this
presentation, we will only look DEMO two. These schools are
comparable on dimensions such as U.S. entrance SAT
scores (in upper 95 percentile) and in quality of faculty (as
assessed from the quality ranks of their Ph.D. universities).
(See Goodman, 2011 [2] for more details.) The small size
of the sample (~60 students per college) was determined
by the OLC construct. We wanted to capture people’s
perception of the contract. You cannot get this from DEMO
data or even survey data because the latter would “prime”
subjects. A semi-structured interview was required. This is
very labor intensive, four interviews per day, and the need
for a small number of highly trained interviewers to
maintain reliability of data collection.
One difference between the two colleges DEMO that one is
relatively new and one is well-established. We sampled a
new engineering college because we reasoned they would
more likely build a DEMO OLC. As a new institution, they
wanted to differentiate themselves and DEMO considered
among the best, which led to a clear and innovative
DEMO
TABLE II.
Age of Organization
Organizational Structure
Funding
Student Quality
Faculty Rating
OLC
DESCRIPTION OF COLLEGE
College 1 College 2
• 7 years
Stand DEMO
• 100 years
Part of
University
Interdisciplinary By departments
Primarily private Primarily private
High SATs High SATs
High High
Strong Weak
IV.
RESULTS
What DEMO we learned about OLCs and their impacts?
In this section we will highlight some of the questions
stated earlier with data and summaries DEMO data.  Measuring
OLC and distinguishing between strong and weak
contracts defines DEMO analysis.
Table 3 shows students in College 1 (strong contract)
DEMO in time (1), there was a formal list of
competencies DEMO their college. When asked to list these
competencies, more of College DEMO students were able to list
the contract’s actual learning competencies. We also asked
them to state their expectations from the college
experience.  More of College 2 students expressed general
expectations such as “challenging work” and “being DEMO
to get a job.” College 1 students were more specific, such
DEMO “there would be an emphasis on group learning
projects.” When we asked students about the source of
their expectations, College 1 students reported it was the
school, whereas College 2 students said from non-college
sources such as parents or peers (Table 4). Thus, College 1
students DEMO more specific expectations about learning
outcomes and environments and sources of these
expectations came primarily from the college.
TABLE III. DOES YOUR SCHOOL EXPECT YOU TO
LEARN A SPECIFIC LIST DEMO COMPETENCIES?
Percent of students responding whether there was a formal list of learning competencies
TABLE IV.
HOW DID YOU LEARN ABOUT YOUR
EXPECTATIONS DEMO COLLEGE?
Source of expectations for college
Percent of students
An important question is whether expectations are met.
Met expectations lead to satisfaction and DEMO feelings,
which can be related to learning.  Unmet expectations lead
DEMO dissatisfaction. In both colleges student expectations
were met or exceeded. Very few expectations were unmet.
The reader should note meeting expectations in College 1
DEMO more challenging since they have more expressed
expectations in their OLC and they are new.
A. Learning with strong versus weak OLCs.
Table 5 DEMO that College 1 students are more likely
to participate in project-based learning, while College 2
relies more on the lecture method. College 2 students learn
more on their own.
TABLE V. WHAT PERCENT OF TIME DO
DEMO IN EACH LEARNING ENVIRONMENT?
6
We asked students about their personal model for
learning, that is, what they had learned about learning.  In
terms of learning tactics, College 1 students are more
likely to learn with others and learn from group projects.
College 2 students prefer DEMO go to class and do homework
as tactical ways to learn. College 1 students differ from
College 2 students in their strategic views on DEMO
They are more likely to understand planning to learn, be
proactive, have a passion for learning and be self-reflective
on learning.
Students reported DEMO there was any transfer from
their college learning experiences to internships in a work
environment. Both College 1 and 2 reported transfer of
learning, with the results being slightly higher in College
1.
Table 6 shows DEMO evaluations of the learning
processes. Both colleges were viewed as challenging, DEMO
quality places. College 1 gets higher student ratings on
level of innovativeness, learning on your own, learning
outside of the classroom and close DEMO with professors.
TABLE VI. EFFECTIVENESS - PROCESSES
Indicator College 1 College 2
Challenging, High-Quality Education 87 83
Innovative Learning Organization 77 47
Learning on Your Own 70 56
Flexibility in Selecting Courses 27 49
Small Classes DEMO 27
Learning Outside Classroom 75 58
Close Contact with Professors 97 49
B. Overall Commitment.
We asked students to rate their overall commitment to
DEMO institution. This is one measure of organizational
effectiveness.  College 1 students DEMO a higher level of
institutional commitment.
V. DISCUSSION
We learned several things from this research.  First we
can measure learning contracts and distinguish between
strong and weak contracts. Colleges 1 and 2 are considered
excellent engineering DEMO, but their contracts are
different. In strong contracts, students know learning
outcomes, learning environments and the system
components. In both institutions, student DEMO were
met, which leads to satisfaction and engagement. College
1, with the strong OLC, had a more positive view of the
learning environment (e.g., professors, innovative
learning) than College 2. Students with strong DEMO had a
more differentiated personal model of learning and were
most closely identified with their institution.
As in any empirical study, there are limitations. We
had a small sample size.  In part, this was determined DEMO
the need to use interviews to get at the OLC. These are
inherently time consuming, and it was a longitudinal study.
We intentionally contrasted new and traditional
institutions. While these represent different institutions, we
selected schools with the same discipline (engineering) and
the same quality of students DEMO faculty. The latter two
factors are very important in assessing results.
Although we have focused on engineering schools, the
OLC is not unique to this area. The basic idea of the OLC
is based on principles of learning. These should work in
other disciplines. DEMO, we have focused on meta
concepts such as learning outcomes and DEMO
environments. We have not specified what the outcomes or
environments should be.
In terms of future research, there are many options.
We would need to extend the OLC to other disciplines.
Similarly, there are important country and cultural
differences that need to be explored relevant to the OLC.
DEMO alternative effectiveness indicators is another
challenge.
In terms of practice, one DEMO use the OLC as a way to
diagnose your organization.  Do DEMO students have a clear
understanding of what they are to learn and how? As you
focus on a specific set of skills, are DEMO reinforced by
multiple learning environments? Do you have ongoing
measures of DEMO skills and how effective are your
redesign processes?  Traditional curriculum reviews do not
operate at this level of detail.
If you wanted to DEMO an OLC in an existing
institution, the process will be challenging.  I would start
with a few outcomes that the majority of the DEMO and
students would consider important.  Then, you need to
design socialization, measurement, and redesign
mechanisms to create an OLC for these outcomes.
DEMO
[1]
[2]
J. Anderson, Cognitive Psychology and its Implications, Seventh
Edition.  New York:  Worth Publishing, 2010.
P. Goodman, Organizational Learning Contracts. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2011.
7{1g42fwefx}