Organizational Research Methods
http://orm.sagepub.com
Book Review: Von Eye, A., & Mun, E. Y. (2005). Analyzing Rater Agreement:
Manifest DEMO Methods. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
James M. LeBreton
Organizational Research Methods 2010; 13; 207 originally published online Jul 1, 2008;
DOI: 10.1177/1094428108321154
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://orm.sagepub.com
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf DEMO:
The Research Methods Division of The Academy of Management
Additional services and information for Organizational Research Methods can be found at:
Email DEMO: http://orm.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://orm.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations http://orm.sagepub.com/cgi/content/refs/13/1/207
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Book Review
Von Eye, A., & Mun, E. Y. (2005)DEMO Analyzing Rater Agreement: Manifest
Variable Methods. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
DEMO
Research Methods
Volume 13 Number 1
January 2010 207-209
 2010 SAGE Publications
10.1177/1094428108321154
http://orm.sagepub.com
hosted at
http://online.sagepub.com
Over DEMO past several years, I have become more interested in approaches to DEMO
interrater agreement—thus, this book seemed right up my alley. Naı¨vely, I thought this
book would be an easy read and an even easier DEMO; however, after reading the table of
contents I realized well over half of the material in this book was new to me. As DEMO worked
through the text, I was reminded how many of us DEMO industrial and organizational
psychology/organizational behavior (IOOB) tend to rely on fairly narrow paradigms for
conceptualizing rater agreement. We have become relatively methodcentric, emphasizing
dispersion-based indices of within-group agreement such as rWG, aWG, ADM, and SDX at
the expense of other approaches. This book discusses some DEMO those other approaches.
Thus, if you are looking for a review DEMO traditional within-group agreement indices, this is
not the book for you. DEMO, if you are looking to expand your knowledge of agreement
beyond DEMO statistics and rethink the fundamental paradigms used to conceptualize agree-
ment, DEMO you might ﬁnd this book worth the read.
Chapter 1 introduces Cohen’s kappa statistic (and several of its derivatives). These sta-
tistics are used with cross-classiﬁcation frequency tables for two or more raters. Such
tables DEMO the extent to which raters rated the same set of targets using the same or
different rating categories for each target. Kappa, often used with nominal or ordinal data,
furnishes information about the level of DEMO for the entire cross-classiﬁcation table.
Speciﬁcally, it provides a researcher with DEMO estimate of the percentage of agreement
above and beyond what would be expected by chance. Thus, it is quite helpful when one
seeks a global estimate of agreement. However, it is not able to address more substantive
hypotheses about how raters weight the various rating categories or to DEMO hypotheses
about how potential covariates are related to agreement. To test such hypotheses,
advanced modeling techniques are needed.
Chapter 2 introduces a set DEMO such techniques known as log-linear models. These mod-
els represent a special case of the generalized linear models and are designed to test the
DEMO between two or more discrete, categorical variables by examining the natural
DEMO of the cell frequencies in a cross-classiﬁcation table. Chapter 2 shows how these
models are used to test hypotheses that are not testable using DEMO (or its variants). For
example, using log-linear models one can test a hypothesis that all rating categories are
given equal weights or DEMO weights by the raters. For example, a researcher might
ask two DEMO to evaluate the upper managers in a company using a 3-point scale on
which 1 = not candidate for executive leadership, 2 = candidate for executive leadership,
and 3 = high potential candidate for executive DEMO Using the log-linear models
presented in chapter 2, this researcher could DEMO whether greater weight was used
by these executives (raters) when assigning people to the high-potential category or
whether they applied weights to all DEMO Chapter 2 also discusses how potential con-
tinuous and categorical covariates could be included in the model. Overall, this chapter
achieves its goal, DEMO I suspect readers who are unfamiliar with log-linear models and
other forms of categorical data analysis may ﬁnd themselves rereading several sections of
207
DEMO from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, DEMO
208 Organizational Research Methods
this chapter or referring to other textbooks to DEMO additional information about these mod-
els (I know I did).
DEMO kappa and log-linear models are often used to test a priori hypotheses, the
methods described in chapter 3 are typically used in a more exploratory context. Speciﬁ-
cally, chapter 3 introduces conﬁgural frequency analysis (CFA), which may be used to
explore the extent to which the levels of agreement (or lack thereof) vary across the speci-
ﬁc rating DEMO and to explore the extent to which a particular pattern or conﬁguration
of ratings agrees (or disagrees) above and beyond some baseline model DEMO chance agree-
ment (or disagreement). Let’s return to our previous DEMO in which two executives
(raters) have been asked to evaluate a set of managers (targets) in terms of their future
executive potential. DEMO CFA, researchers could explore the extent to which levels of
agreement DEMO across the rating category. For example, researchers might learn that the
DEMO have very high agreement on their ratings of 1 (i.e., not a candidate for execu-
tive leadership) but had higher levels of disagreement for their ratings of 2 and 3. This
would suggest that raters DEMO in terms of who might be a ‘‘bad’’ executive but are not
able to agree in terms of who might be a high-potential candidate DEMO a typical candi-
date. The procedures presented in chapter 3 permit exploring such patterns of agreement
and disagreement at the level of individual rating DEMO In addition, this chapter, like
chapter 2, also explains how DEMO could be included when using CFA to examine
patterns of agreement or disagreement.
Chapter 4 moves away from analyzing cross-classiﬁcation frequency tables and instead
DEMO techniques for comparing the patterns of correlations among groups of raters.
Most readers will likely be familiar with the standard Pearson correlations and intraclass
DEMO discussed in this chapter. Using these types of correlations, the authors
DEMO how tests for homogeneity of correlation matrices could be conducted. For exam-
ple, a researcher might use the techniques described in this chapter if he or she had data
from a group of men (N = 100) and a group of women (N = 100) who were asked to rate
various dimensions of work–family conﬂict (e.g., time-, strain-, and behavior-based
work–family conﬂict). In such a situation, this researcher DEMO wonder whether the
patterns of ‘‘agreement’’ (deﬁned as correlations between the DEMO) were homoge-
neous across groups.
Chapter 5 demonstrates how to implement DEMO procedures introduced in the ﬁrst four
chapters of the book using a wide range of software programs, including SPSS, SAS, and
LISREL. This chapter, when combined with the sample exercises included with the other
chapters, really helps the reader integrate a technical understanding of these procedures
with a practical understanding of how to generate the necessary output using common DEMO
tistical software packages. This chapter also reviews how to use several specialty pro-
grams to test for agreement. Many of these specialty programs are DEMO free of charge
or may be downloaded for a free trial period. The ﬁnal chapter simply recapitulates the
previous chapters before brieﬂy describing how DEMO of rater agreement may be extended
to latent variable analysis, namely DEMO on latent class modeling.
In general, I found the ideas presented DEMO this book to be stimulating. However, before
recommending this book to DEMO researchers, several caveats are in order. First,
the techniques discussed DEMO this book are most applicable in situations in which one has
multiple raters evaluating multiple targets. This is often the case in organizational
Downloaded DEMO http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
LeBreton / Book Review 209
research. However, there are some limited instances in which one might be interested
summarizing patterns of agreement when multiple DEMO evaluate a single target. Second,
as described in the text, DEMO techniques are largely applicable to situations in which one
has a crossed design. That is, most of these techniques assume that each rater evaluated
each target. Although such designs do occur in IOOB research (e.g., DEMO panel inter-
views in which each job applicant is evaluated by the same set of raters), they are often
not the norm. In DEMO instances, raters are not crossed with targets but are instead nested
DEMO targets (e.g., the typical climate study in which raters are nested within organiza-
tion). Individuals dealing with nested, not crossed, designs DEMO still ﬁnd this book intel-
lectually stimulating, but I doubt they DEMO ﬁnd it to be practically useful for their work,
especially when dealing with very large numbers of raters. Third, the procedures described
in this book focus heavily on estimating agreement for categorical data, speciﬁcally
nominal and ordinal data. Researchers collecting data using an interval or ratio scale DEMO
beneﬁt from using other techniques. Finally, because this book focuses heavily DEMO analy-
zing categorical data, it assumes a basic degree of ﬂuency DEMO log-linear models. Indivi-
duals lacking that basic knowledge are encouraged to supplement this book with a more
basic categorical data analysis book (Agresti, DEMO).
James M. LeBreton
Purdue University
Reference
Agresti, A. (2002). Categorical data analysis (2nd ed.). New York: Wiley.
Downloaded from DEMO://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009{1g42fwefx}