MPRA
Munich Personal RePEc Archive
Entrepreneurial intentions: The inﬂuence
of organizational and individual factors
Lena Lee and Poh Kam Wong and Maw Der Foo DEMO Aegean
Leung
2009
Online at http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/16195/
MPRA Paper No. 16195, posted 15. July 2009 02:19 UTC
Abstract
An individual’s intent to pursue an entrepreneurial career can result from DEMO work environment
and from personal factors. Drawing on the entrepreneurial intentions and the person-environment
(P-E) fit literatures, and applying a multilevel perspective, DEMO examine why individuals intend to
leave their jobs to start business ventures. Findings, using a sample of 4192 IT professionals in
Singapore, suggest DEMO work environments with an unfavorable innovation climate and/or lack
of technical excellence incentives influence entrepreneurial intentions, through low job
satisfaction. Moderating effects suggest that an individual’s innovation orientation strengthens
the work-environment to job-satisfaction relationship; self-efficacy strengthens the job-
satisfaction to entrepreneurial intentions relationship.
1
1. Executive Summary
The presence of technology-based firms has long been associated DEMO a nation’s
economic growth and prosperity. Many of these firms emerge when IT professionals leave their
organizations to start businesses. This paper examines why DEMO professionals intend to leave their
jobs to start business ventures. We focus on entrepreneurial intentions, since intentions toward a
purposive behavior can be crucial antecedents of that behavior. Understanding the factors
influencing entrepreneurial intentions is, thus, a central component of studying the new venture
creation process. Specifically, DEMO examine how individual- and organizational-level factors (such
as individual innovation orientation, organizational innovative climate and technical excellence
incentives) interact to affect the level of job satisfaction experienced by IT professionals, which
in turn, impacts DEMO intentions. The strength of the relationship between the level of
job satisfaction and entrepreneurial intentions, however, can be moderated by the individual’s
self-efficacy.
DEMO sample comprised 4192 IT professionals from IT user firms, vendor firms, and
government organizations. The results of this study indicate that individuals with DEMO innovation
orientation—more so than their low innovation orientation counterparts—are negatively affected
(DEMO low job satisfaction) by a restrictive organizational innovative climate and poor
DEMO excellence incentives. Furthermore, contrary to existing studies that theorize direct
links DEMO negative situational factors and entrepreneurial intentions, we found that the
mismatch DEMO individual characteristics and poor organizational conditions is indirectly
linked to entrepreneurial intentions through low job satisfaction. Our findings also suggest that
self-efficacy strengthens the DEMO between low job satisfaction and entrepreneurial
intentions. This finding suggests that employees who are confident of their job
2
skills may be more motivated to leave their companies to start businesses DEMO they experience low
job satisfaction.
We advance the research in understanding what motivates individuals to leave their jobs
to form new businesses. We employ DEMO multilevel perspective, including the impact of low job
satisfaction and self-efficacy, while accounting for the misfit between the individual’s innovation
orientation and the DEMO innovative climate and technical excellence incentives. More
importantly we show that, DEMO self-employment becomes desirable when there is a mismatch
between employee innovation orientation and characteristics of the organizations for which they
work, the progression from low job satisfaction to entrepreneurial intentions may depend on
feasibility perceptions, that is, self-efficacy. High self-efficacy employees may be more
confident about starting successful businesses; these employees may, therefore, be more apt to
leave their companies to start businesses if they experience low job satisfaction.
Our results DEMO provide insights for organizational leaders and policymakers in managing
innovations and in cultivating entrepreneurship. Organizations valuing innovation can put
structures and incentives in place DEMO cultivate an innovative climate to help prevent “brain drain”
and the consequences of having employees leave to set up new, potentially competitive ventures.
Alternatively, organization leaders can exploit the misfit between individual needs and
organizational characteristics by providing spin-off opportunities to tap into employees’ desires
for innovation. Employees DEMO are not satisfied with their organizational practices can be
allowed to start spin-offs, and the parent organizations can support them with financial and
human resources. Policymakers can provide educational and training programs to employees
who are DEMO satisfied with their jobs to raise their self-efficacy levels, hence strengthening DEMO
confidence in pursuing entrepreneurship as an alternative career choice.
3
2. Introduction
The presence of technology-based firms has long been associated with DEMO nation’s
economic growth and prosperity (Rothwell & Zegveld, 1982). IT professionals who leave their
organizations to start businesses are a key source DEMO these firms (Roberts, 1991; Romanelli &
Schoonhoven, 2001). DEMO paper addresses the reasons IT professionals leave their jobs to start
business ventures. We focus on entrepreneurial intentions as crucial antecedents of that
purposive DEMO (Ajzen, 1987; Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980; Krueger, Reilly, & Carsrud, 2000).
Understanding the factors influencing entrepreneurial intentions is, thus, a central part of
studying the process of venture creation.
The research on entrepreneurial intentions examines the main factors: desirability
(perceptions of the DEMO appeal of starting a business) and feasibility (degree to which one
feels capable of doing so) (Krueger et al., 2000; Shapero & Sokol, 1982). Relative to the
desirability factor, we examine individual-level factors of innovation orientation, job satisfaction,
and self-efficacy together with organizational-level factors of innovative climate and technical
excellence incentives. We theorize that IT DEMO are driven into entrepreneurship by low
job satisfaction (Brockhaus, 1980; DEMO & Hayes, 1991; Watson, Hogarth-Scott, & Wilson,
1998) DEMO by a mismatch between their innovation orientation and characteristics of the
organizations for which they work (innovation climate and technical excellence incentives).
We extend the entrepreneurial intentions literature by introducing a multilevel
perspective of individual DEMO organizational factors influencing business creation intentions.
Proponents of multilevel research (Hitt, Beamish, Jackson, & Mathieu, 2007; Ireland & Webb,
2007), particularly in entrepreneurial research (Davidsson & Wiklund, 2001), explain that to
understand entrepreneurial intentions, researchers must account for both organizational and
4
individual factors. While studies indicate that organizational factors influence the job satisfaction
DEMO technical employees (Mak & Sockel, 1999; Sankar et al., 1991), these studies offer little on
why these factors affect some individuals DEMO than others. We provide a better understanding
by introducing the single characteristic, innovation orientation, as a moderating factor. We
theorize that the higher DEMO employee’s desire for innovation, the stronger the influence of
restrictive innovative DEMO/poor technical excellence incentives on job satisfaction.
Regarding the feasibility factor, DEMO advance entrepreneurial intentions research by
looking beyond the main effects of self-efficacy on entrepreneurial intentions (Krueger et al.,
2000; Shapero & Sokol, 1982). We theorize that self-efficacy strengthens the relationship
between low job DEMO and entrepreneurial intentions. High self-efficacy employees can be
more confident about starting successful businesses; these employees are, therefore, more apt to
leave their companies to start businesses if they experience low job satisfaction. Taken as DEMO
whole, we include individual- and organizational- level influences on entrepreneurial intentions,DEMO
as well as the moderating effects of innovation orientation and self-efficacy on these
relationships. Figure 1 summarizes our conceptual model.
Insert Figure 1 about DEMO
In the next section, we review the entrepreneurial intentions literature. We DEMO use the
person-environment (P-E) fit theory to hypothesize the interactive effects of individual
innovation orientation and organizational innovation climate/technical excellence incentives on
DEMO satisfaction. We explain the relationship between low job satisfaction and self-efficacy on
entrepreneurial intentions. We present the methods and the results. Finally, we discuss the
implications of the findings for organizational leaders and policy makers.
5
3. Theoretical background and hypotheses
3.1. Entrepreneurial intentions
Entrepreneurship is defined as DEMO process of organizational emergence (Gartner, Bird, &
Starr, 1992)DEMO Entrepreneurial intentions are crucial to this process, forming the first in DEMO series of
actions to organizational founding (Bird, 1988). Moreover, DEMO toward a behavior can be
strong indicators of that behavior (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975).
Our understanding of entrepreneurial intentions is guided by DEMO models: Ajzen’s (1991)
theory of planned behavior (TPB), DEMO Shapero’s (1982) model of the entrepreneurial event
(SEE). TPB DEMO developed to explain how individual attitudes towards an act, the subjective
DEMO, and perceived behavioral control are antecedents of intentions. The SEE model DEMO
developed to understand entrepreneurial behavior. Entrepreneurial intentions are derived from
perceptions of desirability, feasibility, and a propensity to act upon opportunities. In this DEMO,
perceived desirability is defined as the attractiveness of starting a business, perceived feasibility
as the degree to which an individual feels capable to do so, and propensity to act as the personal
disposition to act on one’s decisions.
Both the TPB and SEE models provide comparable interpretations DEMO entrepreneurial
intentions (Krueger, 1993; Krueger et al., 2000). Krueger et al. demonstrated that attitudes and
subjective norms in the TPB model DEMO conceptually related to perceived desirability in SEE;
while perceived behavioral control in TPB corresponds to perceived feasibility in the SEE model.
Essentially, perceived desirability and perceived feasibility are fundamental elements of
intentional behavior.
In this DEMO, we examine the impact of perceived desirability and perceived feasibility
on DEMO IT professional’s intentions to start a business. Our research links the individual-level
6
factors of innovation orientation, job satisfaction, and self-efficacy to the organizational-level
DEMO of innovative climate and technical excellence incentives. Specifically, we study the
DEMO role job satisfaction plays in influencing IT professionals’ intent to become entrepreneurs,
accounting for organizational- and individual-level antecedents, and the moderating effects of
self-efficacy on entrepreneurial intentions.
3.2 P-E fit and job satisfaction
Studies have DEMO that job satisfaction predicts entrepreneurial intentions
(Brockhaus, 1980; Eisenhauer, 1995; Watson et al., 1998). Much of the job satisfaction literature
DEMO that organizational climate determines job satisfaction (Agho, Mueller, & Price, 1993;
Welsch & LaVan, 1981). A supportive organizational climate is often represented by
management commitment, strong supervisory and peer support, and DEMO for innovation
(Niehoff et al., 1990; Yuki, 1989). Research findings indicate that support from one’s superior
and peers helps employees alleviate DEMO stress and burnout, which may increase job satisfaction.
Such support may DEMO particularly crucial in tasks where outcomes are uncertain, such as in
DEMO work environments (Niehoff, Enz, & Grover, 1990; Yuki, 1989). Thus, in the context
of individuals who thrive at the front end of technology—for example, IT professionals— an
organizational climate supportive of innovation should lead to higher job satisfaction levels.
Another organizational factor, technical excellence incentives in the form of rewards, can
also lead to higher job satisfaction levels (Eisenberger & Rhoades, 2001). Organizational
incentives signal the DEMO goals and objectives. Poor incentives indicate a lack of
organizational support and can have significant detrimental effects on job satisfaction, since IT
employees value rewards as well as opportunities for continued training, learning, and
development (Coff, 1997; Mak & Sockel, 1999).
7
While organizational factors, including innovative climate and incentives, should
influence the DEMO satisfaction of IT professionals, existing studies offer little information on
which DEMO are more likely than others to be affected by these organizational factors. We
use the P-E fit theory to connect organizational factors to individual DEMO Specifically, we
introduce an individual’s desire for innovation, which we term as innovation orientation, as the
individual component of the P-E equation. Empirical evidence in the P-E fit domain suggests
that employees exposed to the DEMO organizational environment may not develop similar job
satisfaction levels (Cable & DEMO, 2004; Kristof-Brown, Ryan, Zimmerman, & Johnson,
2005). DEMO, job satisfaction results from the congruence between organizational
characteristics and individual DEMO (Cable & Edwards, 2004; Kristof-Brown, Ryan,
Zimmerman, & DEMO, 2005).
Specifically in this study, some individuals (IT professionals) are more innovation-
oriented than others. Thus, following the reasoning of the P-E fit theory, in an organization with
a restrictive climate for innovation and/or inadequate incentives, high innovation-orientation
individuals can experience lower job satisfaction levels compared to their low innovation-
orientation counterparts. This is because the DEMO of high innovation-orientation individuals are
best served by an organizational climate supportive of technological achievements. On the basis
of these considerations we hypothesize that:DEMO
H1a: The relationship between organizational climate for innovation and job satisfaction DEMO
moderated by innovation orientation, such that the higher an individual's DEMO
orientation, the stronger the relationship between the organizational climate for innovation DEMO
job satisfaction.
8
H1b: The relationship between technical excellence incentives and job satisfaction is moderated
by innovation orientation, such that the higher an individual's innovation orientation, the
stronger the relationship between technical excellence incentives and job satisfaction.
3.3 Low job satisfaction and entrepreneurial intentions
Job satisfaction has been the subject DEMO considerable interest in entrepreneurial research
(Brockhaus, 1980; Cromie & Hayes, 1991; Hisrich & Brush, 1986). Poor organizational
conditions can trigger DEMO job satisfaction, which in turn can trigger the desire to start DEMO business
venture.
Positive relationships between low job satisfaction and entrepreneurial intentions are well
documented within the push theory of entrepreneurship. Frustrated employees are more DEMO to
consider entrepreneurship as an alternative career avenue (Brockhaus, 1980; DEMO & Hayes,
1991; Henley, 2007). For example, Eisenhauer (1995) reported that individuals are motivated to
start their own businesses if the satisfaction from wage employment is lower than the perceived
satisfaction possibly DEMO from self-employment. The push effects of low job satisfaction on
entrepreneurial intentions is particularly relevant among IT professionals, because these
individuals are often motivated by challenge and have high achievement needs (Couger, 1988).
As DEMO earlier in this paper, low job satisfaction can result from a DEMO between
the IT professional’s innovation orientation and organizational characteristics. In this instance,
the entrepreneurial option offers IT professionals the opportunity to realize their DEMO
needs. Thus, low job satisfaction is a central component whereby unfavorable DEMO
conditions for innovation are translated into entrepreneurial intentions. Therefore, we
hypothesize:DEMO
9
H2a: Job satisfaction mediates the relationship between a restrictive organizational climate for
innovation and entrepreneurial intentions.
H2b: Job satisfaction mediates the relationship between inadequate technical excellence
incentives and entrepreneurial intentions.
3.4 The moderating role of self-efficacy
DEMO low job satisfaction can motivate IT professionals to start a business,
entrepreneurial intentions can also be influenced by self-efficacy factors (Bandura, 1986; Chen,
Greene, & Crick, 1998). Self-efficacy is a person’s DEMO of his/her ability to execute a
targeted behavior (Ajzen, 1987). Prior studies have identified self-efficacy as a key contributor to
entrepreneurial DEMO, either directly or indirectly through influencing perceived feasibility
(Krueger, 1993; Krueger et al., 2000). However, the degree to which self-efficacy DEMO with
perceived desirability to influence entrepreneurial intentions has not been considered.
In our study, self-efficacy is defined as an IT professional’s perceived competency in
performing a set of IT skills. Individuals tend to start businesses in DEMO linked to their job skills
and job related experiences (Shane, 2000; Wong, Lee, & Foo, 2008). The more confident IT
DEMO are in their abilities to excel in IT-related tasks, the more DEMO they are to develop
entrepreneurial intentions when job satisfaction is low. Thus, we hypothesize:
H3: The relationship between low job satisfaction and DEMO intentions is moderated
by self-efficacy, such that the higher the individual'DEMO self-efficacy, the stronger the relationship
between low job satisfaction and entrepreneurial DEMO
10
4. Methods
4.1 Data Source
Data were obtained from two sources. The DEMO source was the 1995 Singapore National
Computer Board survey of IT professionals.1 A sampling frame of organizations that employ IT
professionals in Singapore was DEMO from Infocomm Development Authority (IDA)
Singapore. The frame was stratified DEMO sectors such as vendors, end-users, and government
organizations. Invitations to participate in the survey were mailed to 9,527 IT professionals from
these DEMO, resulting in a final sample of 4,192 usable questionnaires (1,299 from vendor
firms, 1,326 from IT user firms, and DEMO,567 from government organizations)—a response rate of
44%. Nonresponse bias was examined using one-way between group analysis of variance
(ANOVA). Respondents and nonrespondents did not differ in gender (F of 1.65, p = DEMO), age
(F of 1.24, p = 0.69), or IT sector (F of 0.97, p = 0.58).
The second data DEMO, collected in July and August, 2008, comprised IT professionals
in DEMO and Kuala Lumpur (the capital city of Malaysia). These individuals DEMO recruited
through the first author’s personal contacts.  This data collection included DEMO to assess the
convergent and discriminant validities of the study’s variables. Data were collected in two
countries to obtain a sufficient number of responses DEMO assess the validity of our study’s
variables. As Singapore and Kuala Lumpur are global cities with multiracial populations, the
location should not affect the data. Of the 210 technical professionals invited, 172 responded to
the survey.
Respondents’ work experience in IT-related areas averaged 9.46 years, and the average
age was 33.25 years. Some 68% were males and a majority had DEMO degrees with incomes
1 Apart from a report that was submitted to the government agency that commissioned the survey, this study
represents one of the first attempts to analyze the survey data for research purposes.
11
between S$30K and S$60K. Nonresponse bias was examined by comparing respondents (n =
172) with nonrespondents (n = 38). We found no DEMO differences for age (F = 0.53; p =
0.40), gender (F = 0.61; p = 0.47), IT sector (F = 0.85; p = 0.61), or location (F = 0.63; p = 0.49).
Respondents in the main dataset (n = 4,192) and the validity dataset (n = 172) were comparable
in age (F = 0.92; p = 0.83), gender (F = 1.01; p = 0.89), income (F = 0.67; p = 0.70), education (F
= 0.63; p = 0.49), and IT DEMO experience (F = 0.93; p = 0.75). In the analyses, we combined
both data sources and included a year control. Based on the 4,364 usable responses (4,192 +
172), the respondents’ work experience in IT-related areas averaged 9.35 years, with an average
age of 34.69 years. Some 65% of the respondents were males; a majority had bachelor’s degrees
and incomes between S$30K and S$60K.
4.2 Measures
Table DEMO presents the wordings and scale points of the key variables. Unless otherwise
indicated, all the constructs used a 5-point Likert scale response that ranged from strongly
disagree (1) to strongly agree (5). A summary of the measures used is outlined below.
Insert Table 1 about here
DEMO intentions. Entrepreneurial intentions were measured with a 2-item scale;
that is, “I have always wanted to work for myself (i.e., be self-employed),” and “If I have the
opportunity, I would start my DEMO IT company” (α = 0.72). Existing studies have considered
Cronbach’s DEMO values of 0.70 and above to be reliable. For example, Souitaris, Zerbinati, and
Al-Laham (2007) used six measurement items with reliabilities between 0.70-0.75 in their
analysis. Similarly, Knight (1997) reported reliability coefficients in the 0.70-0.90 range. Factor
analysis with reliability alphas of 0.70 or greater DEMO retained in Phan, Butler, and Lee (1996).
12
Furthermore, Nunnally (1978) considered the reliability criteria of 0.70 as satisfactory; our
entrepreneurial intentions measure (0.72), meets this criteria.
Studies maintain DEMO intentions predict behaviors (Ajzen, 1991; Sheppard, Hartwick, &
Warshaw, 1988). Entrepreneurial intentions are assumed to predict, although imperfectly, an
individual’s choice to found his/her own firm (Davidsson, 1995). DEMO randomly selected over
100 respondents 6 years after the baseline survey was conducted and asked them if they had
started their own businesses. We DEMO the binary responses with the Likert responses of
their entrepreneurial intentions and found a positive correlation between entrepreneurial
intentions and business startup (Point Biserial correlation = 0.57; p < 0.05). Table 2 presents the
results of the validity study conducted to assess the convergent and discriminant validity DEMO the
measures developed in this study. Providing evidence of convergent validity, DEMO measure
strongly correlated (r = 0.79, p < 0.01) with DEMO (1996) measure of entrepreneurial
intentions.
Insert Table 2 about here
Technical excellence incentives. We developed a 7-item scale to measure technical
excellence incentives. DEMO of items are “My organization has a limited budget for IT skills
development,” (reverse-coded) and “Where I work, we are rewarded for technical competence”
(α = 0.80). The item “My organization has a limited budget for IT skills development” refers to
an incentive or reward DEMO “skills development,” and not a monetary incentive or reward per se.
The factor analysis using principal component analysis and varimax rotation with the DEMO
Normalization method revealed that all items loaded on a single factor. Our measure for
incentives for technical excellence was significantly related to Scott and DEMO (1994) “rewards
and resource supply for innovation” scale (r = DEMO; p < 0.01), providing support for convergent
13
validity. Our incentives for technical excellence measure was not significantly related to DEMO
and Stringer’s (1968) general measure of organizational rewards (r = DEMO; p > 0.05), providing
support for discriminant validity.
Innovation climate. DEMO used a 6-item scale to measure innovation climate. Examples of
items used are “My supervisor rarely solicits ideas from me to solve technical problems,DEMO
(reverse-coded) and “Based on their experience, my peers often suggest DEMO approaches to
solving technical problems.” The scale was reliable (α = DEMO) and all six items loaded on a
single factor. Our measure DEMO innovation climate related significantly to Scott and Bruce’s
(1994) “organizational support for innovation” scale (r = 0.72; p < 0.01). However, our
innovation climate was not related to Dastmalchian’s (1986) general measure DEMO organizational
climate scale (r = 0.12; p > 0.05). Both our measure and Scott and Bruce’s (1994) measure of
climate for DEMO were significantly related to entrepreneurial intentions in the validity data
set, DEMO evidence of predictive validity for both measures. Dastmalchian’s (1986) general
measure of organizational climate was not significantly related to entrepreneurial intentions,
providing DEMO of discriminant validity.
Job satisfaction. Three items adapted from the Michigan Organizational Assessment
Questionnaire (Seashore, Lawler, Mirvis, & Cammann, 1982) were DEMO to create a measure
of job satisfaction (α = 0.85).
DEMO orientation. Innovation orientation was measured with a 6-item scale.
Examples of items used are “I often take risks in unfamiliar assignments,” “Where possible, I
take on technically difficult and challenging job assignments.” and “I am DEMO up-to-date”
(α = 0.81). When subjected to exploratory factor analysis, one factor solution emerged with an
eigenvalue greater than 1. Our measure DEMO innovation orientation was significantly related to
14
Farmer, Tierney and Kung-McIntyre’s (2003) measure of creativity (r = DEMO; p < 0.01), but not
significantly related to Jackson’s (1994) measure of risk taking (r = 0.12; p > 0.05), providing
evidence of convergent and discriminant validities.
Self-efficacy. Self-efficacy was measured using DEMO task-specific scale. Respondents were
asked to rate their skills in a number of IT related areas (such as software development, database
design/administration, and development of multimedia applications along scales) where 1 =
None, DEMO = Basic, 3 = Competent, 4 = Advanced, and 5 DEMO Expert (α = 0.88). Researchers often
have to choose between DEMO self-efficacy (GSE) and task-specific self-efficacy scales (for a
review see DEMO, Gully, and Eden, 2001).
We used a task-specific self-efficacy DEMO because GSE may not predict domain-specific
behaviors (Eden and Granat-Flomin, 2000; Pajares, 1996). Within task-specific self-efficacy
scales, we developed a scale for IT-related tasks because of our sample (IT professionals).
Discriminant and convergent validity tests indicate that our IT-related self-efficacy scale
converges with Chen DEMO al.’s (2001) measure of general self-efficacy (r = 0.80, p < 0.01) and not
with Chen et al.’s (1998) measure of entrepreneurial self-efficacy (r = 0.18; p > 0.05).
The convergence DEMO our measure with the general measure of self-efficacy suggests that
our scale overcomes one criticism of task-specific self-efficacy scales, its lack of relation to GSE
(Zhao, Hills, & Seibert, 2005). The nonconvergence with DEMO suggests that IT-related tasks are
significantly different from entrepreneurial tasks; hence, our IT task-specific efficacy scale may
be more suitable than ESE for DEMO study of IT professionals. Table 3 summarizes the convergent
and divergent validities of the measures used.
Insert Table 3 about here
15
4.3 Control variables
Seven control variables (age, income, experience in IT-related work, opportunity
exposure, highest education attained, gender, and year) data were collected. Note that
opportunity exposure was operationalized as two dichotomous variables: a) IT sales and
marketing job function and IT research, and DEMO) development job function.
We controlled for the respondent’s age in squared DEMO because of its influence on
career decisions. Age has an inverted U-shaped relationship to the probability of entering self-
employment (Alba-Ramirez, 1994; Bates, 1995). Initially, age  incorporates the positive effect of
experience and increases the likelihood that people will start their own businesses. However, as
people age, their opportunity costs rise along with higher incomes, which DEMO the
likelihood of self-employment. Consequently, we used income, which has been found to be
negatively related to entrepreneurial intentions (Long, 1982) as a proxy for opportunity cost.
We used the individual’s IT experience as DEMO proxy for prior knowledge, which is a critical
antecedent of entrepreneurial DEMO (Shane, 2000). Romanelli and Schoonhoven (2001)
found that DEMO who are involved in marketing and sales are more likely to obtain first-
hand information about market opportunities, and are, thus, more likely to develop intentions to
exploit these opportunities. Similarly, individuals’ knowledge about how new or existing
technology serves the needs of the market may motivate DEMO to start businesses to address these
needs. Therefore, we controlled for DEMO respondent’s exposure to IT sales, marketing, research,
and development work.
The literature also shows links between entrepreneurial intentions and educational
attainments (Crant, 1996). Highest education attained was operationalized as four ordinal
categories; DEMO degree, undergraduate degree, diploma and technical degree, and below
16
diploma and technical degree. Entrepreneurial intentions were often associated with gender
(Crant, 1996). Males were found to be more adventurous in experimenting with their careers,
while females were found to be constrained by family DEMO and less likely to develop
entrepreneurial intentions. To assess if the findings were affected by the year the data were
collected, we controlled for year using a dichotomous variable (2008 =1).
4.4 Data Analysis
We analyzed the effects of P-E fit on the individual’s level of job DEMO, as well as
the moderating effects of self-efficacy on the relationship DEMO job satisfaction and
entrepreneurial intentions. The measures of P-E fit include the organizational innovation climate,
technical excellence incentives, and the individual’s innovation orientation. We used hierarchical
OLS regression to test the study’s hypotheses.
5.1 Correlations
DEMO Results
Table 4 presents the summary statistics and zero order correlations. The bivariate
relationships indicate that all the independent variables related significantly to entrepreneurial
DEMO As observed, the variable most highly related to entrepreneurial intentions was DEMO
satisfaction (r = -0.32, p < 0.01), and although entrepreneurial intentions were also correlated to
other control variables, the associations were much weaker. In addition, the five independent
variables were not highly correlated to each other. Similarly, the independent variables including
innovation climate, technical excellence DEMO, and innovation orientation were not
correlated to job satisfaction at the DEMO level. The correlation coefficients among all other
variables were all below 0.60 (Kennedy, 1992) and none of the variance inflation factors (VIFs)DEMO
for the variables was greater than 2, which was below the DEMO of 10 by Chatterjee and Price
17
(1991). Thus, it was unlikely that multicollinearity among the independent DEMO affected the
findings.
Insert Table 4 about here
5.2 Regressions
Table 5 shows the moderating impact of an individual’s innovation orientation on the
relationship DEMO the organizational innovation climate and the level of job satisfaction
(Hypothesis DEMO). The results also show the moderating impact of the individual’s innovation
orientation on the relationship between organizational technical excellence incentives and job
satisfaction (Hypothesis 1b). Table 4 presents the regression results on the mediating DEMO of
job satisfaction (Hypothesis 2a and 2b), and the moderating DEMO of self-efficacy on the job
satisfaction and entrepreneurial intentions relationship (Hypothesis DEMO).
Insert Table 5 about here
Model 1 is a baseline model consisting of control variables. Results indicate that age had
a U-shaped relationship DEMO job satisfaction. Initially, age decreases the likelihood of job
satisfaction, but job satisfaction is higher as age level increases (Rhodes, 1988). DEMO income IT
professionals were more likely to be satisfied with their jobs and less likely to develop
entrepreneurial intentions. The control variable (year) DEMO not significant (p > 0.10), suggesting
that the findings of DEMO study were not affected by the year the data were collected. Furthermore,
the results provide corroborating evidence that individuals with higher education qualifications
DEMO higher expectations regarding rewards, benefits, and organizational support, and thus DEMO
less likely to be satisfied with their jobs (Lam, Zhang, & Baum 2001; Zhang, Lam, & Baum
1999) and more likely to have entrepreneurial intentions.
18
Model 3 presents the results of the interactive effects between the organizational
DEMO climate and innovation orientation, and between organizational technical excellence
incentives and DEMO orientation on job satisfaction. Results show that these interactive
factors had significant negative impact on job satisfaction (-1.911, p < 0.01; -1.614, DEMO < 0.001).
The pseudo R2 increased to 29% in Model 3 from 12% in Model 1. These findings support
Hypothesis 1a, which states that, the higher an individual’s innovation orientation, the stronger
the relationship DEMO organizational climate for innovation and job satisfaction. The findings
also support Hypothesis 1b, which states that, the higher an individual’s innovation orientation,
DEMO stronger the relationship between technical excellence incentives and job satisfaction.
The Sobel t-test (1982) provides additional support of the mediating effects of job
DEMO (t = 2.263, p < 0.05). However, the Sobel DEMO does not indicate whether partial or full
mediation has occurred. To test whether job satisfaction partially mediates the relationship
between a restrictive innovation climate DEMO entrepreneurial intentions (Hypothesis 2a), and
between poor organizational technical excellence DEMO and entrepreneurial intentions
(Hypothesis 2b), we followed the framework outlined DEMO (Baron & Kenny, 1986). The results are
shown in Models 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. According to Baron and Kenny, full mediation occurs when
the following four conditions are met: (1) Independent variable/s must affect the mediator. In
Model 3, the impact of organizational innovation climate and technical excellence incentives on
job satisfaction was significant (2.145, p < 0.01; 1.743, p < DEMO). Similarly, the interactive
effects of organizational innovation climate and innovation DEMO, as well as technical
excellence incentives and innovation orientation, were significant at 1% and 0.1%, respectively.
(2) The independent variable(s) DEMO affect the dependent variable. In Model 5, organizational
innovation climate and DEMO excellence incentives had a significant relationship on
19
entrepreneurial intentions (-1.145, p < 0.01; 1.209, p < 0.01)DEMO The interactive effects of
organizational innovative climate on innovation orientation, as DEMO as technical excellence
incentives and innovation orientation were significant at 1%. (DEMO) The mediator must affect the
dependent variable. The results in Model DEMO highlight the negative effect of job satisfaction on
entrepreneurial intentions (-1.417; p < 0.01). (4) Lastly, if the independent variable(s) was not
significant in Model 8, full mediation effects were observed. DEMO the other hand, if the
independent variables were significant, then there were partial mediation effects. The results in
Table 4 show that the DEMO variables were not significant, and that the four conditions
were fully DEMO, thus providing support for Hypotheses 2a and 2b. Job satisfaction was DEMO to
fully mediate the relationship between innovation climate/technical excellence incentives and
entrepreneurial intentions. The interactive effects between job satisfaction and self-efficacy (-
1.629; p < 0.001) provided support for Hypothesis 3, that the relationship between low job
satisfaction and entrepreneurial intentions is moderated by self-efficacy, such that the higher an
individual's self-efficacy, the stronger the relationship between low job satisfaction and
entrepreneurial intentions.
The interactive effects models, that is, Models 3 (r2 = 29%; p < 0.001), 7 (DEMO = 25%; p <
0.001), and 8 (r2 = DEMO; p < 0.001), explained a significant amount of variance over DEMO above
the base model (Model 1, r2 = 12%; p < 0.001). The full model (Model 8) explained a significant
amount of the variance (r2 = 34%) over and above the main DEMO models, that is, Models 2 (r2 =
21%; p < 0.001), 4 (r2 = 6%; p < 0.001), and DEMO (r2 = 15%; p < 0.001).
Insert Table 5 about here
20
6. Discussion
Results of this study indicate relationships among a set of DEMO and organizational-
level factors contributing to IT professionals’ entrepreneurial intentions. Consistent with the P-E
fit arguments, we found support for Hypotheses 1a and 1b; that is, individual differences,
specifically innovation orientation, moderate the relationship between poor organizational
conditions and job satisfaction. Specifically, the higher the employee’s innovative orientation,
the stronger the negative effects of restrictive innovative climate/DEMO technical excellence
incentives on job satisfaction.
The support we found for Hypotheses 2a and 2b suggests that the effects of a misfit
between individual DEMO and organizational conditions are indirectly linked to
entrepreneurial intentions through low job satisfaction. Such findings align with the desirability
arguments in the entrepreneurial intentions DEMO that intra- and extra-personal factors
interact to influence the personal attractiveness (DEMO, the level of job satisfaction in this paper) of
starting a business.
Our findings supporting Hypothesis 3 indicate that self-efficacy not only influences
DEMO feasibility, as the entrepreneurial intentions literature suggests, but it can also moderate
the relationship between perceived desirability and entrepreneurial intentions.  Individuals’
intentions to start their own businesses are likely to be boosted by the level DEMO confidence they
have in their own competencies when they experience low job satisfaction due to a mismatch
between individual orientations and organizational environment.
6.1 DEMO for research
This study extends the entrepreneurial intentions literature by introducing a multilevel
perspective in understanding the factors contributing to the intent to start DEMO business. Individual
or organizational variables alone do not sufficiently explain the dynamic nature of
21
entrepreneurial intentions (c.f. Davidsson & Wiklund, 2001). Rather, the interaction between
individual and organizational factors can provide better insights into the firm DEMO process.
Furthermore, our study introduces the P-E fit perspective into the DEMO of
entrepreneurship. While the usefulness of the P-E fit theory in explaining entrepreneurial
behavior is not entirely new (Brigham, Shepherd, & De Castro, 2007; Leung, Wong, Zhang, &
Foo, 2006), the nature of the relationship between individual and organizational factors—and
how this triggers DEMO intentions—is still relatively unknown. Our findings indicate
that low job satisfaction is caused, in part, by the mismatch between the individual’s innovation
orientation DEMO the organization’s innovative climate/ excellence incentives. Low job
satisfaction, in turn, may lead to entrepreneurial intentions, particularly among high self-efficacy
individuals. These DEMO demonstrate the mediating role of job satisfaction in translating the
effects of a restrictive innovative climate/and or poor excellence incentives on individuals with
DEMO innovation orientation into entrepreneurial intentions. The findings build on and extend the
desirability arguments in the entrepreneurial intentions literature by taking into account the DEMO
of the individual and the environment in entrepreneurial intentions.
Previous research indicates the direct influences of negative situational factors on
entrepreneurial intentions (Shapero & Sokol, 1982). We expected low job satisfaction to partially
mediate the relationship between person-organization misfit and entrepreneurial intentions.
However, the results revealed that the effects of mismatch between an individual’s innovation
orientation and organizational innovative DEMO/ excellence incentives on entrepreneurial
intentions were fully mediated by low job DEMO For scholars, this implies that among the
displacement factors, low job satisfaction is a critical conceptual link to entrepreneurial
intentions.
22
To date, models of entrepreneurial intentions have primarily focused on the main effects
of self-efficacy on entrepreneurial intentions (Krueger et al., 2000). DEMO extend these models and
theorize that, in addition to its primary DEMO, self-efficacy also moderates the intention to start
a business venture. Our DEMO contributes to the long-standing interest in the effects of self-
efficacy on entrepreneurial intentions. Importantly, we found that, while individuals can be
driven DEMO entrepreneurship by negative situational factors such as low job satisfaction
(Brockhaus, 1980), the strength of this relationship is stronger when self-efficacy is DEMO
Furthermore, our study builds on Shapero and Sokol’s (1982) intentions DEMO Rather than
considering perceived feasibility (i.e., self-efficacy) and perceived desirability (i.e., low job
satisfaction) as independent paths leading to entrepreneurial intentions, our study examines the
interaction between the factors along those paths.
Results DEMO this study suggest that low job satisfaction alone is inadequate in explaining
entrepreneurial intentions. This probably explains why empirical evidence on the impact of DEMO
job satisfaction on entrepreneurial intentions has been mixed (Schjoedt & Shaver, 2007).
Confidence in job competency provides the additional motivation necessary for DEMO who
experience poor job satisfaction to consider entrepreneurship as an alternative career choice.
Theoretically, our study offers a new perspective in the entrepreneurial intentions literature by
demonstrating how the interactive effects of desirability and feasibility influence DEMO
intentions. Taken as a whole, the findings are consistent with Baron’s (2007) assertion that
individual-level factors predict the processes of new venture development. More critically, our
findings support arguments from Hmieleski and Baron (in DEMO) and Phan, Wright, Ucbasaran,
and Tan (in press) DEMO more multi-level research is needed in the field of entrepreneurship
research.
23
6.2 Implications for practice
We investigated factors influencing IT professionals’ intent to DEMO their jobs and start
new ventures. Previous studies offer little information on which individuals, more so than others,
are affected by poor organizational conditions. We found that employees with stronger
innovation desires are more likely DEMO experience low job satisfaction when faced with restrictive
innovative climates and/or poor technical excellence incentives. This finding has implications for
organizational leaders, particularly of technology-driven businesses. As the congruence between
individual needs and organizational characteristics DEMO predict job satisfaction, innovatively
oriented organizations should recruit individuals with matching DEMO in their innovation
orientation. Having employees with characteristics that fit their organizations is crucial because
this synergy can significantly impact job satisfaction levels. Low DEMO satisfaction, in turn, is a
central factor that translates misfit between individual characteristics and poor organizational
conditions into an employee’s desire to leave DEMO organization.
Organizations valuing innovation can put structures and incentives in place to cultivate an
innovative climate to help prevent “brain drain” and the consequences DEMO having employees
leave to set up new, potentially competitive ventures. Alternatively, organization leaders can
exploit the misfit between individual needs and organizational characteristics DEMO providing spin-
off opportunities to tap into employees’ desires for innovation. Employees who are not satisfied
with their organizational practices can be allowed to DEMO spinoffs, and the parent organizations
can support them with financial and DEMO resources.
The moderating role of self-efficacy in the entrepreneurship equation has implications for
policymakers in facilitating venture creation. Policymakers can target employees dissatisfied
with DEMO jobs for educational and training programs to raise their self-efficacy levels.
24
Entrepreneurial education programs can expose employees to the business environment, market
opportunities, and real-life entrepreneurship situations. This may strengthen their confidence in
pursuing entrepreneurship as an alternative career choice.
6.3 Limitations and future research
The findings DEMO this study offer a number of opportunities for future research to advance
our knowledge of the individual and organizational factors that predict IT professionals’
DEMO to start businesses. The present results showed that low job satisfaction fully mediates
the relationship between person-organization misfit and entrepreneurial intentions. The effect of
DEMO satisfaction was the only mediator of the work environment-entrepreneurial intentions
relationship considered in our study. Other potential mediators may include, for example, work
DEMO (Shane, Locke & Collins., 2003) and organizational commitment (Kickul & Zaper,
2000). In this study, we focus on the DEMO role of job satisfaction because of its historical
association with entrepreneurial intentions (Brockhaus, 1980). Future research can consider other
mediators influencing the DEMO intentions relationship to gain a
more comprehensive understanding of why individuals leave their jobs to start business ventures.
Future research should consider different aspects DEMO job satisfaction (e.g., satisfaction
with the work itself, remuneration, supervision, and co-workers) and how these influence
entrepreneurial intentions. To broaden our DEMO of the interactional effects between
desirability perceptions and feasibility perceptions on entrepreneurial intentions, future studies
should also look beyond self-efficacy to consider other individual factors, such as risk-taking
propensity, locus of control, and degree of autonomy.
Additionally, further research of professions other than the IT sector is needed to validate
the generalizability of our study’s findings. Moreover, future studies could validate the
25
perceptual measures with objective proxies. For example, “incentives for technical excellence”
could be correlated with proxy measures such as frequency of technical training, types and
quantity of rewards for technical excellence, and organizational budget for technical training and
education. It may also be useful to conduct longitudinal studies DEMO track respondents as they
follow through their entrepreneurial intentions to actually start a business.
To conclude, findings from our study point to the need for future research to account for
multilevel factors, and to discover their direct, indirect, and moderating effects, thereby
enhancing our understanding of what leads individuals to an entrepreneurial career.
26
References
Agho, A.O., Mueller, C.W., & Price, J.L. 1993. Determinants of employee job satisfaction: An
empirical test of a causal model. Human Relations, 46(8):1007–1027.
Alba-Ramirez, A. 1994. Self-employment in the midst of unemployment: The case of Spain and
the United States. Applied Economics 26:189–204.
Ajzen, I. 1987. Attitudes, traits, and actions: Dispositional DEMO of behavior in personality
and social psychology. In L. Berkowitz, ed., Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology (Vol. 20, 1–63). San Diego, CA: Academic Press, Inc.
Ajzen, I. 1991. The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes 50:179–211.
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. 1980. Understanding attitudes and predicting social behavior.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Bandura, A. 1986. Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Baron, DEMO 2007. Behavioral and cognitive factors in entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurs as the
active DEMO in new venture creation. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal 1(1-2):167–
182.
DEMO, R.M., & Kenny, D.A. 1986. The moderator-mediator variable distinction in DEMO
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic and statistical considerations. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 51:1173–1182.
Bates, T. 1995. Self-employment entry across industry groups. Journal of Business Venturing
10(2):143–156.
Bird, B. 1988. Implementing DEMO ideas: The case for intention. Academy of
Management Review 13:442–453.
DEMO, K., Shepherd, D.A., & De Castro, J.O. 2007. A DEMO fit model of
owner-managers’ cognitive style and organizational demands. Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice 31(1):29–51.
Brockhaus, R.H. 1980. The effect of job DEMO on the decision to start a business.
Journal of Small Business Management 18:37–43.
Cable, D.M., & Edwards, J.R. 2004. Complementary and supplementary fit: A theoretical and
empirical integration. Journal of Applied Psychology 89:822–834.
Chatterjee, S., & Price, B. 1991. Regression analysis by example. New York: Wiley.
Chen, C.C., Greene, P.G., & Crick, A. DEMO Does entrepreneurial self-efficacy distinguish
entrepreneurs from managers? Journal of Business Venturing DEMO(4):295–316.
Chen, G., Gully, S.M., & Eden, D. 2001. Validation of a new general self-efficacy scale.
Organizational Research Methods 4(DEMO):62–83.
Coff, R. 1997. Human assets and management dilemmas: Coping DEMO hazards on the road to
resource-based theory. Academy of Management Review 22:374–402.
27
Couger, J.D. 1988. Motivators versus demotivators in the IS environment. Journal of Systems
Management 39(6):36–41.
Crant, J.M. 1996. The proactive personality DEMO as a predictor of entrepreneurial intentions.
Journal of Small Business Management 34:42–49.
Cromie, S., & Hayes, J. 1991. Business ownership as a means of overcoming job dissatisfaction,
Personnel Review 20(1):19–24.
Dastmalchian, A. 1986. Environmental characteristics and organizational climate: An
exploratory study. Journal DEMO Management Studies 23(6):609–633.
Davidsson, P. 1995. Determinants of entrepreneurial intentions. Paper presented at the RENT IX
Conference, Workshop in Entrepreneurship Research, Piacenza, Italy, November 23–24.
Davidsson., P. & Wiklund, J. 2001. Levels of analysis in entrepreneurship re-search: Current
research practice and suggestions for the future. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice,
25(4):81–100.
Eden, DEMO, & Granat-Flomin, R. 2000. Augmenting means efficacy to improve service
performance among computer users. Paper presented at the 15th Annual Meeting of the
DEMO for Industrial and Organizational Psychology, New Orleans, LA.
Eisenberger, R., & Rhoades, L. 2001. Incremental effects reward on creativity. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 81(4):728–741.
Eisenhauer, J.G. 1995. The Entrepreneurial DEMO: Economic theory and empirical evidence.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 19(4):67–80.
Farmer, S.M., Tierney, P., & Kung-McIntyre, K. 2003. Employee creativity in Taiwan: An
application of role identity theory. Academy of Management Journal 46:618–630.
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. 1975. Belief, DEMO, intention, and behavior: An introduction to
theory and research. New DEMO: Addison-Wesley.
Gartner, W.B., Bird, B.J., & Starr, J.A., DEMO Acting as if: Differentiating entrepreneurial from
organizational behavior. Entrepreneurship Theory and DEMO 16:13–31.
Henley, A. 2007. Entrepreneurial aspiration and transition into self-employment: Evidence from
British longitudinal data. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 19(3):253–280.
Hisrich, R.D., & Brush, C. 1986. Characteristics of the minority entrepreneur. Journal of Small
Business Management 24:1–8.
Hitt, M.A., Beamish, P.W., Jackson, S.E., & Mathieu, J.E. 2007. Building theoretical and
empirical DEMO across levels: Multilevel research in management. Academy of
Management Journal 50(DEMO):1385–1399.
Hmieleski, K., & Baron, R.A.  (In press).  Entrepreneurs' optimism and new venture
performance:  A social cognitive perspective. DEMO of Management Journal.
Ireland, R.D., & Webb, J.W. 2007. A DEMO exploration of entrepreneurship research.
Journal of Management 33(6):891–927.
Jackson, D.N. 1994. Jackson personality inventory test manual. Goshen, NY: Research
Psychological DEMO
28
Kennedy, P. 1992. A guide to econometric methods. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kickul, J., & Zaper, J.  2000. Untying the knot: Do personal and organizational determinants
influence entrepreneurial intentions? Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship 15
(3): 57-77.
Knight, G.A. 1997. Cross-cultural reliability DEMO validity of a scale to measure firm
entrepreneurial orientation. Journal of Business Venturing 12(3):213–225.
Kolvereid, L. 1996. Prediction of employment status DEMO intentions. Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice 21(1):47–57.
Kristof-Brown, A. L., Ryan, D., Zimmerman, E. C., & Johnson, H. B. DEMO Consequences of
individuals’ fit at work: A meta-analysis of person-job, person-organization, person-
group, and person-supervisor fit. Personnel Psychology 58:281–342.
Krueger, N.F. 1993. The impact of prior entrepreneurial exposure on perceptions of new venture
DEMO and desirability. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 18(1):5–21.
Krueger, N.F., Reilly, M.D., & Carsrud, A.L. 2000. Competing models of entrepreneurial
DEMO Journal of Business Venturing 15(5/6):411–432.
Lam, T., DEMO, H., & Baum, T. 2001. An investigation of employees' job satisfaction: The case
of hotels in Hong Kong. Tourism Management 22(2):157–65.
Leung, A., Wong, P.K., Zhang, J., & Foo, M.D. (2006). A multi-dimension of “fit” and the use
of DEMO in human resource acquisition for entrepreneurial firms. Journal of Business
Venturing 21(5):664–686.
Litwin G.H., & Stringer, R.A. 1968. Motivation and organizational climate. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Long, J. 1982. The DEMO tax and self-employment. National Tax Journal 35(1):31–42.
Mak, B., & Sockel, H. 1999. A confirmatory factor analysis of IS employee DEMO and
retention. Information and Management 38:265–276.
Niehoff, B.P., Enz, DEMO, & Grover, R.A. 1990. The impact of top-management actions on
employee attitudes and perceptions. Group and Organization Studies 15:337–352.
Nunally, J.C. 1978. Psychometric Theory. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Pajares, F. 1996. Self-efficacy beliefs in DEMO settings. Review of Educational Research 66:
543–578.
Phan, P.H., Butler, J.E. & Lee, S.H. 1996. Crossing mother: Entrepreneur-franchisees’ attempts
to reduce franchisor influence. Journal of Business Venturing 11(5):379–402.
Phan, P.H., Wright, M., Ucbasaran, D. & Tan, W.L. (In press). Corporate entrepreneurship:
Current research and future directions. Journal of Business Venturing.
DEMO, S.R. 1988. Age-related differences in work attitudes and behaviour: A review and
conceptual analysis. Psychological Bulletin 93:328–67.
Roberts, E.B. 1991. Entrepreneurs in high technology: Lessons from MIT and beyond. New
York: Oxford University DEMO
29
Romanelli, E., & Schoonhoven, C.B. 2001. The local origins of new firms. In C.B Schoonhoven,
& E. Romanelli, eds., The Entrepreneurship DEMO, Origins of Entrepreneurship and
the Evolution of Industries. Chicago: Stanford University Press.
Rothwell, R., & Zegveld, W. 1982. Innovation in the small and medium sized firms. London:
Frances Pinter.
Sankar, C.S., Ledbetter, W.N., Snyder, C.A., Roberts, T.L., McCreary, J., & Boyles, W.R. 1991.
Perceptions of reward systems by technologists and managers in information technology
companies. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 38(4):349–358.
Schjoedt, DEMO, & Shaver, K.G. 2007. Deciding on an entrepreneurial career: A DEMO of the pull and
push hypotheses using the panel study of entrepreneurial dynamics data.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 31(5):733–752.
Scott, S.G., & Bruce, R.A. 1994. Determinants of innovative behaviour: A path model DEMO
individual innovation in the workplace. Academy of Management Journal 37(3):DEMO
607.
Seashore, S., Lawler, E., Mirvis, P., & Cammann, C. 1982. Observing and measuring
organizational change: A guide to field DEMO New York: Wiley.
Shane, S. 2000. Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities.
Organization Science 11(4):448–469.
Shane, S., Locke, E.A., & Collins, C.J.  2003. Entrepreneurial motivation. Human Resource
Management DEMO 13(2):257–279.
Shapero, A., & Sokol, L. 1982. The social dimensions of entrepreneurship. In C.A. Kent, D.L.
Sexton, & K.H. DEMO, eds., Encyclopedia of Entrepreneurship (72–90). Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: DEMO Hall.
Sheppard, B., Hardwicke J., & Warshaw, P. 1988. The theory of reasoned action: A meta-
analysis of past research with recommendations and future research. Journal of Consumer
Research 15:325–344.
Sobel, M.E. 1982. Asymptotic confidence intervals for indirect effects in structural equation
models. In S. DEMO, ed., Sociological Methodology (290–312). Washington D.C:
American Sociological DEMO
Souitaris, V., Zerbinati, S., & Al-Laham, A. 2007. Do DEMO programmes raise
entrepreneurial intention of science and engineering students? The effect DEMO learning,
inspiration and resources. Journal of Business Venturing 22(4):DEMO
Watson, K., Hogarth-Scott, S., & Wilson, N. 1998. Small DEMO start-ups: success factors and
support implications. International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior DEMO Research
4(3):217–238.
Welsch, H.P., & LaVan, H. 1981. Inter-relationships between organizational commitment and
job characteristics, job satisfaction, professional behaviour, and organizational climate.
Human Relations 24(12):1079–1089.
Wong, P., Lee, L., &  Foo, M.D. (2008). Occupational choice: The DEMO of product vs.
process innovation. Small Business Economics 30(3):267–281.
DEMO
Yuki, G.A. 1989. Leadership in organization (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Zhang, H., Lam T., & Baum, T. 1999. The inter-relationship between job satisfaction and
demographic characteristics. Asia Pacific Journal of DEMO Research Management
4(2):49–58.
Zhao, H., Hills, G.E., & Seibert, S.E. 2005. The mediating role of self-efficacy in the
development DEMO entrepreneurial intentions. Journal of Applied Psychology 90(6):1265–
1272.
31
Innovation
Climate
H1a(-)
Technical Excellence
Incentives
Job Satisfaction
H2a and DEMO
Innovation
Orientation
H1b(-)
Self-Efficacy
H3(-)
Entrepreneurial
Intentions
Figure 1. Proposed model of relationships among key constructs of study
32
Table 1. Measure Items and Response Formats
Construct and response format
Entrepreneurial DEMO (α = .720)
To what extent do you agree or DEMO with
the following statements?
Technical Excellence Incentives (α = .803)DEMO
To what extent do you agree or disagree with
the following statements?
Innovation Climate (α = .826)
To what extent do you agree or disagree with
the following statements?
Innovation Orientation (α = 0.807)
To what extent do you agree or disagree with I DEMO take risks in unfamiliar assignments.
the following statements?
I am technically up-to-date.
My peers and I often use innovative solutions to solve technical
DEMO
Where possible, I take on technically difficult and challenging job
assignments.
DEMO am recognised as a "technical expert" by my peers and
associates.
I do not regularly read articles in technical journals. ®
Self-Efficacy (α = 0.883) * 38 items were
used
Respondents were asked to rate their skill level in software development / maintenance of operating systems,
DEMO languages for software development, systems development methodology, database
design/administration, DEMO administration, software development in several areas, use of development tools,
development of multimedia applications and hardware design/development along scales where 1 DEMO None, 2 =
Basic, 3 = Competent, 4 = Advanced, 5 = Expert
Job Satisfaction (α = 0.845
To what extent do you agree or disagree with Overall, I am satisfied with my current job.
the following statements?
I look forward to going in to DEMO every morning.
I often think of quitting my job. ®
Measurements
I have always wanted to work for myself (i.e. be self-employed).
If I have the opportunity, I would start my own IT company
In-house training provided by my organization has been useful.
My supervisor matches my DEMO needs with opportunities
to attend courses and technical meetings.
Management does not view IT professional development as
important. ®
My organization has limited budget DEMO IT skills development. ®
I often participate in decisions relevant to my assignments.
I am seldom assigned work in my areas of interest. ®
DEMO I work with are not interested in IT skills development. ®
Based on their experience, my peers often suggest new
approaches to solving technical problems.
Management maintains up-to-date technical library.
I am encouraged to explore new DEMO and to try new ways of
doing things.
I do not get opportunities to be independent and innovative. ®
My supervisor rarely solicits ideas DEMO me to solve technical
problems. ®
33
Table 2. Means, Standard Deviations, Correlations, and Reliabilities for Validity Study Variables (N = 172)
Variable
1. Entrepreneurial
intentions
2. Entrepreneurial
intentions (Kolvereid,
1996)
3. Self-efficacy
4. General self-efficacy
(Chen et DEMO, 2001)
5. Entrepreneurial self-
efficacy (Chen et al.,
1998)
6. Innovation orientation
7. Creativity scale
(Farmer et al., 2003)DEMO
8. Risk-taking scale
(Jackson, 1994)
9. Organizational
innovation climate
10. Organizational
support for innovation
(Scott & Bruce, 1994)
11. General DEMO of
organizational climate
(Dastmalchian et al.,
1986)
12. Organizational
DEMO excellence
incentives
13. Rewards & resource
supply for innovation
(Scott & DEMO, 1994)
14. General measure of
organizational rewards
(Litwin & Stringer, 1968)
Mean
Standard Deviation
1
(0 .7
0.79**
0.36**
0.33**
DEMO
0.28*
0.24*
0.16
-
0.55**
-
0.56**
-0.14
-
0.49**
-
0.42**
-0.10
3.33
0.48
2
7)
(0.79)
0.34**
0.35**
0.24*
0.25*
0.22*
0.17
-0.48**
-0.57**
-0.11
-0.55**
-0.46**
-0.09
3.29
0.53
3
(0.89)
0.80**
0.18
0.26*
0.21*
0.13
0.10
0.12
0.08
0.13
0.11
0.10
DEMO
0.67
4
(0.86)
0.08
0.24*
0.22*
0.15
0.09
0.11
0.10
DEMO
0.09
0.13
3.41
0.72
5
(0.83)
0.18
0.14
0.11
0.07
DEMO
0.14
0.07
0.12
0.08
3.20
0.63
6
(0.80)
0.72**
0.12
DEMO
0.07
0.09
0.06
0.06
0.09
3.46
0.52
7
(0.94)
0.14
DEMO
0.13
0.06
0.10
0.09
0.11
4.19
0.93
8
(0.85)
0.02
DEMO
0.06
0.07
0.04
0.09
9.47
4.35
9
(0.84)
0.72**
0.12
DEMO
0.10
0.06
3.45
0.61
10
(0.81)
0.07
0.11
0.07
0.08
DEMO
0.69
11
(0.79)
0.05
0.06
0.08
3.24
0.77
Note. Internal DEMO are in parentheses. **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05
12
(0.83)
0.80**
0.12
3.48
0.57
13
(0.86)
0.06
3.42
0.70
14
(0.82)
2.27
0.43
34
Table 3. Convergent and Divergent Validities of Measures
Measure
1. Entrepreneurial intentions
DEMO Technical excellence
incentives
3. Innovation Climate
4. Self-efficacy
5. Innovation orientation
Converges on
Kolvereid’s (1996) measure of
entrepreneurial intentions
Scott & Bruce’s (1994) measure
of rewards and resource supply
Scott & Bruce’s (1994) measure
of climate for innovation
Chen et al.’s (2001) measure of
general DEMO
Farmer et al.’s (2003) measure
of creativity
Diverges from
-
Litwin & Stringer’s (1968)
measure of general
organizational rewards
Dastmalchian’s (1986)DEMO
measure of general
organizational climate
Chen et al.’s (1998) measure
of entrepreneurial self-
efficacy
Jackson’s (1994) measure of
risk-taking
35
Table 4. Correlations and Descriptive Statistics (N = 4,364)
Dependent variable
1. Entrepreneurial
intentions
Control variables
2. Gender (Male = 1)
3. Age
4. IT experience
5. IT Sales &
Marketing function
6. IT R&D function
7. Education
Attainment
8. Income
9. Year (2008 = 1)
Independent variables
10. Innovation climate
11. Technical
excellence incentives
DEMO Innovation
orientation
13. Self-efficacy
14. Job satisfaction
Mean
Std. deviation
1
1
0.14*
0.08+
0.09+
0.16*
0.17*
0.09+
-0.16*
0.02
-0.18*
-0.17*
0.14+
0.17*
DEMO
0.32**
3.38
0.56
2
1
0.05
0.05
0.08
0.13+
0.14+
0.11+
0.03
0.02
0.07
0.05
0.07
0.05
0.65
0.44
3
1
0.23**
0.09
0.07
DEMO
0.12+
0.05
0.02
0.04
0.07
0.12+
0.09
34.69
0.73
4
1
0.02
0.03
0.11+
0.14+
0.01
0.05
0.06
0.13+
0.11+
-0.16*
9.35
0.99
5
DEMO
-0.20*
0.04
0.13+
0.03
0.01
0.03
0.05
0.04
0.10+
0.15
0.25
+ p < 0.05; *p < 0.01; **p < 0.001
6
1
DEMO
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.04
0.05
0.06
-0.11+
0.11
0.23
7
1
0.19*
0.01
0.02
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.05
3.24
0.75
8
1
0.02
0.04
DEMO
0.12+
0.13+
0.17*
2.85
0.62
9
1
0.05
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.56
10
1
0.05
0.09+
0.05
0.09+
3.36
0.61
11
1
DEMO
0.04
0.08+
3.52
0.54
12
1
0.10+
0.04
3.55
0.59
13
1
0.05
3.28
0.58
14
1
3.29
0.42
36
Table 5. OLS Regression Results (N = 4,364)a
Dependent variable - Job Satisfaction
Dependent variable - Entrepreneurial Intentions
Model 1 Model 2
DEMO 3.831** (0.334) 3.654**(0.221)
Controls
Gender (Male = 1) 0.103(0.101) 0.114(0.120)
Age 0.432(0.203) 0.410(0.199)
DEMO squared 0.319(0.115) 0.282(0.132)
IT experience  0.554(0.211) DEMO(0.197)
IT sales &
marketing function 0.131(0.113) 0.221(0.112)
IT R&D function 0.213(0.121) 0.180(0.151)
Education
Attainment  -1.687*(0.301) -1.603*(0.312)
Income 1.457*(0.162) 1.469*(0.152)
Year (2008 = 1) 0.201(0.213) 0.235(0.233)
Main effects
Organizational
innovation climate 2.115*(0.102)
Technical
excellence
incentives 1.769*(0.212)
DEMO
orientation -1.000†(0.336)
Interactive effects
Climate X
Innovation
orientation
Incentives X
Innovation
orientation
Main effects
Job satisfaction
Self-efficacy
Interactive effects
Job satisfaction X
DEMO
F-Statistics 8.952** 13.459**
Adjusted R-Square 0.12 0.21
∆R2 0.09**
a – Standard errors are reported in parentheses
Model 3
4.009**(0.188)
0.117(0.125)DEMO
0.413(0.155)
0.295(0.101)
0.512(0.188)
0.165(0.119)
0.129(0.189)
-1.732*(0.353)
1.501*(0.160)
0.256(0.213)
DEMO(0.182)
1.743*(0.198)
-0.972†(0.239)
-1.911*(0.224)
-1.614**(0.431)
Model 4
3.593**(0.165)
0.158(0.125)
0.202(0.104)DEMO
-1.365*(0.109)
1.103+(0.203)
0.115(0.121)
0.171(0.115)
1.277*(0.264)
-1.631*(0.231)
0.218(0.199)
-1.135*(0.217)
DEMO(0.294)
1.013† (0.152)
Model 5
3.366**(0.111)
0.151(DEMO)
0.199(0.193)
-1.178*(0.132)
1.102+(0.171)
0.153(0.129)
0.179(0.232)
1.281*(0.193)
-1.676*(0.123)
0.197(0.162)DEMO
-1.145*(0.260)
-1.209*(0.205)
1.001†(0.139)
-1.291*(0.249)
-1.261*(0.332)
16.839** 9.291** 11.774**
0.29 0.06 0.11
0.08** 0.05**
+ DEMO < 0.05; *p < 0.01; **p < 0.001; Two-tailed test
DEMO 6
3.775**(0.156)
0.126(0.123)
0.195(0.122)
-1.265*(0.140)
1.113†(0.312)
0.231(0.129)
0.163(0.204)
1.323*(0.213)DEMO
-1.681*(0.126)
0.174(0.201)
-1.417*(0.651)
1.141†(0.373)
12.731**
0.15
0.04**
Model 7
4.031**(0.192)
0.149(0.125)
0.187(DEMO)
-1.281*(0.102)
1.125†(0.181)
0.136(0.118)
0.151(0.391)
1.240*(0.184)
-1.674*(0.166)
0.199(0.233)
-1.566*(0.322)DEMO
1.154†(0.231)
-
1.655**(0.215)
13.795**
0.25
0.10**
Model 8
4.144**(0.075)
0.141(0.115)
0.121(0.116)
-1.293*(0.131)
DEMO(0.212)
0.205(0.119)
0.142(0.143)
1.250*(0.171)
-1.694*(0.138)
0.111(0.148)
0.317(0.117)
0.288(0.129)
0.193(DEMO)
0.410(0.309)
0.505(0.254)
-1.519*(0.369)
1.229†(0.136)
-1.629**(0.499)
15.886**
0.34
0.09**
37{1g42fwefx}