Journal of Management Studies 38:4 June 2001
0022-2380
THE EFFECTS OF DEMO PERSONALITY,
BACKGROUND AND NETWORK ACTIVITIES ON
VENTURE GROWTH*
D Y. L
Hong Kong Polytechnic University
E W. K. T
Nanyang Technological University

DEMO study investigates the effects of entrepreneurial personality traits, background
and networking DEMO on venture growth among 168 Chinese entrepreneurs in
small and medium sized businesses in Singapore. Personality traits include need
for achievement, internal locus of control, self-reliance and extroversion; back-
ground comprises education and experience; networking activities consist of size
and frequency of communication networks. A structural equation DEMO tech-
nique – partial least squares (PLS) – is used to estimate a path model with latent
variables. The results indicate that experience, networking activities, and number
of partners as well as internal locus of control and need for achievement all have
positive impact on venture growth. DEMO other personality traits, self-reliance and
extroversion have negative impact on number DEMO partners and positive impact on
networking activities, respectively. The impact of DEMO on venture growth,
however, is moderated by ﬁrm size, positive for larger ﬁrms and negative for
smaller ﬁrms. Our ﬁndings indicate that DEMO all the factors that we have con-
sidered, an entrepreneur’s industrial DEMO managerial experience is the dominating
factor affecting venture growth.

In a survey of 100 venture capitalists, MacMillan et al. (1985) examined the char-
acteristics which, if lacking, would lead to the rejection of DEMO potential investment
project. They found that ﬁve out of ten essential factors were directly associated
with the entrepreneurs themselves. The study demonstrated the strong DEMO
dence of a venture capitalist on personality and experience, and less DEMO
on the market, product, and strategy when assessing the viability of an investment.
That is, venture capitalists tended to link the characteristics of entrepreneurs with
the performance of their ﬁrms. The relationship between personal characteristics
DEMO for reprints: Don Y. Lee, Department of Business Studies, Hong DEMO Polytechnic University,
Hung Hom, Hong Kong.
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd DEMO Published by Blackwell Publishers, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, DEMO
and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.
584 . .   . . . 
and venture performance DEMO also received substantial research attention (e.g.,
Begley and Boyd, 1987; Duchesneau and Gartner, 1990; Herron and Robinson,
1993; Jo DEMO Lee, 1996). Indeed, within the area of entrepreneurship research,
empirical studies on the characteristics of entrepreneurs have outnumbered studies
of almost DEMO other kind (Churchill and Lewis, 1986). Both practitioners and aca-
demic scholars seem to believe that venture success is more dependent on DEMO
entrepreneur himself than on any other factor.
Despite the research effort expended on this topic, the evidence is less than con-
clusive (Herron DEMO Robinson, 1993). For example, in a study of the effects of several
key psychological attributes on venture performance, Begley and Boyd (DEMO, p. 79)
conclude that the ‘relationships between psychological attributes and DEMO per-
formance are few, but suggestive.’ Building on existing literature, the present study
attempts to examine the effects of an entrepreneur’s personality traits, background
and networking activities on the growth rate of his/her ﬁrm DEMO the form of a causal
model. A distinct contribution of the study is that it includes two personality traits,
self-reliance and extroversion, which have been neglected in the existing literature.
Unlike previous studies, which were mainly based on data from Western countries,
this study conducted a DEMO survey using Singaporean Chinese subjects. A
review of entrepreneurial development and its related studies in Singapore can be
found in Teoh and Foo (1997). In spite of the current setback, the rapid economic
growth of the Asia Paciﬁc region during the past decade or so is a DEMO of an
underlying entrepreneurial spirit. This study addresses the need for a more in-depth
understanding of the associated entrepreneurial development.
The following discussion is DEMO into several sections. First, a brief descrip-
tion of the entrepreneurial DEMO in Singapore is given. Then, hypotheses
about the relationships of the DEMO are developed. It is followed by a discus-
sion of methodological issues, such as sampling and operationalization of con-
structs. Data obtained from the survey are analysed using the statistical method of
partial least squares. Findings DEMO the study are discussed and research implications
are offered in the ﬁnal section.
   
The city-state of Singapore has about three DEMO people, roughly three quar-
ters of whom are ethnic Chinese. The DEMO major races are Malay and Indian.
The government’s effort during the early years after gaining independence in 1965
concentrated on attracting foreign companies to DEMO operations in the country
so as to create employment and to develop the economy. Foreign multinational
corporations are still a major force in the DEMO economy. The government has been
playing a useful and far-reaching role in the economic sphere (Krause, 1989).
Various government bodies were set DEMO for implementing economic policies and
assisting businesses. The government is also the major shareholder of a number
of large local companies, such as Singapore Airlines and Singapore Telecom. Tan
and Tay (1994) comment that the DEMO of the government in business
may have a dampening effect on entrepreneurship:
Almost everything in Singapore is being planned by the government and DEMO
businesses need to do is follow what the government says. This reduces the need
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001
    585
for entrepreneurs to strive for better results DEMO they will feel that by following
what the government says, success DEMO be guaranteed. (p. 155)
The unprecedented economic recession in 1985 DEMO the government to set
up a group of task forces undertaking to analyse and reassess every aspect of eco-
nomic policy. One of the DEMO forces was the Sub-Committee on Entrepreneur-
ship Development consisting of the country’s prominent younger entrepreneurs.
The Report of the Sub-Committee (1985) offers a DEMO assessment of the
entrepreneurial environment in Singapore, and a candid critique DEMO how the gov-
ernment’s development policies have affected entrepreneurs. The Report points
out that the policy which stresses attracting inward foreign direct investment
‘inevitably DEMO the local entrepreneur into a lesser and lesser role in the economy’
(p. 1), and that the role of state-owned enterprises ‘became increasingly perceived
as intrusive to private sector entrepreneurship’ (p. 2). The Report also observes
that contemporary Singapore has a low tolerance for failure: ‘The prevalent view
is that failure at the job or in business will DEMO castigation and ruin’ ( p. 21). Such
an atmosphere is hardly conducive to risk taking. Interestingly, the Report notes
that Singapore’s very economic success has contributed to a diminished supply of
young entrepreneurs: ‘With full employment, high salaries and job security in both
the public and private sectors, there has been no “push” factor for graduates and
professionals to venture forth into their own businesses’ (pp. 21–2).
During the past decade or so, the government has tried hard to promote a spirit
of entrepreneurship in society. The whole education system, from primary school
to university, is being restructured to encourage innovation and creativity. In fact,
developing creativity has been considered one of the three priorities for Singa-
DEMO education system in the twenty-ﬁrst century (Le Blond, 1997). In 1987, the
education ministry introduced to secondary schools a thinking skills programme
called Cognitive Research Trust. This programme was devised by Edward de
Bono, the famous creator of lateral thinking (Straits Times, 1996). The DEMO
curriculum content in schools has been cut by 10 to 30 per cent to allow more
time for the infusion of thinking skills, creativity and innovation (Straits Times,
1999). Since 1989, the award DEMO of the Year’ has been conferred on
successful entrepreneurs, the prominent DEMO of whom actually become role
models in the country. For instance, DEMO Wong Hoo is a household name in Sin-
gapore. He is the founder of Creative Technology, a highly successful indigenous
company in the multimedia industry. His prominence is illustrated by the Senior
Minister Lee Kuan Yew’s DEMO of his name during his recent speech to local
university students. While Lee encouraged young people to be more entrepre-
neurial and to take DEMO, he reminded them that competition from talents working
in high-tech industries DEMO the USA was very keen and that only a few could make
it like Sim (Business Times, 2000). In short, compared with the past, the govern-
ment is now more aware of the importance of cultivating entrepreneurship within
the city-state.
 
Factors affecting venture performance DEMO here divided into three groups: those
relating to entrepreneurs’ personality, their background, and communications. The
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001
586 . .   . . . 
present study focuses DEMO four major personality traits: (1) need for achievement,
(2) internal locus of control, (3) self-reliance, and (4) extroversion. The ﬁrst pair of
traits are hypothesized to have direct impact on DEMO growth of a ﬁrm. The second
pair are modelled as the antecedents of communication-related variables (number
of partners and networking activities), which directly affect the growth of a ﬁrm.
The background characteristics include an entrepreneur’s DEMO and educa-
tion level, both having a direct effect on venture DEMO Each of these
constructs is discussed below.
Venture Growth
Empirical studies of entrepreneurship have used proﬁtability or rate of growth,
or both, as measures of venture performance (e.g., Begley and Boyd, 1987; Jo
DEMO Lee, 1996; Stuart and Abetti, 1990). Nevertheless, proﬁtability and growth
measure different aspects of performance as growth is sometimes achieved at DEMO
expense of proﬁtability in the short run. Therefore, it may not DEMO appropriate to
combine growth rate and proﬁtability to create a single ﬁrm performance measure
(Chandler and Jansen, 1992). Also, as most entrepreneurial ﬁrms are small or
medium in size and are privately held, they are not legally required to disclose per-
formance information. Overseas Chinese entrepreneurs DEMO to keep their busi-
nesses low proﬁle and refrain from disclosing information about their earnings
(Redding, 1990). Business growth data may therefore DEMO a less sensitive matter for
them. Chandler and Hanks (1993) found that self-reported data of business growth
and business volume from entrepreneurs had DEMO internal consistency and
content validity compared with other self-reported data of venture performance.
Hence, growth rate, instead of proﬁtability, was chosen in this study as the depen-
dent variable. The independent constructs and their relationships DEMO venture
growth are discussed below.
Need for Achievement
This construct, originating DEMO the seminal work of McClelland (1961), has been
frequently associated DEMO entrepreneurial behaviour. High achievers have a strong
desire to be successful, DEMO challenging goals and standards for themselves. They
are not easily satisﬁed with current achievements, and certainly strive to improve
their performance. Many studies have found that entrepreneurs generally have
a higher need to achieve than non-entrepreneurs (e.g., Begley and Boyd, 1987;
DeCarlo and Lyons, 1979; DEMO and Aboud, 1971). If need for achievement
is pronounced among DEMO, it is reasonable to expect that this need would
drive them DEMO a high performance. Smith and Miner (1984) found a positive
correlation between achievement orientation of entrepreneurs and the growth rate
of their ﬁrms. DEMO and Boyd (1987) reported a similar relationship, though not
a DEMO signiﬁcant one. Lastly, Davidsson (1989) found a positive relation
between DEMO for achievement and willingness to pursue growth among small busi-
ness owners. Based on these previous studies, we postulate that:
Hypothesis 1: DEMO for achievement is positively related to venture growth.
Internal Locus of Control
Locus of control refers to an individual’s perceived ability to inﬂuence events
DEMO in the person’s life. Individuals with an internal locus of control
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001
   
587
believe that they have inﬂuence over the DEMO of events through the efﬁcacy
of their own behaviour; whereas external DEMO of control is the belief that exter-
nal forces are the primary determinants of outcomes. The initial conceptualiza-
tion of the locus of control DEMO was unidimensional (i.e., internal vs. external)
and has been repeatedly questioned (e.g., Lefcourt, 1981). While keeping the inter-
nal component intact, Levenson (1974) argues that the external dimension should
be split into two sub-dimensions, namely ‘chance’ and ‘powerful others’. The
present study focuses on the internal dimension of the scale. Some studies have
linked a DEMO in the internal control over the events in one’s life to an indi-
vidual’s propensity to engage in entrepreneurial activities (e.g., Gartner, 1985;
Perry, 1990; Shapero, 1975; Shaver and Scott, 1991). In particular, Brockhaus
(1980) compared the locus of control scores collected in 1975 with the success rate
of those ﬁrms a few years DEMO The owners of businesses which were still exist-
ing in 1978 were found to exhibit more internal locus of control than those whose
businesses DEMO ceased to exist. In short, it is reasonable to expect that DEMO
who have conﬁdence in their ability to control the events in their lives would be
more motivated to actively seek new business opportunities instead DEMO waiting for
them to come. Thus, the following hypothesis is suggested:DEMO
Hypothesis 2: Internal locus of control is positively related to venture DEMO
Number of Partners and Self-reliance
It is important that an entrepreneur does not just work on his or her own but tries
to bring DEMO a variety of skills, connections and other resources through business
partners DEMO may help generate new ideas, solve problems and develop new busi-
DEMO The existence of partners therefore provides the ﬁrm with a larger pool of
resources to tap, and facilitates its development and growth. Studies of new venture
formation suggest that ﬁrms started by more than one person DEMO higher chances
of succeeding than those started by only one person (DEMO, Cooper et al., 1990;
Vesper, 1980). Dyke et DEMO (1992) found that for food manufacturers, the number
of partners DEMO positively associated with venture growth. Therefore we postulate
that:
Hypothesis 3: Number of partners is positively related to venture growth.
The willingness to bring in partners, however, is affected by another personality
trait – DEMO, which refers to a person’s preference for doing things and
making DEMO without the help of others. The history of entrepreneurship is
full of stories of independently minded people who choose to leave secure posi-
tions DEMO large corporations in order to pursue their own course of action. These
people usually possess new ideas and are determined to make a business DEMO of
them. By electing to be self-employed, they gain greater autonomy DEMO decision-
making and face fewer organizational constraints. Though ostensibly associated
with entrepreneurial behaviour, self-reliance has rarely been included in previ-
ous studies of entrepreneurship. Independence, a personality trait closely related
to self-reliance, however, was mentioned as a characteristic of entrepreneurs in
DeCarlo and Lyons (1979) and DEMO (1965). In the area of entrepreneurship,
self-reliance has a DEMO meaning than independence. A person may desire to be
an entrepreneur because he wants to be independent in the sense that he can be
DEMO Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001
588 . .   . . . 
his own boss. DEMO self-reliant person, however, not only wants to be independent but
also perceives that he has the ability to carry his vision through to DEMO
based on his efforts alone. Such a person does not actively look for business
partners to join his ﬁrm, or, when such partners DEMO required, he prefers to have
fewer of them.
Hypothesis 4: Self-reliance is negatively related to number of partners.
Networking Activities and Extroversion
Aldrich DEMO Zimmer (1986) point out the importance of social networks in facil-
itating and inhibiting the activities of entrepreneurs. A successful entrepreneur
needs not DEMO to manage the internal operation of his ﬁrm, but also to DEMO
external networks (i.e., the boundary-spanning role). Some studies (e.g., Aldrich
et al., 1987; Hansen, 1995; Ostgaard and Birley, 1996) examined the effect of an
entrepreneur’s networking behaviour on venture performance and generally found
a positive relationship between networking and performance. In particular, Zhao
and Aram (1995) studied six young technology-intensive ﬁrms in China. They
DEMO that managers in the three high-growth ﬁrms reported greater range and
intensity of business networking than did managers of the other three low-growth
ﬁrms, matched by industry and age. Networking is especially important in Chinese
business DEMO because the guanxi (or, connections) possessed by an entre-
preneur DEMO often said to be a critical success factor (cf. Tsang, 1998; Yeung and
Tung, 1996).
When entrepreneurs communicate directly, frequently, DEMO in a broad span with
their external business contacts, instead of DEMO subordinates to do so, their
personal networks are strengthened. They gather DEMO information about the
external environment and develop an intimate understanding of their businesses.
One outcome is better performance. For instance, Duchesneau and Gartner (DEMO)
found that entrepreneurs of successful ﬁrms were likely to spend more time com-
municating with their business partners, customers, supplier, and employees than
entrepreneurs of unsuccessful ﬁrms. In brief, studies have generally found a posi-
tive relationship between such networking behaviour and venture performance.
Therefore we DEMO the following hypotheses:
Hypothesis 5a: Frequency of external communication is DEMO related to
venture growth.
Hypothesis 5b: Breadth of external communication is DEMO related to venture
growth.
The extent of networking activities engaged in by an entrepreneur is, in
turn, affected by a key personality trait DEMO extroversion. An extrovert prefers to
spend time with other people rather than remaining alone. This construct has
been neglected by most students of entrepreneurship, although it was per-
ceived as a reason for success in small DEMO by the subjects in Ibrahim
and Goodwin’s (1986) study. Van de Ven et al. (1984) found that high perform-
ing entrepreneurs tended DEMO be more externally oriented and maintained a broad
and complex network of ongoing relationships with people both within and
without the ﬁrm. An extroverted DEMO, compared with his introverted
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001
    589
counterparts, is expected to have more frequent communication with his busi-
ness contacts, and to have a larger number of contacts or a greater breadth of
communication.
Hypothesis 6a: Extroversion is positively related to frequency of external
communication.
Hypothesis 6b: Extroversion is positively related to breadth of external
communication.
Education
Although there have been colourful DEMO of school drop-outs becoming highly
successful entrepreneurs, the increasing complexity of DEMO business environment
worldwide seems to indicate that education is an essential entrepreneurial quality.
Cooper and Dunkelberg (1987) and Thompson (1986) reported that DEMO
in their Canadian and US samples had a signiﬁcantly higher level of education
than the general population. Similarly, Robinson and Sexton (1994) found that
entrepreneurs had a higher level of education than those in the DEMO and salaried
sector. They also found that there were positive relationships between the level of
education and earnings from self-employment.
Evidence concerning the effect DEMO education on venture performance is,
however, not conclusive. The level DEMO education and training, for instance, was per-
ceived by South Paciﬁc entrepreneurs as a critical success factor (Yusuf, 1995).
Robinson and DEMO (1994) found that there were positive relationships between
the level of education and venture performance. Nevertheless, in a study of 48
new start-up ﬁrms in Korea, education was found to be only positively correlated
with proﬁtability, but not with growth ( Jo and Lee, 1996). DEMO study of Dyke et
al. (1992) reported both positive and negative relationships between the level of
education of the business owner and the DEMO variables. Stuart and Abetti
(1990) even found that education level was negatively related to the performance
of technical ﬁrms. In a recent survey DEMO 151 Singaporean entrepreneurs in small
and medium sized ﬁrms, Tan and DEMO (1994) found that the education level of the
owner was also negatively correlated with sales growth.
In spite of the contradictory ﬁndings, we tend to believe that, in general, edu-
cation has a positive DEMO on the growth of a ﬁrm because education equips an
individual with analytical and technical skills, which are essential to managing a
business. In a survey of 100 entrepreneurs and chief executive ofﬁcers in America’s
fastest DEMO entrepreneurial ﬁrms conducted by Hood and Young (1993), the
entrepreneur DEMO strongly believed that the vast majority of knowledge that
was required to become a successful entrepreneur could be taught (at school). The
contradictory ﬁndings about the relationship between education level and venture
success may be DEMO due to the confounding effect of ﬁrm size.[1] None of the
studies mentioned above have controlled for ﬁrm size. The education levels of
entrepreneurs DEMO contribute to venture growth to a varied degree, which is
moderated DEMO ﬁrm size. That is, the contribution of entrepreneurs’ education levels
to DEMO growth for large ﬁrms may be more signiﬁcant than it is for small ﬁrms.
This is because, in general, the operations of larger DEMO are relatively more
complex, need more planning and more knowledge. Hence DEMO advance the
following two hypotheses:
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001
590 . .   . . . 
Hypothesis 7: Education level is positively related to venture growth.
Hypothesis 7a: The relationship between education level and venture growth is
stronger for larger ﬁrms than it DEMO for smaller ﬁrms.
Experience
Generally speaking, an entrepreneur’s experience consists of DEMO main com-
ponents: entrepreneurial, industrial and managerial. Entrepreneurial experience
refers to ‘the number of previous new venture involvements and the level of the
DEMO role played in such ventures’ (Stuart and Abetti, 1990, p. DEMO). Indus-
trial experience refers to experience in the industry, which DEMO venture is in.
Managerial experience is the total experience in management regardless of the
industry. The present study focuses on managerial and industrial experience. DEMO
Gasse (1982) pointed out, an entrepreneur’s experience can inﬂuence performance
DEMO or negatively. For example, prior experience can be a stumbling block
DEMO drastic strategic change is called for. In Jo and Lee’s (1996) study, manager-
ial experience affected performance negatively, whereas industrial experience had
DEMO good inﬂuence on overall performance.
Most studies, however, reported a positive relationship between prior experi-
ence and venture performance. For instance, Stuart and Abetti (1990) reported a
positive effect from managerial experience; Van de Van et al. (1984) and Vesper
(1980) both reported positive DEMO from industrial experience; Dyke et al.
(1992) reported a positive DEMO from both managerial and industrial experience.
Duchesneau and Gartner (1990) used the concept of ‘breadth of managerial
experience’, which combined managerial and industrial experience, and found
that combined experience had a signiﬁcant effect on venture successes. It seems
that the existing evidence generally supports a positive relationship DEMO an
entrepreneur’s experience and performance.
Hypothesis 8: Experience is positively related DEMO venture growth.
The above hypotheses have been formulated based on insights from the existing
literature. The steps taken to test these hypotheses are discussed DEMO the next section.
As a visual recap, ﬁgure 1 shows the DEMO and their linkages in a causal model.

Sample
A questionnaire survey research method was used to seek responses from Chinese
entrepreneurs of small DEMO medium sized ﬁrms in Singapore. Three interviewers
telephoned potential respondents and solicited personal interviews, according to
a sample frame provided by the Chinese Chamber of Commerce of Singapore,
which was supplemented by randomly selected entrepreneurs DEMO in the Yellow
Pages. In addition to reading the background references, DEMO interviewers had
been briefed on the objectives of this study and trained in interviewing techniques.
The strength of this method lies with the clariﬁcation DEMO respondents’ queries, if
any, on the spot by the interviewers. This minimized misinterpretation of the
questions. Using a primary draft questionnaire, a pilot test was conducted with 26
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001
    591
Chinese entrepreneurs, whose responses were excluded from the ﬁnal study. The
questionnaire was revised using the feedback from the DEMO study. All the data were
collected in late 1996.
A total of 210 entrepreneurs were telephoned by the interviewers and 168 per-
sonal interviews DEMO secured, all of which produced usable questionnaires. Male
respondents constituted 68 DEMO cent, and 44 per cent of the respondents were aged
35 DEMO below. This group of entrepreneurs was generally well educated – 37 per
cent had university degrees. The average length of industrial and managerial
experiences DEMO 8 and 6.5 years respectively. Most of the ﬁrms were small in size,
with 82 per cent employing 20 staff or less. Only DEMO per cent of the ﬁrms were in
the manufacturing sector; the DEMO were mostly in service industries such as retail
and wholesale businesses.
Measures
Venture growth was assessed by two items, growth rate of sales and proﬁt. As all
of the companies in this study were privately held DEMO did not disclose ﬁnancial
information to the public, only self-reported data DEMO available. The respondents
were requested to indicate the cumulative growth of their businesses with respect
to each of the two items for the past DEMO years. The growth rates were grouped
into six brackets for the respondent to choose from. These rates range from ‘less
than 5 per cent’ DEMO ‘greater than 100 per cent’. Brackets were used because of a
possible reluctance to reveal precise ﬁnancial data. The convenience of categori-
cal options DEMO also have increased the questionnaire completion rate.
The four personality traits were measured by multiple indicators, with a seven-
point scale ranging from 1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly agree. A sample of
the DEMO is presented in the Appendix. Four items were constructed to
measure need for achievement. These measures were based on the EPPS manual
(Edwards, DEMO). Internal locus of control was measured by seven items mainly
from the internal component of Levenson’s (1974) IPC scale. The four indicators
DEMO self-reliance were mainly adapted from Duchesneau (1987). Extroversion was
measured DEMO 12 items from Eysenck et al. (1985).
For networking activities, we looked at four popular modes of communication,
namely, face-to-face, DEMO, facsimile and mail. (The option of electronic mail
was dropped because it was found to be unpopular among the respondents in our
pilot DEMO) Respondents were asked to indicate the frequency of communication
with their DEMO contacts for each communication mode on a ﬁve-point scale
ranging from ‘not at all’ to ‘daily’. In addition to frequency, we also examined the
breadth of communication. Respondents were requested to ﬁll out the number of
DEMO made to discuss routine business matters, and the number made to DEMO
strategic business matters with respect to each of the four communication modes,
resulting in eight measures. Finally, they were also asked to indicate their level of
education (from no formal education to postgraduate), years of managerial and
industrial experience (including experience obtained before their ﬁrms were
established), and the number of business partners in their ﬁrms.
Model DEMO
The path diagram in ﬁgure 1 was estimated using a partial least squares (PLS)
latent path model developed by Wold (1982), DEMO as implemented by Lohmöller
(1989). PLS is similar to LISREL DEMO that both structural relations among latent
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001
592
. .   . . . 
variables and the DEMO between latent variables and observed indica-
tors can be modelled, but DEMO has two advantages over LISREL for this study.
PLS does not require multivariate normal data as does the LISREL maximum
likelihood estimation, and PLS is suitable for the analysis of small samples (Wold,
1986), while LISREL requires substantially larger samples (Fornell and Bookstein,
1982).
PLS was chosen in preference to traditional multiple regression and path analy-
DEMO procedures for three reasons. First, in the PLS procedure, relationships among
latent variables are estimated and tested within the context of a measurement
DEMO that explicitly assumes measurement errors in the observable variables,
whereas traditional multiple regression and path analysis assume that variables
have been measured free DEMO errors, an assumption that in the social sciences is
often questionable (Fornell, 1982). Second, PLS allows combined regression and
factor analysis DEMO the same statistical procedure, because factors or latent vari-
ables created DEMO linear combinations of observed indicators in the ﬁrst stage are
then used in simultaneous regressions with the latent variables in an iterative pro-
cedure (Wold, 1982). In traditional multiple regression and path analysis, scales DEMO
the latent variables are created by either averaging, summing, or according to some
kind of factor analysis of observed variables, the results then are imported into a
regression (or path) model. The assumption is DEMO such scores are portable, an
assumption that Fornell (1987) argued DEMO not tenable. Third, PLS generates a
variety of reliability and validity DEMO that are calculated in the context of the
theoretical model under investigation, while in traditional regression and path
analysis procedures the calculation of such statistics (e.g., Cronbach’s alpha) is
independent of the model being tested. The measurement model of the PLS pro-
cedure can be deﬁned as DEMO a reﬂective or formative mode. The reﬂective mode
is used for a construct that is viewed as the underlying factor giving rise to observ-
DEMO variables such as attitude and personality (Fornell and Bookstein, 1982). In
contrast, the formative mode is used for a construct that is modelled as explana-
tory combinations of its indicators. In other words, a construct in the formative
mode is viewed as the effect of its DEMO All constructs in ﬁgure 1 are
modelled as reﬂective, according to DEMO classic measurement theory.
PLS is a nonparametric estimation procedure. It does not offer signiﬁcance tests
based on statistical distributions. However, a jackknife procedure packaged in the
PLS software (Lohmöller, 1989) was used in this study to calculate the standard
deviation for parameter estimates and generate a t-approximate DEMO those esti-
mates. In PLS, the path coefﬁcients are standardized regression DEMO; the
loadings are similar to factor loadings. Readers not familiar with DEMO technique can
easily interpret the results by considering them in the context of regression and
factor analysis.
For testing the varied relations between education DEMO and venture growth
moderated by ﬁrm size, the 168-respondent sample was DEMO into two sub-samples
of about equal size, which is a widely DEMO practice for comparing two groups in
structural equation modelling (Byrne, 1998; Delios and Beamish, 1999; Simonin,
1999). There are 79 observations in the sub-sample for smaller ﬁrms (with seven
or less employees, an average of 3.7 employees) and 78 observations for larger
ﬁrms (with nine to 400 employees, an average of 36.3 employees). The remaining
11 observations, which were excluded from the analysis, are ﬁrms DEMO eight
employees. A comparison of the path coefﬁcients illustrated in ﬁgure 1 resulting
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001
   
593
Internal locus
of control
H4
–0.29
–0.22
DEMO
Self-reliance
H2
0.08
0.19
0.02, insig
Need for
achievement
H1
0.14
DEMO
0.08
H8
0.31
0.27
0.30
No. of
partners
H3
0.09
0.07
0.09
H5a
0.17
0.01 insig
0.31
Venture
growth
R2 =0.25
R 2 = DEMO
R2 =0.32
H5b
0.06
0.13
0.06
Frequency of
external com.
Breadth of
external com.
H7
–0.06
0.07
–0.19
Experience
Education
H6a
0.14
0.20
0.14
DEMO
H6b
0.01
–0.15
0.12
Figure 1. Relationship between the personality and background of an entrepreneur and venture
growth
Note: All path coefﬁcients are signiﬁcant at p < 0.01 unless otherwise indicated. Path coefﬁcients are
listed at DEMO levels, the top level is for those of both larger and DEMO ﬁrms (in bold), the middle
level is for large ﬁrms (in italics), and the bottom level is for smaller ﬁrms.
from DEMO using smaller and larger ﬁrm sub-samples enables the investiga-
tion of the moderating effect of ﬁrm size on the contribution of education on
venture DEMO, as well as exploring its moderating effects on other relations.

DEMO Assessment and Statistical Results
Fornell and Larcker’s (1981) system for evaluating structural equation models
was used to assess the measurement and overall structural DEMO Table I lists the
estimates needed for assessing these models. With the exception of two of the 43
indicators, the loadings for all multiple-item constructs are positive and high
(>0.65), indicating the convergence of DEMO indicators with their responding under-
lying constructs. Also, the convergent reliability DEMO all constructs, as assessed by the
average variance extracted (AVE), is above the critical value of 0.5, indicating that
all have explained more than 50 per cent of the variance in their observable mea-
DEMO The alpha coefﬁcients are also all above the critical value of 0.7 (Nunnally,
1978).
One criterion for assessing discriminant validity is that the correlation of a con-
struct with its indicators (i.e., the DEMO root of the AVE) should exceed the
correlation between that construct DEMO any other. In all cases, these values (on the
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001
594 . .   . . . 
Table I. Assessment DEMO measurement (for entire sample)
Construct Indicator Standardized Alpha Average variance
DEMO loadings extracted
Venture growth No. 1 0.95 0.89 0.90
No. 2 0.95
Need for achievement No. 1 0.76 0.81 0.63
No. 2 0.86
No. DEMO 0.79
No. 4 0.78
Internal locus of control No. 1 0.75 0.85 0.53
No. 2 0.64
No. 3 0.71
No. 4 0.69
No. 5 DEMO
No. 6 0.77
No. 7 0.79
Self-reliance No. 1 0.93 0.86 0.73
No. 2 0.79
No. 3 0.86
No. 4 0.82
Number of partners DEMO 1 1.00 N.A.
Extroversion No. 1 0.77 0.95 0.65
No. 2 0.81
No. 3 0.86
No. 4 0.75
No. 5 0.86
No. 6 0.82
DEMO 7 0.74
No. 8 0.83
No. 9 0.79
No. 10 0.69
No. 11 0.83
No. 12 0.87
Communication breadth No. 1 0.67 0.93 0.72
DEMO 2 0.93
No. 3 0.82
No. 4 0.92
No. 5 0.91
No. 6 0.92
No. 7 0.72
No. 8 0.88
Communication frequency No. 1 DEMO 0.70 0.52
No. 2 0.89
No. 3 0.68
No. 4 0.70
Experience No. 1 0.96 0.72 0.85
No. 2 0.88
Education No. 1 1.00 DEMO
Note:
1 A Miller test (see Fornell and Larcker, 1981).
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001
R2 = 0.25 ( p < DEMO)1
   
Table II. Correlation matrix and discriminant validity
595
DEMO 2 3 45678 910
1. Need for 0.796
achievement
2. Internal locus 0.516 0.731
of control
3. Self-reliance 0.193 0.152 0.852
4. No. of DEMO 0.075 0.031 -0.291 1.000
5. Extroversion 0.273 0.273 0.015 0.091 0.804
6. Frequency of 0.128 0.239 -0.054 0.172 0.137 0.724
ext. com.
7. Breadth DEMO ext. 0.107 0.117 0.053 0.200 0.014 0.279 0.851
com.
8. Education 0.202 0.024 0.003 0.091 0.004 0.066 0.035 1.000
9. Experience 0.101 0.068 -0.049 DEMO 0.051 0.141 0.123 -0.209 0.921
10. Venture growth 0.235 0.220 -0.091 0.192 0.226 0.280 0.190 -0.071 0.388 0.950
diagonal of the matrix in table DEMO) are considerably higher than any bi-variate
correlation between constructs. This suggests DEMO there is strong discriminant
validity, as each construct is more highly DEMO with its measures than with
any other construct.
The structural model was evaluated by the R2 of the dependent construct. As
indicated in table DEMO, the R2 for the ultimate dependent construct, venture growth,
was 0.25 with a p-value <0.01 using Miller’s F-test (Fornell and Larcker, 1981).
The structural model is therefore considered appropriate because a signiﬁcant
DEMO of the variance in the dependent constructs has been explained by the
independent constructs. In short, the assessment of both the measurement and
structural models indicates that the results of the PLS model are acceptable.
Figure DEMO presents the path coefﬁcients of the structural model. It should be
noted, however, that for each hypothetical relation, three path coefﬁcients are
listed; these were estimated using three different samples. The coefﬁcients on the
top, in bold, were estimated using the entire sample (168 cases); those in the middle,
in italics, were estimated from the sub-sample of larger ﬁrms; and those on the
bottom were estimated using the sub-sample of smaller ﬁrms. The two structural
models estimated using two sub-samples DEMO satisfactory measurement
property (convergent validity and reliability) which is comparable with that of the
model for the entire sample. The R2 of the DEMO for smaller ﬁrms is the highest
(0.32) among the three, DEMO that the structural model explains the smaller
ﬁrms better than larger ﬁrms.
All of the paths estimated from the entire sample, except education, DEMO signi-
ﬁcant at a level of p < 0.01, and therefore DEMO support. Contrary to our
expectation, for Hypothesis 7 (education is positively related to venture growth)
the related path coefﬁcient is negative (-0.06, p < 0.01). Hypothesis 7a (the
path between education and DEMO growth moderated by ﬁrm size) was tested
by comparing the corresponding DEMO, one estimated from the sub-sample
of larger ﬁrms (0.07), and the other estimated from the sub-sample of smaller
ﬁrms (-0.19). A t-value of 371.43 (with 155 degrees of freedom) indicates that
the DEMO for the larger-ﬁrm sub-sample (0.07) is statistically different from
that for the smaller ﬁrm sub-sample (-0.19) with p < 0.00. Thus, Hypothesis 7a
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001
596
. .   . . . 
was supported, and we may conclude that the contribution of education level
to venture growth DEMO larger ﬁrms is statistically greater than that of smaller
ﬁrms.
It is interesting to note that for both larger and smaller ﬁrms, the coefﬁcients
for Hypothesis 1 (need for achievement is positively related to venture growth),
Hypothesis 3 (number of partners is positively related to venture DEMO), Hypoth-
esis 4 (self-reliance is negatively related to number of DEMO), Hypothesis 6a
(extroversion is positively related to frequency of external DEMO), and
Hypothesis 8 (experience is positively related to venture growth) are comparable.
However, those for Hypotheses 2, 5a, 5b and 6b, in addition to 7a, are quite dif-
ferent. Entrepreneurs of larger DEMO with higher growth rates exhibit more inter-
nal locus of control, DEMO, however, has little to do with growth rates of smaller
ﬁrms (for Hypothesis 2). For larger ﬁrms, the entrepreneur’s communication fre-
DEMO with his or her network has no effect on venture growth; DEMO for
smaller ﬁrms, communication frequency does have a strong and positive DEMO on
venture growth (for Hypothesis 5a). Finally, communication network size seems to
contribute to venture growth more for larger ﬁrms than it DEMO for smaller ﬁrms
(for Hypothesis 5b). Extroverted entrepreneurs in larger DEMO tend to have a
limited network to communicate with, while those DEMO smaller ﬁrms tend to have
a larger communication network (for Hypothesis DEMO).

This study mainly investigates the effects of three groups of variables, entrepre-
neurs’ personalities, backgrounds and networking activities on venture growth.
DEMO the four personality variables, two (need for achievement and internal
locus of control) were posited to have direct impact on venture growth. Their path
coefﬁcients are 0.14 and 0.08 respectively. The other two personality variables
(self-reliance and extroversion) were posited as having indirect effects on venture
growth, while their direct impact can be calculated, -0.03 for the former (-0.29
¥ 0.09) and 0.02 for the latter (0.14 ¥ 0.17 DEMO 0.01 ¥ 0.06). Need for achievement
is therefore the personality trait that has the greatest impact on venture perfor-
mance. This result is DEMO surprising. As mentioned earlier, Singapore is a society
with a low DEMO for failure. The fear of failure naturally leads to a strong desire
to succeed, and venture growth is a clear indicator of business success. Never-
theless the impact of need for achievement is substantially smaller than DEMO of
experience (0.31). Our model indicates that among all the DEMO considered, an
entrepreneur’s industrial and managerial experience has the greatest effect DEMO
venture growth. The positive effects of the networking activities (frequency and
DEMO of external communication) on growth conﬁrm, to a certain extent, DEMO
importance of guanxi in Chinese business communities.
Contrary to what was expected, education has a negative effect on venture
growth, but the effect DEMO minimal. This is, however, not surprising, because the
effect of DEMO on venture growth may well be moderated by ﬁrm size. Our
ﬁndings show that for larger ﬁrms, education does have a small, but DEMO effect
on venture growth. This is a reasonable result because the operations of larger
ﬁrms are more complicated and need more knowledge, some of which can be
gained from formal education. In particular, larger ﬁrms engage in more interna-
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001
    597
tional trade and foreign direct investment activities, which require English proﬁ-
ciency and a considerable amount of book knowledge. DEMO ﬁrms are also more
likely to make use of information technology and e-commerce, and education
deﬁnitely helps in these areas. Nonetheless, for smaller DEMO, the entrepreneur’s
education level may even have a negative effect on DEMO growth. Education plays
a less important role in running smaller ﬁrms because they are simpler. In the case
of Singapore, since the more educated people have been drawn into the private
sector or have opted for DEMO jobs, ‘those with less formal education seem
to be more venturesome’ (Economic Committee, 1986, p. 129).
Our study makes four main DEMO to entrepreneurship literature. First,
there have been heated debates about whether entrepreneurs can be differentiated
from non-entrepreneurs by a set of personality traits (e.g., Carland et al., 1984,
1988; Garnter, 1988). DEMO issue has continued to attract interest from researchers
(e.g., Begley, DEMO; Busenitz and Barney, 1997; Chen et al., 1998; Johnson, 1990;
Miner, 1990). While this study does not directly participate in the debates, it does
show that personality traits in general are not important factors affecting venture
growth. Our ﬁndings are consistent with Begley DEMO Boyd (1987), who found that
there was little relationship between DEMO attributes and ﬁnancial perfor-
mance. The dominant impact of experience upon growth in our model suggests
that students of entrepreneurship need to shift their DEMO from entrepreneur-
ial traits to entrepreneurial skills. Studies have indicated that these skills can be
developed through learning-by-doing (Collins and Moore, 1970; Gartner, 1984).
A careful examination of the intricate relationship between an entrepreneur’s
experience, learning and skills may lead to a better understanding of venture per-
formance as well as the entrepreneurial process. Chandler and Jansen’s (1992)
study offers an example of research in this direction. They focus DEMO how venture
performance is affected by a business founder’s self-assessed competence, DEMO
incorporates the founder’s experience.
Second, previous studies of entrepreneurial characteristics fail DEMO take the effect
of ﬁrm size into account. Our study clearly shows that ﬁrm size is a signiﬁcant
moderating factor. Although some of the DEMO postulated in the model hold
for both smaller and larger ﬁrms, DEMO are moderated by ﬁrm size. The most
drastic cases are the relations between education and venture growth, and between
extroversion and breadth of external communication; the related coefﬁcients have
opposite signs for smaller and larger ﬁrms. While, as noted earlier, the moderat-
ing effect of ﬁrm size DEMO the former relation makes intuitive sense, the moderat-
ing effect on DEMO latter relation requires further research. In short, more empirical
work is DEMO to examine and explain these and other differences affected by
ﬁrm size.
Third, this study is a signiﬁcant improvement over previous studies in terms of
techniques of analysis. Almost all of the existing studies in the DEMO stream use
conventional multivariate techniques (e.g., multiple regression, factor analysis,DEMO
cluster analysis, etc.). This study, however, used PLS, one type of structural equa-
tion model with multiple-item measures, which offers at least two types of advan-
tage over the traditional approach, namely construct validity and integrative
modelling. The assessment of construct validity consists of three DEMO:
(1) Content validity – a behavioural construct usually exhibits multiple mani-
festations, which should be measured by multiple items.
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001
598 . .   . . . 
(2) Other DEMO – a structural equation modelling approach such as PLS is
capable of assessing the convergent validity of a construct (i.e., if all of DEMO
measurement items converge to the construct to be measured), and also
affords an examination of the discriminant validity of a construct (i.e., DEMO a
construct differs considerably from another related construct).
(3) Measurement error – while the conventional approach typically assumes no
measurement errors, PLS explicitly examines the magnitude of measure-
ment errors at the construct level (e.g., average variance extracted).
Additionally, PLS offers an integrative modelling DEMO that enables us to asso-
ciate all the constructs in a ‘causal’ framework as opposed to the traditional
approach such as regression, which requires all the independent variables to have
direct effect on the dependent variable. DEMO modelling approach has clearly illus-
trated that PLS could be a useful tool for researchers interested in studying
entrepreneurship.
Fourth and ﬁnally, with few exceptions, previous studies of the entrepreneurial
characteristics associated with venture performance have been based on Western
countries, particularly the USA. In recent years, DEMO generalizability of manage-
ment theories developed in one culture or nation to other cultures and nations has
been seriously questioned (Hofstede, 1993; Rosenzweig, 1994; Shenkar and Von
Glinow, 1994). Entrepreneurship is a culturally embedded phenomenon. Cross-
cultural or cross-national generalizations without adequate empirical support are
DEMO any substance. The miraculous economic growth of the Asia Paciﬁc region
is, without doubt, a reﬂection of the underlying entrepreneurial spirit in the DEMO,
and deserves greater research attention. The present study attempts to bridge this
research gap and is a valuable addition to the scant studies DEMO entrepreneurs
in Singapore.
The research also has some limitations. Because of the nature of our sampling
method, it is impossible to assess how representative the sample is. Additionally,
growth rates may vary across industries, but industry is not treated as a moderat-
ing variable. As a result, our ﬁndings may be biased towards industries character-
ized by small and DEMO ﬁrms. In short, our ﬁndings should be
considered tentative.
In conclusion, our research ﬁnding that experience is the single factor that has
the DEMO effect on venture growth has practical implications for potential entre-
preneurs. It is important for them to obtain relevant experience before they start
their DEMO business. The weak effects of personality traits found in this study suggest
that the focus of previous studies on the impact of psychological characteristics
DEMO performance may have been misplaced. A more fruitful research direction
appears to be studying the relationship between an entrepreneur’s skills, experi-
ence, learning DEMO, and performance.

*The authors would like to thank Corinne Low, Jeanne Sun and Sharon Tay for their
research assistance, and two anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments.
[1] We would like to thank one DEMO the reviewers for pointing out the effect of ﬁrm size.
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001
    599
:     
Need for Achievement
I will not be satisﬁed unless I have reached the DEMO level of results.
Even though people tell me ‘it cannot be done’, I will persist.
I look upon my work as simply a way to achieve my goals.
Internal Locus of Control
When I get what DEMO want, it is usually because I worked hard for it.
My DEMO is mostly determined by my own actions.
I can pretty much control what will happen in my life.
Self-Reliance
I feel that there are DEMO in the ﬁrm who can do my job equally well. (Reverse
DEMO)
I like to make my own decisions, rather than be DEMO what to do.
I prefer to have partners involved in making decisions for the ﬁrm. (Reverse scale)
Extroversion
I enjoy meeting new people.
I usually take the initiative in making new friends.
I like plenty DEMO bustle and excitement around me.

A, H. and Z, C. (1986). ‘Entrepreneurship through social networks’. In
Sexton, D. L. and DEMO, R. W. (Eds), The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge,
MA: Ballinger, 3–23.
A, H., R, B. and W, W. (1987). ‘The impact of social networks on
business founding DEMO proﬁt: a longitudinal study’. In Churchill, N. C., Hornaday, J. A.,
Kirchoff, B. A., Krasner, O. J. and Vesper, DEMO H. (Eds), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research.
Wellesley, MA: Babson DEMO for Entrepreneurial Studies, 154–68.
B, T. M. (1995). ‘Using DEMO status, age of ﬁrm, and company growth rate as the
basis for distinguishing entrepreneurs from managers of smaller businesses’. Journal of
Business Venturing, 10, 249–63.
B. T. M. and B, D. P. (1987). ‘Psychological characteristics associated with per-
formance in entrepreneurial ﬁrms and smaller businesses’. DEMO of Business Venturing,
2, 79–93.
B, R. H. (1980)DEMO ‘Risk taking propensity of entrepreneurs’. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 23, 3, 509–20.
B, L. W. and B, J. B. (1997)DEMO ‘Differences between entrepreneurs and
managers in large organizations: biases and heuristics DEMO strategic decision-making’.
Journal of Business Venturing, 12, 9–30.
Business Times (DEMO). ‘How to compete in a global economy: SM’. 16 February.
DEMO, B. M. (1998). Structural Equation Modeling with LISREL, PRELIS, and SIMPLIS: Basic
Concepts, Applications, and Programming. London: Lawrence Erlbaum DEMO
C, J. W., H, F., B, W. R. and DEMO, J. A. C. (1984). ‘Differentiating
entrepreneurs from small business owners: a conceptualization’. Academy of Management
Review, 9, 2, 354–9.
© DEMO Publishers Ltd 2001
600
. .   . . . 
C, J. W., H, F. and C, J. A. C. (1988). ‘“Who DEMO an entrepreneur?” is a
question worth asking’. American Journal of Small Business, 12, 4, 33–9.
C, G. N. and H, S. H. (1993). ‘Measuring the performance of emerging
businesses: a validation DEMO Journal of Business Venturing, 8, 391–408.
C, G. N. and DEMO, E. (1992). ‘The founder’s self-assessed competence and
venture performance’. Journal of Business Venturing, 7, 223–36.
C, C. C., G, P. G. and C, A. (1998). ‘Does entrepreneurial self-efﬁcacy
distinguish entrepreneurs DEMO managers?’. Journal of Business Venturing, 13, 295–316.
C, N. DEMO and L, V. L. (1986). ‘Entrepreneurship research’. In Sexton, DEMO L.
and Smilor, R. W. (Eds), The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger,
333–65.
C, O. F. and M, D. G. (1970). The Organization Makers. New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts.
C, A. C. and D, W. C. (1987). ‘Entrepreneurial research: old questions,
new answers and methodological issues’. American Journal of Small Business, 11, 3, 11–21.
C, A. C., D, DEMO, W, C. and D, W. (1990). New Business in America:
The Firms and Their Owners. Washington DC: NFIB Foundation.
D, P. (1989). ‘Entrepreneurship – and after? A study of growth willingness in small
ﬁrms’. Journal of Business Venturing, 4, 211–26.
DC, J. F. and L, P. R. (1979). ‘A comparison of DEMO personal charac-
teristics of minority and nonminority female entrepreneurs’. Journal of Small Business
Management, 17, 4, 22–9.
D, A. and B, P. W. (1999). ‘Geographic scope, product diversiﬁcation and the
corporate performance DEMO Japanese ﬁrms’. Strategic Management Journal, 20, 8, 711–27.
D, D. A. (1987). ‘New venture success in an emerging industry’. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Nova University.
D, D. A. and G, W. B. (DEMO). ‘A proﬁle of new venture success and
failure in an emerging industry’. Journal of Business Venturing, 5, 297–312.
D, L. S., DEMO, E. M. and R, A. R. (1992). ‘An inter-industry DEMO
of the impact of owner experience on ﬁrm performance’. Journal of Small Business
Management, 30, 4, 72–87.
E C (1986). The DEMO Economy: New Directions. Singapore: Ministry of
Trade & Industry.
E, DEMO L. (1959). Edwards Personal Preference Schedule. New York: The Psychological
Corporation.
E,S.B.G., E, H. J. and B, P. (1985)DEMO ‘A revised version of the
Psychoticism scale’. Personality and Individual Differences, DEMO, 1, 21–9.
F, C. (1982). ‘A second generation of multivariate analysis: an overview’. In Fornell,
C. (Ed.), A DEMO Generation of Multivariate Analysis, Vol. 1. New York: Praeger, 1–21.
DEMO, C. (1987). ‘A second generation of multivariate analysis: classiﬁcation DEMO methods
and implications for marketing research’. In Houston, M. J. (Ed.), Review of Marketing.
Chicago, IL: American Marketing Association, 407–50.
F, C. and B, F. L. (1982). ‘Two structural equation models: LISREL
and PLS applied to consumer exit-voice theory’. Journal of Marketing Research, 19,
440–52.
F, C. and L, D. F. (1981)DEMO ‘Evaluating structural equation models with unob-
servable variables and measurement error’. Journal of Marketing Research, 18, 39–50.
G, W. B. (1984). DEMO in business startup: the relationships among entrepre-
neurial skills and problem DEMO for different types of new ventures’. In Horna-
day, J. A., Tarpley, F., Timmons, J. A. and Vesper, K. H. (Eds), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research. Wellesley, MA: Babson Center for Entrepreneurial DEMO, 496–512.
G, W. B. (1985). ‘A conceptual framework for DEMO the phenomenon of new
venture creation’. Academy of Management Review, 10, 4, 696–706.
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001
   
601
G, W. B. (1988). ‘ DEMO is an entrepreneur?” is the wrong question’. American Journal
of Small Business, 12, 4, 11–32.
G, Y. (1982). ‘Commentary elaboration: elaborations on the psychology of the
entrepreneur’. In Kent, C. A., Sexton, D. L. and Vesper, K. H. (Eds), Encyclopedia of
Entrepreneurship. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 58–71.
H, E. L. (1995). ‘Entrepreneurial networks and new organization growth’. Entrepre-
neurship Theory and Practice, 19, 4, 7–19.
H, L. and R, R. B. (1993). ‘A structual model of the effects of entre-
preneurial characteristics on DEMO performance’. Journal of Business Venturing, 8,
281–94.
H, G. (DEMO). ‘Cultural constraints in management theories’. Academy of Manage-
ment Executive, DEMO, 1, 81–94.
H, J. N. and Y, J. E. (DEMO). ‘Entrepreneurship’s requisite areas of develop-
ment: a survey of top DEMO in successful entrepreneurial ﬁrms’. Journal of Business
Venturing, 8, 115–35.
H, J. A. and A, J. (1971). ‘Characteristics of successful entrepreneurs’.
Personnel Psychology, 24, 141–53.
I, A. B. and G, J. DEMO (1986). ‘Perceived causes of success in small business’.
American Journal DEMO Small Business, 11, 2, 41–50.
J, H. and L, DEMO (1996). ‘The relationship between an entrepreneur’s background and
performance in DEMO new venture’. Technovation, 16, 4, 161–71.
J, B. R. (DEMO). ‘Toward a multidimensional model of entrepreneurship: the case
of achievement DEMO and the entrepreneur’. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 14,
3, 39–54.
K, L. B. (1989). ‘Government as entrepreneur’. In Sandhu, K. S. and Wheatley, P.
(Eds), Management of Success: The Moulding of Modern Singapore. Singapore: Institute of
Southeast Asian Studies, 436–51.
L DEMO, R. (1997). ‘Three priorities for S’pore’s education system’. Straits Times,31
January.
L, H. M. (1981). Research with the Locus DEMO Control Construct, Vol. 1. New York:
Academic Press.
L, H. (1974). ‘Activism and powerful others: distinctions within the concept of
DEMO control’. Journal of Personality Assessment, 38, 4, 377–83.
L, W. D. (1965). ‘The motel entrepreneur and the motel manager’. Academy of
Management Journal, 8, 268–81.
L, J. B. (1989). Latent DEMO Path Modeling with Partial Least Squares. Heidelberg:
Physica-Verlag.
MM, I. DEMO, S, R. and N, S. P. N. (1985). ‘Criteria used by venture
capitalists to evaluate new performance’. Journal of Business Venturing, 1, 119–28.
MC, D. C. (1961). The Achieving Society. Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand.
M, J. B. (1990). ‘Entrepreneurs, high growth entrepreneurs, and managers: contrast-
ing and overlapping motivational patterns’. Journal DEMO Business Venturing, 5, 221–34.
N, J. (1978). Psychometric Theory, 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
O, T. A. and B, DEMO (1996). ‘New venture growth and personal networks’.
Journal of Business DEMO, 36, 37–50.
P, C. (1990). ‘After further sightings of the Heffalump’. Journal of Managerial Psychol-
ogy, 5, 2, 22–31.
R, S. G. (1990). The Spirit of Chinese Capitalism. New York: Walter de Gruyter.
Report of the Sub-Committee on Entrepreneurship Development (1985). Singapore.
R, P. B. and S, E. A. (1994). ‘The effect of education and experience on
self-employment success’. Journal of Business Venturing, 9, 141–56.
R, P. M. (1994). ‘When can management science research be generalized inter-
nationally?’ Management Science, 40, 1, 28–39.
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001
602
. .   . . . 
S, A. (DEMO). ‘The displaced, uncomfortable entrepreneur’. Psychology Today, 9,6,
83–8.
S, K. G. and S, L. R. (1991). ‘Person, DEMO, choice: the psychology of new
venture creation’. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 16, 2, 23–45.
S, O. and V G, M. S. (1994). ‘Paradoxes of organizational theory and
research: using the case DEMO China to illustrate national contingency’. Management Science,
40, 1, 56–71.
S, B. L. (1999). ‘Ambiguity and the process of knowledge DEMO in strategic
alliances’. Strategic Management Journal, 20, 7, 595–623.
S, N. R. and M, J. B. (1984). ‘Motivational considerations in DEMO success of
technologically innovative entrepreneurs’. In Hornaday, J. A., Tarpley, DEMO, Timmons,
J. A. and Vesper, K. H. (Eds), DEMO of Entrepreneurship Research. Wellesley, MA: Babson
Center for Entrepreneurial Studies, DEMO
Straits Times (1996). ‘Being creative about creativity’. 11 September.
Straits DEMO (1999). ‘Knowledge economy needs new teaching focus’. 20 October.
S, R. W. and A, P. A. (1990). ‘Impact of entrepreneurial DEMO managerial
experience on early performance’. Journal of Business Venturing, 5, 151–62.
T, W. C. M. and T, R. S. T. (1994). ‘Factors contributing to the growth of SMEs:
the Singapore case’. Proceedings DEMO the Fifth ENDEC World Conference on Entrepreneurship,
Singapore, 150–61.
T, H. Y. and F, S. L. (1997). ‘Moderating effects of DEMO for ambiguity and
risk-taking propensity on the role conﬂict-perceived performance relationship: DEMO
from Singaporean entrepreneurs’. Journal of Business Venturing, 12, 67–81.
T, DEMO (1986). ‘Characteristics of the small business entrepreneur in Canada’.
Journal DEMO Small Business and Entrepreneurship, 4, 1, 5–11.
T, E. W. K. (1998). ‘Can guanxi be a source of sustained competitive advantage for
doing business in China?’ Academy of Management Executive, 12, DEMO, 64–73.
V  V, A. H., H, R. and S, D. M. (1984). ‘Designing new business
start-ups: entrepreneurial, organizational, and ecological considerations’. Journal of
Management, 10, 87–107.
V, K. (DEMO). New Venture Strategies. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
W, DEMO (1982). ‘Soft modeling: the basic design and some extensions’. In Joreskog,
K. G. and Wold, H. (Eds), Systems under DEMO Observation, Part II. Amsterdam: North-
Holland, 1–54.
W, H. (DEMO). ‘Partial least squares’. In Kots, S. and Johnson, N. L. (Eds), Encyclopedia
of Statistical Sciences, Vol. 6. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 581–91.
Y, I. Y. M. and T, R. L. (1996). ‘Achieving business success in Confucian soci-
eties: the DEMO of guanxi (connections)’. Organizational Dynamics, Autumn, 54–65.
Y, A. (1995). ‘Critical success factors for small business: perceptions of South DEMO
entrepreneurs’. Journal of Small Business Management, 23, 2, 68–73.
Z, L. and A, J. D. (1995). ‘Networking and growth of DEMO technology-intensive
ventures in China’. Journal of Business Venturing, 10, 349–70.
© Blackwell Publishers Ltd 2001{1g42fwefx}