1
Chapter 1
A Study of New Business Venture
Trust
1. 1  The Role and Function of Trust for
New Business Ventures
Every established DEMO enterprise has once started as a new venture. The
existing enterprise managed to survive the period of start-up and early
development. New businesses are DEMO and many do not survive the first
few years. One very large study of survival rate of start-ups among 3.6 million
firms found that DEMO two out of five new firms survived the first six years
(DEMO, 1990, p. 32).
No wonder that there is an large amount of books and start-up training
courses etc. oriented towards giving business DEMO practical "hands-on" advice
on how to manage and succeed with a new venture. "Hands-on" advice generally
means normative prescriptions on matters like DEMO to raise capital, how to
formulate a business idea, how to select between legal forms of business in a
specific country, how to approach potential customers etc. Often advice
concerning a precise sequence of start DEMO can be found: Get funding first
or get customers first. These DEMO are often given in a tone of "Do it in
this DEMO and you will succeed". This way of approaching business start-up gives
important information in start-up situations but is at the same time problematic
DEMO at least two angles. Firstly, empirical research indicates that there is DEMO one
"best" way to start a business. Vesper (1990, pp. 112 - 118) found a wide variety
of different ways to start for new ventures that were successful. Secondly, the
business start-up is a matter not only for the starter but also for others in contact
DEMO the new venture, notably customers, suppliers and financers in spe. That is
also to say: Relationships between the business starter and other actors around
the new venture are important for the start-up. Relationships differ beween DEMO
specific start-up situation due to the basic fact that people differ in the situations.
Relationships - new or existing from before - are thus DEMO for the
new venture to enter into exhange on markets, acquire DEMO legitimacy to
2
act or just to get important information for operations. Advice on DEMO must
take relationships into account, as a prerequisite for action to DEMO understood or
accepted. For example the network research approach to study business
formation assumes that the key to success is the ability to develop DEMO maintain a
personal network of ties and linkages (Aldrich & Zimmer, 1986; Birley, 1985;
Johannisson, 1988). This line of research has brought attention to the quantity
and intensiveness of relations as well DEMO the implications thereof. But important
questions remain: Why has a network DEMO specific extension and intensiveness?
What determines the network? What underlies DEMO observed set of network ties
and linkages? Network characteristics can be DEMO as an outward display of the
parties' inner meaning. The parties' meaning concerning a relationship is
fundamental for the relationship as such. This DEMO has been recognized in the
business formation network approach (e.g. Johannisson, 1988) but the meaning
of relationships in connection to business start-up deserves to be more focused,
be it by network studies or in DEMO ways.
The notion of meaning, used in the last paragraph, in connection with
business formation can be exemplified concerning the external actors. It DEMO vital
for them to judge whether it is certain, probable or DEMO least reasonable that the
new venture can deliver products/services, pay DEMO material bought, pay rent on
loans etc. The business starter must DEMO trusted. Trust is one meaning in relation-
ships and action. New businesses may have a history, if for example the
entrepreneur starting the business is not new in the industry. Trust may then exist
since before. DEMO in many cases the new venture is not a well-known actor in the
market for products, capital and other resources and has no adequate
trustworthiness with external actors. For a new venture to establish itself as DEMO
actor, secure its position in the markets and develop, trustworthiness is
important.
The importance of trust for a new business venture has been DEMO by
some writers in the literature concerning new business ventures. Birley &DEMO
Norburn (1985) write that young companies often fail because they do not
succeed in acquiring credibility. They need money to buy equipment, lease
space, hire people etc. Credibility has to be gained with stakeholders providing
the resources. The entrepreneur must
establish personal credibility in the eyes of DEMO least one of the stakeholder groups to
survive. As business grows, DEMO credibility will be replaced by corporate credibility.
The organisation will have a track record - critical factor for survival of the small firm.
By DEMO, large firms already possess that characteristic of corporate credibility (p.
84).
3
How can trust be gained? MacMillan (1983) points at the need to use trusted
contacts to increase one's own trustworthiness:
DEMO entrepreneur must be able to mobilize all parties with a stake in the new venture to
commit themselves firmly to it. One way of DEMO credibility is via a network of
influential contacts (p. 8).
DEMO MacMillan (1983) also points at a catch-22 situation due to stakeholders
watching each other before they act:
Stakeholders will not join in DEMO commitments from other stakeholders are forthcoming.
More often than not, none DEMO these parties wants to be the first to commit itself to a new
venture. Entrepreneurs must learn to anticipate resistance or reluctance, and develop
political skills to neutralize and overcome it (p. 8).
Concerning stakeholders' importance and the impact of their assessment
Diffenbach & Higgins (1987) write that credibility refers to how others view a
company's strategy DEMO strategic planning capability. Credibility is likely to be
critical in different situations. So, they contend, a start-up firm is especially
vulnerable to low DEMO But they also refer to examples where the start-up
companies enjoyed high trustworthiness when organised by leading teams with
successful track records from other DEMO This e.g. allowed raising a large sum
of start-up funds in a referred case study.
Bird (1992) elaborates the theme above in the DEMO that the venture takes
shape in the public eye as the firm establishes credit, acquires resources and
manages timely payment. Events like writing a business plan, signing a lease,
sales to the first customer take on symbolic meaning - "Symbolic Marker
Events". Due to such events people more and more come to trust the
organisation. Through the symbols DEMO organisation acquires verification by
social construction of the organisation's reality (DEMO & Luckmann, 1967).
Bird's approach contains the view of DEMO and events evolving over time. The
actors base their action on events and others' actions, which become meaningful
in that they are given DEMO interpretation.
The quotations above point at trustworthiness or credibility as an
important issue concerning new ventures. But apart from stating importance, the
writers do not explicitly study the role and function of trust in new business
DEMO This study agrees on the general view of the above quoted authors
concerning trust as an important issue in business start-up and early
development. DEMO view will also be further qualified by new aspects in
discussions in this book. But the main reason for the study is not to DEMO the
importance of trust in a general or normative sense but to bring the investigation
4
further into the notion of trust bringing insight into and answers DEMO questions
like: How does trust make sense for entrepreneurs and external DEMO in business
start-up and early development? What does trust mean for DEMO actors? Has
trust the same or different meaning over time during DEMO start-up and early
development process? How is trust-building performed? Specifically, DEMO does
the entrepreneur use trustworthiness or build trustworthiness among different
actors? DEMO the actors make sense of specific patterns of action in building and
using trust?
Answers to such questions bring insights into how entrepreneurs DEMO
external actors act when they see trust as meaningful. Thereby the study can
contribute to theory concerning entrepreneurship by concept-building with focus
on action DEMO and trust. So the study's over-all purpose is to contribute to
knowledge of the role and function of trust in business start-up and DEMO
development in action processes between entrepreneurs and external actors.
This over-all purpose is broad and needs to be delimited to a few tangible
aspects. DEMO, the study is designed to deal with three specific research
issues.
DEMO first issue becomes: What are the external actor's bases for DEMO in
the entrepreneur and the new venture? Trust is a complicated DEMO multifacetted
phenomenon, which needs to defined for any specific study purpose. DEMO
between actors in business start-up is individually and socially constructed
meaning governing the commitment between the actors. What one actor sees as
important for DEMO in the other, i.e. what makes sense for trust, becomes a
starting point for further analysis. Therefore insight into constructed meanings of
trust DEMO needed and a language representation for the findings - in the form of a
taxonomy concerning trust bases - will open up for the DEMO analysis.
Trust as a mental representation between two actors may change over time
due to action performed and the actors' interpretation of consequences, DEMO
An actor makes sense of her/his trustworthiness in the eyes of the other actor but
how does s/he cope with the need DEMO be trusted? Particularly, how can the actor
handle a situation where trustworthiness is not or can be assumed to not be
adequate? The second study issue then becomes: How do entrepreneurs and
external actors use and build trust in action processes?
In trust between two actors DEMO complex patterns concerning trust may
be constructed by them. Trust may involve intermediaries in a role of conveying
trust. The third research issue therefore DEMO: Do entrepreneurs and external
actors in action processes repeatedly use intermediaries DEMO trust-building and
assessment of trust?
5
These three research issues will form three steps in the analyses, forming
the main contents of chapters 6, 7 and 8 respectively. But before that a number of
central concepts need to be discussed and DEMO, along with a frame of
reference as a basis for the DEMO
1. 2  New Business Venture - An Equivocal
Situation
1. 2. DEMO  Business Start-up and Early Development
The term new /business/venture will in the study be used covering both busines
start-up and early development DEMO on the following discussion.
Business Start-up
First of all, it is DEMO to define business. The Concise Oxford Dictionary
(1976, p. 133) DEMO two relevant definitions:
1/ Buying and selling; commerce; trade
DEMO/ Commercial house; firm.
The first definition concerns transaction and exchange made on just one
occasion or, as the notions of trade and commerce clearly imply, transactions and
exchanges repeatedly performed over time. The last notion brings us over to the
second definition: Repeatedly performed transactions and exchanges will
become the basis for a commercial firm, i.e. an organisation that deals with
business transactions and exchanges.
So, one way of seeing business start-up is that transactions and exchanges
performed repeatedly form the commercial enterprise DEMO a process of organising.
"To organise is to assemble ongoing independent DEMO into sensible
sequences that generate sensible outcomes" (Weick 1979, p. DEMO). In chapter 3 we
will go deeper into what organising means in a business start-up situation.
The entrepreneur - one person or more DEMO a specific venture - is a key
element. S/he acts to perform business transactions: Selling, buying, acquisition
of necessary funds, production DEMO management of how goods and services are
produced. In these actions the entrepreneur as an actor acts with other actors:
customers, suppliers, DEMO etc. So, there is an interplay between the
entrepreneur and the DEMO Different actors interplay on several
occasions or repeatedly, forming processes of DEMO and interaction. Gartner
6
(1985) describes new venture creation as an interplay between four DEMO:
Individual(s), environment, process and organisation.
In this interplay DEMO entrepreneur seeks out resources and competences in
the market place. A combination of individuals, environment and action
processes shapes the organisation formed.
Gartner (DEMO) also means that actions evolve in their own particular way for
DEMO new business start-up. It is not instantaneously produced, but evolves over
DEMO Each business start-up is both a unique and complex phenomenon.
Foundings occur within a time-pace context in which the order of events is a
DEMO part of the process (Bird, 1992, p. 13 ).
Empirically, to distinguish between an entrepreneur and a new business
venture is not easy (Birley & Norburn, 1985, p. 82). Obviously, an DEMO
is a prerequisite for a new venture to occur. In the continued start-up, the
entrepreneur will take part in almost all action, until DEMO other people not
fulfilling the entrepreneurial role come into the play. Then the typical roles for
manager vs. employee, problems about differentiation and integration of tasks
etc. - that we recognise in the traditional management and DEMO theory -
may become issues in what is by then an established enterprise.
There is normally a period between the entrepreneur's starting to DEMO and
the formal registration of a firm. Reynolds (1993) uses the term nascent
entrepreneur covering the period when the prospective entrepreneur works with
DEMO idea in her/his head. The pre-start-up period covers in Kazanjian's (1988)
terminology activities up to formal registration. In the pre-start period there does
not yet exist a firm, which can legally assume rights and obligations (apart from
an extrapreneurial situation, where the prospective entrepreneur DEMO act in
another firm). This must be done by the entrepreneur in person, which may make
a clear difference in the eyes of surrounding actors and the general environment.
Formal registration means that there is DEMO firm in the legal sense, which in
accordance with laws governing DEMO of enterprises (i.e. firms), brings rights
and obligations to bear. DEMO registration is important in that the business start-
up gets its own identity in the eyes of surrounding actors and the general
environment.
Based DEMO this discussion the study will use business start-up as a
collective name for the action processes starting with the entrepreneur's
sensemaking of a DEMO opportunity continuing until the formal registration of
a firm.
Early Development
7
New venture creation is an emerging organisation (Gartner et al., DEMO, Gartner,
1993). Emerge means that a phenomenon becomes manifest, comes into view,
and does that by evolution. The view is DEMO one of diversity: Each business'
early development is in itself DEMO Gartner (1985, p. 696) refers to literature
surveys showing that DEMO between entrepreneurs are as great as the
variation between entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs. Likewise, differences
among their ventures are great just they are between new firms and established
firms. Even if development in processes is firm-specific, there are two
distinguishing features. One common feature is that the formal registration DEMO the
firm has brought rights and obligations to bear. Another common feature is early
development often characterised by vulnerability, which manifests itself in a
weak or unstable financial position of the firm (Vesper, 1990, p 32). More
basically, vulnerability is due to lack of effective relationships (Singh, Tucker &
House, 1986) or undeveloped ones in its environment (Aldrich & Fiol, 1994).
Other studies show that survival DEMO increase after the first years (Singh, House
& Tucker, 1986)DEMO Relations with external actors become more established
(Stinchcombe 1965). Olofsson (1979) uses the term environmental anchorage,
denoting a situation where a developing enterprise establishes co-operation with
organisations, groups or individuals representing the intended market or which
are expected to be important for the market the DEMO strives to establish.
Early development will in this study be used as a collective name for the
action processes from formal registration onwards. The DEMO "early" just
implies that the first few years after start-up will be in focus.1
Business Start-up and Early Development - an Equivocal Situation
DEMO what is problematic for business start-up and early development for
emerging organisation, Gartner et al (1992) express their stance:
Emerging organizations are thoroughly equivocal realities that tend towards non-
equivocality through entrepreneurial action (p. 17).
1 The notion of "early" in early development can DEMO that the firm changes its situation in a
specific way. Normann (DEMO, p. 184) distinguishes between early and mature stages of
development, DEMO early development is characterized by a view of process, growth and
DEMO For mature development a view of goal, business ideas and harvesting DEMO tangible
and intangible investments is more typical. However, we consider that DEMO process and goal
views are not necessarily based on stage development of the firm. Furthermore, growth views
are often not important for new ventures. Finally, a culture of learning may be more contingent
on type of environment and industry than the position of a firm's development. The DEMO
shows that the notion of "early" easily becomes problematic linked to firm characteristics. Our
needs to delimit a study period of new firms DEMO not linked to any other characteristics than just
having operated for a short time, hence the more pragmatic notion of "early".
8
The concept equivocal is based on Weick (1979) and denotes DEMO situation
with abundance of information, which can be given two or DEMO interpretations.
In an equivocal situation it can for example be difficult to assess cause - effect
relationships. In emerging organisations, entrepreneurs will give plausible
explanations of current and future equivocal events by non-equivocal
interpretation. Entrepreneurs talk DEMO act "as if" equivocal events are non-
equivocal (Gartner et. DEMO 1992). Action is taken in expectation of non-equivocal
events occurring in the future. Starr & Macmillan (1990) give a good example in
DEMO how an entrepreneur secured the use of a friend's business resources
(office equipment and delivery van) during the start-up of an import DEMO to
show outsiders his available resources. They actually took it for granted that
these resources were acquired on a permanent basis. Outsiders are likely DEMO
respond to an emerging business "as if" it were an existing business: They will
place orders, offer material on credit etc.2
In DEMO, according to Gartner et. al. (1992), the established
organisation is more bound-up in non-equivocal events. Individuals behave more
in a context of DEMO determined (and interpreted) interactions. Individuals in
existing organisations tend to "DEMO" (Powell & Di Maggio, 1991)
that certain interactions will DEMO and that these interactions will have a
particular meaning to those individuals involved. Established organisations
function more on the basis that individuals, both in and around the organisation,
have developed a common view of meaning DEMO interaction.
Our conclusion from this discussion will be: One should be DEMO in
seeing the equivocality concerning emerging and existing organisations as
exactly contrary, but rather see them as varying. Still, the interaction between
individuals DEMO emerging and established organisations may imply that
expressed desires of unequivocality from emerging organisations will be taken-
for-granted by established organisations, since this may be congruent with their
reality. But for the emerging organisation, expressed desire of unequivocality
may reflect a process of building trust.
Going back again DEMO the discussion in section 1.1 we can see that the
quoted references pointed at stakeholders providing resources, sales to customers
and use of influential contacts for ensuring others' commitment (Bird, 1992;
Diffenbach & Higgins, 1987; MacMillan, 1983). Trustworthiness is considered
to be necessary but the surrounding parties' commitment is not certain, according
2 The researcher DEMO studied an entrepreneur, who hired secreterial services only during visits to
DEMO company. Still, the researcher does not consider these examples to contain DEMO or
fraud, since the resources were actually there to be used DEMO the occasion.
9
to the quoted writers. Seen from the point of view of DEMO entrepreneur the
situations are equivocal and trust may be seen as a way to cope with
equivocality. Therefore we now need to see how DEMO may reside in
some important business matters like the market, the DEMO of funds and
also general relations between entrepreneur and actors surrounding the business
start-up.
1. 2. 2  Equivocality Concerning Market
A new enterprise is often unknown in the market. Its intentions, motives and
goals may not be seen by existing competitors; in Porter's (1980) terminology the
entrant sends market signals that can be characterised as weak. Weak market
DEMO may enable the new entrant to build a market before competitors react.
However, weak market signals could be contrary to the new entrant's desire to
become a well-known actor among customers in spe, and may make trust-
building in general more difficult. So the entrepreneur may face DEMO equivocal
situation: To be salient in the market for building trust DEMO evoke more
countermeasures from strong competitors.
Entry barriers for the start-up enterprise can emanate from a number of
sources, the most important being customers, competitor capability and required
assets (Vesper, 1990). Customer habits and beliefs may favour existing products,
if these are considered to be DEMO The new entrant has to prove
advantages and change customer thinking - build trustworthiness for the
enterprise and its products. Changes can also be DEMO by switching-costs
for customers leaving an old supplier in favour of a new one (Porter, 1980).
Knowledge and skills necessary for the DEMO and market can be a barrier for a
new entrant compared to existing competing enterprises. No wonder therefore
that many investigations show that successful DEMO into different industries are
made by entrepreneurs with high competence and experience in the same
industry (Diffenbach & Higgins, 1987; Reynolds, 1993)DEMO They are often
extrapreneurs, trained in an existing company.3 This makes DEMO situation with
lower equivocality which may facilitate building trustworthiness in the eyes of
external stakeholders. Required assets can be entry barriers. Some assets are
DEMO, such as reputation and name recognition. Others may involve formal
documents: patents, trade marks, copyrights, quality certificates and contracts
3 Cooper, DEMO; also Hägg & Johnsson, 1985: Extrapreneur is a white-collar worker DEMO leaves
his employment for the purpose of establishing a separate firm which will complement his
earlier employment; they could also establish themselves as competitors.
10
with external actors. There may also be tangible assets: funds, DEMO,
production and distribution equipment. In these days information handling
equipment and systems are often vital assets which can sometimes be difficult to
obtain DEMO a start-up. Assets may be important for building and conveying trust
(DEMO Birley & Norburn, 1985 above).
1. 2. 3  Equivocality Concerning Acquisition of Funds
Funding, the acquisition of money, is central and DEMO much - although not
all - acquisition of other resources. Since a business start-up nearly always is a
small business very much debate regarding DEMO business financing is relevant
also for new ones. A point of departure is the degree to which the start-up is
financed by owner's DEMO versus borrowed capital. If it is totally financed by
owner's capital, which in itself could be easier to accomplish in a new and small
business, most of the discussion below will be irrelevant. But to a large extent
entrepreneurs need external funding and the following will be DEMO or
crucial.4 The legal forms of proprietorship and partnership, which are DEMO
for start-up in most countries, normally do not permit limited liability DEMO
The owner has to bear all the risk including also her/his personal property. In
some countries a small business can be organised as DEMO corporation on the same
lines as a large business, but - DEMO least in Sweden and the United States - owners
will not be protected against personal losses from business failure. The reason is
that they DEMO often required by lenders to provide a personal guarantee or to put
up non-corporate personal assets as security for loans. Trust in the owner DEMO
become an essential issue. The new venture may have less property to offer as
security for loans than an established business. New (and small) businesses also
generally have fewer sources for funds in the capital market. No publicly traded
securities, neither debt nor stock are traded on the capital market, not until the
enterprise may have grown. This also means that market valuation as a basis for
further funding the enterprise does DEMO exist, which makes evaluation of lending
terms more difficult for lenders. DEMO absence of market valuation may make cost
of capital higher for start-ups. The new venture's duration in the market, and
consequently the basis for long-term loans, can be difficult for lenders to judge.
For the lenders, trust in the financial resources and stability will be an issue and
the situation for the borrower will be equivocal.
4 The following DEMO is partly based on Ang (1991).
11
An established business applying for new loans is assessed by i.a.
DEMO performance data (balance sheet, income statement etc.). Start-ups
have no or little such information. Instead they have to be assessed based on
DEMO instead of performance information, judgement on entrepreneurial
capability etc. New ventures DEMO for the reasons stated here have a weak
bargaining position for funds. Opportunities in the ordinary capital market can be
low and transaction costs DEMO capital high. On the other hand the government
provides support to start-ups in many countries in order to promote new busi-
ness. Support can DEMO loans (on or below market terms), guarantees or direct
contributions. DEMO relations with capital providers are often different for the
start-up. Partly due to a weaker position on the capital market an entrepreneur
may have DEMO rely on other sources for money: friends and relatives (Birley, DEMO;
Johannisson, 1988). The owner - employee relationship is often DEMO to personal
(Brytting 1991; Steiner, 1990) and the employees may be capital providers on a
temporary or more permanent basis. New and DEMO business could in this way
get financial flexibility including extra support in financially critical situations.
To this flexibility can also be added that small DEMO owners are often willing
to settle for a lesser monetary reward in return for the fulfillment of objectives
which the ownership function and other DEMO rewards provide
(Dandridge, 1979). To conclude, instead of trust DEMO a convincing financial
history, the new venture's trustworthiness must be DEMO on other grounds.
Equivocality resides in assessment criteria with less "hard DEMO" which can be
compared to other financial support situations for reduced DEMO
1. 2. 4  Equivocality and External Actors
The now almost classical DEMO in discussing relations between entrepreneurs
and actors surrounding the business start up is the "liability of newness" coined
by Arthur Stinchcombe (1965). He took an interest in what encourages the start
of new organisations DEMO also why new organisations so often fail. He states that,
as a general rule, a higher proportion of new organisations fail than old ones
(Stinchcombe, 1965, p. 148; see e.g. also Singh, House & Tucker, 1986). A new
organisation - especially if it is a new form, e.g. bringing in an innovation - has
to be much more beneficial than the old one to compensate for its newness. DEMO
concludes that if there are populations in which the "liability of DEMO" is
exceptionally great, organisational innovation will tend to be carried out only
when alternatives are difficult to implement. Equivocality would be a barrier DEMO
new ventures to emerge.
12
Stinchcombe (1965, pp. 148-9) presents four criteria for the liability of
newness: First, new organisations, especially new types of organisations,
generally involve new roles, which have to be learned. In old organisations
former occupants of roles can teach their successors: skills, decision criteria,DEMO
responsibilities, devices for conflict-resolving and - and also loyalty to the
DEMO New organisations have to get by with generalised skills produced
elsewhere or to invest in education. Learning costs, including inefficiency from
lack of routine, appear.
Second, the process of inventing new roles, the determination of their
mutual relations and of structuring the field of rewards and sanctions DEMO high
costs in time, worry, conflict and temporary inefficiency. These problems can be
reduced by standard social routines and - more important still DEMO the sense of
responsibility and initiative to get the job done.
Third, new organisations must rely heavily on social relations among
strangers. Relations of trust are more precarious in new than in old organisations.
Trust may DEMO that a stranger will do the job he says s/he will do,
furthermore that his/her promises to pay actually bind the DEMO s/he says
they do. Other concerns may be that the new goods stranger describes are
something like what s/he says they are DEMO that the stranger acts from honesty
and competence.
Fourth, one of DEMO main resources of old organisations is a set of stable
ties to those who use organisational services. These ties stand for accurate
knowledge of DEMO needs and quality requirements. Ties may also stand for
channelling of orders and whom to call for action. These stable ties also imply
personal DEMO in the consumer-producer relation.
All these four criteria of "the liability DEMO newness" have implications for
trust: built-up skills that are visible to others, standard social routines, and
relationships. But it is also vital DEMO qualify Stinchcombe's arguments against
other views and findings: First, not all entrepreneurs are new in their field of
operation. In fact, most have industry experience (Cooper, 1985; Reynolds,
1993) and a DEMO network of contacts to use in start-up (Birley & Norburn,
DEMO).
Second, Stinchcombe (1965) may underestimate the importance of new
DEMO for innovative work, non-routine can actually be an advantage (Peterson,
1981). Actually, the break away from the tradition and routine can in itself be the
cause of the new business and may have DEMO for trust. Bull & Willard
(1993) expressed the view that new firms face liability of newness but existing
firms face liabilities of age DEMO tradition.
13
Third, even if Stinchcombe (1965) identifies the sense of responsibility
and initiative to get the job done, he may underestimate strong motivational
forces evoked when the entrepreneur faces the need for survival and expansion DEMO
an equivocal situation. "We suggest that entrepreneurs create a constellation of
DEMO motivational systems to involve different stakeholder groups in the
organising process" DEMO the conclusion of Gartner, Bird & Starr (1992) from a
DEMO of motivational theories' potential in entrepreneurship research.
Equivocality in relations does DEMO necessarily hamper new ventures, instead it
may evoke action to become DEMO
14
1. 2. 5  Conclusion: The Equivocal Situation for the
New DEMO Evokes a Need for Trust
The start-up and early development of a new venture is performed by the
entrepreneur as starter of the new DEMO and by external actors providing
resources for the new venture. The relationships between entrepreneurs and
external actors differ between ventures. The relationships develop differently.
DEMO situation is equivocal for the entrepreneur, i.e. open to many possible
DEMO Equivocality pertains to relationships to customers and suppliers
(markets), financers (acquisition of funds) and to others bringing important
resources to the new venture. For the entrepreneur, and the other actors, reduced
equivocality makes DEMO in order to experience lower risks in action involving
the other parties. One way of reducing equivocality and thereby risks is to trust,
DEMO by using existing trust or building trust with important actors. Trust
becomes a vital issue in action processes between the entrepreneur and those
external DEMO which are important to the new venture.
1. 3  Outline of DEMO Book
Chapters 2 - 4 present the study's frame of reference, which is built on existing
theory: Thus in chapter 2 theories DEMO the entrepreneur and entrepreneurship
are discussed. A short historical background is given on the notion of
entrepreneur. The lack of precision and a clear-cut DEMO of the notion itself
is discussed. Modern theory of entrepreneurship is then classified and presented
as a ground for the selection of a framework DEMO the entrepreneur for the study.
Chapter 3 is devoted to a presentation of theory about organising and
action process, mainly based on Weick (DEMO). Sensemaking, i.e. how people
make sense of events and experience DEMO discussed. The social constructionist
view of action process is then applied to organising business start-up and early
development.
Trust is the theme in chapter DEMO Different scholars' (mainly economists and
sociologists) writings about trust are DEMO and discussed as a basis for
defining trust, trustworthiness and mutual DEMO Trust is then introduced as a
meaning in sensemaking.
Chapter 5 deals with methodology. The case study design is presented,
along with considerations DEMO different design issues. The chapter includes an
15
overview of how the study was conducted and methods used for DEMO collection,
reduction, interpretation and analysis. Quality criteria are discussed. The DEMO in
the pre-study and main study are presented.
Chapters 6 - 8 contain analyses of trust and action processes in the cases,
covering DEMO the entrepreneurs and external actors of the new ventures. Chapter
6 thus presents and discusses case data on what external actors base trust in DEMO
entrepreneurs and new ventures: person-based, enterprise-based and institution-
based trust.
An analysis of performed action in the cases is the aim of chapter DEMO The
notions of use and build trust are presented. Sequences and patterns of use of
trust and trust-building in six relationships between entrepreneurs and DEMO
actors are studied. Commonalities are identified, concerning how trust develops
in DEMO processes and how trust develops in interaction between two actors.
Chapter 8 brings together the analyses to how entrepreneurs use and build
trustworthiness through DEMO symbolising trust. How they make sense
of strategies for building and using trust is also identified. These strategies
function as interpretive schemes built on DEMO experience.
Chapter 9 presents conclusions from the study in three areas: DEMO findings'
contribution to theory, implications for practice and suggestions for DEMO
research.
16
Chapter 2
The Entrepreneur and
Entrepreneurship
2. 1  A Short Historical Background
The word entrepreneur derives from the French word entreprendre, meaning to
undertake. The word was in use as early as in the twelfth DEMO and the noun
entrepreneur developed in the course of the fifteenth century. In the early 16th
century the Frenchmen who organised and led military DEMO were referred
to as entrepreneurs. By 1700 the term was applied to road, bridge, harbour, and
fortification contractors, and by the middle DEMO that century, French economists
used the term to designate self-employed persons DEMO the economic sphere as
opposed to hired people (Long, 1983; DEMO, 1981). Richard Cantillon is the
best known of these economists. DEMO said that entrepreneurship entails bearing
the risk of buying at certain prices in the present and selling at uncertain prices in
the future. During DEMO latter part of the eighteenth century the fysiocrats
expanded the concept of entrepreneur into someone "who must have the capacity
of economically combining the appropriate goods and services to the end of his
greatest profit" (DEMO, 1983, p. 48). The French economist Jean Baptiste Say in
the early nineteenth century with the emerging industrial revolution brought in
attributes DEMO qualities of judgement and talents like the ability to procure loans
of capital. Say described the entrepreneur as someone who shifts economic
resources out DEMO an area of lower and into an area of higher productivity and
greater yield. Thus the entrepreneur becomes a promoter of economic activity in
DEMO (Stevenson & Jarillo, 1990).
This sets the line for the classical economists' view of entrepreneurship;
what matters is the net effect on the general economic system of the
entrepreneur's actions. The micro-economist DEMO, in the first decade of the
20th century, followed by Robinson and Chamberlin in the 1930's, focused their
attention on the market equilibrium. In investigating the consequences of a
particular event in the economy, they examined and compared the equilibrium
conditions (product prices and quantities) DEMO and after the change. An
economist who emphasises equilibrium tends to identify economic development
17
with attaining an equilibrium position in production and consumption. They may
DEMO other aspects underlying economic development. Another development
of thoughts concerned economic development due to changes in equilibrium.
Joseph Schumpeter considered entrepreneurship to be the DEMO that
disrupts the market equilibrium, and makes the economy as a DEMO go forward.
It is a shift from one equilibrium to the next one, in his words "the circular flow".
Its essence is "innovation", a novel recombination of pre-existing factors of
production. "Carry out new combinations" is enterprise, and the individuals who
perform this task DEMO called "entrepreneurs" (Schumpeter, 1934). He
distinguishes as "new DEMO":
- introduction of new goods
- new method of production
DEMO opening of a new market
- conquest of a new source of supply of raw materials or semi-
manufactured goods
- new organisation of DEMO industry.
Schumpeter could be considered as the first in a line of writers to identify
entrepreneurship with innovation. The previous tradition was to use DEMO term
"entrepreneur" for any businessman (Stevenson & Jarillo, 1990, DEMO 19). The
importance of Schumpeter can be characterised in the following way: 1) the
movement from a view of static equilibrium to DEMO as a dynamic force
for innovative change in the economy 2) DEMO recognition of the entrepreneurial
function as responsible for economic improvements, due DEMO innovations, and 3)
the distinction between the roles of owner, financer, manager and innovator is
opened up, i.e. the need for DEMO clear notions of "entrepreneurship" and
"entrepreneur" when the words are used.
While Joseph Schumpeter emphasised the equilibrium view, Israel
Kirzner saw entrepreneurship in a still other perspective. He wanted to
understand how the decisions DEMO individual participants in the market interact to
generate the market forces that compel changes in prices, output, and in methods
of production and DEMO of resources (Kirzner, 1973, p. 6). These decisions
are DEMO successively and interactively by consumers, entrepreneur-producers
and resource-owners. Taken over time, this series of systematic changes in the
interconnected network of market decisions DEMO the market process
(Kirzner, 1973, p. 10). The lack DEMO knowledge of potential buyers/sellers, output,
prices, qualities etc. among the original sellers and buyers gives room for "an
entrepreneurial element in the market" consisting of "outsiders" who are able to
perceive opportunities for entrepreneurial profits. Apart from these outsiders, the
entrepreneurial element may also reside in actors already in the market,
18
middlemen, as well as in resource owners, producers and managers. (But then
one also has to distinguish the entrepreneurial element from the DEMO as investor,
leader etc.)
There is present in all human action an element which, although crucial to economizing
activity in general, DEMO itself be analyzed in terms of economizing, maximizing, or
efficiency criteria (Kirzner, 1973, p. 31).
This concept of entrepreneurial element builds on von Mises' homo agens.
Man is capable of acting in a framework not confined to given ends and means,
which was the DEMO assumption of earlier economists. The entrepreneurial
element in human decision-making is responsible for our understanding of
human action as active, creative, defining and DEMO means and ends rather
than as passive, automatic, mechanical and bounded. It is possible to view a
succession of different decisions by the DEMO individual as a logically unified
sequence, with each decision comprehensible as DEMO logical outcome of reflection
and learning from prior decisions (Kirzner, 1973, pp. 35-37) To sum up: Man
learns from her/his experience in the market and changes her/his actions
accordingly. Despite Kirzner's DEMO to the behavioural aspects in decision
making and action, he could DEMO be classified as an economist. His conclusion,
the arbitrage theory of profit is: Profit opportunities arise when the prices of
products on the product markets are not adjusted to the prices of resources on the
DEMO markets. Successful entrepreneurship consists in noticing maladjustments
before others do. The entry of entrepreneurs has the effect of adjusting prices and
eliminating profit. In DEMO meantime new reasons for lack of knowledge of price
adjustment come up with room for new entrepreneurial action. Kirzner's
signification for the notion DEMO entrepreneur and entrepreneurship can be
summarised in this way: 1/ he introduces dynamics residing in a wider
perspective on human decision making and DEMO 2/ he displays a focus on a
realistic picture of what DEMO a market, and 3/ he refines the Schumpeterian
discussion on different roles in business including the role of entrepreneurship.
2. 2  The Entrepreneur and Entrepreneur-
ship in Recent Theory
2. 2. 1  The Entrepreneur and Entrepreneurship -
Elusive Notions?
19
Since the 1960's there has emerged a variety of views DEMO the notions of
entrepreneur and entrepreneurship, due to scholars' different backgrounds,
frames of reference and focus of research interests. Currently, no single
definition of "entrepreneur" has uniformly been accepted. Writers have
expressed concern DEMO the lack of precision in the entrepreneurship literature
(e.g. Bull & DEMO, 1993; Bygrave & Hofer, 1991; Carland, Hoy, Boulton &DEMO
Carland, 1984; Cunningham & Lischeron, 1991; Gartner, Mitchell & DEMO,
1989; Macmillan & Katz, 1992). The lack of precision is due to the above-
mentioned different views and interests concerning what DEMO study, but also that
entrepreneurship is - in spite of some DEMO in history - a rather new field of
research. Bygrave (1989) compared different basic and applied fields of
research. He found that empirical DEMO research has during 30 years
mainly imported and used different concepts from several disciplines.5 Baumol
(1968) once called the entrepreneur an elusive notion. DEMO are also arguments
against the possibility of a precise construct of entrepreneurship, it being used as
too broad a notion.6 Even so, for DEMO specific purpose, it is vital to clarify one's
notion of DEMO, what one includes - and excludes - in using the word.
DEMO this vein, it is possible and worthwhile to classify entrepreneurship research.
DEMO entrepreneurship research, as displayed in the literature and conference
documentation, it is possible to distinguish four main levels of study of
entrepreneurship: Society, clustered enterprises (e.g. industries), enterprise (as an
entity), individual.7 Studies are normally focused on one level, sometimes multi-
level studies are designed to identify phenomena on different levels, or
perspectives are selected joining more than one level.8 The purpose of this study
concerns trust between DEMO and external actors, which indicates the
importance of level of study DEMO defining the notion of entrepreneur. The
question is therefore: What would DEMO the consequences for the study of selecting
a certain level? A DEMO discussion of entrepreneurship theory forming
the basis for each level is needed to guide the selection.
5 Being also a Ph.D. in physics, Bygrave could make comparisons, and as a contrast show that
modern physics is firmly based on a tradition with theory developed from the 17th century.
DEMO Low & Macmillan (1988) compared the notion of entrepreneurship with that of leadership,
which is considered by e.g. Pfeffer too broad to DEMO distinguished from other concepts of social
influence.
7 In the literature you can see variations. For example van de Ven, Hudson & Schroeder (DEMO)
in studying 14 educational software start-ups' performance used three levels: entrepreneurial
(individual), organizational and ecological (industry as a whole).
DEMO See e.g. Aldrich & Auster (1986) who studied new and small organizations versus large and
old from both organization and population (society) DEMO
20
2. 2. 2  The Entrepreneur from a Societal Perspective
The entrepreneur in society and in its development is a focus of interest which
DEMO have already met in the beginning of this chapter. The economists Cantillon,
Say, the microeconomists, Schumpeter and Kirzner all took a primary DEMO in
how entrepreneurs contribute to the functioning of society as a whole.
Entrepreneurship is seen as a function or a role, which together with other
functions or roles have different implications for society. Typical study areas
DEMO a focus on entrepreneurship in society are how entrepreneurship contributes
to growth in the economy, the role of entrepreneurship in society, the importance
DEMO the social context for entrepreneurship, how entrepreneurship affects values,
norms DEMO traditions in society, and how entrepreneurship contributes to
knowledge development in DEMO Entrepreneurship in this perspective has in
the Western hemisphere since 30 years been interesting for society' s policy-
making concerning business start-up as a vehicle towards economic expansion
and employment. Public administrations have engaged researchers to DEMO how
the founding and expansion of enterprises can be promoted.
A societal perspective applied to our study would mean that the
individual business start-up DEMO early development came outside the focus, since
the perspective entails a DEMO view on the actors, seen as a function or role
in DEMO How trust develops in action processes would mainly be outside of
the study.
2. 2. 3  The Entrepreneur from a Clustered Enterprise
Perspective
Studies regarding the entrepreneur from a clustered enterprise perspective
concern sub-sets of society, e.g. a region, a type of business such as
manufacturing, or DEMO industry. The perspective takes its origin from a view of the
sub-set as an entity and the enterprises within the sub-set as units. Typical DEMO
of a focus on entrepreneurship in a clustered enterprise perspective may be for
example how entrepreneurship contributes to growth in the industry, or the role
of entrepreneurship in knowledge intensive enterprises. Entrepreneurship on
industry level has DEMO studied using the institutional approach and also using
the population ecology approach.
Aldrich & Fiol (1994) used an institutional approach to study the
DEMO facing entrepreneurs in emerging industries, i.e. in the founding of
21
whole industries. Aspects of the entrepreneurs' legitimacy outside and inside the
emerging industry were discussed. Strategies that founders can pursue for
legitimacy to DEMO from innovative ventures to broader contexts were
identified, collectively reshaping industry DEMO institutional environments. There
are some obvious parallels in purpose between their study and this one, but also
some main differences. The individual entrepreneur is in Aldrich & Fiol (1994)
seen as part of a group within the industry, external actors are groups in
collective roles in the industry's environment. Their study also takes an interest
in new industries DEMO than specific new ventures.
Hannan & Freeman (1977) applied the population ecology model,
originating from biology and developed by Campbell (1969), as a metaphor for
organisation fit and survival. The study was based DEMO their main question: Why
do so many kinds of organisations exist? The first stage in the natural selection
process is the occurrence of DEMO of organisations, planned or unplanned.
Instead of genetic processes there are DEMO processes (Aldrich & Pfeffer,
1976). The second stage is DEMO operation of selection criteria that select indivi-
duals, i.e. those organisations DEMO that are consistent with the selection
criteria. The third step involves a retention mechanism, by which selected
organisations are preserved, duplicated or reproduced DEMO once again the learning
process and memory system function as means for recalling positively selected
responses in the future. In this way enterprises and DEMO will be developed
over time. They survive or not, those that DEMO best develop and may become
models for others. Apart from Hannan & Freeman a number of researchers have
used this metaphor-based model to study DEMO of enterprises, often based on
statistical data (see further an overview in Tucker, Singh & Meinhard, 1990).
To see trust between DEMO and external actors using a clustered
enterprise perspective entails a generalised view of the actors, seen as a function
or role in a larger setting. In this way it resembles the societal perspective above.
But at DEMO same time trust as a phenomenon pertinent to industry norms, types DEMO
products could be studied. But studies using this perspective do not - or to a
lesser extent - account for the individual variation between DEMO and
specific actors.
2. 2. 4  The Entrepreneur from an Enterprise-as-Entity
DEMO
In business administration research there is a long tradition of seeing the
enterprise as one entity and studying what the enterprise does in the DEMO, how
22
it competes or co-operates with other enterprises. You can say that DEMO enterprise
in this perspective is handled as an individual and acts in relation to other
enterprises, seen as other individuals. The enterprise is on this level of analysis
assumed to be uniform, and as an entity it gets certain characteristics. To see the
enterprise as a uniform entity DEMO a number of analytical advantages. The most
important one is making it possible to handle several enterprises in the same
analysis without getting overwhelmed DEMO data.
Another tradition in business administration is to identify and study
functional areas within enterprises: marketing, finance, control, management etc.
Similar functional DEMO exist in most or all enterprises, so studies can concern
one DEMO area and encompass several enterprises or just one enterprise,
using knowledge and earlier research experience concerning that same functional
area. The very reason DEMO defining functional areas is in itself functional specia-
lisation of research, DEMO a need or just a desire among researchers to develop
specific knowledge.
This perspective in research concerning business start-up leads to
research issues such DEMO: What is typical for business start-ups, what factors make
them develop, and how resources, planning, production, distribution etc. are
handled in DEMO start-ups. Key success factors and entry strategies that enable
the business start-up to survive and develop is an area attracting interest for
studies (cf. Vesper, 1990). E.g. Sandberg & Hofer (1987) have in a contingency
approach studied the interaction of personal, environmental and strategic
variables on performance of new ventures.
In the perspective of the enterprise as an DEMO it is seen as created,
growing, sometimes stagnating, sometimes revitalised and sometimes dying. The
organisational life cycle is a metaphor based on DEMO biological life cycle of
organisms and it is assumed that there is an isomorphic relationship between
biological and social or organisational phenomena (Kimberly & Miles, 1980).
This relationship might stimulate new views, new research DEMO and bring
focus to observations that would else pass by unnoticed. In this way it can open
up for new findings.9 In the words DEMO Kimberly & Miles (1980) the biological
metaphor "can force theorists DEMO think through carefully where the metaphors are
appropriate and inappropriate, their DEMO can lead to the raising of new important
questions and perhaps to the recasting of old ones" (p. 9). Some well-known life
DEMO models have been presented by Adizes (1988), Churchill & Lewis (1983),
Cooper (1981), Greiner (1972), Katz & Gartner (1988), Kimberly & Miles
(1980), and Quinn & Cameron (1983). Common to them is that stages in the life
9 DEMO e.g. Norén (1995) for a discussion on the use of metaphors in general.
23
cycle are discussed and named or defined, characteristics of each stage are stated
and discussed, and explicitly or implicitly the researcher discusses the findings in
terms of generality.
Trust can be studied as a central DEMO in the enterprise as an entity
perspective. On the other hand the new venture as it emerges, particularly during
start-up, is characterised very DEMO by the entrepreneur in person (Birley &
Norburn, 1985, p. 82). Trust may therefore very much be connected to one or
DEMO specific persons. Also trust in and from some external actors may be
personal and not characteristics of the specific organisation or function within it.
DEMO there is an element of individual perspective in our research issues concerning
trust.
2. 2. 5  The Entrepreneur from an Individual
Perspective
The characteristics of the entrepreneur and traits in the entrepreneurial
personality have attracted considerable DEMO, particularly among scholars with
background in psychology. The main issue is: Who is the entrepreneur? How
entrepreneurs differ from non-entrepreneurs and motivational forces for the
entrepreneur are other common issues.
In 1948 Arthur H. Cole DEMO Harvard University established the Center of
Entrepreneurial History at Harvard. The centre advocated the need for research
into motivation forces and characteristics of the DEMO (Cole, 1968). The
Harvard studies have been famous primarily through David C. McClelland,
whose book The Achieving Society (1961), has been very influential in the area
throughout the years. McClelland's research DEMO based on the concept of a "need
for achievement" (n DEMO). He characterised the individuals with high n Ach as
those preferring to be personally responsible for solving problems, setting goals,
and reaching those goals by their own efforts. Such persons have a strong desire
DEMO know how well they are accomplishing their tasks. In his studies he
investigated relationships between n Ach and behaviour, e.g. risk-taking.
McClelland has been followed by a large number of researchers in a similar
direction (see overviews in e.g. Brockhaus, 1982; Davidsson, 1989; Wärneryd,
1988)DEMO
A responsible individual who does not believe that the outcome of a
business venture will be influenced by his own efforts is unlikely to DEMO
himself to risky business efforts. The potential entrepreneur's perception of a
situation influences her/his decision to start a business. This is the DEMO behind
24
Rotter's (1966) "locus-of-control"-theory, which implies that an DEMO
perceives the outcome of an event as being within (called internal DEMO
control) or beyond (called external locus-of-control) her/his personal control DEMO
understanding. Rotter and his followers have studied whether individuals with
internal belief would more likely strive for achievement than would individuals
with external beliefs.
DEMO typical denominator for studies of entrepreneurs (individuals) is
motivation (Wärneryd, 1988), personal values: (e.g. Hornaday and Aboud,
1971), DEMO, self-confidence, needs for independence or autonomy,
conformity, adaptiveness to DEMO (Sexton & Bowman, 1986). Entrepreneurs'
growth-orientation is often studied (e.g. Cooper & Dunkelberg, 1986;
Davidsson, 1989), comparisons are made of the path to entrepreneurship
(inheritance, purchase, start-up) with DEMO attitudes characteristic of
entrepreneurs. Some researchers have used personality traits to identify different
entrepreneurial types and have sometimes also created typologies. In that vein
DEMO & Curran (1976) identified three types: the Artisan, who wants an in-
dependent type of work to make a product of high DEMO; the Classical, who
aims at traditional profit maximisation; and the DEMO, who wants status and
security and often has inherited the enterprise.
DEMO personality trait that has attracted attention in the last two decades is the
entrepreneur's tolerance for ambiguity, i.e. her/his ability to work in perceived
vague and unclear business conditions. This has been studied by DEMO Johannisson
(1992), Schere (1982), and Sexton & Bowman (DEMO). Effects of the individual's
previous business or professional experience is an issue that has attracted much
attention, not least for its start-up policy-making relevance: Is the potential
entrepreneur "pulled" or "pushed" into a start-up? Pull is an independent own
decision, while push is DEMO force for reasons such as unemployment (Cooper &
Dunkelberg, 1987)DEMO Do the entrepreneurs have role models? Do they have
personal contacts DEMO the profession or industry, such as businessmen with
experience from start-ups? There are numerous such studies. A well-known
classical study to determine age, education, birth, country and similar
characteristics is Collins, Moore & Unwalla (1964): The Enterprising Man, an
empirical study of 150 successful DEMO The authors see the
entrepreneur in a Freudian psycho-analytical perspective and discuss background
characteristics and performance as entrepreneur.
In sum, the perspective of the entrepreneur from an individual perspective
implies a focus on the traits and DEMO or experience of the person. As
we discussed in the preceding chapter the start-up and early development of a
new venture is performed by DEMO entrepreneur and by external actors providing
25
resources to the new venture. That is to say, not only the entrepreneur but also
the interplay between the actors form the development DEMO the new venture.
Important actors around the entrepreneur must therefore also be focused, not
only the entrepreneur. The present study needs a perspective allowing the study
of this interplay.
2. 2. 6  The Entrepreneur from an Individual-in-
Context Perspective
Research concerning the individual entrepreneur may, as we have seen above,
include a research interest of the entrepreneur and her/DEMO personal experience
and situation. This opens up for a view on the importance of the individual
entrepreneur in her/his context. Low & Macmillan (1988) mean that
psychological studies that focus on the entrepreneur in a context will be useful.
Schein (1983) asked: How do the entrepreneurs/founders of organisations create
organisational cultures? Organisational culture is the pattern of basic
assumptions that a given group has invented, discovered or developed in learning
to cope with problems of external adaptations and internal integration. In DEMO
article the entrepreneur's personality is central for shaping the new organisation
and building culture. Still, his study has the entrepreneur in focus and the context
is mirrored in the entrepreneurial personality.
But instead of asking DEMO is the entrepreneur, one could ask: What does
the entrepreneur do to accomplish something, e.g. to start a new business? Others
involved, what do they do? How does the entrepreneur influence the
accomplishment, DEMO a business created? That is entrepreneurial behaviour or
action. Instead of DEMO or characteristics the process becomes central. The
organisation is shaped in and by the process. Not only the entrepreneur but also
other people involved DEMO then become interesting. There are often unclear
boundaries between the entrepreneur and others involved in the process, hence
both individual and organisation (as DEMO number of people connected) need to be
studied. This approach views DEMO creation of an organisation as a contextual
event, the outcome of DEMO influences. The action view of entrepreneurship
places the entrepreneur within the process of new venture creation performing a
series of actions that result in DEMO creation of a new organisation (Gartner, 1988).
Entrepreneurial action along the lines outlined in this section has a
shorter study history. There DEMO some researchers who view entrepreneurship as
organising (Weick, 1979), and the formation of the organisation as a
fundamentally enacted phenomenon, a socially constructed reality (Berger &
26
Luckmann, 1966) in an equivocal situation. The network approach to DEMO
business formation assumes that the key to successful entrepreneurship is to be
found in the ability to develop and maintain a personal network (Aldrich &
Zimmer, 1986; Birley, 1985; Johannisson, 1988). Aldrich & Zimmer (1986)
view the entrepreneurial process as embedded in a DEMO network of
continuing social relations that facilitates and constrains linkages between
entrepreneurs, resources and opportunities. Birley (1985) in studying the role of
network in the founding of 160 new firms differentiated between two kinds of
DEMO: informal (family, friends) and formal (banks, accountants, lawyers,DEMO
promoting agents). Johannisson (1988) discussed context and boundary-
spanning which concerns the small business' need to use resources outside itself
to reach its aims; a problem less prominent for the large business with specialists
and different resources inside its organisation. The main condition for required
action, mutual commitment, is supplied by the entrepreneur's social network and
its ties between the entrepreneur and family, friends, relatives, business
colleagues, DEMO, suppliers etc. Mentors and role models are important.
Both Birley (1985) and Johannisson (1988) see the local anchorage of the
network as important for business start-up. The network must also be able to
channel DEMO information and influence, i.e. it must include both strong and weak
DEMO (Granovetter, 1973).
The perspective of individual-in-context encompasses the view of
interplay between entrepreneurs and other actors in a process, which will allow
studies of trust development in action and over time. Further consequences are
DEMO as conclusions in the following section.
2. 3  Conclusions for the DEMO: The
Entrepreneur in Context and a
Process View
In the preceding DEMO five different perspectives on the entrepreneur in theory
were identified and discussed with the aim of establishing the most fruitful
perspective for the study. DEMO individual-in-context perspective brings focus
both to the entrepreneur and to actors around the new venture. In this perspective
there is also earlier research carried DEMO to give a foundation to the view of new
venture creation as organising in action processes. At the same time this research
has opened DEMO a view of actors' sensemaking, which can give this study a frame
of reference concerning why actors act, their construction of meaning, DEMO trust
27
as meaning. The next two chapters will elaborate this framework further. DEMO
that we will conclude with assumptions and definitions for the study concerning
the entrepreneur, the context and the process view.
2. 3. 1  DEMO of Entrepreneur for the Present
Study
In the literature survey above in this chapter one theme has been the variety of
views between writers. DEMO, there seems to be little divergence in views
of the entrepreneur DEMO a person when the notion is used for a business starter.
Theory in this line can be summarised that the entrepreneur is the founder-
DEMO (alone or with other entrepreneurs) of a business start-up. There
are different foci on the entrepreneur's characteristics, but one common
characteristic can be labelled as dedication or commitment to the business start-
up, to be the owner of the business and to the work entailed. Therefore DEMO study
will define the entrepreneur as the founder-owner-manager (alone or with DEMO
entrepreneurs) of a business start-up and to have three commitments. All DEMO
commitments should be fulfilled for a person to be considered as an
entrepreneur.
Commitment means that the entrepreneur is willing to and actually does
DEMO a considerable effort to succeed with the business start-up. Start
commitment implies that the entrepreneur him/herself or together with other
entrepreneurs has taken DEMO initiative that aims at a new business venture.
Initiative means that a person takes the first step or makes the introductory
moves. The entrepreneur DEMO a new venture is generally legally owner and at
the same time manager (Steiner, 1990). When the firm grows, i.e. is not any
more an emerging organisation, and becomes more complicated to operate
internally, Steiner (1990) found that new managers, often with no ownership,DEMO
come into the play. So the concept of entrepreneur can in this study assume
ownership commitment to be central for the emerging enterprise. Generally
DEMO starters also provide owner's capital (often along with other sources DEMO
finance). The importance of owner's capital may vary between different
industries according to capital needs for activities. The provision of owner's
DEMO implies two things: 1) the owner bears some risk of personal financial
loss in case of failure, and 2) being capital provider DEMO owner has specific rights
concerning the firm, more than e.g. an DEMO not providing owner's capital.
More risk and more rights characterises the situation with provision of owner's
capital. In the definition above is DEMO a work commitment, i.e. to manage
28
and actively work with the business start-up makes a difference from DEMO situation
with detached ownership. I other words: The person's occupation DEMO
professional role is at stake.
The notion of entrepreneur and entrepreneurship is often also used to
denote change, renewal and development within existing enterprises (e.g.
Corporate Entrepreneurship, Stevenson & Jarillo, 1990; Intrapreneurship,
Pinchot, 1985). Trust concerning new business ventures emerging and remaining
within established DEMO is not covered in the study. Excluded is also trust
concerning business ventures that are by the entrepreneur considered as
temporary or short-lived. The DEMO is concentrated on new ventures important
for making a living more permanently. At least one entrepreneur should work
full-time with the new venture after DEMO
2. 3. 2  The Entrepreneur and Context
In the discussion of DEMO perspectives above the notion of context has been used,
but it has still not been clarified. Context and environment are notions used by
DEMO writers. During the last few decades the relationships between an
organisation and its environment have been discussed extensively in the
literature. Burns & Stalker (1961) introduced the contingency perspective on
organisations, which takes on different DEMO depending on the character of
the environment. The environment, although discussed, seems less often to be
defined. To quote Buckley (1967, p. DEMO):
The environment, however else it may be characterized, can DEMO seen as an ensemble of
more or less distinguishable elements, states, or events, whether these discriminations are
made in terms of spatial or temporary relations' properties.
"More or less distinguishable elements, states or events" and "spatial or
temporary relations' properties" is a rather unlimited DEMO It also represents
well how the term environment actually has been used. A definition intended to
cover all aspects of a wide and indistinct DEMO will inevitably become
vague. With the sensemaking view for this study, DEMO is natural to see not only a
multitude of different relations between a focal entrepreneur and external actors,
but also that these relations DEMO over time and situations. For any specific
action process, at any DEMO of time and by a specific focal actor, e.g. the
entrepreneur, a part of the general environment is enacted. This part will or DEMO
be active in forming the action process. This part of the general environment will
29
be called the context. The organising context is a structure between DEMO
individual entrepreneur/new venture and the wider environment (Johannisson,
1988)DEMO The context can in the study be defined as: Environment, enacted in an
action process by a focal actor at a specific point DEMO time. The context in an
action process can vary
- for one actor over time, and
- between actors, at a specific point DEMO time.
30
2. 3. 3  Entrepreneurship in a Process View
The notion of process has been used above in connection with the entrepreneur
in individual-in-context DEMO As yet it has not been discussed and
clarified as to its implications. This will be done in this section by contrasting a
structural DEMO processual view of entrepreneurship. A structure is a configuration
of parts, DEMO structural description is a characterisation of the way the
components in a set are interrelated (Hernes, 1976, p. 518). A structural view is
to see the character of phenomena as stable, static, unchanging DEMO time and place.
The notion of structure implies stability or constancy as a predominant feature,
while a process is a series of actions, operations or motions involved in the
accomplishment of an end (Merriam-Webster Thesaurus, 1991, p. 466).
Similarly, Stymne (1970, p. 35) DEMO process as:
a number of interrelated activities extended in time. An activity is seen as the behavior of
an individual at a given DEMO in time.
A processual perspective is to see a phenomenon as changing, streaming,
flowing. The phenomenon will be different over time and place. The notion of
process implies instability. The phenomenon is undergoing changes, movement.
A process is a sequence of events, different appearances are bound together.
Dynamics is a predominant feature: Inherent power and forces produce motion
and change. According to Buckley (1967, p. 18):
the process model views society as a complex, multifacetted, fluid interplay of widely
varying DEMO in intensities of association and dissociation.
The dichotomised description of structure and process above needs to be
qualified, since there are links combining the views rather than definite
contradictions. A stable structure can be seen as DEMO process in equilibrium
(Hernes, 1976, p. 520), the equilibrium DEMO be more or less temporary. That is to
say: Conditions governing DEMO are processual or a combination of
processual and structural. Stymne (1970, p. 39) discusses on similar lines:
Structural or environmental characteristics elicit processes leading to structures.
Still the researcher can in her/his view DEMO either constancy, change or
both regarding a structure. If change is DEMO the structure can be seen as
the output or the distribution of results, which Hernes (1976, p. 519) calls an
output structure.
31
In a description of a complicated phenomenon, there is often the need for
economising on information conveyed to the recipient/reader. To describe DEMO
complex process over time, with many actors and other intervening
circumstances DEMO imply a mass of information and loss of overview of
important phenomena. A structural description is advantageous here since it can
easily be based DEMO logic and parsimony. And a process can be described in
structural form. Hernes (1976, p. 519) defines what he calls process structure as
"a specification of the logical form of the process generating the result".
A phenomenon like entrepreneurship can be viewed in terms of structure
DEMO process. In fact, most of the schools, directions and studies discussed above
display a conscious stance in this respect. The view of structure DEMO inherent in the
personal trait and characteristics type of research. It is assumed that clear-cut
types of characteristics can be identified. It is further DEMO that the
characteristics cause something else that can also be defined, DEMO for
example. These factors are assumed to be stable as factors. Once they are defined
and operationalised and relationships discovered they can be applied DEMO future
studies and values compared. New factors can be included, but DEMO the whole
progress in knowledge is based on stabilised structures. The critique within this
line of thought often implies that intended structures have not DEMO established.
Some researchers take on the view that the personality is a structure but
processes in the environment have an impact, e.g. entrepreneurial motivation is
affected by the person's earlier experience. The traditional view of DEMO enterprise
as an organisational entity or its functional division is clearly structural in its
basis. Processes may change structure though. Change may or may DEMO be
prominent in the view, i.e. the structural forms of the DEMO may be more or
less the result of processes, more or DEMO permanent due to impact of processes
involved.
The individual-in-context study perspective is generally process-oriented.
There seem to be two underlying views of the role DEMO process. One is to focus on
the process as important and at the same time work towards structural aims:
establish structured models or DEMO out of the processual findings. Schein
(1983) and Aldrich & Zimmer (1986) seem to follow this line of research. The
views of DEMO organisational life cycle and population ecology are rather similar in
this discussion. The researchers see the enterprise as a process, developing from
birth to death. In the definitions of stages and common characteristics for
enterprises, properties take on structural forms. These function as a means of
economised description.
DEMO second process-oriented view of entrepreneurship - organising and
formation of the organisation as a fundamentally enacted phenomenon, i.e. as a
32
socially constructed reality - seems to consider the study of processes DEMO a
research issue per se (e.g. Gartner, 1985, 1988; Van de Ven & Polley, 1992).
The socially constructed reality presumes changes, streams and flows in action
processes. Complex processes - as they normally are seen to be - will often be
depicted in structural form.10
DEMO process view will suit the needs of this study to capture the
development of business start-up and early development, due to the inherent
character of change, sequence of events and, to a large extent, instability. It can
also be added that time is an important issue (Bird, 1992) underlying actions and
events as well as sequences of action. DEMO will emerge in process studies (Van
de Ven & Polley, 1992). In this predominantly processual view, structural
elements may be important to identify. Results from the study may take on
structural forms (cf. the notion of process structure; Hernes, 1976).
To sum up, this concluding section has set the line for frame of reference
for the DEMO in three ways. First, the three commitments constituting the
entrepreneur have DEMO an argument concerning e.g. the selection of cases. The
business starters in the cases should display three entrepreneurial commitments:
start, ownership and work commitment. Second, external actors should be
focused in accordance with the notion of context, i.e. those made sense by the
entrepreneur. Third, the DEMO view opens up for studying the business start-up
and early development as action processes. Fundamental behind all this is the
view of sensemaking governing DEMO organising of the new venture. This
fundamental view will be further elaborated in the following chapter.
10 See for example Gartner's (1985) DEMO model of "diamond type" with the four concepts
(variables) of Individual, Environment, Process and Organization.
33
Chapter 3
Action Processes and
Sensemaking
3. 1  Organising in Action Processes
The discussion in section 2.3.3 concerning the characteristics of structure and
DEMO is applicable to the term "organisation". In Webster's Dictionary DEMO are
two main definitions, each with two variants. One definition is "association,
society; an administrative and functional structure (as a business DEMO a political
party)" (1976, p. 594). The second definition is "act or process of organising or
of being organised; condition DEMO manner of being organised".11 In the first set of
definitions the word "organisation" is a noun denoting structure with per-
manence, stability and a more or less definite state. "Organisation" is conceived
as DEMO object to which fixed properties are assigned. Sometimes organisation is
not even seen as an object but is an object, e.g. "the organisation DEMO flexible and
smooth, well adapted to its environment and capable of DEMO". When an
abstract concept becomes used as if it referred to a thing (reification), there is
always the risk of e.g. conclusions more relevant to the thing than for the original
concept - and DEMO phenomenon the concept denotes. Abstract, structural
phenomena can easily in people'DEMO mind take on the object's properties. Dynamics
in a setting may then be underestimated.
When conditions in the environment change, objects and social systems
will change, but in different ways; when an object no DEMO suits your needs,
you normally simply discard it and acquire a new one. A social system is not
discarded, it usually changes itself to comply with new circumstances. A social
system normally takes part actively DEMO its own change, whereas an object is
changed by activities outside DEMO, passively. "Organisation" as reification can
e.g. hamper needs to change DEMO evoking passiveness.
According to Hernes (1976) a stable structure can be seen as a process in
equilibrium (cf. section 2.3.3), where the equilibrium can be more or less
temporary. Here one part of the DEMO definition comes into the picture. A
11 The definitions represent two ways of seeing definitions: ostensive versus performative as
discussed by Czarniawska-Joerges (1994)DEMO
34
process leads to the state of being organised. By change a DEMO occurs over to
another state: the new organisation, assuming new permanence and stability.
But the second definition also covers what has in section DEMO been
discussed as the process view. "The act or process of DEMO" links the notion
of process to organising. Weick (1979) builds DEMO process view on the verb
organising. A verb denotes movement, change, streams and flows. Just as nouns
easily can be connected to structure, verbs imply process: Transformation
occurs, events are connected, somebody does something. In the words of Weick
(1979): "Streams, flows and changes are the essence of what managers manage"
(p. 42), i.e. often initiated or run by people. Using verbs when studying what
happens DEMO an organisation means focusing on people and what they do.
Czarniawska-Joerges (DEMO) thus distinguishes between organisation as being or
doing. Verbs bind together DEMO of events and give a picture of what
happens over time (DEMO sometimes also spatially). Transformation from one
point of time to another will automatically become highlighted. Finally, verbs
often denote acting. Action of people will be in focus. People will be noticed for
what they do, as actors. Actors and actions change one event to the next.
Sequences DEMO action can be identified. Organising is doing things in a flow:
Processes contain individual behavior that are interlocked between two or more people.
DEMO behaviours of one person are contingent on the behaviors of another person (Weick,
1979, p. 89).
Patterns of on-going action-reaction will DEMO: An action by A can evoke a
specific response from B, which is then responded to by A. Regular patterns of
"interacts" DEMO be established forming action processes (Weick, 1979, p. 89). DEMO
person does not invest all interacts in one single group; interacts DEMO occur with
several groups. One or several interacts enacted by an actor to reach an
outcome will in this study be labelled an action DEMO This definition implies
that any action process will be personally conceived by every actor involved for
the reasons that desired outcomes may differ.
The DEMO notion of outcome is used in this study. Outcomes will be
continuously constructed and reconstructed as part of meaning development. In
this view, organising is not necessarily governed by clearly specified goals as in
the main DEMO in classical analytical decision theory (cf. Enderud, 1976).
Instead, DEMO stated goals may be formulated in retrospect, which means
that unfolding DEMO precedes goals. Van de Ven & Polley (1992) studied trial-
and-error learning during the development of a technological innovation by an
interorganisational joint DEMO They found that the principal actors' outcome
35
criteria shifted over time and appeared to reflect the dominant concerns DEMO
managers and investors at different points of time along the innovation journey.
The goals themselves were reconstructed to redirect the innovation. People
adjusted what DEMO wanted to come out of action to the unfolding of action
processes. Thus, the notion of outcome as a meaning is subjective, personally
DEMO and time-bound. Action processes and actors' sensemaking are
intertwined.
3. 2  Sensemaking
Chapter 1 briefly presented the view that emerging organisations face an
DEMO reality (Gartner et al., 1992; Weick, 1979). The entrepreneur meets an
abundance of information, possible to use for different and alternative ways to
act. The information may be not unclear in itself, instead it gives room for
different ways to act, where the entrepreneur often must make choices based on
values, priorities and clarity of preferences (DEMO, 1995, p. 27).
The abundance of information is a problematic situation, which the
entrepreneur has to convert to a possibility that can be acted upon to reach
something desired. This conversion of the problematic DEMO into a possibility
to be acted upon is done by the entrepreneur's sensemaking of reality.
Sensemaking refers to people's concern with making DEMO of events and
experience. It is a process where they attempt to construct meaningful
explanations for situations and their experiences within those situations.
Sensemaking DEMO entails intricate (and often unconscious) processes such as
attending, comparing, attributing, relating, reflecting and retaining (Gioia, 1986,
p. 61)DEMO The basic view behind sensemaking is that the human mind constructs or
invents meaning out of complicated settings rather than seeing or responding to DEMO
world of meaning that is objectively there.
Sensemaking can be defined as the reciprocal interaction of information
seeking and meaning construction with action (cf. Thomas, Clark & Gioia, 1993,
p. 240). The expression "information seeking" has also to be seen in the light of
conditions of equivocality, where seeking can be both systematic, unsystematic
and mixed. DEMO engage in ascribing or imposing meaning upon experience
including their own actions and use the imposed meaning as a basis for
subsequent understanding and DEMO (Gioia, 1986, p. 50). Meaning created
influences action taken. DEMO, reciprocally, action taken also influences meaning.
There are for this study important characteristics of the sensemaking view
36
concerning how people construct meaning. The notions of sensemaking and
meaning DEMO seem to be used by different writers with little or no
difference (Weick, 1995, p. 69). In this study meaning and meaning construction
is used in a more narrow sense as can be seen DEMO the sensemaking definition
above.
Just like action, the notion of behaviour DEMO denotes what people do but
behaviour has no connection with sensemaking. In traditional behavioural
research you observe behaviour and maybe measure connections between stimuli
DEMO response, but you do not interpret motives and intentions (meaning).
Behaviour is primarily associated with the questions of what and how. Action DEMO
in the view of this study closely linked to the question of why.
3. 2. 1  Sensemaking is Both Individual and Social
Sensemaking will be personal in that people use intuition, imagination, vision,
revelatory DEMO of insight, and creative problem solving in the construction
and use DEMO meaning (cf. Gioia, 1986, p. 64). Sensemaking will also DEMO contingent
upon the personal experience, professional competence and abilities. The
personal DEMO in sensemaking is one reason why two persons "see" different
things in the same problem setting and based on that act differently. This DEMO
fundamental to entrepreneurship and pervades some of the entrepreneurship
research as we have seen it in chapter 2, particularly what we have labelled the
individual-in-context perspective.
At the same time, human thinking and social functioning are essential
aspects of one another (Weick, 1995, p. 38). This is also relevant for
organisations, as expressed by Burns & Stalker (DEMO, p. 118) :
In working organizations decisions are made either DEMO the presence of others or with the
knowledge that they will have to be implemented, or understood, or approved by others.
The set DEMO considerations called into relevance on any decision-making occasion has
therefore to be one shared with others or acceptable to them.
The entrepreneur's sensemaking DEMO not only be individual but social,
including external actors. Information seeking is done in conjunction with others.
Meaning is sought individually but may DEMO emerge in communication
involving others. Action generally is made possible or constrained by others
taking part in it. The entrepreneur's sensemaking becomes a DEMO of influence
from her/his own mind and that of others.
37
Does the individual and social sensemaking imply shared meanings
between the DEMO and external actors? Does a specific situation with two
actors in DEMO sensemaking occurs also imply that equivalent meanings are
attributed by actors for joint action to occur? It is not necessary for people to
agree on ends to act collectively. Although they may not share meanings, they do
share experiences (Weick, 1995, p. 188). They can actually pursue different ends
for quite different reasons, still, they can agree DEMO means and initiate common
action. Partners may
share space, time and DEMO, but they need not share visions, aspirations, or intentions.
The DEMO comes much later if it ever comes at all (Weick, 1979, p. 91).
Business exchange means for a buyer acquisition of goods or recieving a service,
whereas for the seller it means inflow DEMO money. A loan from the bank may mean
business start-up for the entrepreneur and for the bank it means revenue on
provided capital, qualified by a certain calculated risk. If the amount of money
and conditions DEMO the loan make sense for both parties action is elicited, but
DEMO sensemaking may be restricted to the situation at hand. In both cases
outcome differs between the involved actors, consequently they enact differences
in coherence of interacts, i.e. action processes.
3. 2. 2  Sensemaking the Environment
DEMO & Stubbart (1985) distinguish between three ways of seeing the
environment: objective, perceived and enacted. In e.g. mainstream business
strategy research, environment is something that exists "out there", just to be
recognised. A focal organisation can discover and map the environment. Anyone
who investigates the DEMO of a specific organisation will find the same
environment. Then research often proceeds to find the fit between organisation
and environment. The environment is DEMO
The problem is that the environment normally is complex, composed of
DEMO different organisations. Man's ability to discover and map is limited, DEMO
discovery depends on what you perceive. Due to various perceptions, people DEMO
find different extensions and compositions of one organisation's environment.
For example, an investigation's result is contingent upon the researcher's
perception. But still there is one objective environment, so the investigation
problem is to overcome the "filter" imposed by human perception. The
environment is perceived.
38
But if you start looking at environment from the viewpoint of DEMO person in
an organisation, (or an entrepreneur in business start-up) DEMO/he may pose questions
like the following: What organisations or people DEMO be useful for us now or in
the future? For this DEMO that specific purpose, who has interesting information for
us? In future contingencies, who could bring us support? The answer to these
questions DEMO differ depending on the person giving the answers just as
discussed above concerning perception. But there is not a finite and precise
number of DEMO and people enabling an objective answer. It is
dependent on how the person interprets the questions, what will be considered as
important features to observe and also her/his imagination. Bringing answers
also implies action, using e.g. personal network to tap information from
(Johannisson, 1988) and intellectual efforts to make sense out of these actions.
The person enacts the DEMO: S/he produces the part of environment faced,
what in DEMO 2.3.2 was labelled context. The enacted environment is
subjectively constructed, built DEMO personalised experience and open to multiple
interpretation. Three strands of research meet in this view: interpretative
sociology (Schütz, 1967), sociology of knowledge (Berger & Luckmann, 1967)
and cognitive social psychology (Weick, DEMO).
The notion of enacted environment is important concerning business start-
up and early development. The entrepreneur often lacks own resources and has
to DEMO use of resources provided by others (see e.g. Stevenson & Gumpert,DEMO
1985; Macmillan, 1983).12 It is vital to enact possibilities and not to be
constrained by a precise notion of enterprise boundaries. The DEMO can be
enacted to extend enterprise boundaries by creating actors outside the enterprise,
who act for the enterprise. A broad network of contacts DEMO the enactable
environment by social construction and may increase viability of action.13
3. 2. 3  Sensemaking Concerns the Future but Tends to      be
Retrospective
Sensemaking concerns outcomes lying ahead and action to come. The future is
equivocal, though. Entrepreneurs need to reduce the abundance of information
by meaning in order to act (Gartner et al., 1992). DEMO there can be many possible
meanings for a person in one situation and a multitude of clues for information
seeking. Clues are often sought DEMO the past. When people contemplate future
12 Brytting (1991) thus used the term "hitch-hiking", and Lindqvist (1991) "piggy-backing" for
making use of another company's market organisation.
13 Cf. the notion of "strength of weak ties" by Granovetter (1973).
39
action they think about it as if it has already occurred DEMO be able to make sense of
the intended outcomes. So what one has experienced earlier can - consciously or
not - be a way DEMO non-equivocality. We therefore often attend to new situations as
if they were earlier experienced situations, in Weick's words retrospective
sensemaking (1979, p. 194-201; 1995, p. 24). The idea of retrospective
sensemaking derives DEMO Schütz's analysis of "the meaning of lived experience"
(1967, p. 73). Creation of meaning is an attentional process focusing on what has
already occurred. The past is singled out to guide the DEMO and the future. "The
meaning of lived experience" also highlights the individual aspect of
sensemaking: life experience. Even if the entrepreneur is new as a business
starter the whole impact of experience from education and DEMO, earlier
positions in work life etc. will be important for retrospective DEMO But
retrospective sensemaking can at the same time be prospective by using
experience that specifies meaningful occurrences in advance of their happening
(Gioia, DEMO, p. 63). Retrospectiveness resides in basic values and beliefs of DEMO
person and experience, stored in memory as patterns called interpretive schemes.
DEMO 2. 4  Basic Values and Beliefs
Basic values and beliefs pervade DEMO individual's assumptions about the nature of
the world, the role DEMO organisation will play in society, the nature of human
beings, truth, relationships, time and space (Schein, 1983, p. 17). Johansson
Lindfors (1989) in a study of small business managers categorised personal
DEMO found into existential ideas, work ethics, conception of human relations,
conceptions of power, and conceptions of human work. Basic values are rooted
in the person's previous experience and stable over time.14 The bearer DEMO be
more or less conscious of her/his basic values. Basic values, even when they are
less conscious to the bearer, become expressed DEMO beliefs, assumptions and ideas.
Beliefs as rooted in basic values are DEMO stable over time but nevertheless more
influenced by meaning construction and reconstruction and may therefore
change and develop more than basic values. Attention and DEMO performed may
reconstruct meaning and, by that, change beliefs.
Implicit or explicit basic values and beliefs will form and activate the
individual's DEMO of meaning (Weick, 1995, p. 146). Through meaning
they DEMO have an impact on attention, interpretive schemes and action. In the
DEMO Basic values as a concept is approximately equivalent to what in anthropologial literature is
called dominant value orientation, cf. Schein (1992, p. 21).
40
words of Brunsson (1982, p. 30): "Ideologies (= DEMO of ideas) that are conclusive,
complex and consistent can provide DEMO good basis for action, in that they solve a
good deal DEMO choice problems". The choice problem, indicated in the quotation,
DEMO the interplay of basic values and beliefs with construction and reconstruction
of meaning.
Basic values and beliefs are primarily individual, but may also be
common in groups. Shared meaning development may result in shared beliefs.
3. DEMO 5  Interpretive Schemes
People develop ways of economising on information and DEMO lessen the task of
handling the myriad of potentially meaningful clues for action available (Gioia
1986, p. 55). This choice problem is DEMO and laborious, so people need to
simplify. From earlier occasions they DEMO experience that has been stored in
memory, and is brought forward DEMO Structured, pre-existing knowledge is
used to interpret the situation and generate DEMO action. These
representations are given various names in the literature: "blueprints",
"interpretive schemes", "schemas", "scripts", "patterns", "templates", "cause
maps" and "theories" (See for example DEMO, 1979 and Gioia, 1986, for con-
cept investigations). Here DEMO notions of interpretive scheme and scheme will be
used as synonyms denoting structured sets of pre-existing views, and patterns of
events/actions that can contribute to meaning and action.
Lord & Foti (1986, p. 23) differentiate between four types of schemes
giving a picture of different ways DEMO schemes to function. A self-scheme
contains information about the scheme-holder him-/herself: personality,
appearance, and behaviour. A person scheme focuses on the DEMO and behaviour
information common to certain groups or types of people. Knowledge about
"entrepreneurs" as a prototype is an example. Event scheme (script) describes the
typical or appropriate sequences of events or activities in a particular situation. It
possesses causal or temporal ordering of events. Examples of DEMO schemes are
the fixed prescriptions of start-up sequences discussed in chapter 1. A person-in-
situation scheme contains information of people and action typically found DEMO
specific social situations, a compound knowledge of persons and events. The
DEMO between these four types points at differences in attention and
meaning ascription, i.e. what a person tends to focus on as a basis for action.
Typical of all schemes is that they guide the perception of DEMO information.
They often shape memory towards consistency or orderliness. They also fill in
gaps where information is missing. Schemes are stored products of successful
41
earlier sensemaking. They have a perseverance effect in that they tend DEMO be
robust against change and thereby promote retrospectiveness (Lord & Foti, 1986,
p. 32). Schemes are built from experience, and they are believed to become more
abstract, contain more information and get more consistent over time.
When a person brings up a scheme in a DEMO situation it is in our
terms contingent on meaning ascribed to or imposed on the situation due to
attention, basic values and beliefs and schemes at hand. Meaning and schemes
are interrelated. Ascribed or imposed meanings DEMO keys to bring relevant
schemes forward, but schemes may also specify DEMO expectation of meaningful
occurrences. Schemes may create a self-fulfilling process, i.e. DEMO expectation that
something will happen, makes it happen or provokes interpretation DEMO it does
(Gioia, 1986, p. 63). Basic values and DEMO have governed what schemes have
become stored. At the same time development of more elaborated schemes may
affect beliefs through meaning reconstruction (cf. Ranson, Hinings &
Greenwood, 1980). Also action is reciprocally related to interpretive schemes -
with ascribed or imposed meaning in between. Daft & DEMO (1984) identify
interpretation modes. In one of them organisations learn by doing. This is also to
say that they actively develop interpretive schemes DEMO future action. Other
organisations interpret and act within traditional boundaries, which DEMO that
they rely on existing schemes.
Schemes taken for granted by people enable them to recognise, interpret
and negotiate even strange and unanticipated situations and thus continuously to
create and recreate meaning in the course of DEMO (Ranson, Hinings &
Greenwood, 1980). But schemes also work as blinders. The more successfully
they are used, the more resistance they can evoke when they need to be changed
in view of e.g. DEMO desired outcome. But meaning construction is not only a process
of recalling existing interpretive schemes. If that were true, no new learning
could occur (Gioia, 1986). Instead, meaning construction and understanding
involves association of experience with existing knowledge, alteration of
existing schemes by incorporating new knowledge, and occasionally a dramatic
restructuring or creation of knowledge by intuition and revelation (Bartunek,
1984). To handle that the literature (see DEMO Brytting, 1991, p. 76; Gioia, 1986)
sometimes uses the notion of "Piagetian framework", in which assimilation
denotes the incorporation of experience into existing schemes (integration) and
accommodation refers to construction or DEMO of schemes in the face of
experience (creation).
Schemes are DEMO either intentionally and therefore under the person's
control or automatically, DEMO consciously. The role of schemes is to facilitate life
and lessen the "cognitive load" (Lord & Foti, 1986, p. 21) brought DEMO people
42
when simultaneously handling a large number of situations. Particularly the
automatically DEMO schemes enhance our capacity to manage many tasks.
To conclude, interpretive DEMO can be both beneficial and detrimental
for business start-up. On one hand an entrepreneur's well developed event
schemes and person-in-situations schemes based on DEMO work experience
can become appropriate guiding lines for action. On the other hand, if existing
schemes govern action in terms of assimilation when accommodation would be
called for, they may cause problems or failure.
3. 2. 6  Attention, Clue Seeking and Selection of
Information
The environment brings DEMO individual information for sensemaking. For any
specific situation, where the individual DEMO a need or a potential need to
act, the entire datum DEMO information tends to be abundant. There is a problem
what information to attend to. The situation is equivocal (Gartner et al. 1992). So
the individual needs guidance regarding what information to distinguish for
further attention DEMO use. Now an interplay starts between attention to informa-
tion and creation of meaning. In the selection of information clues are needed.
Clues work DEMO reference points in the large and complicated quantity of
information. But once extracted, clues may suggest something more (Weick,
1995, pp. 49-50). Clues map, discover and create at the same time. Clues
interplay with meaning. A meaning attributed at the start of the process can
DEMO and develop as a result of the clues selected and applied to information
selection. Clues trigger meaning development. The individual can in an active
DEMO through meaning development produce change in her/his environment due
to information selected. Attention, clue seeking and selection of information is to
a greater or lesser extent done by the individual in conjunction with others.
An DEMO question is whether attention and clue-seeking consciously
and intentionally can be done by the individual, and whether it is possible by
clue selection to govern one's own development of meaning. The question is
problematic. According DEMO Bateson (1979, p. 56) people are not conscious of the
DEMO we call perception, only the products of the processes. Furthermore, in
these non-conscious processes, people use assumptions and preconditions, which
will be DEMO of the final perceived result. We know very little of the brain's way
of forming perception. Still, Bateson (1979, p. 268) DEMO that it is possible to
assume that perception can be governed by his referring to results from a number
of studies. For this study DEMO assumption will be that attention is partly automatic
43
(cf. Kiesler & Sproull, 1982, p. 555), some clues may be non-consciously
selected which will make information selection more automatic. But DEMO may
also put much effort into attention, selecting clues out of DEMO perceived ones
and the actor may even express clear-cut reasons for the selection. Even if the
processes behind are not known, reasons stated for selection can express
meaning.
In the equivocal reality the individual engages him/DEMO or becomes
engaged in many problems at the same time. When attributed, meaning problems
may be connected or not. Information seeking, clue seeking DEMO action evolve
differently and at different times. Meanings change as current projects change
(Gioia & Chittipeddi, 1991, p. 435). One reason for change is influence on
meaning construction by actors around a focal actor DEMO change of surrounding
actors.
3. 2. 7  Symbols in Sensemaking
Construction DEMO reconstruction of meaning is done throughout any specific
sensemaking process. To ascribe or impose meaning to a situation is an attempt
to gain understanding. DEMO of the ways people engage in the sensemaking
process is by using symbols to convey meaning and understanding. A symbol is
some representative sign DEMO stands for some other object, entity or concept
(Gioia, 1986, p. 52). Symbols are part of meaning construction and relate to DEMO
other components in the sensemaking process. Organising provides people and
organisations involved in the process with names, roles and identities
(Czarniawska-Joerges, 1994). These may take on symbolic meaning. In a
business start-up the identity DEMO is connected to the entrepreneur.
Entrepreneurship is often associated with a stock of taken-for-granted meanings,
regarding both the entrepreneur him/herself and surrounding DEMO as well as a
wider environment (society). The entrepreneur and DEMO can be
typifications, ready-made labels that are attached to the words DEMO to people
denoted by them (Schütz, 1967).
3. 2. 8  Implications of the Sensemaking View for        Business
Start-up DEMO Early Development
The sensemaking process will be characterised by both individual and social
construction. At least some, albeit not all, meaning construction for DEMO,
44
objects, words and people will become shared between the actors (DEMO,
1983). The business start-up situation may for the entrepreneur include a
contradiction between the individual and social construction of reality. On one
DEMO the entrepreneur may bring in innovation to the market (Schumpeter, 1934)
which implies a different sensemaking from what is taken for granted. DEMO
meaning construction may be prominent. On the other hand, the entrepreneur
DEMO need sensemaking in conjunction with external actors (cf. section 1.2.4).
DEMO an actor's sensemaking concerns the individual in the
context but also groups such as a company or categories such as customer or
supplier. DEMO schemes often contain prototypes, an abstract set of
features commonly associated DEMO members of a category (cf. person schemes
above and Lord & DEMO, 1986, p. 25). Sensemaking in the action processes may
be contingent on categories. Scott & Meyer (1991), use the notion of technical
and institutional environments. Following that, we define two corresponding
categories surrounding the entrepreneur.
The commercial context concerns production, distribution and exchange
in a market for goods and services. The entrepreneur - as well as other DEMO -
are rewarded for effective and efficient control of production, distribution DEMO
exchange. This control makes sense for the actors and meaningful outcomes will
be characterised by trading: exchange of goods and services for money.
Participants in an exchange relationship impose meaning on: 1) reciprocity, by
which one is morally obligated to give something in return for something
received, 2) fair rates of exchange between utilitarian costs and benefits (Blau,DEMO
1964), and 3) distributive justice, through which all parties receive benefits that
are proportional to their investments (Homans, 1961).15
The DEMO context is a category characterised by sensemaking rules
and requirements to which the entrepreneur must conform in order to receive
support and legitimacy. The DEMO and external actors construct and
reconstruct meaning with rules and requirements in mind. Typical external actors
surrounding a business start-up:
- regulatory agencies DEMO e.g. registration of firms, fiscal authorities,
- professional and trade DEMO e.g. product testing and  certification,
- morally and financially supporting DEMO for business start-up.
The entrepreneurs' outcomes will imply action in conformance DEMO rules,
regulations, conventions and generalised belief systems (Scott & Meyer, 1991).
Outcomes may also be based on order and advice provided by the external actors
15 We label this category commercial instead of DEMO & Meyer's (1991) notion technical, in
order not to DEMO it with the word technical in other senses.
45
in the institutional context. This context differs from the commercial context DEMO
constructed meanings. Often there is no reciprocity in these relations. They are
unilateral with one-sided directives or information (Stymne, 1970, p. 45) DEMO
normative implications going from the external actor to the entrepreneur.
Relations are not characterised by exchange in the classical meaning of the word
(see above).
For many business start-ups a third context category would be
DEMO: the personal context. Family and friends are often important for the
DEMO and the entrepreneur (Birley & Norburn, 1985; Johannisson, 1988)
Values and beliefs may have different implications from what may characterise
both DEMO commercial and institutional contexts. Meanings based on family
relations and friendship will take on other content and requirements: more love,
liking and multiple common interests.
Sensemaking may imply no clear boundaries between the three types DEMO
context. Business relations can take on meaning partly based on friendship (DEMO
e.g. Johanson & Mattsson, 1987). Dependency of the entrepreneur on DEMO dominant
supplier in the market can make sense for compliance with imposed conventions
(cf. Porter, 1980). Commercial exchange can make sense also DEMO the personal
context, in for example family businesses.
As can be DEMO from the discussion above in this chapter there is no
fixed pattern or sequence of how attention, basic values and beliefs, interpretive
schemes DEMO with meaning. The entrepreneur in business start-up and
early development must manage situations, action processes and relationships
characterised by a variety of requirements. Different action processes within
commercial, institutional and personal contexts will be going on at the same time
with very different meanings (cf. Gartner, 1985)DEMO All these processes must be
handled by the entrepreneur him-/herself. This adds to the situation containing
equivocality, liability of newness and need for trustworthiness. Adaptiveness,
tolerance for ambiguity and different social skills must form DEMO of the
entrepreneur's repertoire:
The owner-manager needs to have the broad thinking of a generalist and be able to
tolerate disorder, endure switching from role to role, and stick to fundamentals (Welsh &
White, 1981, p. 32).
Mitchell (1973) suggested three elements DEMO content of interaction: a)
communication content; the passing of information from one to other, b)
exchange content; or the goods DEMO services flowing between organisations, and
c) normative content; or the DEMO one has of the other because of some
46
social characteristics or attribute.16 Interaction between any two actors may
contain DEMO the three elements, but one element may be prominent depending on
DEMO category. The commercial context would then be characterised largely by
exchange content, the institutional context by normative content.
Communication content would be important in all three contexts and prominent
in the personal context. The personal context DEMO also have an interaction based
on normative content. The entrepreneur must have social skills convening with
all three elements and must have ability to DEMO and create meanings
involved.
Sensemaking in Weick's view depicts actors as active. Many choices are
made out of a multifacetted reality. This leads DEMO varied experience and
consequently a diversity of interpretive schemes. Resulting action, DEMO,
will become highly personalised. Weick's view implies that there can be a wide
scope of e.g. strategic choice open to an actor, such as the entrepreneur (Child,
1972). Actually, even the DEMO becomes personalised into a context in
the way the sensemaking works. Enactment implies: Which other actors will be
attended to depends on the actor! And, as Czarniawska-Joerges (1994) contends,
some actors will be more successful than others in making sense of a context that
matches their DEMO Those more actively making sense of the context will in
enactment by trial and error build more externally oriented interpretive schemes
(Daft & Weick, 1984, p. 294), and they build their schemes more in DEMO
with external actors. This may provide a wider scope of possible action for an
entrepreneur.
On the other hand the liability of newness (Stinchcombe, 1965) implies
the need for building relations with external actors. It DEMO be described in terms
of reciprocal sensemaking processes. If the entrepreneur is not familiar with
other potential actors there may be no relevant schemes DEMO earlier success or
failure ready to guide relations towards the actors. The process is one of reality
construction implying trial and error, which can be both hazardous and time-
consuming. Enactment is also learning. Ties (schemes) standing for accurate
knowledge of customer needs and quality requirements, channelling DEMO orders
etc. are lacking and loyalty between the parties does not exist yet. Seen from
other actors' points of view, the situation is DEMO There may not be relevant
schemes of earlier success or failure guiding relations towards the specific actor
either. Nor may schemes come forward in DEMO minds guiding them how
procedures for information, merchandise handling etc. will DEMO towards the
16 Stymne (1970, p. 45) used a similar DEMO: 1) reciprocal (exchange in market), 2)
unilateral (one-sided imformation), and 3) unilateral (one-sided directives, such as legislation).
47
start-up. To the extent the start-up and other actors are familiar DEMO one another
from before, present schemes may become further resorted to DEMO assimilation or
developed by accommodation. One interesting point about one entirely new
party is the possibility that reciprocal trust-building will facilitate common action
by DEMO schemes emerging.
Unfolding action means that interacts will influence later action by
accommodation and assimilation of interpretive schemes. Sensemaking can by
meaning development and DEMO schemes have deviating and amplifying
effects on action processes and vice versa. Action processes and events within
them can by sensemaking be connected in DEMO way to change outcomes. This is the
essence of enactment. Often loops will emerge like virtuous or vicious circles
(Weick, 1979, pp. 72-83) An entrepreneur, having a good reputation from earlier
employment, could by doing something good in action processes in others' view
amplify this reputation. External actors bracket positive information, earlier
information will be confirmed and strengthened, i.e. his action in the process
affects their sensemaking. Another entrepreneur, DEMO into temporary
difficulties, could have a tough time convincing actors having DEMO of
earlier difficulties that problems are over, i.e. their views and DEMO ought to be
revised - but his action does not change their meaning and accommodation of
schemes will not occur, rather may the old schemes become reinforced. Self-
reinforcing schemes could develop what Merton (1968) DEMO self-fulfilling
prophecies after having studied a bank crisis during the great depression. He
found that the rumour of the bank being insolvent caused the DEMO to withdraw
their savings which then actually provoked insolvency. Likewise, from
DEMO potential actors prospective entrepreneurs often meet attitudes
which may assume the character of a self-fulfilling prophecy: Macmillan (1983)
points at external actors DEMO themselves to a new venture and thereby
becoming gateopeners for others to commit themselves - and vice versa (cf.
section 1.1). The actors' prophecies may contribute to the actual unfolding of
events.
In a two party relation both parties construct and reconstruct meaning
concerning the other. Reciprocal DEMO between enacted contexts occur.
Their schemes can by mutual influence become developed in similar or different
directions. In group relations the same phenomenon can DEMO be seen. Janis
(1972) thus in Victims of Groupthink described how groups slightly isolated
from their environment developed shared illusions of invulnerability and
DEMO, stereotyped views of external parties and a shared illusion of group
DEMO That can be interpreted as reciprocal influences between their
individually enacted contexts resulting in joint construction of meanings with
48
little influence from other sources. Entrepreneurs who foster an open context, by
enacting new actors for new outcomes, run less risk of becoming victims of
groupthink than when context and outcomes are seen to be DEMO
3. 3  Conclusion: Sensemaking in Action
Process
The arguments in this chapter are that in an equivocal reality actors act in action
processes DEMO promote desired outcomes in the new venture creation. They need
different meaningful clues as to what action makes sense to embark upon.
Individually and DEMO with other actors in an enacted context they construct
meaning concerning action: sensemaking. Sensemaking and action processes are
intertwined in enactment. This implies that meaning guides the unfolding of
action processes and in an action process DEMO becomes developed. Meaning
is sought in interrelation between the individual's basic values and beliefs,
experience memorised as interpretive schemes concerning earlier action
DEMO, and her/his attention to a situation. Symbols can convey meaning.
DEMO discuss some different situations where sensemaking is important to
understand action concerning new ventures. We have in this chapter not been
very specific about DEMO meaning can be. We assume, however, that there is a
vast variety of representations in the human mind that potentially constitute
meaning for DEMO processes and a basis for enactment. This study will from
now on concentrate on trust as one such meaning. The next chapter is devoted DEMO
studying trust as the literature deals with it, and introduces a DEMO of trust into
our frame of reference for the study.
49
Chapter 4
Trust
4. 1  The Notion of Trust
In the Merriam-Webster Dictionary (1976) trust is defined as "assured reliance
on the character, ability, strength, or truth of someone and something". It has
also a definition of trust in a commercial setting: "reliance DEMO future payment for
property (as merchandise) delivered" (p. 952). Central in both the general and the
more commercially oriented definitions is DEMO someone, a truster, believes
something about someone or something else, DEMO trustee. The truster has a belief
about the trustee's ability to do something, about her/his character etc. This belief
is somehow important for the truster who may be at odds if the trustee does DEMO
live up to what the truster expects him/her to do or be.
Trust as a more or less prominent issue has been studied DEMO i.a.
psychologists, sociologists, economists, management and marketing theorists -
and DEMO philosophy (Hosmer, 1995). A multifacetted phenomenon lacking
agreement on fundamental definitions and ways to define it lends itself to be
grasped and DEMO by different views on it. Two main views concerning
trust can be traced in this literature. In the first expectation is seen as the DEMO
of trust. The second view also concerns expectation, but it is DEMO against
risk. These two main views of trust and the more specific aspects that can be
seen in the literature, namely trustworthiness, reputation DEMO distrust, need to be
discussed here before stating the study's DEMO of trust.
4. 1. 1  Trust and Expectation
In the view DEMO trust as expectation Luhmann (1979) is a common point of
reference for most authors published in the field since 15 years. In any DEMO
we put trust on another party, that s/he will meet DEMO our expectations. Our
action is often based on expectations that others will do things which will favour
us or at least not put us DEMO a detrimental position. Trust builds on one's
expectation that the other will act in some desired way. Expectation implies that
50
this will not occur immediately but in a future time. Trust DEMO in as a form of
complexity reduction (Luhmann, 1979) involving DEMO problematic relationship
with time. "To show trust is to anticipate the DEMO It is to behave as though the
future were certain." (p. 10) That is to say: Man makes use of the present DEMO
to reduce complexity of the future. Trust in the present forms the basis for trust
in the future.
Barber (1983) has the same DEMO as Luhmann (1979) in taking an
actor's expectations as a starting point for trust. Expectation is for him meanings
actors attribute to DEMO and others as they make choices about which
actions and reactions lead to desired ends and are emotionally and morally
appropriate. Barber (1983, DEMO 7) sees three kinds of expectations underlying trust:
1) Expectation of the persistence and fulfillment of the natural  and
the moral order.
2) Expectation of technically competent role performance from  parties
involved with DEMO in social relationships and systems.
3) Expectation that partners in interaction DEMO carry out their
fiduciary obligations and responsibilities, that is, their duties in
certain situations to place other's interest before their own.
Society DEMO based on natural and moral order. Trust works as a "functional DEMO
cultural variable" (Barber, 1983, p. 5) and in the DEMO more specific ways above.
Man puts trust in competence. In a complex society with accumulation of
knowledge and technical expertise, professionals and professional groups are
often looked upon as trustworthy (Barber, 1983, p. 14). For example, a
technically competent engineer presenting a technical solution to a problem will
normally be trusted. Trust as fiduciary obligations and responsibilities, goes
beyond technically competent performance to the moral dimensions of
interaction. Technically competent DEMO can be monitored insofar as it is
based on shared knowledge and expertise. But when some parties to a social
relationship or some members DEMO a social system cannot comprehend the
expertise, performance can anyway be DEMO by trust.
Expectations need to be tied to someone or something. Zucker (1986, p.
53) discusses how people connect expectations and sees three central modes of
trust. In process-based trust the decision or inclination to DEMO is contingent on a
record of prior exchange often obtained second-hand or by imputation from
outcomes of prior exchange. The prevailing view is that DEMO and firms make
investments in process-based trust by creating positive "reputations" or brand-
names (Zucker, 1986, p. 61). In characteristics-based trust all that is necessary is
information concerning social similarity (Zucker, 1986, p. 61). Similarity in
family background or social situation may be DEMO out as a basis for common
51
understanding and for attaining reciprocally satisfactory exchange outcomes.
Institutional-based trust is DEMO to formal societal structures, depending on
individual or firm-specific attributes. Formal DEMO are used to provide
trust that does not rest on personal characteristics or on past history of exchange.
Formal mechanisms can be membership in DEMO sub-culture, such as a well-known
professional association, or intermediary mechanisms, DEMO as commonly
accepted procedures.
But how much reason and experience are expectations based on? Lewis &
Weigert (1985) discuss expectation as a DEMO beyond what reason and experience
alone would warrant. Expectation is according to them not necessarily
calculative. Expectation can differ as to what one expects DEMO the other.
Expectation can mean hope. Luhmann (1979, p. 24) DEMO the word hope to
denote expectation without connection to a decision. Trust implies that you
handle an uncertain situation in a calculative manner. One DEMO hopes simply has
confidence despite uncertainty. Trust reflects contingency. Hope ignores con-
tingency. The one who trusts bears the risk of miscalculation and trust
DEMO Anyone who puts hope into someone or something ignores risk and
more or less takes things for granted. Giddens (1990) opposes the view DEMO
calculation as a basis for trust. It is unhelpful to connect the notion of trust to the
specific circumstances in which individuals consciously contemplate DEMO
courses of action. Trust is usually much more of a continuous state (Giddens,
1990, p. 32) and, when trust is given DEMO people, it is connected to non-calculative
attribution of emotions, like honour, love and faith - sometimes also to
correctness of abstract principles like expertise. Also for other authors
expectation can contain predictability (e.g. Zucker, DEMO) or only confidence in
other's good-will (Ring & van de Ven, 1992).
The effects expectations may have were demonstrated by Zand (1972), in
investigating the role of managers' trust in solving DEMO marketing-manufacturing
policy problem. He studied two groups, one characterised by low DEMO in the
group's problem-solving behaviour, the other high trust. In DEMO low trust group
the energy and creativity was diverted from finding comprehensive, realistic
solutions, and members used the problem as an instrument to DEMO their
vulnerability. In contrast, in the high trust group there was DEMO socially generated
uncertainty and problems were solved more effectively.
4. 1. 2  Trust and Risk
52
The debate indicated in the last section brings us over the DEMO of trust as
expectation qualified by risk. The essence of going into a risky situation can be
seen like this: The penalty (disutility) one suffers if the other abuses one's
expectation is greater than DEMO benefit (utility) one gains if the other does not
abuse that expectation. The main source of reference for his view is Deutsch
(1962). If you trust someone you give that person something that is DEMO can be
important to yourself. The trusted person acts on that but outside of your control.
Risk is attributable therefore to the action of DEMO, including the possibility that
they will behave opportunistically, such as withhold information, create
confusion etc. (Lorentz, 1988). Some risks are avoidable. You can choose not to
trust a person, company etc. But then you may miss something valuable, e.g. a
business opportunity. Luhmann (1979, p. 33) argues that the truster seeks clues
whether or not trust is justified. By the clues you can reduce risk but not
eliminate DEMO
If you trust someone to do something for your benefit, you DEMO
yourself to risk of suffering detrimental effects. You become vulnerable.
Vulnerability is central in some definitions of trust. According to Sabel (1993, p.
DEMO) trust is the mutual confidence that no party to an exchange DEMO exploit
another's vulnerability. Parties to an exchange can be vulnerable in several
different ways. Barney & Hansen (1994, p. 176) in discussing adverse selection
vulnerability and hold-up vulnerability thus argues as follows: When a party
brings to an exchange resources that are costly to evaluate, the party is subject to
adverse selection vulnerability, because the other party may find it cheaper,
easier to evaluate or less risky to choose DEMO from a third party. When
parties bring to an exchange asymmetric transaction-specific investments they
are subject to hold-up vulnerability. A hold-up situation is at DEMO when one of
the parties has invested large amounts of money in e.g. product development and
needs cash from sales, which the other party knows and can make use of in
negotiations. Trust in these situations DEMO to be when the parties share a
mutual confidence that the other party will not exploit adverse selection or hold-
up vulnerability. For start-up DEMO the problem of both kinds can be important.
Being new can lead to adverse selection vulnerability, being small in the market
can lead to hold-up situations.
4. 1. 3  Trust and Trustworthiness
In the discussion above there are expressions concerning the truster's beliefs
about the trustee; beliefs as a basis for trust. Trust is belief seen from the truster'DEMO
53
point of view. Trust seen from the trustee's point of DEMO is trustworthiness, i.e.
to be worthy of trust in the eyes DEMO truster. Trustworthy is in the Oxford
Dictionary of current English defined as: worthy of trust, dependable, and in
Merriam-Webster Thesaurus (1991, p. 627) as reliable, having qualities that
merit confidence or trust. Reliable DEMO a synonym to trustworthy. A related notion
is credible. If it is believed that a person's word is reliable and corresponds with
her/DEMO deeds, that person will be considered trustworthy (Huemer, 1994).
DEMO often denotes trustworthy in a slightly narrower sense, denoting what a
DEMO says. Trustworthiness is an attribute of individual parties, while trust is DEMO
attribute of a relationship between parties. Trustworthiness is given to a person
(trustee) by another (truster); it is a conferred status. Expectations and norms
form trustworthiness, but also experience from the relation between trustee and
truster. Trustworthiness can also be attributed to a group of persons, (trustees) if
this group is expected by the truster to be DEMO in relation to the truster.
Every social action involves the actor's presenting himself in terms of
trustworthiness (Luhmann, 1979, p. 39). The actor knows that and gauges her/his
action accordingly. The result DEMO selective representation of him/herself, which
provides other criteria on which DEMO build up trustworthiness and to establish
norms of anticipated continuity. Trustworthiness will be formed gradually, in
selective steps, by a combination of action DEMO and action already determined
institutionally or historically (cf. interpretive schemes). DEMO choose whom we
will consider trustworthy, in which respects and under DEMO circumstances. We
base the choice on what we take to be "DEMO reasons", constituting evidences of
trustworthiness. Trustworthiness involves at least some familiarity with the
object of trust (Lewis & Weigert, 1985). We DEMO to know the sort of person we
are dealing with before we deal with him/her. But we will know it only im-
perfectly. DEMO form an opinion on the basis of background, the opportunities s/DEMO
has faced, the courses of action s/he has taken and DEMO forth. Our opinion is thus
based partly on the theory we hold of the effect of culture, class membership,
family line, and DEMO like, partly on a person's motivation (her/his disposition) DEMO
hence behaviour (cf. basic values and beliefs). Our problem in DEMO is to infer
the person's qualities from such data (Dasgupta, 1988).
In Koenig's (1995) view the trusting party develops DEMO
regarding its opposite's behaviour, in mutually relevant matters. If the DEMO is
trustworthy, it will feel obliged to fulfill these expectations. Only DEMO specific
expectations can be formed on one hand, and fulfilled on DEMO other, is
trustworthiness confirmed and reconfirmed. A breach of trust occurs DEMO there
is awareness of the expectations, but no fulfillment. Consequently, in the
development of a relationship there is a reciprocality in the roles DEMO truster and
54
trustee. For mutual trust to develop, both parties need to display trustworthiness
before the other (cf. Blau, 1964). The process may DEMO, though, by one requiring
more trustworthiness than the other. Aware of the anticipations regarding its
general conduct, the trusted party becomes trustworthy. The party then feels the
obligation to fulfill these anticipations. The combination of DEMO and
obligation yields an effective mode of co-ordination (Koenig, 1995).
Trustworthiness is dependent on norms and social structures. Barney &
Hansen (DEMO) consider that trustworthiness is partly based on the existence of
elaborate DEMO and economic governance mechanisms and that opportunistic
behaviour would violate values, DEMO and standards of behaviour that have
been internalised by parties to an exchange. In some situations trustworthiness is
clearly exogenous to a particular exchange DEMO, in other it is endogenous.
Values, principles and standards may reflect an exchange partner's unique
history, culture or the personal beliefs and values of individuals associated with
it.
4. 1. 4  Reputation
What is extensively said or believed about a person's or an object's DEMO is
covered by the notion of reputation (Bromley, 1993, p. DEMO). Reputation can
concern what the person has done, is or DEMO been able to do or her/his
outstanding attributes. Not only a person, but also groups or organisations can
get reputation. Weigelt & Camerer (1988) for example define corporate
reputation as a set of attributes DEMO to a firm, inferred from the firm's past
actions. A DEMO is an example of an object which can be given a reputation.
Trust, as we have discussed it, is between two parties: truster and trustee.
Reputation includes a third party, a more or less easily defined set of people or
objects. The word "extensively" above indicates DEMO this third party is often
large and unspecified, e.g. customers in DEMO, people in the industry, industrial
purchasers in Europe. Reputation is also a shift of our interest in trust over to the
third party. DEMO, when we use the word reputation, we imply that the third
party has an impact on trust. The trusters' beliefs about the trustee is mediated
through the third party. Trust, where reputation has an impact, becomes
complicated. The third party could consist of people with different pre-existing
beliefs (interpretive schemes) about the trustee or object. It is often DEMO to
establish whether a specific alleged reputation is widespread or not, DEMO it is
unanimous or not. The grounds, i.e. what it is DEMO on, or the motives for a
reputation can be significant, but difficult to find out.
55
About the importance of reputation in economic life Hayek (1948) DEMO
that in actual life we have inadequate knowledge of the available commodities or
services. This is made up for by our experience with the DEMO or firms
supplying them - competition is in a large measure competition for reputation or
goodwill. His conclusion was that reputation is one of DEMO most important factors
which enables us to solve our daily problems. There is a discussion in the lite-
rature of just how important reputation DEMO and how it works: Just as with trust
between truster and DEMO, reputation can be built up by pursuing certain
courses of action, or destroyed by pursuing certain others. Normally it is
acquired gradually. People DEMO resources for the purpose of building a
reputation of being trustworthy (DEMO, 1988). Reputation can also concern
the exchange parties themselves.
Trust DEMO more likely to be extended to an organization when that organization earns a
reputation in the market place for following norms of equity (Ring & van de Ven, 1992,
p. 489).
Madhok (1995) in an investigation of opportunism and trust in joint venture
relationships found DEMO reputation was important when the parties lacked
familiarity with one another. But Ring & van de Ven (1992, p. 489) also state:
a reputation for trustworthiness, while necessary for acting in reliance on trust in a
business relationship, is not sufficient.
There is a line of discussion concerning reputation as important but not
always necessary or sufficient. What DEMO of limits are there? According to
Huemer (1994, p. 3): "Reputation is only part of trust: a look into a rear-view
window." This means that reputation may be lost, and not to DEMO relied upon due
to changes that the third party has not observed. In the words of Lorentz (1988,
p. 206) who studied DEMO's trustworthiness: "Reputation (given by
others) is not enough, DEMO experience is also necessary." Reputation from a third
party can not DEMO the truster - trustee relationship. Differences between how
the truster and the third party make sense of the trustee may exist.
4. 1. 5  Trust and Distrust
Trust implies positive expectations, i.e. a trustee expects the truster to bring
him/her something positive. Distrust implies the opposite: A trustee expects the
truster to bring him/her something detrimental. Would then DEMO expectation of
56
trust and no expectation of distrust be the same? Distrust can be seen not to be
the opposite of trust (Luhmann, 1979, p. 71). Differences between trust and
distrust are in Luhmann's DEMO due to the functions of trust. Trust reduces social
complexity and simplifies social life. Distrust, on the other hand, is often
emotionally tense DEMO often frantic. It displays repertoires of fixed roles, such as
seeing DEMO other as enemies to be fought. Distrust relieves the role partners from
obligations to one another. Moral order may even seem to be non-existent DEMO not
meaningful. Social interaction combined with expectations within trust may over
time and by increasing contact have strengthened ties as a motive. Distrust, on
the other hand, often implies rudimentary or no contacts at all and often a wish to
preserve distrust (Luhmann, 1979, p. 74).
In the present study it is in this vein assumed that a DEMO from distrust
to trust (and vice versa) will necessitate radical shifts in the parties' construction
of meaning, especially if earlier expectation is DEMO developed. The study
will not focus distrust, nor shifts between trust DEMO distrust.
4. 2  Trust and Action Processes
In chapter 3 the DEMO was presented that meaning interplays with action,
enactment. Does trust as meaning also imply that there is an interplay between
trust and action DEMO, i.e. that trust influences an individual's enactment?
Does trust DEMO in and through action processes? Arrow wrote that "virtually
every commercial transaction has within itself an element of trust, certainly any
transaction conducted over a period of time" (1973, p. 24) and that "trust is an
important lubricant in the social system" (1974, p. 23). This depicts a view of
trust as important for the DEMO of action processes. Blau (1964, p. 98) argues
that social DEMO generates trust: "As individuals regularly discharge their
obligations, they prove DEMO trustworthy of further credits." Specifically,
he points at the connection DEMO action and development of trust.17
Development of trust in action is also a theme of Luhmann (1979, p. 42):
In open-ended situations and where both parties can operate selective choices, which
influence one another, it is possible to set in motion a process which forms trust by
17 However, in his view there is a distinction between purely social exchange and economic
exchange in that the former "engender feelings of personal obligation, gratitude and trust,
purely economic exchange as such does not." His view on this marked distinction between
social and economic exchange has been extensively critizised, by e.g. Emerson, (1975) based
on DEMO view that economic exchange also contains more or less clear elements of personal
obligation, gratitude and trust.
57
tackling problems of the reduction of complexity over several discrete steps, i.e.
sequentially.
So for Luhmann development of trust will occur by successive DEMO deliberate
selection of action forming the action process with trust-building in mind.
This brings the discussion over to action processes and time. Perrow
(1986, p. 240) uses the term trust when there are long-term relationships DEMO
firms and suppliers, firms and customers or supervisors and workers. He DEMO
continuity in trustful relations: "repeated interactions", and "bilateral
relationship"DEMO An action process with trust-building in mind and extended over
time will require something more. There are demands concerning commitment in
the process. Luhmann DEMO again (1979, p. 64) that:
Trust accumulates as a DEMO of capital, which opens up more opportunities for more
extensive action DEMO which must be continually used and tended and which commits the
user to a trustworthy self-presentation.
Shared expectation between the actors is essential for DEMO to occur
(Zucker, 1986). Shared expectations may develop piecemeal, DEMO The
trusting party displays expectation regarding the opposite's behaviour in
mutually relevant matters. If the party is trustworthy, the opposite party will feel
obliged to fulfill these expectations. The process may take a long time. DEMO drive
to create standardised expectations can emerge, if all parties are DEMO (cf.
Håkansson, 1982). But as has been discussed in chapter 3, shared expectations in
common action do not necessarily mean common goals. In the long run the
development of a relationship will promote a DEMO in the roles of truster
and trustee. For mutual trust to develop, both parties need to display
trustworthiness before the other (cf. Blau, 1964). Combination of anticipation
and obligation yields an effective mode of DEMO (Koenig, 1995).
Gradually growth of mutual trust occurs.
By discharging their obligations for service rendered, individuals demonstrate their
trustworthiness, and the DEMO expansion of mutual service is accompanied by a parallel
growth of mutual trust. Hence processes of social exchange, which may originate in pure
self-interest generate trust in social relations through their recurrent and gradually
expanding character (Koenig,1995, p. 94 ).
But the opposite may also occur. DEMO expectations and betrayal can break
trust-building as well as common action.
To sum up, there is evidence from the literature of an interplay between
trust and action/action processes. There are also views implying that trust
58
develops in and through action processes. In our study's terminology DEMO makes
sense and may therefore influence enactment.
4. 3  Sensemaking Trust
DEMO is future-oriented. It concerns outcomes and action to come. Trust
as expectation is also oriented towards the future (Luhmann, 1979, p. 10):DEMO
To show trust is to anticipate the future. It is to behave as if the future were certain.
A truster gives attention to information DEMO which expectation concerning
the trustee is worked upon, clues are bracketed DEMO elaborated in a construction
of meaning. Basic values and beliefs concerning trust as well as trust from earlier
occasions residing in interpretive schemes will DEMO be brought into the meaning
construction. Expectations concerning a trustee will be an element in action
formed and entered upon, enactment. Experience concerning trust in the action
performed will be worked upon and perhaps reconstructed for DEMO in or
accommodation to existing schemes. Trust can be an important element in the
sensemaking process. The next step is to further consider how DEMO can work in
the sensemaking process.
4. 3. 1  Trust and DEMO Values / Beliefs
Trust as existential ideas is a part of people's general values about obligations
and moral order (see above). People may experience trust in obligation to be
important in social life, where obligation denotes promise, duty or condition that
indicates what action ought to be taken. Behind obligation there is a sense of
what is right DEMO others. If this sense of what is right is generally accepted,
as the law, obligations extend to become general moral order (Barber, 1983, p.
16). Barber (1983) and Zucker (1986) discuss expectation as tied to obligation
and moral order. Expectation is based on DEMO of others' values
concerning obligation and moral order. Our own values, conscious or more
taken-for-granted, will underlie construction of meaning. We need unanimity
with or at least predictability of other's values for entering into DEMO with them.
Basic values and beliefs with trust as an element pertain also to business
and work life In business marketing, trust has been viewed as a belief about an
exchange partner's trustworthiness that comes DEMO of the partner's expertise,
59
reliability or intentionality. Behavioural intention or behaviour reflecting reliance
of a DEMO is another issue, which may also involve vulnerability and
uncertainty on DEMO of the truster. Also honesty, standing by one's word,
DEMO role obligations, interest in the other party's welfare, sincerity and
timeliness are discussed (Moorman, Deshpandé & Zaltman, 1993). These values
and beliefs are preconditions for business relations or transaction to occur. In DEMO
view of this study values relate to expected business outcomes by meanings.
A third area of basic values and beliefs is human relations. Trust DEMO be
based on the degree to which one party judges that another party will fulfill its
commitments and that the relationship is equitable. Norms DEMO equity can be
important for trust (Ring & van de Ven, 1992) The concept of equity is
developed in exchange theory, which DEMO that participants in a relationship
desire reciprocity, by which one is DEMO obligated to give something in return
for something received, fair rates DEMO exchange between utilitarian costs and
benefits, and distributive justice, through which all parties receive benefits that
are proportional to their investments (cf. Zucker, 1986, p. 60; also Blau, 1964;
Homans, 1961).
Schurr & Ozanne (1985) found that buyers' expectations about trust
significantly affected attitudes and behaviour toward their current supplier. Low
trust stimulated less DEMO attitudes, communications and bargaining power
with respect to the supplier. Reciprocity, fairness in exchange and distributive
justice are values which have impact on DEMO
4. 3. 2  Trust and Interpretive Schemes
According to Luhmann, (DEMO p. 26) trust makes sense in situations to generalise
experiences and DEMO them to other similar cases. Retrospectiveness is
prevalent in his notion of trust. His views parallel that of Weick (1979, 1995).
Trust DEMO on the properties of interpretive schemes as we have met it in the last
chapter about sensemaking. In the view of Zucker (1986) DEMO has background
expectations as one major component, which stands for interpretive DEMO,
indices and signals, used for interpretation of meaning. These frames DEMO the
way we have seen discussed among the sensemaking writers: to DEMO events and
action in a typical way, to make use of DEMO knowledge. Persons and
firms make investments in creating schemes about e.g. brands, family
background, professional association where trust is tied to exchange, persons and
formal social structures respectively. Membership in a sub-culture, e.g.
association for chartered accountants, brings automatically trust to individual
60
members. Mechanisms that e.g. guarantee the performance of something can
imply DEMO Concerning business start-up, this view of Zucker (1986) can
be DEMO as follows: When a bank makes as a condition for support DEMO a
business start-up that the business idea should be scrutinised by a business start-
up consultant, we have a trust-building process based on competence in a social
structure. And a similar view is displayed by Barber (1983, p. 19):
Trust has the general function of social DEMO, of providing cognitive and moral
expectational maps for actors and systems DEMO they continuously interact.
Barber (1983) specifically discusses generalised beliefs about professions
and how trust pertains to these through schematic knowledge and assumptions.18
Trust DEMO fiduciary obligations and responsibilities goes beyond technically
competent performance to the moral dimensions of interaction. Technically
competent performance can be monitored insofar as it DEMO based on shared
knowledge and expertise. But when some parties to a social relationship or some
members of a social system cannot comprehend the DEMO, performance can
anyway be controlled by trust. For example when someone DEMO a
technically complicated solution to a problem, even if the solution DEMO not
understood, trust could still emerge due to formal guarantees in DEMO contracts or
other forms of social control.
Barney & Hansen (1994) consider that trustworthiness is partly based on
the existence of elaborate social DEMO economic governance mechanisms. They
further contend that opportunistic behaviour would violate values, principles and
standards of behaviour that have been internalised by parties to an exchange. In
some situations trustworthiness is clearly exogenous to a particular DEMO
structure, in others they are endogenous. As discussed above, values, DEMO
and standards may reflect an exchange partner's unique history, culture DEMO the
personal beliefs and values of critical individuals associated with it. Their notion
of governance mechanisms seem to be equivalent to the interplay between
DEMO and interpretive schemes in the terms of this study's sensemaking frame
of reference and their discussion also brings in the impacts of basic DEMO and
beliefs. We can also in their discussion see that interpretive schemes can be both
pertinent to a specific set of actors as well DEMO in a larger setting. Zucker (1986, p.
64) goes more DEMO into what she calls intermediary mechanisms: In
transactions between parties or DEMO procedures between them, signals are given to
convey trust in the DEMO of insurances, guarantees etc. These intermediary
18 Cf. also prototype: Lord & Foti (1986, p. 23).
61
mechanisms signal the willingness of one party to protect the other DEMO losses
or from failures of the signalling party.
When stored interpretive schemes do not make sense, the situation may be
attended to as being different. Personal trust can also be acquired by withdrawal
of standardised expectations DEMO one's partner and replacing them with other
expectations, based on DEMO partner's individual personality, unique style etc.
(assimilation and accommodation of schemes). For example: a customer meeting
an entrepreneur in a business start-up may have earlier standardised expectations
of new businesses and entrepreneurs, which may or may not be relevant in the
situation at hand. But, on the other hand trust residing in interpretive schemes
can be compared DEMO a capital asset (Dasgupta, 1988), denoting the characteristics
that trust may need time and effort to acquire and is seen as valuable DEMO it is
there. Once established, trust may resist accommodation and become DEMO taken-for-
granted belief.
4. 3. 3  Trust and Attention
Luhmann (1979, ch. 4) means that man lives in a complex world and DEMO sees
trust as a reduction of complexity. The view parallels that of Weick (1979) and
Gioia (1986). So trust as a meaning gives a guide to attention. For attention,
clues implying trust are DEMO out. Luhmann (1979, p. 33):
A truster seeks in DEMO subjective image some objective clues about whether or not trust is
justified.
Information congruent with trust is worked upon to become a basis for DEMO If
trust has been an issue earlier in a specific situation resembling a later situation,
people will look for and use information congruent DEMO the earlier situation.
People also present themselves in a way so as to be assessed as trustworthy or in
the words of Luhmann (1979, p. 41): "every socially comprehensible action also
involves the actor'DEMO presenting himself in terms of his trustworthiness". We
explicitly or implicitly judge trustworthiness (Gambetta, 1988, p. 217):
The probability that DEMO other will perform an action that is beneficial or at least not
detrimental to us to consider engaging in some form of co-operation with DEMO
In a situation which is relatively open-ended, and where both parties DEMO
operate selective choices which influence one another, trust can be formed DEMO
several separate steps (Luhmann, 1979, p. 42). Attention and DEMO
62
construction and reconstruction interplay. Trust can be built gradually as or
DEMO meaning development.
Also standardised expectations of trust (see above) can in this way be
replaced by trust in the trustee. Reputation as standardised DEMO, mediated
by a third party, is a way to get attention. This makes judgement against meaning
different. Since
- the third party may DEMO be involved in direct communication
- the grounds and motives for reputation are difficult to assess
- reputation may differ between groups
- reputation DEMO be static, i.e. does not take into account changing conditions
meaning DEMO become more complex between the parties. But if reputation by
truster is considered relevant and clear-cut, selection may be facilitated (cf.
Hayek, 1948, and Barney & Hansen, 1994).
4. 4  Conclusions: The DEMO of Reference    for the
Study
The theory-based discussion above gives DEMO conclusions concerning trust for
the study's frame of reference. 1) DEMO is mainly expectations 2) trust can be one-
sided or mutual DEMO) clues to trust as meaning can be identified 4) trust as meaning
is affected by basic values, interpretive schemes, attention and action.
DEMO first conclusion is that expectations are prominent in most authors'
view of trust. The sociologists Luhmann (1979), Barber (1983), Zucker (1986) as
well as the economists and business administration writers Arrow (DEMO),
Håkansson et al. (1982), Lewis & Weigert (1985), Ring & Van de Ven (1992,
1994) make expectation essential among trusting parties. Also among exchange
theorists (Homans, 1961; Blau, DEMO) reciprocity, fair exchange and distributive
justice are notions containing element of expectations. Therefore expectations
will in this study be a foundation to the DEMO of trust.
A second conclusion concerning trust is distinguishable in the references
above: Who trusts whom in an action process? That is to DEMO, for a focal trustee,
different trusters can vary in beliefs DEMO the trustee. Hence
trustworthiness as a notion will be important as a set of one-sided expectations
concerning one actor in the eyes of another DEMO It is a conferred status.
Trustworthiness is then a set of expectations concerning one actor in the eyes of
another actor. Mutuality in beliefs DEMO oneself and one or several
counterparts is a common theme in the literature. Mutuality, i.e. shared expecta-
63
tion, is a mutually conferred status. Mutual trust is a set of expectations shared
by actors involved in an interaction.
The third conclusion DEMO as follows. Trust is part of the basic values and
beliefs of any actor concerning e.g. the role of business, human relations and
work (cf. section 3.2.4). By sensemaking the actors construct meaning to create
unequivocality out of equivocal situations (cf. section 3.3). By clues invented
and extracted out of meaning, complexity in information will be reduced and
possibility for action increased (cf. section 3.2.6). The question is now: What
clues can trusters invent and extract out of the meaning of trust? That is to say:
On what will the truster base trust? To what is trust associated? The views of
Barber (1983), Luhmann (1979) and Zucker (1986) applied to the study DEMO
indicate three bases for an actor to make sense of trust (DEMO 4.1.1):
- a person, e.g. the entrepreneur
- an organisation, i.e. the new venture in early development
- some kind of normal order of things in the eyes of the truster, such as "DEMO we
normally do in business" or "in this industry".
This leads to a view of actors' (trusters') sensemaking of trust DEMO
1) Person-based, where trust is tied to person, her/his DEMO,
competence and experience, managerial and commercial capacity
2) Enterprise-based, DEMO trust is tied to the enterprise as an entity, its
operations DEMO past and future action processes, its products, resources and
financial stability
3) Institution-based, where trust is tied to formal mechanisms based on DEMO and
norms in society or a sub-society, general values, beliefs, DEMO order, and
traditions.
64
Chapter 5
Methodology
5. 1  Basic Assumptions
The researcher's choice of methods is ultimately governed by assumptions about
the nature of the DEMO under investigation (ontology), about a deterministic or
voluntaristic view of DEMO nature, about the nature of knowledge produced
(epistemology) and methodology (Burrell & Morgan, 1979). Assumptions within
this range always pervade how the researcher approaches the study field and how
the researcher interacts with DEMO in the study area. The reader may very
well have noticed that basic assumptions concerning the study have to a large
extent already been DEMO by choices made in the chapters so far.
The notion of sensemaking implies that reality is seen through the minds
of people. Reality is DEMO shaped and changed in their minds as people act on
the basis of their view of reality. The entrepreneurs create the new venture in
DEMO with external actors. The resulting new venture will make sense for
the entrepreneur, shaped by not only the entrepreneur but also by others. A
choice was made to see trustworthiness as a set of expectations concerning DEMO
actor in the eyes of another actor. Mutual trust is seen as a set of expectations
shared by actors involved in interaction. This implies DEMO trustworthiness and
trust is shaped in the mind of each specific actor, it is not merely given outside
people involved. The ontological assumption underlying this view is reality as a
product of individual construction. The view DEMO not rule out that some
phenomena will be conceived as reality common to many people or everybody.
The assumptions concerning human nature are central DEMO entrepreneurship
theory and the theories concerning entrepreneurship recapitulated above in
chapter 2 have various stances concerning whether entrepreneurship is
determined by the environment or DEMO The framework selected allows for the
individual's action based on her/his will, but does not preclude constraints and
influences due to situations and context.
The epistemological assumption is to see knowledge as more personal,DEMO
based on experience, and therefore differing between people. It is constructed DEMO
a large extent in social interaction. However, extreme views in this DEMO see
knowledge to be so personal that it can not be communicated between people or
65
systems. That is not the stance of this study, which will be further commented
below.
Burrell & Morgan (1979) dichotomise assumptions concerning
DEMO as nomothetic vs. ideographic. The former denotes as a main stance
the search for universal laws which explain and govern the reality observed.
Even DEMO social sciences may not reach so far, the way to do DEMO is by theory-
building, where clarified and commonly accepted rules for DEMO
should be adhered to:
The scientific endeavour is likely to focus upon an analysis of relationships and
regularities between the various elements and DEMO the discovery of ways in which these
relationships can be expressed. The methodological issues of importance are thus the
concepts themselves, their measurement and the identification of underlying themes
(Burrell & Morgan, 1979, p. 3).
The ideographic methodology, on the other hand, emphasises understanding of
DEMO is unique and particular to the individual rather than what is general and
universal. Furthermore, the particular and individual may not at all be expressed
as commonalities between individuals.
Now we are coming to a central DEMO of this study. It adheres to the
general view that reality formed in the minds of people, i.e. individually by
social construction. At the same time it is possible in research to identify patterns
and commonalities DEMO interpretation (cf. the nomothetic view above). The
language provides us DEMO the means for interpretation and identification of
commonalities. Patterns and commonalities can then form bases for further
knowledge building, by the same researcher or be communicated to others. The
research process can thus build theory out DEMO a process of accumulation of indivi-
dual knowledge and experience. At the same time, the interpretative research
process needs clarified and commonly accepted rules and procedures for theory
building, since knowledge accumulation builds on communicability and
acceptance of results between researchers. Research quality assessment needs
clarification of how DEMO are performed. For this combination of  ontological
and methodological approach the DEMO has found inspiration in the works of
Glaser & Strauss (1967), Lincoln & Guba (1985), Miles & Huberman (1994),
DEMO Strauss & Corbin (1990).
These assumptions also lead to a DEMO view concerning the researcher. In
this study the researcher's role is to convey constructed realities, which is done
by interpretation (Schütz, 1967). The view underlying this study could be
depicted and in short DEMO as follows (Figure 1).
66
The field
Theory
Reseach-
er
Concept-
building
Actor
A
Actor
B
DEMO
"Reality"
Actor
N
Researcher's sensemaking
Actor's sensemaking
Figure DEMO  Role of the researcher
Different actors make sense of their "reality". The researcher studies and tries to
interpret the meaning of the DEMO' respective reality. The researcher uses theory
(frame of reference) and DEMO by building concepts, models, with the aims
of building or refining theory. The researcher also attends to and interprets
meaning in phenomena directly DEMO the field. All the double arrows in figure 1
indicate the process of sensemaking. We can also see in figure 1 that actors B
DEMO N in a joint process attend to and construct meaning of the same phenomena.
(The researcher may also actively construct or impose meaning on phenomena in
the field in order to affect the actor's construction DEMO reality. That would be action
research, which is not the aim DEMO this study.) Implications of the approach
concerning research design and study DEMO will further be noticed below
in this chapter.
5. 2  Methods DEMO the Study
5. 2. 1  Decision Bases for Study Design
67
A research design is the logic that links the data to DEMO collected (and the
conclusions to be drawn) to the initial questions of the study (Yin, 1989, p. 27).
The initial questions in the study are the study purpose and study issues as stated
DEMO chapter 1. Also the basic assumptions come into play (see above) guiding how
the researcher interprets phenomena in the field of study. This DEMO aims to
bridge a gap which otherwise may appear between research philosophy and
research practice. The research design must be suitable to study
- DEMO in action processes,
- how actors make sense of phenomena, DEMO
- how action makes sense for the actors.
The study should allow for the researcher's interpretation, both for specific actors
or action and for patterns or other commonalities in data collected. This also
implies allowance DEMO "sensitising concepts", concepts developed successively to
be filled with content DEMO accordance (Blumer, 1954; cf. also the concept
theoretical sensitivity of DEMO & Strauss, 1967). Since there is very little earlier
research DEMO the interface of entrepreneurial action processes and trust, the study
must DEMO built on exploration, implying data collection which will be extended
successively DEMO the study. All this indicates also a design and methods
applicable to predominately qualitative data being collected and analysed.
There are three sources of DEMO behind these standpoints: Symbolic
Interactionism, Grounded Theory and Naturalistic Inquiry. Since they are
guiding lines for performance of the study, we will give a short presentation of
each and also indicate what has and has DEMO been important for the study.
Symbolic interactionism is a qualitative movement made known by
George Mead and Herbert Blumer at Chicago University (Joas , 1987). It stands
for the following:19
Ideographic research studies to DEMO based on understanding and
therefore necessarily small number of cases
Qualitative methods in order to catch variation in the in-
terpretative processes between people
DEMO to reach a more complete understanding of
empirical data
19 The description is based on Alvesson & Sköldberg (1994).
68
Social action to be interactive, symbolic and inter-
subjective
Conceptual orientation to get insight into new relations, per-
spectives and views. Sensitising concepts
Cognitive orientation implies that meaning is cognitive rather than
emotional; every action has inner meaning
and outer behaviour
Empirical orientation designed as induction by DEMO study in
a mood of empathy, then comparison by
successively enlarged DEMO of theory
These principles form the basis for the study except for part of the
cognitive orientation. It is not the belief of this DEMO that it is possible to
demarcate cognition (logos), emotion (pathos) and ethics (ethos) in research of
entrepreneurial action. Otherwise it is for the study an important view that action
has outer behaviour and DEMO meaning: Action is normally directed and
performed in a way that DEMO sense for the actor.
In later years grounded theory has become a most discussed line within
this movement with its founders Glaser & Strauss (1967). Grounded theory adds
to these general principles of interactionism ideas DEMO a specific methodology
concerning data collection, interpretation and analysis procedures. Even DEMO
grounded theory is a source of inspiration for the study there is no intention here
to describe grounded theory.20 Instead it is worth mentioning DEMO point where the
study does not agree. Glaser and Strauss (1967) advocated not having prior
knowledge of the research field before a study.21 DEMO, as we see it, having no
knowledge in an area will increase risks for misjudgement and biased views. An
investigator who is ignorant DEMO earlier research and theories risks studying a
trivial problem, producing a DEMO of some earlier study or repeating others'
mistakes (Merriam, 1988, pp. 73-74).
The third source for inspiration is Lincoln & Guba (1985) with their
principles and methodology called naturalistic inquiry. They also DEMO to the
set of principles discussed above. "Natural setting" for a study implies that no
20 See e.g. Glaser & Strauss (1967) DEMO Strauss & Corbin (1990) for presentations of the
methodology.
21 Strauss has later modified his view. According to Strauss & Corbin: (1990, p. 42) one source
of theoretical sensitivity is literature, which "includes readings on theory, research and
documents (e.g. biographies, government publications) DEMO various kinds. By having some
familiarity with these publications, you have DEMO rich background of information that
'sensitizes'you to what is going DEMO with the phenomenon you are studying".
69
phenomenon can be understood without its relationship to contexts around it
(e.g. the new venture and its environment). "Purposive sampling" covers DEMO
that non-statistic sampling design carried out with serial selection of sample units
could be the best way to get maximum variation in a sample. "Negotiated
outcome" is about relations researcher - respondents, and they discuss DEMO facts
and interpretations that find their way into reports must be subjected to scrutiny
by respondents who earlier acted as sources for that information.
DEMO 2. 2  Case Study Design
This concept- and theory-building study can DEMO related to study choice criteria in
Yin (1989, p. 21). He recommends case study when
the investigator's goal is to expand DEMO generalise theories (analytic generalization) and
not to enumerate frequencies (statistical DEMO).
Action concerns actors outside the new venture but focuses entrepreneurs
inside the new venture. The boundaries of the study are influenced by discovered
DEMO and subsequent interpretation during the study. Yin (1989, p. 23)
recommends case study when the researcher investigates a contemporary
phenomenon within its DEMO context and boundaries between phenomenon
and context are not clearly evident.
One design issue is the choice of single-case or multiple-case design. In
order DEMO build concepts by a study we wanted to cover different new venture
situations (cf. section 1.2 and section 5.5.1):
- capital intensity (resources crucial for trust)
- knowledge intensity (competence crucial for trust)
- different market situations, (a broad market versus narrow
market DEMO different implications for trust).
It seemed impossible to cover these situations in one case. Therefore, a multiple-
case was desirable, so designed DEMO each case could produce different results for
predictable reasons, i.e. in DEMO's terminology a theoretical replication. That is
also to say: as DEMO variation in data as possible (Lincoln & Guba, 1985). On
the other hand the number of cases must be restricted to the DEMO resources for
the study. Below in this chapter the choices will be discussed and specific data
about selected cases will be presented.
70
How to use cases is not self-evident but has to be DEMO to an over-all
purpose. Stake (1994) discusses three main types of case study in connection
with research:
Intrinsic case study the researcher DEMO better understanding of
a particular case. The case itself is in focus
Instrumental case study the researcher studies a particular case to
provide insight DEMO an issue or refinement
of a theory
Collective case study the researcher studies a number of cases in
order to inquire into a phenomenon,DEMO
population or general condition
Understanding differs between the types. In an intrinsic case study understanding
the case itself is central. In the other two DEMO understanding the case,-s is/are
instrumental to something outside the case per se. This concept-building case
study concerning trust could be labelled instrumental (focusing on theory-
building concerning trust in action processes). Of its DEMO character
follows that understanding concerns 1) phenomena important for concept-
building DEMO trust in action processes which should be prioritised before
other phenomena in the cases, and 2) that cases should be bounded to incorporate
DEMO important for trust for the case even if the phenomena would be
found outside, i.e. external actors.
The study of action process also calls for a sustained study period. Studies
of processes require a design that DEMO the important events over time (Yin, 1989).
4 to 6 years of business start and early development was estimated to be possible
DEMO to cover development of relationships (cf. section 1.2.1). A longitudinal
DEMO therefore becomes the natural choice. A study can be outlined as a
retrospective, simultaneous or a combination thereof. A simultaneous study of 4
to 6 years' length was outside the possible scope of the project. The decision thus
was a combination of simultaneous and retrospective study. The entrepreneurs
DEMO have initiated their venture 2 to 4 years before the first interview and it
should be studied by recurring interviews with them and with DEMO external
actors during another 2 years. In this way the desired time length of operations
would be covered. In section 5.4 the issue of DEMO within the study
will be further discussed.
71
5. 3  How the Study was Performed
This section will first give an account of how different issues concerning data
management: Collection, DEMO, interpretation/analysis were resolved. Then
we describe the course of the DEMO and the main study.
72
5. 3. 1  Data Management Issues: Collection,
Reduction, Interpretation and Analysis
A source of inspiration concerning data management is Miles & DEMO
(1994), who convincingly discuss and show how systematics and rigour DEMO be
guidelines for research without loss of understanding and insight. They propose
and demonstrate a middle way between a totally impressionistic data handling
and DEMO in detail pre-planned and rigorously performed collection and analysis.
An impressionistic data handling can promote new ideas for interpretation and
the discovery of unexpected DEMO and events, but may not be congruent with
the our view DEMO communicability and credibility will be important in a concept-
and theory building study. It aims at a language which could also be used in
DEMO outside the cases per se and by other researchers. So systematics and
rigour is a guiding line. In detail pre-planned and rigorously performed
collection DEMO analysis may on the other hand obscure identification of patterns
and commonalities.
Data Collection
Qualitative data collection sources are mainly observation, interviews and
documents. Since the researcher's purpose is not to influence action (i.e. action
research), observation - only possible in the simultaneous part of the DEMO -
would have to be performed with no interference with action process: passive
attendance in meetings and other communication. Most of the entrepreneurs'
communication with external actors during the study period would, from their
experiences, be telephone contacts and documents. Documents would be made
available to the researcher. Telephone contacts provide a number of problems:
They are often DEMO and done during travels. In addition, it is obviously
difficult to DEMO to both parties' argumentation on the telephone. Together, the
entrepreneurs and the researcher considered recurring planned interviews to be
adequate for data collection DEMO the entrepreneurs. From external actors,
interviews and some requests for documentation were considered adequate.
The main purpose of the interviews was to acquire DEMO bank of information
usable for interpretation of meaning ascription by the respondents, for building
concepts and identifying patterns in action. For the sake of bringing enrichment
and to identify unexpected and important results, there was a need for thickness
in data (Lincoln & Guba, 1985, p. 125). Thickness in data was of course
restricted by resources available for DEMO study. Therefore the interviews had to be
73
designed to make many analyses possible: Each interview must tell more than
one thing. But there were more purposes than the analyses. Apart DEMO being
conducive to the specified research issues, they must give the DEMO a
general insight into the companies, the industry niches served and DEMO
environment for the company and entrepreneurship in the area. Interviews had
also a cross-checking purpose regarding earlier collected information and were a
forum to DEMO the researcher's preliminary interpretations of earlier collected
information.
Data Reduction, DEMO and Analysis
In a qualitative study data reduction, interpretation and analysis DEMO
become intertwined as the researcher successively penetrates into the data (Miles
& Huberman, 1994, pp. 10-11). Interpretation of a rich material can take many
ways. The researcher needs guiding lines. This study is built DEMO two:
Sensitising concepts and coding procedures.
Understanding is reflected in the language and we use linguistic means to
increase understanding. Concepts, model and theories are expressed in language.
So theory building - concepts, model and theories - is active use of linguistic
means to increase understanding. This DEMO where sensitising concepts come in:
Concepts actively used to comprehend thinking, meaning, relationships etc.
Blumer (1954, p. 7) differentiates between definite and sensitising concepts. The
former refers to
precisely what is common to DEMO class of objects, by the aid of a clear definition in DEMO of
attributes or fixed bench marks.
Sensitising concepts lack fixed attributes or bench marks. Instead, they give the
user a general sense of reference and guidance in approaching empirical
instances: What to look for more than what to see. Or as a guiding question:
What is relevant DEMO look for?22 In the building of the frame of reference in the
chapters above a concept like person-based trust is used as a DEMO line into the
empirical data, to provide clues and suggestions for DEMO collection, data
reduction, analysis and presentation. Still, by a concept DEMO on earlier theory it
is hoped to obtain benefits from other researchers' earlier experience (cf.
"theoretical sensitivity"; Strauss & Corbin, 1990, p. 41). The sensitising work
22 Concerning definite vs. sensitizing concepts DEMO also the different views on definitions
discussed in section 3.1. Definite concepts and ostensive definitions denote permanence,
stability and structure, whereas sensitizing concepts and performative definitions imply change,
transformation and processes.
74
confirms or contradicts, qualifies and extends the concepts by bringing in
developed knowledge concerning phenomena in study. Inference from the
concrete instance to DEMO concepts and models is the approach.
An early decision concerning interpretation/analysis concerned how to
handle the volume of data, especially the need for different kinds of sorting and
clustering the data in order to identify DEMO and commonalities. The standard
way is coding. This is a procedure where raw data are systematically transformed
and aggregated into units that permit precise DEMO of relevant content
characteristics (Lincoln & Guba, 1985). Codes is by Miles & Huberman (1994)
defined as "tags or labels DEMO assigning units of meaning to the descriptive or
inferential information compiled during a study" (p. 57). In our view coding
brings consistency DEMO the data reduction, interpretation and analysis in four
possible ways: 1) codes can be deduced out of key concepts of the research
issues, thereby safeguarding adherence and sensitivity to the theoretical
framework, 2) codes work as guiding lines to reduction of data and to
understanding what DEMO going on in the data, 3) codes with assigned data facilitate
discerning connections, i.e. patterns and relationships, and 4) codes developed by
confrontation with data can be the basis for new or developed concepts, models
and theories. Miles & Huberman (1994) identify three levels of DEMO:
Descriptive coding implies that you code superficially on recognition of
phenomena, i.e. facts etc. Interpretive coding means that you analyse behind the
act or event trying to discover motives etc. The third level is pattern DEMO,
where you identify emergent themes, configurations or explanations.
Successively applying DEMO levels means getting more and more insights into the
data. Coding was therefore applied as a prominent feature in our analysis. It was
applied DEMO, though, in various stages in the work, as will be DEMO
described in the next two sections.
5. 3. 2  The Pre-study
DEMO main approach of the pre-study was to study six cases rather broadly in
order to investigate areas for further study within a general interest DEMO in
entrepreneurial development.23 The first approach included a main focus on
characteristics of the new venture in the areas of relationships, competence and
trust, but also other distinguishing features of the new ventures. For the selection
the researcher turned to two organisations engaged in promoting entrepreneurs in
23 DEMO information about the six cases can be seen below in this chapter.
75
new venture creation: The Regional Development Fund in Örebro County
(DEMO i Örebro län, later during the period of the study renamed
DEMO Företagspartner AB) and the branch office in Örebro of The Jobs DEMO
Society Association (Nyföretagarcentrum). Each of them provided the researcher
with DEMO list of entrepreneurs/new ventures meeting our requirements of initiation 2
- 4 years earlier. The primary selection from the lists consisted of 8 DEMO,
which were contacted by telephone and asked if they were interested in being
interviewed. Seven were positive, the eighth was closing down. One of the seven
had started formally but not in reality. Since the DEMO was to get 4-6 new ventures
for the pre-study, all the DEMO six were included.
One interview was prepared and performed for each of the new ventures.
The interviews were semi-structured and the questions covered the DEMO'
background, basic ideas behind the new venture, the pre-start period, formal
start, activities and events so far, a little about the near future and expectations
for some years ahead. Each interview lasted around DEMO hours. All six were
interviewed in March-April 1994. The entrepreneur performing the managing
director role was the respondent. The interviews were taped and written-up.
DEMO, company- and product descriptions, curriculum vitae's, newspaper
articles etc. DEMO also collected. Respondents were given an opportunity to make
changes and give comments on the transcripts.
The data were analysed using qualitative methodology (Miles &
Huberman, 1994) to build preliminary concepts concerning competence, network
DEMO trust, but also to display other distinguishing features of the new DEMO
Analysis of the six cases in transcript was done accordingly based on the
principle of coding (see also section 5.3.1). A coding scheme was successively
developed based mainly on the collected data. Manually, codes were attached to
sections or statements of the text. In the pre-study all DEMO were on the descrip-
tive level. The purpose of this coding was threefold: 1) to identify areas of
interest for the deeper study, 2) to develop a coding scheme useful as a starting
point for more elaborated coding in the area of interest with the intention to
DEMO interpretations and pattern identification, and 3) to choose two new
ventures for the continued study.
As areas of primary interest the researcher judged DEMO possible to continue
with a cognitive perspective of the new venture, DEMO (network
perspective) or examine the role of trust for the new venture. Finally trust in
action processes was selected on two grounds: 1) the researcher's reading
indicated that there were few studies on new venture trust, and 2) there was
richness in case data concerning DEMO
76
5. 3. 3  The Main Study
The plan for the continued study was to use two of the cases. The researcher
wanted to DEMO different new venture situations as presented in section 5.2.2 and
to get as much variation as possible in data (Lincoln & Guba, 1985)DEMO Just one
new venture would not fulfill the demands. 3-4 new ventures would probably
give even more variation in data (Eisenhardt, 1989), DEMO would have been outside
the scope of the project's limited resources to handle in time and volume. One
new venture (Explosive) was DEMO on the grounds that it is a knowledge-
intensive and highly innovative technical consultant producing tailored solutions
to a few customers' needs. The second selection was a manufacturing company
producing goods in bulk for many, but exacting industrial customers (Plastics).
The selection of the two companies based on their characteristics and other facts
about the companies are described in DEMO 5.5. Before final choice the
researcher checked once again with each of the entrepreneurs their willingness to
spare some hours in contacts with the DEMO The researcher also guaranteed
continued anonymity since the entrepreneurs considered that sensitive market
and relation information would be given. The researcher finally checked that
DEMO would not disagree about the project plan to contact some of their
customers, suppliers, creditors and business advisors. The project got the OK
DEMO both.
The next step was to use the collected data on these two companies again
for the deeper study. The aim now was to DEMO go from descriptive
coding to interpretive coding (Miles & Huberman, 1994) by going deeper into
the data. Some early reflections concerned how to perform the deeper analysis
and how to reduce time-consuming manual searching and DEMO of data.
Another factor was the anticipated increase in the volume of data being analysed.
Computer software has increasingly, also in qualitative research, DEMO an aid
in data management, from simple text storage with word-for-word DEMO and
editing to indexing, categorising and linking of data. Therefore we DEMO for
adequate software to support the analysis. Some options were investigated.
Demo-versions of software packages tested led to the decision that the computer
software DEMO would suit the purposes best.24 The software package is
designed for data management and for creating and exploring new ideas and for
building theories/DEMO It does not determine the research approach, but rather
24 NUD*IST DEMO for Non-numerical Unstructured Data Indexing Searching and Theorizing.
NUD*IST is developed by Qualitative Solutions and Research, La Trobe University, Australia.
77
provides tools to support a range of tasks required for qualitative DEMO For
example
- store and retrieve document texts
- create, record, store and explore categories (cf. Glaser & Strauss,  1967)
- organise categories in a hierarchical system
- index categories in document text
DEMO use the index system for different kinds of search and retrieval of
documents, linking, making reports
- write and handle memos to record DEMO about documents and  categories
- develop categories for further analysis.
The DEMO were introduced into NUD*IST and the software was used to
mark text units, i.e. demarcate chunks of data. Text units were mainly one
statement in the interview, normally one question from the researcher together
with the response from the respondent (there are exceptions from this general
rule). The next step is the interpretation, i.e. coding of data. The old coding on
the first and second level from the pre-study concerning the DEMO ventures was
revised and registered. Concepts, deduced from the research issues DEMO used as
codes forming a coding scheme with Actor with subcategories and Trust with the
notions from the frame of reference as subcategories (cf. chapters 3 and 4). The
researcher worked repeatedly through the texts DEMO relevant codes to text
units, thereby creating a reference base for DEMO empirical occurrences of
the different concepts.
The concepts in the beginning were rather broad notions supposed to
become more specified and sharpened by the DEMO/analysis. The method
was first to browse several times through the reference base of each node to
identify what was empirically going on. Expected DEMO unexpected things were
identified. For example new aspects were detected widening the notion of
enterprise-based trust. The next step was to create new reference DEMO by
combining nodes, which for example brought the researcher's attention DEMO
questions like: Which external actors tend to see trust as institution-based? The
software offers a variety of combinations using Boolean algebra. The work
DEMO with browsing combinations to detect and grasp for example how trust
came into the play for different external actors. So among other things some
DEMO situations with so far non-included external actors were clearly seen,
such as authorities, mass media and technical consultants. Successively the
coding scheme was enlarged, encompassing new concepts.
Working with chunks of data in different selected reference bases started
processes of remarks, questions and ideas in the researcher's mind (this is the
human mind's work - not the computer's). These remarks etc. were noted in
78
memos (Glaser & Strauss, 1967, Strauss & Corbin, 1990, and Miles &
Huberman, 1994) and were used in the analysis and as one basis for subsequent
report writing.
Above in section 5.3.1 DEMO mentioned the coding levels of descriptive
coding and interpretative coding (Miles & Huberman, 1994) based on deepened
experience in the study. The presence of a specific actor in a situation is typically
descriptive coding denoting DEMO fact in the data. Even if the already used codes
concerning trust bases are interpretative in character, the second research issue
oriented towards action processes contained much more interpretation of things
going on in processes over DEMO At the interpretative level the researcher by
using the empirical data identified different aspects, variations etc. which gave
more dimensions to the concepts, DEMO or new combinations. To some
extent the reference bases of use trust and build trust (cf. chapter 7) could be
utilised, but interpretation of action processes required a more holistic view than
the precise text DEMO of the software permitted. After a few coding attempts the
researcher instead used his earlier experience from management procedures
specification to get relevant overviews DEMO later to communicate facts and
interpretations in cross-checking with the respondents. Action processes were
outlined in schemes containing activities, key events and trust as meaning
ascription during the processes. In a condensed form such schemes can DEMO seen
in section 7.2. So far the work was intra-case analyses of each of the two new
ventures.
In October 1994 the second round DEMO interviews with the two ventures was
performed. A semi-structured interview of two hours length was done with each
of the ventures. The aims were DEMO to collect more data of the new venture, i.e.
what had DEMO since the first interview and supplementary hard data
(concerning finance and DEMO). But the main aim was to discuss the
researcher's interpretations of their action processes and trust content. The
respondents were asked to DEMO whether they considered the researcher's inter-
pretations to be correct and reasonable. They were also requested to give
supplementary or more correct data DEMO the processes.
The analysis using both the old and the new data now began to focus the
actors' sensemaking of trust in action. Beliefs, interpretive schemes etc. were
identified (cf. chapter 8). The work DEMO interpretation also started in the
researcher's mind a process of trial and error on how concepts are related and
patterns of e.g. action DEMO meaning construction are discernible in the empirical
data. Inter-case analysis, using DEMO from both cases, gave crude sketches to
concepts like trust "spill-over": trust reference, trust agent, and trust sign (cf.
chapter 8). The analysis started to reach the coding level of patterning: Pattern
79
identification is even more inferential to see how the coding works DEMO a more
integrated level. The computer software was now used less and less in order to
enable broader visions requiring synthetic thinking more than DEMO
classification. Pattern identification grows out of the researcher's work with
sensitising concepts and data, the insights acquired by being extensively exposed
to the material. Pattern coding also implies looking from new angles at the earlier
DEMO results. Three steps can be distinguished in the pattern identification.
Firstly, DEMO written during the interpretation/analysis became one way of
systematically using ideas, hunches and observation from the earlier work.
Secondly, pattern coding was DEMO, on a trial-and-error basis first, more
decidedly later on. Thirdly, DEMO discussions and cross-checking the pattern
ideas with respondents stabilised the picture. In this way the more abstract level
concepts emerged (cf. Lincoln & Guba, 1985; Miles & Huberman, 1994).
This ended the first part of the main study. Up to that point trust and
action process DEMO been studied mainly as seen from the entrepreneurs' point of
view. DEMO researcher had by then also got a fairly good picture of what action
processes had occurred and which were the important external actors around
DEMO of the new ventures. The findings so far were summarised in three
conference papers. One concerned the concept building about trust. It was
discussed DEMO EIASM's Research on Entrepreneurship VII workshop in Tampere
in November 1994. The second paper concerned trust and action processes. It
was presented at DEMO Babson Conference on Entrepreneurship in London in April
1995. Finally, the DEMO revised the content on the two papers due to
comments and combined them into a third one, which was presented and
discussed at the International Council for Small Business (ICSB) 40th World
Conference in Sydney DEMO June 1995. Together with informal comments from
colleagues this ended peer reviews (Lincoln & Guba, 1985) in the first part of the
main study.
In the second part of the main study data collection was DEMO by
including key actors around the two ventures. Two customers, one DEMO and
one financer of one of the selected firms, Plastics, were interviewed in spring
1995. The two customers represented industrial purchasers with different DEMO
requirements and variation in how the action processes with Plastics had started.
The supplier was the largest raw material provider to the venture and DEMO financer
was a definite key actor concerning financial trust for Plastics. In the spring of
1995 an interview was made with one customer of DEMO, the other selected
firm, which represented a third type of relationship between industrial customers
and new ventures. A business advisor, important for trust in Explosive in the
eyes of a wider range of actors and DEMO actors, was included. The selection
80
of external actors was intended to enlarge possible variability in findings DEMO
give richness in data (cf. the notion of theoretical sampling in DEMO & Strauss,
1967) within a limited number of interviews. A DEMO of interviews with other
business advisors and financers were performed to give the researcher a wider
picture of how these services were given by DEMO providers. Interviews were
taped, written up and respondents were given an DEMO to give comments
and effect changes on the transcripts (negotiated outcome; Lincoln & Guba,
1985). As had been done with earlier DEMO, the new data was introduced to the
qualitative analysis software to DEMO cross analyses between cases, concerning
trust, action processes and their patterns. Interpretation based on new data and
the earlier constructed concepts confirmed earlier DEMO or gave
successively more content to concepts and patterns concerning trust bases
(mainly in chapter 6), the concepts and patterns concerning trust in action
processes (mainly in chapter 7) and intermediaries for trust and DEMO in
sensemaking trust (chapter 8). In the end of 1995 DEMO final round of interviews
was conducted with the entrepreneurs. The latest evolution of the action
processes were presented by the entrepreneurs, facts and interpretations in drafts
were checked etc. (negotiated outcome; Lincoln & Guba, 1985).
During the study all write-ups were returned for scrutiny by and
DEMO from the respondents. In some instances they remarked on wording or
technical vocabulary, which led to changes in documentation. The low number
of comments is probably due to the fact that all interviews were taped and
DEMO written up, which the respondents could clearly see. The researcher's
DEMO concerning each actor's action and meaning behind action was pre-
sented to the respondents, who could verify, bring nuances and complementary
information DEMO reject the interpretation. A couple of preliminary interpretations
concerning meaning of specific actions were rejected and therefore discarded
from further analysis. For some others DEMO information enriched further
analysis.
In all, for the pre-study and main DEMO 18 interviews (See list in
appendix) were performed and transcripts amount to 340 pages, to which should
also be added documentation provided by the ventures and external actors,
newspaper articles etc. Before this monograph, two working papers summarising
state-of-the-project were produced, in the end of 1994 and 1995 respectively.
These working papers were presented and discussed at faculty DEMO
5. 4  Quality Assessment
81
One ultimate quality of a study is whether other people, researchers and
practitioners, find that the ways to results make sense. For the present study the
language in form of concepts should convey insights and DEMO researchers to
use and further develop them. How can we tell if the study is performed in such a
way that the results will DEMO good enough for making sense?
In predominately quantitative study the terms of validity and reliability
mean precise contents in construct, operationalisation of variables, exactness in
relation, instrument precision (cf. Lincoln & Guba, 1985)DEMO In a mainly qualitative
study high complexity of data is focused, DEMO than low complexity enabling
frequencies of data.  Validity and reliability in DEMO qualitative study do not
generally reside in measurement. Common for any study, irrespective of its kind
of data, is the basic needs to DEMO credibility in the study and its results. Some
researchers use the terms validity and reliability in qualitatively oriented studies
and give them other definitions. DEMO have developed concepts covering the
essential purposes behind reliability and validity to prevent face resemblance
with the traditional notions. Attempts up to now have DEMO in a diversity of
such concepts, although not so diverse in DEMO An evaluation of this diversity
is outside the scope of this study. This study has adopted quality assessment
criteria based on its own basic DEMO and uses the four assessment
concepts of Brytting (1991), which DEMO to be fruitful for an explorative,
qualitative, interpretive and concept DEMO study. These assessment criteria
are: Accuracy, reliability, theoretical linkage and DEMO capacity. For the
four assessment concepts we were also inspired by discussions in Lincoln &
Guba (1985), who have a similar classification.
DEMO
Accuracy is to carry out the study in such a way that the findings can be
approved by the constructors of the multiple reality DEMO The respondents
should for example recognize contents and wording in write-ups from interviews
in which they have taken part. The second issue is researcher'DEMO interpretations
from this data being close to the original wording. With a specific research issue
and purpose of study in mind the researcher always DEMO the risk of over-
interpreting phenomena in the direction of issue and purpose. For this study there
is a risk of identifying actor's DEMO in the data when trust was not making sense
25 Examples of studies and books on methodology using or proposing different terminology:
Brytting (1991); Färnström & Kedström (1975); Lincoln & Guba (1985); Miles & Huberman
(1994).
82
for action. Such a risk can never be completely eliminated, but it can be
effectively reduced by adherence to three rules in handling DEMO:
1) The researcher must be aware of the risk and DEMO self-critical e.g. by constantly
asking "Does this really make sense? Is this expressed meaning really so
important?" These questions may lead to DEMO re-interpretation.
2) Submit preliminary interpretations to the respondents. They should be DEMO
the opportunity to confirm or reject interpretations concerning phenomena to
which they have close access. If they reject, the interpretation should normally
be discarded. But there is also the researcher's interpretation of a more general
DEMO, concerning for example several actions and several actors involved.
Sensemaking of DEMO order concerning commonalities such as patterns of action
and sensemaking grows out of the researcher's experience from the case and
should be considered DEMO be the researcher's responsibility towards results (see
section 5.3.3).
DEMO) Discuss interpretations in peer groups and with fellow researchers. Working
papers DEMO in different seminars with prepared discussants is a good way
for scrutiny (see section 5.3.3).
Apart from respondent review, "negotiated outcome" DEMO Lincoln & Guba's
(1985) terminology, the authors recommend prolonged DEMO, persistent
observation and triangulation of sources, methods and investigators. Prolonged
engagement is attained by the longitudinal study design, which enables a check
against temporary phenomena dominating collected data and makes reflections
on events and actions DEMO Recurrent interviews were partly used to check
earlier data and to collect what was new since the preceding interview.
Persistency was regarded in that DEMO Triangulation is in books on methodology
often recommended but not often applied in practice, probably due to costs
involved. Triangulation could not be introduced is this study, but different
sources were used to cross-check action processes, since both a focal actor and at
least one external actor were involved. They were interviewed separately. This
latter is also a matter of DEMO
Reliability
Reliability in a qualitative study may be given a sense covering replicability,
instrumental unreliability due to human factors, such as fatigue, DEMO to
83
make mistakes etc. Replicability is to a large extent based on DEMO clear-cut frame of
reference for the study, which at least makes DEMO possible to conduct similar
studies for comparison. We have devoted extensive discussion to outline the
frame of reference in the chapters 1 - 4 DEMO to enable the readers to assess
replicability potentials.
As to human factors, one important source for making mistakes is time
between an event and the study of the event. The study was performed during a
shorter DEMO of time than the studied period of business start-up and early
development for the two cases in the main study (cf. section 5.3.3). This
highlights reliability concerning retrospectiveness.26 Approximately four years
were covered retrospectively and DEMO years simultaneously. By retrospectiveness
is here meant the difference between the respondent's sensemaking at the time of
a specific event and the time DEMO the respondent in an interview was asked to
describe her/his sensemaking at the time of the specific event. The time-lag may
impose problems DEMO reliability due to the following factors (Thurén, 1986, ch. 3):
People just forget, meaning can be influenced by sheer wish to forget something
unpleasant, or they have a desire to be different from before. Furthermore,
combined with oblivion people may add new details and DEMO their
memory-pictures. Such rationalisations can be conscious or unconscious. The
length of the time-lag is also important. The longer the retrospectiveness the
more biases DEMO occur due to the factors. On the other hand, according to
DEMO (1986, p. 29):
people remember better what they are DEMO in, what is useful for them and what is
congruent with DEMO values, and - not least - significant roles of their own DEMO a setting,
particularly if the circumstances are flattering (translated from DEMO).
This may account for the detailed and accurate descriptions entrepreneurs often
give regarding how their new venture started. Even so, this will not necessarily
preclude biases.
In the present study retrospectiveness may concern a) facts and events, b)
action (own or another actor's), DEMO c) meaning in action. Potential biases due to
retrospectiveness have been DEMO and handled as follows:
26 Due to ontological paradigm there are also different views on the signification and
consequences of retrospectiveness. A less DEMO view seems to go along with less
signification. Weick (1979; 1995) sees all sensemaking as subject to retrospectiveness, i.e. it is
not DEMO for an actor to distinguish in a specific situation between sensemaking earlier
experience and sensemaking the situation as original. For Weick retrospectiveness is always DEMO
prominent datum in interpretation. The present study agrees on the view but assumes in
accordance with the presented discussion that it may be possible DEMO discern retrospectiveness
after the event.
84
a) important facts and events, i.e. numbers, points of time, and order of events
have been cross-checked with documents and with statements of other actors
involved (cf. previous section). These cross-checkings have been performed on
separate occasions, not involving the first source of information.
b) the unfolding of actions studied has been described by two parties involved,
irrespective of one another. On a few occasions slight differences appeared,DEMO
which have been straightened out if being important for the analysis.
Cross-checking done in these ways should reduce biases.
c) for meaning in action we can use our view that meaning interplays with
attention, basic values and beliefs, and interpretive schemes. Retrospectiveness
in attention is difficult to cross-check if the same facts for attention were not
been brought in by DEMO actor. So there remains a source for bias concerning
e.g. how one actor looked upon the other actor at their first meeting. Basic values
DEMO beliefs tend to be stable over time which would imply that there should be
no or little difference during the retrospectiveness period (Schein, DEMO; cf. also
note in section 3.2.4; Thurén 1986, p. 29)DEMO So for example when one actor
contends that the other seemed to be reliable for dealing with, the expressed
general belief in reliability in business will probably not be very different in
retrospect for that actor. DEMO schemes as based on experience tend also to
be stable over time, but may be affected by accommodation. So changes may - at
least in theory - be discernible as changes in interpretive schemes due to DEMO
experience. However, most experience tends to be assimilated, moulded into the
form of already existing schemes, in which case meaning in interpretive schemes
will probably not be very different in retrospect. In practical work with
DEMO the distinction between assimilation and accommodation does not
appear as clear-cut as in theory, though. Sometimes retrospectiveness in
respondents' reasoning can be detected DEMO inconsistencies.
The conclusion of the discussion concerning retrospectiveness is that
biases concerning facts, events and actions can be controlled to a large extent.
Biases in meaning can not be effectively controlled, only judged by reason after
collecting a wide range of data concerning the situation. Another way is DEMO
the respondent aware of possible biases and thereby enable him/her to make the
distinctions in memory pictures. The study design with multiple information DEMO
viders concerning the same information, recurrent interviews with partly
overlapping discussions DEMO important opportunities for assessment concerning
85
retrospectiveness. Throughout the study, inconsistencies involving retrospective
phenomena have been few. Either they really are few or they remain undetected.
86
Theoretical Linkage
The third assessment criterion for a concept building study DEMO to a large
extent on whether there is a base of theory to build on. If not, or if the researcher
intends to build theory irrespective of theory that exists, the principles of
grounded theory (DEMO & Strauss, 1967) would be appropriate. Now, this study
takes DEMO position that theoretical linkage (cf. Brytting 1991) is a principle
guiding the study. New concepts and further theory building should therefore be
related DEMO existing theory. As the reader has seen in chapters 2 - 4 there is
existing relevant theory concerning the entrepreneur and entrepreneurship, action
processes and trust. Theoretical linkage also implies conclusions about the study
results, i.e. in what way the results complement or supplement existing theory.
This will DEMO a theme in chapter 9 together with other implications of the study.
Generative Capacity
The fourth assessment criterion is that a study should bring DEMO to existing
knowledge. The results of a concept building study should be useful in other
studies contingent upon the judgement of the researcher and DEMO, whether
setting and circumstances allow it. Its generative capacity can be DEMO a large
extent monitored by the selection of concepts, models and DEMO to be
confronted with empirical knowledge, together with data collection,
DEMO/interpretation guided to bring extended or revised knowledge (cf.
Brytting, 1991). Generative capacity will be discussed in chapter 9 together with
other DEMO of the study.
5. 5  The Cases
5. 5. 1  The Six New Ventures in the Pre-study
For the pre-study the six ventures DEMO selected in February and March 1994
with the characteristics in common discussed above in previous chapters. First,
they should be new ventures, operate on a market, the entrepreneur should be
committed to it by working full time and should by him/her be seen as a
permanent DEMO, not a temporary one. Second, among them there should be
manufacturing firms, where finance and capital provision is important, and also
87
knowledge-intensive firms, in which competence and competence development
could be an issue. The mixture of ventures should also reflect different market
situations: some of them dependent on a large number of customers, some on a
few and consequently each one important. Some basic data on the ventures DEMO the
pre-study are summarised in Table 1. Since some requested anonymity, DEMO
was guaranteed, the names are constructed. In Table 1 some basic DEMO
about the new ventures in the pre-study is displayed.
As mentioned earlier in this chapter data collected from the pre-study
cases were important for DEMO sensitising concepts. They also formed a base
of six new ventures from which those for the main study were selected. Selection
for a theory- DEMO concept building study is generally based on acquiring as much
variation as possible in the data enabling richness in interpretation and thereby
content of DEMO (Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Lincoln & Guba, 1985). Explosive
and Plastics together cover the important characteristics (see also section 5.2.2).
In Table 2 all companies are characterised according to how important the
DEMO criteria above are for their development as interpreted from the
interviews.
5. 5. 2  The Two New Ventures and External Actors in      the
Main Study
The main study included two companies and some of their external actors.
Criteria for the choice are presented above, needed here only to indicate that
Explosive was selected on the ground that it DEMO a knowledge-intensive and highly
innovative technical consultant producing tailored solutions to a few customers'
needs. The second selection was Plastics, a manufacturing company producing
goods in bulk for many, but exacting industrial customers. The covering of
different venture situations in type of production, market and capital needs is the
primary reason for the selection. In Table 2 it is DEMO to see that the two
selected new ventures together covered the important criteria.
Table 1  Basic Information About the New Ventures in the Pre-study.
Name
Type of business
Start
Entre-
pre-
neursa
Em-
ployeesb
88
Explosive Chemical process con-
sultancy and product
development to industrial
customers
DEMO Containers for chilled food
transport, manufactured
with purchased components
Smokepure Electro-chemical DEMO
and products for
purification of industrial
emissions; consultants and
manufacturers
Plastics DEMO plastic com-
ponents manufactured
Pulpprocess Computer systems deve-
lopment for monitoring
complex industrial pro-
cesses; consultants
Metalshop Industrial metal com-
ponents manufactured
1990 3 3
1992 1 1
1991 2 9
1990 1 6
1992 4 DEMO
1990c
2 6
a Number of entrepreneurs in April 1994. Entrepreneurs = Starters+owners+working in the new
venture
b Number of employees in April 1994. DEMO but no ownership
c Metalshop originally started 1971, went bankrupt in DEMO Reconstruction with new
owners/entrepreneurs, a number of new products and DEMO
89
Table 2  Characteristics of the Pre-study Cases
Important characteristic
Company
Finance and capital provision
Competence and competence
development
Broad market
Focused market
Smokepure
DEMO
Metalshop
Explosive
Smokepure
Plastics
Pulpprocess
Frigotrans
Plastics
Metalshop
Explosive
Smokepure
Pulpprocess
A Note on Case Descriptions
The following sections aim at giving a description DEMO the reader of the two new
ventures studied. A case description can be made for many purposes and in many
ways, though. Therefore thoughts about case description in this particular study
will now be discussed. The DEMO task is to give a reasonable account of the
phenomena observed, DEMO is to give an over-all account of the cases: Important
facts, such as background of the entrepreneurs, types of products, market and
DEMO data about the emerging enterprise. Such an account is contingent on the
account teller's thoughts regarding the reader's interest concerning the cases. DEMO
account is given on a general level with the usual types of data when a company
is presented, and the aim is to give the reader a broad notion of the new ventures,
a short DEMO concentrated description. By doing that other aims with the
description are sacrificed or not attained. A description in a study should also
contain data DEMO that are focused on the research issues. That is, the multi-
DEMO of data should be arranged in a way to permit connection to the analysis. In
90
this way a description can form a bridge between the research DEMO and
subsequent detailed treatment of collected data. Hopefully, this will enable DEMO
reader to assess the potential of the cases in connection with stated research
issues. This kind of description will also facilitate for the researcher DEMO analyse in
accordance with research issues and identify what further analyses are called for
during the work. The second task is therefore to account DEMO the new ventures
applying the perspective of organising by action processes.
The two case descriptions below are based on documentation and the
interviews with DEMO entrepreneur performing the role of managing director in
each company.
5. 5. 2. 1  Explosive Inc.
Explosive was started in 1990 by three engineers working in one of the largest
chemical companies in Sweden, below called Incubator Inc. Two of the
entrepreneurs are chemists and one is a DEMO engineer. They knew each
other very well and had worked in Incubator for 30 years, i.e. most of their
careers. All had worked together with different aspects of pyrotechnics, and were
specialised in a field in which very few people in Sweden are experts. Incubator,
which is DEMO diversified group of companies, was at this time, in the end of the
1980's, changing its strategy. The purpose was to specialise more deeply into its
chemical core business. The line of pyrotechnics, which had been developed by
the three engineers, did not belong to the core business. Managers in Incubator
mentioned this line of product as one DEMO those that were not going to be
important for Incubator in the future. But there was no immediate danger of the
three engineers losing DEMO jobs in Incubator.
The three engineers had developed know-how and products for which
they could see a market and thought it would be wrong DEMO "put the products in
the grave", as one of them DEMO it. Instead they said to themselves: "Would
it not be possible for us to take over this business on our own?" And DEMO did so.
They outlined the market, products and general ideas on DEMO the company
should work. None of them had any experience of running a business of their
own, but one of them went to a course on "Start-your-own-business". Actually
they were familiar with their main market since their employment in Incubator.
To begin with they continued product development DEMO already in Incubator.
They could e.g. bring a patent with them. They were well-known in the industry,
and at the beginning very often DEMO with Incubator. But since they were
new in running a business of their own and a company, they looked for support.
91
Relations were developed with The Regional Development Fund (Almi) in
DEMO County, which gave them advice in commercial matters and has also
DEMO them in other ways.27 But Explosive has no venture capital from Almi,
which is otherwise one common support of Almi. Explosive also participates DEMO a
network of entrepreneurs in its municipality. The activities of this network are
seminars and study tours etc. on matters useful for business, especially new
ventures.
The business idea is to develop tailored solutions to industrial DEMO'
needs in the chemical area where the venture has competence. This means to
design, construct and test a theoretical solution. Depending on customer's needs
they can also make prototypes and small series of products. DEMO they do not
manufacture a product once it is developed. Their customers are mostly well-
known and large Swedish industrial companies (not Incubator, DEMO). To them
Explosive is a consultant in chemical problem solutions and product
development. The size of the jobs vary from small and insignificant (in revenue)
to a couple of large jobs, that have been very important for Explosive, both in
terms of future business and financially. In periods doing large jobs Explosive
can become rather dependent on the DEMO Each job is individual in scope
and content.
The basis for Explosive is a small number of customers. In the end of
1994 the DEMO had five regular customers (with recurrent orders) of which
only two are very significant in number of orders as well as in volume. DEMO
competence-based and having no scale production suppliers are not important.
The company also sticks to one bank connection. Characteristic for Explosive's
network is DEMO relationships for its sales and a large and complex network
for development of business ideas.
The venture is based on the chemical competence of DEMO engineers,
products emanate from that competence combined with the needs of each
customer. This has up to the end of 1994 resulted in DEMO patents, owned by either
the customer or Explosive. If Explosive is DEMO owner the patent is usually sold
against contract on further development work for Explosive or against royalty on
sales of the manufacturing company. Their DEMO are inventions, and three of
them have been nominated for awards DEMO national invention contests.
Explosive has during the period of research three employees (apart from
the three entrepreneurs/owners). They are young engineers, DEMO in chemistry and
one in mechanics. One of the chemists is also trained in computer programming.
27 RDF is now reorganized under the name DEMO Almi Företagspartner AB. See also below in this
chapter, where Almi DEMO presented as external actor.
92
They came to Explosives to do specified parts of project work DEMO in the
meantime learn more of the specific know-how of Explosive. Since there is no
school in Sweden covering pyrotechnic chemistry, they have to learn it on site.
Gradually they will become responsible for projects.
Explosive DEMO a small building in the grounds of a company in the
Incubator group, which also provides janitorial services. Upstairs is the office
with computers, drawing-office, archives for technical specifications, drawings
and patent information. Downstairs are two small laboratories, one chemical and
one mechanical. They have several instruments of their own for construction
work and measurement. They can also still DEMO laboratory equipment at
Incubator's laboratories. Whenever necessary, they buy specialised DEMO
and similar services from other sources.
Financially, Explosive is run on DEMO principle of funding with owner's
capital and retained earnings. It avoids long-term liabilities. A small long term
loan from the National Swedish Board DEMO Technical Development (NUTEK) for
financing a large project has been repaid in advance. In Table 3 can be seen
some data and financial DEMO about the company since its start. Turn-over
and profit have steadily increased. Current assets are steadily higher than current
liabilities which makes the liquidity DEMO in working capital well above 100
%. Retained earnings and decreasing liabilities in 1993/94 make the equity ratio
increase. In the summer of DEMO, immediately at the start of the fiscal year of
1994/95 DEMO company repaid its long-term debts which was a goal. The second
goal was attaining 50 % in equity ratio, which was then also accomplished.
Table 3  Data concerning Explosive.
kkr 1990/91 1991/92 1992/93 1993/94
Turnover 515 832 2115 3029
Profit before depreciation and taxes (IS) 121 23 259 629
Net profit (IS) 51 1 105 262
Current assets (BS) 264 373 823 686
Fixed assets (BS) 42 75 126 504
Current liabilities (BS) 174 210 552 396
Long-term liabilities (BS) 0 93 108 169
Owners' equity (BS) 50 100 100 200
Total equity (BS) 101 102 207 469
93
Number of entrepreneurs at the end of
the year
Number of DEMO at the end of the
year
3  3  3  3
DEMO 0 1 3
Working capital in % (CA/CL*100) 152 178 149 173
Fixed assets/Long-term liabilities in %
(FA/LL*100)
- 81 117 298
Equity ratio in % (100*TE/TE+TL) 37 25 DEMO 45
Abbreviations: IS = Income Statement, BS = Balance Sheet, DEMO = Current Assets, FA = Fixed
Assets, CL = Current Liabilities, LL = Long-term Liabilities, TL = Total Liabilities, TE = Total
Equity
Sources: Financial Annual Report 1990/91, 1991/92, 1992/93, 1993/94.
Postscript
In the middle of 1995, two of the DEMO retired at the age of 67. The
remaining entrepreneur chose not to take over all on his own. Instead he
accepted a take-over bid DEMO Incubator, which at that time had changed its
strategy to include DEMO line of chemistry represented by Explosive. Explosive
became a subsidiary company in the Incubator group. The entrepreneur is still
managing director in the company. DEMO line of business, as described above, is
unchanged, but for DEMO future product development requiring a level of funding
which the Incubator group can provide is foreseen.
5. 5. 2. 2  Plastics Inc.
Plastics was founded in 1990 by two entrepreneurs, but one of them left the new
venture after a short time. The remaining entrepreneur was born in DEMO nearby town
as the son of a local industrialist. His parents and grandparents, as well as his
wife's, were families of entrepreneurs DEMO industrialists, active in the region. The
entrepreneur's father had a DEMO making plastic components, but since none of the
growing children at DEMO time seemed interested in taking over, the firm was sold
and DEMO little later closed down. The future entrepreneur worked as a young man in
his father's firm but decided on a technical education. He DEMO became a civil
engineer in mechanics, then continued his education and DEMO into research in
plastic chemistry. After attaining the degree of Doctor of Technology he worked
for a short time in a plastic company situated DEMO the big city where he had
studied. But he and his family wanted to return to the neighbourhood where they
were born. For him DEMO also meant the chance to start a new business with much
moral and practical support from people in the area. He started Plastics, based on
94
the idea to develop and manufacture high-quality plastic components for
industrial DEMO The combination of developing and manufacturing is unusual in
one and the same company in that industry, but he believes that Plastics should
be based on the entrepreneur's knowledge of Technology. He considers this to DEMO
a competitive advantage.
Customers are well-known industrial companies in different Swedish
industries. What they have in common is their need for qualities like acid-
DEMO, durability etc. for these components, used in their production
processes and products going to their customers. But Plastics also makes
standard components, as a way to be a full range supplier and to get new
DEMO As components in exported products, a large proportion of Plastics'
DEMO goes on to indirect export. Plastics seeks competitive advantage in
certification of its products. Its demanding industrial customers often require
product certificates, which in many instances is more important than price.
Product certificates can for Plastics DEMO this way ward off competitors that have
not attained the certification standard. Standards are based on the
recommendations of a United Nations committee. Products DEMO tested by a
Swedish agency (Statens provningsanstalt), which also issues DEMO
There are a number of external actors with which Plastics has developed
relationships. In the middle of 1995 the company had between 25 and DEMO regular
customers (i.e. that have bought from Plastics more than once)DEMO Plastics has three
regular suppliers of raw material (plastics in bulk) as well as various special
suppliers for specific details. The company also DEMO to one bank connection
plus Almi for loans. Characteristic for Plastics' DEMO is bilateral relationships
for most business deals, i.e. one customer or DEMO at a time.
Plastics is situated in a small village, earlier DEMO by a mining
company, that has now reduced its activities and DEMO the village. Plastics bought
a large barn - one of the left-over facilities of the mining company - and rebuilt it
to suit its DEMO manufacturing and storing needs. Two large rooms are
occupied by four machines for the component production. There is a storing
room for the plastic DEMO material. A large room is used to store final products.
On the upper floor is the office, three small rooms and in the attic of the former
barn a conference room. In the summer of 1994 DEMO bought another building,
some miles away but close to the entrepreneur's own house. One of the
machines, suitable for automatic production, DEMO moved over and is run by the
entrepreneur himself "passing by DEMO and after work".
The production philosophy runs like this: One DEMO is low manual
operating time per produced unit. In practice, one DEMO should handle two
machines. Efficient store handling and machine service is another principle. At
95
the same time good working environment is sought. Second-hand machines are
DEMO in order not to increase debt more than necessary. At the same time these
should be modern machines, i.e. flexible for production of different products
with low degree of manual operation and high production per time DEMO All this
combined takes of course much investigation to obtain the right equipment.
Machines have been bought in central Europe and sent to Sweden. DEMO the
right machine is a strategic decision, since it can open DEMO for new products and
customers.
Apart from the entrepreneur (at the DEMO they were two, but one left after a
short time and DEMO shares were bought by the remaining entrepreneur) five
employees have come DEMO the company, to work in the two-shift production. Since
the autumn DEMO 1994, number six, a part-time clerk has been employed for office
work. An increase in production volume is managed by organising production in
DEMO shifts together with less operating time on each machine, i.e. productivity
DEMO Different measures have also been taken to reduce the constant
problem of vulnerability, due to illness, vacation and similar causes.
The standardised raw DEMO is bought in bulk on an international market
with oligopoly characteristics. A few large companies dominate as sellers and the
buyers are many and DEMO Raw material prices are sensitive to changes in oil
prices. Price changes in raw material give clear repercussions downstream.
Plastics uses three suppliers. A DEMO large amount of capital is bound in
stocks of raw material and final products. Due to requirements of the industrial
customers and competition prompt DEMO are often necessary, even delivery
on the same day as the DEMO is received. As is usual for a manufacturing firm,
Plastics has great needs of capital, which is ploughed down in buildings,
equipment and material. A strategic competitive necessity is also new
investments, requiring new funds. A new venture in manufacturing cannot
generally rely on retained earnings. DEMO if the entrepreneur commits a large
amount of owner's capital - as he did - this is seldom sufficient. Large loans
become a DEMO But since the future of Plastics could be judged as unclear -
actually he started in a period when there was a general overcapacity DEMO the
industry - there is a need for venture capital with risks above normal bank risk.
In this case Almi went in with venture DEMO enough to enable the bank to
contribute with loans with preferential repayment rights and therefore lower
risks.
As can be seen in Table 4 DEMO has had an increasing turnover and
profit before depreciation and taxes. But the company needed large investments
in fixed assets, which has had to be financed by long-term liabilities. The
positive development of turnover and profit DEMO depreciation is almost wiped
96
out when costs for capital and depreciation are added. Consequently, the large
amount of liabilities in combination with low build-up of equity results DEMO an
extremely low equity ratio. The financial strategy of Plastics is to use the still-
increasing turnover to generate own funds for its investment DEMO, then in the
future to repay debts. Liquidity measured in working DEMO has been good
considering the general financial circumstances, which indicates a DEMO
well-run company.
Table 4  Data concerning Plastics.
kkr 1990 1991 1992 DEMO 1994
Turnover 689 3402 4551 5673 7736
Profit before depreci-ation
and taxes (IS)
11 325 668 933 1437
Net profit (IS) -7 5 23 20 54
Current assets (BS) 453 1049 1299 1825 DEMO
Fixed assets (BS) 2654 3182 4293 4870 6700
Current liabilities (DEMO) 421 516 547 1358 2441
Long-term liabilities (BS) 2392 3357 DEMO 4582 6019
Owners' equity (BS) 300 360 600 600 600
DEMO equity (BS) 293 358 620 640 695
Number of entrepreneurs at
the end of the year
Number of employed at the
end of DEMO year
Working capital in %
(CA/CL*100)
2 1 1 DEMO 1
0 3 3  5 7
108 203 237 134 119
DEMO assets/Long-term 111 95 97 106 111
liabilities in %
(FA/DEMO)
Equity ratio in %
(100*TE/TE+TL)
9 8 11 DEMO 8
97
Abbreviations: IS = Income Statement, BS = Balance Sheet, CA = Current Assets, FA = Fixed
Assets, CL = Current Liabilities, LL = Long-term Liabilities, TL = Total Liabilities, TE = Total
DEMO
Sources: Financial Annual Report 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994
DEMO
During 1995 expansion has continued, both sales to existing customers and DEMO
new ones. A new range of products, using soft plastics has DEMO developed and is
mainly sold on export. Acquisition of additional machinery is planned and a
new, supplementary factory building will be erected. The number of employees
is 11 in the end of 1995.
5. 5. 2. DEMO  External Actors of the Two New Ventures
The selection criteria for DEMO external actors were presented in section 5.3.3. Each
of the external actors was interviewed in one interview in the middle of 1995.
The interviews DEMO 2 hours. Respondents were the persons with whom the
entrepreneur made the initial agreement. These persons have in all five
companies also continued relations DEMO the entrepreneur in important matters,
such as agreements, policy discussions DEMO agreements, evaluation of
performances and large events with implications on relations. DEMO five external
actors are the following28:
Alpha
Actors Relationship
Alpha Alpha is customer to Plastics
Beta Beta is customer to Plastics
Gamma Gamma DEMO customer to Explosive
Delta Delta is supplier of raw material to Plastics
Almi Almi has provided capital to Plastics
Almi is commercial advisor to DEMO
28 See also section 5.3.3. The selection was guided by a need to cover variation in customer
relationships due to different product requirements and DEMO the relation started. Furthermore,
only the manufacturing new ventures has important supplier relationships.
98
Plastics' customer Alpha is a small company with some 15 million Sw. Kronor in
turnover and 8-9 employees in 1995. It is a DEMO to a large multinational
manufacturer in steel. It also has a number of sister companies in Sweden. Alpha
has a specific niche in manufacturing DEMO for surface treatment of high-
quality steel. Its chemicals are sold world-wide. Its products are classified by law
as environmentally hazardous products, requiring special handling in transport
and usage. The company has operated since the 1960'DEMO
Beta
Plastics' customer Beta is a Swedish company within a large DEMO business
group. It has a history as an independent family enterprise since the 1950's. Beta
specialises in the manufacture of decorative coating, i.e. paints for the building
industry and other professional use. Purchase of packing, such as containers, is
done on a large scale since the company's purchasing officers also serve sister
companies in some other countries. The DEMO works with a large number of
suppliers. Purchase activities and procedures are to be standardised and efficient.
In 1994 total purchases of packing amounted DEMO 53 million Sw. kronor.
Gamma
Explosive's customer Gamma is a Swedish company manufacturing detonators
for explosive charges. The company has existed since the DEMO of the
century and had in 1994 close to 500 employees. Today it is owned by a larger
company abroad in the same industry. DEMO's policy is to be the world's
leading company in its niche and was actually the first to change over to a
detonator DEMO using chemicals less hazardous for the environment and
safer in both production and use. Safety is mainly attained by more strictly
monitoring the time DEMO the detonator's explosion. Product development re-
quires advanced pyrotechnic competence.
99
Delta
Plastics' supplier Delta has since 1970 been a sales and distribution company for
polyethylenes in bulk in Sweden and Finland. Delta belongs DEMO a large world-
wide company in petrochemistry, in which polyethylenes is DEMO small part of its
total operations. The manufacturing plant for polyethylenes is located in a
European country so Delta is also an importer. Delta DEMO a sales turn-over in
1995 of 577 million Skr, which is DEMO market share of 5 % of the whole range of
polyethylenes sold in Sweden. There are about 10-15 supplying competitors in
Sweden: 5 from European countries and 5-10 from other countries.
Almi Företagspartner
Almi Företagspartner is DEMO Swedish organisation established to promote new
enterprise and to develop small and medium-sized enterprises. Support in the
establishment of new enterprises can be given DEMO two ways: 1) By capital
provision to develop business ideas, DEMO and competitiveness, and 2) In
the form of consultant services based on general business competence and
experience. Almi Företagspartner is jointly owned by DEMO state, the Swedish
Trade Council and a number of trade and DEMO organisations. In each county
the organisation has a subsidiary with consultants working with the support.
A further description of each company's relationship to DEMO action
processes with Explosive and Plastics is given in chapter 7.
5. 6  Conclusions Concerning Methodology   for the
Study
A study of actors' meaning in action requires a number of methodological
decisions stated in this chapter. The first point of departure is that the study aims
at DEMO concepts based on empirics in order to contribute to theory. Such a
concept-building approach implies three conditions: 1) richness in data is
required DEMO) data must emanate from the field, i.e. an inductive approach.
Richness in field data is mainly provided in case studies 3) the study design is
guided to evolve successively in accordance with the need for DEMO for the
concept building.
100
The second point of departure is that the study area concerns DEMO
processes in which actors are involved. Action is governed by actors' DEMO
This implies two conditions: 1) understanding actors' sensemaking is necessary
DEMO) this understanding is attained by interpretation of the actors' accounts.
The methodology and consequently the performance of the study can be
summarised as DEMO in Figure 2. The theoretical analysis in chapters 2 - 4 is
directed towards forming some provisional sensitising concepts, such as the
entrepreneur, DEMO process, meaning, interpretive schemes, trustworthiness,
mutual trust and the DEMO bases of trust. These concepts are used as a guiding
line into the empirics, to provide clues and suggestions for data collection, data
DEMO, analysis and presentation. They are confronted with the empirical data
to DEMO or contradict, qualify and extend the content of the concepts. They
DEMO as triggering clues bringing an understanding that will in its turn permit
development of new or revised concepts and induce patterns in the data. DEMO
using the empirical revised or induced concepts, patterns of action and
DEMO schemes can then be related to theory in order to state and discuss
contribution to theory, suggestions for further research and other implications.
Chapter 6 will thus be dedicated to development of the concepts
concerning bases DEMO trust as an empirical answer to corresponding theoretical
implications in section 4.4. In chapter 7 the concepts of trustworthiness and
mutual trust (cf. section 4.4) are extended into a number of new concepts by
studies of action processes in the cases. Chapter 8 induces patterns in the data
DEMO concepts denoting construction of trust in action processes involving not
only truster and trustee but also intermediaries. It extends the concepts in the
theoretical DEMO presented in section 4.4. Chapter 9 summarises the
concept development and pattern induction in terms of contribution to theory and
practice. The methodology described DEMO this section is summarised and illustrated
in Figure 2.
101
Sensitizing
concepts
Empirical data
Theory
Data
Figure 2.  Methodology for the Study
Induced concept
and patterns
Theory
102
Chapter 6
Bases for Actors' Sensemaking of Trust
6. 1  DEMO
The main reason for doing the case analysis underlying this chapter is the
research issue What are the external actors' bases for trust in the entrepreneur
and the new venture? 29 The sensitising concepts built and presented in section
4.4 have been confronted with the interview data to DEMO or contradict,
qualify and extend concepts. The results are summarised in content dimensions
to each trust base reflecting our interpretation of the data DEMO to the coded
concept (cf. section 5.3.3). In focus will DEMO what the external actors have
expressed and what are their clues to trust concerning the entrepreneurs and new
ventures. To some extent the entrepreneurs DEMO also expressed knowledge or
opinions of actors' trust, which can then be used for comparison. Trust covers
trustworthiness in the eyes of the DEMO actor or mutual trust when indicated.
As a tool for the data handling a computerised qualitative data program
was used (NUD*IST; cf. chapter DEMO). The bases and dimensions should not be
seen as a classification scheme but as conceptual tools for understanding actors'
view and action.30 DEMO, as with all interpretations, the interpreter's (researcher's)
DEMO comes into the play.31
29 Cf. chapter 1.
30 McKelvey (1982): "Classification systems categorize phenomena into mutually exclusive and
exhaustive sets".
DEMO Cf. chapter 5 above about basic assumptions.
103
6. 2  Person-based Trustworthiness
Person-based trustworthiness is expectations about an entrepreneur due to her/his
- personal characteristics, such as motivation, self-assurance   etc.
- competence and experience, appropriate education/training
and/or industry DEMO
- managerial and/or commercial capacity to manage business
and a firm, including creating and keeping relationships   to that
end.
6. 2. 1  Personal Characteristics
Personality traits and characteristics is one way of external actors' clue-seeking
for trustworthiness. The dimension covers the entrepreneur's motivation for
doing business, her/his self-assurance, seriousness and honesty in business and
towards DEMO in action processes.
Motivation concerns the entrepreneurs' willingness to give quick, accurate
and reliable responses to external actors questions and requests concerning
matters DEMO needed investigation and reflection on the part of the entrepreneur.
Such responses are for example
- what product development could be performed,
- DEMO products could be delivered.
As the entrepreneurs saw it, interaction implied DEMO assurance to the
external actor that the entrepreneur is reliable and would be so in future
interaction. And the external actors looked for signs DEMO the entrepreneur's
efforts to fulfill engagements and promises. That is giving clues and noticing
them. One of Plastics' customers, Beta, explicitly noted that the entrepreneur
often calls or pays a visit when passing by DEMO check that shipments have duly
arrived, even if he has no DEMO to fear delays. "Things like that makes us feel
confident in DEMO to him and his firm." (10)32 The entrepreneur displays
motivation for the relationship, which gives the other party a feeling of trust.
Self-assurance is i.a. when the entrepreneur conveys impression of
personal drive to DEMO things done. Commenting on the first contacts between
Plastics and Alpha the latter stressed as part of trustworthiness that the
entrepreneur gave quick and DEMO responses to questions and also
32 A number by an interview quotation refers to its number on the interview list. See appendix.
104
immediately fulfilled what was required. Under these circumstances the
responses came DEMO imply trust.
Close to these motivational and self-assurance aspects comes whether the
entrepreneur is seen as serious and honest, i.e. that the entrepreneur only gives
assurances of things that s/he is sure to live up DEMO A purchasing officer:
New contacts with new firms, that we DEMO not know, are risky. They promise much
because they are anxious DEMO deliver and get cash soon. But we can not take any chances.
We purchasers must not make any mistakes considering our production planning and
DEMO (10). 33
Clues given and clues desired for sensemaking may DEMO between the
parties, making clue display problematic. Attention, including clue display, and
construction of meaning may convene or not. Therefore trust development may
halt or even reverse. External actors' expressions concerning the personal traits
and characteristics seemed to be more common and important in the very
beginning DEMO the interaction, i.e. clues for early sensemaking of trust.
6. 2. DEMO  Competence and Experience
Competence is an important feature for business ideas DEMO both cases but in
different ways. Explosive is a high-tech operator in its niche, selling knowledge,
not goods. Plastics as a manufacturer seeks a competitive edge in product
development based on the entrepreneur's competence. DEMO is not astonishing then
that competence was one dimension of person-based trustworthiness that the
external actors very much focused regarding both Explosive and Plastics.
DEMO entails different clues for trust.
Explosive's early main customer (Gamma) was from the beginning so
convinced of the competence of Explosive, that no other external alternative was
discussed. The contact persons had a very DEMO knowledge of the patents the
entrepreneurs had developed throughout the years. The customer also revealed
that if Explosive had not succeeded at the start, they would have offered the
entrepreneurs employment. This trust in Explosives' entrepreneurs formed the
basis for continued co-operation: "We were convinced that co-operation DEMO
be successful" (12). That is in our frame of reference: Our shared meanings
makes it easy to form and create joint action.
33 This and following quotations of respondents' statements in interviews are translations from
Swedish.
105
Plastics' entrepreneur looked particularly for customers with high
requirements for quality where the entrepreneur's competence would be
interesting. This would at the DEMO time create a protected niche for Plastics in
competition and also enable wider price margins. Both interviewed customers
had the same ideas and very DEMO expressed trust for Plastics' entrepreneur by
going into joint activities in DEMO development. Plastics could, if its ideas
were considered to be fruitful DEMO the customer, have considerable influence on
types of products and the DEMO of product development. The parties came near in
joint construction of meaning. One extreme situation was commented by Alpha
in this way:
I DEMO not accept his [the entrepreneur's] ideas immediately, instead I need DEMO to think it
over. The ideas were right, but I needed DEMO to accept certain compromises about the
design, over which our final DEMO in France had opinions (11).
Plastics here, by its trustworthiness in the external actor's eyes, came very near to
assuming leadership in the product development downstream.
One of Plastics' financers, Almi, backed up the entrepreneur to a large
extent due to his solid technical DEMO, which "is an important factor to
interest financers and others" (13). And Almi's finance manager contended that if
the entrepreneur DEMO enterprise is trustworthy in their view, it would be so also
DEMO customers. Financial back-up would facilitate potential customers'
decisions to rely on the new supplier. Almi in its advisory role towards
Explosive expressed trust DEMO the entrepreneurs, whose strength was the combi-
nation of personal experiences DEMO technical field of expertise. They had chosen
a niche just so narrow as to ensure that their competence created superiority.
Strategic positioning affects trustworthiness.
DEMO 2. 3  Managerial/Commercial Capacity
Technical competence and experience regarding the DEMO need not
necessarily be matched by trust in the managerial and commercial ability and/or
capacity of the entrepreneurs. One of Plastics' customers, DEMO, was not
convinced at the beginning but felt instead a need DEMO observe for some time
whether the theoretically educated technical expert really could run a business
enterprise. Clues for trustworthiness had to emerge. The consultants DEMO Almi
assess potential business starters. A person may be trustworthy in competence
and in ideas to exploit. Still, if s/he has handled financial matters, e.g. debts, ir-
106
regularly in the past, the total trustworthiness will be low. Clues for trust can
certainly make negative sense for the other.
In what DEMO did the entrepreneurs display managerial or commercial
ability and capacity? Both DEMO considered it necessary or desirable to
enter into close co-operation with customers for problem solving and product
development. They must display ability to work DEMO with the customer in
accordance with the customer's procedures and traditions. It can also be
expressed as displaying different clues for the other'DEMO construction of meaning.
Trustworthiness lies in success of the projects in terms of quality, notably result
and timing. Alpha commented concerning Plastics' entrepreneur:DEMO
He informed us about the time schedule to develop necessary tools and equipment for the
new production. He managed in accordance with the time DEMO We were not used to
that. This was important, since we DEMO dissatisfied with another supplier, and we had in
our turn given DEMO to our selling agents abroad (11).
Since then they have DEMO developed other products. Trustworthiness is often
relative, depending on other actors DEMO competitors. Trust can be a competitive
advantage.
One way to accomplish person-based trustworthiness in managerial/
commercial ability and capacity is to display understanding DEMO the other actor's
problems. That is like saying: "I see your needs in meaning construction and
make that my own construction of DEMO" The entrepreneur often meets
actors in large, established organisations, where DEMO people are involved in
business transactions. Procedures are different. When many people are involved,
procedures may be difficult to change. There were situations DEMO
entrepreneurs in both Explosive and Plastics had to consider the ways of
handling interaction and business transactions of their larger customers. The
entrepreneurs immediately DEMO this problem and did adapt their ways of
interaction, which the DEMO expressed as being positive for trust in the new
ventures. Alpha also expressed satisfaction with quick action from the
entrepreneur, since the entrepreneur did not have to inform so many others and
co-ordinate others' tasks in implementation.
Trust in managerial/commercial ability and capacity is central in person-
DEMO trustworthiness. An entrepreneur believed to be able to run a business must
assume commercial and managerial responsibilities. This is very important as a
prerequisite DEMO growth and for being an employer. No wonder therefore that the
business start advisors connect trust to this dimension and look at the business
DEMO's whole personal capacity. The question about a specific entrepreneur:
Why do you consider him trustworthy? was answered by Almi as follows:
107
Well, it is really the whole way of running the company. To be out visiting the customers
is important and to try to DEMO new categories of customers. It is together with the
customers you will see new possibilities. Then bring it back to production. He has also DEMO
large network with machine suppliers abroad. Sweden is too small. He invests in better
machinery before his competitors do, and he gets machines cheaply buying from
bankruptcy sales. He works with the organisation, arranges things so that it works also
when he is out travelling. He acts before DEMO problems show up (13).
6. 2. 4  Conclusions: Dialogue DEMO Mutuality in
Person-based Trust
A purpose of using sensitising concepts in interpretations is to discover or
highlight new dimensions that will enrich the concept DEMO make it more useful in
the future (cf. chapter 5). DEMO three dimensions above of person-based
trustworthiness have now been discussed. What additional dimensions has the
analysis brought up? As an extension and partly rearranged outlook we will
discuss the importance of dialogue for person-based trustworthiness. Mutuality
DEMO a stance behind the actors' interaction and its implications for trust DEMO the
second extended dimension.
6. 2.4.1  Dialogue and Trust
A dialogue DEMO with each of the persons paying attention to the other. Each of
them seeks clues that make sense. They may then enter into further DEMO
development and action. A clue for imposing meaning can be the impression on
the other that one makes. The other notices one's attitudes, modes of behaviour
etc. The entrepreneurs in the cases made contact using DEMO old network and they
also tried to expand it by engaging new actors. Those interviewed who met
entrepreneurs of the new ventures for the DEMO time reflected quite a lot about the
impressions they got of the entrepreneur on the first few occasions. In the
interviews we also discussed DEMO external actors' experiences from meeting other
entrepreneurs than those in the DEMO
The situation for the external actor is one of possibilities and risks. The
purchasing officer in Beta said: "Can I believe what he DEMO? Can I rely on what
he says, that they will live up to it the way I need for a supplier?" (10). In
Weickian terms: Do I get clues for meaning construction? DEMO chapter 1, this
situation has been explained in terms of equivocality (Gartner, Bird & Starr,
1992). The entrepreneur may express an equivocal situation as unequivocal for
108
two reasons. One is that the external actor is expected to DEMO unequivocal
situations, the other may be the entrepreneur's self-deception. The DEMO
in question also realised the dilemma for the external actor: the DEMO in
premature trust. They used two ways to promote their own aims with the
discussion. One was an open attitude: As straightforwardly and candidly as
possible inform the external actor and give accurate answers to questions. DEMO
expressions given in the interviews with the entrepreneurs of their endeavours
were matched by similar commentaries from the actors on how they perceived
the DEMO The open attitude displayed by the entrepreneur has then
continued in the relationships. An open attitude facilitates the others' attention
and meaning construction. Plastics' main supplier of raw material, Delta,
expressed it in this DEMO:
Our discussions, normally three times a month, about the market and prices, his view of
what is going to happen, also DEMO a kind of picture of confidence. We are in a central
position of this development. What he tells, gives us signals that he perceives things in a
realistic way and that he is actively seeking information DEMO his business (15).
Providing external capital to an existing enterprise DEMO at least partly be
based on the history of the enterprise: DEMO figures, market share, financial data
from balance sheets etc. But history does not normally exist for the new venture.
There are few or DEMO "hard figures" to assess as clues for trust. Judgement can be
partly be based on a business idea but as a credit officer DEMO Almi said:
Everything falls back on the person. Trust must be conveyed through discussions, by
posing questions you let the person tell as much as possible. Raise questions that will
make the person open up DEMO the discussion. Then the person must give accurate and sharp
answers on what he will do, how he will handle different situations. Formal
questionnaires, checklists and other templates give less than a straightforward dialogue
(13)DEMO
The initial dialogue and its continuation is very much contingent on the
discussing parties' general view on what they want to do and how to do business.
Alpha:
We soon noticed that we could discuss DEMO a high level. We have the same background in
chemistry and we want a supplier to bring us new useful ideas. With him
[the DEMO we can have a fruitful dialogue (11).
The entrepreneur expressed DEMO same view in this way:
We want a new way of thinking among our customers: To see new areas for using our
products. And we look for such customers (8).
109
The attitudes and ways of action seem to set the line DEMO continued interaction.
Those actors who have long term relations to the entrepreneurs expressed similar
views, e.g. that they continue to work with the entrepreneurs because they speak
the same language, which was considered to be very important, particularly in
doing product research and development together.
110
6.2.4.2  Mutuality and Trust
The views expressed concerning dialogue show a natural interest to promote
each actor's own aims but there is DEMO to be identified. Beta said:
it is important that he [the entrepreneur] feels he can trust us, that they have a reliable
customer in us (10).
And another:
We are trustworthy, otherwise DEMO would not continue to cooperage with us (11).
There is DEMO view of mutuality in trustful dialogue. 34
But the dialogue in its turn seems to be instrumental to more depth in
trustful relations. There DEMO also expressions for mutual trust in a more
personalised view. Explosive's entrepreneurs have, as mentioned above, decades
of relations with key actors DEMO a large customer, Gamma, whose contact
person talked about a strong co-operation characterised by mutual trust and
respect for each other's work. DEMO, the entrepreneurs had very clearly
acknowledged the customer's competence and DEMO versa. The contact person in
Gamma commented:
We know what each of us is good at and where we are weak. So then DEMO can complement
each other. Together we have sometimes also had to look for competence from outside
our relations in order to reach what we DEMO wanted (12).
Mutuality in personalised trust could be seen in DEMO relations.
But there is still one step deeper where mutual trust can be seen as based
on ideology or values: Common views and ideas concerning the aims for doing
business, the role of the industry in society and responsibilities in a wider sense
than just the enterprises involved. DEMO entrepreneurs in Explosive and Gamma
felt trust in each other because they shared the views on safety and
environmental protection in the industry handling DEMO and hazardous
processes and products (i.e. basic values and beliefs). DEMO very experienced in
handling the processes and products they could all of them rely on each other's
34 Cf. the discussion in chapter DEMO concerning one-sided trust, i.e. trustworthiness, developing
into mutual trust.
111
precautions not to cause accidents and maybe loss of life. This DEMO was
accurately summarised by Gamma's contact person in this way:
Ideas and visions are important. To have an ideology. Environment, for my part. Not to
use things that could be dangerous for man and DEMO Not to jeopardise people's health
for profit. I have experienced the same ideology in Explosive. We all want support for
our thoughts (12).
6. 3  Enterprise-based Trustworthiness
Enterprise-based trustworthiness is in the analysis expectations tied to the new
venture in the dimensions:
- trust in DEMO new venture as an organisation, which is its
characteristics (not the entrepreneur's) and processes   within the
venture or exchange processes between the new   venture and
external actors
- trust in products, characteristics of products, product
development, quality of products and distribution
- trust DEMO financial resources and stability.
6. 3. 1  Trust in the New DEMO as an Organisation
For a business start-up and in its early development there is in the view of
external actors often no clear distinction DEMO the entrepreneur as person and
the new venture (cf. section 1.2.1)DEMO Nevertheless, discussions on trust evoked
thoughts and arguments among external actors DEMO entrepreneurs concerning
different issues: Is the new venture complementary to the DEMO actor's own
enterprise? Is it something new or not in DEMO market? What business risks are
involved when the external actor deals DEMO new venture? How does the new
venture handle things compared to DEMO external actors themselves?
To be complementary is to have something that the other party needs or
desires in order to reach its outcomes. DEMO possessed when it started a
specific patent around which it marketed and performed services, a very
noticeable clue. The new venture was complementary also in another way:
considered by actors to bring in new ideas, working with smooth-running
procedures and less bounded by traditions. Trustworthiness, manifested in
company assets based on competence, was important for the customer needing
the complementary services.
112
Complementarity and novelty are phenomena close to one another. To be
DEMO in the market and succeed can be based on bringing in something which did
not exist before - cf. Schumpeter's (1934) criteria DEMO innovation in section 1.2.4.
Plastics' entrepreneur said on a number of DEMO, that it is no use to start a
business with a "me too"-strategy, i.e. try to market something parallel to
existing enterprises. And this entrepreneur consciously attempted to bring
novelty to the market in DEMO of new product applicability and qualities that the
competitors could not or would not attain. Novelty was for the venture a way to
convey DEMO, to offer clues for trust. Still more so for Explosive:
DEMO in four years developed 14 patents and been awarded three times in
innovation contests functioned deliberately as a way to invite trust. Explosive's
DEMO:
These awards can be decisive for potential customers. The fact is that we have been
assessed by impartial people and been nominated to DEMO rather advanced award. We see
that as trust between supplier and customer (9).
Trust can be an issue in deciding between alternative business partners.
Alpha had since a very long time, and before the start of Plastics, on-going
relations with another supplier. This quality-minded buyer regularly tested
quality of its supply and found in the last few years increasing DEMO
irregularities in delivery from its supplier. A visit on site showed ageing
production equipment (which the supplier had tried to camouflage). Discussions
did not help. Plastics happened to market itself at that moment, Alpha started to
buy from the new venture on a small scale. Plastics' products met the
requirements. As a consequence and after a period of slowly DEMO between
these suppliers, Plastics is now replacing the old supplier. In DEMO words: Well-
established trust between parties in a relationship is not DEMO forever. It has to
be constantly reproduced. Trust and trustworthiness may dwindle. But to fulfill
business aims trustful parties are still needed. Relationships may DEMO due to
the needs of trusted partners.
The discussion in the last section showed another issue connected to trust.
Alpha would not accept risks DEMO a business relationship would not bring
accomplishment of its outcomes. There was a need to trust a partner, but trust did
not remain. Trust is important when there are risks. To reduce risks trust was
sought DEMO When a trustworthy partner emerged, trust developed and
risks were reduced DEMO the customer's eyes. The need for trust goes hand in hand
with risk: An important relationship is a potentially risky relationship and trust
makes meaning in the relationship of reducing feared risk. Are there specific
113
risks concerning new ventures and hence trust issues? All interviewed external
actors could see such issues. If it is difficult to assess trustworthiness, it is more
difficult to evaluate risks in involvement with the new DEMO (whether new in
the market or not). Risks in the DEMO can concern promises and engage-
ments: prices, qualities, quantities, timing, all of which may bring repercussions
to the external actor's own production, distribution etc. Different consequences
for the management were also mentioned when changes of plans had to be made.
But also explicit statements that DEMO of these risks are not only connected to
new ventures but also to new relations with existing enterprises. A new venture
can be vulnerable DEMO a number of ways: financially, in organisation of its pro-
duction and distribution.
Due to risk assessment different criteria, rules-of-thumb, are needed DEMO the
eyes of the external actors. There were a number of ways to perceive reduced or
controlled risk: One is trying to judge how important the customer or product is
for the new venture. A key DEMO is one on which the new venture is very
dependent for survival and development. A key product can bring proportionally
high sales to the DEMO venture and is therefore important for its cash-inflow. A
key product can also be important to create a niche or competitive edge for the
DEMO venture. So the argument from one external actor, Beta, goes this way: The
new venture will do its utmost to succeed with a key product. Hence a noticeable
key product is positive for the new DEMO's trustworthiness. A parallel
argumentation came up concerning a key customer (DEMO potential one). So
experienced purchasing officers tried to assess what key products and key
customers made sense for new venture. To be a DEMO customer or buyer of a key
product is a clue for trust in the new venture.
Plastics explicitly tried to promote its trustworthiness by "records".
Records are references that a product or a relationship has DEMO in the past
between two actors. References are used by one actor to acquire trustworthiness
in the eyes of a third actor. Records as DEMO will be further discussed in
chapter 8, here it needs only DEMO said that the new venture can refer to a
relationship or ongoing transactions with one actor when it tries to promote
trustworthiness to another DEMO If this new actor believes the reference to be
trustworthy, the DEMO for the new venture may be enhanced.
References are clues for trust. References are mentioned as being a standard
procedure in emerging contacts with DEMO ventures, but only when there are
references considered to be relevant DEMO the potential new actor's outcomes from
dealing with the new venture.
Before and during business start-up financers' and advisors' trust in the
DEMO business concept is an issue. Apart from what was discussed regarding
114
person-based trustworthiness above, trust to these actors has a wide meaning
covering almost all aspects of the start and early business: "Commercialising DEMO
business idea", covers the possibilities in the market place, what DEMO novel
compared to competitors, production and distribution facilities needed and
possible DEMO obtain and how finances can be arranged. These issues will be further
covered later in this chapter. We concentrate here on what is important DEMO trust
particularly in the start-up in relation to start-up financers and advisors. Many or
even most business ideas are in their very beginning vague, unspecified, often
unrealistic in terms of possible profitability. The market is often conceived too
wide or too narrow. The product may not be adapted DEMO production in practice,
etc. That is to say: Clues for DEMO are lacking. Normally it takes a process of
dialogue and investigations in order to arrive at a practicable business solution.
Financers and start advisors DEMO - apart from assessment of the entrepreneurs as
persons - evaluate adaptability in the business ideas: that ideas could be and were
actually changed when circumstances from market investigations etc. so
indicated. Trust is very much DEMO as flexibility in what arrangements
should be viable for the prospective new venture. Also Plastics' main supplier,
Delta, took some pains in DEMO whether the new venture had a business
concept that would survive in the market and hence become an active and solid
buyer of raw DEMO A supplier, well positioned in the industry, with a deep
knowledge of the industry's structure and way of functioning can both directly
DEMO indirectly become an important "gate opener" or "gate closer" for the new
venture, depending upon how it assesses the new venture's possibilities.
Trustworthiness and trust is an issue. This supplier presented a similar DEMO
outside the cases:
Respondent: We have another customer, which started in the same period. Much more
capital was required for that venture. DEMO established company went in with 10 % capital
and got a seat in the company board.
Researcher: Was that enough to increase trustworthiness?
R: Yes, definitely. Far more than the 10 % capital represented. DEMO very competent person
at the board to give them advice. Had it not been for that solution, we would have
considered it very hard to give them help, considering the higher risks in this case due to
narrow price margins (15).
This combination of person-based and enterprise-based trustworthiness
immediately put the new venture on the recognised map of that DEMO, brought
trust to counter risks perceived.
Explosive developed, after a couple of years in business, a new idea. The
entrepreneurs immediately understood that it needed to be organised as a joint
115
venture including authorities, technical consultants, financing bodies and
potential key DEMO Since the idea was still very much in the core of
Explosive's competence and experience, the company saw itself as the "spider DEMO
the web". But parts of the idea implied risky and temporary undertakings, other
parts expensive investments. It would not be possible to remain trustworthy if the
business's forms and joint venture organisation was not DEMO to the specific
situation. So immediately, when the business ideas started DEMO be discussed with
external actors, Explosive signalled its willingness to discuss DEMO the joint
venture should be built up. Among other things this was a way to display
trustworthiness: We are prepared to do our utmost to make the joint venture
successful.
116
6. 3. 2  Trust in Products
Trust and trustworthiness is seen in connection with the importance of the
product. In the preceding section DEMO importance of the key product for
supplying new venture to counterbalance risk was identified. When the customer
of the new venture considered the product DEMO be a key product for their own
operations it was subjected to more scrutiny, tests or small amounts in trial
orders. But, inversely, an experienced purchasing officer in Beta would also
assess whether the product DEMO important for the new venture for
trustworthiness:
I would try to check how important the product is for them and based on that DEMO I
would believe that things would turn out (10).
As DEMO be expected, products from the new ventures were put to tests DEMO
customers. Test procedures could be rather elaborated. First a "reference
product" - was required to be compared with existing or expected supply. If
DEMO, a second step would be to buy a small sample and DEMO it in the
production process, as a component in what is DEMO to final customers. A blind
test was to use the sample in certain delivered lots but not others in order to see if
the DEMO customers noted any change, complained or reacted in a positive way.
DEMO next step would then be increased lots. When, finally, adequate
trustworthiness for the product was established, links to the new venture's
competitors might be weakened or broken. Somewhere in the process the
customer paid DEMO visit to the new venture in order to assess production facilities,
production processes and maybe how distribution is organised. As Alpha put it:DEMO
"We want to see that they do not burn out antiquated DEMO, that may
impede quality and jeopardise delivery to us" (11)DEMO Trust was in this way built
stepwise in interplay between attention, DEMO for clues denoting trust and
assessment, i.e. meaning construction/reconstruction.
Of DEMO not only new products were assessed. Regular delivery
reliability was important to the customers who often had made promises to
dealers and final customers DEMO their turn. They risk their own trustworthiness
when they rely on the new venture. Their own trustworthiness is an important
meaning imposed for their DEMO with others. No wonder that reliable delivery
was mentioned (together with DEMO and quality) as being one of the most
important aspects of DEMO in on-going transactions. Reliability
concerned both quality, quantity and timing. Delivered DEMO and timing of
delivery was by Alpha once in a while tested by suddenly placing a larger order
117
than usual to see what happened, i.e. if chaos broke out or not. Quality and
timing was assessed and registered upon arrivals of DEMO Statistics were compiled
on quality deficiencies (by sample tests) and on timing of delivery. A sign of
trust was increasing long-term contracts and DEMO on Explosive and Plastics
as main or sole supplier.
Belief that the new venture would continue product development was
important to the customers. This DEMO furnish the customers with new ideas to
make use of in their markets. Alpha said:
We always look for new ideas for business, unconsciously. Stimulation. We want our
suppliers to bring that (11).
To be active in reconstructing meaning implies active attention and search for
clues. DEMO were also signs of accelerating speed of development among
customers due to such ideas. Alpha and Gamma - one customer of each of the
DEMO ventures - mentioned that some products came out commercialised earlier
than expected. Trustworthiness and development of trust was enhanced by that.
Entering into continued DEMO product development was facilitated. The financing
start-up advisor Almi also reckoned commercializable product ideas and on-
going product development as a basis in trustworthiness DEMO funding
decisions.
6. 3. 3  Trust in Financial Resources and Stability
DEMO the business start-up Plastics needed capital from external sources to build up
its production facilities etc. Trustworthiness was built very much on the
entrepreneur'DEMO capability and motivation, the business concept, products and the
competitive ability. On top of that came the financial requests. Two things were
important DEMO the financing actors' view: 1) The total capital need compared DEMO
what is normal for the industry, and 2) The financial leverage. Plastics could
count on a factory building with low rent. Rebuilding it DEMO cheap, since friends
and family gave help, business friends sold material for low "friendship" prices.
The entrepreneur bought second-hand machinery. So the DEMO investment was
favourable. He could personally raise funds making the relation between owner's
and borrowed capital favourable. Localisation in the countryside in an DEMO with
unemployment made state loans on favourable conditions possible.
Trustworthiness could in these circumstances be raised both with Almi and the
bank.
118
Essential for a new venture in manufacturing is credit with suppliers DEMO
extended that capital tied to material in the production does not cause extensive
costs. This means negotiating for normal credit conditions on purchased material
DEMO avoiding cash payment deals or special bank guarantees. Plastics was
scrutinised by Delta's (its main supplier's) finance department, since the new
company had no finance history to display in a normal credit investigation.
DEMO, other than normally expected ones, had to be displayed by Plastics for
Delta's meaning construction. At the start Plastics therefore had to DEMO
trustworthiness much more than had to be done once this "gate" was passed.
Explosive with its competence-oriented business ideas could argue the opposite
DEMO:
When we started the business we had the aim not to build on loans and grants. Instead we
started with as little capital DEMO possible, all of it was owner's capital. Then we wanted DEMO
finance by retained earnings. But we were not against external funds for specific projects,
if it could be quickly repaid. We do not DEMO to be dependent on the bank (1).
They have managed DEMO live up to these expectations. But this obviously
favourable financial position has seemingly not been important for customers' or
other actors' trust in DEMO Trust seems more to be based on factors
discussed above: the DEMO' competence, successful product
development, a network suitable for expansion.
A DEMO procedure is credit investigation concerning the new venture
by using service bureaux specialised in the field. The actors seemed to consider
this as a DEMO measure taken by the company's finance department rather than
taken by those responsible for transactions, who in a couple of cases knew
nothing about what was reported. Credit investigation as clue for trust seemed
more DEMO less to work as an alarm bell: You know nothing until DEMO suddenly
sounds.
Additional fund raising became dramatic on certain occasions for Plastics.
Financial trust has required extensive personal acquisition of additional owner's
capital, otherwise Plastics would not have been entrusted loans from Almi and
the DEMO Trust within the local community, i.e. among business friends of his
DEMO his father's earlier company, have entrusted him with extended debt
DEMO when necessary. But Plastics' entrepreneur had to fight for capital
from DEMO bank several times, when investments in additional machines and new
products DEMO planned. Trustworthiness has been at stake. In all he used five
ways for maintaining trustworthiness: 1) an open attitude to show circumstances
as DEMO are, 2) a continuous dialogue with the local bank, 3) a use of balancing
parties for support and other external capital providers DEMO reducing risk, 4)
119
financial commitments by the entrepreneur himself and, finally, 5) showing
reliability in earlier commitments: "We have paid our interest on loans DEMO if
the bank had tough prices on their money." (4) DEMO use of balancing parts for
support and capital provision included suppliers. The main supplier agreed on
prolongation of payment for bills, confident that the new venture would do its
utmost to pay, all in the belief that its liquidity problems were temporary.
Relations so far had built up DEMO to meet the situation in an air of mutual regard.
The supplier, Delta, commented:
We accepted later payment against interest, since we knew what customers he had and
that they would not stop doing DEMO with Plastics. At the end of the line there was a
good demand for the products in that range of certification (15).
So, financial trustworthiness was connected to a wider scope of assessment, a
DEMO set of clues for sensemaking.
Plastics has taken part in product development co-ordinated with
customers having specific requirements. Plastics' competitors have in similar
circumstances demanded that their customers with the specific requirements
should finance the product DEMO These competitors claimed that there is
no other buyer to sell to. Plastics instead offered to share development costs with
the customer. Looking for DEMO business opportunities the entrepreneur saw it the
other way round: As DEMO opportunity to get half the development costs for a new
product paid externally and still be free to market the result wherever possible!
This DEMO was commented by Alpha:
We want a partner who is eager to develop new ideas. Next time we can use the spin-off
from DEMO ideas (11).
Trust resides in realising and meeting the customers DEMO and needs, i.e. to
understand what makes sense for the other DEMO construct meanings in
accordance.
6. 3. 4  Conclusions: Trust and Market, Trust and
Equity
6.3.4.1  Trust and Market
Among the actors around DEMO two ventures it is possible to distinguish between
two opposite connections of trust and market. Some actors see the market,
120
notably the industry where they are actors, as stable, not DEMO all or very slowly
changing its structure. Still, the studied industry DEMO based on chemistry with many
new product possibilities. These actors saw trust as not to disturb the industry's
main structure and functioning. New DEMO' entrance was seen as something
positive, but at the same time the entrants should not rearrange industry
conditions in a more radical way. DEMO was to enter and stick to the rules. The
respondent in Delta said that if the company wanted to expand, he would prefer
expansion involving existing actors rather than entrants. On the other hand the
same DEMO was positive in doing business with the study's new venture once it
was in the market.
The opposite connection between trust and market DEMO be represented by
Alpha, who actually chose the new venture on DEMO grounds that it brought
something new to the industry, namely novel DEMO that would expand the
market as a whole. Trust here was seen to be efficient in bringing changes to
bear, and to challenge the established views of the products' roles and
functioning. Trust implied here that the new venture actually worked as a motor
for the customer's DEMO development.
Trust is sensemaking based on the truster's view of ideals, i.a. their notion
of the ideal market. The notion of an ideal market reflects basic ideas and beliefs
about business in the industry, which for referred actors had a strong impact on
their meaning construction and DEMO they paid attention to the new venture. The
entrepreneur must count on different grounds for equivocality in connection with
the market since the actors: customers, suppliers and competitors construct
meaning differently (cf. section 1.2.2).
DEMO  Trust and Equity
Developing mutuality in trust could be seen on DEMO number of occasions taking the
form of fair dealing in opportunities or costs. Above, concerning Explosive and
Gamma, we have seen mutuality in DEMO outcomes, such as benefit from spin-
off products. Increasing costs were DEMO shared as a sign of trust. Plastics
met during a short time sharply increasing prices in raw materials. It could not
swallow the whole DEMO itself and feared negative consequences passing all
price increase over to its customers. So in open discussions with key customers
Plastics negotiated and reached DEMO on splitting the loss between the
parties. The parties considered trust in the relationship to be important enough
not to take one-sided advantage of DEMO situation.
Mutuality comes here close to equity (cf. section 4.3.1). DEMO splitting a
loss between the parties is an example of a situation that could have been settled
121
in negotiation based on power, a solution that would probably have brought
detrimental effects to at least one of the actors involved. Instead DEMO parties
sought a solution where the costs, imposed from outside, would be shared by all
actors involved. To suggest and to reach a DEMO based on equity the parties
must rely on each other, i.e. DEMO that everybody will fulfill her/his part of the
agreement. Also the deal between one of the ventures and a customer about
shared product DEMO costs has an element of equity in it, particularly fair
rate DEMO exchange between utilitarian costs and benefits expected.
Norms of equity and trust (mutual trust) go hand in hand. Equity is a set
of DEMO and underscored by interpretive schemes. If that set of meanings is
shared between the actors, they will pay attention to each other accordingly.
Clues displayed signal meanings, ascribed as shared by the other actor and
including mutual trust. Common action based on trust ensues.
122
6. 4  Institution-based Trustworthiness
Institution-based trustworthiness is expectations about an entrepreneur or new
venture tied to formal mechanisms which can provide trust. Formal DEMO
are based on the dimensions appearing in the analysed data:
- laws and norms in society or a sub-society
- general values, beliefs and moral order
- traditions.
Laws and norms are highly standardised and DEMO They are imposed
generally but are often not very personally comprehended. Still they are used for
guidance. A sub-society can be an industry, region, or other social setting.
General values are values commonly upheld in a social setting. They are often
more personally comprehended than laws and norms. DEMO are personal. Moral
order is values considered in a social setting to be obligations, even if they are
not formalised as laws or written rules. "Businessmanship", can be an example of
such a notion, DEMO a businessman is expected by other businessmen to be or act in
certain ways. An offer or an agreement from a businessman is in DEMO setting
given certain meanings. Moral order is the obligation to share these meanings as
a basis for offers or agreements if you belong to DEMO setting. Traditions as a base
for trust concern use of trust in the past for assessing trust in contemporary or
future situations.
Trust in DEMO entrepreneur and/or the new venture resides in adherence to
institutional mechanisms as these are seen by the context or a wider
environment. These DEMO be seen in the same way by the entrepreneur or in the
new venture but they may also be seen differently or not at DEMO It is the external
actor's sensemaking which is the basis for institution-based trustworthiness. In a
specific situation an external actor may see both DEMO trustworthiness
and another dimension: The entrepreneur may be seen both as DEMO
competent (i.e. person-based trustworthiness) and anxious to adhere to contract
norms in the industry (institution-based trustworthiness) at the same time. Still,
DEMO distinction can be interesting for analytic purposes.
6. 4. 1  Laws DEMO Norms in Society or a Sub-society
123
Both new ventures were by external actors enacted regarding how they DEMO to
laws as well as norms in the industry. Legal aspects pertain to different
comments on
- responsibility taken according to Swedish business laws
DEMO financial legally sanctioned obligations concerning short-term
and  long-term debts.
The legal DEMO of the business venture can signal trust. In both new
ventures the entrepreneurs in the start-up chose the legal form of company
limited, even if that requires formal reports, more developed auditing etc., than
alternative DEMO forms (partnership or proprietorship). Explicitly, the
entrepreneur in Plastics explained that he did so because it seems more serious in
contact with DEMO customers and suppliers. They get more confidence in the new
venture when financial control is more elaborated. And the entrepreneur picked
out an audit DEMO which was expensive but had a nation-wide reputation. He
wanted to show that the company was backed up by the best financial
competence possible. DEMO entrepreneurs stressed in the discussion about start-up
how important it was to show to actors the symbols of an established company,
such as DEMO number, bank accounts, postal giro number etc. Trustworthiness
seemed for them very much connected to the symbols that convey trust. The
symbols were DEMO to work as clues for trust. Common to the examples given
is that the entrepreneur (trustee) assumes that the displayed facts work as
DEMO (trust) for the external actors (trusters). These meanings are DEMO to
be held by the actors in a pre-determined way as interpretive schemes. They are
assumed to facilitate the external actors' sensemaking of trust for the new
venture.
Norms in industry concern i.a. agreements between the DEMO One of
Explosive's customers, Delta, considered it very important with a thoroughly
worked-out agreement including not only co-operation between parties and
financial DEMO, but also rights and obligations to patents, product use,
secrecy etc. They felt trust in that they shared the same view in DEMO an
agreement covering as much as possible of these matters. One external actor
explicitly stated that they required industry norms to be the basis DEMO agreements
with new entrants - "the floor", but also that DEMO standards should be "the
ceiling": In a market with free DEMO open competition no extra requirements
should be put on the entrants. Upon norms made sense as general, the actor
constructed meaning based on personal beliefs about the functioning of the
market.
So far this discussion regards DEMO to laws and norms. Adherence is
a rather passive stance, that DEMO just do what you must do. But the actors also
124
enacted a more active way for the new ventures. They were DEMO a large extent
proactive making use of laws and norms, even DEMO advantage of changes of
norms. Plastics' financer:
The entrepreneur acted DEMO a unique way compared to more traditional competitors. He
quickly saw to it that he got important product certificates when the state increased
requirements DEMO environmental laws. This was actually part of his business idea (13)DEMO
Both Plastics and Explosive explicitly considered acquisition of certificates to be
a business idea, to secure market niches and to ward off less qualified
competitors:
We sell a certified product to a key customer. Our DEMO competitor is still trying to get
his certificate. Meanwhile we develop a related product for certification. In this way we
create a niche for DEMO by cutting the competitive situation and creating difficult
thresholds for competitors (DEMO).
The customer in question (Alpha) expressed it in this way:
Plastics was not one of our regular suppliers at the time. DEMO the product was certified, so
we started to buy from them DEMO a small scale (11).
To be active in promoting business DEMO norms is to attract attention, display clues
on meanings, similar to those imposed by the norms and expect that other actors
have or DEMO create similar meanings. The role of norms is to standardise
expectations and meanings within a social setting.
Technical characteristics covered by norms, such as acid and heat
resistance were checked by scrutinising certification documents. The functioning
DEMO the product was tested. Particular attention was paid to how the product
behaves in the actor's own production line together with other components DEMO
whether it suited production and handling downstream, towards final customers.
This DEMO and documentation functions as stored interpretive schemes to
promote business outcomes. In an example mentioned above, one of Plastics'
customers had changed to Plastics as supplier when the norms and requirements
were not reached by DEMO former supplier, a competitor of Plastics.
Also the  storage and handling during production in Explosive and
Plastics and the work processes are subjected DEMO norms. The adherence to
different norms is regularly checked by the certification agencies in accordance
with the rules and requirements in the institutional context. DEMO had
acquired two different production and handling certificates from public
125
authorities in the field. Inspections were regular and Explosive used the DEMO
argument to promote its trustworthiness:
The certificates give us orders. But we know that certificates are based on trust and we
must show DEMO certification agency that we are worthy of trust by keeping good order in
what we do (1).
Both the entrepreneurs and external actors considered the inspections as well as
information exchange inherent in the inspection DEMO to be important for
trustworthiness. Explosive also tended to see contacts between formal
inspections as some kind of insurance against mistakes or possible mishaps DEMO its
operations, which could be negative for its reputation. To maintain DEMO it
is worth paying some costs in time, as some kind DEMO insurance fee. This could
also be expressed as an attempt to continuously reconstruct meaning for the com-
pany relevant for and in accordance with DEMO institutional requirements.
Also many actors in the commercial context used inspection on the
premises as a means to judge the standards of the business DEMO (prospective
or in on-going relationship). Inspection concerns production and production
DEMO, production processes and control as well as distribution processes.
Actors with DEMO quality audits could make inspections of the supplying
new venture also on a regular basis. Plastics felt a pressure from a buyer who
used DEMO ISO 9000 quality standard to meet the standard, but saw at DEMO same
time more fundamental issues for trustworthiness in the short run. Another of its
customers using the same standard considered it to be more DEMO that its
supplier worked with successive quality improvements over time.
Trustworthiness lay in the assurance that progress is part of the new venture's
DEMO, be it quality standards or other measures. To construct and
reconstruct DEMO together with external actors was an issue, but a broader one
DEMO just norms.
6. 4. 2  General Values, Beliefs and Moral Order
When two parties work together with product research and development it is DEMO
important that you have the same background and understand each other. Even what is
not said. If your views are not the same, the co-operation will not be fruitful. You must
work for the same aims (12).
As a general view, represented by the quotation above, DEMO Gamma project leader
considered the entrepreneurs' attitudes in Explosive towards safety DEMO
environmental issues to be important in the industry. She also paid attention to
126
this attitude showing itself in handling experimental and other development
work.35 DEMO and business start-up are in themselves phenomena to
which values are ascribed in society and sub-societies. Values concerning
business start-up were expressed by external DEMO and how these values could
affect action towards entrepreneurs and new ventures.
I considered it to be very strong to dare to start on DEMO own after so many years in
Incubator. To take the risks. Positive factor (12).
This was expressed in part of a discussion on how the key actor in Gamma
judged entering into business with the DEMO venture. General values concerning
business start-up influenced action in the specific situation. The purchasing
officer in Alpha:
Start-ups may have fresh eyes, looking at things in new ways. May come with new ideas
and are DEMO laden with traditions. They have a slimmed organisation, making it easier DEMO
handle co-operation, contacts go directly to the person who can fix DEMO is needed. You
can use that to stir around in the pot a little, both in your company and the industry (11).
DEMO values regarding the role of start-ups in the development of an industry
can affect trustworthiness for a specific entrepreneur exposing this set of values.
DEMO with this new venture takes on meaning. But there was also the opposite:
Expressions of hesitation, implying the importance of sticking to traditional ways
in the industry (cf. section 6.3.4 about the discussion on trust and market), and
attention concerning the entrepreneur focused on congruent clues, such as
adherence to the traditional delivery terms.
Among both entrepreneurs and DEMO external actors there is a common
belief that there is a virtue for the entrepreneur to have a short way between
perception and action. DEMO entrepreneur should grasp a situation and quickly
respond to it by action. For example the purchasing officer in Alpha:
I very quickly noticed DEMO we could go into a direct dialogue, here and now. Not
DEMO to send a lot of fax messages back and forth. Here we have a person who can
walk directly to his machines and adjust DEMO is necessary (11).
For short this belief can be called "quick action". Enactment of this belief is
firmly based in the DEMO's context and it seems to be taken more or less
for granted in discussions. There was no difference in this belief between the
DEMO and interviewed external actors. "Quick action" was often enacted
35 Cf. the discussion on mutuality and trust in the section on person-based trustworthiness
DEMO in this chapter.
127
by the actors concerning themselves and other actors. As a predominant DEMO
construction in the context the belief probably influences how the entrepreneurs
want to see themselves and want others to look upon them. They want DEMO act in
accordance with the common belief, since such action would DEMO rewarded: It
facilitates reaching desired outcomes.
Researcher: Why do you have so large a stock of raw material?
Respondent: Must have. Today when we get an order we must deliver on the same day.
DEMO may call at noon, and at 7 pm the truck is DEMO here. So we must have in stock
what we think customers may order (4).
-------
Respondent: Now I try to make the DEMO order 2 - 4 weeks in advance, but I fear the
DEMO may cut in.
Researcher: In this way every company in the DEMO has very little influence?
Respondent: Yes.
Researcher: Strong norms develop?
Respondent: Yes, this is a function of spoilt salesmen who DEMO too much. And their
career hungry bosses who believe everything they read in business magazines (8).
An important implication is that the enactment of a belief such as "quick action"
easily becomes self-reinforcing. If among two actors both enact "quick action" to
be a virtue DEMO will influence each other. This means that "quick action" will
become important for trust-building and use of trust. It will ultimately influence
the DEMO and directions of trust in industries. Quick action as a belief concerning
the entrepreneur will be value-laden and underlie trust.
6. 4. 3  Traditions
Tradition is an inherited or established way of thinking, feeling or doing
(Merriam-Webster Thesaurus, 1991, p. 619). Traditions play an important role in
the development of the two ventures, in the thinking of the entrepreneurs as well
as external actors. In the case description above (section 5.5) and earlier in this
chapter there are quotations and discussions where tradition is evident. To
summarise and conclude:
Explosive's three entrepreneurs DEMO considerable industry background in
a large well-known company, from which the DEMO could use earlier
performance and network for sensemaking. The main customer at the beginning
knew two of the entrepreneurs from doing business with Incubator, one of them
had actually worked with a project for that customer DEMO years ago, another one
128
had once been a teacher for the customer's contact person. DEMO of Explosive's
entrepreneurs stated:
"We [the entrepreneurs] had as DEMO common denominator that we had worked an immense
number of years with this kind of development work in Incubator. [...] We had learnt in
DEMO how to do the job and we continued in that way when we started." (1).
Traditions guided their professional work and also DEMO assessment of the main
customer in their business start. Tradition in this sense includes stored
interpretive schemes by using earlier established work procedures, as
exemplified in the quotation.
The entrepreneur in Plastics also has a large DEMO, production and
marketing experience in his industry. Furthermore, there are industrialist
traditions in his family and he is well anchored in local society. DEMO family
tradition was well-known among Plastics' earliest customers, who knew or knew
of the entrepreneur's father and his father's company. The DEMO himself
was by some actors immediately connected to the father's company, since the
prospective entrepreneur had worked there. Beta saw Plastics as a direct conti-
nuation with some years in between. The entrepreneur himself expressed DEMO
importance of trust from the family industrialist tradition in a situation with
temporary financial problems:
Suppliers gave me extra credit, they knew me through my father. He had a good
reputation and they assumed I DEMO brought up in the same spirit (4).
The market director DEMO his main supplier Delta formulated himself in a similar
way and added:
we had reason to assume that he would adopt his father'DEMO way of running the business
(15).
Institution-based trustworthiness in the DEMO of tradition could be
important at the start. Trust as meaning is connected to tradition, which can be a
way to reduce equivocality by an already determined meaning construction. As
discussed in section 1.2, unequivocality makes sense for existing enterprises. The
new venture will therefore try to express DEMO as unequivocal. This is where
tradition may come into the play.
Traditions as an inherited or established way of thinking, feeling or doing
also must have a start some time and be formed and shaped due DEMO events after
the start. New ventures in interaction with external actors embark upon tradition
formation, apart from what is inherited. Signs of tradition formation can be seen
in both the new ventures. Norms concerning product delivery DEMO payment
129
procedures were early built in a specific way in some relations DEMO they tend to
continue without question over time once they are established. Reliance on each
other may promote the emergence of institution-based trustworthiness. An
DEMO could be that Explosive nowadays gets orders on some rather complex
development work in a rather simplified way, almost as automatic orders. The
entrepreneurs' comment:
The customer does not make any effort to more clearly specify and delimit the orders
over time. I think they rely more DEMO more on us and our specific competence. It is
difficult to buy in this specialised technical field (9).
We can see here signs of person- and enterprise-based trustworthiness, but also
the building of institution-based trustworthiness, i.e. an established way of doing
business that takes its model from what has functioned earlier, in the immediate
past, as stored interpretive DEMO
6. 5  Conclusion
In this chapter we used the three concepts DEMO bases of trustworthiness:
person-based, enterprise-based and institution-based trustworthiness, denoting
the general types of clues for actors' attention concerning another actor. The
bases of trust were all believed to cover complex meanings and be rich DEMO variety
at the time of forming the study's frame of reference. Dimensions of contents
within the trust bases were partly set as a DEMO of reference built in section 4.4,
partly they successively grew by interpretation out of the analysed data with
meaning expansion and enrichment as DEMO purpose (Miles & Huberman,
1994; Lincoln & Guba, 1985)DEMO How an originally more narrow concept became
expanded in meaning can be illustrated by the following example: Enterprise-
based trustworthiness was first given two main meanings, based on literature at
hand. Trust in products delivered and in the venture's financial resources
available were the preliminary content given. DEMO confrontation of this sensitising
concept with interview data a prominent widening was the indication that trust
could reside in a trustee which was complementary, i.e. had or developed
something that the truster needs or desires. Also, it was pointed out, that if the
trustee has something new in the market, can bring novelty, this is a similar
cause for DEMO Therefore, a new dimension of enterprise-based trustworthiness
was introduced, pertaining to the new venture as an organisation, its general
capabilities. An example of enrichment of the notion of trust in products
130
delivered is the following. Not only quality, quantity and timing is conducive to
trust but also trusters' assessment of how strategically important delivery seemed
to be for the new venture (trustee) itself, i.e. conditions around a delivery
mattered for the truster to trust the trustee.
External DEMO were in the analyses labelled trust raters, when the role of
DEMO actor to assess trust is in focus.36 Trust rating means that a truster pays
attention to, and seeks clues from meaning. Furthermore, the DEMO creates
meaning about a trustee by attention, basic values and beliefs, and interpretive
schemes. Also non-actors (with no direct contact with the new venture) in the
general environment, e.g. mass media, were found to be trust raters.
Some general conclusions can also be made concerning the DEMO
studied concerning trust. Trust can be a precondition for action to occur. The
entrepreneurs first considered whether trust should be justified and then enacted
DEMO Entrepreneur's and/or external actor's construction of trust as meaning
elicits action or affects the way action will ensue. Trust raters assessed DEMO
characteristics, competence and capacity of the entrepreneur (person-based trust-
worthiness) DEMO for action. Enterprise-based trustworthiness often rested
on agreements, orders and capital DEMO decisions etc. Adherence to norms
such as certification was a necessity in many instances (institution-based
trustworthiness).
Trust can also be a result of action performed. Due to action, trust
emerges or is changed in the eyes of entrepreneur and/or external actor. By
interaction their sensemaking of DEMO is affected. Trust in the entrepreneur as
person could change due to sensemade performance in interaction. Enterprise-
based trustworthiness could e.g. emerge by small DEMO orders or product tests. We
have also discussed examples of common values and norms developing during
interaction.
36 It is an analogy to the DEMO of rating, assessment of a company's financial status.
131
Chapter 7
Trust Development in Action Processes
7. 1  The Notions of Use and Build Trust
One of the main study issues presented DEMO chapter 1 is: How do entrepreneurs
and external actors use and DEMO trust in action processes? The purpose of this
chapter is to DEMO how trust made sense in action processes. First, there is a
DEMO to clarify how concepts are used. Some emanate from the theory presented
in preceding chapters, such as action process, sensemaking, trustworthiness and
the trust bases. Other concepts were induced from the data during the analysis, as
tools for description and understanding: use trustworthiness, build
trustworthiness and DEMO are such concepts.
7. 1. 1  Trust Before and After an DEMO Process
One of the conclusions in the last chapter (see section DEMO) was that trust can be a
precondition for action to occur. DEMO entrepreneurs in the cases first considered
whether trust should be justified and then enacted trust. An actor's construction
of trust as meaning elicits DEMO or affects the way action will be taken. Trust as
meaning concerns the actor's own trust for the other actor, for example whether
the entrepreneur trusts a customer. For action to occur it also an DEMO whether
the entrepreneur is trusted in the eyes of the external actor. Trustworthiness as
precondition for an action process to occur includes for each DEMO a double
sensemaking: A sensemaking B and A sensemaking whether B DEMO A. Any
two-actor relationship thus includes four sensemakings. If more actors are
involved, sensemaking becomes highly complex.
Trust can, as has been said DEMO section 6.5, also be a meaning formed by
action performed, a result of action. Due to action trust emerges or is changed in
DEMO eyes of entrepreneur and/or external actor. By interaction their sensemaking
of trust is affected. Each actor's double sensemaking (of the other and of self in
the other's eyes) comes in here too.
132
From an analytical point of view there is a difference between DEMO as a
precondition to action and trust as result of action. As a precondition trust is
given ex ante. It is made sense outside DEMO the studied action process, e.g. by
earlier action between the parties. DEMO a result trust is made sense by the action,
but the action process may not be the only reason to trust ex post. DEMO as a
result of action is a consequence of the interaction between the focal actor and
another actor, but can also be influenced by information about the parties coming
from outside the interaction and by other DEMO
7. 1. 2  Use and Build Trustworthiness
In action processes the DEMO can use trustworthiness, considered by the
entrepreneur to exist in the DEMO of an external actor as a precondition to an
action process (DEMO section 4.4). Trustworthiness could in its turn be affected or
not by the unfolding of the action process. Trustworthiness can as a result DEMO
unchanged, increased or diminished.
In action processes the entrepreneur can intentionally DEMO
trustworthiness, if existing trustworthiness as a precondition to the action
process DEMO considered by the entrepreneur to be inadequate in the eyes of an
external actor for use in an action process (cf. section 4.4). Trustworthiness can
as a result be unchanged, increased or diminished.
When trust makes sense for the entrepreneur's desired outcome it is a
reason DEMO use or build trustworthiness. Typical outcomes in business start-up and
early development are to become an established business, acquire external
funding or a new customer, get increased sales from a sales campaign, etc. But
such DEMO business outcome can be difficult to reach and may require preparation in
the form of extensive trust-building in order to first develop trust between DEMO
parties. Developed trust will then facilitate reaching a desired business outcome.
So trust-building can make sense not only for business outcomes but also for DEMO
relationship between the parties. Meaning and action processes vary as to what
extent they are predominately business or relationship oriented, and whether acts
are characterised by use of trustworthiness, building of trustworthiness or a blend
thereof.
7. 2  Trust Development in Six
Relationships
133
The study has analysed the two cases, Explosive and Plastics, DEMO well as external
actors dealing with the new ventures, to see: 1) whether the entrepreneurs and
external actors attempted to make use of trustworthiness for the entrepreneur in
action processes in order to reach a DEMO outcome, and 2) whether the
entrepreneurs attempted in action processes to build trustworthiness in a
relationship with the actor in order to promote DEMO of outcome.
The stated two points indicate a concentration to study the sensemaking
concerning the entrepreneur as focal actor (cf. the discussion in section 7.1.1
concerning complexity of the sensemaking situation).
Trust as a precondition DEMO action to occur will for shortness be called pre-
trust. Pre-trust can be defined as trust considered by an actor to exist in the DEMO
of another actor before an action process starts. If not otherwise stated pre-trust
will refer to the focal actor, the entrepreneur.
The presentation below contains central action processes with one focal
actor (entrepreneur) and one DEMO actor in six different relationships. The
selection of relationships is based on the following considerations (compare also
section 5.3.3):
- Relationships between DEMO entrepreneur as focal actor and different external
actors (customer, supplier, DEMO and advisor) will give an over-all view of
trust development as DEMO by the focal actor and at the same time a variety in
data
- Bilateral relationship between the entrepreneur and external actor in order DEMO
distinguish more clearly the truster and the trustee
- As few relationships as possible to enable depth in analysis without an
overwhelming amount of DEMO
For each relation will be
- described the action processes over time
- discussed outcomes of the action process
- characterised the main pre-trust DEMO in the new
venture start, whether trust existed and could be DEMO or had to
be built
- indicated trustworthiness used and/or built in action
processes
134
- discussed trustworthiness as result of interaction
- indicated some implications DEMO mutual trust.
An action process is in this study defined as one or several interacts enacted by
an actor to reach an outcome (cf. section 3.1). What an action process is, where it
starts and stops compared to different events, how action is grouped into a
specific process is due to actor's sensemaking of outcome. In this analysis,DEMO
however, action processes studied are demarcated by the longitudinal study
period (cf. section 5.3.3). It embraces the time from the start of DEMO new venture
up to the stop of data collection for the study. So trust as result of interaction is
here linked to the stop DEMO data collection and not to any specific event or outcome
in the processes. Since the purpose of this instrumental case study (see section
5.2.2) is not the study of trust in any specific outcome, but DEMO concept
building, the important thing for the analysis is that a DEMO of action processes
have occurred during the study period. Trust as result of interaction is "up to
now", where "now" is the third round of interviews with the focal actors (cf.
section 5.3.3).
The presentation and discussion will in each relationship be built on
documentation DEMO interview data from both the entrepreneur and the external
actor. The six relationships are the following:
135
Actors Relationship / type of outcomes
Plastics - Alpha Alpha is DEMO of Plastics
Plastics - Beta Beta is customer of Plastics
Explosive - Gamma Gamma is customer of Explosive
Plastics - Delta Delta is supplier DEMO raw material to
Plastics
Plastics - Almi Almi has provided capital to Plastics
Explosive - Almi Almi is commercial advisor to
Explosive
7. 2. DEMO  Plastics - Alpha
7.2.1.1  Action Processes over Time
Customer Alpha's traditional main supplier of plastic containers for its products
more and more DEMO to reach quality standard in deliveries in the beginning of
the 1990's. Furthermore, the supplier did not manage to improve quality despite
complaints. Alpha was in this situation open for new solutions to its supply
DEMO At that moment the entrepreneur in Plastics, well aware of Alpha'DEMO
quality requirements but not of its supply problems, started marketing to DEMO
The entrepreneur and Plastics were at the time (1991) totally unknown in Alpha.
The entrepreneur's competence and ideas as well as the DEMO matched the
requirements of Alpha's managing director. Product samples were tested and
found adequate, test lots were ordered and blind tests were performed with
Alpha's customers. All passed without adverse remarks. So Alpha successively
DEMO purchases from Plastics and diminished ordering from its old supplier.
For the original type of container, there is now an annually running agreement of
delivery. Alpha considers Plastics to be a stable supplier in quantity, quality and
time.
Alpha's managing director also wanted to develop new types DEMO containers
for its products. That is also where Plastics' product ideas DEMO competence fitted
into the picture. The dialogue between the entrepreneur and Alpha's managing
director resulted in a couple of new types of containers DEMO by Plastics,
where development costs were shared between the companies. This successful
136
co-operation has then encouraged further joint development of existing and new
DEMO Ideas and initiatives in this dialogue come from both parties.
7.2.1.2  DEMO of Action Processes
For Plastics marketing to Alpha meant getting a stable customer in an industry
where legally enforced quality standards were strict. Plastics DEMO that its
product certificates matched Alpha's requirements and that few of its competitors
had the same certificates. Plastics' competence could then easily be noticed in
marketing and the venture's position in the niche was DEMO For Plastics,
new product development together with Alpha also meant increasing its product
range with high-quality products for which there was a demand DEMO the market.
Sales of these products could possibly be extended to new or existing customers.
Sharing development costs with Alpha facilitated for the new DEMO to
financially engage itself in this investment.
For Alpha, Plastics meant DEMO more reliable supplier of containers. Alpha
runs risks if its customers - or environmental protection authorities - become
dissatisfied with the packing of delivered DEMO For Alpha Plastics also meant a
co-operative partner bringing new competence in plastic containers to support
Alpha's own product development.
7.2.1.3  Pre-trust
Since Plastics and its entrepreneur were unknown to Alpha no trustworthiness
existed before DEMO first contacts between the entrepreneur and Alpha's managing
director. The latter commented:
Our contacts in the container market had been very few. DEMO exclusively stick to those
who have a good reputation. You do not enter into this business without references (11).
For Alpha pre-trust seemed important. And at the same time Alpha did not
consider Plastics references DEMO at the time - important, since Plastics' customers,
then mainly in food processing and paint production, have far less strict quality
requirements in terms of necessary certificates. So Plastics could not use
trustworthiness to DEMO into this business. Trustworthiness had to be built.
7.2.1.4  How Trustworthiness DEMO used and built in Action
Processes
137
The first meeting with the entrepreneur and subsequent telephone contacts were
DEMO on by the managing director in Alpha in this way:
He gave a very competent impression. He knows chemistry. Being a chemist myself, I
immediately felt that we can understand each other. [...] He gave DEMO answers to my
questions. [...] A serious person (11).
So DEMO entrepreneur could build person-based trustworthiness at the start of the
relationship. Then there were the tests of Plastics' products with no adverse
results. Trustworthiness for products was built, i.e. enterprise-based
trustworthiness. Alpha could here also compare the results with its former
supplier's. But what about entering into DEMO with a completely new venture?
Alpha was not afraid of that, partly because of Plastics' competence, partly since
Alpha did not buy larger volumes than could have been bought from other
sources. When Plastics' delivery capacity and timing was proven, Alpha bought
more from Plastics. That is: a trade-off between trustworthiness and risk. At that
time trustworthiness for the entrepreneur (person-based trustworthiness) and
Plastics (enterprise-based trustworthiness) could be DEMO - no tight schedule
enforced by Alpha. Finally, Alpha put itself DEMO little more in the hands of Plastics,
going into product development that was important for Alpha itself. Alpha's
managing director:
He DEMO us of the time table. And he stuck to it. We are not used to that. Important
for us, since we must give reliable information to our distributors in 30 countries (11).
7.2.1.5  Trust DEMO Result of Interaction
Starting with no trustworthiness, person-based and enterprise-based
trustworthiness DEMO been built throughout the three years of business relations.
One example of Plastics' trustworthiness in the eyes of Alpha at the beginning of
1995 is the statement of Alpha's managing director:
During the development DEMO the new products he saw our problems and could come up
with a suitable concept. I do not accept his ideas without question, but I need time for
thinking. His ideas were right, but I needed time to accept some compromises in design. I
had to check with DEMO distributor how the final customer would consider the change. But
the ideas worked (11).
To accept, put efforts and costs in ideas DEMO from an external partner displays
very developed trustworthiness for the external partner.
138
7.2.1.6  Implications for Mutual Trust
Building of trustworthiness for the entrepreneur and new venture has in this
relation been very effective throughout the DEMO years. Regarding the
trustworthiness of Alpha in the eyes of the entrepreneur in Plastics there are three
indicators: Firstly, in an intimate dialogue DEMO a supplier (Plastics) and a
customer (Alpha) concerning products based on the supplier's specific ideas,
competence and market information, the supplier runs the risk that the customer
will use the information for DEMO with competitors. If the supplier suspects
that, restrictions on information will DEMO into the dialogue. In this case Plastics
has acted with free and open communication. Secondly, Plastics has used Alpha
as a reference in its marketing. Thirdly, if a supplier suspects that the customer is
unreliable in payment, then restrictions, such as shorter or no credit, bank
guarantee etc., will be claimed. No such thing has happened.
Particularly considering the free and open discussions and joint financing
of product development, trustworthiness seems to be reciprocal. Mutual trust has
developed during the period.
139
7.2.1.7  Summary of the Action Process and Trust
Development
The action processes and trust development elaborated above concerning Plastics
and Alpha can be DEMO as follows.
Pre-trust Action process and trust Trust as
result
Marketing ---------> Prod test---------> Regular Sales ---------> Prod dev P-trust
None - build P-trust     - use P-trust     - use/build P-trust      - use P-trust E-trust
- build E-trust   - use/DEMO E-trust    - use E-trust
Explications: I-trust is Institution-based trustworthiness, DEMO is Person-based
trustworthiness, E-trust is Enterprise-based trustworthiness. Use trust denotes that DEMO
entrepreneur went into action considering he had trustworthiness. Build trust means that
the entrepreneur had a prominent wish to increase trust by entering into DEMO action, i.e.
trust-building was intended. It is indicated whether use or DEMO was predominant in the
entrepreneur's sensemaking.
7. 2. 2  Plastics DEMO Beta
7.2.2.1  Action Processes over Time
Beta was a customer of DEMO' entrepreneur's father's company, from which
they bought containers. When that company ceased to exist Beta bought from
elsewhere. Then in 1991, shortly after Plastics' start the entrepreneur began
marketing the Plastics business ideas together with the former salesman of his
father's company. The entrepreneur DEMO unknown but the salesman was very
well-known within Beta. The purchasing officers of Beta considered Plastics to
be a continuation of the father's DEMO and started to buy the same kind of
container as earlier (DEMO some functional improvements). First they bought a
small quantity for a test, which was successful. There are international
certification requirements for transport and handling of the containers, which
Beta adheres to, but not as DEMO as the Swedish requirements for hazardous
products. The quantity purchased of this product has then increased. Deliveries
are agreed on annually in a contract. DEMO may in the future also start buying
containers of different sizes, DEMO no decisions have been made yet. The
relationship between Plastics and Beta is up to the beginning of 1995
characterised by on-going planned purchase DEMO one specific product.
140
7.2.2.2  Outcomes of Action Processes
For Plastics, marketing to Beta DEMO getting a stable customer buying regularly
in bulk. Such customers are important for positive cash flow and constant use of
production facilities. Since Beta DEMO a central position in its industry it is also
important for Plastics to have Beta as a reference in its marketing to new
customers.
DEMO Beta, Plastics is important as a stable supplier. Timing of deliveries
DEMO quality is important since the containers go immediately into the production
process, and delays are expensive in terms of Beta's own deliveries. But Plastics
accounts for less than 1 % of Beta's total purchase DEMO of packing, and can
easily be replaced.
7.2.2.3  Pre-trust
Trustworthiness existed at the start of the relation in two ways. First, the
entrepreneur's father was a highly regarded businessman in the industry, which
was indicated in the researcher's discussion with the purchasing officer in Beta:DEMO
Researcher: Did you feel more confident in Plastics because you used DEMO buy from its
forerunner?
Respondent: Maybe subconsciously. It is possible DEMO were not alien in that way. Even
if it was not the same person I believe it affects you. We knew he was the DEMO of the old
company's owner (10).
The second way DEMO existed was through the well-known
salesman in the former company, who DEMO came to represent Plastics. He
formed the bridge between the old and new, as the purchasing officer put it. But
on the other hand the entrepreneur in person was unknown to Beta. In all, pre-
trust existed as person-based trustworthiness. To some extent the attitudes
concerning the entrepreneur'DEMO father reflected values on business morals, i.e.
there was also institution-based DEMO
7.2.2.4  How Trustworthiness was used and built in Action
Processes
Plastics DEMO use of trustworthiness of the former well-known salesman in the
first contacts. But soon the entrepreneur took over the interaction. By that time
141
product tests were performed, building trustworthiness for the new venture. Beta
also made a credit investigation of its new supplier. Enterprise-based
trustworthiness was DEMO The entrepreneur has in regular sales both used and
actively built person-based trustworthiness in the eyes of Beta. He is in Beta
considered to DEMO a competent professional and a serious businessman. Since he
also knows how important timing and accuracy in delivery is for Beta, he has
displayed more than ordinary interest in checking that delivery is according to
the DEMO's wishes. Beta as a large professional buyer has standardised
computer-based procedures for arrival control, invoice handling etc. Plastics has
taken pains in arrangements to meet the large and established customer's require-
ments in that DEMO, i.e. used and built trust very much by displaying
understanding of DEMO customer's needs (enterprise-based trustworthiness).
7.2.2.5  Trust as Result of Interaction
After four years Plastics is trustworthy in the eyes of Beta DEMO because
promises of quality and timing of deliveries have always been fulfilled. Since
Beta is ISO-certified this has been documented in systematised follow-ups. Beta
DEMO also considers Plastics a possible future partner for new sizes and types of
containers. It is also possible that shifts will occur from other DEMO to
Plastics for some products. Trustworthiness is here very much due to the new
venture's adaptiveness to the large, established customer, in DEMO ways different
from Plastics itself. This adaptiveness also means that Plastics is trusted for
adherence to the norms set by Beta, i.e. it still has institution-based
trustworthiness. In all, trust as result of interaction is both person-based,
enterprise-based and institution-based.
142
7.2.2.6  Implications for Mutual Trust
Use and building of trustworthiness for the entrepreneur and new venture has in
this relation been very effective DEMO the four years. The trustworthiness of
Beta in the eyes of the entrepreneur in Plastics can be demonstrated by two
indicators: First, Plastics DEMO used Beta as a reference in its marketing. Second, if
a DEMO suspects the customer to be unreliable in payment, then restrictions,
DEMO as shorter or no credit, bank guarantee etc., will be claimed. No such thing
has happened.
There is a situation of certain dominance DEMO submissiveness, conceived
by both parties. Plastics takes very great pains in DEMO with the customer's
needs. In one situation the researcher could even see that the entrepreneur over-
interpreted some delivery requirements from Beta. Beta, on the other hand,
measures its supplier completely out of its DEMO perspective, giving very little
room for mutual adaptation.
If mutual trust DEMO exist in situations characterised by some dominance
and submissiveness it can be ascribed to the smooth and well-working
relationship between the parties. If mutual DEMO, on the other hand, is
incompatible with dominance creating an unsafe situation for one of the parties,
there are in this case DEMO to mutual trust.
7.2.2.7  Summary of the Action Process and Trust
DEMO
The action processes and trust development elaborated above concerning Plastics
and Beta can be summarised as follows.
Pre-trust Action process and trust
Marketing ----------------> Product test-------------------> Regular Sales         - use
P-trust           - build P-trust             - use/build P-trust
- build E-trust             - use/build E-trust
P-trust
I-trust
Explications: see section 7.2.1.7 above.
7. 2. 3  Explosive - Gamma
Trust as
result
P-trust
E-trust
I-trust
143
7.2.3.1  Action Processes over Time
Customer Gamma had in the beginning of the 1990's all the competence for
development of a new DEMO, but the timetable for development was tight, and
the company decided to hire expertise on a consultant basis from outside for joint
product DEMO Explosive was contacted by the project leader in Gamma.
This occurred shortly after Explosive's start. This contact was not preceded by
any marketing DEMO from Explosive. The three engineers in Explosive were
well known in Gamma since the 1950's, when one of them developed a patented
product for Gamma. No other firm was contacted, since the project staff in
Gamma were convinced that Explosive was the right choice.
A one-year agreement DEMO co-operation was settled in December 1991. The
agreement consisted of a thorough description of the job, clauses concerning
finance, secrecy, rights to developed patents and products. A close co-operation
ensued. The basic view of Gamma DEMO to have a fully-fledged co-operating
partner with as wide an interest and role in the project as possible and not to hire
a consultant DEMO delineated parts of the work. Ideas were discussed
jointly as was planning of work. Job performance depended on what a person or
a group DEMO people could take responsibility for on each occasion. Evaluation of
the job was done together. The first agreement was completed within the time
limit, which was all around considered to be a very good performance. New
DEMO agreements of the same type followed, concerning variants of the product.
DEMO continued along the same line.
7.2.3.2  Outcomes of Action Processes
For DEMO, Explosive meant both extra resources and acquisition of new
competence, together enabling the company to keep the timetable for product
development. For Gamma, co-operation with Explosive also meant bringing in to
the company another kind DEMO experience within pyrotechnics. Explosive
functioned as a stimulator for new ideas and as a means for concentration on the
main development task, warding off side issues so common within a large
company. Finally Explosive helped to DEMO more conservative people within
Gamma of the benefits of newer technology. Through the co-operation Gamma
has also become a supplier to Explosive's development DEMO together with
another of Explosive's customers. That is to say: DEMO and Explosive are now
both suppliers and customers for each other.
144
For Explosive, the project meant a stable customer in Explosive's main
line of competence: contribution to constant project occupation, positive cash
DEMO etc. Due to the co-operation and ideas of reciprocal benefit from the work
which was manifested by the agreements, the project has also given Explosive
new products and patents to market to other customers. This development DEMO
not have been carried out solely in Explosive's own laboratory.
7.2.3.3  Pre-trust
Explosive's entrepreneurs' trustworthiness in the eyes of Gamma was DEMO high
right from the start. Person-based trustworthiness existed concerning the
competence of all three engineers (entrepreneurs) due to long-term earlier
professional contacts and DEMO A conviction that these persons were the
right ones for the job existed on several levels within Gamma. Gamma took on a
risk that DEMO venture might fail, but confidence in the persons was strong:
DEMO: What would have happened if the venture had failed?
Respondent: We could have offered them jobs in Gamma (12).
So even though there was at the moment no basis for enterprise-based
trustworthiness, person-based trustworthiness was strong and compensated for
lack of possibilities to show enterprise DEMO for enterprise-based
trustworthiness.
7.2.3.4  How Trust was used and built in DEMO Processes
From a start of using person-based pre-trust, further person-based
trustworthiness DEMO enterprise-based trustworthiness was built by successful co-
operation and outcomes in accordance with timetables and agreements. Both
Gamma's project leader:
Explosive's DEMO became stronger over time. What I had hoped for came true.
We knew they had a different situation in Incubator than we had, but they showed that
they really understood that. You must think in other DEMO here. And so they did (12).
The entrepreneurs of Explosive DEMO engagement in Gamma's problems and
in their needs for outcomes to be attained. Person-based and enterprise-based
trustworthiness was used in renewal of contracts. DEMO time, co-operation
became deeper through shared ideas concerning the co-operation, i.e. institution-
based trustworthiness. Gamma:
145
We speak the same language and that has become more evident DEMO the three
years of co-operation. Thoughts about safety, the respect for DEMO, product
development is based not only on facts and figures, sometimes it is more art than science.
Fingerspitzgefühl (12).
Trust was also built in shared values concerning the products' and industry's role
in society as a whole (institution-based trust). The contact person again:
Ideas and visions are important. Environmental matters for example. Not to use DEMO
dangerous for man and nature. Not to jeopardise people's health for profit. I have
experienced the same ideals in Explosive (12).
So we can see institution-based trust-building on different levels at the same
time. DEMO, in the work itself. Second, concerning ideas about co-operation.
Third, DEMO values and norms of this work in general. In sum, the DEMO
project work for Explosive functioned as an important means for building
person-based trust concerning performance in the work and enterprise-based
trust as a platform DEMO new agreements, which then could be used for new
contracting. Successful DEMO work then gave chances for more trust-building.
A virtuous circle appears.
146
7.2.3.5  Trust as Result of Interaction
Now after three years of active co-operation Explosive is trustworthy in the eyes
of the Gamma project, based both on pre-trust and trust-building. Gamma's
project leader:
You DEMO not get a better co-operation than this, because in the resulting DEMO we
contributed with one chemical compound each. This says something of how we worked.
If one party had disappeared the other could not have DEMO it. Both were necessary for
the result (12).
It seems DEMO that trustworthiness is at a maximum for any co-operation,
covering both person-based, enterprise-based and institution-based trust. In a
wider sense they have also reached views on shared responsibilities versus
external parties to the relation. They DEMO on joint effort to make the end-
product users assume responsibilities to more actively prevent accidents, for
example. When trust emerges during the process, it becomes natural to
cooperage even in matters outside the immediate relationship.
7.2.3.6  Implications for Mutual Trust
Actually, as may be noticed in DEMO quotations above, mutual trust pervades very
much of the process. Explosive DEMO immediately into a very demanding
agreement and would have hesitated about the scope of obligations accepted in a
near-start situation if Gamma's trustworthiness DEMO not high in their eyes. In the
joint co-operation Explosive disclosed competence that could have been misused
by Gamma if Gamma were not trusted DEMO them. It would have been difficult for
Explosive to impose legal sanctions if Gamma had broken the rules and spirit of
the agreement. Conversely, also Explosive could have misused its knowledge of
business secrets in Gamma. DEMO of them seriously contemplated such risks.
The action processes are very much based on mutual trust. According to
Gamma's project leader:
We DEMO confidence in each other and respect each other's work - that is what I have
experienced (12).
They acknowledge each other's competence. They also discuss openly
weaknesses in competence and ability and seek DEMO to complement
deficiencies, inside the relationship or using resources from outside. DEMO in
147
mutual trust can both parties acknowledge weaknesses to each other. Some
DEMO from Gamma to Explosive are given at short notice and in small portions.
Over time it seems that Gamma gives less and less guidelines DEMO restrictions to
their job orders. Explosive, on the other hand, accepts this, which for a
consultant could be a risky undertaking, if DEMO parties do not have confidence in
one another.
7.2.3.7  Summary of DEMO Action Process and Trust
Development
The action processes and trust development elaborated above concerning
Explosive and Gamma can be summarised as follows.
Pre-trust Action DEMO and trust
Contracting -----> Project work ---- -> Contracting ----->Project work-->
- use P-trust       - build P-trust       - use P-trust      - build P-trust
- build DEMO  - use/build E-trust - use E-trust   - use/build DEMO
- build I-trust
P-trust
Explications: see 7.2.1.7 above.
Trust as
result
DEMO
E-trust
I-trust
7. 2. 4  Plastics - Delta
7.2.4.1  Action Processes over Time
The father of the entrepreneur in Plastics bought raw material DEMO bulk from the
supplier Delta for his company since the end of the 1970's. The entrepreneur at
the start of Plastics contacted the DEMO salesman in Delta. The salesman and the
entrepreneur knew each other well. Plastics wanted to buy from Delta on normal
business payment terms, one month credit, since Plastics intended to use the
same terms towards its customers. Delta understood that a formal credit
investigation would not give very DEMO information about the recently started
Plastics. Therefore not only the sales department but also the finance department
became engaged in assessment of Plastics' trustworthiness as a debtor. They
visited Plastics for an investigation and discussion on DEMO spot: Plastics' sales
prospects and subsequent supply needs, how financial DEMO looked in
general etc. The discussion was very open-hearted. Delta's assessment covered
148
the trustworthiness in the following respects: 1) The entrepreneur's DEMO
as a producer and businessman (person-based trustworthiness), and 2) The new
venture's financial prospects, primarily for stable future payment for deliveries
(enterprise-based trustworthiness). Delta got a positive picture of the
entrepreneur from answers to posed questions. The salesman also to an extent
recognised business DEMO and morals from the entrepreneur's father (institution-
based trustworthiness). DEMO their general knowledge of the industry they also
judged the range of products and types of customers to be favourable for Plastics
for the DEMO They came to the conclusion that Plastics could be given normal
credit terms, i.e. no bank guarantee or other intermediate buffer was needed.
Order, delivery and payment has ensued in a normal way. But on two
occasions Plastics ran into payment problems. From the beginning there were
two DEMO in Plastics. One of them left the new venture after a short time,
withdrawing capital, which the remaining entrepreneur had to raise. This took
some time and strained the liquidity of Plastics. The entrepreneur called DEMO's
sales manager and informed him about the situation. He was given some days'
respite. The debt was paid. The sales manager considered DEMO entrepreneur's
action positive, since not all of their customers would DEMO taken pains to contact
and explain but would instead just have tried to let it pass. On a second occasion
Plastics ran into payment DEMO, mainly due to the fact that Plastics'
customers had run DEMO similar problems in their turn. There was a short but
marked recession in the Swedish economy at the time (1992). Again, the DEMO
preneur called Delta's sales manager, explained the situation, asked for a time
respite and offered interest on a rather high level, used in delay situations. The
manager accepted for two reasons: 1) he DEMO relied on the entrepreneur to do his
utmost to keep promises, DEMO 2) he knew the market where Plastics customers
were and he DEMO convinced that the market would expand despite the situation
for the moment. Payment was then fulfilled in accordance with the agreement.
7.2.4.2  Outcomes of Action Processes
For Delta, Plastics is a small customer, representing only DEMO few percent of its
total sales in Scandinavia. Financially, Plastics brings DEMO sales income which
is not very important for Delta. But in the specific niche: sales of raw material to
be used for blow moulding of high-quality containers, Plastics represents 20 %
of their market. And Delta considers it to be important to stay in that niche.
Therefore Plastics DEMO important strategically more than in sales volume and Delta
regards the business relation as valuable.
149
For Plastics, it is vital to have a stable supplier on a world supply market
that changes rather quickly due to forceful actors DEMO price fluctuations. Apart
from supply per se, price and market information DEMO personalised contacts for
agreement are vital for Plastics to maintain. Plastics also uses other suppliers, but
they work more locally, and can give DEMO business information back in
discussions.
7.2.4.3  Pre-trust
Pre-trust existed for the DEMO in the eyes of the former contact persons
between Delta and the company of the entrepreneurs' father. The entrepreneur
was known in person. They also assumed that he would act in the same way as
did DEMO father. Delta's sales manager:
We entered into this because we had the picture of the entrepreneur and his background,
his father DEMO our business with him. Undeniably, this has facilitated contacts between
Plastics DEMO Delta (15).
Pre-trust was person-based with some undertone of morals, institution-based
trustworthiness:
Researcher: What did you know about his ability as an entrepreneur?
Respondent: First of all we knew he had the experience from his father's business, who
was a skillful entrepreneur, DEMO started with his empty hands. The son was opposite,
academic background and comes in another way. Still, we had reason to think that he had
his father's way of running the business (15).
7.2.4.4  How Trust was used and built in Action Processes
The entrepreneur was successful in building trust in the first discussion.
According to Delta'DEMO sales manager:
The impression he made on me and my colleague was positive. He could speak for
himself in a way that impressed DEMO of plans he had for the future (15).
But pre-trust DEMO not sufficient to enter into ordinary credit terms with the new
venture. Trust had to be built. Now the entrepreneur's personal ability had DEMO be
displayed: Knowledge of product and market and how financial stability DEMO
be reached for the new venture. Both person-based and enterprise-based
trustworthiness had to be built. In following regular purchases person-based
trustworthiness and enterprise-based trustworthiness DEMO be used. Successful
150
continued supply and payment relations have ensued with contacts 3-4 times DEMO
month about price development, future deliveries, etc. Trust-building seems to
continue as this part of the interview with Delta's sales manager indicates:DEMO
Researcher: What is most important for the entrepreneur's and the DEMO venture's
trustworthiness?
Respondent: Our recurrent discussions about the market, his view of what is going to
happen, gives also a sort of picture of trustworthiness. We know most of what there is to
DEMO about price development. Positive to hear that he has a clear picture and keeps
himself informed. Raw material is an important part of the DEMO's price, which an
entrepreneur must realise, otherwise he may get into trouble (15).
The entrepreneur builds trust by displaying knowledge of important business
factors in the eyes of the other party. He also DEMO displays eagerness for more
information and shows the other party that the information is used for the
business. The entrepreneur could later on use DEMO in two trust-
demanding situations with disturbances. First, the problems were DEMO caused by
the entrepreneur or the new venture. Second, there were DEMO solutions at
hand, not detrimental for the supplier. Third, the entrepreneur displayed open-
ness and candidness. But the basis for the supplier's DEMO must be belief in the
entrepreneur's handling of earlier similar situations (building of person-based
trustworthiness) otherwise the supplier would have required supplementary
DEMO
7.2.4.5  Trust as Result of Interaction
Trust as result of interaction DEMO be exemplified by the last quotation of the
preceding section. The sales manager of Delta seems confident that Plastics will
also manage its business DEMO the future. He also recognises the entrepreneur's
competence:
When there are problems in the production, where raw material is or when the producer
is believed to be a cause for the trouble, then we often have to give help. But that has
never been necessary for DEMO, the entrepreneur's background in polyethylenes
accounts for more stable production (15).
Fewer problems to be feared in future interaction seems to DEMO positive for trust.
In all, Delta displays institution-based, person-based and enterprise-based
trustworthiness for the new venture at the end of the interaction.
7.2.4.6  Implications for Mutual Trust
151
The open discussions between the parties where they disclose market
information DEMO indicate that some mutual trust exists. Information exchange
seems to cover more than a minimum for this supplier - buyer relation. The
parties seem DEMO experience more gains than risks by openness.
There can also be discerned a slight unbalance in the situation. Delta seemingly
considers itself to have DEMO vital information than its counterpart, a possible
source for dominance. This DEMO be a way to bind the customer harder to its
supplier. On the other hand, Plastics has more sources of information, so the
DEMO need not become dominated by this contact.
152
7.2.4.7  Summary of the Action Process and Trust
Development
The action processes and trust development elaborated above concerning Plastics
and Delta can be DEMO as follows.
Pre-trust Action process and trust
Purchase --------->Credit   ----------> Regular   <------------> Disturbances
request          investigation   purchase
- use I-trust
- use P-trust - build P-trust   - use/build P-trust  - use/build P-trust
- build E-trust   - use/build E-trust   - use E-trust
I-trust
P-trust
Trust as
result
DEMO
P-trust
E-trust
Explications: see 7.2.1.7 above.
7. 2. 5  Plastics - Almi
7.2.5.1  Action Processes over Time
As a part of preparations before the start of Plastics the entrepreneur contacted
Almi in the county to DEMO them about his plans. His aim was general support and,
more specifically, financial support. No one at Almi had up to that point had any
contact with the entrepreneur (nor his father in his previous business). But they
knew who the entrepreneur was from indirect sources. DEMO the entrepreneur's
first presentation the consultants considered him to be a person with a very good
technical education, relevant industry experience, and DEMO person with no financial
problems (unpaid debts etc.) in his background. He presented his business ideas
in an interesting and accurate way.
In DEMO next step, after an agreement on support, Almi conducted a market
investigation. They noticed that this initiative could become one of few
polyethylene DEMO in Sweden to comply with new and more strict
norms concerning transport of hazardous products. They learnt from contacts
with industry experts that the DEMO would need specific qualities of raw
material and strictly monitored dispersion of raw material into the production
process. This required adequate competence. The market DEMO this kind of
153
products could be expected to grow. Their conclusion was: Had the
establishment been a new company of the kind that is already typical DEMO the
market - to compete on the same grounds as others - they would not have
supported the new venture. But this encompassed something DEMO: Products that
fitted into the new requirements, which had been manifested by certifications.
Financially, they knew that the entrepreneur was prepared to raise owner's
capital. Then he had a bank contact. Finally some capital DEMO the top was needed.
The bank declared itself prepared to provide capital if Almi did the same. Almi
for its part considered the business DEMO good enough according to the market
investigation (see above). The DEMO of borrowed capital could be held
comparatively low, partly because of DEMO's capital, partly because of the low
cost level (low rent for a factory in the countryside and second-hand machinery).
Location in DEMO area with unemployment qualified for state localisation loans on
favourable conditions, DEMO that local employment would be promoted. Almi
made a positive decision and so did the bank. Almi has later supported Plastics
with temporary loans DEMO a few occasions. Firstly, when the entrepreneur's partner
left and DEMO owner's capital had to be replaced and when Plastics widened its
product range by acquisition of another machine and another building. Secondly,
DEMO has also performed the role of a regular discussion partner in monthly
meetings with the entrepreneur concerning Plastics' business development.
7.2.5.2  Outcomes of DEMO Processes
For Plastics, co-operation with Almi has meant a necessary contribution DEMO
funding its business at the start and expansion. These loans have been more
important than the amounts themselves, since the bank has conditioned their
loans on the investigations and decisions of Almi. In this way Almi DEMO has
functioned as a financial gate-opener. Apart from financial matters, the
DEMO that Almi built up concerning Plastics' industry, together with Almi's
general business consulting experience, has provided Plastics with a discussion
partner for its other strategic business decisions. The interaction continues also
when no funding DEMO are impending.
Almi has a very specific role. It is as a semi-public organisation in matters
of start-up funding, and a more typically market oriented role in general business
consultancy. In the market for business consultancy DEMO needs customers that
show success in business and where this success at least to some extent can be
attributed to Almi's support. Plastics DEMO such an example.
7.2.5.3  Pre-trust
154
Plastics' entrepreneur had no pre-trust in the eyes of Almi's consultants, apart
from reputation, which was not in itself adequate for DEMO
7.2.5.4  How Trust was used and built in Action Processes
The DEMO's presentation of his business idea clearly built trust. Trust-
building was person-based trustworthiness.
Researcher: Which is most important, the person or the DEMO?
Respondent: The person, no doubt. In this case, he DEMO give a very good account of
how blow moulding should be performed. Then the person must have a view of potential
customers, market, DEMO But if someone shows up and can not give sharp answers
to our questions, that is a signal of warning. It all falls back on the person. In the
conversation we build a view of how DEMO person functions, if he or she is prepared to take
responsibility, how earlier situations have been managed - and that the person has DEMO
driving force to act (13).
Plastics' entrepreneur passed the scrutiny. The next step was to build enterprise-
based trustworthiness, which was done by the investigation of market and
product. Then came the financial discussions DEMO the funding decisions. Earlier
built person-based trustworthiness could be used, and DEMO the entrepreneur
showed commitments both by assuming own financial risk and pursuing a credit
proposal with the bank, i.e. he built person-based trustworthiness. The
enterprise-based trustworthiness from the investigation was used to make
trustworthy calculations for DEMO venture's operations based on accurate
knowledge of materials, production and DEMO organisation. After the start, Almi
follows how Plastics performs in its DEMO operations. Its good performance
builds trustworthiness, both in terms of person-based DEMO enterprise-based
trustworthiness:
Researcher: Plastics' trustworthiness in your eyes after the start period?
Respondent: Still very high. Can be measured in financial terms: Growth, turnover,
profitability, all is positive. Increased turnover by 1,5-3 million Sw. kronor each year,
takes market share, enters successively into profitable areas. New designs, new
containers, interesting for customers. DEMO we have an open communication between him
and us (13).
DEMO financial needs are often met with doubt or suspicion after fund-
raising in the start, i.e. whether the venture has a future or will become a "leaking
seave". Business plans and calculations need fundamental support of
trustworthiness. Plastics passed the test and got temporary credit when it DEMO
155
important to settle temporary problems or to take advantage of expansion
DEMO It could use its person-based and enterprise-based trustworthiness.
7.2.5.5  Trust as DEMO of Interaction
Trust as result of interaction for Plastics was described by the consultant in Almi
as many ways of doing things combined:
DEMO way of running the business. To be out visiting the customers and listen to their
needs and in that way see new possibilities. Looking DEMO new customers actively. To
renew production facilities before problems arise. Develop the work organisation and
give responsibility to the staff (13).
These things are visible for the consultants as a result of the interaction. They
DEMO person-based and enterprise-based trustworthiness.
7.2.5.6  Implications for Mutual Trust
Plastics' entrepreneur displays trustworthiness for Almi:
They have been very important for us DEMO have reached where we are now. [...] We have
also had them as a balancing part, when the bank was reluctant to give us extended credit
(4).
But Plastics' trust for Almi is wider DEMO merely as a financing part. That
is clear from their interaction in strategic development matters for Plastics. Since
Almi is no actor on the DEMO market as Plastics the company does not need to
feel any risk of business plans leaking to competitors. This can facilitate
confidence.
In terms DEMO a balanced or unbalanced situation of dominance and
submissiveness in the relationship Plastics has no doubt been dependent on
Almi's assessments, decisions and gate opening role versus the bank. But Plastics
may in the future DEMO rely on retained earnings for investment (cf. section
5.5.2), which DEMO automatically reduce risk of dominance. On the other hand,
for Almi, Plastics represents one role model for its activities: Almi recommends
others DEMO contact Plastics for study visits, newspaper articles etc., which is good
marketing not only for Plastics but for Almi as well. Almi needs DEMO kind of role
model to show how it co-operates with its customers. A high degree of mutual
trust seems to have developed between the DEMO due to openness in their
discussions and reciprocal benefits from interaction.
156
7.2.5.7  Summary of the Action Process and Trust
Development
The action processes and trust development elaborated above concerning Plastics
and Almi can be DEMO as follows.
Pre-trust Action process and trust
Presen-  -------->Investiga-  ------->Funding--------->Perfomance <-------
>Tempo-
None  tation              tion               decision                               rary
credit
-build P-trust                         -use/build P-trust  -build P-trust  -use P-
DEMO
- build E-trust     -use E-trust            -build E-trust       -use E-trust
Explications: see 7.2.1.7 above.
DEMO as
result
P-trust
E-trust
7. 2. 6  Explosive - Almi
7.2.6.1  Action Processes over Time
Explosive's financial strategy is to develop and DEMO mainly by retained earnings
and not to be dependent on external financers (see also section 5.5.2). So
Explosive had no reason to look for partners bringing capital to its business,
although specific projects have DEMO temporarily funded by external capital. But
from the very start and onwards Explosive has been looking for business advice
and organisations for joint development DEMO its business, i.e. organisations which
can complement its own competence and DEMO
Through a business development project conducted by the municipality,
Explosive made contact with Almi. The entrepreneurs were at this point of time
not DEMO by the Almi consultants. They paid a visit to the venture in 1992.
Explosive presented its business ideas and activities so far. Both Explosive DEMO
Almi found it interesting to keep in touch for the future. In this case no funding
for investment was needed, so the main purpose for continued contacts was
exchange of thoughts and ideas. Almi considered the DEMO and product ideas
in Explosive to have a high technical level and at the same time good market
157
prospects. Some short information activities followed during the following
months.
One DEMO Almi's business support activities is to select interesting products
and companies for prize nominations in product contests and similar reward
activities. So, based on suggestions from local business, Explosive was
nominated to "Alfred Nobel'DEMO Skapa-stipendium", a nation-wide product contest.
Almi's assessment was in accordance with regulations for this prize: technical
level, novelty and market prospects. DEMO was nominated as number one in
the county and ended up with an honorary diploma in the nation-wide contest.
Explosive has since then been DEMO for two more products, ended up as
number one in the DEMO and participated in the national contest. These three
contests with regional awards each time have been followed by a number of
articles and interviews DEMO local newspapers as well as in industry journals.
Explosive has taken the initiative to develop recycling processes and start
recycling some of its earlier DEMO products. It is a large project which must
encompass large manufacturing companies in the industry, regulating and
licensing agencies, and risk capital financers. DEMO project organisation is open
and characterised by a lot of meetings. Being and feeling small in this group of
large and powerful actors Explosive DEMO support for its ideas and solutions.
Almi is one of its supporting bodies.
158
7.2.6.2  Outcomes of Action Processes
For Explosive the contacts with Almi have meant assessment from outside by
experienced consultants, whether its business ideas will bring commercializable
products and whether they are novel. Also it has DEMO feed-back that the
enterprise is well-run. For Explosive, Almi is also DEMO partner which through its
network can enhance good-will to Explosive and its competence for product
development. This good-will is particularly high-lighted by the nominations DEMO
product contests.
Explosive is not one of Almi's most intimate customers, but Almi also has
the role of promoting business in its region. To forward Explosive is for Almi a
good example of how regional DEMO activities can be run.
7.2.6.3  Pre-trust
Explosive and its three entrepreneurs DEMO not known by Almi's consultant so no
pre-trust existed before interaction started.
7.2.6.4  How Trust was used and built in Action Processes
The consultants in Almi immediately got interested at the first meeting:
Their DEMO was on such a level that we immediately got interested. The high
technical level of it makes it interesting. Also the persons, the background, the way of
presenting it all (13).
The consultants themselves DEMO a technical background, so they could estimate
the competence along with DEMO presentation of the extrapreneur-story behind
Explosive. Person-based and enterprise-based trustworthiness was built
immediately. Trust was then the platform for further, but not very intensive,
contacts. There was no agreement that Almi should take part in DEMO research,
finance investigation or other business matters. But Almi had insight into the
product development and assessed products. In the words of Almi'DEMO consultant:
They had very good competence within their narrow market niche. Another solution than
electronics to compete with. Electronics is more vulnerable than DEMO And their
products are always close to commercialisation. No point in developing products nobody
wants to buy (13).
159
So further person-based and enterprise-based trustworthiness was built for
Explosive, which was used in the nominations to the product awards. (However,
it should be pointed out that these were not based only on assessment DEMO
Almi.)
7.2.6.5  Trust as Result of Interaction
Trust for Explosive DEMO three years is in a way summarised by one of the
consultants:
Explosive's entrepreneurs are active 'doers' - all the time DEMO actors around
themselves. And somehow they make things and people move in the direction Explosive
wants them to. It is a combination of will-power, open communication and to think one
step ahead of others (13).
The last two quotations clearly indicate person-based and enterprise-based
trustworthiness of Almi DEMO Explosive as a result of the interaction. Almi's
support to Explosive's product development contacts and the award nominations
are further indications. Concerning DEMO awards, does trust built in action process
make trust even more DEMO to build further in later stages of an action process?
Does one success make next success more easy to accomplish? That is to ask:
Does trust built by the first award make the next DEMO easier to get? Is trust-
building like a snowball that automatically DEMO in size once it has started
rolling? What is the implication DEMO built trust and reputation? Has trust from
earlier awards made it DEMO to win two more contests in sequence or is it
possible to disregard the past in a moment of assessment? Questions are more
easily posed than answers given. However, chapter 8 will discuss a phenomenon
which in this study is called "trust spill-over", meaning situations where trust
connected to one person or situation automatically will become connected with
other DEMO or situations. It will particularly treat implications of i.a. these
awards for reputation and trust outside interaction between the two parties.
7.2.6.6  Implications for Mutual Trust
The relationship does not contain decisive commitments from any of DEMO parties.
No one would lose anything by breaking the contact. There is no dependence.
But both gain from the interaction. Even experienced consultants in DEMO seem
to learn things from Explosive's actions. This attitude, and DEMO resulting events
such as the nominations, is closely connected to trust. DEMO has expressed
trust for Almi by disclosing secrets in the products before they got protected by
160
patents. Explosive has on a number of occasions sought trust with "objective"
partners such as Almi before difficult negotiations with demanding and DEMO
customers. Trust is here a way of compensating for lack of resources or power.
7.2.6.7  Summary of the Action Process and Trust
Development
The action processes and trust development elaborated above concerning
Explosive and Almi can DEMO summarised as follows.
Pre-trust Action process and trust
Presentation ---- -> DEMO <--- --> Product prize ---- -> Business
nomination         development
- build P-trust       - build P-trust   - use P-trust         - use P-trust
- build DEMO       - build E-trust    - use E-trust        - use E-trust
None
Explications: see 7.2.1.7 above.
Trust as
result
P-trust
E-trust
7. 3  Conclusions Concerning Trust Development in
the Action Processes
Some conclusions concerning trust development in referred action processes
above can DEMO made:
1) Trust can be built even if there is DEMO pre-trust at the start, as was indicated in
Plastics' relations to Alpha and Almi as well as the relations between Explosive
and Almi.
DEMO) Institution-based trustworthiness was important either as pre-trust, i.e. the
background of Plastics, or as norms and values developed during the action
process (DEMO - Gamma).
3) At the start person-based trustworthiness developed early DEMO personal
presentations in marketing etc. Plastics' relations to Alpha and Almi DEMO well as
the relations between Explosive and Almi had these characteristics. In the three
other relations person-based pre-trust for the new venture existed.
161
4) Enterprise-based trustworthiness was developed after person-based (and
possibly institution-based) trustworthiness. This occurred in all relations except
Explosive - Almi.
These conclusions DEMO be depicted as trust development patterns:37
Person-based trust -------> Enterprise-based DEMO
Person-based trust concerning personal qualities and competence can be the
sensemaking basis on which enterprise-based trust may develop.
Institution-based trust and Person-based trust ---> Enterprise- based trust.
Trust based on norms, morals or tradition together with person-based trust can be
the basis for development of trust concerning product DEMO, delivery timing or
correct payment etc.
Person-based trust and Enterprise-based trust DEMO> Institution- based trust
Person-based trust and enterprise-based may be the trust DEMO for rewarding
interaction between the parties. Together the parties may develop values and
norms concerning products, the industry, business in general or society. DEMO
common values and norms will become an additional basis for trust, DEMO
based trust.
Furthermore, some conclusions can be induced from the data DEMO
how trustworthiness is used and built. In the processes there is often an
alternation between use trustworthiness and build trustworthiness from one
action/event DEMO the next in sequence. Either that concerns the same trust base, DEMO
example build person-based trustworthiness to use it in next action, or DEMO shift:
use person-based trustworthiness to build enterprise-based trustworthiness. And
as we contended in section 7.1.2, meaning and action processes may vary as to
what extent they are predominately business or relationship oriented. In business
oriented DEMO the actor uses trustworthiness to promote outcome; if a
relationship needs DEMO be strengthened there is an element of building
37 Induced patterns composed of chronological events in sequences can pose a challenge to the
researcher DEMO relationship between the events. Yin (1989, p. 119) identifies four
DEMO relationships: 1) some events must occur before other events; reverse DEMO being
impossible 2) one event must be followed by other events; a contingency basis 3) some events
can only follow other events after a prespecified passage of time, or 4) certain time periods in DEMO
case study may be marked by classes of events that differ substantially from those of other time
periods. At present it is not possible DEMO state relationship in these patterns due to the small
amount of data for induction. The patterns should be regarded as propositional - a challenge DEMO
increased knowledge to be gained by more similar studies.
162
trustworthiness. There are in the studied action processes some situations
characterised DEMO the actor using trustworthiness for a business outcome and at
the same time aspiring to further build trustworthiness. It would be interesting to
discern DEMO the blend of meaning regarding use and build trustworthiness
varied in different situations, particularly if there as any pattern of blend during
the process. Such a study would, however, require a longer study period and
DEMO data than provided in this study.
7. 4  Social Construction of DEMO
In our presentation and discussion of trust as sensemaking we have so far
focused one actor's sensemaking of trust concerning another (cf. chapter 4). In
the discussed examples above we have met situations where DEMO actors'
sensemaking has an impact on the unfolding of action processes. Reciprocality is
a matter in which sensemaking trust also implies that meaning DEMO action of the
actors influence one another. To discuss our findings in general terms we now
make the following assumptions:
- an action DEMO involves two actors, one truster and one trustee,  but no DEMO
- the trustee is an entrepreneur in a business start-up and the truster  is an external
actor. No action between the parties has been  performed earlier
- the trustee takes the initiative to reach a desired outcome on which  truster
has an impact.
The action process will unfold in a sequence of six steps described below.
Further similar sequences may DEMO
1. Trustee's construction of trust
The trustee constructs meaning which would include action with the external
actor, enactment. Meaning is some business outcome. Part of meaning is also
pre-trust: The trustee's trustworthiness in the eyes of the truster will make sense
in the trustee's action. DEMO trustee's meaning is influenced by basic values and
beliefs and stored interpretive schemes. (cf. section 4.3). By interpretive
schemes, the trustee DEMO assess trustworthiness in the eyes of the truster to be
adequate for the trustee's desired outcome. To use trustworthiness in accordance
with the DEMO will then be part of constructed meaning. But the trustee may
instead assess trustworthiness in the eyes of truster not to be adequate for DEMO
outcome, a need to build trustworthiness will enter into the construction DEMO
meaning, and schemes to that end may enter into the meaning DEMO of the
situation.
163
2. Trustee enacts truster.
Based on trustee's sensemaking the trustee DEMO involving the truster. In the
action there is an element of using or building trust.
3. Truster interprets action and constructs meaning.
The truster DEMO attention to the trustee's action and interprets meaning, whether
trustee'DEMO action makes sense for the truster. Truster's basic values and beliefs and
stored interpretive schemes guide meaning ascription. Both truster's own
outcomes DEMO trustworthiness concerning the trustee make sense.
164
4. Truster enacts trustee
Based on sensemaking the truster acts involving DEMO trustee. In the action there is
an element of displaying trustworthiness as non-existent, using it or building it.
5. Trustee interprets truster's action.
The trustee pays attention to the truster's action and interprets meaning, whether
truster's action makes sense for the trustee. The trustee's DEMO values and beliefs
and stored interpretive schemes guide meaning ascription. Both the trustee's own
outcomes and the trustee's trustworthiness in the eyes DEMO the truster make sense.
6. Reciprocal reflection, i.e. trust reconstruction.
Now, at this stage, one sensemaking signal has been given and one received by
each party. This will become the basis for individual or joint DEMO on the
process so far. Each party's reflection concerns outcome as well as consequences
for trust, i.e. trust as result of interaction. Reflection may be assimilated into
interpretive schemes  or be affected by accommodation. Beliefs may also
change. Reflections may therefore give new insights for each party'DEMO
sensemaking henceforward. The action process may continue between the parties
in a new sequence, i.e. as 1 - 6 above again.
Two more elements have been introduced compared to our earlier
analysis. One element is that DEMO by one leads to attention and
sensemaking by the other (steps DEMO and 5). Plastics sends quarterly financial
reports normally intended for internal control to the bank even though this is not
mandatory. This is DEMO done without connection to demand for new credit.
The entrepreneur does so with the future in mind, if a situation with need for
extra support from the bank should occur. In such a contingency it should DEMO
sense for the bank to support Plastics based on Plastics' action. DEMO as the
entrepreneur in Explosive expressed it concerning another situation:
We always try to play with open cards towards our customers, so during the product
development with Electro we accounted for all costs. They could DEMO see that we did
not try to exploit or manipulate them. We thought that they would not need to ask so
much later on (9).
When Alpha's managing director was presented with Plastics' solution to
one of Alpha's product development needs, he realised that the ideas were right
but he needed time to think and then work DEMO some attitudes among the
company's distributors. The new solution brought to attention changed ideas
about the product (i.e. accommodation into interpretive schemes). The last
165
example also encompassed the second element: reflections on action (step DEMO).
Another obvious example concerning reflection is the three years' time DEMO of
project work between Explosive and Gamma. During the action process the
parties entered upon a joint development of ideas concerning products and the
DEMO as a whole. This is based on a co-operation with ample opportunities for
reflections on action, for example during the yearly evaluation leading to the
next agreement. Reflection concerning trust is the same as construction or
DEMO of trust as meaning.
We can now pin-point important elements in two actors' sensemaking
trust regarding each other in a model depicting how the individual sensemaking
of each of two actors may affect each other.
Through DEMO and attention the one's individual construction of trust will affect
the other's individual construction of trust. Trust may - to some extent DEMO least -
be given changed meaning due to clues emanating from another person's trust
(reconstruction). More specifically what are those clues? DEMO we can see from the
above described six-step sequence and depicted in the model in Figure 3,
attention to the other's action DEMO a base for reconstruction of trust, apart from
experience of own DEMO We can also conclude that interpretive schemes by
accommodation and in the long run also beliefs may be changed. Figure 3 using
the six DEMO above gives a view of how individual construction of trust becomes
reciprocal construction of trust between two parties.
The next question is whether social DEMO of trust also means
development towards mutual trust. Our study with its empirical data is not
primarily aimed at the study of mutual trust, but some findings may give us a
clue. The co-operation between Explosive DEMO Gamma had distinct and regular
opportunities for reflection, i.e. trust construction DEMO reconstruction, in
performance evaluation connected to annual renewal of contracts. Reflections
DEMO action performed and possible action for the next period was to a large
extent done jointly. Quite naturally, this gave social construction of trust ample
opportunities to develop. As we have seen above the
166
1. Construction of trust
(Actor A)
6. Attention
(Actor DEMO)
Basic values
and beliefs
Interpretive
schemes
5. Action
(Actor A)DEMO
2.  Action
(Actor A)
3.  Attention
(Actor B)
44. Construction of trust
(Actor B)
Figure 3.  Interplay Between DEMO Actors' Construction of Trust
relationship was to a large extent by DEMO parties given expressions of mutual trust
with converging views on a large number of common issues. It could from this at
least be proposed DEMO mutual trust can develop by joint attention, action and
meaning construction, by assimilation and accommodation leading to similarities
in interpretive schemes and common DEMO Joint sensemaking and reciprocal
enactment would promote mutual trust.
Converging meanings can as we saw in the relation between Explosive
and Gamma develop in DEMO virtuous circle: Truster displays trustworthiness for the
trustee, which makes the trustee's trustworthiness for the truster meaningful, the
truster responds with more trustworthiness in the trustee, etc. Converging to
mutual trust implies changes in the parties' original meanings, but not necessarily
symmetrically, one may change meanings more than the other. For example,
Plastics developed different meanings DEMO trust with its customers Alpha and Beta,
respectively, and efforts DEMO development differed. Self-fulfilling prophecies
contain mechanisms of a similar kind: If DEMO trustee's belief in self as trustworthy
167
brings a truster's attention to clues making the trustee's DEMO
meaningful for this truster, trustworthiness may be imposed upon the trustee,DEMO
which will encourage the trustee to live up to these requirements. The important
thing is that the trustee manages the start of the sequence DEMO presents
him/herself in such a way that the truster in his/her attention brings forward
"right" clues for the trustee's trust-building DEMO It seemed in the interview
with the experienced external actors that they made sense of the entrepreneur's
self, that is the entrepreneur's presenting himself in a genuine way, being honest
etc. Both entrepreneurs on occasions managed very quickly to build person-
based trustworthiness, which they then did their utmost to correspond to.
But in the sequence, expectations about trustworthiness may not be
experienced, which will affect meanings and enactment in other ways than if
expectations were fulfilled. The action process with an DEMO in mind may be
broken or geared over to another actor. The opposite of converging meaning:
Diverging meaning may create a vicious circle DEMO reciprocal reduction of
trustworthiness in an action process. Since the vicious circle has a starting point
of trust in action, it is more expected to be found between established actors in a
context, not business start-ups. The example described above when Plastics
entered into expanding business with Alpha, displays some elements of a vicious
circle concerning Alpha's former supplier: The more times Alpha experienced
unfulfilled expectation due to deficiencies in delivered DEMO, the more
trustworthiness was reduced. The supplier could have tried to DEMO by
improvements to maintain trustworthiness, but did not do so. Trust DEMO the
parties diminished successively, until joint action process ceased.
168
7. 5  Conclusion
This chapter has been devoted to findings in the study concerning how
entrepreneurs and other actors use and build trust DEMO action processes. We have
shown that trust is one meaning the actors give to their action, which affects
enactment and how action processes evolve. In the evolvement of action
processes we have empirical indications that trustworthiness DEMO in the
actors' interaction and ultimately may become mutual trust. There DEMO to be
certain ways and patterns of trust development in the action processes.
Furthermore, in attention and action involving two actors, each actor'DEMO individual
construction of trust seems to affect the other's individual construction of trust,
which leads to trust being reciprocally constructed between the DEMO parties.
There are also some empirical indications that social construction of trust may
promote the development of mutual trust.
But action processes and trust DEMO also involve more than two actors and
consequently more meanings in the interaction. The next chapter will go into
sensemaking when intermediaries (third parties) come into the play and how the
entrepreneurs by trust strategies involving intermediaries try to cope with more
complicated trust issues in action processes.
169
Chapter 8
Intermediaries for Trust in Action
Processes
The construction of DEMO is the actor's way of coping with and trying to reduce
equivocality. We have so far seen ways and patterns of how trust DEMO
mainly in two-actor relations. In this chapter we will go further to action
processes involving an intermediary: a person, group or organisation or DEMO object
symbolising trust. The first step is to see how intermediaries can be enacted by
entrepreneurs in sensemaking of trust in action processes. With DEMO analysis in
mind we will proceed in a second step to the third issue in the purpose of the
study, namely: Do entrepreneurs DEMO external actors in action processes
repeatedly use intermediaries for trust-building and assessment of trust?
8. 1  Intermediaries
In the study it has been possible to identify two patterns of how the entrepreneur
enacted external actors DEMO action processes. One pattern was characterised by
enactment of the external actor that the entrepreneur really considered to be
central for an outcome. This DEMO what would normally be expected, i.e. to build
trustworthiness where it DEMO believed to be needed. The preceding chapter
presented and discussed those patterns. Another pattern concerns enactment of
another external actor than the external actor DEMO to be central for an
outcome. Trust with one external actor (DEMO) could be built by building trust with
for example another external DEMO (B) if the entrepreneur considers B's
assessment to be important for A's assessment.
Explosive early made contacts with the National Swedish DEMO for
Technical Development (NUTEK), which can give financial aid and DEMO kinds
of support to development and commercialisation of innovations in companies.
Later Explosive came up with an innovation, got temporary financial support
from NUTEK and patent rights after further development. For
commercialisation, Explosive needed co-operation with at least one large
Swedish industrial group in manufacturing and some of DEMO sub-contractors. As a
170
developer and not manufacturer, Explosive wanted to sell the patent rights
against contracts for further development to such a group. But Explosive found
DEMO at odds in negotiation being unknown and acting with the advanced legal
expertise in those resourceful companies. So Explosive asked NUTEK for
negotiating support. DEMO accepted and after negotiation a contract was
signed between Explosive and the industrial group. NUTEK knew the products
as well as the capability of DEMO NUTEK also knew what the industrial
groups wanted and how they performed this kind of negotiations. The industrial
groups considered NUTEK to be reliable DEMO assessment of the new and unknown
venture. NUTEK could act a balancing part due to its trust with both parties. The
entrepreneur built trust DEMO an intermediary to use it for building trust with
others connected to the business outcome.
8. 1. 1  Trust Carriers
In the cases have been observed that different kinds of intermediaries
symbolising trust make sense for DEMO Examples:
- Plastics chose a business form that makes it easier to check the     new
venture's financial position
- both DEMO and Explosive used product certificates,
production and handling safety certificates to secure a market
niche,
i.e. to become the natural supplier in DEMO eyes of certain  customers (These
examples were referred to in chapter 7).
The entrepreneurs consider that these intermediaries make sense to build
DEMO in the eyes of external actors. A typical intermediary for
institution-based trust is the quality concept of ISO 9000. Explosive's
entrepreneur commented in DEMO way:
This customer performed a quality review in our company. They came to the conclusion
that we on the whole work according to DEMO 9000, even though we are not certified. If
you document, you have to do it properly. Then you follow the law. As Juran DEMO: ISO
9000 is good - if it does not interfere with DEMO (1).
38 The notion of intermediary or intermediating actor denotes DEMO third party bridging a gap
between two parties due to distance, DEMO it geographical and/or cultural, psychical, or
technological (Havila, 1996, p. 5). Trust in our framework functions as one way to bridge a
psychical gap.
171
This example shows that the focal actor may enact the intermediary DEMO bring trust
in the eyes of other actors even if the focal actor him/herself considers that the
intermediary may in itself be less DEMO for trust.
To conclude from these examples: Some person or object DEMO sense to the
new venture to carry trust, useful for the DEMO venture's purposes. A trust carrier
is a mental representation for the entrepreneur believed by him/her to mean trust
for the new venture DEMO trust raters' eyes. A trust carrier can be
- human, a person, a group of persons or an organisation
- object, tangible DEMO intangible
Below this classification will be called: Type of trust carrier. DEMO
A trust carrier can also be seen as active or passive (DEMO of trust carrier).
A trust carrier can be seen to actively promote the new venture by own activity
towards trust raters as did DEMO in one example above. In the other examples
no such activity from the trust carrier was seen. Its role was passive in the
entrepreneur'DEMO sensemaking. It takes a human to be active in this sense, DEMO we get
the following possible combinations of type and role:
Type of carrier Human Human Object
Role of carrier Passive Active Passive
These DEMO combinations of type and role: Human + passive, human +
active and object + passive make a starting point for a deeper analysis DEMO
discussion of trust patterns discerned in the cases. This will be the aim of the
next section.
8. 1. 2  Trust "Spill-over" Patterns
When studying the action processes and trust in cases to understand how DEMO is
used and built it was possible to discern three recurrent patterns for the
entrepreneur to build trust for the new venture in the DEMO of external actors (trust
39 The notion of intermediary seems in DEMO literature generally to denote a person, group of
persons or organization. DEMO the meaning of trust can be carried also by objects, we DEMO the
notion of carrier. It should be remembered that carrier is a product of sensemaking.
172
raters) with a trust carrier in mind. From the discourse with the entrepreneurs and
the external actors, (trust raters), external actors DEMO seemed to base actions
concerning the new venture on other companies, DEMO, or objects with high
trust in their eyes. These companies, persons or objects also seemed to have
some kind of connection with the DEMO venture. This trust for a third party was
somehow transferred to the new venture - it seemed to "spill over". The new
venture had actually in its own eyes lower trust than the trust carrier, still it got
what it wanted through this other carrier's trust. DEMO entrepreneur (as trustee in
spe) makes sense of the external actor (trust rater) making sense of the trust
carrier. For a "spill-over-effect" to work two double sensemaking processes must
come into the play. The entrepreneur must ascribe trust in the intermediary to
make sense for the DEMO actor (trust rater). The external actor (trust rater)
must make sense of the intermediary's (trust carrier's) making sense DEMO the
entrepreneur (trustee). In short, "spill-over" effect can be defined as: Trust for a
person, organisation or object is by DEMO trust rater by sensemaking automatically/
spontaneously connected/ transferred to the DEMO venture or entrepreneur of
which the rater needs to make sense in terms of trust.
On one hand, trust spill-over can be a decision rationale for the trust rater.
Instead of making own efforts for investigation, the trust rater takes advantage of
some earlier acquired experience about a DEMO from a trust carrier, thereby
reducing her/his need for own DEMO to investigate the trustee, i.e. the new
venture. Trust spill-over can DEMO be seen as risk-reducing behaviour. The trust
rater relies on a trust carrier in order to reduce risks with unwarranted trust. On
the other DEMO, an interesting question to be commented on later in this chapter DEMO
whether the entrepreneur and the trust rater deliberately or more automatically
made use of spill-over effects. The notion of "spill-over" is used to DEMO both
possibilities, not to convey a view of deliberation as the DEMO one.
Let us now by examples investigate the identified three "spill-over"DEMO
patterns. The "spill-over" patterns should not be considered as a classification
system, though.40 As we will see there is a considerable overlap and other
patterns can possibly also be discerned.
8.1.2.1  Trust Carrier that is Passive and Human: Trust
Reference
40 "Classification systems categorize phenomena into DEMO exclusive and exhaustive sets"
(McKelvey, 1982).
173
Plastics expanded its business by first selling to one customer to DEMO a number on
the customer's regular supplier list. Plastics deliberately sought these relations
with well-known industrial companies nation-wide and as exporters. Plastics
used DEMO in its marketing to others. It told customers in spe that it is a supplier to
this and that company (with a good reputation) and gave references. The
entrepreneur:
Lambda came with a product inquiry to us. They asked who else buys from you? I could
mention Kappa. Well, if they buy from you, there cannot be any DEMO And so we got
that order. In this way new sales relations have started a number of times (4).
Plastics used its first customers as references to start selling to new ones. The
entrepreneur commented:DEMO
To show others that we deliver to a well-known company creates trust and is a basis for
others to start trusting us (4).
These customers based further action involving Plastics on this information.
Either knowledge DEMO its supplier situation was sufficient to start doing
business with Plastics, DEMO the information about well-known customers was
important to elicit a small order on a trial basis. Another example is the
following: Plastics got very much help at the start from local craftsmen and
business people because DEMO knew members of his family, who had been well-
known industrialists DEMO the area. A third example: At the start of Explosive its
DEMO were very often identified as former employees in their incubating
company, DEMO facilitated marketing competence and product ideas.
In these examples the new venture made use of a trust carrier outside of
the new venture itself: Trust "spilled over". The companies, the entrepreneur's
family and DEMO in the examples did not do anything in particular in the
action process to promote the new venture's interest, i.e. they were passive
human trust carriers in the terminology above. But they had high trust DEMO the eyes
of trust raters, who then acted as if they DEMO the new venture. The passive
human trust carrier simply was there but was not actively involved in
transferring trust. The trust carrier made sense DEMO a reference for the
entrepreneur. A reference person is supposed to give statements about another
person's character, abilities etc.41 The value of a reference is based on the
reference's trust in the eyes of DEMO person seeking the information, often even
41 Note that the word DEMO denotes either the (potential) information given or the
(potential) informer. The notion of trust reference for human passive trust carrier denotes the
(potential) informer in this study.
174
without contact between the information seeker and reference. The thing the DEMO
raters and the trust carrier had in common was a connection with the new
venture, which the raters knew. The necessary double sensemaking for trust
"spill-over" to occur, included the entrepreneur making sense of trust carriers and
trust raters also making sense of the trust carriers. Part DEMO both sensemaking
processes concerned the trust carrier's connection with the trustee. A passive
human trust carrier must in the eyes of the trust DEMO have 1) high own trust, and
2) a connection with DEMO new venture.
In the analysis of interview data and documents of the two cases it was
found that in these situations the entrepreneur made DEMO of a desired outcome
and at least one rater. For a rater one or more trust reference can make sense in
the eyes of DEMO entrepreneur. The following outcomes, raters and agents were
found:
Outcome: Start of the new venture, Financial improvement, Market position,
New DEMO, Purchase, Sales.
Trust raters: Authority, Bank, Co-operating company, Customer, Supplier.
Trust reference: Accountant, Authority, Business Consultant, Customer, Family,DEMO
Former employer, Prize committee, Product, Supplier, Technical consultant.
Example of how a situation could be composed: For the outcome
Development of a new patented product (PD) a customer (C1), the bank for
capital (B), a co-operating producer for components (P) etc. could be made
sense. For any trust rater one or more trust reference/DEMO could be made sense in
the entrepreneur's eyes. For the customer (C1) this could be another well-known
customer (C2) of the DEMO venture with similar needs, a sister company that is a
supplier DEMO the new venture (S) etc. Graphically illustrated:
175
Outcome
PD
Raters
Trust
reference
C1
C2
S
B
P
For DEMO possible outcome there are a number of possible trust raters and
a number of possible trust references. This pattern can be generalised: For
Outcome (O1...n) Raters (R1...n) make sense and could be conceived References
(Ref1...n).
8.1.2.2  Trust Carrier that is Active and Human: Trust DEMO
The situations in the last section contained human trust carriers that were
passive. This section will highlight situations with trust carriers that explicitly act
DEMO promote the new venture to trust raters. Both Explosive and Plastics got new
customers by existing customers telling potential customers about the companies
and DEMO The old customers' activity gave them new ones. As expressed in
DEMO with Explosive:
Respondent: The customers we work with have been DEMO useful, because of their
contacts. Since our customers know us very DEMO they can say who we are and what we
do.
Researcher: DEMO you got any orders in this way?
Respondent: Yes, we have (1).
When Plastics needed additional funding from the bank, DEMO entrepreneur asked
Almi for assistance in the negotiation. Almi actively supported Plastics with
arguments to the bank. Plastics' entrepreneur:
We had Almi with us as a balancing part. Had they not been our co-partner I DEMO the
bank would have killed us (4).
176
A human trust carrier outside the new venture acted to promote DEMO new
venture in a situation, i.e. active role of human trust DEMO, a trust agent. An
agent can be defined as a person DEMO acts for another. In this context a person or
an organisation acts for the new venture by using its own trust. A trust agent
DEMO from a trust reference by being active in promoting the new venture. An
agent defines him-/herself. Other trust carriers are defined by the DEMO An agent
is normally in close interaction with the new venture, DEMO reference could be more
distant from the new venture. A trust agent (active human trust carrier) must in
the eyes of the trust DEMO 1) have a good knowledge about the new venture, 2)
have high own trust, and 3) give information about the new DEMO normally
implying trust.
The new ventures and the trust agents in the cases normally had close
contact with each other. Sometimes this could mean DEMO the new venture
consciously selects a trust agent, which Explosive did DEMO several occasions.
However, there was not necessarily any specific activity by DEMO new venture to
do that. The agent that takes on this role had often a business interest or a
mission (e.g. Almi), which is promoted by acting as an agent. The agent is not
necessarily DEMO but acts from self-interest. The situations are characterised
by the work of three processes of sensemaking. In addition to the two concerning
the entrepreneur DEMO trust rater discussed above, the active role of the trust agent
DEMO her/his making sense of trust in the entrepreneur. If trust concerning the
entrepreneur were not meaningful for a potential trust agent, s/he would not act.
Trust agent situations can - and in one of DEMO cases actually did - represent a very
efficient means for the new venture. Explosive managed to expand its trust by
supplementary efforts from outside DEMO The agent works from a higher
level of trust and the entrepreneur uses the agents' resources to compensate the
new venture's own scarcity. In the analysis of interview data and documents of
the two cases DEMO found the entrepreneurs made sense of the following outcomes,
raters and agents:
Outcome: External Funding, Product development, Product prize, Purchase,DEMO
Sales, Start of the new venture.
Raters: Bank, Customer, Supplier.
Agents: Authority, Customer, Business consultant, Technical consultant.
Example: For the outcome of raising external funds in a financially
critical situation (F) DEMO entrepreneur made sense of the following raters: The
177
bank for providing capital (B), Suppliers for extending credits (DEMO) and the
customer (C) for assurance of payment. For every DEMO rater one or more agents
could in his eyes be possible. For the bank as trust rater Almi, regional
development authorities, and a DEMO consultant could be agents. Graphically
illustrated:
Outcome
Raters
Agents
F
B
Almi
Authority
Consultant
S
C
For every possible outcome there is a DEMO of possible raters and a
number of possible agents. This pattern can be generalised: For Outcome
(O1...n) Raters (R1...n) make sense and could be conceived Agents (A1...n).
8.1.2.3  Trust Carrier that is DEMO and an Object: Trust
Sign
A trust sign displays to trust DEMO positive facts about the new venture and its
products with the effect of promoting trust. In this sense trust signs are of course
often DEMO in industrial marketing in general. Here the discussion is restricted to
trust signs used to enhance the trust of the new venture in the DEMO of trust raters,
i.e. were given symbolic representation involving trust. Plastics often gives
potential customers samples as a reference on its products. The DEMO are to be
seen as a sign of functionality, quality, design etc. performed by the
manufacturer. Often samples are not exactly the product DEMO potential customer is
looking for, still it is a sign of DEMO the producer can accomplish, meant to
convey enterprise-based trustworthiness. Certificates are DEMO of competence
and/or quality. Product certification is important for Plastics, DEMO to customers'
needs for acid or heat resistant material:
We look forward to certification of our new series of components. That will DEMO new
business opportunities in the chemical-technical industry. We will make better use of our
production capacity, larger business volume, increased turn-over. I have DEMO from the
purchasing manager in Omikron that if these components are certified according to their
178
wishes, he will place orders here in the range of half a million kronor on a yearly basis
(8).
Hanging on the conference room wall at Explosive, clearly visible to
visitors, is put DEMO invitation they received to the final award meeting for the
Swedish Nobel Skapa innovation contest (cf. also section 7.2.6). The innovation
contest concerns a prize, which the winner gets at a ceremony in connection with
the yearly Technical Fair in Stockholm. Several organisations stand behind it.
Explosive DEMO to the final and when interviewed there, one of the entrepreneurs DEMO:
The prize is important. Being able to show the company to the technical journals, to
representatives of Swedish and international industry (Nerikes DEMO 1994-06-23).
The importance was later commented on by the entrepreneur in this way.
The purpose for us is to influence existing and new DEMO An inexpensive way of
marketing. Another purpose: Trust between supplier and DEMO This will strengthen
undecided buyers, because this product has been assessed DEMO impartial people and was
nominated for such an advanced prize (9)DEMO
A sign is an object that can make sense concerning trust. The new venture
uses a sign as a symbol for something it wants DEMO point out to one or more trust
raters. A sign could be anything making sense for a desired message. A sign in a
more DEMO sense could be objects like those above, a product sample or DEMO
prize nomination, material or immaterial. The notion of sign denotes in DEMO study
the object type of trust carrier and the passive role of carrier.
In the terminology of the study, what is the difference between trust sign
on one hand, and trust reference and trust agent on the other? Sign is an object,
not a human being. Sign is sensemaking of a trust carrier that is normally more
inside the DEMO venture (a product etc.), whereas the other two concepts, as
discussed above, denote carriers outside the new venture. A sign can be a clue to
trust in the new venture in the eyes of DEMO rater, the other two trust in some-
one/something else that DEMO be connected to the new venture. This conceptual
demarcation does not rule out the possibility that a combination of spill-over
effects could come into DEMO and be given meaning in a specific situation. In
fact one of the examples above could be seen in that way: The displaying of the
letter from the Nobel Skapa Committee could by a trust rater DEMO meaningful as a
trust sign and at the same time it brings spill-over effect from trust reference. To
be effective, a sign must in the eyes of a rater imply trust. In the analysis of data
DEMO the two cases we found that the entrepreneurs made sense of the following
outcomes, raters and signs:
179
Outcome: Purchase, Sales, Start of the new venture.
Raters: DEMO, Co-operating company, Customer, Competitor, Financer,
Prize committee, Supplier.
DEMO: Accounting documents (Financial indicators), Bank account, Civil
engineer (title), Certificate, Doctor of Technology (title), Firm registration
number, Patent, Product Prize, Supplier number, Taxes paid.
Example: For the outcome DEMO start of the new venture (TNV) the
entrepreneur made sense of  trust raters: customers (C), suppliers (S) and
financers (DEMO). In the entrepreneur's eyes a supplier wants signs that the firm is
legally registered (Reg), has funds to pay (Bank DEMO) and proper payment
procedures (Giro). The example can be illustrated in this way:
Outcome Raters Signs
TNV C
Reg
Bank
Giro
DEMO
F
For every possible outcome there are a number of possible trust raters and
a number of possible signs. This pattern can be generalised: For Outcome
(O1...n) Raters (R1...n) make sense and could be DEMO Signs (Si1...n).
8. 1. 3  Conclusions Concerning Intermediaries in
Sensemaking Trust
Out of the case data we have identified, discussed and conceptualised some
intermediaries that carry trust in the eyes of trustee and/or DEMO Such trust
carriers: persons, groups, organisations or objects are by DEMO given symbolic
representation concerning trust. A symbol is a representation that stands for
180
some other entity (cf. section 3.2.7), and the trust carriers take on signals that
convey trust in the form of insurances, guarantees etc. (cf. section 4.3.2 and
Zucker, 1986). They can also DEMO in an active or passive role in the process.
An expression used in this study is that trust "spills over" to a trustee DEMO a trust
carrier in a truster's eyes. The entrepreneurs in the study have made sense of such
effects repeatedly. These effects underlie patterns DEMO action and consequently in
accordance with the study's theoretical basis these patterns can be seen as
interpretive schemes. Actors (persons) and events DEMO prominent in these
schemes (cf. section 3.2.5).
Spill-over effects may DEMO wide implications if sets of beliefs concerning
trustees become widespread. In section 4.1.4 reputation and the intermediary role
in trust conveyed by reputation was DEMO The empirical data of this study
can not give any conclusions concerning the role and function of reputation,
since only the entrepreneurs' most immediate context was studied. But the notion
of spill-over effects and conceptualisation DEMO intermediaries done in this study
could be a point of departure for studying reputation. This will be discussed
more in chapter 9.
8. 2  Strategies in Sensemaking Trust
In  section 8.1 we have presented and discussed how trust carriers could be given
symbolic representation concerning trust and different DEMO of trust carriers
have been identified. Now the question is how this symbolic representation was
applied by the entrepreneurs in the action processes in DEMO cases. That is also to
say, we will try to characterise DEMO entrepreneurs' interpretive schemes
concerning trust and intermediaries.
We see three ways DEMO characterising the interpretive schemes, whether:
1) the entrepreneur applies ways of action concerning trust and intermediaries
consciously or more automatically,
2) the entrepreneur makes sense of simple interpretive schemes, e.g. always one
specific way of trust-building involving intermediaries or different ways of trust-
building, and
3) it is a separate action or maybe part of a connected chain of steps taken to
build and use trust to enhance some DEMO outcome.
Trust strategy is here defined as an interpretive scheme implying a pattern or
connected sequence of actions for trust, made sense by the new venture to
181
promote an outcome. A trust strategy implies: 1) ways of DEMO concerning trust,
often consciously involving intermediaries, and 2) a connected chain of steps
taken to build and use trust. Schemes can imply DEMO specific way of trust-
building involving intermediaries, or different ways of DEMO Patterns or
connected sequences imply that time is an element. If the entrepreneur should
have a tendency over time to display similar actions for DEMO in similar situations,
it is a trust strategy.
One question concerning trust strategy is whether interpretive schemes are
consciously selected and controlled or DEMO consciously and automatically
applied. Lord & Foti (1986, p. 21) DEMO that controlled processing of schemes
places heavy demand on our limited capacity to pay attention. It requires much
thinking. Automatic processing, on the other hand, demands less attention and is
used in very familiar situations where it allows us to operate with little thought
or strain. Looking at DEMO situations above in this chapter, there are characteristics
and similarities in DEMO entrepreneurs' handling of the situations: they can express
very clear-cut and developed motives for their ways of action. This could lead to
the DEMO that schemes in the cases are always consciously applied. It is,
however, necessary to make two reservations here: The data was collected DEMO
the events, and there is a possibility that the respondents rationalised DEMO and
thoughts in retrospect (cf. section 5.4). It may therefore, at least partly, reflect
their making sense of calculated action. But it has been possible to cross-check
some of the actions and events with DEMO actors involved, who have given
accounts supporting a high degree of DEMO entrepreneurs' control of motives for
action. The second reservation is that DEMO scheme processing may need
more data than the scope of this study to become visible. For evident reasons the
actors themselves highlight consciously made DEMO and motives for them,
which will tend to dominate their tales in interviews. Let us look into the data.
Some of the data DEMO now familiar to the reader, it is brought up again for DEMO new
purpose.
8. 2 .1  Focused Trust Strategies
Explosive displays a DEMO to enact trust agents to promote its interest. They
nurtured relations with Almi and NUTEK and built trust in the eyes of these
actors. DEMO they needed a trust agent to promote their interest in negotiations
concerning product development, they asked NUTEK for help, which was then
given (cf. also section 8.1). And Almi has been used as trust DEMO in two ways,
as explained by Explosive's entrepreneur:
182
We have seen to it that we have good relations with DEMO Three times we have been
nominated for the Alfred Nobel Skapa- prize. This has also enabled us to deepen
relations with Almi. And then, when we have a product idea and want co-operating
parties in exploitation, it is sometimes a tough burden to convince others of the
advantages. DEMO such occasions, Almi has been useful (1).
So, Explosive DEMO looks for trust agents, to have as a trusting ally when
DEMO want to promote an invention or a business idea. The role of the agent is to
compensate for the venture's own lack of DEMO in terms of marketing, legal
expertise or other capacity. Enacting the DEMO agent is not an isolated action, it is
a tendency. It DEMO in our terms a consciously applied interpretive scheme, has a
certain DEMO in using at least two ways of action and is repetitive.
Concerning the product contests the entrepreneur commented:
Researcher: The purpose of participation in contests?
Respondent: It is a good way of marketing, DEMO does not cost so much. And increases
trust between us and potential buyers. It helps them to become convinced, since
assessment by impartial people has actually brought us nomination to such an advanced
prize three times (9).
The prize is a trust sign, which could be used in the long run to strengthen
relations to customers. It brings also DEMO spill-over effect from the prize committee.
It is important for trust (DEMO) to be nominated several times, repeatedly.
Headlines in two local newspapers at the third nomination after the prize
committee's press conference: "DEMO idea gave them another nomination"
(Karlskoga Tidning, 1993-06-05) "First in the world, again!" (Direkt, No. 5/93)
Plastics DEMO trust signs and spill-over effect in the long run.
We have proven our specific position in the niche by doing things others haven't DEMO
But it takes a very long time. You must work for references. You must have so called
records. A potential customer, Lambda, came DEMO a request on a product. I could
mention our customer Kappa, DEMO details. 'Well, if they buy from you there cannot be
any problems", Lambda said. So we got that order. And so it DEMO continued. [...] We sold
some details to our customer Beta, that DEMO is still running. We got a supply number
in Beta. We also got a supply number at Epsilon, a component no others have managed to
make. I consider relations with the customer Epsilon important, not as business but as
reference. To show others that we sell to them DEMO trustworthiness and a basis for
others to risk doing business with us. I use this often when we contact new customers. I
mention it. DEMO prestige we must have such references and reference products to expand
business (4).
This excerpt from an interview shows that when Plastics markets its products,
the potential customer's need for a decision rationale DEMO them to enact
references and signs of Plastics being a supplier to well-known Swedish
183
companies. This is not an isolated occasion. Plastics has found this DEMO as a
repeated normal procedure to point at "records" and well-known company names
as trust signs and to take advantage of trust spill-over DEMO Trust signs become
the basis for interpretive schemes brought in on several occasions when similar
business outcomes make sense for the actor.
Another forceful DEMO to expand market is to enact and systematically use
certificates (trust DEMO), which is explicitly done by both ventures. Plastics takes
every opportunity to get their products certified. The entrepreneurs make sense
of certification as DEMO trust sign denoting competence and quality in products,
necessary for business outcomes, as this interview statement indicates:
Certificates can be decisive for us to get the order or not, and that much more than the
price. It is a competitive advantage, decreases competition in our own area. And I am
working for that. It means to cut competition DEMO making the threshold higher for our
competitors, to be the first DEMO certified products good for the environment (4).
One thing is DEMO for the examples and discussion of trust strategy
above: Firstly, the entrepreneurs make sense of one specific trust pattern useful
(e.g. carriers, DEMO references, agents or signs). Secondly, the trust carriers are
given symbolic meaning concerning trust. Thirdly, they use that pattern
repeatedly and connect positive experience from one situation to later situations.
This line of trust DEMO could be called focused trust strategy.
184
8. 2. 2  Multiplex Trust Strategies
But there can also be discerned another pattern of trust strategy. It is
characterised by an applied DEMO of different ways of trust-building in steps.
Section 8.1 has in short quoted a large project in which Explosive is - or wishes
to DEMO - a central part. The project concerns a large business or product
development situation, complex in its action processes and with a large number
of trust raters. Another example was also discussed above concerning a strategy
DEMO trust agents. Let us reconsider now the second example in the light of trust
strategy using a chain of different ways of trust-building:
DEMO: No one has attended to the problem how this product can DEMO disposed of in a
good way for the environment. We have developed a business idea how it could be
accomplished. We are implanting the DEMO now with a lot of different parties involved.
We have discussed it thoroughly with Almi and have some contacts with authorities. We
think that DEMO should be given the task of managing a system for product disposal in an
authorised way. The state county administration and Almi agree on DEMO We form a
subsidiary company in which necessary capital is invested. We bring competence and
technical solutions, investors bring capital, together we start DEMO from this idea. A
new niche for us.
Researcher: How important DEMO the dialogue?
Respondent: Important, because in the end authorities must give guidelines. We must be
on the same line as them. We DEMO meet their requirements with a company that can run
the operations. We have also involved the authority Sigma in the discussions. No one
disagrees, but the whole matter must mature a little.
Researcher: To live up to guidelines, are you sure that the authorities can give workable
guidelines in this new area, so that all will work well?
Respondent: They can only give guidelines based on relevant facts. We can give them
facts that will become the basis for their decisions. In this DEMO we get the decisions we
need. Lobbying.
Researcher: It seems you DEMO it important to tell them how this should be
accomplished?
Respondent: Exactly. Explain to them problems that might come if it is run in the wrong
way, so that they, so to speak, realise that this must run in a specific way. Then of course
it DEMO not wrong if that is our way!
Researcher: Do you consciously DEMO that it is good to influence them in such a way that
there will be guidelines fitting your competence, your way of working and so on?
Respondent: Yes, definitely (1). We can influence them by presenting solutions to bring
about decisions in the right direction. DEMO that we will work even harder in the near
future with the customer Zeta about the disposal. After all it is Zeta as the DEMO, that
in the end will be responsible for making disposal of DEMO products possible (9).
185
Explosive in this example enacts a chain of trust steps. First DEMO new venture
secures the support of its trust agent. Then it attempts to get trust in its
competence in the eyes of relevant authorities DEMO rules and regulations. In this
discussion the new venture attempts to use its competence and/or product trust to
become the natural supplier of DEMO solutions for the new prospective
industry, to be backed up by DEMO authorities (trust spill-over). Furthermore,
Explosive, by being in the middle of the dialogue, tries to get early information
on rules and regulations that are to come. They count on being in the field
DEMO when the new system starts, which means that Explosive could,
DEMO others, convey trust easily all around, incl. customers. And it also
attempts to use its position (trust in its competence) to influence DEMO new rules
and systems in a way that suits its competence and development plans.
In the example above the new venture enacts an array DEMO different steps to
build trustworthiness. The entrepreneurs in the case count on an effect from
combinations they consciously and consequently apply. Almi, authorities and
their regulations, and a company are conceived as symbolic representations
concerning trust that Explosive (trustee) wants to display for potential customers
(trusters), The pattern is not focused on one specific way of building trust,DEMO
instead in applying a combination of different ways. This line of trust strategy
could be called multiplex trust strategy.
8. 2. 3  Trust Strategies as Interpretive Schemes
Trust strategies work as interpretive schemes focused on patterns DEMO action and
also containing actors and events. They possess causal or temporal ordering of
events (cf. section 3.2.5) Above we distinguished between focused DEMO multiplex
trust strategies. As compared to examples regarding focused trust strategies, DEMO
multiplex trust strategy example contains more different or more complicated
interpretive schemes applied. If we look at the background of the situations, the
entrepreneurs base their action on long term learning in the industry in the
DEMO to Explosive, i.e. in Incubator. And they continue to work as DEMO did
in Incubator (see section 5.5.2), along with the tradition DEMO the industry. Seen as
interpretive schemes, there is a long development DEMO schemes, where assimilation
successively forms schemes with trust based on established DEMO of acting.
(Instititution-based trust) But the situation is partly new to the entrepreneurs who
make sense of e.g. environmental requirements which become accommodated
DEMO interpretive schemes. So the multiplex trust strategy is characterised by both
assimilation and accommodation of schemes in enacting the situations. A rich
186
array of experience stored in interpretive schemes will probably enhance
viability DEMO sensemaking situations and bring forward variety in possible actions.
This may promote both adaptation and change within the setting where the
entrepreneur acts. On DEMO other hand, the situations with more focused trust
strategies seem more DEMO cover situations where the entrepreneur makes sense of
adapting to the external actors' interpretation of meanings in the situation. This
may imply more automatic enactment of interpretive schemes once they are
stored, assimilation of experience in different situations but less accommodation.
8. 3  Conclusion
In this chapter we have studied the construction of trust in action processes
involving not only DEMO and trustee but also intermediaries. The more actors
involved the more different constructions of trust (meanings) come into the play.
The most complicated DEMO processes, bringing in even more equivocality,
encompass actors with very DEMO roles in the process. For example in section
3.2.8 we contrasted commercial, institutional and personal contexts for actors,
which may bring very varied meanings to bear when actors from different
contexts take part in an DEMO process. One actor may also enact another actor in
very different ways.
In these complex situations the entrepreneur needs to facilitate reduction
of equivocality. DEMO manifests itself in interpretive schemes, which may
contain persons, events and types of action (see section 3.2.5) and will become
guiding lines DEMO different situations. From the case data we identified patterns of
seeing actors, intermediaries and action that were relevant in trust construction.
We conceptualised trust carriers, i.e. third party intermediaries (human and
objects) given symbolic representation concerning trust, where the effects spill
over from a third party trusted by a truster to a trustee. We also identified
strategies using trust DEMO which trustees tended to enact towards trusters to
promote trust. These trust strategy patterns were discussed in terms of
interpretive schemes.
187
Chapter 9
Implications of the Study
9. 1  The Findings' DEMO to Theory
In section 1.1 the main purpose of the study was set to contribute to
entrepreneurial theory regarding entrepreneurship by concept-building with a
DEMO on action processes and trust. In this approach three distinct research issues
were formulated, which will be commented in section 9.1.1.
The notion of generative capacity denotes to what extent a theory
building study actually contributes DEMO existing theory (cf. section 5.4). A study
performed with generative DEMO in mind requires presenting the "state-of-the-
art" on the research area as a starting point for the study. The next need is an
DEMO methodology to make the study generative. These two requirements
were met with in a way which was summarised in section 5.6. That is to DEMO: Out
of theory of entrepreneurship, action processes and trust were formulated
sensitising concepts (Blumer, 1954). These were confronted with case data DEMO
confirm or contradict, to qualify and extend the concepts into developed
DEMO, patterns and other commonalities. The conceptual findings of the study
can DEMO compared with the theories used, and contributions can then be discerned,DEMO
which is the purpose of this chapter.
9. 1. 1  A DEMO of New Venture Trust
The underlying belief in this study is that a taxonomy of concepts regarding new
venture trust brings benefits to understanding DEMO and to further
knowledge-building. Such a taxonomy can be used as a guiding framework to
theory-building in further studies. A taxonomy focuses the researcher'DEMO problem
identification and attention to research issues. A taxonomy of concepts thus
becomes a tool and a platform for knowledge-building. In this vein the DEMO
will be commented on and discussed in this section.
The first research issue was: What are the external actor's bases for trust
in the entrepreneur and the new venture? The three bases of trust, DEMO,
enterprise-based and institution-based trust were formulated out of views and
188
terminology of Zucker (1986): process-based, characteristics-based and
institutional-based trust (cf. section 4.1.1). In Zucker's notion of process-based
trust the DEMO or inclination to trust is contingent on a record of prior
exchange often obtained second-hand or by imputation from outcomes of prior
exchange. The DEMO view is that persons and firms make investments in
process-based trust by creating positive "reputations" or brand-names (Zucker,
1986, p. 61)DEMO In characteristics-based trust all that is necessary is information
concerning social similarity (Zucker, 1986, p. 61). Similarity in family
background or social situation may be sought out as a basis for common
understanding and DEMO attaining reciprocally satisfactory exchange outcomes.
Institutional-based trust is tied to formal societal structures, depending on
individual or firm-specific attributes. Formal mechanisms are used to provide
trust which does not rest on personal characteristics or on past DEMO of
exchange. Formal mechanisms can be membership in a sub-culture, such DEMO a
well-known professional association, or intermediary mechanisms, such as
commonly accepted procedures. The findings from our study indicate that trust
concerning the new DEMO is broader. Particularly, person-based trust denotes
more than indicated by Zucker'DEMO characteristics-based trust which is biased
towards family and social background. Thus, DEMO/experience and
managerial /commercial capacity was found to be very important DEMO studied
external actor's construction of trust concerning the entrepreneur. Enterprise-
based trust was first given two main meanings, based on literature at hand: trust
in products delivered and financial resources available in the venture. By
confrontation of this sensitising concept with interview data the notion became
both DEMO and enriched. A prominent broadening was indications that the
new venture (DEMO) could be important for the other company (truster) in a
DEMO by being complementary in different ways. One way is that it had or did
develop something that the truster needs or desires. Another way DEMO to bring
novelty to the industry. Therefore, a new dimension of DEMO trust was
introduced, pertaining to the new venture as an organisation, its general
capabilities. An example of enrichment of the notion of trust DEMO products
delivered is the following. Not only quality, quantity and timing DEMO conducive to
trust but also the trusters' assessment of how strategically DEMO delivery
seemed to be for the new venture (trustee) itself, DEMO conditions around a delivery
mattered for the truster to trust the trustee. Our findings regarding institution-
based trust were congruent with Zucker's institutional-based DEMO In all, our
findings confirm, but give a more extended picture of what constitutes actors'
trust bases. Our study concerning the bases DEMO trust has set a framework for
dimensions in new venture trust which can work as a platform for further
189
elaboration. For example can different actors' meanings of trust be highlighted
and their differences over time in the start-up process be described and
DEMO
Barber's (1983), Luhmann's (1979) and Zucker's (1986) views concerning
the role and importance of expectation underlying trust is confirmed in this
study. But it has in addition brought new reference DEMO to expectation by the
notion of pre-trust and trust as a result of interaction. When expectation is
studied 1) over time, 2) in a process, or 3) before and after a specific event,
DEMO as pre-trust and trust as result of interaction could be delineated and
compared. By juxtaposition of pre-trust and trust as a result of interaction,DEMO
studies may highlight differences and contribute to a more clear picture of how
expectation changes. These concepts are also an illustration of the benefits DEMO this
study's perspective: By seeing new ventures as action processes DEMO on
actors' sensemaking, it is possible to identify trust and how trust develops.
The study has a basic view on trust as meaning DEMO action, and more
specifically the study undertakes to investigate the research DEMO: How do
entrepreneurs and external actors use and build trust in DEMO processes? The
study has focused on trust development - as opposed DEMO a more common view in
the literature of trust as a state. Two conceptual tools were built in the study to
acquire further opportunity DEMO study changes in expectations concerning trust,
specifically with reference to actors in an action process. The concepts use
trust/worthiness/ and build trust/worthiness/ facilitate understanding how trust
functions in action processes and relationships between parties as described in
chapter 7. The concepts can also work as DEMO points on an ordinal
measurement scale concerning the development of trust, DEMO meanings of "more"
and "less". Finally, to study DEMO in action processes using the combination of
pre-trust/trust as a result of interaction and use/build trustworthiness, makes it
possible to discern patterns. Social construction of trust between actors is an
example where these notions DEMO highly rewarding for description and analysis
(see the discussion about interplay DEMO two actors' construction of trust,
section 7.4).
Regarding the DEMO of our third research issue: Do entrepreneurs and
external actors in DEMO processes use intermediaries for trust-building and
assessment of trust? a number DEMO action processes were found to involve
intermediaries: persons, groups/organisations or objects symbolising trust in the
eyes of trustee and/or truster. The DEMO as trustees often managed to
convey external actor's (truster's) trust for the intermediary over to the trustee.
This phenomenon was in DEMO study labelled spill-over effects. The role of
intermediaries in mediating trust has been described (e.g. Barber, 1983; Zucker,
190
1986), but these authors' publications have not developed the views and concepts
to the extent done in this study. A classification scheme DEMO developed which
brings attention to the findings that both people and objects functioned as
intermediaries for trust. Human intermediaries also vary as to whether DEMO
actively support the trustee or not. As trust carriers were identified 1) trust
references, which are a human type of carrier with passive DEMO, i.e. not
themselves promoting the interests of the trustee, 2) DEMO agents, also human
type of carrier but working actively towards the DEMO to promote the trustee,
and 3) trust signs, i.e. objects implying trust in the trustee. These findings have
implications for entrepreneurship studies, particularly concerning different third
party functions in action processes. For example can DEMO impact of reputation be
described, analysed and understood using this terminology. DEMO classification
scheme - or a further elaboration of it - may facilitate knowledge-building
concerning complex networks and particularly processes behind their
development. The "spill-over"-effect as a prominent pattern of meaning
construction has in our view DEMO rich potential as a study issue. The "spill-over" -
effect may very well be important to trust in other settings as well as DEMO in
studies concerning social construction. The concepts concerning trust carriers
and the phenomenon of "spill-over"-effects also opens up for studying
symbolism in both entrepreneurship and trust, which will be discussed later in
this chapter.
The work with concepts facilitated identification of patterns of action and
actors' meaning construction. Trust development patterns were induced from
data concerning the development of DEMO between the entrepreneur and
external actors. Combining the notions of using and building trust with meanings
of trust (i.e. trust bases) in a DEMO frame gave three sequence patterns of how
person-based, enterprise-based and institution-based DEMO was given
meaning. Such patterns are seldom to be found in the literature due to a lack of
time and process oriented studies.42 The DEMO can be seen as a framework for
other studies and could then be further elaborated.
Trust strategy was defined as a pattern or connected DEMO of actions
for trust, made sense by the new venture to DEMO an outcome. The identified
tendency to display similar actions for trust in similar situations can, in our view,
explain action in many circumstances. It can be seen as interpretive schemes
42 Close to ours in DEMO and general approaches, although not the research issues, is the study
of van de Ven & Poole, (1990): Methods for Studying DEMO Development in the
Minnesota innovation research programme. This programme works also with inductive concept
building, pattern identification and it studies processes over time. However, the programme
resources enable wider aims, and quite a different scope DEMO information management, etc. than
our study.
191
(Weick, 1979, Lord & Foti, 1986), denoting structured DEMO of pre-existing views,
patterns of events/actions that can contribute to meaning and action. In the study
entrepreneurs were found to consequently apply DEMO of action for building
trust with use of intermediaries. Some trust strategies incorporated a complex set
of actors and sequences of action. These multiplex DEMO strategies, implied a
combination of different ways for the entrepreneur to DEMO trust, others
expressed a more automatic response in well-articulated situations using DEMO
same specific way of trust-building (focused trust strategies). The concept DEMO
trust strategy may have implications for theory (as well as practice) regarding ex-
planation and prediction of action. The notion of interpretive scheme DEMO been
useful in identifying patterns, particularly concerning trust strategies, by opening
up for possible explanations of the phenomena. Therefore we believe that it DEMO
be rewarding in future to study one of the traditional issues in entrepreneurship
research, namely the entrepreneur's locus-of-control, using a sensemaking
approach DEMO an alternative or a complement to the traditional personal traits and
characteristics view (cf. section 2.2.5).
We will in the sections below continue to discuss possible contributions to
the specific areas of theory within or DEMO to the study's frame of reference.
9. 1. 2  The DEMO in Context and a Process
View
In chapter 2 a range of different perspectives on entrepreneurship was presented
in order to give the background DEMO selection of a more recent and yet not very
often used perspective: the entrepreneur seen as an individual-in-context. The
conceptual article by Gartner, DEMO & Starr (1992) gives the ideas behind this
perspective and indicates a possible direction for development (cf. section 1.2).
Our study shows that it is possible to go further than indicated in the article.
DEMO that it is necessary first to present part of Gartner's et al. (1992) dis-
cussion in some more detail.
They position themselves DEMO how social psychology provides insights
into understanding factors that influence an individual's behaviour. Doing so
they use the foremost theory building within that DEMO of research, namely
theories of motivation. Traditionally, motivational theories have the fundamental
orientation that behaviour is a function of both person (traits and characteristics
such as motivation) and environment. Gartner et al. (1992) bring emphasis to the
contextual factors that influence the motivations of individuals in DEMO
creation. Furthermore, through the lens of emergence the entrepreneur is often
192
critical to the process of changing the equivocality of interactions among DEMO
number of different individuals into the non-equivocal interactions of an
organisation. How entrepreneurs motivate others is then a typical question. They
conclude that motivation DEMO be used as a tool-kit of ways that entrepreneurs
influence others. Still bent on motivation, Gartner et al. (1992) apply this view to
different types of motivation theory: need, reinforcement, equity and expectancy.
They present a number of possible research questions where motivation is seen
as DEMO used by entrepreneurs.
However, as we see it, by building their discussion on motivation, they
overlook some of the potential in their own ideas. Motivation is not defined in
the article but they seem to DEMO "something inspiring to action". The notion
automatically leads your attention DEMO one individual: Does the entrepreneur
motivate others? etc. The thinking is stuck to just one individual at a time, be it
the entrepreneur or someone else. But interaction must be seen as reciprocal:
One DEMO the other, and the other influences the first one. The notion DEMO
trust, as applied in this study, automatically brings attention to the interplay
between individuals. Furthermore, Gartner et al. (1992) use the notion of
behaviour in the article more than the notion of action. Behaviour DEMO traditionally
built on a structural view, which may imply seeing the DEMO as a
demarcated component and may impede attention to interaction. The
contribution of this study to the individual-in-context perspective is the insight
that the DEMO may need to build theory on entrepreneurial action, posing
research questions DEMO using concepts focusing on interaction and being
consistent in seeing action in a process view.
9. 1. 3  Business Trust and Action Processes
This study may have implications concerning trust in a wider range of business
DEMO than just new ventures. A discussion of this study in relation to trust in
some recent marketing and management studies can point at possible
DEMO Trust is acknowledged as important in marketing channel
literature (Anderson & DEMO, 1990; Hallén, Johanson & Seyed-Mohamed,
1991) as well as in studies oriented to relationship in marketing or inter-firm
relationships (Dwyer, DEMO & Oh, 1987; Larson, 1992; McAllister, 1995;
Moorman, Deshpandé & Zaltman, 1993; Schurr & Ozanne, 1985; Sullivan,
DEMO, Kameda & Shimada, 1981; Sullivan & Peterson, 1982). The approach
is generally to investigate the content of trust and causal relationships DEMO studied
between different variables of which trust is one. Trust is seen as either a
193
precondition to some outcome (Hallén et al., 1991; Schurr & Ozanne, 1985), an
intervening variable (Anderson & Narus, 1990), a result of independent variables
(Sullivan et al., 1981) or its characteristics are studied (Moorman et al., 1993).
Some of the DEMO come to the conclusion that longitudinal studies would be a
natural extension of their study (Anderson & Narus, 1990; McAllister, 1995;
DEMO & Peterson 1982). Anderson & Narus (1990) write:
Longitudinal research could be directed at sets of "core" constructs, making possible
better inferences about their development over time and their causal sequence. (p. 55).
Larson (1992) investigated dyadic alliances between established, high-tech, DEMO
growing firms and their customers and suppliers in a process oriented study.43
The alliances were characterised by existing relationships being used for new
exchanges. DEMO if trust was not the main study aim, Larson found that
DEMO were governed in important ways by social controls arising from
norms of reciprocity and trust. Another striking similarity with our findings is
that what DEMO call person-based and institution-based trust developed in the pro-
cesses studied by Larson in ways resembling what occurred in our cases. But
there are DEMO differences in the case situations studied: Larson's case firms
seemed DEMO be able to rely more on reputation and the use of what we call trust
references at the start of the processes, probably because the firms existed since
before and therefore had more earlier opportunities to DEMO trust. These
established firms also seemed to have more resources of their own at the start of
the studied process. Our contributions extend those DEMO Larson in some respects:
In contrast to Larson we identified the dimension in what we called enterprise-
based trust: the significance of trust in the product, product development, its
quality and distribution. Furthermore, Larson's study identified intermediaries as
important for reputation, but the findings did not - as did our study - encompass
the type and role DEMO nor the symbolic significance of persons and objects
making sense as trust carriers. We therefore conclude two things: 1) The process
oriented approach DEMO led to findings concerning trust in action processes in
both studies, DEMO indicates the approach to be rewarding for the future 2) The
DEMO concerning new venture trust in our study may be useful as a frame of
reference for studies of business trust in general.
Sullivan et DEMO (1981 and 1982) studied cultural differences concerning
perception of trust between American and Japanese firms in joint ventures. They
43 The author uses DEMO term "entrepreneurial firms" meaning adaptive and innovative in
combination with high growth, i.e. another sense than our study's new venture (cf. DEMO
1.2.1).
194
came to the conclusion that American and Japanese firms defined trust DEMO
(i.e. its content) but raised different requirements on contractual processes in
which trust was important. Such differences will not be noticed if the DEMO
themselves are not studied. But our study can be seen as a qualification and
extension of these findings since we also show that the DEMO of trust (trust
bases) in a specific relation can change as the relation changes during an action
process. Trust bases can thus be DEMO a prerequisite for an action process to
develop and the unfolding of an action process can have an impact on the trust
content (trust base). Our study indicates interrelationships, which may be of
interest for further studies. There could be fruitful combinations for further
studies concerning business DEMO using experience from time-as-element and
process oriented studies, such as our DEMO, and the results from content-of-trust
and causal relationship studies.
9. 1. DEMO  Methodology for Entrepreneurship Research
Among scholars there is a debate concerning DEMO most rewarding approaches to
entrepreneurship research, and a number of them DEMO what is often labelled
as mainstream entrepreneurship research. Low & Macmillan (DEMO, pp. 156-57)
see challenges in entrepreneurship research coping with i. DEMO the lack of
definitional agreements, weak theory development with too few DEMO
perspectives, focus on personality instead of social context, single instead of
multiple levels of analysis. Gartner et al. (1992, p. 21) mean that there is a lack
of theoretical lense in studying entrepreneurs' managerial activities: "We suggest
that theories on entrepreneurial behavior would benefit more DEMO studies that
utilize a variety of data-collection methods that describe what entrepreneurs do."
In this debate one underlying problem seems to be the DEMO of unanimous clarity
and unity of definitions on the entrepreneur and entrepreneurship in combination
with attempts to apply methodology - to a large extent DEMO studies and testing
of hypotheses - requiring basic conceptual clarity. Gartner et al. (1992):
The entrepreneurship area's pursuit of "rigor" DEMO been narrowly construed to encompass
only large sample sizes of the latest sophisticated numerical analytical techniques, rather
than openness to use other methodologies that are likely to produce significant insights
into the phenomenon" (p. 21)DEMO
This concept-building study may by its approach and type of results contribute to
the view: Entrepreneurship studies need to focus on conceptualisation and less
on verification using premature concepts.
195
Apart from conceptual clarity Low & Macmillan (1988) also point DEMO a
need for longitudinal data collection to comprehend complex phenomena. To
comprehend entrepreneurial processes Bygrave (1989) contends,
Entrepreneurship begins with a disjointed, discontinuous, non-linear (and usually unique)
event that cannot be studied DEMO with methods developed for examining smooth,
continuous, linear (and often repeatable) processes (pp. 7-8).
Davidsson (1990, p. 7) considers longitudinal studies in entrepreneurship to be
"badly needed". Our study used a sustained study period covering important
action and events for data collection DEMO identify sequences and timing of action
and events. Most of that data can only be collected in observation and in
interviews, i.e. on the spot. A comparatively long time span for the study
facilitated reflection, both on the part of the respondents and the researcher.
Forming concepts and DEMO of sensemaking and action inferred from data
needs recurrent data collection with time in between. This experience can be
used and developed in further DEMO
9. 2  Practical Implications
The Entrepreneur and New Venture
Views and DEMO in this study may be an aid to focus on how to build and use
trust in specific start-up situations: In relations with different trust raters, what is
most important concerning trust? Examples of important DEMO concerning trust:
- the entrepreneur as a person
- competence in the field of the new venture
- the ability to run a DEMO
- its potential or actual product
- financial resources and stability
- background of the entrepreneur
- industry experience.
These aspects may have varying DEMO for different actors around the
venture: Customers may trust competence or DEMO most, suppliers financial
stability etc. It could therefore be important for DEMO entrepreneur to concentrate
on those trust dimensions actually expressed by identified external actors and
build trust in relations with that in mind. The study DEMO points out conditions
important for trust such as
196
- dialogue between actors
- mutual views on benefits from interaction
DEMO shared risks and results between parties
- the parties being complementary to each other
- identifying key products and key customers
- use of DEMO parties in financing, and the
- importance of industry norms for DEMO in the market
may have implications for trust in the start-up.
Furthermore, patterns of trust-building could become consciously applied
ways of action. Could the new venture find a good trust agent? What trust signs
could be valuable and how to display them? Insight into the notion of trust "spill-
over" effects could open ways of dealing with relations. From DEMO start or by
learning under way the new venture could design effective trust strategies. The
examples in chapters 7 and 8 indicate some ways. DEMO more general thing to
remember: It is not self-evident that one DEMO judges others' assessment of
oneself. The different trust concepts could be DEMO aid to remember that.
Entrepreneurial Training and Education
Entrepreneurial training courses, "start-your-own-business"-aid activities and
practically oriented books in the field normally identify DEMO as
something important for new business ventures. In discussions how to build and
use these contacts, trust is worthwhile pointing out. It is also possible to
emphasise trust and action to build trust in different case-studies, checklists and
other educational material. Particularly, looking at the growing field of
entrepreneurship in academic education, the framework and concepts from this
study could be used when describing and explaining the phenomenon of
entrepreneurship and new DEMO creation. In e.g. thesis writing, views and
concepts from this study DEMO be elements used and elaborated.
Decision Making and Advice
Decision making is done by organisations which promote new ventures by rating
venture possibilities, and giving different kinds of financial or managerial
support. Swedish as well as DEMO studies indicate that decision makers
and advisors use a combination of structured and unstructured information as a
basis for decisions and other judgements concerning DEMO new venture. By
structured aids for information is meant check-lists, ranking DEMO, scoring
methods, business planning models and similar. (These issues are DEMO in
197
Scott, Gibb, Lewis & Faulkner, 1986; NUTEK, 1993; DEMO & Hofer, 1987)
From various studies and the researcher's DEMO communication with new
venture advisors, unstructured information seems to be considered DEMO
important by the raters themselves. For the same reasons as discussed above in
this section, the notion of trust could be a mental tool when decision-makers and
advisors work using unstructured information. When using check-lists, models
for judging entrepreneurial possibilities etc., the trust notion could be one means
of assessing the potential entrepreneur's contact abilities.
9. 3  Suggestions for Further Research
Generative capacity implies whether the results of a concept building DEMO can
be used in other studies, by the same researcher or DEMO others. Eisenhardt (1989,
p. 541) discusses theory-building in two main steps. The first step is concept
building as in this study. The DEMO step implies that you regard concepts as
hypotheses and shape them by using a replication logic across new cases. The
aim could be increased DEMO of "why" relationships, sharpened
construct definitions, insights into validity and measurability. The second step
can concern similar cases, which would be continued theory building concerning
new venture trust or it could be an orientation DEMO build business trust theory in
different empirical settings (cf. Glaser & DEMO, 1967). The latter means to
study trust concerning other business DEMO than that of being a new venture.
In both orientations there are common themes to study concerning e.g. what is
the impact on trust DEMO characteristics of the relationships where trust comes into
the play.
9. 3. 1  Theory-building Concerning New Venture
Trust
The concepts and notions in the study can be seen as a frame of reference which
is not DEMO just for the ventures actually studied in this study, but reflects
DEMO phenomena in any such study. The concepts and notions themselves
can be further elaborated, refined or revised in studies to come. This study can
be seen in a chain of theory and knowledge development in the DEMO of Glaser &
Strauss (1967), the constant comparative method. By such studies a deeper
understanding can be reached in two areas: 1) The role of trust in business start-
198
up and early development, and 2) The conditions for entrepreneurship DEMO
business start-up and early development.
This study has focused on new ventures surviving their first five years. In
these cases the entrepreneurs/new ventures DEMO external actors have managed to
use and build trust. But in other situations trust cannot be used or built. Lack of
expectations may remain DEMO expectations may vanish during an action process.
Business failures could be studied for the impact and consequences of lack of
trust, which would bring understanding concerning the role of trust from another
angle. Furthermore, in section 4.1.5 the notion of distrust was discussed. Distrust
implies negative expectations, e.g. denials of common norms and obligations.
External actors may impose active resistance DEMO the new venture, even in
situations where their sensemaking trust and DEMO business outcomes would
be possible. Distrust as an obstacle for new venture creation may have important
implications for entrepreneurship on different levels and deserves DEMO be studied.
9. 3. 2  Theory-building Concerning Business Trust
This study DEMO been focused on business start-up and early development during
the first few years after start-up. Trust-building and the use of trust may be
different DEMO this period. A couple of studied relationships in this study indicate
that mutual trust can become more prominent. This is also in line with DEMO
in the industrial network studies (see e.g. Håkansson & Johanson, 1992) and
small business network studies (Johannisson, 1988). Studies in mutual trust
could also be seen as part of network studies in business, with the aim of
investigating for example ties between parties due to DEMO trust.
The entrepreneur may personalise the new venture. Person-based
trustworthiness often precedes enterprise-based trustworthiness. Common values
and beliefs between actors may develop later. Development DEMO common values
and beliefs can be seen as externalisation of an originally subjective stance of the
actors. When externalised and accepted by other actors, values and beliefs
become objectified and subsequently may become internalised in new DEMO in
the setting. The process of institutionalisation, discernible in the study, can be
studied using the Berger & Luckmann (1966) framework. This DEMO provide
insight into issues like development of industries by influence from new actors
or - vice versa - how existing value systems become internalised DEMO entrants.
So far we have looked upon trust mainly as a phenomenon pertinent to
individuals or enterprises. But the institutionalisation view opens up for DEMO as
a collective phenomenon: industry trust, trust in society sectors and organisations
199
in society. The actors here are industry organisations, trade unions, DEMO,
professional opinion makers and mass media. There is a need for industries and
society sectors to build and use collective trust and the DEMO bodies are actors
for using, building or changing trust concerning themselves (cf. Berg & Jonsson,
1991). Trust here is not personal DEMO often conveyed by persons. Reputation is
one form of collective trust. Intermediaries play an important role for collective
trust. Views and concepts from this DEMO could be used, extended and revised in
studies on collective trust. DEMO the same time important phenomena in society may
be brought to attention and reflection. Collective trust can be studied using our
terminology of person-based (organisation personified by e.g. its president),
enterprise-based or institution-based trust (DEMO to law, norms etc.).
In the study there are examples DEMO actors, for whom trust itself is a
business outcome. Some actors DEMO on the production and distribution of trust:
They invest in trust, maybe acquire a licence for providing trust and produce
trust for other's consumption. Trust becomes a commodity. In our study some
commercial and DEMO advisors worked as professional intermediaries
between trusters and trustees. As trust agents they used trust in themselves in the
eyes of trusters to promote DEMO in trustees. An example: The bank gives the new
venture credit DEMO on assessment from Almi which is then a commercial
advisor working as a professional in trust production and distribution.44 The role
may as in DEMO example be based on society's legitimation as trust producer
(Zucker, 1986). Whole organisations in society are dedicated to maintaining such
systems DEMO trust legitimation ("Packaged trust", Carlman, 1993). Trust as DEMO
commodity brings different impacts on entrepreneurship and new venture
creation, which DEMO be studied for development of trust theory as well as its
implications for new ventures and society.
9. 3. 3  Trust and Asymmetric Relationships
The notion of equity in conjunction with trust has been discussed in DEMO literature
(Barney & Hansen, 1994; Luhmann, 1979; Ring & DEMO de Ven, 1992). Equity is
not in focus for this DEMO but it has been noticed in relationships studied that
different relations vary in terms of equity as interpreted by the parties, which
may have implications for trustworthiness and mutual trust. Relations may be
made sense as DEMO in terms of 1) dependence of one on the other (Blau,
44 Trust in business professions such as accountantcy has been studied DEMO Barber (1983) and
stock broking by Zucker (1986).
200
1964; Emerson 1975) 2) information asymmetry (Barney & Hansen, 1994; Ring
& van de Ven, 1992) when one party can make use of information that the other
cannot use, and 3) DEMO one has over the other (Cook & Emerson, 1978; Pfeffer
& Salancik, 1978). The meaning of trust, the need for trust and how it is used
and built may be affected by asymmetric DEMO There is a potential to
deeper analysis in the study's collected data concerning how the entrepreneurs
made sense of trust regarding certification agencies DEMO regulating authorities on
which they depended more than vice versa. Apart from the issue of equity and
trust, studies of equity in action processes would also provide widened
knowledge of individuals' sensemaking in action, in DEMO and social
construction of reality.
9. 3. 4  Entrepreneurial Symbolism
The DEMO in the cases displayed a very good understanding of how to
use symbols to promote their interests in the action processes. They spotted and
DEMO human intermediaries as well as objects conveying trust (cf. chapter 8)DEMO
They have probably also made sense of persons, companies as well DEMO objects
conveying trust unreflectedly, even if that is more difficult to DEMO Symbols
transcend the literal to represent some wider domain of meaning (DEMO, 1986, p.
52).45 In entrepreneurship literature, however, symbols seem to have attracted
very little attention, but for a few writers.46 Even if this study could give only
limited conclusions (see e.g. section 6.4.2), further studies may encounter a rich
field concerning symbolic meanings in DEMO with 1) entrepreneurial action,
and 2) actors, signs and DEMO Another area for studies could be symbolic
representation of the phenomenon of entrepreneurship itself, its meanings to
entrepreneurs, other groups, or in society as a whole. Our new ventures have
been commented in local newspapers DEMO ways that imply symbolic meaning for
progress and hope in a wider sense than merely pertaining to the ventures
themselves. Different conceptions in newspapers DEMO popular management
45 A symbol is something that stands for something else by reason of relationship, association,
convention, or accidental resemblance (The Merriam-Webster Dictionary). This definition is
one of the more precise; the notion of symbol has in recent years become rather wide, denoting
e.g. that all human understanding is essentially symbolic in nature. Gioia (1986, DEMO 52)
comments on such wide definitions as "so encompassing that DEMO tend to preclude a definition
of what is not a symbol, DEMO limiting the concept for organizational analysis".
46 Bird (1992) was quoted in section 1.1 for her notion of "Symbolic Marker Events". Events
like writing a business plan, signing a lease, sales to DEMO first customer take on symbolic
meaning. Johannisson (e.g. 1992) introduces metaphors for understanding entrepreneurship and
entrepreneurial behaviour.
201
magazines implying "entrepreneurs as saviours from unemployment" and similar
ideas DEMO richness in symbolic meanings. Benefits from studies in
entrepreneurial symbolism could be increased understanding concerning
viability of entrepreneurial action and the role and conditions DEMO entrepreneur-
ship in general.
202
Appendix
List of Interviews
Interview Company Date Respondent
No.
1 Explosive DEMO Entrepreneur
2 Frigotrans 1994-03-23 Entrepreneur
3 Smokepure 1994-03-29 Entrepreneur
4 Plastics 1994-04-06 Entrepreneur
5 Pulpprocess 1994-06-13 Entrepreneur
6 Metalshop 1994-06-14 Entrepreneur
7 No Name DEMO Entrepreneur
8 Plastics 1994-10-05 Entrepreneur
9 Explosive 1994-10-10 Entrepreneur
10 Beta 1995-02-16 Purchasing officer
11 Alpha 1995-02-16 Manager / purchasing officer
12 Gamma 1995-04-06 DEMO leader
13 Almi 1995-04-27 Start advisor / credit officer
14 Jobs & Society 1995-09-14 Start advisor / trainer
in Örebro
15 Delta 1995-09-19 Sales DEMO
16 Explosive 1995-12-11 Entrepreneur
17 Plastics 1995-12-12 Entrepreneur
18 Sparbanken 1996-05-02 Credit manager
203
Förtroende mellan entreprenörer och externa
aktörer  - sammanfattning
Förtroendets roll och funktion för nya företag
Förtroendets betydelse för nya företag har diskuterats i DEMO Några
författare ser förtroendet hos det nya företagets omgivning (kunder, leverantörer,
finansiärer m fl) som avgörande för att företaget ska lyckas att etablera sig (Bird,
1992; Birley & Norburn, 1985; Diffenbach & Higgins, 1987; Macmillan, 1983).
Emellertid fördjupar inte tidigare studier DEMO till att empiriskt
undersöka förtroendets roll och funktion för det nya företaget. Denna studie har
därför som övergripande syfte att ge ett bidrag till DEMO om förtroendets
roll och funktion vid företags start och tidig utveckling. Start och tidig utveckling
av nya företag ses i studien som handlingsprocesser i DEMO entreprenörer och
externa aktörer deltar. Förtroende ses som mening/uppfattning vilken de olika
aktörerna tilldelar handlandet.
Studien avser att genom begreppsbildning bidra till teori DEMO
entreprenörskap. Detta övergripande syfte utgör grund för tre specifika
forskningsfrågor. Den första forskningsfrågan gäller: Vilka är externa aktörers
grunder till förtroende för entreprenörer och nya företag? Förtroende ses som
ett komplext och mångfacetterat fenomen . Förtroende hos aktörerna är en
individuellt och socialt konstruerad mening/uppfattning. Insikter om DEMO
meningskonstruktioner kräver bl a ett språk, en taxonomi, rörande grunder för
aktörers förtroende i och för fortsatt analys.
Förtroende mellan två aktörer kan DEMO över tiden beroende på
handling och aktörernas tolkning av handlingarnas konsekvenser. Aktörers egen
trovärdighet är betydelsefull men skapas hos andra aktörer. Därför måste aktören
DEMO med utgångspunkt från en uppfattning om sin trovärdighet hos viktiga
andra aktörer. Den andra forskningsfrågan blir då: Hur utnyttjar och bygger
entreprenörer förtroende i handlingsprocesser?
Behov av förtroende kan medföra komplexa mönster för utnyttjande och
DEMO av förtroende. Mellanhänder kan ha en roll i att förmedla
förtroende. Den tredje forskningsfrågan blir därvid: Utnyttjar entreprenörer och
externa aktörer regelbundet mellanhänder i handlingsprocesser för uppbyggnad
och bedömningar av förtroende?
204
Företagsstart och företagets tidiga utveckling ses som en oviss (eng.
equivocal) situation i aktörernas ögon (Gartner, Bird & Starr, 1992; Starr &
Macmillan, 1983; Weick, 1979). Ovisshet gäller marknad, där det nya företaget
kan vara okänt och ha ett underläge visavi etablerade DEMO (Vesper,
1990). Vidare kan ovisshet också gälla kapitalanskaffning, i de fall
entreprenörernas egna kapital inte är tillräckligt. Det nya företaget kan DEMO en
svag position på lånemarknaden, beroende på att det har få DEMO att erbjuda
och ytterst att det inte har historiska data att uppvisa angående lönsamhet och
andra finansiella nyckeltal (Ang, 1991). Slutligen kan DEMO finnas i själva
relationerna till andra aktörer: Roller som inte är DEMO, ömsesidig förståelse
som är outvecklad, och att stabila rutiner för leveranser av t ex service saknas
(Stinchcombe, 1965). Alla dessa ovissheter DEMO beroende på
omständigheterna i varje specifikt fall (Gartner, 1985). Det är dock meningsfullt
för entreprenören och externa aktörer att söka minska ovisshet. DEMO sätt är att
utnyttja och/eller bygga förtroende.
Entreprenör och entreprenörskap
Begreppet entreprenör har länge funnits i ekonomisk litteratur. Entreprenörskap
har länge förknippats med DEMO att genom utbud och efterfrågan skapa jämvikt
på marknaden (Peterson, 1981; Stevenson & Jarillo, 1990). Schumpeter (1934)
bröt mot denna tradition i och med att han definierade entreprenören som den
som omkombinerar DEMO genom innovation och därigenom
skapar en förflyttning från en jämvikt till en annan. Kirzner (1973) såg
entreprenören som den som utnyttjar vinstmöjligheter genom DEMO
kännedom om marknaden och dess aktörer. Enligt Kirzner står handlandet i
fokus: Aktörerna lär sig av erfarenhet och anpassar sitt handlande i enlighet
därmed.
Under senare tid har en mängd olika synsätt på entreprenör och
entreprenörskap DEMO fram beroende på olika forskares disciplinbakgrund,
referensramar och forskningsintressen. Begreppen entreprenör och
entreprenörskap har betecknats som obestämbara och gäckande för analys (t ex
Baumol, 1968). Då är det viktigt att studier på ämnesområdet diskuterar tänkbara
synsätt, lägger fast ett synsätt vars innebörd för studierna klarläggs. Detta sker i
denna studie som en genomgång av teoribildningen och klassificering av
DEMO och entreprenörskap i fem olika perspektiv:
-  ett samhällsperspektiv
-  ett perspektiv med företag grupperade, t ex i bransch
-  ett DEMO
205
-  ett individperspektiv
-  ett perspektiv med individ i kontext.
DEMO med individ i kontext är ett synsätt i vilket uppmärksammas
samspel mellan entreprenören och andra aktörer i handlingsprocesser. Detta
medger studier av förtroendeutnyttjande och DEMO i handling över tiden.
Begreppet entreprenör definieras som grundare-ägare-ledare till ett nystartat
företag och bärare av tre engagemang, vilka samtidigt ska vara karaktäristiska för
personen: Startengagemang, ägarengagemang och arbetsengagemang. Kontext är
den del av omvärlden DEMO en aktör ser som meningsfull för handlande vid någon
specifik tidpunkt. Externa aktörer bestäms därvid genom entreprenörens kontext.
Handlingsprocesser och meningsskapande
Företags start och DEMO utveckling ses i studien som organisering genom
handlingsprocesser mellan entreprenör och externa aktörer (Gartner, 1985;
Weick, 1979). Handlingsprocesser innebär att handling av en person väcker
någon specifik respons från en annan, varvid den första personen ger ny respons,
osv. Varje person har en uppfattning DEMO meningsfullt resultat (eng. outcome) av
sitt handlande, något som styr DEMO (Gioia, 1986; Weick, 1995). Aktörer
involverar andra aktörer i  handling i vilken var och en uppfattar egna eller
gemensamma resultat. Denna syn på resultat medför också att vad personer
uppfattar som resultat förändras DEMO tiden och att resultatuppfattning anpassas
till handlings- och händelseutveckling. Dessutom tilldelar aktörer sitt handlande
mening även retrospektivt, dvs konstruerar motiv i efterskott.
Ovisshet finns samtidigt med överflöd av sådan information som kan
utgöra grund för meningsfullt DEMO resultat. Det centrala begreppet
meningsskapande (eng. sensemaking; Thomas, Clark & DEMO, 1993; Weick,
1995) i studien står för att människor DEMO meningsfullt handlande genom:
1) Grundläggande värderingar (basic values) och DEMO (beliefs),
vilka är stabila över tiden (Schein, 1992). 2) Tolkningsscheman (interpretive
schemes) som bygger på individens erfarenheter från tidigare handling. 3)
Ledtrådar till vad av den överflödiga informationen individen uppmärksammar
DEMO grund för handling. Tolkningsscheman är strukturerade uppsättningar av
synsätt och mönster av händelser/handling som kan ge mening åt fortsatt
handlande (Lord & Foti, 1986). Medvetet eller omedvetet tenderar därvid
personer att handla enligt tidigare mönster, vilka dock kan utvecklas och
förändras.
Entreprenören befinner sig i en motsägelsefull situation.
Meningsskapande är både individuellt och socialt. Andra aktörer blir en
206
väsentlig del i entreprenörens handlande, samtidigt som entreprenören kan vara
eller vilja se sig själv som ett komplement till kontextens traditionella syn- och
DEMO (Johannisson, 1992). Dessutom möter entreprenören samtidigt i
kontexten aktörer med skilda föreställningar om mening och resultat. Tre sådana
kontextkategorier identifieras: den kommersiella (affärsutbyten), den institu-
tionella (normerande) resp den personliga (släkt- DEMO vänskapsband).
Entreprenörens kommunikation med externa aktörer i de olika kon-
textkategorierna kan påverkas av föreställningar i och om kontextkategori.
Entreprenören måste i samspel DEMO hantera alla. Dessutom skapar
entreprenören själv sin kontext genom meningstilldelad handling och påverkar
därmed de yttre gränserna för företagandet (Czarniawska-Joerges, 1994).
Symboler DEMO utgöra ett medel att kommunicera mening (Gioia, 1986).
Mening och handling i processer kan utvecklas genom olika typer av
förstärkning och t DEMO bli goda och onda cirklar som främjar eller hindrar det nya
företaget. Det finns stor variationsrikedom i vad som kan vara mening i
handlingsprocesser DEMO organisering av nya företag. Förtroende är en sådan
mening.
Förtroende
Förtroende kan uttydas som tilltro till egenskaper, förmåga, styrka eller
tillförlitlighet hos någon DEMO något. Begrepp och innebörd i förtroende har
studerats inom många akademiska ämnen (översikt i Hosmer, 1995).
Förväntningar är ett vanligt tema i DEMO, ofta, men ej alltid, ställd mot risk.
Efter en diskussion DEMO förtroendebegreppets behandling hos ett antal centrala
författare inom främst sociologi och ekonomi utvecklas ett synsätt och ett antal
begrepp att utnyttja i studien. Förväntningar DEMO en väsentlig beståndsdel i förtro-
ende. Förväntningar mellan parter innefattar ömsesidighet, DEMO för bägge
parter, rättvisa och rimlig fördelning i deras utbyten (Barber, 1983; Blau, 1964;
Luhmann, 1979; Ring & van de Ven, 1992; Zucker, 1986). Begreppet ömsesidigt
förtroende avser en uppsättning förväntningar som delas av aktörer involverade
i interaktion. Trovärdighet rör en parts DEMO på den andra: En
uppsättning förväntningar avseende en aktör i en DEMO aktörs ögon. I begreppet
anseende (reputation) ligger vad som i vida kretsar sägs eller anses om en per-
sons eller ett föremåls egenskaper, förmåga, styrka eller tillförlitlighet. Anseende
för in en tredje part, vars DEMO är att överbrygga förtroende mellan de två
parterna, dvs den som DEMO och den som blir bedömd.
Förtroende i handlingsprocesser diskuteras i studien med utgångspunkt i
frågans behandling i litteraturen. Teman i litteraturen gäller förtroendets
207
betydelse i ekonomiska transaktioner, vidare hur förtroende antas utvecklas i
sociala relationer på kort sikt och över tiden, slutligen hur ömsesidighet i
förtroende antas kunna utvecklas i långvariga relationer. Det finns olika
indikationer på ett DEMO mellan förtroende och handlingsprocesser (Arrow,
1973, 1974; Blau, 1964; Håkansson, 1982; Koenig, 1985; Luhmann, 1979;
Perrow, 1986; Zucker, 1986).
Förtroende som meningsskapande föreställning diskuteras på så sätt DEMO
olika litteraturteman kopplas till studiens referensram med grundläggande värden
och trosföreställningar, DEMO och styrt uppmärksammande av
information. Grundläggande värden och trosföreställningar diskuteras inom
förtroendelitteraturen.  Teman avser föreställningar om dels förpliktelser och
moralisk ordning som grundval för förväntningar, dels ärlighet och heder och
dels ömsesidighet i utfästelser (t DEMO Barber, 1983; Moorman, Deshpandé &
Zaltman, 1993; Zucker, DEMO). Ifråga om tolkningsscheman förs i litteratur om
förtroende likartade diskussioner kring dels förväntningscheman, dels
generaliserade föreställningar om professioner dels också sociala och
ekonomiska styrmekanismer (t ex Barber, 1983; Barney & Hansen, 1994;
DEMO, 1979; Zucker, 1986). Styrmekanismer avser här sådana som hindrar
DEMO opportunistiskt beteende bryter mot värden, principer och beteendestandard.
Slutligen finns ett DEMO innefattande att människan lever i en komplex värld där
förtroende är ett sätt att reducera komplexitet (främst Gambetta, 1986; Luhmann,
1979). Detta utgör sålunda ett helt parallellt synsätt till studiens referensram
kring att DEMO ledtrådar till begränsad information för handling. Slutsats för
studiens referensram blir då att förtroende kan vara meningsskapande
föreställning.
En fråga uppstår därmed: Vilka ledtrådar finns till förtroende som
meningsskapande föreställning? Eller annorlunda uttryckt: Den som DEMO en
annan persons trovärdighet, vad grundar sig bedömningen på? Utifrån
litteraturgenomgångarna beträffande entreprenörskap och förtroende kan studien
ställa en uppsättning begrepp som utnyttjas DEMO informationsinsamling och analys
i den empiriska undersökningen. Aktörer kan se förtroende som mening kopplat
till ledtrådarna person, företag och institutionaliserad miljö. Förtroende kan vara
personbaserat, företagsbaserat och/eller institutionellt baserat.
Metodfrågor
En grundläggande metodologisk föreställning inför studien är att teoribyggande
kan ske på empirisk grund genom ackumulation av DEMO information från det
beforskade området. Teoribyggandet genomgår en process innefattande att pröva
208
och vidareutveckla begrepp ur tidigare litteratur samt att skapa begrepp induktivt
DEMO insamlad och tolkad information. Genom antaganden prövas sedan relationer
mellan begreppen varvid modeller och teorier ställs upp (Lincoln & Guba, 1985;
Miles & Huberman, 1994). Studien avser att mot empiri pröva begrepp ur
DEMO teoretiska referensram och att denna prövning leder till
vidareutvecklade eller nya begrepp.
Från denna utgångspunkt blir fallstudier lämplig undersök-
ningsuppläggning (Yin, 1989). DEMO handlingsprocesser är studieobjekt
måste fallen studeras över tiden. Fallstudien blir därmed longitudinell. Den
täcker cirka 5 år från start av företag och framåt. Då DEMO studiens tidslängd
avsågs bli kortare, skedde den delvis retrospektivt, delvis simultant. För
datainsamling utnyttjades främst intervjuer. Datareduktion, tolkning och analys
bygger på kodning av huvudsakligen kvalitativa data, där kodstruktur återspeglar
valda begrepp och successivt begreppsbyggande (Miles & Huberman, 1994). I
detta arbete har forskaren delvis DEMO ett specialinriktat datorprogram för
teoribyggande med kvalitativ information.
I en förstudie ingick sex företag som vid studiens start varit verksamma 2-
4 år. Genom DEMO intervju per företag insamlades information om entreprenören,
företagsidén, handlingsprocesser före DEMO, efter formell start, förväntningar för
nära framtid och för längre tid. Efter analyser av förstudiedata valde forskaren att
studera förtroende. Sedan utvecklade forskaren DEMO första kodningsschema och
valde två företag ur förstudien för huvudstudien. Det ena företaget, i denna
rapport kallat Explosive, utsågs på grundval av att DEMO kunskapsintensivt, främst
präglat av innovativ teknisk konsultverksamhet gentemot ett litet antal
DEMO kunder vilka hade krav på kundanpassade lösningar. Det andra
företaget, kallat DEMO, är ett tillverkningsföretag som producerar varor i serier
till många, men samtidigt kvalitetskrävande industriella kunder.
Sammansättningen avsåg ge tillräcklig bredd för att studera DEMO för de
begreppsbyggande syftena (Lincoln & Guba, 1985). Forskaren följde företagen
genom återkommande intervjuer och studier av dokumentation. Intervjuerna gick
ut på DEMO kartlägga handlingsprocesser med externa aktörer samt entreprenörernas
meningsuppfattningar rörande sitt och externa aktörernas handlande i
processerna. Ett successivt tillkommande syfte var att delge respondenterna
DEMO tolkningar av den tidigare insamlade informationen och att därvid få
deras uppfattning om riktighet och rimlighet i gjorda tolkningar. Vissa korskon-
troller av insamlad DEMO ingick dessutom. Intervjuerna bandades,
transkriberades och introducerades i analysprogrammet.
Externa aktörer till de två företagen intervjuades också: Tre kunder med
olika slags krav och förväntningar, en råvaruleverantör, en finansiär samt en
209
nyföretagsrådgivare. Oberoende av entreprenören gav de sin syn på olika
handlingsförlopp DEMO mening/ innebörd i dessa. Deras allmänna föreställningar
om företroende och trovärdighet DEMO nyföretagare tog forskaren också upp. Viss
korskontroll av sakuppgifter kunde också ske.
Tolknings- och analysförloppet kan sammanfattas så här: Med
utgångspunkt i kodningsschema som byggdes på forskningsfrågorna och den
litteraturbaserade referensramen, gjorde forskaren successiva analyser på tre
nivåer.  På en deskriptiv nivå kartlades handlingsprocesser med handling,
händelser och aktörer. På en tolkningsnivå identifierades meningsskapande
föreställningar, särskilt förtroende och trovärdighet. Slutligen, på
mönsteridentifierande nivå, studerades begreppsinnehåll, sammanhang samt
mönster i handlingsprocesser och meningsskapande.
Grunder för aktörers meningskonstruktion om förtroende
Analys gjordes som svarade DEMO mot den första forskningsfrågan: Vilka är
externa aktörers grunder till förtroende DEMO entreprenörer och nya företag?
Begreppen personbaserat, företagsbaserat och institutionellt baserat DEMO
ställde forskaren mot intervjudata för att finna bekräftelser, motsägelser,
nyansering DEMO utvidgning. Resultaten bildar innehållsdimensioner till
respektive begrepp återspeglande tolkningar av data.
Personbaserat förtroende hos externa aktörer för entreprenörer avser
deras personliga karaktäristika, såsom motivation, självförtroende, ärlighet och
hederlighet i framträdandet. Om betydelsen av dessa karaktäristika DEMO
intervjuade externa aktörerna alltid bestämda uppfattningar och de syntes mycket
snabbt bilda uppfattningar, så redan vid den första kontakten med entreprenören.
Entreprenörers kompetens och erfarenhet var betydelsefulla bl a på så sätt att när
förtroende för DEMO och erfarenhet fanns, kunde entreprenörerna få stort
inflytande och genomslag för DEMO idéer till nya produkter och gemensam
utvecklingssatsning. Entreprenörers företagsledande och kommersiella kapacitet
bedömdes i vissa fall inte vara självklar för de nya företagarna utan DEMO
växte fram som en följd av iakttagelser av deras handlande. Bl a utsattes de för
medvetna prov. Att entreprenörerna visade en öppen attityd och DEMO klara och
raka svar på ställda frågor synes vara en viktig del av de externa aktörernas
bedömningar. I gengäld upplevde de också viktigt att DEMO entreprenörens
förtroende tillbaka i dialogen, ömsesidighet.
Företagsbaserat förtroende avser externa aktörers DEMO för det nya
företaget som organisation, dess produkter, produktkvalitet, leveranskapacitet
DEMO kapacitet för produktutveckling. Vidare finns förtroende för finansiella
210
resurser och finansiell stabilitet som en dimension. Förtroendet för det nya
DEMO som organisation var för aktörerna nära kopplat till deras syn på det nya
företagets roll på marknaden och i branschen. Att företaget kan erbjuda DEMO
som kompletterar branschutbudet och gärna kan erbjuda något nytt var för vissa
aktörer en källa till företroende. Andra såg det i stället som förtroendeskapande
DEMO det nya företaget höll sig till traditionella sätt att verka i branschen.
Förtroendet för det nya företagets produkter byggde i stor utsträckning på
successiva DEMO och testförfaranden, såsom tekniska funktionstester, kontroller
med nästa led (dvs DEMO köparnas egna kunder), leveranstester avseende tid,
kvantitet och kvalitet. Dessutom tillämpades tester som utvisade hur företaget
klarade av oväntade eller brådskande order. DEMO för företaget som
produktutvecklare var mycket knutet till entreprenörens kompetens och en väl
fungerande dialog. Att ge kredit och lån, finansiering, till det DEMO företaget
upplevs givetvis medföra risker. Dessa måste motbalanseras av bl a förtroende,
något som förutom sedvanliga kreditprövningar mycket sammanhängde med ett
förtroende uppbyggt DEMO andra dimensioner: ärlighet, kompetens, punktlighet i
tidigare betalningar samt, inte minst, en väl fungerande dialog. Att entreprenörer
klarar finansiering genom uppbackning från flera håll, dvs verkar för
riskspridning, angavs som förtroendeskapande. En liknande DEMO
föreställning hos de externa aktörerna var entreprenörers förmåga att skapa
uppgörelser med vinst- och riskspridning i samband med produkt- och
marknadsutveckling.
Institutionellt baserat förtroende DEMO att entreprenörer lever upp till
lagar och normer, allmänna värderingar och DEMO Ofta avsåg de externa
aktörerna i intervjuerna normer, värderingar och traditioner DEMO den egna branschen
eller den egna koncernen. Entreprenörerna själva såg den juridiska formen på
företagandet (aktiebolag) viktig för att skapa förtroende hos de DEMO aktörerna.
Detta innefattade i ett fall att visa upp att en välkänd - men samtidigt dyr -
revisionsfirma anlitades. De externa aktörerna syntes närmast DEMO
aktiebolagsformen med dess kontrollmöjligheter, revision och årsredovisning,
som givna i DEMO industriella miljö där entreprenörerna verkade. Symboler för att
vara etablerade, såsom DEMO, logotyper mm, lade
entreprenörerna i början av sin verksamhet stor vikt vid. De externa aktörerna, av
vilka de flesta ingick i stora koncerner, lade mer eller mindre automatiskt vikt
vid att de nya företagen följde avtalsnormer och liknande som var typiska för
dessa stora koncerners egen verksamhet. DEMO bägge de nya företagen var normer
för verksamheten i form av tillstånd av myndigheter, produktcertifikat mm
betydelsefulla och i viss mån tvingande. Bägge lade stor vikt vid att skaffa även
ej tvingande tillstånd och certifikat för DEMO på marknaden. De sågs som
211
en konkurrensfaktor och affärsutveckling inriktades på att ligga före
konkurrenterna i DEMO avseenden. Betydelsen ur trovärdighetssynpunkt att
kunna visa upp kompetens och bra produkter via tillstånd och certifikat
bekräftades i rikt mått av de externa aktörerna. DEMO tillmätte sådan verifierad
kompetens stor vikt för att olika relationer utvecklats och resultat uppnåtts. Vissa
externa aktörer utnyttjade reglerna för sina egna ISO 9000-certifikat DEMO att göra
inspektioner hos företagen. Om förväntningarna vid dessa inte skulle ha
uppfyllts (vilket de gjorde) så hade trovärdigheten snabbt kunna förbrukas. Att
DEMO värderingar är gemensamma mellan extern aktör och entreprenör
betonades som viktigt för förtroendet av framför allt de aktörer som hade
långvariga relationer med entreprenören. DEMO betydelse för förtroende
kom in vissa aktörers intervjuer. Det handlade då om att entreprenören själv eller
genom familj och släkt sedan länge funnits i DEMO
En allmän slutsats från analysen av de studerade situationerna är att
förtroende kan dels vara en förbetingelse för handling, dels ett resultat av
genomförd handling. Förtroende syntes kunna påverkas av handling.
Förtroendeutveckling i handlingsprocesser
Andra forskningsfrågan DEMO: Hur utnyttjar och bygger entreprenörer
förtroende i handlingsprocesser? Följande synsätt och begreppsapparat
användes och utvecklades i analysen. I handlingsprocesser kan entreprenörer
utnyttja trovärdighet, som entreprenören anser finnas i en extern aktörs ögon
såsom förbetingelse för DEMO handlingsprocess. Entreprenören kan också bygga
trovärdighet, om entreprenören anser befintlig trovärdighet DEMO otillräcklig i en
extern aktörs ögon såsom förbetingelse för en handlingsprocess. Trovärdighet
ses som meningsfull i entreprenörens ögon i förhållande till önskat resultat, som t
ex kan vara att skaffa externt kapital, få ökad omsättning genom mark-
nadsföringsåtgärd etc. Entreprenören kan då välja att handla med uppfattning om
DEMO trovärdighet kan utnyttjas för att nå resultat, men också bedöma resultatet
DEMO att uppnå och kräva förberedelse i form av uppbyggnad av trovärdighet.
Trovärdighet skulle därigenom kunna ha mening inte enbart för affärsresultat
utan även för DEMO utveckla relationen mellan parterna och därmed förbättra
betingelserna för framtida affärsresultat.
Studien har analyserat sex relationer över tiden mellan huvudstudiens två
fallföretag och externa DEMO (kunder, råvaruleverantör, finansiär,
företagsstartrådgivare) för att se om och hur entreprenörer utnyttjade och byggde
trovärdighet gentemot externa aktörer. För varje relation DEMO i studien
kartlagd handlingsprocess över tiden, huvudsakliga förväntade resultat,
212
förtroendesituationen vid det nya företagets start, utnyttjad och byggd
trovärdighet över tiden, trovärdighet som interaktion resulterat i samt
konsekvenser för ömsesidigt förtroende.
Analysen av de sex relationerna ger ett antal slutsatser och indicerar vissa
mönster DEMO utveckling av förtroende. Slutsatserna är 1) Trovärdighet kan byggas
även om DEMO sådan existerade vid företagets start 2) Institutionellt baserad
trovärdighet var betydelsefullt DEMO företagets start eller kunde byggas upp genom
utveckling av gemensamma normer och värderingar under handlingsprocessen 3)
Personbaserad trovärdighet utvecklades tidigt genom direkta kontakter DEMO
externa aktörer 4) Företagsbaserad trovärdighet utvecklades efter personbaserad
och eventuell befintlig DEMO baserad trovärdighet. Detta antyder följande
mönster i förtroendeutveckling:
A) Personbaserat DEMO kan vara meningsföreställning utifrån vilken
företagsbaserat förtroende kan utvecklas,
B) DEMO kombination av institutionellt baserat och personbaserat förtroende kan
vara meningsföreställning utifrån vilken företagsbaserat förtroende kan
utvecklas,
C) Personbaserat förtroende i kombination med företagsbaserat förtroende kan
vara meningsföreställning för utveckling av institutionellt baserat förtroende
under handlingsprocessens DEMO
Vidare kan ytterligare ett mönster urskiljas i data hur trovärdigheten byggdes:
Sekvenser av handling under processers gång uppvisade ofta en växling mellan
utnyttjande DEMO byggande av trovärdighet från en handling till nästa handling i
sekvensen. Denna växling kunde då avse samma trovärdighetsbas, t ex att bygga
personbaserad trovärdighet för att utnyttja den in nästa handling, eller en växling
i trovärdighetsbas, t ex utnyttja personbaserad trovärdighet för att bygga
företagsbaserad trovärdighet.
Analyserna ovan bygger på en aktörs meningsföreställningar om
trovärdighet hos den andre. Många situationer DEMO av reciprocitet, dvs
uppbyggnad av trovärdighet beträffande entreprenör hos extern aktör DEMO
av den omvända trovärdighetsuppbyggnaden hos entreprenören beträffande den
externa aktören. Det insamlade materialet ger indikationer på den reciproka
trovärdighetsuppbyggnadens karaktär. Denna kan sammanfattas i DEMO
sammanhängande sekvens i sex steg gällande två aktörers (A och B) reciproka
trovärdighetsuppbyggnad enligt följande:
1) A ser förtroende som mening i handling som innefattar B
2) A handlar visavi B
3) B DEMO A's handling och tolkar dess trovärdighetsmening för B's egen del
4) B handlar visavi A
213
5) A uppfattar B's handling och tolkar dess trovärdighetsmening för A's egen del
6) ömsesidig reflektion, dvs rekonstruktion av respektive DEMO tro-
värdighetsföreställningar. Denna rekonstruktion kan eventuellt påverka
tolkningsscheman. Reflektion kan möjligen även ha konsekvenser för aktörernas
värderingar och deras grundläggande trosföreställningar.
Handlingsprocessen kan fortsätta DEMO en ny sexstegssekvens. Två element har
identifierats jämfört med föregående analys. 1) Handling av den ene leder till
uppmärksamhet och prövande av mening hos den andre. 2) Reflektion över
handling sker hos bägge aktörerna individuellt eller gemensamt och leder till
konsekvenser för fortsatt meningskonstruktion rörande förtroende. Utveckling av
DEMO kan beskrivas som flera kopplade sekvenser i en handlingsprocess,
där meningsföreställningar kan konvergera eller divergera. Konvergerande
meningsföreställningar om trovärdighet är utveckling av förtroende. DEMO
av reciproka meningsföreställningar kan anta mönster såsom självuppfyllande
profetior samt goda och onda cirklar. Här kan utvecklingen studeras med
sexstegsekvensen som modell.
Förtroendeförmedlare i DEMO
Handlingsprocesser kan innefatta förmedlare av förtroende mellan två aktörer:
Person, DEMO av personer, organisation eller föremål kan symbolisera
förtroende. Första steget i DEMO fortsatta analysen gällde vilka mellanhänder
entreprenörer uppfattar för förtroende och trovärdighet i handlingsprocesser,
andra steget gällde den tredje forskningsfrågan: Utnyttjar entreprenörer och
externa aktörer regelbundet förmedlare i handlingsprocesser för uppbyggnad
och bedömningar av förtroende?
DEMO studien framkom att entreprenörerna i många situationer byggde
trovärdighet hos extern aktör genom att bygga eller utnyttja trovärdighet hos
förmedlare, vilken entreprenören föreställde sig ha trovärdighet i den externa
aktörens ögon. Från intervjuerna med såväl entreprenörerna DEMO deras externa
aktörer framträdde en grundläggande föreställning bakom utnyttjande av
förmedlare. Entreprenören tillskriver förmedlare trovärdighet i den externa aktö-
rens ögon. Förmedlarens trovärdighet i DEMO externa aktörens ögon antas av
entreprenören "spilla över" på entreprenören själv, som därvid får sin
uppbyggnad av trovärdighet hos den externa aktören underlättad. Förmedlarens
roll är sålunda att aktivt eller passivt förmedla trovärdighet för entreprenören.
DEMO förmedlare har utöver aktiv eller passiv roll grupperats i typ av
förmedlare: Människa eller föremål. Därvid uppstår tre möjliga kombinationer:
Passiv resp aktiv människa och objekt (alltid passivt).
214
Passiv förmedling av trovärdighet via en person eller organisation är att DEMO
roll som i studien kallas trovärdighetsreferens. Entreprenören hänvisar till
referensen som är passiv, dvs inte gör någon egen insats för entreprenörens
trovärdighet. Referensen har egen trovärdighet i den externa aktörens ögon och
uppfattas av denne att DEMO bedöma entreprenören. Exempel är när entreprenör
framhåller inför en ny kund att man levererar till ett välkänt företag.
Aktiv förmedling av trovärdighet via en DEMO eller organisation är att
utöva roll som kallas trovärdighetsagent. Denne gör någon form av aktiv
handling för att främja entreprenörens trovärdighet i den externa DEMO ögon.
Ett exempel är när företagsstartrådgivare hos banken bistår entreprenör med
bedömningsunderlag i entreprenörens kreditförhandling med banken.
Passiv förmedling av trovärdighet via objekt som DEMO
trovärdighet för entreprenör i den externa aktörens ögon är den tredje formen av
förmedling. Exempel på sådana materiella objekt iakttagna i studien är
dokument, såsom bolagsregistreringsbevis, produktcertifikat, patenthandlingar,
diplom och årsredovisning. Immateriella motsvarigheter är DEMO som teknologie
doktor, civilingenjör och identitetsangivelser som organisationsnummer,
leverantörsnummer.
Förmedlare DEMO alltså tillskrivas symbolisk mening med avseende på
trovärdighet och förtroende. Om entreprenörer utnyttjar förmedlare på visst sätt
är detta en del av entreprenörens tolkningsschema DEMO hur förtroende utnyttjas
och byggs. Dessa tolkningscheman kan ha olika karaktäristika: DEMO
kan tillämpa dess mönster medvetet eller omedvetet. Mönstren kan vara enkla
eller komplexa, dvs att alltid bygga trovärdighet på samma sätt eller att tillämpa
variation. Slutligen kan det finnas variation i vilken omfattning mönstren
upprepas. Studien DEMO begreppet förtroendestrategi för tolkningsschema
innefattande mönster eller kopplad sekvens av handling som entreprenören/det
nya företaget tillskriver trovärdighetsmening för att främja ett resultat. Studien
DEMO sådana tolkningsscheman innefattande förtroende som mening och
som tillämpas medvetet av entreprenör. Studien fann enkla förtroendestrategier,
där entreprenören upprepat utnyttjade i likartade situationer DEMO
trovärdighetsagent, trovärdighetsreferens eller trovärdighetsobjekt. Studien fann
också exempel på komplexa förtroendestrategier, i vilka entreprenören utnyttjade
en kedja av handlingar i en process, innefattande olika slags förmedlare av
trovärdighet som tillskrevs olika mening beträffande trovärdighet i DEMO lägen
under processen. De komplexa förtroendestrategierna verkade utformas speciellt
för varje tillfälle, återspeglande att situationerna under handlingsprocesserna
varierade. En del tolkningscheman karaktäriserades av mer automatisk
215
tillämpning utan förändring vid tillämpning, andra påverkas troligtvis mer vid
tillämpning.
Slutsatser av studien
Studiens teoretiska bidrag är att utifrån dess begreppsbyggande syfte DEMO empirisk
grund ha skapat en taxonomi kring trovärdighet och förtroende för entreprenörer
och nya företag. I samband med detta utvecklar studien också ett
processorienterat DEMO och metodologi för studier av entreprenörskap i sin
kontext. Men resultaten kan ha teoretiska bidrag även i övrigt. Studier kring
förtroende i företagsekonomiska studier DEMO andra studieobjekt kan dra nytta av
resultaten för att ställa upp referensramar. Det gäller dels begrepp som
institutionellt baserat, personbaserat resp företagsbaserat förtroende, DEMO
tillvägagångssättet att studera förtroende i och genom handlingsprocesser samt
dels synsätt och begrepp kring roller som förtroendeförmedlare. Slutligen utgör
studien ett exempel på hur DEMO's (1979, 1995) och Gioia's (1986) syn på
DEMO handling kan tillämpas i en empirisk studie.
Slutsatser för praktiskt utnyttjande finns i studerade handlingsprocesser
där företagare, utbildare och företagsrådgivare kan hitta exempel på betydelse av
trovärdighet och förtroende för nya företag. Idéer kan också hämtas DEMO praktisk
hantering av trovärdighet och förtroende i olika situationer.
Förslag till fortsatt forskning gäller några olika områden enligt följande.
Förtroende för nya företag förtjänar DEMO i fler liknande fall, då det finns
potential för ytterligare slutsatser DEMO större material än denna studie har kunnat
inrymma. Dessutom bör "negativa DEMO", dvs startmisslyckanden samt fall som
drabbats av externa aktörers misstro vara värda studeras för att öka kunskaperna
om hinder för nyföretagande. Vidare bör DEMO göras som från företagsstart
sträcker sig längre fram i tiden än vad som här har varit möjligt. Då kan
ömsesidighet i förtroende mera ingående DEMO, bl a kan så ske genom att
denna studies taxonomi kopplas DEMO med nätverkssynsätt som referensram
(Håkansson & Johanson, 1992; Johannisson, 1988). Förtroendets roll i
institutionaliseringsprocesser (Berger & Luckmann, 1966) kan också studeras
under längre tidsrymd, varvid t ex nyföretagares roll för branschutveckling kan
fokuseras. Förtroende är även ett kollektivt fenomen och taxonomin kan ha
relevans DEMO att studera problem kring förtroende för samhällssektorer och
branscher i näringslivet. Förmedlarrollen finns även här och kommer att bl a
gälla anseende (reputation). I asymmetriska relationer, dvs sådana där makt är
ojämnt fördelad eller en part har informationsövertag, får förtroende speciella
konsekvenser, vilket denna studie ger DEMO indikationer om. Detta kan studeras
216
med mera empiriskt material. Slutligen har denna studie berört symboler och
DEMO Studien innehåller vissa exempel på olika
symbolföreställningar om entreprenörer och entreprenörskap, DEMO vidare
konsekvenser än enbart förtroende mellan aktörer. Sålunda förknippas
entreprenör och entreprenörskap med varierande föreställningar om roll och
betydelse för samhället. Sådana föreställningar kan DEMO präglas av rikedom i
symbolisk innebörd, såsom: "Entreprenörskap som räddning DEMO arbetslöshet"
Om symbolföreställningar kring entreprenör och entreprenörskap synes än så
länge finnas mycket liten forskning.{1g42fwefx}