TIME AND CORPORATE
ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Miri Lerner, Shaker A. Zahra and Yael Gal Kohavi
ABSTRACT
Time considerations are an important element of entrepreneurial
processes in DEMO The current study analyzes the interface
between time and entrepreneurship in the ﬁrm, examining the relation-
ships between organizational time norms that are shaped by the ﬁrm and
individual time structures that reﬂect individual personality differences
DEMO how individuals perceive and interpret the organizational time norms.
The study seeks to determine if, how, which, and to what extent
organizational time norms and individual time structures impact employ-
ees’ attitudes toward undertaking entrepreneurial DEMO and practices
related to corporate entrepreneurship in the organization. The chapter
develops a model and ﬁve hypotheses that are empirically tested in an
Israeli DEMO company that encouraged its employees to pursue
entrepreneurial activities within the company. The ﬁndings show that, as
hypothesized, individual time structures moderate the DEMO
between organizational time norms and undertaking corporate entrepre-
neurial activities. It was found that under loose (ﬂexible) organizational
time norms, employees with deﬁned time structures generated entrepre-
neurial proposals. In contrast, employees with vague time structures did
not produce entrepreneurial proposals. The results highlight the
Entrepreneurial Strategic DEMO
Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence and Growth, Volume 10, 187–221
DEMO r 2007 by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved
ISSN: 1074-7540/doi:10.1016/S1074-7540(07)10008-8
187
188
MIRI LERNER ET AL.
importance of matching employee time structures with DEMO ﬁrm’s time
norms as a means of promoting corporate entrepreneurial activities.
INTRODUCTION
Time considerations are an important element of entrepreneurial processes
in organizations. While DEMO that involves an organizational process
includes the temporal dimension, it often DEMO, uniquely, and explicitly
characterizes the entrepreneurial process (Bird & West, 1997, p. 5).
However, entrepreneurship researchers have not examined this DEMO in a
systematic fashion.
Researchers disagree in their perspectives on whether time is an objective
or subjective phenomenon. These two contrasting views of time DEMO pervade
studies on time in organizations, as the clock vs. social DEMO concept (Lee &
Liebenau, 1999; Fischer, Reuber, Hababou, DEMO, & Lee, 1997), with the
two sides having opposing views of time as either existing independently of
human action or as socially DEMO through human action (Orlikowski &
Yates, 2002). The clock DEMO concept characterizes time as homogeneous
and divisible in structure, linear and DEMO in its ﬂow, objective and
absolute, that is existing independently of objects and events, measurable
(or quantiﬁable), and singular, with one and only one ‘‘correct’’ time. It is
often called the linear-quantitative tradition (Lee & Liebenau, 1999, p. 1038).
In contrast, the social time concept posits the existence of a multiplicity of
time at the DEMO, organizational, and professional levels, with different
cultures and groups having DEMO notions of time (Lee & Liebenau, 1999,
p. 1045). In this view, ‘‘time is a social construction that varies tremendously
between and within societies’’ (Bluedorn & Denhardt, 1988, p. 300). At the
level of the individual, according to Francis-Smythe and Robertson (1999,DEMO
p. 274),‘‘y people are required to be able to master DEMO and ﬂexible
temporal regimes, ﬂexibility being the key. Time now is DEMO and
multiple, no longer linear, continuous, regular, and unidirectional.’’
Recently, another perspective on time in organizations has emerged,
bridging the subjective–objective dichotomy of the views of time. Orlikowski
and Yates (2002) propose DEMO develop an alternative perspective on time in
organizations that emphasizes human practices (as distinct from external
force or subjective construction) as bridging the DEMO opposition between
objective and subjective conceptualizations of time, and thus as DEMO
possible a new understanding of the temporal conditions and consequences
of organizational life.’’
Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship
189
This chapter focuses on the interface between DEMO and entrepreneurship at
the organizational level. Following Orlikowski and Yates (2002), we apply an
‘‘interactionist perspective of time’’ to the area of corporate entrepreneurship
(CE) that is centered on people’s recurrent practices that shape DEMO are
shaped by a set of temporal structures. CE refers to a company’s formal and
informal activities, aiming to extend its ability to innovate and take calculated
risks. Some of these activities are formally sanctioned and DEMO by
companies. Other CE activities are informal and reﬂect employees’ initiatives
(DEMO, 1985; Zahra, 1991; Zahra, Jennings, & Kuratko, 1999; Sharma &
Chrisman, 1999).
The issue of how employees really DEMO time norms and how they
react to them given their individual time structures has not yet been
subjected to a systematic study within the DEMO of the literature of CE.
Empirical research is still needed to assess the issue of ﬁt–misﬁt between
organizational time norms and individual time structures DEMO the area of
CE. This ﬁt can inﬂuence the pace and success of a company’s CE
activities.
This study analyzes the interface between time DEMO CE, examining the
relationships between organizational time norms, which are shaped by the
ﬁrm, and individual time structures, which are shaped by DEMO individuals in
combination with how they perceive and interpret the organizational time
norms. The study seeks to determine if, how, which, and to what extent
organizational time norms and individual time structures impact employees’
attitudes DEMO undertaking entrepreneurial activities and their practices
related to CE in the organization. As both organizational time norms and
individual time structures are multifaceted, we aim to capture those time-
related facets that inﬂuence CE not only DEMO theory but also in practice.
Given that the literature has rarely referred systematically to the interface
between time and CE, we suggest a conceptual model and develop
hypotheses that are based on studies of time in DEMO organization,
management, and CE. These hypotheses are then tested empirically DEMO the
context of a rapidly growing Israeli ﬁrm.
Our ﬁndings reveal that employees’ time structures moderate the
relationship between organization’s time norms and employees’ DEMO
activities. These ﬁndings highlight the importance of developing an effective
match between the norms prevailing in the organization and the individual
time structures of DEMO members for promoting CE.
The next section of the chapter presents a review of the literature and
develops the hypotheses that are derived from DEMO This is followed by an
empirical study that tests the hypotheses. After presenting the results, the
190
MIRI LERNER ET AL.
ﬁnal section of the chapter discusses the DEMO key ﬁndings and their
implications for theory and for practitioners.
THEORY AND HYPOTHESES
Different Views on Time in Organizations
The literature offers different views DEMO the concept of time (McGrath &
Rotchford, 1983; Clark, DEMO; Hassard, 1996; Das, 1993). According to the
objective view, time is ‘‘independent of man,’’ abstract, absolute, unitary,
invariant, linear, mechanical, and quantitative (Clark, 1990, p. 142). DEMO
clock has emerged as a primary metaphor in this conceptualization of time.
Most quantitative social science studies of organizations adopt this
perspective and treat DEMO as ‘‘quantitative time – continuous, homoge-
neous, and therefore measurable because equal parts are equivalent’’
(Orlikowski & Yates, 2002). Another view DEMO time as subjective,
a product of the norms, beliefs, and customs of individuals and groups. The
subjective time (Das, 1993), DEMO social time, implies a time concept that is
accepted by the DEMO and shared by the group or organization (Lee &
Liebenau, DEMO, p. 1039). It is also called organizational time (Gherardi &DEMO
Strati, 1988). This view reﬂects a socially constructed conceptualization of
DEMO, where time is deﬁned by organizational members (Clark, 1985, p. 36)
and is assumed to be neither ﬁxed nor invariant. Time DEMO relative, contextual,
and organic (Adam, 1990).
The use DEMO the dichotomy between clock and subjective time has been
criticized. For instance, Orlikowski and Yates (2002, p. 684) argue that,
‘‘focusing DEMO one side or the other misses seeing how temporal structures
emerge from and are embedded in the varied and ongoing social practices of
people DEMO different communities, and at the same time how such temporal
structures DEMO shape those practices in turn.’’ The authors also
suggest focusing on what organizational members actually do, and how
people construct and reconstruct the temporal conditions that shape their
lives. This perspective allows a bridging of the DEMO
dichotomy that underlies much of the existing literature.
As the above discussion makes clear, within an organization, there are
multifaceted times (the plurality of time) (Gherardi & Strati, 1988) that can
inﬂuence the DEMO various activities associated with undertaking CE. For
example, the way employees DEMO encouraged or discouraged by management
to pursue new initiatives clearly relate to organizational time. The fostering
Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship
191
of new and innovative ideas requires that DEMO have time to incubate
these ideas (Hornsby, Naffziger, Kuratko, & Montagno, 1993). Processes of
innovation of new products or services, DEMO allocation, decision
making, and the implementation of the new CE initiatives often take time.
Yet, empirical research indicates that individual variables such as previous
experience also explain why certain CE initiatives come into existence
(e.g., Greene, Brush, & Hart, 1999). Also, the role of individual
characteristics that foster CE (Hornsby et al., 1993) has been mentioned.
Thus, individuals display differential degrees of interest in and support of
CE. These variations interact with time sense and the reading of social DEMO
in the creation of a shared meaning regarding CE projects. For instance,
some employees may view the organizational climate as encouraging CE,
DEMO others may have a different view. Therefore, our study adds the
DEMO level to the organizational level, assessing individual employees’
time structures. Adopting DEMO interactionist view, the study examines the
interactive effect of organizational time DEMO and the individual time
structures within the organization on the employees’ perceptions and
entrepreneurial behavior. These issues are discussed next.
Organizational Time Norms
Time DEMO in organizations can be analyzed along different dimensions.
Indeed, Schriber and DEMO (1987) have identiﬁed 13 separate aspects of
organizational time norms. Examples include focus on punctuality; setting
work vs. nonwork time boundaries; deﬁning DEMO pace, showing the speed
required and density of assignments in given DEMO periods; allocating time,
referring to planning vs. implementation in exploiting DEMO; and preference
for routine vs. variety, which indicates the degree of the regularity and
repetitiveness of the tasks a person performs within a DEMO time frame.
In some organizations, an awareness of time is central DEMO employee’s acceptance
among group members, whereas in others it is less DEMO (e.g., Landy,
Rastegary, Thayer, & Colvin, 1991; Gersick, 1989). Schriber and Gutek (1987)
also proffer that individual DEMO and productivity are related to the
extent the employees’ time awareness matches organizational norms.
For example, companies’ emphasis on holding to schedules and deadlines
and to being on time (punctuality) and their relationships with poly-
DEMO was tested in two large hospitals (Bluedorn, Kalliath, Strube, &DEMO
Martin, 1999). Polychronicity, the set of values and beliefs people hold
about organizing and sequencing activities, was presented as a continuum
192
MIRI LERNER ET AL.
anchored by two temporal archetypes: monochromic time, in which people
prefer to attend to and do only one thing at a time, and polychromic time,
where people prefer to be involved in doing many things at once (Hall,
1983). The results supported a focused polychronicity concept, reinforcing
the fact that both types of monochromic and polychromic time senses exist
in the work population.
Individual DEMO Structures
There are several measures in the literature of individual differences relating
to time. Francis-Smythe and Robertson (1999) summarized 24 studies
measuring individual DEMO attitudes or behaviors, some of which
suggested that individuals have styles DEMO time use that combine to form
overall time personalities and govern responses to different time-related
situations (Kaufman, Lane, & Lindquist, 1991).
DEMO this study, we employ the most frequently used individual time measure
DEMO date, the Time Structure Questionnaire (TSQ) constructed by Bond and
DEMO (1988), which captures the degree to which individuals perceive their
DEMO of time as structured and purposeful (Francis-Smythe & Robertson,
1999)DEMO The TSQ measures the sense of purpose, structured routine, present
orientation, and persistence.
Organizational Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship
Time norms areone of the most important factorsdetermining theabilityof an
established organization to nurture entrepreneurship. Hisrich (1986) observes
that the corporate environment must establish a long time horizon for
evaluating thesuccess of an entrepreneurialprogram and invest patientmoney
in an entrepreneurial effort. DEMO employees view a company’s time norms
(as manifested in the organizational DEMO) as supporting CE, they may
become motivated and energized to develop and propose entrepreneurial ideas.
Researchers also highlight different ways in which time DEMO can
inﬂuence CE. Hornsby et al. (1993) notes that organizations must moderate
the workload of people, avoid putting time constraints on all aspects of a
person’s job, and allow people to work with others on long-term problem
solving. Time is also viewed as a resource for developing DEMO ideas. Slevin
and Covin (1997) view time as a resource that can be leveraged for an
entrepreneurial ﬁrm’s advantage. Time-related matters are implicit DEMO their
description of entrepreneurial challenges of ﬁrms aspiring to grow.
Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship
193
Promoting CE activities requires ﬂexibility in the DEMO structure
and human resource (HR) practices to give employees autonomy in using
their time to develop new products, make improvements, and engage DEMO
other innovative activities. Increased autonomy means increased personal
control over time. (DEMO, Montagno, & Hornsby, 1990; Lumpkin &
Dess, 1996; DEMO, 1985; Schuler, 1986). CE requires extensive commu-
nication, negotiating, creating the social network (Greene et al., 1999) for
solving DEMO under tight time pressure, and allocating time to the new
venture. DEMO though corporate entrepreneurs are prepared to dedicate all
their time to their new venture, they also have to meet conﬂicting demands
on their schedules (McKinney & McKinney, 1989).
Firms can encourage employees to develop DEMO ideas by giving
them time to conceive and reﬁne their ideas (DEMO et al., 1999). Thus,
for example, 3M has an informal doctrine of letting employees bootleg
15 percent of their time schedule DEMO work on their own projects to develop
new ideas for new products (Collins & Porras, 1994). In most industries, it
takes time for an entrepreneurial project to achieve success, demanding
patient investments by the ﬁrm (e.g., Starr & MacMillan, 1990). The
innovative work associated with cultivating CE activities – strategic
planning and development, resource deployments, DEMO decision making
– also takes time, as does building the social DEMO that fosters
entrepreneurship. Companies also need time to develop and obtain the
knowledge and experience necessary to implement CE activities (Jaques,
1997; DEMO et al., 1999). Given these challenges, Starr and MacMillan
(DEMO) note that bringing corporate ventures to proﬁtability takes twice the
amount DEMO time as independent ventures. A short-time orientation is often
incompatible with the information ﬂow and promotion of the exchanges
needed for successful independent (Bird & West, 1997) and corporate
entrepreneurs (Zahra & Covin, 1995)DEMO
Model and Predictions
Fig. 1 presents the study’s conceptual model, depicting DEMO expected
relationships of the organization’s time norms and the individual time
structures, with employees’ perceptions of the ﬁrm’s climate and their
entrepreneurial behavior in the context of a single organization. Consistent
with Orlikowski and Yates (2002), we suggest that individual employees
perceive the organizational time norms existing DEMO the ﬁrm through
their own individual lens, and that these perceptions DEMO with the
194
MIRI LERNER ET AL.
Organization
Time Norms
H1
H2
H5
Individual
DEMO Structures
Entrepreneurial
Behavior
H4
H3
Perception of
Entrepreneurial Climate
Fig. 1. A Model of the Relationships among Norms of Time: Structure of Time,
Entrepreneurial Behavior, and Perceptions.
impact upon both their perception of organizational climate and their
practical behavior. Employees may perceive the organizational climate as
supporting DEMO impeding CE. Thus, employees may choose to generate
entrepreneurial proposals and DEMO and undertake real entrepreneurial steps
for implementing them, or avoid such DEMO Thus, we examine
employee behaviors related to CE emphasizing two facets: (a) generating
entrepreneurial proposals and (b) undertaking those activities needed DEMO
institutionalize CE.
We conceive of organizational time norms and individual time structures
as multidimensional constructs, relating respectively to the values and
priorities a ﬁrm and an individual attach to their time and operations
(Schriber & Gutek, 1987; Bond & Feather, 1988; Francis-Smythe &
Robertson, 1999)DEMO Following Schriber and Gutek (1987), we study four
time-related factors DEMO the organization: scheduling and planning; lack of
autonomy of time use; pressure in allocating time; and synchronization and
coordination with the work DEMO others through time. These time norms may
range from being tight (DEMO, stringent) when schedules are rigid, there is a
lack of DEMO in time use, and pressure in time allocation exists, to loose
(i.e., ﬂexible) when employees have autonomy in the use of time, time
allocations are ﬂexible, and schedules are ﬂexible. In examining employee
DEMO structures, we use Bond and Feather’s (1988) most frequently used
DEMO of individual time, where they propose a continuum ranging from
clear DEMO organized, with well-deﬁned priorities, to vague and undeﬁned.
Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship 195
As organizational variables (e.g., length of DEMO in the organiza-
tion, previous experience in the industry) have been previously related to
entrepreneurial behavior (e.g., Cooper, Ramachandran, & Schoorman,DEMO
1997; Greene et al., 1999) and to the perception of DEMO ﬁrm’s entrepreneurial
climate, we controlled for these variables. Given the relatedness DEMO gender
and education to entrepreneurial activities (Parasuraman, Purohit, &
Godshalk, 1996), we controlled for these demographic variables as well.
Fig. 1 indicates that organizational time norms can play an important role
in the DEMO by which employees conceive, reﬁne, and develop their
entrepreneurial ideas. This is reﬂected in the existence of an entrepreneurial
climate, one that employees believe encourages innovation and risk taking
(Lumpkin & Dess, 1996; Kuratko, Hornsby, Naffziger, & Montagno, 1993).
Baer and Frese (2003) have argued that process innovations in organizations
need to be accompanied by climates that complement the adoption and
implementation of such innovations. Consistent with DEMO proposition, we
suggest that the tightness or looseness (ﬂexibility) of DEMO time
norms is important for whether employees view the ﬁrm’s time norms as
supportive of CE activities or not. Tight organizational time norms can
DEMO employees’ desire and willingness to assume the risks associated with
proposing ideas for innovation. These norms are usually shown in
employees’ perceptions of the DEMO, punctuality, speciﬁc time allocations,
and the lack of autonomy in managing their personal schedule. Conversely,
loose organizational time norms encourage entrepreneurship (Miller, 1983;
Pinchot, 1985). When employees perceive these norms DEMO relatively loose
(ﬂexible), they are likely to view the ﬁrm’s DEMO as conducive to CE. Thus,
studies show that serendipity which is seen as a part of CE (Floyd &
Wooldridge, 1999) DEMO time, as it often comes from exploration, gooﬁng
around, and DEMO ‘‘time wasting’’ activities (e.g., Martello, 1994). These
observations suggest DEMO following hypothesis:
H1. Tight (rigid) organizational time norms are negatively associated
with employees’ perceptions of the organizational climate as being
entrepreneurial, whereas loose (ﬂexible) organizational time norms are
positively associated with perceptions of DEMO climate as entrepreneurial.
Constraints inherent in decreased ﬂexibility are an outcome of externally
imposed time schedules (Greene et al., 1999). While tight DEMO
time norms may inhibit creativity and reduce employees’ willingness to take
risks, looseness of organizational time norms allows employees to explore
and develop ideas. This gives employees the time and opportunity to share
196
MIRI LERNER ET AL.
and exchange information, informally test their ideas among colleagues,
reﬁne and connect them to other projects already in DEMO in the ﬁrm, and
ﬁnd a champion to communicate their ideas DEMO higher ranking managers
(Pinchot, 1985; Kuratko et al., 1993). Therefore:
H2. Tight (rigid) organizational time norms are negatively related DEMO
employees’ entrepreneurial behavior, whereas loose (ﬂexible) time norms
are positively DEMO to their entrepreneurial behavior.
Employee Time Structure and Entrepreneurship
Fig. 1 also suggests that an employee’s own time structure is likely to
inﬂuence his/DEMO disposition toward CE. Time structure indicates the extent
to which a person perceives the use of his/her time as being organized, well
deﬁned, and purposeful (Bond & Feather, 1988). A person whose time
structure is well deﬁned usually organizes his/her time and sets his/DEMO goals.
Conversely, a person with a vague time structure usually feels DEMO lack of order
and clear objectives. Some research indicates that time structure is positively
related to a person’s behavior and effective adaptation on the DEMO (Bond &
Feather, 1988), effective learning habits (Macan & Shahani, 1990;
Macan, 1994), overall ﬁt with the organization (Jaques in Goodman,
1967; Francis-Smythe & Robertson, 1999), and DEMO and
competitive behavior (Mudrack, 1999). The recognition of time as a scarce
resource compels individuals to choose among different and often
competing DEMO Employees divide their time into ‘‘work time’’ and
‘‘non-work time,’’ based on their life styles and the value and meaning they
attach to DEMO (Feldman & Hornik, 1981).
Time structure is also related to those personality variables that inﬂuence
entrepreneurship such as the motivation to achieve DEMO the willingness to take
risks (Brockhaus and Horwits (1986); Das & Teng, 1997). For instance, one
study shows that women DEMO show more commitment to ‘‘family
time,’’ whereas men of the same status are more committed to ‘‘work time’’
(Parasuraman et al., 1996)DEMO Another study ﬁnds that entrepreneurs differ
signiﬁcantly from venture capitalists in the time pressure they experience
(Cable & Shane, 1997). Thus, an employee’s time structure will inﬂuence his/
her perception of a ﬁrm’s DEMO climate as being conducive to
entrepreneurship and also the willingness and ability to pursue entrepreneur-
ial activities. Thus, our following two hypotheses are contrary to another line
of research that suggests that polychrons, who prefer subjective time
models, (and low structure scores on the TSQ) are more likely to do well in
Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship 197
creative/adaptive situations (Kaufman-Scarborough & Lindquist, DEMO).
Speciﬁcally, our review of the literature suggests the following hypotheses:DEMO
H3. Employees with a well-deﬁned time structure are more likely to
perceive the organizational climate as being entrepreneurial.
H4. Employees with a well-deﬁned time DEMO are more likely to
exhibit CE behavior.
Fit-Misﬁt between Individual Time Structures and Organization
Time Norms
The notion of ﬁt between a person’s time DEMO and the time norms
of the work environment has been documented in the literature
(Francis-Smythe & Robertson, 1999). The interactionist perspective within
DEMO psychology acknowledges this interaction as a two-way
process, accepting that jobs DEMO modify people (socialization processes) and
people can signiﬁcantly modify their jobs. The emphasis is on attaining an
effective ﬁt between the person and DEMO job (Edwards, 1991). Fit produces
positive outcomes such as job satisfaction and job involvement, whereas
misﬁt produces negative outcomes such as high absenteeism (O’Reilly,
Chatman, & Caldwell, 1991).
Following the above arguments, we propose that when there is a ﬁt
between time norms at the organization level (these time norms are conducive
to CE) DEMO individual time-related structures, the employees’ tendencies
toward CE behavior will be DEMO Conversely, when there is misﬁt between
the organizational time-related norms and DEMO time structures,
employees will avoid CE activities or behave less entrepreneurially.
We expect employees’ time structures to moderate the relationship
between perceived organizational DEMO norms and employees’ undertaking
of CE activities. Loose (ﬂexible) organizational time norms can confuse
those employees with vague time structures, making them feel a lack of
a clear sense of direction, and creating a serious impediment to initiating
and implementing CE activities. In contrast, employees with well-deﬁned
time structures may thrive in this environment, believing that they have
an opportunity to innovate and initiate changes that will improve the
organization’s operations. DEMO:
H5. Employees’ time structure moderates the relationship between the
organization’s time norms and employees’ entrepreneurial activities.
198
MIRI LERNER ET AL.
When organizational time norms are loose (ﬂexible), employees with more
highly deﬁned time structures will generate more entrepreneurial
DEMO and undertake more CE activities, whereas employees with
vague time structures DEMO not exhibit such CE behaviors.
METHOD
Sample
Ninety-nine employees in an Israeli plastic products’ manufacturing ﬁrm
completed a comprehensive questionnaire. The 11-year-old ﬁrm achieved
DEMO growth and was acquired by a US-based corporation. This study was
conducted before the acquisition and because it was at a time when the
DEMO knew nothing of the forthcoming acquisition, it is not discussed
here. DEMO employees worked for two organizational units in two separate
locations in Israel. The sample consisted of 75 staff employees (out of 80 staff
employees, representing a 94 percent response rate) and 24 manufacturing
workers (out of 50 manufacturing workers, a 48 percent response rate). The
different response rate reﬂected the fact that among the manufacturing
workers some had DEMO problems, and therefore did not complete
the questionnaire. Since the two DEMO units could have differences
in culture, social setting, work pace, DEMO time use, the organizational unit
variable was taken into account in DEMO our analyses, as reported later.
We conducted a pilot study to DEMO that the questions ﬁt the ﬁrm’s
climate and the work procedures. Initially, in-depth interviews that were
conducted with the ﬁrm’s managers and several key employees regarding the
organizational culture, were used for questionnaire development and later for
the interpretation of the research results. Next, we distributed the
questionnaire directly to the employees. Of the 110 distributed question-
naires, 99 were completed and returned (for a 90 percent response rate).
Corporate data were also gathered from secondary sources to supplement the
data obtained through DEMO survey. Finally, one of the authors observed the
study participants during DEMO corporate functions (e.g., ofﬁcial meetings).
Measures
The instrument included items that covered perceptions of the organiza-
tional climate, entrepreneurial behavior in the organization, organizational
Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship 199
time norms, and employees’ structuring of time. To ensure reliability and
validity, we used measures that have been validated in past research
(Schriber & Gutek, 1987; Bond & Feather, DEMO; Reynolds & Miller, 1992).
All items used in our measures of the dependent and independent variables
are presented in the Appendix.
Dependent DEMO
In measuring entrepreneurial behavior, we assessed (a) two facets of DEMO
entrepreneurial behavior of employees (generating entrepreneurial proposals
and ideas and the DEMO of CE in the company) and (b) employees’
perceptions of DEMO entrepreneurial climate, as described next.
Generating Entrepreneurial Proposals and Ideas
The DEMO included 15 items that covered the presentation of proposals
or ideas for a new product, making improvements in product or process
efﬁciency, and DEMO other innovative ideas. Each of the 15 items
related to the whole period the employee had been employed in the ﬁrm and
required a DEMO or ‘‘no’’ answer. A varimax rotated factor analysis of the
15 items yielded two signiﬁcant factors, on which 11 of the 15 loaded
signiﬁcantly. The remaining four items were dropped because they were not
signiﬁcant. The DEMO factor captured employees’ entrepreneurial proposals
for improvements of HR routines (6 DEMO; a = .80). The second covered
employees’ entrepreneurial proposals of DEMO new product or a new market
(5 items; a = .80). A scale was developed for each of these two factors by
DEMO responses. A high score on each scale indicated greater entrepre-
neurial initiatives by the employees.
Undertaking Entrepreneurial Activities
This second measure of entrepreneurial behavior DEMO the organization
consisted of nine items. Following Reynolds and Miller (1992), we asked
respondents to state the extent to which they actually undertook different
activities to advance their entrepreneurial proposals in the organization.
We used DEMO 5-point Likert scale (1=not at all to 5=to a great extent)DEMO
An overall index that captured employees’ undertaking of CE activities was
constructed by averaging the six relevant items from the nine that were
offered DEMO the question (a = .85). The higher the score on DEMO index, the
higher the extent to which employees actively engaged in DEMO activities.
200 MIRI LERNER ET AL.
Perception of the Organizational Climate as Being DEMO of CE
Perception of a ﬁrm’s entrepreneurial climate was measured by 11 items
based on Hisrich’s (1986) research. The items captured employees’
perceptions DEMO their ﬁrm’s climate, using a 5-point Likert scale (1=to a
small extent to 5=to a great extent). A varimax rotated factor analysis DEMO
the 11 items yielded two factors: (a) perception of management DEMO of
CE (5 items; a=.86) and (b) perception of DEMO to CE (6 items; a=.70).
These sub-indices gauged speciﬁc facets of the ﬁrm’s entrepreneurial climate.
The ﬁrst covered the important role of DEMO in creating an
entrepreneurial setting (e.g., Pinchot, 1985; Kuratko et al., 1990, 1993).
The second captured the existence of restrictions, lack of tolerance of
mistakes, lack of autonomy in work, and DEMO barriers to CE (e.g., Hisrich,
1986; Kuratko et al., 1990, 1993).
Independent Variables
Consistent with Fig. 1, we developed DEMO following measures for the study’s
independent variables.
1. Organizational Time Norms. Organizational time norms are multidimen-
sional constructs (Landy et al., 1991). DEMO used 22 items that were taken
from Schriber and Gutek’s (1987) work to gauge employees’ perceptions
of organizational time norms. Responses followed a DEMO Likert scale
(1=not at all to 5=to a very great extent)DEMO A varimax rotated factor
analysis of the 22 items revealed seven factors where the following four
factors with acceptable reliabilities were used: (a) scheduling and planning
(6 items; a=.71); (b) lack of DEMO of time use (3 items; a=.68);
(c) synchronization DEMO coordination with the work of others through
time (3 items; a=.62); and (d) pressure in allocating time (4 items; a=.63)DEMO
An overall index of organizational time norms was developed by
averaging the responses to 13 out of the 22 items that were included in DEMO
four factors (a=.69). The remaining nine items were dropped as DEMO
related to the three other factors that were not used. The higher the score
on the index, the tighter the employees viewed their ﬁrm’s time norms,
regardless of the organizational unit.
2. Employee’s Time Structure. DEMO employee’s time structure was measured
by 13 items that were taken from the 26 items of the TSQ (Bond &
Feather, 1988). The items were selected mainly from the structured
routine subscale of the DEMO Each item followed a 5-point Likert scale
Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship
201
(1=never to 5=always). An overall time structure index was created by
averaging the responses of 10 items among DEMO (a=.63). The higher the
average score, the more deﬁned an employee’s structure of time and the
higher his/her sense of purpose.
DEMO Variables
We controlled for gender and educational level (seven categories ranging
DEMO secondary incomplete up to second college degree), because research
suggests that these demographic variables may inﬂuence employees’
undertaking of CE behavior. Previous research DEMO (Greene et al.,
1999) also led us to control for industry-related experience (no=0, yes=1).
The organizational unit of the two DEMO (1=ofﬁce employees;
2=manufacturing personnel) was the fourth control variable that was
entered for each of the examinations.
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
Sample Description
DEMO percent of the respondents were males, 56 percent had college
degrees, and 67 percent had been employed for up to 2 years with DEMO
company. Most respondents lacked experience in the industry (62 percent)
DEMO more than half of them had some previous entrepreneurial experience.
On average, employees reported six proposals (SD=3.93). They made 3.47
proposals in DEMO HR area (SD=2.04) and 1.95 proposals in the
technological and marketing areas (SD=2.11). When the employees in the
two organizational sites were compared separately, it was found that those
in the ofﬁce unit suggested signiﬁcantly more CE proposals than those in the
manufacturing unit. Fifty-eight of DEMO 99 respondents undertook CE
initiatives in the organization to advance the implementation of their
proposals. Manufacturing personnel were higher in undertaking CE
activities, but the difference was not statistically signiﬁcant.
Correlates of CE Activities
The hypotheses DEMO examined using Pearson’s simple correlations and
hierarchical regression analyses. Table 1 presents the Pearson correlations
Table 1. Pearson Correlations between the Entrepreneurial Variables and Demographic, Organizational,
and Time Variables.
Mean SD 1 2 3 4567 89 10 11 DEMO 13 14 15 16 17
1. Entrepreneurial proposals 6.00 3.93 –
2. Improvement of HR proposals 3.47 2.04 .82* –
3. Proposals of new DEMO 1.95 2.11 .84* .41* –
or market
4. Undertaking entrepreneurial 3.28 .99 .26* .26* .24* –
activities
5. Perception of non-blockage of 2.64 .76 DEMO .02 .05 .07 –
entrepreneurship
6. Perceived encouragement of 3.13 .98 .28* .21* .21* .37* .46* –
entrepreneurship
7. Norms of time in the DEMO .48 .13 .04 .23* .04 .09 .16 –
organization
8. Pressure in allocation of time 3.80 .69 .28* .34* .19 .27* .21* .01 .00 DEMO
9. Schedules and future orientation 3.33 .69 .07 .06 .18 .02 .18 .42 .78* .14 –
10. Synchronization and coordination 3.32 .84 .07 .08 DEMO .19 .06 .21* * .52** .21** .34* –
11. Lack of autonomy of time use 2.84 .90 .21* .21* .11 .29* .34 .34 .21* DEMO .17 .29* –
12. Employee’s structuring of 3.72 .46 .03 .13 .04 .04 .16 .17 .25 .13 .36* .07
time index
13. Length of DEMO in 2.03 1.40 .34* .30* .24* .21 .06 .01 .29* .15 .17 .11
the organization
14. Prior experience in .56 .50 .38* .26* .36* DEMO .12 .18 .14 .01 .02 .12
entrepreneurship
15. Previous experience in industry .37 .49 .34** .12 .38* .06 .03 .31* .14 .08 .13 .07 DEMO .13 .02 .29* –
16. Gender 1.44 .50 .26* .12 .25* .00 .01 .24 .04 .16* * .13* .03 .00 .21** .17* .30* –.40* DEMO
17. Education 3.63 .86 .30 .13 .37* .20 .11 .01* .43 .26 .43* .13 .10 .34* .24 .09 .04 .11 –*
18. Unit .75 DEMO .08 .18a .06 .16 .23 .16 .43 .17 .40 .16 .09 .24 .12 .21 .26 .32 .47
**
.14 –
.26* .12 –
.22* DEMO .02 –
*po.05.
**po.01.
*
*
202
MIRI LERNER ET AL.
Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship
203
matrix of the entrepreneurial variables and demographic, organizational,
and time variables.
As Table 1 shows, employees’ propensity to suggest proposals for impro-
vements in HR practices and actual undertaking of DEMO activities were both
signiﬁcantly associated with time norms. Speciﬁcally, pressure in DEMO
allocation was positively related to each of them and lack of autonomy was
negatively related to them. Generating proposals for products or markets
was DEMO and signiﬁcantly associated with norms of time in the
organization (index)DEMO In contrast, the employee’s time structures’ index was
not signiﬁcantly associated DEMO any of the study’s dependent variables. The
factor of ‘‘synchronization and coordination with the work of others through
time’’ was not signiﬁcantly correlated with DEMO of the CE variables, and it
was therefore dropped from further DEMO analyses. As several of the
time variables (particularly schedules and lack DEMO autonomy variables) were
signiﬁcantly correlated with the membership in a given DEMO, the organizati-
onal unit was examined as a control variable in DEMO the multiple examinations.
Predictors of Perception of Entrepreneurial Climate
We ran two hierarchical regression analyses to determine whether the time
variables added signiﬁcantly to DEMO employees’ perceptions of the
organizational climate as entrepreneurial, beyond the variance DEMO
explained by demographic and organizational variables. Four time-related
variables were included in each of the two regressions: the individual time
structure index and three factors of the organizational time norms. The
control variables included gender, education, organizational unit, and prior
experience in industry. (Prior entrepreneurial experience and the length of
employment in the organization were not included in the DEMO because
of the limited sample size.) The results of the two DEMO appear in
Table 2.
In the ﬁrst hierarchical regression, in which DEMO of management’s
encouragement of CE was the dependent variable (reported in DEMO left
columns of Table 2), the results show that among the demographic and
organizational variables only industry experience was statistically signiﬁ-
cant, explaining 11 percent of the variance ( po.05). When the four time
DEMO were introduced, the R2 rose to 34 percent, and the change with
respect to the prior equation was signiﬁcant ( po.001). Schedules DEMO
planning had a positive and signiﬁcant coefﬁcient, whereas lack of
autonomy DEMO negative and signiﬁcant.
204
Table 2. Hierarchical Regression of Perception of Entrepreneurial
Organizational Climate.
Variable DEMO of Encouragement for Perception of Barriers to Corporate
Corporate Entrepreneurship Entrepreneurship
b R2 R2 F b R2 R2 F
change change change change
.01
DEMO
.32
.06 .06 .06 1.53
2. Schedules and planning .39***
3. Lack of autonomy of time use .27**
4. Synchronization .01 .09
5. Time DEMO
Adj. R2
*po.05.
**po.01.
***po.001.
The results for the second regression analysis, in which the perception of
barriers in the organizational climate to CE was the dependent variable item
(right columns of Table 2), show that the control variables explained
6 percent of the variance and only DEMO unit was signiﬁcant, with a
negative sign. When we entered the DEMO time variables, the regression
equation was signiﬁcant ( po.01) and the R2 improved to 27 percent, and
the change with respect to the prior equation was signiﬁcant ( po.01). Three
of the four time DEMO were signiﬁcant: pressure in allocation of time and
lack of autonomy DEMO positive coefﬁcients, and schedules and planning had
negative coefﬁcients.
The results DEMO the two regressions partially supported H1. They indicated
the multifaceted nature of the relationships between organizational time
norms and perception of the organizational climate. DEMO time
structure failed to signiﬁcantly contribute to explaining employees’ percep-
tions of the organizational climate in any of the equations, contradicting H3.
Proposing Entrepreneurial Ideas
The analyses also sought to determine if organizational time norms signi-
DEMO explained the variance in CE behavior variables. We ﬁrst explored the
MIRI LERNER ET AL.
A. Demographic organizational variables
1. Gender .12
2. Education DEMO
3. Unit .02
4. Experience in industry .22* .11 .11 2.90*
B. Time variables
1. Pressure in allocation of time .11 .22*
.01 .34***
DEMO 6.39***
*
*
.27
.21
.13 .27 .21 5.12**
.28 .18
Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship
205
contribution of the demographic and organizational variables, then the
contributions of the perception of entrepreneurial climate variables, contro-
lling for demographic and organizational variables. Finally, we determined
the contribution of the time variables, after controlling for all the above
variables. These analyses used two measures of entrepreneurial proposals:
(a) proposals for improvement of DEMO practices and (b) proposals of a product
or a market. The results, which appear in Table 3, are summarized below.
When the DEMO of entrepreneurial proposals of improvement of HR
practices was considered as the dependent variable (left columns of Table 3),
the regression equation DEMO organizational unit was signiﬁcantly negative
and explained 9 percent of the variance. This indicated that employees at the
ofﬁce location suggested more proposals of DEMO type compared to their
colleagues at the manufacturing unit. When perception of the organizational
climate was entered into the analysis, the R2 increased to 12 percent but the
two equations were not signiﬁcant ( pW.05). DEMO four time variables entered
in the ﬁnal step of the analysis added signiﬁcantly to the model’s R2 and the
explained variance increased from 9 DEMO 33 percent ( po.01). Time pressure
Table 3. Hierarchical Regression of Entrepreneurial Proposals.
Variable Entrepreneurial Proposals for
HR Improvement
b R2 R2 F
DEMO change
A. Demographic organizational variables
1. Gender .07 .16
2. Education .14 .30*
3. Unit .31* .03
4. Experience in industry .04 .09 .09 DEMO .33**
B. Perception of entrepreneurial climate
1. Management encouragement .03 .09
2. Barriers .02 .12 .03 1.96 .00 .32 .00 .41
C. Time variables
DEMO Pressure in allocation of time .45*** .18
2. Schedules and planning .09* .20
3. Lack of autonomy of time use .29 .10
4. Synchronization DEMO .06
5. Time structure .12 .33 .21 4.56**
.04 .37 .04 1.11
Entrepreneurial Proposals of
New Product or Market
b
R2
R2 F
change DEMO
.32 .32 9.42***
Adj. R2
*po.05.
**po.01.
***po.001.
.23 .28
206
MIRI LERNER ET AL.
had a positive and signiﬁcant coefﬁcient, and the lack of autonomy in time
use had a negative and signiﬁcant DEMO
Table 3 also displays the results for CE proposals of new product or market
(right columns of Table 3). These results differ considerably from those of the
HR improvement proposals. Initially, demographic variables were entered
into the analysis, explaining 32 percent of the variance ( po.001). Education
and industry experience were both positive and signiﬁcant. When perception
of DEMO entrepreneurial climate was entered into the analysis, neither the
equation and DEMO change in the R2 nor the dimension of climate was
signiﬁcant . In the ﬁnal step, the four time norms were entered into the
analysis but none of them was signiﬁcant. Thus, whereas perceived
organizational time norms did not contribute signiﬁcantly to explaining CE
proposals of new product DEMO market, they signiﬁcantly contributed to
proposing entrepreneurial HR improvements, partially supporting H2.
Individual time structure did not signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the generation of
entrepreneurial DEMO in any of the two regressions, failing to support H4.
The DEMO thus far have shown the impact of organizational time norms
on the dependent entrepreneurial variables. However, the direction of this
impact seems to be more complicated than hypothesized, reﬂecting the
multifaceted nature of organizational time norms. Whereas the results show
consistently that the factor of lack of autonomy DEMO time use had a negative
association with the dependent variables (except DEMO not having any signiﬁcant
association with the CE proposals of new product or market), pressure in
time allocation consistently exerted a positive impact (both on proposing HR
improvements and on the perception of barriers to DEMO organiza-
tional climate). The third time factor, schedules and planning, had a positive
association with the perception of entrepreneurial climate variables, but had
no effect on the generation of entrepreneurial proposals.
Undertaking Corporate Entrepreneurial DEMO
The results of the hierarchical regression analysis, where the employees’
undertaking DEMO CE activities was the dependent variable (Table 4), show that
DEMO time norms contributed signiﬁcantly to explaining its
variance. Time pressure and lack of autonomy in time use signiﬁcantly
inﬂuenced the undertaking of CE activities (the ﬁrst with a positive
association and the second had a negative DEMO), supporting H2. Given the
small number of respondents who undertook CE activities in the
organization (n=58), we could not distinguish those employees who
suggested improvements of HR practices from those who suggested new
Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship
207
Table 4. Hierarchical Regression of Undertaking Entrepreneurial
DEMO
Variable
b
R2
R2 Change
F Change Adj. R2
A. Demographic organizational variables
1. Gender .09
2. Education .08
3. Unit .12
4. Experience DEMO industry .13 .09 .09 1.23 .02
B. Perception of entrepreneurial climate
1. Management encouragement of .44**
entrepreneurship
2. Barriers .16 .24 .15 5.12** .15
DEMO Time variables
1. Pressure in allocation of time .29**
2. Planning .15
3. Lack of autonomy in time usage .25
4. Synchronization .22a
*
DEMO Time structure .04 .37 .13 1.99 .22
Note: Number of respondents=58.
DEMO
**po.01.
product or market ideas. Finally, the results did not support DEMO
Speciﬁcally, employees’ personal time structure did not signiﬁcantly
contribute to any DEMO the study’s dependent variables, perceptions of
entrepreneurial climate in the company, or CE behavior variables.
Time Norms, Employee Time Structure, and Corporate DEMO
H5 posits that under loose (ﬂexible) time norms employees with a more deﬁned
time structure will generate entrepreneurial proposals, and vice versa. We
expected employees’ time structure to moderate the relationship between the
organization’s time DEMO and employees’ CE activities. To examine H5,
regression analysis was performed using the number of entrepreneurial
proposals as the dependent variable. The regression DEMO included the
employees’ time structure, the index of organizational time norms, and an
interaction of the two variables. The analyses controlled for organizational DEMO
The results presented in Table 5 supported H5. Further, we examined
DEMO correlations between these organizational time norms and the
entrepreneurial proposals of respondents with vague time structures and
separately for employees with well-deﬁned time structure (the separation
208
MIRI LERNER ET AL.
Table 5. Multiple Regression Model Explaining the DEMO of
Entrepreneurial Proposals by Norms of Time in the Organization,
Employees’ Structure of Time, and Their Interaction.
Explaining Variables
B (Standard Error)DEMO
b
T(89)
Unit
Organizations’ norms of time
Employees’ structure of time
Interaction: norms of time  structure of time
1.44
(.96)DEMO
5.68
(2.50)
Intercept 11.59*
.17
(1.23).41 .04
(.33).98 .29**
.24**
2.27*
– 2.60*
1.50
.34
2.87**
(4.45)
*po.05.
**po.01.
12 3 4 5
The extent of tightness of time norms
DEMO 2. Two Regression Equations for Explaining the Number of Entrepreneurial
Proposals by Organizational Time Norms for Employees with Vague and Deﬁned
Time Structure.
was DEMO at the median). The results revealed that while among the
employees with a well-deﬁned structure the correlation was negative
(
(
was DEMO signiﬁcant difference between the two correlations.
r=.28, p=.068), for those DEMO a vague time structure it was positive
r=.20, p=.160). A DEMO Z test (Z=2.21, p=.013) indicated that there
Fig. 2 shows DEMO different slopes for the equations correlating the two
relationships. For employees with vague time structures, the slope is
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Employees with vague
DEMO of time
Employees with defined
structure of time
Number of entrepreneurial
proposals
Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship
209
positive. The opposite is true for those DEMO deﬁned time structures (slope is
negative). This suggests that under DEMO (ﬂexible) organizational time
norms, employees with deﬁned time structures generated DEMO proposals,
while employees with vague time structures did not. These results also
supported H5.
DISCUSSION
This study sought to determine if and to DEMO extent organizational time
norms and individual time structures inﬂuence employees’ CE behavior and
their perceptions of the organizational culture as being entrepreneurial. This
chapter DEMO an interactionist view of the relationship between the
external organizational time norms and the individual time structures to
determine if and how they inﬂuenced DEMO CE behavior of individuals. Our
examination was guided by the practice-based theoretical perspective of
Orlikowski and Yates (2002).
Time norms are an important part of the culture of organizations and, as
such, represent normative DEMO These norms are shaped by the
organization; individual time structures are DEMO by the individuals in
combination with how they perceive and interpret the organizational time
norms. As organizational time norms are multifaceted, we have empirically
attempted to capture those norms that inﬂuence CE activities. Four factors
of DEMO time norms derived from factor analysis were examined in
this study: DEMO in allocation of time, schedules and planning, lack of
autonomy in use of time, and synchronization and coordination with others
over time. Given that different people attach different values and meanings
to time (Francis-Smythe & Robertson, 1999), we also examined employees’
personal time structures deﬁned as the extent to which they perceived the use
of their time as DEMO structured and purposeful (Bond & Feather, 1988).
The ﬁndings relating to the study’s ﬁve hypotheses that were examined
within an Israeli organization DEMO discussed next.
Hypothesis 1. H1 posited that tight (rigid) organizational time norms are
negatively associated with employees’ perceptions of the organizational
climate as DEMO, whereas loose (ﬂexible) organizational time
norms are positively associated with DEMO of the climate as
entrepreneurial. The results of two hierarchical regressions, DEMO which
demographic (gender, education) and organizational variables (organiza-
tional unit, experience in industry) were controlled for, partially supported
210
MIRI LERNER ET AL.
this hypothesis. They indicated that organizational time DEMO explained a
statistically signiﬁcant amount of variance in employees’ perceptions of
management’s encouragement of the entrepreneurial climate, and their
perceptions of organizational climate as a barrier to CE. Two of the four
time variables were signiﬁcant: schedules and planning had a positive and
signiﬁcant coefﬁcient, whereas lack of autonomy was negative and
signiﬁcant. When we examine the barriers in the DEMO climate to
CE as the dependent variable item, three of the DEMO time variables were also
signiﬁcant: schedules and planning had negative coefﬁcients, while pressure
in allocation of time and lack of autonomy had positive DEMO
These results also indicated that among the organizational time norms,
schedules and planning were found as having the strongest effect on
perceptions regarding DEMO entrepreneurial climate. Lack of autonomy in time
allocation had a negative effect on employees’ perceptions of the
entrepreneurial climate. Pressure in allocation of time DEMO also perceived
as contributing to perception of barriers to CE. In contrast, synchronization
of time did not contribute to the explained variance in employees’
perceptions of management’s encouragement of the entrepreneurial climate,
and their perceptions DEMO organizational climate or a barrier to CE.
Hypothesis 2. Here we argue that tight (rigid) organizational time norms are
negatively related to employees’ DEMO behavior, whereas loose (ﬂexible) time
norms are positively related to DEMO CE behavior. The results revealed two
separate areas in which employees have centered their CE activities and
further distinguished between these two areas in DEMO of their relatedness to
time variables. The ﬁrst area was improvements in HR practices. The second
area was proposing a new product or a DEMO market niche.
HRM practices in any organization articulate its true culture (DEMO,
1986) and time-related aspects are an important part in organizational DEMO
that strives to foster entrepreneurship. Organization time norms were found
as signiﬁcantly increasing the explained variance in proposing entrepreneurial
ideas for improvements of HRM DEMO Time pressure had a positive and
signiﬁcant coefﬁcient but the lack of autonomy in time use had a negative and
signiﬁcant coefﬁcient. The contribution DEMO these organizational time norms
was important, even after controlling for both DEMO and organiza-
tional variables as well as perceptions of the organizational climate. However,
schedules and planning were not found to be signiﬁcant in DEMO hierarchical
regressions nor were synchronization and coordination.
Time norms did not contribute signiﬁcantly to explaining variations in
proposing of entrepreneurial ideas for new products DEMO market niches. One
Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship
211
possible reason was that these ideas are DEMO usually constrained by the
organizational time norms. They are more related to individual human
capital variables such as level of education and experience in DEMO
Innovations in these areas also take time to be conceived, reﬁned, and
introduced. These heavy time requirements may discourage employees from
considering marketing DEMO technological innovation, particularly if they
lack ﬁrst-hand knowledge of the area. DEMO, employees usually appreciate
the changes needed to foster productivity and performance DEMO
in their work environment and therefore quickly develop ideas for
innovations that improve HR matters. There is also the possibility that
because the second DEMO of CE proposing combined either new product or
a new market niche the effect of this measure was diluted. Innovation of a
product might DEMO a manufacturing function, while a marketing idea is an
ofﬁce function. DEMO in one function usually do not do what the other
groups do, possibly diluting the effect. Overall, the results only partially
supported H2.
DEMO the conceptual framework of Orlikowski and Yates (2002) to
our empirical ﬁndings provides an enriched view of the importance of these
three organizational DEMO norm factors that impact the CE variables:
autonomy in use of time, pressure in time allocation, and schedules and
planning. According to DEMO conceptual view, when taking action such as
undertaking entrepreneurial initiatives in DEMO organization, employees
routinely draw on common temporal structures that they (and others) had
previously enacted to organize their ongoing practices, such as DEMO project
schedules to pace work activities for their entrepreneurial projects.
Hypotheses 3 and 4. We proposed that employees with a well-deﬁned time
structure are DEMO likely to perceive the organizational climate as being
entrepreneurial (H3) and behave more entrepreneurially (H4). When we
examined these two hypotheses in the same hierarchical regressions with the
organizational time norms, controlling for demographic and organizational
variables, no signiﬁcant contribution of the employees’ personal time
structures was tied to any of the CE behavior variables. These results failed
DEMO support H3 and H4. One cannot rule out the possibility that our measure
of time structure was oversimpliﬁed as it mainly included the time DEMO
Other research suggests that some people tend to be linear–objective–
monochronic, DEMO long been thought of as the ‘‘clock watchers,’’ and not
generally thought of as the more creative sorts. The others are nonlinear–
subjective–polychronic DEMO are seen as more free ﬂowing in work and
thinking, and DEMO more creative. Our hypotheses predicted contrary link
212
MIRI LERNER ET AL.
between individual time structure and CE and DEMO refutation of our results
may perhaps suggest that employees’ time structures do not ‘‘stand alone’’
in their inﬂuence upon entrepreneurial perceptions or actual CE DEMO
Rather, CE activities and perceptions of the organizational climate are
shaped DEMO by employees’ perceptions of the company’s time norms as well
as by other structural conditions.
Hypothesis 5. We proposed that employees’ time structure moderates DEMO
relationship between the organization’s time norms and employees’ CE-
related activities. The results supported this hypothesis (H5). When
organizational time norms were loose (ﬂexible), employees with more highly
deﬁned time structures generated more CE-related proposals, whereas
employees with vague time structures did not exhibit such behaviors.
Employees with vague time structures generated more entrepreneurial
proposals under tight organizational DEMO norms. These ﬁndings suggested
that matching employees’ time structures with their perceptions of the
company’s time norms was essential for enhancing employees’ willingness to
DEMO entrepreneurial activities.
These results also indicate that different employees may hold different views
regarding the existing external organizational time norms and their individual
interpretations DEMO interact with their own personal time structures, to lead
them to DEMO CE activities or avoid them. These ﬁndings show how external
organizational time norms and individual time structures may interact
together to inﬂuence actual behavior DEMO individuals in the area of CE.
The results may also be related to the person–organization ﬁt (O’Reilly,
Chatman, & Caldwell, 1991; DEMO, 1991; Bluedorn, 2000). Research
suggests that ﬁt or congruence DEMO job satisfaction and organizational
commitment. The notion of initial ﬁt between a person’s time structures and
the time norms of the work environment has DEMO documented in the
literature (Francis-Smythe & Robertson, 1999). Our results contribute to
this stream of research, suggesting that the ﬁt between organizational time
norms and individual time structures signiﬁcantly increases CE activities
while misﬁt DEMO them.
Our results may be related to what Nowotny (1992, p. 424) termed
pluritemporalism – ‘‘the existence of plurality of different modes of social
time(s) which may exist side by side.’’ This goes back to the subjective–
objective time differentiation mentioned above, and to other studies showing
that both types exist in the work population. Bluedorn et al. (1999) examined
polychronicity at the dimension of individual–organizational value con-
gruence as a speciﬁc case of the more general question of the consequences
Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship
213
obtained from individual–organizational value congruence (Bluedorn, DEMO,
p. 122). Bluedorn also related to the attraction–selection–attrition theory
that states that individuals search for and are attracted to organizations
whose cultures DEMO values and beliefs similar to their own (Schneider,
Goldstein, & Smith, 1995). Investigating the value-congruence question as it
applies to polychronicity values, Bluedorn (2000) found support for this
congruence (Slocombe & DEMO, 1999). Our results may suggest that
engagement in such temporal DEMO and especially that the congruence
of ﬁt between organizational time norms and individual time structure has
important consequences for people’s experiences of time and DEMO their
undertaking of CE-related behaviors. Thus, our results suggest that the
DEMO between organizational time norms and individual time
structures signiﬁcantly increases CE activities while misﬁt decreases them.
Limitations
Though the research design has enabled us DEMO canvass a wide range of
opinions and experiences by employees regarding CE, source bias cannot be
eliminated. Fortunately, when we performed factor analysis (employing
different measures), we found multiple dimensions, which indicated that
source bias was not a serious issue in the study. Still, the fact that data were
collected from a single ﬁrm in one country at DEMO point in time suggests a
need for caution in generalizing the results. Another limitation of this study
is embedded in its partial usage of DEMO TSQ scale, which might have
weakened the results. Also the TSQ DEMO the objectivist linear-time
approaches over subjectivist view of time.
Implications for Management
Organizations recognize that effective planning of time and the synchroni-
zation of DEMO and assignments are important time norms for future
survival, growth, and proﬁtability (Barkema, Baum, & Mannix, 2002).
Companies structure their DEMO around time, as reﬂected in work
hours, the level of output per unit of time, work shifts, and time-based
compensation (Cunningham, DEMO; Doob, 1971; Krausz & Freibach, 1983).
Given the pervasiveness of these activities, employees recognize that the
appropriate allocation of their time and its effective use profoundly
inﬂuence their behaviors and performance on the DEMO
214
MIRI LERNER ET AL.
Our results show that organizations and employees DEMO hold different
perceptions of time norms. Employees analyze the organizational norms and
behave in ways that reﬂect their understanding of their organization’s
commitment to DEMO, especially when developing CE projects. Firms hoping
to foster CE need DEMO be aware of the relevance of their time norms in this
process and ensure that they are clearly communicated to employees, and
that managers’ behavior reﬂects the priorities attached to the different
norms. Giving employees autonomy DEMO managing their own work as well as
scheduling and planning their work can be viewed as an important
investment by the company in promoting DEMO activities.
The results also highlight the importance of synchronizing employee and
ﬁrm time norms to boost CE activities in the organization. Employees with
deﬁned DEMO norms appeared to be capable of taking control of their
situations, DEMO the importance of the loose (ﬂexible) time structure
prevailing in the ﬁrm. In doing so, these employees closely resembled
Pinchot’s (1985) depiction of entrepreneurs – self-motivated and capable
of deﬁning their own goals and DEMO them with vigor. Employees
with vague time structures may become frustrated with the loose time
norms prevailing in their companies. These employees would beneﬁt
DEMO having a more directive leadership from managers working closely
with them in deﬁning organizational priorities and the best way to achieve
them.
Implications for DEMO and Research
Time plays an important role in the life of organizations (George & Jones,
2000; Fischer et al., 1997), and time orientations inﬂuence a ﬁrm’s
performance (e.g., Hay & Usunier, 1993). However, researchers have not
systematically examined how time inﬂuences CE. This study offers an initial
effort to document the effect of employees’ perceptions DEMO organizational
time norms and their own individual time structures on their CE activities.
The results indicate a further need to study this issue in DEMO, examining the
process aspects of time in CE and also the DEMO of using different groups of
employees from different organizations in different industries and countries.
This should provide a basis for understanding when organizational and
DEMO time norms inﬂuence the CE process. To do so, future studies DEMO
improve upon the design used in this chapter. For instance, it DEMO be
possible to obtain supervisors’ evaluations of employees who undertake
different CE activities within the ﬁrm’s various functions (production vs.
Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship
215
marketing). Using multiple sources of data DEMO this fashion can reduce
response bias and enhance conﬁdence in the ﬁndings.
Given the interplay between employees’ perceptions and CE activities, it is
also important to conduct longitudinal research on the relationships among
the variables explored DEMO this chapter. This should allow researchers to
better document the relative contributions of prior experience and
perceptions of time norms in explaining employees’ future DEMO activities.
Experience might color employees’ perceptions of the value added to their
ﬁrms as they undertake CE activities.
This study also adds to the DEMO by making a distinction between
different areas of CE activities. Future research should validate this
distinction between HR improvements and new product and market
DEMO, linking employees’ perceptions of time norms to different
dimensions of CE DEMO and investigating the effect of their different
initiatives on organizational performance.
CONCLUSION
The consequences of time for CE have not been well documented in DEMO
literature. In this chapter, we have argued that organizations and employees
DEMO have different time clocks, inﬂuencing employees’ sense of urgency and
support DEMO entrepreneurial activities. The results show that employees’ time
structures signiﬁcantly moderate the interaction between their perceptions of
their organization’s time norms (schedules and planning, autonomy in use of
time, pressure in allocation of time) and their willingness to propose ideas for
innovation and undertaking the risks associated DEMO entrepreneurial
ventures. The results invite entrepreneurship scholars to give more attention
to the meaning of time and how it inﬂuences employees’ attention and
commitment DEMO CE activities. Incorporating time in future research can
enrich our understanding of the temporal relationships between employees’
perceptions and entrepreneurial activities in existing organizations.
DEMO
We are grateful for the insightful comments of Professors Tom Lumpkin
and Jerome Katz for an earlier version of this chapter. We thank Amram
DEMO for his statistical assistance.
216
MIRI LERNER ET AL.
REFERENCES
Adam, B. (1990). Time DEMO social theory. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Baer, M., & Frese, M. (2003). Innovation is not enough: Climates for initiative and
psychological safety, process innovations, and ﬁrm performance. Journal of Organiza-
DEMO Behavior, 24, 45–68.
Barkema, H. G., Baum, J. A. DEMO, & Mannix, E. A. (2002). Management challenges in a DEMO
time. Academy of Management Journal, 45(5), 916–930.
Bird, B. J., & West, G. P., III. (1997). Time and DEMO Entrepreneurship: Theory and
Practice, 22(2), 5–9.
Bluedorn, A. DEMO (2000). Time and organizational culture. In: N. M. Ashkanasy, DEMO M. Wilderom &
M. F. Peterson (Eds), Handbook of organizational culture and climate (pp. 117–130).
Thousands Oaks, CA: Sage.
Bluedorn, A. C., & Denhardt, R. B. (1988). Time and DEMO Journal of Management,
14(2), 299–320.
Bluedorn, A. C., Kalliath, T. J., Strube, M. J., & Martin, G. D. (1999). Polychronicity and the
Inventory of Polychronic Values (IPV): DEMO development of an instrument to measure a
fundamental dimension of organizational culture. Journal of Managerial Psychology,
14(3/4), 205–225.
Bond, M. J., & Feather, N. T. (1988). Some correlates of structure and purpose in the use of
time. Journal of Personality and Social DEMO, 55(2), 321–329.
Brockhaus, R. H., & Horwits, P. S. (1986). The psychology of the entrepreneur. In: D. L. DEMO &
R. W. Smilor (Eds), The art and science of entrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Cable, D., & Shane, S. (DEMO). A prisoner’s dilemma approach to entrepreneur-venture
capitalist relationships. Academy of Management Review, 22(1), 142–176.
Clark, P. A. (1985). A review of theories of time and structure for organizational sociology.
Research in DEMO Sociology of Organizations, 4, 35–79.
Clark, P. A. (1990). Chronological codes and organizational analysis. In: J. Hassard & D. Pym
(DEMO), The theory and philosophy of organizations: Critical issues and new DEMO
(pp. 137–163). London: Routledge.
Collins, J., & Porras, DEMO (1994). Built to last: Successful habits of visionary companies. New York:
Harper Business.
Cooper, A., Ramachandran, M., & Schoorman, D. (1997). Time allocation patterns of
craftsmen and administrative entrepreneurs: DEMO for ﬁnancial performance.
Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 22(2), 123–136.
Cunningham, J. B. (1989). A compressed shift schedule: Dealing with some of the problems of
shift work. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 10, 231–245.
Das, T. K. (1993). Time in management and organizational studies. Time and Society, 2(2),
267–274.
Das, T. K., & Teng, B. S. (1997). Time and entrepreneurial risk behavior. Entrepreneurship:
Theory and Practice, 22(2), 69–88.
Doob, L. DEMO (1971). Patterning of time. New Haven, CT: Yale University DEMO
Edwards, J. R. (1991). Person–job ﬁt: A conceptual integration, literature review and
methodological critique. In: C. L. Cooper & I. T. Robertson (Eds), International review
of industrial and organizational psychology (Vol. DEMO). Chichester: Wiley.
Feldman, L. P., & Hornik, J. (DEMO). The use of time: An integrated conceptual model. Journal
of DEMO Research, 7, 407–419.
Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship
217
Fischer, E., Reuber, A. R., DEMO, M., Johnson, W., & Lee, S. (1997). The role of socially
constructed temporal perspectives in the emergence of rapid-growth ﬁrms. DEMO
ship: Theory and Practice, 22(2), 13–30.
Floyd, S. DEMO, & Wooldridge, B. (1999). Knowledge creation and social networks DEMO corporate
entrepreneurship: The renewal of organizational capability. Entrepreneurship: Theory
and Practice, 23(3), 123–143.
Francis-Smythe, J., & Robertson, I. (1999). Time-related individual differences. Time and
Society, 8(2), 273–292.
George, J. M., & Jones, G. R. (2000). The role DEMO time in theory and theory building. Journal of
Management, 26(4), 657–684.
Gersick, C. J. G. (1989). Marking time: Predictable DEMO in task groups. Academy of
Management Journal, 32, 274–309.
Gherardi, DEMO, & Strati, A. (1988). The temporal dimension in organizational DEMO
Organization Studies, 9(2), 149–164.
Goodman, P. S. (1967)DEMO An empirical examination of Elliot Jacques’ concept of time span.
Human Relations, 20, 155–170.
Greene, P. G., Brush, C. G., & DEMO, M. M. (1999). The corporate venture champion:
A resource-based approach to role and process. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice,
23(3), 103–122.
Hall, E. T. (1983). The dance of life: The other dimension of time. Garden City, NY: Anchor.
Hassard, J. (1996). Images of time in work and organizations. In: S. DEMO Clegg, C. Hardy &
W. R. Nord (Eds), Handbook DEMO organization studies (pp. 581–598). London: Sage.
Hay, M., & Usunier, J. C. (1993). Time and strategic action: A cross-cultural view. Time and
Society, 2(3), 313–333.
Hisrich, R. D. (1986). Entrepreneurship, intrapreneurship and venture capital. Lexington, MA:
Lexington DEMO
Hornsby, J. S., Naffziger, D. W., Kuratko, D. F., & Montagno, R. V. (1993). An interactive
model of the DEMO entrepreneurship process. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice,
17(2), 29–38.
DEMO, E. (1997). Time and entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 22(2), 11–12.
Kaufman, C. F., Lane, P. M., & Lindquist, J. D. (1991). Time congruity in the
organization: DEMO proposed quality-of-life framework. Journal of Business and Psychology,
61(1), 79–106.
Kaufman-Scarborough, C., & Lindquist, J. D. (1999). Time DEMO and polychronicity:
Comparisons, contrasts, and insights for the workplace. Journal of Managerial
Psychology, 14(3/4), 288–312.
Krausz, M., & Freibach, N. (1983). Effects of ﬂexible working time for employed DEMO upon
satisfaction, strains, and absenteeism. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 56, 155–159.
Kuratko, D., Hornsby, J., Naffziger, D., & Montagno, R. (1993). Implementing entrepreneurial
thinking in established organizations. S.A.M. Advanced Management Journal, 58(1), 28.
Kuratko, D. F., Montagno, R. DEMO, & Hornsby, J. S. (1990). Developing an intrapreneurial
assessment DEMO for an effective corporate entrepreneurial environment. Strategic
Management Journal, 11, 49–58.
Landy, F. J., Rastegary, H., Thayer, J., & Colvin, C. (1991). Time urgency: The construct and
its measurement. Journal DEMO Applied Psychology, 76(5), 644–657.
Lee, H., & Liebenau, J. (1999). Time in organizational studies: Towards a new research
DEMO Organization Studies, 20(6), 1035–1058.
218
MIRI LERNER ET AL.
Lumpkin, G. T., & Dess, G. G. (1996). Clarifying the entrepreneurial orientation construct and
linking it to performance. Academy of Management Review, 21(1), 135–172.
Macan, T. DEMO (1994). Time management: Test of a process model. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 79(3), 381–391.
Macan, T. H., & Shahani, C. (1990). College students time management: Correlations with
academic performance and stress. Journal of Educational Psychology, 82(4), 760–768.
Martello, DEMO E. (1994). Developing creative business insights: Serendipity and its potential in
entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 6(3), 239–258.
McGrath, DEMO E., & Rotchford, N. L. (1983). Time and behavior DEMO organizations. In:
L. L. Cummings & B. M. Staw (Eds), Research in organizational behavior
(Vol. 5). Greenwich, CT: JAI DEMO
McKinney, G., & McKinney, M. (1989). Forget the corporate umbrella: Entrepreneurs shine in
the rain. Sloan Management Review, 30(4), 77–82.
Miller, D. (1983). The correlates of entrepreneurship in three types of ﬁrms. Management
Science, 29(7), 770–791.
Mudrack, P. (1999). Time structure and purpose, type A behavior, and the DEMO work
ethic. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 20(2), 145–158.
Nowotny, H. (1992). Time and social theory: Towards a social theory DEMO time. Time and Society,
1(3), 421–454.
O’Reilly, C. DEMO, Chatman, J., & Caldwell, D. F. (1991). People DEMO organizational culture:
A proﬁle comparison approach to assessing person-organization ﬁt. Academy of
Management Journal, 34(3), 487–516.
Orlikowski, W. J., & Yates, J. (2002). It’s about time: Temporal structuring in organizations.
Organization Science, 13(6), 684–700.
Parasuraman, S., Purohit, Y., & Godshalk, V. (1996). Work and family variables,
entrepreneurial DEMO success and psychological well-being. Journal of Vocational
Behavior, 48(3), DEMO
Pinchot, G. (1985). Intrapreneuring. New York: Harper & Row.
DEMO, P. D., & Miller, B. (1992). New ﬁrm gestation: Conception, birth and implications
for research. Journal of Business Venturing, 34, 487–516.
Schneider, B., Goldstein, H. W., & Smith, D. DEMO (1995). The ASA framework: An update.
Personal Psychology, 48, 747–773.
Schriber, J. B., & Gutek, B. A. (1987). DEMO time dimensions of work: The measurement of
an underlying aspect of DEMO culture. Journal of Applied Psychology, 72(4),
642–650.
Schuler, DEMO S. (1986). Fostering and facilitating entrepreneurship in organizations: Implications
for organization structure and human resource management practices. Human Resource
Management, 25(4), 607–629.
Sharma, P., & Chrisman, J. J. (1999). DEMO a reconciliation of the deﬁnitional issues in the
ﬁeld of corporate entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 23(3), 11–27.
Slevin, P. D., & Covin, J. (1997). Time, growth, complexity, and DEMO: Entrepreneurial
challenges for the future. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 22(DEMO), 53–68.
Slocombe, T. E., & Bluedorn, A. C. (1999). Organizational behavior implications of the
congruence between preferred polychronicity and experience DEMO polychronicity.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 20, 75–99.
Starr, J. A., & MacMillan, I. C. (1990). Resource cooptation via social contracting: Resource
acquisition strategies for new ventures. Strategic Management Journal, 11, 79–92.
Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship
219
Zahra, S. A. (1991). Predictors DEMO ﬁnancial outcomes of corporate entrepreneurship:
An exploratory study. Journal of Business Venturing, 6, 259–285.
Zahra, S. A., & Covin, J. G. (1995). Contextual inﬂuences on the corporate entrepreneurship-
performance relationships: A DEMO analysis. Journal of Business Venturing, 10(1),
43–58.
Zahra, DEMO A., Jennings, D. F., & Kuratko, D. F. (1999)DEMO The antecedents and ﬁrm-level
entrepreneurship: The state of the art. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 24(2), 45–65.
APPENDIX
This Appendix presents the items used to construct the study’s various
measures. Response formats, along with procedures used to construct the
measures, are presented in the text.
(DEMO) Entrepreneurial proposals for improvements of human resources
(6 items; a=.80)DEMO
1. A proposal for an innovation/improvement in the organizational unit
2. A proposal for an improvement in manpower in the organizational
unit
3. DEMO proposal for an improvement of data transmission in the
organization
4. A proposal for improvement of the employment routines in the
organization
5. A DEMO for improvement and improved savings in the organization
6. A proposal for change or improvement of administrative processes
(b) Entrepreneurial proposals of new DEMO and markets (5 items;
a=.80)
1. A proposal for DEMO new line of products or a new product in existing
line
2. Discovery of new market or new niche
3. A proposal for new DEMO
4. A proposal for new design for existing product
5. An improvement or additional usage to existing product
Undertaking Entrepreneurial Activities in the Organization
(9 Items; a=.85)
This included nine items describing activities undertaken by the employees
to promote their proposals or ideas in the organization. Response DEMO
220 MIRI LERNER ET AL.
followed a 5-point Likert scale (0=not relevant, 1=not at all, 5=to a great
extent). Items asked employees DEMO report the extent to which they performed
the following activities:
1. Collection of data and examination of proposal/idea
2. Mobilizing resources: budgets
3. Mobilizing resources: equipment and laboratories to advance the project
4. Mobilizing resources: manpower
5. Mobilizing resources: work hours
6. Preparation of an DEMO business plan
7. Obtaining management support to advance the proposal/idea
8. Forming an intra-organizational coalition
9. Obtaining support from outside the organization
(a) Organizational support of corporate entrepreneurship (5 items; a=.86)
1. Management enables anyone at the organization to propose ideas
2. Management enables anyone DEMO implement new ideas
3. Management provides resources for implementing new ideas
4. Management encourages inter-disciplinary work teams
5. Management encourages proposing new ideas
(b) Perception of barriers to corporate entrepreneurship (6 items; a=.70)
1. Performing in non-regular ways encounters many restrictions
2. Implementing new ideas in DEMO organization is a frustrating process
3. Efforts at independent decisions meet objections
4. Any decision necessitates obtaining management’s approval
5. When I do something DEMO, my mistakes are remembered
6. In my department it is expected DEMO everyone will solve problems in
the same way
Organizational Norms of Time (4 Factors)
(a) Schedules and planning (6 items; a=.71)
1. Staying on schedule is important here
2. We do not DEMO much attention to schedules
3. Doing things right is better than doing things fast
4. Tasks usually take longer than planned
5. Planning for DEMO future is important here more than the present
6. It is important to stick to milestones
Time and Corporate Entrepreneurship
221
(b) Lack of autonomy of time DEMO (3 items; a=.68)
1. All of our work is tightly scheduled
2. People can work at their own pace
3. People here DEMO set their own work schedules
(c) Synchronization and coordination of work with others (3 items; a=.62)
1. To get the job DEMO, it is important for each person to coordinate
his/her work DEMO others
2. To get the job done, it is important to DEMO tasks in a speciﬁc order
3. It is easy to ﬁnd time to plan something new
(d) Pressure in allocation of time (4 items; a=.63)
1. Schedules usually seem too tight for most big jobs
2. We never seem to get enough time to get everything DEMO
3. Most people do not have time to take breaks during the day
4. People here work many hours during the day
Employee Time DEMO (10 Items; a=.63)
1. Difﬁculty to arrange required activities
2. Having a daily routine
3. Feeling your life has deﬁned purpose
4. DEMO activities from day to day
5. Leaving things to be done for the last moment
6. It happens that you are not sure what DEMO do next during the day
7. It takes a lot of time to start doing things
8. Feeling you spend your time well
9. DEMO main activities in life are relatively stable
10. Devoting time for thinking about own future{1g42fwefx}