When Bureaucrats Meet Entrepreneurs: The Design of Effective 'Public Venture Capital'DEMO
Programmes
Author(s): Josh Lerner
Source: The Economic Journal, Vol. 112, No. 477, Features (Feb., 2002), pp. F73-F84
Published DEMO: Blackwell Publishing for the Royal Economic Society
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/798492 .
Accessed: 02/08/2011 15:39
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and DEMO of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/DEMO/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. DEMO contact information may be obtained at .
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=black. .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must DEMO the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools DEMO increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Blackwell Publishing and Royal Economic Society are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
extend access to The Economic Journal.
http://www.jstor.org
The
Publishers, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF,
EconomicJournal,
DEMO (February),
F73-F84. ? Royal Economic Society 2002. Published by Blackwell
UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.
WHEN BUREAUCRATS MEET ENTREPRENEURS:
THE DESIGN OF EFFECTIVE 'PUBLIC VENTURE
CAPITAL' PROGRAMMES*
DEMO Lerner
Recently public efforts to finance small high-technology firms have proliferated. We review the
motivations for these efforts and make some preliminary observations about DEMO design. We
explore the underlying challenges that the financing of young growth firms poses, the ways that
specialised financial intermediaries address them, and DEMO rationales for public efforts to fi-
nance these companies. The final section makes a set of observations about the ways in which
the structure DEMO these efforts can most effectively complement private sector activity. A frequent
fault in programme design is the presumption that technological criteria can be divorced DEMO
business considerations when evaluating firms.
The federal government has played an active role in financing new firms, partic-
ularly in high-technology industries, since DEMO Soviet Union's launch of the Sput-
nik satellite. In recent years, European and Asian nations and many US states have
adopted similar initiatives. While these programmes' precise structures have dif-
fered, the efforts have DEMO predicated on two shared assumptions: (i) that the
private sector DEMO insufficient capital to new firms, and (ii) that the govern-
DEMO either can identify investments which will ultimately yield high social and/or
private returns or can encourage financial intermediaries to do so. In contrast DEMO
other government interventions designed to boost economic growth, such as pri-
DEMO programmes, these claims have received little scrutiny by economists.
The neglect DEMO these questions is unfortunate. While the sums of money involved
are modest relative to public expenditures on defence procurement or retiree
benefits, these programmes are very substantial when compared to contempora-
neous private investments in new DEMO Government programmes in this arena
have been divided between those efforts that directly fund entrepreneurial firms
and those that encourage or subsidise the development DEMO outside investors. In this
paper, I will focus on 'public venture capital' initiatives: programmes that make
equity or equity-like investments in young DEMO, or encourage other intermedi-
aries to make such investments. In some DEMO programmes, such as the Advanced
Technology Program and the Small Business DEMO Research programmes
discussed below, the funds are provided as a contract DEMO outright grant.
While these efforts have proliferated, a consensus as to DEMO to structure these
programmes remains elusive. While the design of regulatory agencies has been
extensively studied from a theoretical and empirical perspective, little work has
* This is based in part on conversations with Zoltan Acs, Ken Flamm, Paul Gompers, Adam Jaffe,
Bill Sahlman, Greg Udell, and Chuck Wessner. Helpful comments were provided by participants in the
workshop on 'Small Business and Capital Constraints' at the University of Warwick DEMO the workshop on
'Managing Technical Risk' at the Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government. Parts of this
article are adapted from Lerner (1998) and Gompers and Lerner (1999a). Financial support was
provided DEMO Harvard Business School's Division of Research. All errors are my own.
F73 I
F74 THE ECONOMIC JOURNAL [FEBRUARY
been done as to how to structure DEMO programmes to insure their greatest
effectiveness and to avoid political distortions. As we discuss below, a number of
these programmes appear predicated on a premise that is at odds with what we
know about the financing DEMO: that technologies in entrepreneurial firms can
be evaluated in the absence DEMO the consideration of the business prospects of the
firm.'
This article will provide an overview of the motivations for these public efforts, as
well as a brief consideration of design questions. In Section 1, the underlying
challenges that the financing of young growth firms poses are discussed, as well as
the ways that specialised financial intermediaries address them. The DEMO for
public programmes are explored in Section 2. Section 3 concludes the paper and
raises a set of issues about the design of these DEMO
1. Venture Capitalists and the Financing Challenge
The initial reaction of a financial economist to the argument that the government
needs to invest in DEMO firms is likely to be scepticism. A lengthy literature has
highlighted the role of financial intermediaries in alleviating moral hazard and
information asymmetries. Young DEMO firms are often characterised by
considerable uncertainty and informational asymmetries, which DEMO oppor-
tunistic behaviour by entrepreneurs. Why one would want to encourage public
officials instead of specialised financial intermediaries (venture capital organisa-
tions) as DEMO source of capital in this setting is not immediately obvious.
1.1. The Challenge of Financing Young High-Technology Firms
To review the types of conflicts DEMO can emerge in these settings briefly, Jensen
and Meckling (1976) DEMO that agency conflicts between managers and
investors can affect the willingness of both debt and equity holders to provide
capital. If the firm raises DEMO from outside investors, the manager has an in-
centive to engage DEMO wasteful expenditures (eg, lavish offices) because he does not
bear DEMO entire cost. Similarly, if the firm raises debt, the manager may increase
risk to undesirable levels. Because providers of capital recognise these problems,DEMO
outside investors demand a higher rate of return than would be the case if the
funds were internally generated.
Even if the manager is DEMO to maximise shareholder value, informational
asymmetries may make raising external capital DEMO expensive or even preclude it
entirely. Myers and Majluf (1984) and Greenwald et al. (1984) demonstrate that
equity offerings of firms may DEMO associated with a (Akerlof, 1970) 'lemons' prob-
lem. If DEMO manager is better informed about the investment opportunities of their
firms than the investors and acts in the interest of current shareholders, then the
manager issues new shares only when the company's stock is overvalued. DEMO,
1 Several limitations-necessitated by the limited available space-should be acknowledged up-front.
First, I will focus on the experience of the United States. Second, I will focus on government efforts to
finance young firms directly, DEMO than on those that subsidise venture capital organisations, as has
been DEMO in the Israeli Yozma programme or the BioRegio effort in Germany.
?) Royal Economic Society 2002
2002]
WHEN
BUREAUCRATS
MEET
ENTREPRENEURS
F75
numerous studies have documented that stock DEMO decline upon the an-
nouncement of equity issues, largely because of DEMO negative signal sent to the
market.
These information problems have also been shown to exist in debt markets.
Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) show DEMO if banks find it difficult to discriminate among
companies, raising interest DEMO can have perverse selection effects. In particular,
the high interest rates discourage all but the highest-risk borrowers, so the quality
of the loan pool declines markedly. To address this problem, banks may restrict
the amount of lending rather than increasing interest rates.
These problems in the debt DEMO equity markets are a consequence of the in-
formation gaps between the entrepreneurs and investors. If the information
asymmetries could be eliminated, financing constraints would disappear. Financial
economists argue that specialised financial intermediaries can address these
DEMO By intensively scrutinising firms before providing capital and then
monitoring them afterwards, they can alleviate some of the information gaps and
reduce capital constraints.
1.2. Responses
by Venture
Capitalists
The financial intermediary that specialises in funding DEMO high-technology firms
is the venture capital organisation. The first modern venture capital firm, Ameri-
can Research and Development (ARD), was formed in DEMO by MIT President Karl
Compton, Harvard Business School Professor Georges F. DEMO, and local busi-
ness leaders. A small group of venture capitalists DEMO high-risk investments in
emerging companies that were formed to commercialise technology developed for
World War II. The success of the investments ranged widely: almost half of ARD's
profits during its 26-year existence as an independent DEMO came from its $70,000
investment in Digital Equipment Company (DEC) in 1957, which grew in value to
$355 million. Because institutional investors were reluctant to invest, ARD was
structured as a publicly traded closed-end fund and marketed mostly to individuals
(Liles, 1977). The few DEMO venture organisations begun in the decade after
ARD's formation were also structured as closed-end funds.
The first venture capital limited partnership, Draper, DEMO, and Anderson,
was formed in 1958. Imitators soon followed, but limited partnerships accounted
for a minority of the venture pool during the DEMO and 1970s. Most venture
organisations raised money either through closed-end funds or small business
investment companies (SBICs), federally guaranteed risk capital pools that pro-
liferated during the 1960s. While investor demand for SBICs in the DEMO 1960s and
early 1970s was strong, incentive problems ultimately led to DEMO collapse of the
sector.2 The annual flow of money into venture capital during its first three dec-
ades never exceeded a few hundred million DEMO and usually was substantially
less.
2 In particular, many SBICs made DEMO in ineffective or corrupt firms. Observers noted that
SBIC managers' incentives DEMO screen or monitor portfolio firms was greatly reduced by the presence of
government guarantees that limited their exposures to unsuccessful investments.
(C Royal Economic Society 2002
F76
THE ECONOMIC
JOURNAL
[FEBRUARY
The activity in the venture industry increased DEMO in late 1970s and early
1980s. Industry observers attributed much of the shift to the US Department of
Labor's clarification of ERISA's 'prudent man' rule in 1979: prior to that year, the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) limited pension funds from
investing substantial DEMO of money in venture capital or other high-risk asset
classes.
The subsequent years saw both very good and trying times for venture capi-
talists. DEMO the one hand, venture capitalists have backed during the 1980s and
DEMO many of the most successful high-technology companies, including Apple
Computer, Cisco Systems, Genentech, Netscape, and Sun Microsystems. A sub-
stantial number of service firms (including Staples, Starbucks, and TCBY) have
also received DEMO financing. At the same time, commitments to the venture
capital industry DEMO very uneven. The annual flow of money into venture funds
increased by a factor of ten during the early 1980s, peaking at over six billion
2000 dollars. From 1987 to 1991, however, fund-raising steadily declined. DEMO
the past decade, the pattern has been reversed. 2000 represented a DEMO fund-
raising year, in which nearly $70 billion was raised by DEMO capitalists. This
process of rapid growth and decline has created a great deal of instability in the
industry.
To address the information problems that DEMO other investors in small
high-technology firms, the partners at venture capital DEMO employ a va-
riety of mechanisms. First, business plans are intensively DEMO: of those firms
that submit business plans to venture capital organisations, historically only 1 % has
been funded (Fenn et al., 1995)DEMO
In evaluating a high-technology company, the venture capitalists employ several
criteria. DEMO be sure, the promise of the firm's technology is important. DEMO this
evaluation is inexorably linked with the evaluation of the firm's management.
Venture capitalists are well aware that many promising technologies do not DEMO
mately fill market needs. As a result, most place the greatest DEMO on the
experience and flexibility of the management team and the size of the potential
market. Even if the market does not evolve as DEMO, with a sophisticated team
the firm may be able to find DEMO attractive opportunity. The decision to invest is
frequently made conditional on the identification of a syndication partner who
agrees that this is an attractive DEMO (Lerner, 1994). In exchange for their
capital, the venture DEMO investors demand preferred stock with numerous
restrictive covenants and representation on the board of directors.
Once the decision to invest is made, the venture capitalists frequently disburse
funds in stages. Managers of these venture-backed firms are DEMO to return re-
peatedly to their financiers for additional capital in order to ensure that the money
is not squandered on unprofitable projects. In DEMO, venture capitalists in-
tensively monitor managers, often contacting firms on a daily basis and holding
monthly board meetings during which extensive reviews of DEMO aspect of the firm
are conducted. (Various aspects of the oversight DEMO played by venture capitalists
are documented in Gompers and Lerner (1999b)DEMO)
It is important to note that, even with these many DEMO, the most likely
primary outcome of a venture-backed investment is failure, or at best modest
?3 Royal Economic Society 2002
2002] WHEN BUREAUCRATS MEET ENTREPRENEURS F77
success. Gompers (1995) documents that DEMO of a sample of 794 venture capital
investments made over three decades, only 22.5% ultimately succeeded in going
public, the avenue through which DEMO capitalists typically exit their successful
investments. (A Venture Economics study (1988) finds that a $1 investment in a
firm that goes public provides an average cash return to venture capitalists of $1.95
in excess of DEMO initial investment, with an average holding period of 4.2 years. The
DEMO best alternative, a similar investment in an acquired firm, yields a cash return
of only 40 cents over a 3.7-year mean holding period.) Similar results emerge from
Huntsman and Hoban's (1980) analysis of DEMO returns from 110 investments by
three venture capital organisations. About one in six investments was a complete
loss, while 45% were either losses or simply broke even. The elimination of the top-
performing 9% of the DEMO was sufficient to turn a 19% gross rate of return
into a negative return.
In short, the environment in which venture organisations operate is extremely
difficult. Difficult conditions that have frequently deterred or defeated traditional
investors DEMO as banks can be addressed by the mechanisms that are bundled with
the venture capitalists' funds. These tools have led to venture capital organisations
emerging as the dominant form of equity financing for privately held technology-
DEMO businesses.3
2. Rationales for Public Programmes
At the same time, there DEMO reasons to believe that despite the presence of venture
capital funds, DEMO still might be a role for public venture capital programmes. In
this section, I assess these claims. I highlight two arguments: that public DEMO
capital programmes may play an important role by certifying firms to outside
investors, and that these programmes may encourage technological spillovers.
2.1. The Certification Hypothesis
A growing body of empirical research suggests that new firms, especially technol-
ogy-intensive ones, may receive insufficient capital to fund all positive net present
value projects due to the information problems discussed in the previous DEMO
If public venture capital awards could certify that firms are of high quality, these
information problems could be overcome and investors could confidently invest in
these firms.
As discussed above, venture capitalists specialise in financing these types of
firms. They address these information problems through a variety of DEMO
Many of the studies that document capital-raising problems examine firms during
3 While evidence regarding the financing of these firms is imprecise, Freear and Wetzel's (1990)
survey suggests that venture capital accounts for about two-thirds of the external equity financing raised
by privately held technology-intensive businesses DEMO private-sector sources.
4 The literature on capital constraints (reviewed in Hubbard (1998)) documents that an inability to
obtain external financing limits many DEMO of business investment. Particularly relevant are works by
Hall (1992), DEMO and Jaffe (1993), and Himmelberg and Petersen (1994). These show that capital
constraints appear to limit research-and-development expenditures, especially in smaller firms, though
the limits may be less binding as those on capital expenditure.
? Royal Economic Society 2002
F78
THE ECONOMIC
JOURNAL
[FEBRUARY
the 1970s and early 1980s, when the venture capital pool was relatively modest in
size. Since the pool of DEMO capital funds has grown dramatically in recent years
(Gompers and Lerner, 1998), even if small high-technology firms had numerous
value-creating projects that DEMO could not finance in the past, one might argue
that it DEMO not clear this problem remains today.
A response to this argument emphasises the limitations of the venture capital
industry. Venture capitalists back only a DEMO fraction of the technology-oriented
businesses begun each year. In 2000, a DEMO year for venture disbursements, just
over 2,200 US companies received DEMO financing for the first time. Yet the
Small Business Administration estimates that in recent years about 1 million new
businesses have started up annually. DEMO, private venture funds have
concentrated on a few industries: for instance, in 2000, fully 46% of the funding
went to internet-related companies. DEMO generally, 92% of the funding went to
firms specialising in information DEMO and healthcare. Thus, many promis-
ing firms in other industries are DEMO attracting venture capitalists' notice, perhaps
reflecting 'herding' by venture capitalists into particular areas, a problem that
finance theory suggests affects institutional investors (Devenow and Welch, 1996).
If government programmes can identify and DEMO these neglected firms, they
might provide the 'stamp of approval' DEMO high potential, underfunded firms
need to succeed.
But if government officials DEMO going to address these problems, they will need to
be able DEMO the many information asymmetries and identify the most
promising firms. Otherwise, DEMO De Meza (2001) argues, these efforts are likely to be
DEMO Is it reasonable to assume that government officials can
overcome these problems while private sector financiers cannot? Certainly, this
possibility is not implausible. DEMO instance, specialists at the National Institute of
Health or Department of DEMO may have considerable insight into which bio-
technology or advanced materials companies are the most promising, while the
traditional financial statement analysis undertaken by bankers would be of little
value. In general, the certification hypothesis suggests that these signals provided
by government awards are likely to be particularly DEMO in technology-intensive
industries where traditional financial measures are of little use.
2.2. The
Presence
of R&D Spillovers
A second rationale emerges from the DEMO on R&D spillovers. Public finance
theory emphasises that subsidies are an appropriate response in the case of ac-
tivities that generate positive externalities. DEMO investments as R&D expenditures
and pollution control equipment purchases may have positive spillovers that help
other firms or society as a whole. Because DEMO firms making the investments are
unlikely to capture all the benefits, DEMO subsidies may be appropriate.
An extensive literature (reviewed in Griliches (1992) and Jaffe (1996)) has
documented the presence of R&D DEMO These spillovers take several forms.
For instance, the rents associated with DEMO may accrue to competitors
who rapidly introduce imitations, developers of complementary DEMO, or to
the consumers of these products. Whatever the mechanism of DEMO spillover,
(? Royal Economic Society 2002
2002]
WHEN
BUREAUCRATS
MEET ENTREPRENEURS
F79
however, the consequence is the same: the firm invests below the social optimum
in R&D.
After reviewing a wide variety of studies, Griliches estimates that the gap between
the private and social rate of return is substantial: the gap is probably equal to
between 50% and 100% of the private rate of return. DEMO few studies have
examined how these gaps vary with firm characteristics, DEMO number of case-based
analyses (Jewkes, 1958; Mansfield, et al., DEMO) suggest that spillover problems are
particularly severe among small firms. These DEMO may be particularly
unlikely to effectively defend their intellectual property positions or to extract
most of the rents in the product market.
2.3. Limitations
DEMO 'Public
Venture
Capital'
Programmes
Even if spillover problems are substantial DEMO government officials can successfully
identify promising small firms, these efforts may DEMO solve these financing prob-
lems. An extensive political economy and public finance literature has emphasised
the distortions that may result from government subsidies as DEMO interest
groups or politicians seek to direct subsidies in a manner that benefits themselves.
As articulated by Olson (1965) and Stigler (1971), and formally modelled in works
such as Peltzman (1976) and Becker (1983), the theory of regulatory capture
suggests that direct and indirect DEMO will be captured by parties whose joint
political activity such as lobbying is not too difficult to arrange (ie, when 'free-
riding' DEMO coalition members is not too large a problem).
These distortions may manifest themselves in several ways. One possibility
(discussed, for instance, in Eisinger (1988)), is that firms may seek transfer pay-
ments DEMO directly increase their profits. Politicians may acquiesce in such
transfers in the case of companies that are politically connected. A more subtle
distortion is DEMO by Cohen and Noll (1991) and Wallsten (2000): officials
DEMO seek to select firms based on their likely success, and fund DEMO regardless of
whether the government funds are needed. In this case, DEMO can claim credit for
the firms' ultimate success even if the DEMO contribution of the public funds
was very low.
The presence of these distortions is likely to vary with programme design. In
particular, one of the reasons that has been suggested for why the SBIR pro-
gramme DEMO relatively effective (as documented in Lerner (1999)) is that the de-
cision makers are highly dispersed. In particular, the federal programme managers
are scattered across many sub-agencies, and are responsible for many other tasks as
well. Thus, the costs of identifying and influencing these decision makers is high.
In programmes where a central group makes highly visible awards, the dangers of
political distortions are likely to be higher.
3. The DEMO of Programme Design
An immense literature in regulatory economics and industrial organisation has
considered the structure of regulatory bodies. The different ways in which DEMO
lators can monitor and shape industry behaviour - and Congress can in turn
? Royal Economic Society 2002
F80
THE ECONOMIC
JOURNAL
[FEBRUARY
monitor the regulators - has been explored DEMO detail. (For an overview, see Laffont
and Tirole (1993).)DEMO
Other areas of interactions between government officials and firms, however,
DEMO been much less well scrutinised. Not only is the theoretical foundation much
less well developed, but the empirical literature is at a much earlier stage. (Klette
et al. (2000) provide an overview of the current state of empirical research.) Thus,
our observations must be necessarily tentative in nature.
My colleague Paul Gompers and I recently (1999a) looked DEMO the design of
efforts to assist high-technology entrepreneurs in one programme, DEMO Advanced
Technology Program (ATP) run by the Department of Commerce. Between its
inception in 1990 and 1997, the programme awarded nearly one billion dollars in
research and development funding to approximately 300 technology-based pro-
jects DEMO by American companies and industry-led joint ventures. From
1990 to 1997, DEMO of ATP funding went to small businesses, with an additional
10% DEMO to joint ventures led by small businesses.
In particular, we asked DEMO the public sector could interact with the venture
community and other providers of capital to entrepreneurial firms in order to
most effectively advance the DEMO process. Reflecting the early state of
knowledge and lack of a theoretical foundation, we did not analyse these
challenging questions through a large-sample analysis. Rather, we relied on
seven case studies of ATP firms, complemented DEMO a review of the secondary
literature.
As part of this analysis, DEMO highlighted four key recommendations, which are
likely to be more generally DEMO to public venture capital programmes. In
this section, we will review DEMO of these recommendations. I particularly highlight
our final recommendation, which emphasises DEMO extent to which the premise that
technologies in entrepreneurial firms can be evaluated in the absence of the
consideration of the business prospects of DEMO firm.
First, there is a strong need for public officials to DEMO in building relationships
with and an understanding of the US venture capital industry. Financing small
entrepreneurial firms is exceedingly challenging. The venture capital industry
DEMO a variety of important mechanisms to address these challenges, which
empirical DEMO suggests are quite effective. Because of the magnitude and
success of venture capital financing, it is important that administrators view their
actions in the context of this financial institution.
A corollary to this first point is DEMO public venture capital investments should
be made with an eye to the narrow technological focus and uneven levels of
independent investments. As noted above, venture investments tend to be very
focused into a few areas of DEMO that are perceived to have great potential.
Increases in venture fundraising - which are driven by factors such as shifts in
capital gains tax DEMO - appear more likely to lead to more intense price com-
petition for transactions within an existing set of technologies than to greater
diversity DEMO the types of companies funded. (These patterns are discussed in
Gompers DEMO Lerner (2000).) Administrators may wish to respond to these in-
dustries conditions by (i) focusing on technologies which are not currently
DEMO among venture investors and (ii) providing follow-on capital to firms
? Royal Economic Society 2002
2002] WHEN BUREAUCRATS MEET ENTREPRENEURS F81
already funded by venture capitalists during DEMO when venture inflows are
falling.
A third point is that federal officials must appreciate the need for flexibility that
is central to the venture DEMO investment process. Venture capitalists make in-
vestments into young firms in settings with tremendous technological, product
market, and management uncertainties. Rather than undertaking DEMO (often im-
possible) task of addressing all the uncertainties in advance, they remain actively
involved after the investment, using their contractually specified DEMO rights to
guide the firm. These changes - which often involve shifts in product market
strategy and the management team - are an integral DEMO of the investment pro-
cess. In our case studies, it appeared DEMO ATP administrators too often view these
shifts as troubling indications that awardees are deviating from plan, rather than as
a natural part of their evolution.5
Fourth, just as the venture capital community carefully analyses the track record
of entrepreneurs they are considering funding, government officials should ex-
amine the track record of the firms receiving public venture awards. As it DEMO now,
public venture capital programmes are often characterised by a considerable
number of underachieving firms. (The presence of 'SBIR mills' who have won
large numbers of awards by cultivating relationships with federal officials is DEMO
manifestation of this phenomenon in another federal programme, as Lerner
(1999) discusses.) In particular, certain company characteristics - attributes that
may not be adequately considered in the selection process of these programmes -
appear DEMO be highly correlated with a company's ability to achieve its research and
commercialisation goals. These include the experience of the management team,
DEMO presence of a clear product market strategy, and a strong desire DEMO seek private
financing. By devising new methods to search for such factors, government officials
would be better able to distinguish between high-performing and underachieving
firms.
Our research indicates that a prevalent characteristic among underachieving
companies is DEMO existence of research grants from numerous government sources,
with few, DEMO any, tangible results to show from previous R&D awards. Because DEMO lack
of results can easily be attributed to the high-risk nature of technology develop-
ment, many of these companies can avoid accountability indefinitely. These gov-
ernment grant-oriented research organisations are able to drift from one Federal
DEMO to the next. For such companies, it appeared that public venture DEMO
funds were treated in exactly the same manner as other government research
grants: it did not appear that ATP funding showed any notable returns or that the
unique programme goals were well-served.
Adding to the problem DEMO the fact that companies with substantial government
grant experience appear to have several advantages over other firms when applying
for future public awards. Past DEMO, regardless of project outcomes, help a
5Of course, since the DEMO of the programme is to fund companies that are developing socially
beneficial technologies, there is a need for programme officers to be alert for firms who radically shift
their objectives. For instance, one supercomputer firm devoted considerable resources after receiving
an ATP award to developing an e-commerce programme, at a time when such technologies were
receiving extensive funding from independent DEMO capitalists.
? Roval Economic Society 2002
F82
THE ECONOMICJOURNAL
[FEBRUARY
company gain legitimacy in a particular area of DEMO, as well as acquire the
equipment and personnel needed to do DEMO work. There is also a tendency for
some government programmes to try to 'piggyback' on other government pro-
grammes, hoping to leverage their grant dollars. In addition, firms gain consid-
erable insight on the grant application process with each proposal they submit.
These firms consequentially often have DEMO greater chance of being awarded future
government grants than other firms. The end result can be a stream of govern-
ment funding being awarded DEMO companies that consistently underachieve.
To level the playing field, our research DEMO that public venture capital
should more closely scrutinise the amount of funding a company has received
from prior government sources. A greater number of DEMO firms could
be weeded out if government officials conducted a more comprehensive evalu-
ation of a company's past performance and examined the tangible DEMO at-
tributable to each government grant the firm has received. Moreover, DEMO inflows
of prior government funding without significant product development may indi-
cate that a particular company is unlikely to generate significant commercialisation
of new DEMO
Another telltale characteristic of underachieving firms was the existence of
factors outside the scope of the publicly funded projects that undermined their
ability to DEMO successfully and later commercialise government-funded
technology. Legal troubles, for instance, can divert substantial amounts of human
and financial resources away from a company'DEMO R&D projects and even cause
dramatic changes in the size and structure of the company. And when a firm is
ready to commercialise DEMO technology, the liability concerns associated with
pending legal battles will often DEMO impair the company's ability to attract
venture capital investment dollars.
For early-stage companies, additional limiting factors frequently involve man-
agers who lack experience in running small companies. Although some of these
managers may have accumulated DEMO experience as consultants or as mem-
bers of large organisations, the DEMO operation of early-stage companies can
demand very different management skills. It thus comes as no surprise that when
venture capitalists sink substantial funds in DEMO company, they will often place their
own hand-picked manager in charge DEMO typically an individual who has already been
successful in managing an early-stage company in a similar industry. Because much
of the skills needed for DEMO start-up companies comes through experience,
the existence of managers who do not have this background can significantly
undermine a company's ability to DEMO
In a broader context, each of these performance-undermining factors empha-
sises DEMO need for the government officials to evaluate critically whether a partic-
ular company is a viable vehicle for accomplishing its commercialisation goals.
This goes DEMO beyond a simple assessment of the feasibility of a business plan. In
fact, many of these potentially limiting factors will not even be discussed in a
company's written proposal to the government. It is tempting, of course, to
attribute the failures resulting from such factors to the high-risk nature of the
technology. But to a large extent, companies exhibiting a high potential for
underachievement could be more thoroughly weeded out by DEMO a greater
?) Royal Economic Society 2002
2002]
WHEN
BUREAUCRATS
MEET ENTREPRENEURS
F83
emphasis on these factors during the DEMO process. The R&D project itself may
be high-risk, but the DEMO of turning the technology into a product should be
minimised. Regardless of how innovative or enabling a technology may be, or how
well a business plan is constructed, if these undermining factors are present, a
DEMO will be hard pressed to succeed. In short, the claim that DEMO
projects can be assessed in entrepreneurial firms without consideration of business
issues is profoundly mistaken.
A broader implication is that administrators of public venture DEMO pro-
grammes must think carefully about the validity of the concept of 'pre-commercial
research' in an entrepreneurial setting. An extensive body of entrepreneurship
DEMO has highlighted the unpredictability of the entrepreneurial process. Very
few entrepreneurs, DEMO in high- or low-technology settings, commercialise
what they initially set to DEMO in their original time-frame. Rather, successful
entrepreneurs gather signals from the DEMO in response to their initial
efforts, and adjust their plans accordingly. DEMO they identify an opportunity, they
move very rapidly to take advantage DEMO it before major corporations can respond.
Yet many federal agencies, leery DEMO being seen as 'picking winners', push entre-
preneurs to devote DEMO to purely pre-commercial research. This may lead to
them ignoring an essential source of information: ie, feedback from customers.
Even more detrimental have DEMO instances where companies - having identified
an attractive commercial opportunity - are afraid to pursue it rapidly, lest they
jeopardise their public funds (DEMO they are relying on as a key source of fi-
nancing) DEMO the grounds that they are pursuing commercial research. While well-
intentioned, DEMO policies may have the perverse effect of punishing success. One
potential change would be to allow firms that rapidly commercialise publicly
funded projects to DEMO the funds to pursue another project.
Harvard University
and National Bureau
of
Economic
Research
References
Akerlof, G.A. (1970). 'The market for "DEMO': qualitative uncertainty and the market
mechanism'. Quarterly Joumnal of Economics, vol. 84, pp. 488-500.
Becker, G.S. (1983). 'A theory of competition among pressure groups for political influence'.
Quarterly Joumnal of DEMO, vol. 98, pp. 371-400.
Cohen, L.R. and Noll, R.G., DEMO (1991). The Technology Pork Barrel. Washington: Brookings
Institution.
de Meza, D. (2000). 'Overlending', ECONOMIC JOURNAL, vol. 112 (2), pp. F17-31.
Devenow, A. and Welch, I. (1996). 'DEMO herding in financial economics'. European Economic
Review, vol. 40, pp. 603-15.
Eisinger, P.K. (1988). The Rise of the Entrepreneurial State: State And Local Economic Development Policy
in the United States. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Fenn, G.W., Liang, N. and Prowse, S. (1995). The Economics of the Private Equity Market.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Freear, J. and Wetzel, W.E. DEMO (1990). 'Who bankrolls high-tech entrepreneurs?' Joumnal of Business
Venturing, vol. 5, pp. 77-89.
Gompers, P.A. (1995). 'Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging of venture capital'.
Joumnal of Finance, vol. 50, pp. 1461-89.
Gompers, P.A. and Lerner, J. (1998)DEMO 'What drives venture capital fund-raising?' Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity: Microeconomics, pp. 149-92.
? Royal Economic Society 2002
F84
THE ECONOMICJOURNAL
[FEBRUARY
2002]
Gompers, P.A. and Lerner, J. (1999a). Capital Formation and Investment in Venture Markets: A Report
to the NBER and the Advanced Technology Program. Report GCR-99-784. Washington: Advanced
Technology Program, National Institutes of Standards and Technology, U.S. Department of
Commerce.
Gompers, P.A. and Lerner, J. (1999b). The Venture Capital Cycle. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gompers, P.A. and Lerner, J. (2000). 'Money DEMO deals? The impact of fund inflows on the
valuation of private DEMO investments'. Joumnal of Financial Economics, vol. 55, pp. 281-325.
Greenwald, B.C., Stiglitz, J.E. and Weiss, A. (1984). 'Information DEMO in the capital
market and macroeconomic fluctuations'. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
vol. 74 (1), pp. 94-199.
Griliches, Z. (1992). 'The search for R&D spillovers'. Scandinavian Joumnal of Economics, vol. 94,
pp. S29-47.
Hall, B.H. (1992). 'DEMO and research and development: does the source of financing
matter?' DEMO Paper No. 92-194, Department of Economics, University of California at
Berkeley.
Hao, KY. and Jaffe, A.B. (1993). 'Effect of liquidity DEMO firms' R&D spending'. Economics of
Innovation and New Technology, vol. 2, pp. 275-82.
Himmelberg, C.P. and Petersen, B.C. (1994)DEMO 'R&D and internal finance: a panel study of small
firms in high-tech industries'. Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 76, DEMO 38-51.
Hubbard, R.G. (1998). 'Capital-market imperfections and investment'. DEMO of Economic Literature,
vol. 36, pp. 193-225.
Huntsman, B. and Hoban, J.P. Jr. (1980). 'Investment in new enterprise: some DEMO
observations on risk, return, and market structure'. Financial Management, DEMO 9 (Summer),
pp. 44-51.
Jaffe, A.B. (1996). Economic Analysis of Research Spillovers-Implications for the Advanced Technology
Program. Washington: Advanced Technology Program, National Institute of Standards and
Technology, U.S. Department of Commerce.
DEMO, M.C. and Meckling, W.H. (1976). 'Theory of the firm: managerial behavior, agency costs
and ownership structure'. Joumnal of Financial DEMO, vol. 3, pp. 305-60.
Jewkes, J., Sawers, D. and DEMO, R. (1958). The Sources of Invention. New York: St. DEMO's
Press.
Klette, T., Moen, J. and Griliches, Z. (DEMO). 'Do subsidies to commercial R&D reduce market
failures? Microeconomic evaluation studies'. Research Policy, vol. 29, pp. 471-95.
Laffont, J.-J. and Tirole, J. (1993). A Theory of Incentives in Procurement DEMO Regulation. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Lerner, J. (1994). 'The DEMO of venture capital investments'. Financial Management, vol. 23
(Autumn), pp. 16-27.
Lerner, J. (1998). 'Angel financing and public policy: an overview'. Journal of Banking and Finance,
vol. 22, DEMO 773-83.
Lerner, J. (1999). 'The government as venture capitalist: The long-run effects of the SBIR
program'. Journal of Business, vol. 72, pp. 285-318.
Liles, P. (1977). Sustaining the Venture Capital Firm. Cambridge: Management Analysis Center.
Mansfield, E., Rapoport, J., Romeo, A., Wagner, S. and Beardsley, G. (1977). 'Social DEMO private
rates of return from industrial innovations'. Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 91, pp. 221-40.
Myers, S.C. and Majluf, N. (1984). 'Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have
information that investors do not have'. Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 13, pp. DEMO
Olson, M. (1965). The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge: DEMO University Press.
Peltzman, S. (1976). 'Towards a more general DEMO of regulation'. Journal of Law and Economics,
vol. 19, DEMO 211-40.
Stigler, G. (1971). 'The economic theory of regulation'DEMO Bell Journal of Economics, vol. 2, pp. 3-21.
Stiglitz, J.E. DEMO Weiss, A. (1981). 'Credit rationing in markets with incomplete DEMO'.
American Economic Review, vol. 71, pp. 393-409.
U.S. Congressional Budget Office (1985). Federal Financial Support for High-technology Industries.
Washington: U.S. DEMO Budget Office.
Venture Economics (1988). Exiting Venture Capital Investments. Wellesley: Venture Economics.
Wallsten, S.J. (2000). 'The Small Business Innovation Research program: encouraging technolo-
gical innovation and commercialization in small firms?' Rand Joumnal of Economics, vol. 31,
pp. 82-100.
? Royal Economic Society 2002{1g42fwefx}