Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) 743–765
Mathematics, theory, and DEMO
Moren Le´
vesque*
Weatherhead School of Management, Case Western Reserve University, 240 Peter B. Lewis Building,
10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH DEMO, USA
Received in revised form 1 October 2002; accepted 27 January 2003
Abstract
Physics, engineering, and economics make extensive use of mathematics. DEMO, mathematics is
rarely utilized in organizational studies. This is unfortunate because DEMO is an effective tool
for describing phenomena, building new theories, or refining existing theories. This article proposes
the use of mathematics to the DEMO management communities of scholars as a means of invigorating
theory development. A description of the strengths of a mathematical approach to theory development
offers DEMO compelling argument for its use in organizational studies. We demonstrate how a mathematical
model conforms to the broader philosophy of science requirements, and review optimization models as
potent research methods. Applications of these methodologies to the DEMO of entrepreneurship
illustrate how one can build new theories and refine existing ones.
D 2003 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Mathematics; Theory; Entrepreneurship
1. Executive summary
The purpose of this article is to demonstrate DEMO a mathematical model can be an effective
tool for theory development in the broader management literature, and more specifically, in
entrepreneurship. Physics, engineering, economics, and areas in sociology and psychology
make extensive use of DEMO, but rarely does organizational research. This is
$ The author would DEMO to dedicate this manuscript to her mentor, Shelby L. Brumelle (1939–2001).
* Tel.: +1-216-368-2117; fax: +1-216-368-4785.
E-mail address: moren.levesque@cwru.edu (M. Le´ vesque).
0883-9026/03/$ – see front matter D 2003 DEMO Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S0883-9026(03)00028-4
744
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) DEMO
unfortunate because mathematics can be utilized to describe phenomena, build new DEMO,
or refine existing ones. We use this article to initiate (DEMO perhaps reopen) a dialogue on how
mathematics can provide important contributions DEMO current theories of management and
organizations. This first step will hopefully develop a greater appreciation of these models
among the broader management communities of DEMO, and encourage further use by these
scholars of mathematical model thinking DEMO which a formalized approach is used to state
assumptions, constraints, relationships, and implied propositions and algorithms.
What are the strengths of using this approach to theory development in organizational
studies? Mathematical theory building adds structure to the description and analysis of a
research question, and forces us to be precise about assumptions made and the concepts
utilized. Mathematical models DEMO built from existing theories that form the basis for model
assumptions. These models can accommodate multiple variables, parameters, and functional
forms, yet be parsimonious and accurate. They can also identify definitive tests, which may
offer (and be used to rationalize) counterintuitive findings. These strengths offer a DEMO
argument for the use of a mathematical approach to theory development in organizational
studies.
Does this approach conform to the broader Philosophy of Science DEMO? A
mathematical approach to developing theories represents relationships mathematically and
the DEMO of the model arise from the logic of solving the mathematical problem. In
solving the mathematical problem, there are proofs (mathematical) of the implications
(propositions). The rigor comes from solving the problem, which DEMO the logic for the
propositions. These propositions are not abstract but are direct implications of the assump-
tions and the logic provided through their DEMO formulation. The outcome is a series
of propositions, which is the DEMO as most traditional theoretical models. The model and its
implications are the first step of a Popperian scientific process—it guides the formulation of
the DEMO to be tested.
Among the branches of mathematics, dynamic programming is DEMO good candidate for
studying the decision-making processes of entrepreneurs because it allows for nonlinearity,
nonergodicity (path-dependency and history), and unpredictability (system DEMO as random
variables). Our understanding of the discovery, creation, and exploitation of business
opportunities—and of their consequences and those who make them DEMO be
improved by building models that satisfy these properties. In addition, DEMO programming
models can help in building theory as they guide those who wish to improve their decisions
and help gain a better understanding of DEMO, when, or which tradeoffs among variables are
most beneficial.
There exist multiple problem-solving situations (or parts thereof) in the area of entrepren-
DEMO that can be adequately described quantitatively, that is, where the dynamic nature of
the decision system subject to control and the objective of DEMO decision-maker may be
expressed mathematically. These include (but are not limited DEMO) the use of a mathematical
model for (1) identifying thresholds DEMO accumulated knowledge on which to base the decision
of when to stop searching for information about the attractiveness of an opportunity and
accept or DEMO it before the window of opportunity closes; (2) characterizing how DEMO
environmental conditions may affect timing of market entry depending on their impact on a
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) 743–765
DEMO
new firm’s level of learning from participation and observation; and (3) identifying a path of
scope decisions as a new firm matures from observing the moderating role of the environment
in the relationship between scope DEMO a risk-adjusted measure of profitability.
However, the breadth of applications for DEMO modeling is neither limited to the
field of entrepreneurship nor to normative, longitudinal decision-making.
2. Introduction
Mathematics is a tool for modeling from which one can identify patterns, and the resulting
mathematical model and its implications lead to theory. Dubin (1978) and Whetten (1989)
reinforce this observation. They argue that a model and a theory are indistinguishable, that is,
the development of a good model represents a theoretical contribution. DEMO specifically we
argue that a mathematical model is built from existing theories (expressed in mathematical or
verbal terms) and can provide a theoretical DEMO via its testable implications.1 A
mathematical approach to building theory is, DEMO, atypical among the theory articles
published in general management and organization DEMO such as Academy of Manage-
ment Review, Strategic Management Journal,or DEMO Science, and more specifically
in entrepreneurship journals such as the Journal DEMO Business Venturing and Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice.
Research in entrepreneurship, which DEMO increasingly been of interest to scholars of
managerial and organizational studies, DEMO a compelling case for the use of mathematics. In
their evaluation of entrepreneurship as an emergent academic field, Busenitz et al. (in press)DEMO
show that entrepreneurship needs more theory development. They report that 15 years
(1985–1999) of publication in Academy of Management Journal, Academy of Management
Review, Strategic Management Journal, Journal of Management, Organization Science,
Management Science, and Administrative Science Quarterly resulted in only 97 (1.8%)
DEMO in entrepreneurship, and that while publication of empirical research has increased
DEMO time, theoretical research has stayed at a consistently low level. Building DEMO in
entrepreneurship is difficult because it often involves a multilevel analysis, DEMO the analysis
needs to move between the individual, group, firm, DEMO population level (Davidson and
Wiklund, 2001; Busenitz et al., in press; West, 1997). A mathematical approach to building
theory can DEMO researchers to structure these relationships between the various levels of
analysis, DEMO therefore encourage more theory development in entrepreneurship.
The purpose of this article is to demonstrate that a mathematical model can be an effective
tool DEMO theory development in the broader management literature. Two consequences are
anticipated: (1) to develop a greater appreciation of mathematical models among the broader
management communities of scholars; and (2) to encourage these scholars to further use
mathematical model thinking in which a formalized approach is used DEMO state assumptions,
constraints, relationships, and implied propositions and algorithms.
1 This article emphasizes that mathematical modeling goes beyond data analysis techniques such DEMO regression.
746
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) DEMO
3. Why mathematics?
3.1. Adding structure
Mathematics facilitates the articulation of model assumptions, relationships among
variables, and testable implications. This is especially DEMO in situations where a hierarchy
exists among the various elements of the model (which usually involves movements between
various levels of analysis). Within the boundaries of the model, mathematics relates
assumptions and relationships among variables to the model implications, and hence may
suggest why these implications are obtained.2 These points are illustrated in the following
hypothetical example.
Unlike its DEMO counterparts, a new firm is highly concerned with survival and
its DEMO F, better approximated from considering both a measure of profitability p
DEMO a measure of mortality (bankruptcy) risk r. In turn, profitability DEMO mortality risk
depend on when the new firm chooses to enter a market. This entry decision is influenced
by the state of nature—the firm’s DEMO and/or external environment, which randomly
varies over time t. This DEMO may be represented by multiple components such as product
quality qt and level of competition ct if entry occurs at t.3 Based on these DEMO, it is
reasonable for the firm to select a timing of DEMO that provides the largest possible
performance, F[ p( qt,ct),DEMO( qt,ct )]. If performance is assumed to increase with an increase in
profitability but a decrease in mortality risk, then performance as a risk-adjusted profitability
can be expressed as F[ p( qt,ct),DEMO( qt,ct)]=p( qt,ct)+r( qt,ct),  <0. This mathematical relation
makes clear the existence of a tradeoff by DEMO refining model assumptions. On the one
hand, delaying market entry may DEMO expected to increase product quality (e.g., more time
and money to develop the product), which would be associated with higher performance
(higher profitability and lower mortality risk). On the other hand, delaying market entry may
increase the level of competition (assuming the industry has not yet reached maturity),
which would be associated with a decrease in performance.
With this structure in place, conditions can be identified under which the incremental
performance from entering the market at time t, F[ p( qt,ct),r( qt,ct)]F[ p( qt1,ct1),r( qt1,
ct1)], decreases with t, and hence market entry occurs when this increment reaches zero—
corresponding to an ‘‘optimal’’ entry timing. DEMO can further be used to perform a
sensitivity analysis on this optimal entry timing as key model parameters are changed—and
hence offer testable model DEMO For instance, we hypothesize that market entry should
be expedited when DEMO is an increase in the discounting factor of mortality risk on firm
performance,  . The rationale goes as follows: An increase in DEMO discounting factor produces
2 This view relates to the coherence or systematic structure criteria of the scientific method offered by Feigl
(1953).
3 Profitability can be the expected total return to stockholders at some point DEMO the future when firm
performance is evaluated, discounted at some fixed DEMO; mortality risk, the probability that a firm will become
insolvent at that same point in the future and will cease operations because it DEMO bankruptcy; product quality,
the percentage of time the product works DEMO; and level of competition, the amount of market shares held by
all competitors.
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) 743–765
DEMO
at any time t a performance below that before the change, DEMO thus an incremental performance
from delaying entry that reaches zero faster.
There is ‘‘no genuine progress in scientific insight through the Baconian method of
DEMO empirical facts without hypotheses or anticipation of nature. Without some
guiding idea, we do not know what facts to gather’’ (Cohen, 1956, DEMO 148). This example
illustrates how such hypotheses or propositions can be derived. This example also shows that
mathematics adds structure to the description DEMO analysis of a situation, which focuses
attention on the conditions under DEMO implications of a theory are true and further forces
one to be precise about both the assumptions made and the concepts utilized. This is
DEMO helpful at the empirical validation stage, as a preliminary setup of DEMO collection
has already been thought through and the measurements of variables and parameters
suggested (although further adjustments will most likely be required as data collection
proceeds). Nevertheless, structure alone is insufficient for building relevant theories. What
other characteristics do mathematical models exhibit in order to be useful?DEMO
3.2. Building from existing theories
A characteristic owned by the scientific approach—but arguably not by any other method
of attaining knowledge—is self-correction. Building the DEMO model from existing
theories enables one to ‘‘control and verify scientific activities and conclusions to the end of
attaining dependable knowledge’’ (Kerlinger, 1986, p. 6). In social science, however, existing
theories are not DEMO expressed in mathematical terms as they commonly are in
physics. The relationship between profitability and competition in the market entry example
can be based DEMO the fact that early entrants can often achieve higher profit potential than later
followers because with less competition, they find it easier to gain customers (Robinson,
1988), and their market share gains are worth more because they are associated with
increasing sales and less competition (Carpenter and Nakamoto, 1989; Golder and Tellis,
1993). This perhaps DEMO the use of a less refined formulation where profitability is a
function of entry timing, p(t), with a downward slope. Existing theories may not say,
however, whether the rate at which profit potential declines as entry is delayed is decreasing,
constant, or increasing. A good mathematical model would accommodate flexibility on some
of these relationships.
Existing DEMO used to build a mathematical model provide a large subset of model
assumptions with real empirical grounding. This link between model assumptions and
empirical DEMO offers guidelines for operationalization. Assumptions that are designed
purely to make the analysis tractable (e.g., conditions under which the incremental performance
decreases with DEMO timing t) are clearly articulated and justified in a mathematical model.
DEMO Counterintuitive findings
Outcomes of mathematical models (also referred to as theorems, propositions, or
implications) can challenge the existing literature by offering findings DEMO are counter-
intuitive. Le´ vesque and Shepherd (2002) utilize such a model to demonstrate a curvilinear
748
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) DEMO
relationship between the likelihood of earlier entry and the marginal effect of competitive
rivalry on the risk of mortality. Would not increased competitive rivalry DEMO the risk of
mortality and thus always suggest a later entry? DEMO if one considers the gain of expediting
entry on potential profit.
Scientific knowledge is different from commonsense knowledge. ‘‘Science acquires a
reach far beyond DEMO limits of our unaided senses’’ (Feigl, 1953, p. 13). DEMO curvilinear
relationship may also be missed by empirical analyses because the range of values for the
parameter is limited by the selected industries. A DEMO model can consider an
unrestricted set of numerical values for the parameter, except perhaps for a nonnegativity
condition. Consequently, the set of testable DEMO (theories) can be refined, and help
researchers characterize those industries (or situations) where this curvilinear relationship
might be observed. A mathematical model that reiterates known findings can only be useful if
it adds to DEMO explanation of those findings.
3.4. Generalizability
Closely related to the previous point, mathematical models are applicable to multiple
situations—as they can accommodate multiple variables, parameters, and functional forms—
and are therefore generalizable. For instance, product quality could be modeled as
t
qt ¼ Pi¼1 Xi , where DEMO is the summation operator and Xi is a random increment on product
quality from time period i1to i, with an expected value of i. Testable propositions on the
timing of market entry could be derived for DEMO where the returns on expected product
quality as entry is delayed one additional time period are either decreasing (concave
relationship where i decreases with i ), constant (linear relationship where i is constant in
i ), or increasing (convex relationship where i increases with i). In turn, the set of expected
product quality increments {t}t=1,2,3,. . . could take on multiple possible combination of
numerical values allowing DEMO the model to ‘‘swipe’’ an infinite set of curves, making
empirical DEMO of the chosen functional forms more likely. A more specialized model may
be useful in mature research areas where empirical support is readily available.
DEMO function of science, as seen by Braithwaite (1955), is to ‘‘establish general laws
covering the behaviors of the empirical events or objects DEMO which the science in question is
concerned, and thereby to enable DEMO to connect together our knowledge of the separately
known events, and DEMO make reliable predictions of events as yet unknown’’ (p. 1). DEMO
general laws are more likely to be derived from the use of a methodology that is applicable to
multiple situations and hence generalizable.
3.5. DEMO
Mathematical models can be simple and still be useful for a broad set of applications, as
illustrated by the following example borrowed from physics.4 Newton defined momentum p
4 Further details on this example can be DEMO in the Handbook of Chemistry and Physics (1980) and Resnick
and Halliday (1980).
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) 743–765
DEMO
as the product of mass m and velocity v, that is, p=mv. This definition is accurate for everyday
applications—and for not so everyday DEMO such as the space shuttle moving objects
in space—and has been utilized for several hundred years.
However, there may be situations where the application of a simple model is at the cost
of losing accuracy. Einstein DEMO in his Special Theory of Relativity that the definitions
of momentum and energy must be refined. The definition of momentum in relativistic
terms is DEMO given as p ¼ m0v=pﬃð8c
the speed of light (approximately 310 DEMO/s). Notice then that any object with a nonzero
mass has a momentum that increases as the speed becomes closer to the speed DEMO light.
Such an object would have infinite momentum if it could reach the speed of light. Since it
would take an infinite amount of DEMO (or a finite force acting over an infinite amount of
time) to accelerate an object to infinite momentum, Einstein concluded that an object
having mass always travels at speeds less than the speed of light. DEMO approximation
of momentum is accurate as long as the object’s velocity does not approach a reasonable
fraction of the speed of light.5 Nevertheless, in particle physics (where particles are
moving very fast), the refined definition of momentum is found to be accurate and highly
relevant.
If a DEMO must be involved due to the complexity of the phenomenon under study—and
mathematics can accommodate complexity at the model formulation stage—then multiple
concrete examples DEMO be offered to guide the reader in interpreting the phenomenon.
Extensive numerical or simulation analyses should be run when appropriate.6 A divide-and-
conquer strategy DEMO a complex problem is divided into multiple parts for which solutions
are identified and then putting the results together has proven to be powerful DEMO solving
multiple complex problems.
Þ, where m0
2
is the rest DEMO of the object and c
1
v=
3.6. Identifying definitive tests
Mathematics can identify definitive tests. That is, within the assumptions of the math-
ematical model, testable hypotheses (propositions) are derived and proofs of these hypotheses
are objectively reached—and as Peirce says, objectivity is an important part of the scientific
approach (Buchler, 1955; see Kerlinger, 1979, for further discussions of objectivity).7 In the
market entry example perhaps an DEMO in the discounting factor of mortality risk  on firm
performance would lead to earlier entry only under the assumption of a product whose DEMO
5 To put this into perspective, the speed of sound in DEMO is 3.4102 m/s—a fast airplane travels at just over three
times the speed of sound (10.5102 m/s) or just 0.0000035 the DEMO of light. At that speed, a 10,000-kg plane
would increase DEMO mass by 66 105 g.
In the analytical management literature, the DEMO of Carrillo and Gaimon (2000) offers a good example of
using extensive numerical analyses to extend the usefulness of a model for guiding DEMO maximization through
process change and knowledge creation.
7 Feigl (1953) prefers to refer to intersubjective testability. He argues that, besides the freedom from personal
or cultural bias or partiality, this formulation involves ‘‘the requirement that the knowledge claims of science be in
principle capable of test’’ (p. 11), going along with Popper’s view.
750
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) DEMO
is expected to increase over time.8 It is possible, however, that quality gets worse over time as
new technologies are introduced and tried DEMO a product. The testable hypothesis is definitive
only under the appropriate set of assumptions, and a change in the expected behavior of
product quality over time may alter this finding.
New proofs are required when assumptions DEMO varied, but these proofs offer the same level
of objectivity. A DEMO analysis identifies circumstances under which a model’s
outcomes are invariable to changing assumptions. A robustness analysis may have important
implications when selecting model parameters DEMO empirical validity. Parameters that are
proven independent of outcomes provide control variables, and if these parameters affect
outcomes in the empirical analysis then important new directions for modeling and/or
explaining behavior can be suggested.
4. DEMO mathematics to build theory
4.1. Building good theory
One of the main purposes of mathematical modeling is theory building.9 The corresponding
models are referred DEMO as ‘‘stylized theoretical models’’ (Eliashberg and Lilien, 1993), and
possess the characteristics described in the previous section. A stylized theoretical model
typically DEMO with a set of assumptions that demarcate the environment being analyzed.
Some of these assumptions are structural (i.e., they make the analysis tractable DEMO
influencing the environment), while others are substantive (i.e., they include real empirical
grounding). A stylized theoretical model captures relationships mathematically and DEMO out-
comes (implications) are solidly grounded, as all outcomes from DEMO models are
logically proven.
Can mathematical model thinking (in which a DEMO approach is used to state
assumptions, constraints, relationships, and implied DEMO and algorithms) and stylized
theoretical modeling (hereafter) produce a theoretical DEMO? That is, according to
Dubin (1978) and Whetten (1989), does a stylized theoretical model contain the four elements
for a complete theory: (1) the what; (2) the how; (3) the why; and taken altogether, (4) the
who, where, DEMO when?
The ‘‘what’’ constitutes the factors—i.e., variables, constructs, and DEMO are
parts of the explanation of the studied phenomenon. All relevant factors must be included,
whereas only those that add value should be DEMO For instance value is added when a tradeoff
is created, such DEMO the tradeoff between product quality and competition in the profitability
8 To keep the manuscript within a reasonable length, we do not explicitly establish these assumptions here.
9 Mathematical models can also be built for practical DEMO For instance, the concerned practitioner may
need concrete measurements (where a dependent variable is expressed as a function of various independent
variables) or help to make better decisions (where the model goes beyond measurement in recommending an
optimal policy).
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) 743–765
DEMO
and mortality risk functions of the market entry decision example, or DEMO tradeoff between
profitability and mortality risk in the performance function. Value-added factors in this case
include time, product quality, competition, profitability, and DEMO risk. The ‘‘what’’
question is clearly addressed in a stylized theoretical model.
Researchers must also consider ‘‘how’’ the factors of a model are related. DEMO (1989)
suggests that this is often done operationally using ‘‘arrows’’ DEMO connect ‘‘boxes’’ and
typically introduces causality. In addition to using arrows and boxes, a stylized theoretical
model captures these relationships mathematically. For instance, DEMO quality and
competition could be related to profitability via an exponent function where p( qt,ct)=
1qtn+2ctm. When higher product quality is expected to produce higher profitability, 1
must be positive. When the returns on profitability from one additional unit of quality are
expected to decrease with DEMO quality, n must lie between 0 and 1; whereas n must
exceed 1 when these returns are expected to increase. Similar conditions could DEMO detailed for
competition. Since quality and competition may interact in the profitability function, a term
involving the product of these two variables could be added to that function.
A model must also achieve credence through addressing DEMO ‘‘why’’ question, that is, ‘‘the
theoretical glue that welds the model together’’ (Whetten, 1989, p. 491). The key to
addressing the why question ‘‘...lies in the logic underlying the model’’: ‘‘...during the
theory development process, logic replaces data as the basis for evaluation’’ (Whetten, 1989,
p. 491). Since mathematics is a type of logic, the why question is directly addressed in a
stylized theoretical model. Propositions (theorems) are logical implications from solving (at
least partially) the model, and proofs detail the logic underlying the model.
The ‘‘who, where, and when’’ questions set the boundaries of generalizability, that is, these
DEMO set assumptions within which the logic applies. These assumptions are made more
specific as the what, how and why questions are further developed, DEMO they are precisely
stated in a stylized theoretical model. Some of these assumptions may be trivial, such as
product quality, and competition must DEMO on nonnegative values. Others may be necessary
to characterize model implications. For instance, a finite optimal timing of entry may be
mathematically proven only when the returns on profitability from additional product quality
are decreasing as DEMO quality is increased.
In summary, a mathematical approach to developing theories DEMO relationships
mathematically and the implications of the model arise from the logic of solving the
mathematical problem. In solving the mathematical problem, there are proofs (mathematical)
of the implications (propositions). The rigor comes DEMO solving the problem, which provides
the logic for the propositions. These DEMO are not abstract but are direct implications of
the assumptions and the logic provided through their mathematical formulation. The outcome
is a series of DEMO (theorems), which is the same as most traditional theoretical models.
DEMO Mathematics in social sciences
James Coleman, a significant figure in mathematical DEMO, argues that ‘‘if conceptual
elaboration is to progress beyond the proverbs DEMO the ancients, special tools are necessary.’’
He proposes the use of DEMO, as it ‘‘provides a battery of languages which, when
752
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) DEMO
carefully fitted to a set of ideas, can lend those ideas DEMO power.’’ He adds: ‘‘The crutch that
mathematics provides to everyday reasoning DEMO essential as sociology moves toward
the analysis of complex systems and predictions based on extended chains of deductions’’
(Coleman, 1964, p. vii).
Roughly half a century ago, mathematics found an important place in sociology research
and theory through measurement (e.g., with the use of graph DEMO in Flament, 1958; Berge,
1962), in the expression of empirical generalizations (e.g., James, 1953; Stephan and
Mischler, 1952), as a language for theory (e.g., with the use of Markov DEMO in Bush
and Mosteller, 1955), and in simple prediction (e.g., with the use of Markov chains in
Anderson, 1954). More DEMO, the seminal work of White (1970) on system models of
DEMO in organizations, of Hannan and Freeman (1989) on organizational ecology, and
Coleman’s (1990) linear system of social action are only a DEMO examples of the usefulness of
mathematics to theory development in this field.
During the same time period, mathematical psychology was also booming. Research
areas in which significant psychological ideas have been formulated in the language of
DEMO include psychophysics and reaction time, learning, choice, and thinking, to
name a few. This field is still growing rapidly today. The European DEMO Psy-
chology Group has existed for over 30 years. This group now meets every year, rotating
from city to city in Europe. In the United States, the Society for Mathematical Psychology is
also an over 30-year-old professional society with a renowned journal (Journal of Mathe-
matical Psychology).
The groundbreaking work of Herb Simon—from bounded rationality (Simon, 1947, 1957)
to subjective expected utility theory (Simon, 1960) to cognitive science (Simon, 1969) to
artificial intelligence (with Langly et al., 1987)—is undoubtedly worthy of mention. ‘‘His
primary purpose was to bring the DEMO rigorous methodology to the social sciences that
existed in physics and other hard sciences’’ (Vazsonyi, 2001, p. 16). Looking back at the
evolution of the field of artificial intelligence, one must admit that the consequences of
Simon’s efforts are breathtaking. Could one argue that as cognitive DEMO (or areas of
sociology) matured as a field of research, DEMO needed to gravitate toward more rigor? If so,
could one DEMO that as entrepreneurship research matures, there will be a call for DEMO rigor,
and is this field prepared for the next stage?
4.3. Optimal decision-making and entrepreneurship
To further illustrate the potential of mathematics DEMO building theory in managerial and
organizational studies, we select the topic DEMO decision-making where decisions are made at
multiple time periods (longitudinal) and answer the ‘‘what should be’’ questions
(normative, i.e., performing optimization). We choose this topic because stylized theor-
etical models are especially powerful DEMO the time dimension takes a center stage in the
decision process. These models can clearly integrate evolution patterns as they change
over time. They DEMO also objectively dictate over time an ‘‘optimal’’ course of action,
with measurable performances of flexibility between the set parameters (‘‘comparative
statics’’).
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) 743–765
DEMO
The field of entrepreneurship is a good candidate to illustrate how one can apply
mathematics to build theories that integrate the normative and longitudinal DEMO of
decision-making.10 The scholarly field of entrepreneurship ‘‘seeks to understand how
opportunities to bring into existence ‘future’ goods and services are discovered, created
and exploited by whom and with what consequences’’ (Venkataraman, 1997, p. 120). This
process of discovery, creation, and exploitation occurs in an DEMO where important
decisions must be made over time. Schwartz and Teach (DEMO) emphasize that strategies of
entrepreneurial firms and their effects on firm DEMO must be studied longitudinally
and not simply at some point in time—theories of entrepreneurship need to be dynamic in
nature.
Moreover, decisions underlying the strategies of entrepreneurial firms are made in an
attempt to reach a DEMO: for example, minimize the use of limited resources, maximize value
DEMO by exploiting a business opportunity, maximize stakeholder welfare or firm
survival, or perhaps a combination of these objectives. In an effort to reach DEMO goal, an
entrepreneurial firm ‘‘may ‘test the water’ by committing small DEMO of resources in a
multistep manner with minimal (risk) exposure at each step’’ (Brown et al., 2001, p. 956).
Altogether, DEMO the entrepreneurial environment changes over time, one can expect important
decisions DEMO be made at multiple time periods and to aspire to select the best alternative at
each time period.
Despite its importance, only a few scholars to date have covered the longitudinal and
normative aspects of decision-making DEMO the entrepreneurial context. These include
Gifford (1992a,b, 1993, 1997) in the (optimal) allocation of limited entrepreneurial
attention; Campbell (1992) and Le´ vesque and MacCrimmon (1997) in career choice
decisions; Cressy (1992) and Minniti and Bygrave (2001) in the entrepreneurial context
DEMO learning; and Le´ vesque (2000), Armstrong and Le´ vesque (DEMO), and Le´ vesque and
Shepherd (2002) in the timing of market entry. We maintain that the field of
entrepreneurship can benefit from DEMO more ambitious utilization of optimization methods
in order to develop more accurate theories, and illustrate how this can be accomplished,
but also first review some of these methods; a nontechnical description of these methods
is offered.11,12
10 A recent call for the introduction of a different DEMO of methodologies to those currently used in the field of
entrepreneurship reinforces our selection (e.g., Bull and Willard, 1993; Cooper, 1993). Woo et al. (1994) argue
that fundamental questions associated with entrepreneurial DEMO should involve an explicit
consideration of the new venture over time, DEMO stylized theoretical models can accommodate such a request.
Davidson et al. (DEMO) suggest the use of simulation, as neither archival nor survey data are ideal for the analysis
of new ventures and their formation process.
DEMO We focus on decision-theoretic optimization models where each decision problem is treated over time as
a one-person (firm) optimization problem, as opposed to game-theoretic models where two or more firms
compete.
12 For those interested DEMO the technical content of optimization, Gravelle and Rees (1992) offer DEMO
introductory chapter with examples in economics, while advanced references include Bazaraa DEMO al. (1993),
Nemhauser et al. (1994), Seierstad and DEMO (1987), Kamien and Schwartz (1991), and Kall and Wallace
(1994). Chow et al. (1971) is a classic reference on the theory of optimal stopping discussed later in this
section.
754
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) DEMO
5. Description of optimization methods
5.1. Decision variables, objective function, and feasible set
An optimization problem consists of three elements. The decision (or choice) variables are
the variables whose optimal values have to be determined. For instance, an entrepreneur may
want to know how much time to allocate during a week to prospecting for customers in order
to achieve DEMO sales. Time allocated during that week is the decision variable. In the
case of the market entry example presented earlier, the decision variable can take on two
different values: enter the market or do not enter the market. The value of any decision
variable is assumed to be DEMO as a real number (1 and 0 in the market entry DEMO),
and there may be multiple decision variables in the decision DEMO
The objective function gives a mathematical specification of the relationship between the
decision variables and a variable whose value is to be maximized or DEMO In the
prospecting for customer example, that relationship could relate the DEMO sales (in dollars)
to time allocated during the week, and sales is to be maximized. In the market entry example,
that DEMO would relate the decision of whether or not to enter a market to a risk-
adjusted profitability, which is to be maximized. The objective function can be interpreted as
a function allocating alternative values of the DEMO variables in order of preference so that
the preferred values can be identified.
The feasible set is the set of available alternatives, and is usually discrete. The feasible set
may be specified by direct enumeration. For DEMO, an entrepreneur can either allocate 10,
20, or 30 hours to prospecting for customers during a week. In the market entry example, the
feasible set is trivial: enter (1) or do not enter (0). This set may also be specified by one or
more inequalities, which directly define a set of alternative values of the decision variable(s).
For instance, the number of hours during a week allocated to prospecting for customers must
be larger than or equal to DEMO Lastly, the feasible set may be specified by one or more
DEMO or equations, which define a set of alternative values. Time allocated DEMO prospecting
for customers could be dependent upon the number of units in inventory. In turn these
functions or equations define the constraints associated with DEMO optimization problem. A
solution to an optimization problem is a vector of values for the decision variables, which
belongs to the feasible set and maximizes (or minimizes) the objective function.
Optimization models can help to DEMO theory because by answering the ‘‘what should be’’
questions, they can DEMO those who wish to improve their decisions. In particular, if
systematic DEMO from rational behavior—i.e., behavior predicted from the model—are
observed empirically (e.g., via an experiment), decision-makers may want to learn which
mistakes are typical and how to avoid potentially inefficient decisions. These models can also
DEMO gain a better understanding of when tradeoffs among variables are most beneficial. By
going through the mathematical relations one can articulate rationales for the DEMO
implications, and hence provide an answer to ‘‘how’’ the chosen strategy DEMO be associated
with the ‘‘best’’ possible payoffs (based on the selected DEMO function). Moreover,
optimization models can help decision-makers who must plan ahead. Typically their current
decisions will influence their future decisions (a dynamic effect) by altering the set of
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) 743–765
DEMO
alternatives that become available to them. The feasible set thus takes on a more sophisticated
form (e.g., it becomes time dependent) and additional types of variables must be accounted
for, as described in the dynamic optimization models presented in the next section.
5.2. Dynamic programming models
In DEMO 1950s, Richard Bellman developed a new tool for dynamic analysis called DEMO
programming. Dynamic programming has been used in many fields, including economics DEMO
engineering. It has been fruitfully applied to both discrete- and continuous-time problems,
where changes are monitored at discrete points in time in a DEMO problem whereas it
is continuously done over time in a continuous-time setting. Dynamic programming has also
been successfully applied to both deterministic and stochastic DEMO In a deterministic
setting, the path of changes over time is DEMO whereas changes are dependent upon
random events in a stochastic setting.
A dynamic programming formulation includes variables that are divided into two classes,
DEMO control variables and state variables. The control variables, also called decision
DEMO or actions, are to be determined by solving the problem. The DEMO variables, which
are affected by the control variables, define the dynamics of the decision system from one
time period to the next, and are thus associated with a system of state equations.Ina
continuous-time setting, the movement of the state variables is governed by first-order
differential equations (these are mathematical equations expressing the rate of change in the
state variables), while in a discrete-time case, the rate of change in each DEMO variable is a
function of the current state (can be a DEMO of state variables) and decision (can be a vector
of control variables). In a deterministic setting, the movement of the state variables is
characterized with certainty, while in a stochastic setting, this movement DEMO not known with
certainty. Hence, stochastic dynamic programming models contain random DEMO that
typically affect the state variables, and thus the decision variables DEMO time.13
In the context of the market entry example, product quality DEMO/or competition would play
the role of state variables when the movement over time of their rate of change rather than
that of their DEMO value is easier to characterize. More specifically, in a discrete-time
setting, it could be natural to model the progress in product quality during DEMO period t by a
random variable Xt, and hence model product DEMO at the beginning of period t+1 as
qt+1=qt+Xt. A similar equation could be developed for competition. In this situation, the
control variable—whether or not to enter the market at time t—affects the product-quality
state in that DEMO the decision is to enter the market at time t, then DEMO quality from time t on
would stay at qt since no more development would be made (i.e., qs=qt for any st). State
DEMO thus depend on previous decisions and can be observed during the decision process
to guide future decisions.
A dynamic programming formulation also includes an DEMO function to be maximized
or minimized and given initial conditions for the control variables. Kamien and Schwartz
(1991) introduce the basic principle of DEMO programming, called the principle of
13 In a discrete-time setting these DEMO variables transition is based upon a transition probability matrix.
756
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) DEMO
optimality, as follows: ‘‘An optimal path has the property that whatever the initial conditions
and control values over some initial period, the control (or decision variables) over the
remaining period must be optimal for DEMO remaining problem, with the state resulting from the
early decisions considered DEMO the initial condition’’ (p. 259). Two special types of discrete-
DEMO stochastic dynamic programming models offer elegant structured solutions and have
been widely used: Markov decision process and optimal stopping models.
5.3. Markov decision processes and optimal stopping
Markov decision process models contain five elements, namely decision epochs, states,
actions, rewards, and transition probabilities: ‘‘Choosing an DEMO in a state generates a
reward and determines the state at the next decision epoch through a transition probability
function. Policies or strategies are DEMO of which action to choose under any
eventuality at every future decision epoch’’ (Puterman, 1994, p. xv). The decision-maker
is looking for policies that prescribe the best action over time for each state of DEMO decision
system. These models are attractive because their Markovian property makes them ‘‘easier’’
to analyze, which holds whenever the state of the decision system in the following period
depends on the past through the current period DEMO (e.g., when qt+1=qt+Xt).
An optimal stopping approach suits the needs of a decision-maker who must choose the
best time to stop an DEMO (e.g., delaying market entry) by calculating additional potential
gains from DEMO the activity for one more period. In its simplest form the model
characterizes an optimal decision rule based on a myopic property: If the performance from
continuing that activity one more period and then stopping is DEMO than stopping the
activity now, then the decision-maker should stop the DEMO now. This decision rule can be
translated as threshold conditions on the state variables when more structure is added to the
decision system.14
Applications DEMO Markov decision process and optimal stopping models are numerous.
Examples of Markov decision processes in behavioral ecology include models of social and
hunting behavior DEMO lions (e.g., Mangel and Clark, 1988), daily vertical migration DEMO sockeye
salmon and zooplankton (Clark and Levy, 1988; Mangel and DEMO, 1988), and mate
desertion in Cooper’s hawks (Kelly and Kennedy, 1993). Another example is the use of
such models in communication (Feinberg et al., 1985). Optimal stopping models have been
used DEMO instance in the maintenance and new product development literature, where they
DEMO the optimal time to replace periodically inspected piece of equipment (Derman DEMO
Sacks, 1960), a selection procedure of activities and the optimal DEMO time for a project
(Granot and Zuckerman, 1991), and a project’s completion time in the context of a project
that can give DEMO returns if not completed (Chi et al., 1997). These models have yet to be
applied to the study of new business opportunities, including the study of their exploration.
Unlike data analysis methodologies such as DEMO or time series analysis, dynamic
programming goes beyond the description of DEMO relationships between the variables and the
effect of historical values. Dynamic programming considers the evolution over time of some
14 Puterman (1994) offers DEMO formulation of optimal stopping problems as Markov decision processes.
M. Le´ vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) 743–765 DEMO
of the major variables and the influence that previous decisions have on future decisions
(regression or time series analyses do not incorporate decision variables). Although this
methodology has rarely been offered in the journals mentioned DEMO the Introduction, we believe
that a dynamic programming formulation has the DEMO to contribute to theoretical and
conceptual understanding of how time impacts managerial and organizational decisions (and
recently, a special topic forum in the DEMO of Management Review emphasizes the
importance of advancing our theoretical understanding of time in organizations; see, e.g.,
Ancona et al., 2001). Examples of potential theoretical and conceptual contributions of
dynamic programming to entrepreneurship DEMO offered in the next section.
6. Future research in entrepreneurship
6.1. Optimal search strategy for assessing a business opportunity
A key component of the DEMO exploitation of a business opportunity is the
accumulated information that the entrepreneur has at hand. When should an entrepreneur
stop searching for information about DEMO attractiveness of an opportunity and grasp it before
the window of opportunity closes?15 Since entrepreneurs are not always actively searching for
a business DEMO (Shane, 2001), one must assume that the entrepreneur is strongly
attached to the newly discovered opportunity and therefore tends to avoid exit DEMO the
venturing process. Instead, the entrepreneur tends to modify an original DEMO move to a
new one—when that idea seems unviable (Bird, 1989).
We propose the use of an optimal stopping model to assess DEMO business opportunity based
on the use of knowledge (accumulated over time) to accept (and exploit) or reject (and not to
exploit) DEMO specific business opportunity before the window of opportunity closes. While there
has been some research about the evaluation of an opportunity and especially of DEMO
pursuing opportunities (Hills and Shrader, 1998), these assessments have been static. In
contrast, an optimal stopping model can consider two dynamic facts. First, the decision
horizon may be randomly truncated at any time because a competitor accepts the opportunity
before the entrepreneur makes a decision. Second, the entrepreneur can increase the accuracy
of the expected profit from exploiting DEMO business opportunity by sequentially gathering
information. The probabilistic nature of such a model can allow for a statistical evaluation of
the benefits of additional DEMO as it increases the probability of grasping a ‘‘good’’
opportunity and lowers that of choosing a ‘‘bad’’ one. The concept of information in the DEMO of
assessing potential business opportunities may provide a new paradigm for the field of
entrepreneurship.
Our objective is not to offer a detailed mathematical DEMO, as this would
correspond to a paper on its own. Instead, we offer Fig. 1 to illustrate the basis for this
optimal stopping DEMO Based on empirical research, delaying market entry increases
15 This section DEMO based on an opportunity assessment model that has recently been published in the
management engineering literature by Shepherd and Le´ vesque (2002).
758
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) DEMO
Fig. 1. Timing of exploitation, knowledge, and profitability.
knowledge, search DEMO, and the probability of closure for the window of opportunity.
Increased DEMO increases decision accuracy and therefore expected profit, whereas
increased search costs DEMO likelihood of closure for the window of opportunity decrease
expected profit.
An optimal stopping model would likely propose threshold values for knowledge
(modeled as a state variable) that determine whether the entrepreneur should accept the
opportunity now, reject the opportunity now, or continue the search for information DEMO the
opportunity. We therefore believe that such a model would make a contribution to our
understanding of evaluating a business opportunity, complementing recent research on
opportunity recognition, decision-theoretic approaches to market entry, and sequential
information-gathering DEMO The optimal stopping approach proposed here would reflect
the dynamic nature of the entrepreneurial process and build on previous research that relies on
a DEMO perspective and/or does not account for a window of opportunity closing.
6.2. Types of learning and their effects on optimal market entry strategy
DEMO new information is a means by which new firms can capture new resources and
develop capabilities that can lead to a sustainable competitive advantage (Hitt et al., 1999).
Therefore, a better understanding of entry DEMO can be gained by investigating the
learning captured by a firm before and after entry. The learning literature suggests that firms
gather information from DEMO through participation and/or learning from the
experiences of others (vicarious DEMO) (e.g., Huber, 1991). Like Bhattacharya (1984), one
DEMO consider the entry decision to be endogenous which in turn influences the amount a firm
can learn. When, then, should a new firm DEMO the market based on the benefits from
learning-by-doing and learning vicariously?
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) 743–765
DEMO
Fig. 2 illustrates the basis for a decision-theoretic model of entry timing. Based on
empirical research, delaying market entry impacts learning (from participation DEMO vicar-
iously) and the higher the learning the greater the profit DEMO and the lower the risk of
mortality, both of which increase DEMO Delaying market entry decreases the amount
of information that can be learned from participation, which decreases profit potential and
increases mortality risk. But delaying market entry also increases the amount of information
learned vicariously which increases DEMO potential and decreases mortality risk. Moreover,
delaying market entry may have a direct effect on performance via the reduction of both profit
and DEMO risk.
Most studies on learning have focused on either learning from participation or learning
from the experiences of others. One could therefore utilize the DEMO proposed by Fig. 2
to contribute to market entry theories (and DEMO entry strategies for newly formed firms) by
investigating the role of DEMO sources of learning in influencing the timing of entry decision.
Further, DEMO strategy scholars have investigated environmental factors but have not
investigated how environmental conditions affect the amount that a new firm can learn
and its DEMO on the optimal time to enter a market. The use of dynamic programming is
well suited to address these issues because of the central DEMO played by the time dimension in
this market entry decision. In addition, such a model would characterize the conditions under
which a firm would most benefit (i.e., optimize the tradeoff between profit potential and
Fig. DEMO Timing of market entry, learning, and performance.
760
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) DEMO
mortality risk) from expediting market entry. Varying environmental conditions should
encourage DEMO or delayed entry depending on its impact on the firm’s level of learning
from participation and/or vicariously.
6.3. Optimizing new firm performance through DEMO scope
As a business opportunity is exploited and a new firm enters a market, question of market
scope—the degree to which a firm spreads its resources across the market—becomes central
to the development of a firm’s DEMO (e.g., Teplensky et al., 1993). Earlier studies appear to
DEMO narrow scope due to an emphasis on decreasing the new firm’s risk of failure and
conservation of scarce resources, whereas later studies advocate a broad-scope strategy due to
increased profit potential. Which scope strategy, then, DEMO superior performance?
Recently, strategy scholars have supported the moderating role DEMO the environment in the
relationship between scope and performance (e.g., McDougall et al., 1994), but they have not
explicitly addressed the apparent tradeoff between profitability and failure nor have they
sufficiently addressed the possible DEMO nature of a firm’s scope strategy over time (i.e., as
the new firm matures). A dynamic programming formulation can easily take these DEMO issues
into consideration, and characterize how past scope decisions may alter DEMO firm’s current
environment and therefore result in different scope decisions over time.
In addition, a mathematical model can accommodate the contingent nature of the scope
decision by looking at the direct effect that the choice of DEMO has on performance as well as
the indirect effect it has on performance via its impact on the firm’s environment (e.g.,
competition and demand variability). Might this model suggest that a strategist’s decision
about DEMO appropriate level of scope is not a ‘‘once off’’ decision? Certainly DEMO as simple as
those suggesting that a broad (or narrow) scope strategy is always best and not as simple as
general rules of DEMO e.g., early entrants should pursue a broad-scope strategy whereas late
entrants DEMO follow a narrow-scope one (Shepherd and Shanley, 1998).
McDougall et al. (1994) found that new ventures in high-growth industries that chose DEMO
enter with a broader scope had the highest sales growth but a nonsignificant relationship with
profitability (measured by return on sales). This inability to find support for the hypothesized
relationship between scope and profitability may DEMO explained by the argument that a short-
term sacrifice in potential profitability is necessary to gain market share. Optimization models
can easily capture such DEMO, and guide those who wish to improve their scope decisions.
7. DEMO
We articulated the potential of mathematics to build theories in the field of entrepreneur-
ship. Among branches of mathematics, dynamic programming is a good candidate because it
allows for nonlinearity, nonergodicity (path-dependency and history), DEMO unpredictability
(system state as random variables). These properties are important DEMO a model ought to be a
close representation of decision-making in real entrepreneurial contexts. Our understanding of
the discovery, creation, and exploitation of DEMO opportunities—and of their consequences
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) 743–765
DEMO
and those who make them happen—can be improved by building models that satisfy these
properties. The breadth of applications for mathematical models is, however, neither limited
to the field of entrepreneurship nor to normative, longitudinal DEMO making.
Multiple strengths of a mathematical approach to theory development in organizational
studies were described. Mathematical theory building adds structure to the description and
DEMO of a research question, and forces us to be precise about DEMO made and
concepts utilized. Mathematical models are built from existing theories that form the basis for
model assumptions; can accommodate multiple variables, parameters, and functional forms,
yet be parsimonious and accurate; and can identify definitive tests, which may offer (and be
utilized to rationalize) counterintuitive findings. Dynamic programming models can help to
build theory as they can DEMO those who wish to improve their decisions and help gain a
better understanding of how, when, or which tradeoffs among variables are most DEMO
There are, of course, limitations to using a mathematical approach. The model and its
implications are only the first step of a Popperian DEMO process—it guides the formulation
of the hypotheses to be tested. However, DEMO measurements of some variables, parameters,
and functional forms can be DEMO to obtain and thus testing the model empirically can be
difficult. In the decision-making focus we opted for in this article, theoretical implications can
be validated (or proven false) via economics experiments (questionnaires and/or laboratory
experiments with payment incentives). These experiments enable scholars to manipulate
DEMO and measure those that are inherent to the decision-maker (the experimenter DEMO
cause and measures effect), and thus be utilized to conduct an analysis of the sensitivity of an
‘‘optimal’’ course of action with respect DEMO changes in the set parameters. We should also
mention that when empirical research of the model’s propositions is conducted, it would
make a contribution to knowledge in the same way that empirically testing the propositions of
DEMO traditional theory papers does.
Optimal decision-theoretic models assume that the decision-maker is rational. However,
decision-makers may violate the requirements of rationality in various DEMO, as observed in
the case of entrepreneurs who may take decisions DEMO a ‘‘nonalgorithmic’’ fashion (Bygrave,
1993) and be overly optimistic (DEMO, 1986). There are various bounded rationality models
that capture some DEMO these concepts, including some of the models mentioned earlier (e.g.,
Minniti and Bygrave, 2001). Also, the application of optimization methods DEMO entrepreneur-
ship is more difficult because it is less clear what entrepreneurs optimize over. Baumol (2000)
argues that optimization models have limited power in situations where the entrepreneur is
viewed as someone ‘‘...who never faces DEMO similar decisions, who operates by intuition,
hunch and daring, and who is responsible for the most unexpected breakthroughs that are the
engine DEMO industrial revolutions’’ (p. 241), in other words someone who does DEMO view
rationality and order as the paramount foundation of decision-making. The optimization
approaches discussed here could be complemented by the use of chaos theory (system
behavior highly dependent on initial conditions and highly unpredictable), catastrophe DEMO
(system jumps from one equilibrium to another), and complexity theory (system somehow
stable yet unpredictable).
The goal of this work was DEMO develop a greater appreciation of mathematical models and
the use of stylized theoretical modeling amongst the broader management communities of
762
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) DEMO
scholars. To trigger the coverage of other topics that are just as beneficial to their field, we
validated mathematical modeling as advantageous to scholarly research and showed that
there exists multiple problem solving situations (or parts thereof) in the area of entrepren-
eurship that can be adequately described quantitatively (i.e., where the dynamic nature of
the decision system subject DEMO control and the objective of the decision-maker may be
expressed mathematically). These included the use of a mathematical model for identifying
thresholds of DEMO knowledge on which to base the decision of when to stop
searching for information about the attractiveness of an opportunity and accept or reject DEMO
before the window of opportunity closes; characterizing how varying environmental
conditions DEMO affect timing of market entry depending on their impact on a new firm’s
level of learning from both participation and observation; and identifying a path of scope
decisions as a new firm matures based on the DEMO role of the environment in the
relationship between scope and risk-adjusted measure of profitability. We initiated (or
perhaps reopened) a dialogue on how DEMO can provide important contributions to
current theories of management and organizations, DEMO we hope others further this
dialogue.
Acknowledgements
The author is grateful to Dean Shepherd for helping in the development of new research
areas proposed DEMO this manuscript, and to Thomas Lumpkin, Atul Nerkar, and Lawrence DEMO
for their insightful comments on an earlier draft. The author is also grateful to Phillip Phan
and four anonymous reviewers for suggestions that have DEMO improved this
manuscript, and to the participants of the 2002 Darden-Lally DEMO on Entrepreneurship
Theory.
References
Ancona, D.G., Goodman, P.S., Lawrence, DEMO, Tushman, M.L., 2001. Time: a new research lens. Acad. Manage.
Rev. 26 (4), 645–663.
Anderson, T.W., 1954. Probability models for analyzing time changes in attitudes. In: Lazarsfield, P.F. (Ed.),
DEMO Thinking in the Social Sciences. Free Press of Glencoe, New York, NY. Chapter 1.
Armstrong, M.J., Le´ vesque, M., 2002. Timing DEMO quality decisions for entrepreneurial product development. Eur.
J. Oper. Res. 141 (DEMO), 88–106.
Baumol, W.J., 2000. Book review: the allocation of DEMO entrepreneurial attention, by S. Gifford, Boston:
Kluwer Academic Publisher, DEMO Small Bus. Econ. 14 (3), 239–241.
Bazaraa, M.S., Sherali, H.D., Shetty, C.M., 1993. Nonlinear Programming: Theory and Algorithms, 2nd ed.
Wiley, New York, NY.
Berge, C., 1962. The Theory DEMO Graphs and Its Applications. Wiley, New York, NY. Alison Doig, DEMO; original
work published 1958, Paris: Dunod.
Bhattacharya, G., 1984. DEMO and the behavior of potential entrants. Rand J. Econ. 15, 281–289.
DEMO, B.J., 1989. Entrepreneurial Behavior. Scott Foresman, Glenview.
Braithwaite, R., DEMO Scientific Explanation. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.
M. Le´ vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) 743–765 DEMO
Brown, T.E., Davidsson, P., Wiklund, J., 2001. An operationalization of Stevenson’s conceptualization of en-
trepreneurship as opportunity-based firm behavior. Strateg. Manage. DEMO 22 (10), 953–968.
Buchler, J., 1955. Philosophical Writings of DEMO Dover, New York, NY.
Bull, I., Willard, G.E., 1993. Towards a theory of entrepreneurship. J. Bus. Venturing 8, 183–195.
Busenitz, DEMO, West III, G.P., Shepherd, D.A., Nelson, T., Chandler, G.N., Zacharakis, A., in press. Entrepreneur-
ship research in emergence: DEMO trends and future directions. J. Manage.
Bush, R.R., Mosteller, F., 1955. Stochastic Models for Learning. Wiley, New York, NY.
Bygrave, W.D., 1993. Theory building in the entrepreneurship paradigm. J. Bus. Venturing 8, DEMO
Campbell, C.A., 1992. A decision theory model for entrepreneurial acts. Entrep. Theory Pract. 17 (1), 21–27.
Carpenter, G.S., Nakamoto, K., 1989. Consumer preference formation and pioneering advantage. J. Mark. Res.
26, 285–298.
Carrillo, J.E., Gaimon, C., 2000. Improving manufacturing performance through process DEMO and knowledge
creation. Manage. Sci. 46 (2), 265–288.
Chi, T., Liu, J., Chen, H., 1997. Optimal stopping rule for a project with uncertain completion time and partial
salvageability. IEEE Trans. Eng. Manage. DEMO, 54–66.
Chow, Y.S., Robbins, H., Siegmund, D., 1971. DEMO Expectations: The Theory of Optimal Stopping. Houghton
Mifflin, Boston, MA.
DEMO, C.W., Levy, D.A., 1988. Diel vertical migrations by juvenile sockeye salmon. Am. Nat. 131, 271–290.
Cohen, M., 1956. A Preface to Logic. Meridian, New York, NY.
Coleman, J.S., 1964. Introduction to DEMO Sociology. Free Press of Glencoe, New York, NY.
Coleman, J.S., 1990. Foundations of Social Theory. Belknap Press of Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA.
Cooper, A.C., 1993. Challenges in predicting new firm performance. J. Bus. Venturing 8, 241–253.
Cressy, R., 1992. The theory of the opportunistic entrepreneur. Small Bus. Econ. 4 (4), 267–271.
Davidson, P., Wiklund, J., 2001. Levels of analysis in entrepreneurship research: current research practice and
suggestions for the future. Entrep. Theory Pract. 25 (4), 81–99.
Davidson, P., Low, M.B., Wright, M., 2001. Low DEMO MacMillan ten years on: achievements and future directions
for entrepreneurship research. DEMO Theory Pract. 25 (4), 5–15.
Derman, C., Sacks, J., 1960. Replacement of periodically inspected equipment (an optimal optional stopping rule)DEMO
Nav. Res. Logist. Q. 7, 597–607.
Dubin, R., 1978. Theory DEMO Free Press, New York, NY.
Eliashberg, J., Lilien, G.L., 1993. Mathematical marketing models: some historical perspectives and future
projections. In: DEMO, J., Lilien, G.L. (Eds.), Marketing. Handbooks in Operations Research and Manage-
ment Science, vol. 5. North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 3–23.
Feigl, H., 1953. The scientific outlook: naturalism and humanism. In: Feigl, H., Brodbeck, M. (Eds.), Readings in
the Philosophy of Science. Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York, NY, pp. 8–18.
Feinberg, E.A., Kogan, DEMO, Smirnov, A.N., 1985. Optimal control by the retransmission probability in DEMO
Flament, C., 1958. Analyse pluridimensionnelle des structures hierarchiques intransitives. Bull. Cent. E´ tud. Rech.
Psychotech. 7, 171–179.
Gifford, S., 1992a. Innovation, DEMO size and growth in a centralized organization. Rand J. Econ. 23, DEMO
Gifford, S., 1992b. Allocation of entrepreneurial attention. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 19, 265–284.
Gifford, S., 1993. Heterogeneous ability, career choice and DEMO size. Small Bus. Econ. 5, 249–259.
Gifford, S., 1997. On DEMO relationship between the venture capitalists and the entrepreneur. J. Bus. Venturing 12,
459–482.
Golder, P.N., Tellis, G.J., 1993. Pioneer advantage: marketing logic or marketing legend? J. Mark. Res. 30,
158–170.
Granot, DEMO, Zuckerman, D., 1991. Optimal sequencing and resource allocation in research DEMO development
projects. Manage. Sci. 37, 140–156.
Gravelle, H., Rees, R., 1992. Micro Economics, 2nd ed. Longman, London.
Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 1980, 61st ed. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
ALOHA DEMO Perf. Eval. 5, 85–96.
764
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) DEMO
Hannan, M.T., Freeman, J., 1989. Organizational Ecology. Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, MA.
Hills, G.E., Shrader, R.C., 1998. Successful managers’ DEMO into opportunity recognition. Front. Entrep. Res.
Babson College, MA, pp. 30–42.
Hitt, M.A., Ireland, R.D., Hoskisson, R.E., 1999. Strategic Management: Competitiveness and Globalization.
South-Western College Publishing, Cincinnati, OH.
Huber, G.P., DEMO Organizational learning: the contributing processes and the literatures. Organ. Sci. 2, 88–115.
James, J., 1953. The distribution off free-forming small group size. DEMO Sociol. Rev. 18, 569.
Kall, P., Wallace, S.W., 1994. DEMO Programming. Wiley, New York, NY.
Kamien, M.I., Schwartz, N.L., 1991. Dynamic Optimization: The Calculus of Variations and Optimal Control in
Economics and Management, 2nd ed. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Kelly, E.J., Kennedy, P.L., 1993. A dynamic stochastic model of mate desertion. Ecology 74, 351–366.
DEMO, F.N., 1979. Behavioral Research: A Conceptual Approach. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York, NY.
Kerlinger, F.N., 1986. Foundations of Behavioral DEMO, 3rd ed. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Orlando, FL.
Langly, DEMO, Simon, H.A., Bradshaw, G.L., Zytkow, J.M., 1987. Scientific DEMO: Computational Explorations
of the Creative Processes. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
DEMO, M., 2000. Effects of funding and its return on product quality in new ventures. IEEE Trans. Eng.
Manage. 47 (1), 98–105.
vesque, M., MacCrimmon, K.R., 1997. On the interaction of time and DEMO invested in new ventures. Entrep.
Theory Pract. 22 (2), 89–110.
DEMO, M., Shepherd, D.A., 2002. A new venture’s optimal entry time. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 139 (3), 626–642.
Mangel, M., Clark, C.W., 1988. Dynamic Modeling in Behavioral Ecology. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ.
McDougall, P.P., Covin, J.G., Robinson, R.B., Herron, DEMO, 1994. The effects of industry growth and strategic
breadth on new DEMO performance and strategy content. Strateg. Manage. J. 15, 537–554.
Minniti, M., Bygrave, W., 2001. A dynamic model of entrepreneurial learning. Entrep. Theory Pract. 25 (3),
5–16.
Nemhauser, G.L., Rinnooy Kan, A.H.G., Todd, M.J. (Eds.), 1994. Optimization. Handbooks in Operations
Research and Management Science, vol. 1. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Olson, P.D., 1986. Entrepreneurs: opportunistic decision makers. J. Small Bus. Manage. 24 (3), 29–35.
Puterman, M.L., 1994. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming. Wiley, DEMO
York, NY.
Resnick, R., Halliday, D., 1980. Ondes, Optique et Physique Moderne (Translation by Q.-T. Nguyen and D.
Martel of Waves, Optic and Modern Physics, 1978, New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons). Montre´ al, PQ:
Editions du Renouveau Pe´ dagogique.
Robinson, W.T., 1988. Sources of market pioneer advantages: the case of industrial goods industries. J. Mark. Res.
XXV, 87–94.
Schwartz, R.G., Teach, R.D., 2000. Entrepreneurship research: an empirical perspective (research note). DEMO
Theory Pract. 24 (3), 77–81.
Seierstad, A., Sydsaeter, K., 1987. Optimal Control Theory with Economic Applications. North-Holland, Am-
sterdam.
Shane, S., 2001. Technology regimes and new firm formation. Manage. Sci. 47 (DEMO), 1173–1190.
Shepherd, D.A., Le´ vesque, M., 2002. A search strategy for assessing a business opportunity. IEEE Trans. Eng.
Manage. 49 (2), 140–154.
Shepherd, D.A., Shanley, M.T., 1998. New Venture Strategy: Timing, Environmental Uncertainty, and Perform-
ance. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, DEMO
Simon, H.A., 1947. Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes DEMO Administrative Organ-
ization. Macmillan, New York, NY.
Simon, H.A., 1957. Models of Man, Social and Rational: Mathematical Essays on Rational Human DEMO in a
Social Science Setting. Wiley, New York, NY.
Simon, DEMO, 1960. The New Science of Management. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, DEMO
Simon, H.A., 1969. The Science of the Artificial. MIT Press, DEMO, MA.
Le´
Le´
Le´
M. Le´
vesque / Journal of Business Venturing 19 (2004) 743–765
DEMO
Stephan, F.F., Mischler, E.G., 1952. The distribution of participation in small groups: an exponential approxima-
tion. Am. Sociol. Rev. 17, 598.
DEMO, J.D., Kimberly, J.R., Hillman, A.L., Schwartz, J.S., 1993. Scope, timing and strategic adjustment in
emerging markets: manufacturer strategies and DEMO case of MRI. Strateg. Manage. J. 14, 505–527.
Vazsonyi, A., DEMO Remembering Herbert A. Simon, wizard of the artificial sciences. Decis. Line DEMO (2), 16–18.
Venkataraman, S., 1997. The distinctive domain of DEMO research: an editor’s perspective. In: Katz, J.,
Brockhaus, R. (Eds.), Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence, and Growth. JAI Press, Greenwich,
CT, pp. 119–138.
West III, G.P., 1997. Frameworks DEMO research and theory development in entrepreneurship. In: Dosier, L.N.,
Keys, J.B. (Eds.), Academy of Management Best Papers Proceedings. Georgia Southern DEMO, States-
boro, GA, pp. 113–117.
Whetten, D.A., 1989. What DEMO a theoretical contribution? Acad. Manage. Rev. 14, 490–495.
White, H.C., 1970. Chains of Opportunities: System Models of Mobility in Organizations. Harvard Univ. Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Woo, C.Y., Daellenbach, U., Nicholls-Nixon, DEMO, 1994. Theory building in the presence of ‘randomness’: the case
of venture creation and performance. J. Manag. Stud. 31 (4), 507–524.{1g42fwefx}