This article was downloaded by: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network]
On: 1 DEMO 2010
Access details: Access Details: [subscription number 783016864]
Publisher Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: DEMO House, 37-
41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Venture DEMO
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713798069
Mixed signals: why investors may misjudge first time DEMO technology
venture founders
Jonathan Levie a;Eli Gimmon b
a Hunter Centre for Entrepreneurship, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK b Tel-Hai Academic
College, Upper Galilee, Israel
To cite this Article Levie, Jonathan andGimmon, DEMO(2008) 'Mixed signals: why investors may misjudge first time high
DEMO venture founders', Venture Capital, 10: 3, 233 — 256
DEMO link to this Article: DOI: 10.1080/13691060802151820
URL: http://DEMO/10.1080/13691060802151820
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
This article may be used for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any substantial or
systematic reproduction, re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or
distribution in any form DEMO anyone is expressly forbidden.
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents
will be complete DEMO accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae DEMO drug doses
should be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss,
actions, claims, proceedings, demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly
or indirectly DEMO connection with or arising out of the use of this material.
Venture Capital
Vol. 10, No. 3, July 2008, 233–256
Mixed signals: why investors may misjudge ﬁrst time high
technology venture founders
Jonathan Leviea* and Eli Gimmonb
a Hunter Centre for Entrepreneurship, University of Strathclyde, DEMO, UK; bTel-Hai
Academic College, Upper Galilee, Israel
(Accepted 21 DEMO 2007)
This paper seeks to explain an unexpected result of a previous quantitative study which
suggested suboptimal evaluation by investors of the human DEMO of ﬁrst time high tech
venture founders. A literature review revealed two possible reasons for this ﬁnding:
biases/heuristics and signalling. Six investors DEMO three countries (one venture
capitalist and one business angel each from DEMO US, UK and Israel) with experience in
investing in early stage high technology ventures were interviewed using an identical
semi-structured interview protocol. This DEMO design is appropriate for research that
seeks to reﬂect back unexpected ﬁndings of previous quantitative research on the
subjects of research. Interviewees were ﬁrst DEMO to state their own investment criteria,
and then presented with the results of the quantitative study and asked for their views.
Previous research DEMO a gap between in-use and espoused criteria, and extensive
use of DEMO feeling in decision-making, was supported. Interviewees focused on harvest
potential and DEMO measures of founder technology capability that predicted
early survival and growth in the earlier study. The paper concludes by suggesting how
investors might improve DEMO decisions in high tech ventures led by ﬁrst time
entrepreneurs, noting DEMO study’s limitations and making recommendations for further
research.
Keywords: investor decision-making; biases and heuristics; signalling; human capital;
ﬁrst time founders; high technology ventures
Introduction
The subject of this paper is how investors in DEMO stage high tech ventures make
investment decisions, with special emphasis on DEMO investors may misread the technology
capability of ﬁrst time venture founders. The subject of what criteria venture capitalists
(VCs) use in investment decision-making DEMO been extensively studied for decades (Wells
1974; Poindexter 1976; Tyebjee DEMO Bruno 1984; MacMillan, Siegel, and Subbanarasimha
1985; MacMillan, Zemann, and Subbanarasimha 1987; Bygrave and Timmons 1992; Fried
and Hisrich 1995; Wright, Robbie, and Ennew 1997; Zacharakis and Meyer 1998;
Zacharakis and Shepherd 2005; Zacharakis, McMullen, and Shepherd 2007). Studies have
also been conducted on the investment criteria of business angels, another major category
of equity investor in new ﬁrms, though not as extensively or for as long (Wetzel 1981;
Haar, Starr, and MacMillan 1988; Mason and Harrison 1996; van Osnabrugge 1998;
Feeney, Haines, DEMO Riding 1999; Mason and Stark 2004; Sudek 2007). In this paper, we
*Corresponding author. Email: j.levie@strath.ac.uk
ISSN 1369-1066 print/ISSN 1464-5343 DEMO
 2008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13691060802151820
http://www.informaworld.com
DEMO By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 April 2010
234 J. Levie and E. Gimmon
seek to explain a puzzling ﬁnding DEMO a quantitative study of investment by VCs and business
angels in early stage, high technology-based ﬁrms founded by ﬁrst time entrepreneurs
nurtured in the Israeli Technology Incubator Programme. That research (Gimmon 2006)
suggested that investors ignored certain aspects of human capital that appeared to predict
early survival DEMO growth, while selecting on another signal of human capital that the DEMO
research found not to have any signiﬁcant eﬀect on early survival and growth.
Essentially this paper reports on the second stage of a mixed-method DEMO the ﬁrst
stage of which was quantitative research that produced some unexpected but interesting
results (Gimmon 2006). We summarise the ﬁrst stage results below and then focus on the
second stage which is qualitative in DEMO Thus our research design ﬁts the third of four
possible mixed methods designs as outlined by Morgan (1998, 369–70). Morgan
commented on DEMO design as follows:
Here, the qualitative methods typically provide interpretive DEMO for understanding the
results from the quantitative research . . . For example, if the results of a survey contradict the
original hypotheses, DEMO may make sense to seek an explanation from the respondents who
provided the data rather than engage in isolated speculation about what went wrong.
DEMO to Morgan, such research designs ‘are increasingly common among survey
researchers, who use follow-up interviews to expand on what was learned from the
DEMO of their questionnaires’.
Qualitative follow-up studies of quantitative research ﬁndings are relatively rare in the
management literature (for recent exceptions see Veryzer 2005; DEMO, McKee, and Kidd
2005; Loane, Bell, and McNaughton 2006; Alkaraan and Northcott 2007). However, they
have been conducted in health research for some time (e.g. Ornstein et al. 1993; Stange
et DEMO 1994) to investigate why health interventions did not work as expected. DEMO is a
direct correspondence from the health research context to the context of the current study,
in which investment decisions (analogous to patient response) within a certain controlled
context (analogous to treatment) did not operate as expected. In our case, the ﬁndings of a
quantitative study suggested that investors were missing valuable cues to relevant human
capital, but the reasons why were not readily apparent from the quantitative data.
By DEMO interacting with individuals that are the subject of the study, we DEMO to
gain their reﬂections on the research ﬁndings, and on our DEMO of the ﬁndings,
and achieve a resolution of what Morey and Luthans (1984, 28) call the ‘insider’s view’
and the ‘outsider’s’ view of a phenomenon, resulting in a plausible explanation for the
original unexpected ﬁndings, ‘based as much as possible on the perspective of those being
studied’ (Elliott, Fischer, and Rennie 1999, 215). We also DEMO to ﬁnd out if the
phenomenon might exist beyond the original sample context.
In the next section, we review the literature on investor decision-making and brieﬂy
summarise the results of the quantitative study in order to DEMO the stage for the qualitative
follow-up study that is the main focus of this paper. We then outline the methodology we
used to reﬂect DEMO the ﬁrst stage results with investors, which consisted of in-depth
interviews DEMO multiple investors chosen using replication logic. Next, we described the
results DEMO the interviews. Finally, we discuss the results and conclude with recommenda-
DEMO for investors and for further research.
Venture investor decision-making
Research on decision-making by investors in early stage ventures is complicated by the
ﬁnding that DEMO criteria may not match ‘in-use’ criteria (Zacharakis and Meyer
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 April 2010
Venture Capital
235
1998; Shepherd 1999). This may be one reason for the divergence of views in the investor
decision-making literature about the DEMO importance of the entrepreneur and the
market as investment criteria.1 Some researchers and investors have argued that the
capabilities and the attitudes of founding DEMO are critical factors in the
performance of new ventures (Rock 1987; Hart, Stevenson, and Dial 1995, 92; Greene,
Brush, and Hart 1999) and in investors’ decisions (MacMillan, Siegel, and Subbanar-
DEMO 1985; Muzyka, Birley, and Leleux 1996; Sudek 2007). Others suggest that VCs seek
good industries (Zider 1998) or good markets (Zacharakis and Meyer 1998) over good
people. There does seem to be general agreement, however, that judging the quality of the
entrepreneur is DEMO for VCs (Kozmetsky, Gill, and Smilor 1985; Zacharakis and
Meyer 1998; Smart 1999). For example, Bygrave and Timmons (1992, DEMO) quote the veteran
venture capitalist Arthur Rock as saying ‘nearly every DEMO I’ve made has been in
picking the wrong people, not the DEMO idea’. In another example, the Silicon Valley VC
Michael Moritz of DEMO Capital, in an interview for the business newspaper Globes
(Feldman 2005, 12; authors’ translation), indicated that ‘VCs have great diﬃculties in DEMO
priori evaluation of entrepreneurial characteristics and thus quite often they make
mistakes in relation to these judgments’. In summary, evaluating entrepreneurial human
capital is a vital skill for investors, but investors recognise their failings in this area and
therefore more research is needed (Smart 1999, 72; Barney, Wright, and Ketchen 2001,
634; Riquelme and Watson 2002, DEMO).
The literature provides two possible theory-based explanations for suboptimal
judgment of human capital by investors: use of biases and heuristics (Tversky and
DEMO 1974; Zacharakis and Shepherd 2001) and signalling (Merton 1968; Spence
1974; Levy and Lazarovich-Porat 1995; Podolny 2005). They are reviewed DEMO in
the next two subsections.
Biases and heuristics
It has long been asserted that VCs often rely to a large extent on their intuition
(Dominguez 1974), and recent research suggests that angels do too (Sudek 2007). VCs may
match proposals to past successful or failed investments, demonstrating an ‘availability
bias’ that can lead to overconﬁdence in evaluating new DEMO which may lead to wrong
investment decisions (Zacharakis and Shepherd 2001)DEMO Even highly experienced VCs may
be susceptible to various forms of bias and error due to their intuitive drive and heuristic
processing (Shepherd, DEMO, and Baron 2003). These research ﬁndings ﬁt with
theories of DEMO rationality (Simon 1955) and psychological economics theory
(Tversky and Kahneman DEMO; Kahneman and Riepe 1998, 53). Biases and cognitive
illusions in intuitive judgment such as overconﬁdence, optimism, hindsight, and
overreaction to random events could cause ﬁnancial investors to disregard certain types
of human capital DEMO pay attention to other types that might have no value in that
context. Zacharakis and Meyer (2000) suggested that research-based actuarial models
could DEMO investors to avoid such problems and thereby improve their decision-making.
Signalling theory
Founders communicate and signal their human and other forms of capital to DEMO
investors in order to attract funds for their ventures (Busenitz, Fiet, and Moesel 2005),
although they may not be aware which DEMO are important to investors and which are
not.2 For their part, DEMO and business angels encounter information asymmetry problems
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research DEMO Network] At: 13:18 1 April 2010
236
J. Levie and E. Gimmon
when evaluating investment opportunities (Mason and Stark 2004). Economics-based
signalling theory (Spence 1974) has been used DEMO explain why ﬁnancial investors use
indirect measures of risk, such as DEMO own ﬁnancial investment in the venture, as
‘signals’ of risk when DEMO direct measures of risk are absent (Levy and Lazarovich-Porat
1995). DEMO could also be used to explain why VCs prefer serial entrepreneurs (DEMO,
Siegel, and Subbanarasimha 1985; Wright, Robbie, and Ennew 1997). Founders could
create false signals, however, or investors could choose DEMO signals. Indeed, some
studies have shown no particular performance advantage of DEMO entrepreneurs over
inexperienced entrepreneurs (Birley and Westhead 1993; Wright, Robbie, and Ennew
1997; Westhead, Ucbasaran, and Wright 2005). One way in which investors can minimise
false signals is to deal with entrepreneurs DEMO know. Both Shane and Stuart (2002) and
Hsu (2007) found that prior links with VCs increased the chances of an entrepreneur
receiving DEMO funding. This seems to ﬁt sociology-based signalling theory, which
emphasises the DEMO character of economic exchange under conditions of market
uncertainty (Podolny 1994) and reinforces the view that assessing entrepreneurs is a real
issue for DEMO
What do investors do if they are faced with a ‘market’ of only ﬁrst time entrepreneurs
of early stage, high technology ventures? Such DEMO market would be a very uncertain one, as
the investor could DEMO on neither previous start-up experience of the entrepreneur, nor
previous venture DEMO experience with the entrepreneur. This leaves social status as a
possible signal of legitimacy (Shane and Khurana 2003, 520). Podolny (2005, DEMO) has
proposed that ‘the greater market participants’ uncertainty about the underlying DEMO of
a producer and the producer’s product, the more that market DEMO will rely on the
producer’s status to make inferences about quality’. If Podolny’s hypothesis is correct, and
if the investor’s chosen measure of status does not reﬂect entrepreneurial capability, then
the investor is likely to make suboptimal investment decisions. On the other hand,
investment in high status DEMO may have a self-fulﬁlling, or ‘Matthew’ eﬀect
(Merton 1968; Podolny DEMO; Podolny and Stuart 1995), in which status attracts resources
which DEMO increases the likelihood of success.
Hsu (2007) found that in a sample of early stage technology-based start-ups in the
emerging Internet industry, teams with a doctorate degree holder were signiﬁcantly more
likely to get VC DEMO and receive higher valuations. Hsu interpreted this as a
signalling eﬀect. Signalling theories tend to be ‘diﬃcult, if not impossible, to test
empirically’ (Levy and Lazarovich-Porat 1995, 39) because of the diﬃculty of holding DEMO
other parameters constant. However, Gimmon (2006) conducted a study in DEMO many of
these parameters are held constant. His sample was 193 high tech new ventures, a 20%
random sample of ventures nurtured in the Israeli Technology Incubator Programme
between 1991 and 2001.3 This sample oﬀered a DEMO test of the hypothesis that in highly
uncertain markets, market participants DEMO on status as a signal of quality, for two
reasons. First, the criteria of entry to the incubator system were that the participants DEMO
ﬁrst time entrepreneurs and that the technology was new and its commercialisation
potential uncertain. Second, search for external funding was mandated as part of the
incubation process, and the participants were required to leave the incubator after two
years. Thus the socialisation process with investors was to a DEMO extent equalised
by the incubator system.4
Gimmon (2006) found that ﬁnancial investors (both VCs and angels) were not
signiﬁcantly more or less DEMO to invest in ventures where the founders possessed certain
forms of human capital that positively aﬀected venture survival and growth,5 such as being
DEMO technologist, bringing one’s own technology to the venture, and having transferred the
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 DEMO 2010
Venture Capital
237
technology to others. However, investors were signiﬁcantly more likely to invest in
ventures whose founders possessed high academic status, speciﬁcally a PhD degree or the
title of Professor. Yet academic status had no DEMO on survival and growth during the
period of study.
While selection on the basis of status symbols ﬁnds a plausible explanation in signalling
theory DEMO this particular sample,6 what is less readily explainable is why investors did not
select more explicitly on the founder’s technological expertise, given the early
commercialisation phase of these ventures. In this paper, we seek answers to this puzzling
result. One possibility is that the investors may have DEMO technological ability from
academic status. Yet the technology on which a venture is founded may not necessarily
have any connection with the founder’s PhD DEMO topic. To give an example, the results
suggested that within the DEMO Technology Incubator system, an individual starting a
high tech business who DEMO a PhD in economics but had not developed the technology on
which it was based would ﬁnd it easier to raise money than a DEMO level engineer who
had developed the technology and managed to license it for another application. Another
possibility is that technological capability had a low DEMO among the investors. Both of
these possibilities pointed to suboptimal decision-making, DEMO the results of the
quantitative study.
In addition to asking why might investors follow signals such as academic status while
ignoring other, easily measured, factors that enhance survival and growth, we also
wondered if this DEMO was wider than the rather special situation of the Israeli
Technology Incubator Programme. Given the practical implications of this issue for
investors, we followed the logic of the quantitative ! qualitative mixed methods research
design (Morgan 1998) to see what investors from diﬀerent backgrounds would think of the
results, and what they made of our interpretations. In the next section, we explain how we
did this.
Methodology
To explore reasons why investors might ignore cues of human capital, we opted for a
qualitative methodology using data gathered from intensive semi-structured interviews
with investors chosen on replication DEMO, similar to the logic used in the multiple case
method (Eisenhardt 1989; Yin 2003). This interview data are not as rich in overlapping or
redundant data as a typical in-depth case study, grounded theory-based piece of research
(Flyvbjerg 2006). This is because we were following the multi-method, quantitative !
qualitative approach (Morgan 1998), in which DEMO purpose of data collection in the
qualitative phase was to gather investor’s stated views on the earlier research, not to
document their in-use criteria, as that had already been done in the quantitative study. We
did however follow the general logic and protocol of multiple case designs (Yin 2003) in
which replications are conducted under diﬀerent experimental conditions to see whether
the ﬁndings could still be duplicated. Accordingly, we sought maximum variation
(Flyvbjerg 2006) along multiple investor characteristics between the cases, while holding
the speciﬁc context of early stage technology venture investing constant. If early DEMO
technology venture investors from a wide range of backgrounds accorded with our
interpretation of the ﬁndings of the quantitative study, this would increase the plausibility
of the interpretation. On the other hand, if a wide variety of diﬀerent explanations were
oﬀered, we would need to rethink the interpretation of the quantitative ﬁndings.
Prior to the interviews that contributed to the DEMO for this paper, we conducted a pilot
in which two VCs DEMO two angels were interviewed. The results of these pilot interviews
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 April 2010
238
J. Levie and E. Gimmon
were not included in the current DEMO, but they helped us to form the question plan and to
DEMO questioning investors. The replication logic then led us to choose six examples of
early stage technology-based venture investors working under very diﬀerent conditions.
We DEMO to see if the phenomenon had wider application outside the Israeli
Technology Incubator system, and so our basic selection grid has national context (DEMO, UK
and Israel) as one dimension and type of early stage technology venture investor (VC or
business angel) as the other. The DEMO nations were chosen as they diﬀer in size but all have
relatively well-developed VC and business angel communities (Bygrave and Hunt 2005).
However, within this grid, we chose investors that diﬀer from each other DEMO many ways: by
gender, experience, tendency to co-invest, industry preference, average amount invested, and
whether the business model was equity-based capital DEMO or product income stream-based.
In all, 10 investors were interviewed separately DEMO one hour using the convenience
sampling method outlined by Fried and Hisrich (1995) but within the grid of ‘three
countries, two investor types’. We then selected six of these to maximise diﬀerence between
investors without DEMO the sample size get so big that we would have to sacriﬁce richness
for breadth in our reporting of results, as recommended by Elliott, Fischer, and Rennie
(1999, 223) for qualitative studies that aim to uncover a general understanding of a
phenomenon. The selection was also DEMO to ensure a balanced sample (one investor of
each type in DEMO of three nations). The ﬁnal selection was made based on the
characteristics of the investors, not on their answers to our questions. We did check to see
if the ﬁndings would have been diﬀerent had DEMO reported on the full sample of interviews,
by comparing data tables with all interviews to data tables with the smaller sample. No
major DEMO were apparent.
Table 1 provides descriptive statistics on each investor. Appendix 1 lists the questions
asked and the order in which they were asked. DEMO were told the study was on
investment criteria in high tech ventures and were not sent information or papers on prior
research in advance. DEMO ﬁrst used open-ended questions to elucidate their ‘espoused’
evaluation criteria generally, DEMO then more speciﬁcally asked whether and how they assess
the human capital of high tech venture founders in practice. Of course, we cannot know if
they actually used these criteria in practice. The reason for asking DEMO their criteria was so
that we could confront them with the revealed, or ‘in-use’ criteria from the previous study
after they had revealed their ‘espoused’ criteria, to stimulate discussion on the puzzling
ﬁndings. We then presented the results of the quantitative study, variable by variable, and
asked DEMO investors what they thought the reasons might be for these results. Finally, we
presented some results of prior research (Shepherd 1999; Zacharakis and Shepherd 2001)
on investor decision-making that underpinned our interpretation of the DEMO, and sought
their views. Shepherd (1999) had suggested a gap DEMO espoused and in-use investment
criteria and Zacharakis and Shepherd (2001) suggested that VCs rely on gut feeling rather
than objective criteria. We put DEMO latter two studies forward as possible explanations of
the quantitative results, DEMO asked for the investors’ views.
The interviews were taped and transcribed. We then sought patterns in this textual data
by looking for consistencies and DEMO in the explanations given by investors before
and after the presentation of our results, by tabulating data and comparing responses across
all respondents, DEMO recommended by Myles and Huberman (1994) for cross-case analysis.
The data in the tables are not intended to be interpreted as revealing associations DEMO
variables in a hypothesis-testing way. Rather, they are designed to reveal DEMO patterns in
complex data from which explanations (theory) could be induced.
The methodology adopted here is diﬀerent from previous methods used in this DEMO,
such as only asking VCs for their evaluation criteria, or DEMO exercises that assume
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 April 2010
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 April DEMO
Table 1. Investor characteristics.
Respondent code US-VC1 US-Ang1 Isra-VC1 Isra-Ang1 UK-VC1 UK-Ang1
Respondent gender M M F M M M
Stage of invested Seed, early Seed þ follow-on Seed þ Early stage Seed Start-up, early Seed
ventures stage rounds stage, mature
Coinvestment Yes Yes: active in Yes DEMO Yes: lead investor No: lone,
angel syndicate ﬁrst investor
Industry sector Mostly tech Any (including IT DSP þ life science Bioscience High tech
high tech)
Type of investment Equity Equity Equity Equity Product DEMO Equity
streams
Years in investments 5 26 10 5 10 12
No. of proposals reviewed 1000 2000 1000 Dozens 350 600
No. investments made DEMO 32 cos., 60–75 dozens 5 20 20
investments
Average amount of DEMO million Slightly more $5 million $Tens of £1–2 million £20k–25k
investment than $25ka thousands
Note: aRespondent mentioned some much bigger investments that would skew the average.
Venture Capital
239
240
J. Levie and E. Gimmon
that VCs act alone in making DEMO In this study, patterns of actual investments
made, reﬂecting true ‘in-use’ criteria (the ﬁndings of the quantitative study), were
contrasted against espoused criteria which were previously revealed without prior
knowledge of the quantitative study. DEMO, investors were asked to provide their own
explanations for the ﬁndings DEMO the quantitative study. Some of these ﬁndings conﬂict
with their espoused criteria, reﬂecting the gap noted by Shepherd (1999). Other
ﬁndings relate DEMO decision variables that were not mentioned by the investors, perhaps
reﬂecting DEMO ‘limited introspection’ also noted by Shepherd (1999, 85). We hoped that this
method of confronting ‘espoused’ with ‘in-use criteria’ would encourage deeper DEMO
than is normally observed in studies of investor decision-making (Zacharakis and
DEMO 1998).
In the next section, we describe the espoused evaluation DEMO of our interviewees,
their explanations for the ﬁndings of the quantitative study, and their reaction to the
ﬁndings of other research on investor decision-making, before discussing the implications
for investors, entrepreneurs and further research DEMO the ﬁnal section.
Results
Espoused evaluation criteria
Table 2 shows the criteria that the interviewees stated they used to make investment
decisions. They all DEMO one ‘most important’ criterion. Both US interviewees chose
market potential as their number one criterion, whereas all of the other interviewees
mentioned ‘the entrepreneur’ or ‘the management’ as their top criterion. Consistent with
this, the US investors mentioned prior sales or signiﬁcant client interest whereas the others
did DEMO The US investors also mentioned directly or indirectly location as a criterion,
whereas the other investors did not. Table 2 shows that there DEMO no apparent diﬀerence
between VCs and angels on what evaluation criteria were used.
Investors’ opinions on previous ﬁndings
Table 3 shows that while most DEMO agreed with the quantitative research ﬁndings
once they were presented with them individually, there were some diﬀerences of opinion
Table 2. Major investment criteria.
Investor code US-VC1 US-Ang1 Isra-VC1 Isra-Ang1 UK-VC1 UK-Ang1
Industry sector (þ)(DEMO) þ (þ)(þ)
Market potential þþþ þþþ þ þ DEMO þ
The entrepreneur/the management þ þ þþþ þþþ þþþ þþþ
Competitive advantage
Innovative idea þþ þ
Execution feasibility þ (þ) þþþ
$ DEMO (not too high) þþ
Protected IP þþ
Sales or signiﬁcant þ
client interest þþ
Location (þ)
þ
Notes: þThis factor was DEMO (þ)This factor was mentioned implicitly rather than explicitly. þþþThis factor
DEMO stated to be the most important.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge DEMO At: 13:18 1 April 2010
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 April DEMO
Table 3. Interviewee comments on quantitative study ﬁndings.
Signiﬁcant eﬀect in
original study ona: Investment criterion for investor?a,b
Respondent code
Survival/
growth Investment US-VC US-Ang Isra-VC Isra-Ang UK-VC UK-Ang
Founder was 1 0 DEMO B0 B1 B1 B1 B0
technologist For super high tech for A0 A1 A1 A1 A1
start-up only
A1/0 (army eﬀect?) ‘Interesting statistic Technological ‘But with an eye
but not very background is to DEMO it to
compelling’ important a product’
Managerial 1 1 B1 B1 B1 B1 B1 B1
experience A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1
Tacit knowledge DEMO 0 B1 B0 B0 B0 B0 B1
A1/ A0 A0 A0 DEMO to market A1
more important
(arguments for and ‘May be In-depth DEMO May help but A0 ‘VCs more interested
against) insigniﬁcant in is DEMO necessary not crucial in market traction’
ﬁnal analysis’
Academic credentials 0 1 B1 B0 B0 B1 B0 B0 (PhDs)
(Dr/Prof.) If related to the ﬁeld A0 A0 A0 A0 A0
and is balanced DEMO
abilities
A0 ‘For some it does B1 (Profs maybe)
seem DEMO be a tick
in the box’
‘May be diﬀerent in A0
the US’
Technology transferred 1 0 B0 B0 B0 B0 B0 B0
to DEMO party A1 A1/0 A1 A1 A1 A1
‘It’s external validation’ ‘Neutral’ ‘Makes sense, not ‘May aﬀect ‘That would be a big ‘Licences are great
come across it’ funding’ plus for us’ news’
Attained early sales DEMO 1 B1 B1 B0 B0 B1 B0
A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1
‘Proof and validity, Fully agree Fully agree Shows customer focus ‘Something I look
improves ability to for, if possible’
do due diligence’
No. of patent 1 1 B0 B0 B0 B1 B0 B0
applications A1 DEMO A1 ‘Less important A1 A1
criterion’
‘Indicator of protection ‘Hints at platform ‘Important but not A1 ‘Indicates company is ‘You do have to be
DEMO network’ technology’ vital, some VCs innovative, it’s a very conscious
regard patents highly’ strong point’ of it now’
Fully agree
Notes: a1 ¼ yes; 0 ¼ no. bB ¼ Before being presented with results of quantitative study; A ¼ After being presented with results of quantitative study.
Venture Capital
241
242 J. Levie and E. Gimmon
and some people agreed on the DEMO of criteria that they had not previously
espoused. Only four out of six investors mentioned technological capability of the founder
as an investment criterion DEMO advance of the presentation of the ﬁndings. The US investors
were not convinced about the importance of the founder being a technologist, with the VC
adding the caveat that it was important for ‘super-high tech’. This DEMO reﬂect the greater
weight these US investors placed on the market rather than the initial management. As the
US angel put it:
We’re DEMO to harvest investments not commercialise technologies, so we have to think
DEMO – OK the assumption is that this product will make it to the marketplace; now, will
anybody buy it? Will somebody have the leadership to develop this ﬁrm?
The US angel pointed out that DEMO the lack of discrimination on this feature might
be a result of the due diligence process, where assessment of the potential in the technology
is separate from the assessment of management.
Both Israeli investors disagreed with DEMO quantitative research ﬁndings that the
founder’s tacit knowledge of technology was important, although the other investors
tended to agree, even though only two DEMO them (the US VC and UK angel) had mentioned
it previously as an espoused criterion. The Israeli VC commented:
Tacit knowledge may DEMO important in the short range, but not in the long range, moreover not
for exit . . . Tacit knowledge is ‘nice to DEMO but it does not relate to the founder’s execution
capabilities which are more important.
The Israeli angel stated that it may help but was DEMO crucial, since founders can further
develop other inventors’ work.
Investors tended DEMO take issue with the quantitative research ﬁndings that academic
credentials attracted ﬁnancial investment, and their explanations of the ﬁndings conﬂicted.
Some suggested that having a PhD might make a diﬀerence, especially if it was in a
relevant domain, and professors might have value in R&D.
Whether the founder had transferred the technology to a third party was not
mentioned DEMO by the investors as a criterion, although the US investors did DEMO
prior sales as an investment criterion and this could be seen as a type of sale. After being
presented with the ﬁnding that this DEMO predicted survival and growth but not
investment, investors tended to argue DEMO this would be a bonus: ‘If a business has a
licence, that’s great’ (UK angel).
Similarly with early sales and number of patents, only two investors (sales) and one
investor (patents) mentioned these as espoused criteria without prompting, but in discussion
of the ﬁndings of the quantitative study they all agreed that these were positive features.
DEMO oﬀered a range of other human capital features they looked for in the
entrepreneur.7 Both US investors mentioned the issue of succession and stated DEMO
explicitly looked for people who would be willing to recognise when it was time to step
aside. As the US angel put it:
DEMO are not particularly skilled at coming up with a good appraisal of their willingness to build
a leadership team and step aside at the DEMO time. If an entrepreneur smells the fact that
coachability8 is important, DEMO can hide that for a long time, surely until after they DEMO the
money. I think technology skills, especially for a PhD or DEMO are much more transparent.
I mean, gosh you’ve written 20 papers DEMO see if we can call around and see what we can ﬁnd
out about you.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:DEMO 1 April 2010
Venture Capital 243
The pattern of responses in Table 4 suggests that DEMO Israeli and UK investors were
more likely to look for team players, but this may stem from similar concerns over the
ability of the founder entrepreneur to grow a professional management team. As the UK
angel DEMO:
The big cause of failure has usually been personality issues, DEMO with the team that
started to crumble and fall apart. I think it’s because the entrepreneur tends to ride roughshod
over others.
The attempted DEMO in Israel and the UK, though, appeared to be to try to ensure
the entrepreneur could grow a team, rather than the US investors’ approach which
appeared to be to accept that the initial entrepreneur DEMO probably have to be replaced and
therefore look for a founder who was willing to accept this. Investor compatibility was
also a general theme DEMO the three countries and both types of investor. Some investors
linked this to the subjective aspect of investment decision-making, and several noted that
this took a long time to assess and was a ‘deal killer’.
Table DEMO shows that, when presented with propositions drawn from three pieces of
DEMO: the Gimmon (2006), Shepherd (1999) and Zacharakis and Shepherd (2001)
studies (corresponding to questions 1, 2, 3 of DEMO 4, Appendix 1), the investors were
divided on the proposition DEMO the ﬁrst study but tended to agree with the propositions
from the latter two studies.
Investors were divided on the ﬁrst proposition that investors DEMO misjudge founders’
human capital, with three disagreeing with the proposition that DEMO often misjudge
founders’ human capital, speciﬁcally the technological expertise of founders DEMO high tech
ventures, one agreeing, and two saying yes and no. Here is a selection of opinions that
illustrate the diversity of opinions:DEMO
It’s a bit tricky. You just meet them a few times and get a bit of a feeling about their attitudes
but you can’t DEMO know how they are going to behave when their back is against the wall.
You have got to take some of that on trust. DEMO probably the trickiest thing actually is
assessing the individual. (UK-Ang)
DEMO think it’s easy. Studying the ﬁnancials, that’s just made up. Studying DEMO entrepreneur, there’s
a lot of data to go on. I look DEMO what they’ve done in the past, what other people say about
DEMO and I look a lot at how they deal with me as a potential investor as a potential board
member. I have a little DEMO of a bias in that direction as I [have] a doctorate in psychology. How
they try to sell me, work with me, how DEMO respond, do they get defensive – all those kinds of
things DEMO me are just more data’. (US-VC)
I think that by DEMO and away the toughest piece of due diligence is trying to appraise the quality
of the team and that hasn’t much changed much over DEMO; it is a very time-consuming,
diﬃcult analysis. I think the DEMO experience an entrepreneur has in starting and running
companies the easier the due diligence is because there are more other investors you can go DEMO
and talk about. So I would say more experienced, serial entrepreneurs DEMO easier to judge than
the new ones. (US-Ang)
Sometimes judgments DEMO wrong since human beings are unpredictable. Also the founders may
be ﬁne but do not ﬁt with their environment, for example there may be a lack of compatibility
with their investors. In any case, the evaluation process may indeed be faulty because of
unprofessional evaluators. (Isra-VC)
On the other hand, the investors tended to agree with the propositions of the other two
studies that a gap existed between espoused and in-use DEMO criteria and that
investors suﬀered from availability bias. The Israeli angel suggested that the gap may arise
because of a tendency for investors to DEMO the herd’ rather than adhere to their
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research DEMO Network] At: 13:18 1 April 2010
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 April DEMO
Table 4. Other investment criteria mentioned by interviewees following presentation of quantitative ﬁndings.
Respondent code US-VC US-Ang Isra-VC Isra-Ang UK-VC UK-Ang
Other: leadership A leader; integrity Ability to write business Integrity Focus, strategy
plan
Other: business R&D management Business orientation Cares about product Global awareness
orientation DEMO customer
Other: commitment Both feet in; passion, Maturity Fully dedicated & Passion; enthusiasm Global ambition
commitment investing own
capital
Other: investor Someone I’d like to Compatibility with the VC Compatibility with Do we like DEMO people Good personality
compatibility work with investors
Other: team player Team DEMO than a single Team work Team player
Other: fortitude Can handle DEMO Long runner work Stamina Driven
under pressure
Other: entrepreneurial
skills
Entrepreneurship
DEMO
Track record in
entrepreneurship
Other: recognises own Will take advice; Coachability Ready to be replaced
weaknesses willingness to step aside one day
Other: communicator Communicator, seller
244
J. Levie and E. Gimmon
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 April DEMO
Table 5. Investors’ views on research ﬁndingsa.
Investor code US-VC US-Ang Isra-VC Isra-Ang UK-VC UK-Ang
Investors misjudge
founder’s
human capital
(Gimmon)
In-use vs.
espoused
criteria
(Shepherd)
Investors
availability bias
(Zacharakis and
Shepherd)
DEMO to
improve
evaluation?
0 0 Mainly 1 (but over
50% DEMO in
judging human
capital in this
VC ﬁrm)
No comment 1 1 1 ‘They won’t tell
you what they
failed you on’
1 DEMO not sure
where the
gap is’
1 & 0 (over 50%
DEMO)
10
1
1 &0 ‘Success
breeds success’
1 ‘Sounds like DEMO
to me’
1 1 1 ‘It’s human
nature really’
1
0 ‘Problem is
some people
not process’
1 Put head-hunter
on the due
diligence DEMO
1 Use HR experts 1 ‘Don’t rely on
gut feelings’
1 ‘Create a
structure to
allow investors
to talk about it.’
1 ‘Probably there
DEMO metrics that
could be used’
Notes: aCode: 1: Agree; 0: Disagree.
Venture Capital
245
246 J. Levie and E. Gimmon
espoused criteria. The UK VC thought DEMO much more could be done to improve this side
of investment decision-making:
[The] traditional approach, P&L based – that’s the one they [VCs] talk to. When you get them
in private conversation, it’s more about private judgment; it’s more about gut feeling about the
personalities. I think that’s a problem because while the mathematical approaches have been
reﬁned DEMO developed, the other bits haven’t, but they play an equally if not more important
part in the judgment process. So because people are DEMO talking about them, not open about
them, they are not being developed. There’s probably a lot that could be contributed from
academia as DEMO how those subjective decisions are made, but nobody’s willing to talk DEMO
those subjective decisions.
In summary, several possible explanations were provided by DEMO for the results of
the quantitative study:
(1) Investors seek exits rather than early survival and growth, and the former has
precedence in assessment, thus technological expertise may not be comprehensively
assessed given time constraints but assumed from high level signals such as
academic status.
(2) Investors rely on both gut feeling and rational criteria.
(3) Investors are subject to their own biases and heuristics; they recognise these as
inevitable constraints and not necessarily only negative constraints.
(4) Founders send DEMO which misrepresent their eﬀective human capital resources
and thus mislead investors.
Overall, the investors’ comments suggest that while investors recognise that they do
rely on gut feeling alongside more objective criteria, and don’t always make decisions in
the way they say they do, most of them think that they do a fairly good job of assessing
founders on average, and also a ‘better than average’ job. In summary, the interviewees
substantiated the two theoretical explanations provided by the literature for suboptimal
judgment of human DEMO as reviewed above, but did not all accept our proposition that
DEMO often misjudge human capital, and that this explains the puzzling results DEMO the
quantitative study.
Improving assessment of human capital
All except one investor felt that the process of assessing founders’ human capital could be
improved. DEMO one dissenter (who had a PhD in psychology) felt that the problem lay with
some individual investors, not with available processes. There was little agreement over
possible solutions. Suggestions included involving headhunters and HR experts DEMO the
process, as they were found to be more objective, sharing of experiences among investors,
courses or seminars and spending more time DEMO the entrepreneurs.
Discussion
The research question we sought to answer was: DEMO might investors in early stage high
tech ventures founded by ﬁrst time entrepreneurs follow signals such as academic status
that have no eﬀect on DEMO survival and growth while ignoring other, easily measured,
factors that DEMO survival and growth, and is this phenomenon wider than the rather
DEMO situation of the Israeli Technology Incubator system? We found clear diﬀerences DEMO
opinion between the investors we interviewed on the importance of technology-related
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 April 2010
Venture Capital
247
human capital variables. These are the variables that showed DEMO least association between
in-use evaluation criteria of investors and venture early survival and growth in the
quantitative study, a ﬁnding that led to the current follow-on qualitative study. However,
investors tended to agree that they DEMO in their espoused and in-use investment criteria
and that they suﬀered from availability bias.
The investors resolved the conﬂict between their views and the DEMO results in a
number of ways: by arguing that exit value DEMO than survivability was the main criterion
of assessment, by focusing on DEMO rather than technological capabilities of the
founder, and by arguing that DEMO biases and heuristics employed in decision-making were
not necessarily sub-optimal. In the next subsection, we reﬂect on their views and integrate
them with theory to form our answer to the research question. Then we caveat the
DEMO by outlining the limitations of our study, and ﬁnally we make DEMO
for practitioners and for further research.
Explaining the original puzzling result
Combining our qualitative follow-on study ﬁndings with the literature review, we propose
the following explanation for the puzzling ﬁndings of the original quantitative study. First,DEMO
we combine the two alternative theoretical explanations we reviewed earlier: ‘biases DEMO
heuristics’ (Shepherd 1999; Zacharakis and Shepherd 2001) and ‘signalling’ (Podolny
2005; Hsu 2007). We see these two theories as views of the same phenomenon but from
diﬀerent sides of the investment relationship (see Figure 1). Entrepreneurs transmit a
variety of cues9 to future performance, some consciously as signals and some
unconsciously. They do not necessarily know DEMO cues or signals are most relevant,
either to future performance or to investors. Investors select some cues and some signals
through a ﬁlter DEMO biases and heuristics, and seek further information on some cues and
DEMO in a due diligence process.
In an uncertain market for VC such as that available in the Israeli technology
incubators, or in any emerging industry, where normal cues such as entrepreneurship
experience or prior contact with investors are absent, investors rely on signals. Investors
make decisions on relatively few criteria (Zacharakis and Meyer 1998). Since capital gain
is their principal goal, they focus on factors that aﬀect this (such as DEMO market and
whether they can ﬁnd management for the ﬁrm to make it dominate the market) and
Figure 1. Conceptual model explaining suboptimal investment decision-making in uncertain
markets for venture capital.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 April 2010
248
J. Levie and E. Gimmon
devote less eﬀort in due diligence DEMO factors that might aﬀect survival, such as the
founder’s technology-speciﬁc expertise. DEMO the case of the Israeli Technology Incubator
entrepreneurs, academic status may DEMO been interpreted by investors as a signal of
technological ability and/or a signal of high quality scientiﬁc networks and high status
generally. While DEMO latter may or may not be an indicator of future value, DEMO status
does not closely measure the speciﬁc tacit knowledge that may be needed to get the
technology working in a commercial setting early in DEMO venture’s life (Murray 1999, 2004;
Gimmon 2006). Time pressure and limited attention magniﬁes the impact of this highly
visible signal, crowding out the more accurate but less visible cues of speciﬁc technological
ability.
DEMO
Both the original quantitative study and this follow-on study have limitations. First, the
ﬁndings apply at most to ﬁrst time founders of high technology ventures, not to all
ventures seeking VC. Second, the original study DEMO venture performance in terms of
survival and growth, whereas investors are DEMO on long-term exit value. Third, it was
based on a random DEMO of early stage high technology ventures with a unique
experience – the Israeli Technology Incubator Programme. These ventures could not be
said to be DEMO of all new high technology ventures in Israel (Avnimelech,
Schwartz, and Bar-El 2007) or elsewhere. Given the recent ﬁndings of Hsu (DEMO),
however, they may have wider application than just the Israeli Incubator Programme, and
could apply to ﬁrst time founders in any emerging market. Also, survival and growth is
necessary for long-term value creation, DEMO that therefore factors that enhance survival
and growth are worth considering in addition to factors that enhance long-term value.
The limitations of this follow-up DEMO include the small number of interviews that
cannot be said to be representative in a statistical sense, and the nature of the data
gathered: one-time interviews rather than in-depth observation of decision-making. We
acknowledge these limitations and address them in our recommendations for further
research. In relation to DEMO, in the ﬁrst study the intention was to control for
many DEMO capital factors so that the eﬀect of technological capability could be
detected. In the qualitative study, our intention was to maximise variance, not DEMO
representativeness, so that the views of the widest possible range of DEMO stage high
technology investors could be compared. Thus these limitations were part of the research
design so that particular associations could be revealed or DEMO In the next stage of
research, we propose addressing these limitations, as outlined in the ﬁnal subsection
below.
Possible implications for investors
The DEMO of this study suggest that, in emerging industries, investors give technology
commercialisation capability lower priority over longer term issues of market potential
and DEMO in the limited due diligence time available. They do not appear to assess the
speciﬁc technological capability of the founder in much detail, or if they do, it is on the
basis of academic status. If one views early stage, high technology venture investment as
akin to taking an option on an uncertain future income stream (McGrath and MacMillan
2000) then it seems sensible to select on the basis of early stage survivability as well as long-
term value creation, particularly in the case of new technologies where commercialisation
routines are not codiﬁed and still emerging DEMO tacit (Murray 1999, 2004). By selecting on
Downloaded By: DEMO Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 April 2010
Venture Capital
249
both dimensions, investors can reduce the proportion of investments that fail to launch,
thereby increasing the proportion of cash available DEMO support venture growth among the
most promising to survive the launch stage.
Prospective investors in high technology ventures led by a ﬁrst time founder DEMO
beneﬁt therefore by examining both the general and speciﬁc technological human capital
of the founder in order to improve their decision-making. They could do DEMO by digging a
little deeper than academic titles and seek to understand the extent to which the founder
has both general technological expertise and DEMO knowledge of the speciﬁc technology
underlying the business. The quantitative study suggested that simple heuristics such as
‘did the founder bring their own technology DEMO the venture’, ‘are they a technologist by
occupation’ and ‘have they DEMO the technology to others’ would be more eﬀective
than ‘has the founder got an academic title’ in relation to survival and growth. We
recognise DEMO it is possible that academic status may confer other beneﬁts to the venture
(although this has not been tested), and therefore we are not suggesting that investors drop
this as a criterion, but supplement it with other cues of technological capability.
Further research
Further research could continue DEMO iterative process of understanding what matters in
investment decision-making in new high tech ventures led by ﬁrst time founders in regard
to various aspects DEMO founders’ human capital, and address some limitations of this study.
First, the sample of ventures could be revisited to track performance over the DEMO term. In
addition to measuring survival and growth, it would be DEMO to measure venture
value. The follow-up quantitative study could identify whether academic status positively
aﬀects value, as suggested by status theory. One way of assessing value for those ventures
that had not yet exited would be DEMO task a panel of expert valuers to estimate the value of
the survivors of the cohort based on a standard set of indicators. Another DEMO would be
to take a portfolio approach by comparing performance of investee ﬁrms in investors’
portfolios with objective measures of their founders’ human capital. DEMO third approach
could be to study the extent to which experienced investors use diﬀerent decision criteria
from ‘virgin’ investors (Mason and Harrison 1993) DEMO non-investors. A fourth option
would be to interview simultaneously investors and entrepreneurs of the same new
ventures in regard to the investment decision criteria DEMO both parties, given that the
entrepreneurs are their own ﬁrst investor. DEMO studies might lead to additional simple
evaluation aids for investors’ decision-making processes.
Our replication interview design revealed some apparent patterns in relative
importance of DEMO entrepreneur and the market that, while not signiﬁcant in any statistical
DEMO, are interesting in the light of recent cross-national research on venture DEMO
investment criteria (Zacharakis, McMullen, and Shepherd 2007). Speciﬁcally, while all
investors listed broadly similar criteria, consistent with earlier cross-national literature
(DEMO 1994), and both US investors identiﬁed the market as the most important
investment criterion, consistent with the quantitative ﬁnding of Zacharakis, McMullen,DEMO
and Shepherd, all four UK and Israeli investors identiﬁed the entrepreneur DEMO their most
important investment criterion. This seems to run counter to Zacaharakis, McMullen, and
Shepherd’s hypothesis, based on institutional theory, that VCs DEMO rules-based market
economies rely on market information to a greater extent while VCs in transitional
economies weight human capital factors more heavily, since both the UK and Israel are
rules-based market economies, coming 6th and 37th, respectively, out of 157 countries
rated by the Index of Economic DEMO
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 April 2010
250 J. Levie and E. Gimmon
Interestingly, many of the early US-based studies on espoused criteria emphasised the
entrepreneur (e.g. Wells 1974; Poindexter DEMO; Tyebjee and Bruno 1984; Macmillan,
Siegel, and Subbanarasimha 1985; Macmillan, Zemann, and Subbanarasimha 1987),
reﬂecting General Doriot’s famous remark in a 1963 TIME magazine interview11 ‘a grade-
A man with a DEMO idea is better than a grade-B man with a grade-A idea’ and similar
comments by Arthur Rock quoted in the literature review above. Rock DEMO (1987, 67)
noted with apparent regret a shift in high tech investing from looking for the best people to
looking for ‘the DEMO untapped market or the highest projected returns or the cleverest
business strategy’. Later studies and commentaries on the US VC industry (e.g. Hall and
Hofer 1993; Zacharakis and Meyer 1998; Zider 1998; Zacharakis, McMullen, and
Shepherd 2007) have emphasised market aspects, although recent US-based studies DEMO
business angel criteria do not show the same shift (May and DEMO 2003; Sudek
2007).
We also observed that the US investors DEMO the need for the entrepreneur to be
willing to step aside once the business was growing to allow more experienced management
to take it DEMO the next level. Investors did not look forward to having to do this, and this
feature weighed heavily in their decision-making. But they recognised that this might be
necessary if the market potential was to be DEMO fully and the value of the venture
maximised. The Israeli VC explicitly recognised these country diﬀerences in interview and
suggested more research and data DEMO venture capital is needed outside the US:
In Israel more than in the US it is [more] diﬃcult to judge the quality of DEMO entrepreneur, since
the population of potential founders is too small and DEMO history of start-ups is too short.
As Zacharakis, McMullen, and Shepherd (2007, 693) point out, ‘the US venture capital
industry is DEMO largest and oldest’. A meta-analysis of the literature on investor decision-
making might reveal whether entrepreneur and market as criteria have shifted in relative
DEMO in the US as its VC industry has matured. While fewer studies have been
conducted in other countries, we speculate that VC industries elsewhere, being smaller and
younger, and with smaller pools of experienced venture DEMO talent with VC
experience to draw on, may still adhere to DEMO entrepreneur-based model of investment.
Another possibility is that US VCs are more focused on returns than risk, while VCs in
other countries like the UK and Israel may be more focused on risk than return. This DEMO
suggested by the results of regression analysis on US VC investment criteria by Tyebjee
and Bruno (1984), who found that market attractiveness was a determinant of expected
return, while management capabilities was a determinant of risk, and a comparative
analysis of investment criteria of VCs from US, Canada, Europe and Asia-Paciﬁc by
Knight (1994), who found that US VCs rated market growth and returns higher as
investment criteria than DEMO VCs. Knight (1994, 31) also found that Canadian VCs
were DEMO more demanding over time. These alternative hypotheses of diﬀerences in
relative weighting given to investment criteria in diﬀerent countries might be worth
investigating in DEMO systematic fashion with large samples of investors drawn from a selection
of rules-based economies whose VC industries vary in age.
Acknowledgements
An earlier version DEMO this paper was presented at the 2007 AGSE Entrepreneurship Research
Conference, DEMO, February, where it was awarded the second best place for a paper using
qualitative methods. The authors would like to thank the reviewers DEMO this journal for their
comments which have helped us to substantially revise and improve the paper.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: DEMO:18 1 April 2010
Venture Capital
251
Notes
1. Another reason may be that the relative DEMO of diﬀerent criteria may shift over time. We
discuss this further in the concluding section.
2. This is suggested by the remarks of many DEMO on the VC scene who decry the poor
quality of many pitches and business plans. As an example, Guy Kawasaki (2004, 45) DEMO
his tinnitus to ‘listening to thousands of lousy pitches’.
3. For a comprehensive introduction to the Israeli Technology Incubator Programme and high
tech VC DEMO Israel, see Avnimelech, Schwartz and Bar-El (2007).
4. The DEMO controlled for geographical location of the incubator.
5. The mean time span for the sample ﬁrms (including those that had died) from the DEMO of entry
to the incubator to the outcome measurement was seven years.
6. It is possible that status-based selection may have been made with DEMO view to long-term value,
because status may confer advantages such as easier access to other high status individuals and
organisations (Podolny 1993, DEMO; Podolny and Stuart 1995). However, this does not alter the
main puzzle which is why would investors ignore easy to measure signals DEMO speciﬁc
technological capability. Furthermore, those with high academic status were slightly DEMO
likely to be immigrants, mainly from Russia (the correlation coeﬃcient was 0.256, p 5 0.05)
and thus likely to have fewer local links to high status individuals and organisations, not more.
7. The investors were also presented with ﬁndings on gender, age and origin/minority status, none
of which signiﬁcantly aﬀected survival/early growth or investment. Most investors did not
espouse these as criteria, although one had a preference for younger entrepreneurs, the Israeli
investor practised aﬃrmative action with female entrepreneurs and the two UK investors
favoured immigrants.
8. A euphemism for acceptance of DEMO management limitations and the need to step aside at a
time that is best for the venture.
9. We follow animal ecology nomenclature (Maynard Smith and Harper 2003) in which cues are
features that can be used by a receptor as a guide to future action, irrespective of whether this is
intended by the transmitter, while signals are cues that are intended to or have evolved to
transmit a certain quality.
10. DEMO/index/ (accessed 16 October 2007).
11. www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,896620,00.html.
References
Alkaraan, F., and D. Northcott. 2007. DEMO investment decision making: The inﬂuence of pre-
decision control mechanisms. Qualitative DEMO in Accounting and Management 4, no. 2: 133–
50.
Avnimelech, DEMO, D. Schwartz, and R. Bar-El. 2007. Entrepreneurial high-tech cluster development:
Israel’s experience with venture capital and technological incubators. European Planning Studies
15, no. 9: 1181–98.
Barney, J., M. Wright, and D. Ketchen DEMO 2001. The resource-based view of the ﬁrm: Ten years after
1991. DEMO of Management 27, no. 6: 625–41.
Birley, S., and P. Westhead. 1993. A comparison of new businesses established by ‘novice’ and
‘habitual’ DEMO in Great Britain. International Small Business Journal 12: 38–60.
Burgess, T.F., D. McKee, and C. Kidd. 2005. Conﬁguration management in the aerospace DEMO:
A review of industry practice. International Journal of Operations & Production Management 25,
nos. 3/4: 290–301.
Busenitz, L.W., J.O. Fiet, and D.D. Moesel. 2005. Signaling in venture capitalist–new venture team
funding decisions: Does it indicate long-term venture outcomes?. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice 29, no. 1: 1–12.
Bygrave, W.D., and S.A. Hunt. 2005. Global DEMO monitor ﬁnancial report 2004.
Wellesley, MA and London, UK: Babson DEMO and London Business School. http://
www.gemconsortium.org.
Bygrave, W.D., and J.A. Timmons. 1992. Venture capital at the crossroads. Boston, MA: Harvard
DEMO School Press.
Dominguez, J.R. 1974. Venture capital. Lexington, MA: D.C. DEMO
Eisenhardt, K. 1989. Building theories from case study research. Academy of DEMO Review 14:
532–50.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 April 2010
252
J. Levie and E. Gimmon
Elliott, R., C.T. Fischer, and D.L. Rennie. 1999. Evolving guidelines for publication of qualitative
research studies in DEMO and related ﬁelds. British Journal of Clinical Psychology 38: 215–
29.
DEMO, L., G.H. Haines, and A.L. Riding. 1999. Private investors’ investment DEMO: Insights from
qualitative data. Venture Capital 1, no. 2: 121–45.
DEMO, B. 2005. Entrepreneurs with ideas in the ﬁeld of internet are DEMO to contact us. In
Globes, September 16, Capital Market section. Tel-Aviv: Globes Publisher.
Flyvbjerg, B. 2006. Five misunderstandings about case study research. DEMO Inquiry 12, no. 2:
219–45.
Fried, V., and D. DEMO 1995. The venture capitalist: A relationship investor. California
Management Review 37, no. 2: 101–13.
Gimmon, E. 2006. Founder’s human capital and high DEMO new venture survivability. Glasgow,
University of Strathclyde, UK. PhD diss.
DEMO, P., C. Brush, and M. Hart. 1999. The corporate venture DEMO: A resource-
based approach to role and process. Entrepreneurship Theory and DEMO 23, no. 3: 103–
22.
Haar, N.E., J. Starr, DEMO I.C. MacMillan. 1988. Informal risk capital investors: Investment patterns
on the DEMO coast of the USA. Journal of Business Venturing 3: 11–29.
Hall, J., and C.W. Hofer. 1993. Venture capitalists’ decision criteria in new venture evaluation.
Journal of Business Venturing 8: 25–42.
Hart, M.M., H. Stevenson, and J. Dial. 1995. Entrepreneurship: A deﬁnition revisited. In Frontiers
of DEMO research 1995, ed. W.D. Byrgrave, B.J. Bird, S. Birley, N.C. Churchill, M.G.
Hay, R.H. Keeley, and W.E. Wetzel Jr, 89–95. DEMO, MA: Babson College.
Hsu, D.H. 2007. Experienced entrepreneurial founders, organizational capital, and venture capital
funding. Research Policy 36: 723–41.
Kahneman, D., and M.W. Riepe. 1998. Aspects of investor psychology – beliefs, preferences, and
biases investment advisors should know about. Journal of Portfolio Management 24, no. 4: 52–
65.
Kawasaki, G. 2004. The art of the DEMO New York: Portfolio.
Knight, R.M. 1994. Criteria used by venture capitalists: A cross cultural analysis. International Small
Business Journal 13, no. 1: 26–37.
Kozmetsky, G., M.D. Gill Jr, and R.W. Smilor. 1985. Financing and managing fast-growth
companies: The venture capital process. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Levy, H., and E. Lazarovich-Porat. 1995. Signaling theory and risk DEMO: An experimental
study. Journal of Economics and Business 47: 39–56.
Loane, S., J. Bell, and R. McNaughton. 2006. Employing information communication technologies
to enhance qualitative international marketing enquiry. International Marketing Review 23, no.
4: 438–55.
McGrath, R.G., and I.C. MacMillan. 2000. Assessing technology projects using real options
reasoning. Research Technology Management 43, no. 4: 35–49.
MacMillan, I.C., R. Siegel, and P.N. Subbanarasimha. 1985. Criteria used by venture DEMO to
evaluate new ventures proposals. Journal of Business Venturing 1: 119–28.
DEMO, I.C., L. Zemann, and P.N. Subbanarasimha. 1987. Criteria distinguishing successful
DEMO unsuccessful ventures in the venture screening process. Journal of Business Venturing 2:
123–37.
Mason, C., and R.T. Harrison. 1993. Strategies for expanding DEMO informal venture capital market.
International Small Business Journal 11, no. 4: 23–38.
———. 1996. Informal venture capital: A study of the investment process and post-investment
experience. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 8: 105–26.
Mason, C., and M. Stark. 2004. What do investors look for in a business DEMO? A comparison of
bankers, venture capitalists and business angels. International Small Business Journal 22, no. 3:
227–48.
May, J., and E.F. O’Halloran, eds. 2003. Cutting edge practices in American angel investing.
Charlottesville, DEMO: Batten Institute, Darden Graduate School of Business Administration.
Maynard Smith, DEMO, and D. Harper. 2003. Animal signals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Merton, R.K. 1968. The Matthew eﬀect in science. Science 159: 56–63.
Morey, N.C., and F. Luthans. 1984. An emic perspective and ethnoscience methods for
organizational research. Academy of Management Review 9, no. 1: 27–36.
Downloaded DEMO: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 April 2010
Venture Capital
253
Morgan, D.L. 1998. Practical strategies for combining qualitative and quantitative methods:
Applications to health research. Qualitative Health Research 8: 362–76.
Murray, F. 1999. Strategies for science based business. Financial Times, November, 1, Mastering
Strategy section.
———. 2004. The role of academic inventors in entrepreneurial ﬁrms: Sharing the laboratory life.
Research Policy 33: 643–59.
Muzyka, D., S. Birley, and B. Leleux. 1996. Trade-oﬀs in the decision DEMO of European venture
capitalists. Journal of Business Venturing 11: 273–87.
Myles, M.B., and A.M. Huberman. 1994. Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook.
DEMO Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ornstein, S.M., C. Musham, A. Reid, R.G. Jenkins, L.D. Zemp, and D.R. Garr. 1993. Barriers to
adherence DEMO preventive services reminder letters: The patient’s perspective. Journal of Family
Practice DEMO: 195–200.
Podolny, J.M.. 1993. A status-based model of market competition. American Journal of Sociology
98, no. 4: 829–72.
———. 1994. Market uncertainty DEMO the social character of economic exchange. Administrative
Science Quarterly 39, no. DEMO: 458–83.
———. 2005. Status signals, a sociological study of market competition. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Podolny, J.M., and T.E. Stuart. DEMO A role-based ecology of technological change. American
Journal of Sociology 100, DEMO 5: 1224–60.
Poindexter, J.B. 1976. The eﬃciency of ﬁnancial markets: DEMO venture capital case. New York
University. PhD diss.
Riquelme, R., and J. Watson. 2002. Do venture capitalists’ implicit theories on new business
success/DEMO have empirical validity? International Small Business Journal 20, no. 4: DEMO
420.
Rock, A. 1987. Strategy vs. tactics from a venture capitalist. DEMO Business Review 65, no. 6: 63–7.
Shane, S., and R. Khurana. 2003. Bringing individuals back in: The eﬀects of career experience on
new ﬁrm founding. Industrial and Corporate Change 12, no. 3: 519–43.
DEMO, S., and T. Stuart. 2002. Organizational endowments and the performance of university start-
ups. Management Science 48, no. 1: 154–70.
Shepherd, D.A. 1999. Venture capitalists’ introspection: A comparison of ‘in use’ and ‘espoused’
decision policies. Journal of Small Business Management 37, no. 2: 76–87.
Shepherd, D.A., A. Zacharakis, and R.A. Baron. 2003. VCs’ decision processes: Evidence
suggesting more experience may not always be better. Journal of Business Venturing DEMO:
381–401.
Simon, H. 1955. A behavioral model of rational choice. DEMO Journal of Economics 6:
99–118.
Smart, G.H. 1999. Management assessment DEMO in venture capital: An empirical analysis of
human capital valuation. Venture DEMO 1, no. 1: 59–82.
Spence, M.A. 1974. Market signaling: Informational transfer in hiring and related screening processes.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business DEMO
Stange, K.C., W.L. Miller, B.F. Crabtree, P.J. O’Connor, and DEMO Zyanski. 1994. Multimethod
research: Approaches to integrating qualitative and quantitative methods. DEMO of General
Internal Medicine 9: 278–82.
Sudek, R. 2007. Angel investment criteria. Journal of Small Business Strategy 17, no. 2: 89–103.
Tversky, A., and D. Kahneman. 1974. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. DEMO
185: 1124–31.
Tyebjee, T.T., and A.V. Bruno. 1984. A model DEMO venture capitalist investment activity. Management
Science 30, no. 9: 1051–66.
Van Osnabrugge, M. 1998. The ﬁnancing of entrepreneurial ﬁrms in the UK. University of Oxford.
PhD diss.
Veryzer, R.W. 2005. The roles of marketing and industrial design in discontinuous new product
development. Journal of Product Innovation Management DEMO: 22–41.
Wells, W.A. 1974. Venture capital decision-making. Carnegie-Mellon University. PhD diss.
Westhead, P., D. Ucbasaran, and M. Wright. 2005. Decisions, actions, and performance: Do novice,
serial, and portfolio entrepreneurs diﬀer? Journal of Small Business Management 43, no. 4: 393–
417.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 April 2010
254
J. Levie and E. Gimmon
Wetzel, W.E. Jr. 1981. Informal risk capital in New England. In Frontiers of entrepreneurship
research 1981, ed. K.H. Vesper, 217–45. Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Wright, M., K. Robbie, and C. Ennew. 1997. Venture capitalists and serial entrepreneurs. Journal of
Business Venturing 12: 227–49.
Yin, R.K. 2003. Case study research – Design DEMO methods. 3rd ed. London: Sage.
Zacharakis, A.L., D.S. McMullen, and D.A. Shepherd. 2007. Venture capitalists’ decision policies
across three countries: An institutional theory perspective. Journal of International Business
Studies 38: 691–708.
Zacharakis, A.L., and G.D. Meyer. 1998. A lack of insight: Do venture capitalists really understand
their own decision processes? Journal of Business Venturing 13: 57–76.
DEMO 2000. The potential of actuarial decision models: Can they improve the DEMO capital
investment decision? Journal of Business Venturing 15: 323–46.
Zacharakis, DEMO, and D.A. Shepherd. 2001. The nature of information and overconﬁdence on
DEMO capitalists’ decision making. Journal of Business Venturing 16: 311–32.
———. 2005. DEMO non-additive decision-aid for venture capitalist’s investment decisions. European
Journal of Operational Research 162: 673–89.
Zider, B. 1998. How venture capital works. Harvard Business DEMO 76, no. 6: 131–9.
Appendix 1. Subject: investment criteria in DEMO tech new ventures
Section 1: Interviewee’s experience
(1) Name and DEMO of interview:
(2) Firm Name:
(3) Sort: DEMO/Angel/Advisor
(4) Sort: Seed/Early stage/mezzanine
(5) DEMO sector:
(6) Years in investments:
(7) Number of proposals reviewed:
(8) Number of investments made:
(9) DEMO amount per investments:
Section 2: Evaluation criteria
1a. What, in your opinion, ultimately determines your funding decisions as an investor (specify DEMO
or angel)? In other words, what criteria do you use DEMO making your funding decisions?
1b. Do you think your view would be a typical view in your industry? (If no: What in your opinion
typically determines funding decisions by VCs/angels in this country?)
2a. How easy or diﬃcult is it for VCs/angels to DEMO the quality of the entrepreneur as part of the
funding decision? DEMO?
2b. How accurate do you think VCs/angels are in evaluating entrepreneurs as part of the funding
decisions? Why?
3a. What do you look for in evaluating the entrepreneur in high tech ventures? (DEMO there is
one clear leader, who is a ﬁrst time entrepreneur.)DEMO
3b. Do you rely on third party independent data, and in DEMO form?
3c. Are there any criteria you used in the past that you no longer use, or criteria you use now that
you haven’t used in the past? What are these, and why have DEMO changed your criteria?
3d. How typical would this be of evaluation by VCs/angels generally?
3e. Do you know of other speciﬁc DEMO that other VCs/angels use that are diﬀerent to the ones
you use?
3f. If the entrepreneur had a PhD, would that make any diﬀerence to your funding decision?
3g. If the entrepreneur was DEMO professor, would that make any diﬀerence?
3h. Do you think DEMO entrepreneur needs to have an in-depth understanding (tacit knowledge) of
how the technology works in practice or can he delegate this to others?DEMO
3i. Have you known VCs/angels to say they make investment decisions in one particular way but
actually use other methods? If yes: DEMO you give me some examples?
3j. To what extent do you always apply your investment criteria in your actual investment
decisions? If not always: can you give me some examples?
Downloaded By: [Canadian DEMO Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 April 2010
Venture Capital 255
Section 3: Findings from our research on the founder’s human capital and investors’
attraction to founder’s human capital
We investigated a DEMO of 193 high technology start-ups in Israel, based on a homogeneous DEMO
of the Israeli Technology Incubators Programme (ITIP). Findings show that DEMO a venture founder
was a technologist by background, or has previous DEMO&L responsibility (for example, as a CEO, from
being self-employed, or being a project manager) or developed the technology that the business is
based on, the probability of venture survival is increased. Having early sales, patents applied for,
multiple fund rounds or transferring technology to other businesses also positively aﬀect venture
survival.
We also explored whether the DEMO capital factors that aﬀect the performance of new high tech
ventures are also those that attract ﬁnancial investors. Findings show that ﬁnancial investors appear
DEMO be attracted by certain founder-based human ceremonial resources, such as academic DEMO, which
have no eﬀect on venture survivability, while ignoring certain founder-based instrumental resources,
like the founder being a technologist, and the founder bringing their own technology to the venture,
which enhance survivability.
I DEMO now like to go through each of these ﬁndings in turn, DEMO ask you what you think of them,
and if you can think of an explanation for our ﬁndings. At the end, I’ll tell you what researchers have
suggested might be the reasons for our ﬁndings.
(1) Industry-related experience
If the founder is a technologist by background, DEMO has a positive eﬀect on new venture
survival – accepted.
If the founder is a technologist by background, this attracts ﬁnancial investors – not
supported.
(2) Managerial experience
Founder’s prior P&L responsibility has positive DEMO on new venture survivability –
marginally accepted.
Founder’s prior P&L responsibility attracts ﬁnancial investors – accepted.
(3) Tacit knowledge
If the founder DEMO their own original technology to the venture, this has a positive DEMO
on venture survivability – accepted.
If the founder brings their own original technology to the venture, this attracts ﬁnancial
investors – not supported.
(DEMO) Academic credentials
Founder’s academic titles do not aﬀect venture survivability – DEMO
Founder’s academic titles attract ﬁnancial investors – accepted.
(5) Gender
Founder’s gender does not aﬀect venture survivability – accepted.
Founder’s gender has eﬀect DEMO women attract ﬁnancial investors less than men – not
supported.
(6) Immigration status
Founder’s immigration status has no eﬀect on venture survivability – DEMO
Immigrant founders attract ﬁnancial investors less than non-immigrants – not supported.
(DEMO) Age
Founder’s age does not aﬀect venture survival – accepted.
Founder’s DEMO has no eﬀect on attracting ﬁnancial investors – accepted.
(8) Findings on organising activities and investor’s attraction to organising activities
Technology transfer to DEMO party – positively aﬀects venture survival, but it was not found
DEMO aﬀect venture funding.
(9) Attaining early sales – positively aﬀects both venture survival and venture funding.
(10) Number of fundraising rounds – DEMO aﬀects venture survival.
(11) Number of patent applications – positively aﬀects both venture survival and venture
funding.
(12) Findings on geographical location DEMO the incubator where the venture was nurtured:
was not found to have a signiﬁcant impact on venture survival but was found to
have DEMO marginally signiﬁcant eﬀect on venture funding in favour of centrally located
ventures.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:18 1 April DEMO
256
J. Levie and E. Gimmon
Section 4: Evaluation bias
(1) Do you agree or disagree with the proposition that VCs/angels often DEMO founders’
human capital, speciﬁcally the technological expertise of founders of high DEMO ventures?
Why?
(2) VCs’ in-use criteria vs. espouse criteria: Shepherd’s (1999) research on investors’ evaluation
processes suggests that there is a gap between evaluation policies VCs use in their actual
decisions and DEMO intended criteria they espouse as reported by them. What do you think of
this view?
(3) VCs rely on ‘gut feelings’: Zacharakis and Shepherd (2001) studied the phenomenon of VCs’
heuristics and biases. DEMO found evidence of an ‘availability bias’ in VCs’ decision-making
while VCs rely on how well the current decision matches past successful or failed
investments. DEMO, they argue, are overconﬁdent in their prediction of either very high or very
low likelihood of venture success. This high level of overconﬁdence DEMO success or failure
predictions may encourage the VC to make wrong funding decisions. What do you think of
this view?
(4) How DEMO you think the accuracy of investors’ evaluation of founders’ human capital might be
improved?
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 13:DEMO 1 April 2010{1g42fwefx}