Harvard Business Review
July-August 1960
• Shortsighted managements often
fail to recognize DEMO in fact there is
no such thing as a growth industry.
MARKETING MYOPIA
By Theodore Levitt
Every major industry was once a growth in-
DEMO But some that arc now riding a wave of
growth enthusiasm are very much in the shadow
ot" decline. Others which are thought of as sea-
soned growth industries have aetually stopped
growing. In every ease DEMO reason growth is
threatened, slowed, or stopped is not because
the market is saturated. It is because there has
heen a failure ot" management.
Fateful Purposes
The failure is at the top. The executives re-
DEMO for it, in the last analysis, are those
\vho deal \vith broad aims and polieies. Thus:
C The railroads did not stop DEMO because tlie
need for passenger and freight transportation dc-
eh'ned. That grew. The railroads are in trouble
today not because the need was DEMO by others
(ears, trucks, airplanes, even telephones), but be-
cause it was not filled by the railroads themselves.
They let others DEMO eustomers away from them
beeause they assumed themselves to be in the rail-
road business rather than in the transportation
business. The reason they DEMO their industry
wrong was beeause they were railroad-oriented in-
stead (if DEMO; they were produet-
oriented instead of eustomer-oriented.
e Hollywood barely escaped DEMO totally rav-
ished by television. Aetually, all the establisbed
film eompanies DEMO through drastic reorganiza-
tions. Some simply disappeared. All of them got
into trouble not because of TV's inroads but be-
eause of their DEMO myopia. As with the railroads,
Hollywood defined its business ineorreetly. It
thought it was in the movie business when it was
actually in DEMO entertainment business. "Movies"'
implied a specific, limited product. This DEMO
a fatuous contentment which from the beginning
led producers to view TV as a threat. HollywootI
seornetl and rejeeted TV when it should have DEMO
comed it as an opportunity — an opportunity to
expand the entertainment business.
Today TV is a bigger business tban the old nar-
rowly DEMO movie business ever was. Had HolK-
wood heen customer-oriented (providing entertain-
DEMO), rather than produet-oriented (making mov-
ies), would it have DEMO through the fiseal purga-
tory that it did? I doubt it. DEMO ultimately saved
Hollywood and accounted for its recent resurgence
was tbe Ava\e of new young writers, producers,
and directors whose previous successes in television
45
46 Harvard Bushiess Review
had decimated the old movie companies and top-
DEMO the big movie moguls.
Ther e are other less ob\ious examjiles of in-
dustries that have heen and are now endangering
their futures by DEMO defining their jiur-
poses. J shall discuss some in detail later and an-
alyze the kind of policies that lead to trouble.
Right now DEMO may help to show wha t a thorough-
ly eustomer-oriented management can do to keep
a growth industry growing, even alter the obvi-
ous opportunities have been exhausted; and here
there are two examples that have been around
for a long titne. 1 hey arc nylon and glass DEMO
spceilically, E. I. duPon t de Nemours & Com-
pany and DEMO Class ^\•^)rks:
Both companies ha\e great teelinical eonipctenee.
Their product orientation is untjiicstioiKHl. lUit
this alone does not explain their success. Alter DEMO,
who A\as more pridefully protlucl-orientetl and
product-conscious tban the erstwliilc Xcw I nglaittl
textile eompanies that ha\ e been so thoroughK
massacred? The Dul'onts and the Comings lia\c
succeeded not primarily because of their DEMO
or research orientation but because thc\ lia\i' been
tboroiighK cusLojiier-orieiited also. DEMO is constant
watclifLibiess for ojiportiuiities to apply their teeb-
nical kno\\-liow to the creation of CListumer-satis-
fying uses whicli accounts for iht'ir prodigious DEMO
put of SLiccessfiil new iirocliieLs. WMtJioiil a vcr\'
sophisticated eye on tlie custiiincr, most itf tlicir
new protiucts Jiiigbt lia\e been wrong, DEMO sales
niethotls useless.
Aluminum lias also continucti Lo be a growth
industry, thanks to the efforts of two wartime-
created com|ianies which deliberately set about
creating new customer-satisfying uses. \A ithout
Kaiser Aluminum & Chemical Cx)DEMO antl
lUnnolds Metals Company, the total tlcmand for
aluminum toda> would he vastK Jess than it is.
Terror of Analysis
Some may argue DEMO it" is Foolish to set the
railroads off against aluminum or DEMO mo\ ics
olf against glass. Arc not aluminum ami glass
naturally so \ersatile that the industries arc hound
to ha\ c more growth opportunities DEMO the rail-
roads and nn)vies? Thi s view commits prccisciv
DEMO error I have been talkin'^ about, it dclines
an industrv, or a product, or a cluster of know-
bow so narrowly as to guarantee its premature
senescence. Whe n we mention "railroads." we
DEMO make sure we mean "transportation."
As transporters, the railroads still have a gooil
chance for \cr\' considerahle growth. 'Tlic\ arc
not DEMO to tlie raih'oad business as sucli
(though in my opinion DEMO transportation is
potentially a much stronger transportation me-
dium than is generally hclicvcd).
What the railroads lack is not opportunity,
but some DEMO the same managerial imaginati\e-
ness and audacity that made them great. Vxcn
an amateur like Jacques Barzun can see what is
lacking when he DEMO:
"I gric\ e to see th e most advanced physical DEMO
social organization of the last cenlurx go dow n in
sliabb\ disgrace for lack of the same eomprebensix e
imagination tha t built it DEMO jWha t is lacking is[
tlic \^i\\ of tlie eonipanics Lo sur\i\ c and Lo satis-
fy LIH' public b\ inventiveness an d skill." '
Shadow of Obsolescence
It is impossible Lo menLion a single DEMO In-
dustry tbaL did noL at one time qualify f{)r the
magic appcllaLion of "growth industry." In each
case iLs assumed strength DEMO in the apparentiv
unchallcngcil superiority of iLs product. 'I bere
appeareii DEMO be no cHccLi\e substitute for it. It
was iLself a runaway subsLitulc for the product
it so triumpiiantiy replaced. YcL one after an-
other DEMO tbese celcbraLed indusLries lias conic
under a shadow. LcL us look brieily at a lew-
more ol' them . Lhis time taking examples that
ba\ e so far recei\cd a little less attention:
i Dry DEMO - - Fliis was once a ,L;ro\\th in-
tlustr\ with DEMO prospccLs. ln an a'j,c of woiil
uarinents . imagine bcini^ linally able to get them
sale h an d casiK clean. Th DEMO hooin was on.
^ et her e A\e are ^o M'ars after ihe boom started
aiul tlic imlu.'^trv is in ti'ouhlc. DEMO \ here has tlic com-
petition CDDH' IVoni? Iro m a better wav ol elean-
ing? .\o . It has eome from s\nlheLie i'lbers and
cliemical atkliti\e s that ha\ e euL the need DEMO di*\
tk'aTiing. lUi! this is onl\ the beginning . I urkini;
in the wings antl ready to mak e ciieniteal tlrv
eleaiiirio DEMO o])soleseent is that powerfui maiii-
ciiin. ultrasonics.
i i'lcctric iiiilitic^ — This is anolher one ol'
tliosc supposetlh "no-substiLLiLc" products DEMO lias
heen enthrone d on a pedestal of invincible ;^rowvli.
\ DEMO he n th e ineantlcsceiiL lamp came along, kerosene
lights were DEMO, late r the water wheel and
ihe steani engine were euL DEMO ribbons by th e ilexibil-
itv, re!iahilit\ . simpliciLw an d DEMO plain eas\ avail-
ahilit\ of electric nioturs. Th e jirosperity of electrie
utilities continue s lo wax extravagant as the home
is con\erLed into DEMO museu m of electric gadgetrN.
B.nviin , ""IvM ;in() DEMO Mint! ol' Mnii," lloli-
How can anybody miss by investing in utilities, with
no eompetition, DEMO but growth ahead?
But a second look is not quite so eomforting. A
score of nonutility companies are well advaneed
toward developing a DEMO chemical fuel cell
whieh eould siL in some hidden closet of every
home silently ticking off elceLrie power. The elec-
tric lines that vulgarize DEMO many neighborhoods
will be eliniinatcd. So will tbe endless demolition
of streets and service interruptions during storms.
Also on Lhe horizon is solar energ\, again pioneeretl
by nonutiliLy eompanies.
W^'ho says that Lhe utilities ba\-e DEMO conipeLiLion?
They may be natural monopolies now, huL Loinor-
row DEMO may be natural deaLhs. To a\x)id this
prospect, they too DEMO have to develop fuel cells,
solar energy, and other power DEMO To sur-
vi\e, they themselves will hiwc Lo plot Lhe ol)DEMO
lescence of what now^ produces their li\t'iiliood.
C Ci-ocery stores — Many people find it hard Lo
realize tbat Lhcre ever was a DEMO esLablish-
ment knowii as the "corner grocery store." The
supermarket has taken over wiLli a powerful effec-
tiveness, Yet the big food chains of Lhe 1930's nar-
rowly escaped being eompletely wiped out by DEMO
aggressive expansion of independcnL supermarkets.
1 he first genuine supermarkeL was opened in i 930,
in Jamaiea, Tong Island. Ey 1933 .supermarkets
were thriving in California, Ohio. Pennsylvania,
and elsewhere. VeL Lhe csLablished chains pomp-
ously ignored them. A\'hen they cho.se to notice
them, iL was with sueb derisive descriptions as
"eheap>," "horse-and-bugg)," "eracker-liarrel store-
keeping." and "unethical opportunists."
The e\ecuLive of' one big chain anjiounced at
Lhe time that he found iL "hard to helieve thaL
people will drive for miles Lo sho|-) for foods and
sacrifice Lhe personal service chains have perfected
and to which Mrs. Consumer DEMO accusLomed." -
As late as 1936, the NaLional Wholesale Gro-
cers conxenLion and Lhe New Jerse\ BeLail Grocers
Association said there was noLhing DEMO fear. They
said LhaL Lhe supers' narrow ajipeal to Lhe price
DEMO limited Lhe size of their market. They had
to draw from miles aromid. When iniitaLors eame,
there would be wholesale liquidations as volume
DEMO Tbe currcnL liigh sales of Lhe supers was said
to be partly due Let their novelty. Easicalh- people
wanted convenient neighborhood grocers. If the
DEMO stores "cooperate wiLh their suppliers,
pay attention to their costs, and improxe Lhcir serv-
ice," Lhe\ would be able to weaLher DEMO compeLi-
Lion until it blew over.''
It never blew over. DEMO chains disco\'ercd that
survival required going into the supermarket busi-
- K(ir more dchiils sc-c M. M. '/Ammcrman, The Super
Miirkct: A P^cvohitkm in Disliihiition (New Yor];. Mc-
Miirketiiig Myopia 47
DEMO Tbis meant Lhe Avholesale destruction of their
huge in\esLmenLs in corner sLore sites and in estab-
lished distribution and nierehandising methods.
Tbe companies ^viLli "the eourage of their convic-
tions" resoluLeh sLiick to Lhe corner store philoso-
phy. They kepL Lheir pride but lost their shirts.
Self-Dctciving Cycle
DEMO memories are short. For example, it is
liard for people who DEMO confidently hail the
twin messiahs of electronics and chemicals to
see how things eould possibly go wrong with
these galloping industries. They probably also
DEMO see how a reasonably sensible business-
man could have been as jn\opic as the famous
Boston millionaire who 50 years ago uninten-
tionally sentenced DEMO heirs to po\crty by stipu-
lating tbat his entire estate be forever invested
exclusively in electric streetcar .securities, flis
posthumous declaration, "1 here will always be a
big demand for efficient urban transportation,"
is no consolation to his heirs who sustain life by
pumping gasoline at DEMO filling stations.
Yet, in a casual sur\cy 1 recently took among
DEMO group of intelligent business executives, nearly
half agreed that it vvould DEMO hard to hurt their
heirs by tying their estates forever to the elec-
tronics industry. When I then confronted them
w ith the Boston DEMO example, they chorused
unanimously. "That"s dilFcrent!"' But is it? [s
not the basic situation identical?
In truth, there is DEMO sneh ihln'^ as a growth
industry. 1 bclic\e. There arc only companies
organized and operated to create and capitalize
on growth opportunities. Industries DEMO as-
sume tbemsches to be riding some automatic
growth escalator invariably descend into stag-
nation. The history of every dead and dying
"growth" DEMO shows a self-deceiving cycle
of bountiful expansion and undetected decay.
There arc four contliLions which usually guar-
antee this cycle:
1. The belief DEMO growth is assured by an ex-
pantling and more aliluciiL populaLion.
2. Tbe belief LluU there is no eompetitive sub-
stitute for the industry'DEMO major product.
3. 'loo much faith in mass production and in
DEMO advanLages of rapidly declining unit
costs as output rises.
4. Preoeeupation with a product LhaL lends it-
self Lo earefully conLrolled seientilic expcri-
Gr;DEMO Book Compimy, Inc., 1955) , p. 48 .
• Ibid., pp. 45 47 .
48 Harvard Business
nienLation, inipro\cmcnL, and manufactur-
ing cost reiluction.
I DEMO like now to begin cxaniiniiT^ each of
these conditions in sonic detail. T o build my
case as boldh' as possible, I shall DEMO the
jioints w itb reference to three iTicUistries —
petroleum, aut()m(»biles, and electronics - - |:>ar-
ticulariy jictrolcum. because DEMO spans more u'ar s
and more \ieissitudcs. \o L only do tlicsc three
ha\ c excellent rejiutations with the j^cneral pub-
lic and DEMO cnjo)" Lhe confidence of sophisLicated
iincstors. but their managenicnLs ha\ e become
known Tor progressi\e thinking in ai"eas like
financial control, product research, and in;magc-
meiiL training. II obsolescence can cripple vwn
these industries, it can happen an\wluM'e.
Populatio n Alytl i
Th e belief that profits arc assured In :in ex-
panding and more allhicnt population is dear to
ibc heart of every industry. IL Lakes the DEMO
oil' the apprehensions c\cryb(>d\ undcrstandubh'
feels about the I'uLure. If consumers arc iiiidli-
plun g atid also buying iiioix- oT DEMO jiroduet oi'
sci"\icc, you can I'acc Lhe Tuturc DEMO consider-
ably more comfort Lhan il: the marki't is shrink-
DEMO .An expanding market keeps the manulac -
Un"er irom Innin g lo think \c!'\ hard or im-
aginaLi\el\". If thinking is DEMO intellectual re-
sponse to a problem, then the absence of a DEMO
lem leads to the absence ol' tbinkijii^. IT \ou r
product DEMO an aiilomaLicalK cxpantiin;^ market,
tben \{)u will not gi\c much tliougliL to how to
expand iL.
On e ol" the iiiosL interesting examples ol this
is pr{)\idcd by Lhe petroleum industrx. Prob-
DEMO our oldest growth industry, it has an en\i -
ablc recorti. DEMO e there arc sonic current .ip-
jirehcnsions about its growth rate, DEMO industrv'
itself Lends to be O[)timistic. IJut I l)eiie\c it can
be demonstrated that it is iindergoiriL: a funda-
mental \ct t\pical change, it is not oni\ ceasing
io be a growth industry, buL nia\ acLualK he ,i
declining one. relative to other business. DEMO
tliough tbere is w idcsi:>rcatl imawarcncss ol it.
bclie\e that DEMO ilhin \ c ars the (til industry
ma\ find itself in DEMO the same position of
retrospective glorv that Lhe railroatis are now in.
Despite its pioneering work in cle\eloping and
applying the present-value nirthod of DEMO
nicnt evaluation, in eniplovcc i-clations, and in
working with backward counLrics. the petro-
Icmn busine'ss is a disLressing example ol liow
conijilaccncv DEMO vvronghcadedness can sLuh-
bornly convert opportunity into near disaster.
On e of tbe characteristics of this and oilier
indusLries thaL have believed very strongly DEMO
the beneficial consequences of an expanding
population, while at the same DEMO being indus-
tries wiLh a generic product for which there has
appeared to be no competiLive substitute, is that
the jiKli\idual companies bavc sought to outilo
their competitors bv" inijiroving on wiiat they are
already doing. Ibi s makes sense, of course, if
one .issujiics that sales DEMO Lied to the count!'} s
pt)pulation strings, because Lhe DEMO can
compare products onlv on a featurc-bv-fcature
basis. I beiic\e it is significant, I'oi- example.
that not since lohn I). Ivockeleller sent free kci'O-
sene lamps \u C'bina has the oil IndiisLrx DEMO
:tnvtliing rcallv ouLsLanding to create a dcmaiul
for its product. Not DEMO in product improve-
ment li:is it show creil iLself w iLh eminence, lh e
grcaLcsL single iinprovemcnt. namcK, the de\cl-
opmciit of DEMO lead, came from ouLsidc the
intlusLrv. sjicL'ifically from (k'ncrai Motors and
DtiPont. riic big cunLribtitions matle bv tbe in-
dusti"\ DEMO arc conlhictl to tbe tccbnolog) of
oil exploration. protkicLion, and refining.
Asking for Iro n bit'
In otlici' words, the iniUistrx 's cllorfs have
fotuscci on improvinu; tbc cljiciciic\ of 'j.cLtin;4
DEMO making its protluct, not rcall\ on improving
the ^cni'ric product DEMO iLs marketing. Morc()\ei".
its cbiet' product bas conLinuoush i)cen dclined
in llie narrowest possible Leriiis, namclw gaso-
line. noL cncrg\ . fuel, or transporlation. This
attitude bas helped assure that :
DEMO Maio r iiiij>i"(n emeiiL s i n gasolin e DEMO x \V\M]
no t l o oriii;i!i;it c i n th e oi l industry . Mso , th e de -
DEMO'Ti t iij' superio r altei'(i;itf \ e fuel s eonu' s fro m
outsid e th e oi l intUisLrx , LIS wil l b r show n hiier .
• \l:DEMO) r innovation s i n aiHomnbil e liK' l niarkel -
in' 4 ar c originate d b \ smal l ne w ni l companie s tlin t
ar e iio l primari K DEMO d wit h jirodnctio n o r
relinini; . Thes e DEMO e tli e companie s tha t ha\ e bee n
responsibl e fo r th e ra]iitll \ expari<liii'_ ; multijium DEMO
iiasohii e st:ilion> , wil h thei r sucecssfu l DEMO s o n
lari^i.' an d clea n hi\outs . rapi DEMO an d elFtelen t ilri\i. '
wa \ ser \ ice DEMO unt.] (|ua]it \ gasolin e a l lo w priecs .
DEMO luis, th e oil indusLry is askin g lo r troubl DEMO
from outsiders . Soonci" or latci". in tbi s I;DEMO of
Imniir ) inventor s an d cntrepi'einHii'S, :t threa t is
sur e to lonif . lh e possibilitie s DEMO thi s will 1)L'-
coni e mor e apparen t whe n w e tnr n to th e next
danue-i'ous DEMO of mai n maiiam-mcnts . I oi" th e
sake of continuity, because this second behef is
tied closely to the first, I shall continue with the
same example.
Idea of Indispensability
The petroleum industry is pretty much per-
suaded that there is no competitive DEMO
for its major product, gasoline — or if there is,
DEMO it will continue to be a derivative of crude
oil, such DEMO dicsci fuel or kerosene jet fuel.
There is a lot of automatic wishful thinking
in this assumption. The trouble is that most re-
fining DEMO own huge amounts of crude
oil reserves. These ha\e value only if there is a
market for products into which oil can be con-
DEMO — hence the tenacious belief in the
continuing competitive superiority of automobile
fuels made from crude oil.
This idea persists despite all historic evidence
DEMO it. T'he evidence not only shows that
oil has never been a superior product for any
purpose for very long, but it also shows that the
oil industry has never really been a growth in-
DEMO It has been a succession of different
businesses that have gone through the usual his-
toric cycles of growth, maturity, and decay. Its
DEMO survival is ov\cd to a series of miracii-
lous escapes from total obsolescence, oi' last-
minute and unexpected reprieves from total dis-
a.ster DEMO of the Perils of Pauline.
Perils of Petroleum
I shall sketch in only the main episodes:
t First, erude oil was largely a patent medicine.
BuL even before thaL fad ran ouL, demand was
greati) expanded by Lhe use of oil in kerosene
lamps. The prospect of lighting the worlds lamps
ga\'e rise to an extravagant promise of DEMO The
prosj>ccLs were similar to tbo.se the industry now
holds for gasoline in other parts of Lhe world. IL
can hardly wait for DEMO undcrckneloped nations to
get a ear in every garage.
In the days of the kerosene lamp, the oil eom-
panies competed witb each other and against gas-
light b\' Lrying to improve the illuminating charac-
teristics of kerosene. Then suddenly the impos-
sible happened. F.dison invenLed a light DEMO was
totallv nondependent on crude oil. Had it not been
for the growing use of kerosene in spaee beaters,
the incandescent lamp would DEMO completely fin-
ished oil as a growth industry at that Lime. Oil
would have been good for little else than axle grease.
i[ Then DEMO and reprieve struek again. Two
great innovations oecurred, neither originating in
DEMO oil industry. The successful de\elopmenL of
Marketing Myopia 49
coal-burning domestie eentral-heating systems made
tbe spaee heater obsolescent. While the industry
reeled, along eame its most magnifieent boost yet
— the internal combustion engine, also invented
by outsiders. Then when the prodigious expansion
for gasoline finally began to DEMO off in tbe 1920 s,
along came the miraculous escape of a central oil
heater. Once again, the eseape was provided by an
outsider's invention and development. And when
that market weakened, wartime demand for avia-
tion fuel eame to tbe rescue. After the war tbe DEMO
pansion of civilian aviation, Lhe dieselization o-f
railroads, and Lhe explosive demand for cars and
trucks kept the industry's growth in high DEMO
I! Meanwhile centralized oil heating — whose
booni poLential had only reeently been proclaimed
— ran IJILO severe eompetition from natural gas.
Wbilc the DEMO companies themselves owned Lhe gas
tbat now conipeted with their oil, DEMO intlusLry did
not originate the natural gas rc\olution, nor has it
DEMO Lhis day greatlv' profited from its gas ownership.
The gas revoluLion DEMO made by nev\Iy formed
transmission companies that luarkeLed the product
with an aggressive ardor. Tbey started a magnili-
cciiL new industry, firsL against Lhe advice and Lhen
against Lhe resistance of tbe oil com|ianies.
By ail DEMO logic of the siLuaLion, Lhe oil compa-
nies Lliemselves should ha\ DEMO made Lhe gas revohi-
Lion. They not onlv' owned Lhe gas; they also were
the onh pefjple experieneeti in handling, scrub-
bing, DEMO using iL, the only people experienced in
pipeline Leclinology and Lransmission, and Lhey un-
dcrsLood beating problems. BuL, parth heeause thev
knew that natural gas would eonipete with their
own sale of heating oil, Lhe oil companies pooh-
poohed Lhe potentials of gas.
The revolution was finalh DEMO bv oil pipeJine
executives who, unable to persuade their own com-
DEMO to go into gas, quit and organized Lhe .spec-
taeularh successful DEMO Lransmission companies.
I:vcii after their success became painfullv evident
Lo tbe oil companies, Lhe laLter did not go into gas
Lransmission. The multibillion dollar business
wbicb should have been theirs went Lo others. As
in DEMO [last, the indusLry was blinded by iLs nar-
rov\' preoccujiation with a specific jiroclucL and Lbe
value of its reserves. It jiaitl litLie DEMO no attention
to its cusLomers' basic needs and preferences.
i[ 1 DEMO posLwar \ cars liav e Jiot witnessed anv
ehange. Immediately after \\"orld War [I the oil
industry was greatly eneouraged about its future
DEMO the rapid expansion of demand for its tradi-
tional line of products. In 1950 mosL companies
projecLed annual rates of domestic expansion of
around DEMO % through at least 1975. Though tbe
ratio of erude oil reserves Lo demantl in the Free
\\'orid was aboiiL 20 to T, with 10 Lo i being usu-
allv considered a rcasf>nable workiii'DEMO ratio in the
50 Ihirvani Bitshicss Revicit^
L'nitcd States, bwrniiiii; demand sent oil DEMO search-
ing for more without suffieient re«^atd to what the
future really promised. In 1952 they "liit" in
the Mitldle Hast; the ratio sk\ roeketed to 42 to i.
Ii' ^ross aiklitions to reserves eoiitlnue at the aver-
n<j,v rate ol' the past five years (37 billion harrels
annually), then i)y 1970 tlie reser\e ratio will he
up to 45 to 1. This abundanee of oil has DEMO
erudc and produet priees all o\er the world.
Unccrt;nii FuLuic
Manaj^enicnt cannot l'md Jiiiich coiisoialioii
today in the rapidly expanding petrochemical
inchistry, another oil-using idea that did not
orij^inato in the leading firms. The DEMO United
States pi-oductiun ol' petrochemicals is equixa-
lent to about 2% (by volume) ol' the demand
lor cill petroleum products. Althouj^h the DEMO
chemical industry is now expected to grow by
about 10% per year, this will not ollset other
drains ou the growth ol' crude DEMO consum[)ti(in.
Furthermore, while petrochemical jiroducts aie
many and growing, it is well to remember that
there are non]ietroleuni soiu'ces ol' the basic raw^
material, such as coal. Besides, a lot ol' plastics
can be produced with relatively little oil. A
50,000 barrel-per-day DEMO rclinery is now con-
sidered the abstilule minimum si/e I'or eOieiency.
But a 5,000-barrel-per-day ebeniical plant is a
giant operation.
Oil DEMO never been a continuously strong
growth industry. It has grown by fits and starts,
always miraculously saved by innovations ant!
developments not of DEMO (nvn making. The reason
it has not grown in a smooth DEMO is that
each time it thought it had a superior product
safe Irom the possil)ility of conii)etiti\e substi-
tutes, the product turned out to be inferior and
notoriously subject to obsolescence. Until now ,
gasoline (lor motor fuel, anyhow") has eseapetl
this fate. But, as we shall see later, it too may
be on its last legs.
The i^oint of all this is that there is no guar-
DEMO against product obsolescence. If a eom-
pan\'s own research does nt)t make it obsolete,
another's w ill. Unless aii induslrv DEMO especially
lucky, as oil has been until now, it ean easily
go dow n in a sea of red figures — just as DEMO
railroads have, as the buggy whip manulaetur-
ers ha\e. as the DEMO grocery chains have, as
most of the big movie companies have, anti in-
deed as man\' otlier industries ha\"e,
rhe 1>est way for a firm to be lucky is to make
' '(he Aljliiciit Sociciy (Hoston, Iliiu^hton MiOlin t^om-
piun . r ()TH) , PI>. 152 I 60 .
its own luck. That requires knowing what malics
a business suceessful. One of the greatest ene-
DEMO of this knowledge is mass production.
Produclion Pressures
Mass-production industries are impelled by a
great drive to produee all they ean. The pros-
peet DEMO steeply declining unit costs as output
rises is more than most companies ean usually
resist. The profit possibilities look spectacular.
All effort ioeuses on DEMO fhe result is
that marketing gets negleeted.
John Kenneth Galbraith contejuls that just
ihe opposite occurs.' Output is so prodigious that
all elfort concentrates 011 tryiug to get rid of it.
Fie says this accounts [or DEMO comniercials,
desecration of tbe countryside \\ilh advertising
signs, and other DEMO and vulgar practices.
(lalbraith has a finger on something real, but he
misses the strategic point. Mass jiroduction tlocs
indeed generate great pressure DEMO "move" ihe
product. But ^vhat usually gets emphasized is
selling, DEMO marketing, Marketing, being a more
sophisticated antl complex process, gets DEMO
The differenee between marketing ant! selling
is more than semantic. Selling Focuses on the
needs of tiie seller, marketing on tbe needs of
tbe buyer. Selling is preoccupied with the sell-
er's need to convert DEMO product into cash; mar-
keting with the idea of satisfying the DEMO of
the customer by means ol' the product and the
w DEMO cluster of things associated w ith creating,
t!eli\ering, and linally DEMO it.
In some industries the enticcinents ol full
mass production have been so j^owerful that for
many \'ears top management in elFect has DEMO
the sales tlepartments. "You get ritl of it; we'll
worry about prolits." By coiitrast, a truly mar-
keting-minded lirm tries to DEMO value-satisfy-
ing goods and services that consimiers will want
to l)uv. What it oilers !br sale includes not only
the generie product or DEMO, but also how it
is made available to the customer, in what form,
when, under what conditions, and at what terms
DEMO trade. Most imptulant. what it offers !or
sale is determined not by the seller but by the
buyer. The seller takes bis cues froui DEMO buyer
in sueh a way that the product becomes a conse-
quence of the marketing elfort, not vice versa.
T.ag in IX'lroit
This may sound like an elementary rule tif
Inisiness. but that does not DEMO it from being
\'iolated wholesale. It is certainly more violated
than honored. Take the DEMO industry:
Here mass production is most famous, most hon-
ored, and has the greatest impact on the entire
society. The industry has DEMO its fortune to
the relentless requirements of the annual model
change, DEMO policy that makes customer orientation
an especially urgent necessity. Ctmsequently the
auto eonipanies annually spend millions of dollars
on consumer research. But the fact DEMO the new
compact cars are selling so weil in their Hrst year
indiciites that Detroit's vast researches have for a
long time failed DEMO reveal what the customer realU'
wanted. Detroit was not persuaded that he wanted
anything different from \^hat he had heen getting
until it DEMO millions of customers to other sninll
car manufacturers.
Ho\v could this unbelie\'ahle lag bcliind con-
sumer wants have heen perpetuated so long? W hy
did not research reveal eonsunier preferences he-
fore consumers' buying decisions themselves re-
vealed the faets? Is that not what eonsumer research
is for — to hnd out before the fact what is going
to DEMO? The answer is that Detroit never really
researched the eustomer's DEMO It only researclied
his preferences between the kinds of things which
it had already decided to offer him. For Detroit
is mainly produet-oriented, not customer-oriented.
To the extent that the customer is reeogni/.ed as
having DEMO that the manufaeturer should try to
satisfy, Detroit usually aets as DEMO tlie job can be dOne
entirely by product changes. Oeeasionally attention
gets paid to financing, too, hut that is done more
in order DEMO sell than to enable the customer to buy.
As for taking care of other customer needs, there
is not enough being done to write about. The areas
of the greatest unsatisfied needs are ign!)red, or at
best get stepchild attention. These are at the point
of sale DEMO on the niatter of automoti\'e repair and
maintenance. Detroit views these problem areas as
being of seeondary importance. That is under-
scored by DEMO fact that the retailing and servicing
ends of this industry are neither owned and oper-
ated nor controlled by the manufacturers. Once
the ear DEMO produced, things are pretty nuieh in the
dealer's inadequate hands. DEMO of Detroit's
arm's-length attitude is the fact that, while DEMO
holds enormous sales-stimulating, profit-building op-
portunities, only 57 of Chevrolet's 7,000 dealers
provide night maintenance service.
iXfotorists repeatedly express their dissatisfaetion
DEMO servieing and their apprehensions about buy-
ing cars under the present selling setup. The anxi-
eties and problems they encounter during the auto
buying DEMO maintejiance processes are probably more
Intense aiic! widespread today than 30 years ago.
Yet the automobile companies do not scan to listen
to or DEMO their cues from the anguished consumer.
Marketing Myopia 51
If they do listen, it must be through the filter of
their own preoccupation with produetion. The mar-
keting effort is still view^ed as a necessary eonsc-
DEMO of the product, not vice versa, as it should
he. That is the legacy of mass produetion, with its
paroehial view that profit resides essential!} in low-
cost full production.
What Ford Put First
The DEMO lure of mass production obviously
has a place in the plans and strategy of business
management, but it must always follow harii
thinking about the customer. This is one of the
most important lessons that we DEMO learn from
the contradictory Ijchavior of Henry Ford. In a
sense Ford was both the most brilliant and the
most senseless marketer in American DEMO
He was senseless because he refused to give the
customer anything but a black car. He was
brilliant because he fashioned a production sys-
DEMO designed to fit market needs. We habitually
celebrate him Tor the wrong reason, his produc-
tion genius. His real genius Avas marketing.
We think he w as able to cut his scllino; price and
therefore sell millions of S500 ears because his
in\ention of the assembly line had DEMO the
costs. Actually be invented the assembly line
because he had concluded that at S500 he could
sell millions of ears. Mass prothiction was DEMO
result not the cause of his low prices.
Ford repeatedly emphasi/ed this point, but a
nation of production-oriented business managers
refuses to hear the ,t;reat lesson he taught. Here
is his operating philosophy as he expressed it
succinctly:
"Our polic) is to reduce the DEMO, extend tlie op-
erations, and impro\e the artiele. You will notiee
tliat tlie reduction of price comes first. We ba\ c nev-
er DEMO any costs as fixed. Therefore we iirst
rctiucc tlie price to the point wliere w'c believe more
sales will result. Then we go DEMO and try to
nijikc tlie priees. W'c do not botlicr about tlic costs.
The new priee forces the eosts down. The more
usual DEMO is to take the costs and then determine
the priee, and DEMO that method may be seientiiic
in the narrow sense; it is DEMO seicntifie in the broad
sense, because what carthh' use is it to know tlie
eost if it tells >ou that you eannot manufaeturc
at a price at whicli the article can be sokl? But
more to the point is the fact that, although one
may calculate what a eost is, and of course all of
our costs are carefully calculated, no one knows
Avhat a cost ought to be. One of the ways of dis-
covering .. . is to name a price DEMO low as to
forec e\er>body in the place to the highest point
of efficiency. The low price makes e\er\body dig
52 fiiin'ani Bitsiiicss P\ei'ic}t'
for proiils. We niiikc more DEMO c
iTiantiractiirin^ niid selliii;^ imtler thi^ forced meth-
od tlian by any method of leisurely ir7\ estimation." ''
Product Provincialism
The tanlali/ing pfulil possibilities ol' lo\v nnit
prodiRtion costs Jiiay I)C the most seriously sell-
(iecei\ing attitude that can afllict a company,
particularly a "growth" company where an ap-
parently assured expansion of demand DEMO
tends to undermine a proper concern for the
importance of marketing and the customer.
The usual result of this narrow preoccupa-
tion \\ith so-called DEMO matters is that in-
stead oi <:;ro\ving, the industry declines. It usu-
ally means that the product fails to atlapt to the
DEMO clian!iing patterns of consiniier needs
and tastes, to new asid modiliet! DEMO insti-
tutions and jiraetices, or to protluct de\elop-
nients in competing DEMO" complementary indus-
tries. 'Lhe industry has its eyes so jirmly on its
own specific product that it does not see how it
is DEMO made obsolete.
The chissieal example of this is the buggy
whip industry. No amount of prothict impro\e-
ment eoukl stave off its death sentence. DEMO had
the intlustry delinetl itself as being in the trans-
portation business rather than the buggy whip
business, it might iKne sur\i\ed. It woidd ha\e
tlone \\hat sin"vi\'al alwa\'S entails, that is. chang-
ing. I'Acn ii' it had only tldined its business as
providing a stiiiiulant or catalyst to an energy
source, it might lia\e survived b\ becoming a
manui'acturcr oi', say, fanbelts or air cleaners.
What may some day be a still more classical
example is. again, tlie oil industry. ILning let
others steal marvelous opportuiiities from it
fe.g., natural gas, as already mentionetl. missile
fuels, and jet engine lubricants"), one would ex-
pect it to ha^e taken steps ne\er to DEMO tiiat hap-
pen again. But this is not the ease. W'e are
now getting extraordinary new de\eiopments in
fuel systems speeifically designed to DEMO auto-
mohiles. Not only are these developments eon-
centrated in ilrms outside tlie petroleum indus-
try, hut petroleum is almost S) stematlcalh ignor-
DEMO them, securely content in its wedded bliss
to oil. It is DEMO story of the kerosene lamp \ersus
the incandescent lamp all over again. Oil is try-
ing to improve hydrocarbon fuels rather than
to develop DEMO fuels hest suited to the needs of
their users, whether or DEMO made in dill'ercnt
ways and with diflerent raw materials from oil.
Here are some of the things w iiich nonpetro-
leimi companies are DEMO on:
I Over a do/cn sueJi lirnis now lia\c ad\ajieed
working models of energy systems whieh, wlien
|)erfeeted, will i-e|>DEMO the internal eomhtistion en-
gine and eliminate the demand Ibr gasoline. The
superior merit oi caeh of these s\stem.s- is their
elimination of frc(DEMO lime-consuiiiing, and irri-
tating refueling stops. Most of these s\stems are
DEMO'liel eells designed to ereate eleetrieai enei'g\ di-
reetly from eheniieals without eonibiistion. Most
of them use ehemieitls ihat are n(!t deri\e(DEMO from
oil, gcnei"ali\ lueirogen 'dnd oxygeji.
t. Several other eoniiianies have ad\aneed mf)d-
els of eleetrie storage batteries desigiietl lo power
DEMO One of these is an aircraft jirodueer
that is working jointh u itli se\cral eleetrie utiiity
eonipanies. lh e latter ho|ie to use off-jieak DEMO
ating eaj")aelt\ lo supply o\'ernight phig-in battery
regeneration. Another DEMO, also using the h;it-
ier\' approaeh, is a niediuiii-si/DEMO eleeironies iirm
witli extensive sniall-hattery experienee lhat it de-
veloped in eoniieetion with its work on liearing
aitls. It is eoliaboratiiig with an automobile DEMO
faetiirer. IJeeent inipi"o\ements arising from tlie
need for high-poweretl miniature |iower storage
]il;)nls in riiekets li:i\e [Hit us witliin reaeh of a
relatively sinali halterv eapahle of wiilislanding
great o\er!oatls or sui'gos DEMO power. Germanium
diode aiiplications and batteries using sintered-
plate ant! niekel-cadniiiun ieelinii|iies promise to
malce a re\'ohition in (utr energy
<i Sohir DEMO'^y eonvcrsion s\stems are Mso get-
ting inereasing attention . On e usuall\ eaiilioiis De-
troit auto exetiitive recently veiitureti that solar-
powered C'DEMO's mi'^ht be eomnion l)\ 1980 .
/\s for DEMO oil companies, tliey are more or less
"watching developments," as one research direc-
tor put it to me. \ iew are doing DEMO bii of re-
search on fuel C'cIIs. but abnost alwa\s conihiet!
to de\eloping cells powered by ]ndfOfari)on
ehemicals. \on e of them DEMO enthusiastically
researching fuel cells, batteries, or solar power
plants. Xoni- of them are spending a fracti(jn
as much on research in these DEMO im-
portant areas as thev are on the usual run-oT-
the-mii! things like reducing eomliiistion cham-
ber dejiosit in gasoline engines. One major
integrated DEMO eompany recentlv took a
tentative look at tlie fuel cell and concluded that
although "tlie companies actively working on it
indicate a belief in ultimate success . . . the
timing and anagnitude of its imiiact DEMO t(jo re-
mote to warrant recognition in our forecasts.'"
DEMO might, of course, ask: A\hy should the
• llfiir y DEMO'oi-(K A/ y 1 i(c mid \Vf»7, ' 'DEMO i Yoi-U , IJ(iiii)I( -
Marketing Myopia 53
oil companies do ^mything different? Would not
chemical fuel cells, batteries, or soliir energy
kill the present product lines? The answer is
that they would indeed, and that is precisely
the reason for the oil firms having to develop
these power units hefore their DEMO, so
they will not be companies without an industry.
Management might DEMO ]nore likely to do what
is needed for its own preservation if it thought
of itself as being in the energy business. But
even DEMO would not be enough if it persists in
imprisoning itself in the narrow grip of its tight
proeluct orientation. It has to think of DEMO as
taking care of customer needs, not finding, re-
fining, DEMO even selling oil. Once it genuinely
thinks of its business as taking care of people's
transportation needs, nothing can stop it from
creating its own extra\ agantly profitahic growth.
"Creative Destruction"
Since words are cheap and deeds are dear, it
may be appropriate to indicate what this kind
of thinking involves anel leads to. Let us start
at DEMO beginning — the customer. It can he
shown that motorists strongly dislike the hother,
delay, and experience of buying gasoline. Peo-
ple actually elo not buy gasoline. They cannot
see it, taste it, feel DEMO, appreciate it, or really test
it. What they buy is the right to eontinuc driv-
ing their cars. The gas station is like DEMO tax eol-
lcctor to whom people are compelled to pay a
periodic toll as the price of using their ears.
This makes the gas DEMO a hasically unpopular
institution. It can never be made popular or
pleasant, only less unpopular, less unpleasant.
To reduce its unpopularity completely means
DEMO it. Nohody likes a tax collector, not
even a pleasantly cheerful DEMO Nobody likes to
interrupt a trip to huy a phantom product, DEMO
even from a hand.some Adonis or a seductive
Venus. Hence, companies DEMO are w^orking on
exotic fuel substitutes which will eliminate the
need for frequent refueling are heading elirectiy
into the outstretched arms of the irritated DEMO
ist. They are riding a wave of inevitability, not
because they DEMO creating something which is
technologically superior or more sophisticated,
hut because they are satisfying a powerful eus-
tomer need. They are also eliminating DEMO
odors and air pollution.
Once the petroleum companies recognize the
customer-satisfying logic of what another power
system ean do, they will see that they have no
more ehoiec ahout working on an efficient, long-
lasting fuel (or some way of delivering present
fuels without bothering the motorist) DEMO the
big food chains had a choice ahout goiug into
the sitpermarket husiness, or the vacuum tuhe
companies had a choice ahout making semicon-
ductors. For their own good the oil lirms will
ha\e to destroy DEMO own highly profitable as-
sets. \ o amount of w ishl'ul thinking can save
them from the necessity of engaging in this form
DEMO "creative destruction."
I phrase the need as strongly as this DEMO T
think management must make quite an effort to
break itself loose from conventional \va\s. Tt is
all too easy in this day and DEMO i'or a company or
industry to let its sense of purpose hecome domi-
nated by the economies of full production and
to develop DEMO dangerously lopsided prodtict ori-
entation. Tn short, if management iets itself
DEMO, it invariahly drifts in the direction of think-
ing of itself DEMO producing goods and services, not
customer satisfactions. While it probahly will
DEMO descend to the depths of telling its salesmen,
"You get DEMO of it; we'll ^vorry al)out prolits," it
can, without know ing it, be practicing precise-
ly that formula for withering deeay. The his-
toric fate of one growth industry after another
has DEMO its suicidal product provincialism.
Dangers of R & D
Another big danger to a firm's eontinued
growth arises when top management is wholly
DEMO by the jirofit possibilities of technical
research and development. To illustrate I shall
turn first to a new industry — electronics —
and then DEMO once more to the cfil companies.
i3y comparing a fresh example with a familiar
one, I hope to emiihasi/e the prevalence and
insidiousness of a hazardous way of thinkiiig.
Marketing Shortchanged
In the ease of DEMO, the greatest danger
which faces the glamorous new companies in
this DEMO is not that they do not pay enough
attention to research and development, but that
they pay too much attention to it. And the fact
that the fastest growing electronics firms owe
their eminenee to their DEMO emphasis on tech-
nical research is completely heside the point.
They have vaulted to allluenee on a sudden crest
of unusually strong general reeeptiveness DEMO new
technical ideas. Also, their sueeess has heen
shaped in the DEMO guaranteed market of
military subsidies and by military orders that in
54 Haivard ihisb/ess Rerieir
many cases actuaUy preceded the existence o(DEMO
facilities to make the products. Their expansion
has, in other words, been almost totally devoid
of marketing effort.
Thus, they are growing up untlcr conditions
that come dangerously close to creating the illu
sion that DEMO superior product will sell itsclt. Hav-
ing created a successful comjian} by making a
Executives concerned with increasing marketing effective-
ness will be interested DEMO three otbcr important aspects of the
problem that are discussed in this issue. See John F. Magcc,
'Th e Logistics of Distribution," page 89; Victor P. Bucll,
"Looking Around: Guides to Marketing inhuming," page ^y\
and Alfred R. Oxcnfeldt, "Aluhi-Stage Approach to DEMO, '
page 125.
superior product, it is not .surprising that DEMO
agement continues to be oriented toward the
protiuct rather than the people who consume it.
It develops the philosophy that continued gr()\vth
is a matter of continued jiroduct innovation and
improvement.
A number of other DEMO tend to strengthen
and sustain this belief:
(1) Jlccause electronic iiroclufts arc liighly com-
plex and sopliisticated, managements become top-
lica\y x\ith engineers and scientists. 'Ihis creates
;t scleeti\'c bias in favor DEMO rt'scarch and produetion
at the expense ot marketing. The (>r<;ani/ation
tends to view itself a.s making things rather than
satisfying customer needs. Marketing gets ireafetl
as a residual acti\'ity, "something DEMO" that must
be (lone once the vital job of procluet creation antl
production is completed.
(2) To this bias in ia\'or DEMO' product research,
(le\el(ipment, and production is added ihe DEMO in
fa\()r of dealing with ci>nlrollable \ariables. fjigi-
neers DEMO scientists arc at home in the world nf
concrete things like maeliincs, test tubes, produetion
lines, and even balance sheets. The abslraetions
to whieh they fed kindly arc those which arc te.s!-
:iblc or manipulatahle in the laboratory., or, if not
testable, theii functional, such DEMO ruclid's axioms.
In short, the managements of the new glamonr-
DEMO eompanies tend to favor those business ac-
tivities which lend themselves to careful stud\% ex-
perimentation, and control — the hard, practieal,
DEMO of the lah, the shop, the books.
What gets shortchanged are the realities of
the iiiarkct. Consumers are unpredictable, va-
rictl, fickle, stupid, shortsighted, stubborn, antl
general!)' bothersome. This is not \\lial the en-
ginecr-nuuiagers say, but deep clown in their
consciousness it is what they believe. \\u\ this
accounts for their concentrating on what they
DEMO and ^vbat they can control, namely, prod-
uct research, engineering, and production. The
empjiasis on protluction becomes particularly at-
tracti\c when the DEMO can be made at dc-
__ dining unit costs. There is no
more inviting way of making
]noncy than by running the plant
full DEMO
Today the top-hea\'\' sciencc-
cngineering-production orienta-
tion of so many DEMO com-
panies works reasonably well be-
cause they are pushing into new
frontiers in which the armed
services have pioneered virtual-
ly assured markets, [he com-
panies are in the felicitous position of having
to fill, not fmcl markets; of not having to dis-
cover what the customer needs and wants, bat
ot liaving the customer \'ohintarily come forward
with specific new product demands. If a team
of consultants had been DEMO specifically to
design a business situation calculated to prevent
the einorgcnce anil development of a customer-
oriented marketing viewpoint, it could not luivc
produced anything better than the conditions
just described.
Stepchild Ircatmen t
The oil DEMO is a stunning example of
how science, technology, and mass production
can divert an entire group of companies from
ihcir main task . DEMO the extent the consumer is
studied at all (which is not DEMO), the focus
is forever on getting information w'hich is de-
signed to help the oil companies impro\e what
they are now doing. DEMO'hey try to discover more
convincing acKertising themes, more eirecti\c
sales DEMO dri\es, v^'XvAt the market shares
of the various companies arc, what people like
or dislike about service station dealers and oil
companies, and so forth. Nobody seems as inter-
ested in probing deepl\' into the basic human
needs that the industry might be trying to satisfy
DEMO in probing into the basic properties of the raw
material that tlie companies work w ith in trying
to ddi\'cr customer satisfactions.
Basic DEMO about customers and markets
seldom get asked. The latter occupy a stepchild
status. TIie\' are rccogni/ccl as existing, as ha\
in>i DEMO be taken care of, but not worth \erv mueb
Marketing Myopia S 5
real thought or dedieatcd attention. Nobody
gets as DEMO about the customers in his own
backyard as alxiut the oil in the Sahara Desert.
Nothing illustrates better the neglect of market-
ing than DEMO treatment in the industry press:
The centennial issue of the American Petroleum
btstlinie Quancrly, published in 1959 to celebrate
the discovery (if DEMO in Titusvillc, Pennsylvania,
contained 21 feature articles proclaiming the in-
DEMO's greatness. Only one of these talked about
its achie\cincnts in marketing, and that was only
a pictorial record of how service station architecture
has changed. The issue also contained a special
secticm on "New Horizons," which was devoted to
showing tbe magnificent role oil would play DEMO
America's future. livery reference was ebulliently
optimistic, never implying once DEMO oil might have
some hard competition, liven the reference to
atomic DEMO was a cheerful catalogue of how oil
would help make atomic encrg\' a success. There
was not a single apprehension that the oil indus-
try's alllnence might be threatened or a suggestion
that one "new iiorizoii" might include new and
better ways of serving oil's present customers.
Gut the most revealing example of the stepchild
treatment that marketing DEMO was still another spe-
cial scries of short articles on "The DEMO
Potential of F.kctronics," Under that licading this
list of articles appeared in the table of contents:
• "In the Seareli for Oil"
• "In ProdiK'ilon Operations"
• "In Tleiinery Processes"DEMO
• "In Pipeline Operations"
Signilicantly, e\ery one of the industry's major
funetional areas is listed, except marketing. Win?
I'Jther it is l)elie\ed that electronics holds no revo-
lutionary potential for DEMO marketing (which
is palpabK' wrong), or tlie editors forgot to discuss
jiiarketiiig (which is more likely, and illustrates its
stepeJiild status)DEMO
The order in which the four functional areas
are listed also betrays the alienation of the oil in-
dustry from the consiuner. The industry DEMO im-
plicitly (lelined as beginning with the search for
oil and DEMO with its distribution from the re-
finery. But the truth is, DEMO seems to me, that the
industry begins with the needs of DEMO customer for
its products. From that primal position its defhii-
tion moves steadily backstream to areas of progres-
sively lesser importance, imtil it finally comes to
rest at the "search for oil."
Beginning i^
- End
The view that an industry is a customer-satis-
fying process, not a goods-producing process, is
vital for all businessmen to understand. An in-
dustry begins with the customer and his needs,
not with a DEMO, a raw material, or a selling
skill. Given the customer's needs, the industry
develops backwards, first concerning itself \\ ith
the DEMO delivery of customer satisfactioi>s.
Then it moves back further to ereatiiv^ the things
by whieh these satisfactions are in part uchicxcd.
How these DEMO are created is a matter of
indifference to the customer, lience DEMO j:)articu-
lar form of manufacturing, processing, or what-
have-you DEMO be considered as a vital aspect
of the industry. Finally, the DEMO mo\cs
back still further to finding the raw materials
necessary for making its products.
The irony of some industries oriented tow ard
technical research DEMO develojiment is that the
scientists who occupy the high executive jiosi-
tions are totally unscientific when it conies t(»
defining their companies' o\er-all needs and |iiu-
poses. They violate the first two rules of tbe
DEMO method — being aware of and defin-
ing their companies' problems, anel then devel-
oping testable hypotheses about so]\ing them.
They are scientific DEMO about the conxenicnt
things, sueh as lahoratory and product exjicri-
nients. DEMO reason that the customer (and tbe
satisfaction of bis deepest needs) is not consid-
ered as being "the jiroblcm* is not because there
is any certain belief that no such problem exists,
bitt because DEMO organizational lifetime has con-
ditioned management to look in the opposite di-
rection. Marketing is a stepchild.
T do not mean that selling is DEMO Far
from it. But selling, again, is not marketing.
As already pointed out, selling concerns itself
\vith the tricks and techniques of getting people
to exchange their cash for your product. Ft Is
not concerned DEMO ith tbe values that the exchange
is all about. And it does not, as marketing in-
\ariably does, vie/w' the entire business process
as consisting of a tightly integrated effort to dis-
cover, create, arouse, and satisfy customer needs.
71ie customer is somehody "out there" w ho, with
jiropcr cunning, can be separated from his loose
change.
/\ctually, not even selling gets much atten-
tion in some DEMO minded firms. Be-
cause there is a virtually guaranteed market for
the abundant flow of their new products, they
do not actually know what a real market is. It
is as if they lived in a DEMO economy, mo\ ing
their products routinely from factory to retail
outlet. DEMO suecessful concentration on prod-
5 6 iiaivard Business lleiiew
ucts tends to convince them of the DEMO of
what they have been doing, and they fail to see
DEMO "otherins clouds over the market.
Conclusion
Less than 75 years ago DEMO railroads
enjoyed a fierce loyalty among astute Wall Strcct-
ers. Furopean monarchs invested in them heav-
ily. Eternal ^vealth w as thought to be DEMO bene-
diction for anybody who could scrape a few
thousand dollars together to put into rail stocks.
No other form of transportation could compete
DEMO the railroads in speed, flexibility, durability,
economy, and growth DEMO As Jacc|ucs
Barzun put it, 'By the turn of llic century it
was an institution, an image of man, a tradition,
DEMO code of honor, a source of poetr)-, a nurscr\'
of boyhood desires, a sublimcst of toys, and the
most solemn DEMO ^ next to the funeral
hearse — that marks the ciwchs in in;m"s life." "
Fven after tbe advent of automobllc-s, trucks,
and airplanes, the railroad tycoons remained im-
perturbably .self-confident, DEMO you had told them
60 years ago that in 30 years they would he flat
on their backs, broke, and pleading for govern-
DEMO subsidies, they would ha^c thought you
totally demented. Such a future DEMO simply not
considered possible. It was not enen a discuss-
af)le subject, or an askable question, or a matter
which any sane DEMO \\c»uld consider worth
speculating about. The \cry thought was insane.
Yet a lot ol' insane notions no\^' ha\c matter-of-
fact acceptance — for DEMO, the idea of 100-
ton tubes of metal moving smoothly through DEMO
air 20,000 feet above the earth, loaded with
100 sane DEMO solid citizens casually drinking
martinis — and they have dealt cruel blows to
the railroads.
What specifically must other companies do to
avoid this DEMO? What does customer orienta-
tion in\olve? f bese questions have in part been
answered by the preceding examples and analv-
sis. It would DEMO another article to show in
detail what is required for specific industries,
in any case, it should be obvious that building
an cfTecti\e customer-oriented company Invohcs
far more than good intentions or promotional
tricks; it in\()lves profound matters of human
organization and leadership. For the present, let
" Oil. cil., p. 20.
me merely suggest what appear DEMO be some gen-
eral requirements.
Visceral Fe d of Greatness
Ob\i()DEMO the company has to do what sur-
\i\al demands. It has to adapt to the require-
ments of the market, and it has to do it sooner
rather than later. But mere sur\i\al is a so-so
DEMO Anybody can survive in some way
or other, even the skid-row DEMO The trick is
to siu-\i\e gallantly, to feed the surging impulse
DEMO conunercial mastery; not just to experience
the sweet smell of success, but to bave the vis-
ceral fed of entrepreneurial greatness.
No organization DEMO achieve greatness with-
out a vigorous leader who is driven onward by
his own pulsating will to succeed. He has to
ha\ e a DEMO ision of grandeur, a vision that can pro-
duce eager follo\i'DEMO in \ast numbers. In busi-
ness, the followers arc the customers. DEMO pro-
duce these cuslomers, the entire corporation
must be viewed as DEMO customer-creating and cus-
tomer-satisfying organism. Manageinent must
think of itself not as producing products but as
providing customer-creating value satisfactions.
It must push this DEMO (and everything it means
and rccjuircs) into every nook and cranny of the
organization. It has to do this continuously and
with the DEMO of Hair that excites and stimulates
tbe people in it. Otherwise, DEMO company will
be merely a series of pigeonholed parts, witli no
DEMO sense of purpose or direction.
In short, the organization must learn DEMO think
of itself not as producing goods or services f)Ut
as hiniii^i cnstoiiicis, as doing the things that
will make people jraiit to do business with it.
And the chief executive himself has the in-
DEMO responsibility for creating this environ-
ment, this \iewpoint, this attitude, DEMO aspira-
tion. He himself must set the company's style,
its direction, and its goals. This means he has
to know precisely where he himself wants to go,
and to makc^ sure the whole DEMO is en-
thusiastically aware of where that is. Tliis is a
first rec|uisite of leadership, for niiless he kn<nv>
irJieie he is <j.(>in<i. any road will take him there.
ff anv DEMO is okay, the chief executive might
as well pack his attache DEMO and go fishing. If
an organization docs not know or care where it
is going, iL docs not neccf to iid\ertise that fact
with a ceremonial figurehead. F.xcrybody will
notice it sf>on enough.
{1g42fwefx}