Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
Vol. 82, No. 2, July, pp. 171–193, 2000
doi:10.1006/obhd.2000.2881, available online at http://DEMO on
Information Processing at Successive Stages of
Decision Making: Need for DEMO and
Inclusion–Exclusion Effects
Irwin P. Levin
University of Iowa
Mary E. Huneke
University of Washington, Bothell
and
J. D. Jasper
University of Toronto
Levin and Jasper ’s (1995) phased narrowing technique for
tracking changes in DEMO usage across successive stages of
the decision-making process was combined with Huneke’s (1996)
“pull-down menu” extension of Payne, Bettman, and Johnson’s
(DEMO) software package for generating measures of information
processing. Because this technique DEMO considerable data
for each individual subject at each stage, we were DEMO to focus
on individual differences in information processing across stages,
most notably differences related to need for cognition (NC; Caci-
oppo & DEMO, 1982). In a computerized information search and
decision task, 60 college students were first asked to narrow their
options for purchasing a DEMO computer to form a consider-
ation set and were then asked to make a final choice from this
set. At the consideration set formation DEMO, half the subjects
were instructed to adopt a mindset to include DEMO while the
other half were asked to exclude options. Especially in the inclu-
sion condition where subjects showed greater narrowing of
The authors especially DEMO the invaluable contribution of Alan C. Huneke, author of
the ComputerShop DEMO used in this research. The authors also thank the following students
for their help in collecting and compiling data: Wendy Forbes, Tara Burmeister, Joel Temperley,
and Vy Nguyen.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to DEMO P. Levin, Department of Psychology,
University of Iowa, 11 Seashore Hall, Iowa City, IA 52242-1407.
171
0749-5978/00 $35.00
Copyright q DEMO by Academic Press
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
172
LEVIN, HUNEKE, AND JASPER
options, high NC subjects processed information in a more
focused manner with greater depth and breadth than did DEMO NC
subjects, and the quality of their selections tended to be DEMO
There was no evidence of widespread shifts in strategy as individ-
uals moved from set formation to final choice but, as a group,
high NC subjects were more successful at adaptive decision mak-
ing. q DEMO Academic Press
Various techniques have been developed to understand decision-making pro-
cesses by tapping into predecisional responses. The present study extends
earlier work by DEMO measures of effort, depth, and breadth of information
processing, as DEMO as decision quality, for the individual decision maker as he
or DEMO proceeds through the successive stages of consideration set formation
and final choice. We are thus able to examine both individual and situational
differences in DEMO information is processed en route to making a complex
decision. By including a reliable and valid measure of individual differences
in cognitive style, we are able to address a long-standing goal of decision-making
research, namely, DEMO understand individual differences in the processing of
information leading to a choice among multiple options. For example, Ford,
Schmitt, Schechtman, Hults, DEMO Doherty (1989), in their review of the contri-
butions of DEMO tracing methods, point to the lack of empirical support for
the DEMO of person characteristics on the decision process. Our task and
measures help address this need.
A version of Levin and Jasper ’s (1995) DEMO narrowing task is used in
which decision makers form a consideration set and then make a final choice
from this set, and Huneke’s (DEMO) extension of Payne, Bettman, and Johnson’s
(1988) information monitoring DEMO is used to obtain information pro-
cessing measures on the individual level at each stage. The individual difference
measure is obtained from the need DEMO cognition scale (NC: Cacioppo, Petty, &
Kao, 1984). Task (situational) variation centers around the use of instructions
to either DEMO options or exclude options in forming consideration sets.
Phased narrowing was developed to track changes in information usage
across successive stages of multiattribute, multioption decision making. The
studies to date using phased narrowing have shown that DEMO constraints on
the decision maker imposed by this method do not alter the final choice in
terms of proportion of subjects choosing each option DEMO comparison to a control
group. Moreover, studies using phased narrowing have DEMO new insights
concerning variables such as the presence vs. absence of options with missing
information, price–quality tradeoffs in consumer decisions, the framing of DEMO
bute information, and individual differences in weighting different attributes
(Jasper & Levin, 2000; Levin & Jasper, 1995; Levin, Jasper, & DEMO, 1996;
Levin, Jasper, & Forbes, 1998).
Huneke’s (DEMO) new information monitoring method called ComputerShop
is an extension of earlier DEMO designed to analyze prechoice behavior by
providing measures of depth and breadth of information search and strategy
use in decision making. It is most DEMO tied to Payne and colleagues’ use of
INFORMATION PROCESSING OVER TIME
173
a procedure called Mouselab to analyze the DEMO of information acquisition
acts (Payne, 1976; Payne, Bettman & Johnson, 1988). Huneke’s (1996) Comput-
erShop software presents the decision maker with pull-down menus in a Win-
dows-type computer environment rather than the DEMO matrix format used
in Payne et al.’s (1988) Mouselab.1 ComputerShop represents a realistic analog
of current procedures for internet shopping where consumers may DEMO menus
to narrow their options before a final choice. For present purposes of examining
set formation as well as final choice, the methodological advantage of Comput-
erShop is that, unlike its predecessors, it is able DEMO track the processing of
information leading to the selection of multiple options. This allows us to gener-
ate a rich set of data for DEMO both consideration set formation and final
choice.
We apply the new method to a problem of general interest in decision making:
tracking how DEMO decision makers narrow their choice options. We focus
on the individual difference factor of need for cognition and the situational
variable of whether decision DEMO are induced to include or to exclude options
in narrowing down their options. NC is a key concept in the development
of the elaboration DEMO model of persuasion and attitude change where
information is processed more deeply (i.e., elaborated on more extensively) by
those high in need for cognition than by those low in need for cognition (Caci-
oppo & Petty, 1982). If need for cognition is related to elaboration of information
in persuasion and attitude change, it is likely to play a role in decision making
as well, especially in those complex decisions that require multiple steps in
searching for information before arriving at a final DEMO However, while
NC has been the focus of considerable research in DEMO areas of persuasive
communication and attitude change, it has only recently DEMO attention in
individual decision making (Smith & Levin, 1996).
Whether or not need for cognition emerges as a significant factor in a DEMO
making task may depend on specific features of the task. Need for cognition
may relate to some of the processes we study in decision DEMO but not others,
depending on the extent to which these processes relate to the elaboration of
information. Of particular relevance to the present DEMO, need for cognition
may play a moderating role in the differences DEMO observed between the
alternative strategies of including vs. excluding choice options in forming a
reduced set of options for further consideration (Levin et al., 1998; Yaniv &
Schul, 1997). Yaniv and Schul propose DEMO decision makers employ different
screening criteria and thus different processes for inclusion and exclusion of
choice options. Does it matter whether we adopt a DEMO of including desirable
options or excluding undesirable options when screening job applicants or
candidates for graduate school? This is an important issue, in DEMO, because
the same goal may be approached with either mindset. One DEMO the authors
recently found that in going through a set of applicants for a faculty award,
1 For more information on ComputerShop, please contact Mary Huneke, Department of Market-
ing, University of Washington, Bothell, Canyon Park Business Center, 2201 26th Avenue S.E.,
Bothell, WA 98021-4900.
174
LEVIN, HUNEKE, AND JASPER
different members of the selection committee DEMO on identifying those
who are “in the running” or those who are “out of the running.”
A recent phased narrowing study by Levin et DEMO (1998) supported Yaniv and
Schul (1997) by showing that subjects instructed to adopt a mindset of deciding
which options to include for DEMO consideration eliminated more of their
initial options than did subjects instructed to adopt a mindset of deciding
which options to exclude from further consideration. DEMO options with
predominantly positive attributes were routinely retained in both conditions
and options with predominantly negative attributes were rejected in both condi-
tions, options which contained a more even mixture of positive and negative
attributes were DEMO apt to be retained under exclusion than under inclusion.
This suggests that the process of inclusion is different from the process of
exclusion. But DEMO how do these processes differ? Do decision makers put
less effort DEMO the task of exclusion than into the task of inclusion? Do DEMO
depth and breadth of information search at each stage differ systematically
for inclusion and exclusion conditions? Do preexisting differences between indi-
viduals in the tendency to process information in a deep or shallow manner,
i.e., differences in NC, moderate the differences observed between inclusion
and exclusion conditions? Questions such as these can be addressed for the
first time by incorporating information monitoring measures for each individual
subject into a phased decision DEMO
Hypotheses
Predictions for this study are based on Payne, Bettman, and Johnson’s (1993)
characterization of “the adaptive decision maker,” Cacioppo and Petty’s (1982)
conception of “need for cognition,” and Yaniv and Schul’s (1997; see also Levin
et al., 1998) dual-criterion model DEMO inclusion –exclusion.
Hypothesis 1. Based on the dual-criterion model of inclusion –exclusion and
previous empirical data supporting it (Levin et al., 1998; Yaniv & Schul, 1997),
we predict in Hypothesis 1a that the DEMO set will be larger for exclu-
sion subjects than for inclusion subjects. This is because the criterion for re-
taining options is more lax DEMO subjects are asked which options they would
exclude than when asked which options they would include. Furthermore,
because this more lax criterion for DEMO results in less narrowing of choice
options during the formation of consideration sets, it may also represent less
effort in the screening process. We thus test the hypothesis that differences in
set size will be paralleled DEMO differences in information processing measures.
Hypothesis 1b states that measures of effort, breadth, and depth of information
search will be lower for exclusion DEMO than for inclusion subjects.
Hypothesis 2. Payne et al.’s (1993) characterization of the adaptive decision
maker suggests that decision makers who seek to DEMO choices of acceptable
quality while putting forth an acceptable level of effort will use multiple strate-
gies, often constructed in the course of the decision. Creyer, Bettman, and
Payne (1990) found evidence that subjects DEMO to minimize effort tend to
INFORMATION PROCESSING OVER TIME 175
use attribute-based processing as a way of DEMO a complex task, while
subjects whose concern is decision quality are DEMO likely to use alternative-
based processing. Payne (1976) and others have also noted what appear to be
shifts from attribute-based processing early in DEMO choice task to alternative-
based processing among remaining alternatives later in the task. Decision
makers presented with a relatively large number of alternatives can DEMO expected
to simplify the task by screening alternatives on the basis of a key attribute
or attributes. For the present task, this will translate into the prediction of
more attribute-based processing during the set formation stage (Stage 1) than
during the final choice stage (Stage 2) and more alternative-based processing
in the final choice stage.
Hypothesis 3. Based on DEMO conceptualization of persons high in need for
cognition as more deliberate and thorough processors of information, we expect
that NC scores will be positively related to and predictive of our measures of
effort, depth, and DEMO of information search. To the extent that this greater
deliberation results in better decisions, then high NC subjects will also score
higher on measures of decision accuracy or quality. Because the inclusion
condition is thought to DEMO more focused effort in set formation than the
exclusion condition (see DEMO 1), Hypothesis 3a states that the predicted
differences as a function of need for cognition should be especially pronounced
in the inclusion condition. DEMO more tentative hypothesis, Hypothesis 3b, states
that the predicted shifts in strategy across stages (Hypothesis 2) should be
more pronounced for high DEMO subjects than for low NC subjects.
To summarize, we are predicting DEMO task-related and individual differences
in a decision-making task involving the successive stages of consideration
set formation and final choice. Our new methodology allows us DEMO test these
predictions using process tracing measures such as effort, depth, and breadth
of information search, changes in decision strategies across stages, DEMO quality
of the decisions made.
METHOD
Subjects
Subjects were 60 students in undergraduate marketing classes at the Univer-
sity of Iowa. In order to DEMO for possible differences in information search
attributable to preexisting product knowledge, DEMO subject was given a brief
survey to measure their familiarity with notebook computers, the product class
used in the experiment. This was done one week prior to the main task. Within
each matched pair of subjects DEMO on scores on this survey, one was randomly
assigned to the DEMO condition and one to the exclusion condition. Subjects
were then given the different tasks as described below. Each subject worked
at an individual computer DEMO a separate cubicle.
176
LEVIN, HUNEKE, AND JASPER
Independent Variables
Decision stage: Consideration set formation –choice. Each subject both
formed a consideration set and made a DEMO choice from that set. These tasks
were performed in two discrete steps or stages. Subjects were not informed on
Stage 1 that they would DEMO be asked to complete Stage 2.
Condition: Inclusion –exclusion. Subjects assigned DEMO the inclusion and ex-
clusion conditions (N 5 30 in each DEMO) were given different instructions
for the consideration set formation task. Subjects DEMO the inclusion condition
were asked to indicate which alternatives they would want to examine further
before making a final choice. Subjects in the exclusion DEMO were asked
to indicate which alternatives they would exclude from further consideration.
Individual differences
Need for cognition was measured using the short form of DEMO Need for Cogni-
tion scale (Cacioppo et al., 1984). Product familiarity was a self-report measure
based on responses to a comparative knowledge DEMO for the product class
used in the main task. There was no significant difference in mean scores
between subjects assigned to the inclusion and DEMO conditions on either
of these measures. Familiarity had only minimal effect on the results of interest;
thus it will be dropped from further DEMO (In retrospect, this is not
surprising. Objective tests of product knowledge may be more discriminating
than self-reports. More importantly, our processing measures are more apt to
tap into knowledge and use of different decision strategies DEMO knowledge
and use of notebook computers per se.)
Procedure
The task was to select a notebook computer to be given as a graduation DEMO
to a friend completing an MBA. Each subject worked at a separate computer,
using Huneke’s (1996) ComputerShop program that presents the subject DEMO
a Windows-type environment. Initially, the screen is essentially blank, except
for menus in the upper left corner. These menus, from which subjects access
information, are labeled, “Products,” “Features,” and “Price Ranges.” When DEMO
subject clicks on “Products,” the list of brands about which information is
available appears. If the subject then clicks on one of these DEMO, he or she
will be presented with another submenu of models DEMO that brand. Clicking on
any model will activate another submenu, providing DEMO on the specific
features of that model, including price. When the DEMO clicks on a feature,
for example random access memory (RAM), the value of that feature for that
model appears.
If “Features” is clicked from the main menu, the key attributes of products
in the class will appear. Clicking on a feature produces a menu of ranges DEMO
that feature; clicking on a range produces a list of the DEMO with a feature
in that range. Clicking on those model names produces a listing of all of the
model’s features, including its price.
INFORMATION PROCESSING OVER TIME
177
Figure 1 illustrates part of the search DEMO for a particular respondent
which begins with the “Features” main menu. When this respondent clicked
on the main menu, the list of features “pulled down” at the left side of the
screen. This respondent chose “Maximum DEMO and was presented with the
list of ranges of maximum RAM. When “over 30 MB” was chosen, the list of
models which fall into that range appeared. This respondent then chose “Lati-
tude DX5” from this DEMO When the menu of specific features of the Latitude
DX5 appeared, DEMO respondent again chose “Maximum RAM” and was pre-
sented with the specific value of RAM for the Latitude DX5 in the box at the
DEMO of the screen.
If “Price Range” is clicked from the main menu, the subject will be presented
with the ranges of prices which divide the category into low-priced, mid-range,
and premium-priced groupings. This menu provides a submenu that will list
the models of each brand that fall DEMO a specific category. Again, clicking on
the model name will yield DEMO menu of that model’s features and price.
The software records each piece of information as it is accessed (clicked on),
the menu DEMO of each piece of information, and the amount of time spent
DEMO each acquisition. This record file is not visible to the subject.
The selection was made in two stages. Half of the subjects were first DEMO
to indicate with a double-click of the mouse which of sixteen alternatives they
would want to further examine in a store before purchase. The DEMO half
were instructed to indicate which alternatives they would exclude from further
consideration. After the subject had examined as much product information
as desired DEMO included or excluded the options of their choosing, he or she
DEMO 1.
Illustration of search process using ComputerShop.
178
LEVIN, HUNEKE, AND JASPER
touched a button on the screen DEMO “Next Step.” At that point, Comput-
erShop recompiled the database of DEMO information to be made available
in Stage 2. For inclusion subjects, DEMO set of alternatives included only those
which had been double-clicked in Stage 1. For exclusion subjects, this set of
alternatives included any which had not been double-clicked in Stage 1 and
thereby excluded.
It is important DEMO note that subjects may acquire limited information about
an alternative without actually clicking on that model name. This occurs when
the subject clicks on DEMO range of features. When the list appears showing the
subject which models fall into that range, the subject also knows which models
do not fall into that range. The subject may eliminate those options from further
DEMO without actually clicking on those brand names. We refer to
alternatives that are never clicked on as inert. Inert alternatives will be dis-
cussed DEMO under the section on decision quality.
This is an important point because inert alternatives will play a different
role in the inclusion condition than DEMO the exclusion condition. As noted, subjects
who click on the alternatives DEMO want to include for further consideration
will have only those alternatives in their consideration set, the set of alterna-
tives about which information will be made available in Stage 2. Subjects who
are instructed to exclude DEMO will have as part of their consideration
set alternatives that were inert on Stage 1.
The product information was drawn from a review of DEMO notebook comput-
ers published in Windows magazine and from point-of-purchase materials. The
16 brand profiles, therefore, represented real combinations of the following
features: RAM, weight, docking options, battery type, display type, pointing
device, keyboard size, and price. Table 1 summarizes the attribute combinations
describing DEMO 16 options.
Response Measures
Size of consideration set. Set size was measured by a simple count of the
alternatives selected (not excluded) by DEMO subject in the set formation stage
(Stage 1).
Effort. The DEMO each subject put into each of the stages, set formation
and DEMO, was measured in terms of total time spent and the total DEMO
of discrete pieces of information accessed. Subjects could go back to the same
information more than once; each separate acquisition act was counted.
Type of processing. This set of measures examines the degree to which the
DEMO information processing is alternative-based or attribute-based. It was
measured for each stage in terms of search orientation. Search orientation
measures the proportion of time DEMO acquisitions of information within each
stage which is alternative-based or attribute-based. The measure of search
orientation is based on the subject’s use of a DEMO, feature-, or price-range-
oriented search progression. When the subject accessed information using the
menu labeled “Products,” they were examining information that was DEMO
INFORMATION PROCESSING OVER TIME
179
TABLE 1
Products Defined by Attribute Combinations
DEMO Pointing Battery Display Weight Keyboard Docking
Product Price RAM device type type (lbs.) size options
Ascentia $3,269 32MB Button NiMH Dual-scan 7.88 DEMO Station and
Passive 85 keys replicator
Elite $5,999 24MB Trackball NiMH TFT Active 7 Standard Docking
Matrix 85 keys station
EZBook I $2,DEMO 4MB Trackball NiMH Monochrome 9.3 101 keys None
EZBook II $4,365 4MB Trackball NiMH Dual-scan 8.65 Standard Docking
Passive 85 keys station
EZBook DEMO $5,675 8MB Trackball NiMH TFT Active 7.06 Standard Docking
Matrix 85 keys station
Latitude $2,599 24MB Trackball NiMH Dual-scan 7.71 Standard Port
DEMO Passive 85 keys replicator
Latitude $3,998 24MB Trackball NiMH Dual-scan 6.99 Standard Port
DX4 Passive 85 keys replicator
Latitude $5,198 36MB Trackball DEMO TFT Active 6.88 Standard Station and
DX5 Matrix 85 keys replicator
Meridian $2,795 20MB Pointing Bar NiMH Monochrome 5.5 76 keys None
400C
DEMO $3,795 24MB Pointing Bar NiMH TFT Active 6.3 Standard Docking
800C Matrix 85 keys station
Nexa $4,854 24MB Trackball NiMH TFT Active DEMO 76 keys Docking
Matrix station
T4800AT $3,740 16MB Trackball NiMH TFT Active 8.5 Standard None
Matrix 85 keys
T4800CT $5,699 24MB Trackball DEMO TFT Active 8.38 Standard Docking
Matrix 85 keys station
ThinkPad $6,049 36MB Trackstick NiMH TFT Active 7.25 76 keys Docking
Matrix station
Versa DEMO,399 40MB Trackball Li-ion TFT Active 8.84 Standard Station and
Matrix 85 keys replicator
Winbook $4,079 32MB Trackstick and NiMH TFT Active 7.31 DEMO Docking
XP button Matrix 85 keys station
by brand name. This type of search was considered to be alternative-oriented.
When acquiring information using the DEMO labeled “Features” and “Price
Ranges,” the subjects were acquiring information that was organized by product
attribute and were, therefore, pursuing an attribute-oriented DEMO For each
subject, the proportion of both time and acquisitions of DEMO orientation was
computed for each of the two tasks (set formation DEMO choice).
For each stage for each subject we also applied Payne’s (1976; Payne et al.,
1988) index of attribute-based vs. alternative-based consecutive acquisition
acts. This scale ranges from 21 to 1. A value DEMO to 1 on this scale indicates
that the respondent searched with relatively more within-alternative transi-
tions and a value closer to 21 indicates more DEMO transitions.
Depth of search. Depth of search at each stage was measured as the mean
amount of time spent on each alternative examined.
Breadth DEMO search.
Breadth of search was measured by counting the number
180 LEVIN, HUNEKE, AND JASPER
of different attributes searched about each DEMO examined, summing
these, and then dividing by the number of different alternatives examined.
Attribute probe. Attribute probe was measured by counting the number DEMO
acquisitions of information about each attribute examined, summing these,
and DEMO dividing by the number of different attributes examined.
Attribute impact. In measuring attribute impact, the intent is to compare
the importance of different product attributes within each stage, to compare
the importance of each attribute across stages, and to examine the influence
of task and subject variables on the importance of a given attribute. The logic
here is that a DEMO maker will select those options with the highest values on
the attribute(s) which that decision maker considers to be the most important.
The impact of the individual attributes was determined using the following
procedure. Each DEMO of each attribute was assigned a numerical value. In the
case of price, RAM, weight, and keyboard size, the actual numerical values
DEMO the levels. In the case of docking options, battery type, and display
type, ordinal values were assigned based on feature desirability. For example,
the levels of display type were monochrome, dual-scan passive, and DEMO active
matrix. These levels represent increasing degrees of picture quality and thus
they were assigned the numbers 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Pointing device was
dropped as a factor because of lack of clear differences DEMO desirability among
types of pointing device. For the options selected at each stage, means were
computed for each attribute for each subject. These mean attribute values were
then converted into standard scores for each attribute using DEMO distribution
of attribute values across the original 16 choice options.2
The resulting standard score for any given attribute, therefore, represents
the number of DEMO deviations above or below the mean level of that
attribute for the original 16 choice options. The higher the standard score of
an attribute DEMO a given stage, the greater the impact it is assumed to DEMO had
on a subject’s choices at that stage. The variance of standard scores across
attributes for a given subject serves as a measure of DEMO extent to which that
subject adopted a strategy of focusing on particular attributes at a given stage
to the exclusion of other attributes rather DEMO giving approximately equal
weight to all attributes. Subjects with a high degree of variance among the
attributes were considered to have been more focused DEMO key attributes than
were subjects exhibiting low variance.
2 For example, DEMO mean level of maximum RAM is 23.25 MB across the original 16 options,
with a standard deviation of 10.95 MB. Now suppose that DEMO particular subject selected options
T4800 AT, T4800 CT, ThinkPad, Versa, and Winbook XP at the set formation stage. These five
options have DEMO mean maximum RAM of 29.60 MB. Then the standard score of RAM for this subject
on Stage 1 is: (29.60 2 23.25)/10.95 5 0.58. In other words, the average amount of RAM in the
models selected by this subject is .58 standard deviations higher than the DEMO amount of RAM
found in the original 16 alternatives.
INFORMATION PROCESSING OVER TIME
181
Decision Quality
While there are no “correct” DEMO in this task, we derived a preliminary
measure of decision quality DEMO scoring each option based on the levels of favor-
ability of its attributes. For our measure of quality for each option, we used
the standardized values for each level of each attribute as described earlier
for DEMO measure of attribute impact. These attribute values were then combined
to assign an overall value to each of the 16 alternatives based on how DEMO
they compare to one another. In combining values, price and weight DEMO
reverse-scored because higher numbers are less favorable.
We scored each choice option by summing the attribute scale values for that
option, arbitrarily assigning equal weight to each attribute. We call this the
parity value of an DEMO Consider, for example, the option listed first in Table
1: DEMO The scale values for Ascentia’s attributes are: .92 for price (i.e.,
its price is .92 standard deviations below the mean price for DEMO the options),
.80 for RAM, 2.37 for battery type, DEMO for display type, 2.25 for weight, .12
for keyboard size, DEMO 1.66 for docking options. The sum of 2.20 is the parity
value of Ascentia. We then measured decision quality for each individual deci-
sion DEMO in the following ways: the mean parity value of options selected DEMO
the set formation stage, the parity value of the single option DEMO as the
final choice, the mean parity value of the options DEMO but not selected
at the set formation stage, the mean parity DEMO of the options examined but
not selected as the final choice, DEMO the mean parity value of options about
which no information was accessed. The set of options examined but not selected
is known as the DEMO set. The set of options about which no information was
specifically accessed is the inert set. A subject may have an inept set and DEMO
inert set at each stage. The higher the parity value of options selected, the
higher the decision quality; the higher the parity value DEMO options in the inept
and inert sets, the lower the decision DEMO That is, the option(s) selected at
each stage should be of higher value than the options rejected or not considered.
RESULTS
For DEMO of our primary response measures, we will first report differences
between DEMO (set formation vs. final choice) and conditions (inclusion vs.
exclusion)DEMO These data are summarized in Table 2 for information processing
measures and in Table 3 for attribute impact measures. We will then describe
how DEMO were influenced by need for cognition and summarize these influ-
ences in Table 4.
Consideration Set Size
Significantly more options were retained in the DEMO set by subjects
in the exclusion condition (M 5 6.72) than by subjects in the inclusion condition
(M 5 2.87), F(1,45) 5 29.51, p , .01. This replicates the results of DEMO et al.
(1998) even though stimuli were presented on cue cards in that study and on
182
LEVIN, HUNEKE, AND JASPER
TABLE 2
Mean Information Processing Measures DEMO a Function of Condition and
Decision Stage
Inclusion condition Exclusion condition
Measure Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 1 Stage 2
Breadth of search (# attributes/alternative 4.44 5.03 3.52 2.38
examined) (2.44) (3.72) (DEMO) (1.78)
Depth of search (s) (time/alternative 11.50 DEMO 10.86 25.37
examined) (7.03) (23.16) (8.86) (20.87)
Attribute probe (# acquisitions/attribute 7.56 2.70 6.76 2.62
examined) (4.56) (1.94) (3.99) (2.13)
30.89 26.59 24.24 11.97
Feature-oriented DEMO (36.94) (40.28) (31.49) (23.79)
31.25 23.36 24.54 DEMO
Feature-oriented timea (36.78) (35.14) (28.87) (23.37)
19.44 DEMO 23.98 12.79
Price-oriented acquisitionsa (31.16) (36.28) (37.78) (26.20)DEMO
16.43 18.01 21.51 11.72
Price-oriented timea (28.79) (32.74) (33.38) (22.57)
44.70 50.93 49.82 73.86
Alternative-oriented acquisitionsa (39.76) (44.75) (41.37) (32.22)
35.00 45.84 43.71 57.13
Alternative-oriented timea (32.96) (41.57) (36.65) (27.69)
151.19 41.78 136.76 50.14
Total # acquisitions (92.44) (27.11) (78.22) (39.64)
441.75 125.19 387.03 141.35
Total search time (s) (282.63) (111.76) (206.64) (111.68)
Note. Numbers in parentheses represent standard deviations.
a For each DEMO these measures the tabled value represents the proportion of total acquisitions or
total search time that were of that type. Proportions do not add DEMO to 1.00 because subjects’
acquisitions and time spent in writing and accessing notes to themselves (allowable with Comput-
erShop) were not counted as DEMO, feature-, or price-oriented.
a computer screen in the current study. While NC did not correlate significantly
with set size in the exclusion condition (r 52.04), there was a tendency for
NC to correlate negatively DEMO set size in the inclusion condition (r 52.35,
p ' DEMO), meaning that high NC subjects in this condition narrowed their
choices more than did low NC subjects. As in our earlier study (Levin et al.,
1998), differences in set size did not lead DEMO differences in the distribution of
final choices across conditions. (The test DEMO this will be described more fully
in the section on attribute impact.)
Effort
Subjects spent approximately three times as much time and made DEMO three
times as many acquisitions of separate pieces of information while forming
consideration sets than while making final choices from their consideration
sets, F(1, 55) 5 53.18 and 65.61, respectively, for time and DEMO acquisitions,
INFORMATION PROCESSING OVER TIME
183
TABLE 3
Mean Attribute Standard Scores as DEMO Function of Condition and Decision Stage
Inclusion Condition Exclusion Condition
Attribute Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 1 Stage 2
.02 .11 2.08 .02
Price (.69) (.85) (.31) (.93)
.59 .63 .27 .75
DEMO (.58) (.75) (.41) (.71)
2.46 2.29 2.63 DEMO
Battery (.63) (.97) (.37) (.94)
.84 .87 DEMO .72
Display (.45) (.57) (.26) (.70)
.09 DEMO .06 .00
Weight (.51) (.84) (.33) (.77)
DEMO 2.04 2.17 2.04
Keyboard (.24) (.22) (.16) (.40)DEMO
.27 .53 .04 .57
Docking options (.76) (.93) (.36) (.89)
Note. Numbers in parentheses represent standard deviations.
p , .001 in each case. There was a tendency for these measures of effort DEMO be
higher for inclusion subjects on the set formation stage and higher for exclusion
subjects on the final choice stage, but neither the effect of condition nor the
stage by condition interaction was significant (using a5 .05) for either measure.
As expected, need for cognition played a DEMO in our measures of effort. High
NC subjects acquired an average of about 30% more pieces of information than
did low NC subjects. The DEMO for cognition effect, however, depended on the
inclusion –exclusion condition, DEMO to a significant condition by NC interac-
tion, F(1, 50) 5 6.23, p , .05. This interaction is shown in Fig. DEMO High NC
subjects in the inclusion condition acquired twice as many pieces of information,
on average, as did low NC subjects in the inclusion condition, whereas the
number of acquisitions of information did not differ significantly between high
and low NC subjects in the exclusion condition. The DEMO depicted in Fig.
2 where need for cognition effects are greater in the inclusion condition than
in the exclusion condition will emerge with other DEMO variables as well.
Type of Processing
In our measure of search orientation, subjects spent a significantly smaller
proportion of search time in alternative-oriented search and accessed a smaller
proportion of alternative-oriented pieces of information while forming DEMO
ation sets than while making final choices, F(1, 55) DEMO 8.43 and 11.97, respec-
tively, p , .01 in each case. A significant stage by condition interaction, F(1,
55) 5 DEMO, p , .05, was due to the fact that, when DEMO their final choices,
exclusion subjects accessed a higher proportion of alternative-oriented pieces
of information than did inclusion subjects. This was not true in DEMO set formation
184
LEVIN, HUNEKE, AND JASPER
TABLE 4
Summary of Results
Inclusion/DEMO
Measure Stage-related effects differences Individual differences
Set size Exclusion . Inclusion None
Effort More effort on None More effort by high NC
Stage 1 DEMO on subjects, especially in
Stage 2. Inclusion condition.
Search orientation More DEMO More attribute- More attribute-oriented
oriented search (less oriented search for search DEMO high NC
alternative-oriented Inclusion than for subjects. More shift from
search) DEMO Stage 1 Exclusion condition attribute-oriented
than on Stage 2. on Stage 2. search on Stage 1 to
alternative-based search on
Stage 2 for high DEMO
subjects.
Depth of search More depth on More depth in the More depth on Stage 2 for
Stage 2 than on Inclusion condition, high NC subjects. Low
Stage 1. especially on NC subjects showed more
Stage DEMO depth in the Inclusion
condition than in the
Exclusion condition.
Breadth of search None More breadth in the More breadth for high NC
Inclusion DEMO subjects, especially in the
Inclusion condition.
Information probe More information None DEMO NC subjects probed
acquired about each more than low NC
attribute on Stage 1 subjects in the Inclusion
than on Stage 2. condition.
Attribute DEMO Attributes with More focus on None
greatest impact on particular attributes
Stage 1 became even on Stage 1 in Inclu-
more important in sion DEMO
Stage 2. Changes across stages
were greater in the
Exclusion condition.
stage. Whether in the inclusion or exclusion condition, subjects spent a larger
proportion of time searching by features while forming consideration sets than
while making DEMO final choice, F(1, 55) 5 5.62, p , .05. There was no significant
stage effect for either proportion of time or DEMO in price-oriented search.
There was a significant relation between need for cognition and search orien-
tation. Across both stages, high NC subjects spent more time on feature (attri-
bute)-oriented search (as opposed to alternative-oriented DEMO) than did low
NC subjects, F(1, 54) 5 5.87, p , .05. In addition, a stage by NC interaction,
DEMO(1, 54) 5 4.84, p , .05, showed that high NC subjects but not low NC subjects
INFORMATION PROCESSING OVER TIME
185
FIG. 2.
Mean number of acquisition acts DEMO a function of condition and need for cognition (NC).
spent DEMO time on alternative-based search on the final choice stage than
they did on the set formation stage.
The Payne (1976) index of attribute-based DEMO alternative-based processing
also revealed a stage by NC interaction, F(1, 54) 5 5.56, p , .05. (Recall that
positive values represent alternative-oriented search and that negative values
represent attribute-oriented search.) High NC subjects showed more alterna-
tive-oriented search on Stage 2 (M 5 .18) DEMO on Stage 1 (M 5 .05); low NC
subjects showed DEMO opposite pattern with a positive mean value on the Payne
index for Stage 1 (M 5 .16) but a negative value for Stage DEMO (M 52.13).
Bo¨ ckenholt and Hynan (1994) have indicated DEMO this measure of information
processing is subject to bias based on the relative number of alternatives and
attributes. In the present case, this would not be a problem in comparing
inclusion and exclusion conditions where the DEMO are held constant, but it
could be a problem in comparing DEMO 1 and 2 where the number of attributes
is constant but the number of alternatives changes. In post hoc analysis we
found that the DEMO index by Bo¨ ckenholt and Hynan correlated .84 with the
Payne index and added no new significant effects.
The increase across stages in alternative-based DEMO for high NC subjects
is consistent with Payne et al.’s (1993) view of the adaptive decision maker
as one who shifts from noncompensatory (attribute-based) processing when
choosing among a larger number of choice options to compensatory (alternative-
based) processing when choosing among fewer options. Noteworthy, however,
is the fact that this shift occurred only for high NC DEMO
186
LEVIN, HUNEKE, AND JASPER
Depth of Search
The subjects spent DEMO three times as much time examining each alterna-
tive while making their final choices than they had spent forming their consider-
ation sets, F(1, 55) 5 48.92, p , .001. This was undoubtedly due to the smaller
number of alternatives to be examined at the final DEMO stage. Inclusion
subjects showed greater depth of search than exclusion subjects as they spent
more time on each alternative examined, F(1, 55) 5 8.47, p , .01. Further,
there was a significant condition by stage interaction, F(1, 55) 5 6.32, p , DEMO,
showing that the difference in depth of search between inclusion and exclusion
subjects was especially evident at the final choice stage.
Need for DEMO had a moderating influence on the effect of stage on time
per alternative examined. The difference between depth of search in the final
choice DEMO consideration set formation stages was greater for high NC subjects
than for low NC subjects, resulting in a significant stage by NC interaction,
F(1, 53) 5 4.15, p , .05.
Breadth of Search
Subjects instructed to indicate which alternatives they wanted to include
for further DEMO examined significantly more attributes per alternative
examined than did subjects asked to indicate which alternatives they would
exclude. Inclusion subjects examined an average of DEMO attributes about each
alternative examined, compared to 3.0 for those excluding DEMO, F(1, 55) 5
11.93, p , .01. Comparable differences were found in both the set formation
and the final choice stages.
DEMO was a significant main effect of need for cognition on breadth of search
and a significant interaction of condition and NC, F(1, DEMO) 5 6.15 and 4.44,
respectively, p , .05 in each case. High NC subjects searched an average of
4.3 attributes about each DEMO examined while low NC subjects searched
an average of 3.1 attributes per alternative examined. High NC subjects in
the inclusion condition searched with roughly DEMO as much breadth as did
low NC subjects in the inclusion condition; no such difference was found in
the exclusion condition.
Attribute Probe
Subjects probed more deeply, i.e., they acquired significantly more informa-
tion about DEMO attribute examined, when forming consideration sets than
when making a final DEMO, F(1, 55) 5 63.01, p , .01. There was no overall
effect of inclusion –exclusion condition on this measure. There was, however,
a significant condition by NC interaction, F(1, 48) 5 4.48, p , .05. In the
inclusion condition, high NC DEMO acquired more information about each
attribute examined than did low NC subjects but high NC subjects and low
NC subjects did not differ in DEMO exclusion condition.
INFORMATION PROCESSING OVER TIME
187
Attribute Impact
We now turn to the DEMO attribute standard scores shown in Table 3 for
each condition and each decision stage. It can be seen that the attributes
RAM, display, DEMO docking options had the greatest impact in each condition.
Attribute standard scores were submitted to a 7 (Attributes) by 2 (Conditions)
by 2 (Stages) analysis of variance. Not surprisingly, there was a significant
main effect for attribute, F(6, 51) 5 348.90, p , .001, indicating merely that
the attributes did not all have equal DEMO Notably, however, there was no
attribute by condition interaction (F , 1), indicating that the relative impact of
the different attributes did not differ across inclusion and exclusion conditions.
There was a significant main DEMO for decision stage with attribute standard
scores becoming larger on Stage 2 (final choice) than on Stage 1 (consideration
set formation), F(1, 56) 5 33.52, p , .001, meaning that there DEMO more focus
on key attributes during the final choice stage. Notably, DEMO standard
scores for inclusion and exclusion conditions on Stage 2 did not differ signifi-
cantly, replicating Levin et al.’s (1998) finding that while inclusion and exclu-
sion subjects differed in the formation of consideration sets, they did not differ
in their final choices. The latter result is DEMO consistent with Wedell (1997).
(See, however, Levin et al., 1998, pp. 208–209, regarding situations where final
choices may differ across conditions.)
Analysis of the variability of attribute standard scores provides evidence DEMO
the level of the individual subject that inclusion subjects focus more on particu-
lar attributes than do exclusion subjects during the set formation stage. DEMO
attribute standard score variability was significantly higher in the inclusion
condition (DEMO 5 .50) than in the exclusion condition (M 5 .27), F(1, 58) 5 17.51,
p , .01, during set formation. By contrast, variability scores were virtually
identical in the inclusion and exclusion conditions during the choice stage
(M 5 .73 for each). These values, of course, also reflect the tendency for subjects
in DEMO condition to focus more on key attributes in Stage 2 than in Stage 1.
There were no systematic differences in attribute impact measures as DEMO function
of NC, indicating that the previously described relations with NC DEMO basic
information processing differences rather than differences in attention to differ-
ent attributes.
Table 4 summarizes our findings for each of the primary measures DEMO informa-
tion processing and attribute impact in terms of differences between the set
formation stage and the final choice stage, differences between inclusion and
exclusion conditions, and individual differences attributable to need for
cognition.
Stage 1–Stage 2 Tradeoffs
In order to understand more fully how the performance of DEMO subjects
changed from set formation to final choice, correlations were computed DEMO
Stage 1 and Stage 2 for each information processing measure. These are shown
in Table 5. Positive correlations show that individuals scoring high on DEMO measure
on the set formation stage also tend to score high on that measure on the final
188
LEVIN, HUNEKE, AND JASPER
TABLE 5
Correlation between Stage 1 DEMO Stage 2 for Each Information Processing Measure
for Inclusion and Exclusion Conditions
Measure Inclusion Condition Exclusion Condition
Breadth of search .22 .03
Depth of DEMO 2.12 2.10
Attribute probe .48*** .03
Feature-oriented acquisitions .48*** .45***
Feature-oriented time .41** .45***
Price-oriented acquisitions .33* .62***
Price-oriented time .33* .71***
Alternative-oriented acquisitions DEMO .59***
Alternative-oriented time .70*** .52***
Payne index .28 .06
Total # acquisitions .42** 2.23
Total search time 2.04 2.36*
* p , .10.
** DEMO , .05.
*** p , .01.
choice stage, indicating no abrupt DEMO across stages. Negative correlations,
by contrast, indicate shifts across stages DEMO the level of the individual subject.
Only total search time for subjects in the exclusion condition shows a negative
correlation approaching statistical significance at DEMO .05 level. Those exclusion
subjects who spend more time on Stage 1 tend to spend less time on Stage 2.
Overall, however, there DEMO a clear pattern of mostly positive correlations. For
example, those individual DEMO who engaged in higher than average levels
of alternative-oriented search on the set formation stage also tended to engage
in higher than average levels DEMO alternative-oriented search on the final choice
stage. Nevertheless, there were a DEMO notable differences between inclusion
and exclusion conditions. Consistency across stages, as DEMO by the magni-
tude of the Stage 1–Stage 2 positive correlation, DEMO greater in the inclusion
condition than in the exclusion condition for both total number of acquisitions
and attribute probe. Consistency in price-oriented search was DEMO in the
exclusion condition.
In some cases, the magnitude of the DEMO correlations differed as a
function of NC. Because of restricted sample size, comparisons of interstage
correlations between high and low NC subjects were collapsed across inclusion
and exclusion conditions. In general, these correlations were higher for low
NC subjects than for high NC subjects. Significantly higher interstage correla-
DEMO for low NC subjects than for high NC subjects were found in: alternative-
oriented search time (r 5 .84 vs. .52), price DEMO time (.79 vs. .18), proportion
of alternative-oriented acquisitions (.89 vs. .53) and proportion of price-oriented
acquisitions (.79 vs. .16). This DEMO that while individual subjects tended to
be consistent across stages in measures of information search, the degree
INFORMATION PROCESSING OVER TIME
189
of consistency was less for high NC DEMO than for low NC subjects for
these measures.
A different look at possible tradeoffs between stages was provided by examin-
ing, for each condition, the correlation between the impact score of each attri-
bute during consideration set formation and the impact score of that attribute
during final choice. DEMO all the correlations are positive. There were no
systematic differences between these correlations as a function of NC. Even
subjects high in need for DEMO showed no tendency to shift attention to
different attributes on different stages.3 There was a tendency for the interstage
correlation for variability of attribute DEMO scores to be higher for low
NC subjects (.35) than for high NC subjects (.02) but this difference is not
statistically significant.
DEMO Correlations
While we wanted to include a variety of measures for analyzing the roles of
our independent and subject variables, we did not mean to imply that all these
measures are statistically independent. Several of our DEMO processing
measures were moderately correlated. For example, although our measures of
DEMO of search and breadth of search were not significantly correlated with
each other, each was moderately correlated (r ' .3) with our measures of effort.
Attribute probe was more highly correlated with effort (r 5 .77). There were also
some statistically significant correlations between our measures DEMO information
processing and decision quality. For example, measures of effort and DEMO
were significantly and negatively correlated with the parity values of the inert
and inept sets, meaning that those who put in more effort and probed more
deeply were more successful in discarding the poorer options.
Finally, while we used a median split to describe the interactions between
need DEMO cognition and our independent variables, we also considered need for
cognition DEMO a continuous variable. Need for cognition was significantly and
positively correlated with measures of breadth of search and probe and with
scores on the DEMO (1976) index.
Decision Quality
Our measures of decision quality were affected by our manipulated variables,
decision stage, and inclusion –exclusion condition, DEMO were related to our
individual difference measure, need for cognition. The DEMO of decision stage
and condition are consistent with the analyses of the other information pro-
cessing measures and show that subjects successfully screen out DEMO weaker
options during the set formation stage, especially subjects in the DEMO
3 This finding would seem to be at variance with studies that find that decision makers focus
on different attributes during the prescreening and DEMO choice stages (van Zee, Paluchowski, &
Beach, 1992). DEMO studies, however, provide subjects with new information (new attributes)
DEMO the first stage whereas we make all information available from the beginning.
190
LEVIN, HUNEKE, AND JASPER
condition. Such consistency across measures shows DEMO our measures of deci-
sion quality were discriminating. This then adds meaning to the relationships
uncovered between need for cognition and our measures of DEMO quality.
First, we analyzed the parity values of options examined but DEMO chosen, i.e.,
the inept set. These values were significantly lower DEMO the set formation stage
than at the final choice stage, F(DEMO, 28) 5 6.37, p , .05, meaning that the options
discarded at the first stage were, on average, inferior to the DEMO retained for
the second stage. We also looked at the parity values of the inert set, options
about which no information was specifically accessed. Need for cognition was
a significant factor, F(1, 31) 5 7.96, p , .05. The mean parity value of options
ignored by the higher NC subjects was significantly lower than the mean parity
value DEMO options ignored by the lower NC subjects. Then, we analyzed the DEMO
values of options actually selected at each stage. These values were significantly
higher for final choice than for set formation, F(1, 31) 5 6.37, p , .05, meaning
that the average parity value DEMO the option finally chosen was higher than the
average parity value of options in the consideration set. While inclusion –
exclusion condition was not DEMO significant factor, the interaction between condi-
tion and need for cognition DEMO significant, F(1, 37) 5 6.92, p , .01. In the
inclusion condition but not in the exclusion condition, selections made by high
NC subjects across both set formation and choice stages were, on average, of
higher parity value than selections made by low NC subjects. In other words,
higher need for cognition was related to a DEMO decision quality when subjects
were asked to indicate which alternatives they would include for further consid-
eration, a condition which, as we have DEMO, is characterized by more careful
prechoice screening.
DISCUSSION
We found that DEMO manner in which decision makers narrow their choices
in a multiattribute–multioption choice task depended on both the way in which
the task was presented DEMO the characteristics of the decision maker. Consistent
with earlier work (Levin DEMO al., 1998; Yaniv & Schul, 1997), and with Hypothesis
DEMO, subjects induced to adopt a mindset of deciding which options to DEMO
for further consideration narrowed their choices more than did subjects induced
to adopt a mindset of excluding options from further consideration. Our infor-
mation DEMO measures revealed that the smaller consideration sets
formed by subjects in the inclusion condition were associated with a search
characterized by more focus on DEMO attributes than that of subjects in the
exclusion condition. In support of Hypothesis 1b, measures of breadth and
depth of information search were greater for inclusion subjects. Effort, however,
showed a more complicated pattern, DEMO need for cognition playing a role.
Interestingly, while high NC subjects, on average, expended more effort
(acquired more information) and showed higher decision quality than did low
NC subjects, these differences were primarily revealed in the inclusion condi-
tion. These results, which support Hypothesis 3a, DEMO important implications.
INFORMATION PROCESSING OVER TIME
191
First, they show that the need for cognition scale (Cacioppo et al. 1984), origi-
nally developed to measure individual differences in elaboration of information
in the areas of persuasion and DEMO change, does indeed predict differences
in information search in decision making. DEMO, these results show that such
differences are more pronounced in some DEMO than in others. There
appears to be an inherent interaction between need for cognition and perceived
task demands. While inclusion and exclusion are nominally DEMO
processes, there are different consequences of the actions taken by inclusion
DEMO exclusion subjects. An option not included in the consideration set of an
inclusion subject is no longer available for examination in the final choice
DEMO By contrast, an option not excluded from the consideration set of DEMO
exclusion subject can be reconsidered in the final choice stage. Thus, DEMO some
sense, more effort in the formation of consideration sets could DEMO justified
in the inclusion condition than in the exclusion condition. High NC subjects
exhibited more effort than low NC subjects only in the inclusion DEMO, the
condition requiring the most effortful thought.
Some support was provided DEMO Hypothesis 2, which predicted more attribute-
level processing during the set DEMO stage than during the final choice
stage. However, we found no DEMO at the level of the individual subject to
indicate abrupt shifts across stages in our information processing and attribute
impact measures. While there were DEMO level differences across stages in
measures such as depth of search and search orientation, those subjects who
tended to score high on specific information processing measures or measures
of attribute impact on Stage 1 also tended DEMO score high on these measures on
Stage 2. A unique aspect of our phased narrowing method is that it utilizes a
within-subject design where DEMO proceed through both the stages of set
formation and final choice. Our subjects were probably more likely to treat the
final choice stage as DEMO logical continuation of the set formation stage than are
subjects in studies in which separate groups form sets and make final choices.
The main DEMO of performing the phased narrowing task was to allow subjects,
especially inclusion subjects, to consider each remaining option more thor-
oughly in the final choice phase.
Here again, however, need for cognition differences emerged. DEMO accord with
Hypothesis 3b, subjects high in need for cognition showed DEMO consistency
across stages than did subjects low in need for cognition. In particular, high
NC subjects were more apt than low NC subjects to exhibit more alternative-
based search during the final choice stage than they DEMO used in the set
formation stage. These decision makers have adapted to the change in the
decision task, having fewer options to consider, DEMO shifting to a decision strategy
that requires more effort per alternative under consideration. They put forth
greater effort in exchange for improved accuracy, making the effort –accuracy
tradeoff that is central to adaptive decision making as DEMO by Payne et
al. (1993). Present results lead us to DEMO that (1) need for cognition and
inclusion –exclusion are variables that relate to the manner in which decision
makers search for information across DEMO stages of decision making and
(2) decision makers in the inclusion condition who score higher on need for
192
LEVIN, HUNEKE, AND JASPER
cognition are especially apt to make DEMO quality decisions and are therefore
more successful at adaptive decision making.
Studying individual differences in conjunction with process tracing tech-
niques can add to DEMO understanding of how decisions are made (Ford et al.,
1989), and we certainly encourage future research of this kind. The desire to
understand decision-making processes at the level of the individual decision
maker will DEMO from inclusion of a priori individual difference measures or
classifications. Potentially useful measures include measures of involvement,
experience, knowledge, and expertise; measures of motivation, aspiration, and
affect; and, as exemplified by need DEMO cognition, measures of cognitive style,
especially as they relate to DEMO processing of information leading to an informed
decision. The least represented of these measures in decision-making research
to date are those related to cognitive DEMO As illustrated in the present study,
the usefulness of such individual difference measures can be tested especially
well in tasks that include process DEMO measures. The relationships observed
between individual difference measures obtained independently from task per-
formance measures and process tracing or information processing measures
can form DEMO basis for expanded theoretical models of the moderating role of
individual differences in decision making.
REFERENCES
ckenholt, U., & Hynan, L. S. (DEMO). Caveats on a process tracing measure and a remedy. Journal
of Behavioral Decision Making, 7, 103–117.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. (1982). The need for cognition. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 42, 116–131.
Cacioppo, J. T, Petty, R. E., & Kao, C. F. (1984). The efficient assessment of need for cognition.
Journal of Personality Assessment, 48, 306–307.
Creyer, E. H., Bettman, J. R., & Payne, J. W. (1990). The impact of accuracy and effort feedback
and goals on adaptive decision behavior. DEMO of Behavioral Decision Making, 3, 1–16.
Ford, J. K., Schmitt, N., Schechtman, S. L., Hults, B. M., & Doherty, M. L. (1989). Process tracing
methods: Contributions, problems and neglected research questions. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 43, 75–117.
Huneke, M. E. (1996). Comparing consideration set formation and choice: An DEMO investigation
of information processing. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, The University of Iowa.
DEMO, J . D., & Levin, I. P. (2000). Validating a new process tracing method for decision making.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
DEMO, I. P., & Jasper, J . D., (1995). DEMO narrowing: A new process tracing method for decision
making. Organizational Behavior DEMO Human Decision Processes, 64, 1–8.
Levin, I. P., Jasper, DEMO . D., & Forbes, W. S. (1998). Choosing versus DEMO options at different
stages of decision making. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 11, 193–210.
Levin, I. P., Jasper, J . D., & Gaeth, G. J. (1996). Measuring the effects of framing country-of-origin
information: A process tracing approach. In K. P. Corfman and J. G. Lynch, Jr. (Eds.), Advances
in Consumer Research, 23, 385–389.
DEMO, J. W. (1976). Task complexity and contingent processing in decision making: An information
search and protocol analysis. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 16, 366–387.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & DEMO, E. J. (1988). Adaptive strategy selection in decision
making. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 534–552.
Bo¨
INFORMATION PROCESSING OVER TIME
193
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993). The adaptive decision maker. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Smith, S. M., & Levin, DEMO P. (1996). Need for cognition and choice framing effects. Journal DEMO
Behavioral Decision Making, 9, 283–290.
van Zee, E. H., Paluchowski, T. F., & Beach, L. R. (1992). The effects DEMO screening and task
positioning upon evaluation of decision options. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 5, 1–23.
Wedell, D. H. (1997). Another DEMO at reasons for choosing and rejecting. Memory and Cognition,
25, DEMO
Yaniv, I., & Schul, Y (1997). Elimination and exclusion procedures in judgment under uncertainty.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 10, DEMO
Received February 22, 1999{1g42fwefx}