Trust and Distrust: New Relationships and Realities
Roy J. Lewicki; Daniel DEMO McAllister; Robert J. Bies
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 23, No. 3. (Jul., 1998), pp. 438-458.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28199807%2923%3A3%3C438%3ATADNRA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q
The Academy of Management Review is currently published DEMO Academy of Management.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not DEMO an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, DEMO you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/DEMO
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of DEMO transmission.
JSTOR is an independent not-for-profit organization dedicated to and preserving a digital archive of scholarly journals. For
more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Thu Feb 8 19:21:29 2007
e Academy of Management Review
1998, Vol. 23, No.3, 438-458.
TRUST AND DISTRUST: NEW RELATIONSHIPS
AND REALITIES
ROY J. LEWICKI
Ohio State University
DANIEL J. MCALLISTER
ROBERT J. BIES
Georgetown University
We propose a new DEMO framework for understanding simultaneous trust and
distrust within relationships, grounded in DEMO of multidimensionality and
the inherent tensions of relationships, and we separate DEMO research from prior work
grounded in assumptions of unidimensionality and balance. Drawing foundational
support for this new framework from recent research on simultaneous positive DEMO
negative sentiments and ambivalence, we explore the theoretical and practical sig-
DEMO of the framework for future work on trust and distrust relationships within
organizations.
The view of trust as a foundation for social
order spans DEMO intellectual disciplines and
levels of analysis. Understanding why people
trust, as DEMO as how that trust shapes social
relations, has been a central DEMO for psychol-
ogists (Deutsch, 1962; WorcheL 1979), sociolo-
gists (Gambetta, 1988), political scientists
(Barber, 1983), economists (Axelrod, 1984), an-
thropologists (Ekeh, 1974),and students of organ-
izational behavior (Kramer & Tyler, 1996). Schol-
ars have seen trust DEMO an essential ingredient in
the healthy personality (Erikson, 1963; Shaver &
Hazan, 1994), as a foundation for interpersonal
relationships (Rempel, Holmes, & Zanna, 1985),
as a foundation for cooperation (DEMO, 1938;
Blau, 1964), and as the basis for stability in
social institutions and markets (Arrow, 1974;
Williamson, 1974; DEMO, 1986).
Recently, researchers of trust within organi-
zations have focused on understanding the ef-
ficiencies of trust and explaining its emer-
gence (Hosmer, 1995; Kramer & Tyler, 1996;
Mayer, Davis, & Schoorman, 1995; Sitkin &
Roth, 1993). We are increasingly DEMO
We thank Morton Deutsch, Rod Kramer, Jackson McAllis-
ter, Tom DEMO, the editors, and two anonymous reviewers for
their comments on an earlier draft of this article. The first
author thanks the Connelly Program DEMO Business Ethics at
Georgetown University and the Interdisciplinary Center for
Conflict Resolution at Ohio State University, endowed by a
grant from the Hewlett Foundation, for financial support
during the preparation of this article.
438
the uncertainty, complexity, and change that
punctuate todoy's fast-paced global business
environment (D'Aveni, 1994; Hamel & Pra-
halad, 1994) and the DEMO strategic impact
of trust and distrust relationships on competi-
tiveness. Given the competitive requirements
of speed (Eisenhardt & Tabrizi, 1995) and qual-
ity (Schneider & Bowen, 1995), coordinated ac-
tion in strategic ini DEMO (such as quality
improvement, customer service, and new prod-
uct DEMO) has become essential. Also,
given the competitive challenges of organiza-
DEMO growth, globalization, and expansion
through strategic alliances, the ability to DEMO
fectively develop and maintain strategic part-
nerships and alliances among competitors
(DEMO & Prahalad, 1994) and multicultural/
multilingual relations (Cox & DEMO, 1997) has
become a critical competence. In all of these
arenas, the trusting qualities of the relations
between parties-through cross-functional
teams, temporary DEMO, strategic alliances,
and socially embedded partnerships-are crit-
ical for successful DEMO (Sheppard,
1995).
The key role played by trust as DEMO foundation
for effective collaboration emphasizes, in no
small way, our recognition of the multiple and
mixed motives that shape collaborative behav-
ior. Yet, while incentives to collaborate and trust
certainly exist, there are simultaneous reasons
to distrust relationship partners (Brandenburger
1998
Lewicki, McAllisterl and Hies
439
& Nalebuff, 1996). The DEMO of speed, qual-
ity, and global reach, which require trust, also
have precipitated distrust, through corporate re-
structuring, downsizing, and fundamental viola-
tions of the psychological contracts connecting
individuals with organizations (Heckscher, DEMO;
Morrison & Robinson, 1997; Rousseau, 1995).
Bringing these DEMO together, we see that
the challenges of the modern global market-
DEMO center on the simultaneous management
of trust and distrust in a hostile environment in
which individuals may be just as inclined to
distrust as DEMO are to trust.
In this article we bring the opportunities for-
and challenges of-managing trust and distrust
into focus, introducing a new theoretical frame-
work for understanding simultaneous trust and
distrust relations wi thin organizations. We
DEMO this framework in assumptions of multi-
dimensionality and the inherent tensions of
complex relationships, supplanting older as-
sumptions of relationship unidimensionality
and balance. We construct this new framework
on a foundation of current research, arguing for
the existence of simultaneous positive and neg-
ative sentiments and ambivalence, and we ex-
plore the theoretical and practical significance
of this framework for DEMO work on trust and
distrust relationships within organizations.
DEFINING TRUST AND DISTRUST
Systematic research on trust in organizations
now spans more than 40 years. DEMO early research
scholars associated trust and distrust with indi-
viduals' expressions DEMO confidence in others'
intentions and motives (Deutsch, 1958, 1960;DEMO
Mellinger, 1956; Read, 1962). Mellinger (1956), for
instance, defined trust as an individual's confi-
dence in another person's intentions and mo-
tives, and the sincerity of that person's word.
Read (1962) built on Mellinger's understanding
of trust, arguing that trusting individuals expect
their interests to be protected and promoted by
those DEMO trust, feel confident about disclosing
negative personal information, feel assured of
full and frank information sharing, and are pre-
pared to overlook apparent breaches of the trust
relationship. Deutsch (1960) saw trust as an DEMO
dividual's confidence in the intentions and ca-
pabilities of a relationship partner and the be-
lief that a relationship partner would behave as
DEMO hoped. Likewise, Deutsch viewed suspicion
or distrust as confidence about a DEMO
partner's undesirable behavior, stemming from
knowledge of the individual's DEMO and
intentions.
In contrast to the emphasis on intentions and
motives of early research, the focus of research-
ers more recently is on behavior (Hosmer, 1995;
Mayer et al., 1995), where trust is defined as one
party's optimistic expectation of the behavior of
another, when the party must make a decision
about how to act (under conditions of vulnera-
bility and dependence; Hosmer, 1995), and as
"the willingness of a party to be vulnerable to
the actions of DEMO party based on the expec-
tation that the other party will perform a partic-
ular action important to the trustor, irrespective
of the ability to monitor or control that other
party" (Mayer et al., 1995: 712). In reciprocal
terms, scholars understand distrust to be the
DEMO that others will not act in one's best
interests, even DEMO in potentially injurious
behavior (Govier, 1994), and the expectation that
capable and responsible behavior from specific
individuals will not be forthcoming (Barber,
1983). Thus, distrust is viewed as the opposite of
trust, and both trust and distrust are understood
in behavioral terms, with DEMO attention given to
the confidences, intentions, and motives that
promote trusting/distrusting and trustworthy/
untrustworthy behavior.
In our analysis we define trust DEMO terms of
confident positive expectations regarding an-
other's conduct, and DEMO in terms of confi-
dent negative expectations regarding another's
conduct. We use the term "another's conduct" in
a very specific, but encompassing, sense, ad-
dressing another's words, actions, and decisions
(what another says and does and how he or she
makes decisions)DEMO By "confident positive expec-
tations," we mean a belief in, a propensity to
attribute virtuous intentions to, and a willing-
ness to act on the basis of another's conduct.
Conversely, by "confident DEMO expecta-
tions," we mean a fear of, a propensity to DEMO
tribute sinister intentions to, and "a desire to
buffer oneself from the effects of another's con-
duct. We assert that both trust DEMO distrust in-
volve movements toward certainty: trust con-
cerning expectations of DEMO hoped for and
distrust concerning expectations of things
feared.
We argue that trust and distrust are separate
but linked dimensions. Moreover, we propose
440
Academy of Management Review
July
that trust and distrust are not DEMO ends of a
single continuum. There are elements that con-
tribute to the growth and decline of trust, and
there are elements that contribute to the growth
and decline of distrust. These elements grow
and develop DEMO an individual's experi-
ences with another in the various facet-specific
transactions of multiplex relations. Although
broad, generalized inferences across the links
may occur (i.e., strong levels of trust in some
elements may generalize to DEMO lower levels
of distrust in others, and vice versa), it DEMO possi-
ble for parties to both trust and distrust one
another, DEMO different experiences within the
various facets of complex interpersonal rela-
tionships.
Two-factor models are not unheard of in the
organization sciences (Herzberg, Mausner, &
Snyderman, 1967). We draw the intellectual
foundations for our DEMO from Luhmann's (1979)
articulation of trust and distrust as DEMO but
potentially coexistent mechanisms for manag-
ing complexity. The empirical foundations for
our work are drawn from recent social psycho-
logical research on the DEMO of positive-
valent and negative-valent attitudes (Cacioppo
& Berntson, 1994) DEMO research on conditions of
ambivalence under which positive-valent and
negative-valent attitudes can coexist. Inasmuch
as expectations of benefit and harm (Nucci,
Stapleton, & Tedeschi, 1973), pro-Black and anti-
Black sentiments (Katz & Hess. 1988), and love
and hate sentiments have been shown to coexist
(Coser, 1956; Freud, 1918), simultaneous trust
and distrust appear possible (Priester & Petty,
1996).
Within the scope of trust research, our concep-
tualization corresponds better with earlier foun-
dational work on trust (Deutsch, 1958; Mellinger,
1956; Read, 1962) than with DEMO recent perspec-
tives (Hosmer, 1995; Mayer et al., 1995). Our un-
derstanding of the relationship between trust
and distrust represents a DEMO break with much
of the management literature on trust in organi-
zations, for in management scholarship, the un-
derstanding of relationships has driven DEMO un-
derstanding of the dynamics of trust and
distrust. We argue that old views of relation-
ships are untenable and that a contemporary
perspective DEMO social relationships must allow
for simultaneous trust and distrust.
TRUST-DISTRUST DYNAMICS AND
RELATIONSHIP REALITIES
Old View of Trust, Distrust, and Relationships
Upon reviewing DEMO spectrum of research on
trust in the organizational sciences, we marvel
DEMO the breadth of theoretical and empirical ap-
proaches informing current theory and practice.
Personality theory, behavioral decision theory,
social psychology, and sociological DEMO
each of these traditions has been drawn upon to
some extent. Although reviewers of this litera-
ture have emphasized the important distinctions
among these DEMO (Ross & LaCroix, 1996;
Sitkiri & Roth, 1993), DEMO recognize converging
themes: the characterization of trust and distrust
as separate DEMO opposite constructs, the norma-
tive view of trust as "good" DEMO distrust as
"bad," and limited emphasis on social context.
Furthermore, this existing research has pro-
ceeded from a perspective on relationships that
DEMO relationship unidimensionality and
governing norms of balance and consistency.
Trust and distrust as one bipolar construct.
Across intellectual traditions, scholars consider
trust and distrust separate and opposite. For
personality researchers who view trust as an
individual DEMO, trust and distrust exist at
opposite ends of a single trust-distrust DEMO
uum (Rotter, 1971), and they generally view low
trust expectations as indicative of high distrust
(Stack, 1988; Tardy, 1988). DEMO decision
theorists, examining trust and distrust from a
rational choice perspective, define trust as co-
operative conduct and distrust as noncoopera-
tive conduct DEMO mixed-motive game situations
(Arrow, 1974; Axelrod, 1984; Coleman, 1990;
Miller, 1992). For social psychologists, conflict-
ing psychological states DEMO by simul-
taneous trust and distrust are unstable and tran-
sitory in nature (Lewicki & Bunker, 1995; Lewis &
Weigert, 1985). Sociologists, while recognizing
the importance of trust and distrust as mecha-
nisms for reducing social complexity and uncer-
tainty (Lewis & Weigert, 1985), view them as
functional equivalents or substitutes. Up to this
point, DEMO systematic effort has been made to
address the potential for simultaneous trust and
distrust within organizational settings.
Normative view of trust and distrust. Across
DEMO traditions, scholars view trust as
"good" and distrust as "bad." The focus of atten-
tion for personality researchers has been on un-
1998
Lewicki, McAllisterl and Hies
441
derstanding distrust as a psychological disorder
to be corrected (Erikson, 1963). Research from the
behavioral decision DEMO perspective has
been sparked by researchers' desire to solve
intractable conflict DEMO and to promote
effective collaboration characterized by trust
(Axelrod, 1984). Similarly, within social-psycho-
logical and sociological traditions, trust has
been seen DEMO a necessary ingredient for social
order and the research focus has been on under-
standing its emergence and development (Bar-
ber, 1983; Lewis & Weigert, 1985; Luhmann, 1979;
Shapiro, 1987). Organizational DEMO have
yet to give systematic attention to the limits of
trust and the functions of distrust.
Limited attention to social context and rela-
tionship DEMO Finally, across intellectual
traditions, scholars have given limited attention
to the role of social context. Personality re-
searchers assume the foundational nature of
DEMO transcends context (Johnson-George &
Swap, 1982; Rotter, 1971; Stack, 1988). Within be-
havioral decision theory, the "qcrne environ-
ment" is devoid of real context information, and
the incentive structure in DEMO predetermines
behavior (Johnson-George & Swap, 1982; Lewis
& Weigert, 1985; Pearce, 1974; Tardy, 1988).
Within the social-psychological tradition, re-
searchers acknowledge contextual differences
but view the "organizational" context as an
DEMO condition that limits the relevance
of the social/emotional/relational element of
trust relationships (Gabarro, 1990; McAllister,
1995). And within the sociological tradition,
scholars place emphasis on those social institu-
tions that DEMO and/or precede conscious
awareness and predispose people to behave in
characteristic ways (Garfinkel, 1973; Zucker,
1986). We need further recognition of the role of
social context.
Relationships as unidimensional constructs.
For the DEMO part, researchers have considered
interpersonal relationships within organiza-
tions unidimensional, with a single component
or dimension of the relationship (such as task-
related interaction) determining the quality of
the entire relationship. For example, assume
DEMO two academic colleagues, A and B, work
together on a research article. A agrees to do the
data analysis, and B agrees to write the first
draft; thus, to do the job well, B is dependent on
A's performance. Most theories of trust assume
that DEMO A is not always reliable in his or her task
performance (DEMO, he or she is overcommitted
and cannot find the time to DEMO the analy-
ses or does a careless job), B will come to com-
pletely distrust A. This assumption-in our
view, usually unstated but pervasive in the lit-
erature (e.g., Gabarro, 1990)-is based on the
logic that B's "overall" trust level for A is DEMO
determined by their interdependence around
this writing task. If B determines that A cannot
be trusted with the writing task, B also cannot
trust A in any other context or relational inter-
dependency.
We can attribute DEMO of this as-
sumption of unidimensionality in trust research,
especially as it concerns the field of organiza-
tional behavior, to the fact that our understand-
ing of relationships is still in its infancy (Green-
halgh, 1995; Greenhalgh & Chapman, 1994;
McAllister, 1995; Sheppard, DEMO; Valley, Neale,
& Mannix, 1995). With only a DEMO "language
of relationships" and a limited framework for
describing the key parameters of relationships
across contexts, it is not surprising that in many
research streams, relationship variables are of-
ten selected for research emphasis without
much attention to the broader framework in
which they operate and interact (Greenhalgh,
1995; Greenhalgh & Chapman, 1994).
Relationship homeostasis driven DEMO balance
and consistency. We also note that the tradi-
tional view of relationships, which has shaped
our understanding of the simplistic social con-
text of trust relationships, is one that empha-
sizes the emergence and maintenance of bal-
ance and consistency. The principles of balance
and consistency in DEMO behavior are
among the oldest in social psychology and are
grounded, DEMO and foremost, in a Lewinian per-
spective on human behavior (Deutsch, 1968).
Within this tradition, psychological imbalance
is an aversive condition DEMO social actors seek
to resolve or minimize (Barker, Dembo, & DEMO,
1941; Deutsch, 1968; Festinger, 1957). In interper-
sonal relations, norms governing exchange and
reciprocity (Bkru, 1964; Gouldner, 1960; Homans,
1950) predict that imbalanced relationships of
liking or disliking DEMO over time toward ei-
ther mutual liking or mutual disliking. For
larger networks of social relations (triads and
beyond), general theories of balance (Heider,
1958) highlight the inherent instability of imbal-
ance: it is hard to remain friendly with two peo-
ple who hate each DEMO (Wallace & Wolf, 1986).
442
Academy of Management Review
July
If one follows balance theories through DEMO their
logical conclusions, social relationships sim-
plify to a single point DEMO a continuum rang-
ing from reciprocated positive to reciprocated
negative sentiment.
Summary. Three interrelated assumptions
provide the foundation for much of the research
on DEMO relationships in organizations. Tradi-
tionally, scholars see trust and distrust as DEMO
tually exclusive and opposite conditions, they
see trust as "good" DEMO distrust as "bad," and
they have given the social context DEMO trust rela-
tionships limited attention. To the extent that we
can bring social context into the equation, we
note that the foundational assumptions concern-
ing relationships emphasize relationship unidi-
mensionality, balance, and consistency. We
now DEMO new relationship realities that
ground our more complex view of trust.
New Relationship Realities
We specify two core tenets to replace the cen-
tral DEMO of the old view of relation-
ships. First, relationships are multifaceted DEMO
multiplex, therefore enabling parties to hold si-
multaneously different views of DEMO other-
views that may be accurate but, nonetheless,
inconsistent among DEMO Second, balance and
consistency in one's cognitions and perceptions
are DEMO likely to be temporary and transitional
states. Parties are more dominantly in states of
imbalance and inconsistency, and the tensions
created by these states do not necessarily pro-
mote quick and simple resolution. We elaborate
below.
DEMO are multifaceted and multiplex.
In all but the most primitive and simplistic rela-
tionships, we relate to each other in multiple
ways. Within the same relationship we have
different encounters in different contexts with
different intentions DEMO lead to different out-
comes. These encounters accumulate and inter-
act to create a rich texture of experience. Parties
may have different experiences in DEMO to-
gether on tasks and activities, may learn to func-
tion DEMO in the same office environment,
and may share conversations about different
topics on which they agree and disagree. For
instance, I may get to know a professional col-
league in my academic department fairly well.
DEMO time, I may learn that this colleague is
excellent as a DEMO, adequate but not
exceptional as a methodologist, highly limited
in skills as a classroom teacher, completely at
odds with me in his political beliefs, outstand-
ing as a golfer, tediously boring in committee
meetings DEMO periodically quite insightful, and
terrible at keeping appointments on time. My
DEMO toward my colleague will be a func-
tion of all of these different encounters with him,
and I may have to learn to DEMO with all of them
if he becomes my department chair. With an
appreciation of the richness of our relationship
and the varied facets of DEMO colleague's "presen-
tations of self," I can come to DEMO and
appreciate those domains where it is appropri-
ate for me to trust him (and in what respects)
and those domains where trusting him is inap-
propriate (Baier, 1985; Govier, 1994).
The DEMO of link multiplexity within net-
work relations provides an essential mecha-
nism for depicting the richness of interpersonal
relationships (Katzenstein, 1996). Linkages DEMO
nect actors within social networks and can rep-
resent any substantive connectivity or interac-
tion. Multiplex relations exist where more than
one linkage is DEMO (Farrace, Monger, & Rus-
sell, 1977; Monge & Eisenberg, 1987).1 In organi-
zations scholars have examined multiplexity in
network relations, including exchanges of infor-
mation, goods, and services; expressions of af-
fection (liking or animosity); and attempts to in-
fluence and control (Monge & Eisenberg 1987;
Tichy, Tushman, & Fombrun, 1979)DEMO
There has been a tendency among social net-
work scholars to assume that multiplex rela-
tions are simply (and unidimensionally) trusting
in nature (Husted, 1994; Ibarra, 1995). Given the
emerging and evolving nature of social relation-
ships, we challenge this view and argue that
both trust and distrust can exist within multi-
plex relations. This view is DEMO in our ap-
preciation of the potential breadth of the band-
width and richness of ongoing relationships. By
bandwidth, we mean the scope of the domains
of interpersonal relating and competency that
are relevant to a DEMO interpersonal relation-
ship. We see relationships as composed of fac-
ets: DEMO components of experience that an in-
dividual has with another. These facets
1 The dictionary defines multiplexity as more than one
channel. By abstraction, a uniplex relationship would entail
only a single form of linkage.
1998
Lewicki, McAllister, and Hies
443
aggregate into bands, which are groupings of
facets across personal qualities that come to
define our experience DEMO a single individual
in a single context. The broader the experience
across multiple contexts, the broader the band-
width. In interpersonal relationships of trust and
distrust we see potential for enlargement in
relationship bandwidth as partners DEMO
knowledge of each other's strengths and/or
weaknesses in new interaction domains (Bkru,
1964).
In addition to breadth, we recognize DEMO po-
tential for richness in the texturing of relation-
ships. That is, although some relationships may
be understood provisionally in general terms,
mature relationships tend to be characterized by
greater specification and detail across the
DEMO (Gabarro, 1978; Holmes & RempeL
1989; Murray, Holmes, & Griffin, 1996). Gabarro
(1978) observes that as trust relationships
evolve from orientation through exploration and
testing to stabilization, trust evolves from im-
pressionistic and highly undifferentiated to
more finely grained and differentiated along
specific DEMO He shows that as emphases shift
from "How much do I DEMO?" to "In what areas
and in what ways do I DEMO?" the limits of trust
and the domains where trust is inappropriate
become specified more clearly.
The effects of increased bandwidth and rich-
ness DEMO texturing serve to create the conditions
for relationship multiplexity. Relationships ma-
ture with interaction frequency, duration, and
the diversity of challenges that relationship
DEMO encounter and face together. Each of
these components is essential. If the parties in-
teract frequently and over a long period of time
but DEMO superficially, or if they have an issue-
rich and frequent exchange DEMO do so only
around a limited and bounded problem, or if
DEMO interact around many issues but do so in-
frequently, these conditions DEMO the potential
for the relationship to mature. Alternatively, as
these components DEMO, the knowledge of
each relationship partner is enhanced.
Balance and consistency DEMO temporary
states. The other traditional assumption we
challenge is that models of interpersonal be-
havior have been-and should continue to be-
strongly grounded in DEMO of balance and
consistency. The tenet is that parties who expe-
rience any tension, inconsistency, and disso-
nance in relationships will find such DEMO state
discomforting and will be motivated to resolve
the inconsistency. These assumptions are
grounded in the long-standing theories noted
earlier.
Although it is bold DEMO deviate from an assump-
tion that has dominated the physical and social
sciences for so long, we nevertheless need to
challenge that assumption when it comes to our
understanding of relationships. We believe that
the premise DEMO been demonstrated and
"proved" over time because researchers have
tended to oversimplify the nature of relation-
ships and to focus only on specific DEMO link-
ages. There is an overwhelming body of litera-
ture in which scholars have examined the
dynamics of dissonance reduction and tension
reduction, but resolution and tension reduction
are not the only mechanisms for dealing with
DEMO induced by inconsistent information and
coqnitions.f
Not all of one party's experiences with another
are consistent. Parties often have inadequate or
incomplete information DEMO achieve balance or
resolve inconsistency; more commonly, parties
are interdependent (DEMO not by choice) and
must effectively interact and coordinate action,
DEMO they like it or not. For example, let us
return to DEMO relationship with the professional
colleague we described in the previous section.
How I relate to this colleague depends upon
whether we are going to DEMO a theory paper
together, design a new course that we will DEMO
jointly, collaborate on a committee report or
take the afternoon off DEMO play golf together. My
disposition toward my colleague is affected by
all of these different encounters that I may have
with him. I might DEMO all of these different
experiences and facets into one overall judg-
ment of trust but to do so would be overly sim-
plistic, moot and highly detrimental to my abil-
ity to work with him around DEMO and
compartmentalized interdependencies. So, I ef-
fectively function with this individual DEMO "parti-
tioning" my trust of my colleague as we talk
2 It is important to note that scholars may not always view
dissonance DEMO aversive. Zajonc (1960) argues that people
work toward an optimum level of incongruity-psychologi-
cal inconsistencies in beliefs, thoughts, perceptions, and
behaviors-that can be identified as a point between little
consistency and too much consistency. DEMO this standpoint,
tension may be a condition that individuals choose to man-
age rather than eliminate (Pinder, 1984).
444
Academy of Management Review
research, work on the committee report, DEMO dis-
cuss club choice on the third tee. This type of
compartmentalized, segmented relationship is
the rule, rather than the exception, in much of
our professional and personal lives.
Foundational support for this view of DEMO
and consistency follows from Lewinian field the-
ory (Deutsch, 1968). From this perspective, con-
sistent with basic principles from engineering
and physics, the current "status" of any dynamic
phenomenon is not a body at rest but, rather, a
body in "quasi-stationary equilibrium." Equilib-
DEMO, as distinct from rest, is the combined re-
sult of those forces pressuring to increase the
current level of the phenomenon and those
DEMO pressuring to decrease the current level of
the phenomenon. In relationships, DEMO of inter-
dependency serve as force elements; while each
force element DEMO have a positive or negative
valence, contributing to pressures that can DEMO
the equilibrium of the relationship in a positive
or negative direction, DEMO coexistence of these
positive and negative links is completely ac-
ceptable in a complex view of the relationship.
Our argument, then, is that DEMO parties
may pursue consistency and the resolution of in-
consistent views, DEMO more common state is not
one of balance but, rather, of imbalance, inconsis-
tency, and "uncertainty" (Holmes & Levinger,
1994). Balance is a transitional state we pass
through as we process DEMO; the continu-
ally arriving wealth of new information, the sa-
lience and prominence of that information, and
the multiple perspectives we have of this informa-
tion continually push us toward inconsistency and
incongruer:ce. Balance DEMO consistency depic-
tions may be more accurately represented as sin-
gle-frame snapshots of a dynamic time-series pro-
cess, as relationships are transformed through
new information that becomes available and is
processed and interpreted.
In summary, a contemporary view of relation-
ships and the dynamics within them suggests
that DEMO need to stop viewing relationships as
unidimensional and uniplex and, instead, see
them as complex, multidimensional constructs.
The building blocks of these relationships are
facet elements in which we encounter the other
within a given DEMO, at a given point in time,
and around a given DEMO Within
each facet element, trust or distrust can develop,
and DEMO facet elements aggregate into bands
of experience and across bands to produce rela-
July
tionships with differing degrees of bandwidth.
This aggregation process leads DEMO to the second
critical element of this new view of relation-
ships: it is possible (and likely) that as facets
aggregate, they DEMO not necessarily consistent
with each other, and individuals can accommo-
date DEMO and hold views of the other that do
not need to achieve this consistency. Based on
these critical, revised assumptions, we now
elaborate DEMO our new view of trust.
A NEW VIEW: TRUST AND DISTRUST DEMO
SEPARATE DIMENSIONS
Having defined trust as confident positive ex-
pectations regarding another's conduct, and dis-
trust as confident negative expectations regard-
ing another's conduct, we now examine the
relationship between them and the possibilities
for their coexistence.
Although we define trust and distrust in recip-
rocal DEMO, we view them as separate and dis-
tinct constructs. Low distrust DEMO not the same
thing as high trust, and high distrust is DEMO the
same thing as low trust. We draw our intellec-
tual foundations for this distinction from Luh-
mann's (1979) articulation of trust DEMO distrust as
functional equivalents. Luhmann (1979) argues
that both trust and distrust function to allow
rational actors to contain and manage social
uncertainty DEMO complexity, but they do so by
different means. From the scheme DEMO possible
conduct, trust reduces social complexity and un-
certainty by allowing DEMO undesirable con-
duct to be removed from consideration (simpli-
fication of DEMO decision tree) and by allowing
desirable conduct to be viewed as DEMO Sim-
ilarly, distrust functions to reduce complexity by
allowing undesirable conduct DEMO be seen as like-
ly-even certain. Luhmann refers to this distrust
as the "positive expectation of injurious action"
(1979: 72). Distrust simplifies the social world,
allowing an individual to move rationally to
DEMO protective action based on these expecta-
tions. Trust and distrust both entail certain ex-
pectations, but whereas trust expectations an-
ticipate beneficial conduct from others, distrust
expectations anticipate injurious conductr'
3 For the remainder of the article, we use the term "con-
duct" as a summary term to address the words, actions, and
decisions of an actor.
1998
Lewicki, McAllisterl and Hies
TABLE 1
Integrating Trust and Distrust: DEMO Social Realities
High Trust
Characterized by
Hope
Faith
Confidence
Assurance
Initiative
Low Trust
Characterized by
No hope
No faith
No confidence
Passivity
Hesitance
High-value DEMO
Interdependence promoted
Opportunities pursued
New initiatives
I
I
2
1
Casual acquaintances
Limi ted interdependence
Bounded, arms-length
transactions
Professional courtesy
4
3
Trust but verify
Relationships highly segmented
and bounded
Opportunities pursued and
down-side risks / DEMO
continually monitored
I
I
Undesirable eventualities
expected and feared
Harmful motives assumed
In terdependence managed
Preemption; best offense is a
good defense
Paranoia
445
Low Distrust
Characterized by
No fear
Absence of skepticism
Absence of cynicism
DEMO monitoring
No vigilance
The distinctness of trust and distrust as sepa-
rate constructs is made clearer when we con-
trast low trust and high DEMO On the one
hand, situations where certain expectations of
beneficial actions DEMO others are absent (bene-
ficial action is seen as u.ncertain or DEMO certainly
not forthcoming) are best understood by the lack
of hope DEMO (e.g., hopeless). On the other
hand, situations where certain DEMO of
harmful action are absent (harmful action is
seen as unlikely DEMO as certainly not forthcoming)
are best understood by the absence of reasoned
fear (e.q., benign). Importantly, the conditions of
low trust and high distrust do not converge--they
are characterized as conceptually distinct condi-
DEMO
Our adaptation of Luhmann's formulation is
straightforward. Trust and distrust exist as two
separate dimensions, as we depict in Table 1.
High Distrust
Characterized by
Fear
Skepticism
Cynicism
Wariness and watchfulness
Vigilance
For each dimension DEMO quasi-stationary equilib-
rium of forces, composed of facets and bands
within DEMO bandwidth, sustains trust or distrust
at a specific level. As specific DEMO in the rela-
tionship change (through dialogue, interaction,
joint decision making, common experience, and
so on), these changes will tend DEMO move the opera-
tional level of trust or distrust upward or down-
ward.
Within this framework, we present trust on the
vertical dimension and characterize it as either
high or 10w.4 Consistent with our definition and
DEMO of trust, we see high-trust rela-
4 In this table we DEMO the trust and distrust dimen-
sions as orthogonal to each other. Although we postulate
here that trust and distrust are separate dimensions, the
question of the relationship between the two dimensions
remains open, both theoretically and empirically.
446
Academy of Management Review
July
tionships characterized by faith, confidence, DEMO
surance, initiative, and industry. Trust is the
mechanism by which the risks associated with
social complexity are transcended-risks that
might otherwise stifle initiative.
DEMO present distrust on the horizontal dimen-
sion and similarly characterize it as either high
or low. Consistent with our definition and
understanding of distrust, we see distrust
expressed by wariness, skepticism, and such
behaviors as DEMO defensiveness, watchful-
ness, and vigilance. Finally, we see distrust-an
actor'DEMO assured expectation of intended harm
from the other-manifested in those social con-
straints (e.g., monitoring mechanisms or bureau-
cratic and regulatory controls) that represent
practical responses by wary and vigilant depen-
dent parties to perceived DEMO Although ex-
pressed distrust may become less visible with
controls in place, its manifest presence remains
(Ring & Van de Ven, 1994).
Within our two-dimensional framework, we
identify four prototypical relationship condi-
tions: DEMO trust/low distrust (cell I), high trust/
low distrust (cell 2), low trust/high distrust (cell
3), and high trust/high distrust (cell 4). Each con-
dition is characterized by a distinct relationship
orientation and distinct relationship challenges.
Low Trust/Low Distrust (Celli)
Under conditions of low trust and low distrust,
an DEMO or actor has neither reason to be
confident nor reason to be wary and watchful.
The relationship likely is characterized by a lim-
ited DEMO of facets, few bands, and low band-
width. Over time and with increased interde-
pendence, awareness of the other will develop
quickly, DEMO rise to the establishment of be-
liefs about the other's trustworthiness and un-
trustworthiness. Parties are not likely to engage
in any relationship DEMO requiring complex
interdependency or in complex assessments of
risk or vulnerability. Conversation most likely is
simple and casual, not violating the privacy of
either party or suggesting the existence of any
closeness or intimacy.
High Trust/DEMO Distrust (Cell 2)
Under conditions of high trust and low DEMO
trust, one actor has reason to be confident in
another and DEMO reason to suspect the other. The
relationship likely is characterized by pooled
interdependence, where interested parties are
assured that partners are pussuinq common ob-
jectives. The facet elements, bands, and band-
width of the relationship DEMO a large number
of positive experiences, in which the aggregate
experience DEMO been trust reinforcing. This ex-
perience creates social capital that enables the
trusting party to exercise initiative, assured of
the support of the trusted party. Parties are
likely to seek ways to continually develop and
enrich DEMO relationship and to expand their mu-
tually beneficial interdependencies. Conversa-
tion likely is complex and rich, reflecting each
party's awareness of the other.
In addition, the trusting party is likely to iden-
tify with the trusted's values, feel strong positive
affect toward the trusted, and DEMO these feel-
ings through various verbalizations of appreci-
ation, support, and encouragement (Lewicki &
Bunker, 1995; McAllister, 1995). Parties will inter-
act frequently, periodically invent new opportu-
nities for interaction, and DEMO monitor and "re-
pair" the trust as tensions surface and are
resolved (Lewicki & Bunker, 1996). These condi-
tions reflect "promotive interdependence" and
cooperation (Deutsch, 1962). Evidence that con-
tradicts trustworthiness beliefs likely is viewed
as suspect and is denied or considered unimpor-
DEMO by trusting parties. Further, we might ex-
pect contradictory evidence to DEMO defense
mechanisms that serve to further consolidate
and strengthen trusting beliefs (DEMO &
Levinger, 1994; McAllister, 1997; Murray &
Holmes, DEMO).
Low Trust/High Distrust (Cell 3)
Under conditions of DEMO distrust and low
trust, one actor has no reason for confidence DEMO
another and ample reason for wariness and
watchfulness. Conditions such as these make it
extremely difficult (if not impossible) to main-
tain effective DEMO relations over
time. The facet elements, bands, and bandwidth
of the relationship reflect a large number of neg-
ative experiences, in which the aggregate expe-
rience has been distrust reinforcing. If they must
interact, distrusting parties may devote signifi-
cant resources to monitoring the other's behav-
DEMO, preparing for the other's distrusting actions,
and attending to DEMO vulnerabilities that
might be exploited. For distrusting parties, con-
1998
Lewicki, McAllister, and Bies
versation is likely to be cautious, guarded, and
often laced with sarcasm, cynicism, and sinister
attributions of the other's intentions and mo-
tives. In sustained relationships we expect DEMO
tempts at preemption, as well as control mech-
anisms to be DEMO in the form of
supervisory or monitoring roles, bureaucratic
checks and DEMO, and the like (Luhmann,
1979; Shapiro, 1990; Zucker, 1986). In Deutsch's
terms the conditions exist for "contrient interde-
pendence" (Deutsch, 1962) or suspicion (Deutsch,
1958, 1960)DEMO
Ultimately, we see cell 3 as an uncomfortable
condition for sustained DEMO relationships.
When the parties have low trust and high dis-
trust but are interdependent nevertheless, they
must find some way to manage their distrust.
One effective way is to compartmentalize de-
pendence relationships, constraining the facets
and bands within which parties must be trusted
and separating them from "contamination" by
distrusting facets and bands. A practical exam-
ple of the transformation of a distrust relation-
ship into a trust relationship is Leon DEMO's
change in his relationship with Dick Morris
(Ogden, 1997). At the outset of their working re-
lationship at the White House, Panetta (White
House Chief of Staff) distrusted Morris (political
adviser to President Clinton). Panetta's method
of handling this relationship was to DEMO
the President and request that Morris be com-
manded to work within the rules set out by
Panetta. Within clearly specified parameters
outlined by DEMO, Morris was trusted and
could be drawn upon as an invaluable DEMO
Ultimately, we argue that distrust relations are
most effectively managed when DEMO allow for
the emergence of constrained trust relations
that permit functional interaction within the
constraints.
High Trust/High Distrust (Cell 4)
Under conditions of high trust and high dis-
trust, one party has reason to be highly confi-
dent in another in certain respects, but also has
reason to be strongly wary and suspicious in
other respects. The relationship DEMO is charac-
terized by multifaceted reciprocal interdepen-
dence, where relationship partners DEMO sepa-
rate as well as shared objectives. The facet
elements, bands, and bandwidth of the relation-
ship reflect many positive experiences, in which
447
the aggregate experience has been trust rein-
forcing, and many negative experiences, in
which the aggregate experience has been dis-
trust reinforcing. In order to sustain and benefit
from this form of relationship, parties can take
steps to limit their interdependence to those
facet linkages that reinforce DEMO trust and
strongly bound those facet linkages engender-
ing the distrust.
An example of this bounded trust is the joint
venture between Boeing and DEMO Japanese in
building the Boeing 777. In this joint venture
engineers worked together by sharing signifi-
cant amounts of technical and proprietary infor-
mation. DEMO, Boeing consciously protected
itself from vulnerability against Japanese spy-
ing by DEMO the access of Japanese engineers
to "secure" areas within Boeing (DEMO, 1996).
Of the four conditions, we believe this condi-
tion of sustained trust and distrust is the most
prevalent for multiplex working DEMO in
modern organizations. At their inception, inter-
personal relationships may be DEMO in
terms of anyone of these four prototypical rela-
tionship conditions (DEMO in cells 1
through 4). The factors that might influence the
initial relationship configurations can include
trust or distrust accumulated in prior relation-
DEMO (Larson, 1992), reputation information
(Stinchcombe & Heimer, 1985), personality fac-
tors (Rotter, 1971; Stack, 1988), social similarities
DEMO differences (Zucker, 1986), and contextual
factors (Shapiro, 1990; DEMO, 1986).The realities
of organizing in the twenty-first century lead us
DEMO recognize that distrust is much more preva-
lent than students of trust in organizations have
been willing to admit and, consequently, that
the DEMO of high-trust/low-distrust rela-
tionships (cell 2) has been overstated. Our ex-
pectation is that practical trust and distrust (cell
4) emerges DEMO is the most prevalent form as
business relationships mature and interdepen-
dencies are expanded and elaborated between
executives in teams, partnerships, and alli-
DEMO
NEW RELATIONSHIP FOUNDATIONS-
SUPPORT FOR THE NEW VIEW
We believe that our approach to the study of
trust and distrust represents a bold break DEMO
traditional scholarly approaches. Nevertheless,
empirical foundations for the tenets of our re-
448
Academy of Management Review
July
search are already in place. In DEMO section we
present evidence that positive and negative at-
titudes frequently do not exist along a single
continuum; that ambivalent attitudes, charac-
terized DEMO simultaneous positive and negative
sentiments, are commonplace; and that the em-
pirical study of trust and distrust shows the sep-
arability of these DEMO and the possibility
of their coexistence.
The Opposite of Trust Is Not Distrust
Our thesis rests on the contention that trust
and distrust are DEMO opposite ends of a single
trust-distrust continuum-the opposite of trust is
not distrust. More broadly, psychologists are in-
creasingly calling for re-examination of the as-
sumption that positive-valent and negative-
valent attitudes are opposite ends of DEMO single
continuum (Cacioppo & Berntson, 1994; Petty,
Wegener, & Fabrigar, 1997). Research findings
regarding positive and negative affectivity sug-
gest that these are not opposite ends of the same
continuum but exist, rather, as distinct bipolar
constructs (Burke, Brief, George, Robertson, &
Webster, 1989; Watson & Tellegen, 1985).
Watson and Tellegen (1985) found that high
positive affectivity (e.g., active, strong, DEMO,
enthusiastic, peppy, and elated) was not synon-
ymous with DEMO negative affectivity (e.g., calm,
relaxed, at rest, and placid). Similarly, low pos-
itive affectivity (e.g., sleepy, dull, drowsy, and
sluggish) was not synonymous with high nega-
tive affectivity (e.g., distressed, scornful, hostile,
fearful, nervous, and jittery). Others have simi-
lar findings demonstrating the separability of
positive-valent and negative-valent constructs
DEMO optimism/pessimism (Stallings, Dunham,
Gatz, & Bengtson, 1997), interracial attitudes
(Katz & Hass, 1988; Katz, Wackenhut, & Hass,
1986; Patchen, Hofman, & Davidson, 1976), and
attitudes DEMO blood and organ donation
(Cacioppo & Gardner, 1993).
The consequences of separate positive-valent
and negative-valent constructs are far reaching.
Whereas positive-valent and DEMO
constructs may be systematically negatively
correlated, their antecedents and consequences
usually DEMO separate and distinct (Cacioppo &
Gardner, 1993). The factors DEMO to positive
affect are distinct from those surrounding nega-
tive affect (DEMO & Tellegen, 1985).
To the extent that trust and distrust DEMO sepa-
rable and distinct constructs, it is imperative
that we systematically DEMO and understand
the nature, antecedents, and consequences of
each. For instance, it would be extremely mis-
leading to assume either that the positive pre-
dictors of trust would necessarily be negative
predictors of distrust or DEMO the positive conse-
quences of trust would necessarily be influ-
enced negatively by increased distrust. More-
over, our assertion is that there is no unitary
midpoint between the "positive" condition of
trust and the "aversive" condition of distrust. As
positive expectations of another's conduct be-
come less certain (i.e., the accumulation of "neg-
ative" facet elements DEMO bands increases),
feelings of uncertainty and unpredictability in-
crease. As DEMO expectations of another's
conduct become less certain, an individual may
DEMO that this portion of the social world is
more benign. Importantly, DEMO benign and
uncertain conditions can occur simultaneously,
they do not represent overlapping or intersect-
ing conditions on the singular trust-distrust con-
tinuum.
Ambivalence DEMO Commonplace
Our thesis rests on the possibility of ambiva-
lence with respect to trust and distrust: the pos-
sibility of coexistent trust and distrust. Our con-
tention is that it would be misleading to reduce
expressed DEMO and distrust to some intermedi-
ary or average sentiment.
Individuals experience ambivalence when
positive and negative attitudes toward a single
target coexist (Otnes, DEMO, & Shrum, 1997;
Priester & Petty, 1996; Thompson, DEMO, & Grif-
fin, 1995). The existence of separate and distinct
antecedents of positive-valent and negative-
valent attitudes provides for the possibility that
DEMO attitude forms will be primed. Possibly the
earliest recognition of ambivalence can be
found in Freud's systematic reflections on the
coexistence of apparently DEMO intimate
sentiments, such as love and hate and affection
and hostility (Freud, 1918). Freud's contention is
consistent with research findings showing that
individuals in abusive relationships may simul-
taneously harbor strong feelings of DEMO, as well
as hate, for each other (Petty & Cacioppo, 1996).
The evidence of ambivalence as a psycholog-
ical condition of DEMO is considerable.
1998
Lewicki, McAllister, and Bies
449
For instance, researchers studying racial atti-
tudes among White Americans have shown that
it is possible for DEMO to simultaneously
maintain pro-Black and anti-Black sentiments
(Katz & Hass, 1988; Katz et al., 1986). Researchers
studying interpersonal attachments have found
DEMO ambivalence (characterized by simulta-
neous desires for closeness and distance) is a
distinguishing feature of the attachment orien-
tations for approximately 10 percent DEMO the U.S.
adult population (Mickelson, Kessler, & Shaver,
1997)DEMO Also, researchers studying characteristic
attitudes of individuals attempting to quit smok-
DEMO have discovered frequent evidence of strong
positive and strong negative beliefs and feel-
ings about smoking (Petty & Cacioppo, 1996). Yet
another DEMO of ambivalence is provided by
researchers examining individual expectations
of benefit and harm from confederates in exper-
imental game situations, who have shown these
expectations to be independent and that sub-
jects can expect both benefit DEMO harm from
others (Nacci et al., 1973). Finally, we DEMO noted
that the classical "two-factor" theory of worker
motivation argues that individuals can be both
satisfied and dissatisfied with aspects of a job
(Herzberg et al., 1967; King, 1970).
Just as it is possible to experience attraction
and disattraction, to like and dislike, and DEMO love
and hate, it may be possible to both trust and
DEMO others. Importantly, researchers have
shown that as interpersonal relationships be-
come DEMO (Coser, 1956; Simmel, 1955), and as
the social context of relationships becomes
more complex and characterized by information
overload, role conflicts, and change (Mancini,
1993; Otnes et al., 1997), DEMO likelihood of ambiv-
alence in beliefs, attitudes, and expectations
increases. Of course, in organizational settings
where complexity, uncertainty, and role conflict
are commonplace, and where ongoing interper-
sonal relationships mature over time and are
multiplex in nature, the potential for simulta-
neous trust and distrust to emerge is consider-
able.
Trust and Distrust Are Separable
Above and beyond DEMO potential for trust and
distrust to exist as separate and distinct con-
structs, and the potential for positive-valent and
negative-valent attitudes such as trust and dis-
trust to coexist, research evidence clearly indi-
cates that trust and distrust can be operation-
alized as separate and distinct constructs.
First, empirical evidence supports the asser-
tion that assessments of the trustworthiness of
DEMO cannot be accounted for on a single con-
tinuum. Using the Philosophies of Human Na-
ture (PHN) scale (a survey instrument address-
ing the beliefs of individuals about the ways in
which other people generally DEMO), Robin-
son, Shaver, and Wrightsman (1991) show that
trust beliefs are separate and distinct from dis-
trust beliefs (cynicism) and DEMO the trust and
distrust beliefs cannot be reduced to opposite
ends of a single continuum. Constantinople
(1969), measuring basic trust and basic distrust
among college students, demonstrates that it is
possible to measure trust and distrust as sepa-
rate constructs and that these constructs have
separate and DEMO patterns of variation
across gender, year of college, and time span.
More recent empirical support comes from a
study of coal mineworkers' trust in their manag-
ers. Clark and Payne (1997) show that workers'DEMO
characteristically certain negative assertions
about the behavior of managers and about how
they, as workers, intend to behave in their
interactions with management (trust-relevant
statements) are clearly separable from charac-
teristically certain positive assertions about
management's behavior and about workers' be-
havioral intentions (distrust-relevant state-
DEMO).
Second, evidence supports the assertion that
trust and distrust can DEMO In ethnographic
fieldwork Mancini (1993) explores the practical
challenges of managing ambivalence within
relationships involving confidences and pri-
vacy. Mancini's exploration of DEMO relationship
between politicians and journalists in modern
Italy demonstrates the practical importance of
building and maintaining trust relationships
with sources of information, while treating
with suspicion much of the information re-
ceived from those sources. Ambivalence (of
journalists toward politicians, and vice versa)
that encompasses both trust and distrust is
reality for politicians and journalists alike.
Besides findings from DEMO research, findings
from quasi-experimental research on ambiva-
lence show that trust DEMO distrust attitudes may
coexist. Priester and Petty's (1996) operation-
alization of ambivalence in their research has
particular relevance for our arguments. These
450
researchers provided subjects with a set of
words that might describe DEMO of a person,
asking the subjects to form an impression of the
person described. Subjects received combina-
tions of both positive-trait descriptors (depend-
able, honest, kind, loyal, reliable, trustworthy,
trusting, and DEMO) and negative-trait
descriptors (untrustworthy, dishonest, lying, mali-
cious, mean, and untrusting). Importantly, the
terms included "trust" and "distrust," as well as
other words typically associated with them. The
researchers DEMO that subjects had little difficulty
forming impressions of people possessing both
positive and negative traits, signifying the exis-
tence of ambivalence with respect to trust and
distrust as a natural condition that people intu-
itively understand DEMO are comfortable with.
Summary
Our review of available research points to the
possibilities of separating trust from distrust
and for trust and distrust's DEMO Findings
from the broader scope of social science re-
search show that positive-valent and negative-
valent attitudes frequently are separable and
distinct, and they can coexist. Impressively, re-
cent evidence indicates that this might be the
case of interpersonal trust sentiments in partic-
ular. This research is still DEMO its infancy, but we
can outline critical implications of what we DEMO
ready know for our understanding of interper-
sonal relationships in organizations.
IMPLICATIONS OF THIS NEW VIEW: CORE
ISSUES AND A RESEARCH AGENDA
Our analysis of social relationships within or-
ganizations proceeds from the assumption that
trust DEMO distrust sentiments vary indepen-
dently and can coexist. Within multiplex social
relationships, selected facets of a relationship
can be characterized by varying degrees of trust,
whereas others can be characterized by varying
degrees of distrust. DEMO perspective fits well
with the understanding that networks of social
relations are penetrated by elements of trust
and distrust (Granovetter, 1985: 491). In this sec-
tion we address the substantive and far-
reaching implications DEMO this view of trust and
distrust for our understanding of individual re-
lationships as well as broader social and organ-
izational relationships.
Academy of DEMO Review
July
Precarious Confidences: Trust and Distrust
Decoupled and Reconnected
Distrust DEMO trust are elements of social rela-
tionships present within all social systems.
Scholars generally understand trust and dis-
trust as functional equivalents (Luhmann, DEMO),
but social structures appear most stable where
there is a DEMO dose of both trust and dis-
trust-a productive tension of confidences ex-
ists. As Luhmann argues, "For contemporary cir-
cumstances, trust cannot exist apart from
distrust, and trust cannot increase apart from
increases in distrust. Increases in trust or dis-
trust-apart from increases in the other-may
do DEMO harm than good!" (1979: 89). We contend
that the DEMO for dysfunction in confidence
relationships increases when either trust beliefs
are maintained to the exclusion of distrust or
distrust beliefs are maintained to the DEMO
of trust. We view this dynamic tension of trust
and distrust beliefs as productive, in the best
interests of confiding parties, and as DEMO source of
stability for relationships.
To an extent, we find it DEMO that simul-
taneous trust and distrust have not been ex-
plored in some detail. It is rarely the case that a
single summary motive DEMO interest can be iden-
tified that accounts for the variety of behaviors
of a given relationship partner. Rather, the mo-
tives of relationship partners usually can be
characterized as partially convergent, partially
divergent, and partially DEMO (Sheppard,
1995). Although convergent interests provide
reasonable foundations for DEMO in the form of
confident positive expectations for desired be-
havior, DEMO interests provide foundations
for distrust, characterized by confident expec-
tations of DEMO behavior. Furthermore,
relationships are frequently multifaceted
(Sheppard, 1995) and, in some cases, compart-
mentalized (Sabbagh, 1995), yielding the possi-
bility that relationship partners might trust each
other in certain respects, not trust each other in
other respects, and even distrust each other at
times. Accordingly, foundations for both trust
and distrust abound, and the DEMO in which
social relations are managed represents a
chosen strategy for both containing expected
undesired conduct and capitalizing on the
opportunities made possible because DEMO
expected desired conduct.
1998
A deeper understanding of the importance of
simultaneous trust and distrust DEMO when
we consider the dynamics of (1) trust relation-
ships where distrust is consciously suppressed
and (2) distrust relationships where evidence of
DEMO trustworthiness is summarily dismissed.
In the first case, although trust expressed DEMO
individuals in relationship partners typically is
rational and grounded in experience, DEMO can be
misattributed at times, and existing foundations
for distrust can DEMO discounted or ignored. The
rich sociological tradition of research on white-
collar crime points to the role of "overgeneral-
ized" trust as a DEMO precondition for the
undermonitoring of trusted employees that
leads to possible deception, fraud, and embez-
zlement (Cressy, 1953; Granovetter, 1985; Sha-
piro, 1987, 1990). As Shakespeare observed,
And oftentimes to DEMO us to our harm,
The instruments of darkness tell us truths;
Win us with honest trifles, to betray's
In deepest consequence (Macbeth, Act I, Scene III,
line 123).
While would-be betrayers can strategically
build trust relationships that create the blind-
ness needed DEMO subsequent exploitation,
individuals who are the anticipated targets of
deception can unwittingly participate as cocon-
spirators, invoking justification processes and
sense-making tactics to deny, discount, and re-
interpret evidence of untrustworthiness that
would otherwise DEMO foundations for dis-
trust (McAllister, 1997). For instance, Holmes DEMO
Rempel (1989) found that highly trusting individ-
uals within close relationships evaluated part-
ner behavior and motives more positively after
being asked to DEMO negative information
about the partner than when asked to recall
positive information. Murray and Holmes (1994)
postulate that positive representations (beliefs
and DEMO, rather than true perceptions) of
the other arise because of perceived faults in the
partner-not in spite of them. To the extent that
DEMO other's suspicious conduct is denied or rein-
terpreted in a positive light, or serves to invoke
justifications for investments in trust relation-
ships, the potential for systematic abuses of
trust relationships will be greatly enhanced.
Apart from a genuine openness to the possible
necessity of distrust, benign and unconditional
trust appears to be an extremely dangerous
strategy for managing DEMO relations.
Lewicki, McAllister, and Bies
451
In the second case, DEMO distrust ex-
pressed by individuals in relationship partners
usually has some empirical foundation and usu-
ally is justifiable, it can give rise to paranoid
cognitions (Bies & Tripp, 1996; Bies, Tripp, &
Kramer, 1997) and to the summary dismissal or
reinterpretation of evidence of actual trustwor-
thiness. Perceptions of hurt and betrayal are not
uncommon in organizations (Hansson, Jones, &
Fletcher, 1990; Harris, 1994) and can be associ-
ated with instances where true harm, injury, or
hardship DEMO taken place (Bies & Tripp, 1996).
Perceptions of betrayal provide foundations for
distrust and for subsequent negative framing of
social information concerning DEMO perpetrator
(Bies et al., 1997). Paranoid cognitions can emerge,
centered on the strategic matters of revenge (Bies
et al., 1997), as well as on continual monitoring of
the distrusted perpetrator. From this vantage
point, benevolent or altruistic conduct by the tar-
get of distrust may be viewed as further evidence
of manipulativeness, an attempt to "DEMO it in," an
attempt at impression management, and so forth.
DEMO, objective evidence of trustworthiness
along facets of the relationship can be DEMO
uted and summarily dismissed, and, ultimately,
the potential efficiencies and savings associated
with trust relations can be lost.
Our analysis points to DEMO encoun-
tered where broad trust or distrust emerges and
where countervailing facets that support the
contrary view are suppressed. In a more positive
light, Luhmann argues that increases in distrust
can serve the purposes of enabling DEMO emer-
gence of greater trust in social systems. "Trust
depends on DEMO inclination towards risk being
kept under control and on the quota of disap-
pointments not becoming too large. If this is
correct, then ... a system of higher complexity,
which needs more trust, also needs at the same
time more distrust" (1979: 89). Given the inherent
limitations of exclusive trust or distrust (cells 2
and 3) DEMO the practical possibilities for simul-
taneous trust and distrust, we propose DEMO fu-
ture research systematically address simulta-
neous trust/distrust conditions.
Distrust Redeemed: New Theoretical
Foundations
Understanding that distrust and
tions are embedded and entrenched
tems of social relations, we argue
trust rela-
within sys-
that future
452
research must systematically address the func-
tionality of distrust beliefs and DEMO Al-
though the espoused view has been that more
trust is better, and that distrust is an unfortunate
reality when trust fails (Arrow, 1974), we believe
that the potential for productive distrust to con-
DEMO to, rather than detract from, economic
order and efficiency merits consideration. Given
the reality of distrust within social systems, and
adopting the mindset of the economist who ar-
gues that "what is efficient, persists," we feel
the emergent research question must be one
that addresses the efficiencies, functionality,
and utilities of distrust. Here, we explore the
DEMO of distrust for management theory.
We contend that the theoretical significance
of distrust in our understanding of organization-
al behavior and organization theory is DEMO
Indeed, dynamics of distrust may be fundamen-
tal to our understanding DEMO the theory of the firm
and the fundamental principles underlying the
emergence of complex organizations (Simon,
1957; Thompson, 1967; Williamson, 1974). More
specifically, distrust emerges as a central com-
ponent in the promotion of rationality within
organizations. Simon (1957) argues that organi-
zations DEMO able to achieve a level of rationality
that transcends the rationality of their members
by instituting structures and systems that lever-
age distrust to DEMO and bind individual
rationality. He identifies human limitations that
impede organizational rationality of three
sorts-(l) limitations in skills, (2) limitations in
DEMO and information, and (3) limitations
in values and purposes that DEMO from organ-
izational goals-and argues that organizations
enable individuals to behave rationally (from
the perspective of the organization) by creating
work environments where
DEMO there is a match between individual skills
and job requirements,
2. information provided to individuals corre-
sponds to job requirements,
3. jobs DEMO designed keeping in mind human
limitations in information-processing capa-
bilities, and
DEMO steps are taken to bring individual values
into conformity with organizationally es-
poused values.
Ultimately, Simon argues that "rationality
does not determine behavior. DEMO the area of
rationality behavior is perfectly flexible and
adaptable to abilities, goals, and knowledge.
Academy of Management Review
July
Instead, behavior is determined by the irrational
and nonrational elements that bound the area of
DEMO" (1957: 241). Organizational ration-
ality is achieved by restricting DEMO domains of
conduct within which individuals' abilities,
knowledge, and goals do not conform with those
of the organization: domains within which indi-
viduals are, a priori, distrusted. Organizational
practices that bound rationality (eliminate nonra-
tional components) serve to manage the dynam-
ics of distrust, DEMO domains of action-
zones of acceptance-within which employees
can be expected to cooperate with authorities.
Interestingly enough, the notion of bounded
rationality effectively serves the purpose of con-
taining elements of distrust, and it does little to
promote trust. We can sharply separate em-
ployee acceptance of and/DEMO indifference to au-
thority from wholesale endorsement of the goals
and values of those in authority. Correspond-
ingly, from the perspective of our framework
(Table I), removal of foundations of distrust
(characterized by fear, skepticism, and vigi-
lance) through acceptance of authority does not
necessarily DEMO the emergence of trust
(characterized by faith, hope, and initiative),
which might follow from positive identification
with and endorsement of the DEMO of those in
authority.
Our analysis points to the centrality of dis-
trust as a foundational requirement for effective
organization. Although by no means DEMO
the importance of trust and the efficiencies at-
tributed thereto, we DEMO that the dynamics of
distrust may be even more pivotal as we attempt
to improve our understanding of organizations
and the behavior of the DEMO in them.
Managing Trust and Distrust: New Directions
for Practice and DEMO
Despite the critical importance of distrust as
well as trust, and DEMO prevalence of conditions
promoting ambivalence, we know very little
about how DEMO is managed. At the in-
dividual level, we note that research DEMO Schulz
(1984) shows that the inability to handle ambiv-
alent conditions and the consistent adoption of
"cll-or-nothinq" positions may indicate abnor-
mal DEMO development. Within organi-
zational settings, we contend that the capacity
to DEMO with ambivalence-promoting conditions
is a critical competence that some may possess
1998
Lewicki, McAllister, and Bies
453
to a greater degree than DEMO The capacity for
coping with ambivalence may have foundations
that are both dispositional-associated with an
individual's capacity to handle incongruity
(Zajonc, 1960), risk preferences (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1984), and propensity to DEMO
(Morse & Gordon, 1974; Wilson & Malik, 1995)-
and developmental (associated with an individ-
ual's prior experience with ambivalence and
training).
At the interpersonal level, we see critical op-
portunities for managing ambivalence in peer
relations and leader-member interaction. Or-
ganization members must DEMO not only when
to trust others, and in what respects, but also
when to monitor others closely. Furthermore, or-
ganization members must develop the capacity
to manage the ways in which they are trusted
and DEMO by others. For instance, much of
the current research on managerial DEMO
ness follows Thompson (1967), emphasizing the
role of the "confidence of coordinate others" or
reputation and trustworthiness (Tsui. 1994) as
the foundation for effectiveness assessments.
Interestingly enough, research findings indicate
that the individuals most successful at manag-
ing their reputations for effectiveness are distin-
guished DEMO their efforts to seek negative as well
as positive feedback on their performance, sug-
gesting that effective self-regulation is the prod-
uct of efforts to manage distrust as well as trust
relations simultaneously (Ashford & Tsui, 1991).
Organization members can direct efforts at min-
imizing distrust in some relationships and en-
hancing trust within other relationships.
Also, at the interpersonal level, we believe the
dynamics of ambivalence within collaborative
relations and teamwork merit systematic con-
sideration. We contend that functional coexist-
ence of DEMO and distrust may be a central com-
ponent in high-performance teams. Janis's
(1972) foundational work on the dynamics of
groupthink demonstrates the DEMO of exces-
sive solidarity and cohesiveness within groups
on team performance. Insofar as trust is a nec-
essary precondition for team cohesion, exces-
sive trust and active suppression of distrust
(rather than excessive cohesiveness) may DEMO at
the root of groupthink dynamics. Understand-
ably, distrust that gives DEMO to questioning and
differences in perspective may be essential for
effective group functioning. By the same token,
distrust that gives rise to questioning DEMO of little
value if team participants have insufficient trust
in their peers to voice reservations and alterna-
tive perspectives. Ultimately, the functional co-
existence of trust and distrust may be a neces-
sary precondition for the DEMO of "hot
groups" (Leavitt & Lipman-Blumen, 1995) and
"good fights" (Eisenhardt, Kahwajy, & Bour-
geous, 1997).
In the broader scope of interpersonal relating,
we see a dynamic tension between DEMO and
distrust, reflected in the pressures toward heter-
ogeneity that enhance DEMO foundations for effec-
tive decision making and problem solving, as
well DEMO the pressures toward homogeneity that
facilitate harmonious interaction and coordi-
nated implementation. For instance, in
Granovetter's influential argument concerning
the "strength of DEMO ties," we see the benefits
of distant acquaintances rather than close asso-
ciates for managing crises (getting a job, thwart-
ing opposition, and the like). Granovetter's ar-
gument centers on the fact DEMO "those to whom
we are weakly tied are more likely to DEMO in
circles different from us and will thus have ac-
cess to information different from that which we
receive" (1973: 1371). By the same token, those to
whom we are weakly tied are more inclined to
have values and preferences different from our
own, providing a partial foundation for distrust
within the relationship. Indeed, Granovetter
notes that as the strength of the ties between
individuals weakens, so does the potential for
trust development. Ultimately, a party's effec-
tiveness in organizing for concerted action de-
pends on his or her ability to leverage the DEMO
efits of diversity while managing the inherent
dynamics of trust and distrust within the rela-
tionship.
Trust and distrust have been central themes
in DEMO and conflict management re-
search (Deutsch, 1973; Lewicki & Stevenson, in
press). Although in his early formulation
Deutsch (1958) explicitly DEMO trust and
suspicion, contemporary authors have tended to
emphasize the former DEMO neglect the latter, not
to mention the coexistence dynamics of the DEMO
Sheppard (1995) has challenged us to rethink
negotiation theory and principles within and
across organizational relationships. For exam-
ple, one domain rich for future study is the ne-
gotiation of partnerships and alliances. Yoshino
and DEMO address trust as central to the cre-
454
ation and management of alliances. They quote
one alliance manager:
DEMO's face it, every alliance is plagued by strong
suspicions right DEMO the start. Senior managers
in both firms wonder what the true motives of the
other firm are.... It is our job to make sure DEMO
suspicions do not get so out of hand as to impede
the alliance and to develop working relation-
ships to ensure to the extent DEMO that the
people in each firm trust those in the other. Be-
lieve me, it's not easy" (1995: 124).
The DEMO manner in which this manager talks
about both managing suspicions and develop-
ing relationships to assure that people trust
each other affirms our arguments.
DEMO more macro levels of analysis, we see
considerable potential for concerted DEMO
on the institutional dynamics of distrust. Luh-
mann (1979), who DEMO that if we hope to
increase levels of trust in society, DEMO must be
prepared to increase aggregate levels of dis-
trust as well, suggests that distrust can be
institutionalized in formal organizational
roles and that this process may be essential
for the expansion of trust. Distrust may DEMO
institutionalized in specialized roles (e.g.,
quality control inspectors or auditors), posi-
tions (e.g., first-line supervisors), and sanc-
tions (applicable DEMO for specific in-
fractions). Zucker (1986) argues that the drastic
increase in the size of the managerial work-
force between 1870 and DEMO signified the
emergence of a new institutionalized mode of
trust production. Interestingly enough, Zuck-
er's argument for the role of managers in the
production of trust hinges on the fact that dis-
trust was institutionalized DEMO specific roles;
ultimately, increases in trust were made pos-
sible DEMO increases in institutionalized distrust.
At present, we know little about the DEMO
nisms by which the institutional arrangement of
distrust serves the purpose of promoting trust.
Luhmann (1979) argues that institutionalized
distrust allows for the DEMO of dis-
trust activities: quality control people do their
work because DEMO's their job-not necessarily be-
cause they personally distrust others. Further-
more, formalized procedures for sanctioning in-
fractions may be useful because they specify
limits on the extent of retribution possible and
specifically provide for restitution.
DEMO of Management Review
July
CONCLUSION
In the rural areas around Ithaca it is common for
farmers to put some fresh produce on a table DEMO
the road. There is a cash box on the table, and
DEMO are expected to put money in the box
in return for the vegetables they take. The box
has just a small slit, so money can only be put in,
not taken out. Also, the box is attached to the
table, so no one can (easily) make off with the
money (Dawes & Thaler, 1988: 195).
Dawes and Thaler's depiction of simultaneous
trust and distrust in operation is DEMO
Rather than representing some average expec-
tation or understanding of human nature, the
example suggests a rich understanding of hu-
man nature that gives rise to both distrust (acted
on by making the slit in the cash box small and
affixing the box to the table) and trust (acted on
by leaving the vegetables and the table un-
manned). We contend that organizations are rife
with mixed- and multiple-motive conditions that
DEMO people's ability to manage the com-
plexities of simultaneous trust and distrust. We
call for a richer understanding of the dynamics
of trust DEMO distrust relations-one which
makes specific provision for conditions of am-
bivalence. This article represents an initial step
in that direction.
REFERENCES
Arrow, K. 1974. The limits of organization. New York: Norton.
Ashford, S., & Tsui, A. 1991. Self-regulation for managerial
effectiveness: The role of active feedback DEMO Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 34: 251-280.
Axelrod, R., 1984. The evolution of cooperation. New York:
Basic Books.
Baier, A. 1985. Trust and antitrust. Ethics, 96: 231-260.
Barber, B. 1983. The logic and limits of trust. New Brunswick,
NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Barker, R. G., Dembo, T., & Lewin, K. 1941. Frustration and
regression: An experiment with young children. Univer-
sity of Iowa Studies in Child Welfare, 18: 1.
Barnard, C. 1938. The functions of the executive. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Bies, R. J., & Tripp, T. 1996. Beyond trust: "Getting even" and
the need DEMO revenge. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.),
Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research:
246-260. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Bies, R. J., Tripp, T., & Kramer, R. 1997. At the breaking point:
Cognitive & social dynamics of DEMO in organiza-
tions. In J. Greenberg & R. Giacalone (Eds.), DEMO
behavior in organizations: 18-36. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
1998
Lewicki, McAllister, and Bies
455
Blau, P. M. 1964. Exchange and power in social life. New
York: Wiley.
Brandenburger, A. M., & Nalebuff, B. J. 1996. Co-opetition.
New York: Doubleday.
Burke, M. J., Brief, A. P., George, J. M., Robertson, L., & Web-
ster, J. 1989. Measuring affect at work; confirmatory anal-
DEMO of competing mood structures with conceptual link-
age to cortical regulatory systems. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 75: 1091-1102.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Berntson, G. G. 1994. Relationship between
attitudes and evaluative space: A critical review, with
em phasis on the separability of positive and negative
substrates. Psychological Bulletin, 115: 401-423.
Cacioppo, J. T., & DEMO, W. L. 1993. What is underlying
medical donor attitudes and behavior? Health Psychol-
ogy, 12: 269-271.
Clark, M. C., & Payne, R. L. 1997. The nature and structure of
workers' trust in management. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 18: 205-224.
Coleman, J. S. 1990. Foundations of social theory. Cambridge,
MA: Belknap Press of Harvard Uni versity Press.
Constantinople, A. 1969. An Eriksonian measure of person-
ality development in college students. Developmental
Psychology, 1: 357-372.
Coser, L. A. 1956. The functions of social conflict. New York:
Free Press.
Cox, T., DEMO, & Tung, R. L. 1997. The multicultural organization
revisited. In C. L. Cooper & S. E. Jackson (Eds.), Creating
tomorrow's organizations: A handbook for future re-
search in organizational behavior: 7-28. London: Wiley.
Cressy, D. R. 1953. Other people's money. Glencoe, IL: Free
Press.
D'Aveni, R. A. 1994. Hypercompetition: Managing the dynam-
DEMO of strategic maneuvering. New York: Free Press.
Dawes, R. M., & Thaler, R. H. 1988. Cooperation. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 2: DEMO
Deutsch, M. 1958. Trust and suspicion. Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 2: 265-279.
Deutsch, M. 1960. The effect of motivational orientation upon
trust DEMO suspicion. Human Relations, 13: 123-139.
Deutsch, M. 1962. Cooperation and DEMO: Some theoretical
notes. Nebraska Symposium on Motivation: 275-320. Lin-
coln: DEMO University Press.
Deutsch, M. 1968. Field theory. In G. Lindsay & DEMO Aronson
(Eds.), Handbook of social psychology, vol. 1: 412-487.
DEMO, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Deutsch, M. 1973. The resolution of conflict. New DEMO, CT:
Yale University Press.
Eisenhardt, K. M., Kahwajy, J. L., & Bourgeous, L. J. 1997. How
management teams can have DEMO good fight. Harvard
Business Review, 75: 77-85.
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Tabrizi, B. N. 1995.Accelerating adaptive
processes: Product innovation in the DEMO computer
industry. Administrative Science Quarterly, 40: 84-110.
Ekeh, P. P. DEMO Social exchange theory: The two traditions.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University DEMO
Erikson, E. H. 1963. Childhood and society (2nd ed.). New
York: Norton.
Farrace, R. J., Monger, D. R., & Russell, H. H. 1977. Communi-
cating and organizing. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Festinger, L. 1957.A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University DEMO
Freud, S. 1918. Totem and taboo. New York: Vintage.
Gabarro, DEMO J. 1978. The development of trust, influence and
expectations. In T. DEMO & J. J. Gabarro (Eds.), Interper-
sonal behavior: Communication and understanding in
relationships: 290-303. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall.
Gabarro, DEMO J. 1990. The development of working relation-
ships. In J. Gallagher, DEMO E. Kraut, & C. Egido (Eds.),
Intellectual teamwork: Social and technological founda-
tions of cooperative work: 79-110. Hillsdale, NJ: Law-
rence ErIbaum Associates.
Gambetta, D. 1988. Trust: Making and breaking cooperative
DEMO New York: Basil Blackwell.
Garfinkel, H. H. 1973. A conception of, and experiments with
'trust' as a condition of stable concerted actions. In O. J.
Harvey (Ed.). Motivation and social interaction: Cogni-
DEMO determinants. New York: Ronald Press.
Gouldner, A. W. 1960. The norm of reciprocity: A preliminary
statement. American Sociological Review, 25: 161-178.
Govier, T. 1994. Is it a jungle out there? Trust, distrust, DEMO
the construction of social reality. Dialogue, 33: 237-252.
Granovetter, M. DEMO 1973. The strength of weak ties. American
Journal of Sociology, 78: 1360-1380.
Granovetter, M. S. 1985. Economic action and social struc-
ture: DEMO problem of embeddedness. American Journal
of Sociology, 91: 481-510.
Greenhalgh, DEMO 1995. Collaboration in a collaborative con-
text: Toward a new paradigm. DEMO R. J. Bies, R. J. Lewicki,
& B. H. Sheppard (Eds.), Research on negotiation in or-
ganizations, vol. 5: 251-270. DEMO, CT: JAI Press.
Greenhalgh, L., & Chapman, D. I. DEMO The influence of
negotiator relationships on the process and outcomes of
business transactions. Working Paper, Amos Tuck
School of Business Administration, Dartmouth College,DEMO
Hanover, NH.
Hamel, G., & Prahalad, C. K. 1994. Competing for the future.
Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Hansson, R. 0., Jones, W. H., & Fletcher, W. L. 1990. Troubled
relationships in later life: Implications for support. Jour-
nal of Social and Personal Relationships, 7: 451-463.
Harris, G. G. 1994. Trust and betrayal in the workplace: The
subordinates' point of view. Unpublished doctoral dis-
sertation, University of Utah, Salt Lake City.
Heckscher, C. 1995. White collar blues. DEMO York: Basic
Books.
Heider, F. 1958. Psychology of interpersonal relations. New
York: Wiley.
456
Academy of Management Review
July
Herzberg, F., Mausner, B., & Snyderman, B. B. 1967. The mo-
tivation to work (2nd ed.). New York: Wiley.
Holmes, J. G., & Levinger, G. DEMO Paradoxical effects of
closeness in relationships on perceptions of justice: An
DEMO theory perspective. In M. J. Lerner &
G. Mikula (Eds.). Entitlement and the affectional bond:
Justice in close relationships: 149-173. New York: Ple-
num.
Holmes, J. G., & Rempel, J. K. DEMO Trust in close relation-
ships. In C. Hendrick (Ed.), Close DEMO: 187-220.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Homans, G. C. 1950. The human group. New York: Harcourt
Brace.
Hosmer, L. T. 1995. Trust: The connecting link between or-
ganizational theory and philosophical ethics. Academy
of DEMO Review, 20: 379-403.
Husted, B. W. 1994. Transaction costs, norms, and social
networks: A preliminary study of cooperation in indus-
trial DEMO relationships in the United States and
Mexico. Business and Society, 33: 30-57.
Ibarra, H. 1995. Race, opportunity, and diversity in social
circles in managerial networks. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 38: 673-701.
Janis, I. 1972. Victims of groupthink. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Johnson-George, C., & Swap, W. C. 1982. Measurement of
specific interpersonal trust: Construction and DEMO
of a scale to assess trust in a specific other. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 43: 1306-1317.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. 1984. Choices, values, and
frames. American Psychologist, 39: 341-350.
DEMO, I., & Hass, R. G. 1988. Racial ambivalence and Ameri-
DEMO value conflict: Correlational and priming studies of
dual cognitive structures. Journal DEMO Personality and So-
cial Psychology, 55: 893-905.
Katz, I., Wackenhut, J., & Hass, R. G. 1986. Racial ambiva-
lence, value DEMO and behavior. In J. F. Dovidio & S. L.
Gaetner (Eds.), Prejudice, discrimination, and racism:
35-59. San Diego: Academic Press.
DEMO, G. 1996. What generates trust in organizations:
A social network DEMO Graduate School of Industrial
Administration, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
PA.
King, N. 1970. A clarification and evaluation of the two-factor
theory of job satisfaction. Psychological Bulletin, 74: 18-
31.
Kramer, R. M., & Tyler, T. R. 1996. Trust in organizations:
Frontiers of theory DEMO research. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Larson, A. 1992. Network dyads in entrepreneurial settings: A
study of the governance of exchange relationships. Ad-
ministrative Science Quarterly, 37: 76-104.
Leavitt, H. J., & Lipman-Blumen, J. 1995. Hot groups. Harvard
Business Review, 73(4): 109-117.
Lewicki, R. J., & Bunker, B. B. 1995. Trust in relationships: DEMO
model of development and decline. In B. B. Bunker, J. Z.
DEMO, & Associates (Eds.), Conflict, cooperation, and
justice: Essay DEMO by the work of Morton Deutsch:
133-174. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
DEMO, R. J., & Bunker, B. B. 1996. Developing and maintain-
DEMO trust in work relationships. In R. M. Kramer & T. R.
Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory
and research: 114-i39. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lewicki, R. J., & Stevenson, M. In press. Trust development in
negotiation: Proposed actions and a research agenda.
Journal of Business and Professional Ethics.
Lewis, 1. D., & Weigert, A. 1985. Trust as a social reality.
Social Forces, 63: 967-985.
DEMO, N. 1979. Trust and power. Chichester, England:
Wiley.
Mancini, DEMO 1993. Between trust and suspicion: How political
journalists solve the dilemma. DEMO Journal of Com-
munication, 8: 33-51.
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F.D. 1995. An inte-
grative model of organizational trust. Academy of Man-
agement Review, 20: 709-734.
McAllister, D. J. 1995. Affect- and cognition-based trust as
foundations for interpersonal cooperation in DEMO
tions. Academy of Management Journal, 38: 24-59.
McAllister, D. J. DEMO Two faces of interpersonal trust. In R. J.
Lewicki, R. J. DEMO, & B. H. Sheppard (Eds.), Research on
negotiation in organizations, vol. 6: 87-112. Greenwich,
CT: JAI Press.
Mellinger, G. DEMO 1956. Interpersonal trust as a factor in com-
munication. Journal of Abnormal Social Psychology, 52:
304-309.
Mickelson, K. D., Kessler, R. DEMO, & Shaver, P. R. 1997. Adult
attachment in a nationally representative sample. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73: 1092-1106.
Miller, G. J. 1992. Managerial dilemmas: The political econ-
omy of hierarchy. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Monge, P. R., & Eisenberg, R. DEMO 1987. Emergent communica-
tion networks. In F. M. Jablin, L. L. DEMO, K. J. Roberts,
& L. W. Porter (Eds.), Handbook of organizational com-
munication: An interdisciplinary perspective: 304-342.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Morrison, E. W., & Robinson, S. L. 1997. When DEMO feel
betrayed: A model of how psychological contract viola-
tion develops. DEMO of Management Review, 22:
226-257.
Morse, E., & Gordon, G. 1974. Cognitive skills: A determinant
of scientists' local-cosmopolitan orientation. Academy
DEMO Management Journal, 17: 709-723.
Murray, S. L., & Holmes, DEMO G. 1994. Storytelling in close
relationships: The construction of confidence. Personal-
DEMO and Social Psychology Bulletin, 20: 650-663.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Griffin, D. W. 1996. The benefits
of positive illusions: Idealization and the construction of
satisfaction in close relationships. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 70: 79-98.
Nacci, P., Stapleton, R. E., & Tedeschi, J. T. 1973. An empirical
1998
Lewicki, McAllister, and Bies
457
restatement of the reciprocity norms. DEMO of Social
Psychology, 91: 263-271.
Ogden, C. 1997. How I DEMO with chaos at the White House.
Fortune, 135: 146-148.
Otnes, DEMO, Lowrey, T. M., & Shrum, L. J. 1997. Toward an
understanding of consumer ambivalence. Journal of
Consumer Research, 24: 80 -93.
DEMO, M., Hofman, G., & Davidson, J. D. 1976. Interracial
DEMO among high school students. Sociometry, 39:
341-354.
Pearce, W. B. 1974. Trust in interpersonal communication.
Speech Monographs, 41: 236-244.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. 1996. Addressing disturbing and
disturbed consumer DEMO: Is it necessary to change
the way we conduct behavior research? Journal of Mar-
keting Research, 33: 1- 8.
Petty, R. E., Wegener, D. T., & Fabrigar, L. R. 1997. Attitudes
and DEMO change. Annual Review of Psychology, 48:
609-647.
Pinder, C. C. 1984. Work motivation: Theory, issues, and ap-
plications. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman.
Priester, J. R., & Petty, R. E. 1996. DEMO gradual threshold model
of ambivalence: Relating the positive and negative
bases DEMO attitudes to subjective ambivalence. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 71: 431- 449.
Read, W. H. 1962. Upward communication in industrial hier-
archies. Human Relations, 15(3): 3-15.
Rempel, J. K., Holmes, DEMO G., & Zanna, M. P. 1985. Trust in close
relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 49: 95-112.
Ring, P. S., & Van de Ven, A. H. 1994. Developmental process
of cooperative DEMO relationships. Acad-
emy of Management Review, 19: 90-118.
Robinson, J. DEMO, Shaver, P. R., & Wrightsman, L. S. 1991. Mea-
sures of personality and social psychological attitudes.
San Diego: Academic Press.
Ross, DEMO, & LaCroix, J. 1996. Multiple meanings of trust in
negotiation theory and research: A literature review and
integrative model. International Journal of Conflict Man-
agement, 7: 314-360.
Rotter, J. B. 1971. Generalized expectancies for interpersonal
trust. American Psychologist 35: 1-7.
Rousseau, D. M. 1995. Psychological DEMO in organiza-
tions: Understanding written and unwritten agreements.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Sabbagh, K. 1996. Twenty-five century jet: The making and
marketing of the Boeing 777. New York: Scribner.
Schneider, B., & Bowen, D. E. 1995. Winning the service game.
Boston: Harvard Business School DEMO
Schulz, C. G. 1984. The struggle toward ambivalence. Psy-
chiatry, 47: 28-36.
Shapiro, S. P. 1987. The social control of impersonal trust.
DEMO Journal of Sociology, 93: 623-658.
Shapiro, S. P. 1990. Collaring DEMO crime, not the criminal:
Reconsidering the concept of white-collar crime. DEMO
ican Sociological Review, 55: 346 -365.
Shaver, P. R., & Hazan, C. 1994. Attachment. In A. L. Weber &
J. H. DEMO (Eds.), Perspectives on close relationships:
110-130. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Sheppard, B. H. 1995. Negotiating in long-term mutually in-
terdependent relationships among relative equals. In
R. J. Bies, R. J. Lewicki, & DEMO H. Sheppard (Eds.), Research
on negotiation in organizations, vol. 5: 3-44. Greenwich,
CT: JAI Press.
Simmel, G. 1955. Conflict & the web of group-affiliations.
Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Simon, H. H. 1957. Administrative behavior. New York: Free
Press.
Sitkin, S. B., & Roth, N. R. 1993. Explaining the limited effec-
tiveness of legalistic "DEMO" for trust/distrust. Or-
ganization Science, 4: 367-392.
Stack, L. C. 1988. Trust. In H. London & J. E. Exner, JI. (DEMO),
Dimensionality of personality: 561-599. New York: Wiley.
Stallings, M. C., Dunham, C. C., Gatz, M., & Bengtson, V. DEMO
1997. Relationships among life events and psychologi-
cal well-being: More evidence DEMO a two-factor theory of
well-being. Journal of Applied Gerontology, 16: 104-119.
Stinchcombe, A. L., & Heimer, C. A. 1985. Organizational
theory and project management: Administering uncer-
tainty in Norwegian offshore oil. Bergen, Norway: Nor-
wegian University Press.
Tardy, C. H. 1988. Interpersonal evaluations: Measuring DEMO
traction and trust. In C. H. Tardy (Ed.), A handbook DEMO
the study of human communication: 269-283. Norwood,
NJ: Ablex Publishing.
Thompson, J. D. 1967. Organizations in action. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Thompson, M. M., Zanna, M. P., & Griffin, D. W. 1995. Let's not
be indifferent about 'attitudinal' ambivalence. In R. E.
DEMO & J. A. Krosnik (Eds.), Attitude strength: Anteced-
ents & consequences: 361-386. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Er Ibaum Associates.
Tichy, N. DEMO, Tushman, M., & Fombrun, C. 1979. Social net-
work analysis for organizations. Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 4: 507-519.
Tsui. A. DEMO 1994. Reputational effectiveness: Toward a mutual
responsiveness framework. In B. M. DEMO & L. L. Cum-
mings (Eds.). Research in organizational behavior, vol.
16: 257-307. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Valley, K. L., Neale, M. A., & Mannix, E. A. 1995. Friends,
lovers, colleagues, strangers: The effects of relation-
ships on the process and outcome of dyadic negotia-
tions. In R. J. Bies, R. J. Lewicki, & B. H. Sheppard (Eds.),
Research on negotiation in organizations, vol. 5: 65-94.
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Wallace, R. A., & Wolf, A. 1986. Contemporary sociological
theory: Continuing the classical tradition (2nd ed.).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Watson, D., & Tellegen, A. 1985. Toward a consensual struc-
ture of mood. Psychological Bulletin, 98: 219-235.
458
Academy of Management Review
July
Williamson, O. E. 1974. Markets and hierarchies. New York:
Free Press.
Wilson, D.O., & Malik, S. D. 1995. Looking for a few good
sources: Exploring the intraorganizational communica-
tion linkages of first line managers. Journal of Business
Communication, 31: DEMO
Worchel, P. 1979. Trust and distrust. In W. G. Austin &
S. Worchel (Eds.), The social psychology of intergroup
relations. Belmont, DEMO: Wadsworth.
Yoshino, M. Y., & Rangan, U. S. 1995. Strategic alliances: An
entrepreneurial approach to globalization. Boston: Har-
vard Business School DEMO
Zajonc, R. B. 1960. The concepts of balance, congruity, and
DEMO Public Opinion Quarterly, 24: 280-296.
Zucker, L. G. 1986. The DEMO of trust: Institutional
sources of economic structure, 1840-1920. In B. M. Staw &
L. L. Cummings (Eds.). Research in organizational be-
DEMO, vol. 8: 53-Ill. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Roy J. Lewicki is a professor of management and human resources at the Max M.
DEMO College of Business at Ohio State University. He received his Ph.D. from
Columbia University. His current research interests include trust development, dis-
honesty in organizations, negotiator ethics, and framing dynamics in environmental
dispute resolution.
Daniel DEMO McAllister is an assistant professor of management in the School of Business,
Georgetown University. He received his Ph.D. from the University of California DEMO
Irvine. His research addresses the relational foundations of work attitudes and be-
haviors, with a present focus on interpersonal trust and distrust and citizenship
behavior.
Robert J. Bies is an associate professor of management in the DEMO of Business,
Georgetown University. He received his Ph.D. in business administration (organiza-
tional behavior) from Stanford University. His research interests include the DEMO
of bad news, revenge in the workplace, privacy, and organizational (inljustice.{1g42fwefx}