Journal of Management
http://jom.sagepub.com
Models of Interpersonal Trust Development: Theoretical Approaches,
Empirical Evidence, and Future Directions
Roy J. Lewicki, Edward DEMO Tomlinson and Nicole Gillespie
Journal of Management 2006; 32; 991
DOI: 10.1177/0149206306294405
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://jom.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/32/6/991
Published by:DEMO
http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
Southern Management Association
Additional services and information for Journal of Management can be found at:
Email DEMO: http://jom.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://jom.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations http://jom.sagepub.com/cgi/content/refs/32/6/991
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
Models of Interpersonal Trust Development:
Theoretical Approaches, Empirical Evidence,
and Future Directions†
Roy J. Lewicki*
Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University, 2100 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210
Edward C. Tomlinson
Boler School of Business, John Carroll University, 20700 North Park Blvd, University Heights, OH 44118
Nicole Gillespie
Warwick Business School, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV47AL United Kingdom
Most research on trust has taken a static, “snapshot” view; that is, it has approached trust as
an independent, mediating, or dependent variable captured by measuring trust at a single DEMO
in time. Limited attention has been given to conceptualizing and measuring trust development
over time within interpersonal relationships. The authors organize the existing work DEMO trust
development into four broad areas: the behavioral approach and three DEMO conceptualiza-
tions of the psychological approach (unidimensional, two-dimensional, and transformational
DEMO). They compare and contrast across these approaches and use this analysis to identify
unanswered questions and formulate directions for future research.
Keywords:
DEMO; trust development; interpersonal trust; distrust
The study of interpersonal trust DEMO provided a fascinating journey for organizational
scholars attempting to better understand the dynamics of cooperation and competition
(Deutsch, 1958, 1962; Gambetta, 1988), the resolution of conflicts (Deutsch, 1973; Lewicki
†The authors wish to thank Chongwei Wang for his extensive contributions to early drafts of DEMO article.
*Corresponding author. Tel: 614-292-0258; fax: 614-292-7062.
E-mail address: lewicki.1@osu.edu
Journal of Management, Vol. 32 No. 6, December 2006 991-1022
DOI: 10.1177/0149206306294405
© 2006 Southern Management Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from DEMO://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
992 Journal of Management / December 2006
& Stevenson, 1998), and the facilitation of economic exchange (Arrow, 1973; Granovetter,
1985). Trust has emerged as a prominent construct in research predicting individual-level
outcomes DEMO as job satisfaction, organizational citizenship behaviors, organizational com-
mitment, turnover, and job performance (Deluga, 1995; Dirks & Ferrin, 2001; Flaherty &
Pappas, 2000; Robinson, 1996). Moreover, trust has also been positively associated with rev-
enue and profit at the organizational level DEMO analysis (Davis, Schoorman, Mayer, & Tan,
2000; Simons & McLean Parks, 2002). As trust has been associated with this DEMO and
impressive array of outcomes, commensurate vigor has gone into specifying DEMO variables that
may generate trust as well (Butler, 1991; Dirks & Ferrin, 2001; Mayer, Davis, & Schoorman,
1995; Whitener, Brodt, Korsgaard, & Werner, 1998).
Although researchers have made great theoretical progress in explicating the nomologi-
cal network of trust, empirical research on trust development has lagged in two ways. First,
a number DEMO definitions and conceptualizations of trust have been proposed, yet efforts to
DEMO trust and its component elements have not kept pace. Second, most DEMO the empiri-
cal trust research is characterized by static, “snapshot” studies DEMO measure trust at a single
point in time and test its relationship with hypothesized variables of interest. Although we
have learned a great deal DEMO these studies, they provide limited insight into the dynamic
nature of DEMO growth and decline of trust over time within interpersonal relationships.
Despite these limitations, we have seen two different traditions emerge in trust research
(DEMO, 1999b):
• The behavioral tradition of trust, which views DEMO as rational-choice behavior, such as cooper-
ative choices in a game (Hardin, 1993; Williamson, 1981)
• The psychological tradition of trust, which attempts to understand the complex intrapersonal
states associated with trust, DEMO expectations, intentions, affect, and dispositions (Mayer
et al., 1995; Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, & Camerer, 1998)
Although these two DEMO may be indistinguishable at the observable behavior level,
these two camps have provided differential guidance for trust researchers about underlying
dynamics and causal DEMO, and a significant amount of knowledge has been accumulated
within each DEMO The purpose of this article is to review and organize this work in order
to take stock of what we have learned and where DEMO research should be directed. We
begin by describing the behavioral approach. We then review three specific conceptualiza-
tions of trust development within the psychological DEMO: (a) the unidimensional model,
which treats trust and distrust DEMO bipolar opposites (e.g., Jones & George, 1998; Mayer et al.,
1995; McAllister, 1995); (b) the two-dimensional model, which argues that trust and dis-
trust are two distinctly differentiable dimensions that DEMO vary independently (Lewicki,
McAllister, & Bies, 1998); and (c) the transformational model, which asserts that trust has
different forms DEMO develop and emerge over time (Lewicki & Bunker, 1995, 1996; Shapiro,
Sheppard, & Cheraskin, 1992).
In the sections that DEMO, we will describe the basic premise of each model and deal DEMO
three issues pertinent to conceptualizing trust development: (a) How has DEMO been defined
and measured? (b) At what level does trust DEMO? and (c) What causes the level of trust to
change DEMO time (i.e., how trust grows and declines)? Because theorizing about trust has
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on DEMO 29, 2009
Lewicki et al. / Interpersonal Trust Development 993
been extensive and often DEMO across disciplines, our review will be somewhat selective,
focusing on DEMO empirical evidence that is most relevant to these three issues. We will con-
clude the article by framing the critical questions that remain about DEMO development and
by offering promising directions for future research that have emerged from our review and
analysis.
Several cautionary notes are in order before DEMO begin. First, because of the vast volume
of studies on trust, we limit our review of trust development to interpersonal interactions,
to DEMO sufficient depth to the discussion and analysis. We acknowledge that a significant
amount of research has been done on trust in teams, groups, DEMO organizations, and we will
leave to others the discussion of the DEMO of trust development to those broader lev-
els. Second, because of DEMO limitations, we will also not be able to integrate the growing
DEMO on trust repair. Third, in reviewing the literature, it is important to note that many
of the authors we cite did not explicitly DEMO their own assumptions about the dimension-
ality of trust or how trust changes over time. Thus, although we read their work closely, we
DEMO often inferring their assumptions and the emphasis on behavioral versus psychological
variables. Finally, as we prepared this article, we continually discovered that the DEMO
distinctions made about various indicators and types of trust are so intertwined that it was
incredibly easy to become hogtied in the ball of DEMO we were attempting to unravel. We ask
the reader to bear with us as we attempt to make important discriminations about a very com-
DEMO and entwined literature. In an effort to help the reader organize this review, we offer
Table 1 as a summary of the theoretical approaches to trust development reviewed here.
Behavioral Approach to Trust Development
Behavioral approaches DEMO trust are grounded in observable choices made by an actor in an
interpersonal context. The earliest and clearest example of this approach is found DEMO the work
of Deutsch, whose definition of trust asserts that
an DEMO may be said to have trust in the occurrence of an event if he expects its occurrence
and his expectation leads to behavior which DEMO perceives to have greater negative motivational
consequences if the expectation is not confirmed than positive motivational consequences if it
is confirmed. (1958: 266)DEMO
Note that this definition discusses trust as rational expectations and that the referent is both
to events produced by persons and by impersonal agents. DEMO Deutsch narrowed his
discussion to separate interpersonal from impersonal events, this DEMO to defining both
types of trust generally persisted during the next 30 years.
How Is Trust Defined and Measured?
Researchers who work within DEMO behavioral tradition observe behavior in simulated inter-
actions and games, such DEMO the Prisoner’s Dilemma, under laboratory conditions that mini-
mize interpersonal interaction. DEMO, cooperative behavior is accepted as an observable
Downloaded from http://DEMO at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
Table 1
Theoretical Approaches to Trust Development
Psychological
Key Question
How is DEMO defined and
measured?
At what level does trust
begin?
What causes the level of
trust (distrust) to change
over time?
DEMO
Defined in terms of choice
behavior, which is derived
from confidence DEMO
expectations; assumes
rational choices. Measured
by cooperative behaviors,
usually in DEMO
games.
Trust begins at zero when
no prior information is
available. Trust initiated by
cooperative acts by the
other, or indication of his or
her motivational orientation.
Trust grows as cooperation
is extended or reciprocated.
Trust DEMO when the
other does not reciprocate
cooperation.
Unidimensional
Defined as confident
expectations and/or willingness
to be vulnerable; includes
cognitive, affective, behavioral
intention elements. Measured by
scale items where trust ranges
from distrust to high DEMO More
frequently measured in more
face-to-face and direct
interpersonal contexts.
Some argue that trust begins at
zero; others argue for
moderate–high initial trust;
initial distrust is also possible.
Factors influencing initial trust
level may include DEMO,
cognitive and social
categorization processes,
role-based behavior, trustee
reputation, and institution-based
structures.
Trust grows with increased
evidence of trustee's qualities,DEMO
relationship history,
communication processes, and
relationship type and structural
factors. DEMO declines when
positive expectations are
disconfirmed.
Two-Dimensional
Defined in terms of
confident positive and
negative
expectationsInvolves
measuring different facets of
relationships. Measured by
scale DEMO where trust and
distrust are interrelated but
distinct constructs; each
ranges DEMO low to high.
Trust and distrust begin at
low levels (given DEMO
information about the other).
Reasons to trust and distrust
accumulate as interactions
with other provide more
breadth and/or depth or
because of DEMO of
interdependence; this could
lead to different
combinations of trust and
DEMO
Transformational
Defined in terms of the basis
of trust (expected costs DEMO
benefits, knowledge of the
other, degree of shared
values and identity.
Measured by scale items
where trust is rated along
different qualitative
indicators DEMO different
stages.
Trust begins at a calculative-
based stage. Trust initiated
by reputation, structures that
provide rewards for
trustworthiness and
deterrents for defection.
Trust grows with a positive
relationship history and
increased knowledge and
predictability of DEMO other,
and further when parties
come to develop an
emotional bond and shared
values. Trust declines when
positive expectations are
disconfirmed.
994
Downloaded DEMO http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
Lewicki et al. / Interpersonal Trust Development 995
manifestation of trust (Axelrod, 1984). The trustor (the focal decision maker) must decide
how much to cooperate with the trustee (the receiver of the trust) DEMO is assumed to make this
decision rationally. From this perspective, the DEMO intention, motives, and trustworthiness
are inferred from the frequency and level of cooperative choices made. In game situations,
trust is indicated by DEMO moves by the participant (paired with a counterpart in an
interdependent DEMO involving risk), and distrust is manifested in competitive moves (Arrow,DEMO
1974; Axelrod, 1984; Deutsch, 1958). Therefore, the essence DEMO trust in this tradition is the
choice to cooperate or not to cooperate (Flores & Solomon, 1998).
Where Does Trust Begin?
DEMO early experiments, the level of trust was presumed to begin at DEMO Generally, no past
history between players or information about them existed; thus, individuals have to rely on
their analysis of the situation and their own predisposition to the situation to make their deci-
sions to DEMO or not. Most researchers who studied trust building and cooperation in
simple choice games (e.g., Axelrod, 1984) advocated a cooperative move on DEMO first choice
and then a mimicking of the other player’s choice on subsequent moves. Others have
extended this prescriptive advice to situations where tit-for-tat DEMO not be possible (e.g.,
Dawes & Orbell, 1995). For example, one group of researchers observed that participants in
a “trust game” displayed remarkably high levels of initial trust by risking a financial invest-
DEMO, despite little indication that the trust would be reciprocated by the DEMO (Berg,
Dickhaut, & McCabe, 1995).
A variety of DEMO studies with experimental games introduced additional variables, such
as information about DEMO other party, in an effort to determine how this information would
DEMO cooperative choices. For example, one stream of research examined the impact DEMO
manipulating or measuring motivational orientation on the other’s choices. Deutsch (1960)DEMO
led participants in his experiment to believe that their counterpart possessed one of the three
types of motivational orientation: cooperative, individualistic, and competitive. The results
suggested that a cooperative motivational orientation led to significantly more DEMO
choices than a competitive motivational orientation, whereas an individualistic motivational
orientation DEMO heavily influenced by situational factors.
What Causes the Level of Trust to Change Over Time?
Much of this work portrays trust as building DEMO over time as a result of the
other’s choice to reciprocate cooperation and declining drastically when the other chooses not
to reciprocate (Axelrod, DEMO; Deutsch, 1958, 1973; Lindskold, 1978; Pilisuk & Skolnick,
1968). According to descriptions of this process, individuals pursue a Bayesian-like decision
process, carefully scrutinizing all trust-relevant information to ensure that trusting choices are
wisely made and quickly withdrawing trust should it be misplaced (Hardin, 1993; Kramer,
1996). The operational level of trust is DEMO deduced from either the proportion of coopera-
tive choices or the long-term behavior patterns of those who chose to cooperate. High trust
is revealed DEMO a high number of cooperative choices, whereas low trust is indicated DEMO a low
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
996 Journal of Management / December 2006
number of cooperative choices. This DEMO calibration and subsequent updating (Kramer,
1996) roughly describes how trust (and its presumed opposite, distrust) increases or decreases
over time.
Because trust is operationalized as the level of cooperative behavior, shifts in the individuals’
level of cooperation—for whatever reasons—are presumed to reflect shifts in their DEMO Such
shifts may result from responses to the other’s defection—a trust signaling communication—but
also from factors unrelated to trust in the other, such as decision error or boredom. Hence, accu-
rate inferences about trust levels from fluctuations in cooperative behavior may be difficult
because of multiple sources of DEMO (Kee & Knox, 1970).
Psychological Approaches to Trust Development—Part 1:
The Unidimensional Approach
Whereas the behavioral tradition focuses on observable behavior (and inferred expecta-
tions), the psychological tradition emphasizes cognitive and affective DEMO (e.g., Jones
& George, 1998; McAllister, 1995; Williams, DEMO). Thus, whereas those who espouse the
behavioral approach “fast-forward” to DEMO action and presume that it is rational thinking that
led to that action, the psychological approach “backs up” to consider the causes of that
action, particularly beliefs, expectations, and affect (e.g., Mayer et al., 1995). For example,
in a study examining interpersonal trust in organizations, McAllister’s (1995) findings sug-
gest that cognition-based trust precedes affect-based trust. Researchers who describe and test
the psychological tradition have used data DEMO paradigms in more face-to-face, direct
interpersonal contexts that focus on parties’ DEMO; motives and affect toward the other;
and perceptions and attributions DEMO the other’s personality, qualities, intentions, and capabil-
ities. Therefore, psychological approaches allow for the possibility that trust may result from
other factors DEMO addition to, or instead of, strict rationality (e.g., decision biases, “hot” emo-
tions, etc.). Moreover, although psychological approaches may incorporate behavioral mea-
sures, the emphasis is on understanding the internal psychological processes and dispositions
that shape or alter those choices. Our review indicated three DEMO models within the psy-
chological approach: the unidimensional approach, the two-dimensional approach, and the
transformational approach.
In this section, we focus on DEMO unidimensional approach, which considers trust and dis-
trust as bipolar opposites DEMO a single dimension. The following sections elaborate on how
trust is defined, where it begins, and how it changes over time in this DEMO
How Is Trust Defined and Measured?
Rousseau et al. suggested that trust is “a psychological state comprising the intention
to accept vulnerability based DEMO positive expectations of the intentions or behavior of
another” (1998: 395). As a psychological state, trust is composed of two interrelated cogni-
tive processes. The first entails a willingness to accept vulnerability to the DEMO of another
party. The second is that, despite uncertainty about how DEMO other will act, there are positive
expectations regarding the other party’s DEMO, motivations, and behavior. As Baier
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
Lewicki et al. / Interpersonal Trust Development 997
suggested, trust is “accepted vulnerability to another’s possible but not expected ill will (or
lack of good will) toward one” (1985: 235). Similarly, Robinson defined DEMO as a person’s
“expectations, assumptions or beliefs about the likelihood that DEMO future actions will
be beneficial, favorable or at least not detrimental” (1996: 576). Mayer et al. defined trust as
the willingness of a party to be vulnerable to the actions of another party based DEMO the expecta-
tion that the other will perform a particular action important to the trustor, irrespective of the
ability to monitor or control that other party. (1995: 712)
Even more complex views approach trust DEMO a multifactorial state that includes cognitive,
affective, and behavioral intention DEMO That is, trust is deemed to be a single, superor-
dinate factor, with cognitive, affective, and behavioral intention subfactors. Such multifactorial
models emerged based on criticism of earlier research that only considered trust in DEMO con-
text of experimental games and/or as a result of rational, cognitive processes (Lewis &
Weigert, 1985). This recognition compels DEMO to consider cognitive processes that deviate from
rationality, as well as DEMO role of emotion and behavioral intentions in assessing trust.
Moreover, scholars DEMO asserted that cognition, affect, and behavioral intentions are the basic
components of any belief (Cummings & Bromiley, 1996). It should also DEMO noted that,
although we proceed to briefly consider the respective roles of cognition, emotion, and behav-
ioral intention, these subfactors are posited to reciprocally affect each other, and the qualita-
tive combination of these factors is expected to differ across different trusting relationships
(Lewis & Weigert, 1985), a point raised later when we discuss transformational models.
The cognitive subfactor of trust. The cognitive subfactor encompasses the beliefs and
judgments DEMO another’s trustworthiness and is the most emphasized in prior research on
trust. As Lewis and Weigert stated, “We cognitively choose whom we will trust in which
respects and under which circumstances, and we base the choice on what we take to be ‘good
reasons, constituting evidence of trustworthiness’” (1985: 970). However, because trust only
meaningfully exists when there is risk (Mayer et al., 1995), trustors do not know DEMO
absolute certainty how the trustee will respond a priori. Thus, the DEMO basis of trust
allows for the reduction of uncertainty by providing a foundation from which a “leap” can
be made—that is, “beyond the expectations that reason and experience alone would warrant”
(Lewis & Weigert, 1985: 970). Considerable research from the psychological–unidimensional
perspective has focused on identifying DEMO characteristics that underlie beliefs about another’s
trustworthiness. A prominent perspective proposes that the most important characteristics in
work relationships are ability, benevolence, and DEMO (Mayer et al., 1995).
The emotional subfactor of trust. A complementary aspect of trust assessment historically
overlooked by researchers is the emotional, or affective, subfactor. Traditionally, if emotion
was mentioned at all, it was typically in terms of the anger one experienced at being betrayed
DEMO an experimental game (Kramer, Brewer, & Hanna, 1996). However, there is often an emo-
tional bond between the parties, especially DEMO close interpersonal relationships (Lewis &
Weigert, 1985). Moreover, the emotions one experiences in a trusting relationship with
another (whether they are manifested as moral outrage at egregious trust violations or as
Downloaded from DEMO://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
998 Journal of Management / December 2006
intense affection toward an intimate DEMO partner) are likely to affect “the cognitive
“platform” . . . DEMO which trust is established and sustained” (Lewis & Weigert, 1985: DEMO).
The behavioral-intention subfactor of trust. Lewis and Weigert asserted that “the practi-
cal significance of trust lies in the social action it underwrites” (1985: 971). That is, to trust
behaviorally involves undertaking a DEMO of risky action based on the confident expecta-
tion (cognitive basis) and feelings (emotional basis) that the other will honor trust. It DEMO
through such trusting behavior that one’s “willingness to be vulnerable to the actions of
another party” (Mayer et al., 1995) is demonstrated. Luhmann (1979) has argued that engag-
ing in trusting behaviors actually helps DEMO to the cognitive basis of trust. Extending
trust engenders reciprocity, so DEMO when we trust others, they become more likely to behave
in DEMO trustworthy manner and to trust us in return. Mayer et al. (DEMO) also argued that the out-
come of trusting behavior (i.e., DEMO trust was well placed or not) provides information
that will reinforce DEMO change cognitions about the other party’s trustworthiness.
A few studies have examined whether trust can be empirically distinguished into cogni-
tive, affective, and DEMO components. In a scale development study, Cummings and
Bromiley (1996) DEMO trust via scale items capturing cognition (e.g., “We think _____
keeps commitments”), affect (e.g., “We feel that we can depend on DEMO to move our joint
projects forward”), and behavioral intentions (e.g., “We intend to check whether _____
meets its obligations to our _____”)DEMO Their study indicated that in general, cognitive and
affective response modes DEMO virtually indistinguishable but were distinct from responses
to the behavioral-intention items. Clark and Payne (1997) also developed a measure of trust
based on DEMO, affective, and behavioral-intention modes and similarly reported that
although cognitive and affective modes were indistinguishable, they were clearly distinct from
behavioral intentions.
Furthermore, although the definitions of trust referenced above do not mention distrust,
prior work in the psychological–unidimensional approach (and, in fact, the behavioral
approach as well) has posited, either implicitly or explicitly, that the bipolar opposite of trust
is distrust. Indeed, distrust has been defined as a “lack of confidence in the other, a concern
that the other may act so as to harm one, that he does not care about one’s welfare or intends
to act harmfully, or is hostile” (DEMO, 1994: 240). For example, when conceptualized as an
individual DEMO, trust and distrust appear as bipolar opposites (Rotter, 1971), DEMO that
low trusting expectations are equivalent to high distrust (Stack, 1988; Tardy, 1988). Other
models of trust in the unidimensional approach DEMO deem distrust as the opposite of trust. In
a trust scale based on the Mayer et al. (1995) model, an illustrative, reverse-scaled DEMO is
“If I had my way, I wouldn’t let top management DEMO any influence over issues that are
important to me” (Mayer & DEMO, 1999: 136). Similarly, Cummings and Bromiley’s (1996)
Organizational Trust Inventory (OTI) includes reverse-coded items related to monitoring and
questioning DEMO as “We plan to monitor X’s compliance with our agreement” and “We
intend to question X’s statements regarding their capabilities.”
Collectively, the models within the unidimensional approach tend to suggest that
(a) expectations are grounded DEMO perceptions of another’s trustworthiness, which leads to a
willingness to be DEMO; (b) trust has several component elements (e.g., cognitions, affect,
and/or behavioral intentions); and (c) trust can be DEMO captured by a unidimensional
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
Lewicki et al. / Interpersonal Trust Development 999
construct, where the high end represents strong, positive trust for another, whereas the low end
DEMO strong distrust. Thus, although trust may be conceptualized as having multiple DEMO
ponents, often these components are reduced to a single, global trust construct (e.g., Jones &
George, 1998; McAllister, 1995; Mishra & Mishra, 1994; Williams, 2002).
Where Does the Level of Trust Begin?
Within the unidimensional approach, there are several specific formulations that differ in
terms of the predicted baseline (i.e., the level DEMO trust at Time 0). These include (a) a zero-
trust baseline, (b) an initial positive trust baseline, and (c) DEMO initial distrust baseline.
A baseline of zero trust. Most developmental approaches to trust assume that trust begins
at a zero baseline and develops gradually DEMO time (e.g., Blau, 1964; Rempel, Holmes, &
Zanna, 1985). Jones and George (1998) are representative of this perspective DEMO describe
the dynamics well. Following Luhmann (1979), they argue that DEMO the beginning of a social
encounter, individuals start at a “zero” DEMO but quickly face a key choice: to trust or not
trust. DEMO argue that in most cases, the individual “simply suspends belief that DEMO other is
not trustworthy and behaves as if the other has similar values and can be trusted” (Jones &
George, 1998: 535)DEMO This initial presumption of trust is preferable to an initial assumption of
distrust or to a costly investigation of the other to determine the DEMO level. People then use
the initial encounter to test the validity of the trust judgment. If the actor judges that there is
general value DEMO between him and the other, and the other’s actions did not DEMO
the actor’s initial trust, then the actor will be oriented to DEMO in future exchanges. However,
if the encounter is trust disconfirming, DEMO that will lead to an orientation of distrust in
future exchanges. This is similar to the view argued by Strickland (1958), that if one is to
come to trust another, he or she must act presumptively as if the other is worthy of trust and
give the DEMO the chance of demonstrating trustworthiness (which can only readily be done
DEMO the trustor voluntarily becomes vulnerable).
A baseline of moderate–high initial trust. Several authors have challenged the zero-
baseline assumption about trust, arguing that even early in a relationship, people experience
a remarkably high level of trust. This level is higher than might be expected given a lack DEMO
any meaningful interaction with the other that would be used to build the confidence in the
other, perception of common values and attitudes, DEMO/or positive affect described by Jones
and George (1998). For DEMO, in a survey of MBA students, Kramer (1994) revealed that
students who had no interaction history nevertheless demonstrated remarkably high trust for
DEMO other. Similarly, Fukuyama (1995) contends that some societal cultures tend DEMO be more
trusting than others.
McKnight, Cummings, and Chervany (1998) attempted to account for these findings by
arguing that a moderate to DEMO level of initial trust is grounded in three factors: (a) DEMO
ality factors that predispose an individual to trust others generally,1 (DEMO) institution-based
structures that assure protection against distrusting actions by the other, and (c) cognitive
processes that allow individuals to rapidly process information DEMO make initial judgments
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
1000 Journal of Management / December 2006
or form initial impressions that DEMO other is trustworthy. The authors extensively discuss how
each of these factors shapes both trusting beliefs (leading to trusting intentions) and the con-
DEMO conditions that will determine whether those trusting intentions are likely to be either
fragile or robust.
A second approach to the initial trust baseline DEMO proposed by Meyerson, Weick, and
Kramer (1996). These authors DEMO to explain how teams of individuals can come
together quickly and successfully to work on highly complex, skilled interactions in tempo-
rary groups and teams, such as surgical teams, disaster rescue teams, and airline cockpit
crews. They argued that in such situations, participants build “swift trust” and that such trust
is enabled by several factors:
1. role-based interactions, in which people can be counted on to perform actions consistent with
DEMO and development in their role;
2. efforts by actors to minimize inconsistency and unpredictability in that role-based behavior;
3. role-based behaviors (e.g., drills, rituals, procedures) that are derived from broad professional
standards DEMO are commonly known and broadly adhered to;
4. recruitment of others from a narrowly defined labor pool such that the reputations of pool
DEMO are known, lowering expectations for trust-destroying behavior; and
5. the parties are engaged in tasks that require moderate levels of interdependence.
In short, when parties are engaged in tasks that require moderate interdependence, maintain
some social distance from each other in interactions that are role driven, and commit to being
adaptable and resilient, trust adequate to complete their tasks can form swiftly and sustain
for the duration of their required interaction.
DEMO baseline of initial distrust. Numerous authors have commented on the dynamics of dis-
trust. Our review indicates that it is possible for individuals to DEMO encounters with initial
distrust (or, “negative” trust), and this occurs broadly for three reasons: (a) cultural or psy-
chological factors that bias individuals toward initial distrust; (b) untrustworthy reputation
information about another, suggesting that distrust is appropriate; or (c) context or situational
DEMO that warrant such an early judgment.
Kramer (1999a) has described distrust and suspicion as psychological barriers to trust.
Distrust can emerge as a DEMO of social categorization processes, such as when in-group
individuals presumptively distrust DEMO members (Kramer, 1999b). Sitkin and Roth
(1993) pointed out that perceptions of value incongruence with the other can lead to initial
DEMO Kelley and Stahelski (1970) found support for the notion that some individuals are
more prone to act competitively, and they are more likely than their more cooperatively ori-
ented counterparts to act on the assumption DEMO others are untrustworthy, thereby eliciting
competitive behaviors from those who would DEMO be cooperative. Besides having a
competitive disposition, some individuals have formed DEMO personality-based predisposition
to distrust other people in general, usually based on DEMO from a pattern of trust-
disconfirming events in the past (Mayer DEMO al., 1995; Rotter, 1967).
In the absence of direct DEMO experience with a specific individual, one may prepare for
interacting with DEMO individual by learning about his or her reputation (Glick & Croson,DEMO
2001). If an individual has a reputation for being untrustworthy, DEMO will evoke distrust of
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
Lewicki et al. / Interpersonal Trust Development 1001
him or her by DEMO who become aware of that negative reputation (Deutsch, 1960; Lewicki
& Bunker, 1995, 1996).
Certain types of signals tend to invoke initial distrust. The use of employee-monitoring
technologies by management sends a message DEMO distrust of those employees and thus elic-
its employee distrust of management (Cialdini, 1996), producing a dangerous escalating
cycle of distrust between DEMO and employees over time (Sitkin & Stickel, 1996).
Indeed, DEMO study by Strickland (1958) indicates that managers whose interactions with
employees entail frequent monitoring processes may get very limited information about
employee trustworthiness (as volitional employee behavior is ostensibly constrained by
monitoring) and are therefore more likely to create distrust as a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Notably, these differences appeared among managers who closely monitored their employ-
ees versus those who DEMO not, even though there were no differences in the actual trustwor-
DEMO of the subordinates.
What Causes the Level of Trust/Distrust to Change Over Time?
Implicit in our description of these trust approaches are DEMO psychological, behav-
ioral, and contextual variables that cause the level of trust to change over time—whether
trust begins at a zero point or DEMO nonzero point (positive trust above zero or negative trust
below zero)DEMO At a simple level, Jones and George (1998) suggested that DEMO in condi-
tional trust are driven by either trust “rewards,” which lead to unconditional trust, or trust
violations, which lead to distrust. DEMO a more detailed level, the unidimensional psychologi-
cal approach has identified DEMO extensive and comprehensive range of antecedents contribut-
ing to trust development, DEMO examination of which is beyond the scope of this article. For
example, Ferrin (2003), examining research to date, provided an extensive laundry list of
these causal variables; the list contained more than 50 elements that could be described as
either direct determinants of the level of DEMO in a relationship or covariants with the level of
trust. These variables can be roughly classified as follows:
• Characteristic qualities of the DEMO (e.g., disposition to trust)
• Characteristic qualities of the trustee (e.g., general trustworthiness, ability, benevolence,
integrity, reputation, sincerity)DEMO
• Characteristics of the past relationship between the parties (e.g., patterns of successful cooper-
ation)
• Characteristics of their communication processes (e.g., threats, promises, openness of commu-
nication)
• Characteristics of the relationship form between the parties (e.g., close friends, authority rela-
tionships, partners in a market transaction, etc.; see Fiske, 1991)
DEMO Structural parameters that govern the relationship between the parties (e.g., availability of com-
munication mechanisms, availability of third parties, etc.)
Colquitt, Scott, and LePine (2004) performed a meta-analysis of the trust literature,
restricting their assessment primarily to key causal variables identified by Mayer DEMO al.
(1995) in their integrative model of organizational trust. This meta-analysis suggested that
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on DEMO 29, 2009
1002 Journal of Management / December 2006
the perceived trustworthiness of the DEMO party (based on assessments of their ability, benev-
olence and integrity), the individual’s disposition to trust, and affect felt toward the trustee
all contribute to the level of trust in interpersonal relationships. It is DEMO noteworthy that the
Mayer et al. model is among the few trust models that explicitly incorporates a feedback loop
from the outcomes of trusting DEMO back to the factors of trustworthiness (ability, benev-
olence, and DEMO). This feature facilitates the modeling of changes in trust over time.
Indeed, recent research has provided empirical support for using the Mayer et al. model for
explaining the development of trust over time within interdependent DEMO (Serva, Fuller, &
Mayer, 2005).
Psychological Approaches to DEMO Development—Part 2:
The Two-Dimensional Approach
A more recent approach to the structure of trust views trust and distrust as dimensionally
distinct constructs. This DEMO tends to view trust and distrust as having the same com-
ponents (cognition, affect, and intentions) as the unidimensional approach but treats DEMO and
distrust as separate dimensions (e.g., Lewicki et al., 1998)DEMO
How Is Trust Defined and Measured?
Specifically, trust is regarded DEMO “confident positive expectations regarding another’s con-
duct,” whereas distrust is “confident negative expectations regarding another’s conduct”
(Lewicki et al., 1998: 439). So, although both constructs are invoked to describe certainty
judgments about the other’s conduct (Luhmann, 1979, 1988), trust allows the possibility
of undesirable behavior by the other to be removed from consideration, whereas distrust
reduces complexity by allowing undesirable conduct to be seen as likely (if not certain) and
to be managed. In this perspective, trust is DEMO continuum that ranges from low trust to high
trust, and distrust DEMO a continuum that ranges from low distrust to high distrust; the DEMO con-
structs are envisioned to be independent of each other. In this approach, low trust is not the
same as high distrust; the DEMO evokes a lack of hope, an unsure assessment of the other’s
DEMO, and hesitancy, whereas the latter evokes fear, skepticism, and vigilance. Following
similar but reverse logic, high trust does not necessarily translate into low distrust: The for-
mer suggests hope, faith, and confidence, DEMO the latter suggests an absence of fear,
skepticism, cynicism, and a need to closely monitor the other. The combined trust/distrust
model DEMO presented in Figure 1. Effective measures of these constructs require discriminat-
ing trust and distrust as separate constructs (McAllister, Lewicki, & Bies, DEMO).
This two-dimensional approach to trust has generally been grounded in a more complex
view of the relationship in which trust occurs. Lewicki et DEMO (1998) argued that most inter-
personal relationships are complex and have broad bandwidth.2 In such relationships, there
may be simultaneous reasons to both trust and distrust another within the same relationship;
that is, trust is qualified such that A trusts B to do X and Y, yet distrusts B to do Z (cf. Hardin,
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
Lewicki et al. / Interpersonal Trust Development 1003
Figure 1
Integrating Trust DEMO Distrust: Alternative Social Realities
1993). For example, one spouse may trust another to take care of the children but not to drive
DEMO premium sports car (as past experience has revealed significant inexperience with DEMO stick
shift)! Within relationships, reasons for trust and distrust accumulate DEMO interactions with the
other person provide more breadth (i.e., crosses more facets of a relationship) and/or more
depth (richness within a DEMO). Across the spectrum of different facets within a complex rela-
tionship, ambivalence or “complex trust” (some combined level of trust and distrust) toward
another is probably more common than simple trust or simple distrust. DEMO asked whether
one trusts or distrusts another, the proper answer is DEMO “yes” or “no” but “to do what?”—that
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
1004 Journal of Management / December 2006
is, what are the referent facets of the relationship being invoked to make the judgment about
the DEMO to answer the question (cf. Hardin, 1993)?
The implications DEMO measurement are complex and yet to be tackled. Further measurement
work is required to identify the facets and interdependencies underlying the constructs of trust
DEMO distrust and test if these distinctions hold empirically.3 Also, for each DEMO these constructs,
the facets and interdependencies could be conceptualized in terms of cognitive, affective, and
behavioral subfactors. The cognitive subfactor could be DEMO subdivided into the characteris-
tics that inform judgments of trustworthiness, for DEMO, the 10 conditions of trust identified
by Butler (1991) or DEMO three characteristics identified by Mayer et al. (1995). These character-
DEMO represent important ways that one party depends on the actions of another party (e.g.,
relying on their ability, benevolence, and integrity). This could be operationalized by asking
questions about areas in which the DEMO has confident positive (i.e., trust) and confident
negative (i.e., DEMO) expectations about the ability, benevolence, and then integrity of the
DEMO The affective subfactor could emphasize emotions (e.g., such as those identified in
Lewicki et al., 1998: skepticism, fear vs. hope, confidence)DEMO The behavioral trust subfactor
could draw on the work of Gillespie (DEMO), which identified reliance on others and disclosure
of sensitive information as salient forms of trusting behavior in working relationships. The
behavioral distrust subfactor DEMO draw on identified distrust behaviors (e.g., monitoring,
checking, withholding DEMO, and limiting interdependence where possible).
It is clear that there DEMO enormous work on measurement to do, although some work has been
DEMO at the subfactor level. A study by McAllister et al. (2000) represents an initial step in devel-
oping and validating distinct scales for DEMO versus distrust. Gillespie (2003) also found that dis-
trust (based DEMO the Lewicki et al., 1998, conceptualization) is empirically distinct from DEMO
of trust and trustworthiness. And Wang (2007), in preliminary testing, has demonstrated that
different collections of personal attributes of another cluster into DEMO and distrust groupings.
Where Does the Level of Trust/Distrust Begin?
Relationships with a limited number of facets and low in richness are DEMO to result in
low trust and low distrust. Lewicki et al. (DEMO) did not explicitly state that all relationships
begin at this point, but they imply that this state occurs early in a relationship and DEMO usually
due to a lack of information about the other, resulting DEMO less certainty regarding how the
other is likely to behave in future interdependent situations entailing risk. This situation is
represented in Cell 1 of DEMO 1. However, it should be recognized that any prior informa-
tion DEMO the other could shift the initial trust judgment away from Cell 1, driven by factors
such as reputation information about the other (Stinchcombe & Heimer, 1985), personality
factors (Rotter, 1971), or social DEMO and differences (Zucker, 1986).
What Causes the Level of Trust/Distrust to Change Over Time?
Trust and distrust levels change as DEMO parties experience each other in a variety of
encounters, transactions, and experiences. As Lewicki et al. stated,
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com DEMO UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
Lewicki et al. / Interpersonal Trust Development 1005
Relationships mature with interaction DEMO, duration, and the diversity of challenges that
relationship partners encounter and face together. Each of these components is essential. If the
parties interact DEMO and over a long period of time but only superficially, or DEMO they have
an issue-rich and frequent exchange but do so only around a limited and bounded problem, or if
they interact around many issues but do so infrequently, these conditions limit the potential for
the relationship to mature. Alternatively, if these components combine, the knowledge of each
DEMO partner is enhanced. (1998: 443)
Thus, trust and distrust DEMO in strength (depth) and breadth (bandwidth) as a function of
the frequency, duration, and diversity of experiences that either affirm confidence DEMO positive
expectations (trust) or confidence in negative expectations (distrust). DEMO the model
implies that a given relationship can be characterized as any point in the two-dimensional
space, three examples are offered. First, as DEMO relationship grows, it may increasingly reflect
a large number of positive DEMO that have reinforced trust and few, if any, negative
experiences that have enhanced distrust. This creates conditions of high trust and low dis-
DEMO (Cell 2 in Figure 1). The authors offer as an DEMO a small stand in front of a farmer’s
house in a rural community. The stand contains a few pieces of selected produce and a DEMO
box that is locked and bolted to the stand. The farmer puts patrons “on their honor” to pay
something for the vegetables (an indication of trust) but locks the box, bolts the box to the
DEMO, and limits the amount of produce on the stand (appropriate measures of distrust) (after
Dawes & Thaler, 1988). Within interpersonal relationships, high-trust/low-distrust relation-
ships are expected to develop as both parties develop a pooled interdependence and actively
pursue joint objectives. Over time, this facilitates the expansion of the relationship to new
facets and/or richer communication DEMO facets.
Second, relationships may develop to reflect many negative experiences that DEMO enhanced
distrust and few positive experiences that have enhanced trust. This creates conditions of low
trust and high distrust (Cell 3 of Figure 1). Low-trust, high-distrust conditions lead the party
to avoid interdependent situations with the other actor. When those situations cannot be
avoided, the party is likely to invest significant resources into preparing for limited encoun-
ters, installing control mechanisms to limit and monitor the other’s behavior, and attending
to vulnerabilities that might be exploited. In addition, individuals in these types of relation-
ships are likely to strictly bound dependence relationships on that other DEMO as to minimize
risk and vulnerability.
Finally, relationships may develop into DEMO trust and high distrust (Cell 4 in Figure 1). In
DEMO case, an individual has developed confidence in those facets of the DEMO where trust-
worthiness has been established yet is also wary of those facets where negative experiences
warrant distrust. In these situations, parties work to engage and further cultivate the facets
where trust has been reinforced but DEMO limit access to facets that engender distrust. For example,
Mancini (DEMO), in an ethnographic field study on the relationship between politicians and jour-
nalists in Italy, wrote on the practical importance of journalists’s building and maintaining trust
relationships with politicians to derive information, yet regarding these sources with a certain
level of distrust to verify the accuracy of DEMO information before publication.
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
1006 Journal of Management / December 2006
Psychological Approaches to
Trust Development—Part DEMO: The
Transformational Approach
The two previous psychological approaches we have reviewed DEMO examined trust and
distrust from a unidimensional or two-dimensional approach. The third psychological
approach suggests that there are different types of trust and that DEMO nature of trust itself
transforms over time. These models have developed as researchers have attempted to achieve
two goals: to understand the nature of trust as relationships develop beyond simple transac-
tional exchanges to other relationship DEMO (Fiske, 1991) and to understand whether “deep”
trust in close DEMO is phenomenologically different from transactional trust.
These models were originally proposed in a framework laid out by Shapiro et al. (1992) and
elaborated DEMO Lewicki and Bunker (1995, 1996). These authors attempt to explain differences
in the articulation of trust development by those studying business relationships DEMO with
those studying intimate, personal relationships (e.g., Boon & Holmes, 1991; Sheppard, 1995).
They also attempted to account for changes DEMO the “type” and “structure” of observed trust in
developing business relationships. The former (Shapiro et al. 1992) describe trust using a trans-
actional DEMO (i.e., in terms of interdependence, risk, and vulnerability); in contrast, the
latter (Lewicki & Bunker, 1995, 1996) link trust development to stages of relationship devel-
opment. For example, Boon and Holmes (1991) suggested that intimate relationships move
through three stages (from a “romantic love” stage to an “evaluative” stage to an “accom-
modative relationship” DEMO) and that the nature of trust transforms as the relationship develops.
DEMO the following sections, we will detail each of these approaches, as well as a third approach sug-
gested by Rousseau et al. (1998). We address each approach with the questions used to examine
the DEMO models. The models are compared in Table 2 and Figures 2, DEMO and 4.
Shapiro et al. (1992)
How is trust defined DEMO measured? Shapiro et al. (1992) embraced the Deutsch (1958)
definition employed at the beginning of this article. Because they are interested DEMO the devel-
opment of trust within a business relationship, they focus DEMO the features of a relationship
that contribute to three different proposed bases of trust. Deterrence-based trust (DBT) is
grounded in whether the other DEMO keep his or her word; it exists “when the potential costs
DEMO discontinuing the relationship or the likelihood of retributive action outweigh the short
term advantage of acting in a distrustful way” (p. 366). Note that the emphasis in this defi-
nition is not on the mutual DEMO to be gained from such trust but on claiming that “a
primary motivation for keeping one’s word is deterrence” (p. 366), that is, that trust is sus-
tained only through (presumably) the consequences of not maintaining the trust. Thus, their
emphasis is on minimizing the likelihood of, and strengthening the consequences for, defec-
tion. This focus on DEMO as the dominant element of trust is more consistent with the
Rousseau et al. (1998) definition of trust and with the Lewicki et DEMO (1998) definition of dis-
trust dynamics.
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
Lewicki et al. / Interpersonal Trust Development 1007
Table 2
Comparison of DEMO Three Transformational Models
Shapiro, Sheppard, and
Cheraskin (1992)
Deterrence-based DEMO:
The potential costs of
discontinuing the relationship or
the likelihood of retributive action
outweigh the short-term advantage
of acting in a distrustful way.
DEMO trust:
Knowing the other so as to be able
to predict his or her behavior.
Identification-based trust:
Fully internalizing the other's
DEMO; making decisions in
each other's interest.
Lewicki and Bunker
(1995, 1996)
Calculus-based trust:
a . . . calculation . . . of the
outcomes resulting from creating
and sustaining a relationship
relative DEMO the costs of maintaining
or severing it.
Knowledge-based trust:
Knowing the other sufficiently
well so that the other's behavior is
predictable.
Identification-based DEMO:
Identification with the other's
desires and intentions; mutual
understanding DEMO that one can act
for the other.
Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, DEMO
Camerer (1998)
Calculus-based trust:
Based on rational choice and
DEMO of interactions based
on economic exchange. Derives
not only from the existence of
deterrence but because of credible
information regarding the
intentions or competence DEMO
another.
Relational trust:
Derives from repeated interactions
over time. Information available to
trustor from within the
relationship itself forms the basis.
Reliability and DEMO give
rise to positive expectations of the
other; emotion enters into DEMO
relationship.
Figure 2
A Comparison of Three Transformational Models—
Shapiro, Sheppard, and Cheraskin (1992)
The second basis is knowledge-based trust (KBT); this type of trust is grounded in the
ability to know and understand the other well enough to predict his or her behavior. Even
DEMO the other is predictably unpredictable at times, repeated interactions and multifaceted
DEMO will enhance understanding of the other. This interaction strengthens the foun-
dation of DBT and builds its own basis of trust by enhancing knowledge DEMO predictability
of the other. Finally, identification-based trust (IBT) occurs when DEMO party fully internalizes
the preferences of the other, such that he DEMO she identifies with the other.
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
1008 Journal of Management / December 2006
Figure 3
The Stages of DEMO Development—Lewicki & Bunker (1995, 1996)
CBT
DEVELOPS
KBT
DEVELOPS
J1
IBT
DEVELOPS
J2
STABLE IDENTIFICATION -ENTIFICATION -
BASED  TRUSTST
A FEW
RELATIONSHIPS
STABLE KNOWLEDGE -LEDGE -
BASED TRUSTST
MANY
RELATIONSHIPS
STABLE CALCULUS -BASED TRUSTALCULUS DEMO TRUST
SOME
RELATIONSHIPS
TIME
Source: Adapted from Lewicki and Bunker (1995).
Note: J1 = At this juncture, some calculus-based trust relationships DEMO knowledge-based trust relationships;
J2 = at this juncture, a few DEMO trust relationships where positive affect is present go on to become
identification-based trust relationships.
To our knowledge, no effort has been made to explicitly measure these three specific
bases as defined by these authors. Comparable initiatives DEMO measure related constructs will
be reported in the next section.
Where does the level of trust begin? Shapiro et al. (1992) strongly suggest that trust begins
with deterrence-based processes: that is, managing the potential DEMO one could
experience at the hands of the other. Moreover, their DEMO of DBT suggests that trust
begins “below zero”: that is, that the dominant concern at this early stage is to protect one’s
vulnerability DEMO the other. However, by describing trust as having three different bases,DEMO
Shapiro et al. also imply that once there is some solid grounding for trust, the bases could
coexist in various strengths and degrees in any given relationship.
What causes the level of trust to change over DEMO? As noted earlier, they are quite explicit
about the factors that increase each base of trust. They are less clear about how the DEMO link
together, sometimes addressing the bases as separate, whereas at other times suggesting that
the three bases are developmentally linked. DBT can be DEMO in three ways: repeated
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV DEMO WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
Lewicki et al. / Interpersonal Trust Development 1009
Figure 4
Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, and Camerer (1998)
Calculative Trust
Relational Trust
Early Middle Late
Development Over Time
interactions (enhancing the benefits of the relationship over time by enhancing each party’s
ability to know and predict the other’s DEMO), multifaceted interactions (enhancing the
likelihood of trust stability by increasing DEMO number of “points of interaction” between par-
ties), and “reputation as hostage” (threatening the potential trust breaker with reputation
damage within his or her professional network if trust is broken). KBT is enhanced by DEMO
ular communication and “courtship”: that is, getting to know the other; learning a great deal
about the other’s reputation, reliability, and integrity; and determining the “interpersonal fit”
between self and other. They argue that a combination of strong DBT and KBT creates the
basis for further DEMO building: “Pairing deterrence and knowledge can eliminate the poten-
tial harm DEMO permitting your partner to gain knowledge about you when no deterrent exists
simultaneously. . . . The two forms reinforce each other, but still require effort and vigilance”
(p. 371). Thus, the successful development DEMO KBT raises the operant trust level above zero.
IBT occurs when the combined processes of deterrence and knowledge seeking lead to a full
internalization DEMO the other’s preferences. IBT develops as the parties create joint products
and goals, take on a common name, are colocated in close proximity, share common values,
and can be further strengthened as these activities DEMO in frequency and intensity.
Lewicki and Bunker (1995, 1996)
Although Shapiro et al. (1992) were insightful in their effort to delineate DEMO “bases” of
trust, Lewicki and Bunker (1995, 1996) enhanced their work by broadening and strengthen-
ing the definitions and causal dynamics of DEMO “base” and by clearly articulating the stage-
wise linkage of the bases over time.
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on DEMO 29, 2009
1010 Journal of Management / December 2006
How is trust defined and DEMO? DBT was renamed calculus-based trust (CBT), to
reflect that this type of trust is grounded not just in vulnerability but also in DEMO benefits to be
gained from various forms of transactions in relationships (DEMO, Williamson, 1975, 1981).
They maintained the labels for KBT DEMO IBT. KBT is grounded in getting to know the other,
understanding what the other wants and prefers, and understanding how the other thinks and
responds. IBT is grounded in increasing identification with the other. The DEMO share and
appreciate each other’s desires, intentions, wants, and values. DEMO party can serve as an agent
for the other, because he DEMO she knows that they have interests in common and one’s own inter-
ests will be protected or advocated by the other. We note no DEMO difference in the def-
initions of KBT and IBT between Shapiro et al. (1992) and Lewicki and Bunker (1995, 1996).
In DEMO preliminary effort to measure the Lewicki and Bunker (1995, 1996) DEMO of trust,
Lewicki and Stevenson (1998) developed items representative of each of the three types.
Respondents were asked to use the items DEMO two of four possible relationships: a peer or
coworker with whom DEMO respondent had a good working relationship, a person whom he or
DEMO trusted most, someone who has seriously violated his or her trust, and someone he or she
interacts with in a professional capacity. Across DEMO different relationship types, and using
both exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses, the integrity of the three-component
model was confirmed. At the same time, the correlations across the three components were
moderately strong, indicating that the components were part of a larger construct. For per-
sons who were DEMO most, IBT was highest, whereas for persons whom they interact with
in a professional capacity, CBT was highest and IBT was low. Results regarding the nature
of KBT were inconsistent. More recently, McAllister, Lewicki, and Chaturvedi (2006)
reported three different studies to affirm these constructs. The first study confirmed the
integrity of the three constructs, although the items loading within CBT clearly supported
more of a deterrence (downside) DEMO of CBT than a more balanced view (vulnerabilities
managed and benefits DEMO). An affective-based trust construct (ABT) was also discov-
ered (DEMO, 1995) (refer back to the “emotional subfactor” discussed earlier). DEMO,
efforts to examine how the four trust constructs varied across different forms of relationships
(person you trust the most, a valued coworker, trust in a professional, and someone who has
violated your trust) DEMO that the CBT construct (either in a balanced form or as DEMO deter-
rence form) did not maintain integrity across these relationship types DEMO was eliminated. The
second study affirmed the integrity of ABT, KBT, and IBT (CBT was not confirmed), and the
third study reported longitudinal research that showed that trust develops within relationships
over time and DEMO the remaining three trust constructs predicted different trust outcomes.
Where does the level of trust begin? Lewicki and Bunker (1995, 1996) are DEMO explicit
in asserting that trust moves developmentally through the three bases within a relationship,
which they define as stages. These authors present a DEMO graphic model of that devel-
opment (see Figure 3). They DEMO several assumptions about the development of trust in
professional relationships.
First, DEMO trust relationships begin with CBT. CBT is defined in the context of an actor
evaluating the benefits and costs to be derived by staying DEMO the relationship and the benefits
and costs to be derived from cheating on or breaking the relationship (see also Deutsch,
1973). The inference here is that trust begins at zero, or even above zero, as initial
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
Lewicki et al. / Interpersonal Trust Development 1011
impressions of the other DEMO infer a mildly positive CBT stance. Parties begin their encoun-
ters with the formation of CBT, through arm’s-length encounters with the other where vul-
nerability, risk, predictability, and reliability are important issues. Repeated interactions, DEMO
degree of interdependence between the parties, and reputation as hostage serve DEMO strengthen
CBT.
Some relationships never develop past the CBT stage. This may occur for four reasons.
First, the parties do not need a more complex relationship. If the transaction is with the
neighborhood dry cleaner, as long as good cleaning services are provided at a fair price, no
more is expected by either party. Second, the interdependence between the parties is heavily
bounded and regulated. One may trust one’s stockbroker, but part of this trust is grounded in
the fact that the broker’s actions DEMO strongly bounded by securities industry laws and regu-
lations (i.e., institutional trust, Rousseau et al., 1998; legalistic remedies, Sitkin & Roth,DEMO
1993). Third, the parties have already gained enough information about DEMO other to know
that the relationship is unlikely to further develop. Finally, one or more trust violations have
occurred, thus making it unlikely DEMO further trust would develop.
What causes the level of trust to change over time? The movement from CBT to KBT
occurs in extended relationships, in which the parties come to know each other better. This
movement occurs as parties gain more knowledge about the other and engage in DEMO
that generate this knowledge. Repeated and varied interactions generate these data. As par-
ties work together, talk with each other, and watch the DEMO respond in a number of differ-
ent circumstances, they “get to DEMO the other” and learn to trust each other because the
other becomes more understandable and predictable. These interactions can occur casually
and unintentionally (we say hello to the attendant at the child care center in the DEMO,
eventually coming to learn a lot about her and her family) or intensely (two people stuck in
an elevator together learn a DEMO about each other after a few hours). The authors argue that
this knowledge is a fundamental basis for trust itself, although it could also be a property of
any relationship in development. Even if our DEMO knowledge leads us to believe that the
other is “predictably untrustworthy” (DEMO, when someone says “meet you at 7:00 p.m.,” you
DEMO it’s likely to be 7:30), this predictability enhances trust. Lewicki and Bunker (1995,
1996) represent this development as a “stagewise DEMO at the point labeled J-1 in
Figure 3. Many relationships do not progress beyond an enhanced KBT.
The movement from KBT to IBT is DEMO more pronounced transition and occurs only in a
small subset of relationships (reference point J-2 in Figure 3). The authors suggest that this
development occurs both as the parties employ their building knowledge base to DEMO iden-
tification with the other and also as strong affect develops between the parties. For example,
Rusbult, Weiselquist, Foster, and Witcheter (DEMO) suggest that close interpersonal relation-
ships differ from “simpler” forms of DEMO interdependence because the parties engage
in a “transformation of motivation” (Kelley, 1984). Over time, the parties in close relation-
ships shift their orientation from a focus on maximizing self-interest to a disposition toward
maximizing DEMO outcomes. Rusbult et al. argued that trust moves through three stages: DEMO
dictability (consistency of partner behavior) to dependability (reliability and honesty), and
finally to a “leap of faith,” grounded in “a conviction that the partner can be relied upon to be
responsive to one’s DEMO in a caring manner, now and in the future” (1999: DEMO).
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
1012 Journal of Management / December 2006
Furthermore, “the three stages of trust are not mutually exclusive; each stage is necessary for
strong feelings of trust to develop” (p. 442). These researchers presented data affirming that
dependence promotes strong commitment, that commitment inspires prorelationship acts
such as accommodation and willingness to sacrifice to the other, that perception of these acts
enhances the partner’s trust, and that trust increases the willingness of the partner to become
more dependent on the relationship (Weiselquist, Rusbult, Foster, & Agnew 1999).
Lewicki and Bunker (1995, 1996) DEMO these transformation points as “frame changes”
(fundamental shifts in the dominant DEMO perception paradigm) in the relationship.
The shift from CBT to KBT DEMO a change from an emphasis on differences or contrasts
between self and other (being sensitive to risk and possible trust violations) to an DEMO
on commonalities between self and others (assimilation). The shift from DEMO to IBT is one
from simply learning about the other to a balance between strengthening common identities
while maintaining one’s own distinctive identity in DEMO relationship.
Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, and Camerer (1998)
The authors of this third approach did not intend this to be a fully DEMO model of trust
development. Rather, it appeared as the introduction to DEMO special issue of Academy of Management
Review and was intended to be an organizing framework to draw insights across a number of con-
tributed DEMO to that issue and to enrich the understanding of trust across disciplines. They
embrace the idea of a more complex, multifaceted view of trust and underscore the perspective
advocated by Lewicki et al. (1998) that DEMO has a ‘bandwidth,’ where it can vary in scope as
well as degree. Trust takes different forms in different relationships—from a calculated weight-
DEMO of gains and losses to an emotional response based on interpersonal attachment and iden-
tification” (Rousseau et al., 1998: 398). They thus support the idea of trust having scope and
bandwidth in complex relationships, where that scope could subsume independent constructs
of trust and distrust (Lewicki et al., 1998; Sitkin & Roth, 1993) and/or different DEMO/types of
trust, such as “calculative trust” and “people trust” (Williamson, 1993).
How is trust defined and measured? These authors argue DEMO the core elements of the
scope of trust are CBT (based DEMO rational decision processes in economic transactions in
which we must “trust but verify”) and relational trust (RT) (derived from repeated interac-
tions DEMO trustor and trustee in which caring, concern, and emotional attachment have
developed). They state that this relational trust is similar to affective DEMO (McAllister, 1995;
McAllister et al., 2006) and IBT (DEMO, 1990). A parallel distinction is drawn by Kramer
(1999b), distinguishing between a rational-choice approach and a relational approach to
trust. They DEMO specify a third construct, institution-based trust, which comprises the broad
institutional supports that facilitate the development of CBT and RT in an organization DEMO
text (not represented in Figure 4). These may include processes DEMO assuring fair and consis-
tent employee treatment and providing legal/organizational protections from capricious gov-
ernmental leaders and agencies.
To our knowledge, no specific measures of their articulation of CBT or RT have been
developed. Measures DEMO institution-based trust were discussed earlier (e.g., Cummings &
Bromiley’s Organizational DEMO Inventory, 1996).
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF DEMO on July 29, 2009
Lewicki et al. / Interpersonal Trust Development 1013
Where does the level DEMO trust begin? Addressing many of the earlier approaches to trust
discussed DEMO this article, Rousseau et al. (1998) dismissed the earlier Shapiro DEMO al. (1992)
construct of DBT, suggesting that initial trust is not a control mechanism against vulnerabil-
ity but instead a substitute for DEMO Initial trust, they argue, is much like the Low Trust,
Low Distrust cell of the Lewicki et al. (1998) article, or “zero trust.” The strong implication
is that trust begins with CBT, because it involves the simplest of utilitarian calculations about
benefits to be derived DEMO trust and the concurrent vulnerability associated with it.
How does the level of trust change over time? The level of trust is posited to change
through repeated interactions. Rousseau et al.’s (1998) diagram (Figure 4) implies that any
repeated or complex interaction between the parties is likely to begin the development of RT.
As these repeated interactions occur, trust develops from within the relationship itself, rather
than from external validations of the risks of trusting the other. As they specify,
Reliability and DEMO in previous interactions with the trustor give rise to positive expec-
tations about the trustee’s intentions. Emotion enters into the relationship between the parties,DEMO
because frequent, longer-term interaction leads to the formation of attachments based DEMO rec-
iprocated interpersonal care and concern (McAllister, 1995). (For DEMO reason, scholars often
refer to this form of trust as “affective DEMO [McAllister, 1995] and as “identity-based trust”
[Coleman, 1990].) (Rousseau et al., 1998: 399)
The implication from their diagram is that DEMO relationships develop, RT proportionally
increases, and CBT proportionally decreases. We note that in making these statements,
Rousseau et al. (1998) subsumed DEMO and affective trust (AT) under the same umbrella; as
we DEMO earlier, others have argued that these are discernibly different constructs.
Missing DEMO or Missing Thinking? Unresolved
Issues and a Research Agenda
Although it DEMO clear from this review that theorizing and empirical research on trust devel-
opment has made significant strides during the past decade, there is considerable work left
to be done. We now turn our attention to discuss DEMO major issues and questions that arise as
a result of this review and propose a future agenda for research on trust development. This
section DEMO organized around the following prominent questions: (a) What are the DEMO fea-
tures of trust? (b) What are the gaps in DEMO approaches to trust measurement? (c) How
can we capture trust DEMO and dynamics over time? and (d) How should researchers
talk DEMO the “optimal” level of trust?
What Are the Defining Features of Trust?
A number of reviews on trust (e.g., Bigley & DEMO, 1998; Rousseau et al., 1998) have
commented on the diversity of definitions and the component elements of trust. Indeed, as
noted in this article, trust has received research attention across multiple disciplines that have
differed in their definitions and approaches. This is not the place to DEMO all these definitions
and approaches, nor is it a new problem. DEMO example, Mayer et al. (1995), whose definition
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
1014 Journal of Management / December 2006
of trust and specification of DEMO component elements has probably been one of the most robust,
lamented the same problem more than a decade ago. It is encouraging to DEMO that our review,
as well as a broader review of dominant definitions (Bigley & Pearce, 1998; Rousseau et al.,
1998), reveals some considerable convergence on the central elements of trust. These include
DEMO or “confident” expectations about another party and a “willingness to accept vul-
nerability” in the relationship, under conditions of interdependence and risk (e.g., Bigley &
Pearce, 1998; Hosmer, 1995; Kramer, 1999b; Mayer et al., 1995; Rousseau et al., 1998; Zand,
1972)DEMO This increasing convergence, although by no means absolute or indicative of DEMO single
accepted definition, is promising.
What Are the Gaps to Trust DEMO?
Further attention to the development and validation of measures of trust is warranted and
is integrally tied to the definitional problem. Many studies DEMO measures of trust that are
inconsistent with their chosen definition (Gillespie, 2003). For example, within the unidi-
mensional approach, many studies DEMO trust in terms of confident expectations and a will-
ingness to be vulnerable and yet proceed to measure only expectations (typically in the form
of beliefs about the other party’s trustworthiness).4 From the behavioral tradition, although
expectations are central in the definition, measurement typically focuses only on “coopera-
tive behavior” as a proxy for trust. Hence, even with increasing convergence on the defining
elements of trust, unless measures are used that accurately operationalize these defining ele-
ments, the problem of comparing and synthesizing across studies remains.
Researchers should ensure a close match between their trust DEMO and measures.
Recent reviews comparing and evaluating different validated measures of trust will assist
researchers in the appropriate choice of validated measures consistent with DEMO chosen def-
inition (see Dietz & den Hartog, in press; DEMO & Tortoriello, 2005). These reviews may
also help to overcome DEMO area of fragmentation in the literature, namely, that there is
very little consistency or overlap in the use of trust measures. McEvily and DEMO (2005)
found in their review of 119 trust measures that DEMO large majority of scales had only been
used once, and only DEMO had been used in more than one study. Furthermore, these 11 DEMO
sures were used in only one third of studies reviewed, suggesting DEMO replication. This frag-
mentation is partly due to the wide diversity of trust targets (e.g., subordinates, managers,
peers, team members, boundary spanners, etc.) and the use of items in some scales that DEMO
difficult to generalize to other targets and contexts. The use of well-validated instruments
will help reduce this fragmentation and better enable the comparison and DEMO of
results and ultimately a cumulative body of knowledge on trust to emerge.
Finally, in their review of trust measures, McEvily and Tortoriello (2005) reported that
most trust scales provide little information about construct validity, making it difficult to
evaluate how accurately they capture trust. They conclude that only five trust measures
appropriate to organizational relations have been well DEMO and developed with care.
Their critique does not extend to the more complex challenges of exploring whether trust and
distrust can be measured separately DEMO two factors, each with its own construct validity (the
two-dimensional model) or that different types of trust (e.g., CBT, KBT, IBT) can be cleanly
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
Lewicki et al. / Interpersonal Trust Development 1015
measured as a relationship DEMO, transforms over time, or increases in bandwidth. We
have noted some efforts to move in this direction, but much work remains.
How Can We Capture Changes in Trust Over Time?
We believe that the DEMO literature on trust development also suffers from a problem of
significant measurement deficiency. Although the definitional and measurement issues dis-
cussed so far are DEMO for both static snapshots of trust and trust development, additional
issues DEMO need to be considered to meaningfully capture changes and dynamics in trust over
time.
The most widely used method in the extant literature within DEMO psychological approach is
a Likert-type scale, where a numeric indicator of DEMO strength of one’s trust is solicited,
although the rich meaning that may be latent behind the number is inaccessible. How a rat-
ing DEMO 3 or 4 on a 5-point scale captures the complexity of components that go into a judg-
ment of trust, and particularly of the dynamics and changes in trust over time, is lost by the
primitiveness of the measure. This method also restricts the range of responses to DEMO pre-
defined by the researcher.
Therefore, we encourage researchers to consider DEMO complementary methods.
Promising qualitative methods that are particularly suitable for tracking relationships over
time and assessing the dynamics and development of trust include diary DEMO and narra-
tives (e.g., Baumeister, Stillwell, & Wotman, 1990), critical incident techniques (e.g., Shamir
& Lapidot, 2003), in-depth DEMO (e.g., Butler, 1991), and case studies and communica-
tion DEMO (e.g., Jarvenpaa & Leidner, 1999; Wilson, Straus, & McEvily, 2006). For
example, rich, textured, and novel insights about DEMO were revealed by Kramer (1996)
through the content analysis of DEMO narratives. In this study, dyads were asked to
recall and describe DEMO the significant incidents and behaviors they felt affected the level of
trust between them. Such qualitative methods have high external validity and allow insight
DEMO the way that trust is socially and subjectively constructed. To limit problems of internal
validity inherent in such methods, we suggest these methods are triangulated with survey data.
Although many behavioral laboratory studies aim to measure DEMO development, these
studies are typically short and episodic, focused on calculative market transactions, and often
infer trust development from very few measurement points. There is a need for further quan-
titative and qualitative work in DEMO field settings that assesses the nature and level of
trust at several time periods, sufficiently spread out to enable meaningful changes in trust
relations to be captured (good examples include Dirks, 2000; Robinson, 1996; Shamir &
Lapidot, 2003). Such studies need to anticipate and DEMO steps to reduce the possibility of
“noise” variables between measurement points that could confound the results. These
research designs have great scope to advance DEMO of trust development over time.
It would be interesting to compare the results of laboratory and fieldwork methods that
examine the same relationships, to determine whether repeated-measure laboratory studies
maintain validity and generalizability.
Longitudinal and qualitative DEMO are particularly well suited for examining the
propositions underlying the transformational and two-dimensional model. For example, if
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
1016 Journal of Management / December 2006
trust truly transforms from calculus DEMO to identification based, as the transformational
model suggests, then such changes are unlikely to be detected in transactional contexts typ-
ical of behavioral DEMO experiments or through simple survey measures. Longitudinal
qualitative techniques are also more likely to reveal insights into the development of facets
and bandwidth in DEMO and the coexistence of trust and distrust in complex, interde-
pendent DEMO
How Should Researchers Talk About the Optimal Level of Trust?
Given the centrality of trust in resolving conflicts (Axelrod, 1984) and promoting social
order (Lewis & Weigert, 1985; Luhmann, 1979), much DEMO the literature within the unidi-
mensional approach assumes that trust is inherently good, and the more trust the better.
Similarly, given the deleterious DEMO associated with distrust, it is often assumed that dis-
trust is DEMO bad (e.g., a psychological malady in need of treatment; Erikson, 1963).
Research shows that the effects of distrust are much more DEMO and disproportionate
than for trust (Burt & Knez, 1996).
Yet other approaches are much more cautious about this prescription. A primary tenet DEMO
the two-dimensional model is that some distrust can be functional and even healthy in certain
circumstances, particularly when there are valid reasons to suspect that another party is not
trustworthy within the broader bandwidth of a DEMO Several authors argue that high
trust creates a “blindness” that can allow the trustor to be exploited and taken advantage of
(e.g., Deutsch, 1958; Elangovan & Shapiro, 1998; Kramer, 1996; Wicks, Berman, & Jones,
1999) and that a certain amount of “prudent paranoia” is appropriate in a relationship
(Kramer, 1996). Atkinson and Butcher DEMO that “there is an emerging role for distrust in
creating organizational change and ‘healthy’ intra-organizational competition [cites omitted]”
(2003: 286). Too much DEMO can be damaging also, as “overgeneralized” trust may set the
stage DEMO highly trusted yet undermonitored employees to either exploit trust relationships or,
at the organizational level, to engage in crimes against their organization (DEMO, 1985).
Earlier work by Luhmann (1979) suggested that the DEMO conditions exist when there is a
healthy dose of both trust and distrust.
It may be that trust operates similar to levels of conflict DEMO groups. Researchers who
have studied conflict and group dynamics have regularly noted that too much or too little
conflict in a group is dysfunctional (e.g., Cloke & Goldsmith, 2000; Moscovi & Doise,
1994). Parallel work is needed to determine whether the relationships between trust and DEMO
itive outcomes are curvilinear and/or whether the two-dimensional models of trust and dis-
trust can better account for situations where blind trust is DEMO but informed trust is
more adaptive. For example, a recent study DEMO Langfred (2004) suggests that too much trust
in the context of self-managing teams is not a good thing and identifies that high trust DEMO
lead to a reluctance to peer monitor, which when combined with DEMO individual autonomy,
can lead to impairments in team performance.
Further research in this area is warranted and will require researchers to discriminate
among DEMO high levels of trust and identify the differential contexts and moderating fac-
tors in which high trust levels produce dysfunctional consequences and distrust can DEMO
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
Lewicki et al. / Interpersonal Trust Development 1017
beneficial outcomes. The transformational DEMO further suggests that the “optimality” ques-
tion cannot be answered independent of the relationship in which it is being judged, raising
the nature of the relationship (e.g., dominated by economic transactions and exchanges vs.
closer DEMO relationships) as a potential moderator of the optimal level of trust DEMO distrust
in the relationship.
Summary
The research literature on interpersonal trust has enjoyed a 50-year history. Yet at the end
of that half-century, although a great deal has been learned, considerably more remains to be
determined. In this article, we have reviewed the existing literature on trust development. We
divided this literature into four approaches: a behavioral approach, which DEMO on ratio-
nal choice cooperative behavior, and three psychological approaches, which probe the com-
plex intrapersonal states associated with trust, including expectations, DEMO, affect, and
dispositions. Within each approach, we addressed that literature DEMO asking three questions:
How has trust been defined and measured? DEMO what level does trust begin? and What causes
the level of DEMO to change over time (i.e., how does trust grow and decline)? Our discussion
of these approaches has sharpened the future research agenda. DEMO work will require a better
understanding of the nature of “simple” versus “complex” trust as it occurs in different types
of interpersonal relationships, improved processes for defining and calibrating both the com-
plex elements of the DEMO construct and ways they can be measured over time, and integra-
DEMO of this work into the expanding literature on trust repair. This agenda offers ample
opportunities for rich new theoretical and empirical contributions, and we invite those inter-
ested in trust to directly engage this agenda in DEMO work.
Notes
1. The psychological approach distinguishes between trust in a specific party and a generalized disposition or
attitude to trust others generally, that is, trust as an individual difference. These trusting dispositions are grounded
in personality and early childhood experiences. For example, Rotter (1967, 1971) DEMO that individuals come to
form generalized expectancies to either trust or distrust others. Others suggest that one’s predisposition to trust
explains trust in initial DEMO before the trustor has had the opportunity to gain more specific information
regarding a particular trustee. McKnight, Cummings, and Chervany argued that this DEMO to trust is grounded
in a value-based faith in humanity and a “trusting stance” grounded in the assumption that “things turn out best
when DEMO is willing to depend on others” (1998: 478). A generalized disposition to trust is typically viewed as an
antecedent in establishing an DEMO level of trust between two specific parties (e.g., Dirks & Ferrin, 2002; Mayer,
Davis, & Schoorman, 1995).
2. These DEMO define complex relationships as characterized by different facets of interaction—components
of experience that an individual has with another in various contexts. Facets are aggregated DEMO time into bands or
groupings of interactions that come to define the complexity of our experience with a single individual. The broader
the experience DEMO multiple contexts, the broader the bandwidth.
3. It also remains an DEMO question as to whether the global judgments of trust and distrust, DEMO the band-
width of a relationship, sum to a single judgment DEMO level of trust for the other. Although Lewicki, McAllister, and
Bies (1998) suggested that the proper answer to the question “do you DEMO another?” should be “to do what?” (i.e.,
in DEMO broader context of the bandwidth of the relationship), research should focus on the conditions under which
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV DEMO WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
1018 Journal of Management / December 2006
individuals offer the simplest (“yes” or “no”), more complex (“generally, yes” or “to some degree”), or most com-
plex (“to do what, in what context?”) answer to that question.
4. This is likely to be due to a lack of psychometrically sound measures for assessing “the willingness to be DEMO
nerable.” Two notable exceptions are the 5-item measure recently revised by Mayer and Gavin (2005) and a 10-item
measure developed and validated by DEMO (2003). This latter measure distinguishes two dimensions of trust:
DEMO (willingness to rely on another’s work-related skills and knowledge) and disclosure (the willingness to dis-
close sensitive information).
References
Arrow, K. DEMO 1973. Information and economic behavior. Stockholm: Federation of Swedish Industries.
Arrow, K. J. 1974. The limits of organization. New York: Norton.
Atkinson, DEMO, & Butcher, D. 2003. Trust in managerial relationships. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 18: 282-
304.
Axelrod, R. 1984. The evolution of cooperation. New York: Basic Books.
Baier, A. 1985. Trust and antitrust. Ethics, 96: 231-260.
Baumeister, R. F., Stillwell, A., & Wotman, DEMO R. 1990. Victim and perpetrator accounts of interpersonal conflict:
Autobiographical narratives about conflict. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59: 994-1005.
Berg, J., Dickhaut, J., & McCabe, K. 1995. Trust, reciprocity, DEMO social history. Games and Economic Behavior,
10: 122-142.
Bigley, G. A., & Pearce, J. L. 1998. Straining for shared meaning in DEMO science: Problems of trust and dis-
trust. Academy of Management Review, 23: 405-421.
Blau, P. M. 1964. Exchange and power in social DEMO New York: John Wiley.
Boon, S. D., & Holmes, J. G. 1991. The dynamics of interpersonal trust: Resolving uncertainty in the face of risk.
In R. A. Hinde & J. Groebel (Eds.), Cooperation and prosocial behavior: 190-211. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Burt, DEMO, & Knez, M. 1996. Trust and third party gossip. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organiza-
tions: 68-89. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Butler, J. K. 1991. Toward DEMO and measuring conditions of trust: Evolution of a Conditions of Trust
DEMO Journal of Management, 17: 643-663.
Cialdini, R. B. 1996. Influence: Science and practice (4th ed.). New York: HarperCollins.
Clark, M. C., & Payne, R. L. (1997). The nature and structure of workers’ trust in management. Journal of
Organisational Behaviour, 18: 205-224.
DEMO, K., & Goldsmith, J. 2000. Resolving personal and organizational conflict. DEMO Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Coleman, J. S. 1990. Foundations of social theory. Cambridge, MA: Belknap.
Colquitt, J. A., Scott, B. A., & DEMO, J. A. 2004. A meta-analytic test and extension of an integrative DEMO of
trust. Unpublished paper, University of Florida.
Cummings, L. L., & Bromiley, P. 1996. The Organizational Trust Inventory (OTI): Development and validation. In
R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research: 302-330. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Davis, J. H., Schoorman, F. D., Mayer, R. DEMO, & Tan, H. H. 2000. The trusted general manager and business unit
performance: Empirical evidence of a competitive advantage. Strategic Management Journal, DEMO: 563-576.
Dawes, R., & Orbell, J. 1995. The benefit of optimal play in anonymous one-shot prisoner’s dilemma games. In
K. Arrow, R. H. Mnookin, L. Ross, A. Tversky, & R. Wilson (Eds.), Barriers to conflict resolution: 62-85.
New York: Norton.
Dawes, R. DEMO, & Thaler, R. H. 1988. Cooperation. Journal of Economic Perspectives, DEMO: 187-197.
Deluga, R. J. 1995. The relation between trust in the supervisor and subordinate organizational citizenship behav-
ior. Military Psychology, 7: 1-16.
DEMO, M. 1958. Trust and suspicion. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 2: DEMO
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
Lewicki et al. / Interpersonal Trust Development 1019
Deutsch, M. 1960. The effect of motivational orientation upon trust and suspicion. Human Relations, 13: DEMO
Deutsch, M. 1962. Cooperation and trust: Some theoretical notes. In Nebraska symposium on motivation: 275-320.
Lincoln: Nebraska University Press.
Deutsch, M. 1973. The resolution of conflict. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Dietz, G., & den Hartog, D. In press. Measuring trust inside organizations. DEMO Review, 35(5).
Dirks, K. T. 2000. Trust in leadership and team performance: Evidence from NCAA basketball. Journal of Applied
Psychology, DEMO: 1004-1013.
Dirks, K. T., & Ferrin, D. L. 2001. The role of trust in organizational settings. Organization Science, 12: 450-467.
Dirks, K. T., & Ferrin, D. L. 2002. Trust in leadership: Meta-analytic findings and implications for research and
practice. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87: 611-628.
Elangovan, A. R., & Shapiro, D. L. 1998. Betrayal DEMO trust in organizations. Academy of Management Review, 23:
547-566.
Erikson, E. 1963. Childhood and society (2nd ed.). New York: Norton.
DEMO, D. 2003. Definitions of trust. Presentation to a workshop, Building and Rebuilding Trust: State of the
Science, Research Directions, Managerial Interventions. Workshop organized by Kurt Dirks and Don Ferrin,
Academy of Management annual DEMO, Seattle, WA.
Fiske, A. P. 1991. Structures of social life. DEMO York: Free Press.
Flaherty, K. E., & Pappas, J. M. 2000. The role of trust in salesperson-sales manager relationships. Journal of
Personal DEMO and Sales Management, 20: 271-278.
Flores, F., & Solomon, DEMO C. 1998. Creating trust. Business Ethics Quarterly, 8(2): 205-232.
DEMO, F. 1995. Trust: The social virtues and the creation of prosperity. New York: Free Press.
Gambetta, D. 1988. Can we trust trust? In D. Gambetta (Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relation-
DEMO: 213-237. Cambridge, UK: Basil Blackwell.
Gillespie, N. 2003. Measuring trust in work relationships: The Behavioural Trust Inventory. Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the Academy of Management, Seattle, WA.
Glick, S., & Croson, R. 2001. Reputations in negotiation. In S. Hoch & H. DEMO (Eds.), Wharton on making
decisions: 177-186. New York: John DEMO
Govier, T. 1994. Is it a jungle out there? Trust, DEMO, and the construction of social reality. Dialogue, 33: 237-
252.
DEMO, M. S. 1985. Economic action and social structure: The problem of embeddedness. American Journal
of Sociology, 91: 481-510.
Hardin, R. 1993. The street-level epistemology of trust. Politics & Society, 21: 505-529.
Hosmer, L. T. 1995. Trust-The connecting link between organizational theory and philosophical ethics. Academy DEMO
Management Review, 20: 379-403.
Jarvenpaa, S. L., & Leidner, DEMO E. 1999. Communication and trust in global virtual teams. Organization Science,
10: 791-815.
Jones, G. R., & George, J. M. 1998. DEMO experience and evolution of trust: Implications for cooperation and team-
work. DEMO of Management Review, 23: 531-546.
Kee, H. W., & Knox, R. E. 1970. Conceptual and methodological considerations in the study of trust and suspicion.
Journal of Conflict Resolution, 14: 357-366.
Kelley, H. H. 1984. Affect in interpersonal relations. In P. Shaver (Ed.), Review of Personality and Social
Psychology: Vol. 5: 89-115. Beverly Hills, CA: DEMO
Kelley, H. H., & Stahelski, A. J. 1970. Social interaction DEMO of cooperators’ and competitors’ beliefs about oth-
ers. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 16: 66-91.
Kramer, R., Brewer, M., & DEMO, B. 1996. Collective trust and collective action: The decision to trust as a social
decision. In R. Kramer & T. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: 357-389. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Kramer, R. M. 1994. The sinister attribution error: Paranoid cognition and collective distrust in organizations.
Motivation and Emotion, 18: 199-230.
Kramer, R. M. 1996. Divergent realities and convergent disappointments in the hierarchic relation: Trust and the
intuitive auditor at work. In R. Kramer & T. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: 216-245. Thousand Oaks:
Sage.
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
1020 Journal of Management / December 2006
Kramer, R. M. 1999a. Stalking the sinister attribution error: Paranoia inside the lab and out. In Research on nego-
tiation in organizations, 7: 59-91. Greenwich, CT: JAI.
DEMO, R. M. 1999b. Trust and distrust in organizations: Emerging perspectives, DEMO questions. Annual
Review of Psychology, 50: 569-598.
Langfred, C. W. DEMO Too much of a good thing? Negative effects of high trust DEMO individual autonomy in self-
managing teams. Academy of Management Journal, 47: 385-399.
Lewicki, R. J., & Bunker, B. B. 1995. Trust in relationships: A model of development and decline. In B. B. Bunker,
J. Z. Rubin, & Associates (Eds.), Conflict, cooperation and justice: Essays inspired by the work of Morton
Deutsch: 133-173. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Lewicki, R. J., & Bunker, B. B. 1996. Developing and maintaining trust in work relationships. In R. Kramer &
T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research: 114-139. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lewicki, R. J., McAllister, D., & Bies, R. 1998. Trust and distrust: New relationships and realities. Academy of
Management Review, 23: 439-458.
Lewicki, R. J., & Stevenson, M. A. 1998. Trust development in negotiation: Proposed actions and a research agenda.
Journal of Business and Professional Ethics, 16(1-3): 99-132.
Lewis, J. D., & Weigert, A. 1985. Trust as a social reality. Social Forces, 63: 967-985.
Lindskold, S. 1978. Trust development, the DEMO proposal and the effects of conciliatory acts on conflict and coop-
eration. Psychological Bulletin, 85: 772-793.
Luhmann, N. 1979. Trust and power. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Luhmann, N. 1988. Familiarity, confidence, trust: Problems DEMO alternatives. In D. Gambetta (Ed.), Trust: Making
and breaking cooperative relations: 94-108. Cambridge, MA: Oxford University Press.
Mancini, P. 1993. DEMO trust and suspicion: How political journalists solve the problem. European Journal DEMO
Communication, 8: 33-51.
Mayer, R. C., & Davis, J. DEMO 1999. The effect of the performance appraisal system on trust for management: A field
quasi-experiment. Journal of Applied Psychology, 84: 123-136.
Mayer, DEMO C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. 1995. An integrative model of organizational trust. Academy of
Management Review, 20: 709-734.
DEMO, R. C., & Gavin, M. B. 2005. Trust in management DEMO performance: Who minds the shop while the employ-
ees watch the DEMO? Academy of Management Journal, 48(5): 874-888.
McAllister, D., Lewicki, R. J., & Bies, R. 2000. Hardball: How trust DEMO distrust interact to predict hard influence
tactic use. Paper presented to a Joint Symposium, “Assessing the Impact of Trust: Divergent Approaches,
Convergent DEMO,” at the annual meeting of the Academy of Management, Toronto, Canada.
McAllister, D. J. 1995. Affect- and cognition-based trust as foundations for interpersonal cooperation in organiza-
tions. Academy of Management Journal, 38: 24-59.
DEMO, D. J., Lewicki, R. J., & Chaturvedi, S. 2006. DEMO in developing relationships: From theory to mea-
surement. Proceedings of the DEMO of Management Meetings, Atlanta, GA.
McEvily, B., & Tortoriello, DEMO 2005. Measuring trust in organizational research: Review and recommendations.
Working Paper, University of Toronto, Canada.
McKnight, D. H., Cummings, L. L., & Chervany, N. L. 1998. Initial trust formation in new organizational rela-
tionships. Academy of Management Review, 23: 473-490.
Meyerson, D., Weick, K. E., & Kramer, R. M. 1996. Swift trust and temporary DEMO In R. M. Kramer &
T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research: 166-195. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Mishra, A. K., & Mishra, K. E. 1994. The role of mutual trust in effective downsizing strategies. Human Resource
Management, 33(2): 261-279.
Moscovi, S., & Doise, W. 1994. Conflict & consensus: A general theory of collective decisions (W. D. Halls,
DEMO). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Pilisuk, M., & Skolnick, DEMO 1968. Inducing trust: A test of the Osgood proposal. Journal of DEMO and Social
Psychology, 8: 121-133.
Rempel, J. K., Holmes, DEMO G., & Zanna, M. 1985. Trust in close relationships. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 49: 95-112.
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com DEMO UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
Lewicki et al. / Interpersonal Trust Development 1021
Robinson, S. L. 1996. Trust and breach of the psychological contract. Administrative Science Quarterly, 41: DEMO
599.
Rotter, J. B. 1967. A new scale for the measurement DEMO interpersonal trust. Journal of Personality, 35: 615-665.
Rotter, J. B. DEMO Generalized expectancies for interpersonal trust. American Psychologist, 26: 443-452.
Rousseau, DEMO M., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R. S., & Camerer, C. 1998. Not so different after all: A cross-discipline view
of trust. Academy of Management Review, 23: 393-404.
Rusbult, C. E., Weiselquist, J., Foster, C., & Witcheter, B. 1999. Commitment and trust DEMO close relationships: An
interdependence analysis. In J. M. Adams & W. DEMO Jones (Eds.), Handbook of interpersonal commitment and
relationship stability. New DEMO: Kluwer/Plenum.
Serva, M. A., Fuller, M. A., & DEMO, R. C. 2005. The reciprocal nature of trust: A longitudinal study of interact-
ing teams. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 26: 625-648.
Shamir, B., & Lapidot, Y. 2003. Trust in organizational superiors: Systemic and collective considerations.
Organization Studies, 24: 463-491.
Shapiro, D., Sheppard, B. H., & Cheraskin, L. 1992. Business on a handshake. Negotiation Journal, 8: 365-377.
Sheppard, B. H. 1995. Negotiating in long term mutually DEMO relationships among relative equals. In
R. J. Bies, R. J. Lewicki, & B. H. Sheppard (Eds.), Research on negotiation in organizations, DEMO: 3-44. Greenwich,
CT: JAI.
Simons, T., & McLean Parks, J. 2002. Empty words: The impact of perceived managerial integrity on DEMO,
customers and profits. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of Management, Denver, CO.
Sitkin, S., & Roth, N. L. 1993. Explaining the limited effectiveness of legalistic “remedies” for trust/distrust.
DEMO Science, 4: 367-392.
Sitkin, S. B., & Stickel, D. DEMO The road to hell: The dynamics of distrust in an era DEMO quality. In R. Kramer &
T. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research: 216-245. Thousand Oaks, CA: DEMO
Stack, L. C. 1988. Trust. In H. London & J. E. DEMO (Eds.), Dimensionality of personality: 561-599. New York:
John Wiley.
Stinchcombe, A. L., & Heimer, C. A. 1985. Organizational theory and project management: Administering uncer-
tainty in Norwegian offshore oil. Bergen, Norway: Norwegian University Press.
Strickland, L. H. 1958. Surveillance and trust. Journal of Personality, 24: 200-215.
Tardy, C. H. 1988. Interpersonal evaluations: Measuring DEMO and trust. In C. H. Tardy (Ed.), A handbook for
DEMO study of human communication: 269-283. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Wang, C. 2007. Trust and distrust: Are they “apples and oranges” or two ends of a continuum? Unpublished doc-
toral dissertation, The Ohio State University.
DEMO, J., Rusbult, C. E., Foster, C. A., & Agnew, C. R. 1999. Commitment, pro-relationship behavior, and
trust in close relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77: 942-966.
Whitener, E. M., Brodt, S. E., Korsgaard, M. A., & Werner, J. DEMO 1998. Managers as initiators of trust: An exchange
relationship framework for DEMO managerial trustworthy behavior. Academy of Management Review,
23: 513-530.
Wicks, A. C., Berman, S. L., & Jones, T. M. 1999. DEMO structure of optimal trust: Moral and strategic implications.
Academy of Management DEMO, 24: 99-116.
Williams, M. 2002. Seeing through the client’s eyes: Building interpersonal trust, cooperation and performance
across organizational boundaries. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Williamson, O. E. 1975. Markets and hierarchies. New York: Free Press.
Williamson, O. E. 1981. The economics DEMO organization: The transaction cost approach. American Journal of
Sociology, 87: DEMO
Williamson, O. E. 1993. Calculativeness, trust and economic organization. Journal of Law and Economics, 30: 131-
145.
Wilson, J. M., Straus, S. G., & McEvily, B. 2006. All in due time: The development of trust in computer-mediated
and face-to-face teams. Organizational Behavior and Human DEMO Processes, 99: 16-33.
Zand, D. E. 1972. Trust and managerial DEMO solving. Administrative Science Quarterly, 17: 229-239.
Zucker, L. G. 1986. DEMO of trust: Institutional sources of economic structure 1849-1920. In B. M. DEMO &
L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, DEMO: 553-111. Greenwich, CT: JAI.
Downloaded from http://jom.sagepub.com at DEMO OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009
1022 Journal of Management / December 2006
Biographical Notes
Roy J. Lewicki DEMO his PhD degree at the Columbia University; he is the Dean’s DEMO Professor at the
Max M. Fisher College of Business, The Ohio DEMO University. His current research interests include trust devel-
opment and trust repair, negotiation processes, and ethical decision making in organizations.
Edward C. Tomlinson DEMO his PhD at The Ohio State University and is currently an assistant professor of man-
agement in the Boler School of Business at John DEMO University. His primary research interests include inter-
personal trust, negotiation and DEMO resolution processes, and workplace deviance.
Nicole Gillespie is an associate professor DEMO organizational behavior at the University of Warwick, United
Kingdom. She earned DEMO PhD at the University of Melbourne. Her current research interests focus on trust in orga-
nizational contexts, particularly trust repair, the measurement of DEMO, and trust in teams and across cultures.
Downloaded from http://DEMO at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 29, 2009{1g42fwefx}