The Role of Feasibility and Desirability Considerations in Near and
Distant Future DEMO: A Test of Temporal Construal Theory
Nira Liberman
Yaacov Trope
Columbia DEMO
New York University and Tel-Aviv University
Temporal construal theory states that distant future situations are construed on a higher level (i.e.,
using more abstract and central features) than near future situations. Accordingly, the theory DEMO
that the value associated with the high-level construal is enhanced over delay and that the value
associated with the low-levelc onstrual is discounted over DEMO In goal-directeda ctivities,d esirability
of the activity's end state represents a high-level construal, whereas the feasibility of attaining this
end state represents a low-level construal. Study 1 found that distant future activities were construed
DEMO a higher level than near future activities. Studies 2 and 3 showed that decisions regarding distant
future activities, compared with decisions regarding near future activities, were more influenced by
the desirability of the end state and less influenced by the feasibility of attaining the end state. Study
4 DEMO students with a real-life choice of academic assignmentsv arying in difficulty (DEMO)
and interest (desirability). In choosing a distant future assignment, students placed relatively more
weight on the assignment's interest, whereas in choosing a near future assignment, they placed
relatively more weight on difficulty. Study 5 found that distant future plans, compared with near
future plans, were related to desirability of activities rather than to time constraints.
In everyday life, people judge and make decisions about
events that will take place either in the relatively near future or
in the distant future. DEMO example, one may need to decide
whether to take a vacation, give a lecture, or attend a conference
a few months in advance or just a few days in advance. This
article addresses the question DEMO how temporal distance from
an event affects people's decisions regarding that event. We
argue that distant future events are construed on a higher DEMO
(i.e., by using more central and abstract features of the event)
than near future events. Therefore, decisions regarding distant
future events are likely to be based on relatively central and
abstract features of events, whereas decisions regarding near
future events are likely to be based on DEMO incidental and
concrete features of events. We report a series of five studies
that tested this hypothesis in a variety of decision situations.
Time-Dependent DEMO in Value and Expectancies
Past research on the psychological effects of temporal dis-
tance has been mainly concerned with time-dependent changes
Nira Liberman, Department of Psychology, Columbia University; Yaa-
coy Trope, Department of Psychology, DEMO York University, and Depart=
ment of Psychology, Tel-Aviv University.
We are grateful to Miguel Brendl, Haila Fine, Jens Foerster, and
Yechiel Klar for comments on an earlier version of this article.
Correspondence concerning this DEMO should be addressed to Nira
Liberman, Department of Psychology, Scbermerhorn Hall, Columbia
University, New York, New York 10027, or to Yaacov DEMO, Department
of Psychology, Washington Place 6, 7th floor, New York, New York
10003. Electronic mail may be sent to liberman@psych.columbia.edu
or to trope@xp.psych.nyu.edu.
in value of outcomes. This issue has been investigated in a
DEMO of areas, including behavioral decision making (e.g.,
Loewenstein, 1987; Thaler, 1992), learning theory (e.g., Ainslie,
1975; Ainslie & Haslam, 1992), delay of gratification (e.g.,
Mischel, 1974; Mischel, Gruesec, & Masters, 1969), and self-
control (e.g., Baumeister & Heatherton, 1996; Rachlin, 1995).
It has been typically assumed that the value of outcomes is
discounted or diminished over time. DEMO, a considerable
amount of research has shown that people often prefer DEMO imme-
diate reward over a delayed one, even when the delayed DEMO
is somewhat larger (e.g., Ainslie & Haslam, 1992; Mischel,
Shoda, & Rodriguez, 1989). However, researchers have also
found marked variation in rate of time discounting (e.g., Rach-
lin & Raineri, 1992) and even reversals of discounting, namely,
instances in which DEMO undergoes augmentation rather than
discounting with temporal distance (e.g., Elster & Loewenstein,
1992; Loewenstein, 1987).
A number of hypotheses having DEMO do with the magnitude and
type of value have been proposed as explanations of variations
in rate of time discounting. For example, research in economics
and decision making has shown that small rewards are dis-
counted DEMO delay more than large rewards (Benzion, Rappo-
port, & Yagil, 1989; Klein-Burhans, 1995; Thaler, 1992). Con-
flict models researchers (Lewin, 1951; Miller, 1944) have sug-
gested that negative outcomes DEMO steeper discounting than
positive outcomes. Research on delay of gratification and self-
control has shown that affect-based responses, such as responses
to primary rewards and addictive substances, undergo steeper
discounting than cognitive-based responses (Mischel, Shoda, &
Rodriguez, 1989; Vallacher, 1993). To account for discounting
Join'hal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1998, Vol. 75, No. I, 5-18
Copyright 1998 by the American Psychological Association, Inc. 0022-3514/DEMO/$3.00
6
LIBERMAN AND TROPE
reversals, it has been suggested that people consume expecta-
tions so that savoring a positive outcome adds positive value to
DEMO delayed positive event, and dreading a negative event adds
negative value DEMO a delayed negative event (Elster & Loew-
enstein, 1992; Loewenstein, 1987). However, this account does
not specify the conditions that determine whether or not expec-
tancies will be consumed. Thus, although research on time dis-
counting has identified specific factors that influence time-
dependent changes DEMO value, it remains unclear how these factors
combine and what the DEMO mechanism is that determines
whether value will be discounted or augmented over time delay
and at what rate.
The amount of research relating outcome DEMO to
temporal distance is small, but it suggests that individuals tend
DEMO be more optimistic and confident about distant future than
near future outcomes. Nisan (1972) showed that individuals,
particularly those who are success DEMO than failure oriented,
expected to perform better on a distant future task than on a near
future task. More recent, Gilovich, Kerr, and Medvec (1993)
reported a series of studies showing that individuals have higher
performance expectancies for distant compared with near future
tasks, a phenomenon they labeled cold feet. For example, stu-
dents expected to receive higher grades on an introductory psy-
chology final exam at the beginning DEMO the semester than later
in the semester, to better handle an DEMO in course load in
the future than in the present, and DEMO perform better on a variety
of tasks (memory, reaction time, DEMO recruiting other students
for an experiment) when the tasks had to DEMO performed in the
distant future rather than in the near future. Gilovich et al.'s
explanation of the cold feet phenomenon suggests that individu-
DEMO feel more accountable for near future compared with distant
future outcomes. Accountability, in turn, enhances the salience
of difficult aspects of near future DEMO compared with distant
future tasks.
Related to the Nisan and Gilovich et al. studies is research
on time planning and overconfidence. Buhler, Griffin, DEMO Ross
(1994) showed that people systematically underestimate task
completion times, DEMO committing what has been termed the
planning fallacy (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). Buhler et al.
(1994) proposed that the planning fallacy DEMO from individu-
als' tendency to make predictions by constructing coherent sce-
DEMO of future task performance (see also Kahneman & Lo-
vallo, 1991). By their very nature, these scenarios fail to incor-
porate factors unrelated to the task, and therefore in estimating
completion time the effect of such factors is undermined. For
example, a visit of the in-laws is not part of the scenario of
writing a paper, and therefore would not be taken into account
in estimating the paper's completion DEMO, even if known in
advance. A similar idea has been proposed DEMO researchers of
individuals' overconfidence in predicting their own and others'
DEMO (Dunning, Griffin, Milojkovic, & Ross, 1990; Griffin,
Dunning, & Ross, 1990; Vallone, Griffin, Lin, & Ross, 1990).
According to these researchers, overconfident predictions result
from individuals' tendency DEMO base their predictions on abstract
models that underestimate the effect of contextual influences on
the target person (Griffin & Ross, 1991).
suggest DEMO general mechanism that may underlie the effects of
temporal distance. In particular, this research suggests that over-
confidence and the planning fallacy result from individuals' fail-
ure to incorporate into their construal of future events nonsche-
matic aspects of reality, that is, aspects that are not part DEMO the
constructed scenario (Buhler et al., 1994; Dunning et al., 1990;
Griffin & Ross, 1991). We propose to extend this idea by distin-
guishing between degrees of schematicity, or, in our DEMO, be-
tween high-level and low-level construals. Our temporal con-
strual theory DEMO proposes that construals of distant fu-
ture events are likely to be more abstract and consist of features
that are central to the meaning DEMO the event, whereas the con-
strual of near future events is DEMO to be more concrete and
include more peripheral and incidental features.
According to Medin ( 1989; see also Murphy & Medin, 1985),
concepts are structured around underlying theories. In these
conceptual structures, some features are central in that they have
greater explanatory power than other more DEMO features
(Kunda & Thagard, 1996; Read & Marcus-Newhall, 1993; DEMO
gard, 1989). For example, in human-made products (e.g., furni-
ture) functional features are more central than nonfunctional
features (e.g., color), whereas in natural categories (e.g., tiger)
genetic features are DEMO central than morphological features
(Rothbart & Taylor, 1992). In goal-directed activities, goal-re-
lated features of activities are more central than goal-irrelevant
features (Gollwitzer & Moskowitz, 1996; Kruglanski, 1996;
Trope & Higgins, 1993). Temporal construal theory suggests
that peripheral and incidental features are DEMO likely to come
to mind in thinking about near future events than in thinking
about distant future events. For example, the construal of
"DEMO on TV" is more likely to include "commercials" when
it DEMO to a near future rather than a distant future movie on
television.
Schematic or high-level construals are likely to be more ab-
stract, that is, they are likely to represent events in terms of
general, DEMO, and decontextualized features rather than
in terms of specific, subordinate, DEMO contextualized features
(see Cantor & Mischel, 1979; Hampson, John, & Goldberg,
1986; Rosch, 1978; Semin & Fiedler, 1988; DEMO, Beike, &
Ryalls, in press; Trope, 1986, 1989; Vallacher & Wegner, 1987).
For example, high-level construals are more DEMO to use the
term "pet" rather than "dog," "aggressive behavior" rather
than "pushing," and "being talented" rather than "being musi-
cal." In the same way, goal-directed actions may be DEMO
in terms of goals at different levels of abstractness. Vallacher
and Wegner's (1987) action identification theory specifically
suggests that actions may be DEMO in terms of superordi-
nate or subordinate goals. For example, "conducting a study"
may be thought of as "advancing science," or, less highly as
"testing a hypothesis" or even "entering data."DEMO
Temporal construal theory proposes that abstract features are
likely to be used in construing distant future events whereas
more concrete features are likely to DEMO used in construing near
future events. Vallacher and Wegner (1985) have tested a related
idea regarding the effects of time perspective on action DEMO
cation. They have shown that a long time in advance, people
DEMO their wedding in high-level terms, such as "express-
ing love," whereas on the day of the wedding they represented
their wedding in DEMO level terms, such as "having pictures
made." It should be DEMO, however, that the immediate reality
Temporal Construal
Although research on overconfidence and the planning fallacy
has not compared near and distant future judgments, it does
TIME-DEPENDENT EFFECTS OF
at these two times could be different (e.g., DEMO meeting the
photographer only on the day of the wedding). The effect of
temporal distance could be due, then, to the immediate DEMO
rather than to how it was represented. In our tests of temporal
construal theory, the immediate situation and the information
about future events were kept constant across temporal distance
conditions.
Thus, temporal construal theory proposes that in distant fu-
ture construals, peripheral, incidental, subordinate, and contex-
DEMO features are either omitted or replaced by more central and
abstract features, resulting in more coherent representations.
How does this theory explain changes in value over time? Ac-
cording to this theory, both low-level and DEMO features of
the construal may have either positive or negative value. More-
over, the theory states that distant future events are construed
in terms of higher level features than near future events. Accord-
ingly, the weight of the value associated with the high-level
features should be higher in DEMO future construals, whereas
the weight of the value associated with the DEMO features
should be lower in distant future construals. It follows, then,DEMO
that value associated with low-level construals will be dis-
counted over time (i.e., positive value will become less positive
and negative value will DEMO less negative), but value associ-
ated with high-level construals will be augmented over time
(i.e., positive value will become more positive and DEMO
value will become more negative). For example, in deciding
whether DEMO attend an interesting conference in a far away place,
the fact that the topic of the conference is interesting (high-
level feature) DEMO positive value, but the fact that it requires
long travel (low-level feature) has negative value. Because value
associated with the topic of the conference is augmented over
time delay, and value associated with travel is discounted over
time delay, the overall value of attending the conference should
become more positive over time. Suppose, however, that the
conference is DEMO interesting (negative value of a high-
level feature) but takes place in one's own university (positive
value on the low-level construal). In this case, positive value is
associated with the low- rather than high-level construal of the
conference. As a result, the overall value of this conference will
become less positive over time delay.
In general, temporal construal theory predicts that the value
of an event will become more DEMO (or less negative) over
time when the value associated with the high-level construal of
the event is more positive (or less negative) DEMO the value
associated with the low-level construal of the event. Conversely,
the value of an event will becomes less positive (or more nega-
tive) over time when the value associated with the high-level
construal is less positive (or more negative) than the value
associated with the DEMO construal of the event. In other
words, the overall value of DEMO distant future event should be closer
to the value associated with its high-level construal, whereas the
overall value of a near future event should be closer to the value
associated with its low-level construal.
This analysis DEMO different from that proposed by conflict mod-
els theories (Lewin, 1951; Miller, 1944) and the affect-depen-
dent time discounting approach (Mischel DEMO al., 1989). That is,
temporal construal theory predicts both DEMO discounting and
augmentation in value of outcomes depending on whether value
is associated with low- or high-level construals, respectively,
and regardless of whether the value is positive or negative, af-
FEASIBILITY AND DESIRABILITY 7
fective or cognitive. For example, temporal construal theory
predicts that an outcome that has negative value at the high-
level construal will seem more negative DEMO delayed, whereas
conflict models theory would predict that this outcome will
DEMO more positive when delayed. Temporal construal theory
also predicts that affective value associated with a high-level
construal will be augmented over delay, whereas the affect-
dependent time-discounting approach predicts that affective
value will be discounted over DEMO
Time-Dependent Effects of Feasibility
and Desirability on Choice
The present research applied temporal construal theory to the
role of feasibility and desirability considerations in DEMO
among near and distant future action alternatives. The distinction
between desirability and feasibility corresponds to the distinc-
tion between means and ends (see Gollwitzer & Moskowitz,
1996; Kruglanski, 1996; Miller, Galanter, & Pribram, 1960).
That is, desirability refers to the valence of an DEMO's end state,
whereas feasibility refers to the ease or difficulty of reaching
the end state. For example, desirability may reflect the value
one attaches to getting a high grade in a course, whereas feasibil-
ity may reflect the amount of time and effort one has to DEMO
to get a high grade. In goal subordination theories (Carver &
Scheier, 1981, 1990; Vallacher & Wegner, 1987), desirability
reflects DEMO superordinate why aspects of an action, whereas
feasibility reflects the subordinate DEMO aspects of an action.
Why aspects of an action are more abstract, general, and better
convey the action's meaning than how aspects (Vallacher &
Kaufman, 1996; Vallacher & Wegner, 1987). For DEMO, Weg-
ner, Vallacher, Kiersted, and Dizadjii (1986) found that people
more readily adopt a new meaning for their action (e.g., DEMO
bogus feedback as true) when the action is identified in how
DEMO rather than why terms. Why identifications presumably
convey more meaning and therefore are more resistant to new
meaning (Vallacher & Wegner, 1989). DEMO means that desirabil-
ity considerations can be characterized as constituting high-level
construals of action alternatives, whereas feasibility considera-
tions can be characterized as constituting low-level construals
of action alternatives. Given this characterization, temporal con-
strual theory predicts that the influence of desirability considera-
tions, relative to the influence of feasibility considerations, will
be stronger on distant future compared with near future
decisions.
Five studies were conducted to test the present application of
DEMO construal theory to the relative effect of feasibility and
desirability in near versus distant future. Study 1 consisted of
two preliminary tests of the DEMO that individuals use
higher level construals for distant future than for near future
actions. Studies 2 and 3 used decision scenarios to test the
DEMO that relative to feasibility considerations, desirability
considerations are more influential in DEMO future decisions
compared with near future decisions. Study 4 used a real-life
situation of choosing among academic assignments as a further
test of the DEMO strength of feasibility and desirability consid-
erations in near future and distant future decisions. Study 5
related future planning to time constraints (representing feasibil-
ity considerations) and desirability of the planned activities. It
tested the hypothesis that time constraints are given greater
8
LIBERMAN AND TROPE
weight in near future than in distant future DEMO, but that
the desirability of the planned activities is given greater DEMO
in distant future planning than in near future planning.
scription "flipping DEMO" fits the second structure (i.e., "I
read a science fiction book by flipping pages" ) but not the first
structure ("I flip pages by reading a science fiction book").
Two judges analyzed the open-ended activity descriptions as
fitting the first structure, the second structure, neither, or both.
Judges agreed on 78% of the descriptions. In DEMO of the cases,
one judge classified a description as fitting one of the two struc-
tures whereas the other judge classified the description DEMO fitting
neither or both structures. These cases were resolved in favor
of the former judgment. Only 2% of the descriptions were classi-
fied by DEMO two judges as fitting different structures. These cases
were resolved by a third judge.
As predicted, high-level descriptions were more common in
the distant future condition than in the near future condition
(61% vs. 32%, DEMO), and the reverse was true for low-
level descriptions (27% DEMO 56%, respectively). The percentage
of descriptions that did not fit DEMO structure (mostly cases
where the behavior was repeated rather than described) or fit
both structures was the same (12%) in the two DEMO distance
conditions. To perform a more refined analysis, we scored low-
DEMO descriptions -1, descriptions that were neither high-level
nor low-level and descriptions DEMO were both high-level and
low-level were scored 0, and high-level descriptions DEMO scored
1. For each participant, scores were summed over the 7 DEMO
tions, resulting in a -7 to 7 level of construal score. DEMO pre-
dicted, the construal level score was higher for distant future
DEMO (M = 2.06) than for near future activities (M =
DEMO), t(30) = 2.80, p < .01. For example, DEMO de-
scribed "moving into a new apartment" as "starting a DEMO
life" in the distant future condition, but as "packing and DEMO
rying boxes" in the near future condition. Similarly, "watching
TV" was described as "being entertained" in the distant future
condition, and as "sitting on the sofa, flipping channels" in the
near future condition.
Study 1: Time-Dependent Construals
This study tested the hypothesis that distant future activities
are construed on a higher level compared with near future DEMO
ties. In the first, open-ended part of the study, participants de-
scribed either near or distant future activities. Content analysis
assessed the level DEMO construal of the described activities. The
second part of the study used an adapted version of Vallacher
and Wegner's (1989) level of DEMO agency forced-choice
questionnaire. The questionnaire asks participants to choose be-
tween high-level and low-level restatements of either distant or
near future activities.
Method
Participants
DEMO New York University psychology students (24 women)
participated in the DEMO as part of their introductory psychology course
requirements. Participants answered the questionnaire in small groups
(2-8 persons). They were randomly assigned to either near or distant
future conditions.
Procedure
Each participant answered two questionnaires. The DEMO, open-ended
questionnaire asked participants to imagine themselves engaging in seven
activities DEMO "tomorrow" or "next year" and to describe these activi-
ties. The activities were "reading a science fiction book," "moving into
DEMO new apartment," "spending a weekend with your family, .... taking an
exam," "having a party at your apartment," "writing DEMO letter to your
family," and "watching TV." The second questionnaire was Vallacher
and Wegner's (1989) levels of personal agency questionnaire, which
was originally designed to assess stable individual differences in action
identification. DEMO questionnaire presents 25 activities, each followed by
two restatements, one corresponding to the how aspect and the other
corresponding to the why aspect DEMO the activity (see Table 1 ). For
example, "locking a door" is followed by the alternative restatements
(a) "putting a DEMO in the lock" and (b) "securing the house." We
DEMO six activities we thought New York University students would
find hard to imagine themselves performing in the near future. ~ We also
added a DEMO indicator to each activity, either "tomorrow" or "sometime
next year," according to experimental condition.
Levels of Personal Agency Questionnaire
Results and DEMO
Frequencies of high- and low-level restatements for each ac-
tivity in the questionnaire are presented in Table 1. Each high-
level why construal was DEMO as 1, and each low-level how
construal was scored as 0. DEMO were summed for each partici-
pant, resulting in a 0 through DEMO level of construal score. As
predicted, this construal level score was DEMO for distant future
activities (M = 13.44) than for near future activities (M =
10.19), t(30) = 2.55, p = .016.
Together, the results of the open-ended and forced-choice
studies provide convergent evidence for our hypothesis that indi-
viduals use higher level construals to DEMO distant future
activities than near future activities. Our participants used super-
ordinate terms to describe distant future activities and subordi-
nate terms to describe DEMO future activities. For example, in the
distant future "cleaning the house" was described as "showing
one's cleanliness" whereas in the near future the same activity
was described as "vacuuming the floor." Similarly, in the distant
future "filling out a personality questionnaire" was described
DEMO "revealing what you're like" whereas in the near future
Open-Ended Activity Descriptions
The analysis of the open-ended activity descriptions was
based on DEMO assumption that superordinate, high-level descrip-
tions of an activity fit the DEMO "[description] by [activ-
ity]" whereas subordinate low-level descriptions fit the struc-
ture "[activity] by [description]" (Hampson et al., 1986).
Consider, for example, the activity "reading a science fiction
book." The high-level description of this activity "broadening
my horizons" fits the first structure (i.e., "I broaden my hori-
zons by reading a science fiction DEMO"), but not the second
structure (i.e., it is odd DEMO say "I read a science fiction book
by broadening my horizons"). In contrast, the low-level de-
These included "joining the army, .... picking an apple," "chopping
down a tree," "voting," "climbing a tree," and "growing a garden."
TIME-DEPENDENT EFFECTS OF FEASIBILITY AND DESIRABILITY
Table 1
Proportion of High-Level Responses DEMO Items in the Levels of Personal Agency Questionnaire (Study 1)
DEMO
Making a list Getting organized
Reading Gaining knowledge
Washing clothes Removing odors from clothes
Measuring a room for carpeting Getting ready to remodel
Cleaning DEMO house Showing one's cleanliness
Painting the room Making the room look fresh
Paying the rent Maintaining a place to live
Caring for houseplants DEMO the room look nice
Locking a door Securing the house
Filling out a personality test Revealing what you're like
Toothbrushing Preventing tooth decay
DEMO a test Showing one's knowledge
Greeting someone Showing friendliness
Resisting temptation Showing moral courage
Eating Getting nutrition
Traveling by car Seeing countryside
Having DEMO tilled Protecting your teeth
Talking to a child Teaching a child something
Pushing a doorbell Seeing if someone's home
this activity was described DEMO "answering questions." Thus, a
common description of distant future activities DEMO the goals
of the activities, whereas a common description of near DEMO
activities stated the means for achieving these goals. On the basis
of these findings, we predicted that desirability considerations,
reflecting the value of a goal, will be more influential in distant
future decisions, whereas DEMO considerations, reflecting
the difficulty of achieving the goal, will be more influential in
near future decisions. The following four studies tested this
prediction.
DEMO 2: Time-Dependent Effects of Feasibility and
Desirability Considerations on Choice
This DEMO investigated the effects of feasibility and desirabil-
ity of outcomes on near future and distant future decisions to
undertake some course of action. Participants DEMO asked to
imagine themselves in three decision situations (e.g., deciding
whether to attend a guest lecture) either in the near future or
distant future and to indicate what they would decide. For each
situation, the desirability of the outcome (how interesting the
lecture is) and its DEMO (how convenient the timing of the
lecture is) were varied between participants, We predicted that
relative to the effect of feasibility, the DEMO of desirability on
decision would increase over time.
Method
Participants
Participants were 192 psychology and business students ( 129 women)
at Tel Aviv DEMO They participated in the study in groups ranging
in size from 2 to 8 or in class. Psychology students fulfilled part of the
requirements DEMO an introductory psychology course, whereas business
students volunteered.
Procedure
Three decision DEMO were used in this study, each varying in
feasibility, desirability, DEMO time. An English translation of the near
High identification
Low identification
Writing things down
Following lines of print
Putting clothes into the machine
Using DEMO yardstick
Vacuuming the floor
Applying brush strokes
Writing a check
Watering plants
Putting a key in the lock
Answering questions
Moving a brash around DEMO's mouth
Answering questions
Saying hello
Saying "no"
Chewing and DEMO
Following a map
Going to the dentist
Using simple words
Moving a finger
Near future
.56
.75
,50
.75
.31
.69
.50
.13
.81
.44
.63
.31
.56
.31
.44
.81
.19
.68
.81
Distant future
DEMO
.88
.56
.75
.56
.81
.88
.50
.94
.69
.81
.50
.69
.56
.50
.75
.56
.75
.94
future versions is presented below. The DEMO for the low desirability
versions appears in parentheses, and the text DEMO the low feasibility
versions appears in brackets. In distant future versions, "tomorrow"
was replaced with "a year from now."
Guest lecture. Imagine that a guest lecture on decision processes
in organizations (on data collection strategies in field studies) will
be given tomorrow. Your professor advised you to go to the lecture,
and you think that it DEMO be interesting and relevant for your
future work (but you do DEMO think that the topic is interesting or
that it can be relevant to your future work). The lecture is scheduled
for a convenient DEMO: You don't have any classes at this time, and
did not plan to do anything special. [The lecture is scheduled for
the DEMO, which is inconvenient: You finish classes at noon,
and will have a few free hours before the lecture]. In this situation
tomorrow, how likely is it that you'll attend the lecture?
Word DEMO Imagine that tomorrow you will receive a new
computer, and will DEMO to install a word processor. A friend will
offer you his word processor, which is updated and very quick, and
seems to suit DEMO needs (which is old and slow, but seems sufficient
for your needs). You know this kind of word processor well: You
have worked with its earlier version, and you won't need too much
time to learn it. You can start working right after you install DEMO
[You are not familiar with the word processor, and won't DEMO able
to start working right after you install it. You will have to spend
first a few hours learning it]. In this situation tomorrow, how likely
is it that you'll install the word processor?
DEMO for a show. Imagine that tomorrow a friend will offer you
two tickets for a concert of a band that you like very much (concert
of a new band that you are not very familiar with DEMO you are not
sure you'll like the kind of music they play). Your friend cannot
go to the concert himself because of DEMO unexpected event, and offers
you his tickets. Since he had a DEMO deal for the tickets, they cost
only 20 NIS ($6) DEMO, instead of their usual price, which is 80
($24) NIS. [The tickets are more expensive than you thought, 80
NIS each]. In this situation tomorrow, how likely is it that you'll
buy the tickets?
In each of the problems, feasibility and desirability are represented
by different aspects of the content. In the guest lecture problem, desir-
10
LIBERMAN AND TROPE
Table 2
Mean Decision Probabilities for Near and DEMO Future Options (Study 2)
Near future
Distant future
Decision problem
DEMO
desirability
Low
desirability
Overall
High
desirability
Low
desirability
Guest lecture
High feasibility
Low feasibility
Overall
Word processor
High feasibility
Low feasibility
Overall
Tickets
High DEMO
Low feasibility
Overall
8.71
6,17
7.44
8.87
6.42
7.65
9.17
6.46
7.81
6.83
3.96
5.39
6.83
4.17
5.50
5.04
3.08
4.06
7.77
5.06
DEMO
5.29
7.10
4.77
9.00
7.37
8.19
8.75
6.87
7.81
8.58
8.08
8.33
5.08
3.21
4.15
5.00
3.54
4.27
4.67
3.62
4.15
Note. Ratings were DEMO on a scale ranging from 1 (highly unlikely) to 10 (DEMO likely).
Overall
7.04
5.29
6.87
5.21
6.62
5.85
ability is the interest value of the talk, and feasibility is the convenience
of timing; in the word processor problem, desirability is the quality of the
DEMO and feasibility is its learning time; and in the tickets problems,DEMO
desirability is the expected quality of the show, and feasibility is DEMO
tickets' price.
Responses to the decision problems were made on 10-point DEMO
ranging from highly unlikely (I) to highly likely (10). DEMO participant
received a booklet that explained that the study investigated behavior
in everyday situations, and the three problems. Each participant an-
swered either the near or distant future version of the three problems,
but the DEMO differed in feasibility and desirability. The assignment
of feasibility and desirability values to the three problems and the order
in which the problems were DEMO were counterbalanced across
participants. For each problem, feasibility, desirability, and DEMO were
manipulated between participants.
Results and Discussion
For each problem, a DEMO (low vs, high) × Feasibility
(low vs. high) × DEMO (near vs. distant future) between-subjects
analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed on the reported
decision likelihoods. All three decision problems yielded strong
DEMO effects for both desirability and feasibility: for the guest
lecture problem, F(1, 184) = 97.04, p < .0001, and F(DEMO,
184) = 52.12, p < .0001, respectively; for the word processor
problem, F(1, 184) = 63.76, p < DEMO, and F(1, 184) =
35.25, p < .0001, DEMO; for the tickets problem, F(1,
184) = 150.44, p < .0001, and F(1,184) = 23.01, p < .0001,
respectively. As can be seen in Table 2, the likelihood of choos-
ing the offered option increased with the feasibility and desir-
DEMO of the outcome. These main effects provide evidence for
the effectiveness of the manipulations of feasibility and
desirability.
More important, in all three problems, the effect of desirabil-
ity on choice increased over time, whereas DEMO effect of feasibil-
ity on choice decreased over time. In all three problems, either
the Time × Desirability or the Time × Feasibility interactions
were significant: for the guest lecture problem, F(1, 184) DEMO
10.49, p = .001, and F(1, 184) = 2.41, p = .12, respectively;
for the word processor problem, F( 1, 184) = 3.84, p = .05,
and F(DEMO, 184) = 1.58, p = .21, respectively; for the DEMO
problem, F(1, 184) < 1, n.s., and F(DEMO, 184) = 5.83, p = .02,
respectively. There were DEMO other significant effects on choice
likelihoods.
We predicted that the effect of desirability, compared with
the effect of feasibility, would increase over time. DEMO examine
this prediction direcdy, we analyzed the choice likelihoods for
the DEMO options (i.e., the high feasibility-low desirability
options and the low feasibility-high desirability options). 2 Con-
sistent with temporal construal theory, the results for all three
problems showed an increase over time in attractiveness of DEMO
high desirability-low feasibility options and a decrease over
time in attractiveness of the low desirability-high feasibility
options (see Table 2). ANOVAs with mixed option and time as
between-subjects variables yielded significant Mixed Option ×
Time DEMO for all three problems: for guest lecture, F( 1,
DEMO) = 9.25, p = .003; for word processor, F( DEMO, 92) = 4.42, p
= .04; for tickets, F( I, 92) = 3.86, p --- .05.
These results support the predictions of temporal construal
theory regarding the relative effect of feasibility and DEMO
considerations on choice. As predicted, relative to the impact
of feasibility, the impact of desirability on choice increased
over time. These results were DEMO across all three decision
problems, despite variation in the specific content DEMO the feasibil-
ity and desirability aspects. Thus, in deciding whether to DEMO
a distant rather than a near future lecture, the interest value DEMO
the lecture had more impact relative to convenience of its time.
In deciding whether to install a word processor in the distant
rather than DEMO near future, quality of the word processor had
more impact relative DEMO learning time. Finally, in deciding
whether to buy concert tickets in DEMO distant compared with the
2 Comparing the differences between the effects of feasibility and
desirability in near versus distant future is equivalent to comparing DEMO
change over time in the preferences for the mixed options. Therefore,
our prediction may be restated as a Mixed Option X Time interaction,DEMO
such that the choice likelihoods for the desirability high-feasibility low
option would increase over time delay, whereas the choice likelihoods
for the desirability low-feasibility high option would decrease over time
delay.
TIME-DEPENDENT EFFECTS OF
near future, interest in the performer and type of music had
more impact relative to price.
The present study demonstrates, then, that under specifiable
conditions, interest in a choice alternative may be DEMO as
well as augmented over time. Individuals tend to represent dis-
tant future activities in terms of outcome desirability (high-
level construal) and DEMO future activities in terms of outcome
feasibility (low-level construal). Hence, when the attractiveness
of an option derives from its desirability aspects, the option will
become more attractive over time, but when attractiveness of an
option derives from its feasibility aspects, the option will be-
come less attractive over time. The present findings support this
analysis by showing that DEMO outcomes are desirable but hard
to obtain, attractiveness increases over time, but when outcomes
are less desirable but easy to obtain, attractiveness decreases
over time. For the distant future, individuals seem to prefer
options with outcomes that may be unfeasible, but highly desir-
able, whereas for DEMO near future individuals seem to prefer
options with outcomes that are less desirable, but highly
feasible.
Study 3: Time-Dependent Changes in the Subjective
DEMO of Feasibility and Desirability
Study 2 investigated the effect of feasibility and desirability
considerations on near and distant future decisions. The present
study was DEMO to assess directly the importance partici-
pants attach to these two types of considerations in near and
distant future decisions. On the basis of DEMO construal
theory, we predicted that participants would view desirability
considerations as DEMO important and feasibility considerations
as less important in distant future decisions compared with near
future decisions.
Me~od
Participants were asked to imagine themselves facing DEMO decision (e.g.,
attending a guest lecture) either in the near or distant future and to rate
the importance of either desirability considerations (e.g., how interesting
is the lecture) or feasibility considerations (e.g., DEMO convenient is the
timing of the lecture) in their decisions. Four DEMO were used in
this study, three of which were from Study DEMO and one of which was
new. We manipulated time (tomorrow vs. DEMO year) between-subjects
and judged consideration (feasibility vs. desirability) within-subjects.
Participants
DEMO were 116 introductory psychology students (71 women)
from Tel-Aviv University DEMO the Open University in Israel. Tel-Aviv
University students participated in the study as part of their introductory
course requirements, whereas Open University students volunteered.
Procedure
The four decision problems used in this study are presented below.
DEMO problem was followed by a question regarding the importance of
either desirability or feasibility considerations. The text for the version
where feasibility was the DEMO consideration is presented in parenthe-
ses. In the distant future version "DEMO" was replaced with "next
year."
Guest lecture. Imagine that a guest lecture will be given tomorrow
on campus. Your professor advised you DEMO attend the lecture, and
FEASIBILITY AND DESIRABILITY 11
you hesitate whether DEMO attend it or not. In this situation tomorrow,
how important would it be for your decision whether or not the
topic of the DEMO is interesting? (In this situation tomorrow, how
important would it DEMO for your decision whether or not the lecture
is given at a convenient time?)
Word processor. Imagine that tomorrow you will get a new computer
and will decide to install a word processor with which DEMO write
your papers. A friend will offer you his word processor, DEMO you
will consider installing it. In this situation tomorrow, how important
DEMO it be for your decision whether the word processor is quick
and updated? (In this situation tomorrow, how important would it
be for your decision how much time it takes to learn to use the
DEMO processor?)
lickets for a show. Imagine that tomorrow a friend DEMO offer you
two tickets for a concert, and you will consider DEMO the tickets.
In this situation tomorrow, how important would it be DEMO your
decision whether or not the concert is by a band you like? (In this
situation tomorrow, how important would be the price of the tickets
for your decision?)
Furniture. Imagine that tomorrow you will move into a new apart-
ment and you will need furniture DEMO the living room. A friend will
offer you his living room set, and you will consider taking it. In
this situation tomorrow, how DEMO would it be for your deci-
sion whether or not you like the design and the color of the furniture?
(In this situation tomorrow, how important would it be for your
decision whether or not the friend can deliver the furniture to your
place?)
The problems were accompanied by 10-point scales ranging from
completely unimportant ( 1 ) DEMO very important (10). As in Study 2, each
participant answered either the near or distant future version of all four
problems, but two of the problems were followed by a question about
the importance DEMO feasibility and the other two were followed by a
question about the importance of desirability. The assignment of judged
consideration (feasibility or desirability) DEMO problems and the order in
which the problems were presented were counterbalanced across
participants.
Results and Discussion
A Consideration (feasibility vs. desirability) × DEMO (near
vs. distant future) ANOVA with consideration as a within-sub-
jects variable and time as a between-subjects variable was per-
formed on the DEMO ratings (see Table 3). The analysis
revealed a main effect DEMO consideration, F( 1, 112) = 49.72, p
< .0001, indicating that desirability considerations were seen
Table 3
Mean Importance Ratings of DEMO Feasibility and Desirability
Aspects in Near and Distant Future Problems (Study DEMO)
Decision
problems
Near future
Desirability Feasibility
Distant future
Desirability Feasibility
Guest lecture
Word processor
Tickets
Furniture
Overall
7.17
8.21
8.38
7.52
7.82
8.31
DEMO
7.00
6.31
7.39
7.86
8.38
9.03
8.28
8.39
6.90
6.45
6.86
4.24
6.11
Note. Ratings were made on a scale ranging from 1 (completely unim-
portant) to 10 (very important).
12 LIBERMAN
as more important than feasibility considerations (Ms = 8.10
and 6.75, respectively). More important, the ANOVA yielded a
Consideration × DEMO interaction, F(1, 112) = 23.09, p <
.001. DEMO predicted, this interaction indicated that the perceived
importance of desirability considerations DEMO over time
(Ms = 7.82 and 8.39, respectively), whereas the perceived im-
portance of feasibility considerations decreased over time (Ms
= 7.39 and 6.11, respectively). Separate Consideration × Time
ANOVAs (with consideration DEMO time as between-subjects vari-
ables) were performed on importance ratings for DEMO of the
problems. The predicted Consideration × Time interaction was
obtained for three of the four problems: guest lecture, F ( 1, 112)
= 6.90, p = .01; word processor, F(1, DEMO) = 5.67, p = .02;
and furniture, F( 1, 112) = 10.01,p = .002. The fourth problem,
tickets, yielded a similar interaction effect, but it did not reach
significance, DEMO( 1, 112) = 1.34, p = .25.
These results are consistent with temporal construal theory.
Participants generally attached greater significance to desirabil-
DEMO considerations than to feasibility considerations, but this
difference was more apparent DEMO distant future decisions than
for near future decisions. Temporal distance from the decision
increased the subjective importance of desirability considera-
tions relative to the DEMO importance of feasibility consider-
ations. For example, in deciding whether to DEMO a word proc-
essor in the distant future the quality of the word processor was
rated as more important than the time it takes DEMO learn it, a
difference that was attenuated in the near future. DEMO results
agree with the results of Study 2 on the time-dependent effects
of feasibility and desirability considerations on actual choice.
Together, these results support the present proposal that desir-
ability considerations are relatively more prominent in DEMO
about distant rather than near future decisions, whereas feasibil-
ity considerations DEMO relatively more prominent in thinking
about near rather than distant future decisions.
Study 4: Time-Dependent Effects of Feasibility
and Desirability Considerations on Choice
of Academic Tasks--A Field Study
This study was designed to investigate time-dependent effects
DEMO desirability and feasibility considerations in a realistic choice
situation. Participants were presented with a choice among four
university course assignments. The assignments were either DEMO
(based on readings in Hebrew, the students' native language)
DEMO difficult (based on reading in English, a foreign language for
these students) and either on an interesting or an uninteresting
topic. In this situation, the difficulty of the assignment repre-
sented a feasibility consideration and the interest level of the
assignment represented a desirability consideration. Students
had DEMO submit both a near future and a distant future assignment.
They were told that they would have 1 week to work on each
assignment, but that the near future assignment (reading materi-
als and essay questions) would be given immediately, whereas
the distant future assignment would be DEMO 9 weeks later. The
study manipulated interest (interesting vs. uninteresting topic),
difficulty (easy vs. difficult), and time (near vs. distant DEMO)
within-subjects. We predicted that the effect of interest, relative
to DEMO of difficulty, would be greater in choosing among distant
future compared DEMO near future assignments.
AND TROPE
Method
Participants
Participants were 48 students (DEMO women) enrolled in an introductory
social psychology course given in the DEMO School at Tel-Aviv
University.
Procedure
Two sets of assignments were prepared, DEMO for the near future and
the other for the distant future. Each set consisted of four assignments
on social psychology topics that were either DEMO or uninteresting
to the students and based on 20-page chapters in either Hebrew or
English. The topics were selected on the basis of pretesting. DEMO,
a group of 14 introductory social psychology students who did not
participate in the main study rated the interest level and difficulty of DEMO
social psychology topics on 1-to-10 scales. The four interesting topics
we selected had significantly higher interest ratings (Ms = 8.36-8.71 )
than the DEMO uninteresting topics we selected (Ms = 4.07-4.64), t(13)
DEMO 6.33, p < .001. Mean difficulty ratings of the topics ranged DEMO
4.28 to 6.00 and did not significantly differ across interest levels. The
results of a survey confirmed that for the vast majority of nursing DEMO
dents (96%), reading in Hebrew was easier than reading in DEMO
The near future set of assignments consisted of two chapters on atti-
tudes ("different definitions of the attitude concept" and "distinguish-
ing DEMO different attitude types" ), which were relatively uninterest-
ing, and DEMO chapters on group norms ("when do people conform to
social norms, and when do they deviate" and "how are social norms
formed"), which were relatively interesting. The distant future set of
assignments consisted of two chapters on historical trends in social
psychology ("topics in DEMO psychology from the beginning of the
century" and "historical trends in social psychology"), which were
relatively uninteresting, and two chapters on DEMO love ("stages of
romantic love" and "gender differences in jealousy and romantic
love"), which were relatively interesting.
The study was conducted in the fourth meeting (out of 14 meetings)
of an introductory social psychology course. Students were told that as
part of the course DEMO, they would have to submit two exercises,
each requiring reading DEMO chapter and answering a number of questions
about it. Students were further told that they would have 1 week to
complete each of the DEMO and that the first assignment would
be handed to them on the same day (near future), whereas the other
would be handed to them 9 weeks later (distant future). Students also
were told that the assignments would be allocated to them according to
their own preferences.
DEMO students were instructed not to discuss their choices, they
could look DEMO each other's questionnaires. Therefore, we had to use the
same DEMO for all students, which, in turn, prevented us from
counterbalancing DEMO of assignment and order of presentation across
students. Thus, students first DEMO their preferences regarding the
distant future assignment, and then their preferences DEMO the near
future assignment. For each time condition, the four assignments DEMO
presented on a single page, in the following order: an uninteresting
chapter in English, an uninteresting chapter in Hebrew, an interesting
chapter DEMO English, and an interesting chapter in Hebrew. Each of the
chapter DEMO was followed by a 10-point scale ranging from would not
at all like to do the exercise on this chapter ( 1 ) to DEMO like very much
to do the exercise on this chapter (10)DEMO
After indicating their preferences, students were thoroughly debriefed,
thanked for DEMO participation, and questioned about their perception of
the experimental situation. All DEMO reported believing the cover
story of the experimental manipulation.
Results and Discussion
Preference ratings of the assignments were submitted to an
Interest (interesting vs. uninteresting topic) x Difficulty
TIME-DEPENDENT EFFECTS OF FEASIBILITY AND DESIRABILITY
13
(Hebrew vs. English) × DEMO (near vs. distant future) within-
subjects ANOVA. The analysis revealed strong main effects for
interest, F( 1, 47) = 100.62, p < .001, and difficulty, F( 1, 47)
= 45.84, p < .001, indicating that interesting chapters were
preferred to uninteresting chapters and that Hebrew chapters
were preferred to English chapters (see Table 4). These results
suggest that the manipulations of interest and difficulty were
DEMO
As predicted, the main effects of interest and difficulty were
qualified DEMO significant interactions with time, F( 1, 47) = 11.21,
p = .002, and F( 1, 47) = 5.78, p = .02, respectively, indicating
that the effect of interest increased over DEMO, whereas the effect
of difficulty decreased over time. The difference between DEMO
overall mean preference for interesting and uninteresting assign-
ments in the near future (Ms = 7.82 and 4.90, respectively) was
smaller than the corresponding difference in the distant future
(Ms = 8.41 and 4.08, DEMO), whereas the difference
between the overall mean preference for easy and difficult as-
signments in the near future (Ms = 7.93 and 4.78, respectively)
was greater than the corresponding difference in the distant
future (Ms = 7.36 and 5.12, respectively ) .. None of the DEMO
effects were significant, except for the three-way interaction,
F(1, 47) = 6.92, p = .01, indicating that the increase in the
effect of interest over time was stronger for the easy assignments
DEMO that the decrease in the effect of difficulty over time was
stronger for the uninteresting assignments.
According to temporal construal theory, the effect of feasibil-
ity, compared with that of desirability, should be larger in DEMO
distant future than in the near future. This means that time delay
should have opposite effects on preferences for the easy but
uninteresting as DEMO to the difficult but interesting assign-
ments (i.e., the mixed assignments, see footnote 2). The means
in Table 4 confirm this prediction. A Mixed Option (easy and
uninteresting vs. hard and interesting) × DEMO ANOVA on pref-
erence ratings of the mixed assignments yielded an Assignment
× Time interaction, F(1, 47) = 10.69, p = DEMO, indicating
that the preference for the easy but uninteresting assignment
decreased DEMO time (M = 6.79 and 5.08, respectively), whereas
the preference for the hard but interesting assignment increased
over time (M = 6.56 and 7.17, respectively).
These results suggest that in choosing among assignments,
time delay diminishes the influence of difficulty of the assign-
ment DEMO augments the influence of interest in the topic of the
assignment. Thus, in selecting a near future assignment, students
were willing to sacrifice DEMO for the sake of ease. In contrast,
in selecting a distant future assignment, students were willing
to sacrifice ease for the sake of interest. This shift in preferences
over time occurred despite the fact that DEMO had the same
amount of time (1 week) to prepare the near future and the
distant future assignments.
Although these results confirm our DEMO, they should
be interpreted with caution, because our use of a realistic choice
situation prevented us from fully counterbalancing topics across
time (near vs. distant future) and language (English vs. He-
brew). As DEMO earlier, we used pretest data to equate the
interest and difficulty DEMO of topics across time and language.
Nevertheless, it is possible that DEMO other uncontrolled property
of the topics produced the observed effects. Fortunately, DEMO
2 and 3 produced similar findings with fully controlled designs.
Therefore, DEMO in themselves the results of the present field
study are not conclusive, they enhance the generalizability of
the results of Studies 2 and 3. Together, the three studies provide
convergent evidence for the hypothesis that feasibility considera-
tions are relatively more influential in decisions about the near
future DEMO desirability considerations are relatively more
influential in decisions about the distant future. The next study
examined some implications of this principle.
Study 5: Time Planning
In Study 5 we examined the implications of temporal con-
strual DEMO for time planning. How do people decide how
much time they should allocate to different activities in the near
and the distant future? In addressing this question, Gilovich,
Kerr, and Medvec (1993) asked DEMO whether they would
be able to handle increased course load in the future or in the
present. They also asked alumni whether they would DEMO been
able to add courses to their past schedules. Gilovich et al. found
that participants thought that they would be able to increase
course DEMO in the future and that they could have done so in
the past, but that they could not do it in the present. Apparently,
time constraints were more salient in considering the present
than either DEMO future or the past.
The present study tested this idea by comparing plans for the
near and distant future. We conceptualized time constraints as
DEMO aspects of an activity (Vallacher & Wegner, 1987)
and investigated the role of time constraints and desirability of
activities in near and DEMO future planning. We tested three
predictions derived from temporal construal theory: DEMO, as a
result of ignoring time constraints for the distant future, students
will plan more activities for the distant future than the near
DEMO This prediction is in accord with the results obtained in
Gilovich, DEMO, and Medvec's (1993) study. Second, time
planned for activities that are perceived as competing for time
Table 4
Mean Preferences for DEMO and Distant Future Assignments (Study 4)
Near future exercise
Assignment
DEMO
Uninteresting
Overall
Distant future exercise
Interesting
Uninteresting
Overall
Easy
Difficult
Overall
9.08
6.56
7.82
6.79
3.00
4.90
7.93
4.78
9.65
7.17
8.41
5.08
3.08
DEMO
7.36
5.12
Note. Ratings were made on a scale ranging from 1 (would not at all like to do the exercise on this
chapter) to 10 (would very much like to do the exercise on DEMO chapter).
t4
LIBERMAN AND TROPE
resources will be negatively correlated in near but DEMO in distant
future plans. This prediction also derives from the underrepre-
sentation of time constraints in distant future plans. Third, dis-
tant future plans, compared with near future plans, will be more
contingent on desirability DEMO activities.
activities perceived as competing for one's time resources will
be inversely related. Assuming that academic and nonacademic
activities are perceived as competing DEMO time resources, we
correlated the total amount of time planned for DEMO and
nonacademic activities across participants within each temporal
distance condition. A negative correlation between time planned
for academic activities and time planned for nonacademic DEMO
ties was found for near future plans, r(65) = -0.42, p < .005,
but not for distant future plans, r(DEMO) = 0.09. The difference
between these correlations was, of course, DEMO significant, Z =
2.96, p < .001. Thus, participants treated DEMO and nonaca-
demic activities as competing on time resources in near future
plans but not in distant future plans.
To test our third hypothesis DEMO the relationship between
the desirability of activities and time planning, we DEMO
the correlations between participants' ratings of the desirability
of each activity DEMO the time they planned to spend on it (see
Table 5)DEMO None of these correlations was significant for near
future plans. In contrast, for distant future plans, significant
positive correlations with desirability were obtained DEMO six of
nine activities.
To further examine the relationship between desirability of
activities and time planning, we computed for each participant
the correlation between the desirability of each activity and
the time planned for it. Planned DEMO for each activity was
standardized within each time-perspective condition, so that
DEMO reflected the degree to which the participant's planned
time for an activity deviated from the mean time planned for
that activity by all DEMO The mean Z-transformed values
of these within-subject correlations were significantly higher in
the distant future plans (M = 0.20) than in the near DEMO plans
(M = 0.03), t(125) = 2.21, p DEMO .03. Thus, in the distant future,
but not in the DEMO future, participants planned to spend relatively
more time on those activities DEMO liked, suggesting that time
planned for activities is contingent on the DEMO of the
activities in the distant future, but not in the DEMO future.
Study 5 demonstrates that distant future plans differ from
Me~od
Participants were 127 Tel Aviv University students ( 100 women) who
participated to partially' fulfill introductory psychology course require-
ments. The study was conducted in groups ranging in size from 2 to 8.
Participants were invited for DEMO two-session experiment. The first ses-
sion was held during Weeks 3 through 7 of the fall semester. During
this session, participants completed an activity desirability questionnaire
in which they were presented with two academic activities and DEMO
nonacademic activities. The academic activities were "study" and "at-
tend DEMO" The nonacademic activities were "participate in cultural
events," "sports DEMO exercise," "go out with friends and attend social
events," "watch TV," "read books unrelated to your studies," "spend
DEMO with your family," and "paid work." Participants rated on 9-point
scales the extent to which they would like to spend more time DEMO
each of these activities. The study was presented as part of a pilot survey
on students' lifestyles.
The second session was held 5 to 8 weeks after the first. Participants
were asked to indicate how many DEMO they would spend on each of
the activities during either "next DEMO" (near future condition) or "a
week a year from now" (distant future condition). As in the previous
session, the questionnaire was presented as a pilot survey on students'
lifestyles.
Results and DEMO
Table 5 presents mean hours planned for different activities
in the near and distant future. A multivariate analysis of variance
revealed a significant effect DEMO temporal distance, F(9, 117) =
3.11, p < .005. This effect indicated that participants planned
to spend more time on the DEMO activities in a distant future
week (M = 81.50 hr) than in a near future week (M = 67.35
hr).
Feasibility considerations require that the time allocated to
Table 5
Mean Hours Planned for DEMO Activities and Correlations of Planned Time
With Desirability of Activities (Study DEMO)
Mean hours planned
Correlation with desirability
Activity
Academic
Study
Attend classes
Nonacademic
Attend cultural events
Work
Sports and exercise
Go out with friends
DEMO time with family
Watch TV
Read books
Overall
* Difference between near and
significant at p < .05 level.
Near future
Distant future
Near DEMO
Distant future
21.22
13.60
2.74*
9.37*
1.94
6.46
5.37
4.71
1.95"
67.35*
22.44
15.32
4.13
15.45
2.50
7.03
6.16
5.31
3.16
81.50
-.04
DEMO
-.12
-.03
.13
-.03
.19
-. 11
.08
.03
-.08
.25**
.25**
.42**
-. t 1
.37**
.36**
.38**
distant future means was significant DEMO p < .05 level. ** Correlation is
TIME-DEPENDENT EFFECTS OF
near future plans in several respects. First, people expect to do
more in the distant future than in the near future. DEMO, near
future plans, but not distant future plans, take into DEMO time
constraints. Third, plans for the distant future, but not for the
near future, are contingent on desirability. These results support
the idea that feasibility concerns (i.e., the time it takes to engage
in DEMO activity) are more prominent in near future plans compared
with distant DEMO plans, whereas desirability concerns are more
prominent in distant future plans DEMO in near future plans. As
a result, planning for the distant DEMO may produce overcom-
mitment. In making such plans, individuals may consider DEMO
given activity in isolation and fail to take into account that this
activity may come at the expense of some other activities they
may DEMO to engage in at the same time.
General'Discussion
Temporal construal theory relates mental construal of situa-
tions to temporal distance. The theory proposes DEMO in thinking
about near compared with distant future situations, people use
DEMO level construals--construals that include more concrete
and peripheral features of the situation. In construing goal-
directed actions, desirability considerations--which pertain to
the action's end state--constitute high-level construals, whereas
feasibility aspects--which pertain to the means for reaching
that end-state--constitute low-level construals. Consistent with
this proposal, Study 1 found that participants describe distant
future activities in terms of their goals but DEMO low-level mean
terms in describing near future activities. For example, in DEMO
distant future "cleaning the house" was described as "showing
one'DEMO cleanliness" whereas in the near future the same activity
was described DEMO "vacuuming the floor." The differences in
construal of near and distant future activities were found in
open-ended descriptions as well as in answers DEMO Vallacher and
Wegner's (1989) forced-choice questionnaire of individual dif-
ferences in action identification.
In theory, changes in preference over time reflect these
changes in construal of activities over time, namely, the tendency
to DEMO higher level construals for distant future than for near
future activities. We therefore predicted that in choosing among
activities, the weight of desirability considerations, relative to
the weight of feasibility considerations, should be augmented
over DEMO The results of Studies 2 through 5 are consistent with
this prediction. Specifically, in Study 2, participants indicated
their preferences regarding near or DEMO future choices varying
in feasibility and desirability. In Study 3, participants DEMO
judged the importance of feasibility and desirability considera-
tions in their near or distant future decisions. As expected, the
results of both studies showed that desirability considerations
were assigned more weight than feasibility considerations in
distant DEMO in near future decisions. For example, in deciding
whether to purchase DEMO word processor in the distant future,
compared with the near future, participants assigned more
weight to the quality of the word processor and less weight to
the time it would take to learn it.
Study DEMO presented students with a realistic situation of choos-
ing near and distant future academic assignments. The assign-
ments varied in interest level (desirability) DEMO difficulty (feasi-
bility). Student's' choices showed that the weight of difficulty
decreased and the weight of interest increased over time. Thus,DEMO
FEASIBILITY AND DESIRABILITY 15
participants were willing to undertake an interesting but difficult
assignment for the distant future, but preferred an uninteresting
but easy one when a near future assignment was considered.
Study 5 examined time DEMO for the near and distant
future. It showed that (a) participants expected to spend more
time on different activities in the distant compared DEMO the near
future, (b) distant future but not near future DEMO were related
to desirability of activities, and (c) academic and DEMO
activities were treated as competing for time resources in near
but not in distant future plans. These results suggest that plans
for the distant DEMO, compared with plans for the near future,
are based on DEMO desirability of the planned activity rather than
on time constraints.
Why Are Higher Level Construals Used to Represent
Distant Future Events?
At this DEMO, we can only speculate why high-level construals
are used to represent DEMO future events. In many situations,
feasibility information regarding the distant future is unavailable
or unreliable and therefore cannot be taken into consideration.
For DEMO, because transportation information for a distant
future conference may be unavailable, one may be unable to
appreciate the time, effort, or cost DEMO getting to the conference.
In these cases, using higher level construals DEMO distant future
events is a natural outcome of one's knowledge. It should be
noted, however, that the results of the present studies DEMO be
explained by unavailability of feasibility information regarding
distant future situations. Studies 1 through 4 explicitly provided
definite low-level feasibility information in both near DEMO distant
future conditions. For example, in Study 2 information regard-
ing DEMO learning time of a word processor was presented and
could be taken into consideration in distant future as well as in
near future decisions. DEMO, it was given relatively less
weight in distant future than in DEMO future decisions. In Study
5 participants most likely knew that academic and nonacademic
activities compete for time resources in both the near and the
DEMO future. Nevertheless, they seemed to ignore this con-
straint in their DEMO future plans.
Thus, our results suggest the possibility that the tendency DEMO
disregard feasibility considerations in decisions about the distant
future is an overgeneralization to situations in which relevant
feasibility information is available or could be DEMO More
generally, it is possible that the tendency to use high-level DEMO
struals for distant future events is the result of overgeneralizing
from cases in which low-level information on distant future
events is unavailable.
It should DEMO pointed out that normative considerations require
relatively regressive (i.e., moderate) DEMO when relevant
information (such as feasibility information) is unavailable or
uncertain. Hence, to the extent that feasibility information re-
garding the distant future is believed to be uncertain, one should
make relatively moderate decisions regarding the distant future.
Temporal construal theory would predict, however, that individu-
DEMO may violate this requirement because they are likely to rely
on high-level construals (i.e., desirability information) for mak-
ing decisions about the distant future. Consistent with this pre-
diction, the results of Studies 2 and 4 show that preference
ratings for distant future options were as extreme DEMO preference
ratings for the near future. These findings argue against an inter-
16
LIBERMAN AND TROPE
pretation of the present temporal distance effects simply DEMO terms
of normatively justifiable responses to uncertainty about distant
future feasibility information.
Related to the notion of unavailability of feasibility informa-
tion is the DEMO that in goal-directed activities, desirability (i.e.,
"what is the DEMO?") is considered first in relatively distant
future plans, whereas feasibility (i.e., "how do I get there?")
is considered only later, in relatively near future plans. Of course,
this does not justify underweighing available feasibility consid-
eration when making decisions for the distant DEMO However,
it may be the case that the tendency to consider desirability first
and feasibility second contributes to the association of distant
future DEMO high-level construals. In sum, it is possible that both
information availability DEMO planning habits contribute to the
association of distant future events with high-level construals.
ever, a key difference between this theory and temporal construal
theory is that temporal construal theory predicts differences in
construal when time perspective DEMO varied within the same deci-
sion stage, and even when no DEMO is involved at all. Indeed,
all our studies addressed either predecisional situations (Studies
2-5) or situations that do not involve decisions (Study 1 ).
Future Optimism and Temporal Construal
Action Control Theories and Temporal Construal
The present findings are relevant to future optimism, that is,
the tendency to hold more positive expectancies for distant fu-
ture than DEMO immediate future outcomes (Brickman, Coates, &
Janoff-Bulman, 1978; Taylor & Brown, 1988). Future optimism
would suggest that temporal distance increases the perceived
feasibility of outcomes. This idea may explain some but not DEMO
of the present findings. Specifically, future optimism may ex-
plain the DEMO over time in preference for the difficult but
highly desirable options, DEMO individuals presumably become in-
creasingly confident over time in the attainability of the outcome.
However, future optimism cannot account for the decreased pref-
erence for easy but less desirable options. Neither can future
optimism account for DEMO null effect of time on preference for
difficult but less desirable options. For example, if temporal
distance makes learning a new word processor seem easy, as
future optimism suggests, then temporal distance should en-
hance DEMO value of both a low- and high-quality word processor.
Our findings, DEMO, show that this is not the case.
In general, future optimism cannot fully explain the present
findings because, unlike temporal construal theory, DEMO does not
take into account time-dependent changes in the weight of desir-
ability considerations in choice. Another important difference
between the future optimism idea DEMO temporal construal theory
concerns feasibility. Future optimism suggests that individuals
undertake harder activities for the distant future than for the
near future because distant DEMO activities seem more feasible.
Temporal construal theory suggests a different possibility,
namely, that individuals undertake harder activities for the dis-
tant future because feasibility receives less weight in distant
future activities. Overoptimistic decisions regarding future DEMO
tivities may thus reflect underweighting rather than overestima-
tion of feasibility.
Cybernetic theories of action control (Carver & Scheier, 1981,
1990; Vallacher & Wegner, 1987) maintain that goals are trans-
lated into subgoals DEMO time of implementation approaches.
Action identification theory (Vallacher & Wegner, 1987) pro-
poses that people naturally prefer high-level identifications and
that they lower the identification level only to execute the action
when difficulties in enactment DEMO encountered (VaUacher &
Kaufman, 1996; Vallacher & Wegner, 1987)DEMO The notion that
temporal perspective affects action representation follows natu-
rally from this mechanism: As one gets closer to executing an
action, she DEMO he is more likely to consider enactment, perceive
it as difficult DEMO therefore identify the action in lower level
terms (Vallacher & Wegner, 1985). It should be noted that,
by this logic, action identification theory would predict that
identification of easy alternatives will remain high DEMO in near
future perspective and that, as a result, time perspective will
have a weaker effect on identification of easy alternatives com-
pared DEMO difficult alternatives. This was not the case in Studies
2 and 4.
More generally, temporal construai theory maintains that time
perspective may affect level of construal of an action even when
its enactment is not difficult. DEMO example, Study 1 found that
people tended to restate "watching TV" in the near future
as "flipping channels," although this action DEMO not particularly
difficult. We also predict that near future perspective might en-
hance low-level details that may be useless for enactment needs.
For example, we predict that in thinking about attending a near
future conference one DEMO more likely to think of the food in the
hotel, even DEMO it does not matter for any action one might under-
take. Moreover, temporal construal theory applies to events that
do not involve action. Therefore, low-level representation of
such events, as temporal distance decreases, cannot be explained
as serving enactment needs. For example, we predict that com-
mercials are more likely to be included in a construal of a near
DEMO television movie than a distant future television movie.
Gollwitzer's (1990) action phase theory proposes a distinc-
tion between a predecisional deliberation and DEMO postdecisional
implementation stage of action. In the deliberation stage, people
compare DEMO action to its alternative whereas in the implementa-
tion stage, people DEMO on means for carrying out the action.
It seems possible that temporal distance increases the likelihood
of engaging in deliberation rather than in implementation. DEMO
Conflict Models and Temporal Construal
Feasibility concerns often refer to effort, DEMO, or other nega-
tive aspects of an activity. Therefore, actions directed toward
attaining a positive goal may be viewed as involving an ap-
DEMO conflict (Lewin, 1951; Miller, 1944). Con-
flict models theory assumes that temporal distance increases the
salience of positive features and decreases DEMO salience of nega-
tive features and therefore situations including both negative and
positive features should be more attractive in the distant than in
the DEMO future. According to temporal construal theory, however,
time-dependent changes in DEMO weight of positive and negative
features depends on the construal level of these features. Nega-
tive features may be less prominent in the distant DEMO than in
the near future if they constitute low-level construais, but DEMO
reverse is expected if they constitute high-level construals. Both
theories predict that desirable but difficult options (e.g., reading
an interesting but difficult chapter DEMO installing an excellent but
TIME-DEPENDENT EFFECTS OF FEASIBILITY AND DESIRABILITY
17
hard-to-learn word processor) will be more attractive in the
distant than in the near future, as our findings actually show.
However, the theories make opposite predictions for easy but
undesirable options (e.g., reading an easy but boring chapter).
Conflict DEMO theory continues to predict that such options
will be more attractive in the distant future than in the near
future, because these options have both positive features (easy
assignment) and negative features (boring assignment). In con-
trast, temporal construal theory predicts that easy but undesir-
able options will be more attractive in the near future than in
the DEMO future, because positive value (easy assignment) is
associated with low-level DEMO considerations, whereas
negative value is associated with high-level desirability consid-
erations (boring assignment). Our findings support the predic-
tions of temporal construal DEMO rather than those of conflict
models theory.
constitute high-level construals. Hence, DEMO associated with
these attributes should be augmented over time. In contrast,
concrete, secondary, and specific attributes constitute low-level
construals. Hence, value associated with these attributes should
be discounted over time. These predictions suggest important
DEMO for future research on time-dependent changes in
judgment and decision making.
References
Implications
Ainslie, G. (1975). Specious reward: A behavioral theory of impul-
siveness and impulse control. Psychological Bulletin, 82, 463-496.
Ainslie, G., & Haslam, N. (1992). Hyperbolic discounting. In G.
Loewenstein & J. Elster (Eds.), Choice over time (pp. 57-92). New
DEMO: Russell Sage Foundation.
Banmeister, R. E, & Heatherton, T. E (1996). Self-regulation failure:
An overview. Psychological Inquiry, 7( 1 ), 1 - 15.
Benzion, U., Rappoport, A., & Yagil, J. (1989). Discount rates inferred
from decisions: An experimental study. Management Science, 35,
270-284.
Brickman, E, Coates, D., & Janoff-Bulman, R. (1978). Lottery winners
and accident victims: Is happiness relative? Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 36, 917-927.
Buhler, DEMO, Griffin, D., & Ross, M. (1994). Exploring the "planning
fallacy": Why people underestimate their task completion times.
Journal of DEMO and Social Psychology, 67, 366-381.
Cantor, N., & Mischel, DEMO, (1979). Prototypes in person perception. In
L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology ( Vol.
12, pp. 3-52). DEMO York: Academic Press.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1981 ). Attention and self regulation: A
control theory approach to human behavior. New York: Springer-
Verlag.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. E (1990). Principles of self-regulation. In
E.T. Higgins & DEMO Sorrentino (Eds.). Handbook of motivation
and cognition: Foundations of social behavior (Vol. 2, pp. 3-52).
New York: Guilford Press.
Dunning, D., Griffin, D. W., Milojkovic, J., & Ross, L. (1990). The
overconfidence effect in social prediction. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 58, 568-581.
Elster, J., & Loewenstein, G. (DEMO). Utility from memory and anticipa-
tion. In G. Loewenstein & J. Elster (Eds.), Choice over time (pp.
213-234). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Gilovich, T., Kerr, M., & Medvec, V.H. (1993). Effect of temporal
perspective on subjective confidence. Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology, 64, 552-560.
Gollwitzer, R M. (1990)DEMO Action phases and mind-sets. In E. 17. Hig-
gins & R. M. Sorrentino (Eds.), Handbook of motivation and cogni-
tion: Foundations of DEMO behavior (Vol. 2, pp. 53-92). New York:
Guilford Press.
Gollwitzer, P.M., & Moskowitz, G. (1996). Goal effects on DEMO
and cognition. In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social
psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 361 - 399). New York:
Guilford Press.
Griffin, D. W., Dunning, D., & Ross, L. (1990). The role of construal
processes in overconfident predictions about self and others. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 1128-1139.
Griffin, D. W., & Ross, L. ( 1991 ). Subjective construal, social inference
and human misunderstanding. In M. Zanna. (Ed.), Advances in experi-
mental social psychology (Vol. 24, pp. 319-359). New York: Aca-
demic Press.
Hampson, S.E., John, O.R, & Goldberg, L.R. (1986). Category
breadth and hierarchical structure in personality: Studies of asymmet-
ries in judgments of trait implications. Journal of Personality DEMO
Social Psychology, 51, 37-54.
Kahneman, D., & Lovallo, D. ( 1991 ). Timid choices and bold forecasts:
The present findings DEMO interesting implications for real-
life decision situations. Many situations involve high-level con-
siderations such as moral principles and ideals as well as low-
level DEMO such as difficulty, cost, or situational pres-
sures. For example, DEMO moral principles and considerations of
effort and convenience are often involved in helping. According
to our approach, moral principles are more likely to guide deci-
sions for the distant future than for the immediate future,
DEMO difficulty, cost, and situational pressures are more likely
to be important in near future decisions. In other words, individ-
uals are more likely to compromise their principles in decisions
regarding near future actions compared with DEMO future
actions.
Study 5 on time planning provides experimental demonstra-
tions of overcommitment in distant future planning and suggests
an explanation of the phenomenon DEMO temporal construal
theory. Specifically, time constraints are presumably part of the
DEMO construal of activities (Vallacher & Wegner, 1987),
and are, therefore, underweighted in distant future planning. As
a result, distant future DEMO are not perceived as competing,
and many activities are planned for the same time. It is interest-
ing that distant future planning and DEMO making are usually
considered to be reasonable and advantageous. However, the
DEMO study suggests that distant future planning and decisions
may have negative consequences, such as overcommitment and
insensitivity to feasibility considerations.
The present research applied temporal construal theory to
feasibility and desirability considerations because these consid-
erations DEMO relevant to a wide range of decisions. It should be
pointed out, however, that the theory is applicable to a variety
of other DEMO that differ in abstractness and centrality. For
example, Slovic (1975) DEMO Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic (1988)
found that in selecting DEMO candidate for some position (e.g., pro-
duction engineer), certain attributes (e.g., technical knowledge)
are seen as more central and are DEMO more than other
attributes (e.g., social skills). Temporal construal theory pre-
dicts that in decisions for the near future, the peripheral attribute
(social skills) would be weighted more than in decisions for
the DEMO future. More generally, personal traits may be abstract
or concrete, goals may be primary or secondary, and skills may
be general or specific. Abstract, general, and primary attributes
18
LIBERMAN AND TROPE
A cognitive perspective on risk taking. Management Science, 39, 17-
31.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Intuitive prediction: Biases and
corrective procedures. Management Science, 12, 313-327.
Klein-Burhans, K. (1995). Trading off time-structured goals: An alter-
native to discounted value theories. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
Columbia University, New York.
Kruglanski, A.W. (1996). Motivated social cognition: Principles of
the interface. In E.T. Higgins & A.W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social
psychology: A handbook DEMO basic principles (pp. 493-522). New
York: Guilford Press.
Kunda, DEMO, & Thagard, P. (1996). Forming impressions from stereo-
types, traits, and behaviors: A parallel-constraint-satisfaction theory.
Psychological Bulletin, 103, 284-308.
DEMO, K. (1951). Field theory in social science. New York: DEMO
Loewenstein, G. E (1987). Anticipation and the valuation of delayed
consumption. The Economic Journal, 97, 666-684.
Medin, D. L. (1989)DEMO Concepts and conceptual structure. American Psy-
chologist, 44, 1469-1481.
Miller, DEMO E. (1944). Experimental studies of conflict. In J. Hunt (Ed.),
Personality and the behavior disorders (Vol. 1, pp. 431-465). New
York: Ronald Press.
Miller, N.E., Galanter, E., & Pribram, K.H. (1960). Plans and the
structure of behavior. New York: Adams-Bennister-Cox.
Mischel, W. (1974). Processes in delay of gratification. In DEMO Berkowitz
( Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 7, pp. 249-
292). New York: Academic Press.
Mischel, W., Gruesec, J., & Masters, J. C. (1969). Effects of expected
DEMO time on the subjective value of rewards and punishments. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 11, 363-373.
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M.L. (1989, May). Delay of
gratification in DEMO Science, 244, 933-938.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. DEMO (1985). The role of theories in concep-
tual coherence. Psychological DEMO, 92, 289-316.
Nisan, M. (1972). Dimension of time in relation to choice behavior and
achievement orientation. Journal of Personality and Social DEMO
ogy, 57, 660-671.
Rachlin, H. (1995). Self control: DEMO commitment. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 18, 109-159.
Rachlin, H., & Raineri, A. (1992). Irrationality, impulsiveness, and
selfishness as discount DEMO effects. In G. Loewenstein & J. Elster
(Eds.), Choice over DEMO (pp. 93-118). New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Read, S. DEMO, & Marcus-Newhall, A. (1993). Explanatory coherence in
social explanations: A parallel distribution processing account. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 429-447.
Rosch, E. (1978). Principles of categorization. In E. Rosch & B. B.
Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and categorization (pp. DEMO). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Rothbart, M., & Taylor, M. (1992). Category labels and social reality:
Do we view social categories as natural kinds? In G. Semin & K.
Fiedler, Language DEMO and social cognition (pp. 11-36). Lon-
don: Sage.
Semin, DEMO R., & Fiedler, K. (1988). The cognitive functions of DEMO
categories in describing persons: Social cognitive and language. Jour-
nal of DEMO and Social Psychology, 54, 558-568.
Sherman, S. J., Beike, DEMO R., & Ryalls, K. R. (in press). Dual-processing
accounts DEMO inconsistencies in responses to general versus specific
cases. In S. Chaiken & Y. Trope (Eds.), Dual-process theories in
social psychology. New York: DEMO Press.
Slovic, E (1975). Choice between equally valued alternatives. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
1, 280-287.
Taylor, S. E., & Brown, J. D. (1988). Illusions and well-being: A social
psychological perspective on human health. Psychological Bulletin,
103, DEMO
Thagard, E (1989). Explanatory coherence. Behavioral and Brain Sci-
ences, 12, 435-467.
Thaler, R. (1992). Savings, fungibility and mental accounting. In R.
Thaler (Ed.) The winner's curse: Paradoxes and anomalies of eco-
nomic life (pp. 150-167). New York: Free DEMO
Trope, Y. (1986). Identification and inferential processes in dispositional
attribution. Psychological Review, 93, 239-257.
Trope, Y. (1989). Levels of DEMO in dispositional judgment. Social
Cognition, 7, 296-314.
Trope, Y., & Higgins, E. T (1993). The what, when and how of disposi-
tional inference: New answers and new questions. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 19, 493-500.
Tversky, A., Sattath, S., & Slovic, E (1988). Contingent weighting in
judgment and choice. Psychological Review, DEMO, 371-384.
Vallacher, R. R. (1993). Mental calibration: Forging a working relation-
ship between mind and action. In D. M. Wegner & DEMO W. Pennebaker
(Eds.) Handbook of mental control (pp. 443-472). DEMO Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Vallacher, R. R., & Kaufman, J. (1996). Dynamics of action identifica-
tion: Volatility and structure DEMO the mental representation of behavior.
In P. M. Gollwitzer & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), The psychology of action
(pp. 260-283). New DEMO: Guilford Press.
Vallacher, R. R., & Wegner, D. M. (DEMO), A theory of action identifica-
tion. Hilsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Vallacher, R. R., & Wegner, D. M. (1987). What do DEMO think they're
doing? Action identification and human behavior. Psychological Re-
DEMO, 94, 3-15.
Vallacher, R. R., & Wegner, D. M. (1989). Levels of personal agency:
Individual variation in action identification. DEMO of Personality
and Social Psychology, 57, 660-671.
Vallone, R. P., Griffin, D. W., Lin, S., & Ross, L. (1990)DEMO The overcon-
fident prediction of future action and outcomes by self and others.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 582-592.
Wegner, D. M., Vallacher, R. R., Kiersted, G., & Dizadjii, D. (1986).
Action identification in the emergence of social behavior. Social Cog-
DEMO, 4, 18-38.
Received April 28, 1997
Revision received December 5, 1997
Accepted December 22, 1997 •{1g42fwefx}