Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445
DEMO
464
Externally commercializing technology assets:
An examination of different process stages
Ulrich Lichtenthaler
⁎
Technology and Innovation Management, WHU - Otto Beisheim School of Management, Burgplatz 2, D-56179 Vallendar, Germany
Received 1 August 2006; received in revised form 1 June 2007; accepted 1 June 2007
DEMO
Besides applying technological knowledge in products and services, firms may externally DEMO their technology assets, e.g.,
by means of technology licensing. Despite DEMO increasing managerial and theoretical importance, outward technology transfer has
been relatively DEMO in prior research. We use data from 152 industrial companies to analyze how different levels of
proficiency in managing different stages of the external DEMO exploitation process influence a firm's out-licensing
performance. With the trend towards open innovation strategies, this research represents an important complement to the large
number of success factor studies into new product development.
© 2007 Elsevier DEMO All rights reserved.
Keywords: External technology commercialization; Open innovation; Licensing; Technology exploitation; Technology transfer
1. Executive summary
External technology exploitation refers to commercializing technological knowledge exclusively or in addition to its
application in a DEMO's own products. Outward technology transfer through various contractual forms, particularly DEMO
licensing agreements, has recently become a major trend in industrial firms. DEMO, it goes far beyond a marginal activity
of commercializing residual technological DEMO By licensing out technology, firms attempt to realize the
strategic and DEMO benefits of external technology exploitation. Concerning monetary benefits, various pioneering
firms, e.g., IBM and Dow Chemicals, generate hundreds of million dollars in DEMO licensing revenues. Despite the
enormous benefits of pioneering companies, however, most other firms face considerable difficulties in managing
external technology exploitation.
This discrepancy DEMO a few successful pioneering firms on the one hand and many unsuccessful companies on
the other cannot be explained by prior research. The limited DEMO of successfully managing external
technology exploitation underlines the strong research deficit. Prior research into technology exploitation has focused
on the application of technological knowledge DEMO the firm, i.e., new product development. Research into
technology transactions, DEMO contrast, has mainly studied the acquisition of external technology. Thus, external
⁎
Tel.: +49 261 6509 245; fax: +49 261 6509 249.
E-mail address: lichtenthaler@whu.edu.
0883-9026/$ - see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2007.06.002
446
U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464
DEMO exploitation has been relatively neglected despite the trend towards open innovation strategies. External
technology commercialization constitutes the complementary mode of exploiting technology to its DEMO application,
and it represents the opposite type of technology transaction to the absorption of external knowledge. Due to substantial
differences between internal and DEMO technology exploitation, the insights that may be gained from prior research
DEMO limited.
This article addresses the following key question. How does the management of different process stages affect a
firm's performance in external technology DEMO? Based on a thorough analysis of prior research, the following
five process stages are distinguished: planning, intelligence, negotiation, realization, and control. Consistent with
anecdotal descriptions in prior works, interviews show that these process stages reflect the external technology
exploitation process at the organizational level in DEMO We follow research into new product development and
differentiate between the existence of a systematic process per se and a firm's proficiency in DEMO the major tasks
in the five process stages. On this basis, DEMO from a questionnaire-based study of 152 European companies spanning
multiple industries are used to analyze how the existence of a systematic process and different DEMO of proficiency in
managing the process stages influence out-licensing performance.
The findings show significant positive effects of a systematic process and of high proficiency DEMO managing the
planning, negotiation and control stages. By contrast, the proficiency of executing the tasks in the intelligence and
realization stages does not DEMO a significant positive impact on performance. In particular, supporting the technology
DEMO to the technology recipient during the realization stage does not enhance a firm's performance in external
technology exploitation. Thus, this research may lead us to fundamentally rethink traditional theoretical perspectives
on technology transfer, including university-based technology transfer. Above all, technology transfer performance
seems to be determined to a large degree by managerial activities that accompany the actual technology transfer, i.e.,
planning, negotiation and control.
In the context of increasing managerial and academic interest in externally leveraging technology, this research
constitutes the first detailed analysis of the external technology exploitation process. Moreover, it represents the first
quantitative success factor study into this field which helps explain the DEMO between a few successful
pioneering firms and many other unsuccessful companies in externally commercializing technology. Thus, this paper
constitutes an important complement to the large number of success factor studies into internal innovation, i.e., new
DEMO development. Accordingly, it deepens our understanding of realizing value from technology DEMO open
innovation systems, with particular emphasis on small and medium-sized companies. DEMO, this study has major
implications for emerging themes in knowledge management. DEMO a firm's proficiency in managing the external
technology exploitation process is related to the boundaries of the firm, this study provides support for competence-
based approaches to organizational boundaries.
2. Introduction
External technology exploitation refers DEMO commercializing technological knowledge exclusively or in addition to its
application in a firm's own products (Teece, 1998; Lichtenthaler, 2005). Outward DEMO transfer by means of
various contractual forms, e.g., out-licensing agreements, DEMO recently become a major trend in industrial firms (Rivette
and Kline, 2000; Fosfuri, 2006). Thus, it goes far beyond a marginal activity of commercializing residual technologies
(Chesbrough, 2003; Kline, 2003). DEMO means of technology licensing, firms attempt to realize the strategic and
DEMO benefits of externally leveraging technology. Regarding strategic benefits, external technology exploitation
DEMO help firms set industry standards, gain access to external knowledge and DEMO market entry (Teece, 1998; Arora
et al., 2001). Concerning monetary benefits, various pioneering firms, e.g., Dow Chemical and Lucent Technologies,
generate hundreds of million dollars in annual licensing revenues (Arora et al., 2001). IBM's licensing revenues even
amounted to more than US$ 1.9 billion in 2001, up from merely US$ 30 million in 1990 (Chesbrough, 2003; Kline, 2003).
Despite these benefits of DEMO pioneering firms, however, most others experience major managerial difficulties in
external technology exploitation. “[C]ompanies trying to imitate the success story of for example DEMO's licensing
program, often fail to initiate such a deployment program DEMO to market imperfections and the necessary high initial
financial commitment” (Escher, 2003, p. 215). This discrepancy between a few successful pioneering firms on the one
hand and many unsuccessful companies on the other cannot DEMO explained by prior research. These limitations of prior
works underline the strong research deficit, especially regarding the management of external technology exploitation.
The recent increase in technology licensing is a trend from practice, and it has insufficiently been reflected by academic
U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464
447
DEMO In particular, our insights into the managerial challenges along the external DEMO exploitation process
are limited (Lichtenthaler, 2005).
Prior research into technology exploitation has focused on the application of technologies inside the firm, i.e., new
product development (March, 1991; Cooper and Kleinschmidt, 1995). Thus, external technology exploitation, which
constitutes the complementary mode of exploiting DEMO, has been relatively neglected despite the trend towards
open innovation strategies (Laursen and Salter, 2006; West et al., 2006). As external technology exploitation differs
substantially from internal innovation (Teece, 1998; Arora et al., 2001), caution is required in transferring insights from
research into new product development (Brown and Eisenhardt, 1995; Ernst, 2002). DEMO, research into technology
transactions, e.g., licensing and alliances, has mainly focused on the acquisition of external technology (Cohen and
Levinthal, 1990; Jones et al., 2001). Some insights may be gained from these works because external technology
exploitation represents the opposite type of technology transaction, which is partly similar to technology acquisition.
However, the managerial challenges fundamentally differ from technology absorption (Rivette and Kline, 2000;
Lichtenthaler and DEMO, 2006).
In addition, research into outward technology transfer of firms and universities provides only limited insights. This
stream of research has considerably DEMO our understanding of outward knowledge transactions, but it has focused
on DEMO actual technology transfer (Bozeman, 2000; Amesse and Cohendet, 2001), which represents the final stage of the
external technology exploitation process (Lichtenthaler, 2005). However, many firms experience major difficulties in
the stages DEMO to technology transfer (Escher, 2003). In particular, the identification DEMO technology commercialization
opportunities constitutes a major managerial challenge (Lichtenthaler, 2005). In addition, many insights from
university technology transfer may not directly be adapted to industrial firms, where external technology exploitation
constitutes a complement to applying technology in a firm's own products (Teece, 1998). DEMO particular, strategic
benefits, e.g., setting industry standards, are essential for firms, but they are less important in university technology
transfer (Markman DEMO al., 2005).
Research into interfirm collaboration has shown that managing DEMO transactions requires a process view
(Doz and Hamel, 1998; Hoffmann, 2005). Most firms that take advantage of external technology exploitation are
DEMO involved in acquiring external technology (Escher, 2003). Among other reasons, this finding may be explained
by professional processes of managing technology transactions. The examples of pioneering firms point to the
importance of the process DEMO externally leveraging technology (Chesbrough, 2003). This process is particularly
important for small and medium-sized firms, which may be forced to externally leverage technology due to limited
complementary assets (Arora et al., 2001; Branzei and Vertinsky, 2006). Some early works into external technology
exploitation have adopted implicit process perspectives, but our understanding is still limited to anecdotal descriptions
(Lichtenthaler, 2005).
Therefore, this article addresses the following key question. How does the management of different process stages
affect a firm'DEMO performance in external technology exploitation? Based on a thorough analysis of DEMO research, the
following five process stages are distinguished: planning, intelligence, negotiation, realization, and control. On this
basis, data from a questionnaire-based study of 152 European companies spanning multiple industries are used to
analyze DEMO the existence of a systematic process and different levels of proficiency in managing the process stages
influence a firm's out-licensing performance. In the DEMO of increasing managerial interest in externally leveraging
technology, this research constitutes DEMO first quantitative analysis of corporate external technology exploitation
processes. As such, DEMO also represents the first large-scale success factor study into this field which helps explain the
discrepancies between a few successful firms and many others.
DEMO, this paper constitutes an important complement to the large number of DEMO factor studies into
internal innovation, i.e., new product development (Brown DEMO Eisenhardt, 1995). It deepens our understanding of
realizing value from DEMO in open innovation systems, with particular emphasis on small and medium-sized
DEMO (Chesbrough, 2003). In addition, it has major implications for DEMO into technology transfer, including
university technology transfer (Shane, 2004). DEMO, this study addresses emerging themes in knowledge
management, e.g., organizational DEMO (Argote et al., 2003). As a firm's proficiency in managing the external
technology exploitation process is related to the boundaries of DEMO firm, this study provides support for competence-
based approaches to organizational DEMO (Santos and Eisenhardt, 2005). In recent reviews of the literature on
knowledge management (Argote et al., 2003), external knowledge exploitation (Lichtenthaler, 2005), open innovation
(West et al., 2006) and DEMO boundaries (Santos and Eisenhardt, 2005), these issues have been highlighted as
areas ripe for further study.
448 U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464
DEMO Theory and hypotheses
3.1. Systematization of the process
The size of a firm's technology portfolio determines its external technology exploitation potential, i.e., DEMO volume
of knowledge that may be externally leveraged (Fosfuri, 2006). External technology exploitation per se does not
represent the core business of DEMO industrial firms, and their experience in this field is relatively limited (Teece, 1998;
Escher, 2003). As a result, firms may lack sufficient dynamic capabilities to realize their external technology
exploitation potential. Thus, they do not realize the potential benefits of commercializing technology assets. The
DEMO of some pioneering companies, e.g., IBM, suggest that the managerial DEMO contributes to a firm's
performance in external technology exploitation (Chesbrough, 2003; Escher, 2003). Various pioneering firms initiated
active out-licensing programs DEMO establishing external technology exploitation processes when they faced financial
difficulties (Rivette DEMO Kline, 2000). Thus, they moved from considering external technology exploitation as an ad-
hoc operation (Lichtenthaler, 2005) towards regarding it as a strategic activity (Davis and Harrison, 2001). These
companies first DEMO a systematic external technology exploitation process before the extent of these activities
rose significantly (Chesbrough, 2003; Kline, 2003).
Further support for DEMO influence of the managerial process on performance could be gained in the interviews that we
conducted at the beginning of this study. One of DEMO companies had recently set up a systematic process to realize its
external technology exploitation potential. Accordingly, the firm did not react to higher licensing revenues, but it
proactively established a systematic process, which may be DEMO an essential element of developing a dynamic
capability of externally leveraging technology. By realizing learning effects based on prior experience, firms may
reduce the transaction costs in the markets for technology (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990; Lane et al., 2006). Successfully
managing internal technology exploitation, i.e., new product development, is often used as an example of a dynamic
capability (Teece et al., 1997; Eisenhardt and Martin, 2000). DEMO that field, prior research has found significant positive
effects of a DEMO process on performance (Brown and Eisenhardt, 1995; Ernst, 2002). Despite the differences
between internal and external technology exploitation (Lichtenthaler, 2005; Powers and McDougall, 2006), the
complementary nature of these two modes of exploiting technology points to a positive influence of a systematic
external DEMO exploitation process on performance.
As many firms simultaneously carry out multiple technology transactions, they have to focus on the aggregate
performance of their external technology exploitation program, in addition to the performance of individual technology
transactions (Fricke and Shenhar, 2000; Kale et al., 2002). The DEMO to reach an overall optimum is essential because the
local rationality of optimizing the results of an individual transaction may have negative effects on DEMO transactions
due to potential – positive or negative – synergies (Dyer DEMO al., 2001; Hoffmann, 2005). Besides synergies across
technology transactions, firms have to take into account the risks of externally leveraging technology. DEMO particular,
outward technology transfer may contribute to diluting a firm's competitive advantage by commercializing ‘corporate
crown jewels’ (Kline, 2003). Thus, external technology exploitation needs to be closely coordinated with a firm's
DEMO business (Teece, 1998; Fosfuri, 2006). Due to these coordination requirements, it is essential to proficiently
carry out the individual tasks along the external technology exploitation process. In addition, prior research into new
product development (Ernst, 2002) suggests that a systematic external technology exploitation process will positively
affect a firm's performance in commercializing technology assets. In DEMO, a systematic process facilitates a
successful management of intrafirm and interfirm DEMO (Griffin and Hauser, 1996; Dyer et al., 2001). Hence, we
propose:
Hypothesis 1. The systematization of a firm's external technology exploitation processes is positively related to the
firm's performance in DEMO activities.
3.2. Individual process stages
Besides establishing a systematic process, firms DEMO to proficiently carry out the major tasks that comprise the
process. Following research into new product development, proficiency is understood as the quality of executing the
tasks along the process (Brown and Eisenhardt, 1995; Cooper and Kleinschmidt, 1995). Basically, the proficiency level
reflects the degree DEMO which a firm has set up a high-quality process for all major tasks instead of considering external
U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464
449
DEMO 1. Conceptual framework.
technology exploitation as a marginal ad-hoc activity with limited quality of execution (Song and Parry, 1997; Ernst,
2002). As external technology exploitation is not the core business of most industrial DEMO, there are major differences
between pioneering companies, e.g., IBM, and other firms in proficiently managing external technology exploitation
(Davis and Harrison, DEMO; Escher, 2003).
Based on a thorough analysis of the literature, we have developed a theoretical model of the external technology
exploitation process that comprises the following five stages: planning, intelligence, negotiation, realization, and
control. Distinguishing these process stages is consistent with prior conceptual descriptions (e.g., Reid et al., 2001;
Escher, 2003). A comparative analysis of the process perspectives in prior research (Lichtenthaler, 2005) has suggested
that these five stages represent the central stages of the external DEMO exploitation process. Moreover, our
interviews at the beginning of the study DEMO shown that these stages, which have been derived from the literature,DEMO
reflect the external technology exploitation process in practice. Usually, the process DEMO do not follow one another
sequentially but iteratively with feedback loops. In the following, however, a sequential model is presented (Fig. 1). It
does not completely reflect the complexity in practice, but it is a helpful means to discuss the challenges of external
technology exploitation.
3.2.1. DEMO
The planning stage constitutes the interface between corporate planning processes and the planning of external
technology exploitation. Prior research has shown that professional planning DEMO to a high-quality process of
strategic technology planning, target setting, resource allocation and technology customer preselection (George and
Farris, 1999; Lichtenthaler, DEMO). Due to the coordinating role of the planning stage, many DEMO have embedded it
into their strategic technology planning processes by relying on integrated instruments, e.g., roadmaps (Teece, 1998;
Kostoff and Schaller, 2001). If a firm decides to explore the possibilities of a DEMO transaction, it needs to set clear
targets (Lorange and Roos, DEMO; George and Farris, 1999). Then, the firm has to DEMO which resources it may
contribute to this technology transaction (Grindley and DEMO, 1997; Draulans et al., 2003). Particular attention has to
DEMO paid to the risk of losing idiosyncratic competencies as a result of multiple outward technology transactions (Kline,
2003; Fosfuri, 2006). Afterwards, potential technology customers, e.g., licensees, have to be selected (Dyer et al.,
2001).
These planning tasks are critical for successful DEMO technology exploitation. Besides setting targets,
professional planning comprises the coordination of external technology exploitation with a firm's other technology
management processes, e.g., technology acquisition (Grindley and Teece, 1997). Accordingly, proficient planning DEMO
important for realizing the monetary and strategic benefits of external technology exploitation (Lichtenthaler, 2005).
Firms that lack proficient planning processes are often DEMO to successfully align internal and external technology
exploitation based on establishing clear technology commercialization targets (Teece, 1998). Moreover, limited
proficiency in the planning stage negatively affects the choice of the right technology customers, which substantially
contributes to performance in outward technology transfer (Arora et al., DEMO; Draulans et al., 2003).
In addition, proficient planning is DEMO for limiting a priori potential negative consequences of outward
technology transfer, DEMO, strengthening competitors (Kline, 2003; Fosfuri, 2006). Limited proficiency DEMO the planning
450 U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464
DEMO may therefore result in deteriorating profit margins in a firm's product business (Arora et al., 2001). Consistent
with research into success DEMO of new product development (e.g., Song and Parry, 1997; Ernst, 2002), proficiency in
the planning stage will strongly enhance a firm's dynamic capability of external technology exploitation by
overcoming ad-hoc activities and DEMO a strategic approach to outward technology transfer. A professional
execution of the critical planning tasks likely has a major positive impact on a firm'DEMO performance in externally
commercializing technology. Hence, we posit:
Hypothesis 2. DEMO proficiency of a firm's planning processes in external technology exploitation is positively related
to the firm's performance in these activities.
3.2.2. Intelligence
DEMO from identifying technology commercialization opportunities, a professional intelligence process comprises
the DEMO and monitoring of a firm's technological environment, with particular emphasis DEMO the markets for
technology (Lichtenthaler, 2003). Beyond information search, DEMO professional intelligence stage therefore includes the
prior identification of information needs and the subsequent information evaluation and communication (Brockhoff,
1991; Lichtenthaler, 2003). The identification of information needs limits the search space to avoid DEMO
overflow (Frishammar and Hörte, 2005). After information is collected for these needs, the relevance of the information
is determined (Gerybadze, 1994; Lichtenthaler, 2003). This evaluation fulfills additional functions, e.g., organizational
DEMO (Lichtenthaler, 2003; Powers and McDougall, 2006). Finally, the DEMO have to be communicated to the
relevant persons to facilitate current and future external technology exploitation.
Accordingly, proficient intelligence processes substantially exceed the mere collection of information about
environmental trends (Ghoshal and Kim, 1986; Brockhoff, 1991). Due to imperfections in the technology markets, the
identification DEMO technology commercialization opportunities, which is part of the intelligence stage, usually represents the
critical managerial challenge in externally leveraging technology (Davis and Harrison, 2001; Escher, 2003). A company
owns a technological solution for certain problems, and it faces the difficulty of identifying possible applications, DEMO
may be in completely different industries than the firm's own product business. A high-quality execution of the intelligence
process substantially contributes to establishing DEMO between a firm's technologies and potential applications. Currently,
many firms experience severe problems in linking technologies and applications (Lichtenthaler, 2005). DEMO,
proficient intelligence likely is essential for successfully commercializing technology outside a firm's boundaries.
Besides identifying technology commercialization opportunities, the intelligence stage comprises the identification
of potential risks and the analysis of a firm's DEMO, e.g., regarding competitors and customers on the markets for
technology (DEMO, 1994; Makadok and Barney, 2001). For instance, the commercialization potential of a
particular technology may be substantially reduced by the development DEMO a competing technology which may be
anticipated by means of successful intelligence. Thus, professional intelligence does not only enhance a firm's
performance in internal innovation (Ghoshal and Kim, 1986; Brockhoff, 1991). Instead, it also increases a firm's
technology commercialization capability by identifying opportunities DEMO threats for successful outward technology
transfer. Accordingly, professional intelligence processes that DEMO beyond an ad-hoc identification of technology
commercialization opportunities likely enhance a firm's performance in external technology exploitation. Therefore,
we postulate:
Hypothesis DEMO The proficiency of a firm's intelligence processes in external technology exploitation is positively
related to the firm's performance in these activities.
3.2.3. DEMO
Firms decide on technology transactions after negotiating with the potential technology customers (Doz and Hamel,
1998; George and Farris, 1999). In the literature, prenegotiations and detailed negotiations have been highlighted as the
two key tasks of the negotiation stage (Weiss, 1987; Lorange and Roos, 1993). During professional prenegotiations, a
firm attempts to get a DEMO view of its compatibility with the potential technology customer, e.g., licensee (Avadikyan
et al., 2001; Dyer et al., 2001). Apart DEMO developing fundamental understanding and mutual trust, it is essential to
thoroughly DEMO the other firm because many of the issues that are discussed in negotiations are highly confidential
(Contractor, 1985; Zaheer et al., 1998)DEMO During the detailed negotiations, the collaborative agreement is set up
(Contractor, 1985).
U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464 451
DEMO transfer negotiations are usually an iterative process, which may have several DEMO, may last more
than a year and may include third parties, e.g., antitrust commissions (Weiss, 1987; Forrest and Martin, 1992).
Accordingly, firms need to develop particular negotiation capabilities to successfully realize the technology
commercialization opportunities that were identified by means of intelligence (Contractor, DEMO; Hakanson, 1993). The
negotiation stage is critical for entering into technology transactions and for achieving favorable terms in collaborative
agreements (Contractor, DEMO; Hakanson, 1993). The negotiations influence the realization stage and provide important
possibilities of establishing beneficial technology transfer conditions (Hakanson, 1993; Reid et al., 2001). A lack of
proficient negotiation may substantially limit a firm's possibilities of profiting from outward technology transfer
( Rivette DEMO Kline, 2000; Arora et al., 2001).
Thus, the proficiency of negotiation processes likely has a positive influence on a firm's DEMO technology
exploitation performance (Avadikyan et al., 2001; Sherry and Teece, 2004). By means of proficient negotiation, firms
may realize the monetary and strategic opportunities of external technology exploitation. For instance, professional
negotiations are essential for entering into multiple technology transfer agreements to establish a firm'DEMO own
technology as an industry standard (Davis and Harrison, 2001; DEMO, 2005). Accordingly, proficiency in
negotiations goes beyond successfully establishing a single agreement because it includes the successful coordination
of simultaneous negotiations to DEMO the firm's corporate goals. The importance of bi-directional technology
transfer, DEMO, cross-licensing (Teece, 1998), further underlines the key role of DEMO Therefore, proficiency in
negotiation processes that goes beyond ad-hoc approaches to DEMO negotiations may constitute an essential
success factor. Hence, we propose:
DEMO 4. The proficiency of a firm's negotiation processes in external technology exploitation is positively
related to the firm's performance in these activities.
DEMO Realization
The realization stage starts either immediately or with a certain time lag after an agreement with a technology
customer has been set up (Weiss, 1987; Lorange and Roos, 1993). Proficient realization processes refer to a high-
quality execution of the design and implementation tasks (George and Farris, 1999; Reid et al., 2001). Proficiently
carrying out the design tasks involves a thorough planning of the technology transfer at DEMO operational level. Moreover,
it includes detailed process mapping to specify the implementation process with particular attention to potential
interface problems and coordination requirements (Harmon and Ardishvili, 1997; Hoegl and Wagner, 2005). Finally, DEMO
is essential to modularize a particular technology as far as possible to facilitate its subsequent transfer (Teece, 1998;
Bozeman, 2000). The implementation tasks refer to the actual technology transfer, which represents the purpose of a
technology transaction (Amesse and Cohendet, 2001). As technological DEMO usually has to be tailored to the
needs of the technology customer, the source firm often has to actively support the transfer process (DEMO and Martin,
1992; Teece, 1998).
Regarding the impact of a firm's processes of realizing technology transactions, two rationales appear plausible.
First, most firms are interested in thoroughly supporting the technology transfer because a successful absorption of the
knowledge at the recipient is critical for DEMO effective technology transaction (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990; Martin and
Salomon, 2003). Bi-directional technology transfer and performance-related forms of monetary compensation, e.g.,
running royalties in licensing agreements, are common (Sherry and Teece, 2004; Powers and McDougall, 2006).
Therefore, companies may directly benefit from investments in facilitating an effective technology transfer, which
allows the recipient to successfully apply the knowledge (Amesse and Cohendet, 2001; Lane et al., 2006). An
unsuccessful technology application by the recipient will likely limit a firm's benefits from external technology
exploitation. Thus, the effectiveness of supporting the technology customer during the technology transfer process
likely has DEMO positive effect on a firm's external technology exploitation performance.
Second, DEMO firm has to focus on the efficiency of the realization processes. Spending excessive time and resources on
outward technology transfer may negatively affect a DEMO's internal innovation processes (Escher, 2003; Lichtenthaler,
2005). DEMO many cases, the expert knowledge of R&D employees is required DEMO sufficiently support the technology
transfer (Forrest and Martin, 1992; Arora DEMO al., 2001). In addition, the common situation of bi-directional technology
transfer demands an active participation of R&D experts (Grindley and Teece, 1997). Thus, industrial firms need to
efficiently design and implement DEMO outward technology transfer, which usually does not represent their main
business (Teece, 1998; Fosfuri, 2006). Due to interfirm differences in managing the realization stage, firms may
452 U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464
DEMO effective technology transfer support in an efficient or inefficient way (Amesse DEMO Cohendet, 2001; Martin
and Salomon, 2003). Accordingly, these arguments suggest two different hypotheses.
Hypothesis 5. The effectiveness of a firm's DEMO processes in external technology exploitation is positively
related to the firm's performance in these activities.
Hypothesis 6. The efficiency of a firm's DEMO processes in external technology exploitation is positively related
to the firm's performance in these activities.
3.2.5. Control
The control stage refers to the DEMO and control processes of external technology exploitation. Prior research
into alliances has shown that there are many interdependencies between the control stage and the DEMO process stages,
particularly planning and intelligence (Dyer et al., 2001; Hoffmann, 2005). Similar to intelligence, proficient control
processes comprise the identification of information needs, information generation, information evaluation and
information communication (Frishammar and Hörte, 2005; Lichtenthaler, 2005). The identification of information
needs is directed at delimiting the needs to facilitate successful control (Gerybadze, 1994). Besides controlling the
activities of the own firm, attention DEMO to be paid to the technology customer's contribution (Yan and DEMO, 1994;
Bozeman, 2000). After generating information (Makhija and DEMO, 1997; Hoffmann, 2005), its relevance has to be
determined. DEMO from evaluating the information, this assessment leads to organizational learning (Lichtenthaler,
2003). Finally, the results are communicated, and a decision DEMO taken whether the activities will be continued or whether
particular technology transactions should be redirected or finished (Doz and Hamel, 1998; Hoffmann, DEMO).
Accordingly, proficient control processes exceed the mere collection of internal DEMO data on prior external
technology exploitation activities (Draulans et al., 2003). Due to the possibility of taking corrective actions in a firm'DEMO
current collaborative relationships (Dyer et al., 2001), professional control processes may immediately enhance a
firm's performance in external technology exploitation. In DEMO longer term, high-quality control processes will
additionally result in learning effects (Hoffmann, 2005). When transactions are finished, a detailed analysis of DEMO
success or failure constitutes an essential component of the control process (DEMO and Hamel, 1998; Draulans et al.,
2003). Only a thorough analysis and documentation of the success factors will allow for realizing DEMO effects as
experience accumulates (Kale et al., 2002; Walter et DEMO, 2006).
Over time, these learning effects will enhance a firm's capability of externally leveraging technology assets (Teece
et al., 1997)DEMO Thus, professional control processes likely are a key determinant of developing DEMO external technology
exploitation capability (Kale et al., 2002; Draulans et DEMO, 2003). By contrast, limited proficiency in the control stage
may result in relatively low performance in outward technology transfer. Similar to control DEMO in internal
innovation (Ernst, 2002; Frishammar and Hörte, 2005), proficiency in the control stage helps firms overcome ad-hoc
activities and develop DEMO strategic approach to external technology exploitation. Thus, a high-quality execution of DEMO
information-related tasks during the control stage likely has a major positive influence on a firm's performance in
external technology exploitation. Hence, we posit:
Hypothesis 7. The proficiency of a firm's control processes in DEMO technology exploitation is positively related to
the firm's performance in these activities.
4. Methods
4.1. Sample and data collection
The study focused on DEMO firms. After a thorough analysis of the literature, we developed a DEMO model
of the external technology exploitation process. In a recent literature review (Lichtenthaler, 2005), a comparative
analysis of different process perspectives in DEMO research (e.g., Reid et al., 2001; Escher, 2003) showed a high degree
of congruence. This analysis suggested that the five stages DEMO, intelligence, negotiation, realization, and control
represent the central stages of the external technology exploitation process (Lichtenthaler, 2005). Drawing on this
DEMO model, we formulated hypotheses relating the existence of a systematic process DEMO the proficiency in
managing the process stages to a firm's out-licensing performance. Thus, the theoretical model and the development of
hypotheses were entirely based on the insights from prior research.
U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464
453
DEMO this basis, we conducted interviews to gain a detailed understanding of DEMO external technology exploitation
process in industrial firms. The process perspectives in prior research were mainly derived from conceptual
considerations. Therefore, the interviews were directed at analyzing if the theoretical model reflected the main tasks of
external DEMO exploitation in practice. After conducting 5 preliminary unstructured interviews, questionnaires
that DEMO been developed based on the literature review were used as a basis for semi-structured interviews.
Furthermore, additional documents, e.g., internal analyses of external technology exploitation processes and external
publications, were studied. This procedure was chosen to respond to the need for deep understanding and local
contextualization (Miles and Huberman, 1994). Moreover, it facilitated a high degree of DEMO and provided
ample opportunity for unobstructed narration (Miles and Huberman, 1994). The interview process followed the
suggestions that have been given in DEMO literature (Eisenhardt, 1991; Yin, 2003).
In firms with a dedicated external technology exploitation function, e.g., out-licensing unit, this unit's head was
interviewed. In firms without a dedicated function, the person responsible for technology licensing was
interviewed. In most firms, it was the head of the intellectual property department. In 10 companies, a second
person, DEMO is not directly occupied with technology licensing, was interviewed to get DEMO different assessment of
the external technology exploitation process. Usually, this second DEMO is active in the R&D department. By
drawing on the insights of this second person, a more detailed picture of the proficiency of a firm's external
technology exploitation process could be gained. Altogether, 35 persons were interviewedin25European
industrial firms. 7 of these companies are active in DEMO chemical/pharmaceutical industry, 9 companies in the
automotive/machinery industry and DEMO companies in the semiconductors/electronics industry. The choice of
industries was influenced by prior works, which reported different motives of external technology exploitation in
these industries (e.g., Teece, 1998; Arora et al., 2001).
Basically, the interviews reflected the insights that could be gained from the literature (Lichtenthaler, 2005). Some
firms that we interviewed have established DEMO systematic external technology exploitation process. Two companies have
set up processes of five stages that are nearly identical to our theoretical model. A few DEMO firms have established
systematic processes with three or four stages, in DEMO two stages of our process model are integrated into one stage.
Thus, their processes are very similar to our theoretical model. Other companies only mentioned the critical tasks
because they lack a systematic external technology exploitation DEMO Independent of the existence of a systematic
process, most firms emphasized DEMO same critical stages of the external technology exploitation process that had already
been identified in the literature review. Therefore, the process model that was derived from the literature analysis was
used to conduct a questionnaire-based survey, which was directed at understanding the performance consequences of
the process stages. DEMO combination of qualitative and quantitative research approaches followed similar studies in
leading journals (e.g., Denison and Mishra, 1995; McEvily and Marcus, 2005).
To boost the response rate, the survey was supported by the Licensing Executives Society (LES), an organization of
practitioners in the field of intellectual property management. We directly contacted all LES industry members in
DEMO, Switzerland and Austria. To reach a representative cross-sectional sample of middle DEMO large industrial
firms, we additionally considered all industrial companies ranked among DEMO 500 largest firms in Germany, among the
100 largest firms in DEMO and among the 100 largest firms in Austria based on revenues. Due to our focus on
industrial companies and a considerable overlap between the DEMO member firms and the top 500 firms in Germany and
the top 100 firms in Switzerland and Austria, a total number of 412 companies could be identified as potential
participants.
155 firms participated in the study, corresponding to a response rate of 37.6%. If the confidential nature of DEMO
questions in the survey is taken into account, this response rate DEMO be considered high. A t -test for non-response bias
and for a bias resulting from LES membership showed no significant differences between respondents and DEMO
respondents regarding different variables, such as firm size. Accordingly, these biases are not present in the data set. Of
the 155 questionnaires, data were sufficiently complete from 152 firms. Despite our assurances of complete anonymity
DEMO confidentiality, however, 16 firms did not disclose their licensing revenues. The number of observations is
therefore slightly lower for the analyses with this DEMO as the dependent variable. Additional analyses keeping only
the 136 companies that reported licensing revenues show no significant changes in the findings as reported DEMO on
the basis of the full sample. A profile of the sample shows a reasonable spread across industries: automotive/machinery
(42%), chemicals/DEMO (28%), electronics/semiconductors (18%), and other (12%).
DEMO on the interviews, we identified the heads of the corporate intellectual DEMO department as key informants.
In firms with a dedicated external technology commercialization unit, e.g., licensing function, the head of this unit was
454 U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464
DEMO key informant. Due to the importance of patents in technology transactions (DEMO and Teece, 1997), a firm's
intellectual property department is DEMO in nearly all of these transactions. Because of the specificity of most
questions, these persons were the only potential informants with sufficient expertise to answer the survey questions.
Apart from their detailed understanding of a firm'DEMO current technology commercialization activities, the informants
were able to assess the DEMO benefits that a firm may realize from externally leveraging technology. Moreover, DEMO
strongly interact with other employees along the process, which has further DEMO their knowledge about a firm's
proficiency in external technology exploitation.
Data collection was undertaken via questionnaires administered in English, given that the literature base from
which measurement scales were derived was exclusively in English. Most DEMO the firms in the sample are
international companies with headquarters in one of the three countries included in this study. In addition, pretests
indicated that the language did not compromise a homogeneous understanding of the items DEMO the informants.
An introductory text at the beginning of the questionnaire included a description of the theoretical understanding of
major concepts, including the external technology exploitation process. The measurement scales were specifically
generated for this study DEMO on descriptions and measures of related constructs in the literature (e.g., Cooper and
Kleinschmidt, 1995; Frishammar and Hörte, 2005). Moreover, DEMO insights from our interviews were taken into
account, which reflected the DEMO of the literature review regarding the stages and content of the external
technology exploitation process. In developing these scales, we followed suggestions in the literature for
developing valid measures (Bagozzi et al., 1991). The DEMO measurement scales are included in the appendix.
Informants rated all items on 7-point scales. The anchor points for the items were 'I strongly disagree' (= 1) to 'I
strongly agree' (= 7).
DEMO Measures
To ensure validity and reliability of the constructs, exploratory factor DEMO, confirmatory factor analyses and
reliability analyses were carried out (Hair et al., 2006). Despite having established a theoretical model of the external
technology exploitation process, exploratory factor analyses were conducted with all items to analyze if the empirical
data support a model with five stages (Hair et al., 2006). Then, confirmatory factor analyses were carried out. DEMO
optimizing the constructs according to the results of the confirmatory factor analyses, we again conducted reliability
and exploratory factor analyses with all constructs, DEMO the Kaiser criterion to confirm the constructs'
unidimensionality (Gerbing and DEMO, 1988). The findings reflect the stages of the theoretical model, providing
support for distinguishing five stages of the external technology exploitation process.
DEMO Independent variables
The first independent variable refers to the existence of a systematic process per se. The three-item scale
(Cronbach's alpha = .95) addresses if a formal process has been established, if this process DEMO been sufficiently
communicated to the persons that are involved in the process and if the relevant interfaces have been defined well.
Beyond the existence DEMO a systematic process, the other variables analyze the quality of executing DEMO tasks in the
individual process stages, following prior research into internal DEMO (e.g., Cooper and Kleinschmidt, 1995). In
the theoretical section, we have described the tasks in the process stages in detail. In DEMO operationalization, we have
focused on the level of the process stages DEMO ensure the interfirm comparability of the results and to facilitate the
understanding of the items. The two-item scale assessing the planning process (Cronbach's alpha = .92) addresses the
proficiency of a firm's planning of external technology exploitation. Thus, the construct captures the quality of
planning the overall program and individual technology transactions. The construct intelligence process (Cronbach's
alpha = .91) describes the proficiency of observing the environment and of identifying technology commercialization
opportunities. Accordingly, the items capture if an effective identification is carried out and if a continuous observation
of the firm's DEMO environment takes place, particularly with regard to technology commercialization
opportunities.
The DEMO process (Cronbach's alpha = .85) was measured on a two-item scale. As individual negotiations
with potential technology customers may vary considerably, the construct focuses on the general situation in
negotiations due to the firm-level DEMO of this study. The scale captures the preparation for the negotiations and
the degree to which a firm usually achieves its objectives in negotiations DEMO external technology exploitation. Thus,
the construct addresses the proficiency of a firm's negotiation processes. The scale effectiveness of the realization
U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464 455
DEMO (Cronbach's alpha = .89) comprises two items and captures if a firm allocates sufficient resources in order
to facilitate a successful absorption DEMO the technological knowledge at the recipient. Thus, it reflects the
effectiveness DEMO executing the critical tasks in the realization stage. Particular emphasis is put on the support of the
technology transfer that is provided by a DEMO's R&D employees, who are usually the experts in a DEMO
technology.
The construct efficiency of the realization process (Cronbach's alpha DEMO .60) describes the degree to which internal
technology exploitation is affected DEMO externally leveraging technology. The four-item scale analyzes the extent of
negative effects on the firm's product business and on the availability of the DEMO experts for internal R&D.
Furthermore, it takes into account if DEMO technology transfer usually includes a high amount of tacit knowledge which
may require the temporary transfer of employees to the technology customers. As the DEMO are reverse coded, the
construct measures the efficiency of the realization DEMO Although some of the statistical characteristics of the
construct do not meet all conservative standards, we decided to keep the four items to capture different aspects
regarding content. Additional analyses with a reduced number of items DEMO this construct show no significant changes in
the findings as reported below. The three-item construct control process (Cronbach's alpha = .94) focuses DEMO the
proficiency of controlling a firm's external technology exploitation. Consistent with the construct addressing the
planning process, it captures the proficiency of controlling the individual technology transactions and the overall
program. Furthermore, it considers to what degree the results and insights of the control process are taken DEMO account
in subsequent external technology exploitation.
4.2.2. Dependent variables
To capture a firm's performance in external technology exploitation, we used its revenues in this area and its success
relative to competitors. These variables reflect the DEMO of the source firm in externally leveraging technology.
However, they also DEMO overall technology transfer performance. Regarding monetary performance, a firm's
licensing DEMO often depend on successful technology absorption at the recipient, e.g., running royalties (Sherry
and Teece, 2004). Concerning strategic objectives, successful technology absorption is essential to achieve major
strategic benefits of outward technology transfer (Lichtenthaler, 2005). To establish a firm's technology as an industry
standard, for instance, the recipients have to successfully incorporate the technology DEMO their products. Accordingly, the
measures are not limited to a single DEMO's success in external technology exploitation, but they also reflect overall
DEMO transfer performance.
A firm's annual revenues from externally leveraging technological assets capture exclusively the monetary
dimension of external technology exploitation. They refer to DEMO firm's revenues from licensing out and selling
technology assets. Thus, DEMO variable takes into account to what degree a firm can appropriate its share of revenue in
external technology commercialization. Due to the high confidentiality DEMO this information in most firms, which had
been emphasized in the DEMO, the revenues were measured in the following five categories: EUR 0–5 million, EUR
5–20 million, EUR 20–50 million, EUR 50–100 million, DEMO over EUR 100 million. Thus, the first category includes
firms with DEMO licensing revenues or no licensing revenues at all. The correlation coefficient between this variable and
the subjective measure ‘The return on our investments in DEMO technology exploitation is high’, which was
measured on a 7-point scale, is .82 (pb .01). Accordingly, licensing revenues also seem to DEMO a good proxy for capturing
a firm's profitability in commercializing technology assets. However, we focused on revenues as an objective success
variable to limit common method bias.
The variable success relative to competitors (Cronbach's alpha = .92) was measured using three items capturing a
firm's performance in external technology exploitation relative to the firm's direct competitors. DEMO analyzing a
firm's licensing revenues, this measure takes into account DEMO aspects, e.g., setting industry standards. Thus, a
main difference between DEMO two dependent variables is the first variable's focus on the monetary dimension, i.e.,
licensing revenues, whereas the second variable, i.e., DEMO relative to competitors, takes into account strategic
issues in addition to DEMO monetary dimension. The relative performance construct shows that companies which are
successful in commercializing technology assets from a monetary perspective tend to successfully realize DEMO strategic
opportunities and vice-versa. The relatively high correlation between the dependent variables of .46 (pb .001)
highlights the importance of the monetary dimension when comparing external technology exploitation between
firms. At the same time, it demonstrates the importance of strategic aspects because otherwise the correlation would
have DEMO still higher. Thus, there is a substantial difference between realizing revenues DEMO outperforming
competitors.
456
U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464
DEMO 1
Descriptive statistics and correlations
Variables Mean S.D. 1 2 3 4 5 6
Licensing revenues° (1) 1.43 .96
Succ. rel. to competitors° (2) 3.45 1.35 .46⁎⁎⁎
Revenues (3) 3.88 9.04 .60⁎⁎⁎
R&D intensity (4) 6.97 6.63 .11
Prior experience (5) 4.57 7.75 DEMO
Automotive/machinery (6) .42 .50
Chemicals/pharma (7) .28 .45 .19⁎
Electronics/semiconductors (8) .18 .38 .09
Austria (9) .11 DEMO − .17⁎
Switzerland (10) .20 .40
Austria/Switzerland (11) .31 .46 − .18⁎
Systematic process (12) 3.03 1.72 .54⁎⁎⁎
Planning process (13) 3.56 1.78 .38⁎⁎⁎
Intelligence process (14) 3.13 1.68 .29⁎⁎
Negotiation process (15) 4.10 1.22 .29⁎⁎
Effective realization process (16) 4.33 DEMO .22⁎⁎
Efficient realization process (17) 4.92 1.06 − .06
Control process (18) 3.56 1.67 .39⁎⁎⁎
.27⁎⁎
− .10
.39⁎⁎⁎
− .13 .10
DEMO
− .14†
.03
− .08 .04
.06
.43⁎⁎⁎
.50⁎⁎⁎
.37⁎⁎⁎
.41⁎⁎⁎
.34⁎⁎⁎
− .16⁎
.50⁎⁎⁎
Pearson correlations; °Dependent variable; †pb .1; ⁎pb .05; ⁎⁎pb .01; ⁎⁎⁎pb .001.
−
−
−
−
−
−
.06
DEMO − .02
.04 − .18† − .07
.01 .13 .21⁎
.09 .18† − .04
− .04
− .05 .12 .04
.18⁎
.26⁎⁎
.14 .09 DEMO
.13 .00 .39⁎⁎⁎
.15† − .03 .32⁎⁎⁎
.08 .09 .31⁎⁎⁎
.10
.16†
.11
.13
− .53⁎⁎⁎
− .39⁎⁎⁎
− .04 .04
− .07 .08 DEMO
.17† .33⁎⁎⁎ − .23⁎⁎
− .21⁎⁎
− .19⁎
− .01
− .09
− .05 − .11
− .02 .45⁎⁎⁎
− .11
− .15†
4.2.3. DEMO variables
Five sets of control variables have been taken into account. The first two variables, i.e., revenues and R&D intensity,
have DEMO considered to control for a firm's technology commercialization potential, which DEMO affect performance.
Therefore, we included a firm's annual revenues in DEMO EUR as a measure of firm size. R&D intensity, i.e., the
percentage of R&D expenditures/sales, has been included as another control to reflect the size of a firm's technology
portfolio. We DEMO considered the firm's number of patent families. As the correlation coefficient between this
variable and a firm's revenues is strong and highly DEMO, we did not include it in the models reported below.
Further DEMO with this additional variable show no significant changes in the findings. Moreover, we have
controlled for a firm's prior experience with externally leveraging technology, which may positively influence
performance independent of a firm's processes. In addition, it may positively affect the process variables. Therefore,
we followed prior measures of experience, e.g., alliance experience (Rothaermel and Deeds, 2006), and measured the
time in years for which the companies have actively commercialized technology assets.
As a result of our cross-industry approach, we also controlled for any industry effects on the relationships
investigated. Based DEMO prior works (e.g., Teece, 1998; Arora et al., 2001), which reported considerably different
motives for commercializing technology assets in these industries, we grouped the companies into the following four
classes: automotive/machinery, chemicals/pharmaceuticals, semiconductors/electronics, and other. For the first three
classes, we included a dummy variable (1 = pertaining to this industry; DEMO = not pertaining to this industry) in our
analyses. The same DEMO was applied to the firms' country of origin with controls for DEMO and Switzerland in the
OLS analyses. However, we could not include DEMO variables for both countries in the ordered logit analyses. Due to
the limited number of firms from these countries, the ordered logit analyses failed to converge (Long, 2002). Therefore,
these categories were combined DEMO one dummy variable (1 = headquarters in one of these countries; 0 = headquarters
not in these countries).
4.3. Analytical procedures
Despite DEMO out exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses, the correlations between some of DEMO
independent variables are relatively high. Accordingly, we calculated the variance inflation DEMO to check for potential
multicollinearity. The highest value across all models and variables refers to ‘ control process' in model 6 and amounts
to 1.87. This value is well within an acceptable range (Hair et al., 2006). Thus, the correlations are not sufficiently high
to lead DEMO a substantial increase in the variance inflation factor. However, the relatively DEMO correlations lead to the
U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464
457
DEMO 1
Descriptive statistics and correlations
7 8 9 1011 121314151617
− .29⁎⁎⁎
.01 − .05
− .01 .03 − .17⁎
− .00 − .01 DEMO .74⁎⁎⁎
.31⁎⁎⁎ − .08 − .06 .01 − .03
.31⁎⁎⁎ − .09 − .05 .05 .01 .69⁎⁎⁎
.27⁎⁎ − .11 .05 − .09 − DEMO .64⁎⁎⁎
.08 − .07 − .04 .04 .01 .37⁎⁎⁎
.32⁎⁎⁎ − .24⁎⁎ .14† .18⁎ .25⁎⁎ .49⁎⁎⁎
.13 .17⁎ − .22⁎⁎ − .08 − .22⁎⁎ DEMO .14†
.30⁎⁎⁎ − .06 − .12 .13 .03 .67⁎⁎⁎
−
.63⁎⁎⁎
.42⁎⁎⁎
.54⁎⁎⁎
− .18⁎
.68⁎⁎⁎
.41⁎⁎⁎
.46⁎⁎⁎
− .18⁎
.58⁎⁎⁎
.44⁎⁎⁎
− .20⁎
DEMO
− .42⁎⁎⁎
.57⁎⁎⁎
− .20⁎
situation that the variable with the strongest impact becomes significant in the regression analyses, whereas some
others remain insignificant.
As the licensing revenues were measured on an ordinal scale, we could not use OLS regressions in the analyses with
this variable. Since OLS DEMO can provide misleading results in this case, we applied ordered logit DEMO (Long,
2002). For the second performance variable, i.e., DEMO relative to competitors, we used linear OLS regression
models. Despite the DEMO measure ‘licensing revenues’ as one indicator of performance, we cannot fully
DEMO 2
Results of ordered logit analyses
Variables Model 1 Model 2 Model 2
Dependent variable Licensing revenues Licensing revenues Licensing revenues
Control variables
Revenues DEMO (.03) .12⁎⁎ (.04) .17⁎⁎ (.05)
R&D intensity DEMO (.04) .03 (.04) .04 (.05)
Prior experience .07⁎ (.03) .09⁎ (.04) .07⁎ (.04)
Automotive/machinery .45 (1.22) 1.68 (1.38) 2.06 (1.48)
Chemicals/pharmaceuticals 1.05 (1.23) DEMO (1.37) 1.58 (1.48)
Electronics/semiconductors 1.74 (1.24) 2.36† (1.44) 2.48† (1.56)
Austria/Switzerland − .83† (.67) − DEMO (.79) − 1.43† (.92)
Hypothesized variables
Systematic process .84⁎⁎⁎ (.23) .81⁎⁎ (.31)
Planning process .24 (.29)
Intelligence process .32 (.25)
Negotiation process .44† (.41)
Effective realization process DEMO .50 (.34)
Efficient realization process − .88⁎⁎ (.38)
Control process .37⁎ (.37)
Pseudo R2 (Nagelkerke) .46 .60 .67
Chi-square 41.93⁎⁎⁎ 60.38⁎⁎⁎ 83.83⁎⁎⁎
†pb .1; ⁎pb .05; ⁎⁎pb .01; ⁎⁎⁎pb .001.
Unstandardized coefficients with standard errors in parentheses.
458 U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464
DEMO 3
Results of OLS analyses
Variables Model 4 Model 5 Model 6
Dependent variable Succ. rel. to competitors Succ. rel. to competitors Succ. rel. DEMO competitors
Control variables
Revenues .03⁎⁎ (.01) .02⁎ (.01) .03⁎ (DEMO)
R&D intensity − .01 (.02) − .02† (.02) − .01 (.02)
Prior experience .06⁎⁎ (.01) .05⁎ (.01) .02† (.01)
Automotive/machinery .26 (.32) .45 (.30) .38† (.30)
Chemicals/pharmaceuticals .04 (.35) − .06 (.33) − .16 (.32)
Electronics/semiconductors − .30 (.37) − .11 (DEMO) − .18 (.35)
Austria .28 (.32) .29 (.30) .41† (.31)
Switzerland .12 (.26) .09 (.24) .05 (DEMO)
Hypothesized variables
Systematic process .29⁎⁎⁎ (.06) .06 (.09)
DEMO process .21⁎⁎ (.08)
Intelligence process − .03 (.08)
Negotiation process .16⁎ (.09)
Effective realization process − .05 (.08)
DEMO realization process − .04 (.10)
Control process .16⁎ (.09)
R2 .22 .32 .41
R2 adjusted .17 .28 .35
F 4.92⁎⁎⁎ 7.48⁎⁎⁎ DEMO
†pb .1; ⁎pb .05; ⁎⁎pb .01; ⁎⁎⁎pb .001.
Unstandardized coefficients DEMO standard errors in parentheses.
rule out the existence of a common method bias because the same key informant per firm assessed independent and
dependent DEMO Therefore, we analyzed the extent of a potential common method bias DEMO applying the procedure
recommended by Lindell and Whitney (2001), which DEMO been applied in other empirical studies (e.g., Jayachandran
et al., DEMO). The results of this analysis suggest that our findings are not merely due to common method bias, but rather
are substantial (Lindell DEMO Whitney, 2001).
5. Results
Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics DEMO correlations. A considerable number of the companies have established
systematic external technology exploitation processes (mean of 3.03 on a 7-point scale). Furthermore, DEMO data show
that the tasks in the negotiation and realization stages are carried out more professionally than the tasks in the planning,
identification DEMO control stages. Moreover, the data show significantly positive correlations between prior DEMO
and nearly all process variables. The significant relationships remain if the partial correlations are calculated to take into
account the remaining control variables in DEMO relation between prior experience and the process variables. This finding
provides support for the path-dependent nature of external technology exploitation processes. Firms with more
DEMO seem to have higher incentives to systematize and proficiently manage their external technology
exploitation processes. Only the efficiency of the realization stage is not DEMO related to prior experience. Firms
with considerable prior experience seem to focus on effectiveness rather than efficiency in the realization stage.
Concerning the performance DEMO of the process variables, model 1 only includes the five sets DEMO controls, and it
shows significantly positive effects of firm size and DEMO experience on external technology exploitation revenues
(Table 2). In model DEMO, we find the expected positive impact of a systematic process. In DEMO 3, the proficiency of the
tasks in the planning and intelligence DEMO is insignificantly related to performance, whereas the proficiency of the
negotiation DEMO has a moderately significant positive impact. While the effectiveness of realization processes is
insignificantly related to external technology exploitation revenues, efficiency has a significantly negative impact. The
proficiency of the control processes has a significantly positive DEMO
In models 4– 6, the relative success measure has been used DEMO capture external technology exploitation performance
(Table 3). Again, we find significantly positive effects of firm size and prior experience. Model 5 shows DEMO significantly
U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464
459
DEMO effect of a systematic process, which, however, disappears when introducing DEMO variables. While the
proficiency of the planning processes has a significantly positive effect, the impact of intelligence processes remains
insignificant. By contrast, the DEMO of the negotiation processes has a significantly positive effect. The
effectiveness and efficiency of the tasks in the realization stage do not have a DEMO effect, whereas the proficiency
of control processes is positively related to DEMO
When comparing the results of models 1–3 and models 4– 6, DEMO find support for Hypothesis 1 because a
systematic process is positively related to performance. Hypothesis 2 on the positive effect of professional planning
processes DEMO partial support because it only has a significant effect on relative performance, which considers
strategic in addition to monetary issues. As the impact of intelligence processes has remained insignificant, we do not
find support for Hypothesis 3. By contrast, Hypothesis 4 on the positive effect of professional negotiation processes
is supported by the data. Hypotheses 5 and 6 on the DEMO impact of effectiveness and efficiency in the realization
stage do not receive support. The efficiency of realization processes even shows a significantly negative relationship
DEMO monetary performance. Firms that focus on efficiency during the realization stage are obviously unable to
successfully appropriate their share of revenues. Finally, the proficiency of control processes has a significantly
positive effect on both performance variables, providing support for Hypothesis 7. In general, the process variables
explain a considerable amount of the variance in the performance variables beyond the variance DEMO by the
controls.
6. Discussion
This research has examined the performance impact of managing major stages of the external technology
exploitation process. Our findings DEMO support for distinguishing five process stages. The proficiency in managing
these process stages and the existence of a systematic process help explain the discrepancies DEMO the success of
some pioneering firms and the problems of many others. As such, this study represents the first quantitative success
factor study into external technology exploitation which constitutes an important complement to success factor studies
DEMO new product development. This is particularly important in the light of an increasing interest of academics and
managers in the successful commercialization of technology DEMO a firm's boundaries.
6.1. Theoretical implications
Following research into new product development (Cooper and Kleinschmidt, 1995), we have distinguished the
systematization DEMO the external technology exploitation process and the proficiency of managing the different process
stages. In line with the results on internal innovation (Ernst, DEMO), the data have shown a positive influence of a
systematic process. Although the significance of the influence is reduced in the analysis of DEMO success, a
systematic process ceteris paribus promises enhanced performance in external DEMO exploitation, particularly
regarding licensing revenues. By contrast, professional planning only has a significantly positive impact on relative
performance, which considers strategic aspects, DEMO, setting industry standards (Teece, 1998). As these technology
transactions DEMO to be less standardized than transactions aimed at generating licensing revenues, DEMO planning is
essential (Lichtenthaler, 2005).
The insignificant influence of the intelligence stage may be explained by the relatively passive strategies that many
DEMO pursue despite the recent increase in external technology exploitation (Davis and DEMO, 2001; Lichtenthaler,
2005). Professional intelligence will not lead to strong performance differences if firms do not actively commercialize
technology assets. However, a major shift towards actively commercializing technology may be currently observed in
DEMO (Davis and Harrison, 2001; Kline, 2003). As a result, professional intelligence will likely gain importance
because the identification of technology commercialization opportunities constitutes a major managerial challenge
(Escher, 2003). Moreover, the data have shown a high importance of the negotiation stage, supporting prior research
into alliances (Contractor, 1985; Avadikyan et al., 2001). DEMO negotiation is often not regarded as a critical stage
(Escher, 2003), firms may enhance their performance by developing negotiation capabilities to realize DEMO own
objectives more successfully than their counterpart. In particular, the negotiation DEMO may substantially contribute to a
firm's success in appropriating its share of revenues from external technology commercialization (Sherry and Teece,
2004). However, it is inadequate to excessively focus on a firm's own position because usually the parties have to agree
on a compromise at DEMO end of the negotiation stage (Doz and Hamel, 1998; Zaheer DEMO al., 1998).
460
U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464
DEMO, the results have shown that supporting the technology transfer based on DEMO realization processes
does not enhance performance. This result has major implications for research into technology transfer because it calls
into question traditional theoretical perspectives. DEMO research into outward technology transfer has often focused on
the stage of actually transferring technology (Amesse and Cohendet, 2001; Martin and Salomon, DEMO). As a result,
these works have relatively neglected the remaining stages. However, technology transfer performance seems to be
determined to a large degree by managerial activities that accompany the actual technology transfer, i.e., DEMO,
negotiation and control. Thus, the results may lead us to DEMO rethink the managerial challenges of outward
technology transactions, which go considerably DEMO the transfer stage. This result is supported by research into
partner-specific absorptive capacity, which has shown that the similarity of managerial mechanisms between the
technology source and the technology recipient positively affects performance (Lane et al., 2006).
In addition, we have found a negative correlation between DEMO effectiveness and the efficiency of the realization
stage. Effectiveness and efficiency emerged from the factor analyses as two separate constructs, providing support for
our conceptual considerations. However, most firms seem to be unable to effectively support the technology transfer in
an efficient way. The negative correlation between these DEMO helps explain the surprising finding that the
efficiency of the realization stage negatively affects monetary performance, contradicting Hypothesis 6. This surprising
finding underlines the differences between external technology exploitation and internal innovation. Efficiency is
essential in DEMO innovation (Ernst, 2002), but it is less important in external technology exploitation. Accordingly,
firms should not excessively focus on efficiency during DEMO realization stage which may limit their success in
appropriating revenues from outward technology transfer (Arora et al., 2001; Sherry and Teece, 2004)DEMO Firms with a lot
of experience in external technology exploitation have obviously recognized this challenge because prior experience is
positively related to effectiveness of DEMO realization stage and proficiency of all other stages. However, it is
DEMO related to efficiency of the realization stage.
Finally, a professional control DEMO external technology exploitation positively influences performance. In particular, it
may help DEMO initiate experience-based learning processes, which considerably contribute to enhanced performance.
Further DEMO for learning effects is provided by the positive relation of prior experience to nearly all process
variables which underlines the path-dependent nature of external DEMO exploitation processes. Outward
technology transfer has only increased in recent years (DEMO and Harrison, 2001; Kline, 2003), but potential learning
effects DEMO already led to visible results. Learning processes may be initiated by a thorough control of prior activities
and a subsequent optimization of the managerial DEMO Over time, these path-dependent learning effects may
contribute to developing a DEMO capability of externally leveraging technology (Teece et al., 1997; Deeds DEMO
DeCarolis, 2000). This dynamic capability may be considered an equivalent DEMO absorptive capacity (Cohen and
Levinthal, 1990; Lane et al., 2006) in outward technology transfer.
In general, the results have shown that DEMO insights from research into internal innovation (Brown and
Eisenhardt, 1995; DEMO and Kleinschmidt, 1995) may be transferred to external technology exploitation. At the same
time, we have found major differences between internally and externally leveraging technology, e.g., the role of
intelligence and the role of DEMO in realizing technology transfer (Ernst, 2002; Frishammar and Hörte, 2005).
Thus, this research has deepened our understanding of realizing value from technology in open innovation systems
( Chesbrough, 2003; Laursen and Salter, 2006). As a firm's proficiency in managing external technology exploitation DEMO
related to the boundaries of the firm, the findings provide support DEMO competence-based approaches to organizational
boundaries. Accordingly, the results highlight the importance DEMO nonefficiency perspectives in boundaries research
( Argote et al., 2003; Santos and Eisenhardt, 2005).
6.2. Managerial implications
The empirical findings allow for giving normative managerial recommendations. Firms should establish a
systematic external technology exploitation DEMO, which needs to be communicated across a firm's distributed
knowledge DEMO (Brockhoff, 1991). This process should not be limited to individual technology transactions, but it
should consider all major tasks at the firm level. Besides a systematic process, firms should focus on the planning,
negotiation and control stages. Currently, most firms manage negotiation and realization more professionally than
planning, intelligence and control. Thus, the data point to DEMO deficits in planning and intelligence, which are
considered the greatest challenges DEMO successful external technology exploitation (Escher, 2003). The relatively
professional approach to negotiation and realization may be explained by the similarity of these DEMO to external
U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464
461
DEMO acquisition. Furthermore, these tasks have to be carried out even if DEMO company pursues a passive external
technology exploitation strategy (Rivette and Kline, 2000). According to a passive approach, which was pursued by
many firms in the past, firms are open to external inquiries, but DEMO do not actively attempt to identify technology
commercialization opportunities (Chesbrough, 2003). Thus, firms may have realized learning effects in negotiation and
realization based on their experience in managing interfirm relations (Rothaermel and Deeds, DEMO).
Accordingly, our findings suggest that companies and researchers alike should DEMO oversimplify the realization of
technology commercialization opportunities by excessively focusing on a firm's strategic openness (Rivette and Kline,
2000; Davis and DEMO, 2001). The opportunities of open technology exploitation strategies will be DEMO if firms
lack a professional management of the critical stages of the external technology exploitation process. In the light of a
growing importance of DEMO technology transfer (Chesbrough, 2003; Kline, 2003), firms need to increasingly
address their external technology exploitation processes instead of focusing on their DEMO innovation processes. In
particular, small and medium-sized firms need a detailed DEMO of outward technology transfer because they
may be forced to externally leverage technology due to limited complementary assets (Arora et al., 2001). DEMO data
have shown that firm size is an essential advantage in external technology exploitation. However, a professional
management of the critical process stages constitutes a well-defined starting point for enhancing the performance of all
firms. High DEMO in managing these critical stages will help companies realize value from innovation and avoid
systematic mistakes in technology management.
6.3. Limitations and outlook
A DEMO limitations of this study are worth noting. First, in the analyses DEMO relative performance, common method bias
was possible. We have taken several DEMO to ensure that common method bias did not distort the empirical
analyses. Besides cross-validating the perceptual performance measure, i.e., success relative to competitors, with
objective data, i.e., external technology exploitation revenues, we have applied the procedures suggested by Lindell
and Whitney (2001) confirming that common DEMO bias was not an issue. Second, the monetary success variable has
DEMO on a firm's revenues from licensing agreements and technology sales. Accordingly, we have not considered
external technology exploitation in alliances and other contractual forms, in which the impact of the process variables
may be equally strong. Third, the findings, particularly the descriptive results, reflect the current situation in the three
European countries included in this study.
Thus, it would be worthwhile to conduct a similar study in the US because DEMO works point to the situation
that some US firms are ahead of European firms in actively commercializing technology (Rivette and Kline, 2000;
DEMO and Harrison, 2001). Moreover, external technology exploitation may be studied in completely different
organizations, e.g., universities or research institutes. The finding DEMO managerial activities which accompany the
actual technology transfer constitute a major success factor may provide new insights into the challenges of academic
technology transfer DEMO (Phan et al., 2005; Powers and McDougall, 2006). In addition, the effects of
managing external technology exploitation may be considered in dyad-level analyses of technology transfer, which
have usually focused on the recipient of technology assets. As much remains to be explored, there are great
opportunities for further research into external technology exploitation.
Acknowledgements
The author would DEMO to thank Holger Ernst, associate editor Phillip Phan and two anonymous DEMO for their
excellent and very helpful comments on prior versions of this article.
Appendix A
Systematic process (α = .95)
–
–
–
A systematic process has been established for carrying out the ETC (= external technology commercialization)
activities.
All persons involved in the ETC process DEMO exactly their particular tasks.
The interfaces between different persons and units involved in the ETC process are well defined.
462
U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464
DEMO
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Planning process (α = .92)
Our overall ETC activities are planned adequately.
The individual ETC projects are planned DEMO
Intelligence process (α = .91)
A continuous observation and intelligence DEMO the technological environment takes place, especially regarding ETC
opportunities and potential DEMO customers.
An effective identification of ETC opportunities is carried out.
Negotiation process (α = .85)
We are usually better prepared for negotiations than our potential ETC customers.
The results of successful negotiations are usually nearer DEMO our position than to the position of the ETC customers.
Effective realization process (α = .89)
We provide the necessary resources for an adequate transfer of the technologies to the ETC customers.
Our R&D DEMO provide sufficient support for an adequate transfer of the technologies.
Efficient realization process (α = .60)
Our R&D employees often spend too much time on transferring knowledge to the ETC customers.R
The time required DEMO the technology transfer activities negatively affects the firm's product business.R
The technology transfer usually includes a substantial amount of tacit knowledge (= knowledge that is difficult to
codify in instructions, blueprints, etc.).R
The DEMO transfer is usually accompanied by a temporary transfer of employees for training the ETC customer.R
Control process (α = .94)
Based on the ETC objectives, the performance of the individual ETC projects is controlled adequately.
Based on the ETC objectives, the performance of our overall ETC activities is controlled adequately.
The results of the control processes are taken into DEMO in the subsequent ETC activities.
Success relative to competitors (α = DEMO)
In relation to our direct competitors, we are successful in DEMO ETC activities.
Our ETC revenues are considerably higher than the ETC revenues of our direct competitors.
We use ETC more successfully for strategic objectives DEMO our direct competitors.
α = Cronbach's alpha.
R = reverse coded item.
References
Amesse, F., Cohendet, P., 2001. Technology transfer revisited DEMO the perspective of the knowledge-based economy. Research Policy 30,
1459–1478.
Argote, L., McEvily, B., Reagans, R., 2003. Managing knowledge in DEMO: an integrative framework and review of emerging themes.
Management Science 49, 571–582.
Arora, A., Fosfuri, A., Gambardella, A., 2001. Markets DEMO technology: the economics of innovation and corporate strategy. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Avadikyan, A., Llerena, P., Matt, M., Rozan, A., DEMO, S., 2001. Organisational rules, codification and knowledge creation in inter-organisation
DEMO agreements. Research Policy 30, 1443–1458.
U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464
463
DEMO, R.P., Yi, Y., Phillips, L.W., 1991. Assessing construct validity in organizational research. Administrative Science Quarterly 36, 421–458.
Bozeman, B., 2000. Technology transfer and public policy: a review of research and theory. Research Policy 29, 627–655.
Branzei, A., Vertinsky, I., 2006. Strategic pathways to product innovation capabilities in SMEs. Journal of Business Venturing 21, 75–105.
Brockhoff, K., 1991. Competitor technology intelligence in German companies. Industrial Marketing DEMO 20, 91–98.
Brown, S.L., Eisenhardt, K.M., 1995. Product development: past research, present findings, and future directions. Academy of Management Review
DEMO, 343–378.
Chesbrough, H., 2003. The logic of open innovation: managing intellectual property. California Management Review 45, 33–58.
Cohen, W.M., Levinthal, DEMO, 1990. Absorptive capacity: a new perspective on learning and innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly 35,
128–152.
Contractor, F.J., 1985. A generalized theorem DEMO joint-venture and licensing negotiations. Journal of International Business Studies 16, 23–50.
DEMO, R.G., Kleinschmidt, E.J., 1995. Benchmarking the firm's critical success factors in new product development. Journal of Product Innovation
Management 12, 374–391.
Davis, J.L., Harrison, S.S., 2001. Edison in the Boardroom: How Leading Companies Realize Value from Their Intellectual Assets. John Wiley &
Sons, New York.
Deeds, D.L., DeCarolis, D., 2000. Dynamic capabilities and new product development in high technology ventures: an empirical analysis of new
biotechnology firms. Journal of Business Venturing 15, 211–229.
Denison, D.R., Mishra, A.K., 1995. Toward a theory of organizational culture and effectiveness. Organization DEMO 6, 204–223.
Doz, Y.L., Hamel, G., 1998. Alliance Advantage: The Art of Creating Value through Partnering. Harvard Business School Press, Boston.
Draulans, J., deMan, A.-P., Volberda, H.W., 2003. Building alliance DEMO: management techniques for superior alliance performance. Long
Range Planning 36, 151–166.
Dyer, J.H., Kale, P., Singh, H., 2001. How to DEMO strategic alliances work. MIT Sloan Management Review 42, 37–43.
Eisenhardt, K.M., 1991. Building theories from case study research. Academy of Management Review 14, 532–550.
Eisenhardt, K.M., Martin, J.A., 2000. Dynamic capabilities: what DEMO they? Strategic Management Journal 21, 1105–1121.
Ernst, H., 2002. Success factors of new product development: a review of the empirical literature. International Journal of Management Reviews 4,
1–40.
Escher, J.-P., 2003. Design DEMO implementation of technology marketing organizations. In: Tschirky, H., Jung, H.-H., Savioz, P. (Eds.), Technology
and Innovation Management on the Move. Orell Füssli, Zurich, pp. 215–228.
Forrest, J.E., Martin, M.J.C., DEMO Strategic alliances between large and small research intensive organizations: experiences in DEMO biotechnology
industry. R&D Management 22, 55–67.
Fosfuri, A., 2006. DEMO licensing dilemma: understanding the determinants of the rate of technology licensing. DEMO Management Journal 27,
1141–1158.
Fricke, S.E., Shenhar, A.J., 2000. Managing multiple engineering projects in a manufacturing support environment. IEEE Transactions on
DEMO Management 47, 258–268.
Frishammar, J., Hörte, S.A., 2005. Managing DEMO information in manufacturing firms: the impact on innovation performance. Journal of DEMO
Innovation Management 22, 251–266.
George, V.P., Farris, G., 1999. DEMO of alliances: formative stages and changing organizational and environmental influences. R&DEMO
Management 29, 379–389.
Gerbing, D.W., Anderson, J.C., 1988. An DEMO paradigm for scale development incorporating unidimensionality and its assessment. Journal of
Marketing Research 25, 186–192.
Gerybadze, A., 1994. Technology forecasting as a process of organisational intelligence. R&D Management 24, 131–140.
Ghoshal, S., Kim, S.K., 1986. Building effective intelligence systems for competitive advantage. Sloan Management DEMO 28, 49–58.
Griffin, A., Hauser, J.R., 1996. Integrating R&DEMO and marketing: a review and analysis of the literature. Journal of DEMO Innovation Management
13, 191–215.
Grindley, P.C., Teece, D.J., 1997. DEMO intellectual capital: licensing and cross-licensing in semiconductors and electronics. California
Management DEMO 39, 8–41.
Hair, J.F., Anderson, R.E., Tatham, R.L., DEMO, W.C., 2006. Multivariate Data Analysis. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River.
Hakanson, L., 1993. Managing cooperative research and development: partner selection and contract DEMO R&D Management 23, 273–285.
Harmon, B., Ardishvili, A., DEMO Mapping the university technology transfer process. Journal of Business Venturing 12, DEMO
Hoegl, M., Wagner, S.M., 2005. Buyer–supplier collaboration in product development projects. Journal of Management 31, 530–548.
Hoffmann, W.H., 2005. How to manage a portfolio of alliances. Long Range Planning 38, 121–143.
Jayachandran, DEMO, Sharma, S., Kaufman, P., Raman, P., 2005. The DEMO of relational information processes and technology use in customer relationship
management. Journal of Marketing 69, 177–192.
Jones, G.K., Lanctot, A., Teegen, DEMO, 2001. Determinants and performance impacts of external technology acquisition. Journal of DEMO
Venturing 16, 255–283.
Kale, P., Dyer, J.H., Singh, H., 2002. Alliance capability, stock market response, and long-term alliance success: DEMO role of the alliance function.
Strategic Management Journal 23, 747–767.
Kline, D., 2003. Sharing the corporate crown jewels. MIT Sloan Management Review 44, 89–93.
Kostoff, R.N., Schaller, R.R., 2001. Science and technology roadmaps. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 48, 132–143.
Lane, P.J., Koka, DEMO, Pathak, S., 2006. The reification of absorptive capacity: a critical review and rejuvenation of the construct. Academy of
Management Review 31, 833–863.
Laursen, K., Salter, A., 2006. Open for innovation: the role of openness in explaining innovation performance among U.K. manufacturing firms.
Strategic Management DEMO 27, 131–150.
464
U. Lichtenthaler / Journal of Business Venturing 23 (2008) 445–464
DEMO, E., 2003. Third generation management of technology intelligence processes. R&D Management 33, 361–375.
Lichtenthaler, U., 2005. External commercialization of knowledge: DEMO and research agenda. International Journal of Management Reviews 7,
231–255.
Lichtenthaler, U., Ernst, H., 2006. Attitudes to externally organising knowledge management DEMO: a review, reconsideration and extension of the
NIH syndrome. R&D Management 36, 367–386.
Lindell, M.K., Whitney, D.J., 2001. Accounting for common method variance in cross-selectional research designs. Journal of Applied Psychology
86, 114–121.
Long, J.S., 2002. Regression Models for Categorical and Limited Dependent DEMO Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks.
Lorange, P., Roos, J., 1993. DEMO alliances: formation, implementation, and evolution. Blackwell Publishers, Cambridge/Oxford.
Makadok, R., Barney, J.B., 2001. Strategic factor market intelligence: an application of information economics to strategy formulation and competitor
intelligence. Management Science 47, 1621–1638.
Makhija, M.V., Ganesh, U., 1997. The relationship between control DEMO partner learning in learning-related joint ventures. Organization Science 5,
508–520.
March, J.G., 1991. Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning. Organization Science 2, 71–87.
Markman, G.D., Phan, P.H., Balkin, D.B., Gianiodis, P.T., 2005. Entrepreneurship and university-based technology transfer. Journal of Business
Venturing 20, DEMO
Martin, X., Salomon, R., 2003. Knowledge transfer capacity and its implications for the theory of the multinational corporation. Journal of
International Business DEMO 34, 356–373.
McEvily, B., Marcus, A., 2005. Embedded ties DEMO the acquisition of competitive capabilities. Strategic Management Journal 26, 1033–1055.
Miles, M.B., Huberman, A.M., 1994. Qualitative data analysis: an expanded sourcebook. DEMO, Beverly Hills.
Phan, P.H., Siegel, D.S., Wright, M., DEMO Science parks and incubators: observations, synthesis and future research. Journal of Business Venturing
20, 165–182.
Powers, J.B., McDougall, P.P., 2006. University start-up formation and technology licensing with firms that go public: a resource-based view of
academic entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Venturing 20, 291–311.
Reid, DEMO, Bussiere, D., Greenaway, K., 2001. Alliance formation issues for DEMO enterprises. International Journal of Management
Reviews 3, 79–100.
Rivette, K.G., DEMO, D., 2000. Rembrandts in the Attic: Unlocking the Hidden Value DEMO Patents. Harvard Business School Press, Boston.
Rothaermel, F.T., Deeds, D.L., 2006. Alliance type, alliance experience and alliance management capability in high-technology DEMO Journal of
Business Venturing 21, 429–460.
Santos, F.M., Eisenhardt, K.M., 2005. Organizational boundaries and theories of organization. Organization Science 16, 491–508.
DEMO, S., 2004. Encouraging university entrepreneurship? The effect of the Bayh–Dole DEMO on university patenting in the United States. Journal of
Business Venturing 19, 127–151.
Sherry, E.F., Teece, D.J., 2004. Royalties, evolving patent DEMO, and the value of innovation. Research Policy 33, 179–191.
Song, DEMO, Parry, M.E., 1997. A cross-national comparative study of new product DEMO processes: Japan and the United States. Journal of
Marketing 61, 1–18.
Teece, D.J., 1998. Capturing value from knowledge assets: the new economy, markets for know-how, and intangible assets. California Management
Review 40, 55–79.
Teece, D.J., Pisano, G., Shuen, A., 1997. Dynamic capabilities DEMO strategic management. Strategic Management Journal 18, 509–533.
Walter, A., Auer, M., Ritter, T., 2006. The impact of network capabilities and entrepreneurial orientation on university spin-off performance. Journal
of Business Venturing 21, 541–567.
Weiss, S.E., 1987. Creating the GM–Toyota joint venture: a case in complex negotiation. Columbia Journal of World Business 22, 23–37.
West, J., Vanhaverbeke, W., Chesbrough, H., 2006. Open innovation: a research agenda. In: Chesbrough, H., Vanhaverbeke, W., West, J. (Eds.), Open
innovation: Researching a new paradigm. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 285–307.
Yan, A., Gray, B., 1994. Bargaining power, management control, DEMO performance in United States– China joint ventures: a comparative case study.
DEMO of Management Journal 37, 1478–1517.
Yin, R.K., 2003. Case study DEMO: design and methods. Sage Publications, Newsbury Park.
Zaheer, A., McEvily, B., Perrone, V., 1998. Does trust matter? Exploring the effects of interorganizational and interpersonal trust on performance.
Organization Science 9, 141–159.{1g42fwefx}