Cogn Neurodyn
DOI 10.1007/s11571-011-9157-x
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Mathematical model of the dynamics DEMO psychotherapy
Larry S. Liebovitch • Paul R. Peluso •
Michael D. Norman • Jessica Su • John M. Gottman
Received: 23 March 2011 / Revised: 3 May 2011 / Accepted: 9 May 2011
 The DEMO(s) 2011. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
DEMO The success of psychotherapy depends on the
nature of the therapeutic relationship between a therapist
and a client. We use dynamical systems theory to DEMO
the dynamics of the emotional interaction between a ther-
apist and client. We determine how the therapeutic end-
point and the dynamics of getting DEMO depend on the
parameters of the model. Previously Gottman et al. used a
very similar approach (physical-sciences paradigm) for
modeling and making predictions DEMO husband–wife
relationships. Given that this novel approach shed light on
the dyadic interaction between couples, we have applied it
L. S. Liebovitch
Charles E. Schmidt College of Science, Center for Complex
Systems and Brain Sciences, DEMO for Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology, Department of Psychology, Florida Atlantic
University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, USA
L. S. Liebovitch
Division of Mathematics and Natural Sciences,
Department of Physics, Queens College, City
University DEMO New York, Flushing, NY 11367, USA
P. R. Peluso
College DEMO Education, Department of Counselor Education,
Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, USA
M. D. Norman (&)
Charles E. Schmidt College of Science, Center for Complex
Systems and Brain Sciences, Florida DEMO University,
Boca Raton, FL 33431, USA
e-mail: mike.d.norman@gmail.com
J. DEMO
Charles E. Schmidt College of Science, Florida Atlantic
University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, USA
J. M. Gottman
The Gottman Institute, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98115, USA
to the study of the DEMO between therapist and client.
The results of our computations provide a new perspective
on the therapeutic relationship and a number of useful
insights. Our DEMO is to create a model that is capable of
making solid predictions about the dynamics of psycho-
therapy with the ultimate intention of using DEMO to better train
therapists.
Keywords
Dynamical systems theory
Biological systems
Nonlinear phenomena


Dynamical systems
 Ordinary differential equations
Psychotherapy


Introduction
DEMO in four adults in the United States suffers with a
diagnosable mental disorder. These disorders are the
leading cause of disabilities and extract a DEMO and
emotional toll on these individuals, their families, and their
communities. Psychotherapy has been shown to be an
effective method for treating these DEMO (Lambert and
Barley 2002; Kazdin 2008; Mozdzierz et al. 2009)DEMO Yet,
only one quarter of those with these disorders seek psy-
chotherapy and one half drop out after the ﬁrst session
(Muran et al. 2009). A therapist in possession of a better
understanding of DEMO would be able to improve
the success of therapy, reduce the DEMO drop out rate, and
yield better ways to train novice therapists.
DEMO success of psychotherapy depends on the nature of
the therapeutic relationship between a therapist and a client.
Studies have sought to identify the most DEMO elements
of this relationship. Although, those elements are not fully
understood, previous psychotherapy studies have reported
that the essential element is the personal DEMO
between the therapist and client, rather than an abstract
123
theoretical framework used by the therapist (Lambert and
Barley 2002; Kazdin DEMO; Mozdzierz et al. 2009; Muran
et al. 2009; Orlinsky and DEMO 1977; Martin et al. 2000).
This suggests that some features DEMO this relationship can be
represented by a model that describes how two people, a
dyad, react to themselves and to each other.
Previous DEMO of this relationship dyad have used the
social science paradigm of determining the functional
correlations between dependent and independent variables.
Here we use a DEMO science paradigm to investigate the
nature of this relationship. Just such a physical science
paradigm approach, based on rigorous mathematical
modeling, was pioneered DEMO Gottman et al. (2002) to study
the interactions between husbands and wives and it proved
useful in understanding the stability (or instability) DEMO their
marriages. They showed that this approach gives insights
into the dynamics of a marriage and has the power to make
speciﬁc successful predictions DEMO whether the marriage
is stable or ends in divorce. We now modify and extend
their approach of husband–wife dyads to analyze and
understand the DEMO dyad.
Our work is the ﬁrst mathematically rigorous model used
in the study psychotherapy (with the exception of Gottman’s
work, mentioned above). DEMO studies have been
done on a ‘case study’ basis or have used an intuitive
approach with no mathematical backbone. In our approach,
we DEMO a rigorous mathematical model of the thera-
pist–client relationship based on published empirical data
and our own experience, determine the dynamical properties
of that model, and then compare those properties to the
known properties of the therapist–client relationship. We
will show that this approach yields new insights into DEMO
therapeutic relationship. This model cannot, and is not
intended to, represent the full nature of the complex human
interaction in psychotherapy. However, the fact that it
does reveal important insights suggests that some simple
dynamical DEMO may underlie the more complex behav-
iors that emerge in the therapeutic relationship.
The long term goal is for such a theoretical mathemat-
ical DEMO to be used to describe and predict successful and
unsuccessful therapeutic relationships depending on the
parameters or conditions of the relationship. Thus, mod-
eling the therapeutic relationship between therapists and
clients may allow researchers to be DEMO to evaluate the
quality of the relationship and the effectiveness of speciﬁc
interventions that might create some signiﬁcant therapeutic
gains with a predictability that DEMO not yet been seen in the
clinical research literature. The information may allow
researchers to see how speciﬁc intervention strategies can
predict changes in DEMO as well as see how speciﬁc
intervention strategies actually produce changes in clients.
One of the fundamentally novel aspects of our type of
approach (beyond the presence of math) is the perspective
123
Cogn Neurodyn
from which the model is developed. Rather than dissecting
the individual components of DEMO system (the client and
therapist) in order to study them independently (i.e. com-
piling an exhaustive survey of possible attributes), we
focus on reproducing the emergent dynamics of the rela-
tionship that exists between DEMO components. We look for
the set of (relevant) properties of the components that play
a dominant role in these relationships. It is the DEMO
that inform the descriptions and properties of the compo-
nents, not DEMO other way around.
Mathematically, our model is based on coupled, ordin-
ary, nonlinear differential equations. Differential equations
have previously been used to model interaction at many
scales, from human relationships [e.g. a love affair (DEMO
gatz 1988, 1994)] to functional neurodynamics [e.g. neu-
ronal populations (Ghosh et al. 2008)]. Our perspective
shares some commonalities with agent-based DEMO,
where a system of agents, each following a set of (rela-
tively simple) rules, can give rise to emergent dynamics.
Agent-based DEMO has been successful in reproducing
emergent behaviors in large biological systems [e.g. bird
ﬂocking (Reynolds 1987), the spread of epidemics/
dynamics of populations (Chowell et al. 2003)], social
systems [e.g. conﬂict (Cederman 2003), ethnic violence
(Lim et al. 2007)], and learning DEMO the impact of emotion
on the strength of beliefs (Memon and DEMO 2010)]. The
advantage of our dynamical systems approach using
ordinary differential equations is that we can analyze many
of the properties of our DEMO analytically. Our model is
therefore much less computationally intensive than most
agent-based simulations.
Model
Our mathematical model is a system of two-dimensional,
ordinary DEMO equations (ODEs) representing the
emotional valance of a therapist and client. Our ODEs were
based on Gottman et al.’s difference equations (Gottman
et al. 2002) as reformulated by Larry Liebovitch into dif-
ferential equations (DEMO et al. 2008). We have used
a similar approach in models of conﬂict (Liebovitch et al.
2008) and gene regulatory networks (Liebovitch et al.
2009
). The equations for dT and dC are
dt dt
dT m1T b1
dt ¼ þ þ c1FC ðCÞð1Þ
dC
dt DEMO m2C þ b2 þ c2 FT ðT Þ: ð2Þ
These equations DEMO to the dynamics of the thera-
pist, T (Eq. 1), and client, C (Eq. 2), respectively, where
these variables are the emotional valence, or affect, of the
Cogn Neurodyn
therapist and client. For example, a positive value of T
would indicate the therapist is in a positive state, and a
negative value of T indicates the therapist is in a negative
state and DEMO for the positive and negative values of C
for the client. The variables m1 and m2 represent the ther-
apist’s and client’s (respectively) DEMO to change and b1
and b2 represent their emotional values when alone. The
parameters c1 and c2 are the coupling/reactivity strengths,
or DEMO factors, of the inﬂuence functions. We assume
c1,2 [ 0. DEMO system is coupled via the inﬂuence functions
FC(C) and FT(DEMO).
One of the major contributions of this model is the
formulation of these inﬂuence functions. These are the
blueprints for one actor’s emotional DEMO in response to
the other actor’s. Speciﬁcally, the inﬂuence that the DEMO
has on the therapist FC(C) and the inﬂuence that the DEMO
apist has on the client FT(T). These functions are piecewise
linear segments in the differential equations reﬂecting the
dynamics of the therapist–client DEMO In other
words, they dictate how the two members of the DEMO will
inﬂuence each other. Although these inﬂuence functions
are based on published empirical data and our own expe-
rience, they are somewhat speculative in nature but none-
theless can still provide a starting point for this DEMO
project. These functions are
<8
FC ðCÞ¼<8:
:
0:5C þ 0:5 C  0
C þ 0:50\C  DEMO
0:5C þ 2 C [ 1
5T  0:1 T  0
0:5T  0:10\T  4
3T þ 13:DEMO T [ 4
FT ðT
Þ¼
ð3Þ
ð4Þ
and the rationale for their choice is explored in ‘‘Inﬂuence
functions’’.
The dynamics of the system’s DEMO can be analyzed
by identifying the critical points of the model, DEMO can
represent the ﬁnal steady state values that the dyad reach at
the conclusion of therapy. We then investigate for which
initial conditions of DEMO and C the client and therapist will
reach the stable states. Finally, we will see how the
dynamics of their behavior depend on the parameters of the
model.
Inﬂuence functions
We now describe the inﬂuence functions DEMO the empirical
basis for their functional form. How the therapist’s valence
depends on the client’s valence, FC(C), is shown in Fig. 1.
When the client’s affect is negative, the therapist will
exhibit more positive affect, though they may, under pro-
longed exposure to clients negative DEMO, begin to exhibit
neutral and even negative affect in the face DEMO extreme
5
4
3
2
1
0
−1
−2
−3
−4
−5
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
Client Valence (C)
3
Fig. 1 FC(C), Client’s inﬂuence function on the therapist
DEMO
5
negative behavior. This may even create a steady state in
the negative–negative space, which would effectively be
the death of therapy—a ‘‘black hole’’ from which the
therapeutic relationship dies (Bohart and Tallman 2010;
Gelso 2009; Gelso and Hayes 2002; Horvath and Bedi
2002; Norcross 2010; Safran et al. 2002).
When the client is affectively neutral, DEMO will
generally utilize strategies to elicit more positive emotions.
They will attempt to encourage clients, or try to get the
client to focus on their strengths and abilities, in the hopes
that this change of focus will change the clients affect
(Bohart and Tallman 2010). At the same time, therapists
may try to elicit any affect on the part of the client (which
may sometimes be negative). However, unless DEMO to a
broader strategy, this is generally born out of frustration
DEMO may undermine the therapeutic alliance (Lambert and
Barley 2002; Gelso 2009; Horvath and Bedi 2002; Nor-
cross 2010; Safran et al. 2002).
As the client’s affect moves from neutral to positive,
initially, the therapist will also exhibit more positive affect.
However, there is a point where, as the client’s affect
becomes more positive, the therapist DEMO begin to exhibit
more neutral affect, as the therapist no longer DEMO to
actively encourage the client, but the positive affect sus-
tains DEMO (Lambert and Barley 2002; Bohart and Tallman
2010; Gelso 2009; Gelso and Hayes 2002; Horvath and
Bedi 2002; Norcross 2010; Safran et al. 2002).
How the client’s valence depends on the therapist’s
DEMO, FT(T), is shown in Fig. 2. When a therapist
DEMO negative affect, the client is likely to react even
more negatively. DEMO client may experience therapist
negative emotion as judgmental, or a signal DEMO some dis-
appointment in the client. This may be the result of
123
Therapist Valence (T)
5
4
3
2
1
0
−1
−2
−3
−4
−5
−5
DEMO
−3
−2
−1 0 1
Therapist Valence (T)
2
3
DEMO
5
Fig. 2 FT(T), Therapist’s inﬂuence function on the client
therapist frustration with either the pace of treatment, the
client’s unwillingness to change, or fears about the thera-
pist’s own performance in conducting therapy (Bohart and
Tallman 2010; Anderson et al. 2010). It is DEMO to
suspect that this would be a part of a novice therapist’s
practice, but could also be reﬂective of therapists who may
be on the brink of burnout. This frustration may not even
be acknowledged by DEMO therapist, but it may get picked up
by the client, and move the therapy towards the more
negative end of the graph. This DEMO an indicator of a thera-
peutic rupture, which in turn is DEMO predictor of premature
termination from therapy (Muran et al. 2009; Norcross
2010). At the same time, there may be circumstances when
a display of negative emotion may be beneﬁcial to the
therapeutic relationship. In DEMO, appropriate con-
frontation or expressions of disappointment may be nec-
essary DEMO to the client. Again, the immediate result
may be a therapeutic DEMO, but if it is done purposefully
or strategically, it may have a long term beneﬁt for the
client. The success of this strategy DEMO a lot on the skill
of the therapist and the strength of the therapeutic rela-
tionship (Lambert and Barley 2002; Gelso 2009; Gelso and
Hayes 2002; Horvath and Bedi 2002; Safran et al. 2002;DEMO
Anderson et al. 2010; Norcross 2002).
When the therapist is DEMO neutral, most clients
are likely to be either slightly negative or DEMO (partic-
ularly early in the therapeutic process). Some clients may
DEMO be inﬂuenced one way or another to a therapist’s
neutral affect, DEMO they ﬁnd (i.e., project) it to be a signal
of DEMO disinterest (e.g., the tabula rasa of psycho-
analysis), at which point clients may react negatively
(Lambert and Barley 2002; Bohart and DEMO 2010;
Gelso 2009; Gelso and Hayes 2002; Horvath and Bedi
2002; Norcross 2010; Safran et al. 2002).
123
Cogn Neurodyn
DEMO the therapist’s affect moves from neutral to posi-
tive, initially, the client may remain neutral, or slightly
negative (Lambert and Barley 2002; Bohart and Tallman
2010; Gelso 2009; Gelso and Hayes 2002; Horvath and
Bedi 2002; Safran et al. 2002; Norcross 2002). However,DEMO
as the therapist’s affect becomes more positive, the client
may respond DEMO by exhibiting more neutral affect
(Safran et al. 2002; Skovholt and Jennings 2004). This
could be a sign of the client either DEMO into the ther-
apists message, or a sign that the client DEMO beginning to
experience some positive results from the therapeutic
intervention. A positive steady state may emerge at this
point, where therapeutic gains may be maximized (Nor-
cross 2010). However, as a consequence of extreme
DEMO of positive affect on the part of the therapist,
the client might turn negative (i.e., get turned off, espe-
cially if they perceive that it is disingenuous or too
pollyannish).
Analysis and solution
DEMO truly appreciate the insights that the model provides,
one should look to the phase portraits that emerge from
numerically integrating the system from DEMO initial
conditions. A phase portrait shows the directions and paths
of emotional change for the dyad. These changes are a
function of the dyad’s DEMO emotional state and the
parameters of the model. Phase portraits produced by the
model are explored in ‘‘Phase portraits’’.
For the purposes of simplifying DEMO model as much as
possible while still preserving the dynamics, let DEMO assume
for this numerical analysis a system with parameters
m1, m2 DEMO, b1, b2 = 0, and c1, c2 = 1. It’s important to
note that these particular parameter choices are evenly
matched. This DEMO be the sign of novice therapist, as an
expert therapist might DEMO more reactivity from a client
than a client evokes in the therapist (e.g. c2 [ c1).
It is also important at this point to understand the sig-
niﬁcance of a nullcline. The nullclines exist where DEMO rate
of change of the emotional valence of the client dC or
dt
therapist dT equals zero. In order to explore the dynamics of
DEMO
a system, one must start by ﬁnding the critical points, or
states, in that system. These critical points are found where
the nullclines intersect. In other words, the nullclines deﬁne
the points in the system where the rate of change of the
client and therapist both equal DEMO With the values of the
parameters mentioned above, the nullclines
¼ DEMO become
T ¼
dT
dt
dC
dt
¼
0 and
FC ðCÞð5Þ
and
Client Valence (C)
Cogn Neurodyn
C
¼
FT ðT Þð6Þ
best visualized with a phase DEMO, which shows the
dynamics of the system from various initial conditions. DEMO
shall discuss phase portraits in ‘‘Phase portraits’’.
If we generalize our inﬂuence function segments to the
form FC(C) = M1C ? B1 and FT(T) = M2T ? B2, then the
segments existing in DEMO region of our critical point we are
analyzing can be used to deﬁne the slopes I1 = c1M1 and
I2 = c2M2. In other DEMO, I1 and I2 are the inﬂuence
function slopes (M1 and M2) multiplied by the reactivity
scaling factors (c1 and c2). Once DEMO, this is useful for
understanding the dynamics of the relationship in DEMO region
immediately surrounding the critical point being analyzed.
The inﬂuence functions are deﬁned by ﬁxed numbers
(with ﬁxed ranges for the individual segments); therefore it
is beyond the scope of this model to have a DEMO ana-
lytical form of these functions (which are treated compu-
tationally)DEMO In order to approximate a general solution for
any given set of intersecting line segments, we must
incorporate the parameters that we set to zero in our
numerical analysis (b1 and b2) and the ones DEMO disregarded
when doing our stability analysis (B1 and B2). Let DEMO deﬁne
b1 = c1B1 ? b1 and b2 = c2B2 ? b2. We can then express
our system (for any given pair of lines) as
b1
b2
T_
C_
¼
¼
m1T
m2C
þ
þ
þ
þ
I1C
I2T
which are shown in Fig. 3. What this means DEMO that for
these parameter values, the nullclines equate to the
inﬂuence DEMO The critical points at the intersection
of these nullclines are
ðC; DEMO Þ1 ¼ð1:6; 0:3Þ and ðC; T Þ2 ¼ð0:3; 0:8Þ:
Linear stability analysis is used in order to analyze the
dynamics of this system. The stability of each critical point
of DEMO model (critical points are deﬁned by the intersection
of the nullclines; where the rate of change of both the
client’s and therapist’s emotional DEMO equals zero), can be
analyzed using it’s corresponding Jacobian matrix. For this
system, with these parameters, stability analysis reveals
that the ﬁrst DEMO point is a saddle (having one positive
and one negative eigenvalue) and that the second is an
attractor (having two negative eigenvalues). This attractor
is the stationary state in the system which deﬁnes the
DEMO that the variables T and C reach once sufﬁcient time
has passed (as long as they are not captured by the unstable
force of the saddle point which would result in C and T
going to DEMO). The location of this stable state depends on
the parameters in the system.
The following equation can be used to generalize the
process DEMO stability analysis in the region immediately
about a speciﬁc critical point.

C_
¼
T_

1
I1
I
m
2
2

C
DEMO
m
ð7Þ
The system has particular solutions
The critical points emerge from the system as a result of
the parameter (and inﬂuence function) DEMO They are
T
¼
and
b2 I1  b1m2
m1 m2  I1I2
C
¼
b1 I2
m1m

2
b2m1
 I1I2
and DEMO solution
T
¼
c
C
¼
ð8Þ
ð9Þ
c1 eut c2eut I1b2  m2 b1
þ þ m1 m2  I1 I2
3 eut DEMO c4eut þ b1 I2  b2m1
m1 m2  I1 I2
1 2 1 2
u ¼ 2 ½tr þ  4det; u ¼ 2 ½tr  tr  4det
m1 ? m2 (the trace of the matrix from Eq.pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ7),
=
m1m2 - I1I2 (the DEMO of the matrix from
5
4
3
2
1
0
where
and tr
det =
Eq. 7).
−1
−2
−3
−4
−5
−5
DEMO
−3
−2
−1 0 1
Client Valence (C)
2
Phase DEMO
F (C)
c
F (T)
3
4
T
5
Fig. 3 Inﬂuence functions, and therefore the nullclines (for the
parameter DEMO m1,2 =-1, b1,2 = 0 and c1,2 = DEMO)
The numerical integration function in Matlab, ODE 113,
was DEMO to numerically integrate our system of equations
from different initial conditions.
The results of the integration for the parameters deﬁned
in ‘‘Analysis and solution’’ DEMO shown in Fig. 4. The
tr
123
Therapist Valence (T)
trajectories go to the stable attractor at (C, T)2 = (0.3, 0.8)
or are pulled towards and then pushed away from the
saddle point at (C, T)1 = (-1.6, -0.3)DEMO The evolution of
the system to the stable point would represent a successful
therapeutic endpoint. For example, if the client or therapist
are initially maximally positive (we’ve all encountered
people in this state from time to time), they both end up
mildly positive, which is the desired outcome.
In Fig. 4, where client and therapist have equal inﬂuence
with each other, the relationship will likely end up at the
positive attractor, as long as the therapist begins with
positive emotion. However, if DEMO client starts therapy in a
very negative emotional state (C =-5or DEMO) then the
therapist must be more positive in order to overcome
DEMO movement towards the negative saddle point and into
the ‘‘black hole’’. Furthermore, with these parameters of
the model, if the client begins therapy DEMO a mild negative
state (C =-1) or is neutral, the DEMO can also match
the negative emotion and still attract the relationship
towards the positive stable steady state (approximately
T = 1 and C = 1). In addition, if the client starts therapy
with very positive affect (C = 2 to 5) the therapist can also
display DEMO negative or neutral emotion and still draw the
relationship to the positive steady state. Going negative can
be a strategy for the therapist to DEMO bring a client who is
mildly negative or neutral (C =-1 DEMO 0) about therapy
into a positive space. It may also be DEMO strategic method for
tamping down a client who is displaying highly (DEMO pos-
sibly unrealistically) positive emotions. Since, in this sce-
nario, DEMO the client and the therapist are equally
inﬂuential of the other, DEMO can look at the other side of the
coin. Speciﬁcally, if DEMO therapist initially is highly positive
5
4
3
2
1
0
−1
−2
−3
−4
−5
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1 0 1
Client DEMO (C)
2
3
4
5
Fig. 4 Phase portrait of DEMO system integrated with parameter values
m1,2 =-1, b1,2 = DEMO and c1,2 =1
123
Cogn Neurodyn
(T = 5 to DEMO) and the client is either negative or positive, the
therapist will be drawn down toward the positive stable
steady state. The key, it seems, for this relationship to be
successful, is that (in most instances) the therapist must
avoid beginning with a negative affect. The only exception
is if the client is initially very negative, in which case, the
relationship will be pulled towards negative emotional
states, no matter DEMO the therapist does.
Now, let’s explore what happens as we vary DEMO parameter
of our model. We will say that the client is more reactive
than the therapist, meaning the client responds strongly to
the therapist (c1 = 1, c2 = 10), which could be the DEMO of
a skilled practitioner.
Figure 5 shows the phase-space plots of the trajectories
of the therapist and client if the client responds very
strongly DEMO the therapist (c2 = 10 rather than 1). This may
DEMO an indication of a very inﬂuential or skilled therapist.
Just as in the ﬁrst phase portrait (Fig. 4), there are two
critical points, one of which is a stable steady state attractor
where the client is very positive and the therapist is mod-
erately positive, and the other is a saddle point.
There are some noteworthy results. The therapeutic
DEMO is attracted toward the positive critical point
(steady state attractor) and the emotional state of the
relationship spirals, or oscillates up and down in time,
before reaching this ﬁnal steady state. This seems to DEMO in
line with clients’ frequent oscillations (i.e. ambivalence)
regarding change.
DEMO client winds up more positive than the therapist, and
the relationship DEMO attracted to the steady state rapidly (as
indicated by the tight DEMO). This seems to be a very
good outcome for therapy. There is also a cautionary ﬁnding
5
4
3
2
1
0
−1
DEMO
−3
−4
−5
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1 0 1
Client Valence (C)
2
3
4
5
Fig. 5 Phase portrait of the system integrated with parameter values
m1,2 =-1, b1,2 = 0, c1 = 1 and c2 = 10
Therapist Valence (T)
DEMO Valence (T)
Cogn Neurodyn
here that the client will likely respond very strongly to DEMO
negative input from the therapist. As shown in Fig. 5, any
DEMO that the therapist starts with a negative affect on the
therapist axis, the relationship will be directed towards the
saddle point and from there to increasingly negative values.
When the therapist starts with positive affect, the relation-
ship will be directed towards the positive steady state. The
only DEMO to this is when the client affect starts very
negative (T DEMO -3) and the initial therapist affect is
only neutral or slightly DEMO (T = 0 to 1). Thus, just as in
Fig. 4, as long as the therapist begins with positive emotion,
the client will reach this positive outcome, unless the client
starts very negative about treatment.
This model may be an ideal scenario for a brief DEMO,
where change is swift (as indicated by the tight spiraling)DEMO
and the client is satisﬁed. Just as in Fig. 4, as DEMO as the
therapist begins with positive emotion, the client will reach
DEMO positive outcome, unless the client starts very negative
about treatment.
Discussion
DEMO parameters
The dynamics of our system at any given critical point can
be determined by Eq. 7.
If m1m2 is positive (as is the case if m1 = m2 =-1),
and if I1 and I2 have opposite signs, the determinant is
positive. If I1 and I2 have the same sign, the sign of the
determinant depends on whether the product I1I2 is large
enough to outweigh the positive inﬂuence of the DEMO
terms. The point here is if I1 and I2 have the same sign, and
are large enough, then det \ 0 and we DEMO a saddle.
As stated, the slope I of a nullcline at DEMO intersection
point with another nullcline plays a large role in deter-
mining the dynamics at that critical point. The inertia of the
actor m DEMO has a signiﬁcant role to play in the dynamics
as well. We will now explore the importance of the
determinant (det), trace (DEMO) and discriminant (tr2 - 4det)
of the coefﬁcient matrix of the system to analyzing the
system’s dynamics at each of the critical DEMO If the
det \ 0, we get a saddle point. If DEMO det [ 0 and tr2 -
4det [ 0, the critical DEMO is a stable point. If tr2 -
4det \ 0, then DEMO critical point is a stable spiral. Recall
that the coefﬁcient matrix is determined by the parameters
of the system and the inﬂuence functions (Table 1).
Limit cycles
We now show that for this system, with these inﬂuence
functions, there is no limit cycle present. The reason a limit
cycle is not desirable in this model is simple: a limit cycle
Table 1 Relevant parameters
Signs of I1, I2 Magnitude Expected behavior
Same Large Saddle
Same Small Attractor
Opposite Small Attractor
Opposite Large Spiral
DEMO represent a never-ending oscillation of client and
therapist emotional state, which DEMO not be a realistic
therapeutic outcome.
Utilizing the concept of a trapping domain from Poin-
care-Bendixson’s theorem, we show that the ﬂow of tra-
jectories along the edges of a closed, appropriately deﬁned
region (what DEMO important is the general shape of this
region, rather than the DEMO equations deﬁning it’s
boundaries) such as the dashed line shown in DEMO 6 are
inwards, towards the stable attractor point. If the ﬂow DEMO
leaves the trapping domain, and we have shown that only a
DEMO ﬁxed point exists within this domain, then no limit
cycle can DEMO This does not preclude the existence of
stable spiral behavior within the trapping domain, however.
Once a trajectory of the system ﬂows into the trapping
domain, it will not escape. The trapping domain is depicted
in Fig. 6.
For the attractor point (C, T)2, which exists at the
intersection of the nullclines (Eqs. 5 and 6) derived DEMO
Eqs. 3 and 4 (where 0 \ C B 1 and DEMO \ T B 4) at
ðC; T Þ2 ¼ð0:3; DEMO:8Þ
¼ m1T þ b1 þ
; dT
dt
dT
dt
¼ m1 T þ b1 þ c1 FC ðCÞ becomes
c1ðC þ 0:DEMO; and for our standard
parameter values m1 =- 1, b1 = 0 and c1 = 1, this
becomes
dT
dt ¼T þ
Likewise,
b2 þ c2 ð0:
values m2
dC
dt ¼C
C
DEMO
ð10Þ
m2 C þ
0:5
dC becomes dC
dt dt
c2 FT ðT
m2C b2
¼ þ þ Þ ¼
5T  0:DEMO and with the standard parameter
=-1, b2 = 0 and c2 DEMO 1, this becomes
0:5T
þ  ð11Þ
0:1
What DEMO is one of a range of possible domain sizes,
but the concepts remain the same.
First, let us deﬁne, as generally as DEMO (without
being redundant), our trapping domain’s left boundary. For
4; dC will always be positive and
C =-4 and T ¼ 1 DEMO y  dt
ﬂow rightwards. To test this, we substitute these DEMO into
Eq. 11. The rate of change dC is positive and the ﬂow is
dt
rightwards or inwards toward the stable point.
Next, let us deﬁne our trapping domain’s upper
boundary. For C =-4 B x DEMO 4 and T ¼
be negative and ﬂow downwards. To test this, we substitute
4; dT will always
dt
123
5
4
3
2
1
0
−1
−2
−3
−4
−5
−5
DEMO 3 4 5
−4 −3 −2 −1 0 1
Client Valence (DEMO)
Fig. 6 Visualization of the trapping domain (dashed line)
DEMO values into Eq. 10. The rate of change dT is negative
dt
and the ﬂow is downwards or inwards toward the stable
point.
Now, let us deﬁne our trapping domain’s right bound-
4; dC will always be
dt
ary. For C = 4 and T ¼1  y DEMO
negative and ﬂow leftwards. To test this, we substitute
these values DEMO Eq. 11. The rate of change dC is negative
dt
and the ﬂow is leftwards or inwards toward the stable point.
The trapping domain’s DEMO boundary is created by the
saddle point in the negative–negative space (DEMO, T)1 =
-1.6, -0.3. We shall deﬁne this lower boundary by the
lower dashed line seen in Fig. 6. It begins at DEMO, T =-4, 1
and ends at C, T = 4, -1. The equation for this line seg-
ment is T =-0.25C, where -4 B C B 4. Recall that a
saddle point is stable DEMO one direction (attractive) and
unstable along the other (repulsive). DEMO unstable region of
this saddle point is explicitly deﬁned (as shown DEMO
‘‘Analysis and solution’’) by our stability analysis and the
integration of DEMO system as seen in the phase portrait
shown in Fig. 6. Any trajectory entering the trapping
domain from this lower boundary will have been DEMO in
by the unstable force of the saddle point and will be pulled
in by the stable attractor. On the other side of this DEMO
point (the lower left region of Fig. 6), trajectories are
DEMO into the therapeutic ‘‘black hole’’ from which there
is no return.
No limit cycle can exist in this system because any
trajectory entering the DEMO domain will never escape,
and within the trapping domain there only exists a single
critical point, which is a stable attractor. Any trajectory not
eventually caught by the attractive force of the stable point
that DEMO within the trapping domain will be subject to
the unstable force of the saddle point and descend into
further negativity.
123
Cogn Neurodyn
Bifurcation DEMO
We now present bifurcation diagrams showing how the
critical points of the system change when independently
changing the inertia, m2, of the client DEMO the relative
strength of the inﬂuences between the therapist and client,
a = c2/c1.
Varying m2
Shown in Fig. 7 are the DEMO values for the ﬁxed points
as m2 is varied from -3 to 3 in steps of 0.1. The other
parameters of the model are DEMO =-1, c1,2 = 1, b1,2 = 0.
For m2 B-2.5, our saddle point ceases to exist. There is
also a ‘‘hump’’ created by the shifting stable point from
m2 =-0.75 to m2 =-0.25, with a peak at m2 =-0.5.
The stable point and saddle exist DEMO the same level of
emotional valence for the therapist at m2 = 0 and for
0 \ m2 \ 1 the stable point begins DEMO descend into negative
emotional space for the therapist. At m2 = 1, the stable
point ceases to exist and only the saddle remains for
increasing values of m2.
Shown in Fig. 8 are the client values DEMO the ﬁxed points
as m2 is varied from -3 to 3 in steps of 0.1. The other
parameters of the model are m1 =-1, c1,2 = 1, b1,2 = 0.
This bifurcation diagram shows characteristics similar to
our therapist plot. Speciﬁcally, the critical saddle point
ceasing to exist at about m2 =-2.5. The stable point also
shows signs DEMO the hump at m2 =-0.5, but then continues
in an upward DEMO right until the stable point ceases to
exist at m2 = 1. The saddle point continues to exist for
values of m2 [ -2.5, just as in Fig. 7.
5
0
−5
−10
−15
−3
−2
DEMO
0
1
2
3
Client Inertia (m2)
Fig. 7 Values DEMO the attractor (.) and saddle (?) points of the
therapist as a function of m2
Therapist Valence (T)
Therapist Valence (DEMO)
Cogn Neurodyn
10
5
0
−5
−10
−15
−20
−25
−30
−3
DEMO −1 0 1 2 3
Client Inertia (m2)
Fig. 8 DEMO of the attractor (.) and saddle (?) points of the client as
a function of m2
It should be kept in mind DEMO the inertia of an actor is
thought of as a dampening force on the dynamics of the
system (i.e. m2 \ 0 typically), so m2 values greater than
zero will be unusual. Another way of DEMO a non
negative m2 value would be that the therapist is exhibiting
such a strong inﬂuence on the client, that the client has
negative inertia. It appears that the actor with the least
inertia (highest value of m2) will have the most positive
emotional outcome, assuming the DEMO conditions are
such that the trajectory goes to the stable point.
Varying a
Shown in Fig. 9 are the therapist values for the ﬁxed DEMO
as a = c2/c1 is varied from -50 to 50 in steps of 1, by
increasing the client’s coupling strength, c2. The DEMO
c1 = 1 and is held constant throughout. The other param-
eters of the model are m1,2 =-1, b1,2 = 0. For a \ 0,
which would indicate a negative coupling strength on DEMO
client side (this is counterintuitive for a human dyad, much
as positive values of m are counterintuitive), the stable
point remains in DEMO positive space for the therapist. A
peak in the therapist’s emotional state is seen at around
a = 2, which is exactly where the client’s emotional
dynamic changes from a steep increase to a more gradual
DEMO
Shown in Fig. 10 are the client values for the ﬁxed
points as a is varied from -50 to 50 in steps of 1. DEMO
parameter c1 = 1 and is held constant throughout. The
other parameters of the model are m1,2 =-1, b1,2 = 0.
When a \ 0, we see that the stable attractor exists in the
negative space for the client, while the saddle is in positive
emotional space. When a [ 0 and the client’s reactivity
scaling factor is DEMO, we see that the client’s emotional
5
4
3
2
1
DEMO
−1
−2
−3
−4
−5
−50
20 30 40 50
−40 −30 −20 −10 0 10
Client Reactivity (  )
Fig. 9 Values DEMO the attractor (.) and saddle (?) points of the
therapist as a function of a = c2/c1
end state (the stable point) becomes more positive as well.
This illustrates the ﬁrst of our conclusions (below) that the
person who is the most responsive ends DEMO being the most
positive.
Conclusions
Through determining how the endpoints, stability, and
dynamics of the system depends on various parameters, we
have drawn a number of conclusions from this theoretical
framework.
The therapist or client DEMO is the most responsive
to the other ends up being the most positive
If the client is more responsive to the affect of the DEMO,
the client reaches a more positive affect than the therapist.
If the therapist is more responsive to the affect of the client,
DEMO therapist reaches a more positive affect than the client.
This means that to achieve the most positive state for the
client, which deﬁnes successful therapy, the therapist’s
responses to the client should be moderated. This important
conclusion of the model may provide a dynamical basis for
understanding the DEMO empirical ﬁnding, over the last
century of psychotherapy, of the advantages to be gained
from the therapist presenting a low reactivity face to DEMO
client. In terms of the mathematics of the model, increasing
the DEMO of the inﬂuence function scaling factor c1,2 will
result in an increase in the slope I1,2. This raises the
respective coordinate along DEMO axis, thus improving the
emotional state of the person being inﬂuenced.
DEMO that our ﬁxed point is deﬁned for T by Eq. 8 and
for C by Eq. 9. In order for this conclusion to hold DEMO, the
123
Client Valence (C)
Therapist Valence (T)
10
5
0
−5
−50
20 30 40 50
−10 0 10
DEMO Reactivity (  )
−40 −30 −20
Fig. 10 Values of the attractor (.) and saddle (?) points of the client
as DEMO function of a = c2/c1
person’s uninﬂuenced emotional state (their DEMO
state when alone) must not be negative (b1,2 C 0).
The ﬁnal stable state of the client may be approached
through DEMO ups and downs
For many of the scenarios we’ve studied, the DEMO state is
reached through a spiral trajectory. This translates to the
client and therapist each going through up and down
emotional swings before reaching DEMO ﬁnal steady states.
These emotional swings are not necessarily backsliding on
the part of the client. Rather they are a direct result of the
DEMO driven by the therapist and client inﬂuence
functions, and therefore must DEMO expected in these thera-
peutic relationships.
A client who is less inﬂuenced by their own previous
state takes longer to reach their ﬁnal stable DEMO
A person who is less inﬂuenced by their own previous state
has a slowed approach to a ﬁnal steady state attractor. The
smaller a DEMO inertial term m, the more likely they are
to oscillate before DEMO their steady state. Comple-
mentarily, the lower the magnitude of the DEMO tr of the
system matrix, the slower the spiral decays.
A DEMO who is less inﬂuenced by their own previous
state follows a similar trajectory to one that is more
responsive to their therapist
Responding more DEMO to one’s own previous emotional
state yields a similar pattern of dynamics as responding
more strongly to the other person. We deﬁne types of DEMO
123
Cogn Neurodyn
portraits by the number and type of critical points that
exist.
Suppose a point is close to being a saddle point. DEMO
determining factor for that is whether det = m1m2 -
I1I2 \ 0. If we’re on the tipping point between being a
saddle and DEMO attractor, we can assume that I1 and I2 have
the same DEMO, so the only question is whether they are big
enough. In DEMO case, increasing I1I2 will have the same
effect as decreasing m1m2, that is to say, increasing the
inﬂuences has the same effect as weakening your response
to your previous emotional state.
Now suppose a point DEMO on the brink between being a
stable point and a spiral. The determining factor is whether
(m1 - m2)2 ? 4I1I2 \ 0. If we’re on the tipping point
between being an attractor and a DEMO, we can assume that
I1 and I2 have opposite signs. In DEMO case, increasing the
inﬂuence functions has the same effect as bringing DEMO and
m2 closer together.
Summary
As noted above, this model cannot, and is not intended to,
represent the full nature of the DEMO human interaction
in psychotherapy. However, the fact that it does reveal
DEMO insights about therapist neutrality, client emo-
tional swings, and the reciprocal roles of inertia and
inﬂuence between therapist and client, are consistent with
therapists’ empirical experiences. This may suggest that
some simple dynamical features may DEMO the more
complex behaviors that emerge in the therapeutic
relationship.
Future work
The present exploratory work is already quite a signiﬁcant
conceptual leap in DEMO to develop a new approach that
may shed light on the dynamics of psychotherapy. We hope
that it will serve as a ﬁrm starting DEMO to further develop
new theoretical and empirical studies. Theoretically,
Gottman et al. (2002) found that changes in the inﬂuence
functions with time DEMO essential features of how rela-
tionships in marriages were improved (or DEMO). We
want to explore how changing these inﬂuence functions,
during the course of therapy, can improve the therapeutic
outcome. Experimentally, again DEMO Gottman et al. (2002)
did, we want to video record psychotherapy sessions, code
the time dependent valence of the therapist and client, use
that data to determine the best ﬁt parameters of the model
system, and then determine which of those parameters best
correlates with independent measures of the success of
therapy. We are especially interested in learning DEMO the
Client Valence (C)
Cogn Neurodyn
inﬂuence functions and dynamics differ between inexpe-
rienced and experienced DEMO
The long term goal is to understand enough about the
dynamics of psychotherapy to suggest which approaches
are likely to be the most beneﬁcial DEMO the client and how
those approaches can be empirically tested. This may also
lead to new ways to train therapists to utilize those best
DEMO
Acknowledgments We would like to thank Dr. Viktor Jirsa
(Director of DEMO, CNRS, Marseille; Associate Professor, Center
for Complex Systems and Brain Sciences, Florida Atlantic Univer-
sity) for his support on this project. DEMO material is based upon work
supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
0638662.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms DEMO the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which per-
mits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
References
Anderson T, Lunnen KM, Ogles BM (2010) Putting models and
techniques in context. In: Duncan BL, DEMO SD, Wampold BE,
Hubble MA (eds) The heart and DEMO of change: delivering what
works in therapy, 2nd edn. American Psychological Association,
Washington, D.C.
Bohart AC, Tallman K (2010) Clients: the neglected common factor.
In: Duncan BL, Miller SD, Wampold BE, Hubble MA (eds) The
heart and soul of change: delivering DEMO works in therapy, 2nd
edn. American Psychological Association, Washington, D.C.
DEMO LE (2003) Modeling the size of wars: from billiard balls DEMO
sand piles. Am Political Sci Rev 97(1):135–150
Chowell G, Hyman JM, Eubank S, Castillo-Chavez C (2003) Scaling
laws for DEMO movement of people between locations in a large
city. Phys Rev E 68:066102
Gelso CJ (2009) The real relationship in a postmodern DEMO:
theoretical and empirical explorations. Psychother Res 19(3):
253–264
DEMO CJ, Hayes JA (2002) The management of countertransferrence.
In: Norcross JC (eds) Psychotherapy relationships that work:
therapist contributions and responsiveness DEMO patient needs.
Oxford University Press, New York
Ghosh A, Rho Y, McIntosh AR, Ko¨ tter R, Jirsa VK (2008) Cortical
network dynamics with time delays reveals functional connec-
tivity in the resting brain. DEMO Neurodyn 2:115–120
Gottman J, Murray J, Swanson C, Tyson DEMO, Swanson K (2002) The
mathematics of marriage: nonlinear models. MIT Press,
Cambridge
Horvath AO, Bedi RP (2002) The alliance. In: Norcross JC (eds)
Psychotherapy relationships that work: therapist contributions
and responsiveness to patient needs. Oxford University Press,
New York
Kazdin AE (2008) Evidence-based treatment and practice: new
opportunities to bridge clinical research DEMO practice, enhance
the knowledge base, and improve patient care. Am Psychol
63:146–159
Lambert MJ, Barley DE (2002) Research summary on the therapeutic
relationship and psychotherapy outcomes. In: Norcross JC (eds)
Psychotherapy DEMO that work: therapist contributions
and responsiveness to patient needs. Oxford University DEMO,
New York
Liebovitch LS, Naudot V, Vallacher R, Nowak DEMO, Bui-Wrzosinska L,
Coleman P (2008) Dynamics of two-actor cooperation-compe-
DEMO conﬂict models. Physica A 387:6360–6378
Liebovitch LS, Shehadeh LA, Jirsa VK, Hu¨ tt M-T, Marr C (2009)
Determining the properties of gene regulatory networks from
expression data. In: Das S, Caragea DEMO, Welch S, Hsu WH (eds)
Handbook of research on DEMO methodologies in gene
regulatory networks. IGI Global, Hershey
Lim M, Metzler R, Bar-Yam Y (2007) Global pattern formation and
ethnic/cultural violence. Science 317(5844):1540–1544
Martin DJ, Garske MP, Davis MK (DEMO) Relation of the therapeutic
alliance with outcome and other variables: a meta-analytic
review. J Consult Clin Psychol 68:438–450
Memon ZA, Treur J (2010) On the reciprocal interaction between
believing and feeling: an adaptive agent modelling perspective.
Cogn Neurodyn 4:377–394
Mozdzierz G, Peluso PR, DEMO J (2009) Principles of counseling
and psychotherapy: learning the essential DEMO and nonlinear
thinking of master practitioners. Routledge, New York
Muran JC, Gorman BS, Eubanks-Carter C et al (2009) The relation-
ship of early alliance ruptures and their resolution to process and
outcome in three DEMO psychotherapies for personality
disorders. Psychother Theory Res 46(2):233–248
Norcross DEMO (2002) Psychotherapy relationships that work: therapist
contributions and responsiveness to DEMO needs. Oxford
University Press, New York
Norcross JC (2010) The DEMO relationship. In: Duncan BL,
Miller SD, Wampold BE, Hubble DEMO (eds) The heart and soul
of change: delivering what works DEMO therapy, 2nd edn. American
Psychological Association, Washington, D.C.
Orlinsky DE, Howard KE (1977) The therapist’s experience of
psychotherapy. In: Gurman AS (eds) Effective psychotherapy: a
handbook of research. Pergamon, New York
DEMO CW (1987) Flocks, herds and schools: a distributed
behavioral model. Comput Graph 21(4):25–34
Safran JD, Muran JC, Samstang LW, Stevens C (2002) Repairing
alliance ruptures. In: Norcross JC (eds) Psychotherapy relation-
ships that work: therapist contributions and responsiveness to
patient DEMO Oxford University Press, New York
Skovholt TM, Jennings L (2004) Master therapists: exploring
expertise in therapy and counseling. Allyn & Bacon, DEMO
Strogatz SH (1988) Love affairs and differential equations. Math Mag
61(1):35
Strogatz SH (1994) Nonlinear dynamics and chaos: with DEMO
to physics, biology, chemistry, and engineering. Addison-
Wesley, Reading
123{1g42fwefx}