ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 27 November 2006 21:35
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007. 58:DEMO
First published online as a Review in
Advance on September 26, DEMO
The Annual Review of Psychology is online at
http://psych.annualreviews.org
This article’s doi:
10.1146/annurev.psych.58.110405.085654
Copyright c 2007 by Annual Reviews.
All DEMO reserved
0066-4308/07/0203-0259$20.00

Social Cognitive
Neuroscience: A Review
of DEMO Processes
Matthew D. Lieberman
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California 90095-1563; email: lieber@ucla.edu
Key Words
theory of mind, empathy, emotion regulation, self-control, mirror
neurons, social cognition, social neuroscience, automaticity,
neuroeconomics
Abstract
Social cognitive neuroscience examines social DEMO and pro-
cesses using cognitive neuroscience research tools such as neu-
roimaging and neuropsychology. This review examines four broad
areas of research within social DEMO neuroscience: (a) under-
standing others, (b) understanding oneself, (c) controlling oneself,
and (d ) the processes that occur DEMO the interface of self and others. In
addition, this review highlights DEMO core-processing distinctions that
can be neurocognitively identiﬁed across all of these domains. The
distinction between automatic versus controlled processes has long
been important to DEMO psychological theory and can be dissociated
in the neural regions contributing to social cognition. Alternatively,
the differentiation between internally-focused processes that focus
on DEMO own or another’s mental interior and externally-focused
processes that focus on one’s own or another’s visible features and ac-
tions is a new distinction. DEMO latter distinction emerges from social
cognitive neuroscience investigations rather than from existing psy-
chological theories demonstrating that social cognitive neuroscience
can both draw on DEMO contribute to social psychological theory.
259
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal DEMO only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
Contents
INTRODUCTION................. 260
UNDERSTANDING OTHERS DEMO 263
Representing the Minds of
Others ........................ 263
Experiencing the Mental States of
Others ........................ 264
UNDERSTANDING ONESELF . . . 265
Recognizing Oneself.............. DEMO
Reﬂecting on the Self ............. 267
SELF-REGULATION.............. 269
Intentional Self-Regulation ....... 269
Unintentional Self-Regulation .... 270
BEING IN A SOCIAL WORLD .... 270
Mirror DEMO and Imitation .... 271
Interactions of Self and Social
Understanding ................ 271
Attitudes and Prejudice ........... 272
Social Connection and Social
Rejection ..................... 274
DEMO Decision-Making .......... 275
CORE PROCESSES................ 276
Automatic Versus Controlled
Processes ..................... 276
Internally-Versus
Externally-Focused Processes . . 276
CONCLUSION .................... 279
INTRODUCTION
Social cognitive DEMO is a burgeon-
ing interdisciplinary ﬁeld combining the tools
of cognitive neuroscience with questions and
theories from various social sciences including
social psychology, economics, and political
science. Although research on the biological
correlates of social processes has been ongo-
ing for decades (Cacioppo & Bernston 1992),
DEMO approach has gone through a period
of rapid expansion with the advent of func-
tional neuroimaging (Adolphs 2003, Ochsner
& Lieberman 2001). DEMO the time of the ﬁrst
conference on social cognitive neuroscience
(the DEMO Conference on Social Cognitive
Neuroscience, April 2001) until the present,
260 Lieberman
there has been an enormous growth in the
ﬁeld as DEMO by increasing numbers of re-
search articles, edited volumes, and academic
meetings devoted to social cognitive neuro-
science. An Internet search using the DEMO
“social cognitive neuroscience” yielded 53 hits
in early 2001, whereas today DEMO same search
yields more than 30,000 hits. Moreover, in the
DEMO year, two new journals have been created
(Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience and
Social Neuroscience) to provide outlets for this
work.
Although selective reviews of social cog-
nitive neuroscience have been written in the
past DEMO years (Blakemore et al. 2004, Ochsner
2004), no comprehensive review has captured
the breadth of the area. Thus, ﬁrst and fore-
most, this review covers the broad themes and
main ﬁndings across numerous areas of so-
cial cognitive neuroscience research. The re-
view is divided into DEMO subsections focusing
on (a) understanding others, (b) understand-
ing DEMO, (c) controlling oneself, and (d) the
processes that occur at the interface of self
and others. Unfortunately, space constraints
prevent this review from covering some top-
ics relevant to social cognitive neuroscience,
DEMO as emotion recognition and face process-
ing (see Adolphs 2002, Haxby et al. 2002).
The second goal of this review is to DEMO
tify core-processing distinctions that may cut
across the different domains of social cogni-
tion and provide a framework for organiz-
ing general principles of DEMO cognitive neu-
roscience. Two core-processing distinctions
are examined throughout this review: (a) au-
tomatic versus controlled processes and (b)
internally-focused versus DEMO
processes.
Dual-process models of automatic and
controlled social cognition have been pro-
posed in nearly every domain of social psy-
chology (Chaiken & Trope 1999). Controlled
processes (e.g., rehearsing a nine-digit num-
ber) are associated with awareness, inten-
tion, effort, and the capacity for interruption
(Wegner & Bargh 1998). In contrast, auto-
matic processes (e.g., “Juliet” spontaneously
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
Table 1 Features associated with DEMO and C-systems posited to support reﬂexive (analogous to
automatic) and reﬂective (analogous to controlled) processes. Adapted from Satpute &
Lieberman (2006)DEMO
X-System
Parallel processing
Fast operating
Slow learning
Nonreﬂective consciousness
Sensitive to subliminal presentations
Spontaneous processes
Prepotent responses
Typically sensory
Outputs experienced as reality
Relation DEMO behavior unaffected by
cognitive load
Facilitated by high arousal
Phylogenetically older
Representation of symmetric relations
Representation of common cases
coming to mind upon hearing DEMO) lack
one or more of these qualities. Consistent
with the notion DEMO automatic and con-
trolled processes are supported by distinct
systems (Smith & DeCoster 1999), distinct
neurocognitive systems have been hypothe-
sized to support these two forms of social
cognition.
The X-system, named for the “x” in re-
ﬂexive (Lieberman et al. 2002, Satpute &
Lieberman 2006), corresponds roughly to
an automatic social cognition system (see
Table 1). The neural regions associated with
the X-system (see Figure 1) DEMO the amygdala,
basal ganglia, ventromedial prefrontal cortex
(VMPFC), lateral temporal cortex (LTC), and
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC).
DEMO C-system, named for the “c” in re-
ﬂective, corresponds roughly to a controlled
social cognition system. The neural regions
associated with the C-system DEMO lateral pre-
frontal cortex (LPFC), medial prefrontal cor-
tex (MPFC), lateral parietal cortex (LPAC),
medial parietal cortex (MPAC), medial tem-
poral lobe (MTL), and rostral anterior cin-
gulate cortex (rACC). For a rationale of each
C-System
Serial processing
Slow operating
Fast learning
Reﬂective consciousness
Insensitive to subliminal presentations
Intentional processes
Regulation of DEMO responses
Typically linguistic
Outputs experienced as self-generated
Relation to behavior altered by cognitive load
Impaired by high arousal
Phylogenetically newer
Representation of asymmetric relations
DEMO of special cases (e.g., exceptions)
Representation of abstract concepts (DEMO, negation, time)
nomination to the two systems, see Satpute &
Lieberman (2006). The automatic and con-
trol distinctions are addressed in each sec-
tion of this review for which relevant data are
DEMO
This review also highlights a second core-
processing distinction between internally-
focused and externally-focused forms of social
cognition. This is not a distinction between
DEMO and other-focused cognition. Rather,
internally-focused cognition refers to mental
processes that focus on one’s own or another’s
mental interior (e.g., thoughts, feelings, expe-
rience), whereas externally-focused cognition
refers to mental processes that focus on one’s
own or another’s physical and visible features
and actions that DEMO perceived through sen-
sory modalities and are experienced as part of
the material world. This distinction emerges
as a data-driven ﬁnding across numerous do-
DEMO of social cognitive neuroscience rather
than from any existing theories of social cog-
nition. As such, this review hopefully reveals
how social cognitive neuroscience can inform
social psychological theory, in addition to be-
ing informed by it.
www.annualreviews.org
•
Social Cognitive Neuroscience 261
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. DEMO from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo DEMO 02/10/11. For personal use only.
Figure 1
Hypothesized neural correlates of the C-system supporting reﬂective social cognition (analogous to controlled processing) DEMO the X-system suppo rting reﬂexive
social cognition (analogous to automatic processing) displayed on a canonical brain rendering from (A) lateral, (B) ventral, and (C) medial views.
Note: the basal ganglia and DEMO are subcortical structures that are displayed here on the cortical surface for ease of presentation.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
262 Lieberman
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
UNDERSTANDING OTHERS
Although social cognition DEMO come to encom-
pass a broad range of mental processes, in DEMO
strictest sense, social cognition is about un-
derstanding other people. In DEMO ways, other
people are like objects that have various phys-
ical DEMO, but unlike objects, other
people have minds and experiences that are
not directly open to inspection. There are at
least two ways to DEMO to understand the expe-
rience and the mind of another. One of these
ways is addressed by work on “theory of mind”
(Perner & Wimmer 1985). Theory of mind
research examines the ability to proposition-
DEMO reason from one’s theory of how minds
operate and how social situations affect men-
tal states in general, in order to represent the
mental state of a particular individual given a
particular situation. Thus, our knowledge of
social rules and norms mediates these insights
(Gilbert & Malone 1995). However, there are
also times when our insight feels unmediated,
when it feels like we are seeing the world di-
rectly through DEMO person’s eyes and feel-
ing the world through their visceral reactions.
In this case, we feel like we have an insider’s
perspective on what it is like to be that per-
son. The following sections review DEMO neural
bases of these two ways of knowing others.
Representing the Minds of Others
Representing psychological states of oth-
ers. The ability to represent DEMO contents of
another’s mind consists of two components:
(a) the recognition that, unlike other objects
in the world, people have minds DEMO thoughts
and feelings, and (b) the development of a the-
DEMO regarding how other people’s minds op-
erate and respond to events in their environ-
ment. Research on theory of mind (Perner &
Wimmer DEMO) has found that by age four
nearly all children develop the DEMO to as-
sess the mental states of others. This pro-
cess may build upon the capacity to rec-
ognize biological motion and goal-directed
action DEMO emerges by around six months
of age (Woodward 1998). From DEMO
through adulthood, increasingly complex and
domain-speciﬁc theories form (Reeder 1993),DEMO
although this increasing sophistication does
not always yield greater accuracy (Gilbert &
Malone 1995).
Neuroimaging studies of theory of mind
have typically DEMO activations in DMPFC
(BA 8/9), posterior superior temporal sulcus
(pSTS) in LTC, and the temporal poles in
LTC (for review, see Frith & Frith 2003).
Research suggests that pSTS is particularly
sensitive to biological motion (Allison et al.
2000) and that the DEMO poles may
be associated with perception of familiar
individuals (Sugiura et DEMO 2001). Frith &
Frith (2003) suggest that unlike LTC, which
is sensitive to external visual cues, DMPFC
is speciﬁcally associated with mentalizing,
which is overt thought about the internal
mental states of DEMO Additionally, Saxe
et al. (2004) have suggested that the temporo-
DEMO junction in LPAC is distinct from
nearby pSTS and is also involved in theory of
mind processes. Finally, both neuroimaging
and neuropsychological investigations have
suggested that right ventrolateral prefrontal
cortex (VLPFC), a subregion within LPFC,
helps to inhibit one’s own experience during
the consideration of another’s DEMO of mind
(Samson et al. 2005, Vogeley et al. 2001).
These ﬁndings are consistent with devel-
opmental research indicating that theory of
DEMO development is linked to advances in
general inhibitory control (Carlson & DEMO
2001). It is plausible that a failure of this
process in adults may play a central role in
naıve realism (Grifﬁn & Ross 1991, Pronin¨
et al. 2004), whereby individuals assume
that others see the world the same way that
they do and have difﬁculty acknowledging
DEMO viewpoints (see Lieberman 2005).
Given the early development of sensitivity
DEMO biological motion and the fact that adults
perceive biological motion without effort, one
would expect this to be a relatively automatic
process. Alternatively, DEMO propositional
thought about the content of another’s mind
www.annualreviews.org
•
Social Cognitive Neuroscience 263
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University DEMO Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
would seem to fall squarely DEMO the domain
of controlled processes. One study using func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
conﬁrms these intuitions, as cognitive load
was found DEMO diminish DMPFC responses, but
not pSTS or temporal pole responses, during
a mentalizing task (den Ouden et al. 2005).
Another study suggests that DMPFC is active
during covert mentalizing processes (German
et al. 2004); however, the covert condition in
this study appears to require more overt men-
talizing than does the control condition.
It is also interesting DEMO note that the only
medial activation (DMPFC) associated with
theory of mind processes is associated with the
internally-focused process of considering the
contents DEMO another person’s mind. Sensitiv-
ity to biological motion and person familiarity
in lateral regions (pSTS and temporal poles,
respectively) are both externally-focused DEMO
cesses that do not require consideration of a
target’s internal states.
Representing psychological traits of oth-
ers. Beyond knowing how the typical per-
son DEMO respond psychologically to partic-
ular events, individuals are also interested in
DEMO the enduring psychological traits
of others. Individuals use their theories of
how people with different kinds of disposi-
tions behave in order to infer DEMO dispo-
sitions from their behavior (Gilbert 1989). A
recent fMRI DEMO of dispositional attribution
(Harris et al. 2005) found that when individu-
als read behavioral descriptions diagnostic for
drawing dispositional inferences about a tar-
DEMO (Kelley 1967), both DMPFC and pSTS
were more active.
Another DEMO (Mitchell et al. 2004) found
that trait-relevant action descriptions (e.g.,DEMO
“he refused to loan his extra blanket to the
other campers”) DEMO with a target face led
to DMPFC activity only when subjects had
an explicit goal to form an impression of the
target. This is DEMO ﬁrst study to hold constant
the relevance of stimulus information for un-
derstanding the mental states or traits of an-
other and instead manipulate DEMO or not
264 Lieberman
the subject has the goal of understanding an-
other mind.
Given that controlled processes that sup-
port trait attribution should DEMO occur when
the intention to make sense of another per-
son is present, the study by Mitchell et al.
(2004) suggests that DMPFC contributes to
controlled processing aspects of trait attri-
bution. Alternatively, pSTS was active in re-
sponse to the action descriptions regardless
of the subject’s DEMO goal ( J.P. Mitchell,
personal communication), a ﬁnding that sug-
gests that this response reﬂects automatic so-
cial cognition. A similar dissociation DEMO also
been observed between DMPFC and the tem-
poral poles (Mason DEMO al. 2004; M.F. Mason,
personal communication). Both of these DEMO
sults are consistent with the previously de-
scribed study by den Ouden et al. (2005) that
examined the automatic and controlled com-
ponents DEMO theory of mind processes. Addi-
tionally, these ﬁndings are consistent with DEMO
internal/external distinction observed in the-
ory of mind research, as DEMO was asso-
ciated with encoding the psychological traits
of a target (DEMO), whereas pSTS and the
temporal poles were activated in response to
descriptions of observable behavior (external).
Experiencing the Mental States of
Others
Empathy. This second way of knowing
others is far more embodied than DEMO
(Merleau-Ponty 1962) and is more appropri-
ately referred to as empathy than as theory
of mind. Empathy has been associated with
increased helping DEMO social support (Batson
1991); however, this consequence of empathy
requires the individual to maintain an aware-
ness that the emotional response is DEMO embod-
ied simulation of another person’s experience,
not to be confused with one’s own experience.
Thus, the two criteria for empathic responses
are (a) an emotional and experiential response
that approximates that of the DEMO and (b)an
awareness and identiﬁcation of this emotion
as referring DEMO the target’s experience.
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
A number of studies have DEMO addressed
the ﬁrst of these criteria. Wicker et al.
(2003) found that two regions associated
with affective processing, the anterior insula
and dACC, were activated both when indi-
viduals smelled disgusting odors themselves
and when they watched videoclips of oth-
ers smelling these odors. Similarly, a number
of studies have observed activation in these
two regions when individuals either DEMO phys-
ical pain or observed another feeling physi-
cal pain (Botvinick DEMO al. 2005, Jackson et al.
2005, Morrison et al. 2004, DEMO et al. 2004),
and the strength of these responses correlated
DEMO self-reported trait empathy (Singer et al.
2004). Alternatively, Farrow et al. (2001) ob-
served greater activity in VMPFC, MPFC,
DMPFC, and MPAC when individuals were
asked to make empathic judgments relative
to other forms of social reasoning. Similarly,
Botvinick et al. (2005) DEMO greater VMPFC
activity when observing another’s pain but
not when feeling pain oneself, which suggests
that this region might contribute to the addi-
tional processes invoked by empathy over di-
rect feeling. Finally, in two neuropsycholog-
ical investigations of patients with different
cortical lesions (Shamay-Tsoory et al. 2003,
2005), VMPFC damage was found to be the
strongest predictor DEMO empathic deﬁcits.
Interestingly, unlike theory of mind pro-
cesses that logically DEMO from externally-
focused processing of situational information
and observed behaviors to internally-focused
processing of another’s mental state, empa-
thy is focused primarily on the experience of
another and is thus internally-focused. Con-
sistent with this distinction, the empathy re-
search reviewed here has typically found me-
dial, rather than lateral, activations. It is also
worth noting that in comparison with repre-
senting other minds, the sense of experiencing
other minds appears to recruit brain regions
more closely tied with automatic affective pro-
cesses, including the dACC and VMPFC.
Issues for empathy research. One open is-
sue DEMO empathy research is whether the pain
distress felt while watching another’s pain
is personal distress or empathic distress. In
Batson’s (1991) examination of DEMO as it
relates to altruism, he cites Adam Smith, who
wrote about the distinction clearly: “In order
to enter into your grief, DEMO do not consider what
I, a person of such a character DEMO profession,
should suffer if I had a son and if that son
was unfortunately to die ... . I not only change
circumstances DEMO you, but I change persons
and characters” (1853/1759, p. DEMO).
In each of the neuroimaging studies of em-
pathy, it DEMO unclear whether subjects are imag-
ining their own experience of pain or truly em-
pathizing (for the study that is most success-
ful at addressing this, see Singer et al. 2006).
In the same way that false-belief paradigms
were critical in establishing theory of mind
because accuracy DEMO children to indi-
cate that a target person had different beliefs
from their own, here the study of empathy
would seem to require situations in which the
subject and the target have different experi-
ential responses. DEMO instance, empathy while
watching a masochist receive painful stimu-
lation might DEMO expected to activate reward
rather than pain regions.
UNDERSTANDING ONESELF
Given that the self feels hermetically sealed
off from others, containing private thoughts
and feelings, one might wonder why the self is
so heavily researched by social psychologists
whose main focus is on social interactions and
situational pressures. DEMO playwright Oscar
Wilde captured the social psychologist’s an-
swer when he wrote, “Most people are other
people. Their thoughts are someone else’s
opinions, DEMO lives a mimicry, their passions
a quotation” (Wilde 1905). Social psycholo-
gists from Wilde’s era (Cooley 1902, Mead
1934) predicated their theories of the self on
the notion that the self is formed DEMO so-
cial feedback from other people. They be-
lieved that what people experience as intro-
spective self-talk is actually a conversation
with a simulated DEMO who is an internalized
www.annualreviews.org
•
Social Cognitive Neuroscience 265
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/DEMO/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
amalgam of our early social DEMO that
comes to serve as a guide for appropriate social
behavior. Thus, research on the self is integral
to social psychology (Baumeister 1998) and
now to social cognitive neuroscience. Here
and in the next section, the four topics that
have dominated social cognitive neuroscience
research on the DEMO (self-recognition, self-
reﬂection, self-knowledge, and self-control)
are reviewed.
Recognizing Oneself
Visual self-recognition. The ability for in-
fants to visually recognize themselves DEMO a
mirror comes online in the second year of
life, with DEMO infants achieving this skill by
21 months of age (Lewis & DEMO 2004).
This contrasts with the ability to recognize
one’s mother in a mirror by nine months
of age (Dixon 1957), suggesting that either
more time is needed for the neural machin-
ery supporting self-recognition DEMO mature or
more socialization is needed in which parents
can teach infants to identify themselves as a
self.
Perhaps because self-recognition is one of
DEMO few self-processes that can be examined
in preverbal humans and animals it has re-
ceived a great amount of attention. In what is
perhaps DEMO ﬁrst social cognitive neuroscience
experiment, self-recognition processes exam-
ined in a DEMO patient (Sperry et al. 1979)
suggested that each hemisphere of DEMO hu-
man brain was independently capable of rec-
ognizing the self. One study has replicated
this ﬁnding (Uddin et al. 2005b), whereas
the data in two others have each favored
one hemisphere or the other (Keenan et al.
2003, Turk et al. 2002). Other research us-
ing different techniques to isolate the pro-
cessing of each hemisphere has DEMO yielded
mixed results (Brady et al. 2004, Keenan et al.
2001).
A half-dozen fMRI studies clarify the neu-
ral basis of self-recognition DEMO some extent.
Although there is also variability in the fMRI
studies examining self-recognition, most have
266 Lieberman
observed greater right LPFC and LPAC ac-
tivity (Platek et al. 2006; Sugiura 2000, 2005;
Uddin et al. 2005a) when individuals iden-
tify pictures as themselves compared with
when they identify pictures of familiar oth-
ers. Given the symbolic nature of DEMO self, it
is not surprising that the regions involved in
self-recognition DEMO been linked with con-
trolled processing.
Agency. In addition to visual recognition of
one’s face, there is also the recognition of one’s
body parts and movements as one’s own, a pro-
cess that involves the combined inputs from
the visual system and internal propriocep-
tion from the muscles. DEMO (Farrer
et al. 2003, Farrer & Frith 2002, Leube et DEMO
2003, Shimada et al. 2005), transcranial mag-
netic stimulation (MacDonald & Paus 2003),
and neuropsychological studies (Sirigu et al.
1999) all suggest that LPAC regions bilater-
ally, but particularly on the right side, are in-
volved in detecting mismatches between vi-
sual and proprioceptive feedback. In these
studies, video displays of the subject’s own
hand movements are shown to the subject
either in real time or at short DEMO such
that the visual feedback and proprioceptive
feedback are asynchronous. Results indicate
that greater LPAC activity is present during
mismatches than during matches. In DEMO
work, schizophrenics experiencing passivity, a
state characterized by a feeling of not own-
ing one’s own actions, showed greater acti-
vation of right LPAC (Franck et al. 2002,
Ganesan et al. 2005, Spence DEMO al. 1997).
Similarly, Blanke and colleagues have shown,
with DEMO variety of methods, that out-of-body
experiences are also associated with right
DEMO activity (Blanke et al. 2002). One
caveat to these ﬁndings DEMO that the LPAC is
typically activated when the external visual
representation of one’s body conﬂicts with
one’s internal experience of oneself. Thus,
it DEMO be more appropriate to suggest that
an absence of LPAC activation is associated
with the feeling that one’s actions are one’s
own.
Annu. Rev. DEMO 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
Reﬂecting on the Self
Reﬂecting DEMO one’s current experience.
Although other animals presumably have ex-
periences, humans DEMO be the only living
creatures who can reﬂect upon and explicitly
represent the character of those experiences.
Having explicit insight into the situations that
DEMO one feel good or bad allows an individ-
ual to much more efﬁciently seek out or avoid
similar situations in the future. This insight
DEMO allows individuals to communicate their
preferences and dislikes to others.
Reﬂecting on one’s current experience
leads to remarkably consistent activation of
MPFC (BA10) DEMO a variety of different
tasks. BA10 is the only region of prefrontal
cortex that has thus far been found to be
disproportionally larger in DEMO than in
other primates (Semendeferi et al. 2001).
The studies DEMO most directly isolate the act
of self-reﬂection have examined neural re-
sponses occurring when participants indicate
their current emotional response to a picture
(e.g., “How pleasant do you feel in response
to this picture?”) DEMO with when mak-
ing a non-self-relevant judgment (e.g., “Is the
picture of an indoor or outdoor scene?”). In
each of these DEMO (Gusnard et al. 2001,
Johnson et al. 2005, Lane et al. 1997, Ochsner
et al. 2004), MPFC was more active during
self-reﬂection than during the control task.
Two of these studies ( Johnson & Schmitz
2005, Ochsner et al. 2004) found additional
activation in MPAC. Similarly, Eisenberger
et al. (2005) found that greater dispositional
self-consciousness was associated with greater
MPFC and MPAC activation during a conﬂict
detection task.
DEMO that cognitive tasks tend to decrease
the activity in MPFC (McKiernan DEMO al. 2003),
it is possible that results of self-reﬂection stud-
DEMO are being driven by MPFC changes associ-
ated with the control condition rather than by
self-reﬂection per se. However, a neuropsy-
chological study by Beer et al. (2003), which
is not susceptible to this alternate explana-
tion, suggests that this is not the case. In
their study, patients with extensive damage
to MPFC, as well as VMPFC, experienced
less self-conscious emotion after engaging in
inappropriate behavior compared with con-
trols, suggesting that MPFC is associated with
initiating or carrying out self-reﬂective pro-
DEMO Surprisingly, patients with MPFC le-
sions are capable of self-conscious emotions
DEMO shown their embarrassing behavior on a
video recording (Beer et al. DEMO), a pro-
cess that may rely on externally-focused vi-
sual self-recognition mechanisms rather than
internally-focused self-reﬂection. Taylor et al.
(2003) also observed DEMO in MPFC ac-
tivity, relative to a resting baseline, when par-
ticipants rated their own emotional reaction
to emotional stimuli, also suggesting that the
MPFC ﬁndings in other studies are not arti-
facts of the DEMO conditions.
Interestingly, Taylor et al. (2003) found
that self-reﬂection on DEMO stimuli was
also associated with reduced activity in the
amygdala, a DEMO implicated in automatic af-
fective processes (Pasley et al. 2004). DEMO
it seems paradoxical that self-reﬂection on
one’s feelings could lead to a reduction in
those feelings, this result is consistent with
other behavioral research (Silvia 2002, Wilson
et al. 2005, Wilson & Schooler 1991) DEMO
highlights the fact that feelings themselves
and thoughts about feelings are not necessar-
ily isomorphic (Lieberman 2006).
Given that self-reﬂection feels effortful
and resource consuming, it is not surpris-
ing that this process relies on neural struc-
tures that have undergone recent evolution-
ary development (Semendeferi et al. 2001)
and whose activity is interrupted by cogni-
tive load DEMO (Greicius et al. 2003,
McKiernan et al. 2003). Perhaps DEMO
more surprising is that the neural correlates
of self-reﬂection are quite distinct from those
involved in self-recognition and agency judg-
ments. Self-reﬂection, an internally-focused
process, is strongly associated with activity
in a medial frontoparietal network, DEMO
self-recognition and agency judgments invoke
externally-focused processes and are strongly
www.annualreviews.org
•
Social Cognitive Neuroscience 267
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
DEMO University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
associated with activity in a DEMO frontopari-
etal network. Such a dramatic dissociation
between self-reﬂection and self-recognition
processes is not easily accounted for in exist-
ing social psychological theories.
Reﬂecting DEMO past experiences. In addi-
tion to being able to reﬂect upon our current
experience, we are also capable of reﬂecting
on our autobiographical past, the events of
personal importance that have made up our
lives. People do not recall all events from
their past equally well. Remembering one’s
DEMO is presumably easier than remem-
bering what one had for breakfast August 21,
2001. Our autobiographical memory tends
to be ﬁlled with events DEMO personal signiﬁ-
cance, rather than a linear record of events
over DEMO (Lieberman & Eisenberger 2005).
Thus, although autobiographical memory
and episodic memory bear more than a pass-
ing resemblance, their neural correlates are
only partially overlapping.
Gilboa (2004) reviewed the prefrontal ac-
tivations in DEMO neuroimaging studies that con-
tained both autobiographical and episodic
memory conditions. Gilboa reported that al-
though VLPFC activations are common to
retrieving both forms DEMO memory, MPFC
(BA10) and VMPFC (BA11) are present
only DEMO autobiographical memory retrieval,
whereas right DLPFC is present primarily in
episodic memory retrieval. The medial activa-
tions associated with autobiographical mem-
ories may DEMO from these memories being
linked to one’s internal sense of self and the
feelings one had during the events. Multi-
ple studies have also DEMO MTL activ-
ity during both kinds of memory retrieval,
but more so during autobiographical retrieval
than episodic retrieval (Cabeza et al. 2004,
Gilboa et al. 2004).
Reﬂecting on one’s self-concept. Within
the study DEMO self-focused processing, reﬂec-
tion upon one’s own self-concept in trait terms
(e.g., “kind,” “smart”) has received a great
deal of attention (for review, see Lieberman
268 Lieberman
& Pfeifer 2005). Several studies have exam-
ined the neural activity involved in determin-
ing whether trait DEMO and sentences are
self-descriptive. Most of these studies have
included a nonsocial control task, such as de-
termining the number of vowels in the trait
words ( Johnson et al. 2002). The studies of-
ten DEMO a social control task, such as de-
termining whether the trait DEMO describes
a close friend (Ochsner et al. 2005, Schmitz
et al. 2004), casual acquaintance (Seger et al.
2004), famous politician (DEMO et al. 1999,
Kelley et al. 2002, Kjaer et al. DEMO), or
whether the trait is socially desirable (Fossati
et al. DEMO). Virtually all of these studies re-
port greater MPFC during the self-judgments
task than during the nonsocial control task,
and several also DEMO greater MPFC dur-
ing self-judgments than during other social
judgments (Craik DEMO al. 1999, Fossati et al.
2003, Kelley et al. 2002, DEMO et al. 2004).
Additionally, a number of these studies also
DEMO greater activity in MPAC during self-
judgments (Fossati et al. 2003, Johnson et al.
2002, Kelley et al. 2002, Seger et al. DEMO). In
two other studies, individuals were prompted
to think about DEMO own personality char-
acteristics over a period of minutes; greater
MPFC DEMO MPAC were observed in this
condition than when participants thought
about someone else’s personality character-
istics (D’Argembeau et al. 2005, Kjaer et al.
DEMO). In addition, in two studies (Fossati et al.
2004, DEMO et al. 2004) that examined the
effects of self-referential encoding on DEMO
ory, it was observed that greater MPFC ac-
tivity during self-referential DEMO is asso-
ciated with better memory performance for
this information (for DEMO analogous study link-
ing DMPFC with memory for social informa-
tion, DEMO Mitchell et al. 2004). These studies
are remarkably consistent in identifying activ-
ity in a medial frontoparietal network when
individuals reﬂect on their DEMO psychological
make-up, an internally-focused process.
These studies, however, have not DEMO
tangled the act of self-reﬂection (i.e., effort-
fully trying to think about oneself ) from
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
DEMO University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
self-knowledge activation (i.e., the DEMO
that is reﬂected upon and retrieved). Although
the act of self-reﬂection is a canonical form
of controlled processing, self-knowledge con-
sists of both automatically accessible and ef-
fortfully retrieved representations (Klein et al.
1992, DEMO; Markus 1977). Lieberman et al.
(2004) examined the neural DEMO of in-
dividuals who possessed strong self-schemas
(i.e., automatically accessible self-knowledge)
for either acting or athletics while they judged
the trait descriptiveness DEMO trait words re-
lated to acting or athletics. Retrieval of non-
schematic self-knowledge was relatively slow
and was associated with activity in DMPFC
and DEMO, whereas automatically accessible
schematic self-knowledge was associated with
activity in VMPFC, amygdala, ventral stria-
tum in the basal ganglia, LTC, and MPAC.
The absence of MPFC in this comparison
suggests that the primary role DEMO MPFC is
in self-reﬂection rather than self-knowledge
representation (see also J.H. DEMO, M.D.
Lieberman, & M. Dapretto, under review).
SELF-REGULATION
The DEMO for self-regulation is critical to
the achievement of both personal and social
goals. Self-regulatory skills allow us to act in
accordance with long-term goals (e.g., get-
ting a promotion) rather than being slaves
to our DEMO impulses (e.g., wanting to
yell at one’s boss). Indeed, DEMO differ-
ences in the ability to delay gratiﬁcation as
a child are highly predictive of achievement
decades later (Metcalfe & Mischel 1999). Self-
regulation has received a great deal of atten-
tion within the social DEMO neuroscience
and broader cognitive neuroscience literature.
Although the neural regions associated with
self-regulation are quite similar across the dif-
ferent forms of self-regulation, there is also a
major conceptual distinction between those
forms of self-regulation in DEMO the individ-
ual has the intention to regulate a response
and other forms of self-regulation in which
the regulatory effects occur, but only as an
unintended by-product of other processes.
Intentional Self-Regulation
Impulse control. A number DEMO neuroimag-
ing studies have examined the process
whereby individuals intentionally override a
prepotent response or impulse. The two brain
regions that have consistently been DEMO
with this process are dACC and LPFC (Mac-
Donald et al. DEMO). A number of studies have
implicated the dACC in detecting the conﬂict
between a current goal and the prepotent re-
sponse rather than DEMO the process of exerting
top-down control to facilitate the appropriate
response or inhibit the inappropriate response
(Botvinick et al. 2004). Alternatively, LPFC
DEMO been more closely tied to maintaining the
current goal in working memory and to im-
plementing the top-down control needed to
produce appropriate responses (Aron et al.
2004). Similar LPFC activations are present
when individuals DEMO inhibit beliefs in order
to reason correctly (Goel & Dolan 2003)DEMO
Reappraising emotional events. Recent
studies have built on the impulse control ﬁnd-
ings by examining self-control of emotional
responses and emotional experience (Ochsner
& Gross 2005). These studies have exam-
ined reappraisal as a strategy DEMO emotional
self-control. Reappraisal typically involves re-
framing a negative emotional event such that
the new understanding renders the event less
aversive. Reappraisal efforts commonly DEMO
vate regions of LPFC, most often VLPFC,
regardless of whether DEMO reappraisal focuses
on trying to reduce the emotional signiﬁcance
of highly aversive images (Ochsner et al. 2002,
2004; Phan et al. 2005), physical pain anticipa-
tion (Kalisch et al. 2005), sad ﬁlms (Levesque
et al. 2003), or erotic ﬁlms (Beauregard et al.
2001). This manipulation also tends to pro-
duce decreased activity in the DEMO, with
some studies also showing decreased activ-
ity in either temporal DEMO or VMPFC. In
one study, Ochsner et al. (2004) manipulated
DEMO •
Social Cognitive Neuroscience 269
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use DEMO
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
whether individuals reappraised in order DEMO
feel more or less negative affect and manipu-
lated whether individuals reappraised in ways
that focused on changes in the target’s phys-
ical situation DEMO in ways that focused on the
subject’s personal relationship to the target.
Reappraising to increase negative affect was
associated with activity in DMPFC, MPFC,
and posterior cingulate near MPAC, whereas
reappraising to decrease negative affect was
associated with right lateral orbitofrontal cor-
tex in the vicinity of DEMO One can imag-
ine that instructions to increase their negative
emotional responses may have led partici-
pants to spontaneously engage in internally-
focused empathy DEMO the target (resulting in
more medial activity), whereas instructions to
DEMO negative affect may have led partici-
pants to engage in externally-focused detach-
ment from the target (resulting in more lateral
activity). Similarly, DEMO focused on
one’s personal relation to the target activated
rACC, whereas DEMO reappraisal
activated left LPFC. Here again, the split be-
tween medial DEMO lateral prefrontal activa-
tions maps onto internally- versus externally-
focused processes, DEMO
Unintentional Self-Regulation
Putting feelings into words. It has long
been known that putting feelings into words
is an effective strategy for regulating nega-
tive DEMO responses. Although express-
ing these feelings is known to have beneﬁts for
both mental and physical health (Hemenover
2003, Pennebaker 1997), the DEMO seem to
occur whether one is intentionally trying to
regulate one’s emotions or not, and even occur
if one writes about an imaginary trauma rather
an actual one (Greenberg et al. 1996). A num-
ber of neuroimaging studies have shown that
merely labeling emotionally evocative visual
images DEMO emotional labels (i.e., affect label-
ing) leads to a reduction DEMO the amygdala activ-
ity that would otherwise occur in the presence
of these images (Hariri et al. 2000, Lieberman
et al. 2006). DEMO studies also show increased
270 Lieberman
activity in right VLPFC during affect labeling
and an inverse relationship between this pre-
frontal activity and the DEMO in the amyg-
dala. Thus, the pattern of activity is very DEMO
lar to the pattern observed during reappraisal
processes, suggesting that self-regulation DEMO
occurring despite the absence of any inten-
tion to self-regulate.
Placebo effects. Expectancy-based placebo
effects typically involve a consciously held
belief about the effectiveness DEMO a treatment
or medication that leads to a reduction in
aversive symptoms. Although only a hand-
ful of neuroimaging studies have examined
placebo effects, the results have been remark-
ably consistent. Investigations of placebo ef-
fects DEMO momentary pain stimulation (Kong
et al. 2006, Petrovic et al. 2002, Wager et al.
2004), chronic pain (Lieberman et al. 2004),
and the distress associated with aversive im-
ages (Petrovic et al. 2005) have almost all ob-
served greater activity in right VLPFC and
rACC during placebo compared with con-
trol conditions. Placebo effects were also DEMO
sociated with reductions in subjective dis-
tress, dACC activity, or amygdala activity,
with rACC and LPFC activations predicting
the magnitude of these DEMO Interest-
ingly, both rACC and right VLPFC overlap
with the opioid DEMO evoked during opi-
oid analgesia (Petrovic et al. 2002). As DEMO
putting feelings into words, placebo effects in-
voke a network similar DEMO that observed dur-
ing reappraisal, a ﬁnding that suggests com-
mon DEMO are at work despite different
phenomenologies accompanying reappraisal,
placebo, and DEMO feelings into words.
BEING IN A SOCIAL WORLD
A great deal of our waking lives is spent
navigating the social world with others, and
many of the processes already reviewed pre-
sumably evolved, in part, DEMO facilitate social
living (Dunbar 1998). The topics reviewed
in this DEMO all link the self and social
world together within a single mental act. We
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University DEMO Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
coordinate our activity with those DEMO us,
use feedback from others to understand our-
selves, make DEMO of others based on our self-
theories, and develop personal attitudes DEMO
social groups. We also care deeply about being
connected to loved ones, not being rejected,
and being treated in a fair and trustworthy
manner in our interactions with strangers. To-
gether, these processes contribute to a coher-
ent social world in which individuals contin-
uously make adjustments DEMO conform to the
norms of other individuals and society more
generally.
Mirror Neurons and Imitation
In the early 1990s, di Pellegrino and col-
leagues discovered a class of neurons in pri-
mates that were activated both DEMO primates
performed a goal-directed action (e.g., grasp-
ing an object) DEMO when they observed the
experimenter perform the same action (e.g.,
DEMO the same object). Dubbed mirror neu-
rons, the presence of DEMO neurons suggests
that the same motor action representations
are activated when performing and observ-
ing goal-directed actions (di Pellegrino et al.
1992). This is analogous to Kosslyn’s earlier
ﬁnding that visual perception and visual im-
DEMO both rely on the same visual code in
visual cortex (for DEMO, see Kosslyn et al.
2001). In humans, activation in regions ho-
mologous to those found in primates has also
been reported both DEMO participants observe
intentional action and when they imitate in-
tentional action (DEMO et al. 1999). In par-
ticular, regions of LPFC (pars opercularis in
BA44) and LPAC have been found to follow
this pattern.
It has been widely speculated that mir-
ror neurons represent a basis DEMO understand-
ing the behavior, intentions, and experience
of others, but DEMO has not yet been demon-
strated empirically. One can imitate without
understanding, and to date, no mirror neu-
ron study has assessed whether DEMO in
the mirror neuron system is associated with
the experience of understanding the perspec-
tive or experience of another. Based on the
earlier section DEMO focused on understand-
ing others, one would expect that if imitation
DEMO or served as a form of embodied
understanding of another’s mental states, it
would lead to increased activity in the me-
dial frontoparietal network. Instead, imitation
is associated with a lateral frontoparietal net-
work consistent with externally-focused un-
derstanding of physical action but not with
internally-focused processes such DEMO mental
state representation or empathy. Indeed, re-
search examining the imitation DEMO emotional
facial expressions observed less activity in
DMPFC during imitation than observation
(Carr et al. 2003), a ﬁnding that suggests that
imitation may demand externally-focused at-
tention to the actions as actions, rather than
as indicators of another’s internal states.
It is possible, however, that mirror DEMO
rons play an important role in nonverbal com-
munication (i.e., gestures, facial expressions,
and posture; see DePaulo 1992). There is
DEMO for a complex reciprocal nonver-
bal “dance” that occurs between interaction
partners (Word et al. 1974) that can provide
the basis for our DEMO about an inter-
action (Chartrand & Bargh 1999). The dif-
DEMO in making this link is that whereas a
great deal of nonverbal communication oc-
curs without conscious effort (Ambady et al.
2000, Lieberman DEMO), the human imaging
research on mirror neurons has examined ex-
plicit intentions to observe and imitate a sin-
gle behavior that is presented DEMO The
connection between mirror neuron work and
nonverbal communication could be strength-
ened if the mirror neuron system were found
to be similarly activated DEMO behaviors that are
embedded in a larger scene unfolding over
time, DEMO participants are not attending to
the behavior focally or under cognitive load.
Interactions of Self and Social
Understanding
Reﬂected appraisals (i.e., “what I DEMO you
think of me”) are thought to be a critical
www.annualreviews.org DEMO
Social Cognitive Neuroscience 271
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
source of self-knowledge throughout devel-
DEMO (Cooley 1902, Mead 1934). A single
neuroimaging study has examined the neural
bases of reﬂected appraisals. Ochsner et al.
(2005) observed DEMO reﬂected appraisal pro-
cesses were associated with greater activity in
the orbital extension of right VLPFC, MTL,
and MPAC, compared with direct DEMO
of the self. This pattern of activation is consis-
tent with the notion that overt generation of
reﬂected appraisals is an effortful controlled
process.
DEMO contrast to reﬂected appraisals, which
involve consulting one’s theory of another
DEMO mind in order to understand one-
self, under some conditions, individuals may
consult their theories of themselves in order
to understand other individuals. DEMO exist-
ing evidence suggests that this occurs when
the target is a close associate of or is seen
as similar to the participant. When DEMO
uals judge the psychological traits and states
of their mother (Ruby & Decety 2004), close
friend (Ochsner et al. 2005), or DEMO
rated as similar to themselves (Mitchell et al.
2005), signiﬁcant DEMO are produced in
MPFC, the region most typically found in
self-reﬂective DEMO Mitchell et al. (2005)
also reported an interaction between DMPFC
DEMO MPFC activity as a function of similarity
between the participant and target, such that
DMPFC activity decreased and MPFC activ-
ity increased with increasing similarity. This
suggests that similarity is promoting under-
standing the minds of DEMO in terms of one’s
theory of oneself.
Attitudes and Prejudice
Implicit and explicit attitudes. Attitudes
serve a critical function in our social lives
as DEMO support and deﬁne our social iden-
tities. When we share our attitudes with oth-
ers, we are providing a roadmap to our be-
havioral proclivities and a promissory note
regarding our reactions to different attitude-
relevant DEMO Neuroimaging work on
attitudes has primarily focused on identify-
272 Lieberman
ing the neural correlates of implicit and ex-
plicit attitudes. When individuals express DEMO
plicit attitudes toward concepts (Cunning-
ham et al. 2004b, Zysset et al. 2002), fa-
mous names (Cunningham et al. 2003), ge-
ometrical shapes ( Jacobson et al. 2006), or
paintings (Vartanian & Goel 2004), activation
tends to increase in both medial and lateral
DEMO networks, compared with when
nonevaluative judgments are made about the
same DEMO This network includes MPFC,
MPAC, VLPFC, and LPAC. These regions
have all been associated with controlled pro-
cesses and are consistent with DEMO notion that
the expression of explicit attitudes depends on
controlled processing. Additionally, an event-
related potential study (Cunningham et al.
2005; see also Cela-Conde et al. 2004) ob-
served that the LPFC activations associated
with explicit attitudes appear at least 400 ms
after the presentation of the DEMO object,
also implicating LPFC in controlled process-
ing of attitudes (DEMO 1977).
Other studies have identiﬁed brain regions
associated with implicit attitudes. In these
studies, negative- and positive-attitude ob-
jects, such as African DEMO and Caucasian
American faces, are shown to individuals as
they perform DEMO nonevaluative task (e.g., gen-
der judgments). Typically, the amygdala DEMO
been found to be more active to negative-
attitude objects than to positive-attitude ob-
jects (Cunningham et al. 2003, Hart et al.
2000, Wheeler & Fiske 2005; for review
of race-related neuroimaging, see Eberhardt
DEMO; for race-related electroencephalogram
research, see Ito et al. 2006). Phelps et al.
(2000) observed that the amygdala response
of Caucasian Americans DEMO African American
faces was correlated with an implicit mea-
sure of racial attitudes but not with an ex-
plicit attitude measure (cf. Phelps et al. 2003).
Lieberman et al. (2005) found that African
American DEMO also showed greater amyg-
dala activity to African American faces than
to Caucasian American faces, consistent with
past ﬁndings that African Americans have
negative implicit attitudes toward African
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
DEMO University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
Americans, in contrast to their positive ex-
plicit attitudes toward African Americans
(Nosek et al. 2002). Cunningham et al.
(2004b) found that the amygdala response to
African DEMO faces was stronger when tar-
get faces were presented subliminally rather
than supraliminally and that the amygdala was
the only brain region that showed DEMO pat-
tern of activity. Apart from the amygdala, the
only other DEMO region that has been associ-
ated with implicit attitudes is VMPFC. Milne
& Grafman (2001) conducted a study of pa-
tients with VMPFC DEMO and observed no
implicit gender bias. Similarly, Knutson et al.
(2006) found VMPFC activity associated with
the automatic activation of political attitudes.
These results are consistent with ﬁndings
from McClure et al. (2004) demonstrating
DEMO VMPFC activity was associated with be-
havioral preferences between Coke and Pepsi
when individuals were unaware of the brand
they were drinking. Alternatively, when indi-
viduals were informed of the brand they were
drinking, behavioral preferences were asso-
ciated with activity in controlled processing
regions, DLPFC and MTL.
Regulating prejudicial responses. A num-
ber of neuroimaging studies have combined
the DEMO of intentional self-regulation with
the study of race-related attitudes in order to
understand the mechanisms by which people
control their prejudicial responses. As with
DEMO more generally, it appears that the
dACC may be involved in DEMO that an
undesirable attitude is prepotent and about
to be revealed (DEMO et al. 2004), whereas
LPFC regions tend to be implicated in exert-
ing control and diminishing the activity of the
amygdala. Multiple studies DEMO shown that a
desire to regulate the expression of a particu-
lar attitude is associated with greater activity
of right LPFC in the presence DEMO the attitude
object (Cunningham et al. 2004a,b; Richeson
et al. 2003). Additionally, the magnitude of
right LPFC under conditions promoting prej-
udice regulation is associated with the extent
to which amygdala responses are DEMO
(Cunningham et al. 2004a).
Unintentional self-regulation of prejudi-
cial attitudes DEMO also been demonstrated in
fMRI studies. Simply categorizing African
American targets in terms of their personal
food preferences rather than their group
membership was DEMO to reverse the
amygdala’s response to African American
and Caucasian American targets (Wheeler &
Fiske 2005). In another study, similar to the
affect-labeling studies described above, pro-
cessing the race of targets verbally rather than
perceptually was sufﬁcient to eliminate the
amygdala’s sensitivity to race, and this reduc-
tion was related to increases in right VLPFC
activity (Lieberman et al. 2005).
Attitude change. Cognitive dissonance re-
search has established DEMO when individuals
perform a behavior or make a choice that
conﬂicts with a previously established atti-
tude, the attitude tends to change in the di-
rection that resolves the conﬂict with the be-
havior. From the DEMO, this process appears
to involve rationalization, whereby individu-
als strategically change their attitudes in or-
der to avoid appearing inconsistent. However,
neuropsychological DEMO by Lieberman et al.
(2001) demonstrated that this might not al-
ways be a conscious strategic process. In one
study, anterograde amnesia patients, who had
neurological damage affecting the function-
ing of MTL and were incapable of forming
new memories, were compared with healthy
controls on a dissonance task. The amnesics
had no memory of having performed a be-
DEMO that conﬂicted with their previously es-
tablished attitudes and thus were not likely to
have engaged in conscious strategic attitude
change. Nonetheless, the amnesics changed
their attitudes to the same extent as controls.
These results suggest DEMO, rather than con-
scious rationalization, cognitive dissonance
reduction may sometimes depend on implicit
constraint satisfaction processes (Read et al.
1997).
www.annualreviews.org •
Social Cognitive Neuroscience 273
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
DEMO University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
Social Connection and Social
Rejection
DEMO connection. The need for social con-
nection and acceptance are powerful motiva-
tors (Baumeister & Leary 1995) that guide
human interactions with peers, romantic part-
ners, and family. Although behavioral work in
social psychology has emphasized the power
of unfamiliar individuals to inﬂuence our own
behavior (Asch 1956, Sherif 1937), few neu-
roimaging studies have examined this form
of social pressure (Amodio et al. 2006, Berns
et al. 2005)DEMO Instead, neuroimaging studies
have focused primarily on neural responses
associated with DEMO to close others. In
these studies, individuals are shown pictures of
DEMO their romantic partner or their own in-
fant along with relevant control images. Most
often, when individuals see someone they
love, they show DEMO activity in the basal
ganglia (Aron et al. 2005; Bartels & Zeki 2000,
2004; Leibenluft et al. 2004; cf. Nitschke et DEMO
2004). Two of these studies also found a broad
network of theory of mind areas to be less ac-
tive during the presentation DEMO a loved one
than a control (Bartels & Zeki 2000, 2004);
however, another study found the opposite
pattern of activity (Leibenluft et al. 2004).
These differences may be attributed to the
fact DEMO in the studies showing a decrease
in these regions, the images DEMO presented
for ∼15 seconds, whereas in the study show-
ing an DEMO in these regions, the images
were presented for 1.5 seconds. Thus, there
may be differences in the immediate and long-
term responses to DEMO presentation of images
of loved ones.
Social rejection. Mammals, unlike their DEMO
tilian ancestors, form long-term parental
bonds with their young. Separation from DEMO
givers typically results in death for young
mammals. dACC activity has been associated
with the distress of losing social connections.
Primates with lesions to DEMO region display
a reduced frequency of distress vocalizations
(MacLean & Newman DEMO), whereas stim-
274 Lieberman
ulation of this region spontaneously induces
distress vocalizations (Robinson 1967, Smith
1945). Additionally, cingulate-lesioned female
rodents do not provide effective maternal
care, resulting in a 12% survival rate for their
offspring compared with 95% for offspring
from sham-lesioned rodents (Stamm 1955).
In humans, neuroimaging studies of so-
cial exclusion (Eisenberger 2006, Eisenberger
et al. 2003) have found that self-reports of so-
cial distress are strongly related to dACC ac-
tivity during exclusion, whereas right VLPFC
was associated with downregulating both
dACC activity and self-reported social dis-
tress. DEMO anxiety is also related to
dACC activity when thinking about negative
relationship scenarios (Gillath et al. 2005). In
related work, the sound DEMO infant cries acti-
vated dACC (Lorberbaum et al. 2002) and did
so more for parents than nonparents (Seifritz
et al. 2003). Finally, a recent study of grief
found that activity in dACC, along DEMO a
number of theory of mind regions, was greater
when bereaved DEMO looked at pictures
of the recently deceased individual compared
with control images (Gundel et al. 2003; cf.
Najib et al. 2004).
It DEMO been hypothesized that mammalian
social pain may have evolved out of the exist-
ing system for physical pain (Eisenberger &
Lieberman 2004, MacDonald & Leary 2005,
Panksepp 1998), with dACC playing a key
DEMO in the emotional distress of physical pain
(Rainville et al. 1997)DEMO Evidence comes for
this, in part, from laboratory ﬁndings that
feeling socially rejected heightens sensitivity
to physical pain (Eisenberger et al. 2006a),DEMO
whereas social support reduces sensitivity to
physical pain (Brown et al. DEMO).
Heightened activity in the dACC, amyg-
dala, and periaqueductal gray (another com-
ponent of the pain matrix; Peyron et al. 2000)DEMO
during a social rejection episode in the fMRI
scanner has also been linked to greater re-
ports of social disconnection in day-to-day life
using DEMO experience-sampling methodology
(Eisenberger 2006). Finally, dACC reactivity
during social rejection has been found to
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
DEMO University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
mediate the relationship between a DEMO
phism in the monoamine oxidase A gene
and aggression in males (DEMO et al.
2006b), such that this gene may render in-
dividuals more sensitive to social threats and
lead to greater defensive aggression as DEMO result
(Twenge et al. 2001).
Social Decision-Making
Social and moral DEMO Behavioral
research has shown that performance on
conditional reasoning tasks is substantially
improved if the conditional rules are formu-
lated from real social norms DEMO than from
abstract content (Cheng & Holyoak 1985).
Neuroimaging studies DEMO domain-
speciﬁc reasoning effects have found a lateral
frontoparietal network that is more active dur-
ing conditional social reasoning than during
conditional abstract reasoning (Canessa et al.
2005, Fiddick et al. 2005), with one group also
observing greater activity in DMPFC during
social reasoning (Fiddick et al. 2005). It is im-
portant to note that the social rules DEMO in
these tasks did not require representing men-
tal states (e.g., if a man is drinking beer, he
must be over 21), and thus the predominance
of lateral frontoparietal activity is consistent
with other DEMO covered in this review.
More attention has been given to the study
of moral reasoning. The most common ﬁnd-
ing across these studies is DEMO moral rea-
soning activates MPFC to a greater extent
than do relevant control tasks (Heekeren et al.
2003; Moll et al. 2002a,b, 2005), with some
of these studies also ﬁnding greater activa-
tion DEMO pSTS and the temporal poles. In the
ﬁrst neuroimaging study of moral reasoning,
Greene et al. (2001) compared personal and
impersonal moral DEMO In the personal
condition, individuals were induced to focus
on their DEMO personal involvement in bring-
ing about a distasteful but utilitarian outcome;
in the impersonal condition, individuals were
induced to focus primarily on the utilitarian
outcome. The personal condition activated
a medial frontoparietal network along with
DEMO to a greater degree than did the im-
personal condition, consistent DEMO the notion
that the personal condition promotes self-
reﬂection on the implications of one’s con-
tribution to the outcome. The impersonal
condition, in contrast, led to greater activ-
ity in lateral frontoparietal regions than did
the personal condition, consistent with an ex-
ternal focus on events in the world. A recent
study (Mendez et al. 2005) with patients with
DEMO damage conﬁrmed these results: The
patients were impaired in making personal
DEMO judgments but not impersonal moral
judgments.
Fairness and trust in interactions. A new
area of research, neuroeconomics (Camerer
et al. 2005, Trepel et al. 2005), has com-
bined the study of behavioral economics and
DEMO neuroscience. Studies that involve
economic exchange with social dynamics are
particularly relevant to social cognitive neu-
roscience. These studies use paradigms such
as the DEMO game (Sanfey et al. 2003),
the prisoner’s dilemma (Rilling DEMO al. 2002),
and the trust game (de Quervain et al. 2004)
in order to examine the neural responses as-
sociated with DEMO, competition, fair-
ness, and trust. Across these studies, coop-
eration, trust, and fair play typically activate
VMPFC, MPFC, and MPAC (Decety et al.
2004, McCabe et al. 2001, Rilling et al. DEMO),
whereas unfair and untrustworthy responses
activate insula (Sanfey et al. 2003), caudate in
the basal ganglia (de Quervain et al. 2004),
or DMPFC (Decety et al. 2004). The ﬁnding
that DEMO, relative to competition, pro-
motes MPFC rather than DMPFC activity is
consistent with previously described work by
Mitchell et al. (2005), such that cooperation
may be associated with seeing the other play-
ers as DEMO similar to oneself (see Decety et al.
2004). Cooperation has DEMO been studied as
a technique for overcoming intergroup differ-
ences and promoting a sense of shared identity
(Sherif et al. 1961).
Across these studies of fairness and trust,
the fairness of the decision-making process
DEMO •
Social Cognitive Neuroscience 275
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use DEMO
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
has often been confounded with DEMO material
value of the outcome. That is, fair responses
from a DEMO are typically associated with
better ﬁnancial outcomes for the subject. G.
Tabibnia, A.B. Satpute, & M.D. Lieberman
(under review) recently manipulated the DEMO
terial payoffs and the fairness of the part-
ner’s behavior independently. After control-
ling for material payoffs, fairness still activated
an array of motivation- and reward-related re-
gions, including VMPFC, ventral striatum in
the basal DEMO, and amygdala, which sug-
gests that fairness is hedonically valued in
social interactions.
CORE PROCESSES
Automatic Versus Controlled
Processes
Across the different domains DEMO social cog-
nitive neuroscience that allow for an as-
sessment of their automatic and controlled
components, a clear pattern of neural ac-
tivation emerges (see Figure 2). Some so-
cial psychological processes, by their DEMO
nature, appear to consist exclusively of ei-
ther automatic or controlled DEMO (e.g.,
self-reﬂection, moral decision-making, feel-
ing rejected). Other DEMO involve task
conditions and baseline conditions that intu-
itively seem to compare controlled processes
with spontaneous processes that may be more
automatic (e.g., DEMO, affect labeling).
Finally, some processes have been examined
with tasks that manipulate whether particular
controlled processes of interest are likely to
operate DEMO not (e.g., theory of mind, dispo-
sitional attribution, self-knowledge, DEMO atti-
tude processes), providing the clearest exam-
ination of automaticity and control.
The picture that emerges is consistent with
previous work on the DEMO systems support-
ing reﬂective and reﬂexive social cognition
(Lieberman et al. DEMO, Satpute & Lieberman
2006). Here, controlled forms of social cog-
nition were consistently associated with ac-
276 Lieberman
tivations in LPFC, LPAC, MPFC, MPAC,
and MTL. Alternatively, automatic forms of
social cognition were consistently associated
with activations in amygdala, VMPFC, and
LTC. Not DEMO studies of automatic and
controlled social cognition have implicated
the basal ganglia or rACC one way or an-
other to allow an assessment. Also, the stud-
ies were mixed regarding the contribution of
dACC. Based on DEMO existing results, dACC
could either be (a) engaged in active DEMO
trolled processing or (b) responding to goal-
related conﬂict automatically (DEMO 1989)
and then triggering other controlled pro-
cesses as a result. Either alternative would
produce dACC activity during tasks that
recruit controlled processes DEMO response to
conﬂict.
Although these results must be considered
preliminary, they DEMO suggest that differences
between automatic and controlled processes
may constitute a core-processing distinction
in the study of social cognitive neuroscience.
Given the importance that DEMO distinction has
had over the past 20 years within the ﬁeld
of social cognition (Chaiken & Trope 1999,
Wegner & Bargh 1998), it is valuable to iden-
tify the neural regions that support this DEMO
tinction. In the long run, it may be possible to
conduct DEMO in which the extent of auto-
matic and controlled processing can be iden-
tiﬁed from neuroimaging alone, without the
need for cognitive load or subliminal presen-
tations, which would allow for more naturalis-
tic investigations of automatic and controlled
social cognition (cf. Poldrack 2006).
Internally-Versus
Externally-Focused Processes
Across a number of social psychological do-
mains, a clear division is present between
the neural correlates of tasks that focus at-
tention on DEMO psychological worlds and
tasks that focus attention on the exterior social
world and the physical social agents in it (see
Figure 3). Externally-focused processes are
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University DEMO Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo DEMO 02/10/11. For personal use only.
Figure 2
Neural correlates of automatic and controlled processes from multiple domains of social cognition overlaid on DEMO the X-system
and C-system regions displayed in Figure 1. Controlled/reﬂective processes are represented by small circles with white text on
a black background. DEMO/reﬂexive processes are represented by small circles with black text on a white background.
Small circles are placed schematically within a region and are DEMO meant to indicate a precise location within a region.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 6 December 2006 0:24
www.annualreviews.org • Social Cognitive Neuroscience 277
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo DEMO 02/10/11. For personal use only.
Figure 3
Neural correlates of internally-focused and externally-focused processes from multiple domains of social cognition.
Internally-focused processes DEMO represented by small circles with white text on a black background. Externally-focused
processes are represented by small circles with black text on a white DEMO Small circles are placed schematically within
a region and are not meant to indicate a precise location within a region.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November DEMO 1:27
278 Lieberman
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
associated with a lateral frontotemporopari-
DEMO network, whereas internally-focused pro-
cesses are associated with a medial frontopari-
DEMO network.
A lateral frontotemporoparietal network is
more activated by social-cognitive tasks that
focus attention on the external, physical, and
most often visual characteristics DEMO other indi-
viduals, oneself, or the interaction of the two.
This lateral frontotemporoparietal network is
activated in tasks involving the nonmental-
izing aspects DEMO theory of mind and dispo-
sitional attribution tasks, action observation
and DEMO, visual self-recognition, imper-
sonal moral and social reasoning, reappraisal
by DEMO on physical events, and labeling
the visual displays of affect in DEMO facial ex-
pressions of others.
In contrast, a medial frontoparietal net-
DEMO is more activated by social-cognitive
tasks that focus attention on the internal, men-
tal, emotional, and experiential characteristics
of other individuals or oneself. This medial
frontoparietal network is activated by tasks in-
volving the mentalizing DEMO of theory of
mind and dispositional attribution tasks, em-
pathy, self-reﬂection on current experiences,
autobiographical memory, self-reﬂection on
one’s traits, personalized DEMO reasoning, and
reappraisal by focusing on one’s personal re-
lation to DEMO target.
It is important to note that this distinc-
tion is orthogonal to and cuts across self
and other processing. Consequently, this dis-
tinction refers to two ways that self and
other can each be processed. DEMO the absence
of existing neurocognitive data, it is hard
to imagine DEMO a case for self-reﬂection
having such a distinct representational basis
from self-recognition. However, in the con-
text of the distinction between internally- and
externally-focused processes that emerged
from this review, these results are entirely
sensible.
CONCLUSION
Social cognitive neuroscience is a vibrant
young area of research. The amount DEMO re-
search and the number of scientists conduct-
ing research at the interface of the social
sciences and neuroscience have increased by
an order DEMO magnitude since the ﬁrst review
of social cognitive neuroscience (Ochsner &
Lieberman 2001). Several exciting lines of so-
cial cognitive neuroscience research DEMO pro-
viding new discoveries, generating original
ideas, and challenging longstanding concep-
tions of existing social science perspectives.
This is exactly what interdisciplinary cross-
DEMO should do. Here, I have provided
evidence for two broad organizing DEMO
of social cognition within the human brain,
one quite old and one that is new. The distinc-
tion between automatic and controlled social
DEMO has long been a contributor to social
psychological research. Identifying the neural
bases of this distinction will help social cogni-
tive neuroscience research to DEMO social pro-
cesses at their joints, just as it has helped DEMO
psychologists in the past. In contrast to auto-
maticity and control, DEMO distinction between
internally-focused and externally-focused so-
cial cognition has no clear theoretical pre-
cursor in social psychology, but emerges un-
mistakably from social cognitive neuroscience
research (see also Eisenberger et al. 2005,
Ochsner et al. 2004). Hopefully, the identiﬁ-
cation of this core-processing distinction can
contribute to the development of new theories
and the enrichment of existing theories DEMO
the social sciences, demonstrating that social
cognitive neuroscience can be both DEMO science
of new techniques and a science of new ideas.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Naomi Eisenberger and the UCLA Social Cognitive Neuroscience laboratory
for comments DEMO an earlier draft. This work was supported in part by an NIMH grant
(R21MH071521).
www.annualreviews.org
•
Social Cognitive Neuroscience 279
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/DEMO For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
LITERATURE CITED
Adolphs R. 2002. DEMO systems for recognizing emotion. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 12:169–77
Adolphs R. 2003. Cognitive neuroscience of human social behavior. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 4:165–
78
DEMO T, Puce A, McCarthy G. 2000. Social perception from visual cues: role of the STS
region. Trends Cogn. Sci. 4:267–78
Ambady N, Bernieri F, Richeson J. 2000. Towards a histology of social behavior: judgmental
accuracy from thin slices of behavior. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 32:DEMO
Amodio DM, Harmon-Jones E, Devine PG, Curtin JJ, Hartley SL, Covert AE. 2004. Neural
signals for the detection of unintentional race bias. Psychol. Sci. 15:88–93
Amodio DM, Kubota JT, Harmon-Jones E, Devine PG. 2006. Alternative mechanisms for
regulating racial responses according to internal vs. DEMO cues. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci.
1:26–36
Aron A, Fisher H, Mashek DJ, Strong G, Li H, Brown LL. 2005. Reward, DEMO, and
emotion systems associated with early-stage intense romantic love. J. Neurophysiol. DEMO:327–
37
Aron AR, Robbins TW, Poldrack RA. 2004. Inhibition and the right inferior frontal cortex.
Trends Cogn. Sci. 8:170–77
Asch SE. DEMO Studies of independence and conformity: a minority of one against a DEMO
majority. Psychol. Monogr. 70:416
Bargh JA. 1989. Conditional automaticity: varieties DEMO automatic inﬂuence in social perception
and cognition. In Unintended Thought, ed. DEMO Uleman, JA Bargh, pp. 3–51. New York:
Guilford
Bartels A, Zeki S. 2000. The neural basis of romantic love. Neuroreport 11:3829–34
Bartels A, Zeki S. 2004. The neural basis of maternal and romantic love. Neuroimage 21:1156–66
Batson CD. 1991. The Altruism Question: Toward a Social-Psychological Answer. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum
Baumeister RF. 1998. The self. In The Handbook of Social Psychology, ed. DT Gilbert, ST Fiske,
DEMO Lindzey, pp. 680–740. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill
Baumeister RF, Leary MR. 1995. The need to belong: desire for interpersonal attachments as
a fundamental human motivation. Psychol. Bull. 117:497–529
Beauregard M, Levesque J, Bourgouin DEMO 2001. Neural correlates of conscious self-regulation
of emotion. J. Neurosci. 21:RC165
Beer JS, Heerey EA, Keltner D, Scabini D, Knight RT. DEMO The regulatory function of
self-conscious emotion: insights from patients with orbitofrontal DEMO J. Personal. Soc.
Psychol. 85:594–604
Beer JS, John OP, Scabini D, Knight RT. 2006. Orbitofrontal cortex and social behavior:
integrating self-monitoring and emotion-cognition interactions. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 18:871–
79
Berns GS, Chappelow J, Zink CF, Pagnoni G, Martin-Skurski ME, Richards J. 2005. DEMO
biological correlates of social conformity and independence during mental rotation. Biol.
Psychol. 58:245–53
Blakemore SJ, Winston J, Frith U. 2004. Social cognitive DEMO: Where are we heading?
Trends Cogn. Sci. 8:215–22
Blanke DEMO, Ortigue S, Landis T, Seeck M. 2002. Stimulating illusory own-body DEMO:
the part of the brain that can induce out-of-body experience has been located. Nature
419:269–70
280 Lieberman
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. DEMO from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
Botvinick M, Jha AP, DEMO LM, Fabian SA, Solomon PE, Prkachin KM. 2005. Viewing
facial DEMO of pain engages cortical areas involved in the direct experience of pain.
Neuroimage 25:312–19
Botvinick MM, Cohen JD, Carter CD. 2004. Conﬂict DEMO and anterior cingulate cortex:
an update. Trends Cogn. Sci. 8:539–46
Brady N, Campbell M, Flaherty M. 2004. My left brain and DEMO: a dissociation in the perception
of self and others. Neuropsychologia 42:DEMO
Brown JL, Shefﬁeld D, Leary MR, Robinson ME. 2003. Social DEMO and experimental pain.
Psychosom. Med. 65:276–83
Cabeza R, Prince SE, Daselaar SM, Greenberg DL, Budde M, et al. 2004. Brain activity
during episodic retrieval of autobiographical and laboratory events: an fMRI study photo
paradigm. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 16:1583–94
Cacioppo JT, Berntson GG. 1992. Social psychological contributions to the decade of the
brain. Doctrine of multilevel analysis. DEMO Psychol. 47:1019–28
Camerer C, Loewenstein G, Prelec D. 2005. Neuroeconomics: how neuroscience can inform
economics. J. Econ. Lit. 43:9–64
Canessa N, Gorini A, Cappa SF, Piattelli-Palmarini M, Danna M, et al. 2005. The effect of
social content on deductive reasoning: an fMRI study. Hum. Brain Mapp. 26:30–43
Carlson SM, Moses LJ. 2001. Individual differences in inhibitory control and children’s theory
of mind. Child Dev. 72:1032–53
DEMO L, Iacoboni M, Dubeau MC, Mazziotta JC, Lenzi GL. 2003. Neural mechanisms of
empathy in humans: a relay from neural systems for imitation to limbic areas. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 100:5497–502
Cela-Conde DEMO, Marty G, Maestu F, Ortiz T, Munar E, et DEMO 2004. Activation of the prefrontal
cortex in the human visual aesthetic perception. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101:6321–25
Chaiken S, Trope Y, DEMO 1999. Dual-Process Theories in Social Psychology. New York: Guilford
Chartrand TL, Bargh JA. 1999. The chameleon effect: the perception-behavior link and social
interaction. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 76:893–910
Cheng PW, Holyoak KJ. 1985. Pragmatic reasoning schemas. Cogn. Psychol. 17:391–416
Cooley CH. 1902. Human Nature and DEMO Order. New York: Scribner’s
Craik FIM, Moroz TM, Moscovitch M, Stuss DT, Winocur G, et al. 1999. In search of the
DEMO: a positron emission tomography study. Am. Psychol. Sci. 10:26–34
Cunningham DEMO, Espinet SD, DeYoung CG, Zelazo PD. 2005. Attitudes to the DEMO and
left: frontal ERP asymmetries associated with stimulus valence and processing DEMO Neu-
roimage 28:827–34
Cunningham WA, Johnson MK, Raye CL, DEMO Gatenby J, Gore JC, Banaji MR. 2004a.
Separable neural components in the processing of black and white faces. Psychol. Sci.
15:806–13
Cunningham DEMO, Johnson MK, Gatenby JC, Gore JC, Banaji MR. 2003. Neural components
of social evaluation. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 85:639–49
Cunningham WA, Raye CL, Johnson MK. 2004b. Implicit and explicit evaluation: fMRI cor-
DEMO of valence, emotional intensity, and control in the processing of attitudes. J. Cogn.
Neurosci. 16:1717–29
D’Argembeau AD, Collette F, Van der DEMO M, Laureys S, Fiore GD, et al. 2005. Self-
referential DEMO activity and its relationship with rest: a PET study. Neuroimage
25:DEMO
de Quervain DJF, Fischbacher U, Treyer V, Schellhammer M, Schnyder U, et al. 2004. The
neural basis of altruistic punishment. Science 305:1254–59
www.annualreviews.org
•
Social Cognitive Neuroscience 281
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. DEMO from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
Decety J, Jackson PL, DEMO JA, Chaminade T, Meltzoff AN. 2004. The neural basis of
cooperation and competition: an fMRI investigation. Neuron 23:744–51
den Ouden HE, DEMO U, Frith C, Blakemore SJ. 2005. Thinking about intentions. Neuroimage
28:787–96
DePaulo BM. 1992. Nonverbal behavior and self-presentation. Psychol. Bull. 111:203–43
DEMO Pellegrino G, Fadiga L, Fogassi L, Gallese V, Rizzolatti G. 1992. Understanding motor
events: a neurophysiology study. Exp. Brain Res. 91:176–80
Dixon JC. 1957. Development of self recognition. J. Genet. Psychol. 91:251–56
DEMO RIM. 1998. The social brain hypothesis. Evol. Anthropol. 6:178–90
Eberhardt JL. 2005. Imaging race. Am. Psychol. 60:181–90
Eisenberger NI. 2006. Social connection DEMO rejection across the lifespan; a social cognitive
neuroscience approach to developmental DEMO Hum. Dev. In press
Eisenberger NI, Jarcho J, Lieberman MD, DEMO B. 2006a. An experimental study of shared
sensitivity to physical and social pain. Pain. In press
Eisenberger NI, Lieberman MD. 2004. Why rejection hurts: a common neural alarm system
for physical and social pain. Trends Cogn. Sci. 8:294–300
Eisenberger NI, Lieberman MD, Satpute AB. 2005. Personality DEMO a controlled processing
perspective: an fMRI study of neuroticism, extraversion, DEMO self-consciousness. Cogn.
Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 5:169–81
Eisenberger NI, Lieberman MD, Williams KD. 2003. Does rejection hurt? An fMRI study of
social exclusion. Science 302:290–92
Eisenberger NI, Way B, Taylor SE, Welch W, Lieberman MD. 2006b. MAO-A genetic poly-
morphism related to dorsal anterior cingulate response during social rejection. Biol. Psy-
chiatry. In press
Farrer C, Frith CD. 2002. Experiencing onself vs another person as being the cause of DEMO
action: the neural correlates of the experience of agency. Neuroimage 15:DEMO
Farrer C, Franck N, Georgieff N, Frith CD, Decety J, Jeannerod M. 2003. Modulating the
experience of agency: a positron emission DEMO study. Neuroimage 18:324–33
Farrow TFD, Zheng Y, Wilkinson ID, DEMO SA, Deakin JFW, et al. 2001. Investigating the
functional anatomy of empathy and forgiveness. Neuroreport 12:2849–53
Fiddick L, Spampinato MV, Grafman DEMO 2005. Social contracts and precautions activate differ-
ent neurological systems: an DEMO investigation of deontic reasoning. Neuroimage 28:778–
86
Fossati P, Hevenor DEMO, Graham SJ, Grady C, Keightley ML, et al. 2003. In search of the emo-
tional self: an fMRI study using positive and negative emotional words. Am. J. Psychiatry
160:1938–45
Fossati P, Hevenor SJ, Lepage M, Graham SJ, Grady C, et al. 2004. Distributed DEMO in episodic
memory: neural correlates of successful retrieval of self-encoded positive DEMO negative
personality traits. Neuroimage 22:1596–604
Franck N, O’Leary DS, Flaum M, Hichwa RD, Andreasen NC. 2002. Cerebral blood ﬂow
changes associated DEMO Schneiderian ﬁrst-rank symptoms in schizophrenia. J. Neuropsy-
chiatry Clin. Neurosci. 14:277–82
Frith U, Frith CD. 2003. Development and neurophysiology of mentalizing. Philos. Trans. R.
Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 358:459–73
Ganesan V, Hunter MD, Spence SA. 2005. Schneiderian ﬁrst-rank symptoms and right parietal
hyperactivation: a DEMO using fMRI. Am. J. Psychiatry 162:1545
German TP, Niehaus JL, Roarty MP, Giesbrecht B, Miller MB. 2004. Neural correlates of de-
DEMO pretense: automatic engagement of the intentional stance under covert conditions.
J. DEMO Neurosci. 16:1805–17
282 Lieberman
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use DEMO
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
Gilbert DT. 1989. Thinking lightly DEMO others. Automatic components of the social infer-
ence process. In Unintended Thought, ed. JS Uleman, JA Bargh, pp. 189–211. New York:
Guilford
Gilbert DT, Malone PS. 1995. The correspondence bias. Psychol. Bull. 117:21–38
Gilboa A. 2004. Autobiographical and episodic memory—one and the same? Evidence from
prefrontal activation in neuroimaging studies. Neuropsychologia 42:1336–49
Gilboa A, Winocur G, Grady CL, Hevenor SJ, Moscovitch M. 2004. Remembering our past:
functional neuroanatomy of recollection of recent and very remote personal events. Cereb.
DEMO 14:1214–25
Gillath O, Bunge SA, Shaver PR, Wendelken C, Mikulincer M. 2005. Attachment-style dif-
ferences in the ability to suppress negative DEMO: exploring the neural correlates. Neu-
roimage 28:835–47
Goel V, Dolan RJ. 2003. Explaining modulation of reasoning by belief. Cognition 87:B11–22
Greenberg DEMO, Wortman CB, Stone AA. 1996. Emotional expression and physical health:
revising traumatic memories or fostering self-regulation? J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 71:588–
602
Greene JD, Sommerville RB, Nystrom LE, Darley JM, Cohen DEMO 2001. An fMRI investigation
of emotional engagement in moral judgment. Science 293:2105–8
Greicius MD, Krasnow B, Reiss AL, Menon V. 2003. Functional connectivity in the rest-
ing brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
100:253–58
Grifﬁn DW, Ross L. 1991. Subject construal, social inference, and human misunderstanding.
In Advances DEMO Experimental Social Psychology, ed. MP Zanna, pp. 319–59. San Diego, DEMO:
Academic
Gundel H, O’Connor MF, Littrell L, Fort C, Lane RD. 2003. Functional neuroanatomy of
grief: an FMRI study. Am. J. Psychiatry 160:1946–53
Gusnard DA, Akbudak E, Shulman GL, Raichle ME. 2001. Medial prefrontal cortex and self-
referential mental activity: relation of a default mode of brain function. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci USA 98:4259–64
DEMO AR, Bookheimer SY, Mazziotta JC. 2000. Modulating emotional responses: effects DEMO a
neocortical network on the limbic system. Neuroreport 11:43–48
Harris LT, Todorov A, Fiske ST. 2005. Attributions on the brain: neuro-imaging dispositional
inferences, beyond theory of mind. Neuroimage 28:763–69
Hart AJ, Whalen DEMO, Shin LM, McInerney SC, Fischer H, Rauch SL. 2000. Differential
response in the human amygdala to racial outgroup vs ingroup face stimuli. DEMO
11:2351–55
Haxby JV, Hoffman EA, Gobbini MI. 2002. Human neural systems for face recognition and
social communication. Biol. Psychiatry 51:59–67
Heekeren DEMO, Wartenburger I, Schmidt H, Schwintowski HP, Villringer A. 2003. An fMRI
study of simple ethical decision-making. Neuroreport 14:1215–19
Hemenover SH. 2003. DEMO good, the bad, and the healthy: impacts of emotional disclosure
DEMO trauma on resilient self-concept and psychological distress. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull.
29:1236–44
Iacoboni M, Woods RP, Brass M, Bekkering H, Mazziotta DEMO, Rizzolatti G. 1999. Cortical
mechanisms of human imitation. Science 286:2526–28
DEMO TA, Urland GR, Willadsen-Jensen E, Correll J. 2006. The social DEMO of stereo-
typing and prejudice: using event-related brain potentials to study DEMO perception. In
Social Neuroscience: People Thinking About People, ed. JT Cacioppo, PS Visser, CL Pickett.
pp 189–208. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
DEMO
•
Social Cognitive Neuroscience 283
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use DEMO
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
Jackson PL, Meltzoff AN, DEMO J. 2005. How do we perceive the pain of others? A DEMO
into the neural processes involved in empathy. Neuroimage 24:771–79
Jacobsen T, Schubotz RI, Hofel L, Cramon DY. 2006. Brain correlates of aesthetic judgment
of beauty. Neuroimage 29:276–85
Johnson SC, Schmitz TW, Kawahara-Baccus DEMO, Rowley HA, Alexander A, et al. 2005.
The cerebral response DEMO subjective choice with and without self-reference. J. Cogn.
Neurosci. 17:1897–906
Johnson SC, Baxter LC, Wilder LS, Pipe JG, Heiserman JE, Prigatano GP. 2002. Neural
correlates of self-reﬂection. Brain 125:1808–14
Kalisch R, Wiech K, Critchley HD, Seymour B, O’Doherty JP, et al. 2005. DEMO reduc-
tion through detachment: subjective, physiological, and neural effects. J. DEMO Neurosci.
17:874–83
Keenan JP, Nelson A, O’Connor M, Pascual-Leone DEMO 2001. Self-recognition and the right
hemisphere. Nature 409:305
Keenan JP, DEMO M, Platek SM, Lardi G, Lassonde M. 2003. Self-face processing DEMO a
callosotomy patient. Eur. J. Neurosci. 18:2391–95
Kelley HH. 1967. Attribution theory in social psychology. In Nebraska Symposium on Motivation,
ed. D. DEMO pp. 192–240. Lincoln: Univ. Nebraska Press
Kelley WM, Macrae CN, DEMO CL, Caglar S, Inati S, Heatherton TF. 2002. Finding the
DEMO? An event-related fMRI study. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 14:785–94
Kjaer TW, Nowak M, Lou HC. 2002. Reﬂective self-awareness and conscious states: PET
DEMO for a common midline parietofrontal core. Neuroimage 17:1080–86
Klein SB, DEMO J, Kihlstrom JF. 1996. Self-knowledge of an amnesic patient: toward a neu-
ropsychology of personality and social psychology. J. Exp. Psychol. 125:250–60
DEMO SB, Loftus J, Trafton JG, Fuhrman RW. 1992. Use of DEMO and abstractions in trait
judgments: a model of trait knowledge about DEMO self and others. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol.
63:739–53
Knutson KM, DEMO JN, Spampinato MV, Grafman J. 2006. Politics on the brain: DEMO fMRI
investigation. Soc. Neuro. 1:25–40
Kong J, Gollub RL, Rosman IS, Webb JM, Vangel MG, et al. 2006. Brain activity associated with
expectancy-enhanced placebo analgesia as measured by functional magnetic resonance
imaging. J. DEMO 26:381–88
Kosslyn SM, Ganis G, Thompson WL. 2001. Neural foundations of imagery. Nat. Rev. Neu-
rosci. 2:635–42
Lane RD, Fink GR, Chau PM, Dolan RJ. 1997. Neural activation during selective attention
to DEMO emotional responses. Neuroreport 8:3969–72
Leibenluft E, Gobbini MI, Harrison T, Haxby JV. 2004. Mothers’ neural activation in response
to pictures of their children and other children. Biol. Psychiatry 56:225–32
Leube DT, Knoblich G, Erb M, Grodd W, Bartels M, Kircher TT. 2003. The DEMO correlates
of perceiving one’s own movements. Neuroimage 20:2084–90
Levesque J, DEMO F, Joanette Y, Paquette V, Mensour B, et al. 2003. Neural circuitry un-
derlying voluntary suppression of sadness. Biol. Psychiatry 53:502–10
DEMO M, Ramsay D. 2004. Development of self-recognition, personal pronoun use, DEMO pre-
tend play during the second year. Child. Dev. 75:1821–31
Lieberman MD. 2000. Intuition: a social cognitive neuroscience approach. Psychol. Bull.
126:109–37
Lieberman MD. 2005. Principles, processes, and puzzles of social cognition: an introduction
for the special issue on social cognitive neuroscience. Neuroimage 28:745–56
DEMO Lieberman
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
Lieberman MD. 2006. D3 -theory: a role for right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex in disruption,
disambiguation, and detachment from immediate experience. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. In press
Lieberman MD, Eisenberger NI. 2005. Conﬂict and habit: a social cognitive neuroscience
approach to the self. In On Building, Defending and Regulating the Self: A Psychological
DEMO, ed. A Tesser, JV Wood, DA Stapel, pp. 77–102. New York: Psychol. Press
Lieberman MD, Eisenberger NI, Crockett MJ, Tom DEMO, Pfeifer JH, Way BM. 2006. Putting
feelings into words: affect DEMO disrupts amygdala activity to affective stimuli. Psychol.
Sci. In press
Lieberman MD, Gaunt R, Gilbert DT, Trope Y. 2002. Reﬂection and reﬂexion: DEMO social
cognitive neuroscience approach to attributional inference. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 34:199–
249
Lieberman MD, Hariri A, Jarcho JM, Eisenberger NI, DEMO SY. 2005. An fMRI inves-
tigation of race-related amygdala activity in African-American and Caucasian-American
individuals. Nat. Neurosci. 8:720–22
Lieberman MD, Jarcho JM, DEMO S, Naliboff B, Suyenobu BY, et al. 2004. The neural
DEMO of placebo effects: a disruption account. Neuroimage 22:447–55
Lieberman MD, Jarcho JM, Satpute AB. 2004. Evidence-based and intuition-based self-
knowledge: an DEMO study. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 87:421–35
Lieberman MD, Ochsner KN, Gilbert DT, Schacter DL. 2001. Do amnesics exhibit cognitive
dissonance reduction? DEMO role of explicit memory and attention in attitude change.
Psychol. Sci. 12:135–40
Lieberman MD, Pfeifer JH. 2005. The self and social perception: DEMO kinds of questions in
social cognitive neuroscience. In Cognitive Neuroscience of Emotional and Social Behavior, ed.
A Easton, N Emery, pp. 195–235. Philadephia, PA: Psychol. Press
Lorberbaum JP, Newman JD, Horwitz AR, Dubno JR, Lydiard RB, et al. 2002. A potential
role for thalamocingulate DEMO in human maternal behavior. Biol. Psychiatry 51:431–45
MacDonald AW, Cohen DEMO, Stenger VA, Carter CS. 2000. Dissociating the role of the dorso-
lateral prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex in cognitive control. Science 288:1835–38
DEMO G, Leary MR. 2005. Why does social exclusion hurt? The relationship between
social and physical pain. Psychol. Bull. 131:202–23
MacDonald PA, Paus T. 2003. The role of parietal cortex in awareness of self-generated
movements: a transcranial magnetic stimulation study. Cereb. Cortex 13:962–67
MacLean PD, Newman JD. 1988. Role of midline frontolimbic cortex in production of the
isolation DEMO of squirrel monkeys. Brain Res. 450:111–23
Macrae CN, Moran JM, Heatherton TF, Banﬁeld JF, Kelley WM. 2004. Medial prefrontal
activity predicts DEMO for self. Cereb. Cortex 14:647–54
Markus HR. 1977. Self-schemata and processing information about the self. J. Personal. Soc.
Psychol. 35:63–78
Mason MF, Banﬁeld JF, Macrae CN. 2004. Thinking about actions: the neural substrates DEMO
person knowledge. Cereb. Cortex 14:209–14
McCabe K, Houser D, Ryan L, Smith V, Trouard T. 2001. A functional imaging study of
DEMO in two-person reciprocal exchange. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98:11832–35
McClure SM, Li J, Tomlin D, Cypert KS, Montague LM, Montague PR. 2004. Neural corre-
lates of behavioral preference for culturally familiar drinks. DEMO 44:379–87
McKiernan KA, Kaufman JN, Kucera-Thompson J, Binder JR. DEMO A parametric manipu-
lation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroimaging. J. Cogn.
Neurosci. 15:394–408
Mead GH. 1934. Mind, Self, and DEMO Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press
www.annualreviews.org
•
Social Cognitive Neuroscience 285
Annu. DEMO Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
Mendez MF, Anderson E, DEMO JS. 2005. An investigation of moral judgement in fron-
totemporal dementia. Cogn. Behav. Neurol. 18:193–208
Merleau-Ponty M. 1962. Phenomenology of Perception. London: Routledge
Metcalfe J, Mischel W. 1999. A hot/cool system analysis of delay of gratiﬁcation: dynamics of
willpower. Psychol. Rev. 106:3–19
Milne E, DEMO J. 2001. Ventromedial prefrontal cortex lesions in humans eliminate implicit
gender stereotyping. J. Neurosci. 21:RC150
Mitchell JP, Banaji MR, Macrae CN. 2005. DEMO link between social cognition and self-
referential thought in the medial prefrontal cortex. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 17:1306–15
Mitchell JP, Macrae CN, Banaji DEMO 2004. Encoding-speciﬁc effects of social cognition on
the neural correlates of subsequent memory. J. Neurosci. 26:4912–17
Moll J, de Oliveira-Souza R, Bramati DEMO, Grafman J. 2002a. Functional networks in emotional
moral and nonmoral social DEMO Neuroimage 16:696–703
Moll J, de Oliveira-Souza R, Eslinger PJ, DEMO IE, Mourao-Miranda J, et al. 2002b. The
neural correlates of moral sensitivity: a functional magnetic resonance imaging investiga-
tion of basic and moral emotions. J. Neurosci. 22:2730–36
Moll J, de Oliveira-Souza R, Moll DEMO, Ignacio FA, Bramati IE, et al. 2005. The moral afﬁliations
DEMO disgust: a functional MRI study. Cogn. Behav. Neurol. 18:68–78
Morrison DEMO, Lloyd D, di Pellegrino G, Roberts N. 2004. Vicarious responses DEMO pain in anterior
cingulate cortex: Is empathy a multisensory issue? Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 4:270–78
Najib A, Lorberbaum JP, Kose S, Bohning DE, George MS. 2004. Regional brain activity in
women grieving a romantic relationship breakup. Am. J. Psychiatry 161:2245–56
Neely JH. 1977. Semantic DEMO and retrieval from lexical memory: roles of inhibitionless
spreading activation and DEMO capacity attention. J. Exp. Psychol.: Gen. 106:226–54
Nitschke JB, Nelson EE, Rusch BD, Fox AS, Oakes TR, Davidson RJ. 2004. DEMO cor-
tex tracks positive mood in mothers viewing pictures of their newborn infants. Neuroimage
21:583–92
Nosek BA, Banaji MR, Greenwald AG. 2002. DEMO implicit group attitudes and beliefs
from a demonstration web site. Group Dyn. 6:101–15
Ochsner KN. 2004. Current directions in social cognitive neuroscience. Curr. DEMO Neurobiol.
14:254–58
Ochsner KN, Beer JS, Robertson ER, Cooper DEMO, Gabrieli JD, et al. 2005. The neural correlates
of direct and reﬂected self-knowledge. Neuroimage 28:797–814
Ochsner KN, Bunge SA, Gross JJ, Gabrieli JD. 2002. Rethinking feelings: an FMRI study of
the cognitive regulation of emotion. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 14:1215–29
Ochsner KN, Gross JJ. 2005. The cognitive control of emotion. Trends Cogn. Sci. 9:242–49
Ochsner KN, Knierim K, Ludlow DH, Henelin J, Ramachandra T, et al. DEMO Reﬂecting
upon feelings: an fMRI study of neural systems supporting the DEMO of emotion to
self and other. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 16:1746–72
Ochsner KN, Lieberman MD. 2001. The emergence of social cognitive neuroscience. Am.
Psychol. 56:717–34
Ochsner KN, Ray RD, Cooper JC, Robertson ER, DEMO S, et al. 2004. For better or for
worse: neural systems supporting the cognitive down- and up- regulation of negative
emotion. Neuroimage 23:DEMO
Panksepp J. 1998. Affective Neuroscience. London: Oxford Univ. Press
Pasley BN, Mayes LC, Schultz RT. 2004. Subcortical discrimination of unperceived objects
during binocular rivalry. Neuron 42:163–72
Pennebaker JW. 1997. Writing about emotional experiences as DEMO therapeutic process. Psychol.
Sci. 8:162–66
286 Lieberman
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. DEMO personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
Perner J, Wimmer H. 1985. “John thinks that Mary thinks that...”: attribution of second-order
beliefs by 5- to 10-year-old children. J. Exp. Child Psychol. 39:437–71
Petrovic P, Dietrich T, Fransson P, Andersson J, Carlsson K, Ingvar M. 2005. DEMO in emo-
tional processing—induced expectations of anxiety relief activate a generalized modulatory
network. Neuron 46:957–69
Petrovic P, Kalso E, Petersson KM, Ingvar M. 2002. Placebo and opioid analgesia—imaging
a shared neuronal network. Science 295:DEMO
Peyron R, Laurent B, Garcia-Larrea L. 2000. Functional imaging of brain responses to pain.
A review and meta-analysis. Neurophysiol. Clin. 30:263–88
Pfeifer DEMO, Lieberman MD, Dapretto M. 2006. “I know you are but what am I?” Neural bases
of self- and social-knowledge retrieval in children DEMO adults. Under review
Phan KL, Fitzgerald DA, Nathan PJ, Moore DEMO, Uhde TW, Tancer ME. 2005. Neural sub-
strates for voluntary suppression of negative affect: a functional magnetic resonance imag-
ing study. Biol. Psychiatry 57:210–19
Phelps EA, Cannistraci CJ, Cunningham WA. 2003. Intact performance DEMO an indirect measure
of race bias following amygdala damage. Neuropsychologia 41:203–8
Phelps EA, O’Connor KJ, Cunningham WA, Funayama ES, Gatenby JC, et al. 2000. Per-
formance on indirect measures of race evaluation predicts DEMO activation. J. Cogn.
Neurosci. 12:729–38
Platek SM, Loughead JW, Gur RC, Busch S, Ruparel K, et al. 2006. Neural substrates for
functionally discriminating self-face from personally familiar faces. Hum. Brain Mapp.
27:91–8
DEMO RA. 2006. Can cognitive processes be inferred from neuroimaging data? Trends DEMO
Sci. 10:59–63
Pronin E, Gilovich T, Ross L. 2004. Objectivity in the eye of the beholder: divergent percep-
tions of bias in self versus others. Psychol. Rev. 111:781–99
Rainville P, Duncan GH, DEMO DD, Carrier B, Bushnell MC. 1997. Pain affect encoded in
human anterior cingulate but not somatosensory cortex. Science 277:968–71
Read SJ, Vanman EJ, Miller LC. 1997. Connectionism, parallel constraint satisfaction pro-
cesses, and gestalt principles: (re)introducing cognitive dynamics to social psychology.
Personal. Soc. DEMO Rev. 1:26–53
Reeder GD. 1993. Trait-behavior relations in dispositional inference. Personal. Soc. Psychol.
Bull. 19:586–93
Richeson JA, Baird AA, Gordon HL, Heatherton TF, Wyland CL, et al. 2003. An fMRI
investigation of DEMO impact of interracial contact on executive function. Nat. Neurosci.
6:1323–28
Rilling JK, Gutman DA, Zeh TR, Pagnoni G, Berns GS, Kilts CD. 2002. A neural basis for
social cooperation. Neuron 35:395–405
Robinson DEMO 1967. Vocalization evoked from forebrain in Macaca mulatta. Physiol. Behav.
2:345–54
Ruby P, Decety J. 2004. How would you feel versus how do you think she would feel? A
neuroimaging study of perspective-taking with social emotions. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 16:988–
99
Samson D, Apperly IA, DEMO U, Humphreys GW. 2005. Seeing it my way: a case
of selective deﬁcit in inhibiting self-perspective. Brain 128:1102–11
Sanfey AG, Rilling JK, Aronson JA, Nystrom LE, Cohen JD. 2003. The neural basis of eco-
nomic decision-making in the Ultimatum Game. Science 300:1755–58
Satpute AB, Lieberman MD. 2006. Integrating automatic and controlled processing into neu-
rocognitive models DEMO social cognition. Brain Res. 1079:86–97
www.annualreviews.org
•
Social Cognitive Neuroscience 287
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo DEMO 02/10/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
Saxe R, Carey S, DEMO N. 2004. Understanding other minds: linking developmental
psychology and functional neuroimaging. DEMO Rev. Psychol. 55:87–124
Schmitz TW, Kawahara-Baccus TN, Johnson SC. 2004. Metacognitive evaluation, self-
relevance, and the right prefrontal cortex. Neuroimage 22:DEMO
Seger CA, Stone M, Kennan JP. 2004. Cortical activations during judgments about the self
and another person. Neuropsychologia 42:1168–77
Seifritz E, Esposito F, Neuhoff JG, Luthi A, Mustovic H, et al. 2003. DEMO sex-
independent amygdala response to infant crying and laughing in parents versus nonparents.
Biol. Psychiatry 54:1367–75
Semendeferi K, Schleicher A, Zilles K, Armstrong E, Van Hoesen GW. 2001. Evolution of the
hominoid prefrontal cortex: imaging and quantitative analysis of area 10. Am. J. Physical
Anthropol. 114:224–41
Shamay-Tsoory SG, Lester H, Chisin R, Isreal O, Bar-Shalom DEMO, et al. 2005. The neural cor-
relates of understanding the other’s DEMO: a positron emission tomography investigation
of accurate empathy. Neuroimage 27:468–72
DEMO SG, Tomer R, Berger BD, Aharon-Peretz J. 2003. Characterization of DEMO
deﬁcits following prefrontal brain damage: the role of the right ventromedial DEMO
cortex. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 15:324–27
Sherif M. 1937. An experimental approach to the study of attitudes. Sociometry 1:90–98
Sherif M, Harvey OJ, White BJ, Hood WR, Sherif CW. 1961. Intergroup Conﬂict and Cooper-
ation: The Robber’s Cave Experiment. Norman: Univ. Oklahoma Press
Shimada S, Hiraki K, Oda I. 2005. The parietal role in the sense of self-ownership with temporal
discrepancy between visual and proprioceptive feedbacks. Neuroimage 24:1225–32
DEMO PJ. 2002. Self-awareness and emotional intensity. Cogn. Emot. 16:195–216
Singer T, Seymour B, O’Doherty J, Kaube H, Dolan RJ, Frith CD. 2004. Empathy for pain
involves the affective but not sensory components of DEMO Science 303:1157–62
Singer T, Seymour B, O’Doherty JP, Stephan DEMO, Dolan RJ, Frith CD. 2006. Empathic neural
responses are modulated by the perceived fairness of others. Nature 439:466–69
Sirigu A, Daprati E, Pradat-Diehl P, Franck N, Jeannerod M. 1999. Perception of self-
generated movement followng left parietal lesion. Brain 122:1867–74
Smith ER, DeCoster J. 1999. Associative and rule-based processing: a connectionist interpre-
tation of dual-process models. In Dual-Process Theories in Social Psychology, ed. S Chaiken,
Y Tropez, pp. 323–36, New York: Guilford
Smith W. 1945. The functional signiﬁcance of the rostral cingular cortex as revealed by its
responses to electrical DEMO J. Neurophysiol. 8:241–55
Spence SA, Brooks DJ, Hirsch SR, DEMO PF, Meehan J, Grasby PM. 1997. A PET study of
voluntary movement in schizophrenic patients experiencing passivity phenomena. Brain
120:1997–2011
Sperry RW, Zaidel E, Zaidel D. 1979. Self recognition and social awareness in the deconnected
minor hemisphere. Neuropsychologia 17:153–66
Stamm JS. 1955. The function of DEMO medial cerebral cortex in maternal behavior of rats. J.
Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 47:21–27
Suguira M, Kawashima R, Nakamura K, Okada K, DEMO T, et al. 2000. Passive and active
recognition of one’s own DEMO Neuroimage 11:36–48
Sugiura M, Kawashima R, Nakamura K, Sato DEMO, Nakamura A, et al. 2001. Activation re-
duction in anterior temporal cortices during repeated recognition of faces of personal
acquaintances. Neuroimage 13:877–90
DEMO M, Watanabe J, Maeda Y, Matsue Y, Fukuda H, DEMO R. 2005. Cortical mech-
anisms of visual self-recognition. Neuroimage 24:143–49
288 Lieberman
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of DEMO on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
ANRV296-PS58-11 ARI 17 November 2006 1:27
Tabibnia G, Satpute AB, DEMO MD. 2006. The neural basis of fairness preference. Under
review
Taylor ST, Phan KL, Decker LR, Liberzon I. 2003. Subjective rating of emotionally salient
stimuli modulates neural activity. Neuroimage 18:650–59
Trepel C, Fox CR, Poldrack RA. 2005. Prospect theory on the brain? Toward a cognitive
DEMO of decision under risk. Brain Res. Cogn. Brain Res. 23:34–50
Turk DJ, Heatherton TF, Kelley WM, Funnell MG, Gazzaniga MS, Macrae CN. 2002. Mike
or me? Self-recognition in a split-brain patient. Nat. Neurosci. 5:841–42
Twenge JM, Baumeister RF, Tice DM, Stucke TS. 2001. If you can’t join them, beat them:
effects of social exclusion on aggressive behavior. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 81:1058–69
Uddin LQ, Kaplan JT, Molnar-Szakacs I, Zaidel E, Iacoboni M. 2005. Self-face recognition
activates a frontoparietal “mirror” network in the right hemisphere: an event-related fMRI
study. Neuroimage 15:926–35
Uddin LQ, Rayman J, Zaidel E. 2005. Split-brain DEMO separate but equal self-recognition
in the two cerebral hemispheres. Conscious Cogn. 14:633–40
Vartanian O, Goel V. 2004. Neuroanatomical correlates of aesthetic preference for paintings.
Neuroreport 15:893–97
Vogeley K, Bussfeld P, Newen A, Herrmann S, Happe F, et al. 2001. Mind reading: neural
mechanisms of theory of mind and self-persepctive. Neuroimage 14:170–81
Wager TD, Rilling JK, Smith EE, Sokolik A, Casey KL, et al. 2004. Placebo-induced DEMO
in FMRI in the anticipation and experience of pain. Science 303:1162–67
Wegner DM, Bargh JA. 1998. Control and automaticity in social life. In The Handbook of Social
Psychology, ed. DT Gilbert, ST Fiske, G Lindzey, pp. 446–96. New York: McGraw-Hill
Wheeler ME, Fiske ST. 2005. Controlling racial prejudice: social-cognitive goals affect amyg-
dala and stereotype activation. Psychol. Sci. 16:56–63
Wicker B, Keysers C, Plailly J, Royet J, Gallese V, Rizzolatti G. 2003. Both of us disgusted in
my DEMO: the common neural basis of seeing and feeling disgust. Neuron 40:DEMO
Wilde O. 1905. De Profundis. Mineola, NY: Dover
Wilson TD, DEMO DB, Kermer DA, Gilbert DT. 2005. The pleasures of uncertainty:
prolonging positive moods in ways people do not anticipate. J. Personal. Soc. DEMO 88:5–
21
Wilson TD, Schooler JW. 1991. Thinking too much: introspection can reduce the quality of
preferences and decisions. J. Personal. Soc. DEMO 60:181–92
Woodward AL. 1998. Infants selectively encode the goal object of an actor’s reach. Cognition
69:1–34
Word CO, Zanna MP, Cooper DEMO 1974. The nonverbal mediation of self-fulﬁlling prophecies
in interracial interaction. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 10:109–20
Zysset S, Huber O, Ferstl E, von Cramon DY. 2002. The anterior frontomedian cortex and
evaluative judgment: an fMRI study. Neuroimage 15:983–91
www.annualreviews.org
•
Social Cognitive Neuroscience 289
Annu. Rev. DEMO 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
Contents ARI 8 November 2006 21:2
Contents
Prefatory
Research on Attention DEMO as a Model for the Integration of
Psychological Science
Michael I. Posner and Mary K. Rothbart
 1
Cognitive Neuroscience
The Representation of Object DEMO in the Brain
Alex Martin  25
Depth, Space, and Motion
Perception of Human Motion
Randolph Blake and Maggie Shiffrar
 47
Form DEMO (Scene Perception) or Object Recognition
Visual Object Recognition: Do We DEMO More Now Than We Did 20
Years Ago?
Jessie J. Peissig and Michael J. Tarr
 75
Animal Cognition
Causal Cognition in Human DEMO Nonhuman Animals: A Comparative,
Critical Review
Derek C. Penn and DEMO J. Povinelli
 97
Emotional, Social, and Personality Development
The Development of Coping
Ellen A. Skinner and Melanie J. Zimmer-Gembeck
 119
Annual DEMO of
Psychology
Volume 58, 2007
vii
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. DEMO from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
Contents ARI 8 November 2006 21:2
Biological and Genetic Processes in DEMO
The Neurobiology of Stress and Development
Megan Gunnar and Karina Quevedo  145
Development in Societal Context
An Interactionist Perspective on the Socioeconomic Context DEMO
Human Development
Rand D. Conger and M. Brent Donnellan
 175
Culture and Mental Health
Race, Race-Based Discrimination, and Health Outcomes Among
African DEMO
Vickie M. Mays, Susan D. Cochran, and Namdi W. Barnes
 201
Personality Disorders
Assessment and Diagnosis of Personality Disorder: Perennial Issues
and an Emerging Reconceptualization
Lee Anna Clark  227
Social Psychology of Attention, Control, and Automaticity
Social Cognitive Neuroscience: A Review of Core Processes
DEMO D. Lieberman  259
Inference, Person Perception, Attribution
Partitioning the Domain of Social Inference: Dual Mode and Systems
Models and Their Alternatives
Arie W. Kruglanski and Edward Orehek
 291
Self and Identity
Motivational and DEMO Aspects of the Self
Mark R. Leary  317
Social Development, DEMO Personality, Social Motivation,
Social Emotion
Moral Emotions and Moral Behavior
DEMO Price Tangney, Jeff Stuewig, and Debra J. Mashek
 345
viii Contents
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of DEMO on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
Contents ARI 8 November 2006 21:2
The Experience of Emotion
Lisa DEMO Barrett, Batja Mesquita, Kevin N. Ochsner,
and James J. Gross  373
Attraction and Close Relationships
The Close Relationships of Lesbian and DEMO Men
Letitia Anne Peplau and Adam W. Fingerhut  405
Small Groups
Ostracism
Kipling D. Williams
 425
Personality Processes
The Elaboration of Personal DEMO Psychology
Beverly M. Walker and David A. Winter  453
Cross-Country or Regional Comparisons
Cross-Cultural Organizational Behavior
Michele J. Gelfand, Miriam Erez, and DEMO Aycan
Organizational Groups and Teams
 479
Work Group Diversity
Daan van Knippenberg and Michaéla C. Schippers
Career Development and Counseling
 515
Work DEMO Vocational Psychology: Theory, Research,
and Applications
Nadya A. Fouad
 543
Adjustment to Chronic Diseases and Terminal Illness
Health Psychology: Psychological Adjustment
to Chronic Disease
Annette L. Stanton, Tracey A. Revenson, and Howard DEMO
 565
Contents ix
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on 02/10/11. For personal use only.
Contents ARI 8 November 2006 21:2
Research Methodology
Analysis of Nonlinear DEMO of Change with Random CoefﬁcientMediation AnalysisDavid P. MacKinnon, Amanda J. Fairchild, and Matthew S. Fritz  593
Models
Robert Cudeck and Jeffrey R. DEMO  615
Indexes
Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles, Volumes 48–58Cumulative Index DEMO Contributing Authors, Volumes 48–58
Errata
639
644
An online log of DEMO to Annual Review of Psychology chapters (if any, 1997 to the
present) may be found at http://psych.annualreviews.org/errata.shtml
x Contents
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007.58:259-289. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Waterloo on DEMO/10/11. For personal use only.{1g42fwefx}