A Framework for Understanding
Opportunity Recognition
Entrepreneurs versus Private Equity Financiers
NOEL DEMO LI N DSAY AND J USTIN CRAIG
N OEL). L INDSAY
is all asso ciate professor
of en trepreneurs hip and
fnuily business DEMO the
d irecto r of t he Aus rmlian
CCIHC'f fo r Fam ily B usin ess
at Bond Un iversity in
Aus DEMO
nlinds<l )'@starr.bond.edu.au
J USTI N CRAIG
is :t po DEMO fellow
and an associa te at t he
A ustralian Cente r for
Family Business at Bon d
Uuivcrs itv i ll Austra lia.
DEMO u.all
WINTEH 20m
T
h e scree ni ng and evaluation o f busi-
n ess oppo rt u nities sub mitted by
e DEMO urs is J maj or co m po-
n en t o f the decisio n-ma king p ro-
m ployed by pr ivate DEMO q uity fin an ciers
cess e
(suc h as ve DEMO u re cap ita lists) when th ey d eci de
DEMO he the r or n ot to i nvest i n a Il C\ V ve n tu re
(M ai n p r ize, Hin dl e, and M itc he ll [2002])_
DEMO hese financiers be lieve they know the " right"
cues for predi ct ing the o ut co me ofa busin ess
opp DEMO r m niry; however, research indi cates that
t he re sults o f the ir d ecisions are p o o r (Z ide r
[1 998])_
Oppo rtu nities stem £i·0 111 DEMO perceptions
of decisio n maker s; th ey are a co DEMO ue nce of
m aking sen se of si tua t io ns (Gartne r an d Shaver
120021) _ Opport u nities DEMO ave t he qualities of
being at t rac tive, d DEMO rable. and t imel y an d are
anc ho red in produ ces or se rv ices t hat crea te o r
DEMO value fo r their bu yer s or e nd u ser s (T im-
m ons 11 999])_ T he most su ccessful e n tre-
prc ne urs and p rivate eq uity DEMO o f en tre-
prcn eurial ventures are o ppo rt unity focused.
Th ey start with w hat custo mers and the market
DEMO and do not lose sight o f thi s (T im DEMO ns
11999))_ U nderta king fo rmaliz ed marke t
DEMO provi d es use ful in fo rmati on in this
regard ; however, intuition or "gut feel" b ased
0 11 ex pe r ien ce is ex tre me ly import an t DEMO
j udgi ng m arket p otential (H ills and S DEMO rader
[19981) -
R esearch into "oppo rtu nity evaluat io n"
has b een ad dressed s u bstant ially in DEMO e aca-
de mi c l iter ature; however, r esearch i nto
" o ppo rt un ity recogn ition " has DEMO less
att ention ( H ills, Lum p ki n, and Sing h 11 997]).
p.... esearche rs are no w beginning DEMO o focus m ore
O il o ppo rtunity re cognitio n as an impo rt ant
p art o f th e en DEMO ur ial p rocess_Very l ittle
is known abou t the sensitivity of entrepreneurs
to o ppo rt un ities, th e cognitive processes they
use to id enti fy o ppo rt unities, or their sel f- pe r-
cep tio ns rega rdi ng thi s DEMO en o me non (Hills,
Shrader, Balrrusairyte, and lz DEMO k-Bilgin 120021) _
T he same applies to p ri vate DEMO finan ciers
thou gh there has been recent interest in t he
d ecision- ma king p ro cesses of th ese t yp DEMO o f
i nd ividuals (see, for ex a m ple. Fa rr e ll a nd
Howorth [20021) -
T hi s stu dy b uilds upo n previous re-search
un de rtaken by DEMO 11995]. Hills, Lum p ki n,
and Singh [1 9971 , and H ills and Sh rade r [ 19981
that fo cus ed o n unde rs tan d ing h ow entre-
preneu DEMO recognize business oppo rt unities. It
exte n ds the previou s research b y exa min ing
d ifferences in the oppor tu DEMO rec ogniti on pro-
c ess between exper ie nced o r ha bitual entre-
pr en eu rs (see, for exa m DEMO, Uc basaran a nd
Wesrh ead 12002J) and ex pe r ie nced private
e quity financiers of e nt repreneu rial vent DEMO res.
We d efin e expe r ie nce in an en treprene ur ial
co ntex t in te r ms of knowle DEMO, sk ills, and / or
know-how gained by an ind ividual w ho, over
th e last 10 years, eit he r DEMO: l ) fo u nd e d more
than one high DEMO -poten tial ent repre neurial
business; or 2) been actively involved in making
investment d ecisio ns about prov id ing pr ivate
DEMO quity finance to high-growth- potenti al e nt re-
THF JOUI ~ N t\1 or I' lt IVi\ T F. E Q UI I'V
13
EXHIBIT 1
Overview of t h e O p por tu nity DEMO n Process
J.
Opportunity
Search Pro cess
;
2. Opportunity
R DEMO tion P rocess
3. Opportunity
Evaluation or
Ver ification Process
~
~
}[
..~
1.1
SI;~ 1Il e nvironment for
opportunitie s .. DEMO ( Look
fo r/generate ideas.}
..
..
1.2 Encounter possible
o pport unity scenario
I·
..... ..................
•
.......... .................................... .....:
I
DEMO
}
~
~
i·
~
:
;
.........
3. 1
2. 1 Is this an o pport unity
from a broad and general
DEMO? ( To decide,
li se No rmative Tell/ o/lIl e.)
..
.. ....... ....
•
.. ................
Undertake Due Diligence
(Vl>rify claims Jill/de and
q ua ntify g ilt [ DEMO
_.
..
2.2 If so, is this en opportunity
spe cifically DEMO me/us'? (7'0
dec ide, use /Ildivid lla DEMO;-ed
Fir Temp/are.)
........... ............ .. .......
...
I
..
3.2 Sho uld we commit funds?
(Co nskterahernati ves and
ad dress g aps.)
:
~
~
prene u ri al busin esses. In t his re sear ch. p ri vate equ ity
DEMO s include venture capital ists (professio nal. formal
investors of iusrirutional DEMO ey), business ange ls (pr ivate
or info rm al DEMO rs who rend to invest their ow n mon ey
and o fte n their time), and investment man agers who wo rk
DEMO rhe private e quity division of banks that provide finance
to hi gh- gro wth-potential e n tre preneu r ial vent u res DEMO
rerum for equity positions in th ose ve ntures. Entrepreneurs
were d efined as individuals who had recognized an o ppor-
ru ni ty DEMO who had broug ht together th e n ece ssary
resources to take advantage of th at oppor tu ni ty (Ch ris-
tensen, Madsen, and Peter son 11989J, B ygravc and H ofer
[1991], and Hil ls, Lu mpkin, and S ing h [19971).
id en tification and develo pmen t to be able to g DEMO th eir
ventu res to at least $1 milli o n in sales turno ver.
E ncreprcu curs are notably overly o ptimistic in DEMO
assessmen t o f busin ess o ppor tu nities (see, for exa mple,
C ooper, Woo, and D unkelber g DEMO) . Non -e nt re pre-
ne urs, ho wever, DEMO be less likely to charac ter ize si tua-
ti ons in optim istic t erms and, thus, m ake decis io ns
DEMO flectin g th is ne gative per spec tive ( Palich a nd Bagb y
[1 995\).
O ppo rt unity recog ni DEMO occ urs in t he early stages
o f the bu siness life cycle pri or t o ventu re laun ch but may
DEMO occur throu gho ut the l ife of the ente rprise a nd t he
life of th e entrepreneur (H ills and Sh rader 11 9981) . Oppor-
tu nity reco gni tion in vol ves p er cei vin g a p o ssibi lity to
DEMO a new business venture or sig nificantly i m proving
the position ofan existing bu siness w hich. in bot h cases,
results DEMO new profit potential (Chr iste nsen, Madsen, and
Peterson [19891)DEMO
E nt reprene urs identify o ppo rtu nities by using dif-
ferent rypes o f info rrn ation about t he environme nt DEMO he re
it is availa ble (l3use nitz II9961). T DEMO ey m ake a habit of
scanning thei r e nviro nme n ts tor information that may
lead to new b usiness oppo DEMO (Knish a nd G ilad
r199 1]). (=o cusing 0 11 marke ts and c ustomers increases the
ENTREPRENEURS AND
O PPORTUNITY DEMO EC O G N ITIO N
The recogni tion and explo itation of bu siness o ppor-
tunities in th e market are co DEMO functi on s o f en trepre ne ur-
sh ip (DEMO, for exam ple, Schumperer 1197 f!; Kirzner 119791;
Casson DEMO 9 82J; Hill s and S hrader 11 9981) . Yet , Illany
would- be ent rep reneu rs fail to reco gnize DEMO tunities.
Ti mmons l19 90] estimated that only 1 in 3 0 business ven-
tures had fou nders that were good e no ugh DEMO o ppo rt unity
14
A FI{AMl:WORK FO R
U",,-'
OF.I{S-
IA N II ING OI'I' O RTU NITY R I:.
CO GN ITt ON
WINTER 2002
p robabi lity of reco gnizing e nrreprc nc urinl o ppo DEMO nities
(Bhave 11 9941 ; H ill, and Shrade r 11 998J) . So me time s the
d ecisio n to start a ve nture pr ecedes recognizing an o ppo r-
runiry and DEMO is a con cert ed search for and filtration of
viable business oppcrrunirics. At othe r tim es, en trepre ne urs
discover p roblems [Q be solved o r mar ket n eed s t DEMO fulfill
a nd, o nly th en , do rhey d DEMO de to s tart a busine ss a nd
become e nt reprelleurs (S have I1994J).
E n tre p re n eurs o fte n act on <I n id ea w ith l im ited
i nformation: (H ebert and Link 119881; Gar tne r, 13 ird, and
S tar r 11 9921; Buscn itz II 996J). T hey often h ave to nuke
dec isions DEMO there arc no historical trends, no p revio us
levels of DEMO e, a nd littl e, if a ny, sp ec DEMO m ark et
info r mation (M ille r and Fri DEMO [ 1984J).
E ntreprene urs, especially i n th e DEMO ma tive S ta gc~ of
t he ir o rga niza tio ns, do not h ave th e luxu ry of becoming
ex pe rt de cis io n makers in a specific area (G ilmore and
Kazanj ian 11 989]). If en trepreneur s DEMO until all the " facts'
aft: in to start co DEMO others rhar th eir venture is indeed
legi tim ate, the DEMO portu nity t hey are seeking to ex ploi t
will mo st likely be go ne by the tim e all th e DEMO become
available (Stevenso n and G umpe rt 119H5]). For DEMO reason ,
Buscni tz and Barn ey 11 997) s uggest rhat th ose who make
g reate r lise o f biaseli DEMO h euristi cs (r ules of rh um b based
on DEMO) i ll th eir dec ision makin g are more likely
DEMO find themselves in :111 e ntreprene urial c o nt ext.
DEMO
OPPORTUNITY R ECOGNITION
It is n ot o n ly e n tre pre ne urs w ho o pe rate in . \11
DEMO ial c o nte xt. P ri va te eq u ity finan ciers of
e nrreprencurial ventures do as we ll; yet . less is known
about how t he y recognize opportunities. Parr of DEMO his has
to do with t he different types offinanciers that are in volved
at the various stages oft he entre pre ne ur DEMO process. Bankers
p rov id ing deb t finan ce, tor DEMO m ple, ge nera lly o nly fund
b usiness ve DEMO ures to the ex te nt t ha t th ere are hard assets
against which co sec ure the d ebt as we DEMO as cash flow to
repay the d ebt. Ali suc h, DEMO ularly in the ea rlier "tage')
of ve nt ure g rowth, entre preneurs often n eed to turn to
p r-iva te eq uity finan cier" ore ntre prene urial ve ntu res such
as b usiness a ngels or ven tu re capi talists DEMO a lte r native
so urces of f und ing.
From o ne per spect ive, different types of financiers
have similar objectives in that t hey want to st ruct ure th eir
fina nc DEMO instru ments so as to find the r ight bala n ce of
sharing cash and risk (Pe tty and U pton I 19961). T hey also
seem to lise sim ilar c riter ia DEMO r cu e sets w he n it co mes to
Wr NlER 10
1f:!
ide ntifyin g po te n tial busin DEMO o ppo rtun ities. Items such
as the m arket , the t eam , an d. to J lesser ex tent, techn ology
SCL'1ll to p rov ide dimensions alo ng w hich finan DEMO rec-
ognize opport unities. Co rporate fina ncial ba ckers ofco r-
poratc entrep re ne urs (in traprene u rs), for exa m ple, seem
to s up po rt proje cts that a re not o nly in stra teg ic align-
ment wi th DEMO co rpo ration, but a lso t hat are in an DEMO trrac-
rive market a nd that have a cor po rate e n trepre ne urial team
wi th a good underst anding of DEMO he m ark et place (K e e n
1"1 DEMO). Venture capitalist st udies re po rt t ha t funding a
po te ntia l op po rt un ity is d DEMO prim aril y 0 11 th e
quality of the e ntrep rene urial team (M acm illan, Siegel,
and S u DEMO Narasimha I19851: Goslin a nd Barge I19861 ;
R obinson 119871) o r the attractiveness o f the market (Rah,
Ju DEMO, and Lee 11994/: 13ahn, Z ach arakis, and Song DEMO) .
B ecau se b usin ess a nge ls aft: n o t acco unta ble to ot he rs for
th DEMO investm ent de cision s, th ey invest more on " DEMO ut feel"
rat he r th an based 0 11 co mprehe nsive research. Bu siness
angels frequently are req ui red to DEMO i nvest me nt de ci-
sions un der co n ditions of un cert ain ty with informa tio n
that is co DEMO a nd inc omplet e (van Osnabrugge [1 9( 91) DEMO
As such, th ey are m or e likely to e DEMO ploy h euristic d eci-
s ion- ma king tec hniq ues. (Farrell and H ow rth 12002 J) .
Intervi ews of DEMO ess angels su ggest that they may be
m o rt' DEMO en c ed by the e ntre prene urial team duri ng th e
screeni ng process (van Osnab rugge It999]) t hough DEMO
pre fer to invest in m arkets and /or te chn DEMO log ies that are
fam iliar to them Or in w hich they h ave had som e d irec t
ex pe r DEMO (Kelly and Hay 11996J) .
Alth ou gh s im ilar cr ite r ia 01' cues seem to be used by
financiers ofe ntreprene urial ventures in recogn izing op po r-
t unities, the var io us p o pu latio ns of financ iers DEMO ffer sub-
st antially, D ifferences occur in their risk preferen DEMO
backgrounds. experie nces, p rej udices, and objectives (see
for DEMO, R o bert.' I19911 ; H arr ison and Mason 120021) .
These types of items w ill vary t he financin g d ecision a nd
h elp to exp lain why some financiers DEMO ay think that a par-
t icular project is an o ppo rtu nity w hile o thers llIay disagree.
OPPORTU NITY R ECOGNITION DEMO PART OF
THE OPPORTUNITY FORMULATION PROCESS
The process of formulatin g 3 11 o ppo rt unity is dis-
cussed in terms of opportunity DEMO, o ppo rt unity recog-
niti on , and o ppo DEMO nity evaluatio n (see, for exa mple, Hills
11 9 DEMO : H ills, Lumpkin , and S ing h 11 9971 ; Hills a nd
Shrader 119981). B uilding upon their findings, DEMO sug-
gest t hat the o ppo rtunity recogni tion is co m prised ofrwo
pans. Du rin g th e o ppo rt DEMO recognition p hase, potcn -
TnI' J O URN Al OF I' IU VAlI' E~l lJITY 15
EXHIB IT 2
Explana tion of th e Opportun ity Form ulation DEMO
1. Opport"lIity S earch: Scallllillgfor and E ncountering
Possible Opport,," ities
The o ppo rtunity search process invo lves scanni ng DEMO
e nviro nme nt for possible o ppo rt unities wh ile looking for
and/or ge ne ra ting po ssible ideas. If DEMO pote nt ial opport u-
nity is encountered, the o pportunity DEMO processceases
and the o ppo rtunity recogni tion process begi ns.
2. Opportllllity R ecogllition:
Nor mative and lndividuaiized Fit P hases
T DEMO process invol ves two phases. The first phase involves
reviewing a situatio n to id en tify w he ther it is a potential
DEMO in broad and general terms. The seco nd
ph ase involves d et ermining w hether th e oppo rtu nity
specij/call)' DEMO an opp o rtunity for the p artic ular e ntre preneur
or financier.
2. 1 Nonnative 0 pp0rrl m;ty Recognition Phase:
"Is this an opportunity?'
T his is the first p h ase of the opportuni ty recognition pro -
cess. During this phase. DEMO nor mative o ppo rtunity pattern
recognition template is used to screen the pote ntial o ppor-
tunity. T his template co ntains "no rmative" cues (such as
those that relate to the market, te am, product/techno lo gy,
e tc.) and "no rmative" we ig hrings fo r tho se cues i n terms
of em " ideal" potencial o ppo rtun ity. In this regard, DEMO
" patterns" exist for the c ues collectively at high er DEMO
and their co nstit ue nt lower-level su bpart'.
At this level, we sug gest that anyon e who has significant
experience in the en treprene urial do main will have devel-
oped a fundarn DEMO tal o ppo rtu nity patte r n te mplare. T his
te mp late will co ntain similar c ues and " guidance" as to
how to e valuate pote ntial o ppo rtunity scenarios DEMO terms
of th ose c ues.
R egard less of whe the r the p er son is an ex pe r ienced
e DEMO o r financier, their oppo rtunity reco gnition
te m plates DEMO ill be si milar due to the exp erien ce they have
devel ope d in the entre preneurial domain . As suc h, they
will be able to recognize whe the r th ere is DEMO poten tial
o pportu nity in a g ive n si tuation . .. at least , for someone
(tho ugh not ne cessarily for th em ), T hus, we wo uld expect
tha DEMO there would be no differen ces am o ng peo ple who
are experience d in working in an e ntre preneurial CO I1-
DEMO
A PR.AMF. WCmK H)R U N DI:RST" NDlN( : 01'l'01l. TUNlTY lt F.c.;( )( ;NI n O DEMO
text in re cogni zing an existing opport un ity at a broad
and general level and th at, in fact, the re DEMO uld be uni-
versal agree ment am o ng them 0 11 this issue. We wo uld
e xp ect differen ces 31 0 DEMO these ex pe rie nced decisio n
m akers, however, with th e second phase of the oppo r-
t unity reco gnition DEMO cess: the i ndividualized fit o ppo r-
t unity reco DEMO phase.
2.2 Individualiz ed Fit Opporlt/llity Recognition Phase:
Ills th is fl l/ opportuuil. yfor me/us?"
T his is DEMO e seco nd phase of the o ppo rtunity recognition
p rocess. Du ong th is phase, th e previously ide nt ifi ed
potential o ppo rtunity is evaluated in te rms of how well
DEMO "fits" the entrepreneu r's or fin ancie r's personal and/or
busine ss-related criteria. In this regard, an individualized
fit opportunity re cogn ition te m plate is use d to scre e DEMO
the opportunity.
We specula te that, during this phase, the "DEMO" ofthe iden -
tified oppo rtunity is d eter mi ned DEMO ter ms of i ndividu al-
ized items such as: prej DEMO; preferences; o bjec tiv es (for
exam ple , lifestyle); skills, k now-h ow, and ex pe r ie nc e
levels; risk preferenc es; and timi ng im plications. Assuch,
DEMO ere will be di vergen ce among the vario us g ro ups of
de cision m aker s (and w ithin g roups of d ecision m akers)
as t o whether an ide DEMO ed give n pote nti al oppo rt unity
is an opportu nity specifically for them.
3. O pporlll"ity Evaluation or Verificatio,,:DEMO
Due Diligence and Funds Com miunent
Where there appears to be a " good" fit, the d ecision w ill
be nude to DEMO to the o ppo rtunity evaluatio n or ve r-
ification phase. This will involve co llect ing info rmation
o n the pote DEMO opportunity to ve rify the "claims" made
in relation to the pote ntial o ppo rtu nity situatio n. This is
so me DEMO referred to as "due dil ig en ce." lr invol ve
att em pti ng to quantify the int uitio n or gut DEMO The
opp ortunity verificatio n phase also will involve a de cision
as to whe ther th e entreprene ur Or fin ancie r DEMO ill co mmi t
funds if there is a positive due dilig en ce outco me. For
e xam ple, an en treprene ur o r financi er may dec ide not to
co mmit funding DEMO an o ppo rtunity even thoug h the due
dilig en ce o utco me was po sitive because they may o btain
a DEMO return on a co mpe ting o ppo rtunity for a gi ven
risk level.
WINTE
R 2002
11
rial o ppo rtuni ties first arc ide ntifi ed at a DEMO and gen-
e ral level and c o m pared against a " nor mative te mp late "
of o ppo rt unity c harac ter istics or c ues before b e ing eval-
DEMO against specific individualized fit c riteria. The oppor-
tun ity recognitio n phase is preced ed by th e o p po rt unity
DEMO p hase and is fo llowed by the o ppo rt unity evalua-
t ion or ver ifica tio n ph ase w here DEMO oppo rt unity is ver i-
fied th rough " d ue diligen ce." Ex hibit 1 prov ides an
overv iew of the entire oppo r tuni ty for m ulation pro cess
(o ppo rt unity se arch, o ppo rtun ity recognitio n, and DEMO ppor-
tu nity evaluation). Exh ibit 2 p rovid es an exp lanatio n of
ind ivid ua l ph ases wit hin DEMO overall p rocess.
In relat ion to th e o ppo rt unity recogn ition phase,
en t rep rene urs a nd DEMO place imp ortan ce upon a
range of c ues whe n recognizing bu siness o ppo rt unities.
Th ese ap pear t DEMO i nclude (and a rc not l im it ed to ) th e
ent reprene ur ial team , the market , and/ or the tec hno logy
(see, for e xample, Ti DEMO 11'19'1 ]). In so rt ing th rou gh
the ran ge o f cues in the op po rt uni DEMO recogni tio n process,
c rea tive th inking (involvin DEMO cross- associat io ns of c hunks
o f exp er ience, kn o w-b ow, a nd con tacts) is u sed to syn-
rh esize t he var io us c ues and DEMO patterns in t he
bu siness co m plex ity (see , fo r exa m ple, imon 11 ':1 51).
DEMO 11 9851descr ibes pattern re cogn ition as a c reative
p rocess that is not simply logical, linear, and addi tive; it
is o ften i ntuitive and deduc tive. H e argues that DEMO takes
10 years o r m o re fo r peo p le to d evelop ap propriate levels
ofe xperience to allow t DEMO m to recognize patt erns in new
situatio ns based on prev io us expe rien ce.
Put s im ply, indi viduals d evelop cogn it ively based
frameworks for ge nera ting explanations of DEMO ir situatio ns
(Good ing and K inic ki 11 9951)DEMO The more times th at an
ex pe r ie nced ent repre neur or privat e eq uity fina ncie r is
e DEMO to the o ppo rt unity reco gnition process, the more
DEMO h un ks of ex pe r ience and m o re h euristics t hat wil l be
develop ed by th em DEMO added to their long- term m em ory.
It is here wh ere the expe r ience and heuristics cu m ulate
a nd DEMO stored i n the form o f an " o pport unity patt e rn
recogni tion te mp late." This tem plate co ntains o pportu-
nity dim en sion s or cu es and DEMO e we igh tings (ready to be
t ransferred in to DEMO rt-term memory if ne ed ed ) against
whic h pot ential o ppo rt u nities can b e co mpared. Entre-
p DEMO ur ial act ionin using the tem plate to seek "oppor-
DEMO unity hits" a nd ensur ing against " missed o ppo DEMO unities,"
h owever, will more likely o ccu r fo r indi vidu als in a pro-
m oti on- focu sed DEMO o f eagerness. It w ill depend on th eir
e ntrep re ue u ria l a ptitude and at titu de (Mc M ulle n and
Shephe rd /20021) .
Since expe rience DEMO an e nt repre ne urial co nt ext-e-
WINIU l. 2002
as a habitu al e ntrepre neur or an experie nced pr DEMO e quity
finan cier-is a prer eq uisit e for developing o ppo rt un ity
reco gnition p attern te m plates, it is expecte d th at, at a
" no nn ative" DEMO rt unity recognition level, th e templates
d evel op ed DEMO h abitual entre prene urs wi ll be sim ilar to
those d eveloped b y ex pe rienced pr ivat e eq uity DEMO ciers
of e ntrepreneur ial vent u res. (Differe nces are DEMO pecte d
b et ween and a mo ng gro ups at the " individualized fit"
op po rt unity recognition level since DEMO given o ppo rt u-
nit ies w ill not fit th e r isk pro files, investme nt preferen ces.
e tc., DEMO some indi vidu als.) As s uc h, it is expec ted t hat , at
the no nnative op port u nity DEMO it io n level, t his w ill
result in si DEMO ilar ities acro ss so me of the d im ensions iden -
rified by H ills II9951for both ex pe r ien ced DEMO ntre pre ne urs
and pri vate equ ity fina nc iers in terms of the var iety and
qua ntity ofselected o ppo DEMO recognition perc ep tion s
and behaviors ado pted by these indi viduals.
HYPOTHESIS DEVELO PMENT
Based o n the above, H ills' DEMO 19'15 1fr am ework was
used to d evelop a number o f hy porheses. Th ere are six
dim ensions associat ed DEMO h t his fram ework . Hills' 11 9951
d im DEMO sion s focu s on creativi ty and idea ge ne rat io n, per-
ce ived e ntre pre ne ur ial ale rtness t o o ppo rt unities. sources
of info r mation DEMO ide ntifying op port un it ies, de libe rate
search DEMO for recognition o ppo rt unities, ca uses of
o ppo DEMO un ities, a nd int uitive j udgment or "gut feel" to
evaluate op po rtu nities. H ypotheses were d eveloped around
these si:x dimensions.
It is e xpec ted that greater expe DEMO nce in de velo pin g
and i nvesting in e ntre p rene u r ial ventu res w ill lead to
g DEMO te r indi vid ual co n fide nc e b y ex pe r ien ce d ent re-
p ren eurs and DEMO vate equ ity finan ciers. As a result, there
will be DEMO beliefa mo ng these indi vid uals that th ey w ill have
a greater en trepre ne ur ial alertn ess in reco DEMO zin g business
o pportu nit ies.
Hyp othesis 1: There DEMO be no diffe rence bet ween
exp e r ien ced ent re p re ne urs a nd pri vat e equity
fina DEMO ciers of entrep reneu ria l ve ntures in te rms of
t he ir b elie fs th a t th ey are DEMO o f re cognizin g
business o ppo rtunities (perceitJCd entreprcneurinl DEMO
ness to opportunities},
Perceived e ntrep reneurial ale rt ness w ill infl uence the
number of ideas generated by ex per ie DEMO d ent rep rene urs
and private equity financiers 3S we ll as how they creat ively
put differe nt c ues togeth e DEMO in loo kin g for o ppo rtunities.
17
TI ll! J ()UI~ N i\I. { l F I'K JVAT !' Bo ur r v
Hyp othesis 2: T h er e w ill be no d iffe re n ce between
ex pe r ien ced e n DEMO rep re ne u rs and pri vat e equ ity
fin an ciers ore n tre p re ne u r ial ven DEMO in terms of
th eir levels of c reativ ity and number of id eas ge n-
e rated (crea tivity and idea f},ellemfioJl).
I n a dd itio n, expe rien ce w ith prev io usly suc cessfu l
an d unsu ccessful opportunities DEMO influen ce the sea rc h
p ro cesses and strat egies used by e xp er ienced e nt repreneurs
a n d DEMO e e q u ity finan ci ers in lo o ki ng for p oten tia l
oppo rt un ities.
H ypothesis DEMO: Th er e w il l be no differ en ce DEMO
ex per ien ced entrepren eurs and pri vat e e q ui ty
finan ci ers of ent re prene ur ial vent DEMO in terms of
th e proc~sses and sea rc h strategies u sed to sou rce
op po rtu nities (set/rell pro cesses nnd strategies) .
Ex pe ri en ced e n t re p re ne urs an d p r iv ate equ it DEMO
provid ers will have an under standin g o f th e unde rlying
causes of o pportun ities. They will app reciate th DEMO th ese are
o ften fo und where th er e are problem s a nd busine ss so lu-
tions availab le to DEMO ve th ose problems, changes i n the
m arket , DEMO nd rea dil y ide n tifiable c usto me rs.
Hypothesis 4: T h ere wi ll be no differen ce b etween
ex per ienced en tre p reneurs a nd pr ivate equ DEMO fin an -
c iers in terms of th ei r understa ndi ng of th e u n de r-
lying causes of DEMO (callses ~r opponunitics}.
Alt hough it is expec te d that DEMO e re w ill b e si mil ari-
ties b etween expe rienced entreprene u rs and private eq uity
providers in terms DEMO some of HjJJ s' [1995"1 dimensio ns,
d ifferences DEMO ex pecte d in ter ms ofthe so u rces id entified
as t o w here future pote ntial o ppo rtu nities DEMO be found
(opporw lliry sOl/rces). E n tre p DEMO ne urs wi ll have th eir own
individualized so u rces; pri vate equi ty fin anciers will have
th eirs.
Hypothesis 5: T h ere wi ll be differen ces be tween
e x pe r ie n ce d e n tre p re ne DEMO a nd p ri vate e q u ity
finan ciers of e n tr eprene u r ial ventures in terms of
whe DEMO th ey search for bu sin ess o pport uni ties in the
o ppo rt u nity reco gnition process (oppor/.lf ni/)l sonrces}.
Among exper ie n ce d e n tre p rene u rs a nd p r ivat e
e qu ity DEMO cier s, 0 11 t he one h and. th e DEMO is an e xp ecta-
cion t hat there w iJJ be no difference in th e o p po rt u n ity
DEMO ognition pr o cess, O p portu nities at a b DEMO a n d general
18
A F ltM1 EW Q l tx eon U N I) J::.It:'l r A NDI N{ ; OI'I'( )ltT U I'11Y I t c C O <;'N1T10 N
level are oppo rtu n ities from any expe rience d person 's per-
spective involved in an e n tre pre ne u rial co n tex t a nd a DEMO
characte r ize d by ce rt ain ch arac te r ist ics or c ues (see, for
exa m ple, T i mmons 11999, pp. 86 -95]) . As such, ex pe r i-
e nc ed ent repre ne u rs a n DEMO privat e eq u ity fina nc ie rs wi ll
have similar co m p re he nsive in ter nal op po DEMO nity recog-
nitio n templat es co m prised ofa rela tively co mmon set of
" no rmative" c ues a nd a " no rmat ive" we ig h ting se t for
in di vidual cu es to h elp th em identify oppo r DEMO ities.
H yp othesis 6: There will be no difference be DEMO
entre p rene u rs a n d pri vate eq u ity finan cier s in t erms
o f th e underlyin DEMO c ues used and cue weig htings used
to id entity o p portu nities at a broad and general le vel
(ellt/ /llarioll and ('gill/eel' ,).
O n th e o ther h and, ho wever. th ere are o th er indi -
vid ualized situa tio nal fac to rs that may influ DEMO ce th e o ppor-
tunity recognition o utco me. T hese fact ors focus on " fit"
bet w een th e DEMO portunity a nd the indi vidu al en trepre ne ur
or finan cier. Fit relates to th e spe cific circumstances of indi DEMO
viduals. Fit w ill be dete rmi ned by items such as risk prop en-
sity (w hich may preclude part icular venture life- cycle stages),
pr ejudice s against, or prefe re n DEMO for, partic ular business
opport unities (that l11:ly be asso ciated with particular indus-
tri es, techn ol ogies. e rc.), the individu al back gro u nds and
skills ofent reprene u DEMO an d finan ciers, and i ndividual o bjec-
tives (for exam ple, lifestyle co nside ratio ns may feature in the
decision to pro ceed). T hese items will mod erate the o DEMO
tunity recog n itio n pro cess. T hus, at a DEMO ad and general
level, th ere may be u nive rsal DEMO t amo n g ex pe r i-
enced e n trep re ne u rs and finan cier s on whe ther a DEMO ticular
scenario is an opportuni ty. At the individual le vel, DEMO,
the fit ofan opportunity as me asured against person al and
business-related circumsta nces , may cause d ive rg ing deci-
sio DEMO as to whe the r th e scen ario is a po tential op po rtu nity
tor an ind iv idual. In o DEMO wo rds, g iven that expe rienced
e n tre p DEMO u rs and fin an cier s may agree t hat a p arti cul ar
sc e nario is a p o tential DEMO nity (t hat is, it is a pote ntial
o ppor tu nity at a broad and ge neral level . . . DEMO "so meo ne"),
th at given op po rt DEMO nity may not be an opport unity for spe-
cific indi vidu als due to an in appro priate indi vidualized fit
for them. DEMO may be an opportunity for o ne person .
may not be an opp ortunity for a no ther"
Hypothesis 7: There w ill be differences betw een
e ntrep rene u rs and pr-i DEMO equity financi ers in ter ms
o f w het he r th e oppo rt u nity fits sit uat io nal (pe rson-
alized a nd bu sin ess-related) cri ter ia (illdil';dll alizedj it).
W INTER 200 2
E XHIBI T
Question C at eg
3
or ies Exp lore DEMO in th e Q u es tio n naire
Q UESTI O N CATEGORIES
DETAILS
Se lf-percei ved entrepre neur ial a lertness to DEMO niz ing opportunities
Imp ortance of venture ideas, indi v idua DEMO , and creativity
Opportunit y recognit ion is a process over Li me; it in vol ves several
le arni ng ste ps rat he r than a one -time oc c urre nce ; it DEMO vol ves
de liberat e se arc h and can re sult in s pin-o ft's to other o ppo rtu nities.
Fundamental DEMO of entrepreneurial opport uni ri es are o ften
asso ciated wi th so lving spec ific proble ms, market c ha nges, DEMO nd
identi fy ing s peci fic c usto mers.
Sou rce importance for identifyin g major new bus iness ideas
Importance of gut DEMO l in e valuating busine ss opportunities
I. Alertness to Opportunities
2. Crea tiv ity and I dea Ge nera tion
3. Search Processes DEMO
Strategies
4. Causes o r Oppor tuniries
5. Oppo rtunity Sources
6. Eva luation ri nd " Gut Feel"
U n fo rtu DEMO, H ypothesis 7 is b eyo nd th e scope of
DEMO his stu dy and th e researc h me th od use d . Hypothesis 7
w ill th erefo re be exami ne DEMO in f u tu re research using a
m ulti -meth od approach. It is i ncl ud ed here to p rovid e DEMO
holistic per spective o f the o pportu nity recogn ition process.
METHOD
Parti cipants
Part icipant s had at least nin e years' cu rre n t expe ri-
e nce in an e n DEMO ne u r ial co ntext (t hey e ither oper DEMO d
their own high- g rowth businesses and had develo ped more
t ha n o ne bu siness o pportu nity or they DEMO ex pe r ienced
in provid ing pr ivate eq uity fina nce to e n treprene urial ven-
t ur es). All DEMO su ccessful high- g rowth bu sinesses (business
turno ver was DEMO excess o f$ 18 m illion a nd business g row th
rat es were at least 20% per year) or operated s uccessf ul
bu sin ess u ni ts within their investm ent organizat DEMO n .
T h e sam ple co mp r ised 262 responde nt s. T his data
set was co llec te d DEMO e nt reprc ncurs (n = 157) and p r i-
vate eq uity finan ciers (n = 105). T he re were 113 respo n-
dents (43%) that had between 10 and DEMO 1 year s' expe rie nce.
The p rivat e eq DEMO finan cier group was co m prised of ven-
tu re ca pitalists (n = 53), bu sin ess a ngels (n DEMO 13), an d
m embers of pr ivate e q uity funding divisions with in ban k s
(n = 39).
W1N1'1'1l 2002
In strument
T he qu estionnaire used in the DEMO d y was m o dified
fro m a questi onnaire or ig inally d eveloped by HiUs 11 995]
which he a da DEMO te d from Tea ch, Sc hwartz, and T arpley
fi 989J and Ch ris te nsen and Pet erson [19901 . H DEMO' [1 9951
qu estionnaire is a 76-i tc m measure. T DEMO ere were 5 '1 qu es-
tions tak en from t DEMO ques tio n naire. T h e 25 q ue stio ns
rej ect ed re lated to " ow ning yo ur Own DEMO ess." The
ass u mp tion was made that many of DEMO he pri vat e eq ui ty
finan ciers may not own th e ir own businesses and there-
fore wo uld n o DEMO be able to an swer the rejected qu estio ns
co rrec tly. Each item was sco re d o n a 5- poi DEMO t Likert scale
ex ce p t fo r th ose id enti fying m ajor new busin ess id eas
(t hese were sco red a ll a 3- point scale). T he question DEMO t-
egor ies matched th e six dimensions of HiU [19951frame-
wo rk. T hese app ear in Ex hibit 3. In add itio DEMO to quest io ns
relat ing to th ese six d imen sions, a de mog rap hic i n fo r-
mation p age was i ncluded t hat aske d respond en ts d DEMO ails
0 11 th eir age, gen de r, acade m ic q ualificatio ns, expe r ie nce,
indu str y, size of o rganizat ion, and n umber of emp loyees.
DEMO nalysis
T he a na lysis fo cu sed o n the d ifferen ces in responses
between the e ntrep re ne u DEMO and pri vate eq uity finan cier
gro ups. Indepen d en t g ro u p t- rests were used to establish
T DEMO JmJRNAJ o r Pruve-ru EQUITY
t 9
s'
diffe rences between the two gro ups in the: ca tego ries of
crea tivity and id ea gen eratio n, perceived en trepreneurial
alertness, search process and strategies, ca uses of oppor-
runiries, sources, and evaluation and gut feel.
Procedures
A research t eam was for med t o co llec t th e data
fro m ex DEMO rie nced en trepre ne u rs an d pr ivate eq ui ty
fin an ciers. A list was co lla ted from DEMO rga niza tio ns a nd
individuals kn own to th e g ro up, financier s listed ill a
ven tu re capital direct o r y, and high- growth busin esses
listed in gove rnme nt- collated databases. Parti cipant s were
co nt acted by DEMO to se e k th eir w illi ng n ess to be
involved in the research and a preferred data co llection
me DEMO (for e xample, ruail. fa-x, e ma il, o r per sonal visit)
was neg oti ated . T he d DEMO a p pro ach by th e research
ream to the targeted individuals facilitated a high response
rate with few reporrs of un willi DEMO to co mplete the
qu estionnaire.
Re sults an d Discussion
T here were few sign ifica nt differen ces between the
e ntreprene DEMO a nd private equity financier groups. O verall,
t h is le nds suppo n to the n oti o n that ex DEMO ri enced
en trepreneurs and p rivate equity fin anciers d evelop a gen-
e ral level of understanding that allows t hem to DEMO
business o ppo rtu nities at a b road and general level.
T here were minor d iffer en ces bet ween the t DEMO
g roups, h owever, for the fo llowi ng hypoth eses: Hypoth-
esis 1 (alertness to o pportun ities), Hvpothesis 2 (creativity
and idea gene ration), Hypothesis 3 (search processes and
strateg ies), H)'pothesis 5 (o ppo rtu nity so urces), and H ypoth-
esis 6 (evaluation and "gut feel"). DEMO hese differences related
to a spec ific question within vario us catego ries of qu es-
tions on the q uestio nnaire rather than DEMO d ifferen ces
across the m ajori ty ofquestio ns in each catego ry. Details
are as fo llows:
Hypothesis 1-Alertuess to O DEMO: Overall,
there were no differen ces on the measures ofalert-
DEMO ess; however, e ntre preneurs were sign ifica ntly dif-
fer ent on o ne questi on , believing that they had a
DEMO sensitivity or alertness toward o pp ortunities
(t =1.963; P < 0.05). E nrrep ren eu rs tend to b e very
DEMO ositive people and tend to h ave stro ng beliefs in
th eir capabilit ies. T his result can be int erpreted as
demon DEMO th e strength of e ntrep rene ur beliefs
20
A FI~ "" M"WOlO< rO J~ UNDJ:RSTANl}rN ( ; O I'DEMO' Ol t T U N1TY R I:Cl) GNlT ION
in th eir "gut feel" ill identifying op po rt unities. T DEMO
reality, h owever, o ften is different as finan ciers well
kn ow. Many bu sinesses do not succeed Pr ivate
equity finan DEMO may be mor e cautio us in th eir
beliefs that they are ale rt to recogn izing oppo rtun i-
ties perhaps because DEMO previous fu nding decisio ns
that h ave " gon e had."
Hypothesis 2-Creati,tity alld Idea Gerr eratioll:
Overall, there were no differences on the measures
of creativity and idea ge ne ratio DEMO Entrep re ne urs,
h owever, d iffered on the DEMO ortance of business
ideas in the creative process (t = 2.24 DEMO ; P < 0.05).
Compared to financiers, entrepreneu rs tho DEMO that
ideas were m ore important, Financiers deal in poten-
t DEMO o ppo rt un it ies that a re presen te d to th em by
e n trep rene urs whe reas e DEMO rene urs need t o sift
thro ugh and gene rate m any ideas before ide ntifying
an o ppor tunity t hat th DEMO can present for fund ing
co nsideration. Assuch, it is a DEMO ofdegree. What
begins as an idea for an en treprene ur b eco mes a
bu siness propositi on for a finan cier. Though
DEMO need to use both right and left brain skills
in evaluating business prop osals. their quantitative
leani ngs may ex'Plain their preference for DEMO valuatio n
rather than idea gene ration.
Hypothesis 3-Search Processes alld S trategi es:
O ve rall, there were no d ifferen ces on the measure
of search pr ocesses and strateg ies. Entrepren eu DEMO,
h owever. believed more stro ngly than financiers that
one idea leads to another (r = 4.054; p < 0 .001). DEMO his
is not s urprising. Finan ciers receive discrete busi-
n ess prop ositio ns from vario us so urces for fu nding
co DEMO Pr esum ably, o ne prop ositio n wo uld
h DEMO no relation to rhe n ext . E ntrepren eurs, o DEMO the
ot her hand, are at a lower level in tr DEMO to ide ntify
oppo rtu nities and nlay use ideas generated o r insights
gleaned from o ne situation as a "s pringboard" DEMO
t he next. In additio n, it suppo rts th e DEMO tio n that
entrepreneurs are more open to ideas th an financiers,
Hy pothesis 4--Callses ojOpportJlt.ities: Th ere were
no differen ces be tween e ntreprene urs and financi ers
o n the measures of DEMO und erlying causes of o ppor-
tunities. Bo th g roups appear to b e attu ned to the
fact that there are op DEMO associated w ith prob-
lem s and market related changes.
W INTER 2002
Hypoth esis 5- 0 pportullity S ources: F in an ci er s
were m o re likely to rel y o n t DEMO e publi cati on s as
sou rces fo r ideas whe reas e ntreprene urs tended to
ob tain i nfor ma tio DEMO about oppo rtunities from p ro-
fessional ac q ua intances (DEMO = 1.81 7: p < 0.001). At
first, th is find ing perpl exed us as we ex pected tha t
financiers DEMO uld rely heavily On th eir network of
con tacts to refer deals to th em . O n reflecti on, h ow-
ever, t his re sult p rovides insight into h ow financiers
m onitor tr ends for future busin ess op portun ities.
Th ey DEMO tain th eir ideas from pu blication s to gauge
co nsume r and industry trends and then most prob-
ably so urce deals DEMO those a reas. On the othe r hand,
e n trepre ne u rs ty pica lly are excelle nt n etw orker DEMO
They kn o w that th ey n eed othe r people to he lp
th em ac h ieve the ir goals. P DEMO fessi on al adv isers a re
ex posed to a range of cl ie nts w ith differing bu si-
nesses and p DEMO u cts/ ser vices. E ntreprene urs appar-
e ntly recogn DEMO t his and lise p rofession als as a t rusted
idea so urce.
Hypoth esis 6-Erm/uotiolJ and " G ut Feel": DEMO verall,
th ere were no differen ces 0 11 the measures of I,; val-
nation and "gut feel ." Financiers, however, fclt sig-
n ific antl y more stro ngly t han e n tr epreneu rs (c =
4 .85 6; P < DEMO) th at formal market r esearch is
important w he n DEMO valuating id eas. T his reflects, p er-
haps. a g DEMO r t enden cy t oward th o rou gh ness o f
financiers and t he fact that they are used to under-
DEMO aking " d u e di ligen ce" on t he DEMO aims o f e n tre-
pren eurs via indep en dent, third-party so urces.
Entrep rene urs, however, have to make d ecisions and
wo rk w ith o nly parti al market and DEMO the r informa-
tion to devel o p thei r o ppo rtu nities.
Ove rall. th e re fore. th ere we re DEMO di ffer en ces
b et ween th e t wo gro ups. Expe rienced (ha birual) e ntre-
pren eurs and exp DEMO d pr ivate eq uity providers appear
to rec ogni ze o ppo rtu nities at a broad and ge ne ral level in
DEMO sim ilar mann er. At this hi gh er level, du DEMO to th e envi-
ro nmental co ntex t in w hic h they d eri ve their ex pe rience,
it seems DEMO lise s im ilar no rmative cues.
R esear ch Limitations
This research has a n um ber ofli mi rations. First, t he
sam ples for t he two g roups were not rando mJy DEMO t ed.
This affects g en erali zabi liry o f the results. Second, there
is no evide nce of co nstruct. cr ite r io n reb ted. a nd dis-
W1NT Ut 21
1
DEMO
cr im in an t validi ties o f th e qu estio nnaire. In a dd itio n .
internal co nsistency ranges DEMO test/retest reliabilities were
n ot establ ishe d.
R ESEARCH CO NTRIBUTION
De spit e its limitation s, this research m akes a co ntri-
buti on at two levels. At the rheo rerical level, it ex tends Our
un derstanding of th e o pportunity recogniti DEMO p rocess and
co ntr ibutes to ward the d evelopment of a theory ofo ppo r-
tunity reco gnition-not just for e nrrepreneurs DEMO also
for pr ivate e q uity financiers of e ntreprene ur ial ve ntures.
Sp ecifically, the research m akes a co ntr ibutio n to
the literature by proposing t hat th e o DEMO rtu nity recogni-
tion process is di vided int o t wo ph ases: I) the " nor -rna-
tive" opport u n ity recognition phase and 2) t he
" individ ualized fit" DEMO ppo rt u nity recogn itio n phase (see.
for exa DEMO ple, Craig and Lindsay (200 11). It also supports
th e no tion that, providi ng that th ere is rele vant informa-
tion availab le ro all decision makers (infor mat io n sym-
merries), ex pe r ie nce d or h abitu DEMO e n tre pre ne u rs a nd
ex pe ri en ced pri vate equity financ iers have th e capability
of DEMO nizin g, un i ver sally, w hen a g iven oppo rt un i ty
exists at a broa d and ge DEMO ral level. The o pportunity, how-
ever, may n o t be an oppo rt unity for th em spec ifically
though they DEMO ill be able to reco gnize it as a g iven o ppo r-
tunity . . . at least as an o ppo DEMO nity for someo ne. In other
wo rds, a given o DEMO tu nity may be an o ppo rt unity for
so m eo ne e lse wh ere th e " individ ual ized DEMO" with t he
o ppo rt unity is more appropriate to DEMO at o t he r person/
entity. (B usin ess DEMO and venture ca pitalists, for exa mple,
d iffer in DEMO importance they attac h to m arket risk and
age ncy ri sk in eva luating oppo rt u nities (Harrison and
Mason [2002]) . Alth ou gh bo th g ro ups may pe rce ive a
g iven o ppo rt unity at a b road DEMO t hat sam e o ppo rt u-
nity may be pr eferred by o ne party over th e o ther due to
DEMO p refe rences.)
Where th ere are i nfor ma tio n asy m me tr ic among
ex pe rience d d DEMO m aker s (releva nt inform ation is not
dist ributed DEMO ually to all de cision m akers), h owever, th DEMO
still may be ind ividu al d ifferences in recogni zin g a given
o ppo rtun ity at a broad and ge nera DEMO level a mo ng ex pe ri-
e nce d e ntrepre ne urs and pri vate eq uity financiers (see, for
example, Shane (2000 1). orne d ecision m akers may know
a bo ut parti cular custo me r problems, market ch aracter is-
tics, o r th e ways [Q c reate parti cular prod u cts or services
wh ereas o ther d ecision mak er DEMO 1113y not (Ve nkatarama n
[1 9971). This may h DEMO to e xplain w hy priva te e qu ity
fina nc ier s suc h as vent u re capital ists may o DEMO achi eve
excep tio nal in vestme nt suc cess in about l o DEMO ofe ve ry 10
ve n tu re s th at t hey f u n d (B i r m ing ha m, Buse n itz, a nd
Art hurs [2002]).
At the DEMO level, th e research provides a basis for
d evelo ping DEMO ainin g pro gra ms t hat will assis t novi ce
e n tre pre ne u rs and novice pri vate equ DEMO financiers to be
b etter a ble to reco gni ze bu siness op por tu n ities. lt also
provid es a basis DEMO r developing a multi- dimen sional "d eal
scree n ing DEMO strument" t hat w ill assist private e q u ity
DEMO an ciers to scree n a nd do cument th e quality assu ra nc e
asp ec ts o f th e deal DEMO ng proce ss. De cision sup p o rt
systems th at h elp to screen de als ho ld the promise of
relieving DEMO ro fession al in vest ors from thi s time- consuming
but vital ac tivity (Sc h ult z, M urray, and D egraeve [2002]) .
A major co n cern o f a ny investor alw ays is Ty pe I
investm ent e rror: placing m oney in a n invesrce when t he
d eal should DEMO b een rej ect ed . In this situa tio n, DEMO e invest-
m ent really is not an op portu nity and th e fin an cier lo ses
money (o r makes retu rns less chan what is co nside red desir-
able). An DEMO co nc ern (thoug h usually see n as a
lesser DEMO nseq ue nce, yet havin g important r amifi cations for
DEMO finan cier) is Type II in vestme nt e rro r. DEMO o ccu rs w he n
the fina ncie r rej e c ts a deal because it is p er ceived not to
DEMO an op portu n ity---either at the n ormati ve le vel or t he
indiv idu alized fit le ve l. T he DEMO eal, h owever, results in gen-
erati ng exce p tional returns for others w ho in vested in that
o pportunity (b ut not fo r the fin an cier that rej ect ed DEMO).
A deal scree n ing in strume n t w ill p ro vide d o cu-
m ented e vide nce fo DEMO th e co nsum ptio n o f third p arti es as
to w hy d eals in the p ipel ine were DEMO o r rejected.
Pro vi din g doc umentar y ev iden ce 0 11 d ea l acce p ta nce /
rejec tion is im p o rtan t w he n man agement DEMO to j u stify
i nvestm en t de cisions, t DEMO exami ne th e qu ality o f d eal flow,
a n d/ or [Q re view its per forman ce.
SUMMARY
This study builds upon previou s research by Hills
[19 951 and DEMO he rs in t o o ppo rru niry re cognition . Early
i ndication s su ppo rt the propos iti on th DEMO . at a bro ad and
gene ral level, o pp DEMO u n itie s are seen in a si m ilar ma n ner
by t hose who have d eveloped ex per ienc DEMO in 3 11
en tre pre n eurial co n text wh e t her th e y a re exper ie nced
(ha b it u al) entre p re ne u rs or expe r ie nced private eq u ity
financiers. This is supported by DEMO e similar ity in the oppo r-
tunity reco gn iti o n b eh aviors, o p portu n ity p er ce ptions ,
o pport u nity causes. e re. . ac ross H ills' 11 995] dimensio ns
th at we re used in this re searc h.
22
A F I{ AME W O R DEMO ron UNIlf;R STI\NUIN G O I' I'URTUN ITY R DEMO:Ct lG NlTI ON
REFERENCES
Balm, S ung- Sik, Andrew Zacharakis, and Kyouug-M o Song.
"E valuati o n Models for Vt'DEMO Capitalists' Investme nt Deci-
sio n: Co m parative Study bet ween Korea and U .S.·' 2002
Babsol/-Kat!ffma/l Entrepreneurship Researdl C J 'r{'l/cc. U niver-
sity ofColorado at Bo ulder, DEMO UIl C.
Bh ave, M .P. " A Proc ess M DEMO el of Ent repreneu rial Vent ure
Crea tio n." Jt' ltmaf(!{ Business Velllllri"g, 9 ( 199-1-) , Pl' . 22 3-242 .
Birm ingham, C arolyn. Lowell Busen irz. and j onathan Arthu rs.
"T he Staging of Ve ntu re Capital lnvcsnnenrs and R ein vestment
Decisions.' 2002 Ba[JsOI I-Kaf!tl i,I171l Entrepreneurship R fscarc!l
COI lji·rm ce. Uni versiry of Co lorado at Bould er, J une.
Braud, W.G .. and M.J. Sch litz. " C onscio us Interactio ns with
R em ote Biologi cal Systems: Anom alo us Intentionality Effects."
5 ,,1,11, Energies, 2 (199 1). pp. 1-46.
Buscni ta. Lowell W. " R esearch o DEMO Entrepren euri al Alertn ess."
J IlI mwl 4 S mall Business .\'1mmgell/ell f, Oc tober, 1996 . Pl' . 35--4-4.
Bu scnirz, L.W.. and ].13. Barn ey. " D iffere nces Bcrween
Entreprene urs and Managers ill Large Organization s: Biases
and Heuristics in Strategic Decision- Making." .Jol/rnal ~r Bnsi-
ness I '""DEMO/ ri,,<~, 12 (1997), pp. ')- 30.
DEMO W illiam D., and C harles W. Hofer. " T heorizing DEMO
Entrepren eu rship ." ElI1reprcfIl·urship 11uwy & Practice, Vol. 16.
0 .2 ( 199 1), pp. 13-22 .
Casson. M. '11/(' Entrepreneur: All Economic Th eory, Totowa. NJ:
Barnes a nd N o ble, 1982.
Chnsteusen. P.$., 0 .0. Madsen. and R. DEMO . " O ppo r-
tu nity Ide ntification: The Contri DEMO o f Ent repre neu rship
to St rategic Managem en t." Ao shns U" ivLTsi / )' 1 1I.~ f ir l/ re oj .\.1ml-
a.eemell l. D enmark, 1989.
C hris rcusen DEMO and R. Peterson . "Opportunity Ide ntification:
M apping the DEMO o f New Ve ntu re Ideas." Paper presented
at the DEMO Annu al Babson Entrepreneu rship R esearch C on-
ference. Denmark: DEMO Uni versiry Institute of Managemen t,
I W O.
Cooper, DEMO, C.Y. Woo. and w.e. Dunkciberg. "Entrepreneurs'
Perceived C hances for S uccess." j mmltJ l oJ S mall Business lIell-
IIfri"g, Vol. 3, No .1 ( I Y88), pp. 97- 108.
DEMO J ustin , and Nod Lindsay. " Q uantifying 'Gut Fee!' in
t he Oppo rrun iry R ecogni tio n Process.,. DEMO l?f Entrepreneur-
s1l ip Reseurds, We llesley, MA: Babson DEMO, 200 I.
WINTER 2002
1ift
Farrell , Ellen, and Caro le Ho wo rth . " Biases and He ur istics of
Novice and Hab itual Business Angels.U 2002 DEMO/(1/1
ElI£reprc lI ('III :~h ip n csearrf, DEMO Ol lji.'T(·IICC. Uni versity o f Colorado at
Bo ulder . J une.
Gartner. W . I3 ., 13 .]. l3ird, DEMO J.A. Starr. "A cting 'As If ' : D if-
fcrenna rin g En tr eprene ur ial fro m O r gani DEMO ional B ehavior ."
Entrepreneurship 771C1l/'}' oud Pmairc, DEMO 16, N o. 3 (1992), pp .
13- 31.
Gar tner, Wi lliam 13.. and Kelly G. Sh aver. "The Att DEMO tional
C haracteristics of Opportunit ies and Pro blems Described by
N asc ent Entrepreneurs i n th e PSED.l • 2002 Btl u DEMO Jl -Km!lJill a /l
E ll rreprCIlClII'sfll}J J(c.\'£,DEMO C O/!lercllce. University of
Bou lder, j une.
~'
DEMO at
Gilmore. T .N .. a nd It .K. Kazanjia n . " Clarifying Decisio n-
Ma king ill High G rowth Ve ntures: The Use of Respo nsibili ry
Chart ing. " } w l'DEMO/lIf C!FBusi ness VCIII III'ill.l!, Vol. 4, N o . 1 (1989),
pp.69- 83.
Good ing , R .Z., and AJ . Kinicki . " Interp re tin g Even t Cau DEMO:
The Co mplementary R ole of C atego rizat io n and Attribu t ion
Pro cesses." J ell/ I'I/al (!{ lV/ al/ f1,I!(' lI/ c1I/ S lI DEMO/iCS, 32 ( 1995), pp . 1- 22.
G oslin, L.N ., and U. l3argt". " En trepreneu rial Q uali ties Con-
side red i ll Ve nt ure C ap ital DEMO uppo rt ." Fnvniers 4 Entrepreneur-
ship R csmrdt. Wellesley. MA: Babson Co llege . 1986.
H arrison , Richard T ., and C o lin M . M ;lSO Il . " Bac king rhc
H o rse o r t he J ock ey? Agenc y Costs, 1nfbnuation and the Eval-
uati on of R isk by tn fon ual Ven ture Ca p italists." 2002 Ba!Jsc)/I DEMO
KCII~{fIll (// 1 EIII/'l'prell(, lIrship R esearch DEMO U ni versity o f
Colorado at Bou lder . june.
Hebe rt. I t ., and A. Link. Tlw 1.:'II/I'('/)I'('IIC/lI'.' N/ai llsm'OI JI DEMO (1//(1
!?.mf imf Critiqvn. N C \ \i DEMO o rk: Praegc r. 19 88.
Hi lls, Gerald E. " O p po rtu nity Rec o gn iti on by Successful
DEMO p reneu rs: A Pilo t Study." Fro ntiers (If DEMO
R escanh, W t.:llcslt:y, MA: Babson College , DEMO
Hills. Gerald E.. G .T . Lum pk in. and R obert P. Sing h. "Op per-
tuniry R eco gnition: Perceptions and DEMO rs.'
Frontiers 1 EI I/I'cprcll c lfr.~fJil' R£'DEMO/rf ,. Wellesle y, MA: Babso n
Co llege, 1997.
Hills. Gerald E.. and Ro dn e y C . Sh rader. "Snccessfirl Enrrcpr e-
u eu rv' Insights i nt o O ppo rtu nity Re co gni tion ." Frontiers '!{
Dl lr{'DEMO/(,I I , :~fl ip !?.csCtl fdl. Wellesley. MA: Babson College. 199H.
H ills, GI:.' I-:lJd E., Ro dney C. S hrndc r. j urg itn Balmrsniryre, and
Elif lzbc rk- Bilgin , " O pportunity R eco gni tion D imens DEMO ns:
?1"
R ela tionship ro O ppo rt DEMO n ities Ide n tified /Pursued and Firm
Growth ." 2 U02 Babs<lI1-Km!ffill all ElII l'ep rC l/clII:~ ftip DEMO COI I-
[ercuce. Un iversity o f Colorado at B oulder- june.
Kaisb, S., and B. G ilad. " Characte ristics ofO pp DEMO Search
of E nrre prencu rs versus Exec uti ves: So DEMO rces, In terest and Ge n-
e ral AlcrtJlcss."}olll'l/DEMO (15I1/ af! BII.~i/l (,JS I /Cl lf lllil DEMO '? t 3 (199 1), pp.
3 1-4 .
Kelly, Peter. and Michael Hay. "Serial Inves to rs: An Exploratory
St ud y. " Frontiers l!r c lII /'cprelll'lI rsftip Resl:DEMO . W ellesle y. MA :
Babson College, 199 6.
Kirzn er , LM. Perception Opportlillity and p"!!ir. Chicago : U ni DEMO
versity of C hi cag o Press, 1979.
Ko e.n, Peter A. " Corpo rate Entrepren eu ring : C riteria Used by
DEMO rp o rat io ns to De te rmine Sta rt- Up Fu nding ." Frontiers ~(
Elilreprell elll'sfJip R('scmrlt DEMO WC'Ut' slt~y, M.A: Babson Co llege, 1998.
Macmillan. Inn C., Rob in Siegel. and P.N . Subba Narasimha.
" Criteria Used by Ven ture Ca p italists to Evnlua cc N ew Ven-
DEMO ur e P ro posals.' j Oll fl/ a/ (!{ Business Vensnrin..!!, Vo L I , N o. I
(1985). DEMO 119- 128.
M ainprize. Bren t. Kevin Hin d le. a nd R Oll K. Mi tch ell .
" T o ward t DEMO Standard ization o f Ven tu re C a pital ln vesrm enr
Evalu ati o ns: Decisio n C rite ria fo r R at ing lu vcsree Busin ess
P lans." 2002 Babsol/· K m1/intln f lltrcprrll(' II Hltip Rcscordt Cm!fi' r-
I' II(£'. Un ive rsity of C olorado at Bou lder, J u ne.
McM ull en, J effery S.. and Dean DEMO She phe rd. " Act io n Bias
and O ppo rt u nity Recogn it io n: An Em pirical Examination o f
Entrepr eneu rial Att itude as Re gula to ry Focus." 2002 £1(//)soll-
Km dJillal1 E rl trqJr(' t li' DEMO rsll ip R esearch C OI![e I1..'l lf C. Univers ity o f Col-
ora do at Bou ld er, JUl1 c.
Miller , D., and P. H. Frierson . O',:'!(l DEMO atioll., .' A Q /I(III/11 11/ Vierl/.
Englewood C liffs, NJ: Prenti ce Hall, 1984.
Palich, l-.. DEMO L. llagby. " Using Cogn itive T heo ry to Explain
E ntrep re ne uri al R isk -T ak ing: C ha lle ng ing Conven tio nal
Wisdom. " j O/lfl/ nl (~F UlIsilIC.'S Vellfl ll'illg, Vol. 10. No .6 (1995),
pp. 425-438.
Pe rry, J. William, and Na ncy B. Upto n . " T he Entr epreneur
a nd the 13amker : A Com parative Srudy of Perceptio ns." Fron-
ti ers i!( EI" reprcl/f!/I/,s{,ip Resea" h. W ellesley, DEMO: Babso n Co l-
lege, 1996.
R :lh. Joongdoug. K DEMO in jung, and Jinj o o Lee. " Validat ion
ofthe DEMO ure E valua tio n Model in K orea." j oll DEMO'llaf ofBnsincss
VC"'/I ril(~, 9 ( 1994), DEMO 5IJ9-5 24.
Tfl l ~ J O UIl,. N l\l. \ )f PrU VAl l: Eo u r I Y 23
S
p
p
T
3
Roberts, Edward n. " High Stakes fo r High-T ec h Entrepreneu rs:
Un d erstanding Ventur e DEMO pital Decision-Making." 510(//11\11(11/-
agell/ell/ Jj f.''III, Winter 1991, pp. 9-20.
R CI
R ob inson , R.B.,Jr. " Emerging S trategi es in the Ve nture Ca DEMO
iral Industry ,"jol/rllalviBusiness f/ellf1/n'lIg, Vol. 2, N o. 1 (1987),
pp.53-77.
Sc hlitz, M .J ., an d W. G . Braud. " D istant Int e ntio nality and
H ealing: Assessi ng the Evide nce. " Alrerllaliw Th erapies;' 1 Health
and Medicine, Vo l. 3, N o. DEMO (1997), p p. 62-73.
Sch ultz. Albert. Go rd o DEMO M u rray, and Zeger D cgr aeve. " A
Neu DEMO N etw ork -Based D ecisio n Su pport System for V enture
Capitalists' Initial Scr ee ni ng of Investm ent Pro posals." 2002
Bll bJ OII-Km~Oi l/(lI1 Entrepreneurship Ri'search COI!fercl/(c. U niver-
sity of Colomd o at Bou lder, J une.
Sc humpere r, J-A . " T he Fu nda me ntal Phenom en o n of Eco -
nomic Development." In P. Kilb y, cd., Entrcpresunnship and
£(C 111 ;[ Deuelopmrns: N ew DEMO o rk: Free Press. 197 1.
S hane. Scott. " Prior DEMO ledge and the Disco very of Ent re-
p re ne urial Op po rtu nities." Organizarioll Sciel ICl!, V ol. 1'1, N o .
4 (2000), pp. 4 48- 469.
Simon. Herber t A. " What We Kn o w Abo ut t he DEMO reative Pro-
cess." In R . L Kuh n , ed., Ftoutiets ill Creative and Innovative
Nl iIJUI,{?CIIICIII. Ca m b DEMO, MA : Balli nger, '1985, pp, 3-20.
t eve DEMO, H .H., and D.E. G um pert. " T he H eart o fEnt re-
rene urship. " Harvard Business Review, Vol. 63 , N o . 2 (198 5),
p. 85- 94.
DEMO nic k. B .G .. and L.S. Fidcll. Usin..,! lV1 f1 !tivllriate S tatistics,
rd ed . New Yo rk: Harp er Collins, 1996 .
T each, R .D ., R .G , Schwartz, and F.A. T arpley . " T he Reco g-
n ition and Ex ploitatio n ofO pportun ity in t he Software DEMO:
A Study ofSurv iving Finns .' Frontiers c!I Ellr reprellclirsli DEMO R cseanh,
W ellesley, MA: Babson Co llege , 1989.
24
'I10
A F IVo M r.WO R K ron U NI )r.ll ST ANUl:-.'(; O I'I' Ol l TVNIl'Y R ECO GNIT IO N
T immons, Je ffry A. New Business Opportunities. Acto n. MA:
Brick Ho use. 1990.
- - DEMO N ew Vellf Hre C rea tion: Emrcprc l/cl/rslJip DEMO the 2 1Sf Cen-
IIIr y, Srh ed. Boston, MA: DEMO/ M cG raw-H ill, 1999.
Ucbasamn, D eniz, a nd Paul Wesrhe ad. " Habitua l a nd N o vice
E DEMO rep re neu rs: Explo ring th ei r Differen ces." 2002 BalJS(lII -
KmdTIII{/1/ Ewreprcllclfrship R.cscmrh Cm!fere.ll(t!. University of Col-
o rado at Bou ld er, Ju ne.
Van Osnabrugge, DEMO "A Co m parison ofBusiness Angel and
Ventu re Ca pitalist DEMO ment Pro cedures: An Agency T h eo ry-
Based Analysis." Frontiers of Eutreprenenrslup Restmrh, Wellesley,
MA: Babson College, 1999.
Venkarnra mau, S. "T he Distinc tive Domain of Entr epren eu DEMO
ship Researc h: An Editor's Perspect i ve." In J. Katz a nd R .
Brockh aus. eds., A(ilml/ces ill Entreprenentship, Finn £mergcl1ce, alia
Cmwtli. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press. -\ DEMO
Z ide r, Bob. " H ow Venture Capital W or DEMO" H arvard Business
R evie w, Vol. 76, N o. DEMO (1998). pp. 13 1- 139.
ENDNOTE
An earlier versio n DEMO f th is a rticle was presented at th e 2001
Babson-Kau ffman Entr ep reneursh ip Research Co nference and
ap pears in DEMO he 2001 Frontiers l!.f Ell t reprC ellrsfl;p R esearch.
der reprints (if (his article, piease C01J{flC(
alllalik@iUollma!s.c
'Toor
(J 1II or 2'12-22 4- 3205.
~ i(1l1i NJafi k at
DEMO
WI ""T IiH. 2 002
©Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC. This material must be used for the
customer'DEMO internal business use only and a maximum of ten (10) hard copy print-outs
may be made. No further copying or transmission of this DEMO is allowed without
the express permission of Euromoney Instituitonallnvestor PLC. Copyright of Journal
of Portfolio Management is the property of Euromoney Publications PLC and DEMO
content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without
the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print,
download, or email articles for individual use.{1g42fwefx}