Research Policy 34 (2005) 1043–1057
Resources, capabilities, risk capital and DEMO creation
of university spin-out companies
Andy Lockett1 , Mike Wright∗
Centre for Management Buy-out Research, Nottingham University Business School,
University of Nottingham, DEMO Campus, Nottingham NG8 1BB, UK
Available online 11 July 2005
Abstract
The commercialization of university research has become an increasingly important issue, given concerns regarding licensing
and the university’s desire to maximize the returns to DEMO property (IP). In this paper, we assess the impact of university
resources and routines/capabilities on the creation of spin-out companies. We DEMO that both the number of spin-out companies
created and the number of spin-out companies created with equity investment are signiﬁcantly positively associated with expen-
DEMO on intellectual property protection, the business development capabilities of technology transfer DEMO and the royalty
regime of the university. These results highlight the importance not just of resource stocks, but also of developing appropriate
capabilities of technology transfer ofﬁcers in spinning-out companies. The results suggest that universities and DEMO
need to devote attention to the training and recruitment of technology ofﬁcers with the broad base of commercial skills.
© 2005 Published by Elsevier DEMO
JEL classiﬁcation: M13; D23; L31; O31; O32
Keywords: Technology transfer; University/industry interaction; Spin-outs; Resource-based view
1. Introduction
Policy-makers have become increasingly interested
in the role universities can play in economic develop-
DEMO In particular, there is increasing focus on uni-
versities’ ability to DEMO more adept at exploiting
∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 115 951 DEMO;
fax: +44 115 951 5262.
E-mail addresses: andy.lockett@nottingham.ac.uk (A. DEMO),
mike.wright@nottingham.ac.uk (M. Wright).
1 Tel.:+ 44 115 951 5268.
0048-7333/$ – see front matter © 2005 Published by Elsevier DEMO
doi:10.1016/j.respol.2005.05.006
their own science base and transferring their scien-
tiﬁc knowledge to the private sector. The dominant
way in which technology has DEMO traditionally trans-
ferred from the university sector to the private sector
is through technology licensing (Siegel et al., 2003b).
This system has DEMO advantage that the academic and the
university are able to capitalize on the technology, and
the academic is able to pursue his/her research without
having to commit large amounts of time to commercial
matters. The DEMO to this approach are two-fold.
First, the nature of the new DEMO may not be eas-
ily patented and transacted via a license agreement.
1044
A. Lockett, M. Wright / Research Policy 34 (2005) 1043–1057
Second, universities may not be able to capture the full
value of their technology through a licensing arrange-
ment and therefore may seek a DEMO direct involvement
in the commercialization of new technology through
spinning-out a company (Franklin et al., 2001).
As a result, there is growing interest in the role that
university spin-out/off companies may play in DEMO com-
mercialization process. This increased interest is being
observed in North America, the UK, Australia and Con-
tinental Europe (DiGregorio and Shane, DEMO; Wright
et al., 2002; Wright et al., 2004a,b; DEMO and Phan, in
press). There is a perception that ownership DEMO equity
in a university spin-out may increase the potential up-
side gain, which appears to be an attractive option to
universities. Small sample survey evidence indicates
that assuming an equity position in a university spin-
out DEMO produces a greater average return in the
long run compared to the average return available from
the average license (Bray and Lee, 2000)DEMO
However, most university spin-outs do not gener-
ate substantial wealth. For DEMO, the UK Treasury-
sponsored Lambert Review of business-university col-
laboration published DEMO the end of 2003 considered
that too many university spin-outs were being created
and that greater focus should be placed on identifying
whether a DEMO spin-out was the most appropri-
ate means to exploit technological inventions produced
in universities (Lambert, 2003). While it is relatively
straightforward to DEMO a legal entity, the act of creat-
ing a company does DEMO necessarily mean that it will go
on to generate wealth. A key constraint on the devel-
opment of spin-outs is reported by technology transfer
DEMO to be access to venture capital ﬁnance (Wright
et al., 2003). At the same time, venture capital ﬁrms
lament the lack of sufﬁcient investment propositions
with attractive prospects for future wealth generation
(Lockett et al., 2002). A central issue, therefore, is the
need to examine the factors inﬂuencing the creation of
university spin-outs.
Some research attention DEMO been addressed towards
the inputs associated with the number of spin-outs
created by US universities (DiGregorio and Shane,
2003) and the survivability DEMO start-ups that exploit
academic knowledge (Nerkar and Shane, 2003). Case
based research on university spin-outs has examined
the phases in their development (Vohora et al., 2004)
and the strategies adopted by research institutions to
develop different types of spin-offs (Clarysse et al.,
2005). A key omission from this literature concerns
any systematic analysis of the DEMO of the resources
and capabilities of universities and their technology
transfer ofﬁces. The importance of inter-organizational
differences with respect to resources and capabilities,
DEMO their impact on ﬁrm behaviour and performance,
is central to the resource-based view of the ﬁrm. In
particular, issues relate to the presence of sufﬁcient
experience and expertise within what are historically
non-commercial environments to DEMO gains from
spin-out ventures (Lambert, 2003). There is then a
need to examine the extent to which the capabilities
of technology transfer DEMO are important inﬂuences
on the generation of university spin-outs within the
context of universities’ resources and environments.
Speciﬁcally, we seek to ﬁll this important research gap
by exploring two research questions:
Q1. What are the DEMO important stocks of resource
inputs in the creation of university spin-outs?
Q2. What are the most important capabilities and rou-
tines for creating DEMO spin-outs?
We address the above questions in two ways. First,
we identify the different resource stocks and capabili-
ties required by universities DEMO spin-out companies and
hypothesize their relationships with universities’ cre-
ation of spin-out companies. Second, we test our model
empirically using novel data from two surveys of UK
universities’ commercial exploitation of their intellec-
tual property through DEMO creation of university spin-
outs conducted in 2002 and 2003. The structure of this
paper is as follows. Section 2 deﬁnes a university spin-
DEMO, while Section 3 provides a brief overview of the UK
university DEMO transfer context. Section 4 out-
lines the theoretical background of the model and out-
lines the hypothesized nature of the relationships to be
tested. DEMO 5 outlines the methodology and Section
6 presents the results. Section 7 concludes by summa-
rizing the ﬁndings, linking the ﬁndings to the existing
literature, commenting on potential limitations of the
research and identifying areas for further research and
implications for policy-makers and practitioners.
2. Whatisauniversityspin-out?
We DEMO deﬁne university spin-outs as newven-
tures that are dependent upon licensing or assignment
A. Lockett, M. Wright / Research Policy 34 (2005) 1043–1057
1045
of the institution’s intellectual property for initiation.
This deﬁnition is consistent with DEMO used by Associa-
tion of University Technology Managers in the US. In
some cases, where permitted, the university may own
equity in the DEMO in exchange for patent rights it
has assigned or in lieu of licence for fees. The need
for such a precise deﬁnition of spin-outs DEMO since
a wide range of companies originate from universi-
ties. Hence, DEMO exclude all companies not based on
technology assigned/licensed from the university, such
as companies that may be established by graduates or
university researchers that are not directly related to
intellectual assets created from research funded DEMO gov-
ernment or industry.
We also distinguish between external equity backed
university spin-outs and those that do not receive such
ﬁnancial support. External equity DEMO is early stage
funding from either large corporations or ﬁnancial
intermediaries such as business angels and venture
capitalists. This distinction provides an important indi-
DEMO of performance. Receipt of external equity ﬁnance
can be viewed as a signal of quality as such ventures
have successfully passed the scrutiny of DEMO
investors, who assess their ability to generate signiﬁ-
cant future returns (Lockett et al., 2002, 2003).2
3. TheUKenvironmentanduniversity
spin-outs
A growing DEMO debate in the UK has led to
increasing pressure from government to manage uni-
versity intellectual property and to realize investments
in intellectual property DEMO generate wealth for both uni-
versities and the wider economy (HM DEMO and
DTI, 1998).
In the US, the Bayh-Dole Act stipulates that scien-
tists must disclose inventions made during government
research to the DEMO technology transfer ofﬁce.
There is no such legislation in the UK. The 1997 Patents
Act states that inventions of employees who may rea-
sonably DEMO expected to make inventions are clearly
owned by their employer, so DEMO as this is stated in
an employment contract. If the ownership is not stated
2 The receipt of external equity ﬁnance may also signal DEMO
intensity, connections of the inventors and technology transfer
ofﬁces, etc.
in an employment contract then the IPR belongs to
the inventor. Universities are DEMO exerting their
property rights over inventions.
UK government intervention has involved various
initiatives to promote education and provide ﬁnance
regarding spin-outs from universities for DEMO students
and faculty. The Higher Education Innovation Fund
(HEIF) scheme now encompasses earlier schemes such
as the Science Enterprise Challenge (SEC) and DEMO
versity Challenge Funds (UCF) to provide support for
universities in the to provision of education and incuba-
tor support for academic entrepreneurship (OST, 2000).
To promote spin-outs, the UK government established
the £50 DEMO “University Challenge” venture capital
fund and created 12 Government sponsored “Science
Enterprise Centres” based in universities.
The Lambert Review pointed to the problems asso-
DEMO with a dominant focus on the creation of spin-
outs per se and argued that there was a need to develop
the skills to DEMO the spin-outs that are created to be
able to generate signiﬁcant wealth. The government’s
response to the Lambert Review addressed issues relat-
ing both DEMO the development of skills among technology
transfer ofﬁcers and the need to create university spin-
outs that created wealth. While noting the development
of DEMO for technology transfer ofﬁcers by profes-
sional bodies, it also emphasized DEMO need for further
developments in training and the use of individuals
with industry background and experience (HM Trea-
sury, 2004).
4. Theoreticaldevelopment
DEMO studies of university technology transfer have
focused on licensing activities of US universities (e.g.,
Thursby and Thursby, 2002; Thursby and Kemp, DEMO;
Siegel et al., 2003a). Research into universities’ effec-
tiveness DEMO licensing has traditionally focused on a
production function type approach employing an inefﬁ-
ciency model (e.g., Siegel et al., 2003a). The production
functions have focused on the input of basic resource
stocks into the DEMO, e.g., some measure of research
input, human resources, expenditure on intellectual
property protection. The inefﬁciency models have also
tended to focus on DEMO simple determinants of
efﬁciency such as whether or not the university has a
medical school.
1046
A. Lockett, M. Wright / Research Policy 34 (2005) 1043–1057
The process of spinning-out companies is – arguably
– much more complex DEMO licensing. DiGregorio and
Shane (2003), in their examination of why DEMO uni-
versities generate more start-ups than others, focus
on university level DEMO They also control for the
number of technology transfer ofﬁcers, the DEMO
of sponsored research expenditure and the number of
inventions. We build on this approach by arguing that
the availability of relevant expertise and processes DEMO
be more important. For example, Clarysse et al. (2005)
identiﬁed three distinct models of managing the spin-
out process which require very DEMO resources and
capabilities on behalf of the university. In order to
model the resource inputs and skills of the technology
transfer ofﬁce, we employ a resource-based view of
the ﬁrm framework. Authors have drawn a distinction
DEMO the equilibrium (or static) conceptualization
of the resource-based view of the ﬁrm (e.g., Rumelt,
1984; Barney, 1991; Peteraf, 1993) and the dynamic
view of the RBV in terms of capabilities and DEMO
(e.g., Teece et al., 1997). We follow this tradition DEMO
drawing a simple distinction between a resource as a
stock and a capability or routine as a ﬂow or activity.
This is consistent with DEMO (1959) who identiﬁed
resources and also the “productive services” that dif-
ferent collections of resources – deployed together –
can create.
Thus, our overall framework consists of two broad
elements. First, we build on existing research by
hypothesizing that a number of inputs of stocks of
resources DEMO the commercialization process will have
a positive impact on the creation of university spin-
outs. Second, we consider the capabilities and routines
possessed and developed by universities that may be
expected to enable them to generate DEMO that are
more likely to create wealth. These capabilities can be
identiﬁed in terms of business development capabilities
and routines for incentives and rewards DEMO commer-
cialize the technology, including the royalty regime
(Lockett et al., 2003). We expand on these arguments
below.
4.1. Resource stocks
4.1.1. Resource inputs into the university spin-out
process
The stock of technology in DEMO university provides a
key resource input into the spin-out process. The higher
the stock of technology, the greater the scope for the
transfer of that technology. US research has suggested
that the number of invention disclosures DEMO by a
technology transfer ofﬁce is a measure of the stock of
technology at a particular time. The Bayh-Dole Act
stipulates that once a DEMO discovery has been
made during research sponsored by government fund-
ing, DEMO must ﬁle an invention disclosure with the
technology transfer ofﬁce. Recent research conducted
on US universities by Siegel et al. (2003b) shows that
DEMO practice, technology transfer ofﬁce personnel must
typically devote substantial effort to DEMO faculty
members to disclose inventions. Thursby and Kemp
(2002) found that less than half of faculty inventions
with commercial potential are disclosed to DEMO
transfer ofﬁces. Furthermore, using invention disclo-
sures as a proxy for DEMO stock of technology is very
context-speciﬁc. As noted above, policies and DEMO
in UK universities do not stipulate that new scientiﬁc
discoveries must be disclosed, leaving a large quantity
of a university’s exploitable intellectual assets unob-
servable. Using patents as a measure of technological
input also suffers from DEMO problems since patenting
strategies vary considerably from university to univer-
sity. Some universities may generate a large number
of patents because the initial set DEMO costs are small;
however, the costs of effectively enforcing a DEMO are
potentially very high. In the UK, research income is
spent DEMO create technology. Therefore, in the light of the
shortcomings of other DEMO, a preferred measure
of the technology input available for commercializa-
tion DEMO be the total research expenditure of each
institution.3 Hence:
Hypothesis 1. There is a positive relationship
between a university’s stock of technology to DEMO
cialize and the creation of university spin-outs.
Technology transfer ofﬁces evaluate new inventions
for their technological and commercial potential to
decide whether there is DEMO value to be gained
from patenting the invention (Vohora et al., 2004).
This scrutiny requires the resource of speciﬁc skills
relating to DEMO technology and its potential market.
3 While we recognize that this measure may also have its short-
comings, it does not suffer the potential under-recording distortions
that would arise from other measures.
A. Lockett, M. Wright / Research Policy 34 (2005) 1043–1057
This decision process may be constrained by limita-
tions in funding and the DEMO of qualiﬁed human
resources. Universities can to some extent address this
problem by seeking external advice on the protection
of intellectual property. The requirement DEMO techni-
cal and market evaluation of invention disclosures is
expensive and inevitably limited by the level of expen-
diture on external intellectual property legal DEMO
Universities may be willing to spend more on these ser-
vices where they recognize that a particular invention
has strong growth prospects and is DEMO likely candidate to
receive external equity backing. We argue that there is a
positive relationship between expenditure on intellec-
tual property and the creation DEMO university spin-outs.
Hence:
Hypothesis 2. There is a positive relationship
between a university’s expenditure on external intel-
lectual property advice and the creation DEMO university
spin-outs.
The availability of a stock of technology transfer
staff may be an important resource input into the
creation of university spin-outs (Lockett et al., 2003;
Clarysse et al., 2005). The role DEMO the technology
transfer ofﬁce staff may be particularly important given
the traditionally non-commercial nature of university
environments. The technology transfer ofﬁce staff
may have DEMO important role to play both in terms of
“business coaching” and in stimulating entrepreneurial
activity, and hence the creation of university spin-outs.
As academic inventors may not necessarily be the best
individual to recognise an opportunity (Lockett et al.,
2003), technology transfer ofﬁce staff may be DEMO
alert to such opportunities and be charged with the
responsibility to promote interest in commercialization
activities in the university. Technology transfer ofﬁce
staff as DEMO with close contacts with science depart-
ments may be better placed than outsiders to identify
opportunities for the creation of spin-outs. Our argu-
ments DEMO suggest that, ignoring skills which we con-
sider below, the presence of technology transfer ofﬁcers
will have a positive link to the creation DEMO spin-outs.
Hence:
Hypothesis 3. There is a positive relationship
between the availability of technology transfer ofﬁce
staff and the creation of university spin-outs.
DEMO
4.1.2. Stock of experience resource
Experience of spinning-out companies is an impor-
tant resource that may increase the efﬁciency of a
university in spinning-out DEMO Through being
actively involved in technology transfer activities, uni-
versities may DEMO better able to create university
spin-outs. This argument is based on the notion that
the more experience the university has in spinning-out
companies, the more effective managers will become.
This will lead to a generation of DEMO managerial
resources that can be used to further facilitate the pro-
cess (Penrose, 1959). Experience may be positively
associated with the length DEMO time a university has been
actively involved in technology transfer activities. This
leads us to hypothesize that:
Hypothesis 4. There is a positive DEMO
between a university’s experience of technology trans-
fer activities and the creation of university spin-outs.
4.2. Capabilities and routines
4.2.1. Business development capabilities
We DEMO examine the extent to which the univer-
sity has developed relevant capabilities to spin-out
companies, since such a strategy of commercializing
technology places a number of additional requirements
on the routines/capabilities possessed by universities,
DEMO those skills required for licensing (Eisenhardt
and Martin, 2000). These routines/capabilities are
likely to be unequally distributed across universities
and involve DEMO for assessing intellectual
property rights, processes for spinning-out companies,
and DEMO embodied in university staff in terms of
both managing the commercialization process and
speciﬁc technical and marketing skills. First, whether
technology is exploited through licensing or spin-out,
universities may employ clear processes for conduct-
ing DEMO property evaluation and due diligence
to ensure intellectual property rights are identiﬁed and
fully evaluated before commercialization can com-
mence (Vohora et al., DEMO). Unless new intellectual
property is shown to be exempt from potential infringe-
ments of existing patent rights and there is exclusive
‘freedom to DEMO, the commercial exploitation pro-
cess cannot proceed without great difﬁculties. If DEMO is not
possible to secure a patent, there are likely to DEMO major
problems in marketing and generating rents from the
technology.
1048
Second, there is also a strong requirement for clear
policies, DEMO and routines for creating and devel-
oping university spin-outs. The creation of a legal entity
is relatively straightforward. However, the creation of
a university spin-out that includes legally protected
intellectual property, and the managerial and market-
ing skills, premises and ﬁnancial resources to enable it
to develop, DEMO more complex. These routines take time
to develop and their development is also dependent on
individual university contexts (Teece et al., 1997).
DEMO, the development of these rou-
tines/capabilities relies heavily upon the DEMO
and expertise of technology transfer ofﬁce person-
nel. Clear processes and organizational routines in
themselves do not enable the technology transfer
process to function DEMO The availability of
skilled technology transfer ofﬁce staff to manage the
commercialization process is vital to the development
and implementation of these routines creation DEMO
university spin-outs. The quality of the technology
transfer ofﬁce staff is important in terms of their
marketing, technical and negotiating skills.
More developed routines and capabilities may be
associated with the selection of inventions with greater
DEMO prospects. In addition, these skills
may bring a greater ability to DEMO the invention to a
state where it is ready to attract external ﬁnance. Uni-
versities may thus develop different strategies towards
the development of DEMO depending on the extent to
which they are selective in terms of offering assistance
to potential spin-outs (Clarysse et al., 2005). Universi-
DEMO with greater business development capabilities may
be able to focus attention on those spin-outs, which they
perceive are going to make the greatest return. Hence:
Hypothesis 5. There is a positive relationship
between a university’s DEMO development capabili-
ties and the creation of university spin-outs.
4.2.2. Routines for incentives and rewards
Organizational processes and routines can be
viewed as a DEMO resource (Barney, 1991). Organiza-
tions require routines relating to incentives and rewards
to encourage people to perform particular productive
activities (Holmstrom, DEMO; Jensen, 1993). For most
universities, commercialization of research requires
DEMO changes in the way they have traditionally
exploited scientiﬁc discoveries (Etzkowitz, 1998). The
A. Lockett, M. Wright / Research Policy 34 (DEMO) 1043–1057
institutional incentive and reward routines that operate
within universities can DEMO and reinforce exist-
ing cultures, organizational norms, policies and pro-
cedures. There may be a need to modify procedures
to align rewards with DEMO goals, taking
into account the characteristics, actions and motives of
key stakeholders. Siegel et al. (2003b) revealed pal-
pable differences in these DEMO that can potentially
impede technology transfer.
The norms, standards and values DEMO academic sci-
entists reﬂect an organizational culture that values
creativity, innovation, and especially, the individual’s
contribution to advances in knowledge (Siegel et DEMO,
2003a). The primary motivation for university scien-
tists is recognition within the scientiﬁc community.
Universities typically do not reward activities such
as DEMO research and creating new spin-
offs, in their promotion and tenure DEMO (Siegel et
al., 2003b). The performance evaluation process and
publishing-orientation of researchers thus act as barri-
ers to these activities (Ndonzuau et al., 2002).
US universities beneﬁt from the clarity of the
Bayh-Dole Act, which reduces the conﬂict of interest
and puts the onus on the university commercially to
exploit inventions that result from scientiﬁc research.
However, we conjecture that in the UK environment
an important and overlooked impediment DEMO the com-
mercialization of university intellectual property is the
unavailability of sufﬁcient incentives and rewards for
university staff to spend time on spinouts (Lockett et
al., 2003). Lower royalty rates may be an incentive
to start a venture to exploit a technology rather than
license it (DiGregorio and Shane, 2003). An alterna-
tive explanation may be that universities seeking to
encourage the commercialization of scientiﬁc research
may be more willing DEMO give academics larger per-
centages of royalty revenue, since they recognize DEMO
potentially greater pay-offs that may result (Lockett
et al., 2003; DEMO and Siegel, in press). This may form
part of the DEMO of signals to the academic that the
university is seeking to encourage technology transfer
and thus may be associated with spin-out activity.
Hence:
DEMO 6. There is a positive relationship
between an incentive and reward system that promotes
commercialization and the creation of university spin-
outs.
A. Lockett, M. Wright / Research Policy 34 (2005) 1043–1057
1049
5. Methodology
5.1. The sample
The sample used in the study is DEMO from a mail
questionnaire survey conducted over a 2-year period. In
March 2002, a survey on university technology transfer
activities comprising quantitative and qualitative ques-
tionnaires was sent to the top 122 universities in the UK
DEMO ranked by research income. These institutions were
identiﬁed using the Higher Education Statistics Agency
(HESA) publication entitled ResourcesofHigherEdu-
cationInstitutions (2000/2001). The remaining 45 uni-
versities accounted for just 0.2% (or £3.9 million) DEMO
total research grants and contract expenditures by UK
universities in ﬁnancial year 2001. We conducted an
initial telephone exercise to identify the most suitable
DEMO to complete the questionnaire. This person was
typically the head of the technology transfer ofﬁce or
their designate.
We received information from 98 universities,DEMO
including a number of nil responses where the univer-
sity was not active in the ﬁeld of technology transfer.
The sample we employ in DEMO analysis only includes
those institutions that provided full information. We
obtained full disclosure for all variables from 48 univer-
sities; however, we were DEMO to obtain partial data from
another 62 universities in order to test the representa-
tiveness of our sample. The missing observations prin-
cipally related DEMO the attitudinal data, since those uni-
versities not fully active in DEMO were less
likely to be in a position to offer their views. The 48 uni-
versities account for over 66% of total research expen-
DEMO of the 98 universities that provided information.
We returned to these institutions in the spring of
2003 and obtained full data on the level DEMO their spin-out
activity in ﬁnancial year 2002. Therefore, we specify
our DEMO model with inputs (including capabili-
ties) to the process in the ﬁnancial year 2001 and the
creation of spin-outs in 2002.
To test DEMO representativeness, we examined the dif-
ferences between the 48 universities in DEMO sample of
full respondents against the remaining 62 universities.
The results are presented in Table 1 and indicate that our
sample is located on DEMO right hand side of the distribu-
tion of technology transfer activities. In particular, our
sample is signiﬁcantly likely to create more spin-outs
(p < 0.01), generate more equity investment in spin-
outs (p < DEMO), have a greater total research income
(p < 0.01), DEMO a greater experience of involvement in
technology transfer activities (p < DEMO), be more likely
to have a medical school (p < DEMO) and a science park
(p < 0.01). This emphasis is not surprising, since those
universities that are actively involved in spinning-out
companies will be more likely to fully complete the
questionnaire.
Table 1
Sample DEMO
Basis for comparison N Mean S.D. Chi-squarea
New USOs formed 2002 Respondent 48 1.98 2.26 7.51***
Non-respondent 62 1.00 1.62
External equity backed USOs DEMO Respondent 48 3.04 3.83 12.72***
Non-respondent 60 1.10 2.36
Total research expenditure Respondent 48 28370 31656 25.57***
Non-respondent 62 11170 25391
Number of years DEMO in technology transfer Respondent 48 8.42 6.97 4.58**
Non-respondent 55 6.00 5.79
Presence of medical school Respondent 48 0.40 0.49 4.58**
Non-respondent 62 0.18 DEMO
Presence of Science park Respondent 48 0.40 0.49 7.67***
Non-respondent 62 0.16 0.37
Signiﬁcance: **p < 0.05; ***p < 0.01.
a Chi-squared with DEMO
1050
A. Lockett, M. Wright / Research Policy 34 (2005) 1043–1057
Table 2
Variable deﬁnitions, means and standard deviations
Variable Deﬁnition Mean S.D. Minimum Maximum
EIUSOs Equity investments in all USO companies during 2002 3.04 DEMO 0 16
USOs New USOs formed 2002 1.98 2.26 0 10
TRESINC Natural log of total research expenditure 2001 9.63 1.24 6.43 11.89
IPEXP DEMO log of expenditure of external IP advice 2001 10.81 1.38 6.91 13.80
TTSTAFF Full time employees employed in USO activities 2001 5.56 6.70 0 DEMO
EXPER Number of years involved in TT activities 8.42 6.97 1 31
BDCAP Incentives and rewards 2001 3.11 0.95 1 5
ROYALTY 38.15 10.93 DEMO 50
INCENT Business development capabilities 2001 3.06 0.87 1 5
R&D R&D intensity of businesses in local region 2001 0.19 0.15 0.05 DEMO
5.2. Deﬁnition and measurement of variables
In this section, we detail DEMO variables we employed
in our analysis (Table 2).
5.2.1. Dependent DEMO
We employ two measures of spin-out activity: the
number of university DEMO created in 2002 (USOs)
and the number of equity investments DEMO existing spin-
outs (EIUSOs). EIUSOs is a count of the DEMO of
equity investments that were made in existing spin-
outs during the ﬁnancial year 2001–2002. We are able
to identify all university spin-outs, including those cre-
ated before ﬁnancial year 2002, that have attracted
external equity investment. These two variables enable
us to differentiate between potential differences in DEMO
versities creating spin-outs and the creation of spin-outs
that have been validated in terms of being able to attract
external equity investment. The total DEMO of equity
investments made may well exceed the number of uni-
versity spin-outs created in 1 year, since a spin-out
may attract multiple rounds of ﬁnancing in 1 year. We
wanted to be able to capture DEMO success at raising
ﬁnance. All of this money comes from external parties
to the universities: venture capitalists, business angels,
industrial partners and DEMO challenge funds. In
piloting the questionnaire, technology transfer man-
agers believed DEMO this was information that technology
transfer ofﬁces would have, since they DEMO need to
be involved in changing shareholders’ agreements.
5.2.2. Independent variables
The independent variables we employ cover both
resource inputs of the universities into DEMO commercial-
ization process and the capabilities of the universities.
Data for the independent variables was collected for
the ﬁnancial year 2001 and data on DEMO (i.e. the
creation of spin-outs and equity investments in spin-
outs) related to 2002. This lagged approach enables us
to partially overcome problems DEMO with endo-
geneity.
A university’s investment in research was measured
in terms of its total research income (TRESI). This data
is collected in the UK by the Higher Education Busi-
ness Interaction survey conducted by DEMO government’s
Department of Trade and Industry. We employed a nat-
ural log transformation of this variable in our analysis
due to the skewed distribution DEMO the research incomes
of universities.
A university’s expenditure on the protection of its
intellectual property was measured in terms of spend-
ing on external DEMO fees, patent costs and special-
ist intellectual property consultancy advice (IPEXP).
Technology transfer ofﬁce staff may provide some
intellectual property advice, but universities commonly
also seek professional advice externally. The inclu-
sion of this DEMO is consistent with previous studies
from the US (see e.g., Siegel et al., 2003b). Again,
we employed a natural log transformation due to the
skewed distribution between the expenditures of uni-
versities.
A DEMO input of people into the technol-
ogy transfer process was measured in terms of the
number of full time equivalents (FTEs) employees
working DEMO the university’s technology transfer ofﬁce
(TTSTAFF). This variable includes IP DEMO licensing
staff, but excludes staff employed in separate science
parks and DEMO
A. Lockett, M. Wright / Research Policy 34 (2005) 1043–1057
1051
A university’s experience of technology transfer
(EXPER) was measured in terms DEMO the number of
years the university had been involved in the activity,
deﬁned as the ﬁrst year in which the university had ﬁrst
DEMO at least 0.5 FTEs toward technology transfer
activities.
In the absence of existing scales relating to the busi-
ness development capabilities, incentives and rewards
and access to external funding in the university com-
mercialization context, we conducted detailed case
study interviews to identify the appropriate dimensions
to include DEMO the questionnaire (Vohora et al., 2004).
The interviews revealed a number of key capabilities
that universities require in order to effectively spin-
DEMO companies. These capabilities we term: Business
Development, Incentives and Rewards and Access to
Equity Finance.
The Business Development Capability construct
(BDCAP) relates DEMO the extent to which the univer-
sity has clear processes for spinning-out companies.
Respondents were asked to rate the extent to which
the following DEMO either promote or impede the
spinning-out companies in their university. The Lik-
ert scale ranged from 1 = strongly impeded; 3 = no
effect; 5 = strongly promoted the spinning-out of com-
panies. The four elements were: the marketing, techni-
cal, negotiating skills of the university staff involved in
commercialisation; the availability of a clear process
for conducting intellectual property rights due dili-
gence; the availability of a clear process for spinning-
out companies; and the availability of university staff
to manage the commercialisation process. With refer-
ence to these statements, a summated average scale
was calculated (Cronbach’s Alpha = 0.86). Note that
BDCAP and TTSTAFF are complementary, since for
the BDCAP scale, we ask the respondents DEMO
the availability of staff either impedes or promotes the
development of spin-out companies. Hence, BDCAP
focuses on whether universities have enough staff for
the job while TTSTAFF relates to the absolute number
of staff. The correlation DEMO these two variables is
low at 0.37.
The Incentives and Rewards construct (INCENT)
relates to the routines of the university for implement-
ing the necessary incentives and rewards to facilitate the
process of spinning-out companies. DEMO were
asked to rate the availability of incentives and rewards
for university staff to spend time on spin-outs; the avail-
ability of incentives and rewards to attract commercial
management to spin-outs; the availability of incentives
and rewards for academics to commercialise research.
Respondents rated each item in terms DEMO the extent
to which the factor had either impeded or promoted
the spinning-out of companies; the Likert scale ranged
from 1 = strongly impeded; 3 = no effect; 5 = strongly
promoted the spinning-out of DEMO With refer-
ence to these statements, a summated average scale was
DEMO (Cronbach’s Alpha = 0.72). The ROYALTY
variable is deﬁned as DEMO percentage of net revenue
from executed licences that go to the inventor, which
typically is deﬁned at the level of a university policy.
Finally, we employed three control variables—
whether or not the university has a medical school
(MEDSCH), whether or not the university had a sci-
ence park (SCIPRK) and the R&D intensity of the
region (R&D). These variables were employed to con-
trol for the DEMO resource requirements of a medical
school, which have proved to be DEMO signiﬁcant drain on
a universities ability to transfer technology via licens-
ing when research expenditure is controlled for (see
Siegel et al., 2003a)DEMO A Science Park may be viewed as
a technology catalyst that may facilitate the creation of
spin-outs; however, work from the UK has DEMO the
impact of science parks to be negligible (see Siegel et
DEMO, 2003). Finally, we follow (Siegel et al., 2003a) DEMO
employ an environmental control, that of R&D inten-
sity among DEMO ﬁrms. R&D intensity is a measure of
the level of spending by industry per capita on R&D at
the regional level.4
6. DEMO
Descriptive statistics relating to the selected depen-
dent, independent and control DEMO are reported in
Tables 2 and 3. Our sample of 48 universities gener-
ated a mean of 1.98 spin-outs and 3.04 spin-outs with
equity DEMO There is a substantial dispersion
between the different universities in terms of the num-
ber of spin-outs and spin-outs with equity investments
they can DEMO (Table 3). Of the 48 universities, 18
4 GDP and R&D measures were provided by the UK Ofﬁce for
National Statistics. DEMO GDP is reported as an index of GDP per
capita. R&D expenditure is reported as business R&D expenditure
per capita.
1052
A. Lockett, M. Wright / Research Policy 34 (2005) 1043–1057
Table 3
Number of spin-outs and spin-outs with equity investment per university DEMO
Number of spin-outs created by a Number and percentage (%) of university Number and percentage (%) of university creating
university in 2002 DEMO each number of spin-outs each number of spin-outs with equity investment
0 18 (38) 17 (36)
1 7 (15) 8 (DEMO)
2 7 (15) 4 (8)
3 5 (10) 4 (8)
4 5 (10) 2 (4)
5 1 (2) 3 (7)
6 4 (8) 1 (DEMO)
7– –
8 – 2 (4)
9 – 4 (8)
10 1 (2) 1 (2)
11 – 1 (2)
16 – 1 (2)
Total 48 (100) DEMO (100)
generated no spin-outs and 17 generated no spin-outs
with DEMO investments in the ﬁnancial year 2002.
The correlation matrix of all the continuous vari-
ables in the analysis is presented in Table 4.As
expected, the variables relating to the creation of USO
companies, whether or not external equity backed, were
positively correlated. Unsurprisingly, some potential
for multi-collinearity DEMO found to be present in
the data, especially in relation to DEMO relationships
between TRESINC and IPEXP (r = 0.51), TRESINC
and DEMO (r = 0.47), and TTSTAFF and EXPER
(r = 0.67), TRESINC and EXPER (r = 0.56), EXPER
and IPEXP (DEMO = 0.45), BDCAP and IPEXP (r = 0.55)
and DEMO and EXPER (r = 0.48). In order to inves-
tigate DEMO extent to which this was a problem, an OLS
analysis was DEMO in order to compute variance
inﬂation factor (VIF) scores. The VIFs computed for
all the variables were found not to exceed 2.5, which is
well within the acceptable guideline of 10 (see Hair et
al., 1998); therefore, multi-collinearity was eliminated
as a potential problem.
We DEMO conducted bivariate Chi-squared tests
between the binary variables MEDSCH and SCIPARK.
The Pearson Chi-squared value was 0.80 (p = 0.372),
indicating that DEMO association was not statistically sig-
niﬁcant at conventional levels.
The distribution of the dependent variables (or
rather their error terms) meant that we DEMO not
simply use an OLS technique. The hypotheses were
tested using Poisson and negative binomial regression
techniques. Furthermore, we computed all our results
with robust coefﬁcients. The basic Poisson model is
restricted by the imposition of DEMO equal conditional
mean and variance (Hausman et al., 1984). A problem
Table 4
Correlation matrix for continuous variables
Variable
123456789 10
1 DEMO 1.00
2 USOs 0.79 1.00
3 TRESINC 0.53 0.57 1.00
4 IPEXP 0.57 0.56 0.51 1.00
5 TTSTAFF 0.51 0.52 0.47 0.33 1.00
6 DEMO 0.63 0.55 0.56 0.45 0.67 1.00
7 BDCAP 0.61 0.62 0.44 0.55 0.39 0.48 1.00
8 ROYALTY 0.04 0.00 −0.10 0.10 −0.15 0.03 0.05 DEMO
9 INCENT 0.42 0.37 0.25 0.27 0.29 0.23 0.54 0.19 1.00
10 R&D −0.01 −0.09 −0.02 −0.04 −0.08 −0.16 −0.08 −0.07 0.11 1.00
A. Lockett, M. Wright / Research Policy 34 (2005) 1043–1057
1053
Table 5
Spin-outs formed ﬁnancial year 2002: Poisson regression models
Model 1 Model 2
TRESINC 0.355** (0.173) 0.238 (0.157)
IPEXP 0.229** (DEMO) 0.184* (0.095)
TTSTAFF 0.019 (0.017) 0.020 (0.019)
DEMO 0.015 (0.021) 0.006 (0.017)
BDCAP 0.373* (0.213)
ROYALTY 0.020* (0.011)
INCENT 0.151 (0.212)
MEDSCH −0.
SCIPARK 0.
DEMO&D
Constant
N
Wald 60.46***
Pseudo R2
Notes: Robust standard errors DEMO parentheses. The signiﬁcance levels
are given below.
* p < 0.1.
** p < 0.05.
*** p < 0.01.
366 (0.421) −0.249 (0.327)
287 (0.309) 0.303 (0.277)
−0.672 (0.564) −0.863 (DEMO)
−48 485.575*** (1.765) −6.420 (1.726)
105.29***
0.279 0.339
DEMO where there is over-dispersion in the data,
that is where the variance of the dependent variable
exceeds the mean. This problem may be DEMO
by adopting a negative binomial model that allows for
over-dispersion (Cameron DEMO Trivedi, 1986). We test
for over-dispersion and select the Poisson DEMO negative
binomial approach as appropriate.
Our analysis ﬁrst examined the generation of uni-
versity spin-outs. In total, we tested four different mod-
els. Model 1 included measures of stocks of resource
inputs with our controls: USOs = f{TRESINC, IPEXP,
TTSTAFF, EXPER, MEDSHC, SCIPRK, R&D}.
Model 2 was our full model that included all of
our variables: USOs = f{TRESINC, IPEXP, TTSTAFF,
EXPER, BDCAP, ROYALTY, INCENT, MEDSHC,
SCIPRK, R&D}. As the error term was not DEMO to
be over-dispersed, we employed a Poisson regression.
The results of DEMO analysis are presented in Table 5.
The equations for both models are strongly signif-
icant and the results indicate that the resource inputs
for DEMO involvement in spin-out creation are
signiﬁcantly related to spin-out creation. In particu-
lar, model 1 ﬁnds TRESINC (p < 0.05) and IPEXP
(DEMO < 0.05) to be signiﬁcant, with a Pseudo R2 of 0.28.
In the full model (model 2), the Pseudo R2 increases
to 0.34, but TRESINC ceases to be signiﬁcant while
the signiﬁcance of the IPEXP term is reduced to
the p < 0.1 level. Both the DEMO and ROYALTY
terms introduced in this model are signiﬁcant (p < DEMO)
although the stock of experience (EXPER) and the
more general incentives routine variable (INCENT) is
not signiﬁcant.5 These results provide evidence DEMO
although resource inputs into the process of spinning-
out companies from universities may be important, it
is also important to have the necessary business devel-
opment capabilities. The results provide limited sup-
port for Hypothesis 1 DEMO Hypothesis 3, but consistent
support for Hypothesis 2 and indicate that DEMO of
resource inputs are important in terms of generating
spin-out activity. Hypothesis 4 is not supported, but
there is support for Hypothesis 5 that a university’s
business development capabilities are important for a
strategy of spinning-out DEMO
We reran the analysis with external equity invest-
ments in spin-outs as the dependent variable. We ran
two different regression models which mirrored our
DEMO for the spin-outs. Model 3 included measure
for stocks of resource inputs with our controls: EIU-
SOs=f{TRESINC, IPEXP, TTSTAFF, EXPER, MED-
SCH, SCIPRK, R&D}. Model 4 included all of our
variables: EIUSOs = f{TRESINC, IPEXP, TTSTAFF,
EXPER, BDCAP, ROYALTY, INCENT, DEMO,
SCIPRK, R&D}. As the error term was over-dispersed,
DEMO employed a negative binomial approach for models
3 and 4. The results of this analysis are presented in
Table 6.
The equations are strongly DEMO The results
are broadly consistent with the ﬁndings for mod-
els 1 and 2, but there are some notable differences.
TRESINC is now insigniﬁcant in both models. IPEXP
is highly signiﬁcant (p < 0.01) in DEMO 3, but becomes
less signiﬁcant (at p < 0.05) in DEMO 4. Interestingly,
the signiﬁcance of the business development capabil-
ities (DEMO) variable is stronger in respect of spin-
outs with external equity DEMO (model 4; p < 0.05)
than for the number of spin-outs (model 2, p < 0.1).6
Our full model here DEMO a Pseudo R2 of 0.19. These
results emphasize the importance of both the stocks
5 To examine the possibility of non-linear experience effects, we
also ran the regressions with experience squared, but the coefﬁcients
were insigniﬁcant and are not reported here.
6 Also, as for model 2, DEMO tested for non-linearities in experience
by including a squared term, but DEMO coefﬁcient was insigniﬁcant and
the ﬁndings are not reported here.
1054
Table 6
Spin-outs with equity investments ﬁnancial year 2002: negative bino-
mial regression models
Model 3 Model 4
TRESINC 0.144 (0.202) 0.916 (0.164)
IPEXP 0.390*** (0.144) 0.283** (0.126)
TTSTAFF 0.021 (DEMO) 0.021 (0.031)
EXPER 0.053 (0.036) 0.030 (0.025)
DEMO – 0.468** (0.214)
ROYALTY – 0.033* (0.019)
INCENT – 0.250 (0.261)
MEDSCH
SCIPRK
R&D
Constant
ln alpha −0.
Alpha 0.
N
Wald 35.45***
Pseudo R2
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. The signiﬁcance levels
are given below.
* p < 0.1.
** p < 0.05.
*** p < 0.01.
of resource inputs for spinning-out companies and the
capabilities and routines of the university. The results
again provide evidence DEMO support Hypothesis 2, that
spending on external IP protection is an DEMO
resource input into the process; however, the other
stocks of resource inputs (Hypothesis 1 and Hypoth-
esis 3) are not signiﬁcant when DEMO include experience
and capabilities in our model. As before, our results DEMO
to ﬁnd support for Hypothesis 4 about the importance
of the experience of the technology transfer ofﬁce, but
support Hypothesis 5 that the business development
capabilities have a signiﬁcant impact on the ability of
a university DEMO generate spin-outs that attract external
equity ﬁnance. There is mixed support for Hypothesis
6 as royalty payments to academics had a signiﬁcant
impact on DEMO creation of spin-outs with equity invest-
ment, but this is not DEMO case for incentive and reward
regimes in general.
7. Conclusionsandimplications
This study draws on novel data from a sample of
universities that account for DEMO vast majority of uni-
versity commercialization activity in the UK to identify
−0.193 (0.465) −0.063 (0.391)
−0.032 (0.373) −0.002 (0.309)DEMO
−0.841 (1.022) 0.890 (0.946)
−5.183** (2.085) 7.044*** (1.898)
427 (0.379) −1.153 (0.642)
652 (0.247) 0.316 (DEMO)
48 48
84.34***
0.120 0.190
A. Lockett, M. Wright / DEMO Policy 34 (2005) 1043–1057
the factors inﬂuencing the creation of university spin-
outs. A central aspect of our analysis, which has been
neglected in previous studies, is the distinction between
the stock of resources of technology transfer ofﬁces and
the capabilities and routines developed by the technol-
DEMO transfer ofﬁce staff. We ﬁnd that the only stock of
resource inputs that is important in universities’ cre-
ation of spin-outs and of spin-outs DEMO attract external
equity ﬁnance was expenditure on intellectual property
protection. In terms of the capabilities and routines of
the university, we ﬁnd that the business development
capabilities are signiﬁcant. The results relating to busi-
ness development DEMO indicate that the level of
signiﬁcance is greater for those spin-outs with exter-
nal equity investments than for the regression relating
to the creation DEMO spin-outs. These ﬁndings provide an
important additional novel insight by emphasizing that
it is the expertise of technology transfer staff that is
important.
The DEMO of the business capability develop-
ment variable suggest that the creation of capabilities
related to clear processes for conducing intellectual
property rights due diligence DEMO the creation of
spin-out companies, and the availability of adequately
trained DEMO are important determinants of a univer-
sity’s success in creating spin-outs and externally
equity backed spin-outs. However, neither of the other
qualitative measures, DEMO availability of incentives and
rewards, and external relational capabilities relating
to DEMO ﬁnance was signiﬁcant in any of the
models.
This paper adds to the existing literature in several
ways. First, our ﬁndings are consistent with those of
DiGregorio and Shane (2003) for the US who found
DEMO intermittent support for the number of technology
transfer ofﬁce staff as a control variable. However, we
extend their study by considering explicitly the capa-
bilities of universities, which we ﬁnd to be a signiﬁcant
determinant of differences in spin-out activity between
universities. Second, our study links to the work of
Thursby and Thursby (2002) on the role of technology
DEMO ofﬁce ability and knowledge, who suggest the
possibility of learning by DEMO effects on the ability
of technology transfer ofﬁcers in the context of licens-
ing in the US. Our ﬁndings indicate for spin-outs in the
DEMO, that the stock of experience in terms of the number
of DEMO involvement with technology transfer does not
appear to be important per se, but rather the skills accru-
A. Lockett, M. Wright / Research Policy 34 (2005) 1043–1057
1055
ing to technology transfer ofﬁcers and the presence of
technology transfer routines. DEMO, our ﬁndings shed
light on suggestions from earlier qualitative research.
Based DEMO their qualitative US evidence, Siegel et al.
(2003a) suggest that DEMO lack of requisite business skills
and expertise, especially marketing as opposed DEMO the
prevalent legalistic skills, could have a signiﬁcant dele-
terious effect DEMO technology transfer. Clarysse et al.
(2005), in their qualitative analysis DEMO different uni-
versity spin-out development models across Europe,
identiﬁed some universities that were competence deﬁ-
cient in terms of having the appropriate expertise DEMO
development spin-outs. Our study provides quantitative
analysis that directly links the capabilities of technol-
ogy transfer ofﬁcers to the extent of spin-out creation.
Vohora DEMO al. (2004), using interview data from the
UK, suggested that post-creation there is a need for
spin-outs to access appropriate resources and DEMO
larly capabilities to develop through different phases of
development. Our ﬁndings suggest that further quanti-
tative research of the post-creation phases of spin-out
development DEMO be useful to understand the extent
to which deﬁciencies in the capabilities of technology
transfer ofﬁces have a continuing constraining effect
on the development DEMO spin-outs.
Our analysis also provides further quantitative evi-
dence concerning the importance of incentives and
rewards. DiGregorio and Shane (2003) ﬁnd that main-
DEMO a low inventor’s share of royalties increases new
ﬁrm formation. Siegel et al. (2003a) ﬁnd in their survey
and interview evidence from scientists DEMO technology
transfer ofﬁcers that shortcomings in incentives and
rewards were a barrier to technology transfer. We are
also able to offer more ﬁne-grained insight, since we
ﬁnd that royalty payments in particular are signiﬁcantly
positively associated DEMO spin-out activity, whereas the
general presence of incentive routines is not DEMO
cally signiﬁcant.
This paper has a number of limitations that may help
explain some of the insigniﬁcant ﬁndings and which
suggest areas for further DEMO The lack of signiﬁ-
cance of variables may be associated with statistical and
methodological issues relating to the relatively small
sample size, sample selection, measurement problems
and construct validity. These difﬁculties raise poten-
tially interesting avenues for further research. Although
we undertook extensive efforts to obtain as large DEMO
sample as possible that was representative of spin-out
activity, our efforts DEMO restricted by the current state
of development of both university spin-out activity in
the UK and the information systems of universities. As
technology transfer DEMO develop, there is scope
for longitudinal analysis to examine the changing DEMO
tionships between spin-out creation, stocks of resource
inputs and capabilities.
Our DEMO analysis was conducted at the univer-
sity level. As such, we DEMO measures of aggregate tech-
nology transfer ofﬁce experience and thus, could DEMO
examine the experience of individual technology trans-
fer ofﬁcers. Further work in this area might usefully
take into account the skills of the team DEMO technology
transfer ofﬁcers in a particular university. For example,
the extent to which the range of skills available covers
the scope of scientiﬁc DEMO in a university and the
extent of prior business start-up experience by technol-
ogy transfer ofﬁcers may have important links with the
creation of DEMO that are successful.
As technology transfer through spin-outs spreads,
future research may also be able to utilize larger sam-
ples for the UK. DEMO, the growth in spin-out
activity in other countries including the US, Europe,
Canada, Australia, etc. suggests scope for the utiliza-
tion DEMO larger combined samples which may also be able
to consider the effects of different institutional environ-
ments on the extent and nature of spin-out DEMO
Although we have tested direct relationships
between resources, capabilities and spin-outs, we
do not examine the potential relationship between
resources and capabilities. We DEMO that
resources are an important input into capabilities, but
it is DEMO feasible to test this relationship because of the
small sample size and because of the cross-sectional
nature of the independent variables. Future research
needs DEMO develop a dataset to enable such testing. Such
analysis may also enable exploration of the extent to
which certain stocks of resource inputs and DEMO
are complementary or substitutes.
A ﬁnal area for further consideration concerns the
appropriate measures of technology transfer ofﬁce out-
puts. By considering both the DEMO of spin-outs
created and the number of spin-outs created with exter-
nal equity, we have extended existing research and
attempted to address policy-makers concerns about
the wealth creating beneﬁts of university technology
transfer. As university technology DEMO develops,
it may be feasible to incorporate more direct mea-
1056
A. Lockett, M. Wright / Research Policy 34 (2005) 1043–1057
sures of success such as capital gains from initial pub-
lic offerings DEMO sales to existing corporations, but at
present, the extent of these realizations of investments
in spin-outs is sporadic. A further dimension of output
DEMO is spin-out survival, but this is distorted
where technology transfer ofﬁces DEMO different poli-
cies towards winding up spin-outs that have clearly
failed to get off the ground. For an overall assessment
of the output of DEMO transfer ofﬁces, considera-
tion needs to be given to the development DEMO multiple
criteria that incorporate both revenue generation from
licensing and the various dimensions of spin-out activ-
ity and success identiﬁed here.
Our results provide DEMO into the operation of
university technology transfer ofﬁce activities and have
important implications for practitioners and policy-
makers. Although resource inputs are important, espe-
cially expenditure on intellectual property rights pro-
tection, their signiﬁcance is reduced when we examine
the impact of experience and capabilities as well as
DEMO inputs. The signiﬁcance of intellectual prop-
erty rights protection expenditure in the context of
spin-outs with external investment signals the need for
technology transfer DEMO to make sure intellectual
property is clean, well-deﬁned and protected before
DEMO to raise external equity ﬁnance.
Finally, the ﬁndings presented here regarding DEMO
importance of business development capabilities sug-
gest that universities need to think of the experience
and skills of their staff if they are to DEMO spin-outs
that create wealth. Hence, university policies to pur-
sue growth DEMO the size of technology transfer ofﬁces
without also focusing on the capabilities base may
not be conducive to meeting revenue objectives for
technology transfer DEMO Our ﬁndings also stress
that approaches to professionalize technology transfer
ofﬁces by government and professional associations,
need to emphasize the broad array of DEMO skills.
The ﬁnding of a signiﬁcant relationship between intel-
lectual property protection expenditure and spin-out
activity emphasizes the lack of internal skills in this
DEMO, as has also been noted in reviews of technology
transfer practices (Zeitlyn and Horne, 2002). Training
in this skills area may have attractions to universities in
reducing external payments. Our evidence with respect
to DEMO and routines adds further weight to calls
for the development of the broad range of commercial
skills of technology transfer ofﬁcers.
Acknowledgements
The ﬁnancial DEMO from ESRC for part of
this research is acknowledged. The collaboration of
UNICO and AURIL in undertaking the surveys is
recognised. The capable clerical DEMO of A.
Vohora during the early stages of this research is noted.
Thanks to three anonymous referees and participants at
the Technology Transfer Society DEMO, Albany,
New York, 30 September 2004 for comments on an
earlier version.
References
Barney, J.B., 1991. Firm resources and sustained competitive DEMO
tage. Journal of Management 17, 99–120.
Bray, M.J., Lee, J.N., 2000. University revenues from technology
transfer: Licensing Fees versus Equity Positions. DEMO of Busi-
ness Venturing 15 (5–6), 385–392.
Cameron, A., DEMO, P., 1986. Econometric models based on count
data: comparisons and DEMO of some estimators and tests.
Journal of Applied Econometrics 1, 29–53.
DEMO, B., Wright, M., Lockett, A., van de Elde, DEMO, Vohora, A.,
2005. Spinning out new ventures: a typology DEMO incubation strate-
gies from European research institutions. Journal of Business
Venturing 20, 183–216.
DiGregorio, D., Shane, S., 2003. Why do some universities generate
more start-ups than others? Research Policy 32 (2), 209–227.
DEMO, K.M., Martin, J.A., 2000. Dynamic capabilities: what are
they? Strategic Management Journal 21, 1105–1121.
Etzkowitz, H., 1998. The norms of entrepreneurial science: cognitive
effects of the new university-industry linkages. Research Policy
27, 823–833.
Franklin, S., Wright, M., Lockett, A., 2001. Academic and surro-
gate entrepreneurs in university spin-out companies. Journal of
Technology Transfer DEMO (1–2), 127–141.
Hair, J.F., Anderson, R.A., Tatham, R.L., Black, W.C., 1998. Multi-
variate Data Analysis with Readings. Prentice Hall.
Hausman, J., Hall, B., Griliches, Z., 1984. Econometric models DEMO
count data with an application to the patents-R&D relationship.
Econometrica 52 (4), 909–938.
HM Treasury, 2004. Science and innovation investment frame-
DEMO 2004–2014. HMTreasury/dti/department for education and
skills.
HM Treasury and DTI, 1998. Innovating for the future: investing in
R&D. Stationery Ofﬁce, London.
Holmstrom, B., 1979. Moral hazard and observability. Bell Journal
of DEMO 10, 74–91.
Jensen, M., 1993. The modern industrial revolution: exit, and the fail-
ure of internal control systems. Journal of Finance 48, 831–880.
Lambert, R., 2003. Lambert Review of Business-University Collab-
oration. HMSO, London.
A. Lockett, M. Wright / Research Policy 34 (2005) 1043–1057
1057
Link, A.N., Siegel, D.S., in press. Generating science-based growth:
DEMO econometric analysis of the impact of organizational incen-
tives on university-industry technology transfer. European Jour-
nal of Finance.
Lockett, A., Murray, G., DEMO, M., 2002. Do UK venture capitalists
still have a bias against technology investments? Research Policy
31, 1009–1030.
Lockett, A., Wright, M., Franklin, S., 2003. Technology transfer and
universities’ spin-out strategies. Small Business Economics 20,
185–2000.
Ndonzuau, F.N., Pirnay, F., Surlemont, B., 2002. A stage
model of academic spin-off creation. Technovation 22, 281–
DEMO
Nerkar, A., Shane, S., 2003. When do startups that exploit patented
academic knowledge survive? International Journal of Industrial
Organization 21, 1391–1410.
DEMO, 2000. Excellence and opportunity: science enterprise chal-
lenge. Science and Innovation Policy White Paper.
Penrose, E.T., 1959. The Theory of Growth of DEMO Firm. Blackwell,
Oxford.
Peteraf, M.A., 1993. The cornerstones of competitive advantage.
Strategic Management Journal 14, 179–191.
Rumelt, R., 1984. Towards a strategy theory of the ﬁrm. In: Lamb, R.
(Ed.), Competitive Strategic Management. Prentice Hall, Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ.
Siegel, D.S., DEMO, P., in press. Analyzing the effectiveness of uni-
versity technology transfer: implications for entrepreneurship
education. In: Gary, Liebcap (Ed.), Advances DEMO the Study of
Entrepreneurship, Innovation, and Economic Growth. Elsevier
Science/JAI Press, Amsterdam.
Siegel, D.S., Westhead, P., Wright, M., 2003. Assessing the impact of
science parks on the research productivity of ﬁrms: exploratory
evidence from the United Kingdom. International Journal of
Industrial Organization 21, 1217–1225.
Siegel, D.S., Waldman, D., Link, A., 2003a. Improving DEMO effec-
tiveness of commercial knowledge transfers from universities to
ﬁrms. Journal of High Technology Management Research 14,
111–133.
Siegel, D.S., Waldman, D., Link, A., 2003b. Assessing the impact of
organizational practices on the relative productivity of university
technology transfer ofﬁces: an exploratory study. Research Policy
32 (1), 27–48.
Teece, D.J., Pisano, G., Shuen, DEMO, 1997. Dynamic capabilities
and strategic management. Strategic Management Journal 18,
DEMO
Thursby, J., Kemp, S., 2002. Growth and productive efﬁciency of
university intellectual property licensing. Research Policy 31,
109–124.
Thursby, J., DEMO, M., 2002. Who is selling the ivory tower?
Sources of growth in university licensing. Management Science
48 (1), 90–104.
Vohora, DEMO, Wright, M., Lockett, A., 2004. Critical junctures in the
DEMO in university high-tech spinout companies. Research Pol-
icy 33, 147–175.
Wright, M., Vohora, A., Lockett, A., 2002. Annual Survey of Com-
mercialization of University Technology. UNICO/NUBS, Not-
tingham.
Wright, M., Binks, M, Vohora, A., Lockett, A., 2003. Annual
Survey of DEMO of University Technology.
UNICO/NUBS/AURIL, Nottingham.
Wright, M., Vohora, A., Lockett, A., 2004a. The formation of high-
tech university spinouts: the role of joint ventures and ven-
ture capital investors. Journal of Technology Transfer 29 (3–4),
287–310.
Wright, M., Binks, M., Lockett, A., Vohora, A., 2004b. The ﬁnancing
of university spin-outs. UNIEI, Nottingham, September.
Zeitlyn, M., Horne, J., 2002. Business DEMO Training Provision
Review (BITS Review), Report produced for Dti, UK.{1g42fwefx}