ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR AND HUMAN DECISION PROCESSES
Vol. 65, No. 3, March, pp. 272 – 292, 1996
ARTICLE NO. 0028
Out of Control: DEMO Inﬂuences on Behavior
GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
Carnegie Mellon University
Und ersta nding discr epancies be tween behavior an d
per ceive d self-inte rest h DEMO s bee n one of the m ajor, but
lar gely DEMO ntack led, t heore tical challenges confr ontin g
decision theor DEMO from its in fancy to the prese nt. Pe ople
oft en act again st the ir self-int erest in full know ledge
tha DEMO they are doing so; they exper ience a feeling of being
DEMO of control.’’ This pa per at tribu tes th is phe nomen on
to t h e ope ration of ‘‘visce ral fa ctors,DEMO wh ich in clude
drive sta tes su ch as h unger , thir st and sexua l desire,
moods and emotions, p hysical pain, and craving for a
dru g one is addicted t o. The deﬁ nin g char acter istics of
visceral factors are , ﬁ rst, a dire ct hed onic impact (which
is u sually nega tive), and second , a n e ffect on DEMO r elative
desirability of different goods and actions. The largely
ave rsive exper ience of hun ger, for exa mple, affects the
desirability DEMO eating, bu t also of oth er act ivities such a DEMO
sex. Like wise, fear a n d pain are b oth DEMO, and both
increase the de sirab ility of wit hdraw al DEMO avior s. The
visceral factor perspective has two ce ntral premises:
Fir st, im media tely e xperienced visce ral fa ctors have a
disproportion ate effect on beha vior a n d ten d DEMO o ‘‘crowd
out ’’ vir tually all goals other t han th at of m itiga ting t h e
visceral factor. Second, p eople under weigh , or e ve n ig-
nor e, visceral factors tha t they will e xperience in the
fut ure, h ave experie nced in the p ast, or that are experi-
enced by other p eople . The p aper d etails these two DEMO s-
sum ption s, the n show s how t hey DEMO n help to exp lain a
wid e range of p h enome na: im pulsivity a n d self-con trol,
dru g addiction , various an omalies con cerning sexual be -
havior, t h e effect of vivid ness on decision m aking, and
cer tain p henom ena re latin g t o m otivat ion DEMO d action.
q 1996 Aca demic Press, Inc.
It is always DEMO, impelled by a state of mind which is destined
not to DEMO, that we make our irrevocable decisions.
Marcel Proust
Das ist eine DEMO, sagte der Hofprediger und erlag ihr.1
Bertolt Brecht, Mutter Courage
The ideas in this essay were stimulated by discussions with Drazen
Prelec, and the formal analysis in section III is adapted from our joint
grant DEMO I thank Baruch Fischhoff, Chris Hsee, Helmut Junger-
mann, Daniel DEMO, Gideon Keren, Sam Issacharoff, Graham
Loomes, Daniel Nagin, Fritz DEMO, and Peter Ubel for numerous helpful
discussions, suggestions, and comments. DEMO reprint requests to
George Loewenstein, Department of Social and Decision Sciences, Car-
negie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890.
1 ‘‘This is a DEMO, the court priest said, then succumbed.’’
0749-5978/96 $18.00
Copyright q 1996 by Academic Press, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
272
I. INTRODUCTION
Avrum Goldstein, in his instant classic Addiction,
provides the following account of relapse to drug addic-
tion:
Relapse DEMO, of course, always preceded by a decision to use,
however vague and inchoate that decision may be. It is an
impulsive decision, not a rational one; and it is provoked by
craving —the intense and overwhelming desire to use the
drug (1994, p. 220).
DEMO is anxious to portray relapse as a decision
involving personal volition, DEMO bolster his position that
drug users should be held personally accountable for
their behavior. However, the difﬁculty of doing so is evi-
dent from his resorting to adjectives such as ‘‘impulsive’’
and ‘‘inchoate’’ to describe the DEMO and his picture
of craving as ‘‘intense’’ and ‘‘overwhelming.’’ The addict
knows, in one sense, that taking the drug is the wrong
course DEMO action but is unable to translate this belief into
action. Craving, DEMO seems, has the capacity to drive a
wedge between perceived self-interest DEMO behavior.
Understanding discrepancies between self-interest
and behavior has been one of the major, but largely
untackled, theoretical challenges confronting deci-
sion theory from DEMO infancy to the present (though,
see Beach, 1990; Fishbein & Azjen, 1975; Janis &
Mann, 1977; Kuhl & Beckmann, 1994). In 1960,
Miller, Galanter, and Pribram lamented that DEMO
thing is needed to bridge the gap from knowledge to
action’’ (DEMO 10). Two decades later, Nisbett and Ross
were continuing to DEMO ‘‘our ﬁeld’s inability to
bridge the gap between cognition and behavior, DEMO gap
that in our opinion is the most serious failing of mod-
ern cognitive psychology’’ (1980, p. 11). This essay is
an DEMO to construct the foundation for a bridge
across the gap between perceived self-interest and
behavior. I argue that disjunctions between per-
ceived self-interest and DEMO result from the ac-
tion of visceral factors such as the cravings associated
with drug addiction, drive states (e.g., hunger, thirst,
DEMO sexual desire), moods and emotions, and physical
pain. At sufﬁcient DEMO of intensity, these, and most
other visceral factors, cause people DEMO behave con-
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: OBHDP
VISCERAL FACTORS
273
trary to their own long-term self-interest, often with Rational choice requires that visceral factors be
full awareness that they are doing DEMO taken into account. It makes good sense to eat when
The deﬁning characteristics of visceral factors are, ﬁrst, hungry, to have sex when amorous, and to take pain
a direct hedonic impact, and second, an inﬂuence on the killers when in pain. However, many classic patterns
relative desirability of different goods and actions. Hun- of self-destructive behavior, such as overeating, sex-
ger, for example, is an aversive sensation that affects the ual misconduct, substance abuse, and crimes of pas-
desirability DEMO eating. Anger is also typically unpleasant sion, seem to reﬂect an DEMO inﬂuence of visceral
and increases one’s taste for various types of aggressive factors on behavior. As the intensity of a speciﬁc vis-
actions. Physical DEMO is, needless to say, painful and ceral factor increases, its DEMO on behavior tends
enhances the attractiveness of pain killers, food, and sex. to increase and to change in a characteristic fashion.
Although from DEMO purely formal standpoint one could re- At low levels of intensity, DEMO seem to be capable
gard visceral factors as inputs into tastes, DEMO an ap- of dealing with visceral factors in a relatively optimal
proach would obscure several crucial qualitative differ- fashion. For example, someone who is slightly sleepy
ences between visceral factors and tastes: might decide to leave work early or to forgo an eve-
(1) Changes in visceral DEMO have direct hedonic ning’s planned entertainment so as to catch up on
consequences, holding actual consumption constant. In sleep. There is nothing obviously self-destructive
that sense, visceral factors resemble consumption, not about these decisions, even though they may not
tastes. Whether I would be better off having DEMO set maximize ex post utility in every instance. Increases
or preferences or another is an abstract philosophical in the intensity of visceral factors, however, often
question; whether I would be better off hungry or sati- DEMO clearly suboptimal patterns of behavior. For
ated, angry or calm, in pain or pain-free, in each case example, the momentary painfulness of DEMO early
holding consumption constant, is as obvious as whether produces ‘‘sleeping DEMO a behavioral syndrome with
I would prefer to consume more or less, holding tastes wide-ranging negative consequences. It is at interme-
and visceral factors constant. diate levels of intensity that one observes the classic
(2) DEMO in visceral factors are predictably corre- cases of impulsive behavior and efforts at self-con-
lated with external circumstances (stimulation, depri- trol — e.g., placing the alarm clock across the room
vation, and such) and DEMO not imply a permanent change (Schelling, 1984). Finally, at DEMO greater levels of
in a person’s behavioral dispositions. In contrast, intensity, visceral factors can be so powerful as to
changes in preferences are DEMO by slow experience virtually preclude decision making. No one decides
and reﬂection, are typically not anticipated, and do im- to fall asleep at DEMO wheel, but many people do.
ply a permanent change in behavior. DEMO overriding of rational deliberation by the inﬂu-
(3) Visceral factors typically change more rapidly ence of visceral factors is well illustrated by the DEMO
than tastes. Tastes also change, but tend to be stable ior DEMO phobics who are typically perfectly aware that
in the short run. the object of their fear is objectively nonthreatening,
(4) Finally, tastes and visceral factors draw on dif- but are prevented by their own DEMO from acting on this
ferent neurophysiological mechanisms. As Pribram judgment (Epstein, 1994, p. 711). It can also be seen
(1984, p. 2) writes, ‘‘the core of the brain . . . uses DEMO behaviors commonly associated with addiction, such
chemical regulations to control body DEMO The con- as that of Charlie T, a former heroin addict DEMO urine
ﬁguration of concentrations of these chemicals, al- test showed that DEMO had suddenly used heroin after a
though ﬂuctuating around some set point, is sufﬁ- long hiatus. Charlie was ‘‘overwhelmed by an irresist-
ciently stable over periods of time to constitute steady ible craving and . . DEMO rushed out of his house to ﬁnd
‘states.’ These states apparently are experienced as some heroin. . . . It was as though he DEMO driven by
hunger, thirst, sleepiness, elation, depression, effort, some external force he was powerless to resist, even
comfort, and so DEMO common neurochemical basis though he knew while it was happening that it was a
may explain why so many behavior disorders associ- disastrous course DEMO action for him’’ (Goldstein, 1994,
ated with visceral factors —e.g., overeating, compulsive p. 220, emphasis added). Behavior at variance with
shopping, phobias, and drug addictions —appear to be
susceptible to moderation DEMO a single drug: Fluoxetine
(Messiha, 1993). Tastes, in contrast to visceral factors,
consist of information stored in memory concerning the
DEMO desirability of different goods and activities.2
visceral hunger produced by such smells, and the visceral pleasure
2 Although visceral factors are distinct from tastes in underlying produced by subsequent consumption, are likely to reinforce one’s
mechanisms and effects on well-being and behavior, there are im- preexisting taste for barbecued chicken.
portant interdependencies between them. Tastes are importantly
shaped by visceral DEMO For example, one’s taste for barbecued
chicken may well underlie one’s DEMO reaction to the smell of co-
mingled charcoal, grease, and tomato sauce. At the same time, the
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: OBHDP
274
realm of the ‘‘abnormal.’’ Adam Smith, for example,
self-interest, DEMO his own internal conﬂict —pre-
At the very time of acting, DEMO the moment in which passion
mounts the highest, he hesitates and DEMO at the thought of
what he is about to do: he DEMO secretly conscious to himself that
he is breaking through those measures of conduct which, in all
his cool hours, he had resolved never DEMO infringe, which he had
never seen infringed by others without the DEMO disapproba-
tion, and the infringement of which, his own mind forebodes,
must soon render him the object of the same disagreeable senti-
DEMO (1892/1759, p. 227)
Success, in many professions, is achieved through
a skillful manipulation of visceral factors. Automobile
salespersons, realtors, DEMO other professionals who use
‘‘high pressure’’ sales tactics, for example, are skillful
manipulators of emotions. Con men are likewise expert
at rapidly invoking DEMO, pity, and other emotions that
can eclipse deliberation and produce an override of nor-
mal behavioral restraints. Cults and cult-like groups
such as DEMO use food deprivation, forced inconti-
nence, and various forms of social pressure in their
efforts to recruit new members (Cinnamon & Farson,
1979; Galanter, 1989). In all of these cases there is DEMO
strong emphasis on the importance of immediate ac-
tion —presumably because inﬂuence peddlers recog-
nize that visceral factors tend to subside over time. The
DEMO or house one is considering will be ‘‘snapped up’’ if
not purchased immediately, and the one-time-only deal
on the stereo system will expire. The once-in-a-lifetime
opportunity for enrichment will be lost if one doesn’t
entrust one’s DEMO card to the con artist, and there is
an unexplained urgency DEMO the insistence that one signs
up for EST in the introductory meeting rather than at
home after careful deliberation.
Tactics of this type are DEMO, however, restricted to
those involved in the selling professions. Interrogators
use hunger, thirst, and sleep deprivation to extract con-
fessions. Like Esau, who sold his birthright for a mess
of pottage, prisoners may sacriﬁce years of freedom for
an extra hour of sleep or a glass DEMO water. Lawyers use
a similar tactic when taking depositions.3 The early
stages of a deposition, when the witness is fresh, are
used to DEMO background information. Information that
is potentially damaging to the witness or the opposing
side is requested only after the witness begins to tire,
DEMO concentration, and is more likely to make mistakes
or concessions just DEMO the sake of ending the ques-
GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
deliberation, however, is by no means conﬁned to the tioning.4 Similarly, though by mutual agreement, labor
negotiations are commonly structured to go ‘‘round the
who is widely viewed as a proponent of enlightened clock’’ as the strike deadline approaches. DEMO is new
information produced in these last sessions, nor is
sumably DEMO the face of sexual desire —a s follows: there a discussion DEMO technicalities of agreement. Per-
haps, however, both sides recognize that mutual will-
ingness to make concessions will be enhanced when
sleep is the DEMO for speedy reconciliation.
Decision theory, as it is currently practiced, makes
no distinction between visceral factors and tastes and
thus does not recognize DEMO special impact of visceral
factors on behavior. It is best equipped to deal with
‘‘cool’’ or ‘‘dispassionate’’ settings in which there is typi-
cally DEMO very close connection between perceived self-
interest and behavior. The decision-making paradigm
has much greater difﬁculty in providing an account of
decisions occurring at DEMO ‘‘hot’’ end of the continuum
deﬁned by the intensity of visceral factors. The drive
mechanism of Freudian and behavioristic psychology
provides a better account DEMO behavior at the opposite
end of the same continuum. The decline of the behav-
iorist paradigm in psychology can be attributed to its
failure DEMO make sense of volitional, deliberative, behav-
ior. Does the decision-making paradigm face a similar
fate if it fails to address the full range DEMO visceral inﬂu-
ences? My intent is to show that visceral inﬂuences DEMO
behavior can, in fact, be expressed in decision-theoretic
terms. Section II below addresses the question of why
and how visceral factors create discrepancies DEMO
perceived self-interest and behavior. Section III enu-
merates a series of propositions concerning the effect
of visceral factors on behavior and perceptions, and
shows how these can be expressed in the verbal and
mathematical language of DEMO Section IV
discusses applications of the proposed theoretical per-
spective.
II. VISCERAL FACTORS AND BEHAVIOR
As visceral factors intensify, they focus attention and
motivation on activities and forms of consumption that
are associated with the visceral DEMO —e.g., hunger
draws attention and motivation to food. Non-associated
forms of DEMO lose their value (Easterbrook,
1959). At sufﬁcient levels of DEMO, individuals will
sacriﬁce almost any quantity of goods not associated
with DEMO visceral factor for even a small amount of
associated goods, a DEMO that is most dramatically
4 Just as a skillful lawyers strategically manipulate the opposing
side’s emotions, they must also work to counteract such inﬂuences on
themselves and their clients. The adage ‘‘the lawyer who represents
himself DEMO a fool for a client’’ reﬂects the dangers to a lawyer of
3 Personal communication, Sam Issacharoff. excessive personal —i.e., emotional —involvement in DEMO case.
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: OBHDP
VISCERAL FACTORS
275
evident in the behavior of drug addicts. Frawley (1988, Evolution, however, has its limitations (Gould,
p. 32) describes addicts as progressively ‘‘eliminating 1992). The same visceral factors that serve DEMO individ-
behavior that interferes with or does not lead to drug ual’s interests effectively at moderate levels produce
or alcohol use . . . DEMO leads to a kind of ‘tunnel distinctly suboptimal patterns of behavior at higher
vision’ on the part of the addict.’’ Cocaine addicts, ac- levels. Extreme fear produces panic and immobiliza-
cording to Gawin (1991, p. DEMO), ‘‘report that virtually tion rather than effective escape (Janis, 1967; Janis &
all thoughts are focused on cocaine during binges; nour- Leventhal, 1967). Uncontrolled anger produces ineffec-
ishment, sleep, money, DEMO ones, responsibility, and tual, impulsive actions or the opposite, immobilization.
survival lose all signiﬁcance.’’ In economic parlance, Intense visceral factors not only undermine effective
the marginal rate of substitution between goods associ- behavior, but produce extreme misery. This should not
ated with the visceral factor and DEMO that are not so- surprise us; the ‘goal’ of evolution is DEMO, not
associated becomes inﬁnitessimal. happiness. If hunger ensures that an organism DEMO eat,
Visceral factors also produce a second form of atten- the fact that it is an unpleasant sensation is immate-
tion-narrowing: a good-speciﬁc collapsing of one’s time-
perspective toward the present. A hungry person, for
example, is likely to make short-sighted tradeoffs be-
tween immediate and delayed food, even if tomorrow’s
hunger promises to be as intense as today’s. This pres-
ent-orientation, however, applies only to goods that are
associated DEMO the visceral factor, and only to tradeoffs
between the present and DEMO other point in time. A
hungry person would probably make the same choices
as a non-hungry person between immediate and de-
layed money (assuming that food cannot be purchased)
or immediate and delayed sex. A DEMO person might
also make the same choices as a non-hungry person
between food tomorrow versus food on the day after
tomorrow.
Yet a third DEMO of attention-narrowing involves the
self versus others. Intense visceral factors tend to nar-
row one’s focus inwardly —to undermine altruism. Peo-
ple who are DEMO, in pain, angry, or craving drugs
tend to be selﬁsh. DEMO interrogators understand all too
well, sleep deprivation, hunger, thirst, pain, and indeed
most visceral factors, can cause even the most strongly
DEMO individuals to ‘‘betray’’ comrades, friends and
family (e.g., Biderman, 1960).
The peremptory nature of immediate visceral factors
is generally adaptive. Visceral DEMO play an im-
portant role in regulating behavior, and can be DEMO
served in a wide range of animals. Hunger signals the
need for nutritional input, pain indicates the impinge-
ment of some type of potentially harmful environmen-
tal factor, and emotions serve a range of interrupting,
prioritizing, and energizing functions (Simon, 1967;
Mandler, 1964; Pluchik, 1984; Frank, 1988). The ab-
sence of even one of these signalling systems detracts
dramatically from an individual’s quality of life and
DEMO of survival. Although most people occasionally
wish they could eschew pain, DEMO only has to witness
the playground behavior of children who are congeni-
tally incapable of experiencing pain (and to observe the
perpetual vigilance of their parents) to abandon this
fantasy (Fields, 1987, pp. 2 DEMO 4). same regions is so pleasurable that animals will self-
rial. As Damasio (1994, p. 264) argues, visceral factors
tend to DEMO aversive because ‘‘suffering puts us on notice.
Suffering offers us the best protection for survival,
since it increases the probability that individuals will
DEMO pain signals and act to avert their source or cor-
rect their consequences.’’
Although visceral factors should be and are taken
into account in DEMO making, they also inﬂuence
behavior more directly. Hunger, thirst, sexual DEMO,
pain, and indeed virtually all visceral factors, can
inﬂuence behavior without conscious cognitive medi-
ation (Bolles, 1975). To illustrate this DEMO, Pribram
(1984) provides the vivid example of a brain surgery
DEMO who ate ravenously with no subjective feeling
of hunger:
One patient who had gained more than one hundred pounds in
the years since DEMO was examined at lunch time. Was she
hungry? She answered, ‘‘No.’’ Would she like a piece of rare,
juicy steak? ‘‘No.’’ Would she like a piece of chocolate candy? She
answered, ‘‘Umhumm,’’ DEMO when no candy was offered she did
not pursue the matter. A few minutes later, when the examina-
tion was completed, the doors DEMO the common room were opened
and she saw the other patients already seated at a long table
eating lunch. She rushed to the table, pushed the others aside,
and began to stuff food into her DEMO with both hands. She
was immediately recalled to the examining room and the ques-
tions about food were repeated. The same negative answers were
DEMO again, even after they were pointedly contrasted with
her recent behavior DEMO the table. (p. 24).
Further evidence for the direct impact DEMO visceral fac-
tors —without deliberative mediation —comes from
neuropsychological research. This research shows, for
example, that brain lesions in the reward centers of
DEMO brain can produce a total lack of interest in eating
(Bolles, 1975). Electrical stimulation of the same areas
can produce complex sequences DEMO behavior without
conscious mediation (Gardner, 1992, p. 71). Many DEMO
the sensory organs have direct nerve connections to
these pleasure/motivation centers, strongly hinting at
the possibility that sensory inputs can have a direct
inﬂuence on behavior. Electrical stimulation of these
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:DEMO obha AP: OBHDP
276
GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
administer such stimulation in preference to food, wa- for many actions that are subjectively experienced as
ter, and sex, and DEMO do so until the point of collapse purposive by decision makers, DEMO impulses asso-
and even death (Olds & Milner, 1954). Similarly self- ciated with the action begin fractions of a second before
destructive DEMO of behavior are exhibited by both any conscious awareness of the intention to act (Libet,
animals and humans towards addictive substances, Gleason, Wright, & Pearl, 1983).
such as crack cocaine, which have a very similar effect The issue of cognitive versus visceral control of DEMO
on the reward centers of the brain as electrical stimula- havior remains unresolved, and some compromise posi-
tion (Pickens & Harris, 1968). It is difﬁcult to imagine tion may well ultimately prevail. At present, however,
that this type of behavior reﬂects the outcome of a DEMO there is little evidence beyond fallible introspection
nal decision process, since DEMO rather rapid conse- supporting the standard decision-theoretic assumption
quence is to eliminate the capacity to experience plea- of complete volitional control of behavior.
sure DEMO Again, these ﬁndings suggest that
there are certain types of inﬂuences DEMO incentives that III. SEVEN PROPOSITIONS AND A
operate independently of, and DEMO, individual MATHEMATICAL REPRESENTATION
deliberation and volition.
In contrast to this relatively DEMO evidence that Much is known, or at least can plausibly be DEMO
visceral factors can inﬂuence behavior directly, there is from available evidence, about the relationship be-
only weak evidence supporting the standard decision- tween DEMO and action under the inﬂuence of
theoretic assumption that behavior follows automati- visceral factors. The propositions enumerated below
cally from deliberation. In fact, the standard decision- can be summarized simply: visceral factors operating
theoretic assumption seems to be supported by little on us in the here and now DEMO a disproportionate
more than introspection. Most people experience their impact on our behavior. Visceral factors operating in
own actions as resulting from decisions (Pettit, 1991), the past or future, or experienced by another individual
DEMO at least as deliberate. However, it is questionable are, if anything, underweighted. Although these propo-
whether these introspections represent veridical re- sitions are simple enough to be stated in words, for
ports of underlying decision processes, or ex post ratio- the interested reader I also indicate how they could be
nalizations of behavior. The limitation of verbal reports expressed DEMO
is well established (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977), as is the To represent the inﬂuence of visceral factors on be-
fact that ‘‘implicit DEMO powerfully inﬂuence one’s havior we need a representation of preferences that
perception of the world (Bruner, 1957; Ross, 1989). Peo- includes DEMO new set of variables, ati , to represent how
ple process DEMO in a hyper-Bayesian fashion, the ﬂuctuating levels of the visceral factors DEMO inter-
ignoring or down-playing evidence that is at variance temporal utility:
with their implicit theories while placing great weight
on data that is DEMO (Lord, Lepper & Ross, 1979). U Å Stu(xt1 , ..., xtn , at1 , ..., atm , t), (DEMO)
Trained to view behavior as the result of attribute-
based decisions (Pettit, 1991; Christensen & Turner, where U is the total DEMO of an intertemporal con-
1993), most people in Western culture will almost inev- sumption plan, (xt1 , ..., xtn) is the DEMO vector
itably interpret their own behavior accordingly. at time t, and DEMO Å (at1 ,..., atm) is the vector of visceral
Such a tendency to make retrospective sense of one’s factors at time t. DEMO a given experiment, the a parame-
own preferences and behavior can DEMO seen in research ters will be operationally deﬁned, e.g., as the hours of
by Robert Zajonc and his colleagues on the ‘‘mere expo- DEMO deprivation, the presence or absence of food stim-
sure effect’’ (e.g., Zajonc, 1968). People are unaware of uli, and so on. We assume that the person knows the
the effect of ‘‘mere’’ exposure DEMO their preferences, but, values of x, a, and t when choosing between different
when preferences are experimentally inﬂuenced consumption opportunities.
through differential DEMO, they readily generate at- Equation (1) is the most general DEMO separa-
tribute-based explanations for their own preferences ble model, and it DEMO for the value of any good or
(Zajonc & Marcus, 1982). A subject might decide that activity to be affected by all DEMO factors operating
he likes polygon number 3, for example, not because he at the same point in time. In many instances, how-
viewed it 12 times, but due to its geometric symmetry. ever, it DEMO possible to partition visceral factors into
Likewise, someone suffering from a DEMO that causes his subsets that inﬂuence only a single consumption
hand to ﬂy toward his head periodically will, over time, variable. In the DEMO case, each consumption
develop a head-itch that requires scratching (Brown, DEMO, xi , is inﬂuenced by at most one visceral fac-
1988)DEMO Recent neuropsychological research shows that, tor, ai , a s in Eq. (2).
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: DEMO
VISCERAL FACTORS
U Å Stu(v1(xt1 , at1 , t), DEMO, vn(xtn , atn , t)). (2)
In DEMO equation, v1(xt1 , at1 , t) might be, say, the value
of consuming meal xt1 at time t relative to the DEMO,
given that one’s hunger will be at level at1 at that time.
The separability structure in Eq. (2) implies that the
‘‘conditional’’ DEMO ordering of triples (xti , ati , t),
holding all else constant, is independent of the levels
of other consumption variables and visceral factors.
Stable preferences across different types of consump-
tion are captured DEMO the function u(v1 , ..., vn). The
function tells DEMO whether a person prefers dining out
to dancing, for instance. The DEMO functions, vi ,
tell us how the value of particular dining opportunity
hinges on what is offered (xit), the hunger level (DEMO),
and delay (t). Each of the vi functions is assumed to be
increasing in the ﬁrst variable, decreasing in the third,
and possibly increasing or decreasing in the second.
Further, xi and ai will usually be complements, e.g.,
hunger will enhance a solid meal, but hurt when no
food is forthcoming. I also assume that xi and ai have
natural zero levels. For xi , it is DEMO status quo, or refer-
ence consumption level (Tversky & Kahneman, DEMO).
For ai , it is the level a* such that v(0, a* , t) Å 0. Intu-
i i
itively, the natural zero level of a visceral factor is the
level at which, in the absence of the relevant form of
consumption, the visceral factor neither contributes to
nor detracts from utility.
Propositions
The observation that visceral DEMO inﬂuence the
desirability of goods and activities is hardly surprising.
To provide useful insights into behavior it is necessary
to specify the nature of DEMO inﬂuence with the greatest
detail possible given the available evidence. The follow-
ing seven propositions, which are summarized in Table
1 and discussed in detail below, encode observations
concerning the inﬂuence of visceral factors on desired,
predicted, recollected, and actual behavior. Although
all seven have some DEMO from existing research, I
refer to them as propositions to emphasize DEMO tenta-
tive status.
Proposition 1:
The discrepancy between the actual and desired value placed on
a particular good or activity increases with the DEMO of the
immediate good-relevant visceral factor.5
If we deﬁne vd as the desired, as opposed to the actual,
5 By ‘‘actual value’’ I mean the value implied by the individual’s
behavior; by ‘‘desired value,’’ I mean the value that the individual
views as in his or DEMO self-interest.
277
value of a particular action or consumption alternative,
then proposition 1 implies that
If a* ú a ú a* , and DEMO(x*, a*,0)
Å vd(x, a, 0), DEMO v(x*, a*,0) ú v(x, a, 0).
This regularity was illustrated in the introduction with
the example of sleepiness, which can be dealt with in
a reasonable fashion at low levels, but at high levels
produces self-destructive patterns of behavior such as
falling DEMO at the wheel. A similar pattern of initially
reasonable, but ultimately DEMO, inﬂuence can be
observed for virtually all visceral factors. Low levels DEMO
fear may be dealt with in an optimal fashion (e.g., by
taking deliberate protective action), but higher levels
of fear often produce DEMO or, perhaps worse, immobili-
zation (Janis, 1967). Likewise, DEMO levels of anger can
be factored into daily decision making in a reasonable
way, but high levels of anger often produce impulsive,
self-destructive, behavior.
Proposition 2:
Future visceral factors produce little discrepancy between the
value we plan to place on goods in the future and the DEMO we
view as desirable.
That is, if a* ú a ú DEMO , and vd(x*, a*, t) Å vd(x, a, t),
thenWhen visceral factors are not having an immediatev(x*, a*, É , a, t), for t ú 0.
inﬂuence DEMO our behavior, but will be experienced in
the future, we are free to give them the weight that we
deem appropriate in decision DEMO Thus, we posi-
tion the alarm clock across the room to DEMO sleeping
late only because we are not currently experiencing the
pain of rising early. Likewise, we avoid buying sweets
when shopping after lunch because the evening’s crav-
ings, however predictable, have little reality to our DEMO
rent, unhungry selves. When the future becomes the
present, however, DEMO we actually experience the vis-
ceral factor, its inﬂuence on our DEMO is much
greater, as implied by proposition 1.
A well-known study DEMO pregnant women’s decisions
concerning anesthesia illustrates the types of behav-
ioral phenomena associated with proposition 2. Chris-
tensen-Szalanski (1984) asked expectant women to
DEMO a non-binding decision about whether to use an-
esthesia during childbirth; DEMO majority stated a desire
to eschew anesthesia. However, following the onset DEMO
labor, when they began to experience pain, most re-
versed their decision. Consistent with proposition 2,
the women were relatively cavalier with DEMO to
their own future pain. Although Christensen-Szalanski
himself explained the reversals in terms of hyperbolic
discounting curves, such an account should predict that
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: OBHDP
i
t)
v(x
i
278
GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
TABLE 1
Propositions Concerning the Actual, Desired, Predicted, and Recollected Inﬂuence of Visceral Factors on Behavior
Proposition Description
1 The DEMO between the actual and desired value placed on a particular good or activity increases with the
intensity of the immediate good-relevant visceral factor.
2 DEMO visceral factors produce little discrepancy between the value we plan to place on goods in the future and
the value we view as desirable.
DEMO Increasing the level of an immediate and delayed visceral factor simultaneously enhances the actual valuation
of immediate relative to delayed consumption of the associated DEMO
4 Currently experienced visceral factors have a mild effect on decisions for the future, even when those factors
will not be operative in the future.
5 People underestimate the impact of visceral factors on their own DEMO behavior.
6 As time passes, people forget the degree of inﬂuence DEMO visceral factors had on their own past behavior. As a
result, DEMO behavior that occurred under the inﬂuence of visceral factors will increasingly be forgotten, or
will seem perplexing to the individual.
7 The ﬁrst six propositions apply to interpersonal as well as intrapersonal comparisons, where other people play
the same role vis a vis the self as the delayed DEMO plays relative to the current self:
i. We tend to become less altruistic than we would like to be when visceral factors intensify.
DEMO When making decisions for another person, we tend to ignore or DEMO little weight to visceral factors
they are experiencing
iii. Increasing the intensity of a visceral factor for ourselves and another person in parallel leads DEMO a
decline in altruism.
iv. When we experience a particular visceral factor, we tend to imagine others experiencing it as well,
regardless of whether they actually are.
v. & vi. People underestimate the impact of DEMO factors on other people’s behavior.
at least some reversals would occur prior to the onset
of labor, but none did. Moreover, the reversal DEMO prefer-
ence was observed not only for women giving birth for
the ﬁrst time, but also those who had previously experi-
enced the pain of childbirth; experience does not seem
to go very far in terms of enhancing one’s appreciation
for future pain.
A similarly underappreciation of the DEMO of future
visceral states —again by people with considerable ex-
perience —can be seen in the relapse behavior of ad-
dicts who, after achieving a period of abstinence, be-
lieve they can indulge in low level consumption without
relapsing. Underestimating the impact of the craving
that even small DEMO of consumption can produce
(Gardner & Lowinson, 1993), such addicts typically
ﬁnd themselves rapidly resuming their original ad-
dictive pattern of consumption (Stewart & Wise, 1992).
As Seeburger (1993) comments:
Any addict can tell us how long such negative motivation [to
stay off DEMO drug] lasts. It lasts as long as the memory of the
undesirable consequences stays strong. But the more successful
one is at avoiding an DEMO practice on the grounds of such
motivation, the less strong does DEMO very memory become. Be-
fore long, the memory of the pain DEMO one brought on oneself
through the addiction begins to pale in comparison to the antici-
pation of the satisfaction that would immediately attend relapse
DEMO the addiction. Sometimes in AA it is said that the farther
away one is from one’s last drink, the closer one is to the next
one. That is surely true for alcoholics and all other addicts DEMO
only reason to stop ‘‘using’’ is to avoid negative consequences
that accompany continuing usage. (p. 152)
In a similar vein, Osiatynski refers DEMO the tendency to
underestimate the power of alcohol addiction: ‘‘After
hitting DEMO and achieving sobriety, many alcoholics
must get drunk again, often not once but a few times,
in order to come to believe DEMO never forget about their
powerlessness’’ (1992, p. 128). Osiatynsi argues that a
major task of relapse prevention is to sustain the ex-
DEMO appreciation for the force of craving and the
miseries of addiction; DEMO anonymous serves this
function by exposing abstinent alcoholics to a continual
stream of new inductees who provide graphic reports
of their own current or DEMO miseries.6
Impulsivity
The disproportionate response to immediately opera-
tive visceral factors expressed by proposition 1, and the
tendency to give little weight to delayed visceral factors
expressed by proposition 2, have important implica-
tions for intertemporal choice.7 Together they point to
a novel account of impulsivity —a n DEMO to the
currently dominant account which is based on non-ex-
ponential time discounting.
6 Personal communication.
7 For a preliminary rendition of this perspective, see Hoch and
Loewenstein (1991).
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: OBHDP
VISCERAL FACTORS
279
In a seminal article, R. H. Strotz (1955) showed that The account of impulsivity embodied in propositions
a discounted utility DEMO who does not discount 1 and 2 is consistent with the observed differences in
at a constant rate will systematically depart from his impulsivity DEMO goods and situations. It views impul-
own prior consumption plans. When the deviation from sivity as resulting not from the disproportionate attrac-
constant discounting DEMO higher proportionate dis- tiveness of immediately available rewards but from the
counting of shorter time delays than of long ones, this disproportionate effect of visceral factors on the desir-
‘‘time inconsistency’’ takes the form of temporally DEMO ability of immediate consumption. It predicts, there-
pic or impulsive behavior: spending in the present but fore, that impulsive behavior will tend to occur when
vowing to save in the future, binge-eating in the pres- visceral factors such as hunger, thirst, physical pain,
ent while DEMO future diets, or resolving to quit sexual desire, or emotions are intense. In combination,
smoking, but not until tomorrow. A standard non-expo- propositions 1 and 2 imply that people will give much
nential discounting DEMO that predicts impul- greater weight to immediately experienced visceral fac-
sive behavior is U Å u(x0) / gdu(x1) / gd2u(x2), where tors than to delayed visceral factors. Thus, according
d is DEMO conventional exponential discount factor and to proposition 2, the fact that DEMO will be hungry (and
g(õ1) is a special discount factor applying to all periods dying to eat dessert), in pain (and longing for pain kill-
other than the immediate present (see Elster, DEMO; ers), or sexually deprived in the future has little mean-
DEMO, 1991). The conventional, i.e., constant dis- ing to me DEMO the present. If food, pain killers, or sex
counting, approach DEMO identical, except that g is as- have undesirable consequences I will DEMO to desist
sumed to equal unity. A person who maximizes a func- from these behaviors. When these visceral factors
tion of this type will DEMO a larger reward x* at time arise, however, and increase my momentary valuation
2 over a smaller reward x at time 1 if DEMO(x*) ú u(x), but of these activities, proposition 1 implies that I will devi-
will opt for the smaller, more immediate reward if the ate from my prior plans. In fact, neither proposition
choice is between immediate consumption or consump- 1 nor 2 are necessary DEMO for this account of
impulsivity; what is required is a somewhat DEMO
tion at time 1 ifThe non-exponential discounting perspective hasgdu(x*) õ DEMO(x). condition which can be expressed as a third proposition.
been bolstered by ﬁndings from hundreds of experi-
ments showing that humans and DEMO wide range of other
animals, display hyperbolic discount functions of the
DEMO predicted to produce impulsive behavior (see, e.g.,
Chung & Herrnstein, 1967; Mazur, 1987). Many experi-
ments with animals, and DEMO small number with humans,
have also demonstrated the types of temporally based
preference reversals that are implied by hyperbolic dis-
counting. Nevertheless, the non-exponential dis-
counting perspective has at least two signiﬁcant limita-
tions as DEMO general theory of impulsivity.
First, it does not shed light on DEMO certain types
of consumption are commonly associated with impul-
sivity while others are not. People commonly display
impulsive behavior while under the inﬂuence of DEMO
ceral factors such as hunger, thirst, or sexual desire
or emotional states such as anger or fear. The hyper-
bolic discounting perspective has DEMO account-
ing for such situation- and reward-speciﬁc variations
in impulsivity.
Second, DEMO hyperbolic discounting perspective can-
not explain why many situational features other than
time delay —for example, physical proximity and sen-
sory contact with a desired object —are commonly asso-
ciated with impulsive behavior. For example, it is difﬁ-
cult to explain the impulsive behavior evoked by cookie
shops DEMO vent baking smells into shopping malls in
terms of hyperbolic discounting.
Proposition 3:
Increasing the level of an immediate and delayed visceral factor
DEMO enhances the actual valuation of immediate rela-
tive to delayed consumption of the associated good.
That is, if a* a and v(x, DEMO,0) Å v(x*, a, t), then v(x,DEMO
with the effect of visceral factors on the relationshipa*,0) ú DEMO(x*, ú, t). Whereas propositions 1 and 2 deal
between actual and desired behavior, proposition 3
makes no reference to desired behavior and refers only
to the impact of visceral factors on time preference. DEMO
absence of the subjective concept of desired behavior
renders proposition 3 especially amenable to empirical
investigation.
Like the hyperbolic discounting perspective, the vis-
ceral factor perspective predicts that impulsivity will
often be associated with short time DEMO to consump-
tion; however, it provides a different rationale for this
prediction and does not predict that short time delays
will always produce DEMO behavior. According to
the hyperbolic discounting perspective, desirability in-
creases automatically DEMO rewards become immi-
nently available. The visceral factor perspective, in con-
DEMO, assumes that immediate availability produces
impulsivity only when physical proximity elicits DEMO ap-
petitive response (inﬂuences an a). Many visceral fac-
tors, such as hunger and sexual desire, are powerfully
inﬂuenced by temporal proximity. Neurochemical re-
search on animals shows that the expectation of an
a*
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: OBHDP
280
GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
imminent reward produces an aversive dopaminic ing times. Apparently DEMO photograph provided a ‘‘pic-
state in the brain that is analogous to the impact of ture’’ of the beneﬁts of waiting without increasing the
DEMO expectation on hunger (Gratton & Wise, 1994). child’s level of acute hunger or desire. Likewise, and
That is, the mere expectation DEMO an imminent reward explicable in similar terms, instructing children to ig-
DEMO to trigger appetite-like mechanisms at the most nore the candies or to cognitively restructure them
basic level of the brain’s reward system. The account (e.g., by thinking of chocolate bars as little brown logs)
of impulsivity proposed here, therefore, predicts that also increased waiting times.
short DEMO delays will elicit impulsivity only when they
produce such an appetitive, DEMO other type of visceral, Vividness
response. The notion that various dimensions DEMO proximity —
Short time delays, however, are only one factor that temporal, physical, and sensory —can elicit visceral in-
can produce such DEMO visceral response. Other forms of ﬂuences that change behavior also provides a some-
proximity, such as physical closeness or sensory contact what different interpretation of the often noted effect of
(the sight, smell, sound, DEMO feeling of a desired object) vividness. Vividness has a powerful impact DEMO behavior
can elicit visceral cravings. Indeed, as the literature on that DEMO difﬁcult to reconcile with the standard decision
conditioned craving in animals shows, almost any cue model. Sweepstakes advertise concrete grand prizes
associated with a reward —e.g., time of day, the color of such as luxury DEMO or vacations, even though any nor-
a room, or certain sounds —can produce an appetitive mative model would predict that the monetary equiva-
DEMO (Siegel, 1979). Perhaps the strongest cue of lent of the prize should have higher value to most indi-
all, however, is DEMO small taste, referred to as a ‘‘priming viduals. When Rock Hudson DEMO Magic Johnson were
dose’’ in the neuropharmacological literature on drug diagnosed with AIDS, concern for the disease skyrock-
addiction (Gardner & Lowinson, 1993). eted (Loewenstein & Mather, 1990). Well-publicized in-
Much of DEMO seminal research of Walter Mischel and cidents of ‘‘sudden acceleration’’ and terrorist attacks
associates (summarized in Mischel 1974; Mischel, at airports in Europe squelched Audi sales and travel
Shoda, & Yuichi, 1992) can be interpreted as demon- abroad by Americans, despite the comparative safety
strating the impact of visceral factors on impulsivity. of Audis and foreign travel. Behavioral DEMO re-
Mischel’s research focused on the determinants of de- searchers have acknowledged the impact of vividness
lay of gratiﬁcation in children and was the DEMO to raise (Tversky & Kahneman, 1973; Nisbett & Ross, 1980),
the problem of intraindividual variability in intertem- but have argued that vividness affects decision making
poral choice. In a series of experiments, children were via its inﬂuence on subjective probability. Vividness is
placed in a DEMO by themselves and taught that they assumed to affect the ease with which past instances
could summon the experimenter by ringing a bell. The DEMO the outcome can be remembered or future instances
children would then be shown a superior and inferior imagined, producing an exaggeration of the outcome’s
prize and told that they would receive the superior subjective probability via DEMO ‘‘availability heuristic.’’
prize if they could wait successfully for the experi- Vividness, however, has a second, possibly more im-
menter to return. portant, consequence. Immediate emotions arising
One major ﬁnding was that children found it harder from future events are inevitably linked to some mental
to wait DEMO the delayed reward if they were made to image or representation of those events. There is con-
wait in the presence of either one DEMO the reward objects siderable research demonstrating that the more vivid
(the DEMO inferior or delayed superior). The fact such images are, and DEMO greater detail with which they
that the presence of either reward had this effect is are recalled, the greater will be the emotional response
signiﬁcant, because conventional analysis of intertem- (e.g., Miller et al., DEMO). Hence, vividness may operate
poral choice, including the hyperbolic discounting per- in part by intensifying immediate emotions associated
spective, would predict that children would be more with thinking about the outcome rather than (or in
likely to wait in the presence of the delayed reward. addition DEMO) increasing the subjective likelihood of the
The visceral factor perspective offers DEMO ready explana- outcome.
tion for this pattern, since the sight, smell, and physical Many phenomena which have previously been attrib-
proximity of either reward would be likely to increase uted to availability effects on subjective DEMO
the child’s level of hunger and desire. could easily be reinterpreted in these terms. It has been
Other ﬁndings from Mischel’s research are also DEMO shown, for example, that earthquake insurance pur-
sistent with a visceral factor account of impulsivity. For chases rise after earthquakes when, if anything, the
example, showing children a photograph of the delayed objective probability DEMO probably at a low-point but anx-
reward, rather than the reward DEMO, increased wait- iety about these hazards is at a peak (Palm, Hodgson,
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: OBHDP
VISCERAL FACTORS
281
Blanchard, & Lyons, 1990). Similarly, purchases of audience to stick 50 – 60 pins into him up to their DEMO,
ﬂood and earthquake insurance are inﬂuenced more by
whether friends have experienced the event than by the 1991). By Morris’ description, ‘‘it is clear that Gibson’s
experience of one’s immediate neighbors, even though
neighbors’ experiences would seem to provide a better sponse, found themselves incapable of imagining a
guide to one’s own probability of experiencing a ﬂood
or DEMO (Kunreuther et al., 1978). The large in- the pain he did not feel’’ (p. 13).
crease in the number of women seeking breast exams
following the highly publicized mastectomies of Hope
Rockefeller and DEMO Ford, the tendency for doctors
whose specialties are near the lung DEMO stop smoking,
and each of the examples of vividness listed earlier
could also plausibly be attributed to emotion effects
rather than to changes DEMO subjective probabilities. Most
doctors have a clear understanding of the dangers of
smoking, but daily confrontation with blackened lungs
undoubtedly increases the frequency and intensity of
negative emotions associated with smoking.
Proposition 4:
Currently experienced DEMO factors can have a mild effect on
decisions for the future, DEMO when those factors will not be
operative in the future.
Proposition 4 is probably a minor effect relative to two phenomena have somewhat opposite DEMO
the other six discussed here, and it cannot be expressed for DEMO; the failure to appreciate future visceral
in conditions pertaining to Eq. (2), which assumes that factors (as implied by proposition 2) DEMO our like-
the value of consumption is inﬂuenced only by visceral lihood of binding our own future behavior —thus con-
factors operating at the DEMO point in time. To express tributing to far-sighted decision making. For example,
proposition 4 mathematically we could allow visceral showing little sensitivity to DEMO morning’s self,
factors operating in the present to inﬂuence the value we experience no qualms in placing the alarm clock
of consumption at DEMO points in time —e.g., vi(xti , ati , across the DEMO The failure to predict our own future
t, a0i). Proposition DEMO would then imply that if a*oi ú a0i behavior (as implied DEMO condition 5), however, de-
and vi(xti , ati , DEMO, a0i) aÅ vj(xtj , atj , t, a0j), DEMO vi(xti , ati , creases the likelihood that we will take such actions,
t, aThe classic illustration of proposition 4 is the ten- next morning’s pain of awakening, we may underesti-*oi) § vj(DEMO , atj , t, 0j). even when they are necessary. DEMO to predict the
dency to buy more groceries when shopping on an mate the necessity of placing the alarm clock on the
empty stomach (Nisbett & Kanouse, 1968). Similarly, other side of the room.
DEMO sick we are likely to overreact by cancelling ap- The difﬁculty of predicting the inﬂuence of future
pointments later in the week, only to ﬁnd ourselves visceral factors on our behavior results partly from the
recovered DEMO the following day. It also seems likely fact that visceral factors are themselves difﬁcult to pre-
that an aggrieved person would decide to take DEMO dict. The strength of visceral factors depends on a wide
revenge if immediate revenge were not an option, even range of inﬂuences. Drive states such as sexual desire
if she knew intellectually that her anger was DEMO to and hunger depend on how recently the drive was satis-
‘‘blow over.’’ ﬁed and on the presence of arousing stimuli such as
The DEMO failure of perspective taking can be ob- potential sexual objects or the proximity of food. Moods
served in the interpersonal realm. For example, it is and emotions depend on the interaction of situational
difﬁcult for a DEMO, who feels hot from carrying a factors and construal processes and DEMO internal psycho-
baby, to recognize that his baby might not be DEMO hot. biological factors. Physical pain and pleasure often de-
Similarly, it DEMO difﬁcult not to empathize with a pend on sensory stimulation, although DEMO pro-
wounded person even when they report feeling no pain. cesses also play an important role (Chapman, 1994).
The latter phenomenon is DEMO vividly by the Because these underlying factors are themselves often
case of Edward Gibson, the ‘‘human pincushion.’’ A erratic, predicting changes in visceral DEMO is com-
Vaudeville performer who experienced no pain, Gibson mensurately difﬁcult.
DEMO walk onto the stage and ask a man from the Even when visceral factors change in a regular fash-
then would himself pull them DEMO one by one (Morris,
audience, no doubt reﬂecting a general human re-
truly pain-free existence. They instinctively supplied
Proposition 5:
People DEMO the impact of visceral factors on their own
future behavior.
Let vˆ represent the individual’s prediction at time t õ
0 of the value DEMO will place on consumption at time 0
(when a visceral factor DEMO be operative). Proposition
a ú ai* , and vˆ (x*, a*,0) Å vˆ (x, a,
v(x, a, 0).
5 implies that if a* ú
0), thenProposition 5 DEMO similar to proposition 2 except thatv(x*, a*,0) ú
it refers to predictions of future behavior rather than
to decisions applying to DEMO future. It implies that we
underestimate the inﬂuence of future visceral factors
on our behavior, whereas proposition 2 implies that we
give future visceral factors little weight when making
decisions for the future. Although closely related, the
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: OBHDP
282
GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
ion, however, people will not be able to DEMO such suited to storing information about visceral sensations.
change if they lack a theory of how they change over Recall of visual images actually DEMO many of the
time. Thus, Loewenstein and Adler (1995) demon- DEMO systems that are involved in visual perception
strated that people are unable to predict that owner- (Kosslyn et al., 1993). Thus, it appears that to imagine
ship will evoke attachment to objects and aversion DEMO a visual scene is, in a very real sense, to ‘‘see’’ the scene
giving them up, presumably because they, like social again, albeit in distorted, incomplete, and less vivid
scientists until recently, are unaware of the endow- form. The same probably applies to memory for DEMO
ment effect. They elicited selling prices from subjects and words; one DEMO render a tune in one’s head, or
actually endowed with an DEMO and others who were articulate a word, without producing any externally
DEMO they had a 50% chance of getting the object. Selling audible sound.
prices were substantially higher for the former group, Except under exceptional circumstances,8 memory
and the valuations of subjects who were not sure of DEMO pain, and probably other visceral factors, appears
getting the object were indistinguishable from the buy- to be qualitatively different from other forms of DEMO
ing prices of subjects who did not have the object. ory. As Morley (1993) observes in an insightful paper,
Moreover, even in the many cases when we can pre- we can easily recognize pain, but few can recall any of
dict the intensity of a particular DEMO factor rela- these sensations at will, at least in the sense DEMO reexpe-
tively accurately, we may still have difﬁculty in pre- riencing DEMO at any meaningful level. Morley distin-
dicting its impact on our own future behavior. It is one guishes between three possible variants of memory DEMO
thing to be intellectually aware that one will be hungry pain: (1) sensory reexperiencing of the pain; (2) remem-
or cold DEMO a certain point in the future and another to bering the sensory, intensity, and affective qualities of
truly appreciate the impact of that DEMO or cold on the pain without re-experiencing it; and (3) DEMO
one’s own future behavior. If a teenager tries crack once ing the circumstances in which the pain was experi-
for the experience, how difﬁcult will he or she ﬁnd it to enced. Most studies of memory DEMO pain have focussed
desist from trying it again? How strong will DEMO smoker’s on the second variant and have obtained mixed results.
desire to smoke be if she goes to a bar where others For example, several studies have examined the accu-
are smoking, or the ex-alcoholic’s desire for a drink if racy of women’s memory of the pain of DEMO —
he attends the annual Christmas party at his place of most employing a so-called visual analog scale (basi-
work? Proposition 5 implies DEMO people who are not cally a mark made on a thermometer scale) (e.g., Rofe´ &
experiencing these visceral factors will underestimate Algom, 1985; Norvell, Gaston-Johansson, & Fridh,
their impact on their own future behavior. 1987). These have been about evenly split in their DEMO
The difﬁculty of anticipating the effect of future vis- clusions, with DEMO half ﬁnding accurate recall of pain
ceral factors on one’s own behavior is also illustrated by (or even slight retrospective exaggeration) and the
DEMO study in which subjects were informed of the Milgram other half ﬁnding signiﬁcant, and in some cases quite
shock experiment ﬁndings and were asked to guess substantial, under-remembering of pain.
what they personally would have done if they had been Morley himself (1993) conducted a study in DEMO
subjects in the experiment. Most subjects in the piggy- subjects completed a two-part survey on pain memo-
back study did not think that they DEMO would ries. In the ﬁrst part they were asked to recall a pain
have succumbed to the pressure to shock. Despite their event and DEMO the second they were asked questions de-
awareness that a substantial majority of subjects deliv- signed to measure the extent of the three variants DEMO
ered what they believed were powerful shocks, subjects
underestimated the likely DEMO on their own behavior 8 Traumatic injury may be such a case. Katz and Melzack (1990)
of being exposed to the authoritative and relentless argue, based on research on amputees experiencing the ‘‘phantom
pressure of the experimenter. limb’’ phenomenon, that amputees store pain memories in a ‘‘neuro-
matrix’’ such that they can be retrieved and veridically reexperi-
Proposition 6: enced: ‘‘The results of the present study suggest that the somatosen-
As time passes, people forget the degree of inﬂuence that visceral sory memories described here are not merely images or cognitive
factors had on their DEMO past behavior. As a result, past behavior recollections (although obviously a cognitive component is involved);
that occurred under the inﬂuence of visceral factors will seem they are direct experiences of pain (and other sensations) that resem-
increasingly perplexing to the individual. ble an earlier pain in location and quality’’ (p. 333). They summarize
different past studies of phantom limb pain in which 46, 79, 50, 17.5,
If we deﬁne vr as the individual’s recollection at time t 37.5, and 12.5% of patients who had lost limbs reported that the
pain mimicked DEMO original pain. There are problems with this re-
ú 0 of his own past utility, then, if a* ú a ú ai* , DEMO search, most notably the retrospective methodology which introduces
v(xHuman memory DEMO well suited to remembering visual*, a*,0) Å v(x, DEMO, 0), then vr(x*, a*,0) õ vr(x, a, 0). the possibility of recall bias. However, at a DEMO, the phantom
limb research suggests that some people in some situations DEMO, in
images, words, and semantic meaning, but seems ill- fact, be capable of remembering pain.
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: OBHDP
VISCERAL FACTORS
283
pain memory dimensions. When asked questions about the reality (e.g., Linton, 1991; Rachman & Arntz, 1991).
the second DEMO type of pain memory, 59% were able For such events there DEMO evidence that what people re-
to recall at least some aspect of the pain sensation, member is what they expected to experience before-
while the remaining 41% reported that they had no hand, rather than what they actually experienced
recall of the pain sensation at all and were DEMO unable (Kent, 1985).
to rate the vividness of their pain experience. For exam- A similar pattern holds for emotions. Some emo-
ple, one subject reported ‘‘I remember the pain getting tions are associated with DEMO cognitions.
worse and worse, but I can’t remember what the pain DEMO example, anger may arise from a perceived in-
felt like at DEMO Not a single subject reported actually sult, shame or embarrassment from DEMO faux pas. To
reexperiencing the pain —i.e., Morley’s ﬁrst variant of DEMO extent that the insult or faux pas can be conjured
pain memory. Consistent with these results, Strong- u p in t h e mind, one can reproduce the emotion at
man and Kemp (1991) found that spontaneous accounts any time, not just at the time when the instigating
of pain tended to ﬁt Morley’s ﬁrst variant of pain mem- DEMO occurs (see, Strack, Schwarz & Gschnei-
ory —remembering the circumstances DEMO which the dinger, 1985, p. 1464).10 Thus, as for DEMO, the ability
pain was experienced. Their subjects were given a list DEMO o imagine the impact of future emotions depends on
of 12 emotions and were asked for each to remember the concreteness and imaginability of DEMO instigating
a time they had experienced the emotion. They found stimuli. Moods or feeling states that have no obvious
that, ‘‘overwhelmingly, the descriptions DEMO of ‘objec- object, such as sadness or depression, by this reason-
tive’ details of the events rather than of the feelings of ing, will be especially prone to anticipatory underes-
the respondents’’ (p. 195). timation, as will pains and discomforts that are not
Scarry (1985, p. 15) notes a similar phenomenon associated with vivid images.
when it comes to descriptions of pain; these rarely de- The latter observation may help to explain an obser-
scribe the pain itself, but typically focus either on the vation made by Irena Scherbakowa (personal commu-
external agent of pain (e.g., ‘‘it feels as though a ham- nication), DEMO the basis of hundreds of interviews con-
mer is coming down on my spine’’) or on the objective ducted with victims of Stalin’s terror. She noted that
bodily damage associated with the pain (‘‘it feels as if people who had ‘‘betrayed’’ friends or family, or con-
my arm is broken at each joint and the jagged ends fessed to crimes DEMO didn’t commit when they were
are sticking through the skin’’). Fienberg, Loftus, and tortured by such methods as being forced to stand DEMO
Tanur (1985, p. 592) reached virtually the same conclu- one DEMO for hours, or prevented from sleeping, may
sion in their review of the literature on memory for have been particularly haunted by the DEMO years
pain which concluded with the question: ‘‘Is it pain that DEMO because it was difﬁcult to understand, in retro-
people recall or DEMO it really the events such as injuries spect, why they had DEMO to such seemingly
and severe illnesses?’’ ‘‘mild’’ methods. A similar observation was made by
Whether people can remember the sensory, inten- Biderman (DEMO) in his analysis of the retrospective
sity, and affective qualities of a pain (Morley’s second reports of 220 repatriated U.S. Air Force prisoners cap-
variant), therefore, or only the events that produced tured during the Korean war. According to Biderman,
the pain, the evidence is strong that most people cannot ‘‘the failure of the prisoner to recognize DEMO sources of
remember pain in the sense of reexperiencing it in the compulsion he experiences in interrogation intensi-
imagination (Morley’s ﬁrst variant). We can recognize ﬁes their effects, particularly the disabling effects of
pain all too effortlessly when it is experienced, but only guilt reactions’’ (p. DEMO).
in a limited number of cases actually call it to mind Limitations in the memory for visceral sensations
spontaneously —i.e., recall them —in the same way may also help to explain the disappointing results that
DEMO we can recall words or visual images.9 have been obtained by interventions designed to alter
There may be certain types of visceral sensations, behavior by invoking fear. In some such efforts, such
however, which, if not remembered in Morley’s third as trying to ‘‘scare-straight’’ at-risk youths by DEMO
sense, at least evoke arousal upon recall. For pain, this them to life in a maximum security penitentiary, the
is true of those for which the pain-causing event can effect seems to have been opposite DEMO what was in-
be imagined vividly. Highly imaginable events such as tended (Finckenauer, 1982; Lewis, 1983). The standard
dentist visits, cuts and wounds, and bone breakage pro- explanation for such an effect is that the fear communi-
duce immediate anxiety and dread, to the point where cation produced a defensive compensatory response.
the recollection of the event DEMO actually be worse than Perhaps, however, the paradoxical effect resulted from
9 Deleted in proof.
10 Jon Elster brought this point to my DEMO
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: OBHDP
284
GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
the weakness of the evoked response to the memory. DEMO t o pr oposit ion 3 st a t es t h a t t h e weigh t on e pla ces on
DEMO about incarceration fails to evoke affect, even on eself r elat DEMO t o oth er person s who ar e exper iencin g
after touring the facility, perhaps the youths in ques- equ iva len t levels of a viscer a l fa ct or in cr DEMO ses a s t h e
tion conclude that ‘‘I’ve experienced the worst, and it comm on level of t he viscer al fa ct or in tensiﬁes. H u n -
must not be that DEMO since thinking about it leaves me ger , t h ir st , pa in , a n d fea r a r e DEMO ll power fu l a n t idot es
cold.’’ This conjecture is consistent with research on to altr uism (Loewenstein , for th coming a).
people’s response to minimally, moderately, and Proposition 4 DEMO to the interpersonal domain
strongly fear-arousing lectures about dental hygiene implies that people who are themselves experiencing a
(Janis & Feshbach, 1953). DEMO following the visceral factor will be more empathic toward, and more
DEMO there appeared to be a monotonic rela- accurate predictors of, others DEMO are experiencing the
tionship between fear intensity and vigilance; however, same visceral factor. One summer, for example, a
1 week later the DEMO of the lectures on behavior was friend mentioned his back problems to me. I responded
inversely related to fear. sympathetically, but his pain had little reality until,
In sum, with certain important exceptions, it DEMO when working in the garden one day, I suddenly felt
that DEMO can remember visceral sensations at a cog- something ‘‘give’’ in my back. My virtually instant reac-
nitive level, but cannot reproduce them, even DEMO dimin- tion was to think of him and to feel deeply for the ﬁrst
ished levels of intensity. It seems that the human brain DEMO what he must have been experiencing all along.
is not well equipped for storing information about pain, Despite such occasional examples of ‘‘priming,’’ how-
emotions, or other types of visceral inﬂuences, in the ever, in which one’s own weak experience of a visceral
same way that DEMO, verbal, and semantic informa- factor allow us to empathize with another person’s
tion is stored. We can recognize visceral sensations of- stronger one, in general, there seems to be an empathic
ten too effortlessly when they occur, but only in a lim- gulf when it comes to appreciating another person’s
ited number of cases actually call them to mind DEMO pain, hunger, fear, etc. As Elaine Scarry writes with
respect DEMO pain,
When one speaks about ‘‘one’s own physical pain’’ an d about
‘‘another person’s ph ysica l pain,’’ on e m ight DEMO appear to
be speakin g about two wholly distinct orders of events. For the
person whose pain it is, it is ‘‘effortlessly’’ grasped (DEMO is, even
with the most heroic effort it cannot not be DEMO); while for
the person outside the sufferer’s body, what is DEMO is
not grasping it (it is easy to remain wholly u DEMO of its exis-
tence; even with effort, one may remain in doubt about its exis-
tence or ma y r etain t he DEMO freedom of denying its exis-
tence; and, ﬁnally, if with DEMO best effort of sustained a ttention
one successfully apprehends it, the DEMO of the ‘‘it’’ one
apprehends will only be a shadowy fraction of the actual ‘it’).
(1985, p. 4).
in t en DEMO A fr ien d r ela t ed t o m e t h e fr en zied st r u g- Scarry argues DEMO pain, uniquely, possesses such an
gles between passenger s t ha t occur red on a tr an sa t- empathic gulf, and attributes it to the poverty of lan-
la n t ic ﬂigh DEMO wh en t h e pla n e su dden ly dived a n d on ly guage when it comes to expressing pain. DEMO agree-
abou t h alf t he oxygen ma sks dropped. Alt hough fea r ing with her that such a gulf exists, I think it applies
ca u sed people t o becom e self-cen DEMO er ed, it seem s likely to a much wider range DEMO feelings than pain, doubt it
th at even as th ey DEMO asped for th eir n eigh bor’s child’s arises from limitations of linguistic expression, and
m a sk, t h ey kn ew DEMO h a t t h ey wer e viola t in g t h eir own also believe that virtually the same gulf exists DEMO it
mora l codes. The self-focusin g effects of viscer al fa c- comes to remembering or anticipating one’s own pain
t or s DEMO n ot su r pr isin g given t h e pr ior it izin g a n d m ot i- and other DEMO factors. Regardless of the source of
va ting role th at viscer al fa ct or s pla y in h um an an DEMO such an empathic gulf, its existence implies that, analo-
n on h u m a n beh a vior . An a logou DEMO t o pr oposit ion 2, gous to proposition 5, people will have difﬁculty pre-
wh en ma king decision s for ot DEMO, we a re likely to dicting the behavior of other people DEMO are experienc-
ign or e or r a dica lly u n der weigh t t h e im pa ct of viscer a DEMO ing intense visceral factors. Just as people underesti-
fa ct or s on t hem. Few of t he classic t ra gedies (e.g., Eve mated the likelihood that they themselves would have
a n d t h e a pple; Ma cbet h ) wou ld h a ve h a ppen ed if t h e conformed to DEMO modal pattern of behavior in the Mil-
pr ot agon ists ha d t ur ned over decision-ma king power gram experiment, for example, they also underesti-
t o a disin t er est ed pa r t y. Com bin in g bot h of t h DEMO mated the likelihood that other, superﬁcially described,
an alogou s DEMO s, th e int er person al equiva lent persons would DEMO so (Nisbett & Ross, 1980). Finally,
neously —i.e., DEMO them —in the same way that we
can recall words or visual images. Unable to recall vis-
ceral sensations as we can recall other DEMO of informa-
tion, their power over our behavior is difﬁcult to DEMO
sense of retrospectively or to anticipate prospectively.
Proposition 7:
Each of the ﬁrst six propositions apply to interpersonal as well
as intrapersonal comparisons, where other people play the same
role visavis the self as the DEMO self plays relative to the
current self.
An alogou s t o proposition 1, actu al altr uism tends t o
declin e r elat ive t o desir ed altr uism as viscer al fa DEMO or s
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: OBHDP
VISCERAL FACTORS
analogous to proposition 6, the behavior of other people despite the opportunities for data ﬁtting inherent in
acting under the inﬂuence of DEMO factors will seem
as incomprehensible as one’s own past visceral-factor- gambling —a n activity which serves as the central met-
inﬂuenced behavior.
Most of DEMO propositions just enumerated, including models have been largely unable to account DEMO the
the 7th, are illustrated in William Styron’s autobio-
graphical treatise DEMO depression. Depression ﬁts the dict the behavior of individuals. Is it possible that part
deﬁnition of a visceral factor since it has a direct DEMO
on well-being and also inﬂuences the relative desirabil- paradigm’s failure to take account of visceral factors?
ity of different activities. Proposition 1 (the excessive
inﬂuence of immediately operative visceral factors) is mains of behavior in which I believe that visceral fac-
illustrated by the fact that while DEMO was depressed
Styron experienced an almost overwhelming desire to
commit suicide, DEMO recognized that this was not in his
self-interest. This latter awareness induced him to seek
psychiatric help. Proposition 2 (the underweighting of
future visceral factors), proposition 5 (underestimation
of the impact of future visceral factors), and proposition
6 (the minimization in memory of the impact of past
visceral factors) are also all vividly described in the
book. When Styron was not feeling depressed, he re-
ports, depression had little DEMO to him; indeed, writ-
ing the book was his attempt to come to terms with
this lack of intrapersonal empathy. Proposition 4 (the
projection of currently experienced visceral factors onto
the future) is well illustrated by the feeling he reports,
while depressed, that the depression will never end —
all the while recognizing intellectually that this is
probably DEMO Finally proposition 7 (the analog be-
tween intra- and interpersonal empathy DEMO a` vis the
effect of visceral factors) is amply illustrated both DEMO
his own perspective and that of others. Prior to his own
long bout with depression, Styron received a visit from
two friends who were suffering from severe depression,
but reports that he found their behavior DEMO, since
their depression had no reality to him in his own DEMO
pressed state. Later, when he became depressed him-
self, he experienced the same empathic void with re-
spect to the people around him.
DEMO effects of the addictive substance. However their
APPLICATIONS account fails to explain why people don’t get the infor-
mation from sources other than their DEMO personal ex-
A major challenge confronting the decision paradigm perience since, DEMO Goldstein notes, the consequences of
is the generally poor ‘‘ﬁt’’ achieved DEMO empirical analy- addiction are well publicized.
ses of behavior that are guided by decision theory. In The theoretical perspective proposed here provides a
attempts DEMO use decision models to explain or predict somewhat different answer to this question (see,
such wide-ranging behaviors as job choice, migration, Loewenstein, forthcoming b, for a more detailed discus-
contraception, criminal activity, DEMO self-protective sion). Research on drug addiction suggests that it is not
measures against health, home and work-place risks, so much the pleasure DEMO taking the drug that produces
the fraction of explained variance has generally been dependency, but the pain of not taking the drug after
low. Although disappointing results are often attrib- one has become habituated to it (Gardner & Lowinson,
uted to measurement error, the poor ﬁt problem per- 1993). This pain is usually subclassiﬁed into two com-
sists DEMO when researchers collect their own data, and ponents: the pain of withdrawing from the drug and
285
the typical retrospective design. Even when DEMO to
aphor for the decision making perspective —decision
‘‘stylized’’ facts of aggregate behavior, let alone to pre-
of the poor ﬁt problem results from the decision making
In this section I discuss a variety of patterns DEMO do-
tors are likely to play an especially prominent role.
Drug Addiction
In the introduction of Addiction, Avrum Goldstein
expresses the central paradox of addiction as follows:
If you know that a certain addictive drug DEMO give you tempo-
rary pleasure but will, in the long run, kill you, damage your
health seriously, cause harm to others, and bring you into con-
ﬂict with the law, the rational response would be to avoid that
drug. Why then, do we have a drug addiction problem at all? In
our information-rich society, no addict can DEMO ignorance of
the consequences.
Several different solutions to this riddle have been pro-
posed. Becker and Murphy (1988), for example, argue
that DEMO addict begins taking the addictive substance
with a realistic anticipation of the consequences. Such
an account is unsatisfactory not only because it fails to
DEMO the facts (e.g., it implies incorrectly that addicts will
buy in bulk to save time and money in satisfying their
anticipated long term DEMO), but also because it is dif-
ﬁcult to understand how the rapid downward hedonic
spiral associated with many kinds of addictions can be
DEMO as the outcome of a rational choice. Cocaine
addiction, for example, seems to produce a relatively
rapid diminution in the overall capacity for DEMO
(Gardner & Lowinson, 1993). Herrnstein and Prelec
(1992), DEMO contrast, argue that people become addicted
because they fail to notice DEMO small incremental nega-
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: DEMO
286
GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
the cravings for the drug that arise from ‘‘conditioned DEMO sex. Clearly, the emotions associated with un-
association’’—i.e., that result from exposure to per- wanted pregnancy are much more powerful or at least
DEMO, places, and other types of stimuli that have be- long-lasting than those associated with sexual sponta-
come associated with drug taking. Proposition 5 (un- neity and enhanced pleasure; however, and consistent
derestimation of the DEMO of future visceral factors) with proposition 1, the immediacy and certainty of em-
implies that people who have not experienced the pains barrassment DEMO discomfort seem to overwhelm the
of withdrawal and craving may over- or underestimate delayed and uncertain consequences of using it or fail-
the aversiveness DEMO withdrawal and craving, but will ing to use it.11 Proposition 7 DEMO, perhaps, help to ex-
almost surely underestimate the likely impact of these plain some of the misguided policies in this area —such
visceral DEMO on their behavior. That is, people will as the abstinence movement DEMO leaves teenagers
exaggerate their own ability to stop taking a particular unprepared for their own feelings and behavior because
drug once they have started. DEMO that they can its proponents underestimate the inﬂuence of visceral
stop taking the drug at will, they are free to indulge factors on the behavior of others.
their curiosity, which, according to Goldstein (1994, DEMO
215) is the driving force in most early drug use. Self-protection DEMO sexually transmitted disease.
Proposition 2 can also help to explain the prevalence Based on his own extensive and innovative research
of self-binding behavior among DEMO The alcoholic on the AIDS-related sexual behavior of gay men, Gold
DEMO takes antabuse (assuring him or herself of horrible (1993, p. DEMO) argues that much unprotected sex oc-
withdrawal symptoms), the smoker DEMO ventures off curs in the heat of the moment but that people can’t
into the wilderness without cigarettes (after a ﬁnal remember or predict what the heat felt like and so are
smoke at the departure DEMO), and the dieter who signs unprepared to deal with it. He believes that the poor
up for a miserable, hungry, vacation at DEMO ‘‘fat farm’’ are memory for the ‘‘heat of the moment’’ has hampered
all imposing extreme future misery on themselves. To researchers who ‘‘have studied DEMO those cognitions
those who view these behaviors as the manifestation that are present in respondents’ minds at the time they
of myopic time preferences, such seemingly far-sighted are answering the researcher’s questions (that is, ‘in
DEMO may seem anomalous. Proposition 2, however, the cold light of day’), rather than those that are pres-
suggests that such readiness to DEMO future pain on ent during actual sexual encounters’’ (Gold, 1993, DEMO 4).
oneself has less to do with time preference, and DEMO Based on his view that gay men forget the inﬂuence of
to do with the unreality of future pain to the currently the heat DEMO the moment (consistent with proposition
pain-free self. It seems unlikely that DEMO, smok- 6), Gold (1994) ran a study in which DEMO compared the
ers, or overeaters would take any of these actions DEMO a effectiveness of a conventional informational interven-
moment when they were experiencing active craving tion intended to increase the use of condoms during
for DEMO substance to which they are addicted. anal intercourse (exposure to didactic DEMO) to a new
Sexual Behavior
As is true for addiction, volition seems to play an
ambiguous and often changing role in sexual behavior.
DEMO we hold people accountable for their behavior
as a matter of policy, sexually motivated behavior often
seems to fall into the ‘‘gray region’’ between pure voli-
tion and pure compulsion. The following three exam-
ples illustrate DEMO applicability of the proposed theoret-
ical perspective to sexual behavior.
Teenage contraception. In a recent study of teenage
contraceptive behavior, Loewenstein and Furstenberg
(DEMO) found that birth control usage was largely unre-
lated to the DEMO variables that the decision making
perspective would predict they should be correlated
with —e.g., belief in birth control’s effectiveness or the
desire to avoid pregnancy. The most important corre-
lates of birth control usage were embarrassment DEMO
using it and perceptions that it interferes with pleasure
11 Immediate affect has been found to be a critical determinant of
behavior in numerous DEMO of decision making. For example,
Grasmick, Bursik, and Kinsey (DEMO) conducted two surveys on lit-
tering in Oklahoma City, one just before and one shortly after the
initiation of a successful anti-littering program. DEMO survey asked
people whether they littered, obtained demographics, and asked
questions about shame (e.g., ‘‘Generally, in most situations I would
feel guilty if I were to litter the highways, streets, or a public DEMO
ation area’’) and also about the embarrassment the respondents
would feel DEMO they littered. The R2 jumped from .076 to .269 when
shame and embarrassment variables were added to the equation
predicting compliance, and the increase in these variables across the
surveys mediated the change in mean compliance, strongly sug-
gesting that the effectiveness of the program was due to DEMO success
in attaching an immediate negative emotion to littering. Manstead
(1995) found that age and sex (typically the two most powerful ex-
planatory variables) dropped out of regression equations predicting
risk taking among drivers after controlling for affective variables.
Klatzky and Loewenstein (1995) found that traditional DEMO mak-
ing variables (probabilities and outcome severities) explained sur-
prisingly little of the variance in women’s breast-self examination
behavior relative to subjective reports DEMO anxiety associated with
breast cancer and self-examination.
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: OBHDP
VISCERAL FACTORS
287
‘‘self-justiﬁcation’’ intervention. Subjects in the self- cases when people DEMO one level of a visceral
justiﬁcation group were sent a questionnaire which in- factor need to make decisions for themselves when they
structed them DEMO recall as vividly as possible a sexual will be at a different level, rules of thumb, such as
encounter in which they had DEMO in unprotected ‘‘have sex nightly, regardless of immediate desire,’’may
anal DEMO and were asked to indicate which of provide a better guide to behavior than momentary
a given a list of possible self-justiﬁcations for having DEMO
unsafe sex had been in their mind at the moment they
had decided not to use a condom. They were then asked Motivation and DEMO
to select the self-justiﬁcations that had been in their
mind most strongly at the time, to indicate how reason- Another area in which the decision making perspec-
able each of these seemed to them now, looking back tive falls short is its treatment of motivation and effort.
on DEMO; and to brieﬂy justify these responses. The men In the decision DEMO there is no qualitative distinc-
were thus required to recall the thinking they had em- tion between choosing, say one car over another, DEMO
ployed in the heat of the encounter and to reﬂect on it ‘‘deciding’’ to pick up one’s pace in the last mile of a
DEMO the cold light of day. The percentage of men in the marathon; both are simply decisions. Years after the
three groups who subsequently engaged in two or more decline of behaviorism, behaviorists still offer the most
acts of unprotected anal intercourse differed dramati- coherent theoretical perspective on motivation DEMO the
cally between the three groups —42 and 41% for the most sophisticated and comprehensive program of re-
control and poster groups, but only 17% for the self- search (see, e.g., Bolles, 1975).
DEMO group. Physical effort, and often mental effort as well, often
produce an aversive sensation referred to as fatigue or,
Sex lives of DEMO couples. Recent surveys of sex- at higher levels, exhaustion. Like other DEMO factors,
ual behavior suggest that the sex lives of married cou- fatigue and exhaustion are directly aversive, and alter
ples tend to be even worse (in terms of frequency) than the desirability of different DEMO; most promi-
what most people already suspected. For example, a nently, they decrease the desirability of further incre-
recent study conducted by the National Opinion Re- ments of effort. Proposition 1 implies that as exhaus-
DEMO Center (Michael, Gagnon, Laumann & Kolata, tion increases, there DEMO be an ever-increasing gap be-
1994) found that the average frequency DEMO intercourse tween actual and desired behavior. Anyone who has
of married couples declined markedly as a function of engaged in competitive sports, or who has taught for
years of marriage. Certainly some of this drop-off re- DEMO hours in a row can conﬁrm this prediction; re-
ﬂects the DEMO effects of soured relations, dimin- gardless of the importance of performing DEMO, and even
ished attraction, etc. What is surprising, as reported DEMO full knowledge that one will recover from the ex-
in the same study, is that many couples enjoy sex quite haustion virtually immediately after suspending the
a lot when it actually occurs. The visceral factor per- DEMO, sustained performance is often impossible to
spective can perhaps shed some DEMO light on the achieve. Proposition 5 implies that people will overesti-
anomaly posed by the failure to take advantage of an mate their own DEMO to overcome the effect of fa-
obvious opportunity for gratiﬁcation. tigue —they will exaggerate the degree to which they
In the early stages of DEMO relationship, the mere can overcome limitations in physical conditioning, con-
thought of sex, or the physical proximity of the other centration, etc. DEMO sheer willpower, and proposi-
partner is sufﬁcient to produce signiﬁcant arousal. DEMO tion 6 implies that, as time passes, people increasingly
is easy to understand this arousal in evolutionary come to blame themselves for deﬁciencies DEMO their own
terms, and indeed research has shown that rats, cattle, prior effort level because they will forget their own past
and other mammals can be sexually rejuvenated fol- exhaustion. Proposition 7 predicts that people DEMO are
lowing satiation by the presentation of a new partner — observing the effort output of others will have a difﬁcult
the so-called ‘‘Coolidge DEMO (Bowles, 1974). Thus, time understanding or predicting reductions in DEMO
early in a relationship one initiates sex in a visceral output. Watching speed-skaters during the Olympics,
state not unlike that associated with the DEMO act itself. for example, I found it difﬁcult to understand why DEMO
Repeated presentation of the same sexual partner, failed to maintain their DEMO in the face of such over-
however, diminishes initial arousal. Proposition DEMO im- whelming incentives.
plies that people who are not aroused will have difﬁ- Many of the tactics that people use to motivate them-
culty DEMO how they will feel or behave once they selves in the face of fatigue and exhaustion can be de-
become aroused. It can thus DEMO why couples fail scribed by the observation that you can only ﬁght vis-
to initiate sex despite ample past experience showing ceral factors with DEMO visceral factors. Thus, a com-
that it will be pleasurable if DEMO do. As in so many mon tactic for mustering willpower is to attempt to
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: OBHDP
288
GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
imagine, as vividly as possible, the potential positive DEMO, Thaler and Shefrin’s (1981) ‘‘planner/doer’’model
consequences of greater effort DEMO, or the potential adopts a principal-agent framework in which a far-
DEMO consequences of insufﬁcient output. When I sighted planner (the principle) attempts to reconcile
lived in Boston many years ago, a friend and I would the competing demands of a series of present-oriented
regularly drive to DEMO Virginia to go canoeing, and doers (the agents).
would typically drive back days later in the middle of The strength of multiple DEMO models is that they
the night. During these long drives I would remain transfer insights from a highly developed ﬁeld of re-
awake at DEMO wheel by imagining myself ringing the search on interpersonal interactions to the less studied
doorbell of my friend’s parents house to announce that topic DEMO intraindividual conﬂict. However, the use-
he had died in a car DEMO The effectiveness of mental fulness of the multiple self approach is limited by im-
imagery in eliciting an emotional response explains not perfections in DEMO analogy between interpersonal and
only why it is commonly used as an emotion-induction intrapersonal conﬂict. There is an inherent asymmetry
method in research, but also may also help to explain between temporal selves that does not DEMO between
its prominent role in decision making (c.f., Pen- different people. People often take actions that hurt
nington & Hastie, 1988; Oliver, Robertson, & Mitchell, themselves materially to either reward or punish oth-
DEMO). Not only does imagery provide a tool for deciding ers who have helped or hurt them. In the intrapersonal
between alternative courses of DEMO but, once a reso- domain, however, people cannot take actions DEMO the
lution has been made, it may also help to stimulate DEMO purpose of rewarding or punishing their past selves.
emotional response needed to implement the decision. Another form of asymmetry arises from the fact that
DEMO analytical evaluation seems unlikely to attempts at self control are almost always made by
provide such a motivational impetus. the far sighted self against DEMO short-sighted one, and
almost never in the opposite direction. Consistent only
DEMO with the planner-doer model, there is little camarade-
One of the DEMO difﬁcult patterns of behavior to sub- rie between successive short-sighted selves, DEMO much
sume under a conventional rational choice framework, more of a DEMO of continuity between far-sighted
and one that has received increasing attention in the selves. For example, when people ‘‘decide’’ to sleep in,
literature, is the phenomenon of intrapersonal conﬂict they rarely disable the alarm clock to promote the
and self-control. People sometimes report feeling as if cause DEMO tomorrow morning’s sluggish self; however,
though there were two selves DEMO them —one more when not actually experiencing the misery of prema-
present- and one more future-oriented —battling for ture arousal, we might well make a policy decision to
control of their behavior. To express the introspective DEMO the alarm clock away from the bed every night.
sensation of intra-individual conﬂict, a number of peo- Perhaps the most signiﬁcant problem with multiple
ple have proposed different types of ‘‘multiple self’’ self models is that DEMO are metaphorical and not de-
models that apply to intrapersonal conﬂict preexisting scriptions of what we think actually takes place in in-
models that DEMO been developed to describe strategic trapersonal conﬂict. Advocates of the multiple self ap-
interactions between different people. proach do not believe that there are DEMO selves in
Schelling’s multiple self model (1984), for example, people with independent motives, cognitive systems,
constitutes a relatively straightforward application of and so on. Thus, it is difﬁcult to draw connections be-
his pioneering research on commitment tactics in inter- tween multiple self models and DEMO on brain neu-
personal bargaining to intrapersonal conﬂict. In his rochemistry or physiology beyond the rather simplistic
model a series of far-sighted selves who DEMO prefer observation that the brain is not a unitary organism.
to wake up early, eat in moderation, and desist from The visceral factor DEMO, and its key assump-
alcohol, use a variety of precommitment techniques to tion that intense visceral factors cause behavior to de-
control the DEMO of their more short-sighted coun- part from perceived self-interest, provides a DEMO ﬁt
terparts. Elster (1985), somewhat differently, sees in- to the stylized facts than do multiple self models. The
trapersonal conﬂict as a DEMO action problem’’ in- introspective feeling of multiple selves, for example,
DEMO the succession of one’s selves. Such a perspec- arises from the observation that one is clearly behaving
tive sheds special light on the phenomenon DEMO contrary to one’s own self interest. Since we are used
unraveling. Just as one person’s cutting in line can to interpreting behavior as the DEMO of a decision,
cause a queue to disintegrate into a state of anarchy, it is natural to assume that there must be some self—
the ﬁrst cigarette of someone who has quit, or the ﬁrst other than the self that identiﬁes one’s self-interest —
drink of an DEMO, often usher in a resumption of that is responsible for the DEMO behavior. The fact
the original self-destructive pattern of behavior. Fi- that impulsive selves never promote one-another’s be-
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha DEMO: OBHDP
VISCERAL FACTORS
289
havior is not surprising if these selves are not, in fact, ity. In everyday language, the term irrationality is typi-
DEMO entities with consciousness and personal mo- cally applied to impulsive and self-destructive behavior
tives, but instead represent the motivational impact of and to actions that violate generally accepted norms
visceral factors. The far-sighted self, in contrast, repre- about the relative importance of different goals.
sented by the individual’s assessment of self-interest, The theoretical perspective proposed here views irra-
is much more constant over time. The far-sighted self tionality not as an objective DEMO well-deﬁned phenome-
can, in a sense, represent the individual’s tastes, DEMO non, but as a subjective perception that occurs in the
toring DEMO as much as possible the effect of visceral mid-range of the continuum deﬁned by the inﬂuence of
factors. visceral factors. At low levels of DEMO factors, people
generally experience themselves as behaving in a ratio-
CONCLUDING DEMO nal fashion. At extremely high levels, such as the level
of DEMO that causes one to fall asleep at the wheel,
decision making is seen as arational —that is, people
The decision-making paradigm, as DEMO has developed, don’t perceive themselves as making decisions at all.
is DEMO product of a marriage between cognitive psychol- It is in the middle region of visceral inﬂuences, when
ogy and economics. From economics, decision DEMO people observe themselves behaving contrary to their
inherited, or was socialized DEMO, the language of prefer- own perceived self-interest, that they tend to deﬁne
ences and beliefs and the religion of utility maximiza- their own DEMO as irrational. Expressions such as
tion that provides a unitary perspective for under- ‘‘I don’t know what got into me,’’ or ‘‘I must DEMO been
standing all behavior. From cognitive psychology, deci- crazy when I DEMO . .’’ refer to discrepancies between be-
sion theory inherited its descriptive focus, concern with havior and perceived self-interest that are produced by
process, and many speciﬁc theoretical insights. Deci- the inﬂuence of visceral factor. As proposition 7 would
sion theory is thus the brilliant child of equally DEMO imply, moreover, the same expressions are used to refer
parents. With all its cleverness, however, decision the- to the irrational behavior of DEMO that is difﬁcult to
ory is somewhat crippled emotionally, and thus DEMO comprehend as self-interested. In sum, the visceral fac-
tached from the DEMO and visceral richness of life. tor perspective helps to explain when and why people
Contrary to the central assumption of decision the- view their DEMO, and others’, behavior as irrational.
ory, not all behavior is DEMO, and very likely most The second problem resulting from the failure DEMO take
of it is not. This is not a novel critique, DEMO most recent account of the impact of visceral factors, is a DEMO
critiques along these lines have attacked from the oppo- spread skepticism toward the decision making perspec-
site angle. A number of researchers have argued DEMO tive, on the part of both the general public and of DEMO
most behavior is relatively ‘‘automatic’’ (Shiffrin, Du- demics in the humanities. A commonly heard complain
mais & Schneider, 1981), ‘‘mindless’’ (Langer, 1989), is that decision theory fails to capture what makes peo-
DEMO (Ronis, Yates & Kirscht, 1989; Louis & Sutton, ple DEMO,’’ or what it means to be a person (c.f., Epstein,
1991), or rule-guided (Anderson, 1987; Prelec, 1991). DEMO). People who introspectively experience high con-
While not disputing the importance of habitual behav- ﬂict in their personal lives are unlikely to embrace DEMO
ior, my focus is on the opposite extreme —one that, theory of behavior that denies such conﬂict or that, at
while perhaps less prevalent than habitual behavior, best, treats it as a matter of DEMO competing rea-
presents a more daunting challenge to the decision sons for behaving in different ways (Tversky & Shaﬁr,
making perspective. My argument is that much behav- 1992). The dismaying consequence of decision theory’s
DEMO is non-volitional or only partly volitional —even in lack of general appeal is a widespread tendency for
situations characterized by substantial deliberation. those in DEMO humanities and in the general public to
The failure to incorporate the volition-undermining fall back on outmoded theoretical accounts of behavior
inﬂuence of emotions DEMO other visceral factors can be such as those proposed by Freud and his followers. The
seen not only in the disappointing explanatory power of DEMO of decision researchers, as I see it, is to try to
decision models, but also in two additional signiﬁcant breathe more life into decision models without losing
problems faced by the decision-making perspective. the rigor DEMO structure that are the main existing
The ﬁrst is the counterintuitive notion of ‘‘irrationality’’ strengths of the perspective. Incorporating the inﬂu-
that has arisen DEMO a ﬁeld which has irrationality as a ence of visceral factors, DEMO hope, is a step in that direc-
central focus. As Daniel DEMO notes (1993), con- tion.
temporary decision theorists typically deﬁne irrational-
DEMO as a failure to adhere to certain axioms of choice REFERENCES
such as transitivity or independence —a deﬁnition that Akerlof, G. A. (1991)DEMO Procrastination and obedience. American Eco-
diverges sharply from personal accounts of irrational- nomic Review, 81, 1 – 19.
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:DEMO obha AP: OBHDP
290
GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
Anderson, J. R. (1987). Skill acquisition: compilation of weak-method negative hedonic brain substrates activated by addicting drugs.
problem solutions. DEMO Review, 94, 192 – 210. Seminars in the Neurosciences, 5, 359 – 368.
Beach, L. R. (1990). Image theory: Decision making in personal and
organizational contexts. Chichester: Wiley.
Becker, G., & Murphy, K. M. (1988). A theory of rational addiction. Gold, R. (1993). On the need to mind the gap: On-line DEMO off-line
Journal of Political Economy, 96, 675 – 700.
Biderman, DEMO D. (1960). Social-psychological needs and ‘involuntary’
behavior as illustrated by DEMO in interrogation. Sociometry,
23, 120 – 147.
Bolles, R. C. (1975). The theory of motivation (2nd ed.). New York:DEMO
Harper & Row.
Brown, J. W. (1988). The life of the mind. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bruner, J. (1957). Going DEMO the information given. In J. Bruner
et al. (Eds.), Contemporary DEMO to cognition. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard Univ. Press.
Chapman, C. R. (1994). Assessment of pain. In W. Nimo & G. Smith
(DEMO), Anaesthesia. England: Blackwell.
Christensen, S. M., & Turner, D. R. (1993). Folk psychology and the
philosophy of mind. Hillsdale, DEMO: Erlbaum.
Christensen-Szalanski, J. J. J. (1984). Discount functions and DEMO
measurement of patients’ values: Women’s decisions during child-
birth, Medical Decision Making, 4, 47 – 58.
Chung, S-H., & Herrnstein, R. J. (1967). Choice and delay of rein-
forcement, Journal of DEMO Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 10,
67 – 74.
Cinnamon, K., & Farson, D. (1979). Cults and cons. Chicago: Nelson-
DEMO
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes’ error: Emotion, reason, DEMO the
human brain. New York: Putnam.
Easterbrook, J. A. (1959)DEMO The effect of emotion on cue utilization
and the organization of behavior. Psychological Review, 66, 183 –
201.
Elster, J. (1985). DEMO of will and the free-rider problem, Eco-
nomics and Philosophy, 1, 231 – 265.
Elster, J. (1977). Ulysses and the sirens. Cambridge, England: Cam-
bridge Univ. Press.
Epstein, S. (1994). DEMO of the cognitive and the psychody-
namic unconscious. American Psychologist, 49, 709 – 24.
Fields, H. L. (1987). Pain. New York: McGraw – Hill.
Fienberg, S. E., Loftus, E. F., & DEMO, J. M. (1985). Recalling pain Kahneman, D. (1993). Presidential address to the society for judgment
and other symptoms. Health and DEMO, 63, 582 – 97. and decision making. St. Louis, MO.
DEMO, J. O. (1982). Scared straight! and the panacea phenom- Katz, J., & Melzack, R. (1990). Pain ‘memories’ in phantom DEMO:
enon. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice – Hall. review and clinical observations. Pain, 43, 319 – 336.
Fishbein, M., & Azjen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention, and behav- Kent, G. (1985). Memory of dental pain. Pain, 21, 187 – 94.
ior: An introduction to theory and research. Reading, MA: Addison- Klatzky, R., & Loewenstein, G. (1995). Proximate inﬂuences and deci-
DEMO sion analyses as predictors of breast self-examination. Working pa-
Frank, R. DEMO (1988). Passions within reason: The strategic role of the per, Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology.
emotions. New York: Norton. Kosslyn, S. M., Alpert, N. M., Thompson, W. L., Maljkovic, V., Weise,
Frawley, P. J. (1988). Neurobehavioral model of addiction: Addiction S. B., Chabris, C. F., Hamilton, S. E., Rauch, S. L., & Buonanno,
as a primary disease. In S. Peele (Ed.), Visions of addiction. Lexing- F. S. (1993)DEMO Visual mental imagery activates topographically orga-
ton, MA: Lexington Books. nized visual cortex: PET investigations. Journal of Cognitive Neu-
Galanter, M. (1989). Cults: faith, healing, and coercion. New York: roscience, 5, 263 – 87.
Oxford Univ. Press. Kuhl, J., & Beckmann, DEMO (Eds.). (1994). Volition and personality.
Gardner, E. L. (1992). Brain reward mechanisms. In J. H. Lowinson, Seattle/Toronto/Bern/Go¨ ttingen: Hogrefe & Huber Publishers.
P. Ruiz, R. B. Millman & J . G. Langrod (Eds.), Substance abuse: Kunreuther, H., Ginsberg, R., Miller, L., Slovic, P., Borkan, B., &
A comprehensive textbook (2nd ed., pp. 70 – 99). DEMO: Wil- Katz, N. (1978). Disaster insurance protection: Public policy les-
liams & Wilkins. sons. New York: Wiley.
Gardner, E. L., & Lowinson, J. H. (1993). Drug craving and positive/ Langer, E. (1989). Mindfulness. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Gawin, F. H. (1991). Cocaine addiction: Psychology and neurophysi-
ology. Science, 251, DEMO – 1586.
cognitions underlying sexual risk-taking. In D. Terry, C. Gal-
DEMO, & M. McCamish (Eds.), The theory of reasoned action: DEMO
application to AIDS preventive behavior. New York: Pergamon
Press.
Gold, R. (1994). Why we need to rethink AIDS education for gay men.
Plenary address to the Second International Conference on AIDS’
impact: Biopsychosocial aspects of HIV infection 7 – 10 July, Brigh-
ton, UK.
Goldstein, A. (1994). Addiction: From biology to drug policy. New
York: Freeman.
Gould, S. J. (1992). The panda’s thumb: More reﬂections on natural
history. New York: Norton.
Grasmick, H. G., Bursik, DEMO J., & Kinsey, K. A. (1991). Shame and
embarrassment DEMO deterrents to noncompliance with the law —The
case of an antilittering campaign. Environment and Behaviour, 23,
233 – 251.
Gratton, A., & Wise, R. A. (1994). Drug- and behavior-associated
changes in dopamine-related DEMO signals during intra-
venous cocaine self-administration in rats. The Journal of Neuro-
science, 14, 4130 – 46.
Herrnstein, R., & Prelec, D. (1992). Addiction. In G. Loewenstein &
J. Elster (Eds.), Choice over time. New York: Russell Sage.
Hoch, S. J., & Loewenstein, G. F. (1991). ‘‘Time-inconsistent prefer-
ences and consumer self-control.’’ DEMO of Consumer Research,
17, 492 – 507.
Janis, I. L. (1967). Effects of fear arousal on attitude change. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol.
3, pp. 167 – 224).
Janis, I. L., & Feshbach, S. (1953)DEMO Effects of fear-arousing communi-
cations. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, DEMO, 78 – 92.
Janis, I. L., & Leventhal, H. (DEMO). Human reactions to stress. In
E. Borgatta & W. Lambert (DEMO), Handbook of personality theory
and research. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Janis, I. L., & Mann, L. (1977). Decision making: A DEMO
analysis of conﬂict, choice, and commitment. New York: Free Press.
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: OBHDP
VISCERAL FACTORS
291
Lewis, R. V. (1983). Scared straight —California DEMO Criminal Jus- market shopping behavior. Proceedings, American Psychological
tice and Behavior, 10, 209 – 226. Association Annual Convention.
Libet, B., Gleason, DEMO, Wright, E., & Pearl, D. (1983). Time of DEMO
scious intention to act in relation to onset of cerebral activity
(DEMO). Brain, 106, 623 – 42.
Linton, S. J. (1991). Memory for chronic pain intensity: Correlates
of accuracy. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 72, 1091 – 95.
Loewenstein, G. (forthcoming, a). Behavioral decision theory and
business ethics: Skewed tradeoffs between self and other. In D. M.
Messick (Ed.), Business ethics.
Loewenstein, G. (forthcoming, b). Addiction, choice, and rationality.
In J. Elster & O. J . Skog (Eds.), Getting hooked: Rationality and
addiction. Cambridge, England: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Loewenstein, G., & Adler, D. (1995). A bias in the prediction of tastes.
Economic Journal, 105, DEMO – 937.
Loewenstein, G., & Furstenberg, F. (1991). Is teenage sexual behav-
ior rational? Journal of Applied Psychology, 21, 957 – 86.
Loewenstein, G., & Mather, J. (1990). Dynamic DEMO in risk
perception. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 3, 155 – 75.
Lord, Lepper, & Ross (1979). Biased assimilation and attitude polar-
ization: the effect of prior theories on subsequently considered evi-
dence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 2098 –
2110.
Louis, M. R., & Sutton, R. I. (1991). Switching cognitive gears: from
habits of mind to active thinking. Human Relations, 44, 55 – 76.
Mandler, G. (1964). The interruption of behavior. In DEMO Levine (Ed.),
Nebraska symposium on motivation. Lincoln, Nebraska: Univer-
sity of Nebraska Press.
Manstead, A. S. R. (1995). The DEMO of affect in behavioural decisions:
Integrating emotion into the theory of planned behaviour. Paper
presented at seminar on Affect and Decision Making. Technical
DEMO of Eindhoven, March 31, 1995.
Mazur, J. E. (1987). An adjustment procedure for studying delayed
reinforcement, In M. L. Commons, DEMO E. Mazur, J. A. Nevins, &
H. Rachlin (Eds.), Quantitative analysis of behavior: The effect of
delay and of intervening events on reinforcement value (Chapter
2). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Messiha, DEMO S. (1993). Fluoxetine: A spectrum of clinical applications
and postulates of underlying mechanisms, Neuroscience and Bio-
behavioral Reviews, 17(4), DEMO – 396.
Michael, R. T., Gagnon, J. H., Laumann, DEMO O., & Kolata, G. (1994).
Sex in America: A deﬁnitive survey. Boston: Little, Brown.
Miller, G. A., Galanter, E. H., & Pribram, K. H. (1960). Plans and
the structure of behavior. New York: Henry Holt & Co.
Miller, G. A., Levin, D. N., Kozak, M. J., Cook, E. W. III, McLean,
A., Jr., & Lang, P. J. (1987). Individual differences in imagery and
the psychophysiology of emotion. Cognition and Emotion, 1, 367 –
90.
Mischel, W. (1974). Processes in delay of gratiﬁcation. In D. Berko-
witz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 7, pp.
249 – 292).
Mischel, W., DEMO, Y., & Rodriguez, M. L. (1992). Delay of gratiﬁca-
tion in children. In G. Loewenstein & J . Elster (Eds.), Choice Over
time. New York: Russell Sage.
Morley, S. (1993). Vivid memory for ‘everyday’ pains. Pain, 55, 55 –
62.
Morris, D. B. (1991). The culture of pain. Berkeley: University of
DEMO Press.
Nisbett, R. E., & Kanouse, D. E. (1968). Obesity, hunger, and super-
Nisbett, R. E., & Ross, L. (1980). Human inference: Strategies and
shortcomings of social judgment. Englewood DEMO, NJ: Prentice –
Hall.
Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, DEMO D. (1977). Telling more than we can
know: Verbal reports on mental processes. Psychological Review,
84, 231 – 59.
Norvell, DEMO T., Gaston-Johansson, F., & Fridh, G. (1987). ‘‘Remem-
DEMO of labor pain: How valid are retrospective pain measure-
ments?’’ DEMO, 31, 77 – 86.
Olds, J., & Milner, P. (1954). Positive reinforcement produced by
electrical stimulation of septal area and DEMO regions of rat brain.
Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 47, 419 –
27.
Oliver, R. L., Robertson, T. S., & DEMO, D. J. (1993). Imaging
and analyzing in response to new product advertising. Journal of
Advertising, 22, 35 – 50.
Osiatynski, W. (1992). Choroba kontroli (The disease of control).
Warszawa: Instytut Psychiatrii i Neurologii.
Palm, R., Hodgson, M., Blanchard, D., & Lyons, D. (1990). Earth-
quake insurance in California. Boulder, DEMO: Westview Press.
Pennington, N., & Hastie, R. (1988). DEMO decision
making: effects of memory structure on judgment. Journal of Ex-
DEMO Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 14, 521 –
33.
Pettit, P. (1991). Decision theory and folk psychology. In M. Bacha-
DEMO & S. Hurley (Eds.), Foundations of decision theory. Oxford:
DEMO
Pickens, R., & Harris, W. C. (1968). ‘‘Self-administration of d-am-
phetamine by rats.’’ Psychopharmacologia, 12, 158 – 163.
Pluchik, R. (1984). A emotions: A general psychoevolutionary theory.
In K. R. DEMO & P. Ekman (Eds.), Approaches to emotion (Chap-
ter 8, pp. 197 – 219). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Prelec, D. (1991). Values and principles: Some limitations on tradi-
tional economic analysis. In A. Etzioni & P. Lawrence (Eds.), Socio-
economics: toward DEMO new synthesis. New York: M. E. Sharpe.
Pribram, K. H. (DEMO). Emotion: A neurobehavioral analysis, In
K. R. Scherer & P. Ekman (Eds.), Approaches to emotion (Chapter
1, pp. 13 – 38). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rachman, S., & Arntz, A. (1991). The overprediction and underpre-
diction of pain. Clinical Psychology Review, 11, 339 – 55.
Rofe´ , Y., & Algom, D. (1985). Accuracy of remembering postdelivery
pain. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 60, 99 – 105.
Ronis, D. L., Yates, J. F., & Kirscht, J. P. (1989). Attitudes, decisions,
and habits as determinants of repeated behavior. In A. R. Prat-
kanis, S. J. Breckerler, & A. G. Greenwald (Eds.), Attitude, struc-
ture and function. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ross, M. (1989). Relation of implicit DEMO to the construction of
personal histories. Psychological Review, 96, 341 – 57.
Scarry, E. (1985). The body in pain. Oxford, England: Oxford Univ.
Press.
Schelling, T. (1984). Self-command in practice, DEMO policy, and in a
theory of rational choice. American Economic Review, 74, 1 – 11.
Seeburger, F. F. (1993). Addiction and responsibility. An inquiry into
the addictive mind. New York: Crossroads Press.
Shiffrin, R. M., Dumais, S. T., & Schneider, W. (1981)DEMO Characteris-
tics of automatism. In J. Long & A. Baddeley (Eds.), Attention and
performance (Vol. IX, pp. 223 – 238). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Siegel, S. (1979). The role of conditioning DEMO drug tolerance and addic-
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: OBHDP
292
GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
tion. In J. D. Keehn (Ed.), Psychopathology in animals: Research
and treatment implications. New York: Academic Press.
Simon, H. A. (1967). Motivational and emotional controls of cogni-
tion. Psychological Review, 74, 29 – 39.
Smith, A. (1892/1759). Theory DEMO moral sentiments. London: George
Bell & Sons.
Stewart, J., & DEMO, R. A. (1992). Reinstatement of heroin self-admin-
istration habits: DEMO prompts and naltrexone discourages
renewed responding after extinction. Psychopharmacology, 108,
DEMO – 784.
Strack, F., Schwarz, N., & Gschneidinger, E. (1985). Happiness and
reminiscing: The role of time perspective, affect, and mode of think-
ing. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 1460 – 1469.
Strotz, R. H. (1956). Myopia and inconsistency in dynamic utility Zajonc, R. B., & Markus, H. (1982)DEMO Affective and cognitive factors
maximization. Review of Economic Studies, 23, 165 – 80. in preferences. Journal of Consumer Research, 9, 123 – DEMO
Thaler, R. H., & Shefrin, H. M. (1981). An economic theory of self-
control. Journal of Political Economy, 89, 392 DEMO 406.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: DEMO heuristic for
judging frequency and probability. Cognitive Psychology, 5, 207 –
32.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1991). Loss aversion DEMO riskless choice:
A reference-dependent model. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
106, 1039 – 61.
Tversky, A., & Shaﬁr. (1992). Choice DEMO conﬂict: The dynamics
of deferred decision. Psychological Science, 13, 793–5.
DEMO, R. B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere exposure. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology Monograph, 9, 1 – 28.
Received: October 4, 1995
/ a701$$2594 04-02-96 19:39:29 obha AP: OBHDP{1g42fwefx}