Organizational Research Methods
http://orm.sagepub.com
Conjoint Analysis in Entrepreneurship Research: A Review and Research Agenda
Franz T. Lohrke, Betsy Bugg Holloway and Thomas W. Woolley
Organizational Research Methods 2010; 13; 16 originally published online DEMO 6, 2009;
DOI: 10.1177/1094428109341992
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://orm.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/DEMO/1/16
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
The Research Methods Division of The Academy of Management
Additional services and DEMO for Organizational Research Methods can be found at:
Email Alerts: DEMO://orm.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://orm.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations http://orm.sagepub.com/cgi/content/refs/13/1/16
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at DEMO OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Conjoint Analysis in
Entrepreneurship Research
A Review and Research Agenda
Franz T. DEMO
Betsy Bugg Holloway
Thomas W. Woolley
Samford University
We review conjoint analysis (CA) usage in recent entrepreneurship research to assess how
researchers have DEMO the method to study entrepreneurial decision making. We first provide
a brief overview of the method and present an exemplar study. We next examine DEMO 16
studies published in leading entrepreneurship journals from 1999 to 2008 used CA, highlight
topics these studies have investigated most frequently, and suggest DEMO why studies, in
general, have not used the method with greater frequency, despite its many advantages in
studying decision making. We conclude by suggesting potential future research applications
in an attempt to encourage greater CA DEMO in entrepreneurship research.
Keywords: quantitative research; research design; multiple regression
DEMO research questions in entrepreneurship include how and why some individuals
C (DEMO teams) identify opportunities, evaluate them as viable, and then decide DEMO exploit
them, whereas others do not, and, in turn, how opportunities result in wealth creation (Brush
et al., 2003; Shane & Venkataraman, 2000). Thus, both judgment and decision making rep-
resent DEMO components within the entrepreneurship process (Baron, 2006).
To examine these components, studies have frequently used surveys or interviews to
investigate why entrepreneurs decide to form and resource providers choose to invest in
new ventures. DEMO these methods have advanced the field, they often involve post hoc
DEMO collection requiring respondents to remember and articulate past decisions, which may
DEMO in recall bias and revisionism (Golden, 1992). Thus, other DEMO that overcome
these potential limitations are needed to study these critical issues (Busenitz et al., 2003).
Conjoint analysis (CA) represents one DEMO method. Given its ability to partition decision-
making processes into underlying respondent preferences for specific stimuli (e.g., product or
idea attributes), studies DEMO various disciplines, particularly marketing, have often used CA
since Luce and Tukey (1964) first proposed it. Researchers have also long acknowledged the
DEMO value CA has for entrepreneurship research (DeSarbo, MacMillan, & Day, 1987).
For example, Shepherd and Zacharakis (1997, 1999) reviewed DEMO research, provided a
useful tutorial, and suggested topics where researchers could effectively use CA.
Authors’ Note: We would like to thank the Guest Associate Editors and two anonymous reviewers for their
valuable comments on this DEMO Please address correspondence to Franz T. Lohrke, Brock School of Business,DEMO
Samford University, 800 Lakeshore Drive, Birmingham, AL 35229; e-mail: DEMO
16
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Organizational
Research Methods
Volume 13 Number 1
January 2010 16-30
# 2010 SAGE Publications
10.1177/1094428109341992
http://orm.sagepub.com
hosted at
http://online.sagepub.com
Lohrke et al. / Conjoint Analysis in Entrepreneurship Research 17
Despite both DEMO long-standing recognition of its usefulness and valuable guidance in its
application, DEMO the decade since the articles by Shepherd and Zacharakis were published,
entrepreneurship studies have rarely used CA. Indeed, Dean, Shook, and Payne (2007)
found studies had only used it to test 2% of hypotheses from 1976 through 2004 in two
leading entrepreneurship journals. Although this DEMO in usage may result, in part, from
some studies examining topics not amenable to CA, decision making’s centrality in the field
suggests that opportunities exist for greater CA usage.
Accordingly, we review CA usage in entrepreneurship research published since
Shepherd and Zacharakis’ (1997, 1999) articles. First, we provide a brief overview of
CA. We then present an exemplar study to illustrate how it can aid in studying an issue
(i.e., risk taking) central to entrepreneurship research. We next examine how studies DEMO
lished in leading entrepreneurship journals from 1999 to 2008 have used CA, highlight
topics examined, and suggest reasons why the method has not DEMO used more frequently.
We conclude by suggesting potential future research applications for CA when studying
entrepreneurial decision making.
Conjoint Analysis: A Brief Review
CA represents a specific set of ‘‘decompositional’’ research methods that researchers can
use DEMO study decision-making processes (Green & Srinivasan, 1990). This method enables
researchers to partition respondents’ decisions into underlying preference structures and
decision rules DEMO collecting data as respondents make decisions. Thus, researchers can
assess respondents’ DEMO in use’’ rather than their ‘‘espoused theories of action,’’ which
is frequently captured when surveying respondents about past decisions (Argyris & Schon,
1974). In doing so, CA avoids validity threats such as post hoc revisionism based on social
desirability, faulty memory, or inability to DEMO complex decision processes (Shepherd
& Zacharakis, 1997).
Early forms of CA grew out of the article by Luce and Tukey (1964) DEMO conjoint mea-
surement. Green and Rao (1971), recognizing its value DEMO answering key marketing
research questions (e.g., ‘‘How do consumers choose among products with different attri-
butes?’’), describe a ‘‘full-profile card-sort’’ CA DEMO a precisely designed deck of cards
with different product profiles that they developed from a standard orthogonal experimental
design. As later studies became more DEMO (e.g., adding interactions), however, this
method could sometimes become DEMO, requiring researchers to develop alternative
methods for presenting decision choices to DEMO
Regardless of the specific method used, CA researchers generally present decision DEMO
to respondents, who provide their preferences for products or concepts having DEMO lev-
els (e.g., high/medium/low or red/blue/green) DEMO different attributes (e.g., expected product
reliability or color). Ratings or rankings then serve as the dependent variable and attribute
levels serve as DEMO variables in the general equation
Y ¼ b1X1 þb2X2 þ ... bnXn þ
E
ð1Þ
where b, referred to as ‘‘part-worths’’ in CA, DEMO the relative importance of an attri-
bute, and n equals number DEMO attributes. Readers will note that Equation (1) closely
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
18 Organizational Research Methods
resembles an analysis of variance (ANOVA) or DEMO regression equation. Indeed, in its
simplest form, CA is similar to an ANOVA where attribute levels are dummy- or contrast-
coded. Like other DEMO methods used to investigate dependence relationships (e.g.,
discriminant analysis), DEMO derives a linear function of attribute levels that minimizes error
between actual and estimated values. Researchers can use several software packages (e.g.,
SAS or Sawtooth) to estimate this function (see, e.g., http://DEMO/
education/techpap.shtml).
One unique aspect of CA, however, involves how researchers collect data to estimate this
linear function. With a ‘‘compositional’’ DEMO approach, researchers obtain both inde-
pendent and dependent variables from respondents DEMO then use these data to estimate or
‘‘compose’’ the predictive model. In contrast, with CA, researchers specify levels for each
attribute (i.e., DEMO variable) and then present respondents with scenarios having
attributes with different DEMO of these levels. Because levels are known, research-
ers need only DEMO collect respondent ratings to use as the dependent variable. In doing so, they
can estimate or ‘‘decompose’’ the importance that respondents assign to each attribute
(Hair, Black, Babin, Anderson, & Tatham, 2006). DEMO short, independent variable levels are
set by the researcher in CA DEMO chosen by the respondents with compositional methods. The
advantage with CA is that researchers can learn how important different attributes are to
respondents by DEMO them to make trade offs in real time.
For example, studies DEMO a compositional research approach might ask questions like:
‘‘After reading Firm #1’s business plan, please answer the following:’’
Far below average Far above average
How strong is top management’s industry experience? 1 2 3 4 5
How protected is the product’s niche from competitive entry? 1 2 3 4 5
How high is the industry’s potential market growth DEMO? 1 2 3 4 5
Researchers could then use these ratings DEMO independent variables to predict each
attribute’s overall importance in investment decisions. For example, in a seminal study,
Tyebjee and Bruno (1984) asked venture capitalists (VCs) to consider a current investment
opportunity and rate DEMO expected return, failure risk, industry, company, and management
attributes. Using regression analysis, they found market attractiveness (e.g., growth rate)
and product differentiation (e.g., uniqueness) were significantly related to expected return,
whereas managerial capabilities (e.g., finance skills) and environmental threat resistance
(DEMO, high entry barriers) were significantly related to failure risk.
In contrast, a study using a decompositional, CA method might present the following:DEMO
Firm 1 Firm 2 Firm 3
Top management’s industry experience (years) 0 10 10
Product niche entry barriers High Low High
Potential market DEMO rate (%) 252510
Researchers could present descriptions individually and ask respondents to indicate the
probability they would invest, have them select the one they are more likely to invest in
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com DEMO UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Lohrke et al. / Conjoint Analysis in Entrepreneurship Research 19
from paired DEMO, or ask them to rank all ventures from most or least DEMO for
investment. With CA, respondents only provide the dependent variable (e.g., investment
probability or firm ranking) because independent variables are fixed at DEMO levels.
Researchers could then estimate attribute importance using one of several multivariate sta-
tistical methods (e.g., ordinary least squares [OLS] or logit regression), depending on fac-
tors such as whether the dependent variable is continuous or binary. For example, Shepherd
(1999) presented VCs with new venture descriptions and asked them to rate survival prob-
ability based on each DEMO industry, company, and management attributes. Using regres-
sion analysis, he DEMO that management attributes (e.g., industry experience) were the
most important DEMO related to VCs’ survival probability ratings.
Although CA studies often use the same statistical methods (e.g., regression analysis) as
those using compositional methods, CA offers several relative benefits when studying
decision-making issues. Most importantly, DEMO is specifically designed to assess respondents’
‘‘theory in use’’ by capturing respondents’ preferences as they make decisions. In contrast,
studies using compositional research DEMO have often used retrospective accounts to study
critical decision-making issues. For example, although Tyebjee and Bruno (1984) asked
VCs to assess a current investment opportunity, other studies have often asked VCs to recall
investment decisions and rank criteria they used in making those decisions. Although retro-
spective DEMO are often necessary in organizational research, they may produce biased
results DEMO respondents are unwilling or unable to recall their decision processes.
CA is also unique in that it can be used to examine preferences at DEMO individual and/or
group (‘‘aggregate’’) level. In addition, whereas many DEMO methods require all
independent variables to have the same (e.g., linear) relationship with the dependent vari-
able, CA allows each to have DEMO different (e.g., linear, quadratic, or stepwise) one, making it
extremely flexible when investigating complex decision-making issues (Hair et al., 2006)DEMO
Given these advantages, extant entrepreneurship research has used CA to examine DEMO
key issues, but, historically, studies have examined a narrow range DEMO topics. For example,
Shepherd and Zacharakis (1997) found, with DEMO exception (e.g., DeSarbo et al., 1987),
studies used CA primarily to investigate VC decisions. They (1999) also reviewed VC
studies DEMO concluded that VCs often used different decision criteria when completing a
CA task than when asked about their decisions post hoc via surveys, which the authors
noted provided additional evidence of CA’s advantages in studying entrepreneurial DEMO
making.
With its increasing use across disciplines, recent tutorials have examined DEMO
research design issues related to CA. To highlight some of these issues prior to reviewing
CA usage in entrepreneurship research, we briefly review an exemplar study.2
An Exemplar Study
McMullen and Shepherd (2006) used CA DEMO examine factors affecting whether untenured
assistant professors would take risks inherent in attempting to publish consensus-
challenging research. We chose their study for three DEMO First, although they did not
directly study the entrepreneurship process, they examined a concept (i.e., risk taking) cen-
tral to it. Second, they used some of the most current CA methods to test their hypotheses.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December DEMO, 2009
20 Organizational Research Methods
Third, their research questions should interest many readers, thus making the example more
salient.
McMullen and Shepherd used self-efficacy theory (Bandura, 1977) to develop their
hypotheses, which states that people DEMO to complete a task based both on whether they
perceive they have the ability (i.e., ‘‘efficacy’’) to successfully finish it and they will obtain
an outcome they desire. Thus, the authors posited that when presented with scenarios
having high anticipated rewards (punishments) and low (high) DEMO pressure, professors
would choose the higher (lower) risk research path, especially when told they had high
(low) research skills.
To test DEMO hypotheses, they developed scenarios using various combinations of attri-
butes (e.g., rewards and time pressure) and levels (e.g., high and low)DEMO For example, they
operationalized high (low) time pressure as ‘‘You DEMO two (five) years before your review
for tenure.’’ Because self-efficacy theory posits that efficacy and expected outcomes inter-
act, the authors also designed scenarios to test these interactions. They then pretested these
and used an DEMO Likert scale anchored with ‘‘incremental’’ and ‘‘radical research’’
choices having a 90% and unknown success probability, respectively, as the dependent vari-
able. To DEMO potential autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity in responses, they used
hierarchical linear modeling. DEMO general, results supported their hypotheses.
Conjoint Analysis Use in Entrepreneurship Research
DEMO assess CA use in entrepreneurship research since the reviews by Shepherd and
Zacharakis (1997, 1999), we electronically and manually searched leading entrepreneurship
DEMO as defined by Fried (2003) from 1999 to 2008. We also added Journal of Inter-
national Business Studies because it frequently publishes entrepreneurship DEMO and
has been included in previous methodological reviews (Ketchen & Shook, 1996). Although
this method may preclude some studies in other outlets (e.g., books) or from related disci-
plines (e.g., marketing), DEMO should provide a broad view of recent CA usage within the field.
We searched for empirical studies that examined entrepreneurship process issues and
located DEMO studies, which we coded according to topic and research methods. Results DEMO
vide some general conclusions about recent CA usage in entrepreneurship research (DEMO
Table 1).
First, studies used a large proportion of non-U.S. DEMO multinational samples and were
conducted by a limited number of authors. Second, comparing our results with the results
of Shepherd and Zacharakis (1997) indicates that research continues to use CA most heavily
when examining venture DEMO issues. Specifically, 6 of the 16 studies investigated how
VCs assess DEMO ventures, one studied how entrepreneurs assess VC firms, and two exam-
ined how loan officers assess new ventures. The remaining studies examined other DEMO
decision-making concepts including opportunity exploitation, self-employment as a career
choice, family business succession, and new venture legitimacy. Third, CA usage is trend-
DEMO upward with 37.5% and 63.5% of studies published in the first and second halves of our
review time frame, respectively.
Table 1 also shows that most studies used similar methods and generally used CA con-
sistent DEMO best practices (e.g., Aiman-Smith, Scullen, & Barr, 2002; Karren & Barringer,
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO DEMO December 3, 2009
Lohrke et al. / Conjoint Analysis in Entrepreneurship Research 21
Table 1
DEMO Analysis Usage in Entrepreneurship Research, 1999–2008
Data Data
Authors Sample Topic DEMO Analysis Validation
Shepherd (1999a), 66 Australian
Management venture capital-
Science DEMO (VCs) in
47 firms
Shepherd (1999b),
Journal of Small
Business
Management
66 Australian
VCs in 47 firms
Shepherd and
Zacharakis
(2000), Entrepre-
neurship Theory
& Practice
Douglas and Shep-
herd (2002),DEMO
Entrepreneurship
Theory &
Practice
Shepherd and
Zacharakis
(2003), Journal of
Small Business
Management
Shepherd, Zachara-
kis, and Baron
(2003), Journal of
Business
Venturing
Choi and Shepherd
(2004), Journal of
Management
Choi and Shepherd
(2005), Journal of
Management
59 North Ameri-
can students
involved in
family business
300 alumni from
an Australian
university
53 U.S.
DEMO
66 Australian
VCs in 47 firms
55 lead entrepre-
neurs in the
U.S. business
incubators
51 employees, 45
managers from
suppliers, 32
investors, and
35 customers
VC assessment of new
venture survival
probability based on
DEMO, firm, and
management attributes
VC assessment of future
new venture profitabil-
ity based on entry tim-
ing, industry
characteristics, and
management
competence
DEMO business succes-
sion decisions based on
financial and beha-
vioral sunk costs
Career choice based on
attitudes toward
income, independence,
risk, and DEMO effort
Customer rating of new
venture legitimacy
based on knowledge of
the product, firm, and
top management as
well as product
importance
VC DEMO quality
based on experience
Entrepreneur exploitation
decision based on
product, managerial,DEMO
market, and stake-
holder attributes
Likelihood of stakeholder
support for a DEMO ven-
ture based on firm
attributes
Interview
and
mail
survey
Interview
and
mail
survey
Multivariate
regression
and
analysis of
variance
(ANOVA)
ANOVA and
Hay’s o2
Interview Multivariate
regression
Interview Multivariate
regression
Mail
survey
Multivariate
regression
DEMO
ANOVA
Interview
and
mail
survey
Multivariate
regression
Interview
and
mail
survey
Hierarchical
linear
modeling
Survey Hierarchical
linear
modeling
Internal,
pilot study,
holdout
DEMO,
test–retest
reliability
Internal,
test–retest
reliability
Internal,
pilot study,
test–retest
reliability
Internal,
pilot study,
test–retest
reliability
Internal,
pilot DEMO,
test–retest
reliability
Internal,
pilot study,
test–retest
reliability,
holdout
sample
Internal,
pilot study,
test–retest
reliability
Internal,
pilot study
(continued)
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on DEMO 3, 2009
22 Organizational Research Methods
Franke, Gruber,
Harhoff, and
Henkel (2006),
Journal of Busi-
ness Venturing
Valliere and
Peterson (2007),
Venture Capital
51 European VCs
in 26 firms
evaluating 20
business plans
DEMO Canadian,
U.S., and U.K.
entrepreneurs
with different
levels of
experience
DEMO U.S., 39 Kor-
ean, and 39
Chinese VCs
Table 1. (DEMO)
Data
Collection
Zacharakis,
McMullen, and
Shepherd (2007),
DEMO of Inter-
national Business
Studies
Brundin, Patzelt,
and Shepherd
(2008), Journal of
Business
Venturing
Bruns and Fletcher
(2008), Venture
Capital
91 employees
from 31 small
Swedish firms
114 Swedish loan
officers
Bruns, Holland, 114 Swedish loan
Shepherd, and officers
Wiklund (2008),
DEMO
Theory &
Practice
DeTienne, Shep-
herd, and De Cas-
tro (2008),
Journal of Busi-
ness Venturing
Franke, Gruber,
Harhoff, and
Henkel (2008),
Entrepreneurship
Theory & Practice
Journals examined: Academy of Management Executive, Academy of Management Journal, Administrative
Science Quarterly, American Journal of Sociology, California Management Review, Entrepreneurship Theory
& Practice, Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, Harvard Business Review, International Small
Business Journal, Journal of Business Venturing, Journal of High Technology Management Research, Journal
of DEMO Business Studies, Journal of Management, Journal of Management Studies, Journal DEMO Private
Equity, Journal of Small Business Finance, Journal of Small Business Management, Management Science,
Organization Science, Regional Studies, Research Policy, DEMO Management Review, Small Business
Economics, Strategic Management Journal, and Venture DEMO (adapted from Fried, 2003).
89 entrepreneurs
from the U.S.
high-
technology
companies
51 European VCs
in 26 firms
evaluating 20
business plans
DEMO from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, DEMO
Authors Sample Topic
VC business plan
evaluations based on
similarities between
the VCs and new
venture team members
Entrepreneurs’ evalua-
tion of venture capital
DEMO as possible fund-
ing sources based on
investment agreement
and firm attributes
VC assessment of new
venture survival
probability based on
economic institution
characteristics DEMO the
VC’s home country
Employee assessments of
their willingness to act
entrepreneurially based
on CEO emotional
displays
Loan officer assessment
of small business-loan
requests DEMO on
repayment ability and
other risk factors
Loan officer assessment
of small business-loan
requests based on
similarities between the
loan officer and new
venture DEMO members
Entrepreneurs’ likelihood
of continuing with a
business despite poor
performance
VC decision-making
methods based on
business plan
characteristics and
VCs’ experience
Data
Analysis DEMO
Interview Ordered
probit
regression
Online
survey
Multivariate
regression
and
ANOVA
Interview Hierarchical
linear
modeling
Interview Hierarchical
linear
modeling
Interview Multivariate
regression
Interview Hierarchical
linear
DEMO
Interview Hierarchical
linear
modeling
Interview Logit
regression
Internal,
pilot study
Internal,
inclusion
of an opti-
mum bun-
dle of
attributes
Internal,
DEMO study
Internal,
test–retest
reliability
Internal,
pilot study,
test–retest
reliability
Internal,
pilot study,
test–retest
reliability
Internal,
test–retest
reliability
Internal,DEMO
pilot study
Lohrke et al. / Conjoint Analysis in Entrepreneurship Research 23
2002). DEMO example, most used regression to analyze data, with an increasing number using
hierarchical linear modeling to control for autocorrelation that may result from DEMO mul-
tiple ratings from the same rater. All studies also used one or more internal validation
methods.
In contrast, none assessed external validity by using their resulting models to predict out-
comes with another sample. In DEMO, most examined linear relationships, despite both
CA’s ability to examine other (e.g., quadratic) relationships and the frequent supposition
that these more complex relationships can exist in some entrepreneurial phenomenon
(e.g., perceived risk and DEMO action).
Although these results show that CA usage has increased, DEMO studies in 10 years from 25
journals still represent a fairly low usage rate. Given both the recurring recommendations
for greater CA usage and DEMO field’s permeable boundaries with related disciplines (e.g.,
marketing) that frequently use this method, our findings remain somewhat surprising. Sev-
eral factors related to CA’s limitations and entrepreneurship scholar training may help
explain this dearth DEMO usage.
Conjoint Analysis Limitations
Although scholars have made tremendous progress in the past 30 years refining CA
methods to study decision-making processes, like all methods, it has limitations, which may
have discouraged its use in DEMO studies. Researchers have noted, for example,
that because studies are DEMO conducted in hypothetical contexts lacking actual conse-
quences, the degree to DEMO CA identifies ‘‘true’’ preference structures can be questioned.
In particular, research DEMO experimental economics indicates that when data collection lacks
true (dis)incentives DEMO motivate behavior, respondents may not expend the cognitive effort
needed to DEMO true judgments, resulting in unreliable data (Smith & Walker, 1993)DEMO In an
attempt to address these limitations, recent research has applied DEMO choice
CA to provide more realistic incentive structures (e.g., Ding, DEMO, & Liechty, 2005).
Researchers can also conduct posttests to have respondents rate how closely scenarios
matched their key decision-making criteria (DeTienne, DEMO, & De Castro, 2008).
In addition, similar to laboratory DEMO, CA requires that researchers know a priori
the most critical attributes DEMO levels affecting respondent decision making, introducing
challenges for a relatively young DEMO such as entrepreneurship, where theory development
has often dominated theory testing. DEMO research areas such as VC decision making, where
substantial theory and DEMO results exist, CA has enjoyed frequent use. In other
research areas DEMO focusing primarily on theory development, however, CA will remain
less applicable.
Similarly, the need for researchers to collect primary data may have also reduced CA
usage in entrepreneurship research. As noted above, most studies have sampled VCs and
loan officers, who can be readily identified and contacted. In contrast, finding other impor-
tant groups (e.g., nascent entrepreneurs) DEMO be substantially more challenging. CA’s
requirement that scenarios be developed a priori also precludes using databases (e.g., the
Kauffman Foundation Survey, Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics, and Global Entre-
preneurship Monitor) that have become DEMO data sources within the field in the last decade.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
24 Organizational Research Methods
In addition, CA may have limited applicability when assessing preferences for futuristic
scenarios because high respondent uncertainty makes accurate responses DEMO
Although recent research (e.g., Hoeffler, 2003) has proposed techniques for improving
measurement in these contexts, a strong need remains to improve CA reliability when using
scenarios based on novel situations that comprise many entrepreneurship DEMO
questions.
Entrepreneurship Scholar Training
Beyond these potential limitations, a second major DEMO for limited CA use may be that
entrepreneurship researchers lack training in the method. For example, when Dean et al.
(2007) surveyed both newly minted PhDs and senior entrepreneurship scholars, the former
indicated they had limited ability to use CA. In contrast, the latter rated CA above the scale
midpoint for its future importance to the field. Although scores DEMO well below those for
other multivariate methods (e.g., multiple regression and factor analysis), these results may
signal an increasing recognition that CA DEMO be in entrepreneurship researchers’ tool kit.
To examine this possibility as well as to survey the field’s CA ‘‘research pipeline,’’ we
conducted a DEMO survey by electronically searching presentations at four leading aca-
demic conferences, DEMO Academy of Management, Babson College Entrepreneurship
Research Conference, the U.S. Association for Small Business and Entrepreneurship, and
International Council for Small Business, DEMO 2006 to 2008. Although we could not con-
duct an in-depth analysis similar to the review above, given that only abstracts were avail-
able for many manuscripts, we found 14 additional studies using CA. In contrast to our
journal review, only about one third of these investigated VC topics compared to over half
the journal articles we examined. The remainder DEMO on opportunity evaluation and
exploitation, corporate entrepreneurship, and intertemporal decision making. Although
these represent a small percentage of articles presented at these conferences, these results
are encouraging because they provide some evidence that sustained interest DEMO for using
CA in entrepreneurship research.
Future Directions
We can generally conclude from our literature review that extant studies have underused
CA to examine DEMO decision making, especially given the method’s direct
applicability to many of DEMO field’s most important research questions. To provide guidance
in applying CA to study these questions, we examine several future research avenues.
Shepherd and Zacharakis (1997) recommended several topics where entrepreneurship
studies could fruitfully use CA DEMO drawing from economics (e.g., decision-making ration-
ality), social psychology (DEMO, decision anchoring under uncertainty), marketing (e.g., lia-
bility of DEMO), and extant entrepreneurship research (e.g., strategic decision making).
Subsequently, other researchers have recommended other topics, including corporate ven-
turing (Shepherd & Krueger, 2002) and entrepreneurial intuition (Mitchell, Friga, & Mitch-
ell, 2005). As noted, extant CA studies have examined some (e.g., liability of newness) but
not all of these topics, indicating that several important research opportunities still exist.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com DEMO UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Lohrke et al. / Conjoint Analysis in Entrepreneurship Research 25
Building on DEMO suggestions, we highlight several other areas where researchers could
use CA DEMO study entrepreneurial decision making. In general, CA could potentially revive
research DEMO individual-level phenomenon, an area that has been somewhat deempha-
sized following DEMO disillusionment with the ‘‘trait’’ approach (Gartner, 1990).
Because entrepreneurship occurs at the individual-opportunity nexus (Shane & Venkatara-
man, 2000), however, deemphasizing the former is not a viable option. One issue with pre-
DEMO (especially trait-based) studies is they often proxied decision making with
demographic (e.g., age) or attitudinal (e.g., need for achievement) attributes, resulting in
a decision making ‘‘black box’’ (Mitchell et al., 2005)DEMO With its advantages in examining
respondents’ ‘‘theory in use,’’ however, DEMO may help open this box by providing insight
into entrepreneurial decision making. Thus, we next examine some of these possible topics
within the entrepreneurship process.3
Opportunity Identification
To form and grow a new venture, entrepreneurs must first identify potential opportuni-
ties. These can arise from different sources, including exogenous shocks to an economy or
asymmetric information possessed by different individuals (Eckhardt & Shane, 2003), but
several factors may influence the likelihood that an individual will recognize an opportu-
nity: a person’s access to information from different life experiences (e.g., employment),
social network involvement, personality traits (e.g., creativity), and cognitive ability to
‘‘connect the dots’’ among diverse trends (Ardichvili, Cardozo, & Ray, 2003; Baron, 2006).
Although some agreement exists about factors that may affect opportunity identification,
considerable debate continues about the cognitive processes that entrepreneurs use DEMO iden-
tify them (Shook, Priem, & McGee, 2003). One view suggests that potential entrepreneurs
intend to start new ventures, and, DEMO, they systematically scan environmental trends for
opportunities. Another suggests that individuals DEMO higher ‘‘entrepreneurial alertness’’
can discover opportunities, sometimes without actively searching for DEMO (Kirzner, 1997).
One possible resolution to this debate may reside in the nature of the opportunity exam-
ined (e.g., how codified DEMO tacit it is, see Smith, Matthews, & Schenkel, 2009). Different
entrepreneurs, however, may also use different decision-making processes, and it is in this
latter area where researchers might successfully use CA to DEMO opportunity identification.
For example, to examine the deliberate approach, future research could examine how nas-
cent entrepreneurs respond to changing industry conditions (see Oppewal, Louviere, &
Timmermans, 2000). In addition, research could use CA to examine whether differences
in respondents’ entrepreneurial alertness levels lead DEMO different decisions related to oppor-
tunity identification. Gaglio and Katz (2001) suggested that mixed results across entrepre-
neurship alertness studies, to date, DEMO arise from frequent reliance on post hoc data
collection. Thus, using DEMO to examine issues relevant to this debate appears to be a critical
future research avenue.
Along with this general debate, other factors potentially affecting opportunity identifica-
tion related to knowledge, personality, or pattern recognition could DEMO examined with CA.
For example, Baron and Ensley (2006) studied DEMO nascent and experienced entrepre-
neurs possessed different mental ‘‘prototypes’’ for new ventures that affected their
opportunity-recognition abilities. They content-analyzed retrospective accounts and found
Downloaded DEMO http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
26 Organizational Research Methods
that these groups varied in both the number DEMO type of attributes that they used in decisions.
Thus, future research DEMO use CA to triangulate and build on these results by assessing
how these different groups make trade offs among different criteria when identifying
opportunities.
DEMO Evaluation
After identifying an opportunity, entrepreneurs must forecast, often under conditions of
high environmental uncertainty, the opportunity’s expected value based on both the poten-
tial costs and benefits of exploiting it (Keh, Foo, & Lim, 2002). Key potential stakeholders
must conduct similar calculations when deciding whether to become involved with the new
venture. Costs may include actual DEMO or opportunity costs from foregoing other
options, and benefits may include DEMO or psychological gains (Shane & Venkataraman,
2000).
Research has DEMO how myriad characteristics, including background (e.g., work
experience), attitudinal DEMO (e.g., self-efficacy), psychological attributes (e.g., risk-
taking propensity), and cognitive processes (e.g., biases), affect opportunity evaluation
(e.g., DEMO, Balkin, & Baron, 2002; Ucbasaran, Westhead, & Wright, DEMO). One
long-standing issue, however, involves whether entrepreneurs are willing to pursue higher
risk opportunities than nonentrepreneurs (Simon, Houghton, & Aquino, DEMO). Given that
starting new ventures, in general, requires entrepreneurs to take several (e.g., financial and
reputational) risks, the widely shared DEMO that they have higher risk taking propensities or
risk tolerances than nonentrepreneurs remains intuitively appealing (Norton & Moore,
2006). Empirical results, DEMO date, however, have been decidedly mixed. One explanation
may be that entrepreneurs categorize risks differently than nonentrepreneurs, and, as a
result, they may not perceive themselves as taking abnormally high risks when asked to
DEMO their actions (Palich & Bagby, 1995). In addition, Janney DEMO Dess (2006) sug-
gest that some risk measures may have limited applicability when studying entrepreneurs
because their primary concerns (e.g., ownership dilution DEMO issuing equity), and, in turn,
risk perceptions differ from DEMO in established firms.
A second major research area involves how entrepreneurs use biases or heuristics when
evaluating opportunities. For example, research suggests that entrepreneurs may have a
higher propensity to use some biases (e.g., escalation DEMO commitment) than nonentrepre-
neurs when evaluating opportunities (Baron, 1998). DEMO addition, entrepreneurs and stake-
holders (e.g., VCs) may rely on heuristics or ‘‘mental shortcut’’ when evaluating
opportunities (Busenitz & Barney, 1997)DEMO Although using these heuristics can expedite
opportunity evaluation, which may provide DEMO critical advantage in pursuing the opportunity,
they can also systematically bias the decision-making process.
To date, researchers have frequently used CA to examine VCs’ and, to a lesser extent,
entrepreneurs’ (e.g., Choi & Shepherd, 2004) criteria for evaluating opportunities. Some
have also examined how DEMO biases can affect these assessments (e.g. DeTienne
et al., 2008). Future studies, however, could use CA to study issues related to DEMO taking
and other decision-making biases. For example, one useful distinction that DEMO help resolve
issues about whether entrepreneurs tolerate risk better than nonentrepreneurs involves
dividing risk into perceptions, which may be influenced by how a problem is framed
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on DEMO 3, 2009
Lohrke et al. / Conjoint Analysis in Entrepreneurship Research 27
(e.g., DEMO gain or loss), and propensity, which is the tendency to DEMO or avoid risk
based on previous (e.g., positive or negative risk-taking) experiences (Sitkin & Weingart,
1995). Thus, researchers could use well-established theories (e.g., prospect theory, Kahne-
man & Tversky, 1979) and constructs (e.g., entrepreneurial experience, Ucbasaran et al.,
2008) DEMO design a CA study examining risk taking.
Beyond its ability to reveal preferences, factors related to how respondents complete a
CA task (e.g., speed) may also provide insights into opportunity evaluation. For example,
although rapid task completion could evidence lack of effort, it can also indicate that
respondents used heuristics rather than more rational decision-making criteria (Hair
et al., 2006). In addition, Franke, Gruber, Harhoff, and Henkel (2008) noted that CA also
can be used to assess whether DEMO use compensatory (e.g., a venture weakness can
be counterbalanced by a strength) versus noncompensatory (e.g., a weakness serves as a
‘‘knock-out’’ criterion) decision making in evaluating opportunities. Thus, CA could be
used to DEMO both how entrepreneurs cope with resources not under their direct control and
which resource deficiencies can derail the opportunity evaluation process. In addition, it
could be used to examine how entrepreneurs trade off important future performance
DEMO when engaging in the cost/benefit calculus of opportunity evaluation. For
example, building on social-cause marketing studies (Bloom, Hoeffler, Keller, & Meza,
2006), researchers could examine how entrepreneurs trade off potential ‘‘double’’ DEMO
‘‘triple’’ bottom-line outcomes in socially entrepreneurial firms (Austin, Stevenson, &
Wei-Skillern, 2006).
Opportunity Exploitation
After evaluating whether opportunities are viable, DEMO must then decide how
best to exploit them. One fundamental choice involves whether to pursue or sell the oppor-
tunity. The field has primarily DEMO on the former, which raises a second important ques-
tion related DEMO how entrepreneurs assemble resources necessary to exploit opportunities
(Shane, 2003).
In examining these issues, research has focused on factors that lead to new venture cre-
ation as well as the different organizational forms these DEMO ventures can use (Brush et al.,
2003). Many key DEMO related to opportunity exploitation involve gaining access to critical
resources. Entrepreneurs, DEMO, often face significant hurdles because potential stake-
holders may be reluctant DEMO conduct business with a new venture lacking an established
track record. These ‘‘liabilities of newness’’ issues can result in firm failure, so finding ways
to overcome them represents a critical opportunity exploitation issue (Stinchcombe, 1965)DEMO
To date, however, most research has focused on external liability of newness issues (e.g.,
stakeholder perceptions). Thus, future research could DEMO CA to examine several internal
liability issues noted by Stinchcombe (1965), including the need to develop organizational
routines and establish trust among managers. Trust, in particular, represents a fundamental
issue for entrepreneurship research, in general (Venkataraman, 1997), and organizational
research has identified several different DEMO that can exist (e.g., Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt,
& Camerer, 1998). In addition, research has recently used CA to study DEMO (e.g., Schoder
& Haenlein, 2004), which future entrepreneurship studies DEMO build on to examine impor-
tant issues within the field.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
28 Organizational Research Methods
Conclusion
This article provides an updated examination of DEMO usage in entrepreneurship research
since the reviews by Shepherd and Zacharakis (DEMO, 1999). In general, we found that stud-
ies have increasingly used CA in recent years, and our research pipeline survey suggests this
upward trend should continue.
One central conclusion from our review is that DEMO can enhance entrepreneurship
research by allowing researchers to assess decision makers’ ‘‘theories in use.’’ Thus, future
studies can investigate whether extant findings based on post hoc methods sustain when
tested using CA. In cases where discrepancies DEMO, opportunities exist to resolve disparate
findings. In addition, we suggested a number of potential applications of CA in the study of
entrepreneurial decision DEMO We hope that through our review and recommendations,
we help encourage greater CA usage in future entrepreneurship research.
Notes
1. Given the large DEMO of recent, excellent tutorials covering conjoint analysis, we do not focus specif-
ically on the mechanics of the method, instead referring interested readers to several useful sources (e.g.,
Aiman-Smith et al., 2002; Hair et al., 2006; Karren & Barringer, 2002).
2. We thank an anonymous reviewer for suggesting this approach.
3. Although, arguably, many DEMO these topics can span decision making across multiple steps in the process,
we discuss each within the primary step within which it has DEMO investigated, to date, in entrepreneurship
research.
References
Aiman-Smith, L., Scullen, S., & Barr, S. (2002). Conducting studies of decision DEMO in organizational
contexts: A tutorial for policy-capturing and other regression-based techniques. DEMO Research
Methods, 5, 388-414.
Ardichvili, A., Cardozo, R., & Ray, S. (2003). A theory of entrepreneurial opportunity identification. Journal DEMO
Business Venturing, 18, 105-123.
Argyris, C., & Schon, D. (1974). Theory in practice. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Austin, J., Stevenson, H., & Wei-Skillern, J. (2006). Social and commercial entrepreneurship: Same, different,
or both. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 30, 1-22.
Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of changes. Psychological Review, 84, 191-215.
Baron, R. (1998). Cognitive mechanisms DEMO entrepreneurship: Why and when entrepreneurs think differently
than other people. Journal DEMO Business Venturing, 13, 275-294.
Baron, R. (2006). Opportunity recognition as pattern recognition: How entrepreneurs ‘‘connect the dots’’ to
identify new business opportunities. Academy of Management Perspectives, 20, 104-119.
Baron, R., & DEMO, M. (2006). Opportunity recognition as the detection of meaningful patterns: Evidence from
comparisons of novice and experienced entrepreneurs. Management Science, 52, 1331-1344.
Bloom, P. N., Hoeffler, S., Keller, K. L., & Meza, C. (2006). How social-cause marketing affects consumer per-
ceptions. MIT Sloan Management Review, 47, 49-55.
Brush, C., Duhaime, I., Gartner, W., Stewart, A., Katz, J., Hitt, M., et al. (2003). Doctoral education in the field
of entrepreneurship. Journal of Management, 29, 309-331.
Busenitz, L., & Barney, J. (DEMO). Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations:
Biases and heuristics in strategic decision-making. Journal of Business Venturing, 12, 9-30.
Busenitz, L., West, G., Shepherd, D., Nelson, T., Chandler, DEMO, & Zacharakis, A. (2003). Entrepreneurship
research in emergence: Past trends and future directions. Journal of Management, 29, 285-308.
Downloaded from DEMO://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Lohrke et al. / Conjoint Analysis in Entrepreneurship Research 29
Choi, Y., & Shepherd, D. (2004). Entrepreneurs’ decisions to exploit opportunities. Journal of Management, 30,
377-395.
Dean, M., Shook, C., & Payne, G. (2007). The past, present, and future of DEMO research: Data ana-
lytic trends and training. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 31, 601-618.
DeSarbo, W., MacMillan, I., & Day, D. (1987). Criteria for corporate venturing: Importance assigned by man-
agers. Journal of Business Venturing, 2, 329-350.
DeTienne, D., Shepherd, D., & De Castro, J. (2008). The fallacy of ‘‘only the strong survive’’: The effects of
extrinsic motivation on the persistence decisions of underperforming firms. Journal of Business Venturing,
28, 528-546.
Ding, M., Grewal, R., & Liechty, J. (2005). Incentive-aligned conjoint analysis. Journal DEMO Marketing Research,
52, 67-82.
Eckhardt, J., & Shane, S. (2003). Opportunities and entrepreneurship. Journal of Management, 29, 333-349.
Franke, N., Gruber, M., Harhoff, D., & Henkel, J. (DEMO). Venture capitalists’ evaluations of start-up teams:
Trade-offs, knock-out criteria, and the impact of VC experience. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
32, 459-483.
Fried, V. (2003). Defining a forum for entrepreneurship scholars. DEMO of Business Venturing, 18, 1-11.
Gaglio, C., & Katz, DEMO (2001). The psychological basis for opportunity identification: Entrepreneurial alertness.
Small Business Economics, 16, 95-111.
Gartner, W. (1990). What are DEMO talking about when we talk about entrepreneurship? Journal of Business Ven-
DEMO, 5, 15-28.
Golden, B. (1992). The past is the past – Or is it? The use of retrospective accounts as indicators of past strategy.
Academy of Management Journal, 35, 848-860.
Green, P., & Rao, B. (1971). Conjoint measurement for quantifying judgmental data. Journal of Marketing
Research, 8, 355-363.
Green, P., & Srinivasan, V. (1990). Conjoint analysis in marketing: New developments with implications DEMO
research and practice. Journal of Marketing, 54, 3-19.
Hair, J., Black, B., Babin, B., Anderson, R., & Tatham, R. (2006). Multivariate data analysis (6th ed.). Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Hoeffler, S. (2003). Measuring preferences for really new products. Journal of Marketing Research, 40,406-420.
Janney, J., & Dess, G. (2006). The risk concept for entrepreneurs reconsidered: New challenges to the conven-
tional wisdom. Journal of Business Venturing, 21, DEMO
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: DEMO analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47,
263-291.
Karren, R., & Barringer, M. (2002). A review and analysis of the policy-capturing methodology in organiza-
tional research: Guidelines for research and practice. Organizational Research Methods, 5, 337-387.
Keh, H., Foo, M., & DEMO, B. (2002). Opportunity evaluation under risky conditions: The cognitive DEMO of
entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 27, 125-148.
Ketchen, D., & Shook, C. (1996). The application of cluster analysis in DEMO management research: An anal-
ysis and critique. Strategic Management Journal, 17, 441-458.
Kirzner, I. (1997). Entrepreneurial discovery and the competitive market process: An Austrian approach. Jour-
nal of Economic Literature, 35, 60-85.
Luce, R., & Tukey, J. (1964). Simultaneous conjoint measurement: A new type of fundamental measurement.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1, DEMO
Markman, G., Balkin, D., & Baron, R. (2002). Investors and new venture formation: The effects of general self-
efficacy and regretful thinking. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 27, 149-164.
McMullen, J., & Shepherd, D. (2006). Encouraging consensus-challenging research in universities. Journal of
Management Studies, 43, 1643-1669.
Mitchell, J., Friga, P., & DEMO, R. (2005). Untangling the intuition mess: Intuitions as a DEMO in entre-
preneurship research. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 29, 653-679.
Norton, W., & Moore, W. (2006). The influence of entrepreneurial DEMO assessment on venture launch or growth
decisions. Small Business Economics, 26, 215-226.
Oppewal, H., Louviere, J., & Timmermans, H. (2000)DEMO Modifying conjoint methods to model managers’ reac-
tions to business environment trends. Journal of Business Research, 50, 245-257.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com DEMO UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
30 Organizational Research Methods
Palich, L., & Bagby, D. (1995)DEMO Using cognitive theory to explain entrepreneurial risk-taking: Challenging con-
ventional wisdom. DEMO of Business Venturing, 10, 425-438.
Rousseau, D., Sitkin, S., Burt, R., & Camerer, C. (1998). Not so different DEMO all: A cross-discipline review of
trust. Academy of Management Review, 23, 393-404.
Shane, S. (2003). A general theory of entrepreneurship. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, N. (2000)DEMO The promise of entrepreneurship as a field of research. Academy of Man-
agement Review, 25, 217-226.
Shepherd, D. (1999). Venture capitalists’ DEMO of new venture survival. Management Science, 45,621-632.
Shepherd, D., & Krueger, N. (2002). An intentions-based model of entrepreneurial teams’ social cognition.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 27, 167-187.
Shepherd, D., & DEMO, A. (1997). Conjoint analysis: A window of opportunity for DEMO
research. In J. Katz & R. Brockhaus (Eds.), Advances in DEMO, firm emergence, and growth
((Vol. 3, pp. 203-248). DEMO, CT: JAI.
Shepherd, D., & Zacharakis, A. (1999). Conjoint analysis: A new methodological approach for researching ven-
ture capitalists’ decisions. Venture Capital, 1, 197-217.
Schoder, D., & Haenlein, M. (DEMO). The relative importance of different trust constructs for sellers in the online
world. Electronic Markets, 14, 48-57.
Shook, C., Priem, R., & McGee, J. (2003). Venture creation and the enterprising individual: A review and synth-
esis. Journal of Management, 29, 379-399.
Simon, M., Houghton, S., & Aquino, K. (2000). Cognitive DEMO, risk perception, and venture formation. Jour-
nal of Business Venturing, DEMO, 113-134.
Sitkin, S., & Weingart, L. (1995). Determinants DEMO risky decision-making behavior. Academy of Management
Journal, 38, 1573-1592.
Smith, DEMO, Matthews, C., & Schenkel, M. (2009). Differences in DEMO opportunities: The role of tacit-
ness and codification in opportunity identification. DEMO of Small Business Management, 47, 38-57.
Smith, V., & Walker, J. (1993). Monetary rewards and decision cost in experimental economics. DEMO
Inquiry, 31, 245-261.
Stinchcombe, A. (1965). Social structures of organizations. In J. March (Ed.), Handbook of organizations
(pp. 153-193)DEMO Chicago: Rand McNally.
Tyebjee, T., & Bruno, A. (1984)DEMO A model of venture capitalist investment activity. Management Science, 9,
DEMO
Ucbasaran, D., Westhead, P., & Wright, M. (2008). Opportunity identification and pursuit: Does an entrepre-
neur’s human capital matter? DEMO Business Economics, 30, 153-173.
Venkataraman, S. (1997). The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research: An editor’s perspective.
In J. Katz & R. Brockhaus (Eds.), Advances in entrepreneurship, firm emergence, and growth (DEMO 3,
pp. 119-138). Greenwich, CT: JAI.
Franz T. Lohrke (ftlohrke@samford.edu) is the Brock Family Chair of Entrepreneurship and Chair of DEMO
Entrepreneurship, Management, and Marketing Department in the Brock School of Business at Samford Uni-
versity. His research focuses on liabilities of newness, strategic alliances, organizational slack, and organiza-
tional turnaround and has appeared in DEMO Theory & Practice, International Small Business
Journal, Journal of Business Research, and Journal of International Management. He is also currently co-edit-
ing two books about entrepreneurship research.
Betsy Bugg Holloway serves as the Dwight Moody DEMO Chair of Business and an associate professor of
marketing in the Brock School of Business at Samford University. Her research focuses on services marketing,DEMO
service failure and recovery, and online retailing, and has appeared in such journals as Journal of Service
Research, Journal of Business Research, DEMO Journal of Personal Selling and Sales Management.
Thomas W. Woolley is Chair of the Economics, Finance, and Quantitative Analysis Department and a profes-
DEMO of statistics in the Brock School of Business at Samford University. His research has included the areas of
outlier methodology and power analytic evaluation DEMO research and has appeared in such outlets as Cancer
Research, American DEMO of Public Health, Teaching Statistics, and Social Science Quarterly.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009{1g42fwefx}