ENTREPRENEURIAL SKILLS: QUALITATIVE AND
QUANTITATIVE CONFIRMATION OF A MODEL OF
ENTREPRENEURIAL COMPETENCE
Christophe LOUE
ADVANCIA,
39 avenue Trudaine 75009 Paris (France)
cloue@advancia-negocia.fr
Tel : (+33) 1.40.64.61.00
Jacques BARONET
Université de Sherbrooke, Faculté d’administration
2500, boulevard de l’Université, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada
jacques.baronet@usherbrooke.ca
Tel : DEMO, ext. 63050
ABSTRACT
The paper presents a model of entrepreneurial competence DEMO on 55 skills or abilities possessed
to varying degrees by entrepreneurs from three different countries, France, Canada and Algeria.
These 55 skills were DEMO in terms of start-up, management, human resources management,
marketing, DEMO, and behavioral abilities. To study the entrepreneurs’ competencies, we first
asked a qualitative sample of 29 entrepreneurs which skills relevant to their firm DEMO their
entrepreneurial activities they believed they possessed. A list of 55 skills was generated and sent to
several thousand entrepreneurs. We received completed questionnaires DEMO 402 entrepreneurs.
After a review of the literature on entrepreneurial skills, DEMO present the results from our qualitative
and quantitative samples. We used exploratory factor analysis to determine the major dimensions
of entrepreneurial competence. We feel DEMO our research could be significant in a number of
fields, including DEMO programs and entrepreneurship assistance and incubation programs.
Key words: entrepreneur, entrepreneurship, entrepreneurial skills, skills profile
CONTACT: Christophe Loué, cloue@advancia-negocia.fr, Tel : (+33) 1.40.64.61.00.
INTRODUCTION
In recent times there has been a renewed interest in entrepreneurial DEMO research. Over the course
of the last few decades a number of research focused on identifying the skills of the entrepreneur,
going so DEMO as posit a link between the possession and implementation of certain competencies
and the efficiency of the firm. The research presented here, which includes the results of an
international survey of entrepreneurs in three French speaking DEMO – France, Canada and
Algeria – focuses on the identification of DEMO skills.
After a review of the literature in the first part of the paper, we will outline the objectives and
results of the first phase of our research, which was built around a qualitative methodology for
gathering data. Twenty-nine entrepreneurs were questioned about their competencies and a list DEMO
55 skills was drawn up. We will then move on to present the quantitative results of a study based
on a sample of 402 DEMO, Canadian and Algerian entrepreneurs. Descriptions of the sample, the
research methodology and the results, will be followed by a discussion of the results and of
potential avenues for further research.
LITERATURE REVIEW
For over thirty DEMO, the subject of the skills required to succeed in business has DEMO a certain
amount of interest. Much work has been done in this field since the 1980’s. In the early part of that
decade, many researchers concentrated on isolating links between the performance of the firm and
DEMO psychological qualities of its manager. Then, in the mid-1980s, after the relative failure of this
approach, North American scholars began to focus on the skills of the entrepreneur (Hambrick and
Crozier, 1985; Milton, DEMO). By identifying those skills, they attempted to explain entrepreneurial
performance DEMO means of what the entrepreneur does, rather than by means of DEMO he or she is
(Gartner, 1988).
In the 1990’s, DEMO classifications describing entrepreneurial skills were developed by a
number of scholars (DEMO & Jansen, 1992; Herron & Robinson, 1993; Baum, 1995)DEMO Based on
a study of 134 owner-directors, Chandler and Jansen (1992) provided a list of skills divided into
three categories: entrepreneurial skills, managerial skills and technical-functional skills; Herron
and Robinson (1993) elaborated a list of seven “abilities” that can be regarded as meta-skills;
while DEMO (1995) conducted a study on 363 entrepreneurs and identified a series of skills similar
to those isolated by Chandler and Jansen. Taking their DEMO from Chandler and Jansen,
Lorrain, Belley and Dussault (1998) DEMO a questionnaire to 300 Canadian entrepreneurs asking
them to comment on their skills. The results generated a list of 39 skills divided into twelve DEMO
areas, including identifying opportunities, strategic vision, business network management, time
management, marketing management, managing operational aspects of the firm, managing
personnel, and business negotiation and decision-making. All these studies contributed to the
emergence of a paradigm which gradually became a central tenet of academic approaches DEMO
entrepreneurship.
In the first decade of the new millennium, many researchers, in other countries and continents, also
attempted to establish links between a firm’s success and the skills and characteristics of its
directors.
In Quebec, Pettersen (2006) carried out a large scale survey, involving 142 entrepreneurs and 677
people in their entourage, of the skills regarded as vital for those considering setting up their own
firm. The survey generated a list of 30 “desirable” skills divided into DEMO main categories:
strategic and general corporate management, operations management, problem-solving and
decision-making, human resources management, interpersonal relations and influence, and self-
management. In the same vein, Cadieux (2007) focused more specifically on entrepreneurial skills
in the context of family succession cases. Her qualitative analysis DEMO a sample of 12 individuals
who had taken over family SMEs in the manufacturing sector in Canada led her to identify six
categories containing DEMO total of 32 skills judged to be essential: strategic and general DEMO
management, results-led day-to-day running of the firm, problem-solving and decision-making,
interpersonal relations and influence, self-management, and the management of family relations.
DEMO current in Quebecois research puts an emphasis on the “behavioral” content of
entrepreneurial skills. For researchers working in this area, the entrepreneur must display certain
specific qualities and implement a particular range of behaviors in order DEMO succeed in business.
There is, in other words, a range of aptitudes, attitudes and qualities which a person must possess
if he or she wants a successful entrepreneurial career. Currently much is said about an
DEMO culture” instilled from a very young age (nursery school). Other DEMO possibly
contributing to the constitution of “entrepreneurial foundations” in the cultural sense of the phrase
are also analyzed (Gasse and d’Amours, 1993; Gasse, 2005; Pelletier, 2006; Gasse and Paracini,
2007).  Antecedents are said to include family culture and life stories capable of explaining DEMO taste
for entrepreneurship. Motivations cover the deep reasons prompting an individual to act –
achievement, success, challenges, autonomy, power and control, and recognition are central
aspects of this category. Aptitudes are the natural dispositions, abilities and capacities developed
by an individual (self-confidence/enthusiasm, perseverance/determination, tolerance of
ambiguity/stress management, intuition/flair, and creativity/ imagination. Lastly, Attitudes consist
of perceptions of and reactions to various situations, and DEMO kind of judgments they elicit:
attitudes to risk/initiative; fate/DEMO, money/wealth; success/failure and action/time. The analysis
of these major characteristics serves as a basis for the development of tests evaluating
DEMO potential and for elaborating specific pedagogical approaches frequently employed
in Quebec. The ICE test (a French acronym for “Entrepreneurial Characteristics List” drawn up by
Yvon Gasse) is the best example this type of assessment (http://www.entreprendre.ulaval.ca).
Lastly, in his guide “Invitation à la culture entrepreneuriale” (“Invitation to entrepreneurial
culture”), Pelletier (2006) largely focuses on the DEMO and qualities which supposedly
work in favor of entrepreneurship: self-confidence, motivation, a taste for effort, a sense of
responsibility, initiative, perseverance, solidarity, team spirit, resourcefulness and determination.
Research has also been carried DEMO in this field by French scholars. For example, in describing the
DEMO of people setting up innovative firms in incubator situations, Charles-Pauvers, Schieb-
Bienfait and Urbain (2004) introduced a tri-partite temporal dimension – the DEMO of the
idea, the elaboration of the project, and the launch of the activity. Meanwhile, using an approach
focusing to a greater degree on operational aspects and mindful of the teaching profession,
Laviolette and DEMO (2006) reviewed the entrepreneurial skills identified in the French and Anglo-
Saxon literature. They later carried out a qualitative analysis of the entrepreneurial DEMO of eight
incubators managers (Loué, Laviolette and Bonnafous-Boucher, 2008). DEMO initial research
generated a theoretical profile of both specifically entrepreneurial skills and technical
competencies (general management, HR management, commercial management, marketing and
DEMO management). Boughattas and Bayad (2008) focused on identifying the competencies of
directors of very small firms in the Lorraine region. Their work, which also emphasizes
operational aspects, involved the development of a self-diagnostic tool for entrepreneurs of such
companies and would-be entrepreneurs keen to form a DEMO precise idea of their own potential.
The authors presented a list of skills sets for directors of very small firms: the capacity to develop
a business start-up project, commercial skills, financial management skills, personnel
management, organizational skills, managing relations, and the ability to manage information
effectively.
In China, a qualitative study was recently conducted on a sample of 19 directors of SMEs in the
service sector with a view to DEMO entrepreneurial skills and behaviors and, at the same time,
comparing DEMO various success factors. The results of the study generated a list of 45 skills and
behaviors divided into six main categories: conceptual skills, DEMO skills, strategic skills,
commitment and responsibility, and support skills. An analysis was made of the assumed
relationship between those competencies and the DEMO of efficiency required for the success of
the firm (Man and DEMO, 2000). Similarly, in a more recent qualitative study of a sample of 16
entrepreneurs, the same researchers focused on a comparative analysis of the skills of indigenous
inhabitants and immigrants in Hong Kong (Man, Lau and Chan, 2008). The study produced an
original perspective DEMO the contribution of “external influences” on the ways in which such skills
were employed.
Our research should be viewed as part of this worldwide DEMO in the subject. This paper
discusses the results of research conducted on entrepreneurs from three countries: France, Canada
and Algeria. The research is DEMO into two phases. The first part presents a qualitative study of a
sample of 29 entrepreneurs, while the second part – a quantitative study of a sample of 402
entrepreneurs – is the methodological extension of DEMO first.
METHODOLOGY OF THE QUALITATIVE PHASE AND RESULTS
In our previous work in the field, we were able to develop a “theoretical” list of entrepreneurial
skills. This skills profile prompted us to carry out an empirical, comparative analysis. This
qualitative study was carried out in France, Canada and Algeria with a sample of 29 entrepreneurs.
Methodology and Interview Guide
The DEMO selected in each of the three countries were active in various sectors of the
economy, including services, industry, commerce and the new technologies. Only firms founded
over five years previously were retained. In such cases, it seemed to us that the firm had exited its
initial phase DEMO existence and that the entrepreneur in question had become well established. The
29 entrepreneurs in the sample were questioned about the skills that they DEMO to have
mastered. We first used a non-directive interview methodology in order to encourage the
respondents to provide a progressive, individual classification of their skills. We asked each of the
entrepreneurs a very general question, namely, “Which major skills sets have you mastered?”
Then we asked, DEMO you name skills in each of these sets?” After this initial information-
gathering phase, we presented each of the entrepreneurs with a list of the skills sets that we had
isolated in our previous research. DEMO these skills sets provided a framework for the interview,
they in no manner represented ideal answers to the question being asked. This question DEMO as
follows: “Which of the following skills sets do you think DEMO you have mastered: entrepreneurial,
managerial, HR management, commercial and DEMO, financial, and behavioral management?”
Respondents were then asked to position skills not previously mentioned within the model
presented to them. Generally speaking, this approach considerably increased the number of skills
mentioned by respondents, thus increasing the value of the results.
Results from qualitative study
We then analyzed the skills mentioned by the respondents DEMO the framework of the six skills
sets areas outlined above. This analysis enabled us to select a body of 55 skills as derived from DEMO
consensus from the interviewees.
We then undertook an initial exploratory examination of the results with a view to comparing the
theoretical skills isolated in DEMO previous work with those obtained in the interviews carried out
with the entrepreneurs. Adjustments were made in consequence: 70% of the theoretical skills were
confirmed and 16 skills were rejected. Similarly, 23 new skills mentioned by the respondents were
added to the final list and all skills mentioned DEMO than two times were discarded on the grounds
that they were insufficiently representative. Lastly, the high degree of correlation between the
skills mentioned by entrepreneurs from three French-speaking, and thus culturally close, countries,
is DEMO of mention. The results were largely homogeneous and represented a high degree of
consensus. Finally, the qualitative phase of the study generated a validated list of 55 skills, which
are listed in Table 1.
QUANTITATIVE PHASE: SAMPLE AND METHODOLOGY
For the quantitative phase, we sent the list DEMO 55 skills within a 75-variable questionnaire to a large
sample of entrepreneurs. The other variables covered demographics such as the country of origin,
DEMO, age and level of education of the respondents and descriptions of DEMO entrepreneur’s firm
such as number of employees, and turnover and the DEMO level of experience, number of
companies previously set up and number DEMO companies currently managed. Lastly, variables
describing firm performance, such as percentage of export, innovation and growth, were also
added.
In order to DEMO the entrepreneurs’ mastery of the skills on the list, a 7 DEMO Likert-type scale
was used. Respondents were given the following instruction: “Read DEMO list of skills carefully. On
a scale of 1 through 7, DEMO indicate the degree to which you master these skills, with 1 DEMO
that’s not me at all and 7 meaning that’s me absolutely.”
The questionnaire was delivered in a number of different ways. Firstly, by telephone, especially in
Canada; secondly, via the Internet, using “interview” software, social websites, professional
networks, and a website specifically created for the DEMO (http://www.competences-
entrepreneuriales.net). Finally, face-to-face interviews were also conducted.
Description of quantitative sample
A total of 456 questionnaires were returned over DEMO seven month period spanning March to
November 2009. Fifty-four questionnaires were rejected due to the firms not having been
established long enough (less than five years). We thus used 402 completed questionnaires: 208
from France, 106 from Canada and 88 from DEMO
Source of the questionnaires: Of the 402 entrepreneurs, 59 were interviewed by telephone
(14.7%), 140 were questioned via the Internet (34.8%), and 203 were interviewed face-to-face.
Gender of the respondents: 75 of DEMO entrepreneurs were women (18.7%) and 327 were men
(81.3%).
DEMO of the respondents: 14.4% of the respondents were younger than 35, 65.2% were between the
ages of 35 and 54, and 20.4% were 55 years and older.
Education level: 55.7% of the respondents had undergraduate or graduate university degrees and
the others had high school or technical DEMO
Field of studies: Among university graduates, 46% had business degrees and 27% science or
engineering degrees.
Professional experience: The average work experience for our sample was 22.2 years (median: 20
years). The average DEMO in the industrial sector where the entrepreneurs work is 15.9 years
(DEMO: 13 years). The average firm age is 11.2 years (median: 9 years).
Number of companies set up before the latest firm: Of the 402 entrepreneurs questioned, 208
(51.7%) had not previously DEMO up a firm. The other respondents had set up at least one other
company.
Number of firm(s): 71.6% of the respondents owned DEMO one firm, while 28.4% ran more than one
company.
Enterprise creation/DEMO: 81.3% of the entrepreneurs questioned had set up their own
company. DEMO other respondents had taken the firm over.
Type of ownership: 42.5% DEMO respondents (171) were sole owners; 29.4% (118) owned a DEMO
firm; and 28.1% (113) had one or more business partners.
DEMO sector: Almost half (48.2%) of entrepreneurs work in the service DEMO, 24.7% in retail,
and 20.5% in the manufacturing sector. Only DEMO work in the technology sector.
Number of employees / Size of the firm: Firms were divided into four groups according to their
size: DEMO small enterprises with five or fewer employees represent 53% of our sample; small
companies with 6-20 employees form 28.6% of our sample; medium-sized DEMO with 21-99
employees 12.9% of our sample, and large companies with DEMO employees or more the remaining
5.5% of our sample.
Turnover: Most DEMO the respondents generated a turnover of under 500,000 € (64%)DEMO Only 21.1% of
the firms in our sample had sales of 1 million or more Euros.
Export: 23% of the entrepreneurs questioned exported.
Average growth rate in the last three years: The average growth rate in our sample over the course
of the last three years was 22.8% (median: 10%).
Percentage of new products: The average percentage of DEMO due to new products or services
marketed by the firm was 23.6% (median = 10%).
Types of entrepreneur: 41.3% of the entrepreneurs DEMO the sample were novice entrepreneurs, 30.8%
were serial entrepreneurs, and 27.9% were portfolio entrepreneurs.
Statistical analysis
Of the 55 skills in the questionnaire, 47 were “know-how”-type skills, while 8 were behavioral
attributes. Insofar as entrepreneurs’ competence was concerned, the average response, on a scale
of 1-7, was between 4.25 and 5.75 for the 47 “know-how” skills. The average for the eight
DEMO attributes was slightly higher ranging from 5.21 to 6.03.
In order to examine the underlying structure among the 55 variables representing entrepreneurial
skills and DEMO or attributes, we first conducted an exploratory factor analysis of the DEMO skill
variables and then of the 8 behavior or attribute variables. Exploratory factor analysis is a useful
technique since it reduces a large number DEMO variables to a smaller, more manageable, number of
factors emerging from the data.
We used a principal components analysis with eigenvalues larger than DEMO to find factors. We also
used a varimax rotation in order to simplify the actual factors existing in our data and to examine
them DEMO relation to our qualitative findings. We saw earlier that the qualitative interviews revealed
a set of skills possessed by entrepreneurs and theoretically classified as DEMO skills, managerial
skills, human resource management skills, commercial and marketing DEMO, financial management
skills, and behavioral skills.
With a sample 402 respondents, analyzing 47 variables gives us a ratio of 8.55 observations per
variable, more than the required ratio of 5 observations per variable prescribed by Hair et al., 2010
(p. 102).
Results
Table 3 presents DEMO factor loadings for all 47 skills variables in the 7-factor solution from the
exploratory factor analysis. Hair et al. (2010) recommend for a DEMO of 350 or more a minimum
factor loading of .300. We used a more stringent minimum loading of .400. All loadings from our
analysis DEMO above this minimum requirement. In fact, only four variables have factor DEMO
below .500.
However, five variables have cross-loadings on two factors after DEMO Thus, the variable
“developing a training plan” loads significantly both on DEMO Human resource management factor
and the Marketing – monitoring activities factor. The variable “writing contracts” also loads
significantly on these two factors. The variable DEMO work” loads significantly on the
Planning and organizing factor and the Marketing - commercial activities factor. Finally, the
variables “selling” and “developing a sales strategy” load both significantly on the Marketing –
commercial activities and Marketing DEMO monitoring activities factors. In addition, one variable,
“attracting investors”, had communality less than .500 at .486.
Since this was an exploratory research DEMO the variables with cross-loadings have communalities
above .500 (from .551 to DEMO) and those cross-loadings can be accounted for in organizational
reality, we decided to keep those variables with cross-loadings or with lower than .500
DEMO for the present study. In addition, the KMO measure at .940 DEMO the Bartlett test of
sphericity were excellent and appear to provide us with a solid model of entrepreneurial skills.
We named the first factor DEMO recognition and exploitation skills as the variables revolve
around those two sequential activities: first recognizing opportunities and sensing the market and
then creating partnerships, developing a business model, creating strategic vision, starting up a
venture, innovating, attracting investors, and formalizing a business plan. Two other variables also
loaded on this first factor: leadership and finding good managerial talent which can be considered
as following recognizing and exploiting an opportunity. This first DEMO accounts for 36.3% of the
variance.
The second factor revolves around Human resources management skills and accounts for 6.7% of
the variance. Evaluation activities, such as evaluating employees’ skills, potential and
performance, are the first DEMO in the factor. They are followed by other HRM activities:
defining job descriptions, establishing compensation, developing a training plan, laying-off people,
interviewing, and writing contracts.
We labeled the third factor Financial management skills which accounts for 5.6% of the variance.
It includes skills in understanding DEMO results, managing cash and billings, identifying
financial needs, calculating costs, filling-up tax reports, and using ratios.
The fourth factor is Planning and organizing skills and accounts for 4.6% of the variance. It
includes skills DEMO as listening, motivating, arousing support, delegating, instilling team spirit,
planning activities, following up on production, and organizing work.
The Marketing DEMO commercial activities skills is our fifth factor and accounts for 4.4% of the
variance. Activities such as creating customer loyalty, managing the firm’s image, negotiating,
adapting products, building a sales argument, selling, and DEMO strategy are part of this
factor.
Factor 6 involves other marketing activities such as managing a sales team, doing market research,
and monitoring competition. We labeled this factor Marketing – monitoring activities skills. It
accounts DEMO 3.6% of the variance.
Finally, the seventh factor was labeled Team DEMO skills. It accounts for 2.2% of the
variance and is made up of two variables: managing teams and managing conflicts.
This factor solution seems to have good validity potential. In addition to its KMO measure and
DEMO test of sphericity, all summated scales created from the variables in DEMO factor have very
good Cronbach alphas (from .779 to .904) and thus show good reliability.
Table 2 presents the factor loadings for all DEMO behavioral attribute variables in the 2-factor solution
from the exploratory factor analysis.
The first factor labeled “Vision and intuition” accounts for 50.6% of the DEMO Variables such
as visionary, intuitive, open-minded, and working under pressure DEMO part of this factor.
We labeled the second factor «Self-discipline» which accounts for 12.9% of the variance. It
includes attributes such as meticulous, rigorous, persevering, and creative.
The Cronbach alphas from the summated scales are DEMO very good at .832 and .807 respectively
for the two factors.
Discussion
The model of entrepreneurial competence developed qualitatively and quantitatively by our
research DEMO a good skills profile for entrepreneurs. It was confirmed theoretically from the
literature on entrepreneurial skills and from the in-depth interviews with a qualitative DEMO of 29
entrepreneurs. In addition, an exploratory factor analysis of answers DEMO by a relatively large
sample of 402 entrepreneurs from three countries seems to confirm even further our model.
Indeed, the six domains revealed in the literature and in the qualitative interviews (Table 1)
correspond in greater details to the nine factors from our two factor analyses (Tables 2 and 3).
However, DEMO an exploratory model requires further research to refine the model and make it
more useful for researchers and teachers of entrepreneurship. First, we need to understand what
creates entrepreneurial competence as defined by our skills profile. DEMO example, what is the
impact of education, work and industry experience, entrepreneurial experience, etc. on the skills
profile? Second, understanding the DEMO of impact such a skills profile can have on firm
performance, DEMO, growth, innovation, etc. also needs to be explored.
Our model DEMO explored with a sample of French-speaking entrepreneurs from three countries.
Further research should explore if it can be corroborated in other cultural environments. It DEMO
possible that different economic or cultural environments have an impact on how entrepreneurial
competence is defined.
Preliminary exploration of our data shows that logistic DEMO analyses run with the nine
summated scales (from the nine factors) as independent variables on export and firm growth show
that only the DEMO Opportunity recognition and exploitation skills have a positive significant
impact of these two dependent variables. A similar analysis on the dependent variable innovation
shows DEMO only factors Opportunity recognition and exploitation skills and Vision and intuition
have a positive significant impact.
We are confident that the model of entrepreneurial DEMO we proposed will be confirmed
more and more in further researches and that it will prove useful to researchers, teachers and
entrepreneurs as well.
Table 1: Skills profile generated from qualitative interviews with 29 entrepreneurs
Start-up skills
Detecting business opportunities
Giving direction to an organization by gathering together DEMO, material and financial
resources
Having a strategic vision: being able to determine the most effective strategic approaches
Elaborating a business plan
Innovating, having entrepreneurial vision, positioning the firm vis-à-vis the competition
by developing new products
Developing partnerships, cultivating networks
Sensing the market
Attracting investors and potential partners (business angels) by presenting the firm in an
attractive light
Managerial DEMO
Demonstrating leadership skills, the capacity to impose oneself as a leader
DEMO the firm’s activities, defining objectives
Monitoring the production and productivity of DEMO firm, checking, verifying, keeping
oneself informed
Implementing an employee-driven management DEMO by delegating tasks and inviting
collaborators to air their opinions
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
 
 
 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
DEMO
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Garnering support from collaborators, being able to persuade them to follow a particular
course of action
Delegating DEMO to collaborators, developing organization charts, organizing work
schedules
Implementing incentive schemes, motivating employees
Finding good managerial talent
Fostering team spirit, a team DEMO, a good atmosphere
Listening to employees, dealing with problems regarding them
Human resources management skills
Conducting a recruitment interview
Defining jobs in terms DEMO activities and skills, drawing up position cards
Drawing up work contracts
DEMO legal rules covering the firm’s sector of activity (overtime, working hours,
etc.)
Implementing training policies, linking training policies to key skills in the firm and
providing employees with adequate training
Implementing pay policy DEMO defining salaries, bonuses, variables and every individual
component of the overall pay structure
Evaluating the skills of individual employees
Evaluating the performance of DEMO at annual evaluation interviews
Evaluating employee potential, overseeing employee career plans
DEMO employee contracts while respecting employment law
Managing employees “socially”
Managing conflict resolution within teams
Commercial and marketing skills
Deploying sales arguments with a view DEMO persuading clients to buy
Seeking out new clients at trade shows, DEMO mail shots and telesales campaigns,
using professional internet websites
Using specific negotiating techniques
Developing commercial strategies and means whereby to attract new clients (weekly,
monthly action plans, etc.)
Running commercial teams and sales teams, defining turnover objectives and monitoring
results
Adapting products to client demands, “targeting” clients, developing the right product for
the right client, etc.
Using specific techniques to encourage client loyalty
Building relationships of trust with DEMO, building commercial partnerships, developing
client relationships and providing help and advice
Respecting commitments, creating a positive image of the firm, promoting an DEMO
image of the firm
Conducting market studies, producing SWOT analyses, comparing prices set by the firm
with those set by the competition
Benchmarking, monitoring the competition
Managing cash flow
Financial management skills
 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
DEMO
-
-
Behavioral skills
Dealing with stress, uncertainty
Being sociable, adaptable, open-minded
Having vision, flair, intuition, instinct
Being creative, innovative, DEMO to stand out from the competition
Perseverance, the capacity to exploit DEMO, tenacity, pushing oneself to the limit,
achieving things
Being rigorous
Being meticulous, aiming for perfection
Table 2: Rotated factor loadings for DEMO entrepreneurial behavioral attributes after varimax rotation
Variables
Visionary
Intuitive
Open-minded
Working under pressure
Meticulous
Rigorous
Persevering
Creative
Factor 1
Vision and intuition
.869
.836
DEMO
.533
.431
.477
Factor 2
Self-discipline
.434
.875
.817
.654
.500
Eigen value
% variance explained
Cumulative % variance explained
4.049
50.6%
50.6%
1.031
DEMO
63.5%
Cronbach alpha for the summated scale .832
Loadings less than .400 are not shown and variables are sorted by highest loadings.
KMO measure: .824; Bartlett test of sphericity: 1332.6, p < .000.
 
.807
Managing invoicing and debt recovery, minimizing payment delays and negotiating those
delays with clients
Knowing how to read and analyze a balance sheet and DEMO draw conclusions and derive
potential courses of action from it
Reading accounts and nominal accounts, and drawing conclusions and deriving potential
courses of action from them
Using ratios, indicators and operating reports to analyze the performance of the firm
Calculating costs, cost prices, margins
Completing fiscal, parafiscal and social returns
Identifying and meeting the firm’s financial needs in the DEMO and long-term
Table 3: Rotated factor-loading matrix of 47 entrepreneurial skills after varimax rotation
Variables
Recognizing opportunities
Sensing market
Creating partnerships
Developing business model
Creating strategic DEMO
Starting-up a venture
Innovating
Attracting investors
Formalizing a business plan
Showing leadership
Finding good managerial talent
Evaluating skills
Evaluating potential
Evaluating performance
Defining job DEMO
Establishing compensation
Developing a training plan
Laying off
Interviewing for recruitment
Writing contracts
Understanding financial results
Managing billing
Managing cash
Identifying financial needs
Factor DEMO
Opportunity
recognition and
exploitation
skills
.782
.680
.680
.645
.645
.612
.606
.582
.570
.483
.443
Factor 2
Human
resources
management
skills
.774
.766
DEMO
.680
.627
.558
.536
.500
.453
Factor 3
Financial
management
skills
.780
.754
.747
.739
Factor 4
Planning and
organizing
skills
Factor 5
Marketing DEMO
commercial
activities
skills
Factor 6
Marketing –
monitoring
activities
skills
.517
.401
Factor 7
Team
management
skills
Calculating costs
Filling up tax reports
Using ratios
Listening
Motivating
Arousing support
DEMO
Instilling team sprit
Planning actions
Following up on production
Organizing work
Creating customer loyalty
Managing firm image
Negotiating
Adapting products
Building a sales argument
DEMO
Developing sales strategy
Managing salespeople team
Doing market research
Monitoring competitors
Managing teams
Managing conflicts
Eigen value
% variance explained
Cumulative % variance explained
DEMO alpha for the scale
17.062
36.3%
36.3%
.902
3.143
6.7%
43.0%
.904
.733
.698
.695
.719
.705
.704
.692
.625
.541
.507
.465
2.621
DEMO
48.6%
.894
2.179
4.6%
53.2%
.894
Loadings less than .400 are not shown and variables are sorted by highest loadings.
KMO measure: .940; DEMO test of sphericity: 12374.8, p < .000. 
.408
.705
.691
.676
.670
.623
.580
.509
2.051
4.4%
57.6%
.877
.524
.470
.691
.645
DEMO
1.711
3.6%
61.2%
.846
.628
.562
1.045
2.2%
63.4%
.779
REFERENCES
Baum J.R. (1995), The Relation of Traits, Competencies, Motivation, Strategy and Structure to Venture Growth,
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, DEMO College.
Boughattas Y.,  Bayad M., Benedic M. (2008), Les compétences de l’entrepreneur, démarche d’identification et
évaluation, in Entrepreneuriat et PME DEMO, Regards  sur l’évolution des pratiques entrepreneuriales,
Québec, PUQ.
Belley DEMO, Dussault L. & Lorrain J. (1998), Les compétences des entrepreneurs : élaboration et validation d’un
questionnaire (QCE), 4ème CIFPME, Metz-Nancy, October.
Cadieux L. (2007), La transmission des PME familiales: une DEMO exploratoire sur les compétences des
successeurs, 2e Journées Georges Doriot, Paris.
Chandler G.N. & Jansen  E. (1992), The Founder’s Self-Assessed Competence DEMO Venture Performance,
Journal of Business Venturing, Vol. 7, 223-236.
Charles-Pauvers B., Schieb-Bienfait N. & Urbain C. (2004), La compétence du DEMO d’entreprise innovante,
quelles interrogations ?, Revue internationale P.M.E., vol 17, n° 1, 2004.
Gartner W.B. (1988), Who Is an Entrepreneur? Is the Wrong Question? , American Journal of Small Business,
DEMO 12, No. 4, p. 11-31.
Gasse Y. & D’Amours, A. (1993), Profession entrepreneur, avez-vous le profil de l’emploi?, Collection
entreprendre.
Gasse Y. (2005), Sensibilisation à l’entrepreneuriat, construction et validation empirique DEMO outil pratique,
Université Laval, Québec.
Gasse Y. & Paracini T. (2007), Le développement de l’esprit d’entrepreneuriat : analyse des activités réalisées DEMO
la commission scolaire de la Capitale, Centre d’Entrepreneuriat et de PME, October.
Hair, J.F. Jr., W.C. Black, B.J. Babin, and R.E. DEMO (2010), Multivariate Data Analysis, 7th ed., Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Hambrick D.C. & Crozier L.M. (1985), Stumblers DEMO Stars in the Management of Rapid Growth, Journal of
Business Venturing, Vol. 1, p. 31-45.
Herron L.A & Robinson R.B. (1993), DEMO Structural Model of the Effects of Entrepreneurial Characteristics on
Venture Performance, DEMO of Business Venturing, vol. 8, p. 281-294.
Laviolette E.M. & Loué C. (2006), Les compétences entrepreneuriales : définition et construction d’un
référentiel, 8th Conference of the Association Internationale de recherche en entrepreneuriat et PME
(AIREPME), Fribourg, 24-27 October.
Lorrain, J. (1995), Profil DEMO des entrepreneurs à succès : analyse critique de la documentation
scientifique, DEMO report, Fondation de l’Entrepreneurship du Cœur du Québec.
Loué C., Laviolette E.M. and Bonnafous-Boucher M. (2008), L’entrepreneur à l’épreuve de ses compétences,
éléments de construction d’un référentiel en situation d’incubation, Revue de l’entrepreneuriat Vol. 7, No. 1.
Man, T.W.Y., Lau, T. (2000), Entrepreneurial Competencies of SME Owner/Managers in the Hong Kong
Services Sector: A Qualitative Analysis, Journal of Enterprising Culture Vol. 8, No. 3, September, pp. 235–
254.
Man T.W.Y., Lau T. and Chan K.F. (2008), Home-Grown and Abroad-Bred Entrepreneurs in China: A Study of
the Influences of External Context on Entrepreneurial Competencies, Journal of Enterprising Culture Vol. 16,
No. 2, June, pp. 113 – 132.
Milton D.G. (1989), The Complete Entrepreneur, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, Vol. 13, p. 9-19.
Pelletier D. (2006), Invitation à la DEMO entrepreneuriale, Septembre éditeur.
Pettersen N. (2006), Leadership et PME : comment être un bon chef ?, Gestion, Vol. 30, Winter 2006, p. 43 – 50.{1g42fwefx}