Start-ups, EstablishedFirms, andthe
CommercializationofUniversityInventions
Robert A. Lowe∗
Arvids A. Ziedonis∗
Graduate DEMO of Industrial Administration University of Michigan
Carnegie Mellon University 701 Tappan Street, D3207
5000 Forbes Avenue Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 azied@umich.edu
roblowe@cmu.edu
February 2, 2004
Work in Progress: Please do not DEMO or quote.
Abstract
Previous research on university start-ups has examined conditions that
favor the formation of such start-ups, yet less attention has been paid to
the commercial outcomes of technologies developed by these ﬁrms. In this
DEMO
ﬁrms in bringing inventions to market. We ﬁndthetimetocommercial-
izationforinventionslicensedbystart-up ﬁrmstobecomparabletothatof
established ﬁrms whencontrollingfor technologyarea. Inventions licensed
by start-ups produce higher royalties for the university DEMO average, how-
ever. Wealso ﬁndthatsuccessfulcommercializationofnewtechnologiesby
start-ups in our sample almost always DEMO acquisition by an established
ﬁrm. This ﬁnding suggests a "division of DEMO" between start-ups and
established ﬁrms,wherestart-upsdevelopcertaintypesoftechnologiesand
established ﬁrms provide complementary assets.
DEMO This paper beneﬁtted from comments and feedback from seminar participants at Carnegie
Mellon University, Georgia Tech, the Organization Science Fall Mini-Conference, and Universi-
dade Católica Portuguesa as well as individual discussions with Steven Klepper and DEMO
Veloso. FundingforZiedonisfromtheMackCenterforTechnologicalInnovationattheWharton
School of the University of Pennsylvania is gratefully acknowledged.
1
1. Introduction
Academics characterize entrepreneurs as a peculiar group of individuals. Eco-
DEMO models have focused on risk tolerance as a critical characteristic of en-
trepreneurs (Kihlstrom and Laﬀont 1979). Others have argued that observed
risk tolerance merely represents a cognitive bias in which entrepreneurs tend to
overvalue DEMO they are faced with (Kahneman and Lovallo 1993). As
Kahneman DEMO Lovallo (1993) argue, individuals may be subject to "Bold Fore-
casts," when entrepreneurs apply an "inside view" by focusing narrowly DEMO the
unique details of a speciﬁc asset or project rather than evaluating the potential
of the project given its observable characteristics and the success DEMO of other
projects with similar characteristics (Kahneman and Lovallo 1993). DEMO evidence,
Cooper, Woo and Dunkelberg (1988) found that entrepreneurs’ DEMO of
their potential were uncorrelated with typical independent, or outside, predictors
of success.
To the extent that biased perceptions of success is more DEMO among
start-up founders than managers of established ﬁrms, start-up ﬁrms should DEMO
a lower average likelihood of success than established ﬁrms. This theory suggests
a simple empirical question: do entrepreneurial ventures suﬀer from "Bold Fore-
DEMO"? In this paper, we examine whether a speciﬁc segment of DEMO,
universityresearcherswhofound ﬁrmstodeveloptheirinventions,overvaluetheir
opportunitiestostarta ﬁrm. Westudysuccessratesofinventor-foundedstart-ups
relative to other ﬁrms in commercializing inventions discovered at the University
of California (UC) over a DEMO year period, 1980-1999.
Entrepreneurial success can be measured in several ways, and we ﬁnd sur-
prisingly mixed results. Entrepreneurs and established ﬁrms illustrate DEMO same
rateofsuccessindevelopmentandcommercialization(measuredby ﬁrstsaleofa
product). However, entrepreneurs tend to hold DEMO to development projects years
afterestablished ﬁrms discontinuedevelopment. Wealso ﬁndthat conditional on
achieving ﬁrst sale, start-ups generate greater returns to the university, although
the DEMO majority of successful start-ups were acquired by an established ﬁrm
before the ﬁrstsaleoccurred. This ﬁnding suggests that the university start-up
may serve as an DEMO organizational form for technological development.
Commercialization may critically depend on linkages with established ﬁrms that
own critical specialized or co-specialized complementary assets (Teece 1986).
Lastly, we oﬀer one methodological ﬁnding for the literature on university
technologytransfer. Previousempiricalexaminationsofuniversitystart-up ﬁrm’s
2
success were limited to patented inventions rather than all licensed inventions.
The DEMO population includes licensed inventions that did not have patents is-
sued during the license. We ﬁnd that limiting analysis to patented inventions
introduces a DEMO favoring established ﬁrms in comparing their success rates of
commercialization to that of start-up ﬁrms.
University start-ups provide an attractive sample to examine this DEMO
question for a number of reasons. First, university inventors arguably represent
DEMO epitome of an economic agent that ﬁts Kahneman and Lovallo’s notion of
individuals susceptible to Bold Forecasts. University faculty have a narrow, deep
knowledgeoftheirresearchprojects,butoftenlackindustrialexperienceorknowl-
edge to compare the commercial potential of similar projects in the DEMO
Other university licensees, such as established ﬁrms and start-ups founded by DEMO
outsideparty—ratherthantheinventor— beginwithgreatermarketknowledgeand
utilize an "outside view" in the language of Kahneman and Lovallo (1993). This
setupprovidesanopportunitytocomparewhethertheInsideViewbias,orBold
Forecasts, are a signiﬁcant DEMO in university licensing.
Second, university start-ups have attracted considerable attention for DEMO
technology management and public policy implications. While established ﬁrms
account for a majority of licensees, start-up ﬁrmshaveemergedasaviableand
important vehicle for bringing university technologies to market and have been
successful. Inthebiotechnologyindustryforexample,ChironandGenentechare
twonotable ﬁrmsfoundedtocommercializeinventionsoriginatingintheuniversity
research lab. Google, Akamai Technologies, Lycos, and Inktomi are just a few of
the DEMO pioneers whose technical roots began at a university.
Universitystart-upscarryanimportantpublicpolicyperspective,particularly
since universities often devote their own resources, many of which are publicly
funded, DEMO encourage start-up activity. Universities have increasingly been will-
ing to take equity positions in lieu of royalty payments for intellectual property
licenses. In a DEMO survey, Feldman, et. al. found that 40% of research uni-
versities surveyed held equity investments in new ﬁrms licensing their technology
(Feldman,Feller,BercovitzandBurton2002). Theseequitypositionshavesome-
times been proﬁtable. For example, the University of California received $1.9
millionfromits equityinsoftware ﬁrmInktomi (UC Technology Transfer Annual
Report2000 2001)andCarnegieMellonUniversityheldconsiderableequityinand
aboardseatatsearchenginecompanyLycos,bothwhichissuedIPO’sduringthe
boom of the late-1990’s.
In the next section we brieﬂy DEMO existing studies of university technology
3
licensing by start-up ﬁrms. Section 3 describes the data and our methodology,DEMO
and Section 4 discusses the results of the our empirical analysis. We discuss the
implications of our ﬁndings and conclude the paper in Section DEMO
2. Recent Literature on University Start-ups
Theentrepreneurial ﬁrmhaslongplayedasigniﬁcantroleinthecommercialization
of university inventions, DEMO pursuing product development after existing ﬁrms
failed to introduce a product. For example, in 1945 MIT licensed the rights to
its Van deGraﬀ patent to High Voltage, Inc., a start-up originated speciﬁcally to
developcommercial applications DEMO the MITtechnology. HighVoltage obtained
its license only after General Electric Company had earlier licensed this patent
andsubsequentlyfailedtocommercialize thistechnology(Etzkowitz2002). More
recently, Calimetrics, DEMO start-up founded by a University of California inventor,
wasformedtocommercializeanopticalstoragetechnologyoriginallylicensedbya
companysupplyinglaboratoryequipmenttotheUCinventors(Lowe2001). These
examples suggest that start-up ﬁrms are a viable option for DEMO,
despite these ﬁrms’ limited access to ﬁnancial capital and complementary assets,
factors critical to successful development and introduction of a new technology
(Teece 1986).
Anumber of recent studies have examined the incidence of DEMO tech-
nology licensing to entrepreneurial ﬁrms. Analyzing licensing activity at MIT,
Shane has examined several factors that encourage new ﬁrm formation, includ-
ing opportunity recognition by entrepreneurs (Shane 2000a), the eﬀectiveness of
patents and complementary assets (Shane 2000b), and the existence of techno-
logical opportunities (Shane 2001). DiGregorio and Shane found that not all
universities seem equally capable in identifying new ﬁrms as potential licensees
(DiGregorio and Shane 2003). They also found that campuses with strong re-
searchreputations anduniversities DEMO policies towards inventor reim-
bursement and equity investment encouraged greater new ﬁrm formation. Lowe
found that inventors may form new ﬁrms to commercialize new DEMO due
to diﬃculties in contracting in the presence of tacit knowledge (DEMO 2003).
Other studies have examined the performance of university-based start-ups.
Shane and Stuart found start-up ﬁrms’ ability to attract venture capital, achieve
aninitialpublicoﬀering(IPO),andevensurvivedependsheavilyonfounders’net-
workofpre-existingtiesto ﬁnanciers,suchasangelinvestorsorventurecapitalists
(Shane and Stuart 2002). In DEMO paper more closely related to our study, Shane
4
compared conditions under which MIT inventions were licensed to both start-
ups DEMO established ﬁrms and assessed the subsequent outcomes of these licenses
(Shane DEMO). The eﬀectiveness of patent protection in the technological ﬁeld
of the licensed invention inﬂuenced whether a start-up or established ﬁrm would
be the DEMO Shane (2002) proposes that among inventions for which patents
servedasaneﬀective mechanism for appropriating economic returns, transac-
tionproblemssuchasadverseselection,moralhazard,andhold-upwerereduced,
facilitatingthelicensingofinventionstoestablished ﬁrms. Whenpatentswerein-
eﬀectiveinmitigatingthese"failures"inmarketsfortechnology,contractingwith
anestablished ﬁrmwasmorediﬃcult. Intheseinstances,licensingtoaninventor
foundedstart-upwas more likelybecausethe inventorhadintimate DEMO
thelicensedtechnologyandwasnotsubjecttothesetransactionandinformation
problems.
Shane(2002)arguesthatlicensingtoaninventor-foundedstart-upisa"second-
best" solution since such ﬁrms DEMO more likely to lack assets necessary to suc-
cessfullybringaproducttomarket,suchasmarketknowledge,contactswithcus-
tomers,ormanufacturingcapabilities. Wewouldthereforeexpectthatinventions
licensed to start-ups to perform more poorly than those licensed DEMO established
ﬁrmswithrespecttocommercialization. Indeed, Shanefoundthatinthosetech-
nology ﬁeldswherepatenteﬀectivenesswasweak,inventor-foundedlicenseeswere
morelikelytoterminatealicenseandlesslikelytointroduceanewproductbased
on the licensed DEMO than an established licensee.
3. Data and Methodology
3.1. Sample construction
Theuniversitylicensingprocessprovidesadetailedpapertrailrelatedtoeachin-
ventionprovidesararedetailedviewofthehistoryofaninventionfromdisclosure
through development. However, the detailed paper trail comes with some cost;
thecomplexityofdiﬀerentlicensingtypes,patentingpractices,revenuesreceived,
and other factors requires careful construction and DEMO of the data to ensure
data integrity and minimize potential bias. In this section, we devote consider-
ablespacetodescribing thedataconstructionindetail, inlargepartbecauseour
results appear to DEMO with previous research in this area which may to some
degree reﬂect diﬀerences in how the data is constructed.
We analyze 734 inventions at DEMO University of California disclosed to and
5
exclusively licensed by the university. We deﬁne a start-up as a ﬁrm DEMO
speciﬁcallytolicenseandcommercializeatechnologywithinoursample.Wecon-
tacted licensees directly and utilized secondary sources to verify whether or not
each ﬁrm in our sample was a start-up as part of DEMO broader project at UC.
Our unit of analysis is an invention and is based on a disclosure by a fac-
ulty member to the DEMO Faculty are obligated to disclose inventions for
whichtheybelievethereiscommercialvaluebasedacombinationoffederallegis-
lationandtheiremploymentcontractwiththeUniversityofCalifornia. Thirty-six
percent of the inventions in our sample were licensed by start-up ﬁrms with es-
DEMO ﬁrms licensing the remainder. Start-up licensees can be placed in two
categories of interest. Some start-ups were founded or co-founded by the univer-
sity DEMO, while other start-ups did not include the involvement of the inven-
DEMO Among only those inventions licensed to all start-ups, 72% were licensed DEMO
inventor-founded ﬁrms (or 27% of the overall sample of licensed inventions)DEMO
Many studies of university technology transfer (including some of our own
DEMO) consider only patented inventions. Patent data are attractive in studies
of DEMO partly because they are readily available and can be easily used
to construct variables based on technology class, citations counts, and the like.
DEMO only on patented inventions introduces several potential biases, how-
ever. First, technology areas or industries in which patents are perceived as less
important DEMO successful technology transfer, product development, or commer-
cialization may be underrepresented. Second, considering the patent as the unit
of analysis introduces possible "DEMO" because many inventions are
associated with more than one U.S. patent (biomedical inventions in particular).
Finally, samplingonlyonpatentedinventions overstatesthe rateof successful
commercialization since a license may be terminated prior to patent issue, which
we assume represents a failure to commercialize. This sampling process, as we
will show later in the paper, overstates the rate of success of established ﬁrms
in commercialization eﬀorts since, compared to start-ups in our data, established
DEMO
earlierintheprocess(inmanycasesbeforethepatenthasissued). Inordertomit-
igate these potential biases, we include both DEMO and unpatented inventions
in our analysis2.
1 More precisely, the unit DEMO analysis is a license-invention pair since in a few cases inventions
are licensed at diﬀerent times by diﬀerent ﬁrms. For example, Firm B may license invention i
after Firm A terminated a prior license of the DEMO invention.
2 Virtually all inventions in our sample are associated with a patent application, however.
6
Ourprimaryinterestinthispaperistocomparewhetherstart-upsaremoreor
less "successful" than established ﬁrms at commercializing university inventions.
A DEMO to an invention in this regard represents an eﬀort by a company to
develop and ultimately commercialize the invention. For our examination, we
thencategorizetheoutcomeofalicenseforaninventionasanevent, inthesense
of an event-history or duration model. Each outcome event is then categorized
into one of three mutually exclusive "States":
1. "Commercialized" (licensed with commercial sales, n=188; 25.6%)
2. "Terminated" (licensed but contract was subsequently cancelled or ended
prior to sales, n=290; 39.5%)
3. "Censored"(licensedbutnocommercialsalesnorlicensetermination,n=256;
34.9%)
Table 1 reports the distribution of inventions by whether the licensee is an
established DEMO or a start-up, and the latter is divided into those ﬁrms DEMO
by an inventor and those start-ups for which the inventor had no involvement
("other start-ups"). We identify inventions within State 1 as those for which the
ﬁrmhas paidroyalties totheuniversitybasedonproduct sales. State 2includes
inventionsforwhichthelicensewascancelled,thussignallingthatthelicenseehas
DEMO development and commercialization of the technology.3 We treat
State 3 observations as censored. Inventions in this state include active (non-
terminated)licensesthathavenotreportedcommercialsales. Therefore, DEMO
a commercialization nor license termination event had occurred by the last time
period in our analysis for these inventions.
In some of the regression DEMO, we use payments to the university, such as
fees and royalties, as proxies for economic return on or invention value. A chal-
lenging aspect to coding university royalty data is howto treat minimumroyalty
paymentsthatdonotnecessarilyreﬂectproductsales. Mostcontractsspecifythat
DEMO the patenting process is costly, the university often shops the invention DEMO prospective
licensees to gauge commercial interest prior to incurring patent application fees and expenses.
While the University of California and many other universities incur DEMO application costs
initially, some if not all costs are typically reimbursed DEMO the licensee. Firms usually do not
license inventions when a patent either does not exist, nor when there are no future plans to
apply for a patent. In our sample, a patent was either applied for, or in a few cases, approved
to be ﬁled but the DEMO had not yet been submitted.
3 An alternative possibility for state 2 inventions is discussed in the next section.
7
the licensee pay the minimum of either a ﬁxed dollar amount (minimum royalty)
orapercentageoftotalsales(earnedroyalty). Ifsalesarebelowaparticularlevel,
the licensee pays the minimum DEMO In some cases, the total dollar sales to
datearezero, andthelicenseepaidtheminimumroyaltyinanticipationthat the
productwouldstillbecommercialized(sincethe ﬁrmdidnotcancelorrenegotiate
the licenseterms weassumethat it anticipatesforthcomingsales). Thechallenge
thereforeistocorrectlycategorizelicensedinventionsthatreceivedminimumroy-
alties. DEMO cannot observe whether a minimum royalty payment represents the
caseofsalesundertheminimumamount(butcommercializationhasoccurred)or
simply no sales and hence the invention has yet to be commercialized.
DEMO data challenge applies to a minority of inventions, but is non-trivial.
DEMO, 17.5% of the inventions generated a minimum royalty but no additional
DEMO royalty. We seek to be conservative in our approach while still trying
to best utilize the information we have on the current State of DEMO invention.
Licensed inventions for which a minimum royalty was paid but the license was
subsequentlyterminatedarecodedasterminatedonthedateoftermination. In-
ventionsgeneratingaminimumroyaltyandasubsequentearnedroyaltyarecoded
as commercialized on the earliest date of DEMO royalty. Finally, inventions
generatingonlyminimumroyalties,butnotterminated,arecodedascommercial-
ized on the date of DEMO royalty.
Asecondconsiderationisthatdataintegrityreliesonthetimelinessandaccu-
racy of licensees reporting sales to the university for the purpose of determining
royalty payments. Unfortunately, we are not able to observe instances where
thelicenseeterminatesanagreement(andthereforediscontinuespaymentstothe
university) but continues development and commercialization activity.4 Univer-
sitylicensingisarepeatedgametotheextentthatmultiplerelationshipsbetween
inventors, the university, and outside companies that should mitigate such DEMO
havior. Continued commercialization after license termination would invite both
legalactionifdiscoveredandprecludefuturelicensingwiththeuniversity. Hence,
while there is a punishment mechanism, monitoring is presumably costly and
thisrelationshipoﬀersnoguaranteeagainst ﬁrmsappropriatingtechnologiesfrom
universities.
4 Shane (2002) also suggests this possibility. He points DEMO that established ﬁrms may
licenseaninventiontolearnaboutthetechnology orobtainrelatedknowledge,butsubsequently
terminatethelicensewithoutintenttocommercialize. Weagreethatsuchcasesmayexist. Our
concernwiththisbiasislimitedtotheeﬀectthatactivecommercialeﬀortshavetowardslicense
termination.
8
Inventor founded start-ups (a large portion of our start-up population) may
DEMO
an economic incentive to monitor the licensee (i.e., her company) DEMO the inventor
receivesashareoftheroyalties. Inaddition,start-upsmaydelayreportingproduct
salestopreservecashthatwouldotherwisegotowardsroyaltypayments,believing
theyarelesslikelytobesuedforcontractviolationbytheuniversityiftheinventor
is also a university employee.
3.2. Measures of "Success"
Wemeasurestart-uplicenseesuccessinseveralways. First,weexaminetheprob-
ability of particular events that indicate success, such as ﬁrst product sales or
termination of the project by the licensee. We ﬁrst construct the unconditional
(non-parametric) DEMO functions of licensed inventions for start-up ﬁrms and
established ﬁrms for two types of outcomes, (a) ﬁrst product sale which we char-
acterize as successful commercialization, and (b) termination of a license before
commercial sales which we characterize as a failed eﬀort. We then compare these
DEMO by ﬁrm type. Extending this analysis, we then turn to parametric DEMO
vival analysis, allowing us to control for a number of factors DEMO included in a
graphical examination of survivor functions.
A third analysis examines the overall returns to the university based on the
university’s economic return DEMO to inventions. Because we are not able to
observe commercial sales for each product since many of the ﬁrms in the sam-
ple are DEMO companies and do not report product-line sales, following Sampat
and Ziedonis DEMO use royalty income to the university as a proxy for overall sales
(SampatandZiedonis 2003). Thisanalysisprovides insightintothelevel of com-
mercial success of inventions licensed by start-ups and generates an estimate of
the economic value of licensed DEMO within the sample.
Lastly, we focus on only those inventions licensed DEMO start-up ﬁrms to exam-
ine the relationship between ownership status (whether DEMO start-up continues to
operate independently or was acquired by an established ﬁrm) and commercial-
ization status (whether commercial sales had occurred). This DEMO provides
additional insight into the development and commercialization processes of uni-
versityinventionsbystart-ups.
9
4. Analysis and Discussion
4.1. Non-parametric survival analysis
Webeginanalysiswithanexaminationthehazardsofcommercializedandtermi-
nated inventions using DEMO and Meier’s (1958) non-parametric product limit
estimation. The Kaplan-Meier method provides a descriptive view of the overall
survival functions, and allows us to unconditionally compare start-up and estab-
lished ﬁrm licensees over time. The value DEMO reviewing unconditional survival is
primarilyasasummarystatisticofsorts—tobetterunderstandthedataatahigh
level before applying more ﬁne-grained analysis.
We calculate the probability of occurrence of an event (e.g., commercializa-
tion)DEMO, E ,andthenumber
of observations at-risk, R,attime tl . Anobservationisremovedfromtheat-risk
DEMO if the observation is censored or removed due to the occurrence of another
event (e.g., termination). Spells begin on the date of DEMO ﬁling for the ﬁrst
patentrelatedtoaninvention,andwetrack ﬁrstsaleeventsorterminationevents
through December2002. Forall survival analyses eachspell begins onthe patent
application date and ends on the date a DEMO payment was received (commer-
cialized),thelicensewasterminated,ortheendofthesampleperiodwasreached
(censored).
The DEMO of California historically followed a practice of initiating a
patent ﬁlingonlyafterapparent,ifnotcommitted,commercialinterestbypoten-
tial licensees. This date most closely reﬂects the commencement of the DEMO
cializationprocess,therefore. Aswenoteabove,noteveryinventionisassociated
with an issued patent since a license may be terminated prior to the issuance of
a patent. Each licensed invention DEMO associated with a patent application (or
an approval to ﬁle a DEMO) however, since ﬁrms are unwilling to pay licensing
fees without the assurance of exclusive rights to develop and market the licensed
invention.
The DEMO procedure generates a step-function estimate of daily sur-
vival and is particularly useful for these data since over one-third of the observa-
tions are DEMO This estimator,5 For constructing conﬁdence intervals in the analysis, standard DEMO of the survival func-Hb(t), is expressed as:5
tion are calculated by applying Greenwood’s suggested method (Blossfeld and Rohwer 1995):
DEMO ].
l <tRl(Rl−El)
SE( b(t))= b(DEMO)[ |P
H H
l t
10
E
l
Rl
The maximum survival time in the data is 7585 DEMO (almost 21 years). In-
ventionsexperiencinganon-censoringeventthatremovesthemfromtheriskpool
R are coded as censored DEMO the maximum spell in the data. For example, in the
estimation DEMO the hazard of commercialization, inventions that were terminated
are coded as DEMO at 7585 days. The intuition behind this coding scheme
is as follows: our analysis estimates the probability that an invention i will be
successfully commercialized by ﬁrm j in time t (and vice versa for the hazard of
termination analysis). A termination is an event that signiﬁes DEMO i will
never be commercialized by ﬁrm j during any period. By keeping these ter-
minated observations in the risk set throughout the process, we more precisely
estimate the probability of commercialization. The alternative scheme, coding
terminated licenses as censored on the date of termination, would understate the
pool of inventions that could have otherwise been commercialized, thus biasing
the estimation upwards6.
Following Dechenaux, et al. (2002), we count inventions DEMO which royalties
were paid but the invention was subsequently terminated as commercialized in-
ventionssinceinthisanalysisweareprimarilyinterestedinwhetheraninvention
is initially commercialized.
Figure 1 plots the estimated commercial sale DEMO functions for start-ups
and established ﬁrms. The survival rate for commercialization for start-up ﬁrms
is below the corresponding rate for established ﬁrms throughout the DEMO series,
indicating that start-up ﬁrms are more likely to achieve a ﬁrst sale on a licensed
invention than are more established licensees. We DEMO the results of a test
thatthetwo hazardfunctions areequal attime t whereeachobservation is given
equal weight (Tarone and Ware 1977). We can reject that the survival functions
for commercialization of technologies for start-ups and established ﬁrm DEMO
are identical (P>χ2 =0.013).7
6 One last technical consideration DEMO the treatment of, in the hazard of termination models,
inventions DEMO which a minimum royalty was paid, but no other information on DEMO sale or
license termination exists. As discussed earlier, we code these DEMO as commercialized
on the date of minimum royalty payment in the hazard of commercialization analysis. In the
hazard of termination models however, we consider observations with only minimum royalties
reported as censored on the last date DEMO the sample frame, December 31, 2002, rather than at
7585 DEMO since we have no information for these observations beyond that date.
7 We found similar results when employing diﬀerent weighting of events over time DEMO the
11
b(t)=
Π (1 − )
l|tl <DEMO
(1)
H
Figure 2 plots the corresponding survival rates for termination of the license.
DEMO ﬁrmsexceedtherateforestablished ﬁrmsthrough-
outtheperiod,indicatingthatstart-up ﬁrmsarelesslikelytoterminatealicense
thanareestablishedlicensees. TheTarone-Wareteststatisticindicatesthatthese
survival functions are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (P>χ2 =0.018).
Overall,theKaplan-Meierproductlimitestimationindicatesthatforoursam-
ple,atanygiventime t,start-upsaremorelikelytoachievea ﬁrstsaleforalicensed
invention than are established ﬁrms, while being less likely to abandon commer-
cializationeﬀortsandterminatethelicense. Althoughwehavenotcontrolledfor
factors that may inﬂuence these survival functions, these estimates suggest that,
contrary to some earlier hypotheses, start-up ﬁrms may be at least as eﬀective in
commercializingtechnologiesarisingfromuniversityresearchasestablished ﬁrms.
We explore this possibility further in the DEMO section.
4.2. Parametric survival analysis
The Kaplan-Meier estimation, while informative, does not enable us to examine
some of the factors that may account DEMO the diﬀerences in commercialization
outcomes between start-ups and established ﬁrms. In this section, we undertake
a parametric analysis that controls for time, campus, and technology eﬀects that
may underpin the above ﬁndings.
WespecifyasurvivalestimationwithaGompertzdistribution. Theestimation
isbasedonthefollowinghazardfunctionfortime DEMO (BlossfeldandRohwer1995):
H(ti )= exiβ+γti . γ is an DEMO of the overall hazard function over time based
onthedata. Ineachof ourregressions γ ispositive, indicatingthathazardrates
are monotonically increasing with time.
We condition the analysis on three classes of control variables. First, we in-
cludeadummyvariableforeachinventor’scampustocaptureanycampus-speciﬁc
or geographic eﬀects.8 Werecognizeinventionsmadebymultipleinventorsat
diﬀerentcampuses. Wealsoincludedummiesfortheyearofinventiondisclosure
to capture time-varying eﬀects.
Lastly,wecontrolfortechnology ﬁeld. Wedepartfromthepreviousliterature
on DEMO start-ups since we are examining a broader class of inventions than
onlythoseforwhichapatentwasissued. Previousstudiesofuniversitystart-ups
log-rank and Wilcoxon statistics (not reported).
8 Because no start-up ﬁrms licensed technologies from UC Santa Cruz, we omit this campus
from our analysis.
12
utilizedeitherinternationalpatentclasses(Lowe2003)orbroadtechnologyareas
aggregatingU.S.patentclassiﬁcationsinto ﬁvetechnologyclasses(Shane2002)to
control for technology ﬁeld. In DEMO paper we identify the academic departments
of primary appointment for each inventor to control for technology ﬁeld eﬀects.
A dummy variable = 1 signiﬁes DEMO inventor’s academic department aﬃliation
(e.g., mechanical engineering, physics, or oncology).9
Table 2 reports the results of Gompertz regressions for the competing DEMO of
commercialization and termination of inventions licensed by start-ups and estab-
lished ﬁrms. Models 1a and 1b include only a dummy variable for start-ups DEMO
a covariate. The hazard rate for commercialization is greater than one (DEMO)
at a ﬁve percent level of signiﬁcance Consistent with our earlier Kaplan-Meier
analysis, this coeﬃcient indicates that start-up ﬁrms are more likely to achieve
a ﬁrst-sale from a licensed technology than are established ﬁrms. Similarly, the
hazard rate for termination is 0.697 (and signiﬁcantly less than one), indicating
thatstart-up ﬁrmsarelesslikelytoterminatealicensethanareestablished ﬁrms.
Models 2a and 2b control for the DEMO department of the inventor and
the location of the inventing campus. For clarity, we do not report coeﬃcients
for the department covariates. When we control for campus and department,
the diﬀerence in hazard rates for DEMO by start-ups and established
ﬁrmsbecomesnon-signiﬁcant (0.940), although the hazard rate DEMO termination
by start-ups remains belowthat of established ﬁrms (signiﬁcant to the DEMO).
These results are qualitatively similar when we introduce year dummy variables
in models 3a and 3b.10
Even when we control for campus and DEMO eﬀects, start-up ﬁrms are less
likely to terminate a license than DEMO established ﬁrms. This may reﬂect entre-
preneurial persistence (Cooper, Woo and Dunkelberg 1988), that new ﬁrms are
morelikelytobesingle-product ﬁrms,ortheneedbystart-upstodemonstrateto
9 Comparable DEMO at diﬀerent campuses may have similar but not identical names,
such as "Electrical and Computer Engineering" and "Electrical Engineering and Computer Sci-
ences." We characterized such departments as equivalent across campuses.
10 Interestingly,coeﬃcientsforthedummiesfortheLosAngeles(UCLA),SanDiego(UCSD),
and San Francisco (UCSF) campuses in DEMO 2 and 3 are signiﬁcantly below one, indicating
that inventions licensed DEMO those locations are more likely to be achieve an initial sale than
inventions licensed from the other UC campuses. This may reﬂect the composition DEMO the
pool of inventions available from licensing at these three campuses - all three include major
medicalresearchfacilities,andwesuspectthatahighproportionofinventionsgeneratedatthese
campuses are biomedical in nature. Of DEMO top ﬁve income earning inventions licensed from
the University of California, DEMO, and Columbia universities, most have been biomedical
inventions (Mowery, Nelson, Sampat and Ziedonis 2001).
13
outside ﬁnanciers such as venture capitalists that the start-up is actively pursu-
DEMO commercialization. In any event, the commercialization results suggest that
established ﬁrms DEMO little advantage compared to start-ups in achieving a ﬁrst
sale with university technology.
Sofar,wehavenotdiﬀerentiatedamongstart-upsfoundedbyinventorsforthe
purpose of commercializing their own inventions and other start-up DEMO The
formationofstart-up ﬁrmsbyinventorshasbeenfoundtobecorrelatedwithdiﬃ-
cultiesincontractingwithestablishedorganizationsinthepresenceofinformation
problems (Shane 2002) and speciﬁcally tacit knowledge (Lowe 2003). Because
inventor-founded ﬁrmswouldnotencounterthesediﬃculties,bothShane(2002a)
and Lowe (DEMO) argue that such ﬁrms are more likely to be the licensee DEMO the
presence of such failures in the market for technology. Non-inventor start-up
ﬁrms, therefore, should be similar to more established ﬁrms in this DEMO Po-
tential adverse selection, moral hazard, hold-up, and diﬃculties in DEMO transfer
of tacit knowledge should aﬄict any ﬁrm in which the inventor does not have a
foundingorotherwiseintimaterole. Toexaminecommercialoutcomesassociated
withonlythosestart-upsfoundedbyinventors,weconductedregressionscompar-
ingthese ﬁrmswithall other ﬁrms. DEMO this analysisis reportedinTable
3.
Models 4a and 4b in Table 3 estimate the hazard rates for commercialization
and termination for inventor-founded start-ups and all DEMO ﬁrms, respectively,
againreportinglogoddsratios.Inventor-foundedstart-upsareslightlymorelikely
to achieve a ﬁrst sale (signiﬁcant at the 10% level) than are established ﬁrms.
Moreover, they are signiﬁcantly DEMO likely to terminate a license thananexisting
ﬁrm(0.674,signiﬁcantatthe5%level). Whenweintroducecampus,department
and time eﬀects however (models 5a, 5b, 6a, and 6b), inventor founded start-ups
performsimilarlytoestablished ﬁrms. Forexample,inmodel5a,thecoeﬃcients
onstartupsarenotsigniﬁcantlydiﬀerentfromone(0.973),andthecorresponding
DEMO for all start-up ﬁrms is 0.940 (model 2a, Table 2). Similarly for ter-
mination, model 5b reports that like start-ups inthe aggregate, inventorfounded
start-upsaresigniﬁcantlylesslikelytoterminatealicense(0.594, 1%signiﬁcance
(model 5b) vs. 0.657, 1% signiﬁcance, model 2b, Table 2). These similar results
with respect to DEMO indicate that the factors that discourage termination
by start-ups suggest above operate on both inventor and non-inventor startups.
Moresurprisinglyhowever,isthatweseelittlediﬀerencebetweeninventorfounder
start-ups and all start-ups DEMO to established ﬁrms in the hazard rate for
commercialization. We return to this issue below.
14
4.3. Economic Returns on Invention
Theaboveanalysesshowthatstart-upsappeartobenomore(andnoless)likelyto
achievea ﬁrst-saleeventthanareestablished ﬁrms,butarelesslikelytoterminate
DEMO over time. Overall, these ﬁndings are inconclusive whether start-ups are
moreorlessabletocommercializeuniversityinventionsthanareestablished DEMO
These results are indeed surprising. Speciﬁcally, we are intrigued to the DEMO
thatweappeartobewitnessesastrongeﬀectfavoringeitherthe"BoldForecasts"
argument articulated by Kahneman and Lovallo (1993) nor an adverse selection
hypothesis to the extent that inventors might keep the DEMO most likely or
most feasible to be developed.
We now focus on only those technologies that are commercialized, excluding
terminatedandcensoredobservations,toexaminewhetherinventionscommercial-
izedbystart-upsgenerategreaterorlesserrevenuesthandothosecommercialized
by established licensees. To address this question, we employ a tobit analysis of
total royalties and fees paid to the university related to a commercialized inven-
DEMO WefollowShane(2002)byspecifyingthelogofpaymentsasourdependent
variable, since the distribution of royalties is necessarily DEMO on the left at
zero and because a few inventions have extreme positive values ("home runs").
Our sample diﬀers from Shane (DEMO) since he only examines returns to estab-
lished ﬁrm licensees, rather than comparing royalties generated by start-ups and
established ﬁrms. Results for all DEMO are reported in Table 4 and results for
inventor founded start-ups are reported in Table 5.
All the models in Tables 4 and 5 DEMO for time eﬀects (although we do not
reportcoeﬃcientforyeardummies). Turning ﬁrsttoTable4,DEMO
allstart-ups,we ﬁndthatinthebasemodel(model7)startupsaremorelikelyto
generategreaterearningsonlicensedtechnologiesthanareexisting ﬁrms(weakly
signiﬁcant at the 10% level). When we also control for inventor department
(coeﬃcients not reported), the statistical signiﬁcance on the start-up coeﬃcient
increases to the one DEMO level, however (model 8). Model 9 adds campus
dummies - here we see similar results. The coeﬃcient forstart-ups is 1.04 and is
DEMO diﬀerent from zero at the one percent level. These ﬁndings suggest
thatmeasuredbyrevenuegeneration,start-upsperformbetterthandoestablished
ﬁrms.
Models 10 - 12 in Table 5 report the results DEMO tobit regressions of license
earningsforinventorfoundedstart-upscomparedtoestablished ﬁrms. Thebase-
line model (model 10) reports that inventor-founded start-ups and established
ﬁrmsgeneratesimilarlevelsofearningsfromlicensedtechnologies. Whencontrol
15
variables are introduced (models 11 and 12), inventor founded ﬁrms generate a
signiﬁcantly higher level of earnings, however (at the 10% level DEMO only de-
partment dummies are included, but at the 5% level DEMO campus dummies are
added). Overall,theseresultsprovidesomeevidencethatstart-upsmaybemore
eﬀective in generating earnings than are established ﬁrms.
Finally,model13comparesearningsgenerationbyinventor-foundedstart-ups
withotherstart-ups, excluding established ﬁrms. The variable of interest in this
model is Startup_inventor.We ﬁnd that inventor founded start-ups generate
DEMO lower levels of earnings than do non-inventor-founded start-ups (the
coeﬃcientfor Startup_inventor DEMO,signiﬁcantatthe1%level). Itappears
that inventor founded start-ups, despite the advantage of DEMO participation,
are less successful in earnings generation than are other start-ups.
This comparison of inventor-founded ﬁrms and other start-ups is quite inter-
esting. DEMO may be tempted to cite this as support of Kahneman and Lovallo
(1993). However,weareguardedinmakinganyclaimsatthispointsincethesuc-
cessoftheseotherstart-upsmaybeverytiedtoanadvantageininitialresources.
Ourinterviewsandqualitativeanalysisofinventor-founded ﬁrmssupporttheno-
tion that on average UC inventors often had few resources immediately at their
disposal when founding their DEMO; ﬁnancial resources were often a combination
ofgovernmentfundingprogramsandbootstrapping. Totheextentthattheother
start-upsareoftenventurecapitalistsandindustryveterans,theirinitialresource
endowment DEMO be greater, which is a diﬀerent argument than the theory that
DEMO is driven by biases related to how an inventor values a given market
opportunity. Clearly, this is an issue that demands further exploration.
4.4. The Process of Development and Commercialization
Perhaps most striking suggestion from the DEMO ﬁndings is the apparent lack
of diﬀerence in success rates between start-ups and established ﬁrms. Overall,
we found the probability of successful commercialization DEMO time by start-ups
and established ﬁrms to be similar. While inventions licensed by all start-ups
generate signiﬁcantly greater economic returns to the university than DEMO
licensedbyestablished ﬁrms,thiseﬀectisgreatlydiminishedwhenonlyexamining
inventor-foundedstart-ups. Thusfar,however,ouranalysesoﬀerlittleinsighton
the development-commercialization process. We now turn to a more qualitative
examination of this process.
Our goal in DEMO paper is to gain insight into the success of start-ups, relative
DEMO
to established ﬁrms, in developing and commercializing university inventions. A
related issue is the role that each of these two types of ﬁrms play DEMO industrial
organization. The academic literature has debated this question since the work
of Joseph Schumpeter and FrankKnight. Abernathyand Utterback(Abernathy
and Utterback 1978), DEMO (Christensen 1997), and Henderson and Clark
(HendersonandClark1990)haveeachemphasizedtheoftentenuousandcompet-
itive relationship between industry entrants, many of which are often start-ups,
andestablished ﬁrms,wherebystart-upsmayreplaceestablished ﬁrmsentrenched
in the current industry status, for example.
Wementionedearlierthepotentialimportanceofcomplementaryassetswhich
are in short supply at university start-ups, in particular. As argued by Teece,
the act of innovation is only one means by which ﬁrms earn DEMO rents from
new technologies (Teece 1986). Established ﬁrms with valuable DEMO
assetscanextractmuchoftheeconomicrentsrelatedtotheintroductionofanew
technology. To explore this issue further, we constructed ten year "commercial-
izationhistories"oftheinventor-foundedstart-upsinthesample. Table6reports
all inventions between 1986 and 1995 licensed to DEMO start-ups and
includesthestart-ups’operatingstatusasofJune2002(operatingindependently,
defunct, or acquired by an established DEMO).
Several interesting patterns are consistent with our earlier analysis. First,
virtuallyallstart-upsthatcommercializedaninventionwereacquired,andallbut
two of these ﬁrms were acquired prior to commercialization. Most DEMO
ﬁrms remain in product development with no signiﬁcant sales. Note that the
greatest return to the University of California among the independent start-ups
wasthroughtheproceedsofaninitialpublicoﬀering,DEMO
commercial sales.
The results reported in Table 6 indicate that start-ups and established ﬁrms
mayoperateascomplementary,ratherthansubstitutevehiclesforcommercializa-
tion of some technologies in university licensing. These DEMO are suggestive,
ratherthanconclusive,however,andweplantopursuethisissuefurtherinfuture
research.
5. Conclusion
In this paper we explored commercialization outcomes of university technologies
licensedbystart-up ﬁrms,measuredbythetimeto ﬁrstsale,timetotermination,DEMO
and level of earnings. Utilizing a novel data set of almost two decades of licens-
17
ing activity at the University of California, we have compared these start-ups’
performance with those of established ﬁrms licensing similar technologies.
Two striking ﬁndings DEMO from this initial analysis. First, start-up ﬁrms in
general reach ﬁrst DEMO, on average, more quickly than do existing ﬁrms, however
thisresultappearstobeproducedbytechnology DEMO,thetechnol-
ogyareaswherestart-upsarelikelytooccur. Conversely,start-up ﬁrmsaremore
likelytoexhibitpersistenceinthecommercializationeﬀortthantheirestablished
counterparts - taking longer to terminate a license on average for those that are
terminated. Start-upalso ﬁrmsappeartogeneratehigherlevelsofearningsthan
our DEMO established ﬁrms.
Overall, our ﬁndings suggest that, contrary to the ﬁnding in Shane (2002),
inventor-foundedstart-up ﬁrmsappeartoperformaswell,andbysomemeasures,
at a higher DEMO than the established ﬁrms in our sample. Second, start-up
ﬁrmsgenerategreatereconomicreturnsonaveragethanestablished ﬁrms,DEMO
otherstart-upsperformbetterthaninventor-foundedstart-ups. Thisdatarejects
the Bold Forecast theory that university inventors overvalue commercialization
opportunities ex ante in the decision to found a ﬁrm. At best, there may be
some evidence for an ex post version of the theory: inventors appear to hold on
to technologies without commercial success longer than DEMO established ﬁrms.
This observation is also easily explained by previous ﬁndings that university
inventors license inventions which are on average more tacit and require DEMO
inventoreﬀort(andpresumablytime)todevelop(Lowe2003,Shane2002). Several
alternative explanations may account for this diﬀerence; established ﬁrms may
have more opportunities to use development resources than start-ups and thus
impose a higher threshold for continuing development projects, or entrepreneurs
maybelesswillingtoadmitfailureorabandontechnologicalpursuit,forexample.
Another explanation could arise from the source of DEMO: commercialization
for many university inventions occurs through government grants which impose
DEMO monitoring on commercializationoutcomes, allowing start-ups to endure on
projectswithlittlecommercialprospects. Documentingthediﬀerenceintime-to-
terminationingreaterdetailmayshedgreaterlightontheprocessofdevelopment
DEMO commercialization.
What might explain the empirical diﬀerences between our regression results
andthose of Shane(2002)? One possible explanationis diﬀerences insampling -
weexamineinventionslicensedfromtheUniversityofCaliforniasystemandShane
studies DEMO from MIT. The policies of these two universities are not the
same-UCismorelikelyseekpatentingforaninventiononlyafterithasidentiﬁed
18
a potential licensee willing to reimburse patenting costs. In contrast, our discus-
sionswithlicensingoﬃcersandinventorssuggestthatMITwasmoreaggressivein
seekingpatentprotectionforitsinventionscomparedtoUC,moreoftenincurring
costs before a licensee has been identiﬁed. This policy DEMO may bias the
results toward better expected performance for UC patents in general relative to
the MIT sample (since the UC inventions have been selected by industrial ﬁrms
for commercial potential). It is also possible DEMO established ﬁrms are better
able to "understand" the market and have superior marketing and manufactur-
ingcapabilitiesthanentrepreneurs,andthusselectmorepromisinginventionsfor
commercialization. On the other hand, inventor-founders may have a deeper
technicalunderstandingoftechnologiestheyselectforlicensing. Sincemanyuni-
versity technologies are licensed at early DEMO (Jensen and Thursby 2001), this
understanding may be a signiﬁcant DEMO for the inventor. We have little
reason to believe, therefore, that these diﬀerences would generate a systematic
diﬀerence in the "quality" of DEMO sought to be licensed by start-ups and
established ﬁrms11.
This leads to our second signiﬁcant ﬁnding: when our inventor founded start-
up ﬁrmsdoachievecommercialization,theydosovirtuallyalwaysonlyafterbeing
acquiredbyanestablished ﬁrm. Thisresultsupportsanotherreinterpretationof
the Shane (2002) ﬁndings. As Shane (2002) DEMO out, established ﬁrms have a
competitive advantage in commercializing inventions. Conversely, inventors of-
ten have a comparative advantage in development when the knowledge DEMO
to further develop the invention is largely tacit (Lowe 2003). DEMO propose that
considering the commercial outcomes such as time to ﬁrstsaleortermination
of licenses without a more detailed examination of the mode of commercializa-
tionrevealsonlypartoftheentrepreneurialstory. DEMO
delicatebalancebetweenestablished ﬁrms’comparativeadvantageincommercial-
ization, through superior access to complementary assets, resources, DEMO market
knowledge, and inventors’ comparative advantage in technology development for
particular DEMO of technologies.
11 Anotherexplanationisthediﬀerenceinhowresultsareinterpretedintheirrespectiveanaly-
ses. Shane interprets from his ﬁndings that inventor-founded start-up ﬁrms are less likely to
achievecommercializationandmorelikelytoterminatealicensethanareestablished ﬁrms. This
conclusion is based DEMO negative coeﬃcients for interaction terms of start-up ﬁrms and measures
of patent eﬀectiveness. In the same regression models, however, the "main eﬀect"— that is, the
coeﬃcient on the start-up ﬁrm variable alone— was signiﬁcant and in the same direction as our
coeﬃcients for both the commercialization DEMO termination regressions (see Tables 5 and 6 of
Shane 2002).
DEMO
Entrepreneursfunctionwithina"marketforideas"andmaychooseastrategy
of "competition" or "cooperation" with established ﬁrms (Gans and Stern 2000;
Gans, Hsu, and Stern 2002). DEMO they have licensed a university technology,
entrepreneurs are not "locked-in" over time to pursuing commercialization on
their own, but may later choose to "cooperate," via joint venture, acquisition,
or other linkages DEMO established ﬁrms. Without the entrepreneurial role of
the inventor-founder however, some DEMO would be left to languish, or
licensedbyestablished ﬁrmsthenunsuccessfullycommercialized,asillustratedby
ourintroductoryexamples. Thus,DEMO ﬁrmsmayserveatransitional
organizationforminthemarketfortechnologycommercializationandthisdivision
of labor — development in start-ups, commercialization in established DEMO This
appears to be particularly descriptive of inventor-founded start-ups.
Asmentionedabove,Lowe(2003)showsthatforearlystagetechnologieschar-
acterizedbyasigniﬁcanttacitknowledgecomponent,itisdiﬃculttotransferthe
requisiteknowledgenecessaryforsuccessfulcommercialization. Thesediﬃculties
suggest that inordertocapturea largepartof theeconomic valueof thenascent
DEMO,theinventormustleadthedevelopmenteﬀortherself. Oncesuﬃcient
developmenthasoccurredandbeensignalledtothemarketplace,thenacquisition
may be an eﬀective vehicle for joining the deep understanding of the technology
by the inventor with the market-related complementary DEMO possessed by the
incumbent.
TheoutcomesreportedinTable6supportthis. Inafutureversionofthis
paper,weplantoexplorethishypothesisingreaterdetailbyexaminingthetiming
ofsuchacquisitionsrelativetotechnologydevelopment. Morespeciﬁcally,wewill
examine the relationships between ownership changes and the timing and total
economic return DEMO the inventions in this dataset. We also plan to expand the
data to include more recent years.
Our ﬁndingsatthispointaresuggestiveratherthanconclusive. Assuch,they
are not without DEMO limitations. Nevertheless, our preliminary ﬁndings of-
fer insight into the commercialization DEMO of licensed university technologies.
Entrepreneursappearto"holdtheirown"relativetomoreestablished ﬁrms,par-
ticularly in the commercialization of early stage inventions requiring substantial
technological development. Because a stated DEMO of most university technology
transferprofessionalsisthedevelopmentandintroductiontothemarketproducts
basedonuniversityresearch,ourevidencesuggeststhattheactivepursuitofstart-
up licensing is worthwhile. Moreover, the relationship between established ﬁrms
andstart-upsinhightechindustriesappearstobeacomplicatedprocessandmay
20
functionasa"divisionoflabor,"onethatwouldbecoordinatedbymarketforces.
This conception may provide a better link between theories of entrepreneurship
and the larger industrial organization and technology management literatures.
References
DEMO, W. J. and Utterback, J. M.: 1978, Patterns of industrial innovation,
Technology Review 80(7), 40—47.
Blossfeld, H.-P. and Rohwer, G.: 1995, Techniques of Event History Modeling:
NewApproachestoCausalAnalysis,LawrenceErlbaumAssociates,Mahwah,
NJ.
Christensen, C. M.: 1997, The Innovator’s Dilemma: When DEMO Technologies
Cause Great Firms to Fail, HarvardBusinessSchoolPress,Cambridge,MA.
Cooper, A. C., Woo, C. Y. and Dunkelberg, W. C.: 1988, EntrepreneursŠ per-
ceived chances for success, Journal of Business Venturing 3(2), 97—108.
Dechenaux, E., Goldfarb, B., Shane, S. A. and Thursby, M. C.: 2002, Appropri-
ability and the timing of innovation: DEMO from mit inventions, NBER
Working Paper w9735 .
DiGregorio, D. and Shane, S.: 2003, Why do some universities generate more
start-ups than others?, Research Policy 32(2), 209—227.
Etzkowitz, H.: 2002, MIT and the Rise of Entrepreneurial Science, Routledge,
New York.
Feldman, M. P., Feller, I., Bercovitz, J. E. L. and Burton, R. M.: 2002, Eq-
uity and the technology transfer strategies of american research universities,
Management Science 48, 105—121.
Gans, J. S., Hsu, D. H. and Stern, S.: 2002, When does start-up DEMO spur
thegaleofcreativedestruction?, TheRandJournalofEconomics 33(4),571—
587.
Gans,J.S.andStern,S.: 2000,Whendoesfundingresearchbysmaller ﬁrmsbear
fruit?: Evidence from the sbir program, NBER Working Papers w7877 .
21
Henderson, R. A. and Clark, K. B.: 1990, Architectural innovation: The re-
conﬁguration of existing product technologies and the failure of established,DEMO
Administrative Science Quarterly 35 35, 9—30.
Jensen, R. and Thursby, DEMO: 2001, Proofs and prototypes for sale: The licensing
of university DEMO, American Economic Review 91(1), 240—259.
Kahneman, D. andLovallo, DEMO: 1993, Timidchoices andboldforecasts: Acogni-
tive perspective on risk taking, Management Science 37(1), 17—31.
Kihlstrom, R. E. and Laﬀont, J.-J.: 1979, A general equilibrium entrepreneurial
theory of ﬁrm formation based on risk aversion, The Journal of Political
Economy 87(4), 719—748.
Lowe, DEMO A.: 2001, The role and experience of start-ups in commercializing uni-
versityinventions, in G.Libecap(ed.), EntrepreneurialInputsandOutcomes,
JAI Press, Amsterdam.
Lowe, R. A.: 2003, Entrepreneurship and information asymmetry: Theory and
evidencefromtheuniversityofcalifornia, DEMO, GSIA
Working Paper 2003-09,Pittsburgh,PA.
Mowery, D. C., Nelson, R. R., Sampat, B. N. and Ziedonis, A. A.: 2001, The
growth of patenting and licensing by u.s. universities: An assessment of the
eﬀects of the bayh-dole act of 1980, Research Policy 20, DEMO
Sampat, B. N. and Ziedonis, A. A.: 2003, Cite-seeing: DEMO citations and eco-
nomic value, Conference on Empirical Economics of Innovation DEMO Patent-
ing, Centre for European Economic Research, Mannheim Germany.
Shane, DEMO: 2000a, Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportu-
nities, DEMO Science 11, 448—469.
Shane, S.: 2000b, Technology regimes and strategies for new ﬁrm formation,
Working Paper .
Shane, S.: 2001, Technological opportunitiesandnew ﬁrmcreation, Management
Science 47, 205—220.
Shane, S.: 2002, Selling university technology, Management Science 48(1), 122—
137.
22
Shane, S.andStuart, T.: 2002, Organizational endowmentsandtheperformance
of university start-ups, Management Science 48.
Tarone, R. and Ware, J.: 1977, On distribution-free DEMO for equality of survival
distributions, Biometrika 64, 156—160.
Teece, D. DEMO: 1986, Proﬁtingfromtechnological innovation: Implications forinte-
gration, collaboration, licensing and DEMO policy, Research Policy 15,285—
305.
UC Technology Transfer Annual Report DEMO: 2001, Technical report,University
of California.
23
Table 1.  Survival outcomes by licensee type (start-up vs. established firm)DEMO
Total Start-up Established
Outcome (n=734) (n=267) (n=467)
Commercialized
DEMO
Censored
188
(21.1%)
268
30.1%
278
31.2%
75
(27.2%)
72
26.1%
120
43.5%
113
(18.4%)
196
31.9%
158
25.7%
Outcome
Commercialized
Terminated
Censored
Total
(n=734)
188
(21.1%)
268
(30.1%)
278
(31.2%)
Inventor-founded
start-up
(n=191)
53
(26.6%)
50
(25.1%)
88
(44.2%)
Others
(n=543)
135
(DEMO)
218
(31.5%)
190
(27.5%)
24
Table 2. Competing Risks of Commercialization and Termination. Hazard rates reported (Absolute value of z-stat in parentheses).
(1a)
Outcome Commercialized
(1b)DEMO
Terminated
(2a)
Commercialized
(2b)
Terminated
(3a)
Commercialized
(3b)
Terminated
Startup
1.400
(2.24)**
0.697
(2.62)***
0.940
(0.35)
0.657
(2.68)***
1.134
(0.65)
0.595
(3.12)***
Inventor's Department
Included in models 2a, 2b, 3a, 3b
Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
Riverside
Santa Barbara
San Diego
San Francisco
Year DEMO
0.393
(1.53)
0.499
(1.14)
0.498
(1.18)
0.240
(2.55)**
0.462
(0.92)
0.640
(0.57)
0.253
(2.60)***
0.127
(3.93)***
1.200
(0.36)
1.297
(0.55)
0.643
(DEMO)
1.876
(1.51)
1.519
(0.57)
0.645
(0.71)
DEMO
(0.86)
1.986
(1.68)
0.414
(1.43)
0.547
(0.97)
0.686
(0.61)
0.239
(2.52)**
0.380
(1.10)
0.419
(1.13)
0.276
(2.42)**
0.128
(3.86)***
1.221
(0.37)DEMO
1.482
(0.79)
0.630
(0.77)
2.271
(1.85)
1.732
(0.69)
1.102
(0.15)
1.464
(0.87)
2.082
(1.71)
Included in 3a and 3b, see below
Observations
Log Likelihood
χ2 test statistic
Degrees of Freedom, χ2 test
734
-629.59975
4.9**
1
734
-731.413
7.23***
1
734
-553.5268
157.05***
57
734
-654.52705
171.00***
57
734
-543.27131
DEMO
74
734
-641.79268
186.47***
74
Notes:
(1) Year Dummies included in models 3a and 3b, but no coefficients were significantly different from zero (Hazard=1.000).
In a χ2 test of the year dummies alone in both hazard of comm. and term. models, we cannot reject that the coefficients are jointly=0.
(2)* significant at 10%; ** significant DEMO 5%; *** significant at 1%
(3) χ2 test statistic refers DEMO test that all coefficients are jointly zero
25
Table 3. Competing Risks of Commercialization and Termination, Inventor-founded start-ups only.
Hazard rates reported (Absolute value of z-stat in parentheses).
(4a)
DEMO Commercialized
(4b)
Terminated
(5a)
Commercialized
(5b)
Terminated
(6a)
Commercialized
(6b)
Terminated
Startup_inventor
Inventor's Department
Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
Riverside
Santa Barbara
San Diego
San Francisco
Year Dummies
DEMO
Log Likelihood
χ2 test statistic
Degrees of Freedom, χ2 test
1.376
(1.91)*
658
-558.85568
3.50*
1
0.674
(2.49)**
658
-660.7074
6.68***
1
0.973
(0.13)
0.356
(1.69)*
0.376
(1.53)
0.649
(0.72)
0.267
(2.35)**
0.382
(1.04)
0.551
(0.78)DEMO
0.223
(2.84)***
0.132
(3.80)***
658
-483.41499
154.39***
55
0.594
(2.83)***
1.037
(0.16)
0.540
(3.13)***
Included in models 5a, 5b, 6a, 6b
1.334
(0.53)
1.667
(1.02)
0.735
(0.50)
1.855
(1.39)
1.567
(0.57)
0.823
(DEMO)
1.579
(1.03)
1.812
(1.35)
0.388
(1.49)
DEMO
(1.29)
0.953
(0.08)
0.250
(2.39)**
0.365
(1.06)
0.357
(1.33)
0.227
(2.71)***
0.131
(3.67)***
1.468
(0.68)
2.053
(1.37)
0.761
(0.43)
2.421
(1.86)DEMO
1.994
(0.81)
1.363
(0.45)
1.714
(1.16)
2.027
(1.52)
Included in 6a and 6b, see below
658
-590.29094
147.51***
55
658
-473.91319
173.39***
73
658
-577.47918
173.41***
73
Notes:
(1) Year Dummies included in models 3a and 3b, but no coefficients DEMO significantly different from zero (Hazard=1.000).
In a χ2 test of DEMO year dummies alone in both hazard of comm. and term. models, DEMO cannot reject that the coefficients are jointly=0.
(2)* significant at DEMO; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
(3) χ2 test statistic refers to test that all coefficients are jointly zero
26
Table 4. Tobit regressions of natural log of university earnings
(Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses).
Startup
(7)
(8)
Inventor'DEMO Department
Berkeley
Davis
Irvine
Los Angeles
Riverside
Santa Barbara
San Diego
San Francisco
Year Dummies
(9)
0.552
(1.71)*
0.893
(2.65)***
1.04
(3.12)***
Included in models 8 and 9
-0.21
(0.19)DEMO
-0.163
(0.15)
-1.229
(1.11)
-0.922
(0.93)
3.05
(1.77)*
-0.338
(0.25)
-1.472
(1.56)
-1.379
(1.61)
Included in models 7-9, see notes below
Constant
14.174
(12.52)***
DEMO
(12.32)***
17.083
(11.57)***
Observations
Pseudo-R2
Log Likelihood
χ2 test statistic
Degrees of Freedom, χ2 test
188
0.0683
-392.64316
57.55***
18
188
0.1643
-352.17542
138.49***
58
188
0.1837
-344.01316
154.81***
66
(1)* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
(2) χ2 test statistic refers to test that all coefficients are jointly zero
(3) Each year dummy except 1983-1986 was significant at the 5% DEMO
27
Table 5. Tobit regressions of natural log of university earnings, Inventor-founded start-ups only
(Absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses).
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
Startup_inventor
Inventor's Department
Berkeley
Davis
DEMO
Los Angeles
San Diego
San Francisco
Riverside
Santa Barbara
Year Dummies
0.554
(1.40)
0.738
(1.87)*
0.877
(2.17)**
Included in models 11 and 12
-0.029
(0.02)
0.033
(0.03)
-0.873
(0.74)
-1.408
(1.32)
-1.366
(1.34)
-1.506
(1.71)
3.318
(1.81)*
-0.348
(0.25)
Included in models 10-12, see notes below
-2.956
(4.77)***
Included
-1.65
(0.86)
-3.435
(1.60)
-7.434
(3.39)***
-2.107
(1.24)
-1.938
(1.11)
-1.712
(DEMO)
Included
Constant
Observations
Pseudo-R2
Log Likelihood
χ2 test statistic
Degrees of Freedom, χ2 test
14.174
(12.20)**
166
0.7000
-350.70274
52.78***
18
DEMO
(11.81)**
166
0.1765
-310.54849
133.09***
58
(1)* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
(2) DEMO test statistic refers to test that all coefficients are jointly zero
(DEMO) Each year dummy except 1983-1986 was significant at the 5% level.
DEMO
(11.68)**
166
0.1965
-302.98058
148.22***
66
14.182
(6.28)**
75
0.5167
-66.098882
141.32***
47
28
29
30
Table 6.  Royalties by inventor-founded firms at the University of California on inventions disclosed between 1986-1995
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
DEMO
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
DEMO
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
Industry
Biotechnology
Pharmaceuticals
Medical devices
Medical devices
Pharmaceuticals
Biotechnology
Pharmaceuticals
Advanced materials
Biotechnology
Pharmaceuticals
Advanced DEMO
Pharmaceuticals
Pharmaceuticals
Medical devices
Computer hardware
Pharmaceuticals
Medical devices
Pharmaceuticals
Biotech/Pharmaceuticals
Biotech/Pharmaceuticals
Pharmaceuticals
Biotechnology
Biotechnology
Pharmaceuticals
Medical devices
Pharmaceuticals
Pharmaceuticals
Pharmaceuticals
Biotech/DEMO
Pharmaceuticals
Pharmaceuticals
Biotechnology
Software algorithm
Biotechnology
Biotechnology
Computer hardware
Medical devices
Biotechnology
Biotechnology
Advanced materials
Biotechnology
Test and Measurement
Biotechnology
Ownership
Acquired
Acquired
Acquired
DEMO
Acquired
Acquired
Acquired
Acquired
Acquired
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
DEMO
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Defunct
Defunct
Defunct
Defunct
Product Status
Commercial Sales1
Commercial Sales
Commercial Sales
Commercial Sales
DEMO Sales
Commercial Sales
Biotech tool integrated in
parent's platform
Commercial Sales
Commercial Sales
In development
In development
In development2
Early clinical trials
In DEMO
Working prototype
Early clinical trials
In development
Early clinical trials
Early clinical trials
Stem cell registry, Clinical
trials
In development
In development
In development
Clinical trials
Commercial Sales
In development
Early clinical trials
In development
Early DEMO trials
In development
In development
Commercial
Sales/Sublicensing
Sublicensing
Early clinical trials
In development
In development
Commercial Sales
Research partnerships
In development
(a)
Earned +
Minimum +
Milestone
$    305,386.72
$ 1,013,735.38
$      13,000.00
$    287,549.93
$      91,249.07
$      17,851.02
$      75,000.00
$    525,000.00
$    140,945.32
$                -
$                -
$      85,752.00
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$      10,000.00
$                -
$                -
$                -
$      58,333.00
$        2,100.00
$        6,000.00
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$      80,000.00
$      14,411.79
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$        6,000.00
$                -
$                -
$                -
(b)
Earned +
Minimum
$    305,386.72
$ 1,013,735.38
$      13,000.00
$    267,549.93
$      26,249.07
$      17,851.02
$                -
$    525,000.00
$    140,945.32
$                -
$                -
$      85,752.00
$                -
$                -
$                -
DEMO                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$      10,000.00
$                -
$                -
DEMO                -
$                -
$        2,100.00
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                DEMO
$                -
$                -
$      80,000.00
$      14,411.79
$                -
$                -
DEMO                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$        6,000.00
$                -
$                DEMO
$                -
(c)
Earned
Royalties
$    305,386.72
$ 1,013,735.38
$                -
$    267,549.93
DEMO      26,249.07
$      17,851.02
$                -
$    100,000.00
DEMO           945.32
$                -
$                DEMO
$      85,752.00
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                DEMO
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$        DEMO,100.00
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$      14,411.79
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
$                -
DEMO                -
$                -
(d)
Royalties on
final products
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
N
N
N
DEMO
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
DEMO
N
Y
N
N
N
Note:  Royalties reported gross of delayed or installment payments through July 2002
(1) Proportion ($272,450) DEMO earned royalties is equity cash out
(2) Entire $85,752 of earned royalties is equity cash out
31{1g42fwefx}