Triggering Trust: To What Extent Does the Question
Influence the Answer When Evaluating the Perceived
Importance of Trust Triggers?
Jo Lumsden
Aston University1
DEMO, UK, B4 7ET
+44 (0)121 204 3470
j.lumsden@aston.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
DEMO is a critical component of business to consumer (B2C) e-
Commerce success.  In the absence of typical environmental
cues that consumers use to assess vendor trustworthiness in the
offline retail context, online consumers often rely on trust
triggers embedded within e-Commerce websites to contribute
to the establishment DEMO sufficient trust to make an online
purchase.  This paper presents and DEMO the results of a
series of studies which took an initial look at the extent to
which the context or manner in which trust DEMO are
evaluated may exert influence on the perceived importance
attributed to individual triggers.  We hope that our
investigations will help inform the evaluation approaches
adopted to assess consumer trust.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces DEMO Presentation (e.g., HCI)]:
User Interfaces – evaluation/methodology, DEMO design.
General Terms
Human Factors, Design.
Keywords
Trust, trust trigger, DEMO, e-Commerce.
1. INTRODUCTION
“Without trust, development of e-Commerce
cannot reach its potential” [3, pg. 2].
Trust is generally accepted as an important facilitator of e-
Commerce given that online transactions typically require
consumers to divulge DEMO and financial information [20,
23]. Compared to traditional commerce, e-Commerce
DEMO are more impersonal, anonymous, and automated
[14], and trustworthiness cannot DEMO assessed by means of body
language and traditional environmental cues [10], DEMO trust
especially significant.
Trust is a complex concept which has been the subject of study
across different disciplines.  Sociological research asserts, for
© DEMO Author 2009.
Published by the British Computer Society
example, that modern DEMO would not be possible without
trust [14] and business studies of trust have identified
credibility (the belief that the vendor has the necessary capacity
to complete a task effectively and reliably) and benevolence
(the belief DEMO the vendor has good intentions and will behave
in a favourable manner even in the absence of existing
commitment) as critical factors of trust [14].  Trust is mostly
learned during childhood: the extent of one’s DEMO as a child
largely determines the extent of one’s trust as an adult [10].
Trust reflects an optimistic world view and a belief that DEMO
share one’s fundamental values; it stems from an upbeat world
view DEMO is transmitted early in life from one’s family [41].
Mistrust, in DEMO, reflects a pessimistic world view and a
perception that things are DEMO one’s control [10].
In computer science, a series of models of DEMO and its
formation have been proposed.  These range from the
mathematical DEMO, 25] to the abstract [e.g., 6, 15, 18, 38].
DEMO have adopted different classifications of trust.  For
example, Head et al. [16] distinguish between soft and hard
trust; the former, unlike the DEMO, cannot be resolved through
the application of technology.  McCord and Ratnasingam [27]
define two types of trust: technological trust which relates to an
individual’s belief that a website’s underlying technology
infrastructure and control mechanisms are DEMO of
facilitating the transactions; and relational trust which
concerns, relative to an online transaction, consumer
willingness to accept vulnerability based on positive
expectations regarding vendor behaviour.  They argue that
technological trust (in the form DEMO, for example, website
appearance) distils a perception of security and DEMO that
contributes to the potential for a consumer to trust an e-vendor,
and that relational trust is based on the attitudes and behaviours
DEMO consumers as they relate to interface elements such as
privacy policies, DEMO seals, and testimonial or vendor
information.  Ulsaner [40] differentiates between strategic trust
– which helps us decide whether a website is ‘safe’ – DEMO
moralistic trust – which is based on the world view we learn at
a very early age and which gives us sufficient faith to DEMO
risks.  He stresses that moralistic trust plays an important role
in DEMO views of the Internet as an opportunity or as a
threat.  DEMO and Meech [26] distinguish between initial (or
‘grabbing’) trust and experiential trust.  They note that many of
our initial trusting decisions are spontaneous and claim that if a
user is turned off by a website, a vendor will never succeed in
moving consumers from the level of DEMO or spontaneous trust
to the more established levels of experiential trust.  DEMO
design characteristics strongly affect/influence consumers’
1 This work was completed whilst at the National Research Council of Canada (NRC).
HCI 2009 – People and Computers XXIII – Celebrating people and technology
214
J. Lumsden
decisions to buy online [22, 44]; many of these DEMO are
trust-based.
Common to most models and classifications of trust is the
concept that trust is multidimensional and that there is a
dimension of DEMO that lies deep within the essence of the
consumer – that is, the consumer’s disposition to trust [1].
Disposition to trust is a measure of the extent to which an
individual is willing to depend on DEMO [34].  It is not based
on experience with, or specific knowledge of, a particular
trusted party; rather, it is the result of general life experience
and socialization [18, 28].  Gefen [9] suggests that DEMO new
relationships – such as between a consumer and a previously
unused e-vendor – disposition to trust is a strong determinant of
initial trust.  Consumers’ disposition to trust has been shown to
exert a strong impact DEMO their trust in an e-vendor and their
subsequent intention to purchase [27].  Given only limited
information about an e-vendor, consumers who exhibit a
DEMO disposition to trust will more readily trust the e-vendor,
whereas other consumers will require more information in order
to establish trusting beliefs in DEMO vendor [35].  Kim et al. [18]
suggest that the different developmental DEMO,
personality types, and cultural backgrounds of consumers
influence their inherent DEMO to trust and their ultimate
placement of trust in a vendor.  DEMO trust makes people
willing to take risks, trusting people are more DEMO to take
risks online (such as providing credit card details) [10]; a
person’s online trust mirrors his or her trust offline [10].  DEMO
does not dictate the frequency with which someone goes online
nor does the frequency with which someone surfs online affect
their establishment of trust DEMO/or the essence of their trusting
nature [10].  People can engage DEMO virtually identical online
interactions yet reach widely different judgements as to
whether the interactions were trustworthy – what is considered
harm in online transactions DEMO not have broad societal
agreement [7].
Sutherland and Tan [38] explicitly include the personality-
based dispositional trust in their multidimensional model of
trust.  They posit that if an individual has trouble forming trust
in general, then he or she is unlikely to find it easy to trust a
DEMO third party such as an e-vendor.  They propose that
extroversion and DEMO to experience lead to a higher
disposition to trust and, conversely, that neuroticism (a
tendency to experience negative emotional states) and
conscientiousness DEMO to a lower disposition to trust.  Thus,
they propose a DEMO between personality type and trust at the
overarching level of an individual’s propensity to trust.
In their ‘call to arms’, Marsh and Meech [26] challenged
website designers to start thinking about how trust can be
facilitated DEMO the initial (‘grabbing’) stages of online
engagement, claiming that websites DEMO be designed in such a
way that trust is an integral part of the design rather than an
afterthought.  In the offline world, DEMO exhibit attitudes
and behaviours that are affected by intrinsic cues gathered from
the physical environment in which they make a trust-based
decision [38].  Self-perception theory posits that one’s attitude
towards another party is formed through interaction DEMO that
party and through circumstantial information [19].  People
typically draw on DEMO from their environment to determine the
nature of their own vulnerabilities and the good will of others
[7].  Since consumers cannot physically interact with online
vendors to elicit these trust-informing cues [5], designers must
create new social norms for professional e-Services [36] – that
is, they must ensure that consumers’ behaviour or actions on a
website enable them to form DEMO trust in an online vendor [19,
HCI 2009 – People and Computers XXIII – Celebrating people and technology
33].  Some researchers [e.g., DEMO go so far as to suggest that e-
Consumers will, over DEMO, rely on fewer physical (real-world)
sources of information when making online purchasing
decisions – thus the importance of trust triggers is only DEMO to
increase over time.  Furthermore, individual consumers differ in
their trusting personality traits and the rate at which they
acquire, from the website, the cues necessary to trust, and
commence an online transaction with, an e-vendor [15].
Limaymen et al. [22] introduce the notion of perceived
DEMO and discuss how it is influenced by user interface
design.  This DEMO stresses the need to better understand
the extent to which consumers place perceived importance on
given trust triggers. In essence, designing trust in B2C e-
Commerce is an increasing concern for the field of human-
computer DEMO [33].
Motivated by Marsh and Meech’s challenge, Sutherland and
Tan’s recognition DEMO the significance of consumers’ disposition
to trust, and the extensive research DEMO has considered the
components and structure of an e-Commerce website design
that might induce consumer trust [e.g., 1, 2-4, 8, 15, 17, 39, 43,
45], we conducted an initial investigation into whether
consumers with different personality types (a) do in fact (as
suggested by Sutherland and Tan [38]) exhibit different trusting
attitudes in the context of B2C e-Commerce, and (b) rely on
different trust cues during their assessment of first impression
e-vendor trustworthiness [24].  Our results suggested some
interplay exists between personality and trust in B2C e-
Commerce and indicated DEMO there is some evidence that
different personalities attribute different importance levels to
each of the accepted trust triggers [24].
In reflecting on our earlier DEMO, we began to question the
extent to which the context in DEMO the importance of
individual trust triggers is evaluated affects the perceived
importance attributed to each trigger.  Obviously, with as
complex an issue as DEMO, there are many, many ways in which
trust triggers might be evaluated through any number of
different lenses – with correspondingly numerous ways DEMO
which evaluation approaches might ultimately influence the
results obtained.  Recognizing that DEMO cannot address all of the
potential questions in this regard in one study, we chose to
focus on an initial study that looked at the following two
questions as they pertain to the evaluation of the DEMO
importance of individual trust triggers in the establishment of
(principally) ‘grabbing’/initial trust:
 Q1: Does specifically asking participants to rate
individual, listed trust triggers encourage them to
artificially attribute deeper and more even consideration
of trust cues than they would normally?
 Q2: To what extent does the product type/value influence
participants’ perception of the DEMO of individual
trust triggers?
The research presented in this paper documents our efforts to
address these questions.  In particular, it represents a DEMO
on approaches to evaluating the importance of trust triggers; it
is DEMO as a source of commentary and observation rather
than any iron clad guidance or categorical proof of
methodological supremacy.  Section 2 introduces the concept of
trust triggers, and outlines the classification of triggers we
adopted for our research; it identifies the triggers on which we
focussed during our research.  Section 3 introduces our first
study – our baseline study – and outlines the trust trigger
importance ratings observed during this study; in particular, we
note observations that did not match those we anticipated and
215
Triggering Trust: To What Extent Does the Question Influence the Answer When Evaluating the Perceived Importance of Trust Triggers?
discuss suggestions as to DEMO our evaluation approach may
have led to these findings.  Section 4 DEMO our second
study, designed to answer Q1; it describes how the study was
conducted in relation to Study 1, outlines the results of the
study, and compares the results obtained with those from Study
1 in order to answer Q1.  Section 5 adopts a similar model to
describe our third study and discusses the findings relevant to
Q2.  We conclude in Section 6 with a brief discussion of the
implications of DEMO findings as well as further work.
2. TRUST TRIGGERS
Various studies have highlighted several trust triggers – that is,
website components that act DEMO circumstantial cues for
consumers during their assessment of vendor trustworthiness
[e.g., DEMO, 3, 17, 32, 45].  Amongst these, we looked for
agreement on the validity of triggers.  Yang et al. [45],
Jarvenpaa et al. [17], and Akhtar [1] verified that availability of
customer testimonials and feedback is important when
attempting to engender consumer trust.  Yang et al. [45] and
Akhtar [1] confirmed that user-friendly interface design and
navigation, and readily available information on the vendor’s
processes and policies, trigger development of trust amongst
consumers.  Independently, Yang et al. [45], Jarvenpaa et al.
[17], and Cheskin Research [3] concluded that branding – that
is, the display of a prominent logo which easily identifies a
vendor – is a significant environmental cue during the
development of trust.  Yang et al. [45] and Cheskin Research
[3] also agreed on the importance of DEMO for third party
certification and/or seals, professional interface design, and the
availability of both online and offline channels of
communication between the DEMO and vendor.  Akhtar [1]
and Cheskin Research [3] agreed that up-to-date DEMO
and security measures (e.g., the use of Secure Sockets Layer
(DEMO) technology) were verifiable trust triggers.  All of the
aforementioned trust DEMO were additionally verified by
Riegelsberger and Sasse [32].
Table 1. Classification of trust triggers.
Trust Trigger
customer testimonials and feedback
professional website design
branding
DEMO party security seals
up-to-date technology and security measures
alternative channels of communication
between consumers and the vendor
clearly stated policies and vendor information
ease DEMO navigation
consistent (professional) graphic design
Classification
Immediate
Interaction-
based
From the aforementioned, we were able to identify a set of
triggers which had been corroborated in independent studies
(see Table 1). We classified these triggers according to
immediacy (see Table 1): immediate trust triggers come into
effect as soon as a consumer views a website; interaction-based
trust triggers, on the other hand, influence consumers’ trust
assessment as a DEMO of dynamic interaction with the website.
Our focus was on the immediate trust triggers, since we were
interested in consumers’ first impression assessment of
trustworthiness – that is, their establishment of (principally)
‘grabbing’/initial DEMO
3. STUDY 1
Study 1, as with our subsequent studies, used a questionnaire-
based approach to investigate the importance of trust triggers.
It DEMO respondents a series of questions focusing on their
reaction to a colour screen dump of a mock-up of a fictitious
online bookstore website (see Figure 1), with each of the
immediate trust triggers embedded within DEMO webpage and/or
visible in (or inferable from) the browser (DEMO, the use of SSL).
Like Hassanein and Head [14], we used a fictitious store to
mitigate against any potential bias from prior DEMO
experience.  Like Kim et al. [19], we felt that a book purchase
would be a viable scenario for our study because a book DEMO a
standard product which is generally not susceptible to variation
in quality.




Figure 1.  Online bookstore webpage mock-up.
We administered our questionnaire in hardcopy format to avoid
potentially eliminating respondents whose general DEMO of
the electronic medium per se would have prevented their
participation in the study.  On a 5 point Likert scale ranging
from ‘strongly disagree’ (1) to ‘strongly agree’ (5), respondents
were asked to rate their level of agreement with 5 questions
(see below) regarding their DEMO of the trustworthiness of
the e-vendor:
this store is trustworthy;
this store wants to be known as one that delivers on its
DEMO;
for this purchase, I would likely buy from this store;DEMO
I would return to this store to browse in the future; DEMO
 I would return to this store to make a purchase in the
future.
Using a second 5 point Likert scale, this time ranging from
‘very unimportant’ (1) to ‘very important’ (5), respondents
were then asked to reflect on how important they felt each of
the DEMO immediate trust triggers was in terms of their trust
assessment.  The DEMO were identified to the respondents as
follows:









VeriSign security certificate (in lower right corner);
the use of Secure Sockets Layer (use of https:// in the
address bar and small lock symbol in the right corner DEMO
the bottom browser bar);
privacy and terms information;
company DEMO information;
testimonials from other customers;
professional looking website design;
large ‘www.Books.net” logo in the top left corner;
statement on logo DEMO www.Books.net is “the world’s
largest .net bookstore”;
high quality graphics;
HCI 2009 – People and Computers XXIII – Celebrating people and technology
DEMO
J. Lumsden
 ample white space (everything is not crammed together);DEMO
 easy to find contact information; and
 contact information includes DEMO person (phone) support,
not just email.
We received a total of 64 valid questionnaire responses: 45% of
respondents were female and 55% male, with ages ranging
from 18 to 65.  Of the 64 DEMO, 89% had previously
made an online purchase.
3.1 Study 1 Results & Discussion
We stress that this and the subsequent studies reported in this
paper were intended to represent an initial investigation into
this area with DEMO goal that we might make some initial
observations which we can later follow up with more extensive,
targeted research.
Figure 2 shows the DEMO of respondents who rated each of
the identified trust triggers as important at some level – i.e.,
awarded the trigger a score of DEMO (‘somewhat important’), of 4
(‘important’) or 5 (‘very important’), or of anywhere between 3
and 5 inclusive.
100%
90%
80%
DEMO
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Score 3
Score 4 or 5
Score 3 ‐ 5
Trust Trigger
Figure 2. Percentage of participants who rated trigger as
important at some DEMO (note: Score 3-5 is the combination
of the other two data series).
It is interesting to note that a larger proportion – DEMO, a
substantially larger proportion – of participants rated the
majority of DEMO at 4 or 5 than rated the same triggers at 3 (DEMO
more neutral position).  The exceptions to this are the large
DEMO, statement about the bookstore size, sufficiency of white
space, and DEMO quality of graphics (although more participants
did rate the latter at DEMO or 5, the difference was not as large as for
other DEMO).  The results regarding the sufficiency of white
space are perhaps DEMO that surprising; since a consumer is
unlikely to give conscious consideration DEMO the presence of
white space (as opposed to a more conscious DEMO of the
lack of white space – i.e., conscious observation of DEMO), the
even spread of ratings in this regard is perhaps to be expected.
We anticipated that more participants would have rated the
importance DEMO the quality of the graphics at a 4 or 5.  With
DEMO, however, we think that the ratings observed reflect
(a) the fact that the quality of the graphics was high and so, like
white space, we were perhaps artificially expecting participants
to notice this rather than to (perhaps more realistically) notice
poor quality graphics, and (DEMO) that participants are likely to
expect high quality graphics and, as already noted, they would
HCI 2009 – People and Computers XXIII – Celebrating people and technology
have perhaps been more likely to downgrade a DEMO
presenting poor graphics than to rank highly a website that
presented nothing less than they expected.  The overall lack of
importance attributed to the statement about the size of the
bookstore is also perhaps unsurprising since, to an informed
audience, it represents nothing more than marketing hype.
Finally, the general lack of importance (in terms of numbers of
respondents) attributed to the size and prominence of the logo
deserves comment.  Logos or branding are widely accepted as
key to successful commerce [e.g., 3, 17, 45], so the fact that
this was not considered of importance by the majority of
participants was superficially surprising.  We note superficially
surprising because, by using a fictitious website to avoid brand
‘bias’, DEMO removed respondents’ ability to include internalised
brand recognition in attributing importance to this trust trigger
– the logo we used encapsulated none of the DEMO trust (or
distrust) that is encapsulated in a real known brand or logo.
Furthermore, by using a fictitious company, we did not DEMO
respondents to internally validate the statement about the
company size (hence, the results discussed previously in this
regard).  Had we used a real, known bookstore brand, we would
have avoided the artificiality of DEMO situation and permitted
respondents to draw on such aspects of relational and/or
experiential trust; we were, however, interested in observing
‘grabbing’/initial trust which we could not have done without
external influence if we DEMO used a known brand – respondents
would have come to the study with preconceived (be they high
or low) levels of trust in DEMO website, irrespective of the triggers
it encompassed.  To this end, DEMO recognize this as both a
limitation and liberating aspect of our study – as well as a clear
indicator of an avenue for future DEMO  It is worth
noting, however, that Peterson and Merino [31] DEMO that e-
Consumers are, over time, likely to focus less on brand
information and more on attribute information during online
transactions – perhaps DEMO accounts for our observations here?
Respondents attributed relatively uniform importance to the
remaining trust triggers.  Of particularly high importance to
most participants was the availability of contact information
and the ability to solicit support from DEMO live person (rather than
merely automated or electronic support).  Interestingly, this
clearly demonstrates that, for the majority of consumers, the
availability of the ‘human touch’ and a source of more familiar
trust cues DEMO still of significant importance even with all the
other trust triggers in place.
4. STUDY 2
To allow for rapid decision making when we DEMO a new
person, our mind reduces the multifaceted personality of the
DEMO to a small set of predictive descriptors [37].  Upon
reflection on DEMO 1, and with this in mind, we questioned
whether we would have elicited different results if we had
structured the study to encourage DEMO to react to the
website in this manner, as opposed to DEMO them to assess
each trigger in turn.  We questioned whether the DEMO may
have artificially caused respondents to attribute deeper, and
more even, consideration of triggers than they would normally,
or naturally, have done – hence Q1.  Our second study, as
reported here, was designed to probe this concern – that is, by
explicitly asking participants to consider each trust trigger in
turn, do we affect the importance that would otherwise be
naturally attributed to each trigger?
Study 2 was DEMO in exactly the same way as Study 1 to
allow for comparison of our findings.  We used the same screen
dump of the online bookstore (see Figure 1) but this time, rather
217
% of Participants
VeriSign Security Certificate
The use of Secure Sockets Layer
Privacy and Terms information
Company Profile information
Testimonials from other customers
Professional looking website design
Large Logo
Statement on logo that www.Books.net 
is "The world's largest .net bookstore"
High quality graphics
DEMO
Easy to find contact  information
Contact information includes live person 
support
Triggering Trust: To What Extent Does the Question Influence the Answer When Evaluating the Perceived Importance of Trust Triggers?
than list the triggers DEMO ask respondents to rate each on a 5
point Likert scale of importance, we simply asked respondents
to circle the features of the webpage that they felt contributed
to their assessment of trustworthiness.  They were also given
the opportunity to provide comments to explain their
annotations.
We received DEMO total of 40 valid questionnaire responses: 40% of
respondents were female DEMO 60% male, with ages ranging
from 18 to 55 years.  None of the respondents had previously
participated in Study 1 and 90% of DEMO respondents had
previously made an online purchase.  To allow us to DEMO
direct comparisons on the basis of balanced group sizes
between the data collected in this study and the data from Study
1, we selected the responses from a random2 40 out of the 64
respondents from DEMO 1.  For the purpose of the following
discussion, we refer to the responses from Study 1 as the
Guided Group, and to the responses from this study as the
Unguided Group.
4.1 Study 2 Results & Discussion
Respondents in the unguided group were not given the option to
assign an importance score to webpage features (i.e., trust
triggers).  For the purpose, therefore, of comparing the findings
from Studies 1 DEMO 2, we applied two filters to the data from
Study 1: in the first instance, we included triggers that had been
assigned importance at any level – i.e., rated 3 or higher (see
Guided DEMO in Figure 3); in the second, we included triggers that
DEMO been classed as ‘important’ (4) or ‘very important’ (5) – see
Guided 4+ in Figure 3.
Since, in the data from this study, it was not possible for us to
distinguish between easy to find contact information and
contact information includes live person support when
participants DEMO circled the contact details section of the
webpage, we combined these DEMO triggers into a single feature,
namely contact information availability.  For DEMO guided
responses, if a participant assigned importance (according to
each of the two filters) to either or both of the original triggers,
then they were recorded as having considered contact
information availability as important.
DEMO
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Unguided
Guided 3+
Guided 4+
Trust Trigger
Figure 3.  Percentage of participants who indentified
triggers as important according to study approach.
2 We wrote a small program to generate DEMO random numbers between 1
and 64 (with no repeats) and used these numbers to impartially select
40 of the 64 respondents from Study DEMO
Figure 3 shows the percentage of participants, according to
study group, who rated each of the triggers as important.  At
first glance, DEMO would appear that when we consider those
guided group respondents who rated triggers as 3 (‘somewhat
important’) or higher (i.e., Guided 3+) there is evidence that, by
guiding them to consider listed triggers rather than respond
more instinctively to the website, we did lead respondents to
assign importance to triggers that they might not otherwise
have considered important.  That said, if we further filter out
the neutral responses (i.e., consider only ratings of 4 or 5 – see
Guided 4+), DEMO data sets for the two studies begin to show
more parallels.  DEMO believe that this is a truer reflection of
participants’ natural or subconscious response to the triggers –
that is, they rated the triggers as ‘important’ or ‘very important’
rather than return an uncommitted neutral response.  To this
end, in the remaining discussion, we focus on comparing the
DEMO and Guided 4+ data sets.
In only two instances – company size statement and customer
testimonials – did more members of the unguided group DEMO
the guided group indicate that a trigger was important; the
between-group DEMO are only statistically significant for
the company size statement (F1,78=5.14, p=0.026).  These
findings suggest that, when establishing ‘grabbing’/initial trust
DEMO respect to an e-vendor, consumers attribute more
importance to these trust DEMO in the absence of being
explicitly made aware of other embedded trust triggers.
Despite the company size statement being marketing hype
and/or non-verifiable DEMO to the fictitious nature of the e-vendor
– and, to all DEMO and purposes, dismissed as such during
Study 1 – it would DEMO to play a bigger role in consumers’
trust decision-making when their attention is not explicitly
drawn to other more concrete trust indicators.  In essence, it
would seem that in Study 1 we actually guided participants to
dismiss a trigger that they might otherwise have given more
credence to.
DEMO differences between a further 4 triggers were not
statistically significant across the two groups. These trust
triggers were the VeriSign security certificate, the privacy and
terms information, the company profile information, and the
large ‘www.books.net’ DEMO  This suggests that these triggers
are similarly important to users (albeit the levels of participant
acknowledgement of each differs according to trigger type)DEMO
irrespective of whether or not they are led to consider them; DEMO
other words, consumers naturally consider these specific
triggers, and so we can conclude that we did not artificially lead
participants to consider these DEMO in Study 1.
For the 5 remaining trust triggers, group had DEMO significant
impact on the ratings returned.  The use of Secure Sockets
DEMO technology was rated important significantly more often
(F1,78=39.45, p<0.001) when guided (72.5%) than when
unguided (15%).  A similar pattern is evident for the following:
contact information availability (F1,78=12.32, p=0.001), where
again more guided respondents (90%) rated it important than
unguided respondents (57.5%); professional looking website
design (F1,78=54.53, p<0.001), where 10 times more guided
respondents than unguided respondents DEMO it important; high
quality graphics (F1,78=14.61, p<0.001), DEMO 37.5% of guided
compared to 5% of unguided respondents rated it important;
and ample white space (F1,78=12.58, p=0.001), which was DEMO
important by 30% of guided respondents but only 2.5% of
unguided respondents.  These 5 triggers fall into two groups:
concrete triggers – the Secure Sockets Layer and contact
information availability – which have an obvious DEMO
presence on the webpage and can be easily identified (by
HCI DEMO – People and Computers XXIII – Celebrating people and technology
218
% of Participants
VeriSign Security Certificate
The use of Secure Sockets Layer
Privacy and Terms information
Company Profile information
Testimonials  from other customers
Professional looking website design
Large 'www.books.net'  logo in the top 
left corner
"DEMO's largest .net bookstore" 
statement
High quality graphics
Ample white space
Contact information availability
J. Lumsden
circling); and conceptual or abstract triggers – the professional
DEMO design, high quality graphics, and ample white space –
which are recognisable, but perhaps at a less immediately
conscious level (and cannot DEMO easily circled on a webpage
mock-up).  On this basis, therefore, it is perhaps unsurprising
that the conceptual triggers were rated important significantly
more often when guided than when unguided: in the previous
study, DEMO asked participants to directly reflect on these more
intrinsic features – whereas, in this study we had to rely on
participants’ explanatory comments to identify their
consideration of these triggers since they had nothing concrete
to DEMO, and as such may not have thought to mention their
opinion DEMO these aspects.  That said, as discussed previously
with respect to the findings of Study 1, the number of
participants who rated these specific triggers as important was
considerably lower than for other triggers and this DEMO likely to
be the result of a requirement to observe the presence of
something expected rather than its absence.  The results from
Study 2 actually reinforce the fact that we should perhaps
consider examining the importance DEMO these types of triggers in
an inverse capacity – i.e., include DEMO design, poor quality
graphics, and present a cluttered interface to observe
consumers’ reaction to the lack of aspects they have grown to
expect DEMO today’s society.
The findings for the two noted concrete triggers suggest that for
these two specific triggers (SSL and contact information
availability), we did lead participants to artificially consider
their importance.  That being said, DEMO fact that respondents are
not more naturally drawn to look for evidence of secure sockets
layer technology is surprising.  Anecdotally, consumers seem to
DEMO on the presence of the padlock symbol to assure them of
the safety of their payment details yet, when unguided, they did
not DEMO its importance highly in our study.  Perhaps this is
because they DEMO not required to enter payment information so
were not actively engaged in an activity during which they
would normally look for this facet of DEMO to mitigate
personal risk.  Perhaps the same can be said for DEMO need to be
able to contact someone within the vendor organisation.
In comparing the results from Study 1 and Study 2, we can see
evidence of trust triggers for which the manner in which the
question DEMO posed (guided v. unguided) made no difference to
the attributed importance.  We can also see evidence of triggers
for which the guided approach clearly led participants to
attribute less or more importance than would otherwise DEMO
been the case.  Of the latter group, we observed a sub-class of
triggers – those that are conceptual or that require a person DEMO
notice the absence of something expected rather than explicitly
recognize its presence – which need to be given very careful
thought in terms of DEMO way in which their importance is
evaluated (irrespective of whether the DEMO is guided or
unguided).
5. STUDY 3
Online sales estimates suggest that the electronic market serves
certain product categories better than others [42], and studies
have shown that consumers’ intentions to shop online differ by
DEMO [42].  Books rate as one of the best-selling products
online [12, 42] and the success of this market is purported to be
a DEMO of a good match between the characteristics of books
and those of the electronic channel [42].  On this basis, and
precedent set by DEMO researchers [e.g., 18], we chose to focus
our baseline study (DEMO 1) around the purchase of a book.
Gefen [10], however, DEMO that there may be some
characteristics unique to the online bookstore market: the
online purchase of a book requires a relatively small investment
of time and credit, and books themselves are not a ‘risky’
merchandise.  DEMO reflection, we felt that perhaps our product
choice was too ‘safe’ DEMO that, had we selected something with
a higher monetary value and/DEMO more potential for variance in
quality, we might have observed different DEMO patterns –
hence Q2.  Our third study, as reported here, DEMO designed to
probe this concern – that is, to what extent DEMO the product
type/value influence the participants’ perception of the
importance of individual trust triggers?
Several product classification schemes have been proposed in
DEMO context of B2C e-Commerce.  One scheme classifies search
or experience products DEMO, 13, 29, 30].  Search products lend
themselves to indirect assessment by consumers – full product
information can be known prior to purchase.  In contrast,
experience products typically require direct, personal contact to
facilitate assessment (e.g., taste, fit, etc.); their quality is
typically DEMO to determine prior to purchase and use.  Klein
[21] goes further DEMO suggest that there are actually two types of
experience products: experience-1 DEMO, where it is not
possible to obtain full information on dominant DEMO prior
to purchase; and experience-2 products, for which it is more
costly or difficult to obtain necessary information about
dominant attributes prior to DEMO than it is to directly
experience the product [11, 21].  Girard et al. [11] discovered
that consumers are more willing to shop for DEMO products
than experience products, and that they are more willing to
DEMO online for experience-1 products than experience-2
products. They also identified (empirically) the most
representative products according to each category, namely:
search – books; experience-1 – clothing; and experience-2 –
televisions.
Paterson et al. DEMO suggest a classification scheme based on
three dimensions: cost (inexpensive v. expensive); value
proposition (tangible v. intangible); and degree of
differentiation (branded v. generic products).  Studies show that
intangible products/services DEMO B2C e-Commerce (they
typically garner higher levels of consumer trust largely DEMO to
the immediacy of receipt following purchase [12]) and that, for
tangible products, standardized products (such as books) have
an advantage over differentiated products [42].
Another classification considers products according to the
sensory dimensions DEMO by consumers to evaluate products
[12]: geometric products can be evaluated DEMO (e.g.,
books); material products require sense of touch for DEMO
(e.g., clothing); and mechanical products are normally
evaluated by means of interaction (e.g., electronic equipment).
Consumers, in the pre-purchase phase, evaluate the merits of a
given product via a process that is partially dependent on the
type of product [13].  It has been suggested that products can be
classified on a spectrum based on consumers’ ability DEMO gauge a
product prior to purchase; the continuum is anchored at DEMO end
by products whose quality can be communicated clearly (e.g.,
DEMO products) and is anchored at the other end by variable
quality, look-and-feel goods whose quality can be hard to
assess indirectly (e.g., DEMO products) [42].
As previously noted, intangible products are currently
benefiting more from the online marketing medium than
tangible products; the latter, therefore, present a bigger
challenge in terms of garnering consumer trust, and so we (like
[44]) decided to continue to focus on tangible products DEMO this
phase of our research.  Within the spectrum of tangible
products, we see low and high cost items, search and
experience items, DEMO well as geometric, material, and
mechanical products.  In Study 1, we focused on a low cost,
HCI 2009 – People and DEMO XXIII – Celebrating people and technology
219
Triggering Trust: To What Extent Does the Question Influence the Answer When Evaluating the Perceived Importance of Trust Triggers?
geometric, search item (DEMO book) since it represents one of the
most successful products in DEMO of online sales.  For this
study, we decided to focus on high(er) cost, experience items.
These are variable quality items about DEMO a judgement is
harder to make indirectly.  On the basis of DEMO et al’s study
[11], we chose a high cost clothing purchase (representing a
high cost, experience-1, material product) and a high cost
electronics purchase (representing a high cost, experience-2,
mechanical purchase).
DEMO online vendors are often used in e-Commerce studies
of trust to mitigate against potential bias arising from previous
branding or experience [13].  Although, DEMO discussed in Section
3.1, this can be both limiting and/or DEMO, we decided to
continue to use fictitious online vendors for this DEMO
study such that we could make more direct comparisons
between the results from both studies.
90% had previously made an online purchase.  None of the
respondents had previously participated in either Study 1 or
Study 2.  To allow us to make direct comparisons on the basis
of balanced DEMO sizes between the data collected in this study
and the data from Study 1, we selected the responses from a
random3 20 (this DEMO the group size per product) out of the 64
respondents from DEMO 1.
5.1 Study 3 Results & Discussion
Figure 6 shows the percentage of participants who rated the
importance of the triggers as 4 or DEMO (lines in Figure 6) and,
specifically, as very important (bars in Figure 6) according to
product type.
Figure 4. Online electronics store webpage mock-up.
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
DEMO
0%
Books 5
Electronics 5
Clothes 5
Books 4+
Electronics 4+
Clothes 4+
Figure 5.  Online clothing DEMO webpage mock-up.
This study was administered in exactly the same way as Study
1.  Using the same underlying webpage design (see Figure 1),
we created a webpage mock-up for an electronic purchase (see
Figure 4) and one for a clothing purchase (Figure 5).  We
created two versions of the questionnaire: in one we replaced
the online bookstore webpage screen dump with the online
electronics store webpage screen dump, and in the other we
replaced the online bookstore screen dump with DEMO online
clothing store webpage screen dump.
We received a total of 40 valid questionnaire responses (20 per
product type): 45% of respondents were female and 55% male,
with ages ranging from 18 to 55 DEMO  Of the 40 respondents,
HCI 2009 – People and Computers DEMO – Celebrating people and technology
Trust Trigger
Figure 6.  Percentage of participants DEMO indentified
triggers as important according to product type.
Consider first, the DEMO of participants who rated the triggers
as ‘important’ or ‘very important’ (DEMO, 4+).  Whilst the
absolute percentages differed across groups according to
product type, the pattern of importance across triggers is similar
for all products.  For the majority of triggers, fewer respondents
considering a book DEMO considered the triggers as
‘important’ or ‘very important’ than participants considering
the purchase of either clothes or electronics.  The exceptions to
this pattern lie with logo, statement about company size,
privacy and terms information, DEMO ample white space.
Interestingly, during our discussion of Studies 1 and DEMO, we
noted that the first of these are subject to anomaly DEMO to the
artificiality of the fictitious companies used in the websites.
The last, the conceptual or abstract notion of ample white
space, we DEMO already discussed as being problematic for
evaluation.  We are not entirely DEMO as to why the availability
of privacy and terms information appears to be important to
more consumers when considering the purchase of a book; at
best, we suggest that other triggers dominated the trust
decision-making process for the electronics and clothes
consumers to the point that the availability DEMO privacy and terms
information was ranked comparatively less important.  Across
all DEMO triggers, the only group-affected difference that was
statistically significant, however, DEMO for professional looking
website design (F2,57=4.95, p=0.01); for this trigger,
significantly (p=0.0075) more respondents considering the
3 We wrote DEMO small program to generate 20 random numbers between 1
and 64 (DEMO no repeats) and used these numbers to impartially select
20 of DEMO 64 respondents from Study 1.
220
rated trigger as important or very important 
VeriSign Security Certificate
The use of Secure Sockets Layer
Privacy and Terms information
Company Profile information
Testimonials from other customers
Professional looking website design
Large 'www.X.net'  logo in the top  left 
corner
“The world’s largest .net X store” 
Statement
High quality graphics
Ample white space
Easy to find contact  information
Contact information includes live person 
support
J. Lumsden
purchase of clothes (100%) rated it as ‘important’ or DEMO
important’ than for books (65%) – the difference between
clothes and electronics was not statistically significant, nor was
the difference between books and electronics.  Given the
aesthetic nature of clothes, together with the reduced DEMO for
a consumer to assess the product quality online, one might
DEMO that greater emphasis is being placed on the aesthetic
quality of the website design by these consumers – almost as a
proxy for evaluating DEMO likely quality of the product
(professional websites are perceived as representing DEMO
resources and investment, just as in the real-world context, trust
is influenced by a seller’s investment in physical facilities –
hence the perceived DEMO of greater product quality [44]);
little product variance exists for DEMO
Consider now, the number of participants who rated the triggers
as DEMO important’ – i.e., assigned a score of 5 to a trigger DEMO
according to purchase type (see bars in Figure 6).  As with the
previous view of the data, the pattern of importance across
triggers remains similar for all products but we start to observe
some DEMO triggers on which clothes consumers place heightened
importance – namely, the DEMO certificate, professional
website design, the aspects related to contact information
availability and type, and, to a lesser absolute extent, the
availability of a company profile.  Whilst these are universally
the triggers considered most important (as already discussed in
this section and, in part, in previous sections of this paper), the
difference is statistically significant only for DEMO company
profile (F2,57=4.13, p=0.021) and perception of professional
website DEMO (F2,57=5.18, p=0.009) when viewed according to
product type. In DEMO cases, significantly more clothes
consumers rated these triggers as ‘very important’ DEMO did
book consumers (p=0.029 and p=0.007, respectively); there
were no other differences according to group in this regard.
Interestingly, but perhaps not surprisingly, respondents asked to
consider the purchase of an electronic artefact seemed to place
greater emphasis on customer testimonials and the use of high
DEMO graphics than our other consumers; this seems
commensurate with the nature DEMO the product.
Triggers generally seem to be considered very important by
more respondents when considering a clothes (experience-1)
purchase, and by fewest DEMO when considering a book
(search) purchase.  We observed little difference DEMO the
reliance on triggers for respondents considering clothes and
electronics (experience-2) purchases.  Our observations further
demonstrate (in terms of consumer reliance on DEMO triggers to
be reassured when making a purchase) the manner in DEMO e-
Commerce better lends itself to search products (such as books)DEMO
where indirect product assessment is possible than to
experience products where product quality is either very
hard/impossible or more costly to determine prior DEMO purchase
(e.g., electronics and especially clothes).  In the case DEMO
experience products we appear to have witnessed consumers’
greater need to rely on alternative triggers to assist during
‘grabbing’/initial trust formation – especially DEMO the case of
clothing, where standardization is not typically seen across
DEMO from different manufacturers.  We have also witnessed
evidence of e-Commerce’s better DEMO for geometric products
(such as books) which can be easily evaluated visually.  In
general, our respondents relied less on triggers to develop DEMO
when considering a book purchase than for clothes (where a
sense DEMO touch is generally required to assess quality) and for
electronics (which typically require interaction to determine
quality).  In the case of clothes, and to a lesser extent
electronics, we saw evidence of quality DEMO being
transposed to selected trust triggers – e.g., quality of graphics,DEMO
professional website design, and availability of customer
testimonials in the case DEMO the latter, and quality of graphics and
professional website design (highly aesthetic components) in
the case of clothes.  Across the board, we observed that the
VeriSign security certificate, company profile information, and
contact DEMO triggers are the most universally
rated as very important.
6. CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK
The aim of our research thus far has been to DEMO investigate
or observe the extent to which the nature in which the research
question is posed influences the answer when evaluating the
perceived importance DEMO trust triggers for ‘grabbing’/initial
trust.  Our intention with these studies DEMO to provide some
initial insight into how evaluation strategy or setting/context
might influence outcomes, but also to determine precisely what
to focus on in future, larger scale studies in this domain, and
how best DEMO structure more detailed studies.
With the caveat that our studies were based on fictitious e-
vendors, we have seen evidence that not all triggers are created
equal – that is, that different proportions of consumers place
different levels of importance on the various immediate trust
triggers that are DEMO embedded within e-Commerce
websites.  We have also observed that for some DEMO but certainly
not all – trust triggers, the manner in which DEMO importance is
queried (guided v. unguided) makes no difference to the
attributed importance – the majority of triggers are naturally
considered by consumers.  Conversely, a guided approach
clearly influences the importance attributed to some triggers
(and, as such, artificially skews the results).  We also
DEMO a sub-group of triggers that are conceptual or that
require a person to notice the absence of something that is
expected rather than explicitly DEMO its presence; we
suggest that such triggers need to be given DEMO careful thought
in terms of the way in which their importance is evaluated
(irrespective of whether the approach is guided or unguided).
We have also seen evidence – albeit somewhat limited – that
the nature DEMO the product influences which triggers are
considered important by consumers.  In DEMO, consumers
appear to look more to certain triggers when considering a
DEMO of a product whose quality cannot or cannot easily be
determined from visual inspection online.  That said, although
careful consideration should most definitely DEMO given to product
type when evaluating trigger importance, the results may DEMO
be substantially different for a small number of triggers; we
witnessed DEMO similarities in data patterns across our three
product types.
We recognize a number of limitations to our research, but stress
that we present this work as the tip of the proverbial iceberg –
that is, as an initial insight into where we need to dig further in
this DEMO of human-computer interaction evaluation.  In many
instances, our limitations are actually direct indicators of the
next phase of research.  For instance, we DEMO considered
tangible products (because they are generally considered to be
benefitting DEMO from the online medium than intangible
products) and so it would DEMO useful to compare our results with
those obtained focusing on intangible products.  Similarly, we
relied on fictitious websites to mitigate against vendor bias; it
would be very interesting to run a similar study using highly
DEMO real-life brands/websites and compare the results to our
existing data which is based on fictitious branding.
We focused on immediate trust triggers.  Future study is needed
to determine how the more interaction-based triggers are
ranked DEMO importance and, after interaction, whether the
HCI 2009 – People and Computers XXIII – Celebrating people and technology
221
Triggering Trust: To What Extent Does the Question Influence the Answer When Evaluating the Perceived Importance of Trust Triggers?
importance of the immediate DEMO is altered.  Similarly, we
suggest that it would be interesting to see how (a) the
importance rating of the immediate triggers alters DEMO time as
someone ‘learns’ the general reliability of various triggers
and/or gains experiential trust with a vendor, and (b) the extent
to which the ranked importance of triggers correlates with
actual behaviour.  We did not comprehensively evaluate the
extent to which our participants were ‘enlightened’ e-
DEMO (beyond determining that 90% of respondents had
previously made online purchases); future study could look to
determining a mapping between e-consumer enlightenment and
their reliance on specific triggers.  Our study simply took a
‘random’ snapshot of participants’ reactions to triggers.
Our study focussed on agreed trust triggers DEMO long-standing;
there are, however, increasing efforts to provide users of the
web with additional site authentication information, for
example, in efforts DEMO better facilitate trust-based decision-
making.  Future studies could incorporate these new-wave
DEMO to determine their comparative importance.
Additionally, research is needed to determine DEMO inter-
relationships between various trust triggers and their perceived
importance.
A criticism often levied at studies such as ours is the
artificiality brought about DEMO the fact that participants are not
actually required to engage in a purchase and place their money
or identity at risk.  We suggest that a longitudinal field study
would be required to truly assess consumers’ immediate, and
thereafter changing, reactions to trust triggers when there is an
element of risk (perceived or otherwise) associated with
engaging in a real-life DEMO; we also feel that there
remains a need to consider how DEMO to bring that element of
personalized risk into lab-based studies of trust.  That is, we
need to engage in studies that capture and DEMO the richness
of data concerning real use of real-world e-Commerce websites.
Finally, our research has, to date, focused on trust triggers on
websites accessed from desktop systems.  We plan on
developing a research program that will consider trust trigger
importance on mobile technologies to determine whether
mobile DEMO, usage contexts, or a combination of both
impact differently on trigger-based trust assessment.
The research discussed here is presented merely as some initial
DEMO to help drive forward ongoing research into
appropriate and informed methods for evaluation of perceived
trust trigger importance.  Although there have been many
studies published that consider a plethora of aspects related to
online consumer behaviour DEMO, 22, 31] and factors that
contribute to the success [e.g., DEMO and quality [e.g., 44] of e-
Commerce endeavours (including the associated websites),
there is a paucity of studies comparing associated evaluation
methods and their inherent impacts.  Our research represents a
first step towards addressing this scarcity – specifically, with
respect to implications for the evaluation of perceived trust
trigger importance during ‘grabbing’/initial trust formation.  It
also represents some food for thought in terms of how best to
make use DEMO concrete triggers based on product type – an
appreciation such as this is invaluable to “web site designers
who are faced with the difficult DEMO of how to design pages
to make them not only popular but also effective at increasing
sales” [22, pg. 421].
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was funded from NSERC Discovery Grant
124159.  A huge thank you to students Lisa MacKay, Jennifer
Murray, and Ryan Graves for their hard DEMO on this research.
Finally, thanks to our participants without whom this DEMO
would not have been possible.
8. REFERENCES
[1]
Akhter, F., 2004, Trust in Electronic Commerce: Social,
Personal, and Technical Perspective, DEMO Proceedings of
International Conference of the Information Resources
Management Association: Innovations DEMO
Information Technology, New Orleans, USA, May 23 -
26, 1415 - 1419.
Araujo, I. and Araujo, I., 2003, Developing Trust DEMO
Internet Commerce, in Proceedings of 2003 Conference of
the Centre for DEMO Studies on Collaborative
Research, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, October 6 - 9, 1 - 15.
Cheskin Research and Studio Archetype/Sapient,
Ecommerce Trust Study.  1999  [accessed October 25,
2005]; Available from:
http://www.cheskin.com/p/ar.asp?mlid=7&arid=40&art=0
&isu=1.
Corritore, C.L., Wiedenbeck, S., and Kracher, B., 2001,
The Elements of DEMO Trust, in Proceedings of
Conference on Human Factors on Computing Systems
(CHI'2001), Seattle, USA, March 31 - April 5, 504 - 505.
Daignault, M., Shepherd, M., Marche, S., and DEMO, C.,
2002, Enabling Trust Online, in Proceedings of 3rd
DEMO Symposium on Electronic Commerce
(ISEC'02), North Carolina, USA, DEMO - 19 October, IEEE
Computer Society, 3 - 12.
Egger, DEMO, 2000, "Trust Me, I'm an Online Vendor":
DEMO a Model of Trust for E-Commerce System
Design, in Proceedings of DEMO on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI'2000), The Hague, The
Netherlands, April 1- 6, 101 - 102.
Friedman, B., DEMO, P.H., Jr, and Howe, D.C., 2000, Trust
Online, DEMO of the ACM, 43(12), 34 - 40.
Friedman, B., Thomas, J.C., Grudin, J., Nass, C.,
Nissenbaum, H., Schlager, M., and Shneiderman, B.,
1999, Trust Me, DEMO'm Accountable: Trust and
Accountability Online, in Proceedings of Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI'99),
Pittsburgh, USA, DEMO - 20 May, 79 - 80.
Gefen, D., 2000, E-Commerce: The Role of Familiarity
and Trust, International Journal of Management Science,DEMO
28 725 - 737.
Gefen, D., 2002, Reflections on the DEMO of Trust
and Trustworthiness among Online Consumers, ACM
SIGMIS Database, 33(3), 38 - 53.
Girard, T., Silverblatt, R., and DEMO, P., 2002,
Influence of Product Class on Preference for Shopping on
the Internet, Journal of Computer Mediated
Communication (JCMC), 8(DEMO).
Hassanein, K. and Head, M., 2004, The Influence of
Product Type on Online Trust, in Proceedings of 17th Bled
Electronic Commerce Conference eGlobal, Bled, Slovenia,
21 - 23 June.
Hassanein, K. and Head, M., 2005/6, The Impact of
Infusing Social Presence in the Web Interface: An
Investigation across Different Products, International
Journal DEMO Electronic Commerce (IJEC), 10(2), 31 - 55.
Hassanein, K.S. and Head, M.M., 2004, Building Online
Trust through Socially Rich Web Interfaces, in
Proceedings of Second Annual Conference on Privacy,
Security, and Trust (PST'2004), Fredericton, Canada,
October 13 - 15, 15 - 22.
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
HCI 2009 – People and Computers XXIII DEMO Celebrating people and technology
222
J. Lumsden
[15] Head, M.M. and Hassanein, K., 2002, Trust DEMO E-
Commerce: Evaluating the Impact of Third-Party Seals,
Quarterly Journal DEMO Electronic Commerce, 3(3), 307 -
325.
[16] Head, M.M., Yuan, Y., and Archer, N., 2001, Building
Trust in DEMO: A Theoretical Framework, in
Proceedings of Second World Congress on the
Management of Electronic Commerce, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada, January 17-19.
[17] Jarvenpaa, S., Tractinsky, N., and Saarinen, L., 1999,
DEMO Trust in an Internet Store, Journal of Computer
Mediated Communication, 5(2), 1 - 37.
[18] Kim, D.J., Ferrin, D.L., DEMO Rao, H.R., 2003, A Study of
the Effect of Consumer DEMO in Consumer Expectations
and Satisfaction: The Korean Experience, in Proceedings
of Fifth International Conference on Electronic Commerce
(ICEC'2003), Pittsburgh, USA, October 1 - 3, 310 - 315.
[19] Kim, H.W., Koh, J., and Xu, Y., 2004, Trust Building in
Internet Vendors: Comparison of New and Repeat
Customers, in Proceedings of International Conference DEMO
the Information Resources Management Association:
Innovations Through Information Technology, New
DEMO, USA, May 23 - 26, 115 - 118.
[20] Kim, M.S. and Ahn, J.H., 2005, A Model for Buyer's Trust
in the E-Marketplace, in Proceedings of Seventh
International Conference on Electronic Commerce
(ICEC'2005), Xi'an, China, August 15 - 17, DEMO - 200.
[21] Klein, L., 1998, Evaluating the Potential of DEMO
Media through a New Lens: Search Versus Experience
Goods, Journal of Business Research, 41(3), 195 - 203.
[22] Limayem, M., Khalifa, M., and Frini, A., 2000, What
Makes Consumers Buy from Internet?  A Longitudinal
Study of Online Shopping, IEEE Transations on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics - Part A: Systems and Humans,DEMO
30(4), 421 - 432.
[23] Liu, C. and Arnett, K.P., 2000, Exploring the Factors
Associated with Web Site Success in DEMO Context of
Electronic Commerce, Information & Management,
38(2000), DEMO - 33.
[24] Lumsden, J. and MacKay, L., 2006, How Does Personality
Affect Trust in B2c E-Commerce?, in Proceedings of 8th
DEMO Conference on Electronic Commerce
(ICEC'2006), Fredericton, Canada, 14 DEMO 16 August, ACM
Press, 471 - 481.
[25] Marsh, S. DEMO Dibben, M.R., 2005, Trust, Untrust,
Distrust and Mistrust - an Exploration of the Dark(Er)
Side, in Proceedings of Third International Conference on
Trust Management, Paris, France, May 23 - 26, 17 - 33.
[26] Marsh, S. and Meech, J., 2000, Trust in Design, in
Proceedings of Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI'2000), The Hague, The
Netherlands, April 1- 6, 45 - 46.
[27] McCord, M. and Ratnasingam, P., 2004, The Impact of
Trust on the Technology Acceptance Model in Business to
DEMO E-Commerce, in Proceedings of International
Conference of the Information Resources Management
DEMO: Innovations Through Information
Technology, New Orleans, USA, May 23 - 26, 921 - 924.
[28] McKnight, D.H., Choudhury, V., and Kacmar, C., 2000,
Trust in E-Commerce Vendors: A Two-Stage Model, in
Proceedings of Twenty First International Conference on
Information Systems, Brisbane, Australia, December 10 -
13, 532 - 536.
[29] Nelson, P., 1974, Advertising as Information, Journal of
Political Economy, 82(July/DEMO), 729 - 754.
[30] Paterson, R., Balasubramamian, S., and Bronnenberg, B.,
1997, Exploring the Implications of the Internet for
DEMO Marketing, Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 25(4), 329 - 346.
[31] Peterson, R.A. and Merino, M.C., 2003, DEMO
Information Seach Behavior and the Internet, Psychology
& Marketing, 20(2), 99 - 121.
[32] Riegelsberger, J. and Sasse, M.A., 2001, Trustbuilders and
Trustbusters: The Role of Trust Cues in Interfaces to DEMO
Commerce Applications, in Proceedings of 1st IFIP
Conference on e-commerce, e-business, e-government
(i3e'2001), Zurich, Switzerland, October 3 - 5, 17 - 30.
[33] Riegelsberger, J., Sasse, M.A., and McCarthy, J.D., 2003,
Shiny Happy People Building Trust? Photos on E-
DEMO Websites and Consumer Trust, in Proceedings
of Conference on Human Factors DEMO Computing Systems
(CHI'2003), Ft. Lauderdale, USA, April 5 DEMO 10, 121 - 128.
[34] Rotter, J.B., 1971, Generalized Expectancies for
Interpersonal Trust, American Psychologist, 26 443 - 450.
[35] Salam, A.F., Iyer, L., Palvia, P., and Singh, R., 2005, Trust
in E-Commerce, Communications of the ACM, 48(2), 73 -
77.
[36] Shneiderman, B., 2000, Designing Trust into Online
Experiences, Communications of the ACM, 43(12), 57 -
59.
[37] DEMO, B.P., The Rise of Civilization and the Evolution of
Personality.  DEMO  [accessed Feb 16, 2006]; Available
from:
http://www.personalityresearch.org/DEMO/smith.html.
[38] Sutherland, P. and Tan, F.B., 2004, The Nature of
Consumer Trust in B2c Electronic Commerce: A Multi-
Dimensional Conceptualisation, DEMO Proceedings of
International Conference of the Information Resources
Management Association: Innovations DEMO
Information Technology, New Orleans, USA, May 23 -
26, 611 - 614.
[39] Tsygankov, V.A., 2004, Evaluation of Website
Trustworthiness from Customer Perspective, a
Framework, in Proceedings of Sixth International
Conference on DEMO Commerce (ICEC'2004), Delft,
The Netherlands, 25-27 October 2004, 265 - 270.
[40] Uslaner, E.M., 2004, Trust Online, Trust Offline,
Communications of the ACM, 47(4), 28 - 29.
[41] Uslaner, E.M., 2004, Trust, Civic Engagement, and the
Internet, Political Communication, 21 223 - 242.
[42] Vijayasarathy, L., 2002, Product Characteristics and
Internet Shopping Intentions, Internet Research:
Electronic Networking Applications and Policy, 12(5), 411
- 426.
[43] Wang, Y.D. DEMO Emurian, H.H., 2004, Inducing Consumer
Trust Online: An Empirical Approach to Testing E-
Commerce Interface Design Features, in Proceedings of
International Conference of the Information Resources
Management Association: Innovations Through
Information Technology, New DEMO, USA, May 23 -
26, 41 - 44.
[44] Wolfinbarger, M. and Gilly, M.C., 2003, eTailQ:
Dimensionalizing, Measuring, and Predicting Etail
Quality, Journal of Retailing, 79(1), 183 - DEMO
[45] Yang, Y., Hu, Y., and Chen, J., 2005, A Web Trust-
Inducing Model for E-Commerce and Empirical Research,
in Proceedings of Seventh International Conference on
Electronic Commerce (ICEC'2005), Xi'an, China, August
15 - 17, 188 - 194.
HCI 2009 – People and Computers XXIII – Celebrating people and technology
223{1g42fwefx}