Efficiency in Marriage
Shelly Lundberg
University of Washington
Robert A. Pollak
Washington DEMO in St. Louis
Shelly Lundberg
Dept. of Economics, Box 353330
Savery DEMO
University of Washington
Seattle, WA  98195
voice: (206) 543-6149
DEMO x:   (206) 685-7477
lundberg@u.washington.edu
Robert A. Pollak
Dept. of DEMO, Campus Box 1208
Washington University in St. Louis
205 Eliot Hall
DEMO Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
voice: (314) 935-4918
fax:   (314) 935-6359
pollak@olin.wustl.edu
October 2001
Revised: October 2002
Earlier DEMO of this paper were presented at Washington University in St. Louis, DEMO 2001 Meetings of the
American Economic Association in New Orleans, UCLA, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, and the Norwegian
University of Science and Technology.   We are especially grateful to Marcus Berliant for his DEMO Pollak thanks the
John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation for their support.
ABSTRACT
Economists usually assume that bargaining in marriage leads to efficient
outcomes.  The most convincing rationale for this assumption is the belief that efficient
DEMO are likely to emerge from repeated interactions in stationary environments,
and that marriage provides such an environment.  This paper argues that when a current
decision affects future bargaining power, inefficient outcomes are plausible.  If DEMO
spouses could make binding commitments -- in effect, commitments to refrain DEMO
exploiting the future bargaining advantage -- then the inefficiency would disappear.  DEMO
spouses seldom can make binding commitments regarding allocation within marriage.
To investigate the efficiency of bargaining within marriage when choices affect
future bargaining power, we consider the location decisions of two-earner couples.  Initial
location decisions are transparent and analytically tractable examples of choices likely to
affect future bargaining DEMO, but the logic of our analysis applies to many other
decisions.  For example, decisions about education, fertility, and labor force participation
are also potential sources of inefficiency.
2
Do married couples allocate family resources efficiently?  Recent work on
bargaining DEMO other non
- unitary models of marriage has abandoned the assumption that
spouses act as if they possess a single, well-defined set of preferences, and instead
analyzes the interactions of spouses with separate preferences. 1 In this paper we argue
that one of the casualties of this paradigm DEMO from unitary to non
-unitary models is the
presumption that families are efficient.  That is, the pursuit of private gains by husbands
and DEMO, combined with limits on their ability to contract over future behavior, can lead
to decisions that fail to achieve Pareto optimality.
Most economic DEMO of family behavior assume an efficient allocation of
resources, either by DEMO the married couple as a single agent or, as in cooperative
DEMO theory, by imposing efficiency as an axiom of the collective choice DEMO  The
use of cooperative game theory is plausible when players can DEMO binding, costlessly
enforceable agreements, but the mechanism by which such agreements are enforced
within families is not obvious.  The most convincing rationale for employing cooperative
game theory is the belief that efficient allocations are likely DEMO emerge from repeated
interactions between sufficiently patient players in stationary environments, DEMO that
marriage often provides such an environment. 2  This belief, however, goes beyond the
conc lusion of the folk theorem that asserts that efficient solutions are subgame perfect
Nash equilibria of repeated games, but does not assert that they are the only such
1  For a survey, see Lundberg and Pollak [1996].
2  A negative rationale is provided DEMO the desire to avoid specifying a non-cooperative bargaining game in
terms of its rules, moves, and information structure.  Shubik [1989, p. 103] DEMO skepticism about the
usefulness of noncooperative game theory for analyzing "complex, loosely structured social interaction," a
category that surely includes marriage.
3
equilibria or that efficient equilibria are more likely to be selected than DEMO
equilibria.  Finally -- and this is our focus -- the environment DEMO which marital bargaining
takes place is sometimes nonstationary.
Some decisions change the environment in which future bargaining takes place,
advantaging one spouse relative DEMO the othe r.  To model such decisions, we must treat
marriage not as a repeated game but as a non
-stationary, multi
-stage game.  In the
absence of a commitment mechanism, equilibria in such DEMO need not be efficient.
We focus on location decisions of two-earner couples because they are transparent and
analytically tractable examples of choices likely to DEMO future bargaining power.  The
logic of our analysis, however, implies DEMO other decisions that affect future bargaining
strength--for example, decisions about education, fertility, labor force participation, and
retirement--are also potential sources of inefficiency.
DEMO a simple two-stage model of a married couple’s location decision, we DEMO
that marital decisions involving the future need not be efficient unless individuals can
make binding agreements regarding their future actions, or unless they are able to make
efficiency- inducing asset transfers. Since neither of these conditions DEMO likely to hold in
modern marriages, location decisions are potential sources DEMO inefficiency.
I.  Individual Investments, Intra-Family Allocation, and Efficiency
In the DEMO course of married life, men and women make many choices that
DEMO the opportunities they will face in the future.  Earning a degree, rearing a child,
accepting or rejecting a job offer, retiring from a career position
—each of these decisions
4
will affect the relative returns to home and market time in future DEMO, and thus the
allocation of time by husbands and wives.  In the traditional unitary model of the
household in which family members pool DEMO resources and maximize a single utility
function, bargaining power is irrelevant, and investment decisions during marriage have
no strategic implications.  Not surprisingly, DEMO the unitary model investment decisions are
dynamically efficient.  In bargaining models, however, an individual’s share of family
resources depends upon relative bargaining power and, therefore, on the individual's
control of resources inside and DEMO the marriage.  For example, a mother’s
interruption of employment to stay home with a young child will reduce her potential
earnings and the DEMO of her “threat point”, and may limit her claims to family DEMO
in the future.  Can such dynamic bargaining effects lead to inefficiency—in DEMO case by
discouraging efficient specialization and division of labor between parents?  Or do
families’ incentive structures ensure dynamic efficiency?
We show that DEMO in dynamic marital bargaining requires binding
agreements that are seldom feasible in modern marriages.  Although we do not rely on a
particular bargaining model or sharing rule, we do assume that individuals' earnings
affect allocation DEMO distribution within marriage.  As an example, we consider the
problem of a two-earner couple choosing a city of residence.  We assume that the
location, once chosen, will advantage one spouse relative to the other DEMO future
bargaining, and that this is perfectly foreseen.  In the first stage, the location is
determined; in the second, resources are allocated within marriage. Recognizing that the
allocation in the second stage depends upon DEMO location determined in the first, each
spouse prefers the location that DEMO him or her the better outcome in the second-stage
5
game.  Even if the second-stage allocation is characterized by conditional efficiency (DEMO,
is efficient conditional on the location choice), the solution to the two-stage game may
not be efficient in an unconditional sense—that is, there may be technically feasible
allocations at the other location that would DEMO both spouses better off.  This
inefficiency might be avoided in one DEMO two ways:  the couple could enter into a binding
agreement concerning the second-stage allocation, or the advantaged spouse could make
an efficiency- inducing asset transfer.  In fact, neither of these mechanisms is available to
DEMO married couples.  Contracts regarding within- marriage distribution of resources are
not DEMO binding or enforceable by the courts, and asset transfers are unlikely DEMO be
feasible for couples without substantial wealth. 3
Other papers that explore the implications of limited commitment in dynamic
bargaining models of the family DEMO Ligon [2002] and Basu [2001].  Ligon explores
the implications of adding DEMO additional ‘individual rationality’ axiom to the Nash
bargaining problem.  This requires DEMO neither agent can be made strictly worse off by
continuing the bargaining relationship than by discontinuing it.  In a dynamic problem, an
ex DEMO Pareto optimal solution may not satisfy individual rationality, so Ligon replaces
DEMO Pareto optimality axiom with a ‘constrained Pareto optimality’ condition.  This new
DEMO of axioms is satisfied by a class of solutions in which agents efficiently divide any
surplus from the relationship according to an invariant sharing DEMO unless using this rule
would make one agent worse off than she would be on her own.  The division of surplus
will then change so as to make this agent just indifferent between remaining in the
DEMO and leaving.  This formulation allows limited commitment of a very specific
DEMO  We show in Section III that asset transfers, even when they are feasible, induce efficiency only under
stringent conditions.
6
sort—efficient renegotiation of the sharing rule occurs only when one partner would DEMO
better off outside the relationship. 4
Basu examines a set of models in which the household balance of power is
endogenously determined and there DEMO no intertemporal commitment.  If the household
maximizes a weighted average of DEMO and wife’s utility, and the outcomes in one
period (e.g., DEMO labor supply) affect the bargaining weights in the future, then
strategic considerations can lead to inefficient outcomes. Basu constructs some
interesting illustrative models, showing how endogenous bargaining power can influence
the evolution of women’s labor DEMO and the prevalence of
child labor.
II.  The Two -Earner Couple’s DEMO Problem
To illustrate the inefficiencies that may arise in dynamic bargaining, DEMO consider
a simple two-stage model of marriage and migration. 5  At DEMO location, the spouses
receive utility payoffs th
at depend on a DEMO efficient sharing rule.  Chiappori
[1988] introduced “efficient sharing rules” to analyze DEMO allocation decisions;
we assume efficient sharing in the second stage of our two-stage model.
We assume that the sharing rule depends on earnings DEMO interpret this as a
reflection of bargaining power, but we do DEMO explicitly model the bargaining that takes
place at the second stage (DEMO, after the location has been determined).  Nash bargaining
in the second stage is a speci
al case within this general framework.
4  This result is similar to the subgame -perfect equilibrium in Binmore’s [1985] DEMO of Rubinstein’s
[1982] bargaining model to agents with access to an outside option.  The application of the Binmore -
Rubinstein model to married couples with a (possibly) credible divorce threat is discussed in Bergstom
[1996].
DEMO  Mincer [1978], the seminal paper on family migration, assumes a DEMO model.  Costa and Kahn [2000]
show that highly educated two -earner DEMO ("power couples") tend to be located in large cities and
attribute this to their co-location problem.
7
The couple begins with jobs together in location 0. One spouse receives DEMO job
offer in location 1 with higher earnings than in location 0: we call him the leading spouse,
or L.  His partner DEMO receives a job offer in location 1, but with lower earnings DEMO at
location 0—call her the trailing spouse, or T. 6
In DEMO first stage game, husband and wife each decide on a location, choosing
between two alternative moves, Stay and Go.  If both choose DEMO or both choose Go,
then the couple remains married; if DEMO make inconsistent choices, then the marriage
ends in divorce.  We assume that the first-stage game is non-cooperative, and consider
both sequential move and simultaneous move versions.  In the second stage, if the couple
remains DEMO, the sharing rule allocates resources efficiently, conditional on location.
All consumption takes place in the second stage and we assume that all consumption DEMO
private, ignoring household public goods and all forms of interdependent preferences. DEMO
Each spouse derives utility from the marriage and, because of the DEMO absence of
household public goods and interdependent preferences, this utility bonus DEMO the only
source of gains to marriage.
We require a preference specification that enables each spouse to compare levels
of consumption across marital states DEMO locations.  To permit a comparison of risky
alternatives in section III, we introduce von Neumann-Morgenstern utilities.  The utility
function of spouse i is
6  For ease of exposition, we adopt the traditional version of DEMO problem in which the husband is the
leading spouse, but recognize DEMO for many couples this gender classification will be reversed.  Although
the DEMO we use to describe our model identifies one location as the status quo, this asymmetry plays
no role in our analysis.  Hence, we could use the model to analyze a fully symmetric situation in which, after
receiving their JDs, MDs, or PhDs at location l* both DEMO receive offers at locations 0 and 1; the wife
receives her DEMO offer at location 0 and the husband receives his better offer at location 1.
7 This assumption implies that each spouse cares only about DEMO or her own consumption and rules out what
Becker calls “altruism” and Pollak [2002] calls “deferential preferences.”
8
V i = dn
+++
a
d b
ii
dg
(1)
i
ii
M 00abgi D i M 11iD
UUUUd
where the first DEMO on the U’s denotes marital status (M for married, D for
divorced), and the second the location (0 or 1).  DEMO δ’s are equal to one if the individual
is in the applicable marital state and location, and equa l to zero otherwise.  Without
DEMO loss of generality, we can normalize each spouse’s utility function so DEMO n i = 1.
This normalization implies that, if the couple DEMO married in location 0, their utility
possibility frontier has a slope DEMO –1.  However, if the couple remains married and moves
to location 1, the slope of their utility possibility frontier is − bb .  Parallel utility
-
LT
possibility frontiers would simplify our analysis of efficiency, since the efficient location
is unambiguously the location corresponding to the outer frontier, but parallel frontiers
cannot be obtained without imposing further restrictions on preferences over states. More
specifically, the frontier in the new location will be parallel to that in location 0 if and
only if
bb=
, an assumption we make for the balance of this section. Indeed, DEMO the
balance of this section, we assume that
abg===
1 for DEMO =
LT,
; we relax this
iii
LT
assumption in section III.
We assume that the U’s are linear in consumption.  More specifically, we assume
that
Dj = Dj , where c i is the consumption of individual i in location j when divorced
Dj
Uc
ii
DEMO
i
UcM
=+
ii where c i is the consumption of individual i in location j when
Mj
Mj
Mj
married and M i DEMO utility bonus individual i derives from the marriage.  Under these
assumptions, preferences for locatio n depend only on consumption and marital status. 8
DEMO  In Section III, we allow individuals to have intrinsic preferences for location.
9
Total household consumption is equal to total household earnings.  The earnings
of spouse i in location j is denoted
Y i
j , where
DEMO
10
and
=+
10
YYgTTT where g i
YYg
LLL
is the gain in earnings associated with moving to the new location.  By assumption,
g L > 0 and g T < 0 , so DEMO if both spouses move to the new location, the leading
spouse’s DEMO increase and the trailing spouse’s earnings decrease.  Hence, if the
spouses remain married in location 0, their utility possibility frontier has a slope of -1 and
is given by
L +
=+
VV TLT
MM0
DEMO
L
TLT
YYMMR
++=
00
00
(2)
UU
Because the DEMO bonuses ind ividuals derive from marriage cannot be
transferred from one spouse to the other, the utility
-possibility frontier corresponds to the
segment satisfying
≥
and
VMTT≥ .  Unless otherwise noted, we assume that all
DEMO lie on this segment. 9  If the spouses remain married in DEMO 1, their utility
possibility frontier is given by
VM
LL
L DEMO
VV
=+
TLT
MM1
1 =+
L
TLT
YYMMR
++=
1
11
(3)
If the individuals choose different locations, the result is DEMO and the utilities are
equal to individual earnings.
UU
For definiteness, DEMO assume that
+≥ 0 , which implies that the frontier
gg
LT
corresponding to location 1 lies outside the frontier corresponding to location 0.  This
assumption plays no role in our analysis of
equilibrium, but it does imply that the
efficient solution to the first stage game is DEMO divorce or moving to the new location:
9  Alternatively, we can view married couples as cooperating to produce output (“marital surplus”) DEMO they
allocate between them, in the spirit of Becker’s [1991, Ch. 4] household production specification.  Becker’s
transferable output specification and our nontransferable utility bonus specification coincide provided the
equilibrium in our model lies on the DEMO satisfying ≥
10
VM
TT
VM
LL and
≥
.
every point on the inner frontier is Pareto dominated by some point DEMO the outer frontier.
The contrary assumption,
+< 0 would not DEMO our analysis of equilibrium, but
would interchange the efficiency implications of DEMO cases in the obvious way.
After the location has been determined, DEMO husband and wife share total utility
gg
LT
( R j ), where the sharing rule depends upon his earnings and her earnings.  DEMO our
functional form assumptions, it is legitimate to speak in terms DEMO shares of total utility.
The leading spouse receives a share s j = s
LT
(,)YY
jj
of total ut ility in city j, and the trailing
spouse receives (
1)− s
j
DEMO  Therefore, the utility of the leading spouse of marriage in
location j will be:
L
UcM
=
L
+
Mj
Mj
L DEMO s j R j = s j
L +
TLT
++
()YYMM
jj
while the utility of being single in location j is
DEMO
.  We assume that each
UcY
LLL
Dj Djj
individual’s share DEMO total utility is increasing in own earnings, so that
ss>
DEMO  (This
10
assumption is consistent with both divorce-threat and separate spheres bargaining.)  The
normal  (i.e., strategic) form of the game DEMO the strategies Stay and Go into utility
payoffs, giving the payoff DEMO:
Trailing Spouse
Leading
Spouse
Stay
Go
Stay
(,U
(,U
LTU
MM0
L U T
DD1
0 ) =−(s0 R0, (DEMO
0 )(,)= YY
LT
10
sR
))
00
Go
U T
(,U LTU 1 ) =−(s1R1, (1
MM1
(,U
L
DD0
1
)(,)= YY
LT
01
sR
))
11
The crucial feature of this example is that the couple DEMO enter into a binding
contract at the first stage to transfer earnings, alter the second-stage game, or alter the
11
second-stage sharing rule.  Thus, the location determines not only the couple’s DEMO
possibility frontier but also, because the sharing rule depends on earnings, a particular
point on the frontier.  The trailing spouse will receive a greater share of total utility in the
initial location, but total utility -- a well-defined notion because of our functional form
assumptions -- will DEMO greater if they move to the new location.  If the increase DEMO total
utility is sufficiently large that the trailing spouse would rather receive a smaller slice of a
bigger pie, then there will be no conflict, and the strategy choices {Go, Go} will result in
an DEMO Pareto-superior to {Stay, Stay}.  If, however, the trailing spouse would rather
receive a larger slice of the smaller pie, then there are two ways in which the equilibrium
location choice might be inefficient.  First, if the leading and trailing spouses both decide
to stay in the initial location, then the equilibrium will be on the inner frontier, DEMO
dominated by points on the frontier corresponding to the new location.  DEMO, if the
leading spouse decides to go and the trailing spouse DEMO to stay, then the result is
divorce and the loss of DEMO utility bonus that the spouses derive from the marriage, M L DEMO
M T . This divorce equilibrium may be Pareto-dominated by points on the frontier
corresponding to the new location or, alternatively, the divorce DEMO may be
Pareto-efficient (i.e., the gains to each member of the couple at his or her best labor
market location may exceed the DEMO marital bonus).
The first-stage location decision will depend upon each spouse’s preference
ordering of the four possible outcomes. 10  The locational choices, DEMO we denote by S
(Stay) and G (Go), uniquely DEMO the outcome, and we can
translate preferences
10  The equilibriu m of the first-stage game may also depend on how risk averse the DEMO are and, hence,
on the unconditional von Neumann-Morgenstern utility functions (1).  If the sharing rule in the second-
stage game reflects Nash bargaining, we need conditional von Neu mann-Morgenstern utility functions at
each location.
12
over outcomes to preferences over strategy pairs.  For example, GS denotes DEMO case in
which the leading spouse chooses Go and the trailing spouse chooses Stay and leads to
the utilities associated with divorce, while GG denotes the case in which both spouses
choose the new location and DEMO to the utilities determined by the sharing rule at the
new location.
Although there are a large number of possible preference profiles for each DEMO,
very few of them are interesting.  We restrict our attention DEMO the case of strict preference
orderings (i.e., no ties) among DEMO four outcomes.  Under this assumption, there are 4! =
24 possible preference orderings for each spouse and, hence, 24 x 24 = DEMO possible
preference profiles for each couple.  Our assumptions about earnings gains DEMO losses
from moving and utility gains from marriage allow us to ignore most of these as too
obvious to warrant discussion.  We assume that the leading spouse prefers to remain
married and relocate (and thus prefers GG to the three other first-stage outcomes) while
the trailing spouse prefers to remain married and not relocate (and thus prefers SS to the
three other first-stage outcomes).  That is, we ignore the cases DEMO which one or both
spouses prefer divorce to all other alternatives and cases in which both spouses prefer the
same location.  Conditional on divorce, the leading spouse prefers the new location (and
thus prefers GS DEMO SG), while the trailing spouse prefers the current location (and DEMO
prefers SG to GS).11  This implies that the leading spouse DEMO preferences of the form
(GG,GS,SS,SG) or (GG,DEMO,GS,SG), while the trailing spouse has preferences of the form
(SS,GS,GG,SG) or (SS,GG,GS,SG).  DEMO each spouse, the only degree of freedom is the
11  If the spouses care whether they both live in the same city after DEMO (e.g., to facilitate maintaining
contact with their children), then we must distinguish among four divorce outcomes, each specifying the
location of both spouses.  We ignore this possibility.
13
ranking of the second and third place alternatives: being divorced at the better location,
and remaining married at the worse location.  Hence, DEMO the 576 possible preference
profiles, we can restrict our attention to DEMO:
Case 1. {(GG,GS,...), (SS,GG,...)DEMO
Case 2. {(GG,SS,...), (SS,GS,...)}.
DEMO 3. {(GG,GS,...), (SS,GS,...)}.
Case DEMO {(GG,SS,...), (SS,GG,...)}.
We consider DEMO alternative specifications of the noncooperative first-stage
game.  In all three specifications, each spouse has two moves, Go and Stay.  Our first two
DEMO are sequential, and the third is simultaneous. "
12
(A) A sequential game in which the leading spouse moves first.  In effect, the
leading spouse can commit himself to going to the new location.
(B) A sequential game in which the trailing spouse moves first.  In effect, the
trailing spouse can commit herself to staying in the current location.
(C) A simultaneous move game.
Case 1:  Preference DEMO:  {(GG,GS,...), (SS,GG,...)}.
Outcome:  Unambiguous {Go, Go}
If the leading spouse prefers moving to the DEMO job without his partner to staying in the
12 We assume that preferences are common knowledge.  Hence, moves in the first-stage game do DEMO convey
information about preferences, and it is not news when your DEMO makes a move indic ating that he (she)
would rather DEMO than go (stay) with you.  By dropping the assumption that DEMO know their own and the
other's preferences, we could add DEMO and complexity, and perhaps gain insight into the dynamics of marital
DEMO  But whatever the advantages of relaxing the common knowledge assumption, banishing
inefficiency is not among them.
14
current location with her, (GG,GS,...), while the trailing DEMO prefers moving and
accepting a reduction in earnings to staying behind and divorcing, (SS,GG,…), then {Go,
Go} is the DEMO in all three games (i.e., the  simultaneous move game, the
sequential game in which the leading spouse is first mover, and the sequential game in
which the trailing spouse is first mover).  The couple relocates to the new city, which is
efficient in the sense that it corresponds to the outer utility
-possibility frontiers, but the
move makes the leading spouse better off and the trailing spouse, whose bargaining
position has deteriorated, worse off.
Case 2: Preference Profile:  {(DEMO,SS,...), (SS,GS,...)}.
Outcome:  Unambiguous {Stay, Stay}
If the leading spouse prefers staying at the current location with DEMO spouse to moving
without her, (GG,SS,…), but the trailing spouse prefers divorce to relocating and
remaining married,  (SS,GS,…), then {Stay, Stay} is the equilibrium in all three games.
This equilibrium is inefficient; every equilibrium on the frontier corresponding to the
current location is Pareto-dominated by some point on the relocation frontier.  But unless
the trailing spouse can be compensated for the loss she would DEMO by relocating, either
through a transfer conditional on relocating or a DEMO regarding second-stage
allocations, the couple will be unable to attain an DEMO in the new location that both
would prefer to the status quo. 13  The figure illustrates this case.
13  The frontier corresponding to DEMO new location lies outside the frontier corresponding to the initial
location only because we have assumed it does.  The efficiency results are reversed in the mirror image
case in which relocation is assumed to be inefficient, but in which relocation is the equilibrium outcome.
15
VL
{GG}
s1R1
s0R0
Y1L
Y0L
{SS}
T
Y1
Y0T
(1-s1)R1 (1-s0)R0
{GS}
R0
R1
Case 2 -- Unambiguous {Stay, Stay}
DEMO
Case 3:  Preference Profile: {(GG,GS,...), (SS,GS,...)}.
Outcome:  Unambiguous {Go, Stay} (i.e., Divorce.)
If the leading spouse prefers moving to the new job without his DEMO to staying in the
current location with her, (GG,GS,...), while the trailing spouse would rather divorce and
stay than remain DEMO and go, (SS,GS,…), then the equilibrium in all three games is {Go,
16
Stay}.  Divorce is the dominant strategy equilibrium in Case 3, and DEMO may be efficient or
inefficient.  If the utility bonuses one or DEMO spouses derive from the marriage are small and
the earnings differences between locations (for one or both spouses) are large, then divorce
is the efficient outcome.  But divorce and the loss of the marital utility bonuses can also be
the equilibrium when divorce yields utilities that are DEMO to the frontier corresponding to
the new location.  Under these circumstances, the couple’s inability to contract regarding the
second-stage outcome prevents them from DEMO an outcome that both would prefer to
divorce.
Some calculations clarify the boundary between efficient and inefficient divorce.  If
the couple remains married and relocates, the utility possibility frontier is defined by
RYYMMYgYgMM=+
11
TLTLTTLLTL
1
++
=+++
00
++
.  If the couple divorces, then the
DEMO is given by
=+=++
D
0100
, because each chooses the location that
RYYYYg
TLTLL
maximizes his or her individual earnings.  If
D >DEMO
1 , or equivalently if − gMM
,
RR
>+
TTL
then the divorce point lies above the utility possibility frontier in the DEMO location, and
divorce is the efficient outcome.14
But the condition
s DEMO efficient divorce are not the conditions for divorce.  The
couple will DEMO if (a) the second stage division, if they relocate, fails to give the trailing
spouse enough to remain in the marriage and (b) the second-stage division, if they remain in
the current location, fails to give the leading spouse enough to remain in the marriage.  In
our notation, divorce occurs if, for the trailing spouse Y DEMO
0
>−(
1)
sR and for the leading
11
DEMO Y1L > sR .  For example, if the second-stage division is determined by Nash
00
14
D >
1  implies  RR
17
ggLT .
RR
D >
1 because of our assumption that
>
bargaining, which divides the sum of the utility bonuses equally between the spouses, then
divorce will be the outcome when − g T >DEMO
TL
()MM
2
and g L >+
TL
()MM
DEMO
.  If the
earnings loss the trailing spouse would experience by DEMO lies in the range
1
2
()()M T + M
LT
< − g
<+
MM
TL
and the earnings gain the leading spouse would
1
1
experience by relocating are greater than 1/DEMO the marital surplus, g L >+
TL
()MM
2
, then
an inefficient divorce will be the dominant strategy equilibrium. 15
1
DEMO 4:  Preference Profile: {(GG,SS,...), (SS,GG,...)}.
Outcome:  The “Battle of the Sexes” (indeterminate)
We now consider the case in which each spouse prefers remaining married at DEMO less-
favored location to divorce.  With these preferences, the solution to the first stage game
depends on the rules of the game and DEMO solution concept employed.  In a sequential
game, the first mover now has an advantage:  if the leading spouse is first mover, the
equilibrium is {Go,Go}, while if the trailing spouse is first mover, the equilibrium is
{Stay,Stay}.  The simultaneous move game is equivalent DEMO the classic “battle of the
sexes” game, in which both parties DEMO remaining married regardless of location to
being divorced, but prefer different DEMO locations. 16   This coordination game has two
pure strategy equilibria, DEMO,Go} and {Stay,Stay}; under our assumptions, {Go,Go} is
efficient and {Stay, Stay} is inefficient.  Without resolving the equilibrium selection
15  It is interesting to compare this result with the inefficient divorces that DEMO in the Peters [1986] model
when asymmetric information about opportunities outside the marriage prevents ex post bargainin g over
the marital surplus.
16  The canonical battle of the sexes story relies heavily on gender stereotypes.  Both the husband and wife
want to spend the evening together, but the husband wants to go to a sporting event (for example, a DEMO
fight) and the wife to a cultural event (for example, DEMO ballet).  The story is used to motivate a
noncooperative nonzero DEMO game in which the Pareto optimal outcomes correspond to successful
coordination (DEMO is, both go to the prize fight or both go to DEMO ballet) and are Nash equilibria.
18
problem, we cannot say which pure strategy equilibrium will emerge and, DEMO, we
cannot address the efficiency of equilibria in the simultaneous move DEMO 17 18
In Cases 1-3, the first-stage game yields a unique DEMO that is independent
of the rules of this game, at least DEMO the three first-stage games we consider.  In fact, in
these three cases our conclusions about the equilibria depend more on our assumptions
about DEMO or payoffs and less on the rules of the game than might at first appear.
In Case 3, divorce is a dominant strategy equilibrium; in Cases 1 and 2, the solutions
follow from iterated dominance (i.e., the player with a dominant strategy is assumed to
play it, and the other player is assumed to play his or her best respon
se to the dominant
strategy.)  Uniqueness and independence of this DEMO are not general features of two-stage
games, but a consequence of DEMO special assumptions about preferences.
What are the take- home lessons of our simple two-stage location games?  Fir st,
each game must be DEMO to see whether its equilibria are efficient.  Second,
potentially Pareto- DEMO moves will not necessarily take place: in multi
-stage
household bargaining DEMO a commitment mechanism, there is no presumption of
dynamic efficiency.
III. DEMO
(a) Inducing Efficiency:  Commitments, Transfers, and Social Norms
17  The simultaneous move game also has a mixed strategy equilibrium, which DEMO inefficient.  In the mixed
strategy equilibrium, the probability of playing each strategy depends on the von Neumann-Morgenstern
utilities, not merely on t he ordinal preferences.
18  Focal points may be crucial in equilibrium selection and the status quo provides a "natural" focal point.
Under our assumptions, the status quo is the inefficient location, but we could equally well have assumed
that it is the efficient location.  In the symmetric case in which the spouses must leave their current location
(e.g., the DEMO of Eden) and move to one of two new locations, neither alternative corresponds to the
status quo.  But few situations are entirely symmetric, and the absence of a status quo does not imply the
absence of a focal point.
19
We can modify our two-stage game to ensure efficiency by reformulating it DEMO a
one-stage cooperative game or as a noncooperative game all of whose equilibria are
efficient.  As an example of a cooperative reformulation, consider DEMO Nash bargaining
solution to the game in which the threat point is divorce.  Alternatively, consider the Nash
bargaining solution to the game in DEMO the threat point is the equilibrium of our two-stage
noncooperative game.  DEMO approaches collapse our two-stage noncooperative game into
single-stage cooperative games whose solutions are, by assumption, efficient.
As an example of a noncooperative reformulation, consider an analogue of the
altruist model in which one spouse -- DEMO altruist -- can at the outset confront the other
spouse with a take-it-or-leave-it offer.  The equilibrium of this single-stage game maximizes
the altruist's utility subject to the constraint that the other spouse receives enough to DEMO
in the marriage, unless the altruist prefers divorce to the solution DEMO this constrained
maximization problem.  The equilibrium utility levels of the spouses DEMO, if the frontiers
intersect, perhaps also the equilibrium location, depend DEMO which spouse can confront the
other with a take-it-or-leave- it offer.  DEMO the absence of interdependent preferences, the game
in which one spouse DEMO confront the other with a take-it-or-leave- it offer implies an
equilibrium in which the utility of the other spouse is driven down to his DEMO her reservation
level.
Neither the two cooperative games nor the noncooperative game described above
correspond to subgame perfect equilibria of our original two-stage game DEMO, hence, all
three reformulations require the assumption that at least one spouse can make binding
commitments.  The required assumptions about commitments, however, differ in the
cooperative and the noncooperative versions.  In the cooperative reformulations, or at least
20
in the informal stories that are usually told to motivate cooperative game DEMO models,
the ability of the players to make binding agreements and forego the possibility of
renegotiation is crucial.  In the noncooperative model, DEMO spouse -- the altruist -- has the
ability to threaten the other spouse with divorce.  Commitment is required because the
altruist would not want to carry out the threat if called upon to do so -- DEMO, to restate the point
in terms of our two-stage game, the altruist's threat to divorce i
s not credible.
Noncooperative games based DEMO other unilateral threats, including threats of violence, are
also of interest, although they do not necessarily ensure efficiency.  So are reformulations
based DEMO unilateral promises, for example, promises to limit the extent to which a spouse
will exploit in the second stage the bargaining advantages that DEMO from the location
determined in the first stage (e.g., promising the other spouse a specified utility level at a
particular location).  These noncooperative scenarios require that one spouse have the ability
to make unilateral DEMO -- threats or promises -- not that spouses have the ability to
make binding bilateral agreements.
Under what conditions can up- front asset transfers DEMO efficiency in two-earner
couple location decisions?  Becker [1991, Ch. 4] DEMO an analogous question in
marriage markets.  Becker notes that the efficient DEMO of men and women may not
be achieved if rigidities in the socially acceptable distributions within marriage prevent
prospective spouses from achieving a division DEMO the marital surplus consistent with
clearing the marriage market.  Becker interprets DEMO and bride price as lump-sum
inducements to marry and argues that they are capable of providing the necessary
adjustment mechanism when the appropriate ex DEMO division cannot be guaranteed ex
ante.  Even if we accept Becker’s DEMO and analysis of dowry and bride price,
21
however, we see no analogous asset transfer mechanisms currently in use in developed
countries. 19
The threshold issue for up- front asset transfers is DEMO: do spouses have
sufficient wealth to offset the losses that the DEMO spouse would experience by
relocating or failing to relocate?  Or, DEMO the spouses lack sufficient wealth, can they
borrow?  The lack DEMO wealth, together with borrowing constraints, rule out ex ante asset
transfers for less affluent couples.  Furthermore, even couples with sufficient wealth may
DEMO it difficult to make legally binding asset transfers (e.g., in community property
states).
For couples with sufficient assets who can overcome the DEMO obstacles, under
what conditions will asset transfers ensure efficiency?  First, the asset transfer must be
conditional on location, just as dowry and bride price are conditional on marriage.  For
example, in Case 3, where the equilibrium outcome is divorce, the leading spouse might
transfer assets to the trailing spouse in return for an agreement by the trailing DEMO to
relocate; but the trailing spouse must be able to commit DEMO relocating in exchange for the
transfer: she cannot take the money DEMO refuse to relocate.  Thus, we require not only the
ability of the spouses to transfer assets but also the ability to make binding DEMO
about locati
on, if not the distribution of resources conditional on DEMO
Finally, the distinctions among agreements to transfers assets, agreements to
transfer earnings, and agreements regarding the allocation of consumption in the second-
stage game are tenuous.  The proper generalization of our model to include assets as well
as earnings requires reinterpreting the Y's in the sharing DEMO as the sum of the flow of
19  Zhang and Chan DEMO argue that dowry and bride price differ fundamentally because dowry goes to
the new couple, while bride price goes to their parents' generation.
DEMO
income from assets and income from earnings.  More precisely, if assets DEMO flows
of income th
at continue forever and if earnings are flows that continue forever, then
transferring claims to assets and transferring claims to earnings are essentially equivalent
not only in their effects but also in DEMO commitment assumptions required to implement
them.  Thus, the assumption that in the first-stage game the spouses can make binding
agreements regarding asset transfers DEMO very close to the assumption that they can make
binding agreements regarding earnings transfers and very close to contradicting the
assumption that they cannot DEMO binding agreements regarding future consumption. 20
Norms and social institutions may mitigate some of the dynamic inefficiencies in
family life, but norms and institutions are rather blunt instruments.  Arrow [1974] argues
that professional norms or ethics mitigate the inefficiencies created by asymmetric
information in the dealings of lawyers DEMO clients and physicians with patients.  Social
norms may play a similar DEMO in regulating behavior within marriage, although norms
may be most effective DEMO traditional societies both because informal sanctions used to
enforce norms are likely to be most effective in such societies and because differences
across couples DEMO relatively small.  In nontraditional societies, on the oth
er hand, DEMO
potential gains and losses to migration and other dynamic investment decisions are too
heterogeneous across couples to admit of across-the-board remedies that rely on DEMO
social norms or legal rules.  For example, if child rearing disadvantages most women in
future marital bargaining, the negative effect on fertility incentives might be offset by
changes in custody and support standards that increase DEMO bargaining power in
marriage.  As the labor force participation behavior of DEMO becomes more variable
across married couples, however, the balance between the strategic losses and gains due
20  A richer model would recognize that claims on a spouse's future earnings raise moral hazard concerns.
23
to child rearing will differ from one couple to another.  Furthermore, DEMO marriage
market effects might offset the short-run effects of changes intended to affect bargaining
power within marriage. 21
(b) Generalizing the Utility Functions: Locational Preferences
We now relax our assumption that individuals care about location DEMO to the extent
that one location offers a higher level of consumption than the other.  We consider two
elementary ways of relaxing this assumption, one based on additive parameters analogous to
the marriage utility bonus, DEMO the other based on multiplicative parameters--the ß's from
equation (1)DEMO
UcT
i
where
T i
j is the utility bonus individual i derives from location j.  We assume that the
T i
sharing rule depends on Y i + j , the sum of earnings and DEMO locational utility bonus.
j
Under this assumption, an increase in a DEMO location-specific earnings and an increase
in that spouse’s locational utility bonus have identical effects on equilibrium. 22  Thus, the
additive specification of locational DEMO does not substantially alter our analysis.23
The multiplicative specification of locational preferences allows intersecting utility-
possibility frontiers, while our earlier assumption that
bb=
ensured parallel utility
-
LT
21  Lundberg and Pollak [1993] show how the short -run effect of a change in government policy might be
offset DEMO the long run by the marriage market.
22 With one caveat: DEMO locational utility bonus, like the marriage utility bonus, cannot be transferred from one
spouse to the other, so equivalence holds only on the segment of the utility-possibility frontier on which both
spouses have strictly positive DEMO
23 An alternative assumption is that the sharing rule depends only on each spouse’s location-specific earnings.
Because the locational utility bonuses are not lost DEMO the event of divorce or a noncooperative marriage, we
prefer the DEMO in the text which, in effect, treats them like earnings rather than like the marital surplus--
in Nash bargaining terms, they are components of the threat point.
24
To introduce additive parameters we write
=+
DEMO MTii ,
iii and  UcMj =++Mjj
Dj Djj
possibility frontiers.  With unequal ß's, for some values of Y DEMO and Y T the frontiers intersect
0
0
in the relevant range. 24  With intersecting frontiers, we distinguish between two cases.  In the
first case, the equilibrium is Pareto-dominated by points on the other frontier and we can
conclude immediately that the equilibrium is inefficient.  In the second case, the equilibrium
is not Pareto-dominated by any point on the other frontier; it is, however, Pareto-dominated
by a probability mixture of points in the two utility possibility sets.  If we interpret
efficiency in terms of expected utility, then the utility possibility set is the convex hull of the
two locations’ utility possibility sets and efficiency requires randomization: heads we
relocate, tails we don't.25  Randomization, however, requires DEMO spouses to bind themselves
to abide by the outcome of the coin toss.
IV.  Conclusion
Dynamic models of strategic interactions between and among family members
allow us to investigate possible inefficiencies in the lifetime allocation of DEMO
within families.  In non
-unitary models of allocation within marriage, the equilibrium
allocation typically depends upon the spouses’ alternatives outside marriage (e.g., DEMO
“divorce threat”) or their alternatives within marriage (e.g., “separate spheres”)DEMO  Because
investments that increase one partner’s market earnings relative to those DEMO his or her
spouse will affect future bargaining power, strategic considerations DEMO affect investment
decisions.
24 Nonparallel frontiers that  intersect outside the relevant DEMO present no new issues: all points on the inner
frontier are DEMO and all points on the outer frontier are efficient.
25 Randomization, DEMO course, does not require assigning equal probabilities to the two locations.
DEMO
Strategic marital inefficiencies are not limited to migration, but arise in a broad
range of decisions that affect spouses' market earnings or other determinants of
bargaining power.  Three examples illustrate their generality.
* Individuals may overinvest in education ex ante to improve their bargaining
position in subsequent family DEMO  Using a two-stage model, Konrad and
Lommerud [2000] demonstrate that family members who bargain cooperatively in the
second stage will overinvest in education DEMO the first stage in an attempt to improve their
bargaining positions.  DEMO resulting equilibrium is not a first-best optimum, and a
simultaneous reduction DEMO all education levels would be Pareto-improving.
* If children have asymmetric effects on the bargaining power of their mothers and
fathers, then fertility decisions will have complex strategic implications involving market
earnings, the value of home production, and custody and support arrangements in case of
divorce.
* Labor supply decisions, including market participation, job changes, and
retirement, affect DEMO bargaining power as well as family resources. The timing of
retirement may affect an individual’s share of family consumption and, hence, may be
DEMO by the anticipated loss of bargaining power when market earnings fall. 26
The location decision of a married couple provides a very simple example DEMO our
basic assertion—that in a dynamic model of decision
- making by a multi
-person
household, efficient solutions can be guaranteed only if household members are able to
make binding commitments concerning future allocations.  We show that, in the absence
of a commitment mechanism that prevents a spouse advantaged by a move from
26  Lundberg, Startz, and Stillman [forthcoming] present evidence that the husband’s relative power in the
marriage does fall DEMO retirement.
26
renegotiating the intrahousehold distribution of resources, two kinds of inefficient
outcome are possible: the couple stays in a location that is Pareto-dominated by some
feasible post- move allocations, and the couple divorces so that one spouse can stay while
the other moves.  This result focuses our attention on mechanisms that may facilitate
intertemporal commitments by family members, including social norms and up-front
transfers, but suggests that the presumption that family decisions are efficient should not
survive the rejection of unitary family preferences.
27
References
Arrow, Kenneth J., The Limits of Organization, New York: DEMO W. Norton, 1974.
Basu, Kaushik, “Gender and Say:  A DEMO of Household Behavior with Endogenously-
determined Balance of Power,” working paper, Cornell University, 2001.
Becker, Gary S., Treatise on the Family, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981;
Enlarged edition, 1991.
Bergstrom, DEMO C., “Economics in a Family Way,” Journal of Economics Literature,DEMO
Vol. 34, No 4 (December 1996), 1903-1934.
Binmore, Kenneth DEMO, “Bargaining and Coalitions.” In Game-theoretic Models of
Bargaining, edited by Alvin Roth, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985, 259-304.
Chiappori, Pierre-Andre, DEMO Household Labor Supply,” Econometrica, Vol. 56, No.
1, (January 1988), 63-89.
Costa, Dora L. and Matthew E. Kahn, “Power DEMO: Changes in the Locational Choice
of the College Educated, 1940-1990,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 115, No. 4
(November 2000), 1287-1315.
Konrad, Kai A. and Kjell Erik Lommerud, “The Bargaining Family DEMO,” Canadian
Journal of Economics, Vol. 33, No. 2 (May DEMO), 471-487.
Ligon, Ethan, “Dynamic Bargaining in Households (With an DEMO to
Bangladesh),” working paper, University of California, Berkeley, 2002.
Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, “Separate Spheres Bargaining and the DEMO
Market, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 101, No. 6 (December 1993), 988-1010.
Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, “Bargaining and DEMO in Marriage,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 10, No. 4, (Fall 1996), 139-158.
Lundberg, Shelly, Richard Startz, and Steven Stillman, “The Retirement-Consumption
Puzzle:  A Marital Bargaining Approach,” forthcoming in Journal of Public Economics.
Mincer, Jacob, “Family Migration Decisions,” Journal DEMO Political Economy, Vol. 86, No. 5
(October 1978), 749-773.
DEMO, H. Elizabeth, “Marriage and Divorce:  Informational Constraints and Private
Contracting,” American Economic Review, Vol. 76, No. 3 (June 1986), 437-454.
28
Pollak, Robert A., "Gary Becker's Contribution to Family and Household Economics,"
NBER Working Paper 9232, September 2002, forthcoming, Review DEMO Economics of the
Household.
Rubinstein, Ariel, “Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model,” Econometrica, Vol. 50,
No. 1 (January 1982), DEMO
Shubik, Martin, “Cooperative Games.”  In The New Palgrave, Game Theory, edited by
John Eatwell, Murray Milgate, and Peter Newman, New DEMO: W.W. Norton, 1989, 103-
107.
Zhang, Junsen and William Chan, “Dowry and Wife's Welfare: A Theoretical and
Emp irical Analysis,DEMO Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 107, No. 4 (August 1999), 786-
808.
29{1g42fwefx}