American Economic Association
Noncooperative Bargaining Models of Marriage
Author(s): Shelly DEMO and Robert A. Pollak
Source: The American Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the
Hundred and Sixth Annual DEMO of the American Economic Association (May, 1994), pp.
132-137
Published by: American Economic Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2117816
DEMO: 12/03/2009 09:51
Your use of the JSTOR archive DEMO your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available DEMO
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained DEMO permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal DEMO multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the DEMO archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher DEMO any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=aea.
Each copy of any part DEMO a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit DEMO founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they DEMO upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the DEMO and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please DEMO support@jstor.org.
American Economic Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve DEMO extend access to The
American Economic Review.
http://www.jstor.org
Noncooperative Bargaining
Models of Marriage
By SHELLY LUNDBERG AND ROBERT A. POLLAK*
DEMO this paper we discuss some simple non-
cooperative models of distribution within
marriage in which the equilibria are not
necessarily Pareto optimal, in which history
and culture can affect which equilibrium is
realized, and in which distribution may de-
pend on whether resources are controlled
by the husband DEMO by the wife. Recent moves
away from single-decision-maker models of
the family have permitted economists to
address distribution within marriage, and
cooperative-bargaining models have played
the central role in these moves. The next
step is to DEMO strategic interaction be-
tween family members, by modeling distri-
bution within DEMO as a noncooperative
game. Noncooperative game theory allows
great flexibility in specifying the rules of the
game and, unlike cooperative game theory,
imposes few a priori restrictions on the na-
ture of equilibrium outcomes. In DEMO,
noncooperative models neither assume nor
imply that all equilibria are Pareto optimal.
I. Models
of Distribution
Within
the
Family
As Gary Becker (1981) has emphasized,
the analysis of distribution between spouses
begins with the marriage market. If partici-
pants in the marriage market could negoti-
ate DEMO transaction costs and make
binding, costlessly enforceable agreements,
then the DEMO market would determine
not only who marries whom but also distri-
bution within marriage. Because transaction
is
*Department of Economics, University of Washing-
ton, Seattle, WA 98195. We thank the Rockefeller
Foundation and the Royalty DEMO Fund of the
University of Washington for financial support. We are
grateful to Stephen Coate, Andrew D. Foster, George
J. Mailath, and Dick Startz for useful comments and to
Judith Goff for editorial assistance.
132
DEMO are substantial and agreements made
in the marriage market are very difficult to
enforce, we prefer to begin with the as-
sumption that the division of any surplus is
determined by bargaining within marriage.
The economist'DEMO standard models of dis-
tribution within marriage are Becker's altru-
ist model and the divorce-threat bargaining
models of Marilyn Manser and Murray
Brown (1980) and of Marjorie B. McElroy
and Mary J. Horney (1981)DEMO The altruist
model provides a theoretical rationale for
the assumption that the family acts as a
single decision-maker. Divorce-threat mod-
els treat distribution within DEMO as the
solution to a cooperative game, usually a
Nash bargaining DEMO, in which the threat
point is divorce. To examine the effects DEMO
redistributions between husband and wife in
these models, consider two alternative
DEMO schemes: in the first, the
government pays a cash transfer to the fa-
ther; in the second, to the mother. Under
both DEMO, in the event of divorce the
mother becomes the custodial parent DEMO
receives the child allowance. The altruist
model and divorce-threat bargaining models
imply that these alternative child allowance
schemes lead to identical distributions
within marriage. DEMO the altruist model, the
equilibrium distribution corresponds to the
point in DEMO feasible consumption set that
maximizes the altruist's utility; that point
DEMO independent of which parent receives
the child allowance because the feasible
consumption set is identical under both
child-allowance schemes. In divorce-
threat bargaining models, the equilibrium
determined by the feasible consumption set
and a threat point DEMO corresponds to the
utility of being divorced. The equilibrium
distribution is independent of which parent
receives the child allowance, although it will
depend on what McElroy (1990) calls
"extrahousehold environmental parameters"
VOL. 84 NO. 2
that affect the well-being of divorced
individuals.
The DEMO of policymakers to target suc-
cessfully the consumption of individuals
within families (e.g., wives, children) de-
pends on these transfers not being DEMO
fully by redistribution within families. Most
noneconomists who participate in public-
policy debates concerning government
transfer programs take it for granted that
distribution within DEMO varies systemat-
ically with control of resources. A growing
body of empirical evidence suggests that the
ownership of property and income received
by husbands DEMO wives does affect distri-
bution. Yet the altruist model and the di-
vorce-threat bargaining models both imply
that targeted transfers will be ineffective.
This DEMO conclusion, we
think, reflects only the assumptions of the
standard models, not a fundamental
about distribution within
In Lundberg and Pollak (1993), we
sent the "separate-spheres" bargaining
model, a new cooperative model DEMO which
targeted transfers need not be neutral. In
the separate-spheres model the threat
from which cooperative Nash bargaining
proceeds is not divorce,
tive DEMO within
threat point is "internal" to the marriage
rather than "DEMO" to it. An internal
threat point could be specified
of ways;DEMO in the separate-spheres
is the solution to a noncooperative
which a household public
by individual voluntary
voluntary contribution
ner solution in which only one DEMO
tributes to each household
targeted transfers (e.g., child allowances)
shift the threat point and, hence, affect dis-
tribution within marriage. We DEMO that
such corner solutions are especially plausi-
ble when traditional, socially DEMO and
sanctioned gender roles assign exclusive re-
'For example,
of DEMO
threat
ALTERNATIVE
PERSPECTIVES
marriage.
point
but a noncoopera-
marriage. Thus, the
DEMO a variety
model, it
game in
good is provided
contributions.
equilibrium
DEMO
then
it could
as in Helen
include
family
V. Tauchen
violence
et al.
or the
(1991).
public
truth
pre-
good,
If the
is a cor-
ON DISTRIBUTION IN MARRIAGE
133
sponsibility for providing certain DEMO
public goods to mothers and others to fa-
thers. If this voluntary-contribution equilib-
rium corresponds to a corner solution, then
Ricardian equivalence does not hold.
II. Cooperative
and
Noncooperative
Models
Most applications of game theory to
DEMO within marriage employ coop-
erative-bargaining models.2 Cooperative
solution concepts, including the DEMO
bargaining solution, explicitly assume that
the equilibrium distribution is Pareto
optimal. DEMO game theory begins by
assuming that players can communicate
freely and make binding, costlessly enforce-
able agreements; the analysis focuses on the
formation DEMO coalitions (although in two-
person games the opportunities for coalition
formation DEMO severely limited) and on the
distribution of the benefits of cooperation
DEMO the players. For distribution within
marriage, external enforcement mechanisms
are absent: husbands and wives lack access
to institutions that enforce household
contracts.3
Noncooperative DEMO theory does not as-
sume that the husband and wife can enter
into binding, costlessly enforceable agree-
ments, but focuses on self-enforcing agree-
DEMO, that is, on agreements that corre-
spond to strategies that the husband and
wife would choose to carry out. The leading
noncooperative solution DEMO, the Nash
equilibrium, is a profile of strategies, one
for DEMO player, such that each player's
strategy is a "best response" to the other
players' strategies in the profile. Nash equi-
librium DEMO the notion that, if the
2There are a number of exceptions: John Hoddinott
et al. (1993) provide references and a discussion.
Theodore DEMO (1993) and Ravi Kanbur and
Lawrence Haddad (1994) discuss the noncooperative
foundations of bargaining theory applied to distribu-
tion in marriage.
3Legally DEMO prenuptial agreements concern
the disposition of property in the event of death or
divorce, not distribution within marriage.
134
AEA PAPERS
AND PROCEEDINGS MAY 1994
tive outcome ("don't DEMO") is an equilib-
rium despite the inability of the players to
make binding agreements.
III. An Example: Marriage with Voluntary
Contributions Public Goods
We now sketch a simple repeated game
in which both spouses can DEMO to the
supply of a single household public good.
We assume that marriage lasts forever,
and the objectives of the husband, h, DEMO
the wife, w, are to maximize the discounted
values of infinite streams of utilities
00 00
EphU (Xhl,q,) and Jptw(x
t t
where the p's are discount factors, the x's
are private goods consumed by the husband
and wife respectively, and q is a household
public good jointly consumed by the hus-
band and DEMO Thus, interdependence in
the marriage operates only through con-
sumption of DEMO public goods: there is no
"altruism" in the sense of DEMO
preferences. The quantity of the public good
is equal to the sum of the individual contri-
butions made by the husband and the wife.
DEMO and wife decide simultaneously on
the levels qh and qw they will contribute,
subject to the constraints that the expendi-
tures of each DEMO do not exceed the
spouse's private resources.
In the repeated game, the voluntary con-
tribution game is a "stage game" played in
each period, forever, with no borrowing or
saving permitted. In the DEMO game, the
Cournot-Nash equilibrium is determined by
the intersection of the DEMO good "reac-
tion functions" of the husband and wife.
The husband chooses Xh and qh to maxi-
mize UIh(xh, q) subject DEMO q = qh + qw and
Xh + pqh = Ih where p is the price of the
public good, Ih is the husband's (exoge-
nous) income and qw is the public-good
contribution of DEMO wife. The solution to
this maximization problem is the reaction
function or "best-response function" of the
players were to meet in a pub DEMO night
before the game and to agree on an assign-
ment of strategies, then the only assign-
ments that are plausible candidates for
equilibria are those that correspond to self-
enforcing agreements, that is, to DEMO
the players would choose to carry out the
next morning in the absence of an external
enforcement mechanism. Noncooperative
game theory does not, however, model the
assignment of strategies to players. In games
with multiple Nash equilibria, there may be
no obvious way to choose among them.
Multiple equilibria and the need to choose
among them suggest how history and DEMO
ture might affect distribution within mar-
riage. David Kreps (1990) points out that, in
many games, there seems to be a "self-
evident way to play" that corresponds to a
particular Nash equilibrium. He emphasizes
that which equilibrium corresponds to the
self-evident way to play cannot, in many
cases, be identified solely from the formal
description of the game: in realistic social
contexts, conventional modes of behavior
may suggest DEMO "focal-point equilibrium,"
thus reducing or eliminating the need for
pre-play negotiations or providing a way of
predicting their outcome. In the case DEMO
marriage, social conventions regarding the
responsibilities of husbands and wives may
DEMO suggest to the spouses a particular
equilibrium.
Repeated noncooperative games typically
have multiple equilibria, and if distribution
within marriage is modeled as a repeated
game, equilibria will include both Pareto
optimal and nonoptimal outcomes. The folk
theorem of noncooperative game theory as-
serts that any vector of feasible, individually
rational payoffs is a subgame-perfect Nash
equilibrium of a repeated game DEMO
the players do not discount the future "too
much." Thus, DEMO optimal outcomes can
emerge as solutions to repeated games even
in the absence of institutions permitting the
players to make binding agreements. The
standard DEMO is the infinitely repeat-
ed prisoner's dilemma: if the prisoner'DEMO
dilemma is repeated as a stage game for-
ever, then it DEMO well known that the coopera-
of
husband:
Xh
=
fXh(p,
Ih'
q)
PERSPECTIVES DEMO DISTRIBUTION IN MARRIAGE
qh = fq(p,
Ih(
w)
Similarly, the wife's reaction function for
(xW, qW) will DEMO upon p, Iw, and qh.
It is straightforward to show from the
first-order conditions that, in the one-shot
voluntary-contribution game, distribution
within DEMO is invariant with respect to
redistribution of resources between the
spouses provided the equilibrium is one in
which both spouses make strictly positive
contributions. DEMO the recipient of a child-
allowance payment is changed from the
husband to the wife, the husband's contri-
bution to the public good will decrease, and
the wife's contribution will increase by the
amount of the allowance, provided both
continue to make positive contributions. As
the analogy with Ricardian equivalence sug-
gests, in the absence of a corner solution,
targeted transfers will be ineffective.
The equilibrium of the one-shot DEMO
contribution game is not Pareto optimal:
the public good will be underprovided. In
the repeated game, however, other equilib-
ria are possible, and the losses from non-
cooperation provide both spouses with in-
centives DEMO depart from the Cournot-Nash
solution. Crucial to achieving a Pareto
optimal outcome in the repeated game is
the ability of the players to punish DEMO
another for deviations from cooperation; a
Pareto optimal equilibrium can be DEMO
by a credible punishment threat if, for each
player, the one-period gain from deviating
from a cooperative strategy is less than the
loss DEMO with being punished.
In the repeated voluntary-contribution
game, players can punish DEMO another only
by reducing their contributions to the public
good, since DEMO rule out divorce, physical
and verbal abuse, and other interesting con-
sequences of domestic disagreement. The
"security level" for the husband and, hence,
his reservation level of utility is the utility
he would DEMO if the wife refused to
VOL. 84 NO. 2
ALTERNATIVE
135
contribute to the public good; similarly, the
reservation level of utility for DEMO wife is the
utility she would achieve if the husband
refused to contribute to the public good.
These "punishment points" imply that a
DEMO of resources from husband to
wife shifts the set of equilibria in favor of
the wife in the sense that, if the equilibrium
were chosen randomly from this set, then
the expected utility of wives would be higher
and the expected utility of husbands lower.
The same conclusion DEMO if the equilib-
rium were chosen randomly from the subset
of Pareto optimal equilibria, although this
prejudges the issue of Pareto optimality.
The multiple equilibria of repeated games
prevent us from reaching stronger compara-
tive-statics conclusions, but we think it is
fair to say that the expected payoffs DEMO in
favor of the spouse whose resources have
increased and that the distribution of re-
sources may matter.
To ensure that Pareto optimal outcomes
DEMO equilibria, we have assumed that the
repeated game continues forever and DEMO
the players do not discount the future "too
much" for the threatened punishment to be
efficacious. Infinite continuation is not cru-
cial; the assumption can be weakened to
allow stochastic termination with the dis-
count DEMO reinterpreted to include the
probability of termination. Thus, if mar-
riages DEMO only with the (exogenous)
death of a spouse and if DEMO probabili-
ties were independent of age, then the folk
theorem would DEMO directly. If mortality
probabilities increase with age, then the
game is DEMO even without the pos-
sibility of divorce and, as the expected DEMO
remaining in the game decreases, Pareto
optimal outcomes become increasingly dif-
DEMO to sustain. Thus, distribution between
aging spouses raises new issues.
IV. DEMO
Coordination
Game
Example:
with
Marriage
Multiple
as a
Equilibria
Consider an alternative model in which
voluntary contributions are made by hus-
band and DEMO to two household public
goods. Suppose that coordination of individ-
136
AEA PAPERS
AND PROCEEDINGS
MAY
1994
ual contributions is desirable in DEMO sense
that the household is better off if the wife
supplies one good and the husband supplies
the other. This would be the case, for exam-
ple, if household production of each good
required the accumulation of specific human
capital and there were increasing returns to
specialization.4 This DEMO may possess two
Nash equilibria analogous to those in the
"battle DEMO the sexes" game: one in which the
wife supplies good 1 and the husband good
2, and another in which the provider roles
are reversed. The husband and wife may
each prefer one equilibrium over DEMO other,
but both will prefer a coordinated provision
of public goods to the alternatives in which
both supply the same good. The choice DEMO
tween these equilibria is likely to be sen-
sitive to history and culture, which may
generate a "self-evident" way to play. The
separate-spheres bargaining model provides
an obvious example: if some household pub-
lic goods are regarded as within the wife's
sphere and others as within DEMO husband's
sphere, then a reasonable focal-point equi-
librium may consist DEMO complete gender spe-
cialization in the provision of household
public goods corresponding to this conven-
tional gender assignment of responsibilities.
In this noncooperative model DEMO is once again
true that distribution depends on individual
resources, due DEMO the corner solution in
public-goods provision.
tion game, corner solutions are DEMO to
effective targeting. In the repeated game,
corner solutions are no longer crucial; the
folk theorem implies that every vector of
feasible, DEMO rational payoffs is a
subgame-perfect equilibrium of the in-
finitely repeated game. In the repeated
game, this set of equilibria shifts in favor of
the spouse whose resources have increased.
Thus, our analysis of the repeated game
confirms and strengthens the central insight
of the separate-spheres bargaining model:DEMO
that distribution within marriage may de-
pend on control over resources. Whether it
does is an empirical question.
REFERENCES
V. Conclusion
Becker, Gary S. A treatise on the family.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1981; enlarged edition, 1991.
Bergstrom, Theodore. "A Survey of Theories
of DEMO Family." Mimeo, University of
Michigan, 1993.
Hoddinott, John; Alderman, Harold and
Haddad, Lawrence. "Household Models
and Intrahousehold Resource Alloca-
tion," in Lawrence Haddad, John Hod-
dinott, and Harold Alderman, eds., Intra-
household resource allocation in developing
countries: Methods, models, and policy.
Mimeo, IFPRI-World Bank, 1993.
Kanbur, Ravi and Haddad, Lawrence. "Are
Better-Off Households More or Less Un-
equal? A Bargaining Theoretic Approach
to 'Kuznets Effects' at the Micro Level."
Oxford Economic Papers, 1994 (forth-
coming).
Kreps, David M. Game theory and economic
modelling. DEMO: Oxford University
Press, 1990.
Lundberg, Shelly and Pollak, Robert A. "Sep-
arate Spheres Bargaining and the Mar-
riage Market." Journal of DEMO Econ-
omy, December 1993, 100(6), pp.
988-1010.
Manser, DEMO and Brown, Murray. "Mar-
riage and Household Decision-Making: A
Bargaining DEMO" International Eco-
nomic Review, February 1980, 21(1),
pp. 31-44.
Noncooperative game theory provides
many possible approaches to distribution
within marriage, and in many cases multiple
equilibria provide a route by which history
DEMO culture may influence distribution. In
general, noncooperative games provide no
unambiguous DEMO regarding the sig-
nificance of control over resources within
marriage and the effectiveness of targeted
transfers. In a one-shot voluntary-contribu-
4Without increasing returns to DEMO
good-specific
mulate
plying
both
each good.
human
types
capita,
of human
both spouses
capital
and alternate
in
could accu-
sup-
VOL. 84 NO. 2
ALTERNATIVE
PERSPECTIVES ON DISTRIBUTION IN MARRIAGE
137
McElroy, Marjorie B. "The Empirical Con-
tent of Nash-Bargained Household Be-
havior." DEMO of Human Resources, Fall
1990, 25(4), pp. 559-83.
McElroy, Marjorie B. and Horney, Mary J.
"Nash-Bargained Household Decisions:
Toward a Generalization of the Theory of
Demand." International Economic Re-
view, DEMO 1981, 22(2), pp. 333-49.
Tauchen, Helen V.; Witte, Ann Dryden and Long,
Sharon K. " Violence in the Family:DEMO
A Nonrandom Affair." International
Economic Review, May 1991, 32(2),
pp. 491-511.{1g42fwefx}