Affect- and Cognition-Based Trust as Foundations for Interpersonal Cooperation in
Organizations
Author(DEMO): Daniel J. McAllister
Source: The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 38, No. 1 (Feb., 1995), pp. 24-59
Published by: DEMO of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/256727
Accessed: 16/04/2010 11:39
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your DEMO of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple DEMO of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive DEMO for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any DEMO use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=aom.
Each copy of any part of a DEMO transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that DEMO scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information DEMO and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Academy
of Management Journal.
http://www.jstor.org
? Academy of Management Journal
1995, Vol. 38, No. 1, 24-59.
AFFECT- AND COGNITION-BASED TRUST AS
FOUNDATIONS FOR INTERPERSONAL
COOPERATION IN ORGANIZATIONS
DANIEL DEMO McALLISTER
Georgetown University
This study addressed the nature and functioning of relationships of
interpersonal trust among managers and professionals in organiza-
tions, the factors influencing trust's development, and the implications
of trust for behavior and performance. Theoretical foundations were
drawn from the sociological literature on trust and DEMO social-
psychological literature on trust in close relationships. An initial test of
the proposed theoretical framework was conducted in a field setting
with 194 DEMO and professionals.
Trust ... tends to be somewhat like a combination of the
weather and motherhood; it is widely talked about, and it DEMO
widely assumed to be good for organizations. When it comes to
specifying just what it means in an organizational context, how-
ever, vagueness DEMO in.
-Porter, Lawler, & Hackman, 1975: 497
Recent developments in the organizational sciences reflect the impor-
tance of interpersonal trust relationships for DEMO individual and or-
ganizational effectiveness. Researchers have recognized trust's influence on
coordination and control at both institutional (Shapiro, 1987, 1990; Zucker,DEMO
1986) and interpersonal levels of organization (Granovetter, 1985; Pennings
& Woiceshyn, 1987). Because economic action is embedded within networks
of social relationships (Bradach & Eccles, 1989; Fichman & Levinthal, 1991;
DEMO, 1985; Larson, 1992), researchers have argued that efficiency
within DEMO systems of coordinated action is only possible when inter-
dependent actors work together effectively. Trust between such actors is
seen as a determining factor (Pennings & Woiceshyn, 1987; Seabright, Lev-
enthal, & Fichman, 1992).
For managers and professionals in organizations, developing and main-
taining trust relationships is especially important. As boundary spanners,
managers work through critical DEMO ties to external constituencies on
which their departments or organizations depend (DEMO, 1973; Sayles,
I am grateful to Jone Pearce, Anne DEMO, and Lyman Porter for their guidance and advice in
this research, conducted as part of my doctoral dissertation at the University of California,DEMO
Irvine. Special words of appreciation are due to Susan Ashford and two anonymous reviewers
for their insightful comments and constructive feedback on several earlier DEMO of this article.
24
1995 McAllister 25
1979). Given the complexity and uncertainty inherent in DEMO work
and the amount of mutual accommodation it involves, effective horizontal
DEMO relationships within organizations are also critical (Gabarro, 1990;
Sayles, DEMO). As Thompson (1967) observed, under conditions of uncer-
tainty DEMO complexity, requiring mutual adjustment, sustained effective co-
ordinated action is only possible where there is mutual confidence or trust.
Although trust's importance DEMO been acknowledged, the matter of how
it develops and functions has DEMO little systematic theoretical attention.
The present work develops and tests a theoretical model based on the so-
ciological literature on trust (Barber, 1983; Lewis & Wiegert, 1985; Luhman,
1979; Shapiro, 1990; Zucker, 1986) and social-psychological work on trust in
close relationships (Johnson-George & Swap, 1982; Rempel, Holmes, &
Zanna, 1985). The DEMO research was designed to contribute to under-
standing of the nature and functioning of interpersonal trust relationships by
(1) distinguishing between two principal DEMO of interpersonal trust-
cognition-based trust, grounded in individual beliefs about peer DEMO
and dependability, and affect-based trust, grounded in reciprocated inter-
personal care and concern-(2) identifying factors influencing the develop-
ment of each form of trust, and (3) examining the implications of each trust
form for coordination-relevant behavior, including monitoring to control
peers, defensive behavior, monitoring to assist peers, and interpersonal cit-
izenship behavior.
THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS
Interpersonal trust is a pervasive phenomenon in organizational life.
Trust enables people to take DEMO: "where there is trust there is the feeling
that others will not take advantage of me" (Porter et al., 1975: 497)DEMO Trust is
based on the expectation that one will find what is expected rather than
what is feared (Deutsch, 1973). Thus, competence and responsibility are
central to understandings of trust (Barber, 1983; Cook & Wall, 1980; Shapiro,
1990). At times an individual'DEMO trust in others is centered more on how they
make decisions that affect him or her than on how they behave: "Do they
DEMO my interests and welfare?" Finally, trust encompasses not only
people'DEMO beliefs about others, but also their willingness to use that knowl-
DEMO as the basis for action (Luhmann, 1979). Combining these ideas yields
a definition of interpersonal trust as the extent to which a DEMO is confident
in, and willing to act on the basis of, the words, actions, and decisions of
another.
Principal Forms of Interpersonal DEMO: Affect- and
Cognition-Based Trust
Interpersonal trust has cognitive and affective foundations (Lewis &
Wiegert, 1985). Trust is cognition-based in that "we choose whom we will
trust in which respects and under what circumstances, and we base the
choice on what we take to be 'good reasons,' constituting evidence of trust-
26
Academy of Management Journal
February
worthiness" (Lewis & Wiegert, 1985: 970). The amount of knowledge nec-
essary for trust is somewhere between total knowledge and total ignorance
(Simmel, 1964). Given total DEMO, there is no need to trust, and given
total ignorance, DEMO is no basis upon which to rationally trust. Available
knowledge and "DEMO reasons" serve as foundations for trust decisions, the
platform from which people make leaps of faith, like those involved in
trusting (Luhmann, 1979; Simmel, 1964).
Past measures of trust in organizational settings DEMO that competence
and responsibility are central elements (Butler, 1991; Cook & Wall, 1980).
Reliability and dependability have also been included in DEMO of inter-
personal trust in close relations (Johnson-George & Swap, 1982; Rempel et
al., 1985). Reliability and dependability expectations must usually DEMO met
for trust relationships to exist and develop (Zucker, 1986) DEMO evidence to
the contrary provides a rational basis for withholding trust (DEMO, 1979;
Shapiro,
1987, 1990).
Affective foundations for trust also exist, consisting of the emotional
bonds between individuals (Lewis & DEMO, 1985). People make emotional
investments in trust relationships, express genuine care and concern for the
welfare of partners, believe in the intrinsic virtue of such relationships, and
believe that these sentiments are reciprocated (DEMO & Woiceshyn, 1987;
Rempel et al., 1985). Ultimately, DEMO emotional ties linking individuals can
provide the basis for trust.
Empirical evidence from the social-psychological literature on trust in
close relationships supports this distinction DEMO the two forms of trust.
Johnson-George and Swap (1982) identified, DEMO between, and re-
liably measured two dimensions of trust they labeled "reliableness" and
"emotional trust." Similarly, Rempel and colleagues (1985) DEMO
between "dependability" and "faith" (emotional security) as unique forms
of trust. Organizations abound with relationships based on dependability
and faith (Pennings & Woiceshyn, 1987) in which moderate expressions of
interpersonal care and DEMO are not uncommon (Granovetter, 1985; Gries-
inger, 1990; Pennings & Woiceshyn, 1987). Drawing on this theoretical dis-
tinction between forms DEMO interpersonal trust, I hypothesized that
Hypothesis 1: Relationships of interpersonal trust among
managers in organizations are characterized by two di-
mensions-cognition-based trust and DEMO trust.
Figure 1 outlines the theoretical framework developed in the following
discussion. The sequence of relationships is from peer attributes and behav-
ior, through focal manager assessments of peer trustworthiness, to focal
manager behavioral responses, DEMO ultimately to focal manager and peer
performance alike.
Factors Influencing Managerial Trust Relationships
Antecedents of cognition-based trust. In organizations, the extent to
which a manager will be willing to vest cognition-based trust in peers may
FIGURE 1
Theoretical Model Outlining the Role of Trust in Interpersonal Relationships DEMO Organizations
itizenship
3ehavior
iteraction
requency
\ H3a
H3b
H6a
Affect-Peer
Based Trustb
Aitizenshi H9
^B"^1,^^~r
Relia^
^-i~ble
eed-Based
Monitoring
\
9a
\
DEMO
H8b
Performance
T ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~r\
^K
H4
Reliable
\
a Direction of relationship is from peer to manager.
b Direction of relationship is from manager DEMO peer.
1 \
co
^rcn
28
Academy of Management
Journal
February
depend on the success of past DEMO, the extent of social similarity, and
organizational context considerations (Zucker, 1986). First, because working
relationships are typically personal and extend over time, it is possible for
people to consider the track record of peers, or how they have carried out
role-related duties in the past, when assessing trustworthiness (Cook & Wall,
1980; Granovetter, 1985)DEMO Evidence that a peer's behavior is consistent with
norms of reciprocity and fairness and that the peer follows through on com-
mitments is DEMO (Lindskold, 1978; Stack, 1988). In working relationships
involving high interdependence, peer performance can have a determining
impact on personal productivity, DEMO evidence that peers carry out role
responsibilities reliably will enhance a manager's assessments of a peer's
trustworthiness. Accordingly,
Hypothesis 2a: The level of a manager's cognition-based
trust in a peer will be DEMO associated with the extent
of that peer's reliable role performance.
Second, social similarity between individuals can influence trust devel-
opment. Groups of individuals with similar fundamental characteristics,
such as ethnic background, may have an advantage over diverse groups in
their ability to create and maintain trusting DEMO relationships. Light
(1984) documented the tendency of ethnic minority entrepreneurs to con-
duct business through co-ethnic rather than interethnic social circles. More
fundamentally, self-categorization theorists have observed that individuals
tend to group themselves with others DEMO the basis of objective attributes such
as race, age, and gender (Turner, 1987) and that such internal classifications
influence beliefs and attitudes. Individuals are more likely to perceive out-
group members as dishonest, untrustworthy, and uncooperative than they
are to so perceive in-group members (Brewer, 1979). Notwithstanding the
potential beliefs of diversity for organizations, which include enhanced cre-
ativity, access to a broader set of environmental resources, DEMO more, the
possibility that cultural similarity facilitates the creation and maintenance DEMO
trust in organizations merits recognition. Accordingly,
Hypothesis 2b: The level DEMO a manager's cognition-based
trust in a peer will be greater when the two are culturally
or ethnically similar.
Third, formal organizations, through DEMO role specifications, specify
boundaries for trust relationships (Baier, 1985; Fox, 1974) and professional
credentials serve as clear signals of role preparedness. DEMO institu-
tions, professional associations, and credentialing agencies manufacture
trust by providing guarantees to would-be trusters through certification that
individuals meet standards for acceptability DEMO a larger professional com-
munity (Zucker, 1986). Professional standing can be maintained over time
through continued membership and participation in relevant professional
DEMO Thus,
1995
McAllister
29
Hypothesis 2c: The level of a manager's cognition-based
trust in a peer will be greater for peers with higher pro-
DEMO credentials.
Antecedents of affect-based trust. Although external factors making the
behavior of relationship partners predictable provide foundations for cogni-
tion-based trust, insights into the motives of relationship partners provide
foundations for affect-based trust. Findings from attribution DEMO indi-
cate that behavior recognized as personally chosen rather than role-
prescribed, serving to meet legitimate needs, and demonstrating interper-
sonal care and DEMO rather than enlightened self-interest may be critical
for the development of affect-based trust (Clark & Mills, 1979; Clark, Mills,
& Powell, 1986; Clark & Waddell, 1985; Holmes, 1978; Holmes & Rempel,
1989; Kelly, 1979; Rempel et al., 1985).
Such DEMO corresponds well with descriptions of organizational cit-
izenship behavior (OCB; Organ, 1988; Smith, Organ, & Near, 1983). Organ
defined OCB as behavior intended to provide help and assistance that is
outside an DEMO's work role, not directly rewarded, and conducive to
effective organizational functioning. Smith, Organ, and Near defined altru-
ism, a specific form of OCB, as behavior "directly and intentionally aimed at
helping a DEMO person in face-to-face situations" (1983: 657). Altruistic
behavior may DEMO an attributional basis for affect-based trust. Being
extra-role, it can be DEMO as being personally chosen, and not being di-
rectly rewarded, it cannot easily be attributed to enlightened self-interest
(MacKenzie, Podsakoff, & Fetter, 1991). Accordingly,
Hypothesis 3a: The level of a manager'DEMO affect-based trust
in a peer will be positively associated with the level of
that peer's citizenship behavior directed toward the man-
ager.
Because DEMO trust is grounded in an individual's attributions
concerning the motives for others' behavior, it should be limited to contexts
of frequent interaction, where there are sufficient social data to allow the
making of confident DEMO (Lewis & Wiegert, 1985). Thus,
Hypothesis 3b: The DEMO of a manager's affect-based trust
in a peer will be positively associated with the frequency
of interaction between the manager and the peer.
DEMO relationship between cognition- and affect-based trust. Although
much of the research on affectivity in organizations and on the relationship
between affect and cognition has DEMO on unanchored mood states (Brief
& George, 1992; Burke, Brief, George, Roberson, & Webster, 1989), increas-
ing attention is DEMO given to the interpersonal foundations of affectivity
(Isen & Baron, 1991; Longenecker, Jaccoud, Sims, & Gioia, 1992; Park, Sims,
& Motowidlo, 1986; Tsui & Barry, 1986). Research on affect and cognition in
close relationships has highlighted the development of interpersonal affect
30
Academy of Management
Journal
February
upon a cognitive base (Holmes & Rempel, 1989; Rempel et al., 1985). Cog-
nition-based trust, DEMO reliableness, is seen as "more superficial and less spe-
cial" DEMO emotional trustworthiness (Johnson-George & Swap, 1982: 1316).
Faith (Rempel et al., 1985: 98) is characterized by a greater investment of
time and emotion than are dependability and reliability.
For working relationships among DEMO, some level of cognition-
based trust may be necessary for affect-based DEMO to develop; people's base-
line expectations for peer reliability and DEMO must be met before
they will invest further in relationships. Where baseline expectations are not
yet established, individuals may be inclined to attribute extra-role conduct
to ingratiation and impression management rather than to care and concern.
DEMO an individual has established a track record for reliability and depend-
ability, and thus some level of cognition-based trust exists, confident attri-
butions DEMO the motivations for that person's citizenship behavior
may follow. Accordingly,
Hypothesis 4: A manager expressing high levels of cogni-
tion-based trust in a peer will also report high affect-
based trust in that peer.
DEMO comments qualify this developmental perspective on the relation-
ship between affect- and cognition-based trust. First, given the distinctive
antecedents and consequences posited, affect-based DEMO should be viewed
as a distinct form of interpersonal trust rather than as a higher level of trust.
Second, as affect-based trust matures, DEMO potential for the decoupling of
trust forms and for reverse causation (DEMO trust influencing cogni-
tion-based trust) increases. Zajonc observed that "once formed, an evalua-
tion is not easily revoked.... Affect often persists after a complete invali-
dation of its original cognitive basis" (1980: 157). Holmes and Rempel (1989)
observed that as affect-based trust develops, DEMO attributions, such as "This
colleague genuinely cares about me," become incorporated into a stable and
global picture of a partner's motives. DEMO time, ascribed motives are taken as
permanent and left unquestioned, even in the face of disconfirming evi-
dence. Transgressions are discounted in advance DEMO explained away. Thus,
once a high level of affect-based trust has developed, a foundation of cog-
nition-based trust may no longer be needed.
Consequences of Managerial Beliefs About Peer Trustworthiness
Control-based monitoring and defensive behavior. DEMO one person,
interdependent with another, cannot count on that individual DEMO be depend-
able and reliable, he or she can take steps DEMO manage the uncertainty inherent
in the situation. Monitoring to control the untrustworthy individual is one
likely response (Bradach & Eccles, 1989; Pennings & Woiceshyn, 1987;
Williamson, 1974). As Ouchi observed, "People DEMO either be able to trust
each other or to closely monitor each other if they are to engage in cooper-
ative enterprises" (1979: 846).
Besides assuring some minimal level of peer performance, managers
1995
McAllister
31
must perform their own duties with little disturbance, buffer themselves
from the influence of others, and protect their personal interests (DEMO &
Lee, 1990). Individuals behave defensively, for example, when they make
requests for assistance well ahead of the time they are DEMO, draw upon
multiple and redundant sources when making requests for the DEMO,
expend extra resources working around and avoiding others, and use DEMO
and formal (rather than informal) means to document requests (Ashforth &
Lee, 1990). Two hypotheses follow:
Hypothesis 5a: A DEMO expressing a high level of cog-
nition-based trust in a peer will engage in little control-
based monitoring of that peer.
Hypothesis 5b: A manager expressing a high level of cog-
nition-based trust in a peer DEMO direct little defensive be-
havior toward that peer.
Within this theoretical framework, control-based monitoring and defen-
sive behavior are behavioral consequences of cognition-based trust alone. In
practical terms, for affect-based trust to develop, some level DEMO cognition-
based trust must already exist, and it can be expected DEMO where cognition-
based trust is present, levels of monitoring and defensive DEMO will be
low. Likely consequences of affect-based trust are outlined below.
Need-based monitoring and interpersonal citizenship behavior. Rela-
tionships characterized by affect-based trust resemble DEMO communal
relationships (Clark, Mills, & Corcoran, 1989; Clark, Mills, & Powell, 1986).
Research findings show that individuals in communal DEMO are
more inclined to keep track of associates' needs than are DEMO in
exchange relationships. What drives need-based monitoring is not the desire
to generate future obligations or to reciprocate benefits received, but rather
an understanding of the communal nature of the relationship: "In a com-
munal DEMO, the idea that a benefit is given in response to a DEMO
that was received is compromising, because it calls into question the DEMO
sumption that each member responds to the needs of the other" (Clark &
Mills, 1979: 13). In communal relationships, partners DEMO less inclined to
keep track of personal inputs on joint tasks (DEMO, 1984) and to feel ex-
ploited by unrequited helping (Clark & Waddell, 1985). They take on their
partners' problems as their own, develop a tacit awareness of partners'
needs, and learn DEMO to respond appropriately (Holmes & Rempel, 1989).
Similarly, in DEMO relationships, sensitivity to the personal and
work-related needs of associates should DEMO high. Accordingly,
Hypothesis 6a: A manager expressing a high level DEMO af-
fect-based trust in a peer will engage in a great amount of
need-based monitoring of that peer.
Individuals expressing high affect-based trust in DEMO may also direct a
great amount of interpersonal citizenship behavior toward them. Increased
assistance may follow naturally either from an increased awareness of peer
32
Academy of Management Journal
February
needs (the product of need-based monitoring) or from a desire to assist peers
in meeting their personal objectives and to express felt care and concern tangi-
bly. Although Organ and DEMO asserted that "characteristic OCB has a
deliberate, controlled character, somewhat DEMO to conscious decision mak-
ing rather than expressive emotional behavior" (1989: 162), I argue that
when a great amount of citizenship behavior is directed toward a focal in-
dividual, the behavior has expressive, DEMO qualities. Accordingly,
Hypothesis 6b: A manager expressing a high level DEMO af-
fect-based trust in a peer will direct a great amount of
interpersonal citizenship behavior toward that peer.
It is important to note that DEMO direct relationship between a peer's in-
terpersonal citizenship behavior and a manager's citizenship behavior is
posited. Observation of a direct relationship would DEMO the influ-
ence of reciprocity and exchange norms (Holmes, 1978; DEMO & Rempel,
1989). Within the proposed framework, peer conduct (citizenship directed
toward a focal manager) influences the focal manager's affect-based-trust
perceptions through its expressive qualities. Those perceptions in turn in-
fluence the DEMO's citizenship behavior toward the peer. The latter's
citizenship behavior becomes an expressive act rather than an obligation-
discharging and equilibrium-restoring act of DEMO
Performance Implications of Cognition- and Affect-Based Trust
Apart from a general assumption of the efficacy of trust relations as a
lubricant to the social DEMO, facilitating coordinated action (Arrow, 1974;
Ouchi, 1979; Williamson, 1974), existing research contains little on how trust
affects performance outcomes. DEMO behavioral consequences of trust may
provide one line of explanation. Managerial and professional work involves
mutual adjustment and accommodation within a multiple constituency con-
DEMO (Sayles, 1979; Tsui, 1984). Trusting peers should receive enhanced per-
formance assessments to the extent that the behavioral consequences of trust
DEMO organizational ends. If trust helps to further organizational ends, it
should DEMO associated with supervisor assessments of the performance of
trusting and trusted individuals.
Performance implications of defensive behavior and control-based
monitoring. In general, monitoring and defensive behavior represent non-
productive uses of finite managerial resources. Allocating work DEMO to
pursuits like monitoring (Alchian & Demset, 1972; Baker, Jensen, & Murphy,
1988) and defensive behavior (Ashforth & Lee, DEMO; Kahn, Wolfe, Quinn, &
Snoek, 1964) involves a DEMO: Managers engaging in excessive monitor-
ing and defensive behavior will have DEMO resources remaining with which
to accomplish fundamental work objectives. Accordingly,
Hypothesis 7a: The level of a manager's control-based
monitoring of peer will be negatively associated with su-
pervisor assessments of the manager's performance.
DEMO 7b: The level of a manager's defensive behav-
1995
McAllister
33
ior toward a peer will be negatively associated with DEMO
pervisor assessments of the manager's performance.
Performance implications of need-based monitoring and citizenship
behavior. Organizations depend on the discretionary contributions of their
members DEMO maintain efficiency and coordination; one has only to witness
the disruption DEMO occurs when employees limit their contributions exclu-
sively to what is specified in their job descriptions to realize that this is the
case (Katz, 1964). Organizations must also depend on employees to use their
skills and energies wisely so that contributions are maximized-organiza-
tions need employees who DEMO not only harder but smarter. An essential
ingredient in working smarter is undoubtedly paying attention and looking
for opportunities to make constructive contributions.
Thus, need-based monitoring and citizenship behavior by focal manag-
ers may enhance assessments DEMO their contributions, especially assessments
provided by supervisors and others whose interests DEMO aligned with those of
the organization. Two hypotheses follow:
Hypothesis 8a: The level of a manager's need-based mon-
itoring of a peer will be positively associated with super-
visor assessments of the manager's DEMO
Hypothesis 8b: The level of a manager's interpersonal cit-
izenship DEMO directed toward a peer will be posi-
tively associated with supervisor assessments of the man-
ager's performance.
Performance enhancement is likely to be DEMO principal motivator for need-
based monitoring. Need-based monitoring arises when individuals feel re-
sponsible for the needs of others and wish to respond to DEMO needs (Clark
et al., 1989). Pearce and Gregerson argued that "felt responsibility is a psy-
chological state that may play an important role in numerous aspects of job
performance and deserves further research attention" (1991: 843). Indeed,
need-based monitoring and assistance behavior that DEMO work-related
needs should enhance peer performance. Two hypotheses complete the
theoretical framework:
Hypothesis 9a: The level of a manager's need-based mon-
itoring of a peer will be positively associated with super-
visor assessments of DEMO peer's performance.
Hypothesis 9b: The level of a manager's DEMO cit-
izenship behavior directed toward a peer will be posi-
tively associated with supervisor assessments of the
peer's performance.
METHODS
Respondents
A sample DEMO 194 managers and professionals, including men and women
from various industries, reported on cross-functional dyadic relationships
34
Academy of Management
Journal
February
with peers at work. Individuals enrolled DEMO, and alumni of, the executive
master's of business administration (DEMO) program of a major university in
southern California were requested to DEMO and to nominate peers
from work to participate with them. In examining relations among middle-
and upper-level managers, I focused on relations of lateral interdependence
(Sayles, 1979), where the impact of trust's presence DEMO absence was expected
to be pronounced (Thompson, 1967).
Each EMBA affiliate agreeing to participate nominated two peers, so
triads were formed. Triad members separately completed surveys describing
various aspects of their working relationships with DEMO another. Respon-
dents provided two forms of data: (1) information DEMO one triad mem-
ber from the perspective of a focal manager, DEMO (2) information concerning
the second triad member from the perspective of a peer. Data collected from
respondents were combined to form manager-peer dyad DEMO Of the 197
individuals initially contacted, 80 agreed to participate, a 41 percent accep-
tance rate. Given the level of commitment involved (questionnaire response,
as well as nominating peers), this response rate is DEMO within accepted
limits. The nominated peers were not associated with the EMBA program,
and the response rate at the second stage of the DEMO was 81 percent (194 of
240 EMBA students, alumni, and DEMO peers). From the data collected,
I constructed 175 complete manager-peer dyad records, which formed the
basis for the present research. The initial contacts also identified one person,
in most cases a superior, familiar with the performance of all triad members
to provide performance information; the superior's response rate was 86
percent.
The respondents were, for the better part, mature (an average age of 38
years), well-educated (57 percent with some graduate training, 28 percent
with undergraduate degrees) DEMO with considerable organizational
experience (an average professional tenure of 11.7 years)DEMO The profile of
respondents by age and gender corresponds well with that of the population
of EMBA students and alumni (average age 37 years, 74.8 percent men).
Although further information on the population from which respondents
were drawn was not available, it appeared likely that they were representa-
tive of the population.
Procedures
Initial contacts agreeing to participate in DEMO study were directed to
think of peers (not supervisors or subordinates), from functional areas dif-
ferent from their own, with whom they DEMO significant work-related inter-
action. After a contact identified three to five people with whom he or she
"worked the best" and three to DEMO with whom he or she "worked less well,"
the individual selected one person from each list to participate in the study
with DEMO or her. The working relationships examined were task-oriented,
not limited to close friendships, and varied along the critical dimensions of
trust. By stipulating that the people chosen should interact with one another
at work, I ensured the existence of three separate dyads in each organiza-
1995 McAllister 35
tion.1 I used a randomization procedure to assign individuals DEMO focal man-
ager-peer dyads and to allocate reporting roles within dyads. The statistical
independence of observations was maintained by having no respondents
provide information DEMO the perspective of one role (focal manager or peer)
for DEMO than one dyad.2
Measures
Except for the performance data provided by superiors, dyad members
provided all data for this study. Given the dyad-specific nature of the infor-
mation involved, I considered these sources most authoritative. Focal man-
agers reported on peer trustworthiness and behavioral responses to peers
(control-based monitoring, defensive behavior, need-based monitoring, and
citizenship behavior). Peers provided exogenous data (interaction fre-
quency, citizenship behavior, reliable role performance, DEMO attain-
ment, and ethnic background).
Affect- and cognition-based trust. A DEMO measure to assess affect- and
cognition-based trust levels was developed for use in this study. The mea-
sure consists of 11 items, 6 assessing levels of cognition-based trust, and 5
assessing affect-based trust; respondents indicated, on a scale ranging from
1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree), their agreement with various state-
ments about a specific peer DEMO work.
Drawing on a review of the literature and on available measures of
interpersonal trust (Cook & Wall, 1980; Johnson-George & Swap, DEMO; Rem-
pel et al., 1985; Rotter, 1971), I created an initial pool of 48 items. Eleven
organizational behavior scholars, provided with definitions of affect- and
cognition-based trust, classified these items as tapping cognition-based trust,
affect-based trust, both forms of trust, or neither form DEMO trust. Based on an
analysis of expert evaluations, I created a DEMO of 20 unambiguous items,
1 The procedure used here is similar to that used by Tsui (1984). Manipulation checks
revealed that it was effective in controlling self-selection tendencies and building variation
along the critical DEMO dimensions. Nominating individuals expressed greater affect- and cog-
nition-based trust in peers selected from the people with whom they worked best than in those
DEMO whom they worked less well (pairwise t-tests, p < .001). Also, nominated peers from the
first list expressed greater affect- and cognition-based trust in the nominating individuals than
did peers from the second list (pairwise t-tests, p < .05).
2 By random assignment, triad DEMO were assigned roles as respondents (1, 2, or 3). DEMO
three focal manager -> peer dyads addressed were as follows: 1 -> 2, 2 -> 3, and 3 -* 1. Thus,DEMO
respondent 1 provided information from the perspective of a focal manager for his or her
relationship with respondent 2 and information from the perspective DEMO a peer for his or her
relationship with respondent 3. Although I collected complete data for all relationships within
each triad, dyad-specific data collected for use in hypothesis testing were collected first. By
collecting respondent l'DEMO assessment of his or her trust in respondent 2 before collecting infor-
mation on his or her trust in respondent 3, the relevant assessment received was absolute rather
than comparative. This method allowed efficient use of DEMO (data concerning three
dyads were collected from each set of three DEMO) and maintained independence of
observations. Further, parallel data collected but not used in hypothesis testing could be used
for preliminary analyses of new DEMO developed in the study.
36
Academy of Management
Journal
February
10 items for each form of DEMO I used results of an exploratory factor analysis
of pretest data from a group of employed M.B.A. and undergraduate business
students to further reduce DEMO measure to the 11 strongest-loading items.
Table 1 gives the wording and confirmatory analysis results for this trust
measure and for the behavioral response DEMO, which are discussed in
the next section. Reliability estimates (Cronbach's alphas) for the cognition-
and affect-based trust measures are .91 and .89, respectively.
Behavioral response measures. The questionnaire contained 25 items
designed to measure behavioral responses associated with trusting or dis-
trusting peers. Respondents reported the DEMO to which they agreed that
certain actions described their behavior toward a specific peer on a seven-
point scale (1, strongly disagree, to 7, strongly agree). Fourteen items measur-
ing control-based monitoring, defensive DEMO, and need-based monitor-
ing were original to the present study, developed from a review of the liter-
ature and pretested on the group DEMO above. Eleven items assessed
citizenship behavior, 6 of which were drawn DEMO Williams and Anderson's
(1991) measure and rephrased to address assistance to specific individuals
rather than organization members in general and 5 of DEMO were developed
to more fully tap the domain of the construct.
Initial exploratory factor analyses were conducted on parallel data that
were collected but DEMO used to test hypotheses in the present research (see
footnote 1)DEMO I extracted four factors with acceptable psychometric properties
(eigenvalue greater than DEMO, ax > .60) and retained them for confirmatory
analysis with the present respondents: control-based monitoring and defen-
sive behavior items together (factor DEMO), citizenship behavior with strong af-
filiative content (factor 2), DEMO behavior involving congenial assis-
tance (factor 3), and need-based monitoring (factor 4).
To assess the adequacy of the derived trust and DEMO response
measures for use with the present research sample and to test the discrim-
inant validity of trust and behavioral response measures, I conducted a con-
firmatory factor analysis using LISREL 7 (Joreskog and Sorbom, DEMO). I
computed the comparative fit index (CFI), a fit DEMO that prevents the
underestimation of fit likely to occur in small samples, to assess the fit of the
factor structure to the data (DEMO, 1990) and examined correlations among
factors to assess the discriminant validity of measures. Table 1 reports re-
sults.
Overall, the model fit the data well (CFI = .90). All factor loadings
(lambdas) on specified factors were significant (t > 1.96). Reliability esti-
mates (DEMO) for affiliative citizenship behavior, assistance-oriented citizenship
behavior, need-based monitoring, and monitoring and defensive behavior
measures were .79, .85, .69, and .87, respectively. However, several correla-
tions among latent constructs were considerable, with off-diagonal elements
in the phi-matrix exceeding .60.
Because I obtained trust and DEMO response measures from a single
source, it was important to demonstrate DEMO differences between
these measures. Within the LISREL framework, discriminant validity can DEMO
1995
McAllister
37
TABLE 1
Results of Confirmatory Factor Analysis for Behavioral DEMO and
Interpersonal Trust Measuresa
Items Lambdas
Affect-based trust
We have a sharing relationship. We can both freely share our ideas, feelings, and hopes.
DEMO can talk freely to this individual about difficulties I am having at work and know that (s)he
will want to listen.
We would both feel a sense of loss if one of us was transferred DEMO we could no longer work
together.
If I shared my problems with this person, I know (s)he would respond constructively and
caringly.
DEMO would have to say that we have both made considerable emotional investments in our
working relationship.
Cognition-based trust
This person approaches his/her job DEMO professionalism and dedication.
Given this person's track record, I see DEMO reason to doubt his/her competence and
preparation for the job.
I can rely on this person not to make my job more difficult DEMO careless work.
Most people, even those who aren't close friends DEMO this individual, trust and respect
him/her as a coworker.
Other DEMO associates of mine who must interact with this individual consider him/her to be
trustworthy.
If people knew more about this individual and his/DEMO background, they would be more
concerned and monitor his/her performance DEMO closely.b
Need-based monitoring
Even when others think everything is fine, I DEMO when (s)he is having difficulties.
This person doesn't have DEMO tell me in order for me to know how things are going for
him/her at work.
Affiliative citizenship behavior
I take time to DEMO to this person's problems and worries.
I have taken a personal interest in this individual.
I frequently do extra things I know I DEMO't be rewarded for, but which make my cooperative
efforts with DEMO person more productive.
I pass on new information that might be useful to this person.
I willingly help this individual, even at some cost to personal productivity.
When making decisions at work that affect this individual, I try to take his/her needs and
feelings into account.
I DEMO not to make things more difficult for this person by my careless actions.
Assistance-oriented citizenship behavior
I help this person with difficult assignments, even when assistance is not directly requested.
I assist this person with heavy DEMO loads, even though it is not part of my job.
I DEMO this person when (s)he has been absent.
Monitoring and defensive DEMO
I find that this person is not the sort of coworker I need to monitor closely.b
The quality of the work I receive from DEMO individual is only maintained by my diligent
monitoring.
I have sometimes found it necessary to work around this individual in order to get things
DEMO the way that I would like them to be done.
I keep close track of my interactions with this individual, taking note of instances where
(s)he does not keep up her/his end of the bargain.
I have found it necessary to make inquiries before responding to DEMO person's requests for
assistance. This ensures that my interests are protected.
Rather than just depending on this individual to come through when I DEMO assistance, I try
to have a backup plan ready.
a The DEMO are reported from the completely standardized solution. Chi-square with 362 degrees of
freedom is 681.64 (p < .001). Comparative fit index is .90. Calculated from null of 3,646.90 with 406 degrees
of freedom.
b DEMO was reverse-coded.
.89
.82
.81
.79
.66
.90
.86
.81
.77
.73
.69
.76
.72
.79
.78
.72
.65
.62
.40
.17
.90
.84
DEMO
.85
.81
.73
.72
.62
.56
38
Academy of Management
Journal
February
assessed in part by constraining a DEMO phi coefficient (4ij) to 1.0, refitting
the model, and testing the resulting change in the chi-square measure of
model fit (Anderson & Gerbing, 1988; Bagozzi & Yi, 1988). I conducted this
analysis for each of four correlations exceeding .60. With one exception,
constraining DEMO to 1.0 resulted in a significant worsening in model fit, indi-
DEMO a real difference in the measures. The relationship between cognition-
based trust and monitoring and defensive behavior measures was found to
be -.85, and the constrained-coefficient model did not yield a change in
model fit (AX2 = .71, df = 1, n.s.). Because monitoring and defensive DEMO
havior could not be empirically distinguished from negative cognition-based
trust, I DEMO to retain the cognition-based trust measure and exclude the
monitoring and defensive behavior measure from further use in this study.
Exogenous variables. Reliable role DEMO was measured with four
items drawn from Williams and Anderson's (DEMO) measure of organization-
directed citizenship behavior and in-role behavior. Respondents assessed,DEMO
on a seven-point scale ranging from 1, "almost never," to 7, "almost always,"
the extent to which each behavior described was characteristic of their be-
havior on the job. Frequency of interaction DEMO measured with four items
adapted from an instrument developed by Wilson (DEMO). Respondents de-
scribed the frequency of various forms of their work-related interaction with
a focal manager on a seven-point scale ranging from 1 (once or twice in the
last six months) to 7 (many DEMO daily). Citizenship behavior, affiliative and
assistance-based, was measured with items identical to those used for focal
manager citizenship behavior.
Table 2 reports DEMO factor analysis results for the exogenous
scales and item wordings. The four-factor solution provides an adequate fit
for the data (CFI = .90, DEMO > 1.96, all loadings). Reliability estimates for
interaction frequency, peer affiliative citizenship behavior, peer assistance-
oriented citizenship behavior, and peer reliable DEMO performance are .91,
.81, .82, .77, respectively.
Demographic data, including education level, age, gender, and ethnic-
ity, were collected DEMO develop a basic demographic profile of the respon-
dents. Further, I DEMO these data to derive measures of cultural-ethnic and
gender similarity, and DEMO status. A binary variable for cultural-
ethnic similarity was created, with DEMO manager-peer dyads whose mem-
bers reported similar ethnic backgrounds (e.g., white-white, Hispanic-
Hispanic) coded 1 and those whose members reported different ethnic DEMO
grounds coded 0. I created a similar binary measure for similarity in gender
and one for the assessment of professional standing (attended a university at
the master's or doctoral level = 1, at most an undergraduate degree = 0).
This breakdown was appropriate because only 16 DEMO of the respondents
did not already possess some sort of four-year university degree.
Performance. Tsui's three-item measure of reputational effectiveness
(Tsui, 1984) and one additional item were used to measure focal manager
and peer DEMO Supervisors were asked to consider the total job,
including job-specified duties, additional activities not formally required,
1995 McAllister 39
TABLE 2
Results of Confirmatory Factor Analysis for Exogenous DEMO
Items Lambdas
Interaction frequency
How frequently does this individual initiate work-related interaction. with
you? .95
How frequently do you initiate work-related interaction with this person? .94
How frequently do you interact with this person at work? .90
How frequently do you interact with this person informally or socially at
work? .66
Peer affiliative citizenship behavior
I take time to listen to this person's problems and worries. .82
I willingly help this DEMO, even at some cost to personal productivity. .70
I have taken DEMO personal interest in this individual. .69
I pass on new information that might be useful to this person. .65
I frequently do extra things DEMO know I won't be rewarded for, but which make
my DEMO efforts with this person more productive. .61
When making decisions at work that affect this individual, I try to take
his/her needs and feelings into account. .54
I try not to make things more difficult DEMO this person by my careless actions. .34
Peer assistance-oriented citizenship behavior
I help this person when (s)he has been absent. .82
I help this person with difficult assignments, even when assistance is not
directly requested. .78
I assist this person with heavy work loads, even though it is not part of my
job. .74
Peer reliable role performance
This DEMO adequately completes assigned duties. .76
This person performs all tasks that are expected of him/her. .71
This person fulfills responsibilities specified in job DEMO .64
This person meets formal performance requirements of the job. .60
a The lambdas are reported from the completely standardized solution. Chi-square with 129
DEMO of freedom is 256.01 (p < .001). Comparative fit index DEMO .90. Calculated from null of
1,688.53 with 153 degrees of freedom.
and the dependability of focal managers and peers, and to assess their satis-
faction with various aspects of each target individual's job performance DEMO a
seven-point scale ranging from 1 (not at all) to 7 (entirely). Performance
measures were found to be reliable (a. = DEMO). Table 3 reports confirmatory
factor analysis results and item wordings.
Analyses
Using LISREL 7 (Anderson & Gerbing, 1988; Joreskog & Sorbom, DEMO),
I took a two-stage approach to structural equation model fitting DEMO assess-
ment, assessing measurement properties of the model prior to considering
DEMO relationships between constructs. Within the structural equation
modeling framework used, multiple DEMO indicators (the individual
scale items) were used to measure latent constructs. In testing the theoretical
40
Academy of Management Journal
February
TABLE 3
Results of Confirmatory Factor DEMO for Performance Measuresa
Items
Lambdas
Assessor rating of focal manager's performance
Overall, to what extent do you feel that this person is performing his/her total
job the way you would like it to be DEMO? .96
To what extent has this person met all of your DEMO in his/her roles
and responsibilities? .93
To what extent are DEMO satisfied with the total contribution made by this
person? .82
If DEMO had your way, to what extent would you change the manner DEMO which
this person is doing his/her job? .71
Assessor rating DEMO peer performance
Overall, to what extent do you feel that this DEMO is performing his/her total
job the way you would like it to be performed? .95
To what extent has this person met all of your expectations in his/her roles
and responsibilities? .94
To what extent are you satisfied with the total contribution made by this
person?DEMO
If you had your way, to what extent would you change DEMO manner in which
this person is doing his/her job?
a The lambdas are reported from the completely standardized solution. Chi-square with 19
DEMO of freedom is 99.57 (p < .001). Comparative fit index DEMO .93. Calculated from null of
1,245.73 with 28 degrees of freedom.
.82
.72
framework, I fitted 11 nested models, each incorporating different DEMO
tions about model parameters, to the data.
The first two models DEMO used to assess measurement properties. An
initial null model specifying no relations among observable variables repre-
sented the poorest-fitting model and provided a baseline DEMO computation of
the normed comparative fit index. A measurement model with the paths
between observable variables and associated latent constructs freed and la-
tent DEMO allowed to correlate freely was fitted to the data. As during
measure development, I assessed the discriminant validity of constructs by
constraining correlations among constructs to zero and examining the
change in chi-square.
To test hypotheses DEMO the structural relationships among vari-
ables, I took a nested-models approach (Anderson & Gerbing, 1988). I ar-
rayed nine nested structural models between the measurement model-the
best-fitting model, with structural relationships among latent constructs as-
sumed to be perfectly estimated-and the null model and compared them
DEMO chi-square difference tests. First, the theoretical model, with all paths
not specifically hypothesized to exist fixed to zero, was specified. Figure 2
presents the structural relationships in this model from which four vari-
ables-defensive behavior, control-based monitoring, social similarity, and
professional status-are omitted. The combined measure DEMO monitoring and
defensive behavior was found to be insufficiently distinct from cognition-
FIGURE 2
Structural Parameters Included in the Theoretical Modela
i~~p
Manager Affiliative
DEMO Behavior
14
A
a Error variances for observed variables (8 and DEMO elements) and correlations among latent exogenous variables (4ij elements) have DEMO
omitted for the sake of clarity.
b Direction of relationship is from manager to peer.
o0
o
l
42
Academy of Management Journal
February
based trust to warrant inclusion, and the categorical measures of social sim-
ilarity (gender and ethnic background) DEMO professional status were not suit-
able for inclusion within the LISREL model.3
In addition, three constrained-parameter and five relaxed-parameter
models were fitted to the data. For the constrained models, I fixed the sets of
relationships hypothesized to exist to zero and assessed chi-square differ-
ence tests between these DEMO and the theoretical model. These tests in-
dicated whether these models included paths that should have been omit-
ted. The three constrained-parameter models can DEMO specified as follows: in
model C1, paths from exogenous variables to affect- and cognition-based
trust are fixed to zero (Y11 = 'Y12 DEMO '13 = '24 = 0); in model C2, paths DEMO
cognition- and affect-based trust to behavioral response measures are fixed
to zero (P31 = 341 = p51 = 0); and in model C3, paths from behavioral
response to performance measures are fixed to zero (DEMO = 364 = 165 = 173
= P74 = 75 = 0). Examining the impact of sets of constrained paths in
addition to DEMO the significance of individual paths is important
where the constructs involved are significantly correlated (Niehoff & Moor-
man, 1993). A significant difference DEMO fit between structural models would
provide support for fundamental relationships hypothesized in the model.
For the relaxed-parameter models, I freed sets of structural paths fixed
to zero in the theoretical model and conducted chi-square difference tests.
DEMO tests indicate the potential importance of relationships not yet spec-
ified. The five relaxed-parameter models examined can be specified as fol-
lows: in model R1, additional paths from exogenous variables to affect- and
cognition-based trust are freed (721', 22, '23, Y14); in model R2, additional
paths from cognition- and affect-based trust to behavioral response variables
are DEMO (332, 142, 152); in model R3, paths from exogenous variables to
behavioral response variables are freed (731, '32' 733, '34, Y41, '42' y43, '44,
Y51, Y52 'Y53, 754); in model R4, paths from trust to performance DEMO freed (161,
162, P71, P72); and in model DEMO, paths from exogenous variables to perfor-
mance are freed (761', 62', 63' 764' '71', 72' y73, 74)'DEMO
Given my focus on theory testing, I made no attempt to DEMO a best-
fitting model by adding paths based on modification indexes, DEMO non-
significant variables and paths, allowing observable variables to load on
DEMO than one latent factor, allowing correlated measurement errors, and so
forth. It should also be noted that reversals in causal ordering and reciprocal
DEMO, especially as they concern the relationship between cognition-
and affect-based trust, were not examined.4 Nevertheless, within the nested-
3 LISREL parameter estimates are distorted when categorical variables are included in the
analysis as interval scale DEMO PRELIS provides for the computation of "polychoric" cor-
relation coefficients between categorical variables and "polyserial" correlation coefficients be-
tween categorical and continuous DEMO as substitutes for Pearson product-moment corre-
lations, but this procedure requires DEMO sample of more than 200 subjects and considerable com-
putational power (DEMO & S6rbom, 1988, 1989).
4 For two reciprocally related parameters to be overidentified, it is necessary for each to
1995
McAllister
43
models framework, considering constrained-parameter models allowed for
detection of potential errors of commission (specifying unnecessary relation-
ships) and considering relaxed-parameter DEMO allowed for identification
of potential errors of omission (excluding relationships that DEMO have theo-
retical and practical significance). A specific advantage of the nested-models
approach to theory testing is its potential for exploring relationships, not yet
included in a model, that may have theoretical relevance (Anderson & Gerb-
ing, 1988).
In addition to structural equation modeling, ordinary-least-squares
(OLS) regression analysis was used to examine Hypotheses 2b (the relation-
ship between cultural-ethnic similarity and cognition-based trust) and 2c
(the relationship DEMO a peer's professional status and a manager's cog-
nition-based trust). I regressed cognition-based trust on all causally prior
(exogenous) variables. DEMO this analysis, I computed scales as the average of
their indicator DEMO Multiple regression analysis is well established as an
acceptable method for path computation in path analysis (Pedhazur, 1982).
RESULTS
Assessment of the DEMO Model
Table 4 presents correlations among all study variables. Table 5 reports
results from the nested-models analysis, including structural path coeffi-
cients and model fit statistics.
The measurement model represents a confirmatory factor analysis of all
DEMO used in the study. The normed comparative fit assessments for the
confirmatory factor analyses of portions of the model (see Tables 1, 2, and 3)
all met or exceeded .90, a generally accepted standard for acceptability, but
the comparative fit index for the measurement model was .87. This finding
mirrors Niehoff and Moorman's (1993) observation that DEMO the number of
latent variables included in a model increases, a DEMO's ability to fit
models, even those with strong theoretical support, decreases. Given the fact
that this analysis included 11 distinct latent constructs, the achieved model
fit is reasonable.
Four correlations among latent measures exceeded DEMO: the relationships
between peer affiliative and assistance-oriented citizenship behavior, focal
manager affiliative and assistance-oriented citizenship behavior, focal-
manager-reported affect- and cognition-based trust, DEMO focal manager affect-
based trust and affiliative citizenship behavior. In part, DEMO excessive co-
efficients reflect the fact that measures were obtained from a single source.
As in initial scale development, I assessed discriminant validity by con-
straining phi coefficients ((ij) for pairs of constructs to 1.0 and conducting
have an instrument, an exogenous variable affecting
(Kenny,
DEMO trust,
not examine reciprocal
1979;
Schaubroeck,
I found no significant
causation.
1990).
In
instrument
one but not the corresponding
the DEMO of the relationship
for cognition-based
between affect-
trust
and accordingly,
variable
and cognition-
could
Correlations
TABLE
and Descriptive Statisticsa
4
Variables
Means
Focal manager attitudes
and DEMO
1. Cognition-based
trust
2. Affect-based trust
3. Need-based
monitoring
4. Manager
citizenship
behavior, affiliative
5. Manager
citizenship
behavior, assistance
Peer attributes and
behavior
DEMO Reliable role
performance
7. Professional status
8. Peer citizenship
behavior, affiliative
DEMO Peer citizenship
behavior, assistance
Relationship
considerations
10. Ethnic similarity
11. Gender DEMO
12. Interaction
frequency
Effectiveness measures
13. Peer performance
14. Focal manager
performance
5.43
4.71
4.44
5.23
4.03
6.22
1.43
5.19
3.63
0.73
0.69
4.67
DEMO
5.07
a Cronbach's alphas appear on
* p < .05
** p < .01
*** p < .001
s.d.
1
2
3
4
DEMO
1.47
1.33
0.98
1.57
(.91)
.63***
.01
.43***
.19**
(.89)
.31***
.71**
.48***
(.69)
.43***
.48***
(.79)
.67***
DEMO
1.24
1,06
1.61
.06
.09
.13*
.09
-.07
.08
.39***
.22**
-.05
-.18**
.23***
.23***
.02
.05
.32***
.23***
0.44-
0.47
.05
.03
DEMO
-.09
.13*
.08
.00
.15*
1.64
.19**
.39***
.34***
.18**
-.08
.35***
.12
1.27
.40***
1.26
.15*
.26***
.02
.23**
the diagonal for multiple-item DEMO
5
(.85)
.07
-.03
.27***
.33***
-.01
.16*
.41***
.03
DEMO
6
(.77)
.05
-.05
-.03
-.08
-.05
-.06
.14*
.05
DEMO
8
(.81)
.52***
.08 -.04
-.15* .16*
.49***
.13*
.16*
DEMO
(.82)
-.07
.07
.40* **
.10
.06
.07
.00
-.02
DEMO
.01
10
.03
.04
-.13
-.05
11
.14*
-.09
-.08
12
(DEMO)
.11
.03
13
(.92)
.22
14
(.92)
q
CtD
CD
I3 0 -
0z
D
P?
c-
Co
CU1
cn
TABLE 5
Structural Parameter Estimates for Nested-Models Analysisa
DEMO
Coefficient
P12
P31
P41
51
P63
164
365
173
(74
P75
DEMO
Yi2
Y13
Y24
Y14
Y21
'22
'23
P32
42
52
Y31
Y32
Y33
Y34
Measurement Path Measureme
Model
Theoretical TheotiConstrained
Model
.63***
.36***
DEMO
.56***
-.19.15 -.20
.31**
-.12
-.14
.52***
- -.27**
.22**
.24*
-.02
.07
1
.68***
.36***
.86***
.57***
19*
.31
-.12**
-.14
.53***
-.22**
DEMO
Models
.68***
3
.63***
.37***
.85***
.56***
.25**
-.11
.15
.45***
-
.19*
.26**
-.06
.07
-
.22**
.24*
-.02
.07
1
.60***
.38***
DEMO
.57***
.32***
-.12
-.14
.54***
-.27**
.20**
.22*
-.02
.10
-.03
.15
.13
-.04
2
.72***
.92***
1.20***
1.07***
-.31***
.38**
-.13
-.11
.56***
DEMO
.21***
.17
.04
.06
-.75***
-
.44 *
*
-.67***
Relaxed Models
3
.64***
.25*
.81***
.48***
- .20*
.33***
-.12
-.13
.53***
-.29**
DEMO
.23*
-.03
.07
.23*
- .14
.27
-.11
4
.63***
.36***
.85***
.56***
-.12
.10
.00
-.17
.47*
-.28**
.22**
.24*
-.02
.08
5
DEMO
.37***
.86***
.56***
-.20*
.23*
-.15
-.10
.49**
- .25**
.22**
.24*
- .02
.09
Null
Model
TABLE 5 (continued)
Path
Coefficient
Y41
Y42
'43
7Y44
Y51
DEMO
Y53
Y54
P61
P62
P71
M~leasurement Path Measurement
Model
TTheoretical Theoretical
Model
Constrained Models
1
2
3
1
.06
-.07
.17
.07
.21*
-.28*
DEMO
.05
P72
Y61
Y62
Y63
764
Y71
Y72
773
'74
X2
DEMO
CFI
AX2
Adf
a Standardized path coefficients are reported. They represent relationships between variables
difference tests were computed on the basis of the deviation DEMO the theoretical model.
* p < .05
**p < .01
< .001
***p
1,843
1,072
.87
2,032
1,107
.84
2,DEMO
1,111
.84
36***
4
2,230
1,111
.81
198***
4
2,061
1,113
.84
29***
6
2,025
1,103
.84
DEMO
4
1,973
1,104
.85
59***
3
1,999
1,095
.85
33***
12
within the theoretical
model
Relaxed Models
2
3
4
DEMO
Null l
Model
-.20
.50***
.13
- .11
2,010
1,103
.85
22***
4
.06
.16
.01
.23**
-.15
.17
- .05
.14
DEMO,015
1,099
.85
17
8
7,089
1,176
.00
5,057***
69
presented in Figure 2. Chi-square
Q,
CD CD
CD DEMO
0D
c
aI
0
r-
?
CD
CT
I)
cu1
1995
McAllister
47
chi-square difference tests. For each pair of constructs, constraining the cor-
relation to 1.0 made model fit significantly worse. This finding DEMO these
measures are better understood as distinct than joined, although not DEMO
out the presence of common method variance, supports the argument that
DEMO covariation alone cannot adequately account for the relationships
observed (Podsakoff & DEMO, 1986).
Assessment of the Structural Model
Results from the nested-models DEMO (Table 5) indicate that the theo-
retical model provides only a limited explanation for the structural relation-
ships among the variables. The measurement DEMO's comparative fit index
of .87 approximates the fit that would be achieved (given the present data)
with the structural portion of the LISREL model perfectly fitted. Accord-
ingly, the theoretical model's index of .84 may appear reasonable. Yet a
chi-square difference test comparing the two DEMO indicates that the mea-
surement model provides a significantly better fit to the data than does the
theoretical model (AX2 = 189, Adf DEMO 58, p < .001).
Figure 3 presents significant standardized path DEMO for the theo-
retical model. Also included are error terms (cs) for the structural equations.
In standardized form, error coefficients represent the proportion of variance
in each equation not accounted for in the structural model. DEMO clearly,
portions of the model fit the data better than others-for instance, 54 percent
of the variance in affect-based trust was accounted for in the theoretical
model, but only 10 percent of the variance in peer performance was ex-
plained. The theoretical framework may best be viewed DEMO addressing ante-
cedents and consequences of affect-based trust and not as comprehensively
explaining the antecedents of performance.
Results from the nested-models analysis clarify the DEMO of the theo-
retical model's misspecification. In general, results of DEMO difference
tests between that model and the constrained models indicate that funda-
mental relationships do exist between peer attributes and a focal manager's
DEMO in peers, between the manager's trust in peers and his DEMO her behavioral
responses, and between those responses and performance outcomes. For
DEMO of the three constrained models, fit was significantly worse than the DEMO
of the theoretical model. Thus, the paths that were included in DEMO model
should have been included. On the other hand, model fit DEMO were
significantly improved with the freeing of additional paths; those from DEMO
manager trust beliefs (affect- and cognition-based) to behavioral responses,
from antecedents to behavioral responses, and from trust to performance.
Thus, considering DEMO relationships among study variables might en-
rich the model.
The Distinction Between Cognition- and Affect-Based Trust
Strong support was found for the distinction between DEMO
and affect-based trust predicted in Hypothesis 1. First, exploratory findings
FIGURE 3
Derived Path Coefficients Based on a Structural Equation Analysis of DEMO Theoretical Model
.69
.99
a Direction of relationship
** *p<.05 p < .01
*** p <.001
is from
manager
to peer.
Q
CD Ct
a
-
CD
c
CD
1
r-
1995 McAllister 49
with parallel data and confirmatory analysis results with the DEMO sample
(Table 1) indicate that the two-factor representation of affect- and cognition-
based trust fits the data well. The two factors were shown DEMO be reliable.
Second, the pattern of relationships between the forms of DEMO and the other
variables included in the study differ considerably. In the theoretical model,
peer affiliative citizenship behavior was found to be positively DEMO
with focal manager affect-based trust in peers but unrelated to cognition-
based trust. Combining insights derived from the theoretical model with
observations from the DEMO model in which additional paths between
focal manager trust in peers and behavioral responses are freed suggests that
although a focal manager's affect-based DEMO in peers is positively associated
with need-based monitoring of peers and assistance-oriented citizenship
behavior, cognition-based trust may be negatively associated with these vari-
ables. Thus, affect-based trust and cognition-based trust represent distinct
forms of interpersonal trust.
Interpersonal Hypotheses: Relating Peer Attributes and Behavior to
Trust Perceptions
In general, peer attributes and behavior were found to be related to focal
manager assessments of peer trustworthiness (Table 5). Model fit assess-
ments were appreciably worse with paths from hypothesized antecedents to
trust constrained to zero; the change in chi-square between the theoretical
model and the first constrained DEMO was 36, p < .001. Further analysis
indicated, as is apparent in Figure 3, that relationships between peer attri-
butes and affect-based trust in particular explain this finding.
It was hypothesized that a manager's DEMO trust in peers
would be greater under three conditions: when peers DEMO high levels of
reliable role performance (Hypothesis 2a), when the DEMO had cultural-
ethnic similarity (Hypothesis 2b), and when peers had DEMO professional
credentials (Hypothesis 2c). Hypothesis 2a was examined in the DEMO
equation assessment of the theoretical model (Figure 3). The path DEMO re-
liable role performance to focal manager cognition-based trust was not sig-
nificant. Hypotheses 2b and 2c were examined in the supplementary OLS
regression DEMO and were also not supported. Regression analysis results,
in which level of cognition-based trust was regressed on all causally prior
variables, were not significant (F = 1.60, n.s.). Thus, findings do not support
Hypotheses 2a, 2b, and 2c.
Hypotheses 3a and 3b, however, DEMO strongly supported. I hypothe-
sized that focal managers would express strong affect-based trust in peers
engaging in interpersonal citizenship behavior (Hypothesis 3a) and DEMO those
with whom the managers interacted frequently (Hypothesis 3b). Significant,DEMO
positive paths from interaction frequency and peer affiliative citizenship
behavior to affect-based trust (y1l = .22, p < .01; y12 = .24, DEMO < .05)
supported predictions. Assistance-based citizenship behavior, however, was
not found to be associated with affect-based trust.
50 Academy of Management Journal February
Intrapersonal Hypotheses: Relationships Among Trust Perceptions and
Behavioral Responses
Hypotheses 4, 5, and 6, addressing relationships among focal manager
beliefs about peer trustworthiness and focal manager behavior, were gener-
ally supported. First, the hypothesis that cognition-based trust would be a
positive predictor of affect-based (Hypothesis 4) was strongly supported (112
= .63, p < .001). Second, results of the nested-models analysis demon-
DEMO that managers' assessments of peer trustworthiness were associated
with the managers' behavior toward their peers. Fit assessments were ap-
preciably worse with paths DEMO focal manager trust perceptions with
focal manager behavioral responses (P31, 141, and ,51) constrained to
zero (Ax2 = 198, p < .001). As Hypotheses 5a and 5b, concerning the be-
havioral consequences of cognition-based trust, were not tested, this finding
is best understood DEMO substantiating relationships from affect-based trust to
its behavioral consequences only.
Results supported the hypotheses predicting that the affect-based trust
focal managers expressed in peers DEMO be positively associated with the
managers' need-based monitoring of peers (Hypothesis 6a) and interpersonal
citizenship behavior toward them (Hypothesis 6b). Paths DEMO focal manager
affect-based trust in peers to need-based monitoring, affiliative citizenship
DEMO, and assistance-oriented citizenship behavior were, as shown in
Figure 3, DEMO significant (31 == .36, p < 001; 141 = .86, p < .001; 51 = .56,
p < .001).
Performance Implications Hypotheses
In general, the behavioral consequences of trust were found to be related
to supervisor assessments of performance. As the results of the DEMO
els comparison of the theoretical model with the third constrained model
indicate (Table 5), model fit assessments were appreciably worse with paths
from behavioral response latent constructs to performance measures (P63,
164, P65, P73, P74, and P75) constrained to zero (AX2 = 29, p < .001). Hypoth-
eses 7, 8, and 9 address DEMO relationships among behavioral response
and performance variables. Again, as Hypotheses 7a DEMO 7b were not tested
in this analysis, findings are best understood DEMO substantiating the relation-
ship between the behavioral consequences of the affect-based trust and per-
formance outcome measures.
Results also only partially supported Hypotheses 8a DEMO 8b. Focal man-
ager need-based monitoring of peers was not positively associated with su-
pervisor assessments of focal manager performance as hypothesized (Hy-
pothesis 8a). Nevertheless, consistent with Hypothesis 8b, the path from
focal DEMO affiliative citizenship behavior directed toward peers to su-
pervisor assessments of focal manager performance was significant (174 =
.52, p < .001). DEMO interesting, nonhypothesized finding was a significant
negative path from assistance-based citizenship DEMO to focal manager
performance (p75 = -.27, p < .01). It may be that people see expressive acts
1995
McAllister
51
of interpersonal help and assistance serving more of a DEMO than a
task function as aiding performance but see other practical acts of help and
assistance as detracting from performance. This anomalous finding suggests
DEMO organizations may particularly value the expressive qualities of inter-
personal citizenship behavior. It may also be that expressive conduct is more
salient to supervisors DEMO task-oriented assistance.
Hypotheses addressing the relationship between focal manager behavior
and peer performance (Hypothesis 9a and Hypothesis 9b) were not sup-
ported. Nested-models DEMO results do not show focal manager need-
based monitoring of peers to be positively associated with peer performance.
Indeed, for the theoretical model, DEMO manager need-based monitoring of
peers was found to be negatively associated with peer performance (63 =
-.20, p < .05). This finding DEMO reflect manager's tendency to look for op-
portunities to assist peers in real need of assistance (signified by their having
low performance assessments). That is, the true causal ordering may be the
reverse of that depicted in Figure 2.
Consistent with Hypothesis 9b, a significant positive relationship be-
tween focal manager affiliative citizenship behavior and peer performance
was DEMO in the theoretical model (p64 = .31, p < .01). Yet when I
examined this relationship at the same time as possible DEMO relationships
between trust and performance outcomes, in the fourth relaxed model, this
path was nonsignificant.
In summary, results did not support the hypotheses concerning the
antecedents of cognition-based trust (2a through 2c). They did support hy-
potheses concerning the antecedents of affect-based trust (3a, 3b, and 4). The
hypotheses concerning the behavioral consequences and performance im-
DEMO of cognition-based trust were not tested. The hypotheses concern-
ing the behavioral consequences of affect-based trust (6a and 6b) were sup-
ported. Partial DEMO emerged for two of four hypotheses concerning the
performance implications of affect-based trust.
DISCUSSION
The Nature of Interpersonal Trust
The findings of this research DEMO that the beliefs of managers about
the trustworthiness of peers can be measured along two dimensions, the
extent of affect-based trust and the extent of cognition-based trust. In gen-
eral, levels of cognition-based trust were higher than levels of affect-based
trust, a finding consistent with the understanding that some level of cogni-
tion-based trust is necessary for affect-based trust to DEMO Further, results
indicate that, although cognition- and affect-based trust may be causally
connected, each form of trust functions in a unique manner and has a dis-
tinct pattern of association to antecedent and consequent variables.
DEMO theoretical work is needed to address the factors that can influence
the development of cognition-based trust; such information should enrich
52
Academy of Management Journal
February
understanding of cognition-based trust itself. Theory-based DEMO of
cognition-based trust-a peer's reliable role performance, professional cre-
dentials, and social-ethnic similarity-were not found to be associated with
cognition-based trust. One DEMO not addressed in the study was the local
reputation of a peer as dependable and reliable. Supervisor assessments of
peer performance were found to DEMO strongly associated with a focal manag-
er's cognition-based beliefs about peer trustworthiness (r = .40, p < .001).
Quite likely, what others think about the dependability of a peer will influ-
ence personal DEMO of that peer. Future research will need to address
reputational effects.
Observed differences in the pattern of relationships between forms of
trust and predictor DEMO consequence variables underscore the importance
of considering not only the level but also the form of trust. In past research
on citizenship behavior in DEMO, authors have argued that trust and
citizenship behavior are positively associated (Organ, 1990; Podsakoff et al.,
1990). The present research DEMO that there may be negative relation-
ships between a focal manager's cognition-based trust in a peer and his or
her affiliative- and assistance-oriented DEMO behavior toward the peer
(142
=
-.44,
p < .001;DEMO
P52
=
-.67,
p < .001).5
Interpersonal Trust and Coordination
Focal managers expressing high affect-based trust in peers were shown
to be DEMO inclined to look for opportunities to meet peers' work-related
needs and DEMO engage in productive intervention. In the complex, uncertain
situations involving reciprocal DEMO, typical in managerial and
professional work, traditional mechanisms of coordination (DEMO, plans,
routines, and such) are usually inadequate as contingencies DEMO always
be properly planned for (Katz, 1964; Thompson, 1967). Under these condi-
tions, coordination is a continuous process in which all the actors involved
adjust their actions to one another (Follett, 1937) and self-initiated mecha-
nisms of coordination are critical. Need-based monitoring and citizenship-
DEMO represent self-initiated steps that can promote coordination under
turbulent conditions.
Findings did not generally support the hypotheses addressing the per-
formance implications of behavioral DEMO to trust. One notable excep-
tion was the positive relationship found between focal manager affiliative
citizenship behavior and supervisor assessments of focal manager perfor-
DEMO Interestingly enough, focal manager assistance-based citizenship be-
havior was negatively associated DEMO supervisor assessments of focal man-
ager performance. As defined here, affiliative DEMO behavior differed
from assistance-oriented citizenship behavior in that it involved personal
5 This finding may not be all that surprising. An individual who sees DEMO peer as dependable
and reliable, competent and capable, may have little reason to offer assistance, as little assis-
tance appears to be needed.
1995
McAllister
53
assistance, was affect-laden and expressive, and served more DEMO a mainte-
nance than a task function. The logic behind managers' DEMO greater value
on affiliative citizenship behavior than on more practical acts of interper-
sonal help and assistance merits systematic attention in future research.
The DEMO Fabric of Managerial Working Relationships
The current findings demonstrate the importance of affect-based trust
relationships and the expressive qualities of interpersonal behavior. These
findings DEMO current thinking on the nature of personal relationships
among managers and professionals in organizations. Management scholars
have recognized for some time that a considerable DEMO of managerial
work is accomplished through interpersonal interaction and that the nature
of the interpersonal relationships between managers and peers can deter-
mine their DEMO to get work accomplished (Gabarro, 1990; Mintzberg, 1973;
Sayles, 1979). Less acknowledged, however, has been the affective element
of these interpersonal relationships. The understanding has been that "be-
cause working relationships generally exist to accomplish tasks while social
relationships [do] not, task achievement, task instrumentality and task-
specific competence are especially important in work relationships, while
affect and self-disclosure are less important" (Gabarro, 1990: 79). Given this
view of affective factors as being somehow less important, their role in
ongoing working relationships has remained unaddressed. In contrast, the
focus here was on the inherent social nature of managerial work and DEMO
enhancing understanding of working relationships in organizations by rec-
ognizing their commonalities with other types of social relationships.
The expressive qualities of behavior in DEMO should receive
more systematic treatment in future research. Findings from the present
theoretical model show that peer affiliative citizenship behavior in particu-
lar, rather than citizenship behavior in general, is associated with managers'
affect-based trust in peers and that peer affiliative citizenship behavior is
associated with managers' affiliative citizenship behavior only indirectly,
through affect-based trust. Exploratory findings from DEMO relaxed-parameter
model with paths from antecedents of trust to managers' behavioral DEMO
sponses freed show peer assistance-based citizenship behavior to be posi-
tively associated with managers' assistance-oriented citizenship behavior
(y53 = .37, p < .001) but not with affect-based trust. It appears that managers
distinguish between instrumental assistance from peers, which generates
debts, and assistance from peers that DEMO primarily demonstrative or expres-
sive. As Kahn (1993) observed, exchanges DEMO resources, time, information,
counseling, and services can all serve DEMO than instrumental purposes and,
with appropriate affective content, can function DEMO essential mechanisms of
social support. In a study of interpersonal dyadic relationships within net-
work-form organizations, Larson quoted an executive as stating, "The [extra]
effort to help is as important as the help itself. The DEMO has to be
attended to" (1992: 89).
It appears DEMO it is not unusual for managers, even those from different
54
Academy of Management Journal
February
areas of functional specialization and different DEMO units, to de-
velop relationships of care and concern for one DEMO and for such senti-
ments to constitute an important basis for trust. Indeed, over 60 percent of
the focal managers in this study, DEMO their beliefs about their trust in
peers, believed that, to some extent, they could talk freely with a specific
peer and know that he or she would want to listen and respond construc-
tively and DEMO Approximately 50 percent of the respondents believed
that both they and the specific peers had made significant emotional invest-
ments in the working relationships DEMO that both would feel a sense of loss
if one or the other were transferred and they could no longer work together.
These findings DEMO Seabright and colleagues' contention that "it is
hard to imagine the development of highly specific relationship capital that
does not engender some element DEMO social ties" (1992: 155). Granovetter's
general observation that "continuing economic relations often become over-
laid with social content that carries DEMO expectations of trust and absten-
tion from opportunism" (1985: 490) can be given added specificity-the
sentiments of care and concern that connect DEMO provide a principal
foundation for this trust. Despite the prevalence of relationships of affect-
based trust, very little theory or data exist to either guide understanding of
the implications of such trust relationships for the individuals DEMO and
their organizations or to distinguish these relationships from those based
solely on cognition-based trust. The present research is an initial step toward
articulating DEMO theoretical framework for future research on how relationships
of affect-based trust between managers in organizations influence their be-
havior and performance.
Study Limitations
The DEMO findings should be interpreted in light of the study's limi-
tations. First, because almost 75 percent of the study's participants were
highly educated men, the findings are best interpreted as evidence concern-
ing working relationships between such individuals. Further research is
needed to establish the generalizability DEMO these findings to other sorts of
working relationships. Second, given the DEMO design, causality
cannot be established from this study alone. My focus DEMO on examining
whether the pattern of relationships among variables was consistent with a
specific causal understanding (Bobko, 1990). The present findings are DEMO
initial step on the road to causality determination. Supplemental longitudi-
nal field studies and controlled laboratory experiments will both prove use-
ful in future DEMO Finally, the disciplined confirmatory assessment of
the theoretical framework through the DEMO analysis indicates that
there remains considerable room for improvement in the fit of the theoretical
model. Insights from the relaxed-parameter analyses, including possible
negative paths from cognition-based trust in peers to need-based monitoring,
affiliative citizenship DEMO, and assistance-oriented citizenship behav-
ior, indicate ways in which the model can be enriched, but these insights
1995 McAllister 55
must be understood as exploratory. Further theoretical and empirical DEMO
is needed to demonstrate that these findings are not unique to this sample
and study.
Conclusion
This article assesses a theoretical framework for studying DEMO
trust in organizations, the factors influencing the development of trust rela-
DEMO, and the mechanisms by which trust influences behavior in inter-
dependent DEMO and ultimately, the efficiency with which coordi-
nated action is maintained. DEMO findings from an initial test of the
framework support the fundamental distinction made between two princi-
pal forms of trust and the argument that DEMO form should be understood.
Further, the results of the research point DEMO the importance of understanding
the affective qualities of working relationships and the expressive qualities
of various forms of interpersonal conduct.
Over fifteen years ago DEMO (1977) expressed concern over existing
conceptions of the role of the informal social relationships in organizations.
Burns noted that Roethlisberger and Dickson saw DEMO informal organization
"as a receptacle for observations about the behavior, relationships, the sen-
timents and beliefs . . . taken to be irrelevant to the formal organization or
incompatible with it," and that Barnard DEMO it as "an essential adjunct to
formal organization." For Burns the theoretical and practical relevance of
the informal organization went much further. He DEMO that "essential or-
ganizational processes involving actual operations and work are DEMO in
the person-to-person relationships formed by people at work, and as DEMO
constitute the necessary counterpart and complement to the control systems
maintained by the management structure" (1977: 308).
In the present research, DEMO relations have been examined with the
understanding that they are central to the real work of organizations. Find-
ings establish the affective foundations upon DEMO trust between managers
is built as an essential counterpart to other foundations for interpersonal
trust and highlight affect-based trust's role in facilitating effective DEMO
nated action in organizations.
REFERENCES
Alchian, A. A., & Demsetz, DEMO 1972. Production, information costs, and economic organization.
American Economic Review, DEMO: 777-795.
Anderson, J. C., & Gerbing, D. W. 1988. Structural equation modeling in practice: A review and
recommended two-step approach. Psychological Bulletin, 193: 411-423.
Arrow, K. 1974. The limits of organization. New York: Norton.
Ashforth, B. E., & Lee, R. T. 1990. Defensive DEMO in organizations: A preliminary model.
Human Relations, 43: 621-648.
Bagozzi, R. P., & Yi, Y. 1988. On the evaluation of structural DEMO models. Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Science, 16: 74-94.
Baier, A. 1985. Trust and antitrust. Ethics, 96: 231-260.
56 Academy of Management Journal February
Baker, G. P., Jensen, M. C., & Murphy, K. J. 1988. Compensation and incentives: Practice vs.
theory. Journal of Finance, 43: 593-616.
Barber, B. 1983. The logic and limits of trust. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
structural DEMO Psychological Bulletin, 107:
Bentler, P. M. 1990. Comparative fit indexes in
238 -246.
Bobko, P. 1990. Multivariate correlational analysis. In M. D. Dunnette & L. M. Hough (Eds.),
Handbook of industrial and DEMO psychology (2d ed.), vol. 1: 636-686. Palo
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Bradach, J. L., & Eccles, R. G. 1989. Price, authority, and trust: From ideal types to plural forms.
Annual Review of Sociology, 15: 97-118.
Brewer, M. B. 1979. In-group bias in the minimal intergroup situation: A cognitive-motivational
analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 86: 307-324.
Brief, A. P., & George, J. M. 1992. Feeling good-doing good: A conceptual analysis of the mood
at work-organizational spontaneity relationship. Psychological Bulletin, 112: 310-329.
Burke, M. J., Brief, A. P., DEMO, J. M., Roberson, L., & Webster, J. 1989. Measuring DEMO at
work: Confirmatory analyses of competing mood structures with conceptual linkages DEMO
cortical regulatory systems. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57: 1091-1102.
Burns, T. 1977. The BBC: Public institution and private world. New DEMO: Holmes & Meier
Publishers.
Butler, J. K. 1991. Towards understanding and measuring conditions of trust: Evolution of a
conditions of trust inventory. Journal of Management, 17: 643-663.
Clark, M. S. 1984. Record keeping in two types of relationships. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 47: DEMO
Clark, M. S., & Mills, J. 1979. Interpersonal attraction in DEMO and communal relationships.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(1): 12-24.
Clark, M. S., Mills, J., & Corcoran, D. DEMO 1989. Keeping track of needs and inputs of friends and
strangers. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 15: 533-542.
Clark, M. S., Mills, J., & Powell, M. C. 1986. Keeping track of needs in DEMO and exchange
relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51: 333-338.
Clark, M. S., & Waddell, B. 1985. Perceptions of exploitation in communal and exchange rela-
tionships. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 2: 403-418.
Cook, J., & Wall, T. 1980. New work attitude DEMO of trust, organizational commitment and
personal need nonfulfillment. Journal of Occupational DEMO, 53: 39-52.
Deutsch, M. 1973. The resolution of conflict: constructive and destructive processes. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
Fichman, M., & Levinthal, D. A. 1991. Honeymoons and the liability of adolescence: A DEMO
perspective on duration dependence in social and organizational relationships. Academy
of Management Review, 16: 442-468.
Follett, M. P. 1937. The process of control. In L. Gulick & L. Urwick (Eds.), Papers on the
science of administration: 161-169. New York: Institute of Public Administration.
Fox, A. 1974. Beyond contract: Work, power and trust relations. London: Faber & Faber.
Gabarro, J. 1990. The development of working relationships. In J. Galagher, R. E. Kraut, & C.
Egido (Eds.), Intellectual teamwork: DEMO and technological foundations of coopera-
tive work: 79-110. Hillsdale, NJ: DEMO
Granovetter, M. S. 1985. Economic action and social structure: The problem of embeddedness.
American Journal of Sociology, 91: 481-510.
1995
McAllister
57
Griesinger, D. W. 1990. The human side of economic organization. Academy of Management
Review, 15: 478-490.
Holmes, J. G. 1978. The exchange process in close relationships: Microbehaviors and macro-
motives. In M. J. Lerner & S. C. Lerner (Eds.), The justice motive in social behavior:
Adapting to times of scarcity and change: 261-284. New York: Plenum.
Holmes, J. G., & Rempel, J. K. 1989. DEMO in close relationships. In C. Hendrick (Ed.), Close
relationships: 187-220. Newbury Park: Sage.
Isen, A. M., & Baron, R. A. DEMO Positive affect as a factor in organizational behavior. In L. L.
Cummings & B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol. DEMO: 1-53.
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Johnson-George, C. E., & DEMO, W. C. 1982. Measurement of specific interpersonal trust: Con-
struction and validation of a scale to assess trust in a specific other. Journal DEMO Personality
and Social Psychology, 43: 1306-1317.
Joreskog, K. G., & Sorbom, D. 1988. PRELIS. Mooresville, IN: Scientific Software.
Joreskog, K. DEMO, & S6rbom, D. 1989. LISREL 7. Mooresville, IN: Scientific Software.
Kahn, R. L., Wolfe, D. M., Quinn, R. P., & Snoek, J. D. 1964. Organizational stress: Studies in
role conflict and ambiguity. New York: Wiley.
Kahn, W. A. 1993. Caring for the DEMO: Patterns of organizational caring. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 38: 539-563.
Katz, D. 1964. The motivational basis of organizational behavior. Behavioral Science, 9: DEMO
146.
Kelly, H. H. 1979. Personal relationships: Their structures and process. Hillsdale, NJ: Erl-
baum.
Kenny, D. A. 1979. Correlation and causality. New York: Wiley.
Larson, A. 1992. Network dyads in entrepreneurial settings: A study of the governance of
exchange relationships. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37: 76-104.
Lewis, J. D., & Weigert, A. 1985. Trust as DEMO social reality. Social Forces, 63: 967-985.
Light, I. 1984. Immigrant DEMO ethnic enterprise in North America. Ethnic and Racial Studies,
7: DEMO
Lindskold, S. 1978. Trust development, the GRIT proposal, and the DEMO of conciliatory acts
on conflict and cooperation. Psychological Bulletin, 85: 772-793.
Longenecker, C. O., Jaccoud, A. J., Sims, H. P., DEMO, & Gioia, D. A. 1992. Quantitative and qual-
itative investigations of affect in executive judgment. Applied Psychology: An Interna-
tional Review, 41: 21-41.
Luhmann, N. 1979. Trust and power. Chichester: Wiley.
MacKenzie, S. B., Podsakoff, P. M., & Fetter, R. 1991. Organizational citizenship DEMO and
objective productivity as determinants of managerial evaluations of salespersons' perfor-
DEMO Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50: 123-150.
Mintzberg, H. DEMO The nature of managerial work. New York: Harper & Row.
Niehoff, B. P., & Moorman, R. H. 1993. Justice as a mediator DEMO the relationship between methods
of monitoring and organizational citizenship behavior. Academy of Management Journal,
36: 527-556.
Organ, D. W. 1988. Organizational citizenship DEMO: The good soldier syndrome. Lex-
ington, MA: Lexington Books.
Organ, D. W. 1990. The motivational basis of organizational citizenship behavior. In B. DEMO Staw
& L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol. 12: 43-72. Green-
wich, CT: JAI Press.
58 Academy of Management Journal February
Organ, D. W., & Konovsky, M. 1989. Cognitive versus affective determinants of organizational
citizenship behavior. Journal of DEMO Psychology, 74: 157-164.
Ouchi, W. G. 1979. A conceptual framework DEMO the design of organizational control mecha-
nisms. Management Science, 25: 833-848.
Park, O. S., Sims, H. P., Jr., & Motowidlo, DEMO J. 1986. Affect in organizations: How feelings and
emotions influence managerial DEMO In H. P. Sims, Jr., & D. A. Gioia (Eds.), The think-
ing organization: 215-237. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Pearce, J. DEMO, & Gregerson, H. B. 1991. Task interdependence and extrarole behavior: DEMO test of the
mediating effects of felt responsibility. Journal of Applied Psychology, 76: 838-844.
Pedhazur, E. J. 1982. Multiple regression in behavioral research: Explanation and prediction
(2d ed.). New York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston.
Pennings, J. M., & Woiceshyn, J. 1987. A typology of organizational control and its metaphors.
In S. B. Bacharach & S. DEMO Mitchell (Eds.), Research in the sociology of organizations, vol.
5: 75-104. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, DEMO B., Moorman, R. H., & Fetter, R. 1990. Transformational leader
behaviors and their effects on followers' trust in leader, satisfaction, and organizational
citizenship behaviors. Leadership Quarterly, 1: 107-142.
Podsakoff, P. M., & Organ, D. W. 1986. Self-reports in organizational research: Problems and
prospects. Journal of Management, 12: 531-544.
Porter, L. W., Lawler, E. E., & Hackman, J. R. 1975. Behavior in organizations. New York:DEMO
McGraw-Hill.
Rempel, J. K., Holmes, J. G., & Zanna, DEMO D. 1985. Trust in close relationships. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 49: 95-112.
Rotter, J. B. 1971. Generalized expectancies for interpersonal trust. American Psychologist, 35:
1-7.
Sayles, L. R. 1979. Leadership: What effective managers really do... and how they do it.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Schaubroeck, J. 1990. Investigating reciprocal causation in organizational behavior research.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 11: 17-28.
Seabright, M. A., Leventhal, D. A., & Fichman, M. 1992. Role of individual attachments in the
dissolution DEMO interorganizational relationships. Academy of Management Journal, 35:
122-160.
Shapiro, S. P. 1987. The social control of impersonal trust. American Journal of Sociology, 93:
623-658.
Shapiro, S. P. 1990. Collaring the crime, not DEMO criminal: Reconsidering the concept of white-
collar crime. American Sociological Review, 55: 346-365.
Simmel, G. 1964. The sociology of Georg Simmel (K. H. Wolff, trans.). New York: Free Press.
Smith, C. A., Organ, D. W., & Near, J. P. 1983. Organizational citizenship DEMO: Its nature
and antecedents. Journal of Applied Psychology, 68: 653-666.
DEMO, L. C. 1988. Trust. In H. London & J. E. Exner, Jr. (Eds.), Dimensionality of personality:
561-579. New York: Wiley.
DEMO, J. D. 1967. Organizations in action. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Tsui, DEMO S. 1984. A role-set analysis of managerial reputation. Organizational Behavior and
Human Performance, 34: 64-96.
Tsui, A. S., & Barry, B. 1986. Interpersonal affect and rating errors. Academy of Management
Journal, 29: 586-599.
1995 McAllister 59
Turner, J. C. 1987. Rediscovering the social group: DEMO self-categorization theory. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Williams, L. J., & Anderson, DEMO E. 1991. Job satisfaction and organizational commitment as
predictors of organizational citizenship and in-role behaviors. Journal of Management, 17:
601-617.
Williamson, O. DEMO 1974. Markets and hierarchies. New York: Free Press.
Wilson, D. 0. 1988. Effects of task uncertainty upon link multiplexity for high and low
DEMO project teams. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of California,
Irvine.
Zajonc, R. B. 1980. Feelings and thinking: Preferences need no inferences. American Psychol-
ogist, 35: 151-175.
Zucker, L. G. 1986. The production of trust: Institutional sources of economic structure, 1840-
1920. In B. M. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol 8:
55-111. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Daniel J. McAllister is an DEMO professor of management in the School of Business
Administration at Georgetown University. He received his Ph.D. degree in organiza-
tional behavior from the University DEMO California, Irvine. His research emphasizes the
social or relational foundations of DEMO attitudes, including interpersonal and institu-
tion-directed trust and affect, and behaviors, including citizenship-type behavior and
other forms of nonmandated conduct.{1g42fwefx}