Choice Under Uncertainty: Problems Solved and Unsolved
Mark J. Machina
The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 1, No. 1. (Summer, 1987), DEMO 121-154.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0895-3309%28198722%291%3A1%3C121%3ACUUPSA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-X
The Journal of Economic Perspectives is currently published by American Economic Association.
Your use of DEMO JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
DEMO permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal DEMO multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the DEMO archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher DEMO any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/aea.html.
Each copy of any part of DEMO JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is a DEMO digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by DEMO, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Fri Aug 24 04:15:03 2007
Economic Perspectives-
Volume I, Number 1 -Summer
1987- Pages 121-154
Choice Under Uncertainty:
Problems Solved and Unsolved
Mark J. Machina
F
ifteen years DEMO, the theory of choice under uncertainty could be considered
one of DEMO "success stories" of economic analysis: it rested on solid axiomatic
DEMO, it had seen important breakthroughs in the analytics of risk, risk
aversion and their applications to economic issues, and it stood ready to provide the
theoretical underpinnings for the newly emerging "information revolution" in DEMO
nomics.' Today choice under uncertainty is a field in flux: the standard theory is
being challenged on several grounds from both within and DEMO economics. The
nature of these challenges, and of our profession's DEMO to them, is the topic of this
paper.
The following section DEMO a brief description of the economist's canonical
model of choice under uncertainty, the expected utility model of preferences over
random prospects. I shall present this model from two different perspectives. The first
perspective is the DEMO familiar, and has traditionally been the most useful for
addressing standard DEMO questions. However the second, more modern perspec-
tive will be the DEMO useful for illustrating some of the problems which have beset the
model, as well as some of the proposed responses.
Each of the subsequent sections is devoted to one of these problems. All are
important, some are more completely "solved" than others. In each case I shall DEMO
with an example or description of the phenomenon in question. I shall then review the
empirical evidence regarding the uniformity and extent of the DEMO Finally, I
shall report on how these findings have changed, or are likely to change, or ought to
'E.g. von Neumann and DEMO (1947) and Savage (1954) (axiomatics); Arrow (1965), Pratt (1964)
and Kothschild and Stiglitz (1970) (analytics); DEMO (1970) and Spence and Zeckhauser (1971)
(information).
Mark J. Machina is Associate Professor of Economics, University of California, Sun DEMO,
La Jolla, California.
122 Economic Perspectives
change, the way we view and model economic behavior under uncertainty. On this
last topic, the disclaimer that "my opinions DEMO my own" has more than the usual
significance.
The Expected Utility DEMO
The Classical Perspective: Cardinal Utility and Attitudes Toward Risk
In light DEMO current trends toward generalizing this model, it is useful to note DEMO
the expected utility hypothesis was itself first proposed as an alternative to an earlier,
more restrictive theory of risk-bearing. During the development of DEMO probability
theory in the 17th century, mathematicians such as Blaise Pascal DEMO Pierre
de Fermat assumed that the attractiveness of a gamble offering the payoffs (x,, . . . , x,)
with probabilities (p,, . . . , p,) was given by its DEMO value F = Cxipi. The fact
that individuals consider more than just expected value, however, was dramatically
illustrated by an example posed by DEMO Bernoulli in 1728 and now known as the
St. Petersburg Paradox:
Suppose someone offers to toss a fair coin repeatedly until it comes DEMO heads,
and to pay you $1 if this happens on the first toss, $2 if it takes two tosses to land
a head, $4 if it takes three tosses, $8 if it takes four DEMO, etc. What is the largest
sure gain you would be willing DEMO forgo in order to undertake a single play of
this game?
1/4 chance of winning $2, etc.,
Since its expected this gamble value offers is (1/2) a 1/2 . $1 DEMO + (1/4) of winning . $2 + (1/8) $1, a . $4 + . . . = $1/2 + $1/2 +
$1/2 + . . . = $m, so it should be preferred to any finite sure gain. However, it is
clear that few individuals would forgo more than a moderate amount for DEMO one-shot
play. Although the unlimited financial backing needed to actually make this offer is
somewhat unrealistic, it is not essential for making the point: agreeing to limit the
game to at most one million tosses will still lead to a striking discrepancy between
most individuals' valuations of the modified gamble and its expected value of
$500,000.
The resolution of DEMO paradox was proposed independently by Gabriel Cramer
and Nicholas's cousin Daniel Bernoulli (Bernoulli, 1738/1954). Arguing that a gain of
$200 DEMO not necessarily "worth" twice as much as a gain of $100, they hypothesized
that the individual possesses what is now termed a van Neumann-Morgenstern utility
function U(.), and rather than using expected value DEMO = Cxipi, will evaluate gambles
on the basis of expected utility DEMO = EU(xi)pi. Thus the sure gain [ which would yield
the same utility as the Petersburg gamble, i.e. the certainty equivalent of this gamble,
'In keeping with the spirit of this journal, DEMO have been limited to the most significant examples of
and/or most useful introductions to the literature in each area. For further discussions of DEMO issues see
Arrow (1982), Machina (1983a, 1983b), Sugden (1986) and Tversky and Kahneman (1986).
von Neumann-
Morgenstern
utility
von Neumann-
Morgenstern
utility
Machina
123
wealth
Fig. DEMO Concave utility function of a risk averter
is determined by the equation
wealth
Fig. lb. Convex utility function of a risk lover
where W DEMO the individual's current wealth. If utility took the logarithmic form
U(x) ln(x) and W = $50,000, for example, DEMO individual's certainty equivalent 5
would only be about $9, even DEMO the gamble has an infinite expected value.
Although it shares the name "utility," U(.) is quite distinct from the ordinal
utility DEMO of standard consumer theory. While the latter can be subjected to any
monotonic transformation, a von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function is cardinal in
that it can only be subjected to transformations of the form a . U(DEMO) + b (a > O), i.e.
transformations which change the origin and/or scale of the vertical axis, but do not
affect the "shape" of the f~nction.~
To see how this shape determines DEMO attitudes, consider Figures la and lb. The
monotonicity of U,(.) and Ub(.) in the figures reflects the property of stochastic
DEMO preference, where one lottery is said to stochastically dominate another one
DEMO it can be obtained from it by shifting probability from lower to higher outcome
level^.^ Stochastic dominance preference is thus the probabilistic analogue of DEMO
attitude that "more is better."
Consider a gamble offering a DEMO/3 : 1/3 chance of the outcomes x' or x"DEMO The
points i = (2/3) . x' + (1/3) . x" in the figures give the expected value of DEMO
3Such transformations are often used to normalize the utility function, for DEMO to set U(0) = 0 and
LT(M)= 1 DEMO some large value M.
4~hus.for example, a 2/3: 1/3 chance of $100 or $20 and a 1/2: 1/2 chance of $100 or $30 both
stochastically dominate a 1/2 : 1/DEMO chance of $100 or $20.
124 Economic Perspectives
gamble, and E, = (2/3) . DEMO(x') + (1/3) . Ua(xU) and Eb DEMO (2/3) . U,(X') + (1/3) DEMO
Ub(xU) give its expected utilities for U,(.) and DEMO(.). For the concave utility function
U,(.) we have U,(?) > ii,, which implies that this individual would DEMO a sure gain
of ? (which would yield utility U,(x))to the gamble. Since someone with a concave
utility function will in fact always prefer receiving the expected value of a gamble to
the DEMO itself, concave utility functions are termed risk averse. For the convex
DEMO function Ub(.) we have ii, > U,(?), DEMO since this preference for bearing the
risk rather than receiving the expected value will also extend to all gambles, U,(.) is
termed risk loving. In their famous article, Friedman and Savage (1948) showed how
a utility function which was concave at low wealth levels and DEMO at high wealth
levels could explain the behavior of individuals who both incur risk by purchasing
lottery tickets as well as avoid risk by DEMO insurance. Algebraically, Arrow
(1965) and Pratt (1964) have shown DEMO the degree of concavity of a utility function,
as measured by the curvature index - Uf'(x)/U'(x), determines how risk attitudes,
and hence behavior, will vary with wealth or across individuals in a variety of
situations. If U,(.)is at least as risk averse as Ud(.) in the sense that - q'(x)/q(x)
2 - Ui'(x)/Ui(x) for all x, then an individual with utility function U,(.)DEMO be
willing to pay at least as much for insurance against any risk as would someone with
utility function Ud(.).
Since a DEMO of U(.) would allow us to predict preferences (and hence
behavior) in any risky situation, experimenters and applied decision analysts are
DEMO interested in eliciting or recovering their subjects' (or clients') von Neu-
mann-Morgenstern utility functions. One method of doing so is termed the DEMO
method. This approach begins by adopting the normalization U(0) = DEMO and U(M) = 1
(see Note 3) and fixing DEMO "mixture probability" p, say 3 = 1/2. The next DEMO
involves finding the individual's certainty equivalent 5, of a 1/DEMO : 1/2 chance of M or
0, which implies that DEMO(t,) = (1/2) . U(M) + (1/2) U(0) = 1/2. Finding the
certainty equivalents of DEMO 1/2 : 1/2 chances of 5, or 0 and DEMO M or 5, yields the
values t2 and t3 which solve DEMO(C2) = 1/4 and U(t3) = 3/4. By repeating this
procedure (i.e. 1/8, 3/8, 5/8, DEMO/8, 1/16, 3/16, etc.), the utility function DEMO (in the
limit) be completely assessed.
Our discussion so far has paralleled the economic literature of the 1960s and
1970s by emphasizing the DEMO of the expected utility model compared to the
Pascal-Fermat expected value approach. However, the need to analyze and respond
to growing empirical challenges has led economists in the 1980's to concentrate on the
behavioral restrictions DEMO by the expected utility hypothesis. It is to these
restrictions that we now turn.
A Modern Perspective: Linearity in the Probabilities as a Testable Hypothesis
As a theory of individual behavior, the expected utility model shares many of the
underlying assumptions of standard consumer theory. In each case DEMO assume that the
objects of choice, either commodity bundles or lotteries, can be unambiguously and
objectively described, and that situations which ultimately imply the same set of
availabilities (e.g. the same budget set) will DEMO to the same choice. In each case we
Choice Under Uncertainty
125
P3
prob (x3)
Pi = prob (DEMO)
Fig. 2. Expected utility indifference curves in the triangle diagram
also assume that the individual is able to perform the mathematical operations
necessary DEMO actually determine the set of availabilities, e.g. to add up the DEMO in
different sized containers or calculate the probabilities of compound or conditional
events. Finally, in each case we assume that preferences are transitive, DEMO that if an
individual prefers one object (either a commodity bundle DEMO a risky prospect) to a
second, and prefers this second object to a third, he or she will prefer the first object to
the third. We shall examine the validity of these assumptions for choice DEMO
uncertainty in some of the following sections.
However, the strongest implication DEMO the expected utility hypothesis stems from
the form of the expected utility maximand or preference function CU(xi)pi. Although
this preference function generalizes DEMO expected value form Cx,p, by dropping the
property of linearity DEMO the payoffs (the xi's), it retains the other key DEMO of this
form, namely linearity in the probabilities.
Graphically, we may illustrate the property of linearity in the probabilities by
considering the set DEMO all lotteries or prospects over the fixed outcome levels x, < DEMO, <
x,, which can be represented by the set of all probability triples of the form
P = (p,, p2, DEMO) where pi = prob(x,) and Cp, = 1. Since p, = 1 - p, - p,, we can
represent DEMO lotteries by the points in the unit triangle in the (p,, p3) plane, as in
Figure 2.5 Since upward movements in the triangle increase p, at the expense of p,
(i.e. shift DEMO from the outcome x2 up to x,) and leftward movements reduce
PI to the benefit of p, (shift probability from x, up to x,), these movements (and
more generally, all northwest movements) lead to stochastically dominating lotteries
'~hus if x, = $20, DEMO, = $30 and x, = $100, the prospects in Note DEMO would be represented by the points
(p,, ,b,) = (1/3, 2/3), (p,, p,) = (DEMO,1/2) and (p,, p3) = (1/2,1/2) respectively. Although it is fair to
describe the renewal of interest in this approach as "modern," versions of this diagram go back at least to
Marschak (1950).
126 Economic Perspectives
(solid lines are expected utility indifference curves)
(DEMO lines are iso-expected value lines)
Fig. 3a. Relatively steep indifference curves of a
risk averter
Fig. 3b. Relatively flat indifference curves of a DEMO
lover
and would accordingly be preferred. Finally, since the individual's DEMO curves
in the (p,, p,) diagram are given by DEMO solutions to the linear equation
(2) i =
3
i= 1
U(xi)pi = U(xl)pl + U(x2)(l - pl - p,) + U(x,)p, = constant
they DEMO consist of parallel straight lines of slope [U(x2) - U(DEMO)]/[U(x3) - U(x2)],
with more preferred DEMO curves lying to the northwest. This implies that in
order to know an expected utility maximizer's preferences over the entire triangle, it
suffices to know the slope of a single indifference curve.
To see how DEMO diagram can be used to illustrate attitudes toward risk, consider
Figures DEMO and 3b. The dashed lines in the figures are not indifference curves but
rather iso-expected value lines, i.e. solutions to
(3)
X DEMO 3 xipi = xlpl + x2(1 - p1
- p3) DEMO x3p3= constant
i= 1
Since northeast movements along these lines do not change the expected value of the
prospect but do increase the probabilities DEMO the tail outcomes xl and x, at the
expense of the DEMO outcome x2, they are examples of mean preserving spreads or
"pure" increases in risk (Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1970). When the utility function U(.)
is concave (i.e. risk averse), its indifference curves can be shown to be steeper than the
iso-expected value lines DEMO in Figure 3a,6 and such increases in risk will lead to lower
indifference curves. When U(.) is convex (risk loving), DEMO indifference curves will be
flatter than the iso-expected value lines (as DEMO Figure 3b) and increases in risk will lead
the iso-expected value DEMO is [x2
[x2
h his follows since the slope of the indifference curves is [U(x2)
xl]/[x3-
- x,]
> [U(DEMO)
-
U(x2)]/[x3
- x2]
x2],
whenever xl
U(x1)]/[U(x3) -
and concavity of 
U(.)DEMO 
< x2 < x3.
U(x2)],
[U(x2)-
the slope of
U(x1)]/
-
-
Machina
127
to higher indifference curves. If we compare two different utility DEMO, the one
which is more risk averse (in the above Arrow-Pratt sense) will possess the steeper
indifference curves.
Behaviorally, we can view DEMO property of linearity in the probabilities as a
restriction on the individual's preferences over probability mixtures of lotteries. If
P * = (p:, . . . , p:) and P = (p,, ..., p,) are two lotteries over a common outcome
set { x,, . . . , x, ), the a : (1 - a) probability mixture of P * and P is the lottery
aP * + (1 - a)P = (ap: + (1 - a)p,, . . . , ap: + (1 - a)p,). This may be thought
of as that prospect which yields the same ultimate probabilities over {x,, . . DEMO , x, ) as
the two-stage lottery which offers an a : (1 - a) chance of winning either P * or P.
Since linearity in the probabilities implies that CU(x,)(ap,* DEMO (1 - a)P,) =
a . CU(x,)p,* + (1 - a) . CU(x,)pl,
expected utility maximizers will exhibit the fol-
lowing property, known as the Independence Axiom (Samuelson, 1952):
If the lottery P * is preferred (resp. indifferent) to the lottery P, then the mixture
aP * + (1 - a)P * * will be preferred (resp. DEMO) to the mixture aP +
(1 - a)P** for all a > 0 and P**.
This property, which is in fact equivalent to linearity in the probabilities, can be
interpreted as follows:
In terms of the ultimate probabilities over the outcomes {x,, . . DEMO , x,), choosing
between the mixtures aP * + (1 - a)P * * and aP + (1 - a)P * * is the same
as being offered a coin with a DEMO of 1 - a of landing tails, in which case
you DEMO obtain the lottery P * *, and being asked before the DEMO whether you
would rather have P * or P in the event of a head. Now either the coin will land
tails, in which case your choice won't have mattered, or else it will land heads, in
which case you are 'in effect' back to a choice between P * or P, and it is only
'rational' to make the same choice as you would before.
Although this is DEMO prescriptive argument, it has played a key role in economists'
DEMO of expected utility as a descriptive theory of choice under uncertainty. As the
evidence against the model mounts, this has lead to a growing tension between those
who view economic analysis as the description and prediction DEMO what they consider to
be rational behavior and those who view it as the description and prediction of
observed behavior. We turn now to DEMO evidence.
Violations of Linearity in the Probabilities
The Allais Paradox and "DEMO Out"
One of the earliest and best known examples of systematic violation of linearity
in the probabilities (or equivalently, of the independence DEMO) is the well-known
Allats Paradox (Allais, 1953, 1979). This problem involves obtaining the individual's
128
Economic Perspectives
Fig. 4a. Expected utility indifference curves and the Fig. DEMO Indifference curves which 'fan out' and the
Allais Paradox Allais Paradox
preferred option from each of the following two pairs of gambles (readers who have
never seen this problem may want to circle their own DEMO from each pair before
proceeding):
.10 chance of $5,000,DEMO
1 .OO chance of $1,000,000 versus a, : .89 DEMO of $1,000,000
.O1 chance of $0
and
: ( .1 1 chance of
.89 chance of
(
.LO chance of $5,000,000 $1,000,000
": 90 chance of $0 $0
Defining { x,, x,, x, ) = ($0; $1,000,000; $5,000,000), these four gambles are seen
form a parallelogram in the (p,, p,) triangle, as in Figures 4a DEMO 4b. Under the
expected utility hypothesis, therefore, a preference for a, in the first pair would
indicate that the individual's indifference curves were relatively steep (as in Figure
4a), and hence a preference for a, in the second pair. In the alternative case of
relatively flat indifference curves, the gambles a, and a, would be preferred.7
However, researchers such as Allais (1953), Morrison (1967), Raiffa (1968) and Slovic
and Tversky (1974) have found that the DEMO if not majority preferences of subjects
has been for a, in DEMO first pair and a, in the second, which implies that indifference
curves are not parallel but rather fan out, as in Figure 4b.
One of the criticisms of this evidence has been that individuals whose DEMO
violated the independence axiom would "correct" themselves once the nature of their
violation was revealed by an application of the above coin-flip argument. DEMO, while
even Savage chose a, and a, when first presented DEMO this example, he concluded
upon reflection that these preferences were in DEMO (Savage, 1954, pp. 101-103).
'~l~ebraicall~,these cases are equivalent to the expression [.I0 . U(5,000,000) - .ll . U(1,000,000) +
.O1 . U(0)]being negative or positive, respectively.
Choice Under Uncertainty 129
Although his own reaction was undoubtedly sincere, the hypothesis that individuals
would invariably react in such a manner has not DEMO sustained in direct empirical
testing. In experiments where subjects were asked to respond to Allais-type problems
and then presented with arguments both for and DEMO the expected utility position,
neither MacCrimmon (1968), Moskowitz (1974) nor Slovic and Tversky (1974) found
predominant net swings toward the expected utility choices.
Additional Evidence of Fanning Out
Although the Allais Paradox DEMO originally dismissed as an isolated example, it is
now known to DEMO a special case of a general empirical pattern termed the common
consequence efect. This effect involves pairs of probability mixtures of the form:
DEMO,: asx+(1 -a)P**
versus b,: aP+ (1 -a)DEMO
and
where 6, denotes the prospect which yields x with certainty, P involves outcomes
both greater and less than x, and P * * stochastically dominates P Although the
independence axiom clearly implies choices of DEMO b, and b, (if 6, is preferred to P)
or else b, and b, (if P is preferred to ax), researchers have found a tendency for
subjects to choose b, in the first pair and b, in the second (MacCrimmon, 1968;
MacCrimmon and Larsson, 1979; Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; Chew and DEMO,
1986). When the distributions 6,, P, P * DEMO P * * are each over a common outcome
set { x,, x,, x, ), the prospects b,, b,, DEMO, and b, will again form a parallelogram in the
( p,, p,) triangle, and a choice of b, and b, again implies indifference curves which
fan out, as in Figure 4b.
The intuition behind this phenomenon can be described in terms of the above
"coin-flip" scenario. According to the independence axiom, preferences over what
would DEMO in the event of a head should not depend upon what would occur in the
event of a tail. In fact, however, they DEMO well depend upon what would otherwise
happeneg The common consequence effect states that the better off individuals would
be in the event of a DEMO (in the sense of stochastic dominance), the more risk averse
DEMO become over what they would receive in the event of a head. Intuitively, if the
distribution P * * in the pair {b,, b2) involves very high outcomes, I may prefer not to
bear DEMO risk in the unlucky event that I don't receive it, DEMO prefer the sure
outcome x over the distribution P in this event (i.e. choose b, over b2). But if P * in
DEMO b ,, b, ) involves very low outcomes, I may DEMO more willing to bear risk in the (lucky)
8~heAllais Paradox DEMO a,, a,, a,, and a4 correspond to b,, bL, b4 and b3, where a = .ll,
x = DEMO,000,000, P is a 10/11 : 1/11 chance DEMO $5,000,000 or $0, P * is a sure chance DEMO $0, and P * * is a
sure chance of $1,DEMO,000. The name of this phenomenon comes from the "common consequence" P * * in
(b,, b,) and P* in (DEMO,, b,).
'As Bell (1985) notes, "winning the top prize of $10,000 in a lottery may leave one much DEMO than
receiving $10,000 as the lowest prize in a lottery."
b,: asx+ (1 - a)P* versus
b,: aP
+ (1 - a)P*
130
Economic Perspectives
Fig. 5a. Indifference curves which fan out and the
DEMO ratio effect
Fig. 5b. Indifference curves which fan out and the
common ratio effect with negative payoffs
event that I don't receive it, and prefer the lottery P to the outcome x in this case (i.e.
choose b4 over b,). Note that it is not my beliefs regarding the probabilities in P
which are affected here, merely my willingness to bear them.''
A second class of systematic violations, DEMO from another early example of
Allais (1953), is known as DEMO common ratio efect. This phenomenon involves pairs of
prospects of the form:
and
p chance of $X versus
": ( 1 - p chance of $0
c,: (
q chance of $Y
1 - q chance of $0,
where p > q, 0 < X < Y and r E (0, I), and includes the "certainty effect" of
Kahneman and Tversky (1979) and the ingenious "DEMO Paradox" of Hagen (1979)
as special cases." Setting { DEMO,, xp, x3 ) = (0, X, Y ) and plotting these prospects in the
(pl, p3) triangle, the segments DEMO are seen to be parallel (as in Figure 5a), so
DEMO the expected utility model again predicts choices of c, and c, (if the individual's
indifference curves are steep) or else C, and c, (if they are flat). However, experimental
studies have found a systematic tendency for choices to depart from these predictions
I01n DEMO conversation with the author, Kenneth Arrow has offered an alternative phrasing DEMO this argument:
The widely maintained hypothesis of decreasing absolute risk aversion asserts that individuals will display
more risk aversion in the event of DEMO loss, and less risk aversion in the event of a gain. DEMO the common
consequence effect, individuals display more risk aversion in the DEMO of an opportunity loss, and less risk
aversion in the event DEMO an opportunity gain.
he former involves setting p = 1, and DEMO latter consists of a two-step choice problem where individuals
exhibit the effect with Y = 2X and p = 2q. The name "common ratio effect" comes from the common
value of prob(X)/prob(Y) in the pairs {cl, c2} and {c3, c4 }.
C3 : (
rp chance of $X versus
1 - rp chance of $0
DEMO chance of $Y
c4: ( - rq chance of $0,
DEMO
Machina
131
Fig. 6a. 'Recovered' utility functions for mixture probabilities 1/DEMO, 1/2 and 3/4
/-----
1/2:112 chance of M or El (-E3j
314 : 114 chance of M or 0 (-(:*
1/2:1/2 chance of M or 0
("ti)
1/4:3/4 chance of M or 0
("<;
1/2:1/2 chonce of t1or 0
(-t2)
( - denotes indifference
Fig. 6b. Fanning out indifference curves which generate DEMO responses of Figure 6a
and de Neufville (1983, 1984) have DEMO a tendency for higher values of 3 to lead to
the "DEMO" of higher valued utility functions, as in Figure 6a. By illustrating the
gambles used to obtain the values t,, t2and t, for fi = 1/2, t: for 3 = 1/4 and
DEMO for 3 = 3/4, Figure 6b shows that, as with the common consequence and
common ratio effects, this utility evaluation efect is precisely what would be expected
I2~ahnemanand Tversky (1979), for example, DEMO that 80 percent of their subjects preferred a sure gain
of 3,000 Israeli pounds to a .80 chance of winning 4,000, but 65 percent preferred a .20 chance of winning
4,000 to a DEMO chance of winning 3,000.
132 Economic Perspectives
in the direction of preferring c, and c4,l2 which again suggests that indifference curves
fan out, as in the figure (Tversky, 1975; MacCrimmon and Larsson, 1979; Chew and
Waller, DEMO). In a variation on this approach, Kahneman and Tversky (1979)
replaced the gains of $Xand $Y in the above gambles with DEMO of these magnitudes,
and found a tendency to depart from expected utility in the direction of c2 and c,.
Defining {x,, DEMO, x,) as {- Y, -X,O) (to maintain the condition x, < x, < x3) and
plotting these gambles in Figure 5b, a choice of c2 and c3 is again seen to imply that
indifference curves fan out. Finally, Battalio, Kagel and MacDonald (1985) found
that laboratory rats choosing among gambles which involved substantial variations in
their actual daily food intake also exhibited this pattern of choices.
DEMO third class of evidence stems from the elicitation method described in the
previous section. In particular, note that there is no reason why the mixture probabil-
ity 3 must be 1/2 in this procedure. Picking DEMO other ji and defining [:, (; and [$
as the DEMO equivalents of the 3: (1 - 3) chances of M DEMO 0, 5: or 0, and M or
[y yields the DEMO U((:) = $, U([$) = $', U([$)= 3 +(1 - $)3, etc., and
such DEMO procedure can also be used to recover U(.).
Although this procedure should recover the same (normalized) utility function for
any mixture DEMO 3, researchers such as Karmarkar (1974, 1978) and McCord
from an individual whose indifference curves departed from expected utility by
fanning out.',
Non-Expected Utility Models of Preferences
The systematic nature of these departures DEMO linearity in the probabilities have
led several researchers to generalize the expected utility model by positing nonlinear
functional forms for the individual preference function. DEMO of such forms and
researchers who have studied them include:
Edwards (1955)
Cv(xi>a( Pi) Kahneman and Tversky (1 DEMO)
Karmarkar (1978)
Cv('i>~i Chew (1983)
DEMO'~(xi)pi Fishburn (1983)
(7) Cv(xi)[g(DEMO + +pi) - g(p, + . . - +piPl)] Quiggin (1982)
(8) Cv(xi)Pi + [C'(xi)DEMO Machina (1982)
I3~aving found that [, which solves U([,) = (1/2) . U(M)+ (1/2) DEMO U(O), choose {x,, xl, x3) =
{0, DEMO,, MI,so that the indifference curve through (0,O) (DEMO a sure gain of 6,) also passes through
(1/2, 1/2) (a 1/2 : 1/2 chance of M DEMO 0). The order of t,, &, c3, 6: DEMO 6: * in Figure 6a is derived
from the individual's DEMO ordering over the five distributions in Figure 6b for which they are the
respective certainty equivalents.
Choice Under Uncertainty 133
Many (though not all) of these forms DEMO flexible enough to exhibit the properties of
stochastic dominance preference, risk DEMO/risk preference and fanning out, and
(6) and (7) DEMO proven to be particularly useful both theoretically and empirically.
Additional analyses of these forms can be found in Chew, Karni and Safra (1987),
Fishburn (1964), Segal (1984) and Yaari (1987).
DEMO such forms allow for the modelling of preferences which are more
general than those allowed by the expected utility hypothesis, each requires a different
set of conditions on its component functions v(.), T(.), r(-)or g(.) for the properties
of stochastic dominance DEMO, risk aversion/risk preference, comparative risk
aversion, etc. In particular, the standard expected utility results linking properties of
the function U(.) to such aspects of behavior will generally not extend to the
corresponding DEMO of the function v(.) in the above forms. Does this DEMO that
the study of non-expected utility preferences requires us to abandon the vast body of
theoretical results and intuition we have developed within the DEMO utility
framework?
Fortunately, the answer is no. An alternative approach DEMO the analysis of
non-expected utility preferences proceeds not by adopting a specific nonlinear func-
tion, but rather by considering nonlinear functions in general, DEMO using calculus to
extend the results from expected utility theory in the same manner in which it is
typically used to extend results involving DEMO functions.14
-
Specifically, consider the set of probability distributions P = DEMO , p,,) over
a fixed outcome set { x,, DEMO . . , x, ), so that the expected utility preference function can
be written as V(P) = V(p,, . . . , pn) XU(xi)pi, and think of U(DEMO) not as a "utility
level" but rather as the coefficient DEMO pi = prob(x,) in this linear function. If we plot
these coefficients against xi as in Figure 7, the expected utility results of the previous
section can be stated as:
Stochastic Dominance Preference: V(.) will exhibit global stochastic dominance
preference if and only if the coefficients {U(x,)} are increasing in xi, as in DEMO
figure.
Risk Aversion: V(.) will exhibit global risk aversion if and only if the
{U(X,)} are concave in x,,DEMO as in the figure.
Comparative Rtsk Aversion: The expected utility preference DEMO *(P)
ZU *(x,)pi will be at least DEMO risk averse as V(.) if and only if the coefficients
DEMO(xZ)) are at least as concave in x, as {U(DEMO,)).16
-
coefficients
V
Now take the case where the individual's preference function V(P) =
V(pl,. . . , pn) is not linear (i.e. not expected utility) but at least differentiable, and
consider its partial derivatives %(x,; P) = DEMO V(P)/dp, = d V(P)/d prob(x,). Pick
some probability distribution Po and plot these %(x,; DEMO) values against xi. If they
I4Reader3 who wish to skip the DEMO of this approach may proceed to the next section.
'"s in Note 6, this is equivalent to the condition
U(x,-,)DEMO/[x, - x,- ,] for all i.
'"his is equivalent to the condition that U *(x,)
-
that [U(x,+,) - U(x,)]/[x,+, - x,DEMO < [U(x,) -
p(U(x,)) for some DEMO concave function p(.).
all
(p,,.
134
Economic Perspectives
von Neumann-
Morgenstern
utility
wealth
Fig. 7. von Neumann-Morgenstern DEMO as coefficients of the expected utility preference function
PI,... , P") = ='(x,)P,
are again increasing in xi, it is clear that any infinitesimal stochastically dominating
shift from Po, such as a decrease in some pi and matching increase in pi+,, DEMO be
preferred. If they are again concave in xi, any infinitesimal DEMO preserving spread,
such as a drop in pi and (mean DEMO) rise in pi-, and pi+,,will make the
individual worse DEMO In light of this correspondence between the coefficients {U(xi))
DEMO an expected utility preference function V(+)and the partial derivatives (DEMO(xi; Po))
of the non-expected utility preference function V(.), we refer to {%(xi; Po)) as.the
individual's local utility indices at Po.
Of course, the above results will only hold precisely for infinitesimal shifts from
the distribution Po.However, we can exploit another result from standard calculus to
show how "expected utility" results may DEMO applied to the exact global analysis of
non-expected utility preferences. Recall that in many cases, a differentiable function
will exhibit a specific global property if and only if that property is exhibited by its
linear approximations DEMO each point. For example, a differentiable function will be
globally nondecreasing DEMO and only if its linear approximations are non-decreasing at
each point. In fact, most of the fundamental properties of risk attitudes and their
expected utility characterizations are precisely of this type. In particular, it can be
shown that:
Stochastic Dominance Preference: A non-expected utility preference function Y(.)
will exhibit global stochastic dominance preference if and only if DEMO local utility
indices {%(xi; P)) are increasing in xi DEMO each distribution P.
Risk Aversion: V(.) will exhibit global risk aversion if and only if its local utility
indices (@(xi; DEMO)) are concave in xi at each distribution P.
Machina
135
(dashed lines are iso-expected value lines)
Fig. 8b. Risk aversion of every local expected
utility approximation is equivalent to global risk
DEMO
Comparative Risk Aversion: The preference function Y *(.) will be globally at least
as risk averse as Y(.)17 if and DEMO if its local utility indices { @ *(x,; P)) are at
least as concave in x, as {@(xl; P)) at each P.
Figures 8a and 8b give a graphical illustration of this approach for the outcome
set { x,, x,, x, ). Here the solid curves denote the indifference curves of the non-
expected utility preference function Y(P). The parallel lines near the DEMO Po
denote the tangent "expected utility" indifference curves that correspond to the local
utility indices {@(x,; Po)) at Po. As DEMO with differentiable functions, an infinitesi-
mal change in the probabilities at DEMO will be preferred if and only if they would be
preferred by this tangent linear (i.e. expected utility) approximation. Figure 8b
illustrates the DEMO "risk aversion" result: It is clear that these indifference curves DEMO
be globally risk averse (averse to mean preserving spreads) if and only if they are
everywhere steeper than the dashed iso-expected value lines. DEMO, this is equiv-
alent to all of their tangents being steeper DEMO these lines, which is in turn equiv-
alent to all of DEMO local expected utility approximations being risk averse, or in
other words, to the local utility indices {@(x,; P)) being concave DEMO x, at each
distribution P.
My fellow researchers and I have DEMO how this and similar techniques can be
applied to further extend the results of expected utility theory to the case of
non-expected utility preferences, to characterize and explore the implications of
preferences which "fan out," and to conduct new and more general analyses of
economic behavior under DEMO (Machina, 1982; Chew, 1983; Fishburn, 1984;
Epstein, DEMO; Allen, 1987; Chew, Karni and Safra, 1987). However, while I feel that
17 For the appropriate generalizations of the expected DEMO concepts of "at least as risk averse" in this
context, DEMO Machina (1982, 1984).
[sol~d lines are loco1 expected utility approximation
to non-expected utility indifference curves at Po)
Fig. 8a. Tangent 'expected utility' approximation
to non-expected utility indifference curves
136 Economic Perspectives
they constitute a useful and promising response to the DEMO of non-linearities
in the probabilities, these models do not provide solutions DEMO the more problematic
empirical phenomena of the following sections.
The Preference Reversal Phenomenon
The Evidence
The finding now known as the preference reversal phenomenon DEMO first reported
by psychologists Lichtenstein and Slovic (1971). In this DEMO, subjects were first
presented with a number of pairs of bets DEMO asked to choose one bet out of each pair.
Each of these pairs took the following form:
q chance of $Y
$-bet : DEMO 1 - q chance of $y ,
p chance of $X DEMO
P-bet :i 1 - p chance of $x
where X and DEMO are respectively greater than x and y,p is greater than q, and Y is
greater than X (the names "P-bet" and "$-betn come from the greater probability of
winning in the first bet DEMO greater possible gain in the second). In some cases, x DEMO
y took on small negative values. The subjects were next asked to "value" (state
certainty equivalents for) each of these bets. The DEMO valuation methods used
consisted of (1) asking subjects to state their minimum selling price for each bet if they
were to own it, (2) asking them to state their maximum bid price for each DEMO if they
were to buy it, and (3) the elicitation DEMO of Becker, DeGroot and Marschak
(1964), in which it is in a subject's best interest to reveal his or her true DEMO
equivalents.18 In the latter case, real money was used.
The expected DEMO model, as well as each of the non-expected utility models of
DEMO previous section, clearly implies that the bet which is actually chosen DEMO of each
pair will also be the one which is assigned the higher certainty eq~ivalent.'~ However,
Lichtenstein and Slovic found a systematic DEMO for subjects to violate this
prediction by choosing the P-bet in a direct choice but assigning a higher value to the
$-bet. In one DEMO, for example, 127 out of 173 subjects assigned a higher sell
price to the $-bet in every pair in which the P-bet was DEMO Similar findings were
obtained by Lindman (1971), and in an DEMO variation on the usual experimen-
tal setting, by Lichtenstein and Slovic (1973) in a Las Vegas casino where customers
actually staked (and DEMO sometimes lost) their own money. In another real-money
18~oughlyspeaking, the subject states a value for the item, and then the experimenter draws a random
price. If the price is above the stated value, the subject forgoes the item and receives the price. If the drawn
price is DEMO the state value, the subject keeps the item. The reader can DEMO that under such a scheme it
can never be in a subject's best interest to report anything other than his or her true DEMO
'g~conomic theory tells us that income effects could cause an individual DEMO assign a lower bid price to the
object which, if both DEMO free, would actually be preferred. However, this reversal should not occur for
either selling prices or the Becker, DeGroot and Marschak elicitations. For evidence on sell price/bid price
disparities, see Knetsch and Sinden (DEMO) and the references cited there.
Choice Under Uncertainty I37
experiment, Mowen and Gentry (1980) found that groups who could discuss their
(joint) decisions were, if anything, DEMO likely than individuals to exhibit the phe-
nomenon.
Although the above studies involved deliberate variations in design in order to
check for the robustness DEMO this phenomenon, they were nevertheless received skepti-
cally by economists, who perhaps not unnaturally felt they had more at stake than
psychologists in DEMO type of finding. In an admitted attempt to "discredit" this work,
economists Grether and Plott (1979) designed a pair of experiments DEMO, by
correcting for issues of incentives, income effects, strategic considerations, ability to
indicate indifference and other items, would presumably not generate this phenome-
non. They nonetheless found it in both experiments. Further design modifications DEMO
Pommerehne, Schneider and Zweifel (1982) and Reilly (1982) yielded DEMO same
results. Finally, the phenomenon has been found to persist (although in mitigated
form) even when subjects are allowed to engage in experimental market transactions
involving the gambles (Knez and Smith, 1986), or DEMO the experimenter is able to
act as an arbitrageur and make money off of such reversals (Berg, Dickhaut and
O'Brien, 1983).
Two Interpretations of this Phenomenon
How you interpret these findings depends on DEMO you adopt the worldview of
an economist or a psychologist. An economist would reason as follows: Each individ-
ual possesses a well-defined preference relation over objects (in this case lotteries), and
information about this relation can be gleaned from either direct choice questions or
(properly designed) DEMO questions. Someone exhibiting the preference reversal
phenomenon is therefore telling us that he or she (1) is indifferent between the P-bet
and some DEMO amount [,, (2) strictly prefers the P-bet to the $-bet, and (3) is
indifferent between the $-bet and an amount [$ greater than 5,. Assuming they prefer
[, the lesser amount [,, this implies that their preferences over these four objects
are cyclic DEMO intransitive.
Psychologists on the other hand would deny the premise of a common underlying
mechanism generating both choice and valuation behavior. Rather, they view choice
and valuation (even different forms of valuation) as distinct processes, subject to
possibly different influences. In other words, individuals exhibit what are termed
response mode efects. Excellent discussions and empirical examinations of this phenome-
DEMO and its implications for the elicitation of probabilistic beliefs and utility functions
can be found in Hogarth (1975), Slovic, Fischhoff and Lichtenstein (1982), Hershey
and Schoemaker (1985) and MacCrimmon and Wehrung (1986). In reporting how
the response mode study of Slovic and Lichtenstein (1968) led them to actually predict
the preference reversal phenomenon, I DEMO do no better than quote the authors
themselves:
"The impetus DEMO this study [Lichtenstein and Slovic (1971)l was our observa-
tion DEMO our earlier 1968 article that choices among pairs of gambles appeared to
to
138
Economic Perspectives
be influenced primarily by probabilities of winning and losing, whereas buying
and selling prices were primarily determined by the dollar amounts DEMO could
be won or lost. . . . In our 1971 article, we argued that, if the information in a
gamble is processed DEMO when making choices and setting prices, it should
be possible to DEMO pairs of gambles such that people would choose one
member of the pair but set a higher price on the other."
Slovic and DEMO (1983)
Implications of the Economic Worldview
The issue of intransitivity DEMO new neither to economics nor to choice under
uncertainty. May (1954), for example, observed intransitivities in painvise rankings of
three alternative marriage DEMO, where each candidate was rated highly in two of
three attributes (intelligence, looks, wealth) and low in the third. In an uncertain
context, Blyth (1972) has adapted this approach to construct a set of random variables
(2, y", z") such that prob(DEMO > y") = prob(y" > 5) = prob(5 > 2) = 2/3, so that indi-
viduals making painvise DEMO on the basis of these probabilities would also be
intransitive. In addition to the preference reversal phenomenon, Edwards (1954, pp.
404-405) and DEMO (1969) have also observed intransitivities in preferences over
risky prospects. On the other hand, researchers have shown that many aspects of
economic theory, in particular the existence of demand functions and of general
equilibrium, DEMO surprisingly robust to dropping the assumption of transitivity
(Sonnenschein, 1971; DEMO, 1974; Shafer, 1974).
In any event, economists have begun to develop and analyze models of nontran-
sitive preferences over lotteries. The DEMO example of this is the "expected regret"
model developed independently DEMO Bell (1982), Fishburn (1982) and Loomes and
Sugden (1982). In this model of painvise choice, the von Neumann-Morgenstern
utility function U(x) is replaced by a regret/rejoicefunction r(x, y) which represents the
level of satisfaction (or if negative, dissatisfaction) the individual would experience if
he or she were to receive the outcome DEMO when the alternative choice would have
yielded the outcome y (this DEMO is assumed to satisfy r(x, y) - r( y, x)). In
choosing between statistically independent gambles P * = (DEMO:, . . . , p,*) and P =
(p,, .. . , 6,) over a common outcome set {x,, . . . , x,), the individual will choose P DEMO
if the expectation CICJr(x,, xJ)p;pJ is positive, DEMO P if it is negative.
Note that when the regret/rejoice function takes the special form r(x, y) = U(x)
DEMO U( y) this model reduces to the expected utility model, DEMO we have
Machina
139
0 PI 1
Fig. 9. 'Indifference curves' for the DEMO regret model
so that the individual will prefer P* to P if and only if C,ll(x,)p* > ClCT(xj)pl.20
However, in general such an individual will neither be an expected utility maximizer
nor have transitive preferences.
However, this intransitivity does not prevent us from graphing such preferences,
or even applying "expected utility" analysis to DEMO To see the former, consider the
case when the individual is DEMO alternative independent lotteries over a common
outcome set {xi, x,, DEMO,), so that we may again use the triangle diagram to DEMO
their "indifference curves," which will appear as in Figure 9. DEMO such a case it is
important to understand what is and is not still true of these indifference curves. The
curve through P will DEMO correspond to the set of lotteries that are indifferent to P,
and it will still divide the set of lotteries that are strictly DEMO to P (the points in
the direction of the arrow) from the ones to which P is strictly preferred. Furthermore,
if (as in the figure) P* lies above the indifference curve through P,then P will lie
below the indifference curve through P * (i.e. the individual's ranking of P and P *
will be unambiguous). DEMO, unlike indifference curves for transitive preferences,
these curves will and DEMO over the lotteries P, P * and P * * are DEMO
to form an intransitive cycle. But in regions where the indifference curves do not cross
(such as near the origin) the individual will DEMO indistinguishable from someone with
transitive (albeit non-expected utility) preferences.
To see how expected utility results can be extended to this nontransitive frame-
work, fix a lottery P = (pi,. . . , p,,) and consider the question of when an (indepen-
dent) lottery P* = (p:, . . ., p,*) will be preferred or not preferred to P. Since
''when r(x, y) DEMO the form r(x, y) v(x)r( y) - v(y)r(x), this model will reduce to the (transitive)
model of equation (6). This is the most general form of the model which is compatible with transitivity.
"In this model the indifference curves will all cross at the same point. This point will DEMO be indifferent to
all lotteries in the triangle.
140
Economic Perspectives
r(x, y) r - r( y, DEMO) implies CiXjr(xi, xj)pipj = 0,
to P if and only if
we have that P * will be preferred
In DEMO words, P* will be preferred to P if and only if DEMO implies a higher
expectation of the "utility function" +(xi; DEMO) Cjr(xi, xj)pj than P. Thus if +(xi; DEMO)
is increasing in xi for all lotteries P the individual will exhibit global stochastic
dominance preference, and if +(xi; P) is concave in xi for all P the individual will
exhibit global risk DEMO, even though he or she is not necessarily transitive (these
conditions will clearly be satisfied if r(x, y) is increasing and DEMO in x). The
analytics of expected utility theory are robust indeed.
The developers of this model have shown how specific assumptions on the DEMO of
the regret/rejoice function will generate the common consequence effect, DEMO common
ratio effect, the preference reversal phenomenon, and other observed properties of
choice over lotteries. The theoretical and empirical prospects for this approach
DEMO seem quite impressive.
Implications of the Psychological Worldview
On the other hand, how should economists respond if it turns out that the
psychologists are right, and the preference reversal phenomenon really is generated by
some form of response mode effect (or effects)? In that case, the DEMO thing to do would
be to try to determine if there were analogues of such effects in real-world economic
~ituations.~~Will individuals behave differently when DEMO their valuation of
an object (e.g. reservation bid on a used DEMO) than when reacting to a fixed and
non-negotiable price for the DEMO object? Since a proper test of this would require
correcting for DEMO possible strategic and/or information-theoretic (e.g, signalling)
issues, it DEMO not be a simple undertaking. However, in light of the experimental
DEMO, I feel it is crucial that we attempt it.
Say we DEMO that response mode effects did not occur outside of the laboratory.
In that case we could rest more easily, although we could not forget about such issues
completely: experimenters testing other economic theories and models (DEMO auctions)
would have to be forever mindful of the possible influence of the particular response
mode used in their experimental design.
"It is important to note that neither the evidence of response mode effects (e.g. Slavic, 1975) nor their
implications for economic analysis are confined to DEMO case of choice under uncertainty.
Choice Under Uncertainty 141
On the other hand, what if we did find response mode effects out in the field? In
that case we would want to determine, perhaps by going back to the laboratory,
whether the rest of economic thecry remained valid provided the response mode DEMO
held constant. If this were true, then with further evidence on DEMO how the
response mode mattered, we could presumably incorporate it as DEMO new independent
variable into existing theories. Since response modes tend to be constant within a given
economic model, e.g. quantity responses to fixed prices in competitive markets,
valuation announcements (truthful or otherwise) in auctions, etc., we should expect
most of the testable implications of this approach to appear as cross-institutional
predictions, such as systematic violations of the various equivalency results involving
prices versus quantities or second price-sealed bid versus oral DEMO auctions. In such
a case, the new results and insights regarding DEMO theories of institutions and
mechanisms could be exciting indeed.23
Framing Effects
Evidence
In addition to response mode effects, psychologists have uncovered an even more
disturbing phenomenon, namely that alternative means of representing or "framing"
DEMO equivalent choice problems will lead to systematic differences in
choice. An early example of this phenomenon was reported by Slovic (1969), who
found that offering a gain or loss contingent on the joint occurrence of DEMO
independent events with probability fi elicited different responses than offering it on
the occurrence of a single event with probability p4 (all probabilities were stated
explicitly). In comparison with the single-event case, making a gain contingent on the
joint occurrence of events was found to make it DEMO attractive, and making a loss
contingent on the joint occurrence of DEMO made it more unattractive.
In another study, Payne and Braunstein (1971) used pairs of gambles of the type
illustrated in Figure 10. Each of the gambles in the figure, known as a duplex gamble,
involves spinning the pointers on both its "gain wheel" (on the left) and its "loss
wheel" (on the right), with DEMO individual receiving the sum of the resulting amounts.
Thus an individual choosing Gamble A would win $.40 with probability .3 (i.e. if the
pointer in the gain wheel landed up and the pointer in the loss DEMO landed down),
would lose $.40 with probability .2 (if the pointers landed in the opposite positions),
and would break even with probability .5 (if the pointers landed either both up or
both down). An examination of Gamble B reveals that it has an identical DEMO
distribution, so that subjects should be indifferent between the two gambles DEMO
2:1A final "twist" on the preference reversal phenomenon: Holt (1986) and Karni and Safra (1987) have
shown how the procedures used in most of these studies will only lead to truthful revelation DEMO preferences
under the added assumption that the individual satisfies the independence axiom, and has given examples
of transitive non-expected utility preference rankings which lead to the typical "preference reversal"
choices. How (and whether) experimenters will be able to address this issue remains to be seen.
142
Economic Perspectives
GAMBLE B
Fig. 10. Duplex gambles with identical underlying DEMO
of their risk preferences. However, Payne and Braunstein found that individuals DEMO
fact chose between such gambles (and indicated nontrivial strengths of preference) in
manners which were systematically affected by the attributes of the component
DEMO When the probability of winning in the gain wheel was greater than the
probability of losing in the loss wheel for each gamble (as in the figure), subjects
tended to choose the gamble whose gain DEMO yielded the greater probability of a
gain (Gamble A). In DEMO where the probabilities of losing in the loss wheels were
respectively greater than the probabilities of winning in the gain wheels, subjects
tended toward the gamble with the lower probability of losing in the loss wheel.
DEMO, although the gambles in Figure 10 possess identical underlying distribu-
tions, continuity suggests that a slight worsening of the terms of the preferred DEMO
could result in a pair of non-equivalent duplex gambles in which the individual will
actually choose the one with the stochastically dominated underlying distribution. DEMO
an experiment where the subjects were allowed to construct their own duplex gambles
by choosing one from a pair of prospects involving gains and DEMO from a pair of
Machina 143
prospects involving losses, stochastically dominated prospects were indeed chosen
(DEMO and Kahneman, 1981).24
A second class of framing effects involves DEMO phenomenon of a reference Foint.
Theoretically, the variable which enters an DEMO's von Neumann-Morgenstern
utility function should be total (i.e. final) wealth, and gambles phrased in terms of
gains and losses should be combined with current wealth and re-expressed as distribu-
tions over final wealth levels DEMO being evaluated. However, economists since
Markowitz (1952) have observed that DEMO attitudes over gains and losses are more
stable than can be explained by a fixed utility function over final wealth, and have
suggested that the utility function might be best defined in terms of changes from DEMO
"reference point" of current wealth. This stability of risk attitudes in the face of
wealth variations has also been observed in several experimental DEMO
Markowitz (p. 155) also suggested that certain circumstances may cause the
individual's reference point to temporarily deviate from current wealth. If these
DEMO include the manner in which a given problem is verbally described,
then differing risk attitudes over gains and losses can lead to different DEMO
depending upon the exact description. A simple example of this, from DEMO and
Tversky (1979), involves the following two questions:
In DEMO to whatever you own, you have been given 1,000 (Israeli pounds).
You are now asked to choose between a 1/2 : 1/2 chance of a gain of 1,000 or 0
or a sure gain of 500.
and
In addition to whatever you own, you have been given 2,000. You are now
asked to choose DEMO a 1/2 : 1/2 chance of loss of 1,000 or 0 or a sure loss of
500.
These two problems involve DEMO distributions over final wealth. However, when
put to two different groups DEMO subjects, 84 percent chose the sure gain in the first
problem DEMO 69 percent chose the 1/2 : 1/2 gamble in the second. A nonmonetary
version of this type of example, from Tversky and Kahneman (1981, 1986), posits the
following scenario:
Imagine that DEMO U.S. is preparing for the outbreak of an unusual Asian disease,
which is expected to kill 600 people. Two alternative programs to combat DEMO
disease have been proposed. Assume that the exact scientific estimate of the
"'subjects were asked to choose either (A) a sure gain DEMO 8240 or (B) a 1/4.3/4 chance of 81,000 or 80,
and to choose either (C) a sure loss DEMO $750 or (D) a 3/4 : 1/4 chance of - $1,000 or 0. 84 percent chose A
over B and DEMO percent chose D over C, even though B + C dominates DEMO + D, and choices over the
combined distributions were unanimous when DEMO were presented explicitly.
'"ee the discussion and references in Machina (DEMO, pp. 285-86).
144 Economic Perspectives
consequences of the programs are as follows:
If DEMO A is adopted, 200 people will be saved.
If Program B DEMO adopted, there is 1/3 probability that 600 people will be
DEMO, and 2/3 probability that no people will be saved.
Seventy-two DEMO of the subjects who were presented with this form of the question
chose Program A. A second group was given the same initial information, but the
descriptions of the programs were changed to read:
If DEMO C is adopted 400 people will die.
If Program D is adopted there is 1/3 probability that nobody will die, and
2/3 probability that 600 people will die.
Although this statement of the problem DEMO once again identical to the former one, 78
percent of the DEMO chose Program D.
In other studies, Schoemaker and Kunreuther (1979), Hershey and Schoemaker
(1980), McNeil, Pauker, Sox and Tversky (DEMO) and Slovic, Fischhoff and Lichten-
stein (1982) have found that subjects' choices in otherwise identical problems will
depend upon whether they are phrased as decisions whether or not to gamble or
whether or not DEMO insure, whether the statistical information for different therapies is
presented in DEMO of cumulative survival probabilities or cumulative mortality
probabilities, etc. For similar DEMO of this phenomenon in non-stochastic situa-
tions, see Thaler (1980).
In a final class of examples, not based on reference point effects, Moskowitz
(1974) and Keller (1982) found that the proportion of subjects choosing in confor-
mance with or in violation of the independence DEMO in examples like the Allais
Paradox was significantly affected by whether the problems were described in the
standard matrix form (e.g. Raiffa, 1968, p. 7), decision tree form, or as minimally
structured written statements. Interestingly enough, the form which was judged the
"clearest representation" by the majority of Moskowitz's subjects (the tree form) led to
DEMO lowest degree of consistency with the independence axiom, the highest proportion
DEMO fanning out choices, and the highest persistency rate of these choices (pp. 234,
237-38).
Two Issues Regarding Framing
The replicability and DEMO of the above types of examples is indisput-
able. However, before DEMO able to assess their implications for economic modelling
we need to resolve two issues.
The first issue is whether these experimental observations possess any DEMO
outside of the laboratory. Since real-world decision problems do not present them-
selves as neatly packaged as the ones on experimental questionnaires, monitoring such
effects would not be as straightforward. However this does not mean that DEMO do not
exist, or that they cannot be objectively observed or DEMO measured. The
real-world example which comes most quickly to mind, and DEMO presumably of no small
Choice Under Uncertainty 145
importance to the involved parties, is whether gasoline price differentials should be
represented as "cash discounts" or "credit surcharges." Similarly, Russo, Krieser and
Miyashita (1975) and Russo (1977) found that the practice, and even method, of
displaying unit price DEMO in supermarkets (information which consumers
could calculate for themselves) affected both the level and distribution of consumer
expenditures. The empirical marketing literature is DEMO doubt replete with findings that
we could legitimately interpret as real-world framing effects.
The second, more difficult issue is that of the independent observability of the
particular frame that an individual will adopt in a given DEMO In the duplex
gamble and matrix/decision tree/written statement examples of the previous section,
the different frames seem unambiguously determined by the DEMO of presentation.
However, in instances where framing involves the choice of DEMO reference point, which
presumably include the majority of real-world cases, this point might not be objec-
tively determined by the form of presentation, and might be chosen differently, and
what is worse, unobservably, by each individuaLZ6 In a particularly thorough and
insightful study, Fischhoff (1983) presented subjects with a written decision problem
which allowed for different choices DEMO a reference point, and explored different ways of
predicting which frame DEMO would adopt, in order to be able to predict their
actual DEMO While the majority choice of subjects was consistent with what would
appear to be the most appropriate frame, Fischhoff noted "the absence of DEMO relation
within those studies between [separately elicited] frame preference and option prefer-
ence." Indeed to the extent that frame preferences varied across his experiments, they
did so inversely to the incidence of the predicted choice.*' DEMO such problems can occur
in predicting responses to specific written questions in the laboratory, imagine how
they could plague the modelling of real world choice behavior.
Framing Effects and Economic Analysis: Have We Already Solved this Problem?
How should we respond if it turns out that framing DEMO is a real-world
phenomenon of economic relevance, and in particular, if individuals' frames cannot
always be observed? I would argue that the DEMO of responding to this issue can
already be found in the "DEMO box" of existing economic analysis.
Consider first the case where the DEMO of a given economic decision problem,
even though it should not matter from the point of view of standard theory, can at
least be independently and objectively observed. I believe that economists have in fact
DEMO solved such a problem in their treatment of the phenomenon of "DEMO
tive advertising." Although it is hard to give a formal definition DEMO this term, it is
widely felt that economic theory is hard DEMO to explain a large proportion of current
advertising in terms of traditional informational con~iderations.'~ However, this has
his is not to say that well-defined reference points never exist. The reference points involved in credit
surcharges DEMO cash discounts, for example, seem unambiguous.
27~ischhoff(1983, pp. 115-16)DEMO Fischhoff notes that .'If one can only infer frames from preferences after
assuming the truth of the theory, one runs the risk of making the theory itself untestable."
18~wonderful example, offered by my colleague Joel Sobel, are milk ads which make no reference to either
price or a specific dairy. What could be a more well-known commodity than DEMO?
I46 Economic Perspectives
hardly led economists to abandon classical consumer theory. Rather, models of
uninformative advertising proceed by quantifying this variable (e.g. air time) and
treating it as an additional independent variable in the utility and/or demand
function. Standard results like the Slutsky equation need not be DEMO, but
rather simply reinterpreted as properties of demand functions holding this DEMO
variable constant. The amount of advertising itself is determined as a maximizing
variable on the part of the firm (given some cost curve), and can be subjected to
standard comparative static analysis.
In the case DEMO decision frames can be observed, framing effects can presum-
ably be DEMO in an analogous manner. To do so, we would begin by DEMO a
method of quantifying, or at least categorizing, frames. The second step, some of
which has of course already been done, is DEMO study both the effect of this new
independent variable holding the standard economic variables constant, and con-
versely, to retest our standard economic DEMO in conditions where we carefully held
the frame fixed. With any luck we would find that, holding the frame constant, the
Slutsky equation DEMO held.
The next step in any given modelling situation would be to ask "who determines
the frame?" If (as with advertising) it is the firm, then the effect of the frame upon
consumer demand, and hence upon firm profits, can be incorporated into the firm'DEMO
maximization problem, and the choice of the frame as well as DEMO other relevant
variables (e.g. prices and quantities) can be simultaneously determined and subjected
to comparative static analysis, just as in the case of uninformative advertising.
A seemingly more difficult case is when the individual chooses DEMO frame (for
example, a reference point) and this choice cannot DEMO observed. Although we should
not forget the findings of Fischhoff (1983), assume that this choice is at least systematic
in the sense that the consumer will jointly choose the frame and make the subsequent
decision DEMO a manner which maximizes a "utility function" which depends both on the
decision and the choice of frame. In other words, individuals make their choices as
part of a joint maximization problem, the other component of which (the choice of
frame or reference point) cannot be DEMO
Such models are hardly new to economic analysis. Indeed, most economic DEMO
presume that the agent is simultaneously maximizing with respect to variables other
than the ones being studied. When assumptions are made on the individual'DEMO joint
preferences over the observed and unobserved variables, the well-developed theory DEMO
induced preferences *' can be used to derive testable implications on DEMO behavior over
the observables. With a little more knowledge on exactly how frames are chosen, such
an approach could presumably be applied here as well.
The above remarks should not be taken as implying that we DEMO already solved
the problem of framing in economic analysis or that there is no need to adapt, and if
necessary abandon, our standard DEMO in light of this phenomenon. Rather, they
29E.g.Milne (1981). For an application of the theory of induced preferences to choice under uncertainty,DEMO
see Machina (1984).
Machina 147
reflect the view that when psychologists are able to hand DEMO enough systematic
evidence on how these effects operate, economists will be DEMO to respond accordingly.
Other Issues: Is Probability Theory Relevant?
The DEMO of Subjective Probabilities
The evidence discussed so far has primarily consisted of cases where subjects have
been presented with explicit (i.e. "objective") DEMO as part of their decision
problems, and the models which have DEMO these phenomena possess the corre-
sponding property of being defined over objective probability distributions. However,
there is extensive evidence that when individuals have DEMO estimate or revise probabili-
ties for themselves they will make systematic mistakes in doing so.
The psychological literature on the processing of probabilistic information DEMO
much too large even to summarize here. However, it is worth DEMO that experi-
menters have uncovered several "heuristics" used by subjects which can lead to
predictable errors in the formation and manipulation of subjective DEMO
Kahneman and Tversky (1973), Bar-Hillel (1974) and Grether (1980), for example,
have found that probability updating systematically departs from DEMO Law in the
direction of underweighting prior information and overweighting the "DEMO
ness" of the current sample. In a related phenomenon termed the "law of small
numbers," Tversky and Kahneman (1971) found that DEMO overestimated the
probability of drawing a perfectly representative sample out of a heterogeneous
population. Finally, Bar-Hillel (1973), Tversky and Kahneman (1983) DEMO others
have found systematic biases in the formation of the probabilities of conjunctions of
both independent and non-independent events. For surveys, discussions and examples
of the psychological literature on the formation and handling of probabilities see
DEMO, Lindman and Savage (1963), Slovic and Lichtenstein (1971), DEMO and
Kahneman (1 974) and the collections in Acta Psychologica (DEMO 1970), Kahne-
man, Slovic and Tversky (1982) and Arkes DEMO Hammond (1986). For examples of
how economists have responded to DEMO of these issues see Arrow (1982), Viscusi
(1985) and DEMO references cited there.
The Existence of Subjective Probabilities
The evidence referred to above indicates that when individuals are asked to
formulate probabilities they do DEMO do it correctly. However, these findings may be
rendered moot by DEMO which suggests that when individuals making decisions
under uncertainty are not explicitly asked to form subjective probabilities, they might
not do it (or DEMO act as if doing it) at all.
In one of a DEMO of examples due to Ellsberg (1961), subjects were presented with
DEMO pair of urns, the first containing 50 red balls and 50 DEMO balls and the second also
containing 100 red and black balls but in an unknown proportion. When faced with
the choice of staking a DEMO on: (R,) drawing a red ball from the first urn, (R,)
148
Economic Perspectives
drawing a red ball from the second urn, (DEMO,) drawing a black ball from the first urn,
or (DEMO,) drawing a black ball from the second urn, a majority DEMO subjects strictly
preferred (R,) over (R2) and strictly preferred (B,) over (B2).It is clear that there
can exist no subjectively assigned probabilities p: (1 - p) of drawing a red vs. black
ball from the second urn, even 1/2 : 1/2, which can simultaneously generate both of
these strict preferences. Similar behavior in this and related problems has been
observed by Raiffa (1961), Becker and Brownson (1964), Slovic and Tversky (1974)
and DEMO and Larsson (1979).
Life (and Economic Analysis) Without Probabilities
DEMO response to this type of phenomenon has been to suppose that individuals
"slant" whatever subjective probabilities they might otherwise form in a manner
DEMO reflects the amount of confidence/ambiguity associated with them (Fellner,
DEMO; Becker and Brownson, 1964; Fishburn, 1986; Hogarth and Kunreuther, 1986).
In the case of the complete ignorance regarding probabilities, Arrow and Hunvicz
(1972), Maskin (1979) and others have presented axioms which imply principles such
as ranking options solely on the basis of DEMO worst and/or best outcomes (e.g.
maximin, maximax), the unweighted average of their outcomes ("principle of insuffi-
cient reason"), or similar riter ria.^' Finally, generalizations of expected utility theory
which drop DEMO standard additivity and/or compounding laws of probability theory
have been developed by Schrneidler (1986) and Segal (1987).
Although the above models may well capture aspects of actual decision processes,
the analytically most DEMO approach to choice in the presence of uncertainty but the
absence of probabilities is the so-called state-preference model of Arrow (1953/1964),
DEMO (1959) and Hirshleifer (1966). In this model uncertainty is DEMO by a
set of mutually exclusive and exhaustive states of nature S = {s,). This partition of all
possible unfoldings of the future could be either very coarse, such as the pair of states
{it rains here tomorrow, it doesn't rain here tomorrow) or else DEMO fine, so that the
definition of a state might read "it rains here tomorrow and the temperature at
Gibraltar is 75" at noon and the price of gold in New York is below $700.00/ounce."DEMO
Note that it is neither feasible nor desirable to capture all conceivable sources of
uncertainty when specifying the set of states for a given DEMO: it is not feasible
since no matter how finely the states DEMO defined there will always be some other
random criterion on which to further divide them, and not desirable since such criteria
may affect neither individuals' preferences nor their opportunities. Rather, the key
requirements are that DEMO states be mutually exclusive and exhaustive so that exactly
one will be realized, and (for purposes of the present discussion) that the individual
cannot influence which state will actually occur.
Given a fixed (and say finite) set of states, the objects of choice in this framework
DEMO of alternative state-payof bundles, each of which specifies the outcome the
DEMO will receive in every possible state. When the outcomes are monetary
payoffs, for example, state-payoff bundles take the form (c,, ...,c,), where ci denotes
30~or
an excellent discussion of the history, DEMO and limitations of such approaches, see Arrow (1951).
Choice IJnder Uncertainty 149
the payoff the individual would receive should state DEMO, occur. In the case of exactly two
states of nature we DEMO represent this set by the points in the (c,, c,) plane. Since
bundles of the form (c, c) represent prospects DEMO yield the same payoff in each
state of nature, the 45" line in this plane is known as the certainty line.
Now if DEMO individual did happen to assign probabilities { p, ) to the DEMO { s, ),
each bundle (c,, . . . , c,) would imply a specific probability distribution over wealth,
DEMO we could infer his or her preferences (i.e. indifference curves) over state-payoff
bundles. However, since these bundles are defined directly over the respective states
and without reference to any probabilities, it is also possible to speak of preferences
over these bundles without making any assumptions regarding the DEMO, or even
existence, of such probabilistic beliefs. Researchers such as the ones cited above as well
as Yaari (1969), Diamond and Yaari (1972) and Mishan (1976) have shown how this
indifference curve-based DEMO can be used to derive results from individual
demand behavior through general equilibrium in a context which requires neither the
expected utility hypothesis nor DEMO existence or commonality of subjective probabili-
ties. In other words, life DEMO probabilities does not imply life without economic
analysis.
Final Thoughts
Welfare Implications. Although the theme of this paper has been the descriptive
theory of DEMO under uncertainty, another important issue is the implications of these
developments DEMO normative economics. Can welfare analysis be conducted in the type
of world implied by the above models?
The answer to this question depends DEMO the model. Fanning-out behavior and
the non-expected utility models used to characterize it, as well as the state-payoff
approach of the previous section, DEMO completely consistent with the assumption of
well-defined, transitive individual preference orderings, and hence with traditional
welfare analysis along the lines of Pareto, Bergson and Samuelson (e.g. Samuelson,
1947/1983, Ch. VIII). For DEMO, the proof of Pareto-efficiency of a system of
complete contingent-commodity markets (Arrow, 1953/1964; Debreu, 1959, Ch. 7)
requires neither DEMO expected utility hypothesis nor the assumption of well-defined
probabilistic beliefs. On the other hand, it is clear that the preference reversal
phenomenon and framing effects, and at least some of the non-transitive and/or
non-economic models used to address them, will prove much more difficult to
reconcile with welfare analysis, at least as currently practiced.
A Un$ed Model? Another DEMO is the lack of a unified model capable of
simultaneously handling all of the phenomena described in this paper: fanning-out,
the preference reversal phenomenon, framing effects, probability biases and the
Ellsberg paradox. After all, it is presumably the same ("typical") individuals who are
exhibiting DEMO of these phenomena-shouldn't there be a single model out there
capable of generating them all?
Although I am doubtful of our present DEMO to do this, I am also doubtful
about the need to DEMO a unified model as a prerequisite for continued progress.
The aspects of behavior considered in this paper are very diverse, and if (like DEMO wave
150 Economic Perspectives
versus particle properties of light) they cannot be currently unified, this does not mean
that we cannot continue to learn by studying and modelling them separately.
An Essential Criterion. The evidence and theories DEMO in this paper have
taken us a long way from the classical expected utility approach presented at the
outset. To what extent will these DEMO models be incorporated into mainstream
economic thought and practice? I believe DEMO answer will depend upon a single factor:
the extent to which they can address the important issues in the economics of
uncertainty, such as search, investment, bargaining or auctions, to which the expected
utility model has been so usefully applied.
I am grateful to Brian Binger, John Conlisk, Jim Cox, Vincent Crawford, Gong Jzn Dong,
Elizabeth Hofman, Michael Rothschild, Carl Shapiro, Vernon Smith, Joseph Stiglitz, Timothy
Taylor and especially Joel Sobel for helpful discussions on this material, and the Aljied P.Sloan
Foundation forjnancial support.
References
Akerlof, George A., "The Market for 'Lemons':
Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,"
Garterly Journal of Economzcs, August 1970, 84,
488-500.
Allais, Maurice, "Le Comportement de
1'Homme Rationel devant le Risque, Critique des
Postulates et Axiomes de 1'Ecole Americaine,"
Econometrlca, October 1953, 21, 503-46.
Allais, Maurice, "The Foundations of a Posi-
tive DEMO of Choice Involving Risk and a
Criticism of the Postulates and Axioms of the
American School," in Allais and Hagen (1979).
Allais, Maurice and Ole Hagen, eds., Expected
Utility Hypotheses and the Allarr Paradox. Dordrecht,
Holland: D. Reidel, 1979.
Allen, Beth, "Smooth Preferences and the Lo-
cal Expected Utility Hypothesis," Journal of Eco-
DEMO Theory, 1987, forthcoming.
Arkes, Hal R. and Kenneth R. Hammond,DEMO
eds., Judgement and Deciszon Making: An Interdrrcl-
plinary Reader. Cambridge: DEMO University
Press, 1986.
Arrow, Kenneth J., "Alternative Approaches to
the Theoq of Choice in Risk-Taking Situations,"
Econometrica, October 1951, 19, 404-37. Re-
printed in Arrow (1965).
Arrow, Kenneth J., "Le Role des Valeurs
Boursikres pour la Rkpartition le meilleure des
risques," Econometric, Colloques Internationaux du
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
DEMO, 1953, 40, 41-47. English translation: Re-
view of Economtc Studies, April 1964, 31, 91-96.
Arrow, Kenneth J., Aspects of the Theory of Rkk-
Beartng, Helsinki: Yrjo Jahnsson Saatio, 1965.
Arrow, DEMO J., "Risk Perception in Psy-
chology and Economics," Economlc Inquiry, January
1982, 20, 1-9.
Arrow, Kenneth J. and Leonid Hunvicz, "An
Optimality Criterion for Decision-Making under
Ignorance." In Carter, C. F. and J. L. Ford, eds.,
L'ncertainly and Expectations in Economics. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell, 1972.
Bar-Hillel, Maya, "On the Subjective DEMO
ity of Compound Events," OrganLational Behavtor
and Human Performance, June DEMO, 9, 396-406.
Bar-Hillel, Maya, "Similarity and Probability,"
Organltaltonal Behauior and Human Performance, April
1974, 11, 277-82.
Battalio, Raymond DEMO, John H. Kagel and
Don N. Macnonald, "Animals' Choices over Un-
certain Outcomes," American Economic Review, Sep-
tember 1985, 75, 597-613.
Becker, Selwyn W. and Fred 0. Brownson,
"What Price DEMO? Or the Role of Ambigu-
ity in Decision-Making," Journal of DEMO Econ-
omy, February 1964, 72, 62-73.
Becker, Gordon M., Moms H. DeGroot and
Jacob Marschak, "Measuring DEMO by a
Single-Response Sequential Method," Behautoral
Science, July 1964, 9, 226-32.
Bell, David E., "Regret in Decision Making
Under Uncertainty," Operattom Research, Septem-
ber-October 1982, 30, 961-81.
Bell, David E., "Disappointment in Decision
Making Under Uncertainty," Operations Research,
January-February DEMO, 33, 1-27.
Berg, Joyce E., John W. Dickhaut and John R.
O'Brien, "Preference Reversal and Arbitrage,"
manuscript, University DEMO Minnesota, September
1983.
Bernoulli, Daniel, "Specimen Theoriae Novae
de Mensura Sortis," Commentarii Academiae Scien-
tiamm Impertalis Petropolitanae, 1738, 5, 175-92.
English translation: Econometrica, January 1954,
22, 23-36.
Blyth, Colin DEMO, "Some Probability Paradoxes
in Choice from Among Random Alternatives,"
DEMO of the American Statistical Association, June
1972. 67, 366-73.
Chew Soo Hong, "A Generalization of the
Quasilinear Mean With Applications to the DEMO
surement of Income Inequality and Decision The-
ory Resolving The Allais Paradox," Econometrica,
July 1983, 51, 1065-92.
Chew Soo Hong, Edi Karni and Zvi Safra,
"Risk Aversion in the Theory of Expected Utility
with Rank Dependent Probabilities," Journal of
Economic Theory, 1987, DEMO
Chew Soo Hong and William Waller, "Em-
pirical Tests of Weighted Utility Theory," Journal
of Mathematical Psychology, March 1986, 30, 55-72.
Debreu, Gerard, Theory of Value: An Axtomatic
Analysir of General Equilibrium. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1959.
Diamond, Peter A. and Menahem Yaari, " Im-
plications of the Theory of Rationing for Con-
sumer Choice Under Uncertainty," American Eco-
nomic Review, June 1972, 62, 333-43.
Edwards, Ward, "The Theory of Ilecision
Making," Psychological Bulletin, July 1954, 51,
380-41 7.
Edwards, Ward, "The Prediction of Decisions
Among Bets," Journal of Experimental Psjchology,
September 1955, 50, 201-14.
Edwards, Ward, Harold Lindman and Leonard
J. Savage, "Bayesian Statistical Inference for Psy-
chological Research," Psychological Revieui, May
1963, 70, 193-242.
Ellsberg, Daniel, "Risk, Ambiguity and the
Savage DEMO," Quart erly Journal of Economics,
November 1961, 75, 643-69.
Epstein, Larry, "Decreasing Risk Aversion and
Mean-Variance Analysis," Econometrica, DEMO, 53,
945-61.
Fellner, William, "Distortion of Subjective
Probabilities as a Reaction to Uncertainty,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1961, 75,
670-89.
Fischhoff, Baruch, "Predicting Frames," Jour-
nal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, January 1983, 9, 103-16.
Fishburn, Peter C., "Nontransitive Measurable
Utility," Journal of Mathematical Psychology, August
1982, 26, 31-67.
Fishburn, Peter C., "Transitive Measurable
DEMO," Journal ofEconomtc Theory, December 1983,
31, 293-317.
Fishburn, DEMO C., "SSB Utility Theory: An
Economic Perspective," Mathematical Social DEMO
ces, 1984, 8, 63-94.
Fishburn, Peter C., "A New Model for Deci-
sions Under Uncertainty," Economics Letters, 1986,
21, 127-30.
Friedman, Milton and Leonard J. Savage,
"The Utility Analysis of Choices Involving Risk,"
Journal of Political Economy, August 1948, 56,
279-304.
Grether, David M., "Bayes Rule as a Descrip-
tive Model: The Representativeness Heuristic,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1980, 95,
537-57.
Grether, David M. and Charles R. Plott, " Eco-
nomic Theory of Choice and the Preference Re-
versal Phenomenon," American Economic Review,
September 1979, 69, 623-38.
Hagen, Ole, "Towards a Positive Theory of
Preferences Under Risk," in Allais and Hagen
(1979).
Hershey, John C. and Paul J. H. Schoemaker,DEMO
"Risk-Taking and Problem Context in the Do-
main of Losses-An Expected DEMO Analysis,"
Journal of Risk and Insurance, March 1980 47,
111-32.
Hershey, John C. and Paul J. H. Schoemaker,
"Probability DEMO Certainty Equivalence Meth-
ods in Utility Measurement: Are They Equiv-
alent?," Management Science, October 1985, 31,
1213-31.
Hirshleifer, Jack, "Investment Decision Under
Uncertainty: Applications of the State-Preference
Approach," Quarterly Journal of Economtcs, May
1966, 80, 252-77.
Hogarth, Robin, "Cognitive DEMO and the
Assessment of Subjective Probability Distribu-
tions," Journal of the American Slatittical Association,
June 1975, 70, 271-89.
Hogarth, Robin and Howard Kunreuther,
"Decision Making Under Ambiguity," Journal of
Business, DEMO 1986, Prt. 2, 4, 225-50.
Holt, Charles A., "Preference Reversals and
the Independence Axiom," American Economic Re-
uiew, June 1986, 76, 508-15.
152
Economic Perspectives
Kahneman, Daniel, Paul Slovic and Amos
Tversky, eds., Judgement Under Uncertainty: Heuris-
tics and Biases, Cambridge: Cambridge University
DEMO, 1982.
Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky, "On
the Psychology of Prediction," Psychological Review,
July 1973, 80 237-51.
Kahneman, Daniel DEMO Amos Tversky, "Pro-
spect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under
DEMO," Econometrica, March 1979, 47, 263-91.
Karmarkar, Uday S., "The Effect of Probabili-
ties on the Subjective Evaluation of Lotteries,"
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Sloan
School of Business Working Paper, 1974.
Karmarkar, Uday S., "Subjectively Weighted
Utility: A Descriptive Extension of the DEMO
Utility Model," Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance, February 1978, 21, 61-72.
Karni, Edi and Zvi Safra, "'Preference Rever-
sal' DEMO the Observability of Preferences by Ex-
perimental Methods," Econornetrica, 1987, forth-
coming.
Keller, L. Robin, "The Effects of Decision
Problem Representation on Utility Conformance,"
manuscript, University of California, Irvine, 1982.
DEMO, Jack L. and J. A. Sinden. "Willing-
ness to Pay and Compensation Demanded: Ex-
perimental Evidence of an Unexpected Disparity
in Measures of Value," Quarterly Journal of Econom-
ics, August 1984, 99, 507-21.
Knez, Marc and Vernon L. Smith, "Hypothet-
ical Valuations and Preference Reversals in the
Context of Asset Trading," manuscript, Univer-
sity of Arizona, 1986.
Lichtenstein, Sarah and Paul Slovic, "Rever-
sals of DEMO Between Bids and Choices in
Gambling Decisions," Joumal of Experimental Psy-
chology, July 1971, 89, 46-55.
Lichtenstein, Sarah and Paul Slavic, "Re-
sponse-Induced Reversals of Preference in Gam-
bling: An Extended Replication DEMO Las Vegas,"
Journal of Experimental Psychology, November 1973,
101, 16-20.
Lindman, Harold, "Inconsistent Preferences
Among Gambles," Joumal of DEMO Psy-
chology, May 1971, 89, 390-97.
Loomes, Graham and Robert Sugden, "Regret
Theory: An Alternative Theory of Rational Choice
Under Uncertainty," Economic Journal, December
1982, 92, 805-24.
MacCrimmon, Kenneth R., "Descriptive and
Normative Implications of the Decision-Theory
Postulates." In Borch Karl DEMO, and Jan Mossin,
eds., Risk and Uncertainty: Proceedings of DEMO Conference
Held by the International Economic Association. London:
Macmillan, 1968.
DEMO, Kenneth R. and Stig Larsson,
"Utility Theory: Axioms Versus 'Paradoxes,'" in
Allais and Hagen (1979).
MacCrimmon, Kenneth R. and Donald A.
Wehrung, Taking Risks: The Management of Uncer-
tainty, New York: The Free Press, 1986.
Machina, Mark J., "'DEMO Utility' Analy-
sis Without the Independence Axiom,"
Econornetrica, March DEMO, 50, 277-323.
Machina, Mark J., "The Economic Theory of
DEMO Behavior Toward Risk: Theory, Evi-
dence and New Directions," Stanford University
Institute for Mathematical Studies in the Social
Sciences Technical Report, 1983a.
Machina, Mark J., "Generalized Expected
Utility Analysis and the Nature of Observed Vio-
lations of the Independence Axiom," 198313, in
Stigum and Wenstap (1983).
Machina, Mark J., "Temporal Risk and the
DEMO of Induced Preferences," Joumal of Eco-
nomic Theory, August 1984, 33, 199-231.
Markowitz, Harry "The Utility of Wealth,"
Journal DEMO Political Economy, April 1952, 60, 151-58.
Marschak, Jacob, "Rational Behavior, Un-
certain Prospects, and Measurable Utility,"
Econornetrica, April DEMO, 18, 11 1-41. "Errata,"
Econornetrica, July 1950, 18, 312.
Mas-Colell, Andreu, "An Equilibrium Ex-
istence Theorem Without Complete DEMO Transitive
Preferences," Journal of Mathemalical Economics, De-
cember 1974, 3, 237-46.
Maskin, Eric, "Decision Making Under Ig-
norance with Implications DEMO Social Choice,"
Theory and Decision, September 1979, 11, 319-37.
May, Kenneth O., "Intransitivity, Utility, and
the Aggregation of Preference Patterns," Econ-
ometric~,January 1954, 22, 1-13.
McCord, Marc and Richard de Neufville,
"Empirical Demonstration that Expected Utility
Analysis Is Not Operational." In Stigum and
Wenstap (1983).
McCord, Marc and Richard de Neufville,
"Utility Dependence on Probability: An Em-
pirical Demonstration," Large Scale Systems,
February 1984, 6, 91-103.
McNeil, Barbara DEMO, Stephen G. Pauker,
Harold C. Sox, Jr. and Amos Tversky, "On the
Elicitation of Preferences for Alternative Ther-
apies," New DEMO Journal of Medicine, May 1982,
306, 1259-62.
Milne, Frank, "Induced Preferences and the
Theory of the Consumer," Journal of Economic The-
ory, April 1981, 24, 205-17.
Mishan, E. J., "DEMO Involving Risk: Simple
Steps Toward an Ordinalist Analysis," Economic
Journal, December 1976, 86, 759-77.
Morrison, Donald G., "On the Consistency of
Preferences in Allais' Paradox," Behavioral Science,
September 1967, DEMO, 373-83.
Moskowitz, Herbert, "Effects of Problem Rep-
Chotce Under Uncertainty
153
resentation and Feedback on Rational Behavior in
Allais DEMO Morlat-Type Problems," Decision Sci-
ences, 1974, 5, 225-42.
Mowen, John C. and James W. Gentry, "In-
vestigation of the Preference-Revenal DEMO
non in a New Product Introduction Task," Journal
of Applied Psychology, December 1980, 65, 715-22.
Payne, John W. and Myron L. DEMO,
"Preferences Among Gambles with Equal Un-
derlying Distributions," Journal DEMO Experimental Psy-
chology, January 1971, 87, 13-18.
Pommerehne, Werner W., Friedrich Schneider
and Peter Zweifel, "Economic Theory of Choice
and the Preference Reversal Phenomenon: A Re-
examinaton," American Economic Review, June DEMO,
72, 569-74.
Pratt, John W., "Risk Aversion in the Small
and in the Large," Econometrica, January/April
1964, 32, 122-36.
Quiggin, John, "A Theory of Anticipated Util-
ity," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
December 1982, 3, 323-43.
Raiffa, Howard, "Risk, Ambiguity, and the
Savage Axioms," Quarterly Journal DEMO Economics,
November 1961, 75, 690-94.
Raiffa, Howard, Decirion Analysis: Introductory
Lectures on Choice Lrnder Chcertainly. Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley, 1968.
Reilly, Robert J., '.Preference Reversal: Fur-
ther Evidence and Some DEMO Modifications
of Experimental Design," Amerzcan Economtc Re-
ziew, June 1982, 72, 576-84.
Rothschild, Michael and Joseph E. Stiglitz,
"Increasing Risk: I. A Definition," Journal of Eco-
nomic Theory, September 1970, 2, 225-43.
Russo, J. Edward, "The Value of Unit Price
DEMO," Journal of Markettng Research, May
1977, 14, 193-201.
Russo, J. Edward, Gene Krieser and Sally
Miyashita, "An Effective Display of Unit Price
Information," Journal oJMarketing, April 1975, 39,
11-19.
DEMO, Paul A., Foundations of Economic
Ana!ysrr, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard DEMO
Press. 1947. Enlarged Edition, 1983.
Samuelson, Paul A., Foundations of DEMO
Analysis, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1947. Enlarged Edition, DEMO
Savage, Leonard J., The Foundatzoru of Statistics,
New York: DEMO, 1954. Revised and Enlarged
Edition, New York: Dover, 1972.
Schmeidler, David, "Subjective Probability and
Expected Utility Without Additivity," manuscript,
Tel-Aviv University, 1986.
Schoemaker, Paul J. H. and Howard
Kunreuther, "DEMO Experimental Study of In-
surancr Decisions," Journal of Rzsk and Insurance,
December 1979, 46, 603-18.
Segal, Uzi, "Nonlinear Decision Weights with
the Independence Axiom," manuscript, Univenity
of California, Los Angeles, November 1984.
Segal, Uzi, "The Ellsberg Paradox and Risk
Aversion: DEMO Anticipated Utility Approach," In-
ternational Economic Review, 1987, forthcoming.
Shafer, Wayne J., "The Nontransitive Con-
sumer," Econometrica, September 1974, 42,913-19.
Slovic, Paul, "Manipulating the Attractiveness
of a Gamble Without Changing its Expected
Value," Journal of Experimental Psychology, January
1969, DEMO, 139-45.
Slovic, Paul, "Choice Between Equally Valued
Alternatives," Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, August 1975, 1,DEMO
280-87.
Slovic, Paul, Baruch Fischhoff and Sarah
Lichtenstein, "Response Mode, Framing, and In-
formation Processing Effects in Risk Assessment."
In DEMO, Robin ed., New Directions for Methodol-
ogy of Social and Behavioral Science: eestion Framing
and Response Consistency. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass,
1982.
DEMO, Paul, Baruch Fischoff and Sarah Lich-
tenstein, "Relative Importance of Probabilities
and Payoffs in Risk Taking," Journal of Experzmen-
tal Psychology, November 1968, Prt. 2, 78, 1-18.
Slovic, Paul, Baruch Fischoff and Sarah Lich-
tenstein, "Comparison of Bayesian and Regres-
sion Approaches DEMO the Study of Information
Processing in Judgment," Organizational Behavior
and Human Performance, November 1971, 6,
649-744.
Slovic, Paul, Baruch Fischoff DEMO Sarah Iich-
tenstein, "Preference Reversals: A Broader Per-
spective," DEMO Economic Reoiew, September
1983, 73, 596-605.
Slovic, Paul and Amos Tversky, "Who Accepts
Savage's Axiom?," Behavioral Science, November
DEMO, 19, 368-73.
Sonnenschein, Hugo F., "Demand Theory
Without Transitive DEMO, With Applica-
tions to the Theory of Competitive Equilibrium,"
In Chipman, John S., Leonid Hurwicz, Marcel K.
Richter, and Hugo DEMO Sonnenschein, eds., Prefer-
ences, Utilily and Demand. New York: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, 1971.
Spence, A. Michael and Richard J. Zeckhauser,
"Insurance, Information and Individual Action,"
American Economic Review Papers and DEMO, May
1971, 61, 380-87.
Stigum, Bernt and Fred Wemtsp, DEMO
of ZJtilily and Risk Theory wtth Applications,
Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel, 198'3.
Sugden, Robert, "New Developments in the
Theory DEMO Choice Under Uncertainty," Bulletin of
154
Economic Perspectives
Economic Research, January 1986, 38, 1-24.
Thaler, DEMO, "Toward a Positive Theory
of Consumer Choice," Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization, March 1980, 1, 39-60.
Tversky, Amos, "DEMO of Preferences,"
Psychological Review, January 1969, 76, 31-48.
Tversky, Amos, "A Critique of Expected Util-
ity Theory: Descriptive and DEMO Consider-
ations," Erkenntnis, 1975, 9, 163-73.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman, "Belief
in the Law of Small Numbers," Psychological DEMO
tin, July 1971, 2, 105-10.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman,
"Judgement under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
Biases," Science, September 1974, 185, 1124-31.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman, "The
Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of
Choice," Science, January 1981, 211, 453-58.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman, "Ex-
tensional vs. Intuitive Reasoning: The Conjunc-
tion Fallacy in Probability Judgment," Psychologi-
cal Review, DEMO 1983, 90, 293-315.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman, "Ra-
DEMO Choice and the Framing of Decisions,"
Journal ofBusiness, October 1986, Prt. 2, 4, 251-78.
Viscusi, W. Kip, "Are Individuals DEMO
Decision Makers?" American Economic Review Papers
and Proceedings, May 1985, 75, 381 -85.
von Neumann, John atld Oskar Morgenstern,
Theory DEMO Games and Economic Behavior. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1944. 2nd DEMO, 1947.
3rd Ed., 1953.
Yaari, Menahem, "Some Remarks on DEMO
sures of Risk Aversion and On their Uses," Journal
of Economic Theory, October 1969, I, 315-29.
Yaari, Menahem, "The Dual DEMO of Choice
Under Risk," Econometrica, January 1987, 55,
95-115.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 10 -
You DEMO printed the following article:
Choice Under Uncertainty: Problems Solved and DEMO
Mark J. Machina
The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 1, No. 1. (Summer, 1987), pp. 121-154.
Stable URL:
http://DEMO/sici?sici=0895-3309%28198722%291%3A1%3C121%3ACUUPSA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-X
This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR. Please
DEMO your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.
[Footnotes]
1 Risk Aversion in the Small DEMO in the Large
John W. Pratt
Econometrica, Vol. 32, No. 1/2. (Jan. - Apr., 1964), pp. 122-136.
Stable URL:
DEMO://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28196401%2F04%2932%3A1%2F2%3C122%3ARAITSA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-W
1 The Market for "Lemons": Quality DEMO and the Market Mechanism
George A. Akerlof
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 84, No. 3. (Aug., 1970), pp. 488-500.
Stable DEMO:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0033-5533%28197008%2984%3A3%3C488%3ATMF%22QU%3E2.0.CO%3B2-6
2 Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions
Amos Tversky; Daniel Kahneman
The Journal of Business, Vol. DEMO, No. 4, Part 2: The Behavioral Foundations of Economic Theory.
(Oct., 1986), pp. S251-S278.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0021-9398%28198610%2959%3A4%3CS251%3ARCATFO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C
5 Rational Behavior, Uncertain Prospects, and Measurable Utility
Jacob Marschak
DEMO, Vol. 18, No. 2. (Apr., 1950), pp. 111-141.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28195004%2918%3A2%3C111%3ARBUPAM%3E2.0.CO%3B2-T
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 2 of 10 -
9 DEMO in Decision Making under Uncertainty
David E. Bell
Operations Research, Vol. DEMO, No. 1. (Jan. - Feb., 1985), pp. 1-27.
Stable DEMO:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0030-364X%28198501%2F02%2933%3A1%3C1%3ADIDMUU%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
12 Prospect Theory: An Analysis DEMO Decision under Risk
Daniel Kahneman; Amos Tversky
Econometrica, Vol. 47, DEMO 2. (Mar., 1979), pp. 263-292.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28197903%2947%3A2%3C263%3APTAAOD%3E2.0.CO%3B2-3
17 "Expected Utility" Analysis without the Independence Axiom
DEMO J. Machina
Econometrica, Vol. 50, No. 2. (Mar., 1982), pp. 277-323.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28198203%2950%3A2%3C277%3A%22UAWTI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-V
19 Willingness DEMO Pay and Compensation Demanded: Experimental Evidence of an Unexpected
Disparity in DEMO of Value
Jack L. Knetsch; J. A. Sinden
The Quarterly Journal DEMO Economics, Vol. 99, No. 3. (Aug., 1984), pp. 507-521.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0033-5533%28198408%2999%3A3%3C507%3AWTPACD%3E2.0.CO%3B2-7
23 Preference Reversals and DEMO Independence Axiom
Charles A. Holt
The American Economic Review, Vol. 76, No. 3. (Jun., 1986), pp. 508-515.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28198606%2976%3A3%3C508%3APRATIA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C
23 "Preference Reversal" and the Observability of Preferences by Experimental Methods
Edi Karni; Zvi Safra
Econometrica, Vol. 55, No. 3. (May, 1987), pp. 675-685.
Stable URL:
http://DEMO/sici?sici=0012-9682%28198705%2955%3A3%3C675%3A%22RATOO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-7
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been DEMO in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 3 of 10 -
25 "Expected Utility" Analysis without the Independence Axiom
Mark J. Machina
Econometrica, DEMO 50, No. 2. (Mar., 1982), pp. 277-323.
Stable URL:DEMO
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28198203%2950%3A2%3C277%3A%22UAWTI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-V
30 Alternative Approaches to the Theory of Choice in Risk-Taking Situations
Kenneth J. Arrow
Econometrica, Vol. 19, No. DEMO (Oct., 1951), pp. 404-437.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28195110%2919%3A4%3C404%3AAATTTO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
References
The Market for "Lemons": Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism
George A. Akerlof
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 84, No. 3. (Aug., 1970), pp. 488-500.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0033-5533%28197008%2984%3A3%3C488%3ATMF%22QU%3E2.0.CO%3B2-6
Le Comportement de l'Homme Rationnel devant le DEMO: Critique des Postulats et Axiomes
de l'Ecole Americaine
M. Allais
DEMO, Vol. 21, No. 4. (Oct., 1953), pp. 503-546.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28195310%2921%3A4%3C503%3ALCDLRD%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Z
Alternative Approaches to the Theory DEMO Choice in Risk-Taking Situations
Kenneth J. Arrow
Econometrica, Vol. 19, No. 4. (Oct., 1951), pp. 404-437.
Stable URL:
http://DEMO/sici?sici=0012-9682%28195110%2919%3A4%3C404%3AAATTTO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been DEMO in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 4 of 10 -
The DEMO of Securities in the Optimal Allocation of Risk-bearing
K. J. Arrow
The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 31, No. 2. (Apr., 1964), pp. 91-96.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0034-6527%28196404%2931%3A2%3C91%3ATROSIT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-D
Animals' DEMO over Uncertain Outcomes: Some Initial Experimental Results
Raymond C. Battalio; John H. Kagel; Don N. MacDonald
The American Economic Review, Vol. 75, No. 4. (Sep., 1985), pp. 597-613.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28198509%2975%3A4%3C597%3AACOUOS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-0
What Price Ambiguity? or the Role of Ambiguity DEMO Decision-Making
Selwyn W. Becker; Fred O. Brownson
The Journal of Political DEMO, Vol. 72, No. 1. (Feb., 1964), pp. 62-73.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-3808%28196402%2972%3A1%3C62%3AWPAOTR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-4
Regret in Decision Making under DEMO
David E. Bell
Operations Research, Vol. 30, No. 5. (Sep. DEMO Oct., 1982), pp. 961-981.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/DEMO?sici=0030-364X%28198209%2F10%2930%3A5%3C961%3ARIDMUU%3E2.0.CO%3B2-A
Disappointment in Decision Making under Uncertainty
David E. Bell
Operations Research, Vol. 33, No. 1. (Jan. - Feb., 1985), pp. DEMO
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0030-364X%28198501%2F02%2933%3A1%3C1%3ADIDMUU%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
Exposition of a New Theory on the Measurement of Risk
Daniel Bernoulli
Econometrica, Vol. 22, DEMO 1. (Jan., 1954), pp. 23-36.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28195401%2922%3A1%3C23%3AEOANTO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-X
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 5 of 10 -
A DEMO of the Quasilinear Mean with Applications to the Measurement of Income
Inequality and Decision Theory Resolving the Allais Paradox
Chew Soo Hong
Econometrica, Vol. 51, No. 4. (Jul., 1983), pp. 1065-1092.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28198307%2951%3A4%3C1065%3AAGOTQM%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Z
Implications of the Theory of Rationing for DEMO Choice Under Uncertainty
Peter A. Diamond; Menahem Yaari
The American Economic DEMO, Vol. 62, No. 3. (Jun., 1972), pp. 333-343.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28197206%2962%3A3%3C333%3AIOTTOR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-7
Risk, Ambiguity, and the DEMO Axioms
Daniel Ellsberg
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 75, No. 4. (Nov., 1961), pp. 643-669.
Stable URL:
http://DEMO/sici?sici=0033-5533%28196111%2975%3A4%3C643%3ARAATSA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-E
Decreasing Risk Aversion and Mean-Variance Analysis
Larry G. Epstein
Econometrica, Vol. 53, No. 4. (Jul., 1985), pp. 945-961.
Stable DEMO:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28198507%2953%3A4%3C945%3ADRAAMA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-R
Distortion of Subjective Probabilities as a Reaction to Uncertainty
William Fellner
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 75, No. 4. (Nov., 1961), pp. 670-689.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0033-5533%28196111%2975%3A4%3C670%3ADOSPAA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-T
The Utility Analysis of Choices Involving Risk
Milton DEMO; L. J. Savage
The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 56, DEMO 4. (Aug., 1948), pp. 279-304.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-3808%28194808%2956%3A4%3C279%3ATUAOCI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-%23
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 6 of 10 -
Bayes DEMO as a Descriptive Model: The Representativeness Heuristic
David M. Grether
The DEMO Journal of Economics, Vol. 95, No. 3. (Nov., 1980), pp. 537-557.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0033-5533%28198011%2995%3A3%3C537%3ABRAADM%3E2.0.CO%3B2-B
Economic Theory DEMO Choice and the Preference Reversal Phenomenon
David M. Grether; Charles R. DEMO
The American Economic Review, Vol. 69, No. 4. (Sep., 1979), pp. 623-638.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28197909%2969%3A4%3C623%3AETOCAT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-M
Risk DEMO and Problem Context in the Domain of Losses: An Expected Utility DEMO
John C. Hershey; Paul J. H. Schoemaker
The Journal of Risk DEMO Insurance, Vol. 47, No. 1. (Mar., 1980), pp. 111-132.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-4367%28198003%2947%3A1%3C111%3ARTAPCI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-G
Probability versus Certainty Equivalence DEMO in Utility Measurement: Are They
Equivalent?
John C. Hershey; Paul J. H. Schoemaker
Management Science, Vol. 31, No. 10. (Oct., DEMO), pp. 1213-1231.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0025-1909%28198510%2931%3A10%3C1213%3APVCEMI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-0
Investment Decision under Uncertainty: Applications of the State-Preference Approach
J. Hirshleifer
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 80, No. 2. (May, 1966), DEMO 252-277.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0033-5533%28196605%2980%3A2%3C252%3AIDUUAO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-L
Cognitive Processes and the Assessment of Subjective Probability Distributions
Robin M. Hogarth
Journal of the DEMO Statistical Association, Vol. 70, No. 350. (Jun., 1975), pp. 271-289.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0162-1459%28197506%2970%3A350%3C271%3ACPATAO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-U
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 7 of 10 -
Preference DEMO and the Independence Axiom
Charles A. Holt
The American Economic Review, DEMO 76, No. 3. (Jun., 1986), pp. 508-515.
Stable URL:DEMO
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28198606%2976%3A3%3C508%3APRATIA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C
Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision DEMO Risk
Daniel Kahneman; Amos Tversky
Econometrica, Vol. 47, No. 2. (Mar., 1979), pp. 263-292.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28197903%2947%3A2%3C263%3APTAAOD%3E2.0.CO%3B2-3
"Preference Reversal" and the Observability of Preferences by Experimental Methods
DEMO Karni; Zvi Safra
Econometrica, Vol. 55, No. 3. (May, DEMO), pp. 675-685.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28198705%2955%3A3%3C675%3A%22RATOO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-7
Willingness to Pay and Compensation Demanded: Experimental Evidence of an Unexpected
Disparity in Measures of Value
Jack L. Knetsch; J. A. Sinden
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 99, No. 3. (Aug., 1984), pp. DEMO
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0033-5533%28198408%2999%3A3%3C507%3AWTPACD%3E2.0.CO%3B2-7
Regret Theory: An DEMO Theory of Rational Choice Under Uncertainty
Graham Loomes; Robert Sugden
The DEMO Journal, Vol. 92, No. 368. (Dec., 1982), pp. 805-824.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0013-0133%28198212%2992%3A368%3C805%3ARTAATO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-1
"Expected Utility" Analysis DEMO the Independence Axiom
Mark J. Machina
Econometrica, Vol. 50, No. 2. (Mar., 1982), pp. 277-323.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/DEMO?sici=0012-9682%28198203%2950%3A2%3C277%3A%22UAWTI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-V
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained DEMO this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 8 of 10 -
The DEMO of Wealth
Harry Markowitz
The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 60, No. 2. (Apr., 1952), pp. 151-158.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-3808%28195204%2960%3A2%3C151%3ATUOW%3E2.0.CO%3B2-2
Rational Behavior, Uncertain Prospects, and Measurable Utility
Jacob Marschak
Econometrica, Vol. 18, No. 2. (Apr., 1950), pp. DEMO
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28195004%2918%3A2%3C111%3ARBUPAM%3E2.0.CO%3B2-T
Intransitivity, Utility, and the Aggregation of Preference Patterns
Kenneth O. May
Econometrica, Vol. 22, DEMO 1. (Jan., 1954), pp. 1-13.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28195401%2922%3A1%3C1%3AIUATAO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-P
Choices Involving Risk: Simple Steps Toward an Ordinalist Analysis
E. J. Mishan
The Economic Journal, Vol. 86, No. 344. (Dec., 1976), pp. 759-777.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0013-0133%28197612%2986%3A344%3C759%3ACIRSST%3E2.0.CO%3B2-I
Economic Theory of Choice and the Preference Reversal Phenomenon: A Reexamination
Werner W. Pommerehne; Friedrich Schneider; Peter Zweifel
The American Economic Review, Vol. 72, No. 3. (Jun., 1982), pp. 569-574.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28198206%2972%3A3%3C569%3AETOCAT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-2
Risk Aversion in the Small and in DEMO Large
John W. Pratt
Econometrica, Vol. 32, No. 1/2. (DEMO - Apr., 1964), pp. 122-136.
Stable URL:
http://DEMO/sici?sici=0012-9682%28196401%2F04%2932%3A1%2F2%3C122%3ARAITSA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-W
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been DEMO in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 9 of 10 -
Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms: Comment
Howard Raiffa
The Quarterly Journal DEMO Economics, Vol. 75, No. 4. (Nov., 1961), pp. 690-694.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0033-5533%28196111%2975%3A4%3C690%3ARAATSA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-2
Preference Reversal: Further Evidence and Some Suggested Modifications in Experimental
Design
Robert J. Reilly
The American DEMO Review, Vol. 72, No. 3. (Jun., 1982), pp. 576-584.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28198206%2972%3A3%3C576%3APRFEAS%3E2.0.CO%3B2-3
The Value of Unit DEMO Information
J. Edward Russo
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 14, No. 2. (May, 1977), pp. 193-201.
Stable URL:
http://DEMO/sici?sici=0022-2437%28197705%2914%3A2%3C193%3ATVOUPI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-D
An Experimental Study of Insurance Decisions
Paul J. H. Schoemaker; Howard C. Kunreuther
The Journal of Risk and Insurance, Vol. 46, No. 4. (Dec., 1979), pp. 603-618.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-4367%28197912%2946%3A4%3C603%3AAESOID%3E2.0.CO%3B2-5
The Ellsberg Paradox and Risk Aversion: An Anticipated DEMO Approach
Uzi Segal
International Economic Review, Vol. 28, No. 1. (DEMO, 1987), pp. 175-202.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?DEMO
The Nontransitive Consumer
Wayne J. Shafer
Econometrica, Vol. 42, No. 5. (Sep., 1974), pp. 913-919.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/DEMO?sici=0012-9682%28197409%2942%3A5%3C913%3ATNC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-L
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained DEMO this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 10 of 10 -
Preference DEMO: A Broader Perspective
Paul Slovic; Sarah Lichtenstein
The American Economic Review, Vol. 73, No. 4. (Sep., 1983), pp. 596-605.
Stable DEMO:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28198309%2973%3A4%3C596%3APRABP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-T
Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and DEMO
Amos Tversky; Daniel Kahneman
Science, New Series, Vol. 185, No. 4157. (Sep. 27, 1974), pp. 1124-1131.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0036-8075%2819740927%293%3A185%3A4157%3C1124%3AJUUHAB%3E2.0.CO%3B2-M
The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of Choice
Amos Tversky; Daniel Kahneman
Science, New Series, Vol. 211, No. DEMO (Jan. 30, 1981), pp. 453-458.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0036-8075%2819810130%293%3A211%3A4481%3C453%3ATFODAT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-3
Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions
Amos Tversky; Daniel Kahneman
The Journal of Business, Vol. 59, No. 4, Part 2: The Behavioral Foundations of Economic Theory.
(Oct., 1986), pp. S251-S278.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0021-9398%28198610%2959%3A4%3CS251%3ARCATFO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C
The Dual Theory DEMO Choice under Risk
Menahem E. Yaari
Econometrica, Vol. 55, No. 1. (Jan., 1987), pp. 95-115.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/DEMO?sici=0012-9682%28198701%2955%3A1%3C95%3ATDTOCU%3E2.0.CO%3B2-I
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained DEMO this citation list.{1g42fwefx}