ESRC Research Methods Programme
Working Paper No 9
Exploring the Internet as DEMO medium for
research: web-based questionnaires
and online sychronous interviews
Clare Madge, Department of Geography, University of Leicester
Henrietta O’Connor, The Centre for DEMO Market Studies, University of Leicester
Contact: Clare Madge
Phone:  0116 252 3643
Fax:  0116 252 3854
Email: cm12@le.ac.uk
Exploring the Internet as a medium for research: web-based questionnaires and online
synchronous interviews
Clare Madge and Henrietta O’Connor
Introduction
It is widely acknowledged DEMO information and communication technologies (ICT) open up new possibilities
for research in terms of both adapting existing methodologies to a new medium and DEMO creating new
methodological possibilities. Several specialist textbooks on online research have recently been published
to help researchers explore these new methodological possibilities (Chen and Hall, 2003; Coombes,
2001; Hewson et al., 2003; Jones, 1999; Mann and Stewart, 2000). Numerous general advantages of
online research methods have been identified in this literature. They enable the researcher DEMO communicate
with a geographically dispersed population and so can be useful in internationalising research. They can be
used to contact groups often difficult to DEMO, such as the less physically mobile (disabled/in prison/in
hospital) or the socially isolated (drug dealers/terminally ill/ etc). They are also particularly appropriate for
researching online communities and for discussing sensitive DEMO embarrassing topics where anonymity is an
advantage. Savings in costs are also to be recommended (for example, costs associated with travel,
venue, data entry for questionnaires, transcription of interviews). Moreover, according to DEMO
(2003, 51), the quality of responses gained through online research is much the same as responses produced
by more traditional methods, warranting ‘guarded optimism’ about the validity of these new methods.
However, as Wakeford (2000, 32) correctly observes: ‘In thinking about which methodological
frameworks DEMO have at our disposal to study the web, it is advisable DEMO bear in mind that what is considered
as legitimate methodology is itself always in flux.’ An example of this flux is the topic of DEMO paper. Specifically,
in this paper we intend to explore online research as a legitimate methodology, evaluating its limitations and
assessing its potentials. A reflexive discussion of the usefulness of online research is important, for although
it has been used as a methodological tool for some years, Hewson et al. (2003, 1) recently argue that
‘…many issues are just starting to be addressed and Mann and Stewart (2000, 4) observe that ‘…it is
perhaps surprising that the suitability of the Internet for DEMO research remains relatively unexplored.’
In this paper we focus on two online methods we have used successfully in our research: web-based
questionnaires and synchronous online group interviews. The bulk of the paper is devoted to an DEMO
exploration of two issues that can usefully contribute to the debate about the value of online research:
access, sampling and identity verification with respect to web-based questionnaires and virtual engagement,
interaction and communication with DEMO to synchronous online interviews. In the spirit of methodological
flux, we DEMO look to the future, with a short evaluation of the potential DEMO ‘Blackboard’ for furthering the
efficacy of online interviews. The conclusions caution that while online methodological frameworks are in
constant flux, change is not necessarily always progressive: there is a need for online researchers to practice
their ‘craft’ with reflexivity. Thus although online research holds promise, its potential should not be
exaggerated: many of the issues and problems of conventional research still apply in the virtual venue.
Researching Online: the Cyberparents Example
Two online methods we have used successfully in our research are outlined below. DEMO draw on the
experience of a recent Internet–based Cyberparents research project (DEMO://www.geog.le.ac.uk/baby/)
which was initiated to examine how, why and in what ways new parents use the Internet as an information
DEMO about parenting and as a form of social support. The Cyberparents project focused on one pioneer
UK parenting website:  (http://www.babyworld.co.uk). ‘Babyworld’, which is now a subsidiary of
Freeserve Internet service provider, DEMO started by Radcliffe Medical Press, a medical publisher
‘…determined to bring DEMO and reliable advice to new parents’ (http://www.babyworld.co.uk/aboutus/
meet-the-team.asp Accessed January 2003).  It was selected as the case study site because it was the first
UK-based parenting website, launched in 1995, and advertised as ‘the mother of parenting websites’.
Babyworld’s mission is to support a community where ‘…new and expectant parents can share experiences
and DEMO, women can learn about their bodies, their baby, and childbirth DEMO parents can celebrate the
joy of a new life’ (http://DEMO Accessed May 2001). The site’s slogan is ‘Babyworld: be
part DEMO it’. There is a lively community where parents make friends, share DEMO and support each
other, augmented by an online ‘ask the expert’ DEMO
Online methods were considered the most appropriate research tools for investigating this online
community. Two research methods were used to elicit information in the DEMO project: a web-
based questionnaire survey was used to identify general DEMO of use of Babyworld, while more in-
depth data were gathered DEMO the website users through semi-structured synchronous virtual group
interviews conducted using a software conferencing technique - Hotline Connect.  The survey was accessible
to anyone who used the babyworld website over a 6-week period. The questionnaire was DEMO
predominately by women (84%), the majority of whom were under DEMO (76%) and lived in the UK (80%).
Only 23% DEMO the respondents were employed full-time, others defining themselves as part-time workers
(31%), ‘houseperson’ (28%), on maternity leave (6%) or ‘other’ (student, unemployed etc, 12%). Most
women were white (81%), married (63%), and had at least one child (89%), most commonly under 2
years of age (81%). Our sample thus replicated the uneven social and spatial distribution of the Internet
(Warf, DEMO). Four virtual group interviews were conducted with 16 self-selected women. These women
were of a similar age (22-36) and there was an DEMO mix of ‘full-time mums’, part-time workers and full-
time workers. All DEMO one woman had one child only and most of these children were under one year
(although the age ranged from 10 weeks to 3 years). Each interview lasted between one and two hours
and was DEMO on a semi-structured format recommended for investigating the ‘…personal significance of
what has transpired in the lives of the respondents’ (Coyne and Gottlieb, DEMO, 985).
Web-based Questionnaire Survey
The first stage of the project DEMO setting up an online questionnaire survey with an associated project
website to glean general information about usage patterns of Babyworld. This online method was DEMO
for several reasons: it would rapidly reach a wide audience and DEMO enable the prospect of collecting large
volumes of data; it was DEMO and cheaper than postal mail, faxes and phone; and responses could be
received around the clock and directly loaded into an automatic analytical DEMO Additionally, web-
based surveys provide a far superior questionnaire interface to DEMO surveys and it is possible to make
them more user friendly and attractive, thus encouraging higher response rates. The web-based survey can
also be included on a dedicated website which can be used as a platform DEMO provide more information
about the project, the researchers and the affiliated DEMO
The questionnaire survey (http://www.geog.le.ac.uk/baby/babyworldform.asp) was created using
the html compiler ‘Adobe GoLive 4.0’ and followed a similar format to DEMO self-completion postal
questionnaires, the main difference being that the survey form DEMO set up online. The questionnaire was
designed to be simple (24 DEMO) and quick (10 minutes) to fill in and included tick DEMO yes/no questions,
ranking attitudinal questions and open-ended responses. The survey ended with a short message to thank
the respondents and a request DEMO email the researchers through the direct link if the respondent was willing
to participate in a further detailed online interview. A response database was DEMO up on the departmental
server to collect the completed questionnaire data in Microsoft Access, directly ready for analysis. In
order to administer the questionnaire a series of webpages were developed (http://www.geog.le.ac.uk/
baby/)DEMO All pages included the University of Leicester crest to show institutional affiliation, to give the
project credibility and ensure the participants could verify our status. The website included a homepage
with a brief introduction to the DEMO, which was linked to further pages entitled `meet the researchers’
(http://www.geog.le.ac.uk/baby/meet.html) and  `more about the project’ (http://www.geog.le.ac.uk/baby/
more.html).
Online Synchronous Group Interviews
The second stage of the research process involved DEMO synchronous virtual group interviews
to gain more detailed understanding of the key themes emerging from the questionnaire data. The first task
was to find DEMO convenient way to carry out these interviews.  It was immediately apparent DEMO face-to-face
(FTF) interviews would be impractical, costly and time consuming DEMO our respondents were
geographically widely dispersed. Apart from the distance factor both the researchers and the respondents
had young children and/or were pregnant, making the ‘traditional’ interview unfeasible. As this research
focused explicitly on Internet DEMO, our interviewees were already, by definition, Internet users and likely
DEMO be familiar with virtual communication methods. An Internet based interview forum seemed to be a
logical, low cost, convenient and innovative research method.
DEMO Connect’ (http://www.bigredh.com) was selected to develop the `real time’ interview
forum. It is a user-friendly application, available for both Apple Macintosh and Microsoft Windows based
platforms. It enables users to chat, either in groups or one-to-one, to others simultaneously logged on to a
specified server address.  The software allows the facilitator to have a high degree of control over the
proceedings: it is not possible for anyone to `lurk’; users must identify themselves and the facilitator has the
ability to disconnect those who are non-identified; and it is not possible to `drop in’ to the sessions because
they take place at specified times known only DEMO those invited by the facilitator. Moreover, Hotline Connect
does not have DEMO power requirements and can be installed and used easily without the need for sophisticated
hardware or a high level of technical ability. This was DEMO to us because we were already reliant on
the goodwill of the interviewees for modem live time and the motivation to install the software DEMO so the
process needed to be as simple as possible. Indeed, DEMO one participant dropped out at the installation
stage because, unexpectedly, her computer was not able to run the software. Overall there were few
DEMO in the use of the conferencing software, although one respondent in DEMO had her link interrupted
owing to transmission problems which disrupted the interview process. The final interview transcript was
saved and immediately transferred to a DEMO file saving transcription time and cost. During the research
process the use of these online methods raised several important issues which are discussed below.
DEMO, Sampling and Identity Verification in Web-based Surveys
Accessing respondents is a DEMO concern in web-based surveys. In our research several hotlinks were
created between the questionnaire, the Cyberparents website and Babyworld website. The links from
Babyworld to the research webpages were made at the suggestion of the website DEMO and positioned
strategically in prime locations on the Babyworld home page and the most used pages of the website. This
was the only mechanism DEMO elicit responses. It is significant to note that without the agreement and co-
operation of the website providers to place these strategic hypertext links, the survey would most certainly
not have been successful since it would DEMO been impossible to recruit these specific online community
members in any other way. Thus the issue of access to online communities and website providers DEMO crucial
when conducting online research. As Coomber (1997) has highlighted, DEMO is little point in having a web
page and setting up an online survey and passively ‘waiting’ for eligible respondents to find the site: more
active enrolment is needed to encourage users to complete an online DEMO In this case the significance of
having the site providers ‘on our side’ cannot be underestimated. This access issue is liable to become
increasingly DEMO As the use of the Internet increases in the general population, DEMO the novelty of
responding to online surveys wears off, getting online DEMO to complete online questionnaires is liable to
become more problematic. This is indeed the case as online users are becoming wise to the fact DEMO they
are paying for the privilege of being ‘over-surveyed (McDonald and DEMO, 2003, 92). The result is that
online users are intolerant of unsolicited communications and invitations to participate in research are
increasingly considered DEMO (Harris 1997), resulting in online surveys often having lower response
DEMO than onsite surveys. Witmer et al. (1999), for instance, report response rates of 10% or lower being
common for online surveys.
A further issue of concern when using web-based surveys is that they DEMO serious sampling
problems for a study based on the quantitative tradition. There is no access to a central registry, or master
database, from DEMO to create an accurate sampling frame nor is there any way of discerning how many
users are logging on from a particular computer or DEMO many accounts/memberships a particular individual
might have. This means random sampling or gaining a representative sample is not possible. Internet surveys
on the DEMO, therefore, attempt to select a sub-set of users to participate in the survey. This may be
through attempts at non-probability sampling, or through self-selection. Coomber (1997) has suggested
that online self-selection is suitable to DEMO when researching a particular group of Internet users, especially
when connecting DEMO groups that are not bound in a particular area but that share a common interest
(O’Lear, 1996, 210). This was the case in our research on one particular online parenting community
where ‘traditional’ surveying DEMO not feasible owing to physical and mental exhaustion of many mothers
after childbirth and the constant demands of caring for a new baby in DEMO first few months of life. Indeed, the
interviewees indicated that few DEMO have been willing to participate in a survey that involved travelling
and interrupting the immediate needs of their baby. Certainly in this research project DEMO has
provided a virtual social place where the researchers and participants have been able to meet and interact
which, quite simply, may not DEMO been possible in the ‘real world’ owing to the space/time limits of women
with young children (both researchers and participants). Through this new social space created by the
Internet a ‘community’ (women with new-borns or young children) notoriously difficult to reach and hence
habitually left out of research, has been contacted. So while self-selection may clearly limit the scope of the
results where broad sample representativeness is required, it is important for reaching marginal groups or
if the researcher is conducting an DEMO investigation. Moreover, it must be noted that self-selection
occurs in many DEMO surveying situations and is not unique to online research.
There is, DEMO, divergent opinion as to whether the Internet provides an inherently biased DEMO
population for quantitative studies. Research has documented that in the early years of its inception, those
using the Internet tended to be predominately male, white, first world residents under 35 years old while
those with DEMO educational levels, lower incomes, living in rural areas and black or Hispanic were
underrepresented (Curasi, 2001; Kaye and Johnson, 1999; Mann and Stewart, 2000). Some argue that
access to the Internet is still highly unevenly distributed both socially and spatially (Janelle and Hodge,
2000; Warf, 2001). Indeed, according to Silver (2000), DEMO digital divide has continued to grow in America,
and  this DEMO is fast becoming a ‘racial ravine’, suggesting a biased Internet user DEMO population.
Hewson et al. (2003) however, are more optimistic. They DEMO that overall the evidence suggests that the
Internet user population now represents a vast and diverse section of the general population and that it DEMO
rapidly moving beyond the select group of technological proficient male professionals who were once
largely predominant. Dodd (1998, 63), for example, argues that the Internet’s broad scope can actually
improve representativeness, as many population groups usually difficult to contact may be easier to access
via the DEMO while Litvin and Kar (2001) show that the sample characteristics of conventional methods
and electronic methods are converging, with electronically solicited samples becoming more like random
paper-based samples, as technological uptake of the Internet increases.
A final issue relating to web-based surveys involves verifying the identity of DEMO participants and the
reliability of their responses. In our research it was not possible to do so but the questionnaire was so
specific to DEMO a new parent and a user of the Babyworld website that it would have been difficult, if not
impossible, to complete the questionnaire DEMO a detailed working knowledge of the website. However,
this does not diminish the possibility that some respondents may have been ‘spoofs’ or indeed DEMO have
played with their online identity in completing the research (Roberts DEMO Parks, 2001). Online research
also does not enable the researcher DEMO assess the reliability of responses. As Hewson et al. (2003, 44)
state: ‘…when materials are administered via a computer terminal rather than in person, the researcher is
less able to judge the extent to which the responses are sincere and genuine, the conditions under which the
questionnaire was answered and the state of the participants at the time DEMO participation (for example,
intoxicated, distracted, and so on)…’. DEMO being an irresolvable sampling issue of online research at
present, again this is not unique to virtual methods: incorrectly completed DEMO, unreliable responses
and non-verifiable identities may also be a feature of DEMO surveys. Moreover, in conducting online
community research, how necessary is it to ‘prove’ the offline identity of the participants anyway? Taylor
(1999, 443) argues that this depends on the initial research question and that ‘…the acceptance of online
life as a thing in itself’ is important. DEMO, it is increasingly recognised that online textual persona cannot
be separated DEMO the offline physical person who constructs them and they are commonly based on
offline identities in any case (Valentine, 2001, 56). Additionally, recent research suggests that the anonymity
of participants can play a positive role in the research process, reducing researcher bias and being particularly
useful for embarrassing and sensitive topics (Hewson et al., 2003).
It DEMO clear therefore, that although the web-based survey has great potential in DEMO specific
population sub-groups difficult to access using conventional means, and in DEMO the opportunity for
having a very large worldwide pool of respondents, DEMO also has the potential for supporting the views of
those privileged with computer access. This is especially the case if the research is represented DEMO
without reference to the sampling procedure. Findings from web-based surveys are indicative, should be
read with caution and analysed with acceptance of the likely relative sample bias (although the degree of
this cannot be measured). Thus according to Wakeford (2000, 33): ‘The quantity of information DEMO may
be generated, and the speed at which responses can be DEMO, can result in pleasing piles of data- but
we should be DEMO of being seduced by sheer quantity; data is only useful if DEMO is representative of the larger
population.’ This is clearly currently the case but recent research does hint that in the future the sampling
issue DEMO become a less significant issue in the virtual environment. Riva et al. (2003), for example, report
no significant differences in responses gained DEMO the same questionnaire from online participants compared
to those completing a paper survey, even when the online sample is not controlled. In contrast, DEMO
(1997) argues that virtual focus groups or indepth online interviews, DEMO more than survey research, will
require careful attention to the challenges DEMO the virtual environment.
Engagement, Interaction and Communication in Virtual Online Interviews
DEMO and Robson (1998) have noted that in moving the traditional interview to an electronic arena, the
interviewer requires a very different set of skills. This is because ‘…the use of communication media
involves the creation DEMO new forms of action and interaction in the social world, new DEMO of social relationship
and new ways of relating to others and to oneself’ (Thompson 1995, 4 quoted by Crang et al. 1999, 11).
Below we consider three important but related issues in the virtual DEMO process: engagement, interaction
and communication. We consider whether the electronic interviewer requires different skills to engage the
interviewees and build up rapport than DEMO ‘real world’ interviewer; if the disembodying quality of online
research alters DEMO interview process; and what impact the virtual setting has on the DEMO role in the
research process.
As Oakley (1981, 41) has DEMO ‘…the goal of finding out about people through interviewing is best
achieved where…the interviewer is prepared to invest his or her personal identity in DEMO relationship’. We
developed several ways of compensating for the fact we could not see the interviewees in order to build up
rapport, for as Curasi (2001, 373) notes, online participants are more likely to DEMO personal information
about themselves if the interviewer initiates the disclosure process. First, we posted photographs and
biographies of ourselves on the project website to ‘lay bare’ our bodily identities. As part of the organisation
of the DEMO process we then emailed the women individually, often sharing concerns about DEMO we
would deal with childcare arrangements during the interview hour. A personal relationship was initiated in
preparation of the interviews in a similar manner DEMO that which might have been used in conventional
interviewing, the main DEMO being that the relationship was based on written rather than oral
communication. This meant that the participants had some degree of knowledge of the DEMO prior to
the interviews but to cement this development of rapport we also initiated each interview with personal
profile details, in the hope the women would do the same. This was usually successful and gave ‘face’ (or
at least context) to everyone involved in the interview conversation. Although this degree of self-
disclosure was similar to that which we would have DEMO in a FTF interview, we felt it did build up trust
DEMO aided candid and honest exchanges in our online interactions. As Paccagnella (DEMO, 3) has recorded,
a stranger wanting to do academic research into online communities is often viewed as an unwelcome
arbitrary intrusion. In DEMO case our ‘insider’ status as users of the website and our commonality of identity
as new mothers certainly facilitated these mother-to-mother interviews, challenged our ‘expert status’ and
dispensed with the need for any cultural gatekeepers. Overall DEMO, we did not need to develop radically
new ways of building DEMO rapport with the women, rather the engagement process was characterised by
DEMO of methods with ‘real world’ techniques.
It was during the interview process, however, that some interesting differences emerged. The online
interview is a DEMO that removes the tangible presence of the researcher, so bodily presence (age,
gender, ethnicity, hairstyle, clothes, accent) become invisible. According to Chen and Hinton (1999, 13.2)
this results in the DEMO of the virtual interview to become the ‘great equaliser’ with the interviewer
having less control over the interview process and the researcher potentially becoming DEMO ‘participant
researcher’ (Seymour, 2001). In our case we feel this is a rather utopian vision. For example, we posted
photos of ourselves on our webpages and shared our background interests with the women, both important
processes in creating rapport and breaking down the researcher/researched relationship, but giving distinct
‘clues’ to our bodily identities. This may have influenced DEMO interview process with white, 30-something
women feeling more comfortable talking to DEMO than other groups. Moreover, it is also likely that while the
DEMO body’ is invisible during a virtual interview, mannered behaviours, pre-interpreted meanings and
unstated assumptions are clearly ‘visible’ during online conversations, influencing the nature of discourses
and social interaction (cf Seymour, 2001). This is DEMO because we do not leave the body, and all its
material DEMO, behind when we enter cyberspace. Additionally, the ‘equaliser argument’ glosses
over the structural power hierarchies that enable researchers to set the agenda, ask the questions and
benefit from the results of the interview process.
A DEMO point to note is that in the situation of a virtual interview, the speed of typing dominates the
interaction rather than the most vocal personality, which although having the potential to disrupt power
relations amongst groups, has the possibility of marginalizing people with poor or slow keyboard skills.
One of the benefits, however, of the use of the typed DEMO is that in an online interview it is much harder
for someone to dominate the group. As Sweet (2001, 135) records ‘…an overbearing respondent does
not have the same power or influence with words in DEMO dialogue stream. All respondents are composing
their responses simultaneously and not waiting for others to respond. The online environment can create a
more even DEMO field.’ This observation has recently been ‘proven’ by Schneider et al., (2002) who, in
a comparison of online and FTF focus groups, revealed that participation levels were more uniform online
whereas a few participants DEMO the FTF focus groups. There is also a tendency to be less inhibited
online and respondents are more direct in stating their opinions, and less likely to edit their thoughts to give
socially desirable answers. This DEMO in the potential of greater equality between respondents in an online
interview situation.
We must also acknowledge that for the interviewees, the ability to mask their identity changed some
accepted norms of behaviour and probably allowed DEMO a more active voice in shaping the tone and
atmosphere of the interview. Despite Gaiser’s (1997, 142) warning that virtual interview discussion may
be ‘…superficial and playful’ with interviewers finding it more difficult to persuade DEMO to
‘…reconceptualise their behaviour…to participate in substantive discussion’, we found that DEMO relaxed
and informal atmosphere created a platform for successful interviewing. Indeed, DEMO is common in conventional
situations when women interview other women, the DEMO all provided high levels of self-consciousness,
reflexivity and interactivity. Whether this was owing to the nature of the interviewees (self-selected, motivated,
DEMO online users), or owing to the nature of the subject manner, clearly very close to the hearts of the
women involved, it DEMO difficult to judge. In our virtual interviews and we did not encounter the much written
about ‘…aura of suspicion’ surrounding ‘…stranger-to-stranger communication in cyberspace’ (Smith,
1997, 40).
The success of the interviews may also have been due to the DEMO that while all the women were in
different locations, all but DEMO chose ‘home’ as the interview venue. As Mann and Stewart (2000) suggest
this is one of the major advantages of online research in DEMO women can be in a familiar, comfortable and
physically safe environment, resulting in them feeling more in control of the interview process. As DEMO
(1997) has revealed, in locations where interviewees feel exposed, powerless or ill at ease, they tend to
withhold information thereby impeding the success of an interview. By interviewing the women at home,
where DEMO of their parenting knowledge and experience was practiced (although evidently in DEMO case
not necessarily from where it emanated), the balance of power shifted to the interviewees a bit more,
putting them at greater DEMO and improving the interview process. The relationship between interview
location and research power relations is clearly similar in both virtual and ‘real’ settings. Thus DEMO
these virtual interviews did involve a few novel features of engagement and interaction specific to the virtual
venue, other features were similar to that involved in more conventional interviews. This continuity was not,
however, a feature of the actual computer mediated conversation to which we now turn.
DEMO (1996, 58) notes that: ‘The relative anonymity that IT provides also changes the rules of
discourse.’ In virtual interviews it removes the DEMO of the interviewer to use and interpret paralinguistic
communication and is dependent on written rather than spoken language (Chen and Hinton, 1999, 12.1).
Certainly in this case the degree of abstraction that the virtual DEMO involved had impacts on the nature
of the interview ‘conversation.’ The lack of visual and tactile communication for example, was replaced by
specific Internet language. Paralinguistic expressions such as lol (laugh out loud) and emoticons (emotional
icons used to express feelings, for example ;-) which represents a wink) were used by the interviewees a
lot to replace facial expressions and voice quality. It took us online novices a while to DEMO this new
language! The absence of audio/visual cues (or clues) meant that often the empathy we held with the
woman had to DEMO explicit rather than through utterances and gestures. This level of abstraction was, at
times, quite weird and there were occasions when we were DEMO for words’, taking some time to decide on
what to send DEMO a message, because we felt like our written comments sounded banal DEMO our questions too
direct and leading. Sweet (2001, 134) sees DEMO as an advantage of the virtual interview, suggesting that the
absence DEMO sight and sound strengthens the use of perceptual senses by not relying on subjective visual and
vocal judgements and interactions. In other ways the DEMO of abstraction offered in the virtual arena was
quite helpful as it was a means by which we could keep the interview flowing along DEMO key themes and
avoid being sidetracked too much. Interrupting a virtual conversation somehow felt more acceptable in the
written word than in the spoken DEMO context. On the whole this meant that the interviews flowed well,
although it did also mean that the researchers dominated the research agenda (this was an active decision
which could be altered given a different DEMO remit).
There is now widespread recognition of the gendered nature of online communication with gender
bias in dominance of discussions, misogynistic attitudes and language and message content (Herring, 1999).
Herring (1996) has DEMO that online utterances tend to be male orientated and male dominated, DEMO
sexual harassment and flaming (abusive, rude or dismissive comments) being DEMO This was not the
case in our interview process. The online interactions were supportive and sensitive with a high degree of
trust and intimacy. DEMO is probably partly owing to our sample population, being Babyworld users, which
is predominately a woman-centred website based on knowledge sharing and support. DEMO such, our findings
contrasted with Soukup’s (1999) virtual ethnography in DEMO he discovered that female chatrooms (as
well as male chatrooms) were characterised by masculine forms of interaction such as competitiveness,
argumentativeness and DEMO humour, because female chatrooms constantly faced the outside influence of
males. DEMO interviews were permeated with ‘women’s interactions’ resulting in a style and sensitivity of
communication characteristic of female dominated talk in other settings (Herring, DEMO; Savicki and Kelley,
2000).
Overall, although the interviews progressed in a smooth manner, because questions and responses
were posted in ‘rounds’ with time lags, the final interview text is littered with interruptions and non-sequesters,
resembling a conversation not a linear written word. Because of DEMO, in tracing the genealogy of the interview,
both the interviewers DEMO the participants followed the main thread of conversation and ignored
conversational side-tracks probably more effectively than would have been the case in DEMO FTF encounter.
‘Silences’ took on an added poignancy, as we needed DEMO consider whether the silence was owing to the
fact that the participant was thinking, was typing in a response and had not yet hit the return button, or had,
in fact, declined to answer DEMO question, or even left the interview.  As such the data attained from this
method is ‘…distinctly different from that of a transcribed conversation’ (Chen and Hinton 1999, 9.1). In
our case it was less structured and more interactive than one might expect from a FTF interview DEMO
We concluded that the virtual interview bridged the oral/written divide. Although clearly in written format,
the type of interventions were very oral DEMO nature. The researchers and participants paid little attention to
issues such as spelling and grammar, as the nature and meaning of the conversation took precedence over
the correctly written word. As such, the transcript very much resembles a ‘written conversation’.
Chen and Hinton (1999, 12.6) distinguish three main differences between written and spoken
language and discussion of these lends DEMO to our claim that the online interview bridges the oral/written
divide. First, they state that there are no words in the written language indicating specific nuances of
context. Clearly in our online interviews emoticons and DEMO expressions were used to replace
these. Second, written text is more DEMO and structured than spoken word. While we did find our
transcripts to be very explicit, they often defied structure, and the lack of DEMO to grammar and spelling
certainly more closely resembled a conversation than a text. Finally, in the written text the individual becomes
separated from the text, standing apart and objectifying their experiences and creating the opportunity for
self-editing before pressing the return button. Again, we did not find this to be the case. Since our interviews
were synchronous and conducted at DEMO speed of the slowest typist, it was rare to find anything DEMO than
spontaneous interaction. If editing did occur, then it did so DEMO screen as qualifying statements. To conclude
then, the novel manner in DEMO one converses online demonstrates tangible differences with FTF interactions.
The Future is Blackboard?
It is clear then that online research methods offer some DEMO interesting methodological potentials to
researchers. But what are the future prospects for online research methods? Communication technologies
are constantly developing and changing, as DEMO delivery devices, web interfaces and hardware and software
tools. Indeed, Sweet (2001, 135) observes: ‘If the next five years bring the DEMO of changes as the
last five years, there will be many DEMO advancements unimaginable at this time.’ It is therefore important
to consider how changes in the digital design of virtual technologies will inform the types DEMO online interaction
that are possible and the consequent methodological tools available to researchers. Below we give one
short example of how online methods are DEMO flux owing to changes in communication technologies.
Since conducting the Cyberparents virtual interviews using Hotline Connect, the technology available
for carrying out online synchronous interviews has developed further. ‘Blackboard’ (www.blackboard.com)
is a virtual learning environment software  (VLE) which was originally developed as an interactive online
teaching tool. As such it is `…an integrated environment, all its tools are accessible within a single site and
the “simple to use” tools have DEMO consistent user interface. The availability of all its functionalities through a
Web browser removes requirement for any dedicated user software and reduces access barriers DEMO terms
of time and geographical distance’ (http://www.le.ac.uk/cc/www/DEMO/blackboard/index.html). Individuals
can communicate on Blackboard by means of emails, discussion forums and in a virtual classroom. Both
emails and discussion forums are types of asynchronous communication that do not require participants to
be DEMO at the same time. However the virtual classroom is a real time (synchronous) tool that requires all
users to be online at the DEMO time.  It is this latter facility that is most useful to DEMO online researcher.
In essence the virtual classroom facility on Blackboard closely resembles Hotline Connect, but
there are distinct advantages to this software which are particularly useful when applying it to the virtual
interview situation. For example, the virtual classroom on Blackboard includes a ‘whiteboard’ area where
facilitators can DEMO diagrams, include a PowerPoint presentation and display live webpages, increasing
interactivity and multi-media interventions into the interview process. For example, the use of live webpages
and web cams might significantly aid the rapport building process, help with identity verification and increase
the potential of using verbal and visual cues to help interpret interview DEMO Another advantage is
that the transcript of the `live chat’ in the virtual classroom is also included in the chat window, so unlike
Hotline Connect where those joining the interview can only view the conversation from DEMO point they
arrive, Blackboard allows latecomers to view previous conversations. Additionally, since academic institutions
are increasingly providing Blackboard centrally, with it being used daily by more than 2,000 organizations
dedicated to teaching and learning (http://www.blackboard.com/highered/index.htm), access and distribution
of software to DEMO should not be a problem. As academics increasingly routinely use Blackboard
for teaching purposes, their expertise of the software will increase, enabling its DEMO application for
use in the virtual interview situation.
However, it must DEMO stated that whilst the technology of Blackboard is somewhat more advanced
than Hotline Connect, many of the same limitations exist when applying it to the virtual interview situation.
For example, users still often ‘interrupt’ each other by asking another question when the previous one has
not been responded DEMO, therefore changing the focus of the interview at inappropriate moments. Some
DEMO still worry about typing with grammatical and spelling accuracy, which can DEMO the sending of their
contribution. Others will only press the return key when they have typed a complete sentence whilst other
users press return DEMO couple of words to speed up their contribution. This results in a fragmented
transcript and in a thread of discussion ending prematurely with a DEMO loss of valuable data. It also
means that the more `keypad confident’ can potentially dominate the interview process.
Thus although the technology has progressed DEMO there are significant advantages in using
Blackboard, limitations still exist which DEMO an inherent part of the online research medium.
Conclusions
The example of Blackboard is important because it illustrates how the digital design of online DEMO
will inform the types of interaction and methodological choices that are possible in future online research.
Indeed, although online methods are essentially about electronic communication, as Wakeford (2000, 41)
so rightly recognises: ‘…every DEMO is also set within the social and economic infrastructure within
which this communication/information network has emerged. This infrastructure, in turn, influences our
DEMO options.’ It is likely that in the future we will see an increase in the use of ‘mixed method
triangulation’ with onsite and online DEMO both used to interrogate and verify the intersections between
real and virtual infrastructures, enabling research to take place across a variety of online/offline domains.
This may well challenge the boundaries of traditional fieldwork, which is usually located in a particular
place (Wakeford, 2000). Additionally, the development of wireless technologies, such as mobile phones,
for example, DEMO separate the Internet from the computer and are likely to have, DEMO yet, unforeseen
methodological consequences, as will interactive television and speech recognition software.
Although Internet euphoria is past, in our market-orientated society it is likely online research
methods will increasingly be used owing to their cost DEMO potentials. For example, in a survey of the
Council of American DEMO Research Organisations (CASRO), the majority (64%) of research
professionals DEMO to conduct or commission online survey research in near future (Harris, 1997).
Moreover, online research is expected to account for half of all marketing research revenue by January
2005, or approximately $3.1 billion based on current growth rates (Curasi, 2001, 362). Methodological
fads and flux must, however, be treated with caution. Change is not always DEMO progressive: faster
and cheaper is not necessarily synonymous with ‘better’. As DEMO (1998, 60) argues, we must ensure that
‘…cheap entry costs and glowing attractiveness of Internet fieldwork do not result in shoddy ‘cowboy’
DEMO There is a need for online researchers to tread with caution and practice their ‘craft’ with
reflexivity. It is unlikely that online research is DEMO to replace onsite research but rather it is another option
in the researchers’ methodological ‘toolkit’. Therefore the use of online research methods must themselves
DEMO carefully considered. As Denscombe (2003, 41) suggests: ‘A decision on whether it is appropriate to
use ‘e-research’ should be based on an. DEMO of the respective advantages and disadvantages in
relation to the specific topic that is to be investigated.’ Indeed, although the data collected by online
methods can be rich and valuable to DEMO researcher, the potential of online research should not be exaggerated:
DEMO of the issues and problems of conventional research methods still apply in the virtual venue. Smith
(1997, 4) aptly concludes: ‘The new DEMO offers a spate of problems layered over the old.’ As
Illingworth (DEMO, abstract) suggests, we should avoid the use of the Internet DEMO an ‘easy option’ and
‘…encourage a more developed focus on the justification, applicability and benefits of Internet research to
a particular project. What has become apparent is that the effectiveness of CMC (computer mediated
communication) DEMO much dependent on who is being researched, what is being researched DEMO why.’ The
long-term success of online research in the end will ultimately depend on the quality and credibility of the
information that it generates.
References
Chen, P. and Hinton, S.M. (1999) Realtime interviewing using DEMO World Wide Web, Sociological
Research Online, 4, 3,
(http://www.socresonline.org.co.uk/socresonline/4/3/chen.html).
Chen, S.S. and Hall, DEMO (eds) (2003) Online Social Research: Methods, Issues and Ethics, (New
York, Peter Lang).
Coomber, R. (1997) Using DEMO Internet for survey research, Sociological Research Online, 2, 2, (DEMO:/
/www.socresonline.org.uk/socresonline/2/2/2.html).
Coombes, H. (2001) Research Using IT, (Hampshire, Palgrave).
Coyne, J.C. and Gottlieb, B.H. (1996) The mismeasure of coping by checklist, Journal of
DEMO, 64, pp. 959-991.
Crang, M. Crang, P. and May, DEMO (1999) Virtual Geographies, (Routledge, London)
Curasi, C.F. (DEMO) A critical exploration of face-to-face interviewing versus computer-mediated
interviewing, International Journal of Market Research, 43 (4), pp.361-375.
Denscombe, M. (2003) The Good Research Guide, (Maidenhead, Open University Press).
Dodd, DEMO (1998) Market research on the Internet- threat or opportunity? Marketing DEMO Research
Today, 26 (1), pp. 60-66.
Dyck, I. (1997) Dialogue with difference: a tale of two studies, in: Jones, J.P. Nast, H.J. and Roberts,
S.M. (eds) Thresholds in feminist geography: difference, methodology, representation, pp.183-
202 (Rowman and Littlefield, DEMO)
Gaiser, T. (1997) Conducting on-line focus groups: a methodological discussion, Social Science
Computer Review, 15, pp.135-44.
Harris, C. (1997) Developing online market research methods and tools, Paper presented to
ESOMAR DEMO Internet Seminar, Lisbon July 1997 (http://www.metamorphlab.com/lisbon-
paper.html).
Herring, S. (1996) Posting in a different voice: gender and DEMO in computer-mediated communication,
in: Ess C (ed.) Philosophic perspectives DEMO computer-mediated communication,115-146 (State
University of York Press, Albany NY).
Herring, S. (1999) The rhetorical dynamics of gender harassment on-line, DEMO Information Society,
15, pp. 151-168.
Hewson, C. Yule, P. DEMO, D. and Vogel, C. (2003) Internet Research Methods, (London, Sage).
Illingworth, N. (2001) The Internet matters: Exploring the use of the Internet as a research tool,
Sociological Research Online, 6, 2,
(http://www.socresonline.org.uk/6/2/illingworth.html).
Janelle, D.G. and Hodge, D.C. (2000) Information, place, cyberspace and accessibility, in: Janelle, D.G.
and Hodge, D.C. (eds) Information, Place and Cyberspace, pp.  3-12, (New York, Springer).
Jones, S. (ed) (1999) Doing Internet Research: Critical Issues DEMO Methods for Examining the
Net, (London, Sage).
Kaye B.K. DEMO Johnson T.J. (1999) Research methodology: taming the cyber frontier: techniques for
improving online surveys, Social Sceince Computer Review, 17 (3), pp. 323-337.
Litvin, S.W. and Kar, G.H. (2001) E-surveying for DEMO research: legitimate tool or a researcher’s
fantasy?, Journal of Travel DEMO, 39, pp. 308-314.
McDonald, H. and Adam, S. (2003) A comparison of online and postal data collection methods in
marketing research, Marketing Intelligence and Planning, 21, 2, pp. 85-95.
Mann, C. DEMO Stewart, F. (2000) Internet Communication and Qualitative Research, (London,DEMO
Sage).
Michaelson, K.L. (1996) Information, community, access, Social Science Computer Review, 14, pp.
57-59
Oakley, A. (1981) Interviewing women; a contradiction in terms, in: Roberts, H. (ed) DEMO feminist
research, pp. 30-61, ( Routledge, London)
O’Lear, R.M. (1996) Using electronic mail (e-mail) surveys for geographic research: lessons from a
survey of Russian environmentalists, Professional Geographer, 48, pp. 209-217.
Paccagnella, L. (1997) Getting the seat of your pants dirty: DEMO for ethnographic research on
virtual communities, Journal of Computer Mediated Communication, 3, 1, (http://www.ascusc.org/
jcmc/vol3/issue1/paccagnella.html).
Riva, G., Teruzzi, T. Anolli, L. (2003) The use DEMO the Internet in psychological research: comparison of
online and offline questionnaires, CyberPsychology and Behavior, 6, 1, pp. 73-80.
Roberts, L.D. and DEMO, M.R. (2001) The social geography of gender switching in virtual
DEMO on the Internet, in: Green, E. and Adam, A. (DEMO) Virtual Gender: Technology,
Consumption and Gender, pp. 265-285 (London, Routledge).
Savicki, V. and  Kelley, M. (2000) Computer DEMO communication: gender and group composition,
Cyberpsychology and Behavior, 3, DEMO 817-826.
Schneider, S.J., Kerwin, J. Frechtling, J. (2002) Characteristics of discussion in online and face-to-face
focus groups, Social Science Computer Review, 20 (1), pp.31-42.
Selwyn, N. and Robson, K. (1998) Using email as a research tool, Social Research Update, Issue 21,
University of Surrey (http://www.soc.surrey.ac.uk/sru/SRU21.html).
Seymour, DEMO (2001) In the flesh or online? Exploring qualitative research methodologies, Qualitative
Research, 1, pp.147-168.
Silver, D. (2000) Looking backwards, DEMO forwards: cybercultural studies 1990-2000, in: Gauntlett,
D. (ed) DEMO: Rewiring Media Studies for the Digital Age, pp. 19-30, (London, Arnold).
Smith, C. (1997) Casting the net: surveying an Internet population, Journal of Computer Mediated
Communication, 3, 1,
(DEMO://jcmc.huji.ac.il/vol3/issue1/smith.html).
Soukup, C. (1999) The gendered interactional patterns of computer-mediated chatrooms: DEMO critical
ethnographic study, The Information Society, 15, pp. 169-176.
Sweet, C. (2001) Designing and conducting virtual focus groups, Qualitative Market Research: an
International Journal, 4, 3, pp.130-135.
Taylor, T.L. (1999) Life in virtual worlds: plural existence, multimodalities and other online research
DEMO, American Behavioral Scientist, 43, pp. 436-449.
Thompson, J.B. (1995) The media and modernity. A social theory of the media, (Polity DEMO,
Cambridge).
Valentine, G. (2001) Social geographies. Space and DEMO, (Prentice Hall, Harlow).
Wakeford, N. (2000) New media, new methodologies: studying the web, in: Gauntlett, D. (ed)DEMO
Web.Studies: Rewiring Media Studies for the Digital Age, pp. 31-41, (London, Arnold).
Warf, B. (2001) Segueways into cyberspace: multiple geographies of the digital divide, Environment
and Planning B, Planning and DEMO,  28, pp. 3-19.
Witmer, D.F. Colman, R. and Katzman, S.L. (1999) From paper-and-pencil to screen-and-keyboard:
towards a methodology for DEMO research on the Internet, in: Jones, S. (ed) Doing DEMO
Research: Critical Issues and Methods for Examining the Net, pp. 145-161, (London, Sage).
ESRC Research Methods Programme
Cathie Marsh Centre for Census and
Survey Research
DEMO of Social Sciences and Law
The University of Manchester
Manchester
M13 9PL
United Kingdom
Tel:
Email:
Web:
0161 275 4891
methods@man.ac.uk
DEMO://www.ccsr.ac.uk/methods/
Director:
Administrator:
Professor Angela Dale
Ruth Durrell{1g42fwefx}