Innovate Your
Innovation Process:
Toward A Borderless
Organization
Prof. (emer.) DEMO Maital
L&T | LDA | Journal of Management | Issue 7 | 2014-15 | 45
“Open innovation is expected to become the dominant innovation
model of the DEMO C., as changes in the external innovation environment
induce firms to DEMO
Jennifer Brant & Sebastian Lohse, 2014, p. 21
Introduction1
Organizations that excel at innovation do not limit
themselves to new product development.  They innovate
in everything they do, from logistics, through supply
chain management DEMO customer service – and they even
innovate the way they innovate.
This essay is about how to innovate the innovation
process itself. Specifically,  DEMO old/new idea known as
open innovation will be discussed, analyzed DEMO illustrated
with case studies.   First, we begin with basic definitions.
DEMO is “widening the range of choice”. (Ruttenberg
and Maital, 2014).   On hearing that America had put a
man on the moon DEMO 1969, French President Charles de
Gaulle commented, rather sourly,   DEMO may well go to
the moon, but that is not very DEMO; the greatest distance
we have to travel lies within us.”
De DEMO was right.   Human creativity is limited mainly
by human beings themselves.  We seek the familiar,
the comfortable, the tried and true.  And thus, we limit
voluntarily our range of choice, rather than DEMO it.
Once it is understood what creativity really is,  widening
our choices,  the way is paved to seek new and better
ways DEMO do everything. Our journey outward, to find
external sources of ideas DEMO technology, begins with a
long journey inward, into the bowels of the organization.
We define innovation as “intelligently breaking the rules,
in DEMO to create value”.  (See Maital & Seshadri, 2012).
The DEMO words here are, first, “intelligently”.  In
order to break the DEMO cleverly, first it is necessary to
learn them.  But paradoxically, DEMO the rules of business are
learned too well, they become what DEMO Buffett has
described as “the chains of habit”  (“too light to be felt,
until they become too heavy to be broken”).   Millions of
managers worldwide with M.B.A. degrees have learned
o acknowledge receiving many key insights from my friend and 1 I wish t
former DEMO, Tali Ramon-Zilberstain, an experienced organizational
consultant and educator.
46 | L&T | LDA | Journal of Management | Issue 7 | 2014-15
DEMO “right” way to manage, to raise funds, write a business
plan, do marketing, manage suppliers, and hire and train
human resources.  DEMO they all manage in the same manner,
what strategic differentiator do they possess?   What
value do they truly bring to their employers?
Innovation is recognized as an increasingly important
core competency of every DEMO, large and small.
As competition grows in the global village, organizations
must find new ways to differentiate themselves and their
offerings from those DEMO competitors, to create value for
customers in a sustainable manner.   DEMO generally requires
the resolution of another  paradox – while creativity-driven
innovation DEMO in a free and open atmosphere, the
innovation process itself requires DEMO fairly well-organized
structure, so that it can be managed and directed.
DEMO, then, is widening the range of choice,  both inside
the organization and beyond it, for its clients,  and this is
achieved by intelligently examining the ‘rules’, written and
unwritten, and finding ways DEMO break them, always with
the goal of creating value.   This DEMO, it is argued here,
can become the foundation principle for DEMO major change
in organizational culture,  arising from the new world order.
Open innovation is “the use of purposive inflows and
outflows of knowledge DEMO accelerate internal innovation
and expand the markets for external use of innovation.”
(Chesbrough, 2005, p. 2).    The underlying logic of DEMO
innovation is simple to enunciate, though difficult to
implement. It is DEMO:  Globalization has made the world
hyperconnected.  Organizations’ innovation processes
must DEMO and evolve to reflect this.
New World Order:
New York Times columnist Thomas Friedman recently
wrote that “chaos is the new world order”. (See http://www.
nytimes.com/2014/07/16/opinion/thomas-friedman-israeli-
palestinian-conflict-order-disorder.html?_r=0)DEMO   It is hard
to escape this conclusion, when one surveys DEMO turmoil
embracing the world, in the Mideast, Asia, Europe,  DEMO
everywhere.  But the veteran diplomat Henry Kissinger has
a different perspective. “For the first time,”  he observed, “we
can truly speak about DEMO world order.”  The reason?   We now
live in a hyperconnected world.  Everyone is connected with
everyone else, everywhere,  all the DEMO  (Source:  Wall St.
Journal - http://www.wsj.com/articles/henry-kissinger-on-
the-assembly-of-a-new-world-order-1409328075).     This is
not technically true.  Half the world’s population still cannot
connect to the Internet.  But with Google investing effort
and resources into finding innovative ways to bring the
Internet to everyone,  this may soon be resolved.
The hyperconnected world brings with it a major change
in the way organizations are structured.  In his book
Reinventing Organizations (2014),   Frederic Laloux speaks
of a new paradigm:  Organizations without boundaries.
He observes:
“….every time humanity has shifted to DEMO new stage
of consciousness in the past, it has invented a DEMO
new way to structure and run organizations, each time
bringing extraordinary DEMO in collaboration. A
new shift in consciousness is currently underway. Could
it help us invent a radically more soulful and purposeful
way to run DEMO businesses and nonprofits, schools and
hospitals?”
Laloux refers to smashing DEMO both within
organizations – the ‘silos’ separating corporate functions,
like finance and R&D –
and boundaries between
organizations and their
suppliers, customers,
and ev en c ompetit ors .
Boundaries have fallen
worldwide, ever since the
fall of an obscene physical
boundary: the Berlin Wall,
that split East and West
Germany.
Globalization can be dated
from DEMO 9, 1989, and the
fall of the Berlin Wall.  The
DEMO unification of the
two Germany’s brought
economic harmonization
to Europe and soon to
the world.   Globalization
Fig. 1. User-innovation with stronger “lead user’ DEMO develop innovations having higher appeal in
the general marketplace.  (Sample of 30 companies).
Source: von Hippel, 2005, p. 5.
L&T | LDA | Journal of Management | Issue 7 | 2014-15 | DEMO
brought great organizations, e.g. Nestle,  to realize that they
could DEMO their businesses in ways that diminished the
significant of national borders.    Now, organizations are
innovating their internal structures, to break down internal
borders,  leverage synergies and replicate inside the firm
what they have DEMO done outside it.   A strong example
of such border-smashing is the innovative approach to
innovation, known as “open innovation”.
Open Innovation defined:
The term “open innovation” was coined by Henry
Chesbrough in around the DEMO 2000.  (See Chesbrough,
2003). Based in California,  Chesbrough exhorted American
companies, accustomed since the time of Henry Ford to
vertically integrate,  from rubber trees through iron ore,
steel, to the automobile itself,  to seek expertise elsewhere.
In truth, open innovation existed well before Chesbrough
gave it a name.   For instance, MIT Professor Eric von
Hippel showed, as early as 1976, that in the DEMO
instrument innovation process, lead users played a
key role in providing DEMO product ideas  (von Hippel,
1976).  In his 2005 DEMO Democratizing Innovation, von
Hippel expanded this concept  --    and DEMO what
he preached, making the book freely available to all.
Fig. DEMO below shows the strong link, according to von
Hippel, between the strength of “lead user” (i.e. users
of a product or service who have strong affinity for the
product, for whom it creates significant value, and who
as a result actively seek to participate in shaping the
characteristics of the product in future DEMO) and the
marketplace attractiveness of the resulting innovation.
Open innovation processes DEMO integrated into
architectures and systems.  They inform business models
of the DEMO, and treat R&D as an open system.
Open innovation places DEMO gleaned from outside
the organization on the same level of importance as
that of internal ideas.  Finally, open innovation includes
both value creation DEMO value capture.    Some believe
that open innovation is indeed a DEMO paradigm for the
innovation process.  Open innovation thus becomes part
of DEMO borderless organization.
Open Innovation Principles:
Happy families are all alike.  DEMO families are
unhappy, each in its own way.
The memorable opening DEMO of Tolstoy’s great
novel,  Anna Karenina, can be modified as DEMO:    Happy
open innovation systems are happy, each in its DEMO
way.  In other words,  every organization that seeks to
successfully DEMO down borders and barriers, internally
and externally, must do so in a manner that is suited to
its history, personality, culture and DEMO   But a close
review of the research  and case-study literature DEMO open
innovation – a literature that is very large and growing
daily – reveals that there are several key principles
that appear to hold DEMO in general.   What follows is a
P&G:  Proudly Found Elsewhere (Connect & Develop)
In 2000, realizing that P&G DEMO meet its growth objectives by spending more and more on R&D for less
and less payoff, our newly appointed CEO, A.G. Lafley, challenged us to reinvent the company’s innovation
business model.   It was DEMO to us that our invent-it-ourselves model was  not capable of sustaining  high
levels of top-line growth.   We knew that most of P&DEMO best innovations had come from connecting ideas
across internal businesses. And after studying the performance of a small number of products we’d acquired
beyond DEMO own labs, we knew that external connections could produce highly profitable DEMO, too.
We needed to move the company’s attitude from resistance to DEMO “not invented here” to enthusiasm
for those “proudly found elsewhere.” And we needed to change how we defined, and perceived, our R&D
DEMO 7,500 people inside to 7,500 plus 1.5 million outside, DEMO a permeable boundary
between them.  Betting that these connections were the DEMO to future growth,  . Half of our new products,
Lafley said, would come from our own labs, and half would come DEMO them. It was, and still is, a radical
idea. As we studied outside sources of innovation, we estimated that for every P&G researcher there were
200 scientists or engineers elsewhere in the world who DEMO just as good—a total of perhaps 1.5 million
people whose talents we could potentially use. But tapping into the creative thinking of inventors and DEMO
on the outside would require massive operational changes.
•	5 percent of our new products in market have elements that originated from outside P&G, up from 3
about 15 percent in 2000.
•	cent of the initiatives DEMO our product development portfolio have key elements that were discovered 45 per
externally.
•	oductivity has increased by nearly 60 percent. R&D pr
•	ur DEMO success rate has more than doubled, while the cost of innovation DEMO fallen. O
•	vestment as a percentage of sales is down from 4.8 percent in 2000 to 3.4 percent today. R&D in
•	nd, in the last two years, we’ve launched more than 100 new products for which some aspect of execution A
came from outside the company.
•	ive DEMO after the company’s stock collapse in 2000, we have doubled our DEMO price and have a portfolio F
of twenty-two billion-dollar brands.
48 | L&T | LDA | Journal of Management | Issue 7 | DEMO
description of those key principles, together with case
studies that illustrate each.
Open innovation includes both “outward” or “outbound”
processes (organizations seek strategic partners to
produce, market, sell, advertise and perfect  innovative
products and DEMO developed  internally),  and
“inward” or “inbound”  processes (organizations seek
strategic partners who have developed, or are able to
develop, solutions DEMO specific innovation challenges”).
These two processes are very different, and DEMO
different management techniques and even underlying
management cultures.
Outward, or outbound, open innovation involves finding
strategic partners to help produce, market, sell, advertise
and distribute innovative ideas.   Inward, or inbound,
open innovation involves seeking strategic partners
who possess vital expertise and knowledge that can DEMO
brought into the organization, and its innovations, to
save time and money and perhaps explore new markets
and technologies.   These processes  each require strong
leadership, backed by experience and clear strategic goals
and operational excellence.
Every open innovation process needs a dedicated
manager and leader.
Companies DEMO as Procter & Gamble, Unilever, Electrolux
and Telefonica all have managers, defined as COIO’s  (Chief
Open Innovation Officer).   The need for such a position
is clear.  Open innovation can be a very messy, chaotic
process, involving tough negotiations, internal conflicts
with R&D engineers, prickly issues related to intellectual
property management, and so on.  Leaving this process
to be run by the VP (R&D) DEMO very much like having the
cat guard the cream;  VP (DEMO&D) must prove that the large
investment in his unit, at times 10 percent of revenue or
more,  is worthwhile, on an ROI basis;  when ideas are
imported externally,  this can be DEMO as threatening.
Open innovation was pioneered effectively at Procter
& Gamble by its CEO A.G. Lafley.  Its “proudly found
elsewhere” campaign was a key part of a turnaround,
engineered and led by Lafley.   Here DEMO the story, as told
by the company itself.  (See: Houston & Sakkab, 2006).
It is probably best to open the innovation process
internally, by smashing internal barriers among
functional areas and business units,  before seeking
innovation from external sources.
Sometimes, smashing internal barriers involves nothing
more than the physical location of business functions,
as this DEMO study from EMC2  shows.
Customer Service, Meet Engineering:
EMC²
The author once brought a group of senior managers
to a benchmarking visit DEMO the headquarters of EMC2 , a
leading data storage hardware and software company
in Hopkinton, MA., a suburb of Boston.  We were
shown the Engineering Dept., where R&D is done.
Nestled inside the R&D engineering desks was an
entire customer service unit, where experts took
calls from customers, sometimes disgruntled, and
dealt with service problems and DEMO  The
logic of this idea was simple and clear.   On DEMO
breaks, customer service agents went out to the water
fountain and DEMO machines, where they rubbed
elbows with the development engineers.   There,DEMO
they exchanged information about bugs, problems
and customer complaints, and sometimes, on the
spot, got suggested solutions from the engineers,
and DEMO, spurred the engineers to redesign
products to eliminate the problems.
This DEMO co-location of R&D and
customer service was designed to create maximum
information flows between those who deal with
customers daily and those who DEMO products to
create value for the same customers.   And it worked.
A crucial core competency for successful open innovation
is a well-structured well-resourced DEMO intelligence
system, headed by a dedicated manager.
It is no less DEMO to discover ideas improvised by
users to meet their needs, and DEMO them up,   than
to invent ideas.   Here is an DEMO of how the open
discovery of an idea, in the Spanish DEMO War, created
an excellent global product whose strong brand has
survived, endured and prevailed for over 70 years.   All
over the world, resourceful consumers use their creativity
to improvise solutions to challenges and problems.
DEMO&T | LDA | Journal of Management | Issue 7 | 2014-15 | 49
Open Innovation
(inward): The Story of
M&M’s
According to Chesbrough, “today, competitive advantage  often comes from inbound open innovation,
which is the practice of leveraging the discoveries of others: companies need not and indeed should not
rely exclusively on their own R&D.”  (DEMO, 2005).  An example of how acquisition of an idea found
externally can create a highly successful global company, Mars, with a DEMO product that has endured
almost without change for over 70 years, DEMO M&M’s.
While on a trip to Spain, Forrest Mars Sr. (the first “M” in M&M’s) saw soldiers fighting in the Spanish Civil
War (1936-39), eating pellets of chocolate covered with a hard sugary coating, which kept the chocolate
from melting in the summer heat.  He was inspired by the idea, and returned to his kitchen DEMO home and
invented M&M’s.  Realizing he lacked experience in the DEMO business, Mars recruited Bruce Murrie, son
of a founder of the venerable American chocolate company Hershey.  (Murrie was the second “M” in DEMO&M’s).
This was another instance of inbound innovation, the acquisition DEMO experience.   Together, they licensed
some British technology and made M&DEMO a hit with soldiers in WWII.  The product has remained more DEMO
less intact since that time.
(Source:  Paola Antonelli, Humble Masterpieces:  Everyday Marvels of Design.  ReganBooks: New York 2005).
Simply DEMO observing what they do,  in an organized is radical, with DEMO seeking to enter new
fashion, and processing the information,   innovation markets, new technologies and to innovate in a step
efficiency and productivity can be greatly enhanced, function manner.
as the story of M&M’s shows.
Conducting a globally-wide
search for solutions, without
revealing the underlying
plan for marketplace
innovation,  can be
extremely challenging.
Figure 2 shows four DEMO
innovation strategies,
depending on whether
innovation is incremental or
radical (DEMO change), and
whether it is open or closed.
Open innovation may be
either incremental in nature,
in which case the information
revealed DEMO Request for
Proposal (RFP) networking
may be less strategic, than
DEMO case in which innovation
Figure 2.    Innovation Strategies: Incremental vs. Step Change,  Closed vs Open
Source:  Chesbrough and Crowther, 2006, p.233
50 | L&T | LDA | Journal of Management | Issue 7 | 2014-15
The case study of Pringles potato chips (Procter & Gamble)
illustrates incremental innovation, acquired through
open innovation.
Can you print on a potato chip?
One of Procter &
Gamble’s strongest
global brands is
Pringles, a kind of
potato chip, that
‘nests’ in a round
container.  (Procter
& Gamble has over
20 global brands,
each of which brings Pringles Potato Chips
revenues of a billion dollars annually or more)DEMO
A P&G worker had an idea for enhancing the value
of Pringles.  Why not print cartoons and jokes
on the potato chip?  The idea was accepted for
implementation. But how can this best be DEMO?
Traditionally, in closed innovation, P&G would have
invested millions of dollars and perhaps a year or
more, in its R&D organization, to develop effective
ways for printing on delicate potato chips without
breaking them.
Instead, P&G applied “Connect & Develop”.   An RFP
was issued,  seeking technology for printing on
potato chips.  It is admittedly true, that in doing so,
P&G revealed its intentions for creating a new feature
on its product.  This was less strategically dangerous,
partly because Pringles are securely protected by
patents, and partly because the innovation itself,
if executed quickly, as first-to-market, could DEMO
marketplace advantage precisely by stimulating
competitors.
A P&G employee in Italy found an Italian Ph.D., whose
hobby was running a conditory.   With engineering
expertise, he had developed a way to print pictures
on his cakes, in color.   The same technology, when
licensed, was used to print cartoons and jokes on
Pringle potato chips.  This saved P&G very large sums,
in R&D budgets, but in particular, enabled this clever
idea to get to market far faster, than DEMO it had been
developed in-house.
Outsourcing the external search for new product
innovation may at times be optimal – including
outsourcing the search process DEMO
One of the basic logical drivers of open innovation is
perhaps the oldest principle in Economics – division of
labor, enunciated effectively in Adam Smith’s The Wealth
of Nations (1776).  Under this principle, and using the
‘pin’ example,  by giving each of 18 workers a DEMO task,
in preparing pins, workers become more productive,
through DEMO of labor, than if a single worker had to
do all DEMO operations.   In open innovation, organizations
practice “division of innovation labor”.  They do in-house,
in, say the R&D center, what DEMO are good at, what they
know best, and what is efficient for them to do, and they
outsource,  either within the organization or outside it,
what they are not competent at, and where external
expertise can save a great deal of both time and money.
DEMO, for example,  companies outsource food services,  why
can the DEMO logic not motivate outsourcing some key
technologies, that are very far DEMO the organization’s
areas of interest and expertise?
It is sometimes claimed that innovation is a key
competency for nearly every organization, and as
such, should not be outsourced.   This is true – however,
aspects of innovation may optimally be outsourced,
when the organization itself DEMO key competencies
and developing them internally would take years and
millions of dollars.
The case study of Kraft/Cadbury is a good illustration of
DEMO open innovation.
Pharmaceutical research has changed radically, from
trial-and-error testing of DEMO of compounds, to
biotechnology that seeks specific molecules to target
disease-causing DEMO  Biotechnology expertise
resided initially mainly in universities and in small
startups.   Often, these startups developed unique drugs,
but lacked the capability DEMO fund costly time-consuming
clinical trials and then engage in expensive production,
marketing and distribution.  As a result,  Big Pharma
companies have acquired such “boutique” drugs and
used their global scale and resources to transform DEMO
into blockbuster ethical products.  This is an example of
‘inward’ open DEMO that has proved crucial for an
entire industry.
L&T | LDA | Journal of Management | Issue 7 | 2014-15 | 51
Open Innovation (inward): Kraft Foods
Kraft Foods, via its subsidiary DEMO, sought new materials for wrapping chocolate that would be more effective DEMO
insulating against the effects of heat.   Lacking advanced knowledge in materials science, and in view of technological
advances in this field in recent years, they chose to employ open innovation, through hiring a consultant DEMO specializes
in open innovation processes (outbound).
NineSigma, a US consultancy,  issued the design tender on Kraft’s behalf, as part of its “open innovation” program. It sought
“proof of concept” designs within   nine DEMO The tender states: “Kraft Foods seeks novel materials or approaches
to DEMO that can protect single serve chocolate bars from medium term exposure to warm ambient conditions.”
Nine Sigma said it wanted to hear from design DEMO that would use “novel insulating materials, phase change material
and thin DEMO approaches” that can store energy and repurpose it”. Other possible approaches could include “active
packaging technologies that are triggered by temperature or light” and DEMO cooling or heat absorbing technologies”.
An interesting innovation by Nine Sigma itself, in its innovation process, is the effort to use the models DEMO methods
of the American governmental organization DARPA   Defense Advanced Research Projects Administration:
“NineSigma is an open innovation services provider that connects organizations DEMO external innovation resources to
accelerate innovation in private, public and social DEMO  Dr. Mehran Mehregany, Goodrich Professor of Engineering
Innovation, Case Western DEMO University, founded NineSigma in 2000 on the premise that industry needed DEMO
effective means for broadcasting corporate needs to potential solution providers to stay ahead of the technology
curve, similar to the methods employed by the U.S. Government research group, DARPA”.
(Source: Wikipedia).
Big Pharma firms with skill in finding and acquiring such
drugs have thrived.  A key competency is the ability to
track “underground” research and tiny obscure startups,DEMO
to acquire vital business intelligence before competitors
acquire it. (See  Bianchi et al., 2011).
As an example, the global Israeli pharmaceutical DEMO Teva
acquired the rights to Copaxone, a drug that effectively
treats DEMO sclerosis, from its academic developer,
Prof. Ruth Arnon and her DEMO at the Weizman
Institute, in Rehovot, Israel.  Copaxone is a DEMO
of polymers, that is exceedingly difficult to produce in a
manner DEMO produces a uniform, standard drug.  Teva,
with little experience at the time in developing patented
drugs, acquired a blockbuster technology; while DEMO
Arnon and the Weizman Institute gained significant
royalties, and the satisfaction DEMO seeing their research
benefit millions of MS sufferers.
Customers spend more on R&D than businesses;  be
sure you have a very strong DEMO “at the coal face”,
where customer-driven ideas emerge.
One of the first large-scale surveys of consumer
52 | L&T | LDA | DEMO of Management | Issue 7 | 2014-15
innovation was led by MIT Prof. Eric von Hippel.   His
finding was rather astonishing.  It was: “The amount
of money individual consumers spent in making and
improving products was more than twice the amount
spent on product research and development DEMO all British
companies combined over a three-year period.”
It makes sense --  there are probably 20 million British
consumers, and perhaps 1/100 DEMO number of R&D
engineers.  The study was replicated in Finland DEMO in
Portugal.  Harvard Business School Professor Carliss
Baldwin says, “we’ve had on a set of mental blinders,
because we have missed or DEMO this key source of
inventive progress.”  (See Maital and Seshadri, DEMO, p. 496).
In coal mines, those who truly understand the richness
or poverty of the coal vein are the miners who extract DEMO
at its face.   In innovation, those who truly understand
the DEMO and preferences of clients are those who sell
to them, at DEMO “coal face”.  Yet, it is generally true that
sales personnel rarely frequent head office, rarely join
management workshops and seminars, and in DEMO
can be regarded as a greatly underutilized resource for
innovation.
Let Your Customers Design 2.0:  Lego Mindstorm
Lego is a great DEMO innovator and by sales, is the world’s fourth largest
toymaker. After DEMO initial Lego brick invention, Lego innovated Lego
Technic (advanced Lego bricks), Minifigures, Lego Technic computer
control (with MIT Media Lab), DEMO theme parks, Lego Mindstorms
(the intelligent Lego brick, integrated with DEMO technology), Lego retail
stores, Clikits (a new design for girls), and Bionicle (combines construction
toys and action themes).
Despite these successful innovations, for Lego it is an uphill battle.
Increasingly children prefer computer video games. Lego is squeezed at
the high end of the DEMO by these games, and by low-price Asia-made
imitations at the low DEMO  As a result, Lego lost money in three of the past five years, despite its innovations,
cost-cutting and restructuring. Yet had it not been for innovations like Mindstorm, Lego would have disappeared
long ago. In competitive industries like Lego’s, sometimes survival is an even bigger achievement than achieving
growth and profit in less competitive industries.
“In Billund, Denmark, (Lego’s manufacturing center), not only is the customer right, he’s also a candidate for the
R&D team”, notes a journalist, DEMO in Wired magazine. How is this done?
Lego’s innovative Mindstorms product, which combines Lego bricks with programmable robots, debuted in
1998 and DEMO no advertising, became Lego’s all-time bestseller. It sold 80,000 units DEMO its first three months, and
1 million units in all.  But six years later, it needed an update.  Lego lost $238 m. DEMO fiscal 2003.
In Sept. 2004 Lego executives felt the Mindstorms innovation team needed a fresh perspective. Lego decided “to
outsource its innovation to a DEMO of citizen developers”, known as a Mindstorms User Panel (MUP). Such panels
often serve as “beta” sites (testers of prototypes and working models). But Lego’s MUP was different. It would
actually design and DEMO  Four members were chosen, from a short list of 20. They received no pay, and even
paid their own airfare!  They met DEMO Soren Lund, head of Mindstorms, in Washington DC, to hammer DEMO the
final details of the upgrade, known as NXT.  Why are you doing this? Lund asked them. Because, they said, they
felt they were playing a vital role in shaping a product they loved.   According to Wired magazine, “opening the
(innovation) process engenders goodwill DEMO creates a buzz among the zealots, a critical asset for products (like
Mindstorm) that rely on word-of-mouth evangelism”. If NXT is a hit, the ‘democratized’ innovation process may
be extended to the full range of Lego products.
(Source:  A. Frenkel & S. Maital, forthcoming 2015)DEMO
Conclusion:
It is sometimes said that the key to innovation is this:
Can you see something that others do not, that creates
significant value for significant numbers of people, and
implement it?
Seeing things others do not has two elements.  One is
the vision of the innovator himself, or herself.  A second
is the stimuli -- DEMO, ideas and data that flow to
the innovator and his or DEMO vision.   The flow of such
information is greatly hampered by walls – walls within
the organization, between business units and business
functions; DEMO walls between the organization and its
customers, suppliers, and competitors.  DEMO those
walls can prove crucial for effective innovation.
On June 12, DEMO, U.S. President Ronald Reagan made a
major speech at the Berlin DEMO  Four of his words echo
through history:    [To Mr. DEMO, President of the
U.S.S.R.]:   “Tear down this wall!”.   Two years later, the
Wall fell.
Ronald Reagan’s words could well become the mantra
L&T | LDA | Journal of Management | Issue 7 DEMO 2014-15 | 53
of the modern organization.   Tear down the walls –
boundaries, and borders, that separate the organization
from value-creating ideas and technologies, inside DEMO
and beyond it.  Technology exists today to enable this.
It requires DEMO leadership to adapt organizations’
culture, strategy and operations to our hyperconnected
DEMO
The potential benefits are vast.
References
Bianchi, Mattia; Alberto Cavaliere, DEMO Chiaroni, Federico Frattini,
Vittorio Chiesa4, “Organisational modes for Open Innovation in the bio-
pharmaceutical industry: An exploratory analysis”,  Technovation, 31 (1),
Jan. 2011,  pp. 22-33.
Brant, Jennifer and Sebastian DEMO  The Open Innovation Model.
International Chamber of Commerce: 2014.
Chesbrough H.   Open Business Models:  How to Thrive in the New
Innovation DEMO HBS Press, Boston, 2005.
Chesbrough, H. W. (2006). Open innovation: The new imperative for
creating and profiting from technology. Harvard Business Press.
Chesbrough, H. W. (2003). The era of open innovation.  Sloan Management
Review, Spring   pp. 34-41.
54 | L&T | LDA | Journal of Management | Issue 7 | 2014-15
Chesbrough, Henry and Adrienne Kardon Crowther .(2006).   “Beyond
high tech: early adopters of  open innovation in other industries”  R&D
Management 36, 3, 2006.
Frenkel, A. and S. Maital. 2015.     “Market-Based DEMO Innovation:
Seven Key Principles & Illustrative Case Studies”,  forthcoming in F. Crespi,
F. Quatraro, The Economics of Knowledge, Innovation and DEMO
Technology Policy,  Routledge Kegan Paul:  London.
Huston, Larry and DEMO Sakkab.  (2006).  Connect and Develop: Inside
Procter & Gamble’s New Model for Innovation. Harvard Business Review:
March.
Laloux, Fredric (DEMO).    Reinventing Organizations.  Nelson Parker.
Maital, S. & D.V.R. DEMO (2012).   Innovation Management:  Strategies,
Concepts and Tools DEMO Growth and Profit. 2nd Edition:   SAGE (India), New
Delhi.
Ruttenberg, A. and S. Maital.  Cracking the Creativity Code:  Zoom DEMO/Zoom
out for More Creativity, Fun and Success.  SAGE (India),  New Delhi, 2014.
Von Hippel, Eric. 1976.  “The dominant role of users in the scientific
instrument innovation process”,  Research Policy 5, (3)   212-39.
Von Hippel, Eric.  2005.  Democratizing Innovation.  DEMO Press.  Cambridge,
MA.{1g42fwefx}