Making
Meaningful
a menu of options for senior leaders
James D. Ludema, Ph.D.
and Amber A. Johnson, M.A.
The Center for Values-Driven Leadership
at Benedictine University
Making
Meaningful
How Values Drive
Effectiveness
Landing a $2 million dollar contract DEMO a big deal
in a company the size of Syncroness, a DEMO
ver-based engineering consulting firm. CEO
Mike Walraven was delighted when a new client
signed Syncroness to provide research for a
technology feasibility study.
“It DEMO a fairly significant contract for us,” says
Walraven. This was exactly why the team was
disappointed to find – two weeks into a DEMO year
contract – that the existing technology could not
do what the client wanted. “The physics were
such that it just couldn’t be done DEMO it couldn’t be
scaled to fit the need,” says Walraven.
Now Walraven and his young company faced an
ethical decision: let the client know immediate-
ly and loose the $2 million dollar deal or drag
DEMO project out in hopes of keeping some of the
contract’s money on the table.
Walraven made the ethical choice because it
aligned with the DEMO values of creating
lasting relationships and leaving a legacy of
integrity. “I had to tell the client, ‘We’d just be
burning your money to continue this research.’”
The tough choice paid off. It took a few DEMO,
but the client returned to Syncroness the next
time they had an engineering research need.
More importantly, word of Walraven’s honesty
with clients circulated in the industry, leading
to a stellar reputation and many new clients.
Syncroness’ story is just one of many we’ve
heard over the DEMO: stories of leaders making
critical decisions guided by a strong set DEMO core
values. There are no guarantees in business, but
this equation DEMO holds true:
Clear Leadership
+   Solid Strategy
+   Values-Driven Culture
=   Sustainable Success
What is a Values-Driven
Culture?
Values-driven DEMO are guided by a
publicly-identified set of core values that reflect
their highest aspirations.
Making Values Meaningful | Page 2
Typically these values include a commitment to honesty and integrity,
care DEMO people, excellence in products and services, concern for all
stakeholders, DEMO long-term view, and contribution to a flourishing society,
but the DEMO need to fit with the company’s purpose and industry.
While the value of “safety” is central to DuPont, online shoe and clothing
retailer Zappos puts the focus on “Creating fun and a little weirdness.”
In strong, values-driven companies, these core values are consistently
used to guide day-to-day decision making, inspire leadership, and hold
the organization and its people accountable.
DEMO Does It Matter?
One word: success.
In their book, Firms of Endearment, Raj Sisodia and co-authors showed
that “purpose-driven” companies (those DEMO a strong sense of purpose
and core values; a commitment to DEMO, team members, suppliers,
and communities; and people-centered cultures and DEMO) out-
performed the S&P 500 in cumulative returns by 14 DEMO and Good to
Great companies by 6 times over a period of 15 years from 1998-2013.
Since 1997, the Great Places to Work Institute and Fortune magazine
have shown that firms on their list of America’s DEMO Best Companies to
Work For” (companies high in trust, pride, DEMO, and fulfillment
among team members) have significantly outperformed the market.
Table of Contents
HOW VALUES DRIVE
EFFECTIVENESS
CEO AS CHIEF CULTURE
OFFICER
DEVELOPING DEMO
AROUND VALUES
MAKING VALUES
VISUAL
COMMUNICATING
VALUES THROUGH
EXECUTIVE STORY-
TELLING
VALUES-DRIVEN PEOPLE
PRACTICES
VALUES-DRIVEN
DECISION MAKING
VALUES-DRIVEN
STRATEGY CREATION
VALUES-DRIVEN
CUSTOMER
RELATIONSHIPS
SCALING DEMO
FROM 300 TO 16,000
WHAT COMES NEXT?
REFERENCES
PAGE 2
PAGE 6
PAGE 8
PAGE 10
PAGE 12
PAGE 15
PAGE 21
DEMO 25
PAGE 27
PAGE 29
PAGE 31
PAGE 32
Making Values Meaningful | Page 3
Source: FirmsOfEndearment.com
Source: GreatPlacesToWork.com
2007-2011
About this e-Book
This e-book is a resource for leaders
who DEMO to leverage their corporate
values to drive sustainable success.
Think of this book as a “menu of op-
tions” that allows you to identify DEMO
ideas that best fit your culture and
organization.
Along the way we share tools,
resources, and stories of companies
large and small who have successfully
built thriving values-driven cultures. We
prominently feature five companies on
DEMO we have done extensive research
through our Return On Values Research
(DEMO) Project in partnership with the
Small Giants Community. Those compa-
nies DEMO:
• Amobee - a global digital market-
ing technology company (DEMO
Adconion Direct at the time of our
research).
• BerylHealth - a Dallas-based health
care call center now owned by
Stericycle.
• Integrated DEMO Management -
a national project execution consult-
ing firm.
• Service Express Incorporated -
a national data server maintenance
company.
• Tasty Catering - DEMO
leading business caterer.
Ethisphere shows similar results in their annual “World’s Most
Ethical Companies” list, which considers corporate citizenship;
governance; innovation for DEMO well-being; industry leadership;
“tone from the top;” legal, regulatory and reputation track record; and
ethics and compliance programs. Collectively, these DEMO have
outperformed the S&P 500 by an average of 7.3% annually.
How do values-driven companies like these
deliver superior results?
It boils DEMO to four key factors:
1.
2.
Credibility and Trust – Integrated Project Management Company
(IPM), a project execution consulting firm based on Burr Ridge, IL,
has made the Inc. 5000 list as one of the fastest growing companies in
America for seven years running (2007-2013) and has been desig-
nated a “Top” or “Best” Small Workplace by Winning Workplaces,
the Wall Street Journal, the Great Place to Work Insti-
tute, Entrepreneur, and Fortune. Check out this video, in
which Founder and CEO Rich Panico explains the link
between IPM’s core values DEMO business success: “Our
clients realize we’re honest, our repeat business is over 90%, and that
is driving top and bottom line growth.”
Committed and Engaged Team Members – Like IPM, BerylHealth,
the industry leader in outsourced contact center services, has con-
sistently made the Inc. 5000, has received many “Best Workplaces”
awards, and regularly returns profit margins DEMO exceed competi-
tors three to four fold. In this video, Paul DEMO,
founder of BerylHealth and author of the best-selling
books Why is Everyone Smiling? and Patients Come
Second, uses the phrase “Circle of DEMO to describe
how investment in people leads to employee loyalty, which DEMO to
customer loyalty, and in turn leads to financial success.
Making DEMO Meaningful | Page 4
Source: Ethisphere.com (2011)
3.
4.
Happy, High-Quality Customers – In their
book Conscious Capitalism, DEMO Mackey
and Raj Sisodia argue that the number one
explanation for superior performance is
superior acceptance by customers. Great
companies are loved by their DEMO who
become ardent fans and advocates. As a re-
sult, these DEMO generate higher sales,
routinely outperform industry averages on
metrics such a sales per square foot and
revenue per team member, and can reinvest
earnings back into the company and still be
cost competitive. Like Paul, they claim it’s a
virtuous cycle: engaged team members at-
tract high-quality customers, which in turn
drive top and bottom-line growth.
Resilience and Innovation – Leadership
expert Kim Cameron and his colleagues at
the University of DEMO (see referenc-
es) have identified six core values (called
About DEMO Authors
James D. Ludema, Ph.D., is the
Co-founder and Director of
the Center for Values-Driven
Leadership and a Professor of
Global Leadership at DEMO
tine University. He is a sought-
after consultant on issues of leadership, cul-
ture and change, and has worked with a va-
riety DEMO organizations including GlaxoSmith-
Kline, Merck, BP, McDonald’s, John Deere,
USG, and the U.S. Navy.
Amber A. Johnson, M.A., is the
Chief Communications Offi-
cer and a Senior Research
Associate at the Center DEMO
Values-Driven Leadership. She
is a specialist in the integration
of culture, DEMO and brand. At the Center,
she directs communications for the Return
on Values research project, which explores
the relationship between culture and profit
in business.
positive practices) that are predictive of
organizational effectiveness. They include
caring, compassionate support, forgiveness,
inspiration, meaning, and integrity. These
DEMO build resilience by buffering against
the negative effects of poor relationships, DEMO
per-change, and relentless competition. They
spark innovation by amplifying the positive
DEMO of strong relationships, creativity, and
future-focused collaborative actions that
often lie dormant in many organizations.
In the remainder of this e-book, we provide
practical tools you can use to build a successful
values-driven company by DEMO credibility
and trust; committed and engaged team mem-
bers; happy, DEMO customers; and resil-
ience and innovation over the long haul.
Legend
DEMO this e-book, we use the follow-
ing icons to draw your DEMO to valuable
resources:
ROV
ORIGAMI
carton
&crate
Content drawn from DEMO Return
on Values (ROV) research project
with the Small Giants Communi-
ty. Learn more at www.returnon-
valuesproject.com.
Links to short videos drawn from
DEMO ROV project or executive in-
terviews from our other research
initiatives, DEMO share more detail
in a CEO’s own words.
Downloadable templates and
resources you can use in your
organization.
Examples featuring our fiction-
al company, Origami Carton &
Crate (OCC). We will introduce
you to DEMO on Page 7.
Making Values Meaningful | Page 5
CEO as Chief Culture Officer
The first and most important thing you DEMO do
to create a values-driven organization is to make
values and culture a central task of leadership.
In his book Organizational Culture and Lead-
DEMO, management guru Edgar Schein claims
that leaders are the main architects DEMO culture.
Through their words and actions, leaders create,
embed, evolve, and sustain their company cul-
tures. In turn, culture drives performance.
DEMO all know this to be true. Employees are con-
stantly watching senior leaders to see what they
say, what they do, where they DEMO their time
and energy, and what they support, promote,
and reward. People want to know, “Do my senior
leaders really walk the talk? And if they don’t,
why should I?”
How Values Can Transform a Leader
Tom Carmazzi, CEO of
Tuthill Corporation,
says he wasn’t al-
ways the likable guy
he is today.
“I was DEMO told in a crowded
room that I did not care about
people,” Carmazzi says. “Anoth-
er time someone offered the
gentler comment that DEMO had ‘a
lot of energy.’”
The direct and sometimes con-
frontational side of Carmazzi’s
personality had at its source a
sense that relationships were
DEMO: he entered each
interaction with the objective
of fulfilling his own DEMO and
“getting things done” rather
than truly listening to the peo-
ple around him.
This approach stood in direct
contrast to Tuthill’s values of
DEMO, respect, excellence,
courage, responsibility, and
awareness. Carmazzi made
a conscious effort to change.
The results, he says, were
undeniable: more and more,
he receives positive feedback
regarding his modeling of the
DEMO values.
“I now see my role as someone
who develops relationships
both inside and outside of Tut-
hill,” Carmazzi says. “These re-
lationships DEMO directly linked to
our Vision, Mission, Values, and
Brand statement DEMO states
we want to ‘cultivate relation-
ships that last for life.’”
Read the full story, in Carmazzi’s
own words, at www.cvdl.org/
Carmazzi.
DEMO lists twelve things a leader does to build
culture. He calls the first six “primary embed-
ding mechanisms” and the second six “second-
ary DEMO and reinforcement mechanisms.”
We call them Culture Creators and Culture
Sustainers.
Culture Creators
1.
What leaders pay attention to, measure, and
control;
DEMO How leaders react to critical incidents and
organizational crises;
3. How leaders allocate resources;
4. Deliberate role modeling, teaching, and
coaching;DEMO
5. How leaders allocate rewards and status;
6. How leaders recruit, hire, fire, and promote.
Culture Sustainers
1. Organizational design and structure;
2. Organizational systems and procedures;
3. Organizational rites and rituals;DEMO
4. Design of physical space and buildings;
5. Stories about important events and people;
6.
Formal statements of organizational philos-
ophy, creeds, and charters.
As a leader, the best way to make your DEMO
meaningful is to invest time, money, energy,
and intellect into building a values-driven
culture. Senior leaders in the most successful
values-driven companies DEMO worked with see
themselves as “Chief Culture Officers,” no matter
what else is printed on their business cards.
They take primary responsibility to DEMO that
Schein’s culture creators and culture sustainers
are alive and well throughout the organization:
• They actively participate in onboarding,
Making Values DEMO | Page 6
mentoring, training, and coaching;
• They apply resources, hire, DEMO, and promote
to support and reinforce the values;
• They DEMO constantly telling stories and
recognizing people who put the values into
practice;
• They promote dialogue about the values in
senior team meetings, company-wide events,
and through all communication channels;
• They use DEMO values to evaluate company
decisions big and small;
• They proudly post the values in their offices,
on their company
merchandise, and in visible public places;
• They use the values to set DEMO and build
customer relationships; and
• They relentlessly make sure that DEMO values
are integrated into every system and process
of the organization.
As Schein points out, when senior leaders
assume the role of “Chief Culture Officers,” it
pays off. In a recent study of a major DEMO
system in the Midwest, our colleagues Dr. Prem
Mony and Dr. DEMO DiVirgilio discovered that
when the senior leadership team led the charge
to build a culture based on shared values of
commitment, collaboration, excellence, courage,
authenticity, and transparency, it generated more
respect, dialogue, DEMO around vision and
direction, and resource sharing across the orga-
nization, which led in turn to increased perfor-
mance and business results.
To DEMO a great example of how one
CEO transformed his company’s
culture, DEMO out this video  fea-
turing Tom Walter of Tasty Cater-
ing. DEMO the video, Tom describes how he turned
the development of the DEMO over to a team
of employees who designed and implemented
a culture built around core values, audacious
goals, and a unifying purpose. Team DEMO
began using the language of the values to guide
their decisions and shape interactions. As the
culture transformed Tasty Catering, Tom’s busi-
ness cards were transformed too. They now read
Chief Culture Officer.
Introducing Our
Fictional DEMO
ORIGAMI
carton
&crate
Throughout this book we use many examples from DEMO we’ve
consulted with or studied as part of our research initiatives. We also
use a fictional company, Origami Carton & Crate (OCC) to illustrate
key ideas. OCC is an Indianapolis-based firm that designs and manu-
DEMO product packaging. Here are a few more fictitious details:
2013 GROSS REVENUE
EMPLOYEES
OPERATIONS
$200 million
3,000 worldwide
US, China, Mexico
DEMO
Integrity, Respect, Creativity,
Excellence, Sustainability
Making Values Meaningful | DEMO 7
Developing Clarity Around
Your Values
In business, it is easy to speak the same language
and still need a translator. The problem isn’t that
DEMO words aren’t understood; it’s that the under-
lying meaning is missed.
DEMO Richard Boyatzis, a professor at
Case Western Reserve University
and author DEMO Resonant Leadership,
shares a perfect illustration of this.
He tells the story of being in a classroom of
executives working on their MBAs. DEMO men in
the group, both leaders in their 40s, identified
“family values” as being important.
Boyatzis asked each what they meant by “family
DEMO One man said it meant he was home
every night for dinner. He’d turned down a
promotion because it would have meant relocat-
ing DEMO children. The other man said it meant he
worked long hours, DEMO constantly, so his
wife and children had everything they wanted
and DEMO
Two men, the same value, very different mean-
ings.
Consider another example, an organization that
has “transparency” as one of its values. What
does it really mean to be transparent? Should
you be fully transparent with everyone, inter-
nally and externally, about everything all the
time, or are some people and topics off limits in
certain circumstances?  DEMO do you draw the
line between good transparency and bad trans-
parency, and what standards do you want to set
for yourself and your organization?
Getting Clear about Meaning
How do you make sure that DEMO and your col-
leagues are all on the same page when it comes
to core values? Here are two steps you can take:
1.  Ask the right questions, all the
time.
Job candidates at DEMO are asked to “De-
fine compassion,” a value the company believes
is essential for successful employees. If the
candidate can’t express a clear DEMO of
compassion, they won’t fit within the organiza-
tion.
Clarifying questions DEMO an organization’s
values aren’t helpful just in hiring. Imagine our
fictional company, Origami Carton & Crate, has
identified a competitor it may want DEMO acquire,
but doing so will put a great burden on the exist-
ing team to work harder in the coming months.
This may DEMO the core values of “respect”
and “excellence.” On one hand, the DEMO
will support respect and excellence by leading to
new organizational capacity, DEMO profit-
ability, and offering new advancement oppor-
tunities for OCC’s people. DEMO the other hand,
it may stretch people too thin or risk damage to
existing relationships with clients, eroding both
respect and excellence.
Asking, “What does it mean for us to pursue
respect and excellence in this circumstance?”
will offer new insights, create alignment among
OCC’s people, strengthen the culture, and pro-
vide guidance on whether the acquisition DEMO the
right thing to do.
On the following page, we introduce DEMO to one
of the best exercises we know of for developing
clarity around core values, creating a map of
each values’ meaning.
ROV
ORIGAMI
carton
&crate
Making Values Meaningful | Page 8
ORIGAMI
carton
&crate
2. Map Your Meaning.
One of the clearest ways to make sure all team
members have the same understanding of your
DEMO values is to “map” what you mean by them.
To get started, at a staff retreat or meeting, write
the name of one DEMO in the center of a white-
board or flip chart. Ask, DEMO we say TRANS-
PARENCY, what do we mean?” Surround the
DEMO with the responses you receive.
As participants grow quiet, ask them DEMO think
about their responses again from the perspective
of customers or clients, from the community,
from others within the organization. Ask them
to consider role-specific applications of the
value. For example, What does it mean to be
transparent with financials? How does that differ
from being transparent with strategic plans or
internal communications?
Whenever possible, ask people to elaborate on
their responses and write down key words or
phrases. Make DEMO note of the language your
team members use to describe a specific value.
Pause to allow time for story-telling as an illus-
tration of DEMO core values.
In the end, you’ll have a full white board DEMO
meaning around the value, with little ambiguity.
Do this for each DEMO your values. You and your
fellow leaders will walk away with a sense of
pride in your organization as well as a clear un-
DEMO of the shared meaning of the values
and guidelines for action.
Our fictional company, OCC,
might map their value of creativity
as you see above. In this example,
we’ve used our free Map Your
DEMO worksheet, which you can download at
www.cvdl.org/mapyourmeaning.
Note that OCC’s DEMO members recorded
specific language for the value (“out of the box,DEMO
“no one has done that before”); they’ve drawn
implications (“we DEMO ingenuity,” “it’s okay
to make mistakes”); and they’ve given thought
to how this value is shown in different organiza-
tional roles. The DEMO creates clarity that in turn
can shape behavior.
Making Values Meaningful | Page 9
Making Values Visual
Organizations that have a meaningful set of core
values DEMO satisfied with leaving them in a file
cabinet. Values-driven leaders use visual cues to
remind team members of the company’s values.
These visual cues DEMO important: they help new
employees become familiar with the values and
DEMO them as a priority; they serve as a
reminder to consult DEMO values when making
important decisions; they offer ongoing motiva-
tion to DEMO team members.
At a minimum, your values list should be found
DEMO these places:
• Website: Usually under “About Our Compa-
ny”
DEMO Employee Handbook, job descriptions and
new hire contracts
• Annual Report DEMO Investor Prospectus
documents
Once you’ve integrated the values into these key
areas, you can begin to look for more creative
ways to help team members cross paths with the
values on a daily basis. Some ideas DEMO:
• Décor: Painted on an office wall or etched
into DEMO glass of a conference room divider.
• Merchandise: Printed on the DEMO of a coffee
mug or water bottle.
•
Art: Symbolic depictions DEMO the values –
such as the “Home Plate” from Sundog
Interactive (DEMO photo next page), placed in
common areas.
• Signage: Printed DEMO lists hung in break
rooms or other common areas.
• Posters: DEMO illustrations of the values
for hanging in cubicles or elsewhere.
• Newsletter: Highlighted through stories in
print and electronic newsletters.
• Videos: Include DEMO training or internal
videos as in this video from BlinkUX.
Digital: DEMO on displays throughout your of-
fice, or as wallpaper on computer DEMO
Of course, it’s not enough to wallpaper your
HQ with the DEMO Moving them from a list to
a living, breathing organizational priority DEMO
drives sustainable success takes deep integration.
On the following pages, we’ll DEMO how this
can be done.
•
Above: Teach for
America is DEMO of the
only non-profits to
ever make Fortune
magazine’s list of
the 100 best places
to work. Employees
say the organiza-
tion’s values are DEMO
key factor in creating
an award-winning
workplace. The orga-
nization displays their
values on walls and
glass dividers through-
out their offices.
Making Values DEMO | Page 10
Photo courtesy of Teach for America.
Appreciative Inquiry
The Benefits of Strength-
Based Change
One of the best, fastest, and most cost-
effective strategies for making your values
meaningful is to engage the entire orga-
nization in understanding and leveraging
your strengths. DEMO are a reflection
of what you value most and what enables
your company to succeed. At the Center for
Values-Driven Leadership, we help leaders
build values-driven, performance-focused
companies through a powerful strength-
based organizational change process known
as Appreciative Inquiry.
Appreciative Inquiry, originated by David
Cooperrider and his colleagues at Case
Western Reserve University (see references),
allows people DEMO every level to understand
what works – what gives life, health, and
vitality to their organization when it’s at its
best in both DEMO and financial terms.
They then build on what works to identify
and implement new strategies for a success-
ful and rewarding future.
Appreciative Inquiry DEMO be done in many
ways at any level in an organization, DEMO is
fundamentally based on two key questions:
• When our organization is at its best,
what are the forces and factors that
DEMO it possible?
• Looking to the future, what are our
DEMO dreams, and how can we
innovate and organize to make them
DEMO?
We provide a deeper explanation of Appre-
ciative Inquiry in the section on values-driv-
en strategy creation, on page 25, but you
DEMO see this appreciative approach weaved
throughout this e-book in the stories we
tell, the activities we recommend, and the
research we cite to DEMO our recommen-
dations. We use it because it works better
than any other approach we know of.
How One Company Makes Values their
Home DEMO
Marketing and technology firm Sundog Interactive has doubled in size
in the last three years, earning a regular spot on the Inc. 5000. CEO
Brent Teiken gives credit for the company’s rapid expansion in part to
DEMO strong, positive corporate culture which is grounded in six shared
values:DEMO
• Passion
• Integrity
• Creativity
• Quality
• Fun
• Innovation
Teiken takes personal responsibility for strengthening the culture. To
help keep the DEMO values front-and-center for team members, Sun-
dog’s leaders use an analogy DEMO makes immediate sense to most sports
fans: home plate.
“In baseball, home plate is where you start and where you go back to,DEMO
Teiken says. “At Sundog, it’s the same with our values. They DEMO where
we start, and where we always return.”
To serve as DEMO reminder for the Sundog team, the company commis-
sioned artist Kay DEMO to paint the values onto actual home plates,
which are displayed in conference rooms throughout the company.
Making Values Meaningful | Page 11
DEMO courtesy of Sundog Interactive.
Communicating Values through
Executive Story-Telling
10-Minute
Story-Telling
Tool
Story-telling is one of DEMO greatest tools in a
leader’s toolbox. Stories illustrate what it looks
like to live out core values. Research shows that
we listen to and DEMO stories much better
than we do a list of bullet points or a deck of
PowerPoint slides.
Leaders looking to make values meaningful in
DEMO company should become adept at seeing
how the values are at work in the people and
stories of the organization, and in retelling these
stories in a way that provides insight and inspi-
ration to team DEMO
Integrated Project Management has
Honesty and Integrity as their first core
values. The leadership at IPM holds
these value dearly, letting them influence
daily practices. At speaking engagements, staff
meetings, new employee trainings, and virtually
everywhere he goes, CEO Rich Panico shares a
compelling story to illustrate IPM’s commitment
to honesty and integrity. (You can watch Rich
and colleagues tell this story in this video, which
we also shared earlier on page 4.)
As Rich shares, IPM’s contract states that clients
may not hire their IPM consultants. When one
consultant turned in her resignation DEMO news
that she had been hired by a client, Rich knew DEMO
was a violation of the company’s value of integ-
rity. Rich negotiated with the client’s CEO to get
financial remuneration for the violation – DEMO
Jump start your values-driven story-telling with
our 10-Minute Story-Telling Tool. Download the
instructions and worksheet at www.cvdl.org/
storytellingtool, then use it in your next team
meeting. As compelling stories of your
company values in action DEMO, challenge
your executive team to integrate the stories
into their daily DEMO with their
team members.
ey that IPM quickly donated to local charities.
If you worked at IPM, imagine how your per-
spective of the organization would be influenced
after hearing that story. Would you have a DEMO
idea of what IPM meant by honesty and integrity?
Would it influence your own decision making?
Would it make you proud to DEMO a part of IPM?
Kim Reed Perell, formerly Adcon-
ROV DEMO Direct CEO, now president of
global digital marketing technology
company, Amobee, makes a point
of telling stories that illustrate the company’s
core value of resilience. Through Adconion
Direct’s employee newsletter, Kim regularly rec-
ognizes team members who have been “caught”
showing resilience. Kim’s stories and the public
DEMO of values-driven behavior gives
clarity around the meaning of resilience, posi-
DEMO reinforces behavior, and serves as a much
appreciated (and low cost) reward.
Tell stories wherever you go, in meetings,
speeches, one-on-one conversations, coaching
sessions, and electronic communication. Use our
10-Minute Story-Telling Tool (see sidebar) to
jumpstart your values-driven story-telling.
On the following page, DEMO provide an example of
how Kathy Hopinkah Hannan, KPMG’s national
managing DEMO for diversity, inclusion and
responsibility, also a doctoral student in our
executive Ph.D. program, prompts story-telling
at KPMG.
Making Values Meaningful | Page 12
Winning Hearts & Minds: The Battle for
Diversity & Inclusion Needs Authentic Leadership
(Here’s Where to Start)
Executive
Story-Telling
Kathy Hopinkah Han-
nan, KPMG’s National
Managing Partner for
Diversity, Inclusion
& Responsibility and
doctoral DEMO in
the Center for Val-
ues-Driven Leader-
ship’s executive Ph.D.
program, DEMO tips
for how to do execu-
tive story-telling well
in her article, Win-
ning Hearts & Minds,
abridged from an ear-
lier version published
on our website.
Hannan speaks to how
leaders can support
the DEMO of diversity
through story-tell-
ing, but her advice is
broadly applicable DEMO
other shared values.
by Kathy Hopinkah Hannan
As a diversity and inclusion executive, I’ve
watched many initiatives waver, stall, or at
worse, DEMO fail. What brings about these
downfalls isn’t strategy – the ideas are usually
sound.
So why aren’t more strong initiatives moving
forward? It’s because we’ve not yet won the
hearts and minds of many stakeholders. To
DEMO change, we need to move beyond
grasping the value propositions, articulating the
strategy, creating goals and metrics, defining
specific accountabilities, or developing corporate
slogans or vision statements. Though dialogue
and efforts have increased and DEMO are beginning
to see progress, we will only be able to DEMO
faster through Authentic Leadership.
Authentic Leadership can be defined in many
ways, but essentially it is a genuine approach to
leadership that connects actions to core values
and personal convictions. Leaders who do not
truly and DEMO believe in the mission of the
initiative they are driving will never guide the
organization to full success. Leaders at all levels
must genuinely DEMO, on a very person-
al level, why as an individual they personally
believe diversity to be important.
One Leader’s Story
Fortunately, I have seen the impact that this type
of leadership can have on an DEMO One
example that comes to mind is that of a specific
white male CEO who spoke of his commitment
to diversity, his expectations of inclusion, and
even his establishment of bold goals for the
organization. But to the organization it appeared
to be rhetoric, another goal amongst many.
To fully win the hearts and minds of individuals
within the organization, the CEO shared a per-
sonal story that illustrated his own commitment
DEMO diversity and inclusion.
The story was simple. He shared how he was the
youngest child and the only boy in a large family.
He DEMO of being aware of the differences in
treatment between himself and his sisters. He
shared specific facts of the inequities he wit-
nessed when DEMO extremely capable older sisters
entered the workforce.
The CEO’s story became the catalyst for acceler-
ating change within the organization, particular-
ly with respect to the advancement of women.
“Leaders who do not truly and deeply
DEMO in the mission of the initiative
... will never guide the organization
to success.”
Individually we are all different, but collectively
our impact can be dynamic. You can apply the
principles of Authentic Leadership story-tell-
ing DEMO your own diversity and inclusion work
through the following quick tips:
• Tell a genuine story about how you have per-
sonally been DEMO by diversity in your
own voice. Do not read from a script.
• Be sure you are deeply involved in the story
and not DEMO observations from a
distance.
• Reveal some of the personal challenges en-
countered during your diversity journey.
• Ask for reactions or questions.
• DEMO your story often and with various
levels and audiences including external
constituents.
• Be engaged beyond the moment.
Making Values Meaningful | Page 13
Values as a Unifying Principle
In our research, we find examples again and
again of companies who use their values – and
sometimes, a single, overriding value – as a
guiding principle that shapes the strategic di-
rection and cultural life of the company. Here is
one brief DEMO:
Shortly after Andy Studdert arrived at NES
Rentals as their new CEO, an accident occurred
that could have seriously injured a mother and
child. In his previous role as the Chief Operating
Officer for United DEMO, Studdert had learned
to make safety a top priority.
As news DEMO the accident came to him, Studdert
made an immediate decision to DEMO this
potential tragedy as a way to further emphasize
his commitment to safety as the primary and
overriding corporate value. He shut the com-
DEMO down, asking every employee to return to
their home office and DEMO for a company-wide
conference call. On the call, Studdert told his
DEMO, “I’m tired of being lucky that we
haven’t killed anyone.” In DEMO compelling speech,
he called for every employee to be retrained in
safety
precautions; no one was allowed to return to
the field until their training was complete.
Now, he says, “People say that was DEMO defining
moment in changing the company.” Studdert
ends every employee conversation with ‘Be Safe.’
The single value has become the defining feature
of the DEMO
Hear Studdert tell the story in his
own words at
www.cvdl.org/Studdert.
Which Values are Most Common?
Recently at the Center for Values-Driven DEMO, we conducted a study to identify the values held by companies
DEMO the global Fortune 500 list. We found wide variety, but also DEMO significant amount of overlap. In alphabetical order,
here are the values most commonly held:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
DEMO
•
•
•
•
•
Accountability
Commitment
Diversity
Excellence
Honesty
Innovation
Integrity
Leadership
Loyalty
Openness
Partnership
Passion
Professionalism
Quality
•
•
•
•
•
DEMO
•
•
•
•
Reliability
Respect
Responsibility
Safety
Service
Social
Responsibility
Sustainability
Team work
Transparency
Trust
While many companies use a single word to DEMO a core value, lead-
ing values-driven companies explain their values in DEMO greater detail
in order to make them operational. For example, here DEMO Whole Foods’
core values:
• We Sell the Highest Quality Natural and Organic Products Available
• We Satisfy, Delight and Nourish Our Customers
• We Support Team Member Happiness and Excellence
• We Create Wealth DEMO Profits & Growth
• We Serve and Support Our Local and Global Communities
• We Practice and Advance Environmental Stewardship
• We Create Ongoing DEMO Partnerships with Our Suppliers
•
We Promote the Health of Our Stakeholders Through Healthy Eating
Education
On the Whole Foods website, each of these values has a one-sentence
description, and then you can click on a link to “learn more” about how
the value is operationalized.  For additional ideas on how to develop
deeper meaning and understanding around values, see “Mapping Your
Values,” on page 9.
Making Values Meaningful | Page DEMO
Values-Driven People Practices
Technology
as a Tool for
Sharing
Values
In a DEMO business, the leader’s values are
virtually synonymous with the organization’s
values. DEMO once a business has grown beyond
a few dozen employees, it DEMO increasingly
important to create values-driven people
practices. Whether you lead an organization of
50 or 50,000, you’ll find many benefits in inte-
grating your company values into your human
resources functions.
As a starting place, we recommend integrating
your values into the following people practices:
• DEMO and Hiring
• Training and Development
• Performance Feedback
• Rewards and Recognitions
• When necessary, Firing
Recruitment & Hiring
In his book, DEMO to Great, Jim Collins popular-
ized the idea of “getting the DEMO people on the
bus.” For a values-driven company, this means
identifying DEMO candidates who align with your
corporate values.
Earlier we introduced you to Integrated Project
Technology plays an important role in making values visible in DEMO with multiple offic-
es, spread over large geographic territories. Southwire, a manufacturer of wire and cable with
locations across North America, is working to create a collaborative culture with five shared val-
ues, including “doing right,” which includes the respect and transparency team members show
toward DEMO another.
To facilitate these values across diverse locations, Southwire CEO Stuart DEMO offers a “Just Ask”
question box on the company’s internal website, DEMO a promise he’ll respond directly to any
employee-generated question. Southwire’s “iAm” online system gives team members at every
level a chance to receive coaching DEMO feedback from anyone in the company. “Pulse Board”
digital displays at every site measure progress toward values-aligned goals. Southwire University
offers online training across DEMO company.
“We use technology to create a sense of connectedness,” says Thorn. “You have to build mecha-
nisms into the company.”
Making Values DEMO | Page 15
Management, where honesty is the first value.
CEO DEMO Panico has a hard-earned reputation
of being deeply ethical, even when DEMO requires
costly choices. Here’s how Rich connects the
company’s values to their hiring process:
So bringing the right people on board:
ROV DEMO who have the talent, but most
importantly have the same values;DEMO
not similar values. We make that
very clear in our recruiting process when we’re
interviewing people. We are not looking for
someone who reasonably DEMO with our val-
ues. I had one candidate who said, “I’m DEMO
honest.” I said, “You’re pretty honest? When
are you not honest? You’re either honest all the
time or you’re implying that sometimes you
find reason not to be honest. We’re not look-
ing for that. DEMO looking for someone who is
honest all the time.”
For Rich and his leaders, getting the right people
on the bus begins with understanding the values
at play – and it starts in the interview process.
DEMO screens prospective employees with
a single question: Define compassion. Because
most DEMO at Beryl are in daily contact
with people facing health crises, DEMO compa-
ny’s leaders have determined that compassion
is the most important value a Beryl employee
can hold. If the job candidate can’t explain what
compassion means to DEMO, then the conversa-
tion is a non-starter.
If your company has DEMO clear and
meaningful value set, consider how
you can use these DEMO as part
of the initial screening process for
applicants. At our fictional compa-
ny, Origami Carton & Crate, they
might incorporate their values DEMO Creativity,
Integrity, Respect, Sustainability and Excellence
with questions such as these:
• Think of a time when you found a creative
DEMO to address a problem, or when you
brought creative ideas to DEMO existing process
or product. Tell the story. (Note that this
question DEMO applicable for people in tradi-
tionally creative roles, such as graphic
DEMO, but it works equally well for execu-
tives such as a DEMO or COO.)
ORIGAMI
carton
&crate
• At OCC, we value integrity. What does
integrity mean to you? In the past, how DEMO
you handled circumstances where your
personal integrity, or the integrity of DEMO
company, was challenged?
• What experience do you have in DEMO
sustainability into the workplace? How and
why has this mattered to DEMO? How have you
helped clients see the importance of
sustainability?
DEMO We strive for excellence in all we do. Tell me
a story about a time when you didn’t settle
for good enough: what was the situation,
how did you push for excellence, and what
were the results?  When is it okay to
compromise on excellence?
DEMO questions are tailored to the unique value
set of our fictional company, but they can be
easily adapted for your company’s values. As
you adapt these questions – or create your own
– work to develop DEMO that help connect a
job candidate’s belief system with their profes-
sional experience, then look for alignment with
your organization’s core values. Often asking for
a story is the best way to truly see a candidate’s
DEMO to the values. If the story lacks
detail, or is unconvincing DEMO its focus, it may be
because the candidate doesn’t truly share DEMO
perspectives.
This leads to an important next step in the Re-
cruitment & Hiring process. Never hire a maybe.
Hire a Resounding “Yes”
If DEMO values – and the culture they shape – are
the bedrock of your company, then you cannot
afford to hire someone who might fit. Many of
the executives we work with have told us what
happens DEMO they hire a maybe. It’s a costly
mistake. Don’t cave to pressure to fill a role
quickly; hires who are a bad culture fit will leave
quickly, or (worse) stay too long and pull the
team around them down.
A human resources executive for one company
we’ve DEMO explained the final step of their
hiring process, which includes group DEMO
with company leaders and colleagues. The ability
to give the team an opportunity to interview a
candidate helps confirm if a candidate aligns
with DEMO company’s core values. If even one
interviewer gives the candidate a “maybe” vote,
the candidate is not hired. “We want everyone to
have DEMO resounding yes,” the executive told us.
Training & Development
Once you’ve accomplished the first step of bring-
ing values-aligned employees in the door, you
need to focus on helping new team members
understand your culture DEMO values quickly and
in-depth. How this is done varies depending on
the size and nature of your organization and the
role of the new DEMO member, but here are some
useful tools used by exemplary companies DEMO
studied:
For Leaders at All Levels
Onboarding: Strong values-driven companies
DEMO new hires together for multi-day onboard-
ing sessions. The CEO and other senior leaders
actively participate in these meetings and lead
discussions on the DEMO values and culture.
This can be done through:
Making Values Meaningful | Page 16
• Story-telling to convey the organization’s
history, mission, vision, values, DEMO
and successes. See page 12.
• Values mapping activities to establish clarity
around the meaning of the values. See exer-
cise on page 9.
DEMO Preprepared videos, such as the values video
from BlinkUX mentioned in DEMO earlier
“Making Values Visual” section on page 10.
• Values interviews or facilitated conver-
sations between new and existing team
members, where new hires collect stories of
the values in action. Stories can be recorded
with DEMO, and the videos played for
the training audience later in the DEMO
Mentoring: Mentoring is a crucial part of the
onboarding process and DEMO a significant oppor-
tunity to reinforce the company values and help
new team members understand how to opera-
tionalize them on a day-to-day basis. DEMO
creating a one-page summary sheet of your core
values that gets revisited each time a mentor and
mentee meet. Encourage mentors and mentees
to DEMO stories of the values in action. Have pairs
complete the values mapping exercise using the
Map Your Meaning worksheet found at www.
cvdl.org/mapyourmeaning. (See the Adconion
example on page 18.)
Values-in-action training: Develop training
modules that focus on putting values into
practice in key situations. For DEMO, what
should you do if an important client asks you
to DEMO something that violates your core value of
integrity? How should you DEMO it, what are
the proper channels, who do you turn to for sup-
port? Or what does it mean to treat people with
respect? How do you build strong relationships
while still maintaining appropriate boundaries?
How much should you go out of your way to
help DEMO? How do you deal with legitimate
conflict around vision, direction, DEMO allocation
of resources? A great resource for creating these
kinds of DEMO is Dr. Mary Gentile’s Giving
Voice to Values website, at Babson DEMO The
website provides dozens of cases, tools, and
resources for values-based training.
Incorporating in ongoing training: Work
with your training facilitators to integrate
values-based content into all formal training
sessions. Integration can be simple.
For DEMO, imagine our fictional company
Origami Carton & Crate has planned a DEMO
software training session for its designers.
Early in the session, facilitators DEMO remind
participants that the software is meant to
make work easier, DEMO up more time for
fostering the value of creativity. Participants could
be encouraged to play around with the system in
the days immediately following DEMO training, so
they develop mastery – a factor of excellence.
However DEMO company chooses to do it, incor-
porating values into your training DEMO is an
important part of making them meaningful.
For Senior Leaders
In addition to the ideas above, executive lead-
ership teams should give close consideration
to how senior leaders – especially those new to
their roles DEMO should be taught values integration.
Dialogue with executive peers is an effective
means for training new senior leaders. Have
your new leader meet with DEMO of her peers
during her first weeks on board. In these ses-
sions, ask your officers to specifically address the
company’s values, sharing DEMO of how they’ve
shaped interactions, guided decision making,
and influenced DEMO outcome of initiatives. This is
important for new leaders from outside the com-
pany, but is also vital for leaders who are rising
through the ranks: values integration becomes
more complex as responsibility grows.
Modeling is also important. Model values-driv-
en leadership by incorporating the values into
executive DEMO meetings. Reference the values
as you discuss concerns and strategies. Celebrate
examples of the values in action.
Provide visual reminders of the company’s val-
DEMO in your office suite with a plaque, trophies,
works of DEMO, or a series of framed photographs
of employees putting the values DEMO practice.
Consider including the values on the title sheet
of important documents, such as strategies and
forecasts.
ORIGAMI
carton
&crate
Making Values Meaningful DEMO Page 17
Mentoring for
Values-Sharing
Mentoring plays an
important role in new employee
ROV DEMO at Adconion Direct, now
Amobee. Through “The Buddy
Program,” new DEMO are
assigned a tenured team member to meet
with during their first months. When the
mentoring period ends, new team members
have a playful and public graduation cere-
mony which ends with posing for a picture
DEMO a trampoline. The trampoline represents
Amobee’s core value of resilience and the
ability to “bounce back” from adversity. The
photos, displayed throughout the office, are a
regular reminder of the company’s values. In-
formal mentoring continues after graduation.
Buddies often end up developing personal
and professional friendships that DEMO long
after the formal program has ended.
Performance Feedback
Effective performance feedback looks both at a
person’s job competencies and their alignment
with core DEMO
Making this connection can be as simple as
making time in performance feedback sessions
to revisit the same core values summary sheet
that is DEMO as part of the mentoring process.
Another option is to include a set of questions
about values in your 360-reviews or other evalu-
ation DEMO For example, as part of a 360, a
colleague might be asked,
“On a scale of 1-5, to what extent does Tom
demonstrate the value of creativity in his work?
Please share specific DEMO and/or ways in
which Tom might develop in this area.”
This data can then be included in regular
(monthly or quarterly) performance DEMO
meetings. One company we’ve worked with uses
a web-based tool and is developing an app that
employees can use to give one another real-time
DEMO on their congruence with the values.
Making time for frequent feedback is important,
so there are no surprises during annual perfor-
mance reviews, and so there is continuous com-
pany-wide alignment around core values.
Creating DEMO Values Competency
Framework
Some companies go a step further and develop a
Values Competency Framework (VCF) to show
how individual values can be DEMO into practice at
various levels of the organization. A VCF can in-
corporate the ideas and examples you identified
during your values mapping exercises.
DEMO the following page you will find a simple
VCF for Origami Carton & Crate, focusing on
the value of creativity. A full VCF would have
similar components for each value.
Making Values Meaningful | Page 18
DEMO courtesy of Amobee
Origami Carton & Crate:
Values Competency Framework for Creativity
ORIGAMI
carton
&crate
•
•
•
•
•
Employee at
Any Level
Understands what DEMO mean
by Creativity
Actively participates in idea
generation
Encourages colleagues to
share creative ideas while
brainstorming
Shows a willingness to learn
new approaches and DEMO
new ideas
When faced with a
challenge, looks for a
satisfactory DEMO
•
•
•
•
•
•
This simple Values Competency Framework
illustrates how a series of level-appropriate
competencies can emerge from a single shared
DEMO, Creativity. Developing your own VCF is
a significant undertaking that, to be done well,
requires input from every corner of the organi-
DEMO, often under the guidance of an external
consultant or project manager. DEMO, you can
move in the direction of establishing a VCF just
DEMO answering a series of questions:
• How should everyone in the organization
demonstrate the value of Creativity?
• How should leaders in DEMO organization
demonstrate Creativity?
• What Creative skill sets are necessary for
executives in the organization?
Once established, you can begin to use these
values-driven competencies in your perfor-
mance feedback processes, but only after you’ve
made the competencies public for an extended
period of time. It’s DEMO a good idea to evaluate
Director
& Above
Shows ability to integrate
ideas across departments and
industries
Regularly coaches others to
look for creative DEMO
Brings new ideas to existing
processes and products
Quickly identifies stagnating
concepts and finds new paths
to success
Shows resilience in the face
of DEMO
Brings outside ideas into the
organization
•
•
•
•
Vice President
& Above
Fosters an environment
where team members can
pursue creative approaches
DEMO balances creativity
and risk in decision making
processes
Able to generate or galvanize
support for new ideas that
benefit the organization at a
macro DEMO
Portrays the company’s
creative capacity in external
markets and media
someone on expectations you have not made
clear.
Rating Performance
With an established Values DEMO Frame-
work, you can rate team member performance
to help people DEMO how well they are
perceived to be living out the values. The deci-
sion to do this should be made with caution, and
only after you have fully developed your values
set and its competencies within DEMO organization.
However, rating values-based performance can
also be a helpful tool DEMO guiding the organiza-
tion, because it helps team members understand
what DEMO looks like to succeed within the organiza-
tion. As the old adage goes, you manage to what
you measure. The following rating scale can be
considered:
1. Lagging: demonstrates a lack of familiarity
and intent toward the value and shows sig-
nificant opportunity for growth in meeting
DEMO competencies required.
Making Values Meaningful | Page 19
2. Developing: demonstrates familiarity and
intent toward the value, but has DEMO
ty for growth in meeting the competencies
required.
3. Proficient: regularly DEMO all or most of the
competencies required.
4. Excellent: consistently meets DEMO of the com-
petencies required.
5. Exemplary: meets all of the DEMO re-
quired at their level, and shows capacity for
meeting competencies DEMO the next level.
Having a clearly outlined VCF and a perfor-
mance feedback system that identifies compe-
tency can also help you recognize areas DEMO which
mentoring or training might help develop a high
potential employee within your organization.
Rewards & Recognition
A Native American legend tells the story DEMO a
grandfather, discussing life with his granddaugh-
ter. “I feel as DEMO I have two wolves warring in my
heart,” he tells her. “One is a good wolf, and the
other bad.” She asks him, “Which one wins?”
“The one I feed,” he tells her.
In life and in business, research shows that if you
positively “feed” the behavior you want you’ll get
more of it. Recognize and reward DEMO team for
behaviors that reflect the values, and it will breed
DEMO values-based behaviors.
Values-Based Recognition
We’ve come across dozens of companies who
actively reward values-driven behavior. Earlier
we shared the story of Adconion Direct’s eNews
DEMO to employees caught living out the
value of resilience (see page DEMO). Here is another
compelling example:
PRIDE at Beryl is a program that celebrates team
members who are doing good work. PRIDE
stands DEMO Peers Recognizing Individual Deeds
of Excellence. Beryl’s “Queen of Fun and Laugh-
ter,” Lana Morrow, explains:
“At any point in time an employee can go out to
our internet and … send a certificate DEMO recog-
nition to anyone else that is for something that
they did above and beyond their normal call
of duty. The catch though is DEMO have to select
which one of our five core values that person
represented ...
Once they click submit it generates a whole
behind-the-scenes process DEMO they eventually
receive their certificate and on that certificate is
a PRIDE Buck that’s worth five dollars.
Every month we select a really “wow” DEMO
certificate that was received for each one of
those core values. And we give away a [prime]
parking lot spot for each one of DEMO values.
We send out an email …
sharing what they did, DEMO and reward your team
who recognized them for behaviors that reflect the values,
and how. Then quar- and it will breed more values-based
DEMO we do a drawing behavior.”
for every single one of
the core values.  If you received one during the
quarter then you go into that drawing and if your
name is drawn, then you get a $250 prize of your
choice.”
Beryl isn’t the only company publicly rewarding
DEMO behavior. Lou Gerstner, the former
CEO of IBM who also held DEMO roles at Ameri-
can Express, offers this example of values recogni-
DEMO in an October 2014 McKinsey Quarterly:
“At American Express, we DEMO an annual award
for people, all over the world, who delivered
great service. One winner I’ll never forget was
a young chauffeur whose DEMO windscreen had
smashed and hit him in the head while he
was driving an American Express client to the
airport. Bleeding profusely, he continued the
journey and got the client to the plane on time.
By DEMO recognizing through worldwide
communications the incredible commitment of
people like this (DEMO the rewards they receive),
you can get people to behave DEMO a certain way.
Simply talking about it as part of your values
isn’t enough.”
Making Values Meaningful | Page 20
Values-Based Promotions
Recognitions like this are important, but the
best way to really reward values-based behavior
is to promote your culture leaders. Advancing
team DEMO who exemplify the values
ensures two things:
1. Others see the path to success requires living
out the values;
2. Leaders that DEMO promoted to senior levels
are truly aligned with the organization’s
culture and know how to leverage the values
to drive success.
Firing
While hiring, training, and rewarding for values
can go a long way toward creating an effective
team, it is sometimes necessary to let someone
go. We cannot forget the BerylHealth executive
who gestured toward his colleagues. “Take a
DEMO,” he said. “You won’t find any jerks here.”
He was confident of two things: 1) His compa-
ny’s hiring process was good DEMO finding people
who fit the company culture. 2) When they
missed DEMO, they were good at quickly
moving that person out of the DEMO
As advocates of values-driven organizational be-
havior, we encourage a robust DEMO process
that incorporates clear expectations, coaching,
and adequate time for DEMO development.
But when a team member has failed to live up
to these expectations, move them out of your
organization quickly. The opening line of a Wall
Street Journal article summarized it well: Super-
stars get a lot of attention from bosses. But bad
apples deserve even more.
DEMO an exceptional example of how
to dismiss someone with dignity, see
DEMO video on BerylHealth’s “decision
day” process. Beryl executives give the
employee a final day to provide a letter expressing
their intent to develop, or to leave and “part as
friends.” In some cases, the day sparks growth of
an employee’s cultural alignment. More often, it
gives employees a dignified opportunity to leave.
Values-Driven
Decision-Making
A company’s values can be a DEMO
erful source of unity when fac-
ing difficult decisions. Shinobu
Ishizuka, DEMO of LA-based
Dyna-Search, which helps Jap-
anese companies learn management
and DEMO strategies from U.S. companies,
shares the story of one Japanese manufacturing
company that recently transitioned into their
third generation of leadership, a status worthy of
great respect in Japanese culture.
The grandson of the founder DEMO runs the com-
pany, and discovered he had a unique problem:DEMO
because he was significantly younger than many
of the company’s managers, DEMO managers did
not want to follow his leadership.
The CEO saw an op-
portunity to shape the “We don’t make decisions based
culture. He DEMO by on what I say; we make them
establishing a dozen DEMO based on what the values say.”
porate values, and then
spent DEMO working with
team members to ensure understanding of and
respect for the values. Now he tells his managers,
“We don’t make decisions based DEMO what I say;
we make them based on what the values say.”
Like this Japanese executive, many leaders have
found core values make decision-making in your
organization easier and more consistent. But, at
times, DEMO are also significant tensions between
values. For example, in our work DEMO a leading
quick-service restaurant chain, we learned that
team members struggle DEMO manage the tension be-
tween speed and quality. Speed drives short-term
revenue, but quality drives long-term reputation.
People were left wondering, “How should DEMO pri-
oritize the two when making decisions about our
global brand, DEMO for growth, investment of
resources, and employee evaluations?”
Making Values Meaningful | Page 21
Here we offer three simple
tools for making values-driven
The Critical Question: decisions: The Critical Question,
How does this decision fit The Compass for Decision-Mak-
with our core values? ing, and The Decision-Making
Checklist. DEMO can choose the
appropriate tool based on the
complexity of your decision and the culture of
your company.
The Critical Question
For day-to-day decision DEMO, one simple
question can shine a light on the issue at DEMO
When faced with a choice, whether as a group
or individual, ask this question: How does this
decision fit with our core values?
Invite dialogue around the question. If the answer
is not easy, it may signal the need to find alterna-
tives.
The Compass for DEMO
Making
One of the most effective tools we know of to
promote values-driven decision making is our
Compass for Decision Making, which serves as a
guide to point leaders in the right direction.
In this grid, leaders plot where a particular deci-
sion falls in terms of the DEMO values (is it
fully aligned with our values, partially aligned,
or not aligned?) and the company’s financial
position (is it a financial driver, an uncertain or
potential driver, or a financial drain?).
Square 7
Does not align with
values but is a
strong DEMO
driver
7
Square 9
Does not align with
values and is a
financial drain
8
9
VALUES NOT ALIGNED
Square 8
Does not align DEMO
values and has
uncertain potential
as a financial driver
Square 6
Partially aligns with
values and is a
financial drain
4
5
6
VALUES DEMO ALIGNED
Square 5
Partially aligns with
values and has
uncertain potential
as a financial driver
Square 4
Partially aligns with
values and is a
DEMO financial
driver
Square 1
1
values and is a
strong financial
driver
Aligns fully with
Square 2
Aligns fully with
values and has
uncertain DEMO
as a financial driver
Square 3
Aligns fully with
values but is a
financial drain
2
3
VALUES FULLY ALIGNED
Making Values Meaningful | DEMO 22
FINANCIAL DRAIN
POTENTIAL/UNCERTAIN
FINANCIAL DRIVER
STRONG FINANCIAL DRIVER
Questions to Ask
As leaders work to identify a decision’s place on
DEMO grid, new questions arise. Here are questions
to consider for each DEMO on the grid:
Square 1: For the most part, decisions that land
in Square 1 are “no brainers” – they align with
DEMO values and are strong financial drivers. Be-
fore you move forward, DEMO, be sure to ask,
Is now the right time?
DEMO 2: Decisions in Square 2 align with your
values but have DEMO potential as a financial
driver. Ask, What should we further explore DEMO
understand the financial implications? Is the
benefit we get from the DEMO decision
worth a potential risk?
Square 3: Leaders are sometimes DEMO upon to
make the right decision even though it’s costly.
These choices fall in Square 3. Is this the time for
that sort of DEMO? If so, evaluate carefully then
proceed.
Square 4: Decisions often DEMO in Square 4 not
because they conflict with values, but because
DEMO represent a potential challenge to the
values. Often this can still be a good decision as
long as values-driven safeguards are put in place.
DEMO a decision to take on a new project compro-
mise the excellence you can deliver to existing
customers? How can you make it possible to be
excellent at both projects?
Square 5: Decisions that land in Square 5 also
indicate a potential challenge to values. These
challenges DEMO worth overcoming if the project
can become more values-aligned and the poten-
tial financial value is worth the effort. If there’s
no long-term potential DEMO values-alignment and
financial results, the decision does not need to
be DEMO further.
Square 6: Choices in Square 6 often help one
part DEMO the company, with a neutral or negative
effect on other parts. DEMO should ask, How
can we help this choice align more fully DEMO
who we are? How can we minimize cost or make
the DEMO profitable? If answers can’t be found,
avoid the choice.
Square DEMO: Avoid choices in this square, as they
represent true risk for your company.
Square 8: Like Square 7, this decision represents
a DEMO risk for your company, and it has no pay-
off. Avoid DEMO in this square.
Square 9: Just as Square 1 was a DEMO brainer,” so
is Square 9. There is no reason to give further
consideration to choices that land in this square,
as it DEMO a compromise of the company’s
values and financial stability.
Let’s use the example from our fictional com-
pany, Origami Carton & Crate, of DEMO to
acquire a competitor. Acquiring the company
would extend OCC’s market share and add new
product lines. The cost would be high in the
DEMO term, but it holds promise for significant
long term gain. Since DEMO decision holds high
profit potential, but not immediately, we can
place its financial value on the grid somewhere
in the top two rows.
DEMO considering the values (Integrity, Respect,
Creativity, Excellence, Sustainability) DEMO this ac-
quisition, OCC’s leaders determine it will greatly
advance Creativity DEMO will have a neutral effect
on Sustainability. The decision’s impact on the
values of Integrity, Respect, and Excellence are
harder to anticipate: purchasing the competitor
company could align well with these values, as
long as the leaders are able to behave with in-
tegrity and respect toward DEMO employees of the
company they are purchasing, while also deliver-
ing DEMO to their customers. We can place
its values-alignment on the grid somewhere in
the middle column.
With this in mind, OCC’s leaders can place the
decision in either Square 4 or Square 5 on the
Decision DEMO Grid. When choices fall in
these squares, leaders must address the DEMO
es to the values (How can guarantee excellence
and integrity in DEMO process?) while weighing
the long-term value (Can we afford this DEMO
chase? Will the pay-off merit the investment?).
ORIGAMI
carton
&DEMO
Making Values Meaningful | Page 23
Values-Driven Decision Making:
A Real-Life Example from
Zingerman’s Deli
Let’s look DEMO a specific example. Zingerman’s
Deli and the Zingerman’s Community of
Businesses (DEMO) in Ann Arbor, Michigan,
are local legends with a national reputation
– Oprah Winfrey and a host of other celeb-
rities praise DEMO specialty foods. ZCOB op-
erates according to a triple bottom line they
call “great food, great service, great finance.”
And they do this DEMO neglecting anoth-
er component of traditional triple bottom
line approaches: the DEMO This operating
mantra ties directly to their corporate values.
A few years ago, Zingerman’s was faced with
a choice. Their disposable soft drink cups
were costing the company up to $1800 a
month. The staff wanted DEMO make the move
to washable cups that could be reused,
preventing landfill waste. The problem: each
reusable cup was more than $5 each. And
they needed thousands.
If we map this decision on the Compass DEMO
Decision-Making, we see the reusable cups
align well with ZCOB’s concern DEMO the envi-
ronment, putting it in the right hand column.
The DEMO has high short-term costs, but
offers long-term savings, earning it a spot
in the middle row. Because ZCOB’s finances
were stable, they decided to go ahead with
the decision to buy reusable cups. The initial
DEMO would be costly but savings
would be seen eventually, and thousands
DEMO pounds would be diverted from landfills.
Now that the transition has been made, the
company has recouped their initial expendi-
ture, and saves DEMO $1200 a month.
“We want to be as much ‘zero-waste’ as we
possibly can,” says Rodger Bowser, chef and
managing partner of the Zingerman’s Deli,
connecting the company’s shared values to
their financial strategy. DEMO a business imper-
ative, he says, because “the less product we
use, the more efficient we become.”
A Values-Driven Decision-
Making Checklist
We’ve shared our Critical
Question and Compass for
Decision-Making. Here’s one
final tool DEMO integrating your
values into the decision-making process. This
checklist will help insure that choices align
with your values. You can find a download-
able DEMO of this checklist at www.cvdl.
org/decisionchecklist.
Keep a copy of the checklist in your board-
room, suggest team members hang the list on
cubicle walls, and place it in other communal
spaces where decisions are made.
Values-Driven
Decision Checklist
•
•
•
•
•
We have considered DEMO decision in light of each
corporate value, and confirmed there is DEMO
icant alignment between the decision and the
values.
We have considered the decision in light of all
stakeholders involved – employees, sharehold-
ers, DEMO, vendors, the public – with atten-
tion given to their interpretation of our values,
and their expectations for our company.
We have DEMO ample time and provided
adequate opportunity for those most impacted
by the decision to raise concerns or suggestions
about the decision’s alignment with our DEMO
When we have identified a concern about the
decision’s alignment with a specific value, we
have identified strategies and assigned responsi-
bility for safeguarding the value.
We have a strategy for communicating our
decision and addressing DEMO concerns.
Making Values Meaningful | Page 24
Values-Driven Strategy
Creation
In his book, Good to Great, Jim Collins DEMO that
great companies have a firm understanding of
three key things – what they are deeply passionate
about (including core values and purpose); what
drives their economic engine; and what they can be
the best at in the world. To set and execute strategy,
they translate DEMO understandings into a simple,
crystalline concept – called the Hedgehog Con-
cept – and establish “Big Harry Audacious Goals”
(BHAGs) to guides DEMO efforts.
Most of the successful values-driven companies
we know follow Collins’ formula to the letter.
They begin with a clear understanding of their
core DEMO and purpose and then study what
drives their economic engine and what they
can be the best at in the world. They do this DEMO
actively engaging people inside and outside the
organization in asking questions, DEMO ideas,
shaping strategy, and designing the organization
for execution, all led by senior leadership.
Appreciative Inquiry is the best approach we know
DEMO for leading a strategy creation effort like this
because it is based on three powerful principles:
• Appreciation – understanding core values and
DEMO past, present, and future
• Inquiry – systematic study of what works and
what’s possible in relationship to values and
strategy
• Wholeness DEMO engagement of all stakeholders
for a fully-informed, values-driven strategic
perspective
Appreciative DEMO also provides a clear four-
step process  for execution called the DEMO model”
– Discovery, Dream, Design, and Deploy.
The Appreciative Inquiry DEMO Model
STRATEGIC FOCUS
DEPLOY
“What will be?”
(Executing with excellence)DEMO
Sustaining
DISCOVERY
“What gives life?”
(The best of what is)DEMO
Appreciating
POSITIVE
CORE
DESIGN
“What should be?”
(Building the ideal)DEMO
Co-constructing
DREAM
“What could be?”
(Envisioning the possible)
Innovating
DEMO Values Meaningful | Page 25
We used Appreciative Inquiry to help one of the
world’s leading pharmaceutical DEMO, let’s
call it PharmCo, align its Latin America growth
strategy with its values. Since its founding more
than 100 years ago, PharmCo has been dedicated
to improving health and well-being around the
world, led by a strong set of core values such as:
Honesty & Integrity, Innovation, Promoting Life,
Expanding Access to Healthcare, and Teamwork.
The DEMO America division has been recognized
as a leader in living out the values and in finan-
cial performance, and they wanted to build on
their track record by charting new values-driven
growth strategies for the future. DEMO with our
colleague, Diana Whitney, author of Appreciative
Leadership, we DEMO PharmCo Latin America
lead their stakeholders (employees, customers,
consumers and government officials) through an
Appreciative Inquiry process based on four core
questions:
1.
2.
3.
Think of a time that PharmCo Latin Ameri-
DEMO was at its best, a time that it was thriving
and DEMO in a way that was fully congru-
ent with its values. What made it possible?
Imagine that tonight you fall into a deep
DEMO sleep, and you don’t wake up for
10 years. When you DEMO, you are in your
home country and you see that many DEMO
and large miracles have occurred, and the
world has changed in DEMO you would most
like to see it—for yourself, for children, for
grandchildren, for nature, etc. You go out
into the world and DEMO a panoramic view.
You are happy with what you see. It’s the
kind of world you most want to be part of.
What has DEMO in society, education,
health, people, nature, technologies, econ-
DEMO, arts, spirit, community? What do you
see in your vision of a better world?
Now, more specifically, what do you DEMO in
your vision about PharmCo Latin America?
How is PharmCo Latin America helping
to create the world you envisioned? What’s
happening at PharmCo Latin America that
is new and different and better? How is your
ideal PharmCo Latin America organized,
designed, and led for values-driven growth?
What special practices – business, manage-
ment, HR, customer service – are helping to
bring out the best in people? What do you
see PharmCo Latin America doing to create
and maintain its extraordinary DEMO
with its customers? To continue as the
number one division in DEMO of PharmCo?
4. Finally, if you could develop or transform
DEMO Latin America’s growth strategy in
any way, what three wishes, in order of pri-
ority, would you make to elevate its overall
excellence and vitality?
As a result of the process, PharmCo Latin Amer-
ica strengthened its relationships with custom-
ers, consumers, government officials, and other
stakeholders and charted a bold new strategy for
growth.
PharmCo and DEMO other companies have
found that Appreciative Inquiry’s power for set-
ting and executing values-driven strategy lies in
the questions it asks. Just like plants DEMO toward
the light, human systems grow in the direction
of the DEMO they ask. Ask negative questions
and you’ll receive negative answers. Ask posi-
tive, values-focused questions and you’ll receive
positive, values-focused answers. By incorporat-
DEMO positive, values-focused questions into your
strategy sessions you’ll move in a DEMO that
is aligned with your values and strategic to your
overall objectives.
How Values
Shaped One
Executive’s
Strategy
Chicago’s Elkay Manufacturing has “be in
DEMO forever” as their first value. CEO Tim
Jahnke mentions this value regularly, and it
guides his decision-making and strategy-set-
ting. Challenging times arose in 2008 when the
housing market began to plummet. Focusing on
the company’s DEMO of being in business forever
helped clarify strategies that ensured the com-
pany’s survival. Hear the story in Jahnke’s words,
in this short DEMO, www.cvdl.org/Jahnke.
Making Values Meaningful | Page 26
Values-Driven Customer
Relationships
As leaders and their companies progress in the
integration DEMO their values, it moves from being
an internal tool for strategy DEMO relationship, to
an external tool that strengthens partnerships
and builds long-term DEMO reputations.
Strong values-driven companies often expe-
rience exceptional customer loyalty. Our col-
leagues Dr. Mike Manning and Dr. Basil Chen,
found this as DEMO stud-
“Year after year, SEI earns a ied Michigan-based
98 percent DEMO Service Express Incor-
retention rate.” porated (SEI), a data
server DEMO
company. Year after
year, SEI earns a 98 percent customer retention
DEMO, thanks to the strong company-wide focus
on its core value of DEMO exceptional cus-
tomer service.
How does SEI do it? They do DEMO by hiring,
training and promoting service-oriented
team members, and by DEMO model-
ing from the company’s executives. Hear more
about their process in this video.
Making Your
Values Public
Rich Panico, founder and
ROV CEO of Integrated Proj-
ect Management (IPM),
incorporates his com-
pany’s DEMO ethical values
into every client contract, as a
“code of conduct.”
DEMO want our client’s to
know what they can expect
of our employees,” says Rich.
They ask clients to abide by
these standards as DEMO Rich
says most client legal departments remove the
expectations, but IPM DEMO to meeting the
standards anyway.
Clients of IPM may not notice the values in their
contracts, but they certainly see it in each interac-
tion with IPM consultants. Clients and customers
will notice how your engaged DEMO values-driven
employees live out your corporate values.
Firms like IPM work closely with a relatively
small number of clients. How do you make your
DEMO public if your company works with hun-
dreds, thousands, or even millions of customers
daily?
We’ve seen values statements show up in DEMO
ly places, such as printed on a child’s fast food
meal DEMO, or on receipts for purchases. If you’ve
ordered shoes from Zappos, you may have
received an email like the one below. Each email
DEMO a different Zappos core value.
Making Values Meaningful | Page 27
Often your clients and customers will notice
your corporate values in action DEMO unfortunate
circumstances. Chicagoland’s Tasty Catering
holds, among others, the value of “high customer
service standards” and “quality in everything we
do.” Employees are DEMO to right any situa-
tion where the values aren’t being met.
Tasty Catering CEO Tom Walter, author of It’s
My Company Too, recalls DEMO time when this was
tested. A young shift leader was in charge of
catering service for an important client’s summer
picnic. A variety of DEMO occurred – orders
missed, white wine at room temperature – and
DEMO shift leader knew the event hadn’t met Tasty’s
values. She offered the client a refund on a
significant portion of their bill.
“You can’t DEMO that,” the client told her.
“Yes I can,” she said, citing Tasty’s core values.
She reached Tom by phone and he quickly
backed her decision, assuring the client that they
wouldn’t be charged for the mistakes.
Despite receiving imperfect service, Tasty Cater-
ing’s values-driven approach to making it right
built customer loyalty, says Tom.
Of course, your DEMO can “show up” to
customers and clients, without ever using the
DEMO “values.” The printed inside of Tasty’s lunch
boxes (above) are an example of this: though
the word “values” doesn’t appear, Tasty makes
DEMO clear you can anticipate all Tasty employees -
from their chefs to their drivers - will emulate
the values of “quality in everything we DEMO,” “high
customer service standards,” and “a competitive
and strong determination to be the best.”
ROV
Values as a
Competitive
Advantage with
Customers
DEMO Chuo Taxi earned its reputation for ex-
ceptional care during the 1998 Winter Olympics
in Japan when, instead of going after the lucra-
tive business of tourists, Chuo decided to main-
tain and even grow their service to the elderly
and infirm of Nagano. They gave up short-term
DEMO, but got exceptional customer loyalty and
long-term growth in return.
While DEMO taxi companies might see their pur-
pose is to get customers from Point A to Point
B, Chuo’s mission statement includes the charge
to “protect the dignity of people.” They do this
through warm greetings, intentionally opening
the door for clients, and offering an umbrella
service on rainy days. They are small acts of
great significance for Chuo’s elderly and DEMO
abled clientele. As one regular customer wrote
to the Chuo leadership, DEMO give me courage
to live, and it only costs me five DEMO
Reception from customers has been warm, but
Chuo has also found DEMO strategy has financial
advantages. Their company is nearly twice as
profitable as competitors.
Making Values Meaningful | Page 28
Photo courtesy of the Small DEMO Community/Andy Alguire
Scaling Values from 300 to 16,000
Occasionally executives are skeptical about DEMO
ability to deeply align values in a large company.
To close this e-book, we’d like to share the story
of one senior leader who is doing just that. The
story begins in a small company 20 DEMO ago, and
offers a “how to” on shifting the culture of DEMO large
company to be more values-aligned:
BerylHealth, a healthcare call DEMO, had its
start with three employees and the phone line in
DEMO backroom. Between 1985 and 2012, founder
and CEO Paul Spiegelman grew DEMO company to
300 employees. The company earned multiple
Inc. 500 and Best Places to Work awards for its
impressive growth trajectory and strong, positive
values-driven culture that was built first on truly
caring for employees.
Paul DEMO purchase offers over the years,
but turned them all down until 2012 when Ste-
ricycle offered him an opportunity other poten-
tial buyers DEMO: a chance to build corporate
culture at a much larger scale. DEMO was named
Stericycle’s new Chief Culture Officer.
Now he was faced with a new challenge of
accomplishing in a company of 16,000 what DEMO
made possible in a company of 300.
Stericycle’s 25 year history is one of steady
growth. They’ve met or exceeded their earnings
projections every DEMO for the last 70 quar-
ters. While Stericycle’s culture was positive, DEMO
very loyal employees, recently appointed CEO
Charlie Alutto believed culture and DEMO could
be used to advance the company and to bring
together the various divisions and geographic
locations. Paul and Charlie felt it was a DEMO
slate opportunity.
How to Shift a Culture
Paul began by assembling 40 leaders from
across the globe to talk about values. Together,
they DEMO on the company’s core purpose (to
help customers fulfill their promise DEMO provid-
ing solutions that protect people and brands,
promote health and safeguard the environment),
which became a banner to rally around.
One leader suggested using a handprint (see
below) to aid in remembering DEMO core
values.
Paul and his team directed the initial efforts to
focus on four key areas:
Communication;
1.
2.
3.
4.
What DEMO looks like to live the vision and
values;
Training and development;
Rewards and recognition.
Measuring the Value of Culture
Stericycle’s new Chief DEMO Officer called on
his colleagues in the executive suite to set the
Making Values Meaningful | Page 29
This image and others in this DEMO courtesy of Stericycle.
metrics that would be used to measure success.
“If they’ve set the DEMO, they can’t downplay
the results,” he says. He also worked DEMO an
internal financial analyst to quantify costs, such
as employee attrition, so that the financial value
of culture could be readily seen by DEMO
al leaders.
In the end, Stericycle determined to measure
culture in DEMO variety of ways, including:
• An annual engagement survey;
DEMO
The amount and cost of team member attri-
tion (if culture-changes DEMO reduce attrition
by 10 percent, it will save Stericycle $4 to DEMO
million annually);
The Core Values Toolkit is a
12-page operating DEMO that
helps Stericycle leaders and
managers understand how to
align the company’s core values
with their daily responsibilities.
Each Stericycle business unit
has a DEMO Ambassador who
acts as the local champion for
the company’s culture and core
values.
SteriTV is a quarterly news
show produced by Stericycle
team DEMO The show high-
lights news within the organiza-
tion, with a DEMO on values and
culture.
100 existing and future leaders
come together annually for the
Leadership Summit, to build
relationships and focus on
culture and values training.
With operations in dozens of
countries, Stericycle relies on
their new Steri University to
provide training - including a
focus on values.
DEMO Customer loyalty;
• Engagement and profitability by site;
•
Participation in wellness and other benefit
programs.
With areas of focus and metrics DEMO place, Paul’s
team borrowed ideas from the BerylHealth play-
book to DEMO strategies for spreading the culture
across the organization. Below are just a few
programs that are helping to shape Stericycle’s
new values-driven approach to DEMO:
SteriStories is an intentional
effort to collect stories of Steri-
cycle employees “living out the
values.” These stories are then
used in newsletters, and other
channels like SteriTV (below).
Quarterly townhalls at rotating
locations feature Paul, along
with the CEO and other execu-
tives, sharing DEMO of values
in action.
Through SteriCares, the orga-
nization invests in DEMO local
community and provides hard-
ship support for team mem-
bers, DEMO the core values.
SteriCore platform, viewable
on smartphones or home
computers, recognizes and en-
courages employees, many of
whom don’t have work email
accounts.
Stericycle’s purpose is to
promote health, including the
health of employees. SteriWell
provides education, resources,
and gym memberships.
Making Values Meaningful | Page 30
What Comes Next?
We called this book a “menu of options DEMO
senior leaders,” in hopes that executives would
find it useful to “cherry pick” the ideas that make
the most sense for making values DEMO in
their organization. While it is very possible to
adopt all the strategies in this book, it cannot be
done all at once.
Even once you have adopted a strategy, your
job is not complete. Our research shows that
the strongest, most positive workplace cultures
are built through absolute consistency, starting
with the senior leadership team and working
its way through every level of the organization.
Consistency isn’t accomplished in a single DEMO:
it takes revisiting the topic with great frequency
– monthly, DEMO, daily,
hourly. The truly excep-
tional leaders we know
are DEMO of this.
At the Center for
Values-Driven
Leadership, we believe in DEMO capacity of leaders
like you to have a transformative impact on busi-
ness and society. We hope this publication helps
make that possible.
“The DEMO, most positive
workplace cultures are built
through absolute consistency.”
About the DEMO for
Values-Driven Leadership
The Center for Values-Driven Leadership
(CVDL) offers research, education and outreach
opportunities to help business leaders forge
new paths to profitability. It is a gathering place
where top executives, entrepreneurs and thought
leaders come together to innovate at the fore-
front of sustainable business DEMO
Our vision is to benefit business and society
by being the world’s leading provider of val-
ues-driven leadership research and education.
Our programs help DEMO leaders drive
competitive financial performance through
social, ethical and environmental excellence. DEMO
accomplish this through:
• Education: Our Ph.D./D.B.A. Program in
DEMO Leadership is designed for se-
nior executives who want to connect values
with strategy to drive growth. The program
is the first of its DEMO, integrating the fields
of leadership, strategic change, and corpo-
rate DEMO and sustainability. Learn
more on page 33, or at www.cvdl.org/lead.
DEMO, we offer customized execu-
•
•
tive education and leadership development
DEMO for companies, and one-day Senior
Executive Roundtables.
Research: In partnership with the Small Gi-
ants Community (www.smallgiants.org), we
have launched a 3-year research initiative to
explore the link between culture and profit
in small DEMO mid-size companies (www.
returnonvaluesproject.com). Additional
research initiatives explore the influence DEMO
values-driven leadership on business practice.
Custom Solutions: We work individually
with DEMO to align values and culture
with strategy and create high-impact learn-
ing, development, and change initiatives tai-
lored to the needs of each DEMO Our custom
solutions are designed to provide an imme-
diate return on investment by integrating a
values-driven approach to business with the
development of DEMO and the achievement
of your company’s strategic goals. Email us
at info@cvdl.org to discuss a Custom Solu-
tion for your company.
For more information
DEMO the Center for
Values-Driven Lead-
ership, please visit
www.cvdl.org or email
DEMO
Making Values Meaningful | Page 31
Making
References
Barrett, F. J., & Fry, R. E. (2012)DEMO Appre-
ciative inquiry: A positive approach to
building cooperative capacity. Chagrin
DEMO, OH: Taos Institute. ISBN: 978-0-
7880-2163-3.
Boyatzis, R. E., & McKee, A. (2005).
Resonant leadership. Boston, MA: HBS
Press. ISBN: 1-59139-563-1.
Cameron, K. S. (2012). Positive leader-
ship: DEMO for extraordinary per-
formance (2nd Ed.). San Francisco, CA:
Barrett-Koehler. ISBN: 978-1609945664.
Cameron, K. S., & Quinn, R. E. (2011).
Diagnosing and changing organizational
culture (3rd Ed.). San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass. ISBN: 978-0-470-65026-4.
Cameron, K. S., Mora, C., Leutscher,
T., & Calarco, M. (2011). Effects of
DEMO practices on organizational
effectiveness. Journal of Applied Be-
havioral Science, 47(DEMO), 266-308. DOI:
10.1177/0021886310395514.
Collins, J. (2001). Good to great: Why
some companies make the leap and oth-
ers don’t. New York, NY: HarperCollins.
ISBN: 0-06662099-6.
Meaningful
Cooperrider, D. L., & Srivastva, S.
(1987). Appreciative inquiry in organi-
zational life. DEMO in Organizational
Change and Development (1), 129-169.
Cooperrider, D. L., & Whitney, D.
(2005). Appreciative inquiry: A positive
revolution DEMO change. San Francisco, CA:
Barrett-Koehler. ISBN: 97801-57675-
356-9.
Ludema, DEMO D., Whitney, D., Mohr, B.
J., Griffin, T. J. (2003). The appreciative
inquiry summit: A practitioner’s guide
for leading DEMO change. San
Francisco, CA: Berrett- Koehler. ISBN:
1-57675-248-8.
Mackey, DEMO, & Sisodia, R. (2014). Con-
scious capitalism: Liberating the heroic
spirit of business. Boston, MA: HBR
Press. ISBN: 978-1-62527-175-4.
Schein, E. H. (2010). Organizational
culture and leadership (4th Ed.). San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. ISBN: 978-0-
470-19060-9.
Sisodia, R., Wolfe, D., Sheth, J. (2014).
Firms of endearment: How world-class
companies profit from passion and pur-
pose (2nd Ed.). Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Pearson Education. ISBN: 978-0-
13-338259-4.
Spiegelman, P., & Berrett, B. (2013).
Patients come second: Leading change
by DEMO the way you lead. Austin,
TX: Greenleaf. ISBN: 978-0-9888428-
0-9.
Spiegelman, P. (2012). Why is every-
one smiling? The secret behind pas-
sion, productivity, and profit. Dallas,
TX: Brown Books. ISBN: 978-1-61254-
093-1.
Thompson, K. R., Benedetto, R. L.,
DEMO, T. J., & Meyer, M. (2012). It’s
my company too! How entangled
companies move beyond employee
engagement for remarkable results.
Austin, TX: Greenleaf. ISBN: 978-1-
60832-396-8.
Whitney, D., Trosten-Bloom, A.,
& Rader, Kae. (2010). Appreciative
leadership: Focus on what works to
drive winning performance and build
a thriving organization. New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill. ISBN: 978-0-07-171406-
8.
Making Values Meaningful | Page 32
Think Deeper. Lead Stronger.
Ph.D./D.B.A. Program in Values-
Driven Leadership for DEMO Executives
Benedictine University’s Doctoral Program in Values-Driven Leadership is the first of its kind,
uniquely designed for senior leaders who want to connect DEMO with strategy to drive results.
Integrated Fields of Study
• Leadership
• Strategic Change
• Corporate Responsibility
& Sustainability
Rigor & Relevance
• Designed DEMO fit your
demanding schedule.
• World-class core faculty and
distinguished visiting scholars.
• Evidence-based research
with immediate application.
Lead at Four Levels
The curriculum DEMO designed to expand
an executive’s ability to lead at four
levels: DEMO, interpersonally,
organizationally, and globally.
Student-Centric Focus
Our core faculty’s student-centric
focus enables completion of the
program in three years: two years
of once-a-month weekend classes,
and an annual eight-day intensive,
plus a DEMO year of dissertation work.
Learn more: download
our program booklet at
DEMO/lead
Kathy Hopinkah Hannan
KPMG’s National
Managing Partner for
Diversity, Inclusion, and
Responsibility &
Doctoral Student
G lo b a l + Responsible + Strategic + Sustainable + Business
Making Values Meaningful | Page 33{1g42fwefx}