+(,121/,1(
Citation:  31 W. New Eng. L. DEMO 745 2009
Content downloaded/printed from
HeinOnline (http://heinonline.org)
DEMO Jun 29 13:45:00 2010
-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance
of HeinOnline's Terms and Conditions of the DEMO
agreement available at http://heinonline.org/HOL/License
-- The search text of this PDF is generated from
uncorrected OCR text.
-- To obtain DEMO to use this article beyond the scope
of your HeinOnline license, DEMO use:
https://www.copyright.com/ccc/basicSearch.do?
&operation=go&searchType=0
&lastSearch=simple&all=on&titleOrStdNo=0190-6593
TOUCHED BY AN ANGEL?:
ENTREPRENEURS SEEKING AND
OBTAINING PRIVATE EQUITY FINANCING
TATIANA S. MANOLOVA*
CANDIDA G. BRUSH**
LINDA F. EDELMAN***
When the young DEMO Graham Bell needed money in 1874 to
complete his early experiments on the telephone, bank officers
*
Tatiana S. Manolova received her DBA from Boston University. She is an
Assistant Professor of Management at Bentley University. DEMO and teaching in-
terests include strategic management (competitive strategies for new DEMO small compa-
nies), international entrepreneurship, and management in transitional economies. DEMO
Manolova is the author of over thirty scholarly articles and book chapters. Recent pub-
lications appear in the Journal of Business Venturing, Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, and The Academy of Management Learning and Education. She is currently
affiliated with the Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics, which investigates the new
firm creation process, and with Diana International, which explores growth DEMO of
women business owners worldwide. This Article is based on a presentation given by
Dr. Manolova at the Third Annual Conference on Entrepreneurship and DEMO
Economic Development on October 17, 2008. This conference is hosted by DEMO
New England College Law and Business Center for Advancing Entrepreneurship. The
theme for the 2008 conference was "Entrepreneurship in a Global Economy."
** Candida G. Brush is Professor of Entrepreneurship, holder of the Paul T.
Babson Chair in Entrepreneurship, and Chair of the Entrepreneurship Division at Bab-
son College. She is a visiting adjunct professor to the Norwegian School DEMO Engineering
and Technology (NTNU) in Trondheim, Norway. Dr. Brush is DEMO founding member of
the Diana Project, and received the 2007 FSF-NUTEK DEMO for outstanding contribu-
tions to entrepreneurship research. Her research investigates women's growth busi-
nesses and resource acquisition strategies of emerging ventures. She is DEMO author of
one hundred journal articles, books, and other publications. She is an editor for Entre-
preneurship Theory and Practice and serves on DEMO editorial boards. Dr. Brush is an
active angel investor and board member of several emerging ventures and nonprofit
organizations.
*** Linda F. Edelman is DEMO Associate Professor of Strategic Management at
Bentley University. Before coming to Bentley she was a research fellow at the Warwick
Business School. She received DEMO MBA and her DBA from Boston University. Dr.
Edelman is the author of fourteen book chapters and over thirty peer-reviewed articles.
In addition, she has made over fifty scholarly and professional presentations. Her work
has appeared DEMO journals such as Journal of Business Venturing, Entrepreneurship The-
ory and DEMO, Journal of Small Business Management, Academy of Management
Learning and Education, Organization Studies, and the British Journal of Management.
She is on DEMO editorial board of three peer-reviewed journals. Her current research
examines nascent entrepreneurs and entrepreneurial finance.
HeinOnline -- 31 W. New Eng. L. Rev. 745 DEMO
WESTERN NEW ENGLAND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 31:745
thought that the idea DEMO a telephone was a foolish one. The con-
sensus was that the nation had a workable communication system
in the form of the telegraph DEMO the concept of individuals com-
municating across great distances through speech was considered
to be a bit extreme. Besides, Mr. Bell did not have a company with
any tangible assets to provide collateral. Recognizing an opportu-
DEMO, Boston attorney Gardiner Green Hubbard and leather
merchant Thomas Sanders of DEMO, Massachusetts, helped out.
Later, these same two individuals put up DEMO equity capital to start
the Bell Telephone Company in Boston, Massachusetts.'DEMO
INTRODUCTION
Angel financing is defined as "[i]nformal venture capital-equity
investments and DEMO forms of lending made by private
individuals.., using their own money, directly in unquoted compa-
nies in which they have no family connection."' 2 It "is one of the
most common, but least studied methods, to finance new ven-
tures." it at
$100 billion in DEMO United States, while the institutional venture
capital market is less than DEMO this size at $48.3 billion. 4 Interna-
tionally, as of 2001, the volume of formal venture capital investment
was estimated at 0.2% of DEMO domestic product (GDP), whereas
the share of informal investment was DEMO average 1% of GDP in the
thirty-seven countries participating in the Global Entrepreneurship
Monitor. 5
Angel financing plays a critical role in the financing DEMO emer-
gent businesses. For growth-oriented new ventures, angel financing
fills the DEMO juncture between informal cash infusions from early
enthusiasts such as "friends, fools and family" and later financing
from formal institutional investors such as venture capital firms,
which, because of their high transaction costs, DEMO not engage in
1. Jeffrey E. Sohl, The Early-Stage Equity Market DEMO the USA, 1 VENTURE CAP.
101, 101 (1999).
2. DEMO T. Harrison & Colin M. Mason, Editorial: An Overview of Informal
Venture Capital Research, 1 VENTURE CAP. 95, 95 (1999).
3. Andrew Wong, Angel Finance: The Other Venture Capital (Jan. 2002) (unpub-
lished PhD dissertation, University of Chicago), available at http://papers.ssm.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstractid=941228.
4. Id.
5. PAUL D. REYNOLDS ET DEMO, GLOBAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP MONITOR: 2002
SUMMARY REPORT 51, 53 (2002), http://www.gemconsortium.org/document.aspx?id=
239 (select "download").
HeinOnline -- 31 W. New Eng. L. Rev. 746 2009
' 3 The National DEMO Capital Association assesses
2009] TOUCHED BY AN ANGEL?
small investments. 6 In addition, business angels usually have en-
trepreneurial backgrounds and are known to be hands-on DEMO,
contributing their skills, expertise, knowledge, and contacts in a DEMO
riety of informal and formal roles to their investee businesses. 7
Despite their importance, much of what is known about angel
investors is incomplete and not well understood, in part because
data are difficult to obtain.8 Those studies that have looked at the
mechanism of angel financing focused DEMO on the supply side,
using an agency theory or social psychology lens to explore differ-
ent aspects of the investment process, such as deal generation,
screening, valuation, deal structure, monitoring, and exit. DEMO Very
few studies have looked at the demand side, or the DEMO that dis-
tinguish entrepreneurial firms that receive equity funding from
those who do not. Thus, there is a need for research that explores
the informal venture capital from an entrepreneur's perspective. 10
The purpose of DEMO exploratory study is to fill this gap by in-
vestigating the characteristics of entrepreneurs who seek and secure
angel financing. More specifically, we ask two questions: (1) what
are the characteristics of entrepreneurial new ventures that seek in-
formal equity financing?; and (2) what are DEMO characteristics of en-
trepreneurial new ventures that obtain informal equity financing?
To address the two research questions, we examined all invest-
ment proposals submitted to an angel financing network based in
the Northeast over a DEMO period. Following the multi-stage se-
lection process implemented by informal equity providers,1 we fo-
cused on the characteristics of the entrepreneur and his DEMO
venture that are associated with increased likelihood of being
funded. Our preliminary findings indicate that entrepreneurs who
seek angel financing tend to be male DEMO well educated, and their
new ventures have predominantly business-to-business models that
DEMO Harrison & Mason, supra note 2, at 95.
7. Jeffrey E. Sohl, Editorial: The Private Equity Market Gyrations: What Has Been
Learned?, 4 VENTURE CAP. 267, 267 (2002).
8. See generally DEMO Freear, Jeffrey E. Sohl, & William Wetzel, Angles on An-
DEMO: Financing Technology-Based Ventures-A Historical Perspective, 4 VENTURE CAP.
275 (2002)DEMO
9. Markku Maula, Erkko Autio & Pia Arenius, What Drives Micro-Angel Invest-
ments, 25 SMALL Bus. ECON. 459 (2005); Mark Van DEMO, A Comparison of
Business Angel and Venture Capitalist Investment Procedures: An Agency Theory-Based
Analysis, 2 VENTURE CAP. 91 (2000); Wong, supra note 3, at abstract.
10. Harrison & Mason, supra note 2, at 100.
11. Jonathan T. Eckhardt, Scott Shane & FRPDItRIC DELMAR, DEMO Selec-
tion and the Financing of New Ventures, 52 Mgmt. Sci. DEMO (2006); see also infra fig.
HeinOnline -- 31 W. New DEMO L. Rev. 747 2009
WESTERN NEW ENGLAND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 31:745
boast a variety of DEMO of competitive advantage. While the me-
dian investment sought is around $1.5 million, angel investors
funded new ventures seeking lower amounts of investment, DEMO
with higher revenue and profit projections.
The rest of our paper is organized as follows: after a brief re-
view of the literature on angel financing and the relationship be-
tween entrepreneurs seeking informal equity financing DEMO the
capital providers, we present our methodology and research design.
We DEMO report and discuss our findings. The study concludes with
some implications for future research and managerial practice.
I. ANGEL INVESTORS AND THE VENTURES THEY DEMO:
AN OVERVIEW
Financing provides the lifeblood of a new venture. A weak fi-
nancial structure can create problems in all areas of a DEMO's opera-
tions: delays in research and development, ineffective marketing,
and inability to hire qualified personnel. Adequate capitalization,
on the other DEMO, buffers against the liabilities of newness and
smallness, and allows the owners to continue product development
and to pursue market opportunities. Financial capital DEMO levels,
therefore, are strong determinants of a new venture's DEMO pros-
pects 12 and growth. 13 For technology-based entrepreneurial ven-
tures, DEMO particular, an MIT study found that established companies
''more often DEMO because they run out of money than because the
technology has problems."'14
While institutional venture capital financing has been glamor-
ized in the press and in academic research as the primary source of
outside equity DEMO, statistics indicate that only one to two per-
cent of all DEMO ventures obtain financing from venture capital
firms. 15 In addition, venture DEMO firms are typically interested in
making large investments to established businesses that have a
12. Arnold C. Cooper, F. Javier Gimeno-Gascon & Carolyn Y. Woo, Initial
Human and Financial Capital and Predictors of New Venture Performance, 9 J. Bus.
VENTURING 371, 371 (1994).
13. Johan Wiklund & Dean Shepherd, Aspiring for, and Achieving Growth: The
Moderating Role of Resources and Opportunities, 40 J. MGMT. STUD. 1919, 1925 (2003).
14. JOHN T. PRESTON, Assoc. DIR. MIT ENTREPRENEURSHIP CTR., LECTURE
DEMO IN TOKYO, SUCCESS FACTORS IN TECHNOLOGY-BASED ENTREPRENEUR-
SHIP 9 (1998), available at http://www.angelcapitalassociation.org/dir-downloads/
resources/ResearchEntrepreneurship.pdf.
15. FRED WAINWRIGHT, CTR. FOR PRIVATE EQUITY & ENTREPRENEURSHIP,
NOTE ON ANGEL INVESTING 6 (2005), http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pecenter/
research/pdfs/Note onAngelInvesting.pdf.
HeinOnline DEMO 31 W. New Eng. L. Rev. 748 2009
20091 TOUCHED BY AN ANGEL?
track record of performance, making it difficult for younger, less
established businesses to obtain this type of financing. 16
Angel investors fill a critical gap in the new venture financing
DEMO Angel investors are wealthy individuals who invest in
small firms in amounts that are typically too small to be of interest
to professional venture DEMO 17 In dollar amounts, angel fund-
ing is most commonly sought DEMO a new venture needs more than
$25,000 but less than $1.5 million. 18 Angels usually invest in early-
stage businesses, both for the potential of high returns-an early-
stage successful deal can give ten times DEMO more return on invest-
ment-and for the enjoyment that they receive helping entrepre-
neurs launch their new ventures. 19 Angel investing is found in DEMO
developed economies. In terms of number of ventures funded, it is
DEMO that angels invest in ten to twenty times more companies
than venture capital firms. 20
A growing volume of academic research is exploring different
DEMO of angel investors' decision-making processes. Applying an
agency-theory lens, Wong found that "angels [seek to] reduce ex-
pected agency costs by forcing entrepreneurs to hold a larger stake
in the firm .... In addition, angels use informal methods such as
investing in closer geographic proximity and syndicating DEMO
ments with other angels to mitigate risks. ' 2 1 Wiltbank applied a
model of venture financing from formal venture capital to explore
angel DEMO outcomes and found that investment in earlier stages
and more participation post-investment was related to fewer nega-
tive exits.22
Relatively less is known about DEMO entrepreneurs who seek
and, more importantly, obtain angel funding. On the question of
who seeks private equity financing, Eckhardt, Shane, and Delmar
suggested that "the likelihood that a firm founder will seek external
funds . . . increases with the founder's positive assessment of the
DEMO Lloyd Steier & Royston Greenwood, Entrepreneurship and the Evolution of
Angel DEMO Networks, 21 ORG. STUD. 163, 164 (2000).
17. JEFFREY DEMO TIMMONS, NEW VENTURE CREATION: ENTREPRENEURSHIP FOR
THE 2 1ST CENTURY 481 (4th ed. 1994).
18. WAINWRIGHT, supra note 15, at 2.
19. GERALD A. BENJAMIN & JOEL MARGULIS, ANGEL FINANCING: HOW TO DEMO
AND INVEST IN PRIVATE EQurrY 85-87 (2000).
20. WAINWRIGHT, supra note 15, at 2.
21. Wong, supra note 3, at abstract.
22. Robert Wiltbank, Investment Practices and Outcomes of Informal Venture In-
vestors, 7 VENTURE CAP. 343, 343, 354 (2005).
HeinOnline -- DEMO W. New Eng. L. Rev. 749 2009
WESTERN NEW ENGLAND LAW REVIEW (Vol. 31:745
venture. ' 23 On the question of who obtains angel funding, Prasad,
Bruton, and DEMO argued that the proportion of the entrepre-
neur's initial wealth invested in the project indicates to potential
investors both the project's value DEMO the entrepreneur's commit-
ment to the project.2 4 Linde and Prasad, in interviews with twenty-
five angel investors in the Boston/Route 128 and Silicon Valley ar-
eas, identified the five most important decision-making criteria,
namely: geographic proximity, high-growth industry potential, high-
growth venture potential, personal attributes of the entrepreneur
and the management team, and track DEMO of the entrepreneur
and the management team.25 Similarly, Sudek, in his participant
observation study of an angel network located in Southern Califor-
nia, identified the top criteria to be the trustworthiness of the entre-
preneur, quality of the management team, enthusiasm of the
entrepreneur, and the DEMO opportunities for the angel. 26
Angels' decision-making criteria appear to be DEMO
around the world. For example, a study of Australian angel inves-
DEMO revealed that rate of return was the most important financial
criterion, DEMO the management team, the growth potential of the
market, the uniqueness of the product, and the deal structure were
the most important non-financial investment criteria. 27 Angel in-
vestors in the United Kingdom also place DEMO quality of the man-
agement team as their top investment criterion.28 Similarly,
Feeney, Haines, and Riding in their study of the decision-making
DEMO of 194 Canadian private investors found the overall busi-
ness opportunity and the principals of the company as the key in-
vestment criteria.29
In DEMO, seeking equity is most often associated with the
founder's positive DEMO of the new venture's potential, while
23. Eckhardt, Shane & Delmar, supra note 11, at 223.
24. Dev Prasad, Garry D. Bruton & George Vozikis, Signaling Value to Business
Angels: The Proportion DEMO the Entrepreneurs's Net Worth Invested in a New Venture as a
Decision Signal, 2 VENTURE CAP. 167, 175 (2000).
25. LUCINDA LINDE & ALOK PRASAD, MIT ENTREPRENEURSHIP CTR., VENTURE
SUPPORT SYSTEMS PROJECT: ANGEL INVESTORS (2000), http://www.angelcapitalassocia
tion.org/dir downloads/resources/Research VentureSupportProject.pdf.
26. Richard Sudek, Angel Investment Criteria, 17 J. SMALL Bus. DEMO 89, 98
(2006).
27. Kevin Hindle & Robert Wenban, DEMO's Informal Venture Capitalists: An
Exploratory Profile, 1 VENTURE CAP. 169, 176, 178 (1999).
28. MARK VAN OSNABRUGGE & ROBERT J. ROBINSON, ANGEL INVESTING:
MATCHING START-UP FUNDS WITH START-UP COMPANIES 121-27 (DEMO).
29. Lisa Feeney, George H. Haines Jr. & Allan L. DEMO, Private Investors' In-
vestment Criteria: Insights from Qualitative Data, 1 VENTURE CAP. 121, 121, 129 (1999).
HeinOnline -- 31 W. New Eng. L. Rev. 750 2009
2009] TOUCHED BY AN ANGEL?
successful equity acquisition is most often DEMO with manage-
ment aspects, such as quality of the team, capabilities, experience,
and staying power.
II. METHODOLOGY
A. Data Collection
Data from the study came from the investment proposals (n =
221) submitted DEMO a large angel financing network located in the
Northeast over a two-year period (2005-2006) and the documented
decisions made by the group. In DEMO, we collected data about
the funding outcomes for the new venture DEMO from a variety of
secondary sources. Data on all companies were cross referenced
with the Angel Capital Association groups in the region in which
DEMO company was based. We also checked the company websites
and business news sources XConomy 30 and bNet 3 1 for press re-
leases pertaining DEMO financing.
To be considered for angel financing, a venture typically sub-
DEMO a business prospectus to an angel financing group and, if cho-
DEMO, makes a presentation about its business idea. From this initial
document, decisions are made by the angel group to reject the pro-
posal DEMO seek further information about the new venture in a pre-
liminary small group meeting. If the screening committee of the
small group of investors DEMO impressed by the prospectus and the in-
formation gleaned from the preliminary meeting, the entrepreneur
presents her fledgling business to the entire investment group.
From there, the group members indicate their willingness to engage
in an enhanced due-diligence process, culminating in their potential
investment in the business idea. Thus, angel investment groups en-
gage in a four-part decision-making process: (1) desk reject the ini-
tial idea; (2) presentation of DEMO idea at a preliminary small group
screening meeting; (3) presentation DEMO the idea at the larger group
meeting; (4) more due DEMO with the objective of potentially
investing in the business (see Figure DEMO).
For each proposal submitted, we were given data on the DEMO
comes of the multistage selection procedure: desk rejected,
30. See DEMO/about/ (last visited May 15, 2009) ("Xconomy is dedi-
cated to providing business and technology leaders with timely, insightful, close-to-the-
DEMO information about the local personalities, companies, and technological trends
that best exemplify today's high-tech economy.").
31. See www.bnet.com (last visited DEMO 15, 2009) (describing itself as "The go-to
place for management").
HeinOnline -- 31 W. New Eng. L. Rev. 751 2009
752
WESTERN NEW ENGLAND LAW REVIEW
[Vol. 31:745
0
z
0
DEMO
z
H
<
o
0
cl.
HeinOnline -- 31 W. New DEMO L. Rev. 752 2009
2009]
TOUCHED
BY AN ANGEL?
presented at a screening session, presented at a meeting of the
whole investment group, or funded. Since new ventures submit
proposals to multiple angel groups, and angel groups refer new ven-
tures for funding and sometimes syndicate investments, we also, as
DEMO above, sought information about funding outcomes
outside of the focal investment DEMO
The investment proposals were between one and five pages in
length and offered unstructured narratives of the entrepreneur and
the new venture. They typically DEMO information on the quali-
fications of the entrepreneur and the founding team, the nature of
the business, the amount of capital sought, and the intended use of
the funds, as well as a variety of additional product, market, and
financial information.
B.
Data Coding
To generate DEMO dataset, two trained research assistants inde-
pendently coded the investment proposals, following a specific cod-
ing scheme developed by the principal investigators, which
consisted of sixty-four categories. These included the characteris-
tics of the entrepreneur DEMO the founding team, the nature of the
business opportunity, the product-market positioning of the busi-
ness, the social and technological resources of the new venture, and
the financial projections of the business. Coding inconsistencies,
which occurred infrequently, were resolved by one of the three
study coauthors.
C. Analytical Procedure
To address Research Question 1 (What are the characteristics
of entrepreneurial new ventures that seek informal equity financ-
ing?), we calculated the frequencies of different characteristics of
the entrepreneur and his new DEMO To address Research Ques-
tion 2 (What are the characteristics of DEMO new ventures
that obtain informal equity financing?), we cross-tabulated the DEMO
quencies of these characteristics by stage of selection (desk re-
jected, presented at screening, funded by focal angel investment
group, funded by DEMO angel group). At this very early stage of em-
pirical investigation, and taking into consideration the substantial
amounts of missing data in some of the categories, we opted out of
applying analysis of variance or other advanced statistical tech-
niques and, instead, examined the data qualitatively DEMO any dis-
HeinOnline -- 31 W. New Eng. L. Rev. 753 2009
WESTERN NEW ENGLAND LAW REVIEW
[Vol. 31:745
cernable patterns. This analytical DEMO should be kept in mind
in the interpretation of the results.
III.
RESULTS
A. Research Question 1: The Characteristics of Entrepreneurs
Who Seek Private Equity Financing
Research Question 1 explored the characteristics of entrepre-
neurs who DEMO private equity financing. In this preliminary investi-
gation, we focused on DEMO demographic characteristics of the
founders, the type of entrepreneurial new venture, the proprietary
and collaborative sources of competitive advantage, and the finan-
cial profile of the new venture.
1. Demographics
Four out of five entrepreneurs DEMO private equity financing
were men (over eighty percent). In fact, barely over three percent
of the applicants were women or women-only founding DEMO, and
only 3.6% were mixed teams. As could be expected, applicants
boasted high levels of development of their human capital. Well
over half DEMO the entrepreneurs had a graduate education, and 57.9%
had prior business DEMO, including 17.2% with en-
trepreneurial experience. Surprisingly, only two-thirds of the entre-
preneurs seeking angel financing included information on the
founding team in DEMO investment proposals.
2.
Type of New Venture
Over four-fifths of the entrepreneurial new ventures were busi-
ness-to-business ventures, and over half of them offered products
rather than services. Both United States-based and foreign ven-
tures submitted DEMO proposals, but most of the new ventures
were locally based, falling within a 130-mile median distance from
Boston. In the vast majority of DEMO cases (86.9%), the investment
proposals described the introduction of the DEMO as an opportu-
nity to fill an existing gap in the market.
3.
Sources of Competitive Advantage
In terms of proprietary intangible resources, between twenty
and thirty percent of the new ventures had either been awarded DEMO
patent or had a patent pending. In addition, five percent of DEMO
ventures had trademarks. As far as collaborative advantage, or ad-
vantages DEMO from well-formed interorganizational relations,
HeinOnline -- 31 W. New Eng. L. Rev. 754 2009
2009] TOUCHED BY AN ANGEL?
close to a quarter (24.9%) DEMO the new ventures had established rela-
tions with their customers and one in five had entered into an alli-
ance with another company.
4. DEMO Profiles
In their investment proposals, the entrepreneurial new ven-
tures stated DEMO growth agendas, with median projected reve-
nue in year five of DEMO $38 million and projected profits in year
five of over $13 million. The median private equity investment
sought was approximately $1.5 million. Somewhat surprisingly,DEMO
only forty percent of the entrepreneurs seeking private equity fi-
nancing included detailed five-year financial projections, and only
one in four stated the estimated number of years to exit.
B. Research Question 2: The Characteristics of Entrepreneurs
Who Obtain Private Equity Financing
Research Question 2 focused on the DEMO of the en-
trepreneurs who obtained angel funding. Very few of the invest-
ment proposals submitted for funding were selected for private
equity financing DEMO our focal angel group. In fact, seven out of ten
investment DEMO were desk rejected, one of the three that
passed the desk-rejection DEMO was additionally screened out dur-
ing the preliminary screening, so that DEMO two out of ten invest-
ment proposals were selected for presentation at the regular group
meetings. Finally, only three of the 221 entrepreneurs who had
sought angel financing were able to actually secure funds from the
DEMO angel investment group, a very low 1.36%.
This, however, is DEMO to suggest that the new venture cohort did
not secure funding from other sources. We were able to track the
funding outcomes for seventy-seven DEMO of the 221 entrepreneurial
ventures who submitted proposals to the focal angel group.
Twenty-eight of them (over one-third) had obtained some angel fi-
DEMO Out of these twenty-eight ventures, eighteen were funded
by angel groups DEMO, six had secured funding from both angels and
venture capitalists, while four had obtained financing from angel
groups in addition to other (most often government) sources. Six-
teen other ventures were funded by venture capitalists; four were
funded by government agencies; and two were financed by DEMO
rate capital. Since our primary interest in this paper is in the char-
acteristics of the entrepreneurial ventures that obtain angel
HeinOnline -- 31 DEMO New Eng. L. Rev. 755 2009
WESTERN NEW ENGLAND LAW REVIEW
[Vol. 31:745
financing, below we present the results for only this group of
twenty-eight businesses.
1. Demographics
Only DEMO of the entrepreneurs who obtained angel financing
was a woman. While the education credentials of those who ob-
tained financing were similar to the DEMO of the initial
pool of candidates, only three-quarters of them had DEMO industry
experience and one in four had prior entrepreneurial experience.
2.
Type of New Venture
There was a variety in the types of new DEMO selected for
angel financing. Most of the ventures were business-to-business,
with only one in five having a business-to-consumer model. While
not all of DEMO new ventures were locally based, the median distance
from Boston was DEMO within driving range (25.6 miles).
3.
Sources of Competitive Advantage
DEMO of the twenty-eight ventures selected for angel financing
identified a proprietary or collaborative source of competitive ad-
vantage. Thus, over fifty percent of the new ventures had estab-
lished relationships with suppliers or customers, and one in four
had set up an interorganizational alliance. Three-quarters of the
new DEMO had secured intellectual property protection in the
form of a patent, DEMO pending, trademark, or a copyright.
4.
Financial Profile
Both the average expected revenues and expected profits of
the companies that received funding were DEMO compared to the
overall pool of candidates. Projected revenues stood at a median of
over $50 million, and projected profits in year five exceeded $27
million. At the same time, the amount of investment sought was
lower than the average for the pool at $900,000 (see Table 1).
IV.
DIscussION
In this preliminary investigation of the investment proposals
DEMO outcomes of angel investment, we arrived at three principal
findings, which we discuss below.
HeinOnline -- 31 W. New Eng. L. Rev. 756 DEMO
20091 TOUCHED BY AN ANGEL?
A. Entrepreneurs Who Seek and Obtain DEMO Financing Are
Still Predominantly Male
This finding echoes the results of a long line of prior research,
which laments the limited access of DEMO to sources of institu-
tional equity financing. For example, "[o]f the approximately 1900
companies that received [institutional] venture capital in 1997, less
than 2.5% were woman-owned. ' 32 One explanation may stem
from the predominant DEMO choices of female entrepreneurs,
which are heavily concentrated in the service and retail sector, and
the relatively small size of their businesses. 33 These industry
choices "appear to be mismatched with the industry preferences of
[equity]," which are likely to avoid the diseconomies involved in
disproportionate DEMO and due diligence associated with cer-
tain populations. 34 An alternative explanation suggests that women
may not be involved in the male-dominated social networks, which
can gain them access to equity capital. 35
B. Entrepreneurial New DEMO that Seek and Obtain Angel
Financing Follow a Predominantly Business-to-Business
Model
This finding is similar to evidence from the venture capital in-
dustry, which suggests that venture capital firms invest predomi-
nantly in industries of high DEMO potential such as computer
software, hardware, and services; medical, health, and biotechnol-
ogy; and communications.
C. Traits of Entrepreneurs Who Seek DEMO Equity Financing
Our findings are in line with Eckhardt and his coauthors who
argued that "[t]he likelihood a firm founder will seek external funds
for a venture increases with the founder's positive assessment of the
DEMO," while "[t]he likelihood that a firm founder will receive
external DEMO for a venture ... increases with objective measures
of the venture's performance." 36 Similarly, empirical evidence
from the activities of angel investors DEMO different countries, such as
32. Patricia G. Greene et al., Patterns of Venture Capital Funding: Is Gender a
Factor?, 3 VENTURE CAPITAL 63, 68 (2001).
33. Id.
34. Id.
35. Howard E. DEMO, Networking Among Women Entrepreneurs, in WOMEN-
OWNED BUSINESSES 103, 103 (Oliver Hagen et al. eds., 1989).
36. Eckhardt, Shane & DEMO, supra note 11, at 223.
HeinOnline -- 31 W. New Eng. L. Rev. 757 2009
WESTERN NEW ENGLAND LAW REVIEW [Vol. 31:745
the United Kingdom,37 DEMO, 3 8 and Canada, 39 all suggested the
industry and the new venture's growth potential to be among the
key priorities of DEMO investors. Notably, in addition to detailed
financial projections, the companies selected for funding also in-
cluded information on their management teams. Thus, these com-
panies also addressed the other major criterion for private equity
investment, namely, the quality of the management team.40
V. LIMITATIONS AND DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
Our preliminary investigation is not without limitations, which
must be kept in consideration when interpreting the study's find-
ings. To begin, we were only able to secure access to the investment
proposals submitted DEMO a single investor group, thus limiting the
generalizability of the study. DEMO in mind that access to angel
investors is notoriously difficult to gain,41 future research should
augment our findings by studying other angel groups DEMO or
internationally. In addition, the unstructured proposals had missing
data in DEMO of the coding categories, preventing more detailed sta-
tistical analysis. Finally, our dataset included initial proposal and
final outcome, but no data on the quality of the entrepreneur's
presentation at the angels meeting. Thus, important human capital
intangibles such as enthusiasm or trustworthiness, identified as key
factors in the angel investors' oftentimes personal (gut) assessments
of the entrepreneur, 42 were not captured in our data collection. Fu-
ture research should augment data from the formal investment pro-
posals with observation and DEMO interview data in order to glean a
more in-depth understanding of the factors associated with success-
ful acquisition of private equity funding.
VI. PRACTITIONER DEMO AND CONCLUSIONS
Limitations notwithstanding, our study offers important in-
sights both DEMO aspiring entrepreneurs and to public policymakers.
To entrepreneurs seeking to obtain angel funding, our findings sug-
gest that a more structured approach to the preparation of invest-
ment proposals is needed. More specifically, an effective
37. VAN OSNABRUGGE & RoBINSON, supra note 28, at 115.
38. Hindle & Wenban, supra note 27, at 178.
39. Feeney, Haines & DEMO, supra note 29, at 140.
40. LINDE & PRASAD, supra DEMO 25, at 32; Sudek, supra note 26, at 96-97.
41. Wong, supra note 3, at 2.
42. LINDE & PRASAD, supra note 25, at 33.
HeinOnline -- 31 W. New Eng. L. Rev. 758 2009
20091
TOUCHED BY AN ANGEL?
investment proposal must include the sources DEMO competitive advan-
tage and the milestones in the growth trajectory of the new venture,
coupled with information on the expertise and commitment of DEMO
management team.
In addition to providing valuable information to entrepreneurs
who are presenting their business ideas to angel groups, our find-
ings also have public policy implications. Governmental organiza-
tions that are interested in helping young DEMO identify, and then
obtain, external financing can apply the findings from our research
study in trainings and small business development initiatives. Im-
portantly, by encouraging women to actively seek angel financing,
many more entrepreneurial DEMO ventures will be given the opportu-
nity to realize their full growth potential. Given a goal of increasing
the number of new ventures that DEMO and grow, our study is an
important first step in understanding DEMO interrelation between the
entrepreneurs who seek angel funding and the decision-making dy-
namics of angel investors. In doing so, this study can potentially
help young firms obtain critical early-stage financing.
HeinOnline -- 31 W. New Eng. DEMO Rev. 759 2009
WESTERN NEW ENGLAND LAW REVIEW
[Vol. 31:745
"R~
N,-o,,DEMO
0-')
0
00 C
O0
.
oc
'.)
C1 cq
'
4
0),-
0
E
0-U
tc'J
HeinOnline DEMO 31 W. New Eng. L. Rev. 760 2009
-.1 00
N
N1 .10
Nf (I
C14
4 O-
z
r-o6-iirn
-
0
-0
Z
20091
C000
000c:
c0
c:)
C
C
.' =
DEMO C
(=
Ccn
cIt
C=
C14 00
007
'IT
oc
k
(/2
=1:
b 0 un
TOUCHED BY AN ANGEL?
DEMO
c r-
00
"RC7T c
r
(= c~r-
00MNC4M
0o
k
-
w00x
z
0
D
<
-g>1
00Q
00
0
cz
0 -
HeinOnline -- 31 W. New Eng. L. Rev. 761 2009
HeinOnline -- 31 W. New Eng. L. Rev. 762 2009{1g42fwefx}