THE ROLE OF REGRETFUL
THINKING, PERSEVERANCE,
AND SELF-EFFICACY IN
VENTURE FORMATION
Gideon D. Markman, Robert A. Baron
and David B. Balkin
INTRODUCTION
Shane and Venkataraman (2000) and Venkataraman (1997) suggest that the ﬁeld
DEMO entrepreneurship seeks to understand how opportunities are discovered, created,
and DEMO, bywhom, and with what consequences (italic added). Surprisingly
and DEMO the fact that the person – the entrepreneur – is central to the creation
of new ventures, entrepreneurship scholars are reluctant to explicitly include
individual differences in formal models of new venture formation. For example,
DEMO the important role that entrepreneurs play in forging new
wealth and creating new jobs, research to identify cognitive processes, attitudes,
behaviors, traits, or other characteristics that distinguish entrepreneurs from others
who opt to work as employees remains somewhat marginal. Indeed, only very
few studies on individual differences have been published in leading management
journals. One possible explanation for DEMO reluctance is that in the past researchers
might have classiﬁed most individual differences as traits research and thus
criticism spilled over to include all DEMO difference research, regardless of
Cognitive Approaches to Entrepreneurship Research
Advances in DEMO, Firm Emergence and Growth, Volume 6, 73–104
Copyright © 2003 DEMO Elsevier Science Ltd.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved
ISSN: 1074-7540/doi:10.1016/S1074-7540(03)06004-5
73
74 GIDEON D. MARKMAN, ROBERT A. BARON AND DAVID B. BALKIN
whether the focus was trait, cognitions, emotions, attitudes, behaviors, or other
characteristics.
The goal of this paper is to employ a rigorous methodology DEMO order to assess
the impact of several individual difference factors (factors DEMO a ﬁrm
foundation in existing theory and empirical ﬁndings) on individuals’ DEMO
to use their inventions (i.e. patents) to start new ventures. Indeed, a more recent
research stream suggests that individual differences might play an important role
in entrepreneurship (Baum, Locke & Smith, 2001). To mention a few studies,
Shane (2000) found that individuals from DEMO technological backgrounds who
assess the same technological invention (e.g. 3DP™ ) DEMO and then develop
very different business opportunities. Sarasvathy, Simon and Lave (1999) used
verbal protocols to illustrate that entrepreneurs evaluate and process information
differently from bankers. Additional evidence suggests that entrepreneurs, as
compared with managers, may perceive and react to risk differently; entrepreneurs
gathered signiﬁcantly less DEMO, utilized less formal techniques to analyze
problems, and followed less rational decision processes than managers did
(Busenitz, 1999; Busenitz & Barney, DEMO). In contrast, Kaish and Gilad (1991)
found that entrepreneurs spent considerably more time searching for information
and paid attention to different DEMO cues than did executives of established ﬁrms.
Studying several biases such as illusion of control and the belief in the law of
small numbers, Simon, Houghton and Aquino (2000) suggest that entrepreneurs
might not realize that certain tasks are beyond their control. Others noted that
entrepreneurs tend DEMO make quick decisions (Bird, 1988; Eisenhardt, 1989;
Stevenson, DEMO, Roberts & Bhide, 1999´ ). New evidence also conﬁrms
that DEMO cognitive scripts not only explain similarities in decision-making
among entrepreneurs across cultures but also behavioral differences between
entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs within countries (Mitchell, DEMO, Seawright
& Morse, 2000). Recently, longitudinal and cross-sectional research DEMO that,
in the architectural woodworking industry, CEOs’ traits, skill, DEMO motivation
were signiﬁcant (direct and indirect) correlates of ventures growth (DEMO & Lock,
2002; Baum, Locke & Smith, 2001). DEMO, entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs
may react to environmental complexity in contrasting ways. DEMO and Dean
(1990) report that managers replace founding entrepreneurs because the latter
reach the “executive limit”; entrepreneurs fail to adequately reduce environmental
complexity and thereby hinder subsequent venture growth.
These more recent studies hint that DEMO research may have yielded in-
conclusive ﬁndings or identiﬁed attributes that could not reliably distinguish
entrepreneurs from non-entrepreneurs due to inappropriate methodology such
as DEMO measures and inadequate statistical control (e.g. issues of direct
versus indirect DEMO; cf. Baum & Locke, in press). Many past studies relied on
TheRoleofRegretfulThinking,Perseverance,andSelf-Efﬁcacy
75
psychometric scales of questionable validity or inappropriate sample DEMO
For example, what is the theoretical rationale for comparing entrepreneurs with
DEMO (Busenitz & Barney, 1997), bankers (Sarasvathy, Simon & Lave,
1999), or students (Chen, Greene & Crick, 1998; DEMO, 1993)? Entrepreneurs
build new businesses regardless of resource availability (Timmons, 1999); they
erect their ﬁrms from the ground up, are DEMO highly vested in their new
venture, and subsequently are liable for DEMO ﬁrm’s success or failure. Managers
and bankers, on the other hand, command and control established business
propositions; they are agents not owners, DEMO they are not as exposed to personal
risks as entrepreneurs are. Keeping these contextual variations in mind, it is
easy to understand why research on individual differences that is based on such
samples might provide very DEMO insights on entrepreneurship.
The challenge of selecting appropriate control groups is related to the daunting
question “who is an entrepreneur and who is not” (Robinson et al., 1991). Thus
an important factor that hinders research in entrepreneurship evolves around pro-
cedures for sample selection. First, due to the aura surrounding economic growth
and innovation, many studies implicitly share a common bias of over-selecting
successful entrepreneurs. Second, despite the importance of technological inno-
vation not many studies actually control for subjects’ ability to innovate DEMO hence
it remains unclear whether reported differences are due to group membership
(e.g. entrepreneurs vs. non-entrepreneurs) or ability to innovate. Third, to our
knowledge, few studies relied on homogenous groups of entrepreneurs and even
fewer relied on random sampling techniques. Ignoring that large variations among
entrepreneurs make DEMO within and across studies difﬁcult, much research
used convenient samples of DEMO who work in diverse, frequently even
unrelated, industries. Finally, researchers DEMO entrepreneurship have a tendency
to “handpick” their samples despite the fact that pre-study knowledge of group
membership might have inadvertently introduced additional confounds and DEMO
The foregoing review suggests that although the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship is in-
terdisciplinary with roots in economics, sociology, management, and psychology,
research on individual differences in entrepreneurship has not drawn extensively
upon the ﬁndings DEMO methodologies of social and cognitive psychology. This
is somewhat disappointing because a number of key issues that entrepreneurship
research tries to address focus on DEMO cognitions, thoughts, and mental models
(e.g. “Why do some persons DEMO not others become entrepreneurs?” “What is it
that makes some entrepreneurs so much more successful than others?”). Indeed,
an important DEMO of this chapter is to augment the methodological standards
currently used in research on individual differences in entrepreneurship by relying
not only on constructs DEMO processes borrowed from sister disciplines such as
social and cognitive psychology, DEMO also on their methodologies.
76 GIDEON D. MARKMAN, ROBERT A. BARON AND DAVID B. BALKIN
For the past several years, Baron and his colleagues (e.g. Baron, 1998, 2000;
Baron & Markman, 2000, in press; Baron, Markman & Hirsa, 2002; Markman,
Balkin & Baron, in press; DEMO & Baron, 2002) and others (cf. Baum & Locke,
DEMO press; Baum, Locke & Smith, 2001; Shane, 2000) have sought to augment
methodological rigor and create closer conceptual links between entrepreneurship
DEMO cognitions by identifying well-established psychological constructs that seem
relevant to understanding the characteristics and activities of entrepreneurs. Our
research sought to extend this ongoing DEMO Building on emergent research on
individual differences and entrepreneurship (including, Busenitz & Barney, 1997;
Chen, Greene & Crick, 1998; Honig, 1998; Stewart et al., 1999, to name a few), we
focus on three dimensions that appear to be particularly relevant for entrepreneur-
DEMO research. The factors examined here are: (a) regretful thinking (an aspect of
counterfactual thinking), thoughts regarding events and outcomes different from
DEMO ones that actually occurred (Baron, 2000); (b) perseverance – perceived ability
to persist and overcome adversity and challenges;1 and (c) self-efﬁcacy – our belief
in our ability to perform certain tasks successfully (Bandura, 1997).
As explained henceforth, we predict that since setbacks, challenges, snags, and
disappointments characterize the process of new venture formation, persons who
start new companies – as compared with ones who don’t – will recall more regretful
thoughts, but will also perceive higher levels of capacity to persevere and self-
efﬁcacy. To reiterate, the goal of this chapter is to address the following question:
Are patent inventors DEMO start new companies (hereinafter called entrepreneurs)
higher in terms of DEMO regrets, perseverance, and self-efﬁcacy than inventors
who opt to work as employees for established organizations (hereinafter called
non-entrepreneurs)?
THEORY AND HYPOTHESES
DEMO:ThinkingAboutNegativeOutcomes
Experiencing unintended detrimental consequences or imagining favorable
outcomes that did not materialize is a frequent experience for most people. Such
regretful thinking often DEMO in response to information about unfavorable
outcomes and unmet expectations, and DEMO leads, in turn, to strong
emotional reactions such as disappointment and blame (Zeelenberg et al., 1998).
For instance, regretful thinking can be observed among Olympic athletes who
win silver medals. Such athletes have DEMO found to be less happy with their
success than are athletes who receive bronze medals (Medvec, Madey & Gilovich,
1995). Research DEMO counterfactual thinking explains this seemingly anomalous
TheRoleofRegretfulThinking,Perseverance,andSelf-Efﬁcacy
77
result in the following manner: Silver medal winners are unhappy because they
imagined winning a gold medal (i.e. they imagined better outcomes than they
actually received), while bronze medallists are happier DEMO they imagined
receiving no medal at all (i.e. worse outcomes than DEMO actually received). Thus,
like counterfactual thinking, regretful thinking is DEMO cognitive representation of
alternative consequences and they are activated automatically, particularly (though
not exclusively) in response to misfortunes and disappointments (Baron, 2000).
Regretful thinking is important because such strong sentiments may have
profound DEMO on one’s mood, understanding of cause-effect relationships,
decision-making, task performance and even personal health (Roese, 1997). For
instance, thoughts may activate the same analgesic pathways that morphine does;
placebos boost blood DEMO to brain areas that are packed with opiate receptors.
In management, DEMO shows that regret and blame are particularly vivid in
contexts involving product failure (Creyer & Gurhan, 1997). Our basic prediction
is that DEMO, because they encounter potent market and technological
obstacles, experience substantially more regrets than others who invent yet
participate in a very limited way DEMO the commercialization of their technologies.
Championing a new venture can evoke strong emotions; capitalizing on poor
opportunities (and the subsequent failure) or caving in to competition (and
observing how others reap the rewards) can DEMO up strong regrets.
At ﬁrst glance, this prediction would appear to DEMO directly contrary to ﬁndings
reported by Baron (2000), who reported DEMO entrepreneurs, as compared to
non-entrepreneurs, experienced fewer life regrets and less intense regret over
missed opportunities. However, there appear to be several reasons why Baron
(2000) found fewer regrets in his group of entrepreneurs DEMO we expect to ﬁnd
more (and more intense) regrets among entrepreneurs in the present research.
First, Baron (2000) worked with a very different population than the one employed
here. The entrepreneurs his research had DEMO started their own businesses (Gartner,
1988), and so can DEMO be described as entrepreneurs. However, in many
cases, these businesses did not involve ideas for new products or services; rather,
they were largely “new variations on existing themes.” In the present research,
in DEMO, we focus on persons who have generated ideas for new products DEMO
services and, moreover, have obtained patents on these inventions. In short, they
are all inventors, and to the extent they use their DEMO to start new ventures,
are entrepreneurs in the strongest sense of this term, as deﬁned recently by Shane
and Venkataraman (2000). DEMO reason that people who have discovered an idea for
a product or service feel a strong, personal involvement with this idea: after all,DEMO
they have truly created it. For this reason, we suggest, they may be more likely to
experience strong regrets following setbacks. In short, they are so “ego-involved”
with their inventions, that they are more likely to experience regrets when they
78 GIDEON D. MARKMAN, ROBERT A. BARON AND DAVID B. BALKIN
encounter obstacles while developing these ideas. In contrast, people who invent
under the auspice of and for existing organizations may be less “ego-involved”
with them; indeed, they have chosen to turn the inventions over to others. Thus,
they would be expected to experience fewer or weaker regrets than DEMO
A second reason why we predict different results in the present study than those
obtained by Baron (2000) is as follows: in his research, Baron used a standard
measure of counterfactual thinking – asking participants to list the three things
they regret most in their lives. This DEMO of open-ended question leaves participants
free to describe regrets over actions they had taken which had turned out badly
(e.g. “I invested in a stock that went straight down.”) and actions they had not
taken but wish they had (e.g. “I wish I had decided to pursue an MBA degree”).
Research suggests that thinking about actions people wish they DEMO taken but did
not, can be especially unpleasant, so it is possible that the participants in Baron’s
research suppressed reports of such events, thus lowering the total number of
regrets reported. In the present research, we restrict our attention to regrets of
decisions – actions taken that DEMO out poorly. As a result, participants may be
more likely to DEMO regrets than was true in the research by Baron (2000). DEMO
given the reasoning presented above (i.e. people who start new ventures DEMO
ego-involved with their inventions), we predict that entrepreneurs will report more
and more intense regrets than non-entrepreneurs.
What about the pattern of regrets DEMO by entrepreneurs and non-
entrepreneurs? If entrepreneurs are indeed more involved DEMO their inventions
than persons who invent for others, we might expect DEMO the regrets they report
will focus more on business decisions and other factors relating to their new
ventures, while non-entrepreneurs will report a wider range of regrets (e.g. over
education, career choices, etc.). This hypothesis too will be investigated. Overall,
our reasoning concerning regretful thinking DEMO us to the following hypotheses:
Hypothesis 1. Inventors who build new ventures based on their discoveries
report a higher number of regrets than DEMO who invent as employees for
an existing company.
Hypothesis 2. Inventors who build new ventures based on their discoveries
report more intense regrets than DEMO who invent as employees for an
existing company.
Hypothesis 3. The regrets of inventors who build new ventures based on their
discoveries focus to DEMO greater extent (than inventors who invent as employees
for an existing DEMO), on business decisions, but to a lesser extent on
other DEMO (e.g. ones pertaining to education, career choices, personal
relationships).
TheRoleofRegretfulThinking,Perseverance,andSelf-Efﬁcacy
79
Perseverance
Despite repeated assertions – particularly by economic DEMO – that at
the core of entrepreneurship is “opportunities recognition” and “alertness” (cf.
Kirzner, 1997), we maintain that entrepreneurship research must also DEMO key
activities such as one’s conviction in his or her ability to convert discoveries into
moneymaking services or products. The recognition versus execution debate DEMO
not new and many scholars remain adamant that the opportunity – and particularly
the process of opportunity recognition – remains fundamental to wealth creation
DEMO (Shane, 2000; Shane & Venkataraman, 2000). We fully agree, yet our
interviews of patent inventors, technology transfer executives, patent attorneys,
and entrepreneurs indicate that only small subsets of all discoveries are DEMO
commercialized. A typical Silicon Valley VC ﬁrm, which receives over 5,DEMO
unsolicited business plans a year and invest only in about ten, DEMO earn industry
admiration once even one of those unsolicited business plans becomes a successful
venture. This inverse exponential relationship between discovered opportunities
and tangible DEMO hints that recognizing opportunity is perhaps necessary but
clearly insufﬁcient for entrepreneurship to take place. Because the recognition
of opportunity is largely an intangible, cognitive process to be ﬁnally validated
when the new venture or product DEMO ﬁnally launched, a fundamental question in
entrepreneurship research is not only DEMO can discover opportunities, but also
who can perseveretoharvest them (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000).
Business history is quite familiar with inferior products, DEMO, and tech-
nologies that nevertheless outmaneuvered, out-marketed, and outsold superior
DEMO or vice versa, where advanced products and breakthrough tech-
nologies that DEMO their pre-eminence were defeated by inferior counterparts.
The Wintel (Microsoft operating DEMO and Intel microprocessor) standard
of personal computers became the dominant computing DEMO despite
the fact that Apple’s MacIntosh technology provided user-friendlier interface.
The technology to record video data on magnetic tape and the subsequent
battle between DEMO and VHS is another example. To use another anecdote,
although science ﬁction enthusiasts envisioned teleportation – dematerializing
an object at one location, and sending the details of that object’s precise atomic
conﬁguration elsewhere, where it is reconstructed – as a real opportunity, for
years it was thought to violate the Heisenberg uncertainty principle of quantum
mechanics (Einstein, Podolsky & Rosen, 1935). Now, using a paradoxical feature
of quantum mechanics known as the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen correlation or
EPR entanglement, it is known that quantum teleportation is possible – at least
with photons (Bennett et al., 1993). The point is that despite the recognition of an
opportunity (i.e. where time and space could be eliminated from travel), complex
80 GIDEON D. MARKMAN, ROBERT A. BARON AND DAVID B. BALKIN
technological barriers, high and long-term risk, and intensive investment capital
required to DEMO such opportunity into a reality daunt entrepreneurs, investors,
and even DEMO Like Thomas Edison, who accumulated 1,093 patents and noted
that DEMO is 1% inspiration and 99% perspiration, we point that it is DEMO thing
to discover opportunities, but an entirely different matter to harvest DEMO
To recap, we concede that opportunity recognition may be a precondition DEMO
entrepreneurial efforts, yet here we stress that it remains unclear who DEMO the
persons who not only recognize novel, useful, and non-obvious technologies, but
also transform these inventions into establish new ventures. Because the actual
pursuit of opportunities is very challenging (McGrath, 1995), we suspect DEMO
at least part of the answer to this question lies in human variability in terms of
perceived capacity to persevere in the face of DEMO
Although the concept of perseverance has been studied for many years,
most research on this topic has focused on how beliefs, thoughts, DEMO attitudes
persist in light of new information and in spite of the discrediting of old “facts.”
More recently, Eisenberger (1992), Eisenberger, Kuhlman and Cotterell (1992),
Eisenberger and Leonard (1980), have extended this line of work to the domain
of task performance and work DEMO For example, Eisenberger (1992)
found that reinforced effort results in persistence that transfers to different tasks:
the phenomenon of learned industriousness (Eisenberger, 1992) occurs when
high effort on one task (e.g. solving complex anagrams) transfers to another
(e.g. detecting differences between cartoon drawings)DEMO Eisenberger and Leonard
(1980) found that high effort reduces disruptive responses such as frustration,
blame, and anger produced by early failure, DEMO thus leading to greater subsequent
tenacity and persistence. Like Eisenberger (1992), we deﬁne perseverance as
one’s capability to persist and endure in the face of difﬁculties, risks, and failure.
We propose that because individuals DEMO varying levels of adversity,
success is determined, to an important DEMO, by the extent to which individuals
persevere despite what appear to DEMO insurmountable obstacles, or in Stoltz’s terms
(1997, 2000), adversity. DEMO corollary of this is that perceived perseverance may be
crucial – even if insufﬁcient – for one’s success in entrepreneurial settings.
Perceived capacity to DEMO inﬂuences individuals’ courses of action, the
level of effort they put DEMO while pursuing their endeavors, the length of their
endurance and the DEMO of their resilience in the face of lasting obstacles and
repeated failures (cf. Eisenberger & Leonard, 1980). Perceived perseverance also
inﬂuences how DEMO stress and setbacks individuals experience while they cope
with taxing situations, DEMO the level of accomplishments they realize (Bandura,
1997). For DEMO, perseverant people ﬁnd out ways to circumvent constraints or
change them DEMO their actions, whereas less diligent people are easily discouraged by
impediments DEMO unexpected challenges (Bandura, 1997; Eisenberger et al., 1992).
TheRoleofRegretfulThinking,Perseverance,andSelf-Efﬁcacy
81
Launching a new venture requires a high level DEMO conviction in one’s ability to
overcome challenges plus the successfully transformation of the new technologies
into attractive commercial products or services. We propose that DEMO who
discover or invent similar inventions and are exposed to very comparable
obstacles differ in the way they perceive adversity. This proposition begs the
DEMO question: What speciﬁc types of perseverance will be most useful to
DEMO? Although the answer to this interesting question depends, to an
important degree, on the various situations entrepreneurs face, a careful review of
DEMO evidence (e.g. Stoltz, 1997, 2000) indicates that two constructs appear
to be particularly relevant. These include, perceived control over adversity and
perceived ownership of the outcome of adversity (regardless of what caused the
adversity in the ﬁrst place). As detailed below, we predict that technical inventors
who create new ventures perceive higher levels of control over the DEMO they
face, and sense greater ownership regarding outcomes of the adversity.
DEMO:PerceivedControloverAdversity
People strive to control events that affect their life circumstances because doing so
provides innumerable personal, ﬁnancial, and social beneﬁts (Lam & Schaubroeck,
2000). Being able to predict and control events fosters DEMO preparedness,
whereas inability to exert inﬂuence over adversity breeds apprehension, DEMO,
and at times desperation (Bandura, 1986). Also, because DEMO are based more
on what is perceived or believed than on what might be objectively true, alleged
control is an important precursor to one’s level of motivation and actions. Speciﬁc
perceived control over adversity is a DEMO basis of action because people who
believe they can attain certain outcomes have the incentive to act (Bandura, 1997).
Perceived control over DEMO – which is central to most human behaviors and
the focus of this theory – should not be confused with general “locus of control”;DEMO
the former refers speciﬁcally to control over adversity whereas the latter is a global
measure of one’s ability to inﬂuence one’s own fate or DEMO (Stoltz, 1997).
Perceived control over adversity inﬂuences the course of action, the level of effort
put forth, and the length of DEMO and resilience in the face of obstacles,
failures, or hardship. DEMO control over adversity also affects how much stress
individuals experience while they cope with taxing environments, as well as the
level of accomplishments they realize (Stoltz, 2000). In short, perceived control
over adversity inﬂuences what individuals do and become and their motivation to
act despite impediments.
DEMO and practice agree that when confronting setbacks, perseverant
individuals intensify their DEMO and experiment with new actions, whereas those
82 GIDEON D. MARKMAN, ROBERT A. BARON AND DAVID B. BALKIN
who are less perseverant quickly give up (Cervone, 1989). We note DEMO the
development and use of new technologies as a basis for new components or
even end products is the outcome of intensive work conducted DEMO determined,
self-disciplined individuals (cf. McGrath, 1995). Indeed, our DEMO with
numerous patent inventors (entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs) indicate that
their key challenge is to persevere until they thoroughly troubleshoot vexing
technological obstacles. Since DEMO a new venture entails a combination of
both technological and business obstacles, it stands to reason that entrepreneurs
would probably have stronger perceived control over their adversity. Stated
differently, launching a business requires strong perceived control over adversity
along both technological and business value chains; entrepreneurs must not
only convert their new technological discovery into working prototypes but also
transform DEMO into viable moneymaking products and services. While we suspect
that all inventors perceive strong control over adversity related to their work, we
expect entrepreneurs to perceive even stronger control over adversity because the
survival and longevity DEMO their young venture depends on their perseverance and
determination to convert their new technology into a business. Hence the following
hypothesis:
Hypothesis 4. DEMO who build new ventures based on their discoveries tend
to have higher perceived capacity to control adversity than inventors who invent
as employees for DEMO existing company.
Accountability:PerceivedOwnershipoftheOutcomesoftheAdversity
Accountability, particularly in response to unfavorable events, might manifest
itself as regret, disappointment, and blame (Roese, 1997)DEMO Some individuals, for
instance, experience intense discontent when they fail to attain outcomes for
which they have a strong mental image (Medvec, DEMO & Gilovich, 1995). Such
strong emotions are important because growing DEMO evidence suggests that
emotions have profound effects on perceptions and judgments (DEMO Forgas, 1995),
understanding of cause-effect relationships, decision-making, and thus on task
performance (Mandel & Lehman, 1996). Perceived accountability, despite the
short-term negative affect it generates (e.g. sadness, disappointment, and blame),
is offset by inferential beneﬁts that prove advantageous on a longer-term basis.
For example, when task performance is deemed inferior because of lack of effort
(rather than ability), a causally potent antecedent has been identiﬁed; deploying
additional effort will enhance future performance. Substandard execution and
its associated negative affectivity alert us to a particular problem and prompt
TheRoleofRegretfulThinking,Perseverance,andSelf-Efﬁcacy
83
corrective thinking and action (Schwarz, Bless, Srtack & Klumpp, 1991). In
short, once accountability “mobilizes” us to DEMO negative outcome (Peeters
& Czapinski, 1990), an adaptive reaction is established. Accountable individuals
focus on actions and outcomes; they take steps to circumvent unpleasant events or
center their attention on the outcomes of adversity DEMO of its origin (Stoltz,
1997). Because entrepreneurship entails highly DEMO environments in which
the process of transforming technological opportunities into innovative products
or services rarely goes undisturbed, human variability in preference and reaction
to setbacks and disappointments may be quite telling. The question, then, is
DEMO entrepreneurs, in the presence of adversity and setbacks, perceive stronger
accountability over adversity (regardless of its origin) than do non-entrepreneurs?
Two DEMO, both emanating from the interaction between persons’ prefer-
ences and situations (Markman & Baron, 2002), suggest that the answer to this
question is yes. First, there is no strong reason to suspect that inventors differ on
how hard they work on their discoveries. However, because it is public knowledge
that launching a new venture requires resolve to overcome DEMO – including
those impediments generated by others – persons with weak sense of ownership
regarding adversity might shirk from becoming entrepreneurs. Conversely, individ-
uals who take leadership over adversity are more likely to excel in entrepreneurial
DEMO Naturally, accountability to harsh circumstances and setbacks could
intensify subsequent to DEMO entrepreneurs and as such diminished ownership
over adversity among entrepreneurs might increase business vulnerability. Agency
theory conﬁrms that owners are more committed to and DEMO for producing
commercial outcomes than their agents (Deckop, Mangel & Cirka, 1999). This
suggests that accountability and business ownership are causally interrelated:
highly accountable persons are likely to pursue entrepreneurial undertakings and
those DEMO are owners of their ventures likely to become more accountable.
Second, DEMO report that lack of ownership, as captured by various excuses
and DEMO, is a self-protecting reaction aiming to reduce personal respon-
sibility for DEMO events (Schlenker, 1997; Schlenker et al., 2001). The goal is to
sway others (self-included) that failure did not stem from DEMO action as it might
otherwise appear to be; and when self-fault DEMO undeniable, that the “incident” is
merely due to transient blemish rather DEMO permanent attribute (e.g. carelessness
rather than stupidity). Avoiding accountability minimizes DEMO repercussions,
including reducing negative affect (e.g. guilt, shame, remorse), damage to reputa-
tion, and punishment for failures. Although failure is DEMO intentional, individuals
vary greatly in the way they see failure, and thus the prospect of failure guides
many decisions (Schlenker et al., DEMO). As entrepreneurial undertakings are
notoriously difﬁcult and the large majority of young businesses fail (Hamel, 2000;
The State of Small Business: A Report to the President, 1995), it stands to
84 GIDEON D. MARKMAN, ROBERT A. BARON AND DAVID B. BALKIN
reason that attitudes towards failure inﬂuence one’s likelihood of championing
a new venture.
DEMO conﬁrms that lack of accountability and the assignment of blame are
particularly vivid in contexts involving failure (Taylor, 1995) and that responsibil-
ity diffuses in proportion to group size (Forsyth, Zyzniewski & Giammanco, 2002).
Keeping this in mind, it is apparent that work span and responsibility horizons of
non-entrepreneurs and entrepreneurs are also unequal. Entrepreneurs are in DEMO
of their business; its growth and the markets to be pursued, its competitiveness, and
of course, failure. Entrepreneurship is an occupation in DEMO; entrepreneurs
work with more diverse and interdependent stakeholders and they are DEMO
for deliverables that are outside their immediate function and control. The
cross-functional nature of their work diverges from the traditional work and com-
partmentalized DEMO that are common in domains in which non-entrepreneurs
work. The prospect of all-embracing vocation span and the open-ended respon-
sibilities (for good, but DEMO bad) suggest that persons seeking entrepreneurial
careers probably hold themselves responsible DEMO accountable for adversity they
face. On the other hand, persons shirking DEMO taking ownership over predicaments
that are not their doings are rather unlikely to seek entrepreneurial undertaking.
Thus, the interaction between persons’ preferences and contexts (cf. Markman &
Baron, 2002), agency theory and the obvious implications of failure suggest that
persons opting to become entrepreneurs will perceive DEMO ownership over
outcome of adversity than their counterparts. This reasoning is summarized by the
following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 5. Inventors who build new ventures DEMO on their discoveries
tend to have higher perceived ownership of the outcome of adversity that they
encounter than inventors who invent as employees for DEMO existing company.
Although studies on individual differences recognize some unavoidable overlaps
between perseverance and self-efﬁcacy, evidence from theoretical and applied
studies on human variability suggests that these constructs have unique features
that merit their conceptual distinctness (Bandura, 1995, 1997; Nir & Neumann,
1995). Hence, DEMO further theoretical development we conclude this theory
section with additional discussion regarding self-efﬁcacy. Testing for the unique
effect of self-efﬁcacy, rather than self-esteem or locus of control, is important
because research has shown that the former is a robust predictor of superior
task performance (cf. Bandura, 1997), and human variability in entrepreneurship
(Baum et al., 2001, 2002; Chen, Greene & Crick, 1998). We reasoned that testing
for DEMO unique effect of perseverance, over and above self-efﬁcacy, would provide
discriminate validity between perseverance and self-efﬁcacy.
TheRoleofRegretfulThinking,Perseverance,andSelf-Efﬁcacy
85
Self-Efﬁcacy:BeliefsinourAbilitytoEffectivelyAccomplishCertainTasks
To brieﬂy reiterate, self-efﬁcacy involves the belief that we can organize and
effectively execute actions to produce given DEMO (cf. Bandura, 1997;
Chen, Greene & Crick, 1998; DEMO & Mitchell, 1992; Krueger & Brazeal, 1994).
Self-efﬁcacy impacts DEMO perceived control, how much stress, self-blame, and
depression we experience DEMO we cope with taxing circumstances, and the level
of accomplishments we DEMO It also inﬂuences our courses of action, level
of effort, our reaction to failure, and whether our thoughts are self-hindering or
self-aiding (DEMO, 1999; Wood & Bandura, 1989). Vasil (1992) found DEMO
when the effects of experience, academic rank, and disciplinary afﬁliation are
controlled, scholars high in self-efﬁcacy excel. While many occupations call
for high self-efﬁcacy (Gist & Mitchell, 1992), performing innovative research
resulting in DEMO is a good example since it is constrained by time, funding,DEMO
and uncertain outcomes despite relentless intellectual effort. Moreover inventions
are scrutinized, DEMO, and frequently refuted before (and sometimes after)
they attain patent status. Since the process of scientiﬁc discovery is strewn with
technological obstacles, successful patenting rests heavily on strong self-belief
(Bandura, 1999; Gist & Mitchell, 1992; Wood & Bandura, 1989). In short,
self-efﬁcacy is central to most human functioning, and since actions are based
more on what people believe than on what is objectively true, thoughts are a
potent precursor to one’s level of motivation, affective states, and DEMO
If self-efﬁcacy impacts career undertaking, performance, and success would
it also predict, or at the very least be related to, entrepreneurial pursuits? We
think that it would because of three main reasons. First, people avoid careers and
environments they believe exceed their capabilities (regardless of the beneﬁts
these may hold), but they readily undertake vocations they judge DEMO
capable of handling (Krueger & Dickson, 1994), and the higher their self-efﬁcacy,
the more challenging the activities they pursue. Second, because entrepreneurs
operate at the crux of change, innovation, and market perturbation, they personally
realize higher ﬁnancial, technological, and legal liabilities and uncertainties. DEMO
the other hand, inventors “working-for-others” continue to operate in relative
seclusion DEMO predictability; they are less exposed to market resistance, competi-
tors’ retaliation, or suppliers’ protest. Past research indicates that under taxing
circumstances individuals with higher self-efﬁcacy perform more adeptly (cf.
Bandura, 1997). Finally, although some research has suggested that self-efﬁcacy
successfully differentiates entrepreneurs from non-entrepreneurs (Chen, Greene
& Crick, 1998), as we noted earlier, such inferences stem from studies with
students, managers, and occasionally with handpicked samples DEMO entrepreneurs.
We suggest that starting a new venture – obtaining external funding, recruiting
86 GIDEON D. MARKMAN, ROBERT A. BARON AND DAVID B. BALKIN
key partners and employees, and overcoming what appear to be insurmountable
business and technological obstacles – is substantially different than managing
an existing operation or DEMO classroom simulations. Since self-efﬁcacy
reliably predicts the scope of career options considered, occupational interests,
and personal effectiveness, we suggest that it will DEMO be related to the pursuit of
entrepreneurial activity. Thus our last hypothesis is as follows:
Hypothesis 6. Inventors who build new ventures based DEMO their discoveries
have higher self-efﬁcacy than inventors who invent as employees for an existing
company.
METHODS
We decided to focus on a sample of DEMO inventors because patents are a reason-
able proxy for technological innovation, DEMO precursor to newly developed product
components, and an indication of technological DEMO (Balkin, Markman &
Gomez-Mejia, 2000). Patents may also erect legal and technical barriers to rivals.
For example, our interviews of patent inventors, technology transfer executives,
and patent attorneys suggested that good patents may provide footholds to new
technologies and therefore are an important source DEMO competitive advantage.
Finally, patents are an indication of inventive capacity that DEMO society
(Trajtenberg, 1990).
To reduce selection biases commonly found in entrepreneurship research (see
Markman, Balkin & Baron, in press, for DEMO detailed discussion on this issue), while
obtaining evidence on the hypotheses, we extracted a random sample from a list of
4,861 patent inventors, obtained from the U.S. Patents and Trademark Ofﬁce. All
4,861 inventors were granted patents for their inventions during 1997 and 1998
for DEMO encompassing surgery devices (patent classes 600, 601, 602, 604,
606, 607). Since the original list of 4,861 inventors included only minimal contact
information (i.e. ﬁrst and last name, city, and state), we used Visual Basic to scan
the Nation Wide Phone DEMO (NWPD) software that resides on CD ROMs
and to retrieve complete contact information (e.g. full address and phone number)
for each inventor.
The Visual Basic output yielded 3,491 non-duplicated entries. Then, using
Excel Spreadsheet and the “randomize” command function, we selected a random
sample of 586 patent inventors. Then, in early 1999, all 586 patent inventors DEMO
contacted via telephone, were invited to participate in our study, and were sent a
survey. Two weeks later we called all the non-respondents DEMO then sent our second
batch of survey mailing. We repeated the same procedure two to six additional
TheRoleofRegretfulThinking,Perseverance,andSelf-Efﬁcacy
87
times with all non-responding inventors. Although we sent DEMO to a random
sample of 568 patent inventors and received 233 surveys back (41% response
rate), only 217 were usable. Hence, in DEMO to many studies in entrepreneurship
that compared samples of known entrepreneurs with a sample of predetermined
non-entrepreneurs, we relied on a random sample of inventors, all of whom invent
in the same technological space, at DEMO same time period, and we did not know
ahead of time, which inventors were entrepreneurs and which were not.
Placed at the last DEMO of the mail survey, a qualifying question asked
inventors to indicate DEMO they used their invention to start their own business
in 1997 or 1998. Such a qualifying question used successfully in previous
studies including the DEMO Research Consortium (ERC project;
Carter, Gartner & Reynolds, 1996)DEMO Of the 217 qualiﬁed inventors, 55 (25%)
used their invention to start a new company and therefore were classiﬁed as
entrepreneurs (coded as 1), whereas the remaining 162 (75%) did not, and thus
were classiﬁed as non-entrepreneurs (coded as 0). This relatively high rate of
entrepreneurship (25%) may be attributable to the monopolistic nature DEMO patents.
Unlike traditional businesses, start-ups anchored in patents enjoy substantial
technological DEMO, competitive insulation, some legitimacy, and a relatively
wider window of DEMO (Rivette & Kline, 2000).
Before outlining the study’s procedures and operations, it is worthwhile to reem-
phasize four things that distinguish this study from others. First, classiﬁcation of
participants, in this case, patent inventors as entrepreneurs or as non-entrepreneurs,
was made only after the DEMO were collected and data were coded. Second, re-
stricting the assessments DEMO entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs to inventors who
invent in the same technological space at roughly the same time period (1997–1998)
provides a stronger test of hypotheses outlined above. Third, although the source
of the primary data collection was based on self-reported surveys, we also veriﬁed
data consistency through phone interviews and crosschecks with the U.S. Patent
and Trademarks Ofﬁce website (e.g. patent count). Fourth, we made an attempt to
account for non-response bias. To this end, we compared our random sample with
46 inventors who refused to return their surveys back on age, formal education,
annual income, and number of patents developed. Data from non-responding
inventors – obtained via phone calls – and analysis showed no signiﬁcant differ-
DEMO between the two samples. Finally, because of potential covariation between
opportunities DEMO individuals, Shane (2000) advocates that studies on individual
differences control DEMO the characteristics of the opportunity. To alleviate this
predicament we took three remedial steps: First, using a random sample of in-
ventors implies DEMO the characteristics of the opportunities may also be randomly
distributed between the two groups. Second, our AQ measures were not tied to the
opportunity, but instead were based on the same hypothetical scenarios described
88 GIDEON D. MARKMAN, ROBERT A. BARON AND DAVID B. BALKIN
henceforth (Table 1). And ﬁnally, inventors in this study invented highly DEMO
patents (surgery devices), which to some extent represents a set DEMO opportunities
with similar characteristics.
ProceduresandOperationalMeasures
Inventors were asked to complete a short questionnaire consisting of several
scales adapted from widely used measures of regretful DEMO (Baron, 2000),
perseverance (Stoltz, 1997, 2000), and self-efﬁcacy (Maurer & Pierce, 1998).
Unlike previous research that treated DEMO thinking as a unidimensional or
homogenous construct, we assessed three aspects DEMO regretful thinking, including
a quantitative, qualitative, and magnitude measure of DEMO regrets. The
quantitative and qualitative measures were based on inventors’ responses to an
open-ended question: “think about your life and career and list the decisions that
you regret most.” This question generated two different dimensions of DEMO
thinking. First, we counted the quantitative measure of regrets by adding DEMO
the decisions that inventors regretted most. Second, a content analysis of DEMO
same decisions by two independent raters had identiﬁed six types of regrets (e.g.
business opportunities, career, education, investment and ﬁnance, personal value,
and relationships). Interrater consistency was high; in 92% of the cases they were
in complete agreement. This was the measure of the DEMO nature of regrets.
Finally, on the next page of our survey, participants were also asked to indicate, on
a seven-point scale, how DEMO regret they had experienced regarding the decisions
they had just listed (DEMO = little regret; 7 = much regret). This was the DEMO of the
magnitude of regrets. The instruments to measure regretful thinking are depicted in
the Appendix.
The measure of perseverance consisted of a 40-item DEMO that was developed
and validated by Stoltz (1997, 2000) with DEMO than 100,000 participants from
diverse organizations in a variety of industries. Each item consisted of a statement
representing hypothetical events (e.g. “you apply for a job change and don’t get
it”; “you fail to meet the deadline on a major project”) followed by two questions,
each representing the dimensions described earlier (i.e. control and ownership).
The respondents’ task was to indicate, on a ﬁve-point scale, the extent to DEMO the
statements represented them (see Appendix). Factor analysis showed that DEMO two
constructs, composed of eight items each, were reliable (e.g. DEMO:  = 0.77
also created one additional variabland ownership:  = 0.81). Following Stoltz’s recommendation (e – a composite of both scores of perseverance.1997, 2000)we
Despite the fact that self-efﬁcacy measures have generally relied on scales re-
lating to speciﬁc tasks, some research calls for broader measures, particularly
Table 1.
Means, Standard Deviations, and Correlations among Study Variables.a
1. DEMO
0.25 0.42
2345 6 7 8 9
2. Regrets’ strength 5.77 1.21 0.10
3. Count of regrets 2.87 1.62 0.16* 0.02
4. AQ – DEMO 3.40 0.59 0.19** 0.16* 0.11
5. AQ – ownership 3.99 0.51 0.17* 0.23** 0.17** 0.41**
6. Self-efﬁcacy 6.01 0.99 0.17* 0.14* −0.01 0.18** 0.18**
DEMO Age 48.11 10.81 0.03 −0.07 0.12 0.04 0.06 0.03
8. Education 18.94 3.22 0.23** 0.08 0.00* −0.07 −0.08 0.01 −0.04
9. Innovation 13.21 16.37 DEMO 0.10 −0.13 0.03** −0.04 0.05 −0.01 0.24**
10. Incomec 11,8273 83,845 0.04 0.16* −0.06 0.18 0.12 0.11 0.04 0.10 0.10
aN = DEMO
b Group refers to entrepreneurs versus non-entrepreneurs.
c Income is annual earnings in dollars.
∗ Correlation is signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).
∗∗ Correlation is signiﬁcant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).
Mean S.D. 1
TheRoleofRegretfulThinking,Perseverance,andSelf-Efﬁcacy
89
90 GIDEON D. MARKMAN, ROBERT A. BARON AND DAVID B. BALKIN
when the vocations under consideration have little in common or require a very
DEMO set of skills (cf. Bandura, 1997). Since starting ventures requires human
capabilities in many and different domains and validated self-efﬁcacy scales for
DEMO inventors are not yet available, we used a general scale. Therefore, perceived
self-efﬁcacy in this study was measured in terms of the belief DEMO what one can do
under different conditions with whatever skills one possesses (Chen, Gully & Eden,
2001; Eden & Aviram, 1993)DEMO This measure was an eight-item, seven-point scale
(1 = strongly disagree; 7 = strongly agree) that was used successfully in previous
research (Maurer & Pierce, 1998). Items in this scale included such statements as
“I am strong enough to overcome life’s struggles,” “I can DEMO the situations that
life brings,” and “I usually feel I can handle the typical problems that come up in
life” ( = 0.89). All eight measures of self-efﬁcacy are depicted in the Appendix.
Consistent DEMO previous research on individual differences in entrepreneurship,
the survey obtained additional control variables such as age, education (measured
by years of formal DEMO), and personal annual income for 1998. Since all the
inventors in our study worked on novel, non-obvious, and useful technologies, an
additional control variable that our study brings to this line of research is DEMO measure
of one’s inventive capacity as captured by the number of patents granted to each
inventor (Griliches, 1990; Romer, 1996).
Analyses
DEMO MANOVA examined the relationship between entrepreneurs and non-entre-
preneurs (as the DEMO factor) on a set of ﬁve dependent variables: magnitude of
regrets; number of regrets; control over adversity; ownership regarding outcomes
of adversity; and self-efﬁcacy, where age, years of education, innovation (i.e.
number of patents), and income included as covariates. Content analyses and
discriminant DEMO examined the relationship between entrepreneurs and
non-entrepreneurs on all qualitative data regarding inventors’ regretful decisions.
RESULTS
Table 1 presents means, standard deviations, and DEMO for all the inventors,
regardless of group membership. As shown in Table 1, the average inventor in this
study was 47 years old, had more than 19 years of formal education, and at the
DEMO of the survey had been granted over 13 patents. In 1998, DEMO average inventor
earned approximately $118,000 a year. Entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs were
closely matched on education, age, income, and innovations, and the DEMO
TheRoleofRegretfulThinking,Perseverance,andSelf-Efﬁcacy 91
who also became entrepreneurs started their ﬁrms with DEMO cofounders and raised,
on average, $6 million to build their DEMO
The results of the MANOVA revealed statistically signiﬁcant differences be-
tween entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs on the sets of dependent variables
(Pillai’s traceentrepreneurship on the ﬁve dependent variables, as indexed by partial eta squared,= 0.05, DEMO = 3.80, p < 0.02). The size of the multivariate DEMO of
was 0.09. Univariate ANOVAs conﬁrmed that entrepreneurship had signiﬁcantly
stronger regrets (F = 6.01, p < 0.05), but the two groups DEMO not differ on the num-
ber of regrets (membership (i.e. entrepreneurs vs. non-entrepreneurs) was signiﬁcantly relatedF = 1.44, p = ns). DEMO ANOVAs also revealed that group
to perceived control over adversity (F DEMO 8.03; p < 0.005) and perceived owner-
ship regarding outcomes of adversity (perceived control over adversity and perceived ownership regarding outcomes ofF = 4.07; p < 0.05). Speciﬁcally, means
adversity were signiﬁcantly higher DEMO entrepreneurs than for non-entrepreneurs.
Finally, and consistent with predictions made elsewhere, but with different sam-
ples (Chen, Greene & Crick, 1998), we too ﬁnd that entrepreneurs tend to have
signiﬁcantly higher self-efﬁcacy (F = 5.27; p < 0.02).
As described earlier, a content DEMO of the qualitative measure of regretful
thinking identiﬁed six types of regretful decisions, including business oppor-
tunities, decisions regarding career, education, investments, personal values,
and personal relationships. A discriminant analysis suggested that entrepreneurs
DEMO more decisions regarding business opportunities whereas non-entrepreneurs
list more regrets about education and career decisions (Chi-square = 30.84;
pvariability. Thus, ﬁndings reported DEMO 0.01). The discriminant function accounted for 78% of the between groupTables 2 and 3 provide support for all
hypotheses except for Hypothesis 1; the difference in entrepreneurs’ and non-
entrepreneurs’ regret count was not signiﬁcant. DEMO is, Hypothesis 1 was not
Table 2. MANOVA Analysis: Dependent Variable Meansa for Entrepreneurs
and Non-Entrepreneurs.
Dependent Variable Entrepreneurs Non-Entrepreneur F-value 2
(H1) Number of regrets 3.21 2.90 1.44 0.01
(H2) Magnitude of regrets 6.15 5.67 6.01* 0.03
(H4) AQ-control 3.65 3.32 8.03* 0.05
(H5) AQ-ownership 4.20 3.90 4.06* 0.03
(H6) Self-efﬁcacy 6.30 5.90 5.41* 0.03
Multivariate effect: Pillai’s trace = 0.09, F = 2.80∗, 2 = 0.09.
a Means adjusted for covariates: age, education, annual income, DEMO number of patents.
∗p < 0.05.
92 GIDEON D. MARKMAN, ROBERT A. BARON AND DAVID B. BALKIN
Table 3.
Discriminant Analysis: Structure Matrix of Regret Variables.a
Function Wilks’ Lambda
F
Sig.
Business opportunity 0.85 0.94 23.58 0.001
Education −0.43 0.99 4.00 0.05
DEMO −0.35 0.98 6.07 0.01
Value 0.12 1.00 0.45 0.50
Relationship 0.03 1.00 0.02 0.88
Investment −0.01 1.00 0.58 0.45
a Dependent function: Entrepreneurs versus non-entrepreneurs.
supported because although, on average, entrepreneurs reported a slightly a DEMO
number of regretful decisions than non-entrepreneurs did, the difference was not
DEMO signiﬁcant. On the other hand, since the two groups differed on DEMO
magnitude of their regrets, Hypothesis 2 was supported; entrepreneurs reported
signiﬁcantly stronger regrets than non-entrepreneurs did. Additionally, and as
predicted by Hypothesis 3, entrepreneurs reported primarily regrets concerning
business opportunities whereas non-entrepreneurs reported mainly regrets about
their career and education. Entrepreneurs, as compared with non-entrepreneurs,
also tend to have signiﬁcantly higher perceived control over adversity and a greater
DEMO of ownership regarding the outcome of adversity regardless of the origin of
adversity. Hence, Hypotheses 4 and 5 were supported. Finally, since entrepreneurs
DEMO signiﬁcantly higher self-efﬁcacy, Hypothesis 6 was supported too.
To recap, the data offered support for Hypotheses 2–6, but Hypothesis 1 was
not supported. Table 2 shows the adjusted means for the ﬁve dependent variables
broken-down DEMO entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs. The discriminant function
of the structure matrix and the test of group means for the qualitative data are
reported in Table DEMO
DISCUSSION
As we stated at the beginning of this chapter, much DEMO in entrepreneurship is
using tighter theoretical views and better empirical testing to address the question
of individual differences (e.g. Baron, 1998, 2000; DEMO & Markman, 2000, in
press; Baron, Markman & Hirsa, DEMO press; Busenitz & Barney, 1997; Chen, Greene
& Crick, DEMO; Krueger, 1993; Markman, Balkin & Baron, in press; Markman &
Baron, 2002). We tried to extend this ongoing work DEMO assessing the relationship
between regretful thinking (Baron, 2000), perceived capacity to persevere (Stoltz,
1997, 2000), and self-efﬁcacy on the DEMO hand, and new venture formation on the
TheRoleofRegretfulThinking,Perseverance,andSelf-Efﬁcacy
93
other. Findings conﬁrmed that those inventors who start DEMO ventures tend to have
speciﬁc regrets (i.e. relating to business opportunities), have signiﬁcantly stronger
regrets, higher perceived control over the adversity and DEMO ownership of
the outcome of adversity that they face, and ﬁnally, stronger self-efﬁcacy.
Unlike previous research that shows that entrepreneurs – as compared DEMO oth-
ers – engage in limited counterfactual thinking (cf. Baron, 2000), we found that
entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs report almost identical numbers of DEMO
decisions. Our research found that not only do entrepreneurs experience stronger
regrets; they also experience regrets over different kinds of decisions than their
counterparts (i.e. business opportunities vs. career and education decisions). We
attribute these ﬁndings, which diverge from the ones reported by Baron (2000),to
our unique and random sample of patent inventors and our qualitative measures DEMO
regrets, which were different from the ones employed by Baron, and focused on
regrets over decisions rather than over life events of missed DEMO As noted
earlier, the different populations employed and the contrasting measures DEMO
from participants were expected to generate contrasting patterns of results.
While the ﬁnding that entrepreneurs regret mostly decisions about business
opportunity has high face DEMO (e.g. pursuing opportunities is at the core of
many entrepreneurial activities), a key question is why did non-entrepreneurs, but
not entrepreneurs, regret career and education decisions? Though this question
should be fully addressed by further research, we offer the following explanation.
Job autonomy, particularly in DEMO capacity, dramatically inﬂuences how
incumbents perceive their work and experience career-related DEMO Unlike
entrepreneurs, non-entrepreneurs work and invent for their employers, and as
such they may encounter stronger barriers to career mobility, limited discretionary
power, and of course, restricted autonomy. A career plateau – the point DEMO which
advancement is improbable – can occur to many astute inventors despite years of
experience. Good engineers have strong problem-solving skills in their respective
DEMO domains; however, to become executives or managers they need new
skills in management, decision making, business acumen, working well with a di-
verse workforce, as well as foresight and perseverance. Thus, one’s early DEMO
to become a skilled scientist or engineer may limit the subsequent likelihood of
being groomed for leadership roles and succession to the top management DEMO
(Daily, Certo & Dalton, 1999). As are a result, non-entrepreneurs in our sample
may have many bases for experiencing regrets over DEMO past decisions. While
this explanation is quite plausible, this proposition is DEMO the scope of our
study and thus awaiting further empirical testing.
Research in social, cognitive, and applied psychology shows that self-efﬁcacy re-
liably DEMO personal effectiveness under diverse tasks and careers (cf. Bandura,
1997), and new studies conﬁrm that entrepreneurs tend to be higher in self-
94 GIDEON D. MARKMAN, ROBERT A. BARON AND DAVID B. BALKIN
efﬁcacy than other persons (Chen, Greene & Crick, 1998). We tried to extend such
results to patent inventors and our ﬁndings conﬁrm that DEMO who start new
ventures have signiﬁcantly higher self-efﬁcacy. Perhaps even more interesting was
our ﬁnding that after controlling for self-efﬁcacy, inventors’ perceived capacity to
persevere continues to distinguish between entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs.
Again, results show that, over and above self-efﬁcacy, perceived perseverance
is related to new venture DEMO; each of the three constructs – self-efﬁcacy
(2 = 0.03); control over adversity (2 = 0.05); and ownership of outcome of
2
adversity ( = 0.03) – accounted for unique variance that DEMO not captured by
the other constructs.
Since past research suggests that perceived capacity to persevere predicts
personal effectiveness under diverse tasks and careers (cf. Bandura, 1997;
Eisenberger, 1992), we were curious whether perseverance DEMO some
variability in inventors’ annual earnings – a crude proxy of personal success.
To this end, we performed a simple stepwise hierarchical regression, DEMO which
we regressed annual income ﬁrst on all the control variables (DEMO, education,
innovation), and then on self-efﬁcacy and ﬁnally on DEMO as captured by
an aggregate measure of perceived control over adversity and ownership of the
outcome of adversity. This post hoc analysis showed that DEMO perseverant patent
inventors earn signiﬁcantly more than patent inventors whose perseverance was
very low (adjusted R2 = 12%; F = 4.40; p < 0.01). To give a concrete example,
the annual earnings of DEMO inventors who’s average perseverance score was
in the top 20% was approximately $128,692 vs. $93,933, which was the annual
earnings of inventors whose perseverance score was in the bottom 20% – almost
$35,000 DEMO year difference. Thus, higher perseverance scores – as measured
across all DEMO inventors – were related to higher personal income. Naturally our
ad hoc analysis provides a simple initial assessment of the link between perceived
perseverance DEMO personal success. Such link should be the subject of future
empirical research, which includes wage determination variables.
Implications,Limitations,andFutureResearch
This study has important implications for research, theory, and practice. It provides
guidance for future DEMO on individual differences in the context of new product
development and innovation, and it makes contributions to our understanding of
individual differences in the context of entrepreneurship. For example, it shows that
even among persons who discover novel, useful, and non-obvious technologies,
those who ultimately undertake DEMO daunting task of creating new ventures appear
to have higher perseverance and higher self-efﬁcacy. However, and despite very
TheRoleofRegretfulThinking,Perseverance,andSelf-Efﬁcacy
95
favorable coverage by the popular press, it appears that the entrepreneurial journey
yields particular, and at times stronger, regrets.
DEMO the fact that regretful thinking is an important cognition in decision-
making, until recently very little research has focused on this topic in the context of
entrepreneurship (cf. Baron, 2000 as an exception). For DEMO, researchers have
noted that decision makers anticipate and take into account DEMO possibility that
their decisions may produce regretful thoughts (e.g. Loomes & DEMO, 1986).
As such, future research on entrepreneurs’ regretful thinking could be helpful
in understanding how these thought processes and cognitions affect decision
DEMO actions. For instance, regretful thinking, which is primarily associated with
the presence of negative outcomes, together with people’s natural tendency to
avoid disappointment, could explain why some people, but not others, reject the
possibility of starting a new venture. Others showed that people are generally
risk-averse DEMO that this tendency is stronger under conditions of possible gains
than possible loss (Kahneman & Tversky, 1982). To extrapolate from the work
DEMO van Dijk et al. (1999), one reason for this tendency DEMO be that opting not
to start a new business might limit disappointments and regretful thinking. In
other words, increased anticipation of disappointment and regrets might motivate
risk-aversive career paths. Playing it “safe” allows us to expect DEMO, obtain what
we expect more easily, and therefore avoid the perils of becoming chagrined with
disappointments and regretful thinking. Clearly, regrets are interesting cognitions
that await further investigation in the context of new venture formation.
DEMO study’s focus on perseverance and the evidence that people are not victims
of their adversities strike a hopeful note. That is, unlike relatively stable personality
and trait characteristics, perceptions of adversity are somewhat open to modiﬁca-
tion. As perseverance enables human action, at least to some extent people are the
architects of their own destinies (Bandura, 1986). Assuming DEMO else equal, one’s
reaction to adversity is – with the appropriate DEMO and training – improvable
(Stoltz, 1997; Waldroop & Butler, 2000). For example, developing perceived
control and accountability is accelerated when individuals alter the reasons they
assign for their successes and failures. When people DEMO their explanations for
why important and impactful outcomes occurred, they improve DEMO expectations
for positive outcomes in the future (Mifﬂin & Schulman, 1986; Seligman, Reivich,
Jaycox & Gillham, 1995). Seligman and his colleagues (1995) suggest that pro-
viding individuals with such tools and DEMO can help them transform helplessness
into mastery that bolsters self-efﬁcacy and perseverance. Teaching individuals to
challenge their thoughts and assumptions can “immunize” them against DEMO
impact of setbacks (Eisenberger, 1992). Improving one’s perseverance reduces
the risk of helplessness as it boosts performance, improves physical health, and
DEMO self-reliance in the face of new challenges (Stoltz, 1997).
96 GIDEON D. MARKMAN, ROBERT A. BARON AND DAVID B. BALKIN
At another level, evidence also suggests that a “can-do” attitude rubs off; DEMO be-
ing around dynamic individuals who keep adversity in perspective is infectious (cf.
Smith & Muenchen, 1995). This suggests that entrepreneurs can DEMO their pattern
of thinking (e.g. “can-do”) to inspire and motivate their partners and others who
work with them. Finally, since perceived perseverance is signiﬁcantly associated
with personal success, we may want to – assuming all else equal – give strong con-
siderations to tenacious entrepreneurs and agents. DEMO corollary of the fact that per-
severance is both augmentable and functional is that it may be worthwhile to assess
this construct among future DEMO For example, investors such as venture
capitalists may improve their odds DEMO they consider technical inventors’ perceived
perseverance. Similarly, in the context of DEMO entrepreneurship, managers
may assess intrepreneurs’ levels of perseverance to identify early DEMO track of
technical people to become champions of new business units. Of course, these
suggestions are tentative and awaiting further empirical testing and validation.
Before concluding, several limitations to this study must be addressed. First,
although dividing patent inventors into entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs
simpliﬁes the methodology, it is an oversimpliﬁcation. In reality, particularly over
time, inventors may “migrate” DEMO working for others to working for themselves
and vice versa. Some inventors may be building their own start-up – which may or
may not DEMO tied to their patent – while holding employment elsewhere. Also, the
DEMO did not collect data on the organizations in which participants work, DEMO it
is possible that some inventors who were classiﬁed as non-entrepreneurs actually
work for start-up ﬁrms. In other words, the division of participants into two
dichotomous groups may fail to capture a richness that ranges between DEMO we
categorically termed entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs. While the use of two
dichotomous groups proved quite revealing, assessment of more than two groups
was beyond the scope of our study and thus awaiting further empirical testing.
A DEMO limitation stems from the reliance on patent count as a proxy of
innovation. Researchers note that the distribution of patent quality is highly skewed
DEMO the low end with a long, thin tail into the high-value DEMO (Trajtenberg,
1990). Our interviews with technical inventors, chief technology ofﬁcers (CTOs),
intellectual property attorneys, and technology transfer directors reveal that fewer
than 10% of patents are commercialized. This is not surprising DEMO many
patents have no market value until they are combined with several other patents
(e.g. Gillette’s Mach 3 is protected with over 30 patents!). Additionally, some
inventors may ﬁle for patents for intellectual reasons, DEMO to passively “protect”
technology share, and yet others use patents to DEMO position their invention
in a particular technological space. Also, patents may DEMO inventors to cajole
rivals into alliances, partnerships, and concessions that are not of the rivals’ initial
liking. In short, as patent count is an imprecise proxy of innovation, we suggest
TheRoleofRegretfulThinking,Perseverance,andSelf-Efﬁcacy
97
that future empirical research try to distinguish between DEMO and low-quality
innovations.
As we hinted earlier, future empirical studies should DEMO attempt to measure and
control for additional factors relating to individual differences (e.g. locus of control,
need for achievement, level of motivation, self-esteem, and so on), contextual
factors (e.g. work environment) and various outcomes variables (e.g. starting a
new business, performance, success, DEMO). Unfortunately, a key challenge to ﬁeld
researchers is the unavoidable DEMO between casting a broad empirical net and
response rate. Highly inclusive survey instruments with a myriad of psychometric
scales are also lengthy and time-consuming, and while such surveys may work
in classroom settings, they are prohibitively difﬁcult to justify to inventors and
scientists or to persuade them to DEMO
One ﬁnal weakness of our study, which is mainly due to DEMO cross-sectional
design, relates to uncertainty regarding causality. Since data were collected DEMO
inventors began building their new ventures, it is unclear whether founding DEMO new
ﬁrm increases one’s regrets, perceived control and ownership of adversity, and
self-efﬁcacy, or whether scoring high on these dimensions leads one to found a
new venture. Two points – and a rich research stream DEMO the causal efﬁcacy of
human thought (cf. Bandura, 1995) – DEMO that at least perseverance and self-
efﬁcacy are more likely to precede the act of new venture formation than to be the
result of DEMO First, it is important to recall that we relied on a DEMO, rather than
speciﬁc, measure of self-efﬁcacy. Since general self-efﬁcacy is the result of lifelong
experiences; is quite stable by the time individuals are adults (Bandura, 1997); and
since we obtained data from entrepreneurs DEMO after they had launched their
new ventures, such short-term business activity, in and of itself, probably did not
elevate one’s self-efﬁcacy in any meaningful way. Second, success and failure in
diverse activities and over prolonged periods of time shape one’s perceived control
over adversity and ownership over DEMO of adversity (Stoltz, 1997, 2000). As
explained above, since our entrepreneurs launched their new ventures only a few
months before we DEMO them, it is unlikely that these relatively short-term
activities had already DEMO inventors’ perseverance levels in such a signiﬁcant
magnitudes. Clearly, only longitudinal DEMO or experimental research design
will fully address this question, but in DEMO meantime, and for the reason outlined
above, we suspect that differences in perseverance and self-efﬁcacy may contribute
to the decision to become an DEMO rather than the opposite.
Notwithstanding these limitations, it is important to DEMO the recent resur-
gence of interest in individual differences in the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship (Baron,
1998, 2000; Baum et al., 2001; Busenitz & Barney, 1997; Chen et al., 1998; Ensley
et DEMO, 1999; Honig, 1998; Sarasvathy et al., 1999; Stewart et al., 1999, to name
a few). In this context, this study adds some value as it was based on a random
98 GIDEON D. MARKMAN, ROBERT A. BARON AND DAVID B. BALKIN
sample of inventors, all of whom had invented patents in the same technological
space, at the same time period (1997 and 1998), and DEMO – the researchers – did not
know ahead of time which inventors were entrepreneurs and which were not. Col-
lecting income information is another DEMO that separates this study from its
predecessors. Our ﬁndings suggest that perceived capacity to persevere in the face
of daunting and formidable obstacles may DEMO related to personal success such as
annual earnings. For example, highly DEMO patent inventors enjoyed almost
$35,000 more in annual earnings than less perseverant inventors. Furthermore,
since perceived perseverance explains additional variance that was DEMO captured
by self-efﬁcacy, our study expends our knowledge of individual differences; it
introduces new constructs that we believe merit further empirical testing.
In DEMO, we found that entrepreneurs, as compared with non-entrepreneurs,
report particular and stronger regrets, signiﬁcantly higher levels of perceived con-
trol and accountability over adversity, and higher levels of self-efﬁcacy. We also
found that, DEMO our inventors, perseverance is related to personal success as
measured by DEMO earnings. To the extent that perceived perseverance is vital in
life, DEMO suspect that Confucius was right when he suggested that our greatest glory
is not in never failing, but in rising every time we fail.
NOTE
1. Some entrepreneurship research addressed the issue of persistence and tenacity (cf.
Baum & colleagues, 2001, 2002; McGrath, 1995) and others have used persistence as an
outcome. However, such research neither measured the underlying psychological factors
that make one persist nor made distinctions between types DEMO perseverance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge that this research was funded in part by the 2001 John
Broadbent Endowment for Research in Entrepreneurship at Rensselar DEMO
Institute. The opinions (and errors) are the authors’ and not the grantor’s. We also
thank the participants of the Lally-Darden retreat (2002) DEMO three anonymous
reviewers for their insightful comments and suggestions.
REFERENCES
Balkin, DEMO B., Markman, G. D., & Gomez-Mejia, L. (2000). DEMO CEO pay in high technology ﬁrms
related to innovation? AcademyofManagementJournal, 43, 1118–1129.
TheRoleofRegretfulThinking,Perseverance,andSelf-Efﬁcacy
99
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of DEMO and action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
DEMO, A. (1995). Comments on the crusade against the causal efﬁcacy of human thought. Journal
ofBehaviorTherapyandExperimentalPsychiatry, 26(3), 179–190.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efﬁcacy:Theexerciseofcontrol. New York, NY: W.H. Freeman & Company.
DEMO, A. (1999). Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. AsianJournalofSocialPsychol-
DEMO, 2(1), 21–41.
Baron, R. A. (1998). Cognitive DEMO in entrepreneurship: Why and when entrepreneurs think
differently than other people. DEMO, 13, 275–294.
Baron, R. A. (2000). Counterfactual thinking and venture formation: The potential effect of thinking
about “what might have been.” JournalofBusinessVenturing, 15, 79–92.
Baron, R. A., & Markman, G. D. (2000). Beyond social capital: How social skills can enhance en-
DEMO success. AcademyofManagementExecutive, 14, 106–116.
Baron, R. A., & Markman, DEMO D. (in press). Social skills and entrepreneurial success: Why the ability
to get along well with others may really matter. JournalofBusinessVenturing.
Baron, R. A., Markman, G. D., & Hirsa, A. (2002). Perceptions of women and men as entrepreneurs:
Evidence for differential effects DEMO attributional augmenting. JournalofAppliedPsychology.
Baum, J. R., & Locke, E. A. (in press). Entrepreneurial traits, skill, and motivation and subsequent
venture DEMO ManagementScience.
Baum, J. R., Locke, E. A., & Smith, DEMO G. (2001). A multidimensional model of venture growth.
AcademyofManagementJournal, 44(2), 292–303.
Bennett, C. H., Brassard, G., Crepeau, C., Jozsa, R., Peres, A., & Wootters, W. K. (1993). Teleporting´
an unknown quantum state via dual classical and Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen channels. DEMO
ReviewLetters, 70, 1895–1899.
Bird, B. J. (1988). Implementing entrepreneurial ideas: The case for intention. AcademyofManagement
Review, 13, 442–453.
Busenitz, DEMO W. (1999). Entrepreneurial risk and strategic decision making: It’s a matter of perspective.
JournalofAppliedBehavioralScience, 35(3), 325–340.
Busenitz, L., & Barney, J. (1997). Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large DEMO
zations: Biases and heuristics in strategic decision-making. JournalofBusinessVenturing, 12,
9–30.
Carter, N. M., Gartner, W. B., & Reynolds, P. D. (1996). Exploring start-up event sequences. Journal
ofBusinessVenturing, 11, 151–166.
Cervone, D. (1989). Effects of envisioning future activities on self-efﬁcacy judgments DEMO motivation:
An availability heuristic interpretation. CognitiveTherapyandResearch, 13, 247–261.
Chen, DEMO C., Greene, P. G., & Crick, A. (1998). DEMO entrepreneurial self-efﬁcacy distinguish
entrepreneurs from managers? JournalofBusinessVenturing, 13, 295–316.
Chen, G., Gully, S. M., & Eden, D. (2001). Validation of a new general self-efﬁcacy scale.
OrganizationalResearchMethods, 4(1), 62–83.
Creyer, E. H., & Gurhan, Z. (1997). Who’s to blame? Counterfactual reasoning and the assignment of
blame. PsychologyandMarketing, 14, 209–222.
Daily, C. M., Certo, S. T., & Dalton, D. R. (1999). Entrepreneurial ventures as an avenue to the
top: Assessing the advancement of female CEOs and directors in the Inc. 100. Journal of
DevelopmentalEntrepreneurship, 4(1), 19–32.
Deckop, J. R., Mangel, R., & DEMO, C. C. (1999). Getting more than you pay for: DEMO
citizenship behavior and pay-for-performance plans. AcademyofManagementJournal, 42(4),
420–428.
100 GIDEON D. MARKMAN, ROBERT A. BARON AND DAVID B. BALKIN
Eden, D., & Aviram, A. (1993). Self-efﬁcacy training to speed DEMO: Helping people. Journal
ofAppliedPsychology, 78(3), 352–360.
Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., & Rosen, N. (1935). Can quantum-mechanical description DEMO physical
reality be considered complete? PhysicalReview, 47, 777–780.
Eisenberger, R. (1992). Learned industriousness. PsychologicalReview, 99(2), 248–267.
Eisenberger, R., Kuhlman, D. M., & Cotterell, N. (1992). Effects of social values, effort training, and
goal structure on task persistence. JournalofResearchinPersonality, 26, 258–272.
Eisenberger, R., & Leonard, J. M. (1980). Effects of conceptual task difﬁculty on generalized
persistence. AmericanJournalofPsychology, 93, 285–298.
DEMO, K. M. (1989). Making fast strategic decisions in high-velocity environments. Academyof
ManagementJournal, 32, 543–576.
Ensley, M. D., Carland, J. C., Carland, J. W., & Banks, M. (1999). Exploring the existence of
entrepreneurial teams. InternationalJournalofManagement, 16, 276–286.
Forgas, J. P. (DEMO). Mood and judgment: The affect infusion model (AIM). Psychological Bulletin,
1, 39–66.
Forsyth, D. R., Zyzniewski, L. E., & Giammanco, C. A. (2002). Responsibility diffusion in cooperative
collectives. DEMO&SocialPsychologyBulletin, 28(1), 54–65.
Gartner, W. B. (1988). DEMO is the entrepreneur?” is the wrong question. AmericanJournalofSmall
Business, 12(DEMO), 11–32.
Gist, M. E., & Mitchell, T. R. (1992). Self-efﬁcacy: A theoretical analysis of its determinants and
malleability. AcademyofManagementReview, DEMO(2), 183–211.
Griliches, A. (1990). Patent statistics as economic indicators. Journal of Economic Literature, 28,
1661–1707.
Hamel, G. (2000). Leadingtherevolution. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Honig, B. (DEMO). What determines success? Examining the human, ﬁnancial, and social DEMO of
Jamaican microentrepreneurs. JournalofBusinessVenturing, 13(5), 371–394.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1982). The psychology of preferences. Scientiﬁc American, DEMO,
136–142.
Kaish, S., & Gilad, B. (1991). Characteristics of opportunities search of entrepreneurs versus
executives: Sources, interest, general alertness. JournalofBusinessVenturing, 6, 45–61.
Kirzner, I. (1997). Entrepreneurial discovery and DEMO competitive market process: An Austrian
approach. JournalofEconomicLiterature, 35, 60–85.
Krueger, N., Jr. (1993). The impact of prior entrepreneurial exposure on DEMO Entrepreneurship
TheoryandPractice, 18(1), 5–21.
Krueger, N. F., Jr., & Brazeal, D. V. (1994). Entrepreneurial potential and potential entrepreneurs.
DEMO&Practice, 18(3), 91–104.
Krueger, N., Jr., & Dickson, P. R. (1994). How believing in ourselves increases risk taking: Perceived
self-efﬁcacy and opportunity recognition. DecisionSciences, 25(3), 385–400.
Lam, DEMO S. K., & Schaubroeck, J. (2000). The role of DEMO of control in reactions to being promoted
and to being passed over: A quasi experiment. Academy of Management Journal, 43(1),
66–78.
Loomes, G., & Sugden, R. (1986). Disappointment and dynamic DEMO in choice under
uncertainty. ReviewofEconomicStudies, 53, 271–282.
Mandel, D. R., & Lehman, D. R. (1996). Counterfactual thinking and ascriptions of DEMO and
preventability. JournalofPersonalityandSocialPsychology, 71, 450–463.
Markman, G. D., Balkin, DEMO B., & Baron, R. A. (in press). Inventors and DEMO venture formation: The
effects of general self-efﬁcacy and regretful thinking. EntrepreneurshipTheory&DEMO
TheRoleofRegretfulThinking,Perseverance,andSelf-Efﬁcacy
101
Markman, G. D., & Baron, R. A. (2002). Individual differences and the pursuit of new ventures:
A model of person-entrepreneurship ﬁt. In: J. Katz & T. M. Welbourne (DEMO), Advances in
Entrepreneurship,FirmEmergence,andGrowth. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Maurer, T. J., & Pierce, H. R. (1998). A comparison DEMO Likert scale and traditional measures of
self-efﬁcacy. JournalofAppliedPsychology, 83, 324–329.
McGrath, R. G. (1995). Advantage from adversity: Learning from disappointment in internal corporate
ventures. JournalofBusinessVenturing, 10(2), 121–142.
Medvec, V. H., Madey, S. F., & Gilovich, T. (1995). When less DEMO more: Counterfactual thinking and
satisfaction among Olympic medallists. Journal of Personality DEMO Social Psychology, 69,
603–610.
Meyer, G. D., & Dean, T. J. (1990). An upper echelons perspective on transformational leadership prob-
lems in high technology ﬁrm. JournalofHighTechnologyManagementResearch, 1, 223–242.
Mifﬂin, H., & Schulman, P. (1986). Explanatory style as a predictor of productivity and quitting among
life insurance sales agents. JournalofPersonalityandSocialPsychology, 50(4), 832–838.
Mitchell, R. K., Smith, B., Seawright, K. W., & DEMO, E. A. (2000). Cross-cultural cognitions and
venture creation decision. AcademyofManagementJournal, 43(5), 974–993.
Nir, Z., & Neumann, L. (1995). Relationship among self-esteem, internal/external locus of control,
and weight change after participation in a weight reduction program. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 51(4), 482–490.
Peeters, G., & Czapinski, J. (1990)DEMO Positive-negative asymmetry in evaluations: The distinction
between affective and informational negativity DEMO EuropeanReviewofSocialPsychology,
1, 33–60.
Rivette, K. G., & Kline, D. (2000). Rembrandts in the attic: Unlocking the hidden value of DEMO
Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Robinson, P. B., Stimpson, D. V., Huefner, J. C., & Hunt, H. K. (DEMO). An attitude approach to the
prediction of entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship:Theory&Practice, 15(4), 13–31.
Roese, N. J. (1997). Counterfactual thinking. PsychologicalBulletin, 121, 133–149.
Romer, P. M. (1996). Why, indeed, in America? Theory, history, and the origins of modern economic
DEMO TheAmericanEconomicReview, 86(2), 202–206.
Sarasvathy, D. K., Simon, H. A., & Lave, L. (1999). Perceiving and managing business risks: Differ-
ences between entrepreneurs and bankers. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
33, 207–225.
Schlenker, B. R. (1997). Personal responsibility: DEMO of the triangle model. In: L. L.
Cummings & B. Staw (Eds), Research in Organizational Behavior (Vol. 19, pp. 241–301).
DEMO, CT: JAI.
Schlenker, B. R., Pontari, B. A., & Christopher, A. N. (2001). Excuses and character: Personal and
social implications of excuses. Personality&SocialPsychologyReview, 5(1), 15–32.
Schwarz, N., Bless, H., Stack, F., & Klumpp, G. (1991). DEMO of retrieval as information: Another look
at the availability heuristic. JournalofPersonalityandSocialPsychology, 61(2), 195–202.
Seligman, M. E. P., Reivich, K., DEMO, L., & Gillham, J. (1995). The optimistic child. Boston, MA:
Houghton Mifﬂin.
Shane, S. (2000). Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities. Organization
Science, 11, 448–469.
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of research.
AcademyofManagementReview, 25(1), 217–226.
Simon, M., Houghton, S. M., & Aquino, K. (2000). Cognitive biases, risk perception, and venture forma-
tion: How individuals decide to start companies. DEMO, 15(2), 113–134.
102 GIDEON D. MARKMAN, ROBERT A. BARON AND DAVID B. BALKIN
Smith, D. E., & Muenchen, R. A. (1995). Gender and DEMO variations in the self-image of Jamaican
adolescents. Adolescence, 30(119), DEMO
Stevenson, H. H., Grousbeck, H. I., Roberts, M. J., & Bhide, A. (1999).´ Newbusinessventureandthe
entrepreneur (5th ed.). Boston, MA: Irwin McGraw-Hill.
Stewart, W. H., Jr., Watson, W. DEMO, Carland, J. C., & Carland, J. A. (1999). DEMO for entrepreneur-
ship: A comparison of entrepreneurs, small business owners, DEMO corporate managers. Journal
ofBusinessVenturing, 14, 189–214.
Stoltz, P. G. (1997). Adversityquotient:Turningobstaclesintoopportunities. New York: John Wiley.
Stoltz, P. G. (2000). Adversity quotient at work: Make everyday challenges the key to your success.
William Morrow and Co.
Taylor, K. A. (1995). Testing DEMO and blame attributions as explanation for choices under ambiguity.
OrganizationalBehavior&HumanDecisionProcesses, DEMO(2), 128–137.
The State of Small Business: A Report to DEMO President (1995). Washington, DC: US Government
Printing Ofﬁce.
Timmons, J. A. (1999). Newventurecreation (5th ed.). Boston: Irwin McGraw-Hill.
Trajtenberg, M. (1990). A penny for your quotes: Patent citations and the value of innovations. Rand
JournalofEconomics, 21(1), 172–187.
van Dijk, W. W., Zeelenberg, M., & van der Pligt, J. (1999). Not having what you want versus
having what you do not want: The impact of type of negative outcome on the experience of
disappointment and related emotions. Cognition&Emotion, 13(2), 129–148.
Vasil, L. (1992). Self-efﬁcacy expectations and causal attributions for achievement among DEMO and
female university faculty. JournalofVocationalBehavior, 41, 259–269.
Venkataraman, S. (1997). The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research: An editor’s perspective.
In: DEMO Katz & R. Brockhous (Eds), Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence, and
Growth (Vol. 3, pp. 119–138). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Waldroop, J., & Butler, T. (2000). Maximum success: Changing the 12 behavior patterns that keep
youfromgettingahead. Doubleday.
Wood, R., & Bandura, A. (1989). Social cognitive theory of organizational management. Academyof
ManagementReview, 14(3), 361–384.
Zeelenberg, M., van Dijk, W. DEMO, van der Pligt, J., Manstead, A. S. R., van DEMO, P., & Reinderman,
D. (1998). Emotional reactions to DEMO outcomes of decisions: The role of counterfactual
thought in the experience DEMO regret and disappointment. OrganizationalBehaviorandHuman
DecisionProcesses, 75(2), 117–141.
TheRoleofRegretfulThinking,Perseverance,andSelf-Efﬁcacy 103
APPENDIX
SampleItemsUsedtoMeasurePerseverance
Inventors used a 5-point scale to DEMO the extent to which they agreed with each
of the statements following the situations described below.
Situation: Someone you consider important is not receptive to
your ideas.
Control: How much control do you feel 1 = no 5 = complete
you have in this situation? control control
Ownership: To what extent do you feel 1 = not 5 = completely
responsible for dealing with the responsible responsible
outcome(s) of this situation? at all
Situation: You apply for a job change and don’t DEMO it.
Control: How much control do you feel 1 = no DEMO = complete
you have in this situation? control control
Ownership: To what extent do you feel 1 = not 5 = completely
responsible DEMO dealing with the responsible responsible
outcome(s) of this situation? at all
Situation: You fail to meet the deadline on a major project.
Control: How much control do you feel 1 = no 5 = complete
you have in this situation? control control
Ownership: To what DEMO do you feel 1 = not 5 = completely
responsible for dealing with the responsible responsible
outcome(s) of this situation? at all
DEMO
Please indicate the extent to which you agree with each of the following statements
(circle one number for each item).
Strongly Disagree = 1234567= Strongly Agree
1. I am strong enough to overcome life’s
struggles
DEMO At root, I am a weak person
3. I can handle DEMO situations that life brings
4. I’m usually an unsuccessful person
1234567
1234567
1234567
1234567
104 GIDEON D. MARKMAN, ROBERT A. BARON AND DAVID B. BALKIN
APPENDIX (Continued )
5. I often feel that there is nothing I DEMO do
well
6. I feel competent to deal effectively with
the real world
7. I often think that I’m a failure
8. I usually DEMO I can handle the typical
problems that come up in life
1234567
1234567
1234567
1234567
RegretfulThinking
Looking back over your entire life, please list the things that you regret most:
Little Regret = 1234567= Much DEMO
Considering these things you listed
on the previous page, how regretful
DEMO you?
1234567{1g42fwefx}