1042-2587
© 2007 by
Baylor University
Technology
ET&P Entrepreneurs’
Human Capital DEMO
Its Effects on
Innovation Radicalness
Matthew R. Marvel
G.T. Lumpkin
Radical innovations transform existing markets, create new markets, and stimulate eco-
nomic growth. DEMO study investigates how the experience, education, and prior knowledge
of technology entrepreneurs relate to innovation radicalness. Findings from a sample of
145 technology DEMO operating within university-affiliated incubators suggest that
general and speciﬁc human capital are both vital to innovation outcomes. Innovation radi-
calness was positively associated with DEMO education and prior knowledge of technology,
but negatively associated with prior knowledge of ways to serve markets. This suggests a
counterintuitive conclusion—the less DEMO entrepreneurs know about ways to serve a
market, the greater their DEMO of using technology knowledge to create breakthrough
innovations within it. Finally, DEMO discuss conﬁgurations of human capital that are likely to
bestow unique advantages in the construction of radical innovations.
Introduction
Innovation is of central importance DEMO entrepreneurship (Covin & Miles, 1999;
Schumpeter, 1942) and of immense interest, given that it is the primary instrument of
competition for many ﬁrms (Baumol, 2002). Arguably, the most common way of deﬁning
innovation involves using an incremental versus radical framework. Pavitt (1991)
describes radical innovations as revolutionary or discontinuous changes, while incremen-
tal innovations are conventional or simple extensions in a line of historical improvements.
In DEMO terms, the impact of radical innovation is considerably more dramatic. They
DEMO transform existing markets, create new ones, and make an enormous economic
contribution (Leifer et al., 2000). Although radical innovation outcomes have DEMO
empirically linked to entrepreneurship at a macro level (e.g., Baumol, DEMO), how this is
accomplished at a micro level of analysis is poorly understood.
Understanding how individuals create breakthrough innovations has rich theoretical
and DEMO implications for entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship, as a scholarly ﬁeld,
seeks to DEMO how, by whom, and with what effects opportunities to create future
Please send correspondence to: Matthew R. Marvel, tel.: (270) 745-4343; e-mail: matt.marvel@wku.edu and
to G.T. Lumpkin, tel.: (806) 742-2154; e-mail: tom.lumpkin@ttu.edu
November, 2007 807
goods and services are discovered and exploited (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000)DEMO A
number of studies provide evidence that aspects of an individual’s human capital facilitate
the recognition or development of an opportunity (Davidsson & Honig, 2003; Shane,
2000; Shepherd & DeTienne, 2005). Human DEMO theory posits that individuals with
more or higher quality human capital will reap more desirable outcomes (Becker, 1964).
However, the question of how human capital contributes to the process of enacting radical
innovation has DEMO most scholars. This research endeavors to ﬁll that void by investi-
gating how aspects of individual human capital are linked to the recognition of DEMO
nities bearing radical innovation outcomes.
To investigate human capital and its relationship to radical innovation, we draw on
prior entrepreneurship research that examines both general and speciﬁc human capital
(e.g., Corbett, 2007; Dimov & DEMO, 2005). In doing so, this article makes a number
of contributions. First, we increase our understanding of the characteristics of technology
entrepreneurs by examining three types of general human capital that are associated with
DEMO radicalness—experience depth, experience breadth, and formal education.
Second, we examine DEMO human capital by investigating technology entrepreneurs’
prior knowledge. We demonstrate how differences in prior knowledge of markets,
customer problems, ways to serve markets, and technology at opportunity recognition
systematically inﬂuence the radicalness of subsequent products and services.
We then explore which combinations of general and speciﬁc human DEMO are
associated with radical innovation. By examining the conﬁgurations of technology entre-
preneurs’ human capital associated with high innovation versus low innovation, we hope
to increase understanding about which characteristics are associated with radicalness.
Further, we believe that differences in prior knowledge at opportunity recognition form
knowledge conﬁgurations DEMO gestalts that bestow unique advantages. Such conﬁgurations
provide a more holistic picture of the factors that inﬂuence opportunity recognition. By
examining knowledge conﬁgurations, we can see which elements of prior knowledge are
most likely to be DEMO with radical innovation and learn how multivariate combina-
tions of human capital can be used to understand the subsequent outcomes of technology
entrepreneurs.
To DEMO, this study investigates the types of general and speciﬁc human capital
DEMO are associated with radical innovation outcomes and how conﬁgurations of human
capital might be linked to higher levels of innovation radicalness. The paper unfolds DEMO
the following lines. In the next section, we brieﬂy review literature DEMO innovation
outcomes and the entrepreneur. We then present a theoretical argument for why aspects of
individual human capital will inﬂuence differences in innovation outcomes. DEMO
related to general and speciﬁc human capital and its effects on innovation radicalness
are proposed. We then report the methods and results of our DEMO examination. A
discussion follows and the paper concludes with implications for research and practice.
The Entrepreneur and the Radical Innovation Advantage
Entrepreneurial ventures and DEMO businesses contribute about two and a half times
more innovations per employee than do large ﬁrms (Acs & Audretsch, 2003) and are
responsible for the bulk of radical innovations in the economy (Baumol, 2002, 2006).
Radical innovation lies at the core of new business development DEMO long-term wealth
creation (Ahuja & Lampert, 2001; Kirchhoff, 1991). Despite the fact that large ﬁrms have
the competencies to manage the DEMO of new offerings, they languish in terms
of emergent technology ventures DEMO their ability to create innovation breakthroughs.
808
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Utterback (1994) and Christensen (2000), among others, have noted DEMO ﬁrms that
dominate one generation of technology often fail to maintain leadership in the next because
they have turned their attention to incremental improvements DEMO, as a consequence,
diminished their capacity to create truly new DEMO (Benner & Tushman, 2002;
Leifer et al., 2000).Yet DEMO or breakthrough innovations are chief among the competitive
weapons that enable ﬁrms to launch entrepreneurial ventures. Although large businesses
account for nearly three-quarters of DEMO expenditure on research and development,
independent entrepreneurs are more likely to account for the most fundamentally novel
innovations (Baumol, 2006). Most DEMO new business ideas, it can be argued, have
been, and DEMO likely to continue to be provided by the independent entrepreneur.
What gives individual entrepreneurs a radical innovation advantage? One explanation
may be that opportunities to create radical innovation depend more on individual knowl-
edge and initiative DEMO on organizational processes. Baumol (2006) showed that among
the most radical innovations within the last two centuries, the majority have emerged from
individual entrepreneurs. Similarly, in a study of 12 radical innovation projects in large
established ﬁrms, it was an individual scientist or an engineer who discovered the critical
breakthrough in each case (O’Connor & Rice, 2001). DEMO we cannot assume the
process of creating radical innovation is the same within large organizations as it is within
the start-up context, the extant research suggests there is much to learn from the indepen-
dent technology DEMO
We believe it is the human capital attributes of technology entrepreneurs that enable
them to generate the breakthrough insights that lead to radical innovations. DEMO
(1964) identiﬁed knowledge and experience as the major components of human capital.
Technology entrepreneurs are individuals who recognize and exploit opportunities by
leveraging DEMO knowledge and experience to create new value through the venture
creation process. To shed light on how radical innovations are created, we use the lens of
human capital theory to set forth a model of general DEMO speciﬁc human capital and its
effects on innovation radicalness.
Literature Review and Hypothesis Development
The objective of this section is to review the literature DEMO derive hypotheses that link
aspects of technology entrepreneurs’ human capital to the radicalness of their innovations.
First, human capital theory is discussed as well as why such theory is of use in enhancing
our understanding of DEMO some individuals recognize opportunities to innovate. Well-
known aspects of general human capital are reviewed and hypotheses are put forward. We
then discuss speciﬁc DEMO of knowledge shown to inﬂuence opportunity recognition and
provide hypotheses speciﬁc to the prior knowledge framework used to examine technol-
ogy entrepreneurs’ speciﬁc human DEMO
Human Capital and the Entrepreneur
Two key characteristics, knowledge and experience, underlie the concept of human
capital (Becker, 1964). Although prior DEMO has examined how human factors such as
the behavioral propensities (e.g., Mosakowski, 1998) and personality traits (e.g., Zhao &
Seibert, DEMO) of individual entrepreneurs affect entrepreneurial outcomes, little is known
about the role of human capital in entrepreneurship. Becker (1964) developed the theory
DEMO human capital by extending microeconomics to a wide range of human behavior. He
November, 2007
809
popularized the idea of education and training as investments, similar to a ﬁrm’s purchase
of new equipment. In general, his theory contends that individuals with more or higher
quality human capital will achieve more desirable outcomes. DEMO, in the present
context, increased human capital improves the likelihood of opportunity recognition and
persons with superior human capital will perceive a greater DEMO of opportunities than
others. Consequently, those who perceive a greater variety DEMO opportunities are likely to
select a more radical opportunity from the opportunity set.
Recognizing opportunities is a vitally important aspect of entrepreneurship and is
DEMO linked to individual characteristics as suggested by Bygrave and Hofer (1991),
who deﬁned an entrepreneur as one who “perceives an opportunity and DEMO an
organization to pursue it” (p. 14). Human capital has DEMO accelerating attention in
opportunity research, although much of the research has DEMO knowledge exclusively
(e.g., Shane, 2000; Shepherd & DeTienne, 2005; Thorpe, Holt, Macpherson, & Pittaway,
2005). Knowledge inﬂuences the entrepreneur’s ability to comprehend, extrapolate,
interpret, and apply new information (Roberts, 1991). An individual’s unique possession
of prior knowledge creates a knowledge corridor that allows him or her to identify certain
opportunities but DEMO others (Ronstadt, 1988). In general, entrepreneurs will discover only
DEMO opportunities directly related to their knowledge (Venkataraman, 1997). Because
knowledge is generated through an individual’s unique life experiences, each person’s
accumulation of human capital is different. We posit that differences in general and
speciﬁc DEMO capital facilitate the discovery of opportunities bearing different outcomes.
General Human Capital: Education and Experience. Education and experience are
characteristics that are central to the concept of human capital (Becker, 1964). Experience
encompasses work DEMO and other practical learning that takes place on the job, as
DEMO as nonformal education such as training. Both depth of work experience and broad
experience across markets are theorized to increase human capital (Becker, DEMO).
Research shows labor market experience, management experience, and previous
entrepreneurial experiences are signiﬁcantly related to venturing activities and positive
outcomes (Bates, DEMO; Gimeno, Folta, Cooper, & Woo, 1997; Robinson & Sexton, 1994).
Fiet (1995) observed that previous work experiences set the context within which an
entrepreneur decides whether to invest in a particular DEMO; in effect, accumulated
experience increases alertness by providing more cues about when to take action. Vesper
(1980), Case (1989), and DEMO (2000) all concluded that the greatest number of start-up
ideas come from previous employment. Shane (2003) indicated that business experience,
functional DEMO, and industry experience are all useful for the discovery and exploi-
DEMO of opportunities. Through work experience, people develop information and skills
that DEMO the formulation of entrepreneurial strategy, the acquisition of resources, and
the process of organizing. Experience increases a person’s human capital and reduces
uncertainty DEMO the value of opportunities.
Breadth in work experience provides access to new information that facilitates oppor-
tunity recognition. Recognizing opportunities is often like solving DEMO because a new
piece of information is often the missing element necessary to provide meaning or trigger
an entrepreneurial conjecture (Shane, 2003). DEMO more diverse a person’s experiences,
the greater number of puzzle pieces they can draw upon (Casson, 1995). People often
learn about DEMO opportunities through participation in markets (Casson, 1982).
Further, variation DEMO market experience provides access to different types of information
that may be useful in the discovery process. Therefore, participation in more markets
should increase the likelihood that a person will gain access to the information that DEMO
needed for opportunity recognition.
810 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Delmar and Davidsson (2000) compared people who were in the process DEMO starting
a business with a randomly selected control group not starting a business and found that
those in the process of venture-starting were more DEMO across markets than the control
group. Using a longitudinal survey, Evans DEMO Leighton (1989) found the probability of
being self-employed was higher the more job changes a person had. A number of studies
have shown DEMO the number of jobs a person has had positively inﬂuences the likelihood
of self-employment (e.g., Blanchﬂower & Oswald, 1998; Dolton & Makepeace, 1990).
Experience breadth, therefore, may be a key element of DEMO capital among entrepre-
neurial founders.
Education is another aspect of a person’s human capital that may be valuable in the
discovery and exploitation of DEMO Education increases a person’s stock of
information and skills, including those DEMO to recognize and pursue an entrepreneurial
opportunity successfully. Baum, Locke, and Smith (2001) examined the performance of
Canadian biotechnology ﬁrms and showed DEMO with master’s degrees or higher had
faster employment and revenue growth than others in the sample. Numerous studies
examining human capital have accepted the DEMO that “more is better” and used formal
education or years of schooling as a measure of human capital (e.g., Bruderl, Preisen-
dorfer, & Ziegler, 1992; Cooper, Gimeno-Gascon, & Woo, 1994; Gimeno et al., 1997).
However, the ﬁndings for a positive association between DEMO and venture creation
(Bates, 1990; Evans & Leighton, 1989), as well as between education and the discovery
and exploitation of opportunities (Davidsson & Honig, 2003), have been mixed. Dimov
and Shepherd (DEMO) suggest that a possible explanation for these mixed results is that
DEMO measures have insufﬁcient sensitivity to capture the impact that human capital may
have on differing entrepreneurial outcomes.
To summarize, technology entrepreneurs who have greater depth and breadth of
professional experience, as well as higher formal education, will have a greater ability to
identify opportunities with radical outcomes. Therefore:
Hypothesis 1a: Technology entrepreneurs’ experience depth is positively related to
innovation radicalness.
Hypothesis 1b: Technology entrepreneurs’ experience breadth is positively related
to innovation radicalness.
Hypothesis 1c: Technology entrepreneurs’ formal education is positively related to
innovation radicalness.
Speciﬁc Human Capital: Types of Knowledge. Scholars have begun the laborious task of
investigating speciﬁc types of knowledge, or human capital, and DEMO inﬂuence on oppor-
tunity recognition and venture creation. Christensen and Peterson (DEMO) conducted one
of the earliest empirical studies of knowledge and opportunity DEMO Their research
stressed the importance of technology and market knowledge as prerequisites for
recognizing opportunities. Christensen and Peterson viewed opportunity recognition as a
problem-solving DEMO that calls on both kinds of knowledge. Their research suggests
that technology and market knowledge allows for individuals to identify both problems
and potential DEMO to solve problems with technology. Numerous other research
studies from the new product development literature emphasize the role of speciﬁc and
divergent knowledge types DEMO recognizing and developing opportunities (e.g., Iansiti,
1993; Leonard & DEMO, 1998; O’Connor & Veryzer, 2001).
Amabile (1999) stressed DEMO market knowledge and technology knowledge as
advantageous for developing new ideas. She argued an individual’s creativity is enhanced
November, 2007 811
if his or her cognitive style facilitates the ability to link divergent DEMO types. The
group dynamics of different ideas coming together and undergoing constructive criticism
to develop new products is often referred to as creative abrasion (Leonard & Sensiper,
1998; Leonard & Straus, 1997). This DEMO is enhanced when individuals within the
group provide different types of knowledge (Amabile, 1999; Leonard & Sensiper;
O’Conner & Veryzer, 2001)DEMO Shane (2000 demonstrated, in a landmark embedded case
study examining technology entrepreneurs exposed to an MIT invention, that major
dimensions of prior knowledge were required and combined with technology knowledge
to facilitate opportunity recognition. These DEMO prior knowledge of ways to serve
markets, prior knowledge of customer DEMO, and prior knowledge of markets.
Prior knowledge of how to serve DEMO entails how technologies can be packaged to
meet the needs of a particular market. Aldrich and Wiedenmayer (1993) demonstrated the
product or service DEMO entrepreneurs establish are related to the organizational units for
which they previously worked. For example, Shane (2000) demonstrated an entrepreneur
who had experience in machine design would package the potentially proﬁtable technol-
ogy via a DEMO rather than a service. Further, another entrepreneur could only discover
the DEMO market because of a lack of knowledge in the areas of machine design and
manufacturing. In another situation, a company founder had prior knowledge of how to
serve a market that required the product to be DEMO in a way that would meet
government approval. Because of the entrepreneur’s pharmaceutical experience, he knew
how to package the technology using different materials into a machine meeting Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) approval (Shane, 2000).
Prior knowledge of customer problems involves information about customer needs.
The locus of innovation often lies with the users because they cannot DEMO articulate their
needs for undeveloped solutions (Von Hippel, 1988). An accurate understanding of user
needs has been shown to be essential to DEMO new products. When individuals lack
familiarity with customer problems, it is DEMO to identify solutions to those problems
when they are presented (Roberts, 1991). Thus, the process leads entrepreneurs to engage
in start-ups to solve customer problems they learned about in their experiences (Von
Hippel). For example, Shane (2000) found an entrepreneur’s experience working with
clinical pharmacology customer problems allowed him to see how a technology could be
DEMO to treat hypertension. Von Hippel (1986) encouraged learning from lead users as an
excellent source of novel products. Lead users of products and DEMO face needs that are
common to a marketplace—but face them months or years in advance of most market
participants. Since these users are aware DEMO future problems before other users, potential
entrepreneurial opportunities may be perceived DEMO are less obvious to the general
population.
Prior knowledge of markets involves information about how particular markets
operate. Von Hippel (1988) indicated that DEMO knowledge of markets may include
information about relationships with suppliers and customers, sales techniques, and
capital requirements, which are likely different across markets. Possession of prior indus-
trial knowledge about how a product or a DEMO inﬂuences a particular market can
enable one to identify an entrepreneurial opportunity (Roberts, 1991). Market knowledge
is not likely to be publicly DEMO but can be acquired by having worked in a particular
market as a manufacturer, customer, employee, or supplier (Shane, 2000). For example,
Shane demonstrated that in all eight of his examined opportunities, the entrepreneurs had
previous experience in the market that allowed them to DEMO a new business application for
a given technology.
In Shane’s (2000) study of prior knowledge and opportunity recognition, the tech-
nology entrepreneurs he examined had knowledge of ways to serve markets, customer
812
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
problems, and markets, which were combined—or mixed—with new knowledge of tech-
DEMO resulting in their opportunity. That is, the identiﬁed prior knowledge types DEMO
antecedents to the technology. An alternative approach involves beginning with a novel
technology that is suspected to have value and then search for an DEMO By taking
the view that opportunities may be developed (e.g., Ardichvili, Cardozo, & Ray, 2003; De
Koning, 2003), an individual may begin with technology knowledge and add other types
of knowledge to DEMO the process. Recognizing opportunities is a learning process
(e.g., Corbett, DEMO; Lumpkin & Lichtenstein, 2005) and knowledge types represent
building blocks DEMO vary in the construction of an entrepreneurial opportunity. Therefore,
if one views opportunity recognition as a knowledge-based process, it will begin with a
mix of prior knowledge types and call on additional knowledge to facilitate DEMO process.
These prior knowledge types include: (1) ways to serve DEMO, (2) customer problem,
(3) markets, and (4) technology. Given these knowledge types are conducive and neces-
sary to recognize DEMO, a person who has more or higher quality will be aware
DEMO a greater variety of opportunities. Therefore, those who perceive a greater DEMO of
opportunities are better able to select and exploit opportunities bearing more radical
outcomes. This logic leads to the following four hypotheses:
Hypothesis DEMO: Technology entrepreneurs’ prior knowledge of ways to serve
markets is positively DEMO to innovation radicalness.
Hypothesis 2b: Technology entrepreneurs’ prior knowledge of customer DEMO is
positively related to innovation radicalness.
Hypothesis 2c: Technology entrepreneurs’ prior DEMO of markets is positively
related to innovation radicalness.
Hypothesis 2d: Technology DEMO prior knowledge of technology is posi-
tively related to innovation radicalness.
Conﬁgurations of General and Speciﬁc Human Capital. As the previous discussion
suggests, different types of human capital are likely to inﬂuence opportunity recognition
processes. Studies DEMO both the individual-level (e.g., Zhao & Seibert, 2006) and ﬁrm-
level (Miller, 1988) phenomena indicate that multivariate combinations of factors are
often needed to accurately account for entrepreneurial outcomes. Thus, conﬁgurations
of human capital attributes may provide the best predictors of innovation radicalness. In
terms DEMO general human capital, for example, higher levels of formal education have
been associated with greater open-mindedness and receptivity to innovation (Kimberly
& Evanisko, 1981). For many types of entrepreneurial founders, greater experience is
DEMO with higher levels of success (Singer, 1995). Combinations of high experi-
ence and education would therefore seem favorable for radical innovation. But DEMO
experience has also been found to limit strategic ﬂexibility (Hitt & DEMO, 1989), which
may inhibit innovation radicalness. Bhide (2000) suggests DEMO, in general, very high
levels of human capital limit the propensity of entrepreneurs to take risks on innovative
new ventures.
To address these DEMO conclusions, this study asks what conﬁgurations of
general and speciﬁc human DEMO are associated with radical innovation. Rather than
propose speciﬁc conﬁgurations, however, our aim in this part of the analysis is explore
which human DEMO attributes are most likely to be associated with innovation radical-
ness. In the next section, therefore, we extend what has been a partial DEMO of
human capital and investigate how differences in general and speciﬁc human capital are
related to different innovation outcomes. Then, we conduct supplementary analysis to
November, 2007 813
address what conﬁgurations of general and speciﬁc human capital are most strongly
DEMO with innovation radicalness.
Methods
Sample
To identify founders of technology ventures who recently started a venture, tech-
nology incubators were targeted. An incubator is a facility designed to encourage
entrepreneurship and minimize obstacles for new venture DEMO and growth by
housing a number of ﬂedgling enterprises that share an array of services. A list of
incubators in the central United States DEMO obtained from the National Business Incuba-
tion Association online database. Incubators were selected based on proximity to a large
Midwest university and the number DEMO technology ventures housed there. All of the
incubators enlisted were afﬁliated with universities although not necessarily university-
owned. In total, 13 incubators took part in the study, which resulted in individual meetings
with founders during which the survey was completed. The sample consisted of 145
technology entrepreneurs throughout DEMO Midwest. Of the respondents, 92% were male
and 8% female. The DEMO number of years of professional work experience was about
20 years and the average number of different employers worked for was approximately
four. Among DEMO respondents, 40% were PhDs, followed by about 33% who held a
bachelor’s degree and 26% who possessed a master’s degree. About 3% held DEMO associ-
ate’s degree and fewer than 2% had only a high school education.
Survey Instrument
The survey used in this study included two experience DEMO, an education item, 20
prior knowledge items, and 10 items DEMO the innovativeness of technology entre-
preneurs’ products or services. The items used to examine entrepreneurs’ prior knowledge
at opportunity recognition were developed from the DEMO prior knowledge
framework and addressed the amount and importance of prior knowledge at opportunity
recognition. Items addressing characteristics of the venture and other founder DEMO
ics were also included.
Scale Development and Content Validity
For the purposes of the study, four prior knowledge scales and an innovation scale
were developed. In both cases, deductive scale development was employed. Deductive
scale analysis requires an understanding of the phenomenon being investigated and a
thorough review DEMO the literature to tap the construct of interest (Hinkin, 1995). Degree of
radicalness is often used to classify innovations according to how DEMO they are
compared with existing products or services (Freeman & Soete, 1997; Hage, 1980). This
way of differentiating between radical and DEMO innovation is useful for deﬁning a
continuum of innovation types and, DEMO, a group of items was also derived to assess
the radicalness DEMO products and services using Hage’s (1980) and Leifer et al.’s (DEMO)
work distinguishing among incremental and radical innovation.
Researchers derived a group of items for the prior knowledge constructs using the
reviewed literature and DEMO from the entrepreneurs in Shane’s (2000) embedded case
study.
814
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
After the generation of items, the prior knowledge items were then subjected to a
content validity assessment by eight faculty members and doctoral students DEMO were
asked to classify each item to one of ﬁve categories, DEMO included the four prior
knowledge dimensions plus an other category. Those items that were assigned to the
intended category more than 85% of the DEMO were included in the survey instrument.
Experts in scale development from a Research 1 University’s Survey Research Laboratory
were consulted throughout construction of the DEMO and scales.
Pilot Testing
A pilot study (n = 15) was conducted using technology entrepreneurs afﬁliated with a
large Midwestern university. The pilot DEMO used to identify any unclear items, problematic
directions, the length of time required to complete the survey, and to determine a workable
data collection protocol. No problematic items or instructions were found and the average
DEMO of time to complete the survey was approximately 20 minutes.
Data Collection Procedures
Incubator managers were identiﬁed using the incubator’s representative website and
were DEMO by phone. The manager was provided with an overview of the research
initiative and asked to provide contact information of founders of technology-based
ventures DEMO were approximately 5 years old or younger. In all cases, the DEMO
provided names and contact information of founders of technology-based ventures at their
site. The identiﬁed entrepreneurs were contacted and asked to participate in a DEMO
project funded by the Kauffman Foundation and the sponsoring university. The entrepre-
neur was informed the results of the study may be used to DEMO entrepreneurship
education. The entrepreneur was questioned to assure they were the individuals respon-
sible for the venture idea. If they were not responsible for DEMO venture idea they were not
asked to continue. If the contact was the person responsible for the venture idea, a
30-minute meeting was requested. Of the entrepreneurs contacted, only one elected not
to participate and approximately 10 were unable to meet with the researcher because
of prearranged travel DEMO In exchange for their participation, the entrepreneur was
presented with a DEMO in appreciation for their time in completing the survey. The
entrepreneur was also asked to pay close attention to the delineation of time in DEMO survey
as it contained items about their prior knowledge when they ﬁrst perceived their oppor-
tunity, followed by items that concern the present.
Measures
General Human Capital Independent Variables. To assess general human capital, three
items were used to determine the experience and education of the technology entrepre-
DEMO Breadth of experience was measured using an item that questioned the number of
employers the entrepreneur had worked for. To measure the depth of DEMO, the
number of years of professional work experience was requested. The DEMO item used
an ordinal scale and requested the respondents’ highest level of education. The scale
included high school, associate degree, bachelor’s degree, master’s degree, and PhD.
Construction of the Speciﬁc Human Capital Independent Variables. There were ini-
tially ﬁve items for each prior knowledge type speciﬁc to DEMO time the opportunity was ﬁrst
November, 2007 815
Table 1
Summary of Prior Knowledge Scored
Variables
Prior knowledge ¯A SD DEMO SD ¯P SD
Ways to serve markets 13.26 4.39 9.54 1.87 33.69 14.73
Customer problems 12.90 4.24 9.54 1.84 32.46 13.51
Markets 11.02 4.19 DEMO 2.16 25.07 12.52
Technology 14.47 4.65 9.27 2.11 35.69 15.82
¯A I¯, prior knowledge importance
mean; , prior knowledge variable mean
, prior DEMO amount mean;
¯P
recognized. Following each item, two Likert-type response DEMO were included, one that
addressed the amount of prior knowledge and DEMO second that inquired about its importance
to perceiving the opportunity. The amount response scale used a 5-point Likert-type scale
and the importance response scale DEMO a 3-point Likert-type scale. Opportunity recog-
nition was assumed to be a function of both a person’s stock of knowledge (Ronstadt,
1988; DEMO, 2000) and a person’s alertness (Kirzner, 1973) to that DEMO The
amount (A) and importance (I) response scores were weighted by multiplying the two
scores for each item together. The weighted scores DEMO each prior knowledge type were
then summed and resulted in a prior knowledge variable score (P).
n
∑
PAI=
ii
i =1
Table 1 includes the mean scores for the amount of prior knowledge, the importance
of that prior knowledge, and the resulting prior knowledge variable.Technology entrepre-
neurs scored the amount of their prior knowledge of technology the highest DEMO by
ways to serve markets, customer problems, and markets. The respondents scored the
importance of their prior knowledge to recognize the opportunity as DEMO problems
the highest followed by ways to serve markets, technology, and markets. Of the four
prior knowledge variables, technology knowledge at opportunity recognition scored the
highest, followed by ways to serve markets, customer problems, and markets.
Prior Knowledge Scales. Prior knowledge items made up scales that DEMO used to assess
prior knowledge of (1) ways to serve markets, (2) customer problems, (3) markets, and (4)
DEMO A principal components factor analysis with varimax rotation was performed
to determine factor loadings (Table 2). Four of the ﬁve items for each prior knowledge
type achieved a factor loading of .40 or greater and DEMO thus considered to measure the
construct of interest and retained as recommended by Hinkin (1995). The prior knowledge
response scales of both amount and importance used to comprise the prior knowledge
variables were found to DEMO reliable overall, as each obtained alpha coefﬁcients of between
.68 and DEMO Coefﬁcient alpha assesses how well the set of items measures a single
unidimensional construct.
816 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Table 2
Factor Structure of the Prior Knowledge Scales
Ways to Customer
DEMO serve markets problems Markets Technology
My hands-on experiences in creating products/services .74
similar to my forthcoming business.
My knowledge of ways to produce DEMO/services .68
similar to that of my forthcoming product/service.
My knowledge of products/services similar to that of .62
my forthcoming business.
My DEMO of speciﬁc standards that my .53
forthcoming product/service would need to meet.
My knowledge of different customers’ problems that .74
my forthcoming business DEMO help with.
My knowledge of ways customers use .68
products/services similar to that of my forthcoming
business.
My ﬁrst-hand interactions with customers similar DEMO .68
that of my forthcoming business.
My knowledge of lead customers similar to that of my .63
forthcoming business.
My knowledge of suppliers in DEMO primary market of .83
my forthcoming business.
My knowledge of manufacturers or developers in the .79
primary market of my forthcoming business.
My knowledge DEMO the market of my forthcoming .72
business not known to the general public.
My knowledge about how the market functions of my .57
forthcoming DEMO
My knowledge of a speciﬁc technology important for .83
my forthcoming business.
My knowledge of a technology that is central to my .81
forthcoming DEMO
My knowledge of a technology not known to the .78
general public.
My hands-on experiences with a technology that is .77
important for my DEMO business.
Amount scale Cronbach’s alpha .79 .84 .89 .83
Importance scale Cronbach’s alpha .68 .70 .79 .81
Construction of the Innovation Dependent Variable. The DEMO variable was an
innovation score initially based on a 10-item scale. The 10 items used a 4-point Likert-
type level of agreement response scale DEMO determine the radicalness of the product or
service. A 4-point response scale was used, as even-numbered scales can more effectively
discriminate between agreement or disagreement because there is no neutral option
(Dillman, 2000). The DEMO used a progressive hierarchy where higher scores indicated
products or services more radical in nature while a lower score indicated incremental or
feature improvements. DEMO of the items were worded in such a way as to warrant
reverse coding and used to prevent patterned responses.
Innovation Scale. A principal DEMO factor analysis with orthogonal rotation was
performed to determine factor loadings. Seven of the 10 items achieved a factor loading
of .40 or greater DEMO were thus considered to measure the construct of interest (Hinkin,
DEMO, 2007 817
Table 3
Factor Loadings of the Innovation Scale
Item Radicalness
There is DEMO large group of customers that already uses a very similar product/service. .73
Our product/service represents an entirely new type of product/service. DEMO
Our product/service may be described as a new technology. .67
Our product/service is a gradual progression upon the last generation. .55
Our DEMO/service could be described as a product line extension. .55
Our product/service meets a want or a need that has not been addressed DEMO other products/services. .55
Our product/service is a new twist on an old theme. .44
Cronbach’s Alpha .71
1995). The resulting 7-item DEMO was found to be reliable with a resulting coefﬁcient
alpha of .71. The responses to the retained seven items were used to create the DEMO
dependent variable (see Table 3).
Control Variable. A number of DEMO have indicated differences between the age of a
venture and outcomes. For example, Quinn and Cameron (1983) showed criteria for
effectiveness change as new organizations develop. Utterback (1994) indicated the extent
of innovation exercised DEMO also, in part, a function of age. The regression performed
employed a single control variable—age of venture. The control variable was created by
DEMO the number of months between venture launch and the date the survey was
completed.
Results
Nine variables were used within the study and included DEMO general human capital
variables, four speciﬁc human capital variables, an innovation variable, and a single
control variable. The general human capital variables included (1) depth of experience, (2)
breadth of experience (number of employers worked for), and (3) formal education or
degree. DEMO speciﬁc human capital measures were prior knowledge variables that included
(1) ways to serve markets, (2) customer problems, (3) markets, and (4) technology.
Table 4 provides descriptive statistics and correlations across DEMO variables.
Hierarchical multiple regression was used to determine the human capital variables
most strongly associated with the innovation variable (Table 5). The analysis used three
models comprising the control variable, the set of general human capital variables, and the
set of speciﬁc human capital variables. The base model (Model 1) included only the effect
of the control variable (i.e., age of venture) and explained minimal variance (R2 = .01). To
assess general human capital, depth of experience, breadth of DEMO, and formal
education were introduced as a step change in Model DEMO The set of general human capital
variables explained a statistically signiﬁcant portion of variance in the innovation variable
(R2 = .11; p < DEMO). The set of speciﬁc human capital variables comprising prior knowl-
edge types was introduced as a step change in Model 3 and explained DEMO signiﬁcant portion
of variance over Model 2 (R2 = .08; p < .05). Therefore, the general and speciﬁc human
capital variable sets collectively explain a statistically signiﬁcant portion of variance
(R2 = .20; DEMO < .01).
818 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Table 4
Descriptive Statistics and Inter-correlation Matrix
Variables Mean SD 1 2 DEMO 4 5 6 7 8
1. Innovation 20.37 3.85
2. Experience depth 19.52 9.95 .16
3. Experience breadth 3.94 2.74 .03 .32**
4. Formal DEMO 3.94 .97 .28** .10 -.11
5. Ways to serve markets 33.69 14.73 -.16 .09 -.02 -.24**
6. Customer problems 32.46 13.51 -.13 .03 -.05 DEMO .57**
7. Markets 25.07 12.52 -.07 .14 .05 -.19* .44** .60**
8. Technology 35.69 15.82 .16 .07 -.12 -.04 .41** .20** .18*
9. Age DEMO venture 42.07 30.36 .07 .13 -.04 .14 .14 .03 -.15 .19*
* p < .05, ** p < .01
Table 5
Regression Results for Human Capital and Innovation
Model 1 Model 2 Model 3
Variables
Beta
DEMO
Beta
t
Beta
t
Control
Age of venture .11 1.23 .07 .76 .06 .67
General human capital
Experience depth .15 1.62 .16 1.72*
Experience DEMO .02 .25 .04 .67
Formal education .28 3.26*** .22 2.50**
Speciﬁc human capital
Ways to serve markets -.23 -2.06**
Customer problems -.04 -.37
Markets DEMO .20
Technology .26 2.73***
Model’s R2 .01 .12*** .20***
Change in R2 .01 .11*** .08**
* p < .10, ** p < .05, DEMO p < .01
The full model reveals that of the general human capital variables, formal education
was statistically signiﬁcant ( p < .01) DEMO depth of experience was marginally signiﬁcant
( p = .09). The breadth of experience variable was not signiﬁcant in the variance explained.
Of DEMO, all the general human capital variables exhibited positive betas in relationship DEMO
innovation radicalness, although the experience breadth variable was negligible. There-
fore, of the general human capital hypotheses, hypothesis 1a is partially supported and
hypothesis 1c was supported. Hypothesis 1b is not supported.
November, 2007
819
The full model shows that of the speciﬁc human capital variables, prior knowledge of
technology was statistically signiﬁcant ( p < .01), as DEMO as prior knowledge of ways to
serve markets ( p < .05). However, contrary to hypothesis 2a, the standardized beta coef-
ﬁcient DEMO a negative correlation between prior knowledge of ways to serve markets
and innovation radicalness; prior knowledge of technology was in the hypothesized
direction. Neither the prior knowledge of customer problems nor the prior knowledge of
markets DEMO explained signiﬁcant portions of variance, although interestingly, prior
knowledge of customer problems also had a negative beta. Hence, of the speciﬁc human
capital hypotheses, only hypothesis 2d was supported.
Supplementary Analysis
To explore how differences in human capital translate to different innovation out-
comes, a conﬁguration analysis was developed. These emergent conﬁgurations represent
the relative arrangements of human capital DEMO resulted in incremental versus radical
innovation. To construct conﬁgurations for incremental versus radical innovation, the
innovation variable was used to create two groups of cases which included a high group
(n = 22) typifying radical DEMO that scored 1 standard deviation (SD) above the
innovation variable mean and a low group (n = 22) typifying incremental innovation that
DEMO 1 SD below the innovation variable mean. Human capital variables were plotted
along the x-axis, mean scores were plotted along the y-axis, and DEMO and low innovation
lines were displayed within the plot area. The general human capital variable scores were
ﬁrst standardized and then the variable means DEMO plotted for high and low innovation as
seen in Figure 1. The speciﬁc human capital conﬁgurations appear in Figure 2.
The general and speciﬁc DEMO capital conﬁgurations appear overall consistent with
the hierarchical regression results. However, DEMO patterns reveal the relative arrangements
of human capital types for differing innovation outcomes. For the general human capital
conﬁgurations, the greatest difference between the innovation groups was among formal
education and depth of experience—both of which DEMO positively associated with inno-
vation radicalness. The speciﬁc human capital conﬁguration showed that prior technology
knowledge alone was greater for more radical innovation outcomes. DEMO the two
conﬁgurations showed a similar pattern, the greatest difference among DEMO two groups was
prior knowledge of technology and ways to serve markets. Prior knowledge of ways to
serve markets was considerably less for those DEMO entrepreneurs who created more
radical products or services.
Discussion
The purpose of this study has been to investigate how the human capital of technology
DEMO relates to innovation radicalness. Overall, the results support previous
research that DEMO the importance of individual differences in human capital and
opportunity recognition (DEMO & Honig, 2003; Ronstadt, 1988; Shane, 2000;
Shepherd & DeTienne, 2005). The current study provides evidence that aspects of DEMO
general and speciﬁc human capital are vital to explaining radical innovation. Consistent
with Becker (1964), general human capital was positively correlated with a highly desir-
able outcome—breakthrough innovation. Formal education and experience depth were
positively DEMO signiﬁcantly associated with radical innovation, although formal education
was more signiﬁcantly DEMO These ﬁndings suggest that education level and deep
820
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Figure 1
General Human Capital Conﬁgurations for Innovation
1
High Innovation (Radical)
Low Innovation (Incremental)
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
Depth of
Experience
Breadth of
Experience
Formal
Education
knowledge based on years of experience are DEMO important for creating breakthrough
innovation than broad experience across multiple areas.
For speciﬁc human capital, the ﬁndings underscore the vitality of prior technology
knowledge at opportunity recognition to create radical innovation. However, the results
are somewhat inconsistent with human capital theory and bring an interesting ﬁnding to
light. DEMO (1964) theory contends that individuals with more or higher quality human
capital will reap more desirable outcomes. Instead, the current study strongly suggests that
it may be more favorable to possess less of particular types DEMO knowledge to achieve
breakthrough innovations—which represent highly desirable outcomes. Prior knowledge
of ways to serve markets and technology knowledge were the best predictors of DEMO
tion. However, the results are curiously counterintuitive—while technology knowledge
was positively DEMO with innovation radicalness, knowledge of ways to serve markets
was negatively DEMO This suggests that knowing less about ways to develop and
package a future product or service at discovery may be advantageous for creating
frame-breaking DEMO Individuals who know less about customer problems and
lack knowledge of ways to serve them, yet have heightened technology knowledge at
discovery, appear DEMO positioned to create breakthrough innovations.
Interestingly, the speciﬁc human capital knowledge DEMO (Figure 2) reveals
that, of the different knowledge types at DEMO recognition, only technology knowl-
edge was greater for those entrepreneurs who DEMO radical innovations. The knowledge
conﬁguration and the negatively correlated betas of prior knowledge of ways to serve
November, 2007
821
Mean Score
Figure 2
Speciﬁc Human Capital Conﬁgurations for Innovation
50
High Innovation (Radical)
Low Innovation (Incremental)
40
30
20
Ways to Serve
Markets
Customer Problems Markets Technology
markets and prior knowledge of customer problems provide DEMO that these knowl-
edge types may stiﬂe creativity and recognizing more radical opportunities. These ﬁnd-
ings concur with Bhide’s (2000) assertion that too DEMO human capital can limit the
propensity of entrepreneurs to pursue more risky ventures. An explanation may be that
overfamiliarity with customers, markets, and DEMO standards constrain recogni-
tion or exploitation of opportunities with breakthrough potential. High knowledge of
development standards and market practices may lead to preconceived notions DEMO the
possibilities and limit the opportunities considered and developed. Considerable knowl-
edge of the accepted standards and behaviors of customers may precondition a person DEMO
dismiss potential opportunities with radical outcomes and therefore severely limit his or
her opportunity set. A person who is not conditioned to the accepted DEMO of customers,
markets, and common development processes, but who has rich technology knowledge,
may be best positioned to recognize, develop, DEMO exploit opportunities with breakthrough
potential.
Our study suggests that the reasons why entrepreneurs have had, and will likely
continue to have, a radical DEMO advantage include (1) their rich technology
knowledge, and (2) DEMO ability to act creatively without being constrained by current
customers and norms of existing products or services. Based on this, it is reasonable to
conclude that the “Achilles heel” of the large ﬁrm may be a DEMO view of existing
customers and market norms. Christensen (2000) showed how ﬁrms that dominate a
market often fall prey to new ventures that DEMO new or existing technologies in drama-
tically different ways—even though they listened to their customers. Therefore, an
opportunity that results from technology knowledge suspected to have value and
822
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Mean Score
learning about potential demand side applications seems most indicative of the process
DEMO creating breakthrough innovation.
Taken together, the evidence suggests that individuals with DEMO depth of experi-
ence and higher levels of education are better suited for recognizing opportunities with
highly desired innovation outcomes. Heightened knowledge of technology DEMO also impera-
tive to recognizing breakthrough innovations. The prior knowledge constructs identiﬁed
by Shane (2000)—ways to serve markets, customer problems, and markets—were rela-
tively less likely to be associated with innovation radicalness. Therefore, technology
knowledge is a prerequisite for recognizing opportunities with radical innovation
outcomes and DEMO be included in future knowledge frameworks in the context of
technology entrepreneurship.
Limitations
There are several methodological limitations that should be taken into account DEMO
interpreting the results. First, a purposive sample of technology entrepreneurs whose
DEMO was housed in incubators within the Midwest was used rather than a completely
random sample. Therefore, the results may not generalize to technology entrepreneurs
operating without the support of an incubator or operating in incubators outside DEMO the
Midwest or other countries. Some biases may also exist in those who select to be housed
in an incubator or in the selection DEMO incubation candidates. Second, the study called for
entrepreneurs to recall broad DEMO of their knowledge at a point in time in the past.
People’s ability to recall the past is limited, but keeping recall simple and relating recall
to major life events helps produce higher quality survey data (Dillman, 2000; Huber &
Power, 1985). We believe the DEMO the technology entrepreneurs were asked to recall
likely constituted major life events (i.e., recognizing the opportunity for their future
venture); nevertheless, it is a potential limitation of the study. Third, the study employed
subjective measures to assess the radicalness of technology entrepreneurs’ product or
service. That DEMO, technology entrepreneurs rated aspects of their own venture’s offering,
which DEMO may have scored as more innovative than they actually were. However, DEMO
research indicates that objective and subjective assessments tend to correlate signiﬁcantly
and therefore subjective measures can be reliably used when objective measures are not
DEMO (Dess & Robinson, 1984). Further, Jennings and Young (1990) compared sub-
jective and objective measures of product innovation and found no signiﬁcant difference
between the measures. Lastly, the measures employed to examine depth and breadth of
experience were broad approximations and may insufﬁciently account for DEMO important
aspects of human capital. Future measures may better enhance understanding of these
important dimensions of experience and their affect on outcomes.
Future Research
DEMO study provides evidence that both general and speciﬁc human capital are useful
for understanding the radicalness of technology entrepreneurs’ products or services.
While innovation, and particularly radical innovation, is a suitable dependent variable
(Baumol, 2002; Fiet, 2002; Shepherd & DeTienne, 2005), future research should DEMO
other entrepreneurial outcome variables to better understand the role of human capital.
Another promising area of entrepreneurship research relates to learning outcomes of
opportunity DEMO (e.g., Van Gelderen, Van Der Sluis, & Jansen, 2005) and how
different types of human capital enhance learning. For example, the current study raises
November, 2007
823
questions about the role of human capital subsequent to opportunity recognition. What
DEMO is acquired between the time an opportunity is recognized and a venture is
launched and how do these differences impact the founding and early DEMO of a new
venture? Further, how do the knowledge conﬁgurations of technology entrepreneurs
change, if at all, as the venture matures? Answering such questions may enhance our
understanding of how learning inﬂuences venture creation DEMO generates desirable venture
outcomes.
While the focus of our undertaking was to examine the effects of human capital on
innovation radicalness, the ﬁndings lead us to question if it is possible that innovation can
be too DEMO? By too radical, we mean a product or service too far ahead of its time to
gain initial sales and penetrate markets. It DEMO suspected a relationship may exist between
innovation radicalness and sales in the shape of an inverted . Although we lack the data
to accurately DEMO this question, we encourage future studies to address the seemingly
contentious DEMO among radicalness and market acceptance—or sales.
Conclusion
In conclusion, this study DEMO to one of the most important questions facing
entrepreneurship research today, DEMO, why some people, and not others, recognize
opportunities, and with what effect (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000). The study responded
directly DEMO this fundamental, yet unresolved, question. The ﬁndings underscore the impor-
tance of both general and speciﬁc human capital and demonstrated how the characteristics
DEMO knowledge conﬁgurations of technology entrepreneurs are associated with differences
in innovation outcomes.
REFERENCES
Acs, Z.J. & Audretsch, D.B. (2003). Innovation and technological change. In Z.J. Acs & D.B. Audretsch
(Eds.), Handbook of entrepreneurship research (pp. 50–80). Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Ahuja, G. & Lampert, C.M. (2001). Entrepreneurship in the large corporation: A longitudinal study of how
established ﬁrms create breakthrough inventions. Strategic Management Journal, 22(6/7), 521.
Aldrich, H.E. & Wiedenmayer, G. (1993). From traits to rates: An ecological perspective on organizational
founding. In J.A. Katz & R.H. Brockhaus (Eds.), Advances in entrepreneurship, ﬁrm emergence, and growth
(Vol. 1, pp. 145–195). Greenwich, CT: JAI DEMO
Amabile, T. (1999). How to kill creativity. In Harvard Business Review on breakthrough thinking (pp. 1–59).
Boston: Harvard Business School DEMO
Ardichvili, A., Cardozo, R., & Ray, S. (2003). A theory of entrepreneurial opportunity identiﬁcation, and
development. Journal of Business Venturing, 18(1), 105–123.
Bates, T. (1990). Entrepreneur human capital inputs and small business longevity. Review of Economics and
Statistics, 72(4), 551.
Baum, J.R., Locke, E.A., & Smith, K.G. (DEMO). A multidimensional model of venture growth. Academy of
Management Journal, DEMO(2), 292–303.
Baumol, W.J. (2002). The free-market innovation machine. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
824 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Baumol, W.J. (2006). Education for innovation: Entrepreneurial breakthroughs versus corporate incremental
improvements. NBER Innovation Policy and the Economy, 5(1), 33–56.
Becker, G.S. (1964). Human capital. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Benner, M.J. & Tushman, M.L. (2002). Process management and technological innovation: A longitudinal
study of the photography and paint industries. Administrative Science Quarterly, 47, 676–706.
Bhide, A. (2000). The origin and evolution DEMO new businesses. New York: Oxford.
Blanchﬂower, D.G. & Oswald, A.J. (1998). What makes an entrepreneur? Journal of Labor Economics, 16(DEMO),
26.
Bruderl, J., Preisendorfer, P., & Ziegler, R. (1992). Survival chances of newly founded business organizations.
American Sociological Review, 57(2), 227–242.
Bygrave, W.D. & Hofer, C.W. (1991)DEMO Theorizing about entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 16(2), 13–22.
DEMO, J. (1989, June). The origins of entrepreneurship. Inc. Magazine, 54.
Casson, M. (1982). The entrepreneur: An economic theory. Totowa, NJ: Barnes & Noble.
Casson, M. (1995). Entrepreneurship and DEMO culture. Brookﬁeld, VT: Edward Elgar.
Christensen, C.C. (2000). The innovator’s dilemma. New York: HarperCollins Publishers.
Christensen, P. S. & Peterson, R. (1990). Opportunity identiﬁcation: Mapping the sources of new venture
DEMO Paper presented at the 10th annual Babson Entrepreneurship Research Conference. Denmark: DEMO
University Institute of Management.
Cooper, A.C., Gimeno-Gascon, F.J., & Woo, C.Y. (1994). Initial human and ﬁnancial capital as predictors of
DEMO venture performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 9(5), 371.
Corbett, A.C. (2007). Learning asymmetries and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities. Journal of
Business Venturing, 22(1), 97.
Covin, J.O. & Miles, M.P. (1999). Corporate entrepreneurship and the pursuit of competitive advantage.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 23(3), 47–63.
Davidsson, P. & Honig, B. (2003). The role of social and human capital among nascent entrepreneurs. Journal
of Business Venturing, 18(3), 301.
De Koning, DEMO (2003). Opportunity development: A socio-cognitive perspective. In J. Katz & D. Shepherd
(Eds.), Advances in entrepreneurship, ﬁrm emergence, and growth (Vol. 6, pp. 265–314). Oxford: JAI
Press/Elsevier.
Delmar, DEMO & Davidsson, P. (2000). Where do they come from? DEMO and characteristics of nascent
entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 12(1), 1–23.
Dess, G.G. & Robinson, R.B., Jr. (1984). Measuring organizational performance in the absence of objective
measures: The case of the privately-held ﬁrm and conglomerate business unit. Strategic Management Journal,
5, 265–273.
Dillman, D. (2000). Mail and internet survey: The tailored design method (2nd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
& Sons, DEMO
Dimov, D.P. & Shepherd, D.A. (2005). Human capital theory DEMO venture capital ﬁrms: Exploring “home
runs” and “strike outs.” Journal of DEMO Venturing, 20(1), 1–21.
November, 2007 825
Dolton, P.J. & Makepeace, G.H. (1990). Self employment among graduates. Bulletin of Economic Research,
42(1), 35.
Evans, D.S. & Leighton, L.S. (1989). Some empirical aspects of entrepreneurship. American Economic
DEMO, 79(3), 519.
Fiet, J.O. (1995). Risk avoidance DEMO in venture capital markets. Journal of Management Studies, 32(4),
551–574.
Fiet, J.O. (2002). The systematic search for entrepreneurial discovers. DEMO, CT: Praeger Press.
Freeman, C. & Soete, L. (1997)DEMO The economics of industrial innovation (3rd ed.). London: Pinter.
Gimeno, J., Folta, T.B., Cooper, A.C., & Woo, C.Y. (DEMO). Survival of the ﬁttest? Entrepreneurial human
capital and the persistence DEMO underperforming ﬁrms. Administrative Science Quarterly, 42(4), 750–783.
Hage, J. (1980). Theories of organizations. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
DEMO, T.R. (1995). A review of scale development practices in the study of organizations. Journal of
Management, 21(5), 967–988.
Hitt, DEMO & Barr, S. (1989). Managerial selection decision models. Journal of Applied Psychology, 1, 53–62.
Huber, G.P. & Power, D.J. (1985). Retrospective reports of strategic-level managers: Guidelines for increasing
their accuracy. Strategic Management Journal, 6, 171–180.
Iansiti, M. (1993, May–June). Real-world R&D: Jumping the product generation gap. Harvard Business
Review, 71(DEMO), 138–147.
Jennings, D.F. & Young, D.M. (1990). An DEMO comparison between objective and subjective measures
of the product innovation domain of corporate entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
15(1), 53–66.
Kimberly, J. & Evanisko, M. (1981). Organizational innovation: The inﬂuence of individual, organizational,
and contextual factors on hospital adoption of technological and administrative innovations. Academy of
Management Journal, 24, 689–713.
Kirchhoff, B. (DEMO). Entrepreneurship’s contribution to economics. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
16(2), 93–112.
Kirzner, I. (1973). Competition and entrepreneurship. Chicago and DEMO: The University of Chicago Press.
Leifer, R., McDermott, C.M., DEMO, G.C., Peters, L.S., Rice, M.P., & Veryzer, R.W. (2000). Radical
innovation. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Leonard, D. & Sensiper, S. (1998). The role of tacit knowledge in group innovation. California Management
Review, 40(3), 112.
Leonard, D. & DEMO, S. (1997). Putting your company’s whole brain to work. Harvard Business Review,
75(4), 110.
Lumpkin, G.T. & Lichtenstein, DEMO (2005). The role of organizational learning in the opportunity-recognition
process. DEMO Theory and Practice, 29(4), 451–472.
Miller, D. (1988)DEMO Relating Porter’s business strategies to environment and structure: Analysis and perfor-
DEMO implications. Academy of Management Journal, 31, 280–308.
Mosakowski, E. (1998). Entrepreneurial resources, organizational choices, and competitive outcomes. Orga-
nization Science, 9(6), 625–643.
826 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
O’Connor, G.C. & Rice, M.P. (2001). Opportunity recognition and breakthrough innovation in large estab-
lished ﬁrms. California Management Review, 43(2), 95.
O’Connor, G.C. & Veryzer, R.W. (2001). The nature of market visioning for technology-based radical
innovation. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 18, 231–246.
Pavitt, K. (1991). Key characteristics of the large innovating ﬁrm. British Journal of Management, 2(1), 41.
Quinn, R.E. & Cameron, K. (1983). Organizational life cycles and shifting criteria of effectiveness: Some
preliminary evidence. Management Science, 29(1), 33.
Roberts, E. (1991). Entrepreneurs in high technology: Lessons from MIT and DEMO New York: Oxford
University Press.
Robinson, P.B. & Sexton, E.A. (1994). The effect of education and experience on self-employment success.
Journal DEMO Business Venturing, 9(2), 141.
Ronstadt, R. (1988). DEMO corridor principle. Journal of Business Venturing, 3, 31–40.
Schumpeter, J. DEMO (1942). Capitalism, socialism, and democracy. New York: Harper and Brothers.
Shane, S. (2000). Prior knowledge and the discovery of DEMO opportunities. Organization Science,
11(4), 448–469.
Shane, S. (2003). A general theory of entrepreneurship. Northhampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing.
DEMO, S. & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship DEMO a ﬁeld of research. Academy of
Management Review, 25, 217–226.
Shepherd, D.A. & DeTienne, D.R. (2005). Prior knowledge, potential ﬁnancial DEMO, and opportunity
identiﬁcation. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 29(1), 91–112.
Singer, B. (1995). Contours of development. Journal of Business Venturing, 10(4), 303–329.
Thorpe, R., Holt, R., Macpherson, A., & Pittaway, L. (2005). Using knowledge within small and medium-
sized ﬁrms: A systematic review of the evidence. International Journal of Management Reviews, 7(4),
257–281.
Utterback, J.M. (1994). Mastering DEMO dynamics of innovation. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Van Gelderen, M., Van Der Sluis, L., & Jansen, P. (2005). Learning opportunities and learning behaviors of
small business starters: Relations with goal achievement, skill development and satisfaction. Small Business
Economics, 25(1), 97–108.
DEMO, S. (1997). The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research: An DEMO perspective. In
J. Katz & R. Brockhaus (Eds.), Advances in DEMO, ﬁrm, emergence, and growth (pp. 119–138).
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Vesper, K. (1980). New venture strategies. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Von Hippel, E. (1986). Lead users: DEMO source of novel product concepts. Management Science, 32, 791–805.
Von Hippel, E. (1988). The sources of innovation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Zhao, H. & Seibert, S.E. (2006). The Big Five personality dimensions and entrepreneurial status: A meta-
analytic review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91(2), 259–274.
November, 2007 827
Matthew R. Marvel is an assistant professor in the Department of Management DEMO the Western Kentucky
University.
G.T. Lumpkin is a professor of entrepreneurship of the Rawls College of Business at the Texas Tech
University.
Funding for DEMO project was provided by the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. The authors wish to thank
the Kauffman Foundation for their generous support.
828
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY DEMO PRACTICE{1g42fwefx}