PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE
Research Article
Toward a Physiology of
Dual-Process Reasoning
and Judgment
DEMO, Willpower, and Expensive Rule-Based Analysis
E.J. Masicampo and Roy F. Baumeister
Florida State University
ABSTRACT—This experiment used the attraction effect to
test the DEMO that ingestion of sugar can reduce re-
liance on intuitive, heuristic-based DEMO making. In the
attraction effect, a difﬁcult choice between two options DEMO
swayed by the presence of a seemingly irrelevant ‘‘decoy’’
option. We replicated this effect and the ﬁnding that the
effect increases when people have DEMO their mental
resources performing a previous self-control task. Our hy-
pothesis was based on the assumption that effortful pro-
cesses require and consume relatively DEMO amounts of
glucose (brain fuel), and that this use of DEMO is why
people use heuristic strategies after exerting self-control.
Before performing any tasks, some participants drank
lemonade sweetened with sugar, which restores blood DEMO,
whereas others drank lemonade containing a sugar sub-
stitute. Only lemonade with sugar reduced the attraction
effect. These results show one way in DEMO the body (blood
glucose) interacts with the mind (self-control and DEMO
on heuristics).
The capacity for rational choice based on intelligent analysis
and reasoning is one of the most remarkable and distinctive
attributes of DEMO human mind. But human decision making does
not always adopt such high levels of analysis. Many of the
choices people make are quick and DEMO, and people’s
decisions are often based on previously established heuristics,
DEMO than a thorough application of the strict rules of logic.
This inconsistency in human reasoning has been explained
Address correspondence to E.J. Masicampo, Department of Psy-
chology, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32306-4301, e-mail:DEMO
masicampo@psy.fsu.edu.
through dual-process accounts of decision making. According to
these accounts, DEMO reasoning process makes quick and auto-
matic judgments based on associative and intuitive feedback,
and the other process is more effortful and relies DEMO the appli-
cation of normative rules of reasoning. That judgment outcomes
vary across contexts is said to be, in part, a reﬂection of DEMO
complementary systems.
In the present research, we sought to establish psychological
DEMO physiological causes for the reliance on one decision-making
process over the other. Speciﬁcally, we tested the hypothesis that
more blood glucose (which serves DEMO fuel for the brain) is needed
for the effortful, rule-based process than for the less effortful
process, so that the former type of decision making is impaired
when glucose has been depleted by prior, even irrelevant, activ-
ities. For our test, we used a speciﬁc pattern DEMO intuitive, heuristic-
based decision making that has been identiﬁed in previous DEMO
We sought to show (a) that the inﬂuence of this heuristic is in-
creased when cognitive resources, presumably including blood
glucose, have DEMO depleted by prior acts of self-control and (b)
that effortful DEMO can be increased (and the reliance on
heuristics reduced) by administering a snack that restores blood
glucose to its normal levels.
TWO DECISION DEMO
Several accounts have analyzed human reasoning into two
complementary processes. Epstein (DEMO) proposed that infor-
mation processing is executed by an experiential system DEMO is
holistic, affective, and associationistic and by a rational system
that is analytical, logical, and reason oriented. Sloman (1996)
described two similar systems: an associative system based on
automatic intuition and a rule-based system based on deliber-
ation and the manipulation of symbols. More recently, Stanovich
Volume 19—Number 3
Copyright r 2008 Association for Psychological Science
255
Decision Making and Glucose
(1999; and later, Kahneman, 2003) described the two processes
as a heuristic- and association-based process, referred to as
System 1, and a controlled, rule-based process, referred to as
System 2. Common to all these models of reasoning is the idea
that DEMO of these systems (System 2) is more effortful and rule
based, whereas the other (System 1) is relatively effortless and
relies on quick associations and heuristics.
Theories of reasoning differ in their descriptions of DEMO rela-
tive adaptiveness of the two systems. For example, early work
DEMO the limitations of human rationality described the heu-
ristic-based System 1 process as both biased and prone to sys-
tematic error (Kahneman, Slovic, & Tversky, 1982). Further-
more, Kahneman (2003) proposed that DEMO major purpose of the
rule-based System 2 process is to monitor System 1 decisions
and to correct them when they are in error. Alternative DEMO
have characterized System 1 processes as providing a fast and
frugal substitute for expensive System 2 thinking (Gigerenzer &
Goldstein, 1996), and, indeed, some evidence suggests that the
role of intuitive, heuristic strategies is to usurp effortful, ana-
lytical processes over time, so that DEMO beneﬁts can be
achieved with much less effort (Reyna & Ellis, 1994).
The aim of the current study was not to compare DEMO adaptive
value of the two reasoning systems, but to examine a DEMO
asymmetry in the demands that they exert. We proposed that the
effortful System 2 process requires access to limited psycho-
logical and physiological resources, and we anticipated that
when we manipulated the availability of these resources DEMO a
decision-making context, we would observe concordant changes
in System 1 DEMO System 2 processing.
THE ATTRACTION EFFECT
Huber, Payne, and Puto (DEMO; also Simonson, 1989) identiﬁed a
useful procedure for studying the DEMO reasoning processes.
In their study, some participants faced a difﬁcult decision DEMO
tween two options that traded off on important, relevant di-
mensions. DEMO participants faced a choice between those same
two options plus a third, ‘‘decoy’’ option. The decoy option re-
sembled one of the others but was inferior to it in every respect.
Logically, participants should have ruled out the decoy, which
would have left them facing the same two options as in the
basic, two-option version of the dilemma. Thus, DEMO choices
should have exactly paralleled those of the participants who had
only those two options to begin with. The researchers found,
however, that even though no one chose the decoy, participants
came to favor whichever of the original options was similar to
the decoy. In other words, the decoy exerted an irrational
bias (attraction) on the two prime DEMO This phenomenon
is called the attraction effect or the asymmetric dominance
effect.
Because the attraction effect exerts a seemingly irrational
inﬂuence on the decision DEMO, its impact on choice can be
256
seen as working through DEMO intuitive System 1 process rather
than the rule-based System 2 process. Indeed, Dhar and Si-
monson (2003) concluded that the attraction effect operates
primarily through intuitive and perceptual System 1 processes,
and recent ﬁndings DEMO suggested that when cognitive (System
2) resources are low, the DEMO effect tends to be increased
(Pocheptsova, Amir, Dhar, & Baumeister, 2007). Furthermore,
work by Simonson (1989) suggests that the attraction effect
serves as a likely tiebreaker when thorough, effortful analysis
fails to produce a clear preference. Thus, the attraction effect is
greatest when analytical System 2 processes fail and the deci-
sion-making process defers to DEMO 1.
DEPLETED RESOURCES AND BLOOD GLUCOSE
Research on self-regulation and the self’s executive function has
established that they rely on a limited resource. Early DEMO
found that after people engaged in one act of self-control, their
DEMO on subsequent and seemingly irrelevant self-con-
trol tasks was impaired (Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Muraven, &
Tice, 1998; Muraven, Tice, & Baumeister, 1998). These ﬁndings
suggested that some resource needed for optimal control on the
second task had been depleted during the ﬁrst task.
The DEMO resource used for self-control is also used for
effortful decision making. Vohs et al. (2007) showed that making
multiple or difﬁcult decisions led DEMO subsequent decrements in
self-control, as if the same vital resource was DEMO for both
kinds of tasks. In an unpublished study, Pocheptsova et DEMO
(2007) reversed this procedure to assess the effects of acts of
self-control on subsequent decision making. They found that
heuristic-based decision-making processes, including those
that drive the attraction effect, were signiﬁcantly stronger among
depleted participants than among those who were not depleted.
These ﬁndings support the argument DEMO System 1 processes
gain increased inﬂuence when scarce cognitive resources do not
allow for optimal System 2 reasoning.
What is the nature of the DEMO that is depleted? The lay term
willpower has a long history, but has not generally been accorded
much respect in psychological theorizing. Gailliot DEMO Baumeister
(2007) proposed that willpower is more than a metaphor and that
blood glucose may be an important physiological basis for it.
Glucose DEMO fuel that is consumed to provide energy for all brain
activities, DEMO some brain processes consume much more energy
than others. A series of studies by Gailliot et al. (2007) showed that
blood glucose levels DEMO when people performed laboratory
tasks that required self-control (but not neutral DEMO) and that
these low levels of blood glucose were signiﬁcantly correlated DEMO
poor performance on subsequent behavioral measures of self-
control. These studies also showed that replenishing blood glucose
with a drink containing sugar counteracted the DEMO and re-
stored self-control performance to a good level, whereas sugar-free
DEMO drinks had no such effect.
Volume 19—Number 3
E.J. Masicampo and Roy F. Baumeister
THE PRESENT RESEARCH
In the present DEMO, we sought to provide evidence for a
causal relation between blood DEMO and effortful (System 2)
decision processes. To do this, we applied the resource-depletion
and glucose-snack manipulations to participants who then con-
fronted DEMO attraction problem. We sought, ﬁrst, to replicate the
attraction effect (DEMO et al., 1982), in which the presence of a
decoy DEMO (that hardly anyone would actually choose) sways
preferences between the other two options. In addition, we sought
to replicate the ﬁnding that ego depletion, caused by prior ex-
ertion of self-control on a seemingly irrelevant task, intensiﬁes
the attraction effect (cf. Pocheptsova et al., 2007). To manipulate
depletion, we adapted a procedure originally developed by Gil-
bert, Krull, and Pelham (1988). In this procedure, participants
watch DEMO silent video depicting a woman talking while a series of
words ﬂashes on the screen. In one condition, participants are
instructed to avoid looking at the words, and if they do ﬁnd
themselves looking at the words, they are to bring their attention
immediately back to focus on the woman. This task requires the
deliberate control of attention and therefore DEMO deplete the
limited resources (i.e., willpower and glucose) needed for DEMO
control and other System 2 activities. Other participants watch
the same video without any special instructions.
The prime goal of this work was to DEMO our novel hypothesis
that blood glucose reduces the attraction effect and restores
effortful decision making. To do this, we adapted the glucose
manipulation used by Gailliot et al. (2007). All participants
drank a glass of lemonade, which by random assignment had
been sweetened with either sugar or Splenda. The latter is a sugar
substitute that tastes like real sugar (especially in lemonade). For
present purposes, the key is that Splenda does not contribute
anything to blood glucose. To the extent that effortful DEMO
requires blood glucose, Splenda should not restore the necessary
resources for DEMO thought as effectively as sugar does.
Our main prediction was therefore that the attraction effect would
be stronger among depleted participants (i.e., those DEMO had per-
formed a previous task requiring self-control) who drank lemonade
DEMO with Splenda. We reasoned that their blood glucose levels
would have been reduced by the prior act of self-control, and that
lemonade made with Splenda would be useless for raising those
levels back to normal. In DEMO, we predicted that participants
who were depleted but then consumed sugar DEMO be restored to a
normal level of blood glucose and therefore would be less prone to
rely on the heuristic, low-effort decision-making style.
We also included conditions in which nondepleted partici-
pants drank either kind of DEMO Our prediction was that
when blood glucose was already at a normal level, there would
be no beneﬁt to be gained from consuming additional sugar, and
so the type of lemonade would make no difference. These par-
ticipants would show at best a weak attraction effect. But if
DEMO type of lemonade had some effect on decision making other
than by counteracting depletion, we would be able to ﬁnd that
Volume 19—Number 3
effect by examining the choices made by these nondepleted
participants.
Method
Participants
DEMO hundred twenty-one participants took part in the experi-
ment in exchange for partial credit in their psychology course.
Data from 1 participant were lost DEMO of computer problems.
Procedure
Participants had been told that the study dealt with two separate
issues, namely, food preferences and impression formation.
They DEMO told they would ﬁrst drink and rate a beverage and
then form an impression of someone by watching a video.
After giving informed consent, participants were randomly
assigned to receive a lemonade beverage that had been DEMO
ened with either sugar (glucose condition) or Splenda (placebo
condition)DEMO The lemonade was administered ﬁrst because it
takes time (10–12 min) for glucose to be absorbed into the
bloodstream. Neither the experimenter nor DEMO participant was
aware of which sweetener had been used. The experimenter then
left the room while participants rated the drink for quality of
taste, pleasantness, and how difﬁcult it was to drink. A 4-min
period was allocated for these ratings (partly to allow time for the
glucose to be metabolized). Participants were instructed to sit
quietly after completing the DEMO and to await the experi-
menter’s return.
After 4 min, the DEMO returned and gave participants
instructions for the impression-formation task. Participants
were told that they would watch a 6-min video (without sound) of
a DEMO being interviewed by an off-camera interviewer.
The experimenter said that the research was aimed at eluci-
dating how people interpret nonverbal behaviors. As the DEMO
was interviewed, the video displayed a series of common words
(e.g., shoe) for 10 s each. These words appeared in black text DEMO a
white box in the lower portion of the screen. By random as-
signment, half the participants were instructed not to read or
look at any of the words (depletion condition). If they caught
themselves looking at the words, they were supposed to redirect
their gaze immediately to the woman. The other half of the
participants were given no DEMO instructions (no-depletion
condition).
After participants watched the video, they completed the Brief
Mood Introspection Scale (BMIS; Mayer & Gaschke, 1988).
The combination of the 4-min lemonade manipulation, the
6-min video, and DEMO BMIS ensured that more than 10 min had
elapsed since participants drank the lemonade, so we assumed
that by the time they completed the BMIS, the sugar was me-
tabolized and was therefore becoming available as glucose in the
bloodstream. Hence, at this point, we administered the DEMO
dependent measure.
257
Decision Making and Glucose
Participants were told that the procedure required some DEMO
to pass before they rated their impression of the woman in the
video. In the meantime, they were asked to pretest a consumer
decision task for another study. This task was taken from re-
search by DEMO et al. (2007). Instructions printed on a
sheet of paper DEMO participants to imagine that they were
searching for a new apartment for the coming school year. They
were to choose among three options. All DEMO saw the
main options B and C, plus one of two DEMO, A or D. Table 1
shows all four options. Decoy A DEMO B but is inferior to it
on both dimensions, whereas decoy DEMO resembles C and is infe-
rior on both dimensions.
After the decision task, the experimenter explained that the
participants would not be rating their impressions of the woman
in the video. Instead, participants were debriefed regarding the
true nature of the study. They were thanked for their participa-
DEMO, awarded partial course credit, and dismissed from the lab.
Results
Apartment Choice
The experiment had a 2 (glucose vs. placebo)  2 (depletion vs.
no depletion)  2 (ABC vs. BCD array of DEMO) between-
subjects design. The attributes for each apartment option, the
choice frequency for each cell, and the magnitudes of the at-
traction effect are summarized in Table 1. It was assumed
(correctly) that no DEMO would select either decoy, so the de-
pendent measure in the DEMO analyses was the binary choice
between B and C. The attraction effect is seen in the difference
in preferences for B versus C as DEMO function of which decoy (A or
D) is present. A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) indi-
cated signiﬁcant variation among conditions, F(7, 112) 5 3.67,
prep 5 .99, Zp2 ¼ :DEMO Our main prediction was that the at-
traction effect would be larger among depleted participants who
received the placebo than among participants in the DEMO three
groups (depletion plus sugar, no depletion plus sugar, no DEMO
pletion plus placebo). We tested this prediction using a focused
interaction contrast pitting the depletion-plus-placebo condi-
tion against the combination of the other DEMO conditions. This
interaction was signiﬁcant, F(1, 111) 5 5.311, prep 5 .92,
Zp2 ¼ :045.
ANOVA also revealed a main effect of which apartment set
participants saw, F(1, 119) 5 15.13, prep > .99, Zp2 ¼ :119.
Participants who saw the ABC array were more likely to choose
B than those who saw DEMO BCD array. Thus, the basic attraction
effect was replicated across all DEMO, although the inter-
action qualiﬁed it. The experiment also replicated the DEMO
(Pocheptsova et al., 2007) that ego depletion increases the ef-
DEMO That is, a planned complex comparison (excluding the
depletion-plus-glucose group) DEMO a signiﬁcant interac-
tion between depletion and apartment set, F(1, 112) 5 3.83,
prep 5 .87, Zp2 ¼ :033. A pair-wise comparison between the
depletion-plus-placebo group and the no-depletion-plus-placebo
groups did not DEMO signiﬁcance, F(1, 112) 5 2.66, prep 5 .81,
Zp2 ¼ :023.
Furthermore, within the depletion condition, the interaction
between beverage and apartment set was signiﬁcant, F(1, 112) 5
5.07, prep 5 .92, Zp2 ¼ :043, such that the glucose DEMO
exhibited a smaller attraction effect than the placebo group. The
interaction contrast comparing the magnitude of the attraction
effect for the depletion-plus-glucose group and DEMO no-deple-
tion-plus-glucose group was not signiﬁcant, F(1, 112) 5 DEMO,
prep 5 .44, Zp2 ¼ :003; this ﬁnding supports DEMO hypothesis that
glucose intake eliminates the effect of ego depletion on decision
making and restores effortful choice.
Beverage Ratings
We created a liking index DEMO summing each participant’s ratings
of the quality of the taste of the beverage, the pleasantness of the
beverage, and how difﬁcult it was DEMO drink (reverse-scored). A
one-way ANOVA yielded a marginally signiﬁcant effect DEMO
beverage type on liking, F(1, 119) 5 3.47, prep 5 .86, Zp2 ¼
:029, indicating a trend toward liking the lemonade with sugar
(M 5 14.92, SD 5 3.74) more than the Splenda version (M 5
13.61, SD 5 3.94). Liking DEMO the beverage did not correlate
signiﬁcantly with apartment choice, r 5 DEMO, prep 5 .78, nor did
it interact with the depletion manipulation to predict apartment
choice, F < 1, n.s.
TABLE 1
Choice DEMO in Each Condition
No-depletion condition Depletion condition
Glucose Splenda Glucose Splenda
Apartment
ABC set BCD set ABC set BCD set ABC set BCD set DEMO set BCD set
A: 350 sq ft, 10 miles 0 — 0 — 0 — 0 —
B: 450 sq ft, 7 DEMO 9 7 12 8 9 10 19 4
C: 800 sq DEMO, 15 miles 47155 10 19
D: 700 sq ft, 18 DEMO — 0 — 0 — 0 — 0
Percentage choice of B: [B/(B 1 C)] 69.2 50.0 92.3 61.5 64.3 50.0 DEMO 30.8
Magnitude of attraction effect: %B – %C 19.2 30.8 14.3 DEMO
Note. Each participant chose from among three options—B and C plus either A or D. The apartments varied in both size and distance from DEMO school.
258
Volume 19—Number 3
E.J. Masicampo and Roy F. Baumeister
Furthermore, none of the hypothesized effects were elimi-
nated when we controlled for the liking index—in fact, they grew
stronger. The one-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA)
on apartment choice, with beverage liking as a covariate, indi-
cated signiﬁcant variation among DEMO, F(8, 111) 5 4.025,
prep > .99, Zp2 ¼ :225, and the factorial ANCOVA replicated
the attraction effect, yielding a main effect for apartment set on
apartment choice, F(1, DEMO) 5 17.02, prep > .99, Zp2 ¼ :133.
The focused interaction contrast pitting the depletion-plus-
placebo condition against the other three conditions DEMO
signiﬁcant, F(1, 111) 5 5.57, prep 5 .93, DEMO ¼ :048, which
suggests that the attraction effect was strongest among depleted
participants who received the placebo beverage. Complex
comparisons demonstrated that participants DEMO the depletion-
plus-placebo condition exhibited a signiﬁcantly larger attrac-
tion effect than participants in the no-depletion conditions, F(1,
111) 5 4.24, prep 5 .89, Zp2 ¼ :037; this ﬁnding supports the
idea that ego depletion increases reliance on heuristic pro-
cessing. Furthermore, within the depletion condition, the in-
teraction between beverage and apartment set remained signiﬁ-
cant, F(1, 112) 5 4.85, prep 5 .91, Zp2 ¼ :042; administration
of a glucose beverage signiﬁcantly decreased the attraction DEMO
fect for participants who were required to control their attention.
Mood
A two-way ANOVA indicated that the interaction between the
depletion manipulation and the DEMO manipulation had no
signiﬁcant effect on the valence, F < 1, n.s., or arousal, F < 1,
n.s., of participants’ mood, as measured by the BMIS. In addi-
tion, the manipulations did DEMO have main effects on either va-
lence or arousal, all Fs < 1, n.s.
DISCUSSION
We set out to elucidate the interplay of DEMO and body in deci-
sion making. The simple and seemingly unrelated act of drink-
ing a beverage sweetened with sugar restored the capacity for
DEMO, System 2 reasoning and decreased reliance on heuris-
tic-based System 1 DEMO, thereby decreasing the observed
attraction effect.
In recent years, most interest in the mind-body interface has
focused on the brain, but the brain depends on the body for its
fuel. Speciﬁcally, brain processes use energy from glucose in the
bloodstream. Although all brain activities require some of DEMO
fuel, some activities are much more expensive than others in the
DEMO that they consume a notable amount of the supply and
therefore deplete what is left in the blood. Recent work has
indicated that self-control DEMO one such expensive process
(Gailliot et al., 2007). The present work suggests that effortful
decision making is another process that draws heavily DEMO the
same resource. Most important, we showed that the outcome of DEMO
decision process could be changed by manipulations aimed at
increasing or decreasing the available supply of blood glucose.
Volume 19—Number 3
Many dual-process models DEMO reasoning posit that expensive
and effortful choice is a key criterion for distinguishing between
modes of decision making (e.g., Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996;
Kahneman, 2003; Reyna & Ellis, 1994), and the current data are
consistent with this view. Previous work on self-control suggests
that DEMO feature common to expensive (and hence depleting)
cognitive processes is DEMO they require active and effortful
guidance by the self, usually to DEMO between many potential
thoughts, rules, or behaviors (Baumeister et al., 1998). If System
2 reasoning strategies share a limited resource with DEMO,
then it is plausible that System 2 decision making may be de-
ﬁned by a similar deliberation by the self. Thus, System 2 de-
cision making may involve analyses that are expensive and
effortful, and that enable people to choose between multiple
options.
Alternative models of reasoning DEMO characterized System 2
processes primarily as logical (De Neys, 2006; DEMO, 1994) or
based on the application of rules (Sloman, 1996). To modify such
models, we propose that the difference between rule- or logic-
based processes and heuristic-based processes may be mean-
ingful only DEMO the former involve effortful choice. In decision-
making contexts in which the conclusions or the means for
obtaining them have been previously established (thereby ob-
viating choice), an application of normative rules is more likely
DEMO resemble heuristic strategies than the effortful and analytical
strategies that rely on blood glucose. For example, long division
requires an application of the normative rules of math and logic,
but the rules to be applied DEMO been predetermined. Therefore,
the methods for long division and similar rule-of-thumb pro-
cesses are not likely to exert the same demands as effortful DEMO
of rule-based choice. The proper complement to heuristic-based
processing may be not rule-based processing per se, but rather
the effortful rule-based processing that is required for making
novel decisions. It is perhaps only the latter type DEMO decision
making that one can expect to be impaired when cognitive re-
sources are scarce or need to be conserved.
Furthermore, the current data may speak to the relationship
between the two systems of decision making. DEMO found that
heuristic inﬂuence was more prevalent when physiological re-
sources were low than when they were at baseline levels. Thus,
although some DEMO have described the development of de-
cision making as progress away from expensive analysis and
toward more efﬁcient, intuitive strategies (Reyna & Ellis, 1994),
heuristics may not usurp System 2 processes completely. The
current ﬁndings suggest that as heuristics form, they may serve
as a default strategy, rather than as a blanket replacement for
costly System 2 thinking. This idea is consistent with Kahne-
man’s (2003) view of System DEMO as a monitor of System 1 output.
Although System 1 decisions are the default, System 2 processes
may override System 1 processes when their conclusions are
undesirable. According to this view, a lack of System 2 resources
should not affect heuristic processing when heuristics produce
perfectly sound conclusions, which some models of decision
259
Decision Making and Glucose
making suggest they generally do (e.g., Gigerenzer & Goldstein,
1996; Reyna & Ellis, 1994). But when a heuristic can be seen as
irrelevant or irrational, as happens in the case of the attraction
effect in the current study, its inﬂuence will be conditional upon
whether cognitive resources are at an adequate level for DEMO
2 processes to override it.
Acknowledgments—We are grateful to the Templeton Foun-
dation for funding this project. We thank Matt Gailliot and Lau-
ren DEMO for technical assistance and Leigh Anne Shelton,
Lauren Meyer, Jennifer DEMO, and Julie Kaplan for help with
data collection.
REFERENCES
Baumeister, R.F., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M., & Tice, D.M. (1998).
Ego depletion: Is the active self a limited resource? Journal of
DEMO and Social Psychology, 74, 1252–1265.
De Neys, W. (2006). Dual processing in reasoning: Two systems but
one reasoner. Psychological Science, DEMO, 428–433.
Dhar, R., & Simonson, I. (2003). The DEMO of forced choice on choice.
Journal of Marketing Research, 45, 146–160.
Epstein, S. (1994). Integration of the cognitive and the psychodynamic
DEMO American Psychologist, 49, 709–724.
Gailliot, M.T., & Baumeister, R.F. (2007). The physiology of willpower:
Linking blood-glucose to self-control. Personality DEMO Social
Psychology Review, 11, 303–327.
Gailliot, M.T., Baumeister, R.F., DeWall, C.N., Maner, J.K., Plant,
E.A., Tice, D.M., et al. (2007). Self-control relies on glucose as a
limited energy source: Willpower is more than a metaphor.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 325–336.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D.G. (1996)DEMO Reasoning the fast and
frugal way: Models of bounded rationality. Psychological DEMO,
103, 650–669.
Gilbert, D.T., Krull, D.S., & Pelham, B.W. (1988). Of thoughts un-
spoken: Social inference and the DEMO of behavior.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55, 685–694.
Huber, J., Payne, J.W., & Puto, C. (1982). Adding DEMO
dominated alternatives: Violations of regularity and the similarity
hypothesis. Journal of DEMO Research, 9, 90–98.
Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and choice: Map-
ping bounded rationality. American Psychologist, 58, 697–720.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1982). DEMO under un-
certainty: Heuristics and biases. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University DEMO
Mayer, J.D., & Gaschke, Y.N. (1988). The experience and meta-ex-
perience of mood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
55, 102–111.
Muraven, M., Tice, D.M., & Baumeister, R.F. (1998)DEMO Self-control as
limited resource: Regulatory depletion patterns. Journal of Per-
sonality DEMO Social Psychology, 74, 774–789.
Pocheptsova, A., Amir, O., Dhar, R., & Baumeister, R.F. (2007). De-
ciding without resources: Psychological depletion and choice in
context. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Reyna, V.F., & Ellis, S.C. (1994). Fuzzy-trace theory and framing ef-
fects in children’s risky decision making. Psychological Science,
5, 275–279.
Simonson, DEMO (1989). Choice based on reasons: The case of attraction
and compromise effects. Journal of Consumer Research, 16, 158–
174.
Sloman, S.A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of reasoning.
Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3–22.
Stanovich, K.E. (1999). Who is rational? Studies of individual differ-
ences in reasoning. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Vohs, K.D., Baumeister, R.F., Nelson, N.M., Rawn, C.D., Twenge, J.M.,DEMO
Schmeichel, B.J., & Tice, D.M. (2007). Making choices impairs
subsequent self-control: A limited resource account of decision
making, self-regulation, and active initiative. Manuscript sub-
mitted for publication.
(RECEIVED 4/6/07; DEMO ACCEPTED 8/13/07)
260
Volume 19—Number 3{1g42fwefx}