International Small Business Journal
http://isb.sagepub.com/
What do Investors Look DEMO in a Business Plan?: A Comparison of the Investment
Criteria of Bankers, Venture Capitalists and Business Angels
Colin Mason and Matthew Stark
International Small Business Journal 2004 22: 227
DOI: 10.1177/0266242604042377
The online DEMO of this article can be found at:
http://isb.sagepub.com/content/22/3/227
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
Additional services and DEMO for International Small Business Journal can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://isb.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://isb.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations: http://isb.sagepub.com/content/22/3/227.refs.html
>> Version of Record - Jun DEMO, 2004
What is This?
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV DEMO October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 227
International Small Business Journal
Copyright © 2004
SAGE Publications (London,
Thousand Oaks and New Delhi)
[DOI: 10.1177/0266242604042377]
Vol 22(3): 227–248
What do Investors Look for in a
Business Plan?DEMO
A Comparison of the Investment Criteria of
Bankers, Venture Capitalists and DEMO Angels
COLIN MASON
University of Strathclyde, UK
MATTHEW STARK
Tenon Limited, UK
Most potential funders wish to see a business plan as a DEMO step in deciding
whether or not to invest. However, much of DEMO literature on how to write
a business plan fails to emphasize that different types of funder look at
business plans from different perspectives. Using DEMO real time methodology
this article highlights the different investment criteria of bankers, venture
capital fund managers and business angels. Bankers stress the ﬁnancial
aspects of the proposal and give little emphasis to market, entrepreneur or
other issues. As equity investors, venture capital fund managers and business
angels have a very different approach, emphasizing both market and ﬁnance
issues. Business angels give more emphasis than venture capital fund
managers to the entrepreneur and DEMO ﬁt’ considerations. The
implication for entrepreneurs is that they must customize their business plan
according to whether they are seeking funding from a bank, venture capital
fund or business angel.
KEYWORDS:
capital
banks; business angels; business plans; small business; venture
is
bj
Introduction
As Barrow et al. (2001: 6) note, ‘perhaps the most important step in DEMO
any new venture or expanding an existing one is the construction of a business
plan.’ Although a business plan has several purposes and target DEMO, most
are produced in order to raise ﬁnance. Kuratko and Hodgetts (2001: 289) suggest
that ‘the business plan is the minimum document DEMO by any ﬁnancial
source.’ For example, more than three-quarters of business DEMO require a
business plan before they will consider investing (Mason and DEMO, 1996a).
227
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October DEMO, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 228
International Small Business Journal 22(3)
The business plan DEMO therefore the ﬁrst – and possibly only – substantial contact
that a potential funder has with the entrepreneur (Shepherd and Douglas, 1999).
DEMO, as Barrow et al. (2001: 11) note, ‘the business DEMO is the ticket of admission
giving the entrepreneur his [sic] ﬁrst and often only chance to impress prospec-
tive sources of ﬁnance with the DEMO of the proposal.’ The decision by the
prospective funder whether to proceed beyond the initial reading of the business
plan to consider the proposal DEMO more detail will therefore depend on the quality
of the business plan used to support the funding proposal.
Entrepreneurs have recourse to a large DEMO that describes the format and
structure of a business plan. However, DEMO of this literature can be criticized
for either failing to draw the attention of readers to the different ways in which
bankers and venture DEMO interrogate business plans, the different questions
that they ask and the DEMO types of information that they look for, or else for
not DEMO out the implications of these differences for their readership.
The fundamental criticism of much of the literature on ‘how to’ write a
business plan DEMO that it adopts a ‘one size ﬁts all’ approach. For example, DEMO
noted that the audience for a business plan might include suppliers, DEMO,
major customers, the board of directors, outside consultants, banks DEMO investors,
Tiffany and Peterson (1997: 12) go on to DEMO that ‘. . . a well-written plan satisﬁes
all these groups ...’ (emphasis added). Even The Sunday Times Business Plan
Workbook (Barrow DEMO al., 2001), one of the most successful UK books on DEMO
to write a business plan, barely acknowledges that bankers and venture DEMO
have different perspectives on the business plan.
Some of this ‘how to’ literature is written from the perspective of one type of
audience – DEMO an equity investor (e.g. Looser and Schläpfer, 2001; Shepherd
and DEMO, 1999; Timmons, 1999). The criticism of this literature is DEMO it
generally does not acknowledge that other types of funder (such DEMO bankers) may
have different expectations concerning the style and content of DEMO plans.
Only a small minority of authors explicitly recognize that different audiences
look at the business plan from different perspectives (e.g. Allen, 1999; Burns,
2001; Kuratko and Hodgetts, 2001; Smith and Smith, DEMO; Vesper, 1996). For
example, Vesper (1996: 241) observes that ‘to some degree all . . . audiences will
care about DEMO issues such as viability, potential proﬁt, downside risk, likely
life DEMO time and potential areas for dispute and for improvement. Beyond that,
however, different audiences will care about different details.’ Speciﬁcally, these
authors DEMO that bankers and equity investors (venture capitalists and
business angels) ‘have very different requirements’ (Kirby, 2002: 236). The criti-
cism of these works is that they mostly fail to draw out the implications DEMO these
differences for the entrepreneur, and have nothing to say about DEMO entrepre-
neurs should differentiate their business plan to suit the different needs and
requirements of bankers and equity investors.
Using a ‘real time’ methodology, the objective of this article is to highlight the
different ways in DEMO bankers, venture capital fund managers (VCFMs) and
business angels (BAs) evaluate business plans, the questions that they ask, the
information which they take into account in making a funding decision and their
investment DEMO The ﬁndings provide entrepreneurs with much clearer
228
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 229
Mason & Stark: A Comparison of Investment Criteria
guidance on how to customize their business plan according to the type of funder
DEMO they propose to approach.
Literature Review
The Banker’s Lending Decision
Bankers face a situation of information asymmetry when assessing lending appli-
cations (Binks and Ennew, 1996, 1997). New businesses are the most informa-
tionally DEMO on account of their lack of track record (Berger and Udell, 1998).
The information required to assess the competence and commitment of DEMO
entrepreneur and the prospects for the business is either unavailable, uneco-
DEMO to obtain or difﬁcult to interpret. This creates two types of risk for the
banker (Parker, 2002). First, there is a risk of adverse selection – lending to busi-
nesses which subsequently fail (type one error) – or not lending to businesses
which go on to become successful, or have the potential to do so (type two DEMO).
The low margins on small business lending encourage bankers to strive to
minimize type one errors.1 Second, there is the risk of moral hazard. This arises
from the inability of banks to monitor entrepreneurs once DEMO loan has been made
to ensure that they do not switch to riskier projects that would enrich them at the
expense of the bank, or reduce their effort. The consequence is that bankers
default to a DEMO gearing approach to lending (Binks and Ennew, 1996) in
which DEMO lending decisions will emphasize ﬁnancial considerations – margins,
cash ﬂow forecasts, gearing ratios, asset management ratios and ﬁnancial controls
(Burns, 2001) – and, in particular, the availability of collateral, rather than a full
evaluation of the proposed project. Storey (1994: 149) notes that ‘overall, bank
lending is only weakly related to the personal characteristics of new ﬁrm
founders.’ Avery et al. (1998: 1058) note that in the USA ‘loans with personal
commitments comprise a majority of small business DEMO measured in numbers
or dollar amounts.’ Taking collateral as security – which in the case of new busi-
nesses will be in the form DEMO personal guarantees or personal collateral – is
attractive to bankers for two reasons. First, the willingness to offer collateral
signals the conﬁdence of an entrepreneur in both his/her own abilities and also
in the likely DEMO of the project. Second, taking collateral is thought to align
the DEMO of the entrepreneur with that of the banker. It therefore addresses
both the adverse selection problem at loan origination and the moral hazard
problem DEMO the loan has been granted (Berger and Udell, 1998).
The capital gearing approach of bankers to lending decisions is highlighted in
a DEMO study of banks and small businesses in Canada. Wynant and Hatch
(DEMO: 132) concluded from interviews with bank managers that ‘the primary
focus in a bank’s decision of a loan request is the degree of DEMO that the loan
represents for the bank . . . Two considerations are key in evaluating a ﬁrm’s risk-
iness: the company’s ability to generate sufﬁcient cash ﬂow to service the bank
loan and the presence DEMO collateral security to ensure that the bank can recover
its funds from the liquidation of the business and/or personal assets if the business
DEMO They go on to report that ‘most bankers claim that adequate collateral
backing is a necessary condition for any loan: once the account manager is
229
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 230
International Small Business Journal 22(3)
satisﬁed that reasonable DEMO is available, the evaluation of risks [then]
focuses on the company’s DEMO ﬂow’ (Wynant and Hatch, 1991: 132–3). The
importance of DEMO is further emphasized by Wynant and Hatch (1991) in
their analysis of credit ﬁles (the top item, present in 97.7% of ﬁles DEMO) and
reasons for formal and informal loan declines, with half of the loan applications
rejected because collateral is insufﬁcient or unsuitable. Indeed, the reasons given
for rejecting loans were overwhelmingly ﬁnance-related. In only 18 per DEMO of
cases was inadequate management cited as the reason.
The capital gearing approach of bankers to lending decisions is further demon-
strated by Deakins DEMO Hussain (1994) in a study in the West Midlands region of
England that involved obtaining the reaction of 30 bankers to a proposal DEMO a
start-up business that was seeking funding. The assessment of the bankers was
dominated by ﬁnancial considerations whereas management capability was
largely discounted. Moreover, those bankers who said that they would offer a
loan would only DEMO so if collateral was available. A replication of this study in
Scotland by Fletcher (1995) using the same proposal conﬁrmed the dominance
of DEMO information and criteria in bankers’ lending decisions.2
This leads to the following hypothesis:
H1: bankers’ funding decisions will be dominated by ﬁnancial considerations
and they will give little consideration to entrepreneurial capabilities or the
characteristics DEMO the opportunity.
The Venture Capital Fund Manager’s Investment Decision
VCFMs and BAs also encounter information asymmetry problems when evalu-
ating investment opportunities. However, as equity providers, they might be
expected to adopt very different approaches to their funding decision. VCFMs
and BAs are investing for capital gain and, in contrast to the banker, they share
in the success of the businesses that they invest in. Unlike the banker, their invest-
ment is also fully exposed in the event that the business fails. A further DEMO is
that their investment will be illiquid if the business does not achieve signiﬁcant
growth. Accordingly, VCFMs and BAs might be expected to place greatest
emphasis on the capability of the management team, the product/service and the
market.
The most consistent ﬁnding from studies of VCFM decision-making DEMO the
importance that is placed on the ability of management. This includes manage-
ment skill, quality of management, characteristics of the management team DEMO
the management team’s track record. Other criteria which VCFMs report that
they take into account when assessing a new venture proposal are the character-
DEMO of the market/industry, environmental threats to the business, the level of
competition and the degree of product differentiation (Shepherd and Zacharakis,
1999). For example, MacMillan et al. (1985) conclude that the quality of the
entrepreneur ultimately determines the investment decision, notably a thorough
familiarity with the industry/market, leadership capability and the ability to
evaluate and handle risks. Muzyka et al. (1996) also conclude that management
DEMO considerations dominate the investment decision. However, other studies –
230
Downloaded DEMO isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 231
Mason & Stark: A Comparison of Investment Criteria
while conﬁrming the importance of the entrepreneurial team – suggest that other
factors are DEMO signiﬁcant in the VCFM’s investment decision, notably product
characteristics (proprietary features, competitive advantage, potential to achieve
strong market position), market characteristics (signiﬁcant growth, limited
competition) and returns (potential for high returns, DEMO exit opportunity)
(Fried and Hisrich, 1994; Manigart et al., 1997; Sweeting, 1991). Indeed, while
not underrating the crucial importance of having a competent management team
in place, Sweeting (1991: 619) nevertheless suggests that VCFMs may be
prepared to invest in situations where weaknesses in management were recog-
nized but the business concept was otherwise DEMO: ‘this was associated with
venture capitalists who tended to be proactive DEMO their style and had a belief that
they could attract good managers to the businesses in which they chose to invest.’
There is also DEMO in the literature that the ﬁnancial aspects of the proposal
are generally of limited importance at the initial screening stage, but assume
importance at the second stage in the decision-making process (Fried and
Hisrich, 1994; Manigart et al., 1997).
This leads to the following hypothesis:
H2: VCFMs will also be concerned with ﬁnancial issues but in addition will
give considerable emphasis to the entrepreneurial team and market
characteristics.
The DEMO Angel’s Investment Decision
BAs might be expected to adopt an approach to investment decision-making that
is similar, although not identical, to that of DEMO There are several aspects
where differences might be expected to arise. First, Fiet (1995a,b) suggests that
VCFMs will be more concerned with market risk – risk that is due to unforeseen
competitive conditions affecting DEMO size, growth and accessibility to the market
– whereas BAs will DEMO more concerned with agency risk – risk that is caused by
the separate and possibly divergent interests of entrepreneurs (agents) and
investors (principals). These differences are related to the types of risk that BAs
DEMO VCFMs believe they are most competent to control. Venture capital fund
managers have learned how to protect themselves from agency risk by using
stringent DEMO contractual provisions that allow them to replace an entre-
preneur who underperforms, is guilty of misconduct or is found to be incom-
petent. However, market risk is less controllable through ex post contracting.
Business angels, DEMO contrast, attach more importance to agency risk. There are
four reasons DEMO this:
• Most angels have limited deal ﬂow and therefore lack comparative data to
evaluate market risk.
• Angels do not have the DEMO level of resources as venture capital funds to
both collect and analyse (costly) market-related information (Fiet, 1995b).
Van Osnabrugge (2000) DEMO that venture capital fund managers
conduct signiﬁcantly more due diligence than business angels.
• The contracts between angels and entrepreneurs tend to be simple DEMO
informal, making it harder for them to enforce sanctions.
231
Downloaded DEMO isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 232
International Small Business Journal 22(3)
• Many business DEMO have prior industry experience themselves and there-
fore feel quite capable of assessing the market risks and so view the entre-
preneur as the DEMO potentially damaging contingency (Fiet, 1995a).
The implication, according to DEMO Osnabrugge (2000), is that VCFMs will seek
to reduce their DEMO at the pre-investment stage by means of careful screening,
due diligence and contracting. BAs, in contrast, will place greater emphasis on
ex DEMO investment involvement as a means of reducing risk. In terms of invest-
ment decision-making, Fiet (1995b: 557) suggests that ‘ . . DEMO business angels may
rely on the entrepreneur to evaluate market risk for them . . . [This] would allow
a business angel to specialise DEMO evaluating whether or not the entrepreneur
understands the deal and whether or not the entrepreneur can be relied upon as
a venture manager, even if they as investors do not have enough market infor-
mation to DEMO it completely. That is, business angels can specialise in
evaluating agency DEMO while relying upon the entrepreneur to manage market
risk.’
The limited empirical evidence available on how BAs make their investment
decisions provides mixed support DEMO this argument. Based on evidence from
focus groups with BAs, Haines DEMO al. (2003: 30) conclude that the people in the
project DEMO the most critical factor in a BA’s decision to invest: ‘many DEMO said
that they would be spending considerable time with these people so it is import-
ant that the people be the right ones for DEMO job and be individuals with whom
the investors would like to spend some time.’ Thus, they look for people who are
honest, exhibit DEMO strong work ethic, understand what it takes to make the business
DEMO, have invested in their business, and have a realistic notion of how to
value the business. In contrast, their earlier study (Feeney DEMO al., 1999) found that
BAs consider both the attributes of the business and the attributes of the entre-
preneurs when deciding to invest DEMO a proposal. They note that investors’ percep-
tions of poor management is the primary deal killer. However, management
ability, although important, is not the primary factor that attracts investors to a
deal. Rather, investors place greatest emphasis on the growth potential of the
opportunity and the entrepreneur(DEMO)’ capability to realize that potential. Mason
and Rogers (1996, 1997) have also found that BAs give greater emphasis to
market considerations than to the entrepreneur at the initial screening stage.
Mason and Harrison’s (1996b) exploration of deals that were rejected by an
investment syndicate found that market-related issues were the most signiﬁcant-
deal killer, followed by entrepreneur-related considerations in second place.
A second difference is that although VCFMs and BAs DEMO emphasize the
importance of the entrepreneur/entrepreneurial team, they stress different
DEMO (Van Osnabrugge and Robinson, 2000). In particular, because BAs DEMO
looking to take a more hands-on role in their investee businesses than are
VCFMs, they place greater importance on the ‘chemistry’ between themselves
and the entrepreneur. This also means that BAs are less deterred by gaps DEMO the
management team because they can contribute missing expertise through their
own involvement. Indeed, as noted above, the opportunity for involvement in the
DEMO process is one of the motivations of BAs. VCFMs, in contrast,DEMO
232
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 233
Mason & Stark: A Comparison of Investment Criteria
regard the need for hands-on involvement as a cost. Thus, the opportunity to
contribute is an important consideration for BAs, both because it is part of the
‘return’ that they look for, and also because they think that their involvement can
contribute to the success of their investee businesses. Indeed, in the Haines et al.
(2003) study the non-ﬁnancial value that DEMO BA can bring to a project is the third
most important factor in the decision to invest (after the people and market
potential for the product/service).
A third difference between VCFMs and BAs is DEMO VCFMs will be expected
to give greater emphasis to ﬁnancial returns. VCFMs are returns-driven. Their
primary objective is to deliver high returns to the DEMO investors (limited
partners) whose funds they manage. BAs, on the DEMO hand, are investing their
own money, and although capital gain is their dominant motivation, other
considerations include satisfaction and enjoyment from playing a role in the
entrepreneurial process, ‘hot buttons’ and, in some cases, altruism (Mason and
Harrison, 1994, 2002; Van Osnabrugge and Robinson, 2000; Wetzel, 1981). These
differences in the investment motivations of DEMO and BAs will also be
reﬂected in the emphasis that they give to growth potential, with VCFMs placing
greater emphasis on investing in businesses with the potential to become signiﬁ-
cant global players.
A fourth difference DEMO that there is some evidence to suggest that VCFMs will
place more emphasis on the ﬁnancials and speciﬁcally are more likely to make
returns DEMO (Dixon, 1991; Wright and Robbie, 1996). BAs are less likely
to perform such calculations and place less weight on ﬁnancial projections, giving
greater emphasis to subjective factors and gut instinct (Van Osnabrugge and
Robinson, 2000). Indeed, some business angels are fairly cynical about DEMO value
of ﬁnancial projections, especially for new and recently started businesses
(Mason and Rogers, 1997).
Finally, Van Osnabrugge and Robinson (2000) suggest that VCFMs will have
a narrower investment focus than BAs. Certainly many venture capital funds
specialize in particular industry sectors. This is a DEMO of coping with infor-
mation asymmetries. Specialist industry knowledge allows VCFMs to be better
able to evaluate the viability of investment proposals and thereby DEMO their
risk. Hall and Hofer (1993) note that an important reason why VCFMs reject
proposals at the initial screening stage is because they DEMO not ﬁt the fund’s invest-
ment preferences. This contrasts with BAs who, according to Van Osnabrugge
and Robinson (2000: 149), are quite open-minded about the industry sector:
‘their main requirement appears to be DEMO they understand the generic business,
rather than the sector. This understanding allows them to assess how they might
add their own general business DEMO and experience to the ﬁrm.’ However,
there is also some evidence to the contrary. From a VCFM perspective, Muzyka
et al. (1996) suggest that deals which offer a good management team and reason-
able DEMO and product-market characteristics will override fund investment
requirements. And from a business angel perspective, both Mason and Rogers
(1997) and Mason and Harrison (2002) suggest that most investors do have
clearly deﬁned investment criteria DEMO inﬂuence the type of businesses that
they will consider investing in, DEMO these criteria may be relaxed in certain
233
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 234
International Small Business Journal 22(3)
circumstances, notably where the entrepreneur/management team has high
credibility. These criteria include stage of DEMO development, industry, tech-
nology and location. Mason and Rogers (1996, 1997) argue that these investment
criteria are generally related to what BAs understand as a result of their business
experience. Although there are exceptions, the approach of the majority of
business angels to minimizing risk is DEMO have a limited investment focus in order
to leverage their experience and knowledge both to evaluate opportunities and
to add value to those opportunities DEMO they invest in.
This discussion suggests that bankers, VCFMs and BAs DEMO analyse funding
proposals in different ways. Speciﬁcally we propose the following hypotheses:
H3a: The approach of BAs will be closer to that of VCFMs than to bankers
because they are both investing for capital gain.
DEMO:
H3b: BAs will place greater emphasis than VCFMs on the DEMO/
entrepreneurial team.
H3c: BAs will give greater emphasis to the DEMO of the business to their own
personal investment criteria.
H3d: BAs DEMO give consideration to the opportunity for involvement in the
investee business.
Methodology
The methodology used in this study is verbal protocol analysis, a technique which
involves respondents ‘thinking out loud’ as they perform a particular task, in this
case reviewing a potential funding opportunity. The technique has been DEMO
successfully to examine the decision-making process of venture capitalists (Hall
and DEMO, 1993; Zacharakis and Meyer, 1995) and business angels (Mason DEMO
Rogers, 1996, 1997) and has also been applied in a DEMO of other contexts (see
Ericsson and Simon, 1993). The verbalizations of respondents are tape-recorded,
transcribed and then content analysed by means DEMO a coding scheme devised for
the speciﬁc research questions.
This methodology provides a more reliable and much richer understanding of
the decision-making process of DEMO and the criteria used to evaluate funding
opportunities than is possible from approaches that use questionnaires, surveys
and interviews to collect data on the self-reported decisions of VCFMs made in
the past (Shepherd and Zacharakis, DEMO). Self-reported, retrospective data are
subject to conscious or unconscious errors DEMO with post hoc rationaliz-
ation and recall bias. There are also cognitive perceptual limitations, with
evidence that VCFMs have limited insights into their decision processes
(Zacharakis and Meyer, 1998; Shepherd, 1999). The consequence DEMO that they
often overstate the number of criteria actually used, understate DEMO most import-
ant criteria and overstate the least important criteria (Shepherd DEMO Zacharakis,
1999). Hence, as Zacharakis and Meyer (1998: DEMO) note, ‘past studies provide a
laundry list of factors that may be biased in that they list a multitude of factors
234
Downloaded DEMO isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 235
Mason & Stark: A Comparison of Investment Criteria
that have a relatively small inﬂuence on the decision.’ As a real-time experiment
that DEMO not require VCFMs to introspect about their thought processes, verbal
protocol DEMO sidesteps these recall, post hoc rationalization and cognitive
biases (Shepherd and Zacharakis, 1999).
Moreover, the funding decision is a multi-stage process (Feeney et al., 1999;
Haines et al., 2003) involving at least three distinct stages: initial screening,
detailed investigation and negotiation, DEMO deal crafting. Although the same
considerations may be present at each stage their relative importance changes
during the course of the decision-making process (Riding et al., 1993). A further
limitation of questionnaire and interview surveys of decision-making is that they
do not differentiate between these different stages DEMO the decision-making
process and as a consequence may produce misleading ﬁndings. Two real-time
studies of the investment decision-making of VCFMs which focused on the DEMO
screening stage suggest that, in contrast to the generalized studies reviewed
DEMO, the entrepreneur is not the primary determinant, except where they are
at one or other end of the distribution (i.e. either very competent or very incom-
petent) (Hall and Hofer, 1993; Zacharakis and DEMO, 1995). Business strategy
and ﬁnancial issues are also unimportant. Rather, the crucial considerations are
the potential of the product (does it meet a need?) and the long-term growth and
proﬁtability of the industry.
DEMO this study the focus is also on the initial screening stage – the stage when a
funder has become aware of an investment opportunity DEMO considers it with a
view to obtaining sufﬁcient initial impressions to decide whether it is worthy of
detailed consideration or should be rejected out DEMO hand. A study of Canadian
business angels reported that they accepted just 6 per cent of the investment
opportunities for detailed consideration (Haines at al., 2003). Sweeting (1991)
found that VCFMs typically spent DEMO minutes on the initial screening stage.
In Hall and Hofer’s (1993) study it was typically completed in less than six
minutes. In the DEMO of business angels the median time devoted to screening was
just nine minutes (Mason and Rogers, 1997).
Nevertheless, verbal protocol analysis has some limitations. First, a frequency
count of ‘thought units’ is an imperfect indicator of the importance of a factor in
the ﬁnal decision (Zacharakis and Meyer, 1995). No weightings are placed on the
responses to measure emphasis and the topics mentioned most frequently are not
necessarily those DEMO have the ultimate inﬂuence on the decision. And neither
does it allow for different convincer patterns. In other words, people may repeat
something several times if they are unsure but say it only once if they DEMO absol-
utely sure. Second, subjectivity is involved in coding, analysing and interpreting
the transcripts (Riquelme and Rickards, 1992). Third, some respondents may be
uncomfortable or self-conscious about thinking and speaking out loud which DEMO
distort their thinking (e.g. resulting in excessive repetition of what they DEMO
reading). Fourth, it is impossible to entirely remove the effect DEMO the artiﬁciality
of the situation. Fifth, from a practical point of DEMO it ignores the role of the
source of funding opportunity, which DEMO an important initial inﬂuence on the
investor’s attitude to the opportunity (DEMO and Hofer, 1993).
However, Ericsson and Simon (1993) argue that verbal protocol analysis is a
235
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE DEMO on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 236
International Small Business Journal 22(3)
valuable method of DEMO decision-making as long as the following criteria
are met:
• the information reported must be the focus of attention;
• the task DEMO not highly routinized by habit;
• there must be only a short time between performance and verbalization;
• verbalization does not require DEMO encoding;
• reports are oral;
• subjects are free from distraction;
• instructions are clear;
• completeness in reporting is DEMO
These conditions are all met in this study.
The sample of funders comprised three bankers, three VCFMs and four BAs.
All were based in the south of England. The three bankers worked in the
Southampton ofﬁces DEMO major clearing banks (Barclays, NatWest and Lloyds
TSB). Two of the VCFMs worked in the Southampton ofﬁces of major private
equity ﬁrms. DEMO third VCFM was a partner in a small fund located in Winches-
ter. Two of the four business angels were based in Southampton with DEMO others
based elsewhere in South East England. Two of them were identiﬁed through the
University of Southampton’s Enterprise Centre (both had invested in one of the
university’s spin-off companies), a third was identiﬁed through the DEMO and
the fourth was an acquaintance of this angel.
Each of these funders was asked to review three business proposals that were
seeking funding DEMO the presence of one of the authors. Two of the proposals were
taken from Venture Capital Report (VCR) and the third was taken DEMO the
Business Angels Bureau (BAB) (now Investor Champions). Both DEMO
are business angel networks which circulate details of investment opportunities
to their subscribers – these are mostly business angels but also include some
venture DEMO funds and corporate investors. The proposals were as follows:
• an internet training company providing on-line, e-learning, tutor-supported
management courses, based in London and seeking up to £300,000 of start-
up funding (from BAB);
•a branded restaurant concept based on a successful Chinese model, with
one outlet in Oxford, seeking £500,000 to open two DEMO outlets in its ﬁrst
phase of expansion (from VCR);
•a provider of test laboratory facilities using its own patented equipment to
test DEMO compare absorbent disposable products, based in North West
England, seeking £380,000 (out of a total funding requirement of £500,000)
for early stage expansion (from VCR).
The information on each opportunity is provided in summary form: three pages
in the case of the BAB opportunity and ﬁve pages for the VCR opportunities.
Each opportunity provides information DEMO the following topics: concept/product;
market; competition; management team; ﬁnancial summary.
The selection of the proposals was inﬂuenced by two considerations. DEMO, it
was thought to be desirable to provide respondents with a DEMO range of
236
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 237
Mason & Stark: A Comparison of Investment Criteria
opportunities to consider in order to militate against the possibility that any of
them DEMO narrow sectoral preferences. Second, and much harder to fully address,
DEMO the need to select investment opportunities that would appeal equally to
bankers, VCFMs and BAs. Given that they were sourced from business angel
networks, all three opportunities could be regarded as being equity deals rather
than loan deals. On the other hand, the restaurant business could be seen as a
loan rather than a credit deal on account of its DEMO basis. A further issue
was the amount of ﬁnance sought, to DEMO that the size of investment would
not be too small to be a VCFM deal nor too big for the typical BA.
Respondents were DEMO to read each opportunity in the same way that they
would normally read an investment proposal but verbalize their thoughts as they
did so. DEMO instruction that they were given was to say out loud the thoughts that
came into their mind. Respondents were not required to provide any DEMO
nations or verbal descriptions (Ericsson and Simon, 1993). The second-named
author was present as each respondent performed this task and reminded respon-
DEMO to think out loud if they lapsed into silence for more than 15 seconds. Their
thoughts were tape-recorded and subsequently a complete transcript was DEMO
for each respondent’s consideration of each investment opportunity, giving a
total DEMO of 30 transcripts. These verbatim transcripts were then broken down
into short phrases, or ‘thought segments’ – that is, phrases and sentences that DEMO
independent thought units – to permit analysis. These thought units were then
coded into one of nine categories relating to different types of investment DEMO
(Table 1). From this analysis it is possible to identify DEMO aspects of the
proposal are most and least important to the funder.
Results
Overview
There was a high degree of consensus among the funders DEMO their overall assess-
ment of the three proposals. Only one funder, DEMO business angel, would consider
further the internet training company. Similarly, one funder, a different business
angel, would consider further the restaurant business. DEMO, six of the
funders – all three of the bankers, two of the VCFMs and one of the business
angels – would consider DEMO the laboratory testing company (Table 2). Thus,
there is DEMO very high level of consistency among the bankers: none would consider
DEMO to either the internet training company or the restaurant chain but all
three were positive about the laboratory testing company. This is likely to DEMO
the structured approach used by bankers to make lending decisions that is
increasingly standardized between banks. There was also a high level of consist-
DEMO among the VCFMs. All three VCFMs rejected both the internet training
company and the restaurant chain. However, the laboratory testing company
passed the initial screening of two of the VCFMs. In contrast, there was no
consensus among the BAs in terms of their reactions to the proposals. Two DEMO
them rejected all three opportunities, one was favourably disposed to the DEMO
training company and the ﬁnal BA would investigate the restaurant chain and
the laboratory testing company in more detail (Table 2).
237
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 238
International Small Business Journal 22(3)
Table 1.
Classiﬁcation DEMO Thought Segments in the Protocols: Evaluation Criteria
Investment Criteria
Description
1. DEMO/Management The background, experience and track-record of the
Team entrepreneur, their personal qualities (e.g. commitment,
enthusiasm) and the range of skills/DEMO of the
management team
2. Strategy The overall concept and strategy of the business
3. Operations (practicalities How the business is organized to produce and deliver the
of the business functioning) product (i.e. issues associated DEMO the production
process)
4. Product/Service The nature of the product/service, in terms of its concept,
uniqueness, distinctiveness and innovativeness. DEMO also
includes the quality, standards and performance,
appearance, styling and aesthetic appeal, and ergonomics,
function and ﬂexibility of the product/service
5. Market The potential and growth of the market, demonstrated
market need, level/nature of competition and barriers to
entry
6. Financial Considerations This includes three aspects: (i) the ﬁnancial structure of the
business (DEMO costs and pricing, revenue stream ﬁnancial
projections), (ii) the DEMO of the equity/worth of business,
and (iii) the likely rate of return and exit route possibilities
7. Investor Fit This includes DEMO elements: (i) the relationship between the
investor’s background, skills and knowledge of the industry,
market, technology, etc. and the investment DEMO,
and (ii) the investor’s preferences (i.e. is this an DEMO,
market, etc. that the investor wants to be in?)
8. Business Plan The whole package/plan
9. Other Comments on any DEMO of the business which cannot be
coded in any other category
Investment Criteria: A Comparative Analysis
The verbal protocol analysis for each type of funder is shown in Table 3. As
anticipated, the approach of the bankers contrasts sharply with that of VCFMs
and BAs. Bankers place considerable DEMO on the ﬁnancial aspects of the
proposals. These account for over half (55%) of all their ‘thought units’, more
than twice the emphasis which VCFMs and BAs give to ﬁnancial issues. For
example, banker 2 reacted to the restaurant chain by observing that ‘the owner
has 40% DEMO plough in which is a good sign’ but then went on to comment that ‘I
would need to check the proﬁts against the industry DEMO In the case of
the lab testing company this banker noted that ‘they have ﬁxed assets of £700,000
which is a strong positive DEMO it gives us security.’ The market (12%) and the
entrepreneur (DEMO) are both of secondary importance to the bankers, and they
give virtually no emphasis to the strategy, operations, product or business plan.
DEMO one of the bankers noted, ‘we look at the ﬁnances, and as long as it meets
certain criteria that’s all we can ask.’ DEMO, hypothesis 1, which states that
238
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 239
Mason & Stark: A Comparison of Investment Criteria
Table 2.
Overall Assessment of the Funding Proposals: By Type of Funder and Proposal
Bank 1 Bank 2 Bank 3 VC 1 VC 2 VC 3 DEMO 1 BA 2 BA 3 BA 4
Internet
Training
Company
Restaurant
Chain
Lab Testing
Company
     
√

 DEMO      
√√ √ √ √

√

√
√
Key:  = reject; √ = consider in DEMO detail
‘bankers’ funding decisions will be dominated by ﬁnancial considerations and
they will give little consideration to entrepreneurial capabilities or the charac-
teristics of DEMO opportunity’ is supported.
VCFMs have a very different approach to investment appraisal. They give
greatest emphasis to market issues (22%) and ﬁnancial issues (21%), which
receive approximately equal weighting in terms of thought units. DEMO further
criteria – the entrepreneur (12%) and strategy (11%) – are of secondary import-
ance. This conﬂicts with the conclusions of post DEMO studies which typically ﬁnd
that the entrepreneur is the most important factor, but conﬁrms the ﬁndings of
other verbal protocol studies by Hall and Hofer (1993) and Zacharakis and
Meyer (1995) that the entrepreneur DEMO not the primary determinant at the initial
screening stage. Hypothesis 2, DEMO states that ‘VCFMs will also be concerned
with ﬁnancial issues but in addition will give considerable emphasis to the entre-
preneurial team and market DEMO is therefore also supported.
Table 3.
Verbal Protocol Frequency Counts
Funding Criterion
% of Thought Units (averaged by type of funder)
Banker (DEMO = 3) Venture Capital Fund Business Angel
Manager (n = 3) (n = 4)
Entrepreneur 9.0
Strategy 5.7
Operations 4.3
Product DEMO
Market 12.3
Finance 55.3
Investor Fit 0
Business Plan 2.7
Other 8.0
Total
100
12.0
11.0
4.7
6.7
22.0
21.3
1.0
6.7
14.7
100
DEMO
2.0
3.8
5.5
19.8
22.5
13.5
4.8
11.8
100
Notes: Each DEMO reviewed three funding opportunities. Percentages do not add up to
100 because of rounding.
239
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 240
International Small Business Journal 22(3)
BAs, like VCFMs, emphasize ﬁnancial and market issues (22% and 21%
respectively). They DEMO give marginally greater emphasis to the entrepreneur
(17%) than VCFMs do. Indeed, the methodology may well have under-
emphasized the importance that angels give to the people behind the business.
Business angel 3 commented that DEMO you invest in a company you are invest-
ing I should think 80 per cent in the people. Not only have we got to DEMO right
about the idea, but you have to have people who DEMO are convinced . . . know what
they are about.’ Business angel 1 commented as follows: ‘We are always looking
at . . . people. If the people know what they are doing we might back DEMO It is
people driven.’ He then went on to say that,
It’s not their track record. I’m not interested in the CVs. It DEMO the personalities of the
people concerned, because ultimately you are backing DEMO . . . The business model
must make sense, but it DEMO very easy to make a business model that works. Are the
people going to be able to sell the product? It’s the smell of the people. The intangible
feeling that this person has what it takes DEMO be a success. Hard work, vision, judgement
together in a mix . . . Start-ups have to be about self-motivated people. You need
DEMO who can motivate themselves to kick down the doors to get customers. It takes
a certain type of person to do that. You also DEMO to like the people. They are the sort
of people you could be good friends with. If you don’t like them you aren’t going DEMO
be able to work with them and that’s because we work a hands on approach.
BAs are also the only type of funder to DEMO any emphasis to investor ﬁt
considerations (14%). Because BAs are DEMO their own money and so are
not answerable to anyone else they can hold personal (and often idiosyncratic)
investment criteria. The attitudes of each of the angels who participated in the
study to the investment DEMO were strongly inﬂuenced by their backgrounds
and experience. First, restricting their DEMO to situations in which they had
some prior knowledge was a way of minimizing investment risk. As angel 4
commented, ‘the more unknowns that you can take out, the less risk you are
running. If you have been involved in this business, or have a particular interest
in something, this can help.’ Angel 3 noted that ‘I’d rather invest in something I
know more about’ and rejected the lab testing company because DEMO don’t really
understand the market.’ Second, angels want ‘exciting’ investments. Angel DEMO
rejected the internet training company because ‘it wouldn’t interest me at all.
Mostly, I think because I ﬁnd the area boring.’ He went on to develop this point:
there is always the motivation to make DEMO, but equally the other big motivation is
to have fun . DEMO . I came out of IT – it has to be IT or technology with some weird and
wacky interest and there is nothing DEMO and wacky about this . . . Basically it’s rather
boring and I would not fund it. That really is irrespective of the return.
DEMO angel 2 would only be attracted by an opportunity that ‘had a bit of
emotion in it’.
Hypothesis 3a, that ‘the approach of BAs will be closer to that of VCFMs than
to bankers because they DEMO investing for capital gain’ therefore receives support.
There was also marginal support for hypothesis 3b, that ‘BAs will place greater
emphasis than VCFMs on the entrepreneur/entrepreneurial team’. However,
following Fiet (1995a,b), it might have been expected that BAs would weigh
240
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com DEMO TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 241
Mason & Stark: A Comparison of Investment Criteria
entrepreneurial issues higher than market issues. This was not the case. Hypoth-
esis 3c, ‘that BAs will give greater emphasis to the “ﬁt” of the business DEMO their
own personal investment criteria’ is also supported. Finally, hypothesis 3d, that
‘BAs will also give consideration to the opportunity for involvement in DEMO
investee business’, could not be supported because of a lack of DEMO, with too few
comments on scope for involvement for them to DEMO separately categorized; they
are included within the residual category. Although the DEMO made some
comments about being hands on investors there was no evidence that their
attitude to any particular investment was shaped by the opportunity DEMO play a
hands on role, or the nature of this role. DEMO is contrary to the ﬁndings of other
studies (Haines et al., 2003; Mason and Rogers, 1996, 1997).
Conclusion
The ﬁndings of this article must be treated with caution. In particular, because of
the artiﬁciality of the situation it is likely that some of the proposals DEMO
considered by respondents whereas, in a real world situation they would DEMO
been rapidly dismissed because of their sector.3 It is also based on a small sample,
comprising just 10 funders and 30 protocols. With DEMO caveats, we can draw
three main conclusions from this study. First, the results do conﬁrm the basic
hypothesis of the article that different DEMO of funder analyse proposals differ-
ently, have different funding criteria and DEMO emphasis on different kinds of
information. This conclusion therefore challenges the tenor of much of the litera-
ture on how to write a business DEMO which implies, often by omission, that
different types of funder look at business plans in broadly the same way. The
ﬁndings from this DEMO indicate that bankers are particularly distinctive in their
approach. Hence, the DEMO by Burns (2001: 340) that ‘bankers are likely to
be DEMO in similar things to the providers of equity ﬁnance, albeit with
DEMO emphasis’ is incorrect. There are fewer contrasts between VCFMs and
BAs: DEMO, the article has highlighted some important differences in their
approaches. As DEMO in the introduction, some texts on business plans have
alluded to DEMO in the approach of different types of funder. However, this
is DEMO ﬁrst study to demonstrate the extent and nature of these differences.
Moreover, whereas such texts generally only make a distinction between bankers
and equity investors, this study has demonstrated that there are also differences
in the approaches of VCFMs and BAs.
Second, contrary to Deakins and Hussain (DEMO), bankers exhibited consist-
ency, not only in their approach, but also in their decision. This may well reﬂect
the development of standardized DEMO by the banks. With the caveat that
this conclusion is based on small numbers, it does raise the question whether it
is worthwhile for an entrepreneur who has been turned down by one bank to
spend DEMO approaching other banks. Conversely, BAs have the least consistency
in either DEMO or outcomes, reﬂecting the great heterogeneity in the angel
population and DEMO personalized nature of their investment criteria. The attitude
of business angels to any investment proposal is very much shaped by whether it
is an DEMO or market that they know anything about. Thus, an entrepreneur
241
DEMO from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 242
International Small Business Journal 22(3)
who is seeking DEMO ﬁnancing should be advised to be persistent in their search
for an investor.
Third, from a methodological perspective, this study’s ﬁndings concerning the
DEMO criteria of VCFMs reinforce concerns about the reliability of the
conclusions of previous studies that have used ‘conventional’ questionnaires,
surveys and interviews which DEMO respondents to self-describe their decision-
making. In contrast with these post hoc studies, but conﬁrming other studies
using real time methodologies (verbal protocol DEMO, conjoint analysis), the
entrepreneur is not the most important consideration (Shepherd and Zacharakis,
1999). There are three reasons why real DEMO methodologies, such as the
approach used in this study, provide a better understanding of how funders make
ﬁnancing decisions. First, they overcome the inherent problems of retrospective
reports (e.g. bias, incomplete recall). Second, real time methods overcome the
poor grasp that investors have about their DEMO decision-making processes
(Zacharakis and Meyer, 1998). Third, conventional post DEMO methodologies do
not differentiate between the different stages in the decision-making process.
However, the weightings that investors give to different criteria change between
stages in the investment process. Using verbal protocol analysis, this study has
been able to identify the considerations of funders at the initial screening stage.
DEMO a consequence, this article gives entrepreneurs a much more accurate and
DEMO guide to the investment criteria of funders than conventional post hoc
studies which generate ‘laundry lists’ of criteria, and which tend to be reproduced
in text books on how to write business plans.
Finally, in terms of its practical applications, the central message of the article
is that different funders will look for different types of information in a business
DEMO, have different expectations about what information should be included and
will DEMO the business plan in different ways. Their decision on whether to
proceed will also be based on different weightings of criteria. Entrepreneurs (and
their advisers) therefore need to be aware of the need to customize their funding
proposal according to whether they are seeking bank funding, approaching
venture capital funds or seeking ﬁnance from business angels. The primary
concern of DEMO banker is the risk that the loan will not be repaid. Accordingly,
the banker is most interested in the ﬁnances of the business (margins, cash ﬂow)
in order to judge whether the business can service the debt, and whether assets
are available from either the business or the entrepreneur to secure the loan in
the event that the DEMO fails. A business plan that is to be used to approach
a bank for a loan must therefore contain sufﬁcient information for a banker DEMO
make this assessment and to indicate how the loan will be repaid in the event that
the business performs below expectations (Smith and Smith, 2000). It is normal
practice for bankers to compare the ﬁnancial information in a business plan
against industry averages. It is therefore essential DEMO any signiﬁcant deviations
are explained in the plan.
VCFMs and BAs give less consideration to such ﬁnancial information. Never-
theless, they expect the business plan to contain such information and will spend
some time looking at DEMO ﬁgures. However, their main concerns relate to the
growth potential of DEMO business and the potential returns that they might expect.
242
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 243
Mason & Stark: A Comparison of Investment Criteria
Accordingly, DEMO are focused on the market – its size, growth, level of
competition – and want to know what is the customer beneﬁt or DEMO problem
is being solved (Looser and Schläpfer, 2001). Financial information is also very
important, although for different reasons to that of the banker. Equity investors
look at the numbers to assess potential valuation, likely level of proﬁtability,
amount of funding that is required now and DEMO the future and what the money
will be used for. However, DEMO are at least two signiﬁcant differences in the
approach of VCFMs and BAs. First, although the capability of the management
team to seize the opportunity that has been identiﬁed is an important consider-
ation for both, because business angels are hands on investors they place more
emphasis on DEMO relationship issues. Second, whereas VCFMs are exclus-
ively oriented to the DEMO returns, business angels are also seeking a psychic
income in the DEMO of interest and fun. Thus, whereas a business plan targeted
at DEMO VCFM needs to contain the ‘steak’, one that is aimed at DEMO angels
needs to contain both ‘steak’ and ‘sizzle’. It is therefore important that the plan
should attempt to engage potential angel investors on an DEMO level.
Acknowledgement
We are grateful to Jonathan Levie and Lesley Hetherington for their comments on an
earlier version of this article that was presented DEMO the 2002 ISBA conference in Brighton,
13–15 November 2002.
Notes
1. According to one banker, the return is just 4%.
2. However, DEMO comparison with the English bankers who reviewed the proposal in the
Deakins and Hussain (1994) study the dependence of the Scottish bankers on DEMO
information was lower and a minority would have been prepared to lend without
security.
3. The restaurant case is the one that is most DEMO to fall into this category.
References
Allen, K. R. (1999) DEMO New Ventures: An Entrepreneurial Approach, 2nd edn.
Boston, MA: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Avery, R. B., Bostic, R. W. and Samolyk, K. DEMO (1998) ‘The Role of Personal Wealth in
Small Business Finance’, DEMO of Banking and Finance 22(6–8): 1019–61.
Barrow, C., Barrow, P. and Brown, R. (2001) The Business Plan Workbook, 4th edn.
London: Kogan Page.
Berger, A. N. and Udell, G. F. (1998) ‘The Economics of Small Business Finance: The
Role of Private Equity and Debt Markets in the Financial Growth Cycle’, Journal of
Banking and Finance 22(6–8): 613–73.
Binks, M. and Ennew, C. DEMO (1996) ‘Growing Firms and Credit Constraint’, Small Business
Economics 8(DEMO): 17–25.
Binks, M. R. and Ennew, C. T. (1997) ‘The Relationship between UK Banks and their
Small Business Customers’, Small Business Economics 9(2): 167–78.
243
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV DEMO October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 244
International Small Business Journal 22(3)
Burns, P. (DEMO) Entrepreneurship and Small Business. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Deakins, D. and Hussain, G. (1994) ‘Risk Assessment and Asymmetric Information’,
Journal of Bank DEMO 12(1): 24–31.
Dixon, R. (1991) ‘Venture Capitalists and DEMO Appraisal of Investments’, Omega 19(5),
333–44.
Ericsson, K. DEMO and Simon, H. A. (1993) Protocol Analysis, 2nd edn. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Feeney, L., Haines, G. H. and DEMO, A. L. (1999) ‘Private Investors’ Investment Criteria:
Insights from DEMO Data’, Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepre-
neurial Finance 1(2): 121–45.
Fiet, J. O. (1995a) ‘Reliance upon Informants in the Venture Capital Industry’, Journal of
Business Venturing 10(3): 195–223.
Fiet, J. O. (1995b) ‘Risk Avoidance Strategies in Venture Capital Markets’, Journal of
Management Studies 32(4): 551–74.
Fletcher, M. (1995) ‘Decision Making by Scottish Bank Managers’, International Journal
of Entrepreneurial Behaviour DEMO Research 1(2): 37–53.
Fried, V. H. and Hisrich, R. D. (1994) ‘Toward a Model of Venture Capital Investment
Decision Making’, Financial Management 23(3): 28–37.
Haines, G. H. Jr, Madill, J. J. and Riding, A. R. (2003) ‘Informal Investment in Canada:
Financing Small Business Growth’, Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship
16(3–4): 13–40.
Hall, J. and Hofer, C. W. (1993) DEMO Capitalists’ Decision Criteria in New Venture
Evaluation’, Journal of Business Venturing DEMO(1): 25–42.
Kirby, D. A. (2002) Entrepreneurship. London: McGraw-Hill.
Kuratko, D. F. and Hodgetts, R. M. (2001) Entrepreneurship: A Contemporary Approach,
5th edn. Orlando, FL: Harcourt.
Looser, U. and Schläpfer, B. (2001) The New Venture Adventure: Succeed With
Professional DEMO Planning. New York: Texere.
MacMillan, I. C., Siegel, R. and Subba Narasimha, P. N. (1985) ‘Criteria Used by Venture
Capitalists to Evaluate New Venture Proposals’, in J. A. Hornaday, E. B. Shils, J. A.
Timmons and K. H. Vesper (eds) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship DEMO 1985,
pp. 126–41. Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Manigart, S., Wright, M., Robbie, K., Desbrières, P. and De Waele, DEMO (1997) ‘Venture
Capitalists’ Appraisal of Investment Projects: An Empirical European DEMO, Entre-
preneurship Theory and Practice 21(4): 29–43.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (1994) ‘The Informal Venture Capital Market in the
UK’, in A. Hughes and D. J. Storey (eds) Financing Small Firms, pp. 64–111. London:
Routledge,.
Mason, C. DEMO and Harrison, R. T. (1996a) ‘Informal Venture Capital: A Study of the
Investment Process and Post-investment Experience’, Entrepreneurship and Regional
Development 8: 105–26.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (1996b) ‘Why Business Angels Say No: A Case Study
of Opportunities Rejected by an Informal Investor Syndicate’, International Small
Business Journal 14(2): 35–51.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (2002) ‘Barriers to Investment DEMO the Informal Venture
Capital Market’, Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 14(3): 271–87.
Mason, C. and Rogers, A. (1996) ‘Understanding the Business Angel’s Investment
Decision’, Venture Finance Working Paper No. 14, University of DEMO and
University of Ulster.
Mason, C. and Rogers, A. (1997) ‘The Business Angel’s Investment Decision: An
244
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 245
Mason & Stark: A Comparison of Investment Criteria
Exploratory Analysis’, in D. Deakins, P. Jennings and C. Mason (eds) Entrepreneurship
DEMO the 1990s, pp. 29–46. London: Paul Chapman Publishing.
Muzyka, D., Birley, S. and Leleux, B. (1996) ‘Trade-offs in the Investment DEMO of
European Venture Capitalists’, Journal of Business Venturing 11(4): DEMO
Parker, S. (2002) ‘Do Banks Ration Credit to New Businesses? And Should Governments
Intervene?’, Scottish Journal of Political Economy 49(2): 162–95.
Riding, A., Dal Cin, P., Duxbury, L., DEMO, G. and Safrata, R. (1993) Informal Investors
in Canada: DEMO Identiﬁcation of Salient Characteristics. Ottawa: Carleton University.
Riquelme, H. and Rickards, T. (1992) ‘Hybrid Conjoint Analysis: An Estimation Probe
in New DEMO Decisions’, Journal of Business Venturing 7: 505–18.
Shepherd, D. A. (1999) ‘Venture Capitalists’ Introspection: A Comparison of “in use”
and “espoused” DEMO Policies’, Journal of Small Business Management 37(2): 76–87.
Shepherd, D. and Douglas, E. J. (1999) Attracting Equity Investors: Positioning, Prepar-
ing and Presenting the Business Plan. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
DEMO, D. A. and Zacharakis, A. (1999) ‘Conjoint Analysis: A DEMO Methodological
Approach for Researching the Decision Policies of Venture Capitalists’, Venture
DEMO: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 1(3): 197–217.
Smith, J. K. and Smith, R. L. (2000) Entrepreneurial Finance. New York: Wiley.
Storey, D. J. (1994) ‘New Firm Growth and Bank DEMO, Small Business Economics
6(2): 139–50.
Sweeting, R. C. (DEMO) ‘UK Venture Capital Funds and the Funding of New Technology-
based DEMO: Process and Relationships’, Journal of Management Studies 28: 601–22.
Tiffany, P. and Peterson, S. D. (1997) Business Plans For Dummies. Foster City, CA: IDG
Books.
Timmons, J. (1999) New Venture Creation: Entrepreneurship For The 21st Century, 5th
edition. Boston, MA: Irwin/DEMO Hill.
Van Osnabrugge, M. (2000) ‘A Comparison of Business Angel DEMO Venture Capitalist
Investment Procedures: An Agency Theory-based Analysis’, Venture Capital: DEMO Inter-
national Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 2(2): 91–109.
Van Osnabrugge, M. and Robinson, R. J. (2000) Angel Investing: Matching Start-Up Funds
With Start-Up Companies. San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass.
Vesper, K. H. (1996) New Venture Experience, rev. edn. Seattle, WA: Vector Books.
Wetzel, W. E. (1981) ‘Informal Risk Capital in New England’, in K. H. Vesper (ed.) Fron-
tiers of Entrepreneurship Research 1981, pp. 217–45. Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Wright, M. and Robbie, K. (1996) ‘Venture Capitalists, Unquoted Equity Investment
Appraisal and the Role of Accounting Information’, Accounting and Business Research
26: 153–68.
Wynant, L. and Hatch, J. (1991) Banks and Small Business Borrowers. London, DEMO:
The Western Business School, University of Western Ontario.
Zacharakis, A. L. and Meyer, G. D. (1995) ‘The Venture Capitalist Decision: DEMO
standing Process Versus Outcome’, in W. D. Bygrave, B. J. Bird, S. Birley, N. C.
Churchill, M. Hay, R. H. Keeley DEMO W. E. Wetzel Jr (eds) Frontiers of Entrepreneur-
ship Research 1995, pp. 465–78. Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Zacharakis, A. L. and DEMO, G. D. (1998) ‘A Lack of Insight: Do Venture Capitalists
Really Understand their Own Decision Processes?’, Journal of Business Venturing
13(1): 57–76.
COLIN MASON is Professor of Entrepreneurship in the Hunter DEMO for
Entrepreneurship, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK. His research is
DEMO
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 246
International Small Business Journal 22(3)
concerned with entrepreneurship DEMO venture capital, particularly in the context
of regional development. He has DEMO extensively on topics such as the new
ﬁrm formation process, the DEMO of new ﬁrm formation and growth, the
impact of small business DEMO, and venture capital. He is founder and co-editor of
Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance (Routledge).
[email: colin.mason@strath.ac.uk]
MATTHEW DEMO is a trainee chartered accountant with Tenon Limited and is
based at the company’s Chandlers Ford, Hampshire ofﬁce. He graduated from the
Department of Geography, University of Southampton in 2001. This article is
based on his research dissertation, which he undertook under the supervision of
Colin Mason. [email: Matthew. Stark@tenongroup.com]
246
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 247
Mason & Stark: A Comparison of Investment Criteria
Que cherchent les investisseurs dans un plan de développement?
Comparaison des critères d’investissement DEMO banquiers, des spécialistes du
capital risque et des business angels – DEMO Mason
University of Strathclyde, Royaume-Uni
Matthew Stark
Tenon Limited, Royaume-Uni
La plupart des ﬁnanceurs potentiels souhaitent considérer un plan de développement
comme une DEMO étape lorsqu’ils décident ou non d’investir. Toutefois, une grande
partie de DEMO littérature sur la façon de rédiger un plan de développement manque de
souligner que des types de ﬁnanceur différents examinent les plans de développement
DEMO points de vue différents. Faisant appel à une méthodologie en temps réel, cet article met
en lumière les critères d’investissement différents des banquiers, DEMO gestionnaires de
fonds capital risque et des business angels. Les banquiers insistent sur les aspects ﬁnanciers
de la proposition et mettent peu l’accent sur DEMO questions liées aux marchés, aux
entrepreneurs ou autres questions. En tant DEMO capital-actions, les
gestionnaires de fonds capital risque et les business angels DEMO une approche très différente,
mettant l’accent sur les questions liées aux marchés et à la ﬁnance. Les business angels
mettent plus l’accent que DEMO gestionnaires de fonds capital risque sur les
considérations liées aux entrepreneurs et à « l’adéquation des investissements par rapport
aux investisseurs ». L’implication pour DEMO entrepreneurs est qu’ils doivent personnaliser
leur plan de développement selon qu’ils cherchent à obtenir un ﬁnancement auprès d’une
banque, d’un fonds capital risque ou d’un business angel.
Mots clés: banques; business angel; plans de développement; petite entreprise; capital
risque
¿Qué esperan los inversores de un plan DEMO actividades empresariales?
Una comparación de los criterios de inversión de los bancos, gestores de capitales
de riesgo y promotores – Colin Mason
Universidad de Strathclyde, RU
Matthew Stark
Tenon Limited, RU
Para la mayoría DEMO los ﬁnanciadores potenciales la primera medida a tomar es examinar el
plan de actividades antes de decidirse a invertir. No obstante, gran parte de la información
sobre la preparación de un plan de actividades no da DEMO al hecho de que los tipos
diferentes de ﬁnanciadores consideran los planes de actividades desde un punto de vista
diferente. Empleando una metodología en DEMO real, este artículo destaca los criterios
diferentes de los bancos, gestores de capitales de riesgo y promotores. Los banco hacen
hincapié en los DEMO ﬁnancieros de la proposición y dan poca importancia al mercado,
al empresario o a otros asuntos. Como inversores en capital social, los gestores de capitales
de riesgo y los promotores tienen un enfoque muy diferente DEMO igual importancia al
247
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014
ISB 042377 (bc/t)  26/4/04  2:30 pm  Page 248
International Small Business Journal 22(3)
mercado y a DEMO asuntos ﬁnancieros. Los promotores dan más importancia a los factores de
la compatibilidad del empresario con el inversor que los gestores de capitales de DEMO La
inferencia para los empresarios es que al buscar ﬁnanciación tienen que adaptar su plan de
actividades a las exigencias del banco, del gestor de capital de riesgo o del promotor, según
el caso. .
Palabras claves: bancos; promotores; plan de actividades; pequeñas empresas; capital de
riesgo
Auf welche Punkte achten Investoren bei einem Geschäftsplan?
Ein Vergleich DEMO Investitionskriterien von Bankiers, Risikokapitalgebern und
Finanzierern bzw. sog. Business Angels – DEMO Mason
Universität von Strathclyde, GB
Matthew Stark
Tenon Limited, GB
Der Großteil interessierter Geldgeber wird als ersten Schritt zur Entscheidung
hinsichtlich einer Investition DEMO Geschäftsplan sehen wollen. Die vorhandene Literatur
über die Art und Weise, DEMO man einen Geschäftsplan erstellt, vermittelt jedoch sehr
selten, dass Geldgeber verschiedenen Typs Geschäftspläne aus unterschiedlicher Perspek-
tive betrachten. Unter Einsatz einer Echtzeit-Methodik veranschaulicht DEMO Beitrag die
verschiedenen Investitionskriterien von Bankiers, Risikokapitalgebern und Finanzierern
bzw. sog. DEMO Angels’. Bankiers konzentrieren sich auf die ﬁnanziellen Aspekte
eines Plans und schenken dem Markt, dem Unternehmer bzw. anderen Gesichtspunkten
wenig Aufmerksamkeit. Als Kapitalinvestoren haben Risikokapitalfondsverwalter und
‘Business Angels’ eine grundlegend andere Vorgehensweise, bei der sowohl marktbezo-
gene als auch ﬁnanzielle Gesichtspunkte betont werden. Im Gegensatz zu Risikokapital-
fondsverwaltern DEMO sich ‘Business Angels’ mehr auf den Unternehmer und die
Erwägungen bezüglich der Geeignetheit für den Investor. Hieraus ergibt sich für
Unternehmer, dass sie ihren Geschäftsplan speziell danach ausrichten müssen, ob sie sich
für ihre Finanzierung an eine Bank, einen Risikokapitalfonds oder an einen ‘Business
Angel’ wenden.
Schlagwörter: DEMO; ‘Business Angels’ (Finanzierer); Geschäftspläne; mittelständische
Unternehmen; Risikokapital
248
Downloaded from isb.sagepub.com at TEMPLE UNIV on October 14, 2014{1g42fwefx}