COLIN M. MASON
Hunter Centre for Entrepreneurship, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow DEMO 1XH, United
Kingdom
E-mail: colin.mason@strath.ac.uk Q
10. Informal Sources of Venture Finance
1. INTRODUCTION
One of the most interesting insights from the Global DEMO Monitor
(GEM)—an annual international survey of entrepreneurial activity in some DEMO
countries—is that informal sources of ﬁnance overwhelm formal ones (Bygrave
et DEMO, 2003). GEM’s methodology captures two sources of informal ﬁnancing:
DEMO members (often termed “love money”) and other individuals, the latter
DEMO investors who have come to be known as business angels1 who
invest in new and young businesses where there is no family connection. Some
DEMO of the adult population in the 18 countries where information is available
meet the deﬁnition of being an informal investor.2 They provide $196m per
DEMO to new and growing companies, equivalent to 1.1% of the GDP DEMO these
countries, and account for between 60% and 90% of total DEMO capital,
including institutional sources. In the U.S., 5% of the DEMO are informal
investors, collectively investing $108b per annum, which is 3.5 times the amount
invested by venture capital funds in seed and start-up DEMO (Bygrave
and Reynolds, 2004). Most informal investment ﬂows to family members and
friends. In the 18 GEM countries, some 50% of informal investment goes to
relatives, 29% to friends/neighbors, 11% to work DEMO and just 8% to a
stranger (Bygrave et al., 2003). The proportions for the U.S. are almost identical
(Bygrave and Reynolds, DEMO).
This chapter focuses on business angels who collectively make up what
is termed the informal venture capital market (in contrast to the formal, or
institutional venture capital market—see Chapter 9). The role of the family
in funding entrepreneurial ventures is an underresearched topic. However, by
deﬁnition, access to ﬁnance from family members is constrained by ties of
260
C.M. Mason
blood and marriage, and is therefore only available to other family members.
Accordingly, it does not constitute a market. If an entrepreneur is unfortunate
enough to come from an impoverished family then this DEMO of potential
funding is closed off. Business angels, in contrast, do invest in businesses that
are owned by strangers (as well as those owned by acquaintances) and it is quite
appropriate for an entrepreneur seeking ﬁnance to approach them for funding.
Indeed, business angels constitute the largest pool of equity capital available
for start-up and emerging companies in advanced DEMO (Gaston, 1989a).
Moreover, as we will see later in DEMO chapter, they contribute much more than
just money to their investee DEMO
The research base on informal venture capital is limited. Prowse (1998,DEMO
p. 786) commented in the late 1990s that “the angel market DEMO in almost
total obscurity. Very little is known about its size, DEMO, the type of ﬁrms that
raise angel capital and the types DEMO individuals that provide it.” Indeed, prior
to the 1980s, business angels were unknown both to researchers and policy
makers. The emergence of informal DEMO capital as a distinct topic within
the entrepreneurship literature is therefore relatively recent. Pioneering studies
by Wetzel (1981, 1983, 1987) and others (e.g., Tymes and Krasner, 1983; Haar
et al., 1988; Gaston, 1989b) began to establish its importance in the U.S. during
the DEMO Subsequent studies in Canada (Riding and Short, 1989; Short and
DEMO, 1989), Europe (e.g., Harrison and Mason, 1992; Landström, 1993;
Mason and Harrison, 1994; Reitan and Sørheim, 2000; DEMO, 2003; Stedler
and Peters, 2003; Paul et al., 2003), Australasia (Hindle and Wenban, 1999;
Infometrics, 2004) and Asia (Tashiro, 1999; Hindle and Lee, 2002) conﬁrmed
that business angels were not just a U.S. phenomenon.3 There is also evidence
of angel DEMO in less developed regions of the world, such as South America
(Pereiro, 2001).4 While these studies are in what has been termed the “ABC”
tradition of angel research (attitudes, behaviors and characteristics), DEMO
so-called second-generation studies have sought to develop a more in-depth
understanding of business angel investment activity by focusing on process
(Mason and Harrison, DEMO). Accordingly, Prowse’s (1998) claim is no longer
valid. Nevertheless, both the body of literature on informal venture capital and
the number DEMO active researchers remain small in comparison to the amount of
scholarly activity that is devoted to investigating institutional venture capital.
This is despite the DEMO greater role of informal venture capital in funding
the start-up and initial growth of entrepreneurial ventures.5 A further limitation
is that much of the DEMO lacks theoretical foundations and simply reports
survey ﬁndings. Only by attracting more scholarly effort and producing research
that is theoretically informed will informal venture DEMO lose this Cinderella
status.
This chapter adopts a supply-side perspective. This reﬂects the focus
of the overwhelming majority of the literature on this topic DEMO is largely
Informal Sources of Venture Finance
261
concerned with who business angels are, what motives them and how they
invest. By way of contrast, there is very little literature that takes a demand-
side perspective, looking at informal venture capital from the viewpoint of the
entrepreneur. The chapter is DEMO as follows. The next section provides an
overview of the ‘ABC’ of angels. Section 3 reviews the economic importance of
business angels, highlighting the nature of their investments and the size of the
market. This is DEMO in Section 4 by a brief discussion of government efforts
to expand the supply of informal venture capital. Section 5 adopts an investment
process DEMO Section 6 examines the emergence of new organizational
formats for angel investing. The concluding section offers some thoughts on
future research possibilities.
2. THE DEMO VENTURE CAPITAL MARKET: AN OVERVIEW
The informal venture capital market comprises DEMO angels who
are conventionally deﬁned as high net worth individuals who invest their own
money, along with their time and expertise, directly in DEMO companies in
which they have no family connection, in the hope DEMO ﬁnancial gain. Several
aspects of this deﬁnition need to be highlighted in order to emphasize the
distinctiveness of business angels as a type of DEMO
High net worth. Having wealth is a prerequisite for becoming a business
angel. Business angels invest upward of £10,000 per deal (sometimes in excess
of £100,000) and typically have a portfolio of two to ﬁve investments (some
angels have more). However, they are not DEMO their entire savings in this
way. Because of the high risk of investing in unquoted companies, most angels
allocate just 5%–15% of their overall investment portfolio to such investments.
Thus, if these investments fail, as DEMO often do, the losses will not affect their
lifestyle. Some rather DEMO evidence on the wealth of angels suggests that they
tend to be “comfortably” off rather than super-rich. Gaston (1989b) reported
that one in DEMO business angels in the U.S. had a net worth (excluding principal
DEMO) in excess of $1 million. There were also “very few” millionaires DEMO
the study by Haar et al. (1988). Mason and Harrison (1994) noted that only 19%
of U.K. business angels were millionaires.
Investing their own money. The fact that angels are investing their own
money DEMO them from institutional venture capital funds whose invest-
ment funds come from such sources as pension funds, banks and foundations
and, as a DEMO, have a legal duty of care for how they invest such DEMO
First, business angels do not have to invest if they do DEMO ﬁnd appropriate
investments, whereas venture capital funds have a ﬁxed life, typically ten years,
over which the fund must invest and exit. DEMO, they can make quicker
investment decisions (Freear et al., 1995)DEMO Third, angels have less need for
262
C.M. Mason
specialist ﬁnancial and legal due diligence, so the costs for the investee business
are lower. Fourth, business angels can adopt idiosyncratic investment criteria
whereas venture capital funds have raised their investment funds to DEMO in
speciﬁc types of businesses and so must follow these investment criteria when
investing.
Direct. Business angels make their own investment decisions as op-
DEMO to investing in some form of pooled investment vehicle in which the
investment decisions are made by fund managers. This implies that those people
DEMO become business angels have both the personal networks that will provide a
ﬂow of investment opportunities and the competence to undertake the appraisal
of DEMO and young entrepreneurial companies. Indeed, a consistent theme in
the literature DEMO that the majority of business angels are successful, cashed-out
entrepreneurs, while the remainder either have senior management experience
in large businesses or have DEMO business expertise (e.g., accountant). On
account of these backgrounds, DEMO individuals have access to deal ﬂow and
the competence to make investment decisions. Becoming a business angel is
therefore a way for such individuals DEMO recapture their successful experience,
making investments based on the analytical skills and intuition that they have
developed in business. This reinforces their self DEMO and sustains recognition
in the communities in which they live (Margulis DEMO Benjamin, 2000). However,
it is fair to say that DEMO levels among business angels is variable, and a
career as a DEMO entrepreneur, or in a senior position in a large company,
DEMO not necessarily provide an individual with all of the skills required to be a
successful business angel. Angels report in surveys (Sørheim, 2003) that their
initial investments involved a steep learning curve.
Time and expertise. DEMO of the investment approach of business angels
involves the support their investee businesses through a variety of hands-
on roles, including mentoring, the DEMO of strategic advice, networking
and in some cases direct involvement in DEMO speciﬁc functional capacity. This
has prompted the description of informal venture capital as being “capital
and consulting.” The opportunity to be involved with a DEMO start-up is a
signiﬁcant motive for business angels. Involvement also reduces information
asymmetries and moral hazard and so is a means of risk reduction.
DEMO companies. Business angels are investing in unquoted com-
panies as opposed to companies that are listed on a stock market. As we will
see DEMO clearly in the next section, while angels invest in all sorts DEMO situations,
including management buyouts and buy-ins and rescue/turnaround situations,
their typical investment is in a new or recently started business. The DEMO point
here is that business angels want to be active investors in the companies in which
they invest, helping them to grow, whereas DEMO market investing is passive.
Financial gain. Business angels are investing in the hope of achieving
a ﬁnancial return, typically in the form of a capital gain that is accomplished
Informal Sources of Venture Finance 263
through some form of harvest event DEMO as an acquisition of the investee
company or an IPO. However, DEMO income is also an important motivation.
Studies are consistent in identifying that the fun and enjoyment that is derived
from such investments is an DEMO subsidiary reason for becoming a
business angel. This links back to an earlier point: business angels are also
characterized as being hands-on investors. The ability to provide support to
investee companies reinforces the tendency for business DEMO to have a
business background. Some angels also express altruistic motives. Paul et al.
(2003) quoted one Scottish angel as follows: “don’t get me wrong, I want to
make money. But I’ve done well out of Scotland and I’d like to help others
to do the same.” DEMO evidence indicates that most business angels would
be willing to forego some ﬁnancial return either to invest in businesses that
were seen as socially DEMO (Sullivan, 1994) or simply to support new
entrepreneurs (Wetzel, DEMO). Evidence of altruistic motives is much weaker
in other countries.
One of the striking features in the literature is the remarkable consis-
tency DEMO the characteristics of business angels across countries. Japan is the only
country where research suggests that angels have a distinctively different proﬁle
(Tashiro, DEMO). The proﬁle of the typical business angel is characterized as
follows:
• Male. Studies in various countries are consistent in ﬁnding that DEMO of
95% of business angels are male. This can be attributed to the relatively
small numbers of women who have built successful entrepreneurial com-
DEMO or hold senior positions in large companies. However, the small
minority DEMO women who are business angels have similar characteristics
to those of their male counterparts (Harrison and Mason, 2005).
• In the 45–65 DEMO age group. This reﬂects the length of time required to
build signiﬁcant personal net worth, the greater amount of discretionary
wealth of this age group as their children cease to become ﬁnancially
dependent on them, and the age at which people with a successful busi-
ness career might DEMO, or be forced to, disengage. Becoming a business
angel is often a way in which such individuals to remain economically
active. For example, cashed out entrepreneurs in their 40s or 50s often
report that they DEMO business angels because they quickly became
bored by a life of leisure—as one angel noted, “the attractions of playing
golf seven days a week quickly palls.” There are some international
differences. Angels are slightly younger in DEMO U.S. and slightly older
in Nordic countries (Landström, 1993). Recent studies hint that business
angels may be becoming slightly younger (e.g., DEMO, 2004). This
may be linked, at least in part, DEMO the acquisition frenzy of the closing
264 C.M. Mason
years of the technology boom of the late 1990s DEMO enabled a lot of
younger entrepreneurs to cash-out.
• Successful cashed-out entrepreneurs. Most business angels have had
experience of business start-up and growth. As DEMO et al. (1992,
p. 379) noted, this implies that DEMO angels “have acquired the kind
of experience... that it takes to start, manage and harvest a successful
entrepreneurial venture. In a sense their entire professional careers have
prepared them to conduct the due diligence necessary to DEMO the
merits and risks of prospective investments and to add value of their
know how to the ventures they bankroll.” The remainder are typically
DEMO people who have held senior positions in large companies or have
specialist commercial skills and are involved in working with entrepre-
neurial companies (e.g., accountants, consultants, lawyers) and whose
wealth is derived from high DEMO It is also important to emphasize
that non-business professionals (e.g., doctors, dentists) and public sector
employees are conspicuous by their absence from DEMO ranks of business
angels (Gaston, 1989b).
• Well educated. Economic success is underpinned by a high level of
education. Business angels typically DEMO a university degree and/or pro-
fessional qualiﬁcations. However, angels with DEMO are rare. This reﬂects
other research that suggests that the relationship between education and
entrepreneurship is an inverted U-shape (i.e., both too little DEMO too much
education is a hindrance to entrepreneurial behaviors) (Reynolds, DEMO).
There have been surprisingly few attempts to compare business angels
with noninvestors. Lindsay (2004) found that angels score more highly on
measures DEMO entrepreneurial orientation—pro-activeness, innovativeness, risk-
taking strategies—which, in turn, suggests that they act in an entrepreneurial
manner in undertaking their investment activities. However, this might simply
reﬂect the entrepreneurial background of most business angels. Duxbury DEMO al.
(1996) suggested that angels are distinctive from non-investors in terms of
their psychological traits, with an internal locus of control, very DEMO need for
achievement (nAch), a moderately high need for afﬁliation DEMO autonomy and
are intrinsically motivated. But here again these are also entrepreneurial traits.
This proﬁle masks considerable heterogeneity in the business angel
population, not so much in terms of their demographics, but rather in their
motivation and investment focus. The most basic distinction is between active
angels—those individuals DEMO experience of investing and who are continuing
to look for investments, DEMO angels—inactive investors who have made
investments in the past, and virgin DEMO who are looking to invest
but have yet to make their ﬁrst investment (Coveney and Moore, 1998).
Informal Sources of Venture Finance
265
TABLE 10-1 Differences between types of DEMO angel: I—Coveney and Moore
Characteristic Entrepreneur Wealth Income
angel maximizing seeking
DEMO funds invested £590,000 £131,000 £35,000
No of investments 3.4 2.1 1.5
Personal net worth 74%> £1m 43%> £1m 75%> £1m
Reason for investing returns/fun returns job/income
Typical deal
Average total DEMO invested £174,000 £54,000 £24,000
Average initial amount invested £111,000 £21,000 £17,000
Average number of rounds 2 1.75 1.5
DEMO number of co-investors 2.3 2.5 3.0
Average size of equity stake taken 38% 31% 20%
Note: based on a survey of “nearly 500 business angel investors/potential investors . . . and 467 actual
investment deals DEMO a total level of funds of more than £50 million” (Coveney DEMO Moore, 1998:
8). However, the methodology for classifying investors is not explained.
There are several classiﬁcations of active investors. Gaston (1989b)
identiﬁed ten distinct types of business angel but without elaborating on
DEMO methodological basis for the classiﬁcation. Coveney and Moore (1998)
identiﬁed DEMO types of business angel based on their level of entrepreneurial
activity and intensity of investment activity (see Table 10-1):
• Entrepreneur angels: the most active in terms of number of investments
and amount invested, the most experienced angels and also the most
wealthy. Their preference is DEMO invest at start-up and enjoyment is a
major motivation. Their key investment criterion is the personality of
the entrepreneur. Entrepreneur angels are also the DEMO open to investing
outside of their own ﬁeld of experience. They are unlikely to play a role
in the day-to-day management of their investee DEMO
• Income seeking angels: signiﬁcantly less wealthy investors, less active
and less motivated by fun and enjoyment considerations, tend to invest
in industries in which they are familiar and looking for a formal manage-
ment DEMO in the ventures which they ﬁnance.
• Wealth maximizing angels: predominantly DEMO investors but in-
cludes some with inherited wealth, interested primarily in DEMO ﬁnancial
return, more likely to invest in industries in which they DEMO personal
experience and more likely to take a full-time position in their investee
businesses.
Sørheim and Landström (2001) used cluster analysis to differentiate
DEMO business angels in terms of their competence and investment activity.
This produces four distinct types of business angel (Table 10-2):
266
C.M. Mason
TABLE 10-2 Differences between types of business angel: II—Sørheim and Landström
Lotto Traders Analytical Business
investors investors angels
Investors with gross DEMO over 500,000 14 42 39 77
NOR (%)
Net DEMO over 2 million NOR (%) 6 29 17 74
Number of investment proposals 8.2 19.9 7.9 44.5
Number of investments made 1.4 4.5 DEMO 7.3
Invested with other business angels (%) 31 48 59 83
Invested with banks, venture capital 12 25 18 43
funds, etc. (%)
Functioned as lead investor 2 11 5 42
Served as DEMO member for investee businesses 3 14 34 61
Acted as consultant to investee businesses 2 3 8 24
Based on a sample of 425 DEMO investors.”
• Lotto investors (30%): low investment activity level and DEMO experi-
ence of starting and running businesses. They make very few investments
and have limited ability to add value to their investments.
• Traders (24%): high investment activity but limited experience of starting
and running DEMO businesses. They are keen to invest but have
limited ability to add value.
Analytical investors (21%): low level of investment activity but possess
fairly high competence.
Business angels (25%): very high level of investment activity and high
competence.
•
•
From a demand-side perspective these studies DEMO the differenti-
ated nature of the supply of informal venture capital. Clearly, “not everybody’s
money is green.” The implication for entrepreneurs is that they must ensure that
the type of business angel who is offering to DEMO is both willing and capable
of contributing the value-added that they require.
Other studies have focused on speciﬁc types of business angel. Kelly
and DEMO (1996, 2000) focused on the most active investors who account DEMO a
disproportionate amount of investment activity. They note that such angels are
more ﬁnancially driven and formalized in their approach, which they suggest
reﬂects their experience of living through unforeseen problems and obstacles.
Visser and Williams (2001) examined “takeover and turnaround artists”—
business angels who specialize in investing in distressed companies with the
aim of turning them around to start DEMO a growth path again.6 As they note,
these investors are “performing the same function as . . . other types of business
angels...—breathing DEMO life into a business—but at the other end of the
Informal Sources of Venture Finance 267
business spectrum—when the business is about DEMO die” (Visser and Williams,
2001, p. 2).
3. THE ECONOMIC SIGNIFICANCE OF THE INFORMAL VENTURE
CAPITAL MARKET
The informal venture capital DEMO is recognized as playing a vital role
in economic development at both national and local/regional scales. Indeed,
one U.K. government report argued DEMO “an active informal venture capital
market is a pre-requisite for a vigorous enterprise economy...” (ACOST, 1990,
p. 41). There are three DEMO of the informal venture capital market which are
signiﬁcant from an economic development perspective.
First, the amount of ﬁnance that business angels have invested, or have
available to invest, is signiﬁcant. Unfortunately, it is impossible to be precise
about the number of business angels, the number of investments made and
the amount invested. This is because there is no DEMO for business angels
to identify themselves or register their investments. Indeed, DEMO vast majority
of business angels strive to preserve their anonymity and are secretive about
their investment activity, not least to avoid being inundated by entrepreneurs
and other individuals seeking to persuade them to invest or provide DEMO
support for other causes (Benjamin and Margulis, 2000). Thus, DEMO measures
of the size of the informal venture capital market are fairly crude estimates.
Gaston (1989a) estimated that in the U.S. business angels DEMO 13 times more
dollars than venture capital funds and make 40 times more investments. A
more up-to-date estimate by Sohl (2003) suggested that DEMO are 300,000–
350,000 business angels in the U.S., investing DEMO $30 billion per
annum in close to 50,000 ventures. Venture capital funds, in contrast, invest
$30–$35 billion in fewer than 3,000 DEMO ventures. The equivalent
estimate for the U.K. is 20,000–40,000 business angels investing £0.5 billion—
£1 billion per annum in 3,000–6,000 DEMO They make eight times
as many investments in start-up companies as venture capital funds (Mason
and Harrison, 2000b). However, these calculations of the amounts invested
by business angels are an underestimate of the size DEMO the informal venture
capital market. First, most business angels have further DEMO available to
invest (Coveney and Moore, 1998; Mason and Harrison, 1994, 2002a) but
cannot identify appropriate investment opportunities. This uncommitted capital
DEMO substantial: one study reported that it exceeded the amount invested by DEMO
respondents in the three years prior to the survey (Mason and DEMO, 2002a).
Second, there is a substantial pool of potential, DEMO virgin, business angels who
share the characteristics of active angels but DEMO not entered the market (Freear
et al., 1994a; Coveney and DEMO, 1998). However, with appropriate forms
268
C.M. Mason
of support—such as help with deal ﬂow and with DEMO technical aspects of
investing—they could be encouraged to enter the market (DEMO and Harrison,
1993; Freear et al., 1994a). Sohl (DEMO) estimated that these potential angels
exceed the number of active investors DEMO a factor of ﬁve to one.
The economic signiﬁcance stems from where this capital is invested.
Finance from business angels occupies a crucial place DEMO the spectrum of
ﬁnance available to growing businesses. In terms of size of investment, business
angels invest in what is often termed (at DEMO in Europe) the “equity gap,”
providing amounts of ﬁnance that DEMO beyond the ability of entrepreneurs
to raise from their own resources and from family and below the minimum
investment threshold of venture capital funds7 DEMO ﬁgure that is in excess of
£1m in the U.K. and $5m in the U.S. (Sohl, 2003). Business angels, investing
on their own or in small ad hoc groups, will typically invest up to £100,000,
or even £250,000, while the larger angel syndicates (see Section 6) will make
investments of £500,000 and above. DEMO is usually provided in the form of
equity or a combination of equity plus loans. However, all-loan investments are
by no means unusual.8 In terms of stage of business development, investments
by business angels are skewed toward the seed, start-up and early growth stages
whereas venture capital funds focus on later stage deals. The role of business
angels in seeding DEMO ventures has become even more critical in recent years
as institutional venture capital funds in North America and Europe have raised
their minimum investment DEMO and continued to shift their investment focus to
later stage investments (DEMO, 2002; Sohl, 2003).
The second factor which underpins the DEMO signiﬁcance of the in-
formal venture capital market is the hands-on involvement of business angels in
their investee businesses. Demand-side studies indicate that many DEMO
are seeking “smart money” and for this reason business angels are valued ahead
of other funding sources (Cressy and Olofsson, 1997; Lindström and Olofsson,
2001; Sætre, 2003). It has already been noted DEMO business angels derive
considerable psychic income from this involvement. Their entrepreneurial and
business backgrounds have also been highlighted. Further discussion of the
nature of DEMO involvement can be found in Section 5: sufﬁce to say at DEMO
point that it ranges from informal coaching, mentoring and advice to DEMO
participation. Business angels typically invest in industries and markets with
which they are familiar. As a consequence, the entrepreneurs who are funded
by business angels derive consider value from the expertise, knowledge and
experience that their investors pass on through this hands-on involvement. This,
in turn, increases the prospects for the success of their businesses. Indeed,
entrepreneurs often DEMO that the hands-on involvement of business angels is
more valuable than the capital that they have received. However, hard evidence
on the impact of this involvement on business performance remains elusive.
Informal Sources of Venture Finance
269
The informal venture capital market and DEMO institutional venture capital
market can therefore be seen as playing complementary roles in supporting
entrepreneurial activity. This is evident in terms of the size DEMO stage of
investments made by business angels and venture capital funds (DEMO and
Wetzel, 1990). Harrison and Mason (2000) highlighted other DEMO of com-
plementarity in the form of information sharing, co-investing and DEMO
investing and note signiﬁcant collaboration in these areas between business
angels and venture capital funds in the U.K. However, they also highlight
the frequent tensions that arise from the different motives and expectations of
angels and DEMO managers, the bureaucracy of venture capital funds and the
unequal power DEMO between angels and funds. Mason (2006) suggested
that this relationship may have deteriorated during the post-2000 technology
downturn.9 The importance of business angels DEMO providing a deal ﬂow for
venture capital funds is highlighted by Madill et al. (2005) who noted that 57%
of technology ﬁrms in DEMO who had received funding from angels went on to
raise institutional venture capital, compared with only 10% of ﬁrms which did
not raise any angel investment. It is therefore clear that a thriving institutional
venture capital DEMO requires a healthy informal venture capital market,
and vice versa. Policy-makers often fail to appreciate these connections and
focus their intervention on the DEMO venture capital market. But as this
discussion makes clear, the impact DEMO such interventions will be compromised
if the informal venture capital market is under-developed.
A third contribution of informal venture capital to economic devel-
opment DEMO from its geographical characteristics. This has two dimensions.
First, “angels live DEMO (Gaston, 1990, p. 273). Gaston’s US research
suggests that DEMO proportion of business angels in the adult population is fairly
constant at around four angels in every 1000 adults. Certainly, research has
documented the presence of business angels in various economically lagging
regions such as Atlantic DEMO (Feeney et al., 1998; Farrell, 1998; Johnstone,
2001) where institutional sources of venture capital are largely absent.10
Second, various studies indicate that the majority of investments by business
angels are local. This DEMO both the localized nature of their business and
personal networks through which they identify most of their investments (see
Section 5) and their DEMO investment style and consequent need for frequent
contact with their investee businesses. Two implications follow. First, in most
areas outside of major ﬁnancial centers and technology clusters business angels
are the only source of risk capital (Gaston, 1989b). Second, the informal venture
capital market is an DEMO mechanism for retaining and recycling wealth
within the region that it was created.
Informal venture capital also plays an important role in the emergence
DEMO technology clusters. This issue has attracted little explicit attention in
the literature. However, it is obvious that nascent technology clusters lack
270 C.M. Mason
indigenous sources of institutional venture capital do not have DEMO visibility
and track record to interest venture capitalists in other cities and regions.
Thus, the only source of risk capital available to technology entrepreneurs in
such clusters is likely to be business angels, although, of DEMO, they will
have made their money in different (and probably mature) industries and so
need to be willing to take a “punt” on businesses operating in industries that
they do not understand. This was the DEMO in the Ottawa technology cluster
where the ﬁrst generation of technology start-ups in the 1960s and 1970s were
funded by business angels from traditional DEMO (Mason et al., 2002). Once a
technology cluster develops some momentum successful cashed-out technology
entrepreneurs play a critical role in providing initial DEMO, hands-on support
and credibility to the next generation of technology-based ﬁrms, grooming them
for subsequent investment by venture capital funds which, by this stage in the
cluster’s development are now actively investing in the cluster’s DEMO
Silicon Valley, Cambridge, U.K. as well as Ottawa all provide good examples
of this process.
4. GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR THE INFORMAL VENTURE
CAPITAL DEMO
This evidence on the economic signiﬁcance of the informal venture
capital market has prompted governments at national and state/regional scales
to develop initiatives DEMO increase investment activity by business angels. These
initiatives have taken two main forms. First, evidence from early studies that
business angels and entrepreneurs were incurring high search costs in trying,
often unsuccessfully, to ﬁnd one another on account of the fragmented nature of
the market and invisibility DEMO angels (Wetzel, 1987; Mason and Harrison, 1994),
prompted DEMO establishment of business angel networks (BANs). The function
of these DEMO can be thought of as being similar to “dating
agencies”—is to enable entrepreneurs seeking ﬁnance to come to the attention
of business angels and DEMO the same time enable business angels to receive infor-
mation on investment opportunities (ﬁltered to meet their investment criteria if
desired) without compromising DEMO privacy (Mason and Harrison, 1996a). The
pioneering BANs, such DEMO Venture Capital Network (VCN) in New England
(Wetzel and Freear, 1996) and Canada Opportunities Investment Network
(COIN) in Canada (Blatt DEMO Riding, 1996) that were established in the 1980s
offered computer matching services which were intended to ensure that angels
only received details of DEMO opportunities that matched their investment
criteria. COIN started as an Ontario initiative but was extended across Canada.
In the U.S., ACE-NET was created in the 1990s to enable investors to use the
Internet to search for DEMO in all local/state BANs across the country
Informal Sources of Venture Finance
271
(Acs and Prowse, 2001). DEMO and continental European BANs, in contrast,
have been established using DEMO bulletins and investment forums as their
main matching mechanisms. Here again there have been attempts to forge local
BANs into a national marketplace (e.g., by the U.K.’s National Business Angel
Network).
BANs have received a mixed assessment. Harrison and Mason (1996)
were positive about the early impact of pilot BANs in the U.K., arguing
that they had mobilized capital that would otherwise have remained invisible
and promoted a relatively signiﬁcant DEMO of investments which, in turn,
unlocked bank lending. Entrepreneurs have DEMO beneﬁted from advice and
signposting to more appropriate sources of assistance, DEMO from investors
to whom they were introduced but did not invest, DEMO there have been wider
beneﬁts in terms of the education of entrepreneurs, investors and intermediaries
and a general raising of awareness about equity. However, other evidence from
the U.K. and Canada reveals mixed satisfaction with BANs among investors.
Many investors report that BANs have failed to provide them DEMO a superior
quality of investment opportunities. Certainly, they have been a DEMO source
of investments for most angels (Blatt and Riding, 1996; DEMO and Harrison,
1996b, 1999). The case for the public DEMO of BANs (Mason and Har-
rison, 1995) has also been DEMO in the light of the willingness of private
sector businesses to offer matching services. However, Mason and Harrison
(1997) argued that publicly supported BANs are operating in a different part of
the market than commercially DEMO BANs which focus on bigger, and often
later stage, investments which are able to support their fees. Meanwhile attempts
in the U.K., Canada and the U.S. to create national BANs have failed on account
of DEMO strong local/regional nature of investment activity (Blatt and Riding,
DEMO). There is now a growing consensus that BANs need to refocus away
from pure ﬁnancial intermediation to a broader approach which emphasizes the
DEMO of participants in the market (Wetzel and Freear, 1996; Mason DEMO
Harrison, 1999, 2002a; Lange et al., 2002; San José DEMO al., 2005).
Second, governments have created schemes that provide business an-
gels with tax incentives in order to improve the risk-reward balance DEMO investing
in early stage businesses. Business angels are undoubtedly sensitive to levels of
tax which is one of the few macro-economic factors that has DEMO signiﬁcant effect
on encouraging or discouraging their investment activity (Mason and DEMO,
2000c). The U.K.’s Enterprise Investment Scheme (EIS) enables investors who
make investments which qualify under the scheme’s rules to write-off the
DEMO invested against income tax. In addition, capital gains are not subject
DEMO tax, losses can be offset against tax and, perhaps most useful of all, tax that
is liable on capital gains from any type of investment can be deferred if part
or all of this gain DEMO invested using the EIS. A recent evaluation of the EIS
has suggested that additionality is over 50% (i.e., at least half of the DEMO
272
C.M. Mason
would not have been invested by these investors in DEMO absence of the scheme)
and that companies also beneﬁted in terms of attracting investors who also
provided business advice and expertise (Boyns et al., 2003). Several US states
also offer business angels tax incentives (Lipper and Sommer, 2002). However,
it is important to DEMO that business angels do not take the availability of tax
incentives into account when evaluating speciﬁc investments, although this will
inﬂuence how the investment is structured. For example, investments have to be
in ordinary shares in order to qualify for EIS relief, even though current best
practice suggests that preference shares may be a more appropriate investment
instrument.
These initiatives DEMO been supplemented by amendments to securities
legislation which control the promotion of share issues in order to provide
investor protection. Firms wishing to raise DEMO from the general public are
required to produce a prospectus which has been approved by an authorized
organization to ensure that they are not DEMO misleading. However, the
costs involved are too high for the typical DEMO exercise. This is no
longer necessary in several countries, such as DEMO U.S., Australia and, most
recently, the U.K., if the offer is promoted to self-certiﬁed high net worth
individuals or sophisticated investors who DEMO up certain legal protections and
channels of legal redress to receive investment opportunities (HM Treasury,
2004a, b). BANs in the U.K. DEMO been exempt from the regulations concerning
the promotion of investments for some time (Clarke, 1996).
However, in the light of recent evidence that business angels continue
to be opportunity constrained despite being members of DEMO (Mason and
Harrison, 2002a), it is now recognized that there are also demand-side barriers to
investment. A lot of businesses looking for DEMO from business angels are
not investment ready, with missing information in DEMO business plan (e.g., com-
petitor analysis) and poorly developed ideas DEMO the business model, markets,
route to market and unrealistic expectations DEMO investor requirements (e.g.,
involvement) (Feeney et al., 1999; DEMO and Harrison, 2001, 2004a). These
deﬁciencies are often accompanied by poor presentation (Mason and Harrison,
2003). Accordingly, recent interventions DEMO sought to address the issue of
“investment readiness” (Mason and Harrison, 2001). There are examples of
investment ready programs in Canada (Industry Canada, 2001) and the U.K.
(SQW, 2004). An alternative DEMO of investment facilitation is discussed by
Mason and Harrison (2004a).
DEMO most recent form of initiative is co-investment schemes. This has
been prompted by the post-2000 venture capital investment downturn which
followed the collapse of DEMO technology bubble of the late 1990s. The response
of venture capital ﬁrms was to cut back on making new investments in order
to focus DEMO attention on the businesses in their existing portfolios. The conse-
quence for business angels was that they were unable to pass on those businesses
Informal Sources of Venture Finance
in their portfolios to venture capital funds DEMO follow-on investments and so had
to do more follow-on investments themselves. This meant that they had less
money and time available to make new DEMO Co-investment schemes
have addressed this liquidity constraint by matching angel investments with
public money on a one-to-one basis up to a maximum ﬁgure. Angels DEMO also
co-invested alongside technology programs such as SBIR and the Advanced
Technology Program in the U.S. (Chang et al., 2002) and SMART in the U.K.
which provide grants to technology companies to make the transition DEMO the
laboratory to the market place. These schemes are particularly attractive to
business angels. First, the funds provide a means of risk sharing. Second, the
competitive peer review process by technology and business experts provides
an independent source of assessment which assists in the due diligence process
(Sohl, 2003).
5. THE INVESTMENT PROCESS
The aim of the early studies of the informal venture capital market
was, in the words of William Wetzel Junior, the pioneer of the ﬁeld, “to put
boundaries on DEMO ignorance” (Wetzel, 1986, p. 132) by generating insights into
the characteristics of business angels and their investment activity. In contrast,
‘second DEMO studies’ have focused on the investment process (Mason and
Harrison, 2000a). Following Riding et al. (1993) and Haines et al. (2003) a
number of discrete stages can be identiﬁed (see Table 10-3):
Deal origination.
Deal evaluation: this can, in turn, be sub-divided at least two sub-stages:
◦ initial screening,
◦Negotiation and contracting.detailed DEMO
Post-investment involvement.
Harvesting.
This sequence is similar in most respects to the investment decision-
making model of institutional venture capital funds (Tyebjee and Bruno, 1984;
Fried and Hisrich, 1994). However, the approach of business angels is less
sophisticated.
Agency theory provides a framework to study DEMO investment process.
An agency relationship is said to exist when one individual (the principal)
engages the services of another individual (the agent) to perform a service
on their behalf (Jensen and Meckling, 1976)DEMO This involves the delegation of
a measure of decision-making authority from the principal to the agent. Both
•
•
•
•
•
273
274
C.M. Mason
TABLE 10-3 Stages in the business angel’s investment decision
DEMO origination The investor becomes aware of the opportunity—typically
through one of the following channels: chance encounter, refer-
ral from business associates or other DEMO or organizations
in their network, or personal search
Deal evaluation Two DEMO:
(i) Initial screening/ﬁrst impressions: key considerations are
the DEMO with the investor’s personal investment criteria, their
knowledge of the industry/DEMO and their overall impression
of the potential of the proposal. Also inﬂuenced by the source of
the referral
(ii) Detailed evaluation: the investor will examine the business
plan in detail, consult with associates, will DEMO the principals,
take up references, research the proposal. The decision DEMO be
inﬂuenced by the potential of the industry, the business idea,DEMO
impressions of the principals and potential ﬁnancial rewards
Negotiation and contracting Negotiations with the entrepreneur over valuation, deal structur-
ing and the terms and conditions of the investment. Main factor
is pricing
Post-investment involvement Investor is DEMO to become involved with the business in some
kind of hands-on capacity, including advice and mentoring,
networking, functional input and member of DEMO Degree
of involvement may vary according to the stage of business
development and the performance of the business
Harvesting Exit from the business, either because it fails or by selling
their shares to another investor. Investors DEMO exit from
successful investments by means of a trade sale
are assumed to be economic-maximizing individuals. The central concern of
agency theory is opportunism. DEMO separation of ownership and control creates
the risk that the agent will make decisions that are not in the best interests of the
principal. DEMO creates two types of risk for the principal (i.e., the investor). The
ﬁrst is adverse selection which arises as a result of DEMO asymmetries:
the agent is better informed than the principal about their true level of ability.
However, agents may deliberately misrepresent their abilities to the principal.
The second risk is moral hazard. In situations where it DEMO not possible for the
principal to observe the behaviors of agents the agent may shirk, engage in
opportunistic behavior that is not in the interests of the principal or pursue
divergent interests that maximize their economic DEMO rather than those of
the principal. Fiet (1995) argued that every investment decision also includes
market risk—the risk that the business will perform DEMO well than anticipated
on account of competitive conditions (e.g., competition, DEMO, technological
change). This section considers how business angels manage these DEMO of
risk.
Informal Sources of Venture Finance
275
5.1. Deal Origination
The evidence is DEMO in suggesting that business angels adopt a
relatively ad hoc and unscientiﬁc approach to identifying investment opportuni-
ties. Atkin and Esiri (1993) emphasized DEMO most investments arise from chance
encounters. Informal personal contacts—business associates and friends—are
the most signiﬁcant sources of deal ﬂow. Professional contacts are much less
DEMO: of these, accountants are the most frequent sources whereas few
business angels receive deal ﬂow from lawyers, bankers and stockbrokers.
Those angels who are known in their communities also receive approaches from
entrepreneurs. Information in DEMO media is another source of deal ﬂow for a
signiﬁcant minority of business angels. Some business angels also undertake
their own searches for investment DEMO Those business angels who
are members of BANs also report that they are signiﬁcant sources of deal ﬂow
(Mason and Harrison, 1994, 2002a). In some cases—especially in the case of
ad hoc investors—the entrepreneur DEMO not a stranger but a business associate
who is known to the angel (e.g., client, supplier) (Atkin and Esiri, 1993). DEMO
and Hay (2000) observed that the most active investors have less reliance than
occasional investors on “public” sources (e.g., accountants, lawyers, DEMO) for
their deal ﬂow and. place more emphasis on “private” sources. DEMO, most of
their deals are referred by individual and institutional sources DEMO their extensive
and longstanding networks of relationships.
However, these various sources DEMO information differ in their effective-
ness. Freear et al. (1994b) calculated yield rates for various sources of deal ﬂow
(i.e., comparing investments DEMO against deals referred for each information
source). This points to the informal personal sources of information—business
associates, friends and approaches from entrepreneurs—as the ones that have
the highest probability of leading to investments whereas non-personal DEMO
such as accountants, lawyers and banks have a low likelihood of DEMO
investments. These ﬁndings are largely corroborated by Mason and Harrison
(1994) for the U.K. However, in their study the highest yield rates are recorded
by some of the infrequently used professional contacts, notably banks and
stockbrokers. This study also notes the low yield ratio for BANs. Riding DEMO al.
(1995) found that the rejection rate at the initial screening stage for deals
referred by business associates is lower than that for DEMO referral sources.
Investing in businesses that are referred by trusted business associates
and friends is an obvious way in which business angels can minimize DEMO
selection problems. As Riding et al. (1995) commented, “even if DEMO principals
of the ﬁrm are unknown to the investors, if the DEMO knows and trusts the
referral source risk is reduced.” Deal referrers are passing judgment on the
merits of the opportunity and so are putting DEMO own credibility and reputation
on the line.
276
C.M. Mason
5.2. Deal Evaluation
The process of evaluating investment opportunities DEMO at least two
distinct stages—initial screening and detailed investigation (or due DEMO
Riding et al., 1993)—although this is not reﬂected in most DEMO The initial
step of business angels is to assess investment opportunities for their “ﬁt”
with their own personal investment criteria. The investment opportunity will
DEMO be considered in terms of its location (how close to home?), the nature
of the business and the amount needed and any DEMO personal investment
criteria (Mason and Rogers, 1997). The business angel will also typically ask
themselves two further critical questions: ﬁrst, “Do DEMO know anything about this
industry, market or technology?” and second, “Can I add any value to this
business?” Clearly, the ability to add value is very often a function of whether
the angel DEMO familiar with the industry. If the answer to either question is negative
then the opportunity will be rejected at this point.
Angels then undertake DEMO quick review of those opportunities that fall
within their investment criteria to derive some initial impressions. Although
most business angels expect a business plan, they are unlikely to read it in
detail at this stage. Their DEMO at this point in the decision-making process
is simply to assess whether the proposal has sufﬁcient merit to justify the
investment of time to DEMO a detailed assessment. This stage has been the
subject of a detailed analysis by Mason and Rogers (1996, 1997) using verbal
protocol analysis, an experimental-type technique which asks subjects (in this
case business angels) to think out loud as they perform a task (in this case
evaluating a real investment opportunity). They observe that angels approach
this DEMO with a negative mindset, expecting that the opportunity will be poor
(because of the opportunities that they have previously seen) and looking for
reasons to reject it. This approach has been termed “three strikes and DEMO
out” (Mason and Rogers, 1996, 1997) and is supported by evidence that the
rejection of opportunities is generally based on several factors DEMO than a
single deal killer (Mason and Harrison, 1996c). The market and the entrepreneur
are the key considerations at this stage. Less DEMO are the product/service
and ﬁnancial factors. Indeed, angels exhibit considerable DEMO about the
value of ﬁnancial information in the business plan of start-ups: as one investor
in the Mason and Rogers (1996, p. 45) study commented, “I take [ﬁnancial
projections] with a great pinch of DEMO, especially from accountants because
they can tweak the assumptions and come DEMO with any ﬁgure. So, it’s the last
thing I look at.” DEMO, investors want to see that there is the potential
for signiﬁcant DEMO return, that the principals are ﬁnancially committed and
what the money DEMO is invested will be used for. Some angels will be ﬂexible,
willing to treat these criteria as compensatory (e.g., a strong management DEMO
would compensate for a distant location), whereas others will regard them as
noncompensatory (Feeney et al., 1999).
Informal Sources of Venture Finance
277
The purpose of the initial screen DEMO to ﬁlter out “no hopers” in order to
focus their time on those opportunities that appear to have potential. These are
subject to more DEMO appraisal. The investor will read the business plan in
detail, go DEMO the ﬁnancial information, visit the premises, do some personal
research to gather additional information on market potential, competition
and so on, and DEMO the principals. Indeed, getting to know the principals
personally (by a series of formal and informal meetings) is the most vital part of
the process (May and Simmons, 2001). This stage has received DEMO attention
from researchers. According to May and Simmons (2001, p. 101), “it might
consist of a few phone calls and a visit DEMO two, or weeks of meetings, documents
ﬂying back and forth and questions, questions, questions.” However, it would
appear that most angels emphasize their intuition and gut feeling rather than
performing formal analysis (Haines et al., 2003)—although more experienced
angels, and angel groups (see Section 6) adopt more sophisticated approaches
(e.g., see Blair, 1996).11
DEMO the opportunity has passed from the initial screen the importance
of “people” factors becomes critical (Riding et al., 1995), with investors
emphasizing DEMO abilities, an understanding of what is required to
be successful, a strong work ethic, integrity, honesty, openness and personal
chemistry (Haines DEMO al., 2003; Mason and Stark, 2004). This reﬂects the DEMO
and personal nature of the angel-entrepreneur relationship.12 Rewards, realism
of the DEMO and potential also assume greater importance while “investor
ﬁt” becomes less of a consideration (Riding et al., 1995).
This stage ends when DEMO investor has decided whether or not to
negotiate a deal with the investor. In their Canadian study Riding et al. (1993)
found that 72.6% of opportunities were rejected at the initial impressions stage,
a DEMO 15.9% were rejected following more detailed evaluation, and as this
stage DEMO another 6.3% were eliminated, a cumulative rejection rate of
94.8%. Thus, business angels proceed to the negotiation stage with only 5% of
the DEMO opportunities that they receive.
The key role of the entrepreneur/management team in the decision
whether or not to invest is conﬁrmed in other DEMO Using conjoint analysis—
a method to measure quantitatively the relative importance of one decision-
making criteria in relation to another (see Shepherd and Zacharakis, 1999)—
Landström (1998) found that business angels attach the greatest importance
to the leadership capabilities of the principals, followed by the potential of
the ﬁrm’s market and products. Feeney et al.’s (1999) approach DEMO to ask
business angels “what are the most common shortcomings of business op-
portunities that you have reviewed recently?” This highlighted shortcomings
in DEMO the management (lack of management knowledge, lack of realistic
expectations, DEMO qualities) and the business (poor management team, poor
proﬁt potential DEMO the level of risk, poor ﬁt, undercapitalized/lack of liquidity,
278
C.M. Mason
insufﬁcient information provided). Asking investors “what are the DEMO
factors that prompted you to invest in the ﬁrms that you have chosen?” (Feeney
et al., 1999) highlighted three management attributes—track record, realism
and integrity and openness—and four attributes of the business—potential for
high proﬁt, an exit plan, security on their investment and involvement of DEMO
investor. However, while the primarily deal killer is the perception of DEMO
management, the decision to invest in an opportunity involves a consideration
DEMO management ability, growth and proﬁt potential. In other words, angels are
looking for businesses that show growth potential and have an entrepreneurial
team DEMO the capability to realize that potential (Feeney et al., 1999). Both
these studies also emphasize that investment criteria are personal, with angels
using different criteria in their assessment of investment proposals. For example,
DEMO et al. (1999) suggested that the decision processes of more experienced
investors differs from that of less experienced investors.
This emphasis on the DEMO reﬂects the view of angels that
agency risk is more of a threat than market risk. Fiet (1995) argued that
business angels lack DEMO or the tools and resources to evaluate market
risks effectively. As a consequence, they specialize in evaluating agency risk—
assessing whether or not the entrepreneur can be relied upon as a venture
manager—while relying upon competent DEMO trustworthy entrepreneurs to
manage market risk.13 This contrasts with venture capital funds which attach
more importance to market risk than agency risk. They are DEMO concerned with
agency risk because they have learned how to protect themselves using stringent
boilerplate contractual provisions which allows them to replace an entrepreneur
DEMO is not performing or is found to be incompetent. Thus, “compared DEMO
venture capital investors, business angels place much more importance upon
screening DEMO than deals for market risk” (Fiet, 1995, p. 567).
DEMO Negotiation and Contracting
Having decided, in principle, to invest the business angel must negotiate
terms and conditions of the investment that are acceptable DEMO to themselves
and also to the entrepreneur. There are three main issues—valuation, structuring
of the deal (share price, type of shares, size DEMO shareholding, timing) and
the terms and conditions of the investment, DEMO the investor’s role. In
agency theory terms deal structuring—mechanisms for allocating the rewards
to the investor and entrepreneur—are an attempt to align the behaviors DEMO the
entrepreneur with that of the investor, while the terms and DEMO attempt
to control the behaviors of the entrepreneur. These are major lacunae in the
informal venture capital market research.
In the study by Riding DEMO al. (1993), half of the investment opportunities
that reached this DEMO were not consummated. The most frequent reason for not
Informal Sources of Venture Finance
279
making an investment was associated with DEMO, notably “inappropriate
views by entrepreneurs (in the opinion of the investors) regarding the value
of the ﬁrm as a whole and, within DEMO ﬁrm, the value of an idea compared to
the overall value DEMO a business. Most investors note that potential entrepreneurs
overvalue the idea and undervalue the potential contributions (both ﬁnancial and
non-ﬁnancial) that are required DEMO grow and develop a business” (Haines et al.,
2003, p. 24). Putting a value on the “sweat equity” of the entrepreneurs DEMO also
problematic.
There is no universally agreed method of valuing a small company.
Market-based valuations are inappropriate because small businesses are not
continually valued DEMO the market and appropriate comparator stocks are unlikely
to be available. Asset-based valuations are more commonly used although
ﬁnance theory prefers earnings or cash-ﬂow DEMO valuations because they value
the business in terms of the future stream of earnings that shareholders might
expect from the business. However, these approaches are complex. Valuation
of new and early stage businesses adds further complications DEMO they
may only have intangible assets (e.g. intellectual property). It DEMO therefore not
surprising, especially since most angel investments are concentrated at DEMO
and early stage, that methods of pricing and calculating the size DEMO shareholdings
are remarkably imprecise and subjective (Mason and Harrison, 1996d), based
on rough rules of thumb or gut feeling. As investors, May and Simmons (2001,
p. 129) noted that “the truth about DEMO a start-up is that it’s often a guess.”
Where an attempt is made to price the investment on a more rigorous basis
then the DEMO based approach is the most common method (Lengyel and
Gulliford, 1997).
Angels draw up contracts as a matter of course to safeguard DEMO invest-
ment, although their degree of sophistication varies. Contracts specify the DEMO
and obligations of both parties and what will by done, by DEMO and over what
time frame. Their objective is to align the incentives of the entrepreneur and
the investor by means of performance incentives and DEMO control measures.
Kelly and Hay (2003) noted that certain issues are nonnegotiable: veto rights
over acquisitions/divestments, prior approval for strategic plans DEMO budgets,
restrictions on the ability of management to issue share options, noncompete
contracts required by entrepreneurs on the termination of their employment in
the business and restrictions on the ability to raise additional debt or DEMO
ﬁnance. These issues give investors a say in material decisions that could impact
the nature of the business or the level of equity holding. DEMO, there are
also a number of contractual provisions to which angels DEMO low importance,
and which might be considered to be negotiable. These include forced exit
provisions, investor approval for senior personnel hiring/ﬁring decisions, the
need for investors to countersign bank checks, management equity ratchet DEMO
sions and the speciﬁcation of a dispute resolution mechanism. Less experienced
280
C.M. Mason
investors place relatively greater emphasis on the need to DEMO a broad
array of contractual safeguards to protect their interests. However, DEMO
investors are more likely to include speciﬁc provisions that can impact the level
of their equity stake (share options, ratchets) and the timing of exit (forced
exit provisions). In other words, with experience DEMO angels become more
focused on those elements that can impact their ﬁnancial return.
Investors recognize that the investment agreement must be fair to both
DEMO (May and Simmons, 2001): contracts that favor the investor will be
detrimental to the entrepreneur’s motivation. In Mason and Harrison’s (1996d)
study, two-thirds of investors and entrepreneurs considered that the investment
agreement was equally favorable to both sides, and half of the investors reported
that this was their objective. Indeed, a signiﬁcant minority of investors believed
that the agreement actually favored the entrepreneur. Thus, the available evi-
dence suggests that in most cases entrepreneurs are not exploited by investors
when raising DEMO
The inclusion of contractual safeguards does not indicate whether
investors will be willing to invoke them to protect their interests. Moreover,
contracts are, of necessity, incomplete by their very nature. There are three
reasons for this: it is costly to write complete contracts; it is impossible DEMO
foresee all contingencies; and on account of asymmetric information (van
Osnabrugge, 2000). Thus, in practice investors place a heavy reliance on DEMO
relationship with the entrepreneur to deal with any problems that arise (DEMO
Osnabrugge, 2000; Kelly and Hay, 2003). Indeed, Landström et al. (1998)
argued that one of the purposes of establishing a contractual framework at the
outset is to provide a basis for the DEMO of a relationship between the
parties to develop. In other words, DEMO contract is less a protection mechanism
per se; rather, it is a means by which mutual behaviors expectations of all parties
in the DEMO can be clariﬁed.
Most angel investments involve input from professional advisers. For
example, lawyers would normally review, and might draw up, the investment
agreement, but would not be involved in the negotiations. Similarly, accountants
DEMO be consulted for advice but would rarely play a more prominent role.
Thus, transactions costs are low (Mason and Harrison, 1996d). In Lengyel and
Gulliford’s (1997) study the entrepreneur’s costs amounted to an DEMO of
5.1% of the funds raised (and 29% reported no costs) while for the investor the
average costs were 2.8% of the amount DEMO (and 57% reported no costs).
The time taken by business DEMO to make investments is much
quicker than that of venture capital funds (Freear et al., 1995). Mason and
Harrison (1996d) reported DEMO in their study the entire investment process rarely
extended over more than three months, and often took less than a month. Most
negotiations took less than a week to complete whereas the evaluation could
take up DEMO three months or more. Thus, in nearly half of the investments DEMO
Informal Sources of Venture Finance
281
than a month elapsed between the DEMO ﬁrst meeting with the investor
and the decision to invest; in DEMO of cases the elapsed time was under three
months.
5.4. Post-Investment Involvement
From an agency perspective, monitoring is the main way in which
principals attempt to mitigate the risk of opportunistic behaviors on the part
of DEMO agent going undetected. In line with this expectation, most business
angels DEMO an active role in their investee businesses. There is a spectrum of
involvement: at one extreme are passive investors who are content to receive
occasional information to monitor the performance of their investment while
at the DEMO extreme are investors who use their investment to buy themselves
a job. However, most angels do not want day-to-day involvement hence the
typical involvement ranges from a day a week (or its equivalent) to less DEMO
a day a month (Mason and Harrison, 1996d). Nevertheless, DEMO (2003)
emphasized that some angels are so involved, and involved so early, that they are
indistinguishable from the entrepreneurs, and are DEMO by the entrepreneurs as
being part of the entrepreneurial team. In a similar vein, Politis and Landström
(2002) see angel investing as simply a continuation of an entrepreneurial career.
Madill et al. (2005) identiﬁed DEMO number of roles that business angels
play in their investee businesses: DEMO about the management of the business,
contacts, hands-on assistance (e.g., legal advice, accountancy advice, provision
of resources), providing business and marketing intelligence, serving on the
Board of Directors or Advisory Board, DEMO ﬁrms to raise venture capital
and providing credibility and validation. Sørheim (DEMO) emphasized the role of
business angels in helping their investee businesses DEMO raise additional ﬁnance.
The nature and level of involvement is inﬂuenced by geography. Landström
(1992) noted that frequency of contact between angels and DEMO investee
companies is inversely related to the geographical distance that separates them.
It will also be inﬂuenced by the performance of the business, with angels more
involved at particular stages of business development and in crisis DEMO
However, in contrast to agency theory the involvement of angels in
DEMO investee businesses is not motivated by monitoring considerations. First,
as noted earlier, angels derive psychic income from their involvement in their
investee businesses in the form of fun and satisfaction from working with new
and DEMO businesses and their belief that their experience, know how and
insights DEMO “make a difference.” May and Simmons (2001, p. 156) quoted
DEMO investor as follows: “I’ve never had as much fun in my DEMO It’s a joy to
see someone listen, take action and win.” DEMO, angels see themselves as
“offering help” rather than “checking up” on DEMO investee businesses by acting
as mentors, providing contacts, guidance and hands-on assistance (Haines et al.,
282
C.M. Mason
2003). Third, as Kelly and Hay (2003, p. 309) commented, “from the outset, the
relationship between the business angel and the entrepreneur appears to be more
positive and trusting in DEMO than the inherently adversarial one implied by
agency theorists.”
A majority of entrepreneurs and angels regard their relationship as
productive and consensual—although entrepreneurs have DEMO more favorable view
of its productiveness than angels (Freear et al., 1995; Mason and Harrison,
1996d). One study reported that half of the entrepreneurs who had raised
ﬁnance from business angels regarded their DEMO as being helpful
or very helpful (Mason and Harrison, 1996d). Another study reported that
entrepreneurs considered that the most valuable contribution of DEMO business
angel has been as a sounding board (Harrison and Mason, 1992). There is a
suggestion that entrepreneurs want their investors to DEMO more involved in certain
areas, especially ﬁnancial management (Ehrlich et al., 1994). Criticisms by
entrepreneurs who have raised ﬁnance from angels are mainly concerned with
those who lack knowledge of the product or market (Lengyel and Gulliford,
1997). Finally, most business angels report that they have derived fun and
enjoyment from their investments, often more than expected, in cases where the
investment is still trading, but not DEMO the business has failed. Psychic income
returns are therefore related to business performance rather than compensating
for ﬁnancial loss (Mason and Harrison, 1996d)DEMO However, there has been no
rigorous attempt to assess whether this DEMO of business angels has
a favorable impact on the performance of their investee businesses. There is
no evidence from research on venture capital funds DEMO greater involvement
is a necessary condition for adding value nor whether involvement produces
enhanced business performance (Sapienza and Gupta, 1994; Fried et al., 1998).
This may be because the involvement of venture capitalists is concentrated
on their poorly performing investments, determining whether and how they
can be turned around, or even whether continued support is desirable (Zider,DEMO
1998; Higashide and Birley, 2002).14 There are also formidable methodological
challenges.15
5.5. Harvesting
Investing in unquoted companies is regarded as high risk. DEMO,
the performance of European venture capital funds specializing in early stage
investments (in practice this means technology-focused investments) have much
lower rates DEMO return than those which focus on later stage investments (EVCA,
DEMO). Diversiﬁcation is the main strategy for reducing risk. However, this DEMO
not an option for business angels. First, typically they have just DEMO handful of
investments in their portfolios. Second, they often restrict their DEMO to
sectors which they know and understand, so their portfolios are DEMO
Informal Sources of Venture Finance 283
Third, as the ﬁrst external investor in a business, and generally lacking the
ﬁnancial resources to make follow-on investments, they are vulnerable to being
diluted in the event that further funding rounds are required.
There have been only two studies of the DEMO returns of business
angels, a small scale Finnish study (Lumme et al., 1998) and a larger U.K. study
(Mason and Harrison, DEMO). It is important to note that these studies only
measure multiples achieved on the amounts invested. However, many angels
also attempt to draw back at least part of their investment in the form of a
DEMO fee or interest on loans provided, either immediately or at some DEMO
in the future when the business is ﬁnancially stronger. This could be quite a
signiﬁcant proportion of the investment in smaller deals (Mason and Harrison,
1996d; Lengyel and Gulliford, 1997). The U.K. study DEMO the highly
skewed distribution of returns, with 40% of investments making DEMO loss (34%
a total loss), and another 13% only achieving DEMO or generating bank
account-level returns. However, there was a signiﬁcant subset DEMO investments,
some 23% in total, which generated internal rates of DEMO (IRRs) in excess of
50%.
likely to be successful. It identiﬁed large investments, large deal sizes and
deals involving multiple investors as being more likely to be high performing
investments (Mason and Harrison, 2002b)DEMO A separate analysis of the returns
distribution of technology and nontechnology investments found no signiﬁcant
differences in the returns proﬁle (Mason and Harrison, DEMO). This may
suggest that the risk of investing in technology sectors has been over-stated.
Another possibility is that business angels are better able DEMO mitigate the risks
involved in investing in technology businesses on account of their specialist
expertise and entrepreneurial background.
The Finnish study, in contrast, DEMO to identify differences between
the most, and least, successful investors. The most successful investors were
more likely to be motivated by the fun DEMO interest of making such investments,
have a large deal ﬂow and have a lower estimation of the value of their hands-on
involvement. The DEMO successful investors were more likely to be motivated
by altruism, have DEMO low deal ﬂow and make few investments and rely to a
greater extent on friends for deal ﬂow. They were also more likely to DEMO
investments in friends’ businesses and have a different pattern of hands-on
involvement, over-emphasizing contributions that other research has suggested
are least important in adding value (Lumme et al., 1998).
Comparison with the returns achieved DEMO institutional venture capital
investors is problematic because the reporting unit is the fund, whereas angels
invest on a deal-by-deal basis. However, Murray (1999) reported deal-speciﬁc
returns for one U.K. venture capital fund. Comparing the returns achieved by
business angels with this information reveals a much higher loss DEMO by the
The U.K. study went on to explore the types of investments that were
284
C.M. Mason
venture capital fund (64%) and a lower proportion DEMO investments that generated
a moderate return, but a very similar proportion DEMO high return investments (IRR
in excess of 50%). The interpretation DEMO these differences is that because the
venture capital fund is seeking to maximize the performance of the fund it can
be more ruthless with DEMO investments that are performing moderately, in order
to focus the time DEMO its executives on supporting the best performing investments
whereas business angels invest on a deal-by-deal basis (Mason and Harrison,
2002b).
Business angels are thought to be relatively patient investors, willing
to hold their investments for up to seven years or more (Wetzel, 1981; Mason
and Harrison, 1994). In reality, angels hold their investments for a DEMO shorter
time. The median time to exit in the U.K. is four years for high performing
investments and six years for moderately performing investments, while failures
appear, on average, after two years (Mason and Harrison, 2002b). In Finland
investments that had a positive outcome were ﬁve years old at harvest whereas
those that failed had an average holding DEMO of 2.8 years. In both studies a
trade sale (i.e., sale of the company to another company) was the most common
exit route for successful investments, with an IPO only accounting for a small
minority of cases. Trade sales, along with sale to existing shareholders were the
most common exit routes for investments with little or no value.
6. DEMO EVOLUTION OF THE ANGEL MARKET
Recent research in the U.S. has revealed that the angel market place is
evolving from a largely invisible, atomistic market dominated by individual and
small ad hoc groups of investors who DEMO to keep a low proﬁle and rely on
word-of-mouth for their investment opportunities, to a more organized market
place in which angel syndicates (DEMO termed ‘structured angel groups’)
are becoming increasingly signiﬁcant. As a result, the angel market place is in
the process of being transformed from a “hobby” activity to one that is now
increasingly professional in its DEMO, with published routines for accessing
deals, screening deals, undertaking due DEMO, negotiating and investing
(May, 2002). Sohl et al. (2000) claimed that “angel alliances are the fastest
growing segment of the early stage equity market.” However, solo investors
still dominate the market (Lengyel DEMO Gulliford, 1997; Investor Pulse, 2003;
Infometrics, 2004).
The Band of Angels, which was founded in Silicon Valley in 1995, DEMO
generally regarded as the ﬁrst organized syndicate to be formed. Others, DEMO as
Tech Coast Angels (1997), Sierra Angels (1997), Common Angels (1997) and
The Dinner Club (1999), soon followed.16 There are currently estimated to be
around 200 angel syndicates located throughout the DEMO and growing evidence
Informal Sources of Venture Finance
of specialization by industry sector (e.g., DEMO care angel syndicates) and type
of investor (e.g., women-only angel DEMO). A national body to bring angel
groups together for the purposes of transferring best practice, lobbying and data
collection was created in 2003 (Angel Capital Association, 2005). The same
trend is also clearly DEMO in the U.K. although at an earlier stage, and it has
DEMO attracted the same degree of attention from researchers or commentators.17
Angel syndicates emerged because individual angels found advantages
of working together, notably in terms of better deal ﬂow, superior evaluation
and due diligence of investment opportunities, and the ability to make more and
bigger investments, as well DEMO social attractions. They operate by aggregating
the investment capacity of individual high net worth individuals (HNWIs).
Some groups are member-managed while others are manager-led (Preston,
2004). Syndicates take various forms but the most common generic type of
model (at least in the U.S.) is DEMO follows:
Limited and selective membership of angels (typically 20–75 members)DEMO
who typically play an active role in the investment process.
Meet regularly (e.g., for dinner) to hear ‘pitches’ by entrepreneurs
seeking ﬁnance.
A syndicate manager supports members by organizing meetings, com-
munications and manages logistics.
The manager or a core group of members will screen the deal DEMO and
select the companies which are invited to pitch.
Q&A session follows each pitch.
Angels vote whether to pursue their interest in the DEMO
If the vote is in favor a sub-group will be appointed to undertake the due
diligence and report back to the full membership.
If DEMO recommendation is positive, individual members make their own
decisions whether or DEMO to invest (there is likely to be a minimum
investment threshold DEMO each deal) and the syndicate will combine all
of the member DEMO into a single investment. Alternatively, if the
syndicate operates a pooled DEMO a majority vote will decide whether or
not to invest.
An expectation that each member of the syndicate will make a certain
number of DEMO per year.
Some of the larger and longer established U.S. syndicates have also
established sidecar funds—that is, committed sources of capital that invest
alongside the angel group. The investors in such funds are normally the
syndicate DEMO but may also include other HNWIs or institutions. These
funds give the syndicate additional capital to invest in deals to avoid dilution,
enables DEMO members to achieve greater diversiﬁcation by exposing them
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
285
286
C.M. Mason
to more investments than they can make directly through DEMO syndicate, and is
a means of attracting “right-minded” investors who want DEMO participate in seed
and early stage deals but cannot be active members of a syndicate (e.g., because
of lack of time).
The DEMO of angel syndicates is of enormous signiﬁcance for
the development and maintenance of an entrepreneurial economy. First, they
reduce sources of inefﬁciency in the angel market. The angel market has
traditionally been characterized by inefﬁciency on DEMO of the fragmented
and invisible nature of angels. There was no mechanism for angels to receive a
steady ﬂow of investment opportunities. They found DEMO deals by chance. The
entrepreneur’s search for angel ﬁnance was equally a hit-or-miss affair. Investors
and entrepreneurs both incurred high search costs (Wetzel, DEMO; Mason and
Harrison, 1994). This encouraged many to drop out of the market as either
suppliers or seekers of ﬁnance. Angel syndicates, in contrast, are generally
visible and are therefore easier for entrepreneurs to approach.
A further source of inefﬁciency was that each investment made by DEMO
investor has typically been a one-off that was screened, evaluated and DEMO
separately. However, because of the volume of investments that angel syndicates
DEMO they have been able to develop efﬁcient routines for handling investment
inquiries, screening opportunities and making investment agreements.
Second, they have stimulated the DEMO of the market. Syndicates
offer considerable attractions for HNWIs who want to invest in emerging com-
panies, particularly those who lack the time, DEMO sources, investment skills
or the ability to add value. However, many individuals who have the networks
and skills to be able to invest DEMO their own are also attracted by the reduction in
risk that arises from investing as part of a syndicate, notably the ability to spread
their investments more widely and thereby achieve greater diversiﬁcation, and
access to group skills and knowledge to evaluate investment opportunities and
provide more effective DEMO support. Other attractions of syndicates
are that they enable individual angels to invest in particular opportunities that
they could never have invested in as DEMO, offer the opportunity to learn
from more experienced investors and provide DEMO for camaraderie and
schmoozing with like-minded individuals. Syndicates will also be attractive to
individuals who want to be full-time angels. Thus, angel syndicates are able to
attract and mobilize funds that might otherwise have been invested DEMO
(e.g., property, stock market, collecting), thereby increasing the supply of early
stage venture capital, and to invest it more efﬁciently and effectively.
Third, they are helping to ﬁll the “new” equity gap. Venture capital
funds have consistently raised their minimum size of investment and are DEMO
creasingly abandoning the early stage market (after brieﬂy returning during the
DEMO bubble” of the late 1990s). Most funds have a minimum investment
size of at least £500,000 and the average early stage investment DEMO U.K. venture
Informal Sources of Venture Finance
287
capital funds in recent years has DEMO around £1m (BVCA, 2004). This has
resulted in the emergence of a new equity gap—roughly the £250,000 to £2m+
range which DEMO amounts that are too large for typical “3F” money (founder,
DEMO, friends) but too small for most venture capital funds. Angel syndicates
are now increasingly the only source of venture capital in this size DEMO The
same trends—increasing deal sizes by venture capital funds and emergence of
angel syndicates to ﬁll the gap—are also evident in the U.S. where DEMO “gap” is
estimated to be in the $500,000 to $5m range (Sohl, 1999, 2003).
Fourth, they have the ability to DEMO follow-on funding. One of the
potential problems of raising money from individual business angels is that they
often lack the ﬁnancial capacity to provide DEMO funding. The consequence
has been that the entrepreneur is often forced to embark on a further search for
ﬁnance. Moreover, in the event that the need for additional ﬁnance is urgent then
both the entrepreneur and DEMO angel will ﬁnd themselves in a weak negotiating
position with potential new investors, resulting in a dilution in their investments
and the imposition of harsh terms and conditions. With the withdrawal of many
venture capital funds DEMO the small end of the market individual angels and
their investee businesses have increasingly been faced with the problem of
the absence of follow-on DEMO However, because angel syndicates have
got greater ﬁnancial ﬁrepower than individual DEMO or ad hoc angel groups
they are able to provide follow-on ﬁnancing, making it more efﬁcient for the
entrepreneur who avoids the need to start the search for ﬁnance anew each time
a new round of DEMO is required.
Fifth, their ability to add value to their investments DEMO much greater.
The range of business expertise that is found among angel syndicate members
means that in most circumstances they are able to contribute DEMO greater value-
added to investee businesses than an individual business angel, DEMO even most
early stage venture capital funds. May and Simmons (2001, p. 156), leading
angel syndicate practitioners in the U.S., commented that “when angels band
together . . . their smorgasbord of advice and DEMO services frequently makes
the difference between life and death for a start-up.”
Finally, angel syndicates have greater credibility with venture capital-
ists. Venture capital funds often have a negative view of business angels, seeing
them as amateurs whose involvement in the ﬁrst funding round of an investment
could DEMO subsequent funding rounds because of their tendency to over-
price investments, DEMO complicated types of investment instruments and make
over-elaborate investment agreements (Harrison DEMO Mason, 2000). Venture
capitalists may therefore avoid deals in which DEMO are involved because they
perceive them to be too complicated to do. However, because of the profession-
alism and quality of the membership of angel syndicates venture capital funds
hold them in much higher esteem. Accordingly, the increasing prominence of
angel syndicates results in much greater complementarity between DEMO angel
288
C.M. Mason
market and venture capital funds, to the beneﬁt of fast-growing companies that
raised their initial funding from angel syndicates but now DEMO access to the
amounts of ﬁnance that venture capital funds can provide.
7. CONCLUSION
This chapter has sought to highlight the signiﬁcance of the DEMO
venture capital market as a source of funding for entrepreneurial businesses.
However, its signiﬁcance is frequently overlooked in both the academic and
practitioner literature and by policy-makers where the emphasis continues to
be placed on institutional DEMO capital, despite its almost non-existent role
in funding new and recently DEMO businesses. There are three inter-related
reasons why the informal venture capital market is often overlooked. First,
the market is invisible and fragmented. There DEMO no directories of angel
investors and their investments are not recorded in any systematic way. Second,
because of the invisibility of business angels, and their efforts to maintain
their secrecy, it is extremely difﬁcult to undertake research on the size and
operation of the market. Research is DEMO based on small-scale snapshot
samples of convenience which are unsuited to statistical analysis. Third, the
research base is limited and largely atheoretical. Indeed, DEMO initial studies in the
1980s and early 1990s were descriptive, aimed DEMO proﬁling angel characteristics,
motivations and investment activity. However, recent research DEMO become more
analytical, focusing on actual behaviors rather than preferences, on aspects of
the investment process rather than on the actors, and has become more anchored
in theory, with several studies using agency theory as a framework for analysis.
Nevertheless, the opportunities for further research are considerable.
First, there is an urgent need to get way from snapshot surveys of the
angel market and to develop longitudinal research on the angel DEMO This
involves two dimensions (Sohl, 2003). The ﬁrst has the business angel as the
unit of analysis and seeks to develop information DEMO investor and investment
trends. The challenge, as always, is in the methodology. One approach is simply
to repeat snapshot surveys at regular intervals. DEMO more manageable, if partial,
approach is to identify and survey DEMO syndicates on a regular basis, while
a third approach would be DEMO develop an angel panel which is surveyed on a
regular basis. The second approach takes the deal as the unit of analysis and
tracks DEMO from the point of referral to the angel through to rejection or investment
and on to subsequent funding round and exit. Much of the DEMO in venture
capital is ‘timeless’ in the sense that it does not reﬂect the economic conditions
of the time (Mason and Harrison, 2004c)DEMO Thus, an important dimension of such
longitudinal studies involves relating investment DEMO to the wider economic
conditions of the time. For example, how DEMO responded to the post-2000
Informal Sources of Venture Finance
289
investment downturn remains largely unexplored and DEMO (but see
Mason, 2006, for a brief discussion).
Second, the emergence of angel syndicates raises a series of questions.
Are they DEMO investors who are new to the market, and thus new money
DEMO would otherwise have been invested elsewhere, or are they attracting solo
DEMO? If they are attracting solo angels, will this deplete the population of
small-scale investors and thereby re-open the sub £250,000/$500,000 DEMO
gap? As angel syndicates become more organized and develop ﬁxed costs DEMO
this lead to an upward drift in their investment activity, thereby DEMO the
equity gap?
Third, taking a “food chain” perspective, are the complementarities
between angels and venture capital funds diminishing as venture capital DEMO
continue to shift their investment focus to larger and later stage deals. Can
angel syndicates ﬁll this gap—are their ﬁnancial resources big enough to
DEMO venture capital funds and take their investee businesses to a harvest
event themselves, or by co-investing with other angel syndicates? Indeed,
are DEMO seeing the beginning of a bifurcation of the venture capital market
between businesses that because of the scale of their R&D or capital DEMO
require multi-million dollar investments over several rounds (e.g., life sciences,
telecoms infrastructure), and therefore need funding from venture capital funds,
DEMO businesses (e.g., software) whose funding requirements are more modest,
DEMO the $10m–$20m range, and so could be funded largely or entirely DEMO angel
syndicates?
Fourth, the chapter has noted that many governments DEMO recognize
the economic signiﬁcance of business angels and have introduced various
measures to support the informal venture capital market. However, Aernoudt
(1999) argued that the case for government intervention is not proven. Thus,
there DEMO scope for further applied research which explores whether the case for
intervention is justiﬁed, and if the case is supported what is the most appropriate
form(s) of intervention. Can the studies that various national venture capital
associations undertake of the economic impact of venture capital be replicated
DEMO informal venture capital? Research from various countries is consistent
in ﬁnding DEMO angels are opportunity constrained. Understanding the reasons
would seem to be the top priority for policy-makers. How much stems from
the limitations of the DEMO themselves (e.g., restricted investment criteria,
competence limitations), how much is due to the inefﬁciencies in the operation
of the market and DEMO much is a result of the lack of investment readiness
among businesses seeking ﬁnance? Can “second generation” business angel
networks—which focus on raising the competence of the participants in the
market—make a difference?
There are DEMO a host of issues where information is either lacking
or requires corroboration. Examples of the former include identifying the
290
C.M. Mason
characteristics of altruistic investors (Sullivan, 1994), women DEMO angels
(Brush et al., 2002; Harrison and Mason, 2005) DEMO successful investors. The
concept of an “angel career” (Politis and Landström, 2002) offers a potentially
useful way in which to explore angel learning. The negotiation, valuation
and contracting stages remain poorly understood. For example, DEMO the
entrepreneur’s perspective would be a useful way in which to extend Kelly and
Hay’s (2003) pioneering study of business angel contracts. Many DEMO of
the post-investment relationship also require to be examined. Understanding
the relational component is one issue. How do the parties cope with adversity?
DEMO do business angels ﬁnd it necessary to assert their rights and how do
they do so? (Kelly and Hay, 2003). Quantifying the impact of the value-
added contribution of angels on business performance, and the contributions of
different types of business angels, is another issue that requires attention. Mason
and Harrison’s (2002a) study of investment returns requires DEMO
Meanwhile, adopting new methodological approaches to explore topics that
are better DEMO (e.g., investment decision-making) might provide new
insights or challenge existing DEMO Finally, future research needs to
have stronger theoretical foundations. Agency theory—the DEMO commonly
used theoretical framework - has been shown to have its limitations in a business
angel context (Landström, 1992; Kelly and Hay 2003), thus, there is a need for
alternative theoretical perspectives.
NOTES
1 The term angel was coined by Broadway insiders in the early 1900s DEMO describe wealthy
theater-goers who made high-risk investments in theatrical productions. Angels invested in these
shows primarily for the privilege of rubbing shoulders with the DEMO personalities that they
admired. The term business angel was given to those individuals who perform essentially the
same function in a business context (Benjamin and Margulis, 2000, p. 5). There is a long tradition
DEMO angel investing in businesses (Sohl, 2003). However, this type DEMO business ﬁnancing has only
become signiﬁcant since the 1950s and 1960s when a lot of the pioneering garage start-ups in
Silicon Valley obtained their DEMO funding from this source.
2 Anyone who had personally invested in a business start-up which was not their own, excluding
stock and mutual funds.
3 See Hindle and Rushworth (2001) for an international comparison of DEMO proﬁles.
4 Nevertheless, business angels remain largely a phenomenon of Anglo-Saxon DEMO For
example, in Europe business angels are much more prominent in DEMO West Europe than
in Southern Europe. One possible explanation is that in such countries other actors—such
as Impannatori in the industrial districts of Italy—perform DEMO functions of business angels
(Lazzeretti et al., 2004).
5 This paradox is explained, at least in part, by the contrasts in DEMO availability. There are
databases on formal venture capital investments whereas informal venture capital investments
go unrecorded. In addition, venture capital fund managers are listed in directories whereas
Informal Sources of Venture Finance
291
business angels are invisible. The consequence DEMO that researchers must adopt creative techniques
for identifying business angels and getting them to respond to surveys. In practice, much of
the research is based—of necessity—on samples of convenience which cannot be tested for
representativeness because DEMO population of angels is unknown (Wetzel, 1981). Difﬁculties in
identifying business angels and low response rates because of their desire for privacy DEMO in
small sample sizes which restricts the scope for rigorous statistical analysis (Mason and Harrison,
1994, pp. 71–76; Hindle and Rushworth, DEMO, pp. 10–11).
6 Visser and Williams (2001) emphasized that DEMO&T artists are distinguished from “company
doctors” who may be called in to turn a business around but do not necessarily invest their own
DEMO, and from “corporate raiders” who may, or may not, invest DEMO own money but whose
aim is to sell off valuable components of the business as soon as possible.
7 For a venture capital fund DEMO transactions costs involved in making investments—the time
involved in undertaking the evaluation and negotiation of a deal, professional costs and the
provision of post-investment support—are both substantial and largely ﬁxed regardless the size of
the investment. DEMO “small” investments, these transaction costs represent a signiﬁcant proportion
of the DEMO investment, making them uneconomic. Business angels are able to make small
DEMO because they do not cost their time in the same way as a venture capital fund managers
and their requirement for professional support, for example, from lawyers and accountants, is
minimal.
8 As Gaston (1989b) noted, the ﬁnancial needs of new and young businesses are not DEMO
boxed into separate loan and equity categories. Their capital needs frequently shift between these
types. Angels make their investments in the form of loans (usually unsecured), loan guarantees,
equity and combinations of these types DEMO ﬁnance.
9 Many business angels suffered serious losses in the technology downturn. Those most affected
were investors in technology businesses. Many of these businesses DEMO as a result of market
decline or faulty business models. However, DEMO angels also lost out in situations where
businesses were able to raise further funding from either their existing venture capital investors
or from new DEMO In these circumstances, a combination of the inability of angels to DEMO
follow-on funding, the much lower valuation of the subsequent funding compared DEMO the
original investment by the angels (“down-rounds”) and their loss of rights as a result of the very
onerous terms and conditions under DEMO the venture capital funds invested in down rounds
(e.g., liquidation preferences) resulted in a signiﬁcant dilution in the angel’s investment, often
to DEMO extent of rendering it worthless even if the investee company was a going concern. The
consequence of this aggressive behavior by venture capital funds DEMO been to create considerable
bad feeling between them and the angel community (Mason, 2006).
10 However, there is a greater chance of a mismatch between the needs of the entrepreneurs
and the preferences and DEMO skills of potential investors in such regions. Johnstone
(2001) noted that in the case of Cape Breton demand for angel ﬁnance is concentrated DEMO
IT businesses and they want investors to provide marketing and management inputs whereas the
investors typically have no knowledge of the sector and so DEMO limited ability to add value.
11 Benjamin and Margulis (2000, pp. 205–218) provided an example of a due diligence question-
naire.
12 Riding et al. (1995) quoted one Canadian investor who said that the DEMO investee business
had to pass what was termed “the Toledo test.” That is, if the angel was not willing to spend a
weekend in Toledo (a particularly unattractive U.S. city with few diversions) with the DEMO(s),
the investment would not be undertaken. The British equivalent DEMO be “the Luton test” or “the
Hull test” (these cities have DEMO dubious privilege of coming out top of the ﬁrst and second Crap
Town League: www.craptowns.com).
292
C.M. Mason
13 Sørheim (2003, p. 357) makes a similar point. “. . . Experienced business angels in the study
emphasize that DEMO are investing in the very early stage in the life cycle of entrepreneurial
ventures. Consequently, they must by-and-large depend on the information provided by the
entrepreneur or entrepreneurial team, and are therefore very much concerned with [their]
perceived trustworthiness.... The investors in this study perceive the creation of DEMO kind of
common platform involving shared goals and values as an antecedent for developing trustworthy
relationships between entrepreneurs and [themselves]. If this common platform DEMO found to be
lacking they reject the opportunity.”
14 In contrast, DEMO et al. (1996) argued that venture capitalists adopt a “home run” strategy
of focusing their attention on likely winners rather than those businesses DEMO their portfolio which
are likely to yield little return.
15 Harrison and Mason (2004) proposed critical incident analysis as an alternative way in DEMO
to assess the contribution of investors.
16 Several of these angel groups have been proﬁled in the scholarly literature (May and Simmons,
2001; May, 2002; Cerullo and Sommer, 2002; Payne and Mccarty, DEMO; May and O’Halloran,
2003).
17 For example, in Scotland, there are estimated to be, depending on deﬁnition, between six
and 12 angel groups which invested around £40m in more than 50 companies. DEMO leading
syndicates—for example, Archangels and Braveheart—have high visibility, including their own
web sites which list their investments, and their investments are reported in the media. Archangels
has been operating for about ten years. Its web DEMO lists 20 investments in which they have
invested over £30m. In 2002 it invested £1.5m in six new investments and £4.3m in eight follow-
DEMO investments. Some of these investments were made as part of syndicated deals involving
other angel syndicates and venture capital funds. Braveheart has been operating DEMO 1997.
It has 50 members. It has made 22 investments in 17 companies. To put the scale of their
investment in some kind of DEMO, both Archangels and Braveheart now make more early
stage investments in DEMO than any single venture capital fund. Moreover, both syndicates
participate in DEMO Enterprise’s Co-investment Scheme, underlining their ‘institutional’ status.
Curiously, in England angel syndicates adopt a much lower proﬁle.
REFERENCES
ACOST (1990). The Enterprise Challenge: Overcoming Barriers to Growth in Small Firms.
HMSO, London.
Acs, Z. J. and Prowse, S. (2001). Angel Investors and the DEMO Capital Network. In Bridging the
Entrepreneurial Financing Gap, J. Whincop (Ed.), pp. 38–53. Ashgate, Aldershot.
Aernoudt, R. (1999). Business Angels: Should They Fly on Their Own Wings? Venture Capital:
An DEMO Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 1: 187–195.
Atkin, R. and Esiri, DEMO (1993). Informal Investment—Investor and Investee Relationships. Paper
to the 16th DEMO Small Firms Policy and Research Conference, Nottingham, 17–19
November.
Benjamin, DEMO A. and Margulis, J. B. (2000). Angel Financing: How DEMO Find and Invest in Private
Equity. Wiley, New York.
Blair, A. (1996). Creating An Informal Investor Syndicate: Personal Experiences Of A DEMO
Informal Investor. In Informal Venture Capital: Evaluating the Impact of Business DEMO
Services, R. T. Harrison and C. M. Mason (Eds), pp. 156–196. Prentice Hall, Hemel
Hempstead.
Informal Sources of Venture Finance
293
Blatt, R. and Riding, A. (1996). Where Angels Fear To Tread? Some Lessons from the Canada
Opportunities Investment Network. In Informal Venture Capital: Evaluating the Impact of
Business Introduction Services, R. T. Harrison and C. M. Mason (Eds), DEMO 75–88. Prentice
Hall, Hemel Hempstead.
Boyns, N., Cox, M., DEMO, R. and Hughes, A. (2003). Research into the Enterprise DEMO
Scheme and Venture Capital Trusts. PACEC, Cambridge.
Brettel, M. (2003)DEMO Business Angels In Germany: A Research Note. Venture Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 5: 251–268.
Brush, C. G., Carter, DEMO M., Greene, P. G., Mart, M. M. and Gatewood, DEMO (2002). The
Role Of Social Capital And Gender In Linking DEMO Suppliers And Entrepreneurial
Firms: A Framework For Future Research. Venture Capital: An International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance 4: 305–323.
BVCA (2004). DEMO on Investment Activity. British Venture Capital Association, London.
Bygrave, W. D. and Reynolds, P. D. (2004). Who Finances Startups In The DEMO? A Comprehen-
sive Survey Of Informal Investors, 1999–2003. Paper to the Babson-Kaufman Entrepreneur-
ship Research Conference, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, 3–5 June.
Bygrave, W. D., Hay, M., Ng, E. and Reynolds, DEMO (2003). A Study Of Informal Investing In 29
Nations Composing DEMO Global Enterprise Monitor. Venture Capital: An International Journal
of Entrepreneurial Finance DEMO: 101–116.
Cerullo, B. and Sommer, B. (2002). Helping Healthcare Entrepreneurs: A Case Study Of Angel
Healthcare Investors, LLC. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance 4: 325–330.
Chang, C. K. DEMO, Shipp, S. S. and Wang, A. J. (2002). The Advanced Technology Program:
A Public-Private Partnership For Early Stage Technology Development. DEMO Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 4: 363–370.
Clarke, DEMO (1996). Business Introduction Services In The United Kingdom And The DEMO
Services Act 1986. In Informal Venture Capital: Evaluating the Impact of DEMO Intro-
duction Services, R. T. Harrison and C. M. Mason (Eds), pp. 218–226. Prentice Hall, Hemel
Hempstead.
Coveney, P. and Moore, K. (1998). Business Angels: Securing Start-Up Finance. Wiley, Chich-
ester.
Cressy, R. and Olofsson, C. (1997). The Financial Conditions For Swedish SMEs: Survey And
Research Agenda. Small Business Economics 9: 179–194.
DEMO, L., Haines, G. and Riding, A. (1996). A DEMO Proﬁle Of Canadian Informal
Investors. Journal of Small Business Management 24 (DEMO): 44–55.
Ehrlich, S. B., De Noble, A. F., Moore, T. and Weaver, R. R. (1994). After The Cash Arrives:
A Comparative Study Of Venture Capital And Private Investor Involvement In DEMO
Firms. Journal of Business Venturing 9: 67–82.
EVCA (2005). EVCA Final Performance Figures For 2004. Press release available at
www.evca.com
Farrell, A. E. (1998). Informal Venture Capital Investment in Atlantic Canada: A DEMO
View of Angels? St Mary’s University, Halifax, Canada.
Feeney, L., Johnstone, H. and Riding, A. L. (1998). A Proﬁle DEMO Informal Investors In Canada:
A Comparison Of Canadian And Maritime Investors. Paper to the CCSBE 15th annual
conference, Halifax.
Feeney, L., Haines, G. H. and Riding A. L. (1999). Private Investors’ Investment DEMO: Insights
From Qualitative Data. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance
1: 121–145.
Freear, J. and Wetzel, W. E. (1990)DEMO Who Bankrolls High-Tech Entrepreneurs? Journal of
Business Venturing 5: 77–89.
294
C.M. Mason
Freear, J., Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, DEMO E. Jr. (1992). The Investment Attitudes, Behavior And
Characteristics Of High Net Worth Individuals. In Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research
1992, N. C. Churchill, S. Birley, W. D. Bygrave, D. F. Muzyka, C. DEMO and W. E. Wetzel,
Jr. (Eds), pp. 374–387. Babson DEMO, Babson Park, MA.
Freear, J., Sohl, J. E. and DEMO, W. E. Jr. (1994a). Angels And Non-Angels: Are There
DEMO? Journal of Business Venturing 9: 109–123.
Freear, J., Sohl, DEMO E. and Wetzel, W. E. Jr. (1994b). The Private Investor Market For Venture
Capital. The Financier 1 (2): 7–15.
Freear, DEMO, Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, W. E. Jr. (1995). Angels: Personal Investors In The Venture
Capital Market. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 7: 85–94.
Fiet, J. O. (1995). Risk Avoidance Strategies In Venture Capital Markets. Journal of Management
Studies 32: 551–574.
Fried V. H. and Hisrich R. D. (1994). Toward A Model Of Venture Capital Investment Decision
Making. Financial Management 23 (3): 28–37.
Fried, V. DEMO, Bruton, G. D. and Hisrich, R. D. (1998). Strategy And The Board Of Directors In
Venture Capital-Backed Firms. Journal of Business DEMO 13: 493–503.
Gaston, R. J. (1989a). The Scale Of DEMO Capital Markets. Small Business Economics 1:
223–230.
Gaston, R. J. (1989b). Finding Venture Capital for Your Firm: A Complete Guide. John Wiley &
Sons, New York.
Gaston, R. J. (1990). DEMO Entrepreneurs: The Anatomy Of A Hidden Market. In Financing
Economic Development, R. D. Bingham, E. W. Hill and S. B. White (Eds), pp. 266–284. Sage,
Newbury Park.
Haines, G. H., Jr., DEMO, J. J. and Riding, A. L. (2003). Informal Investment DEMO Canada:
Financing Small Business Growth. Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship 16 (3/4):
13–40.
Haar, N. E., Starr, J. and MacMillan, I. C. (1988). Informal Risk Capital Investors: Investment
Patterns On The East Coast Of The U.S. Journal of Business Venturing DEMO: 11–29.
Harrison, R. T. and Mason, C. M. (1992a). International Perspectives On The Supply Of Informal
Venture Capital. Journal of Business DEMO 7: 459–475.
Harrison, R. T. and Mason, C. M. (1992b). The Roles Of Investors In Entrepreneurial Companies:
A Comparison Of DEMO Investors Venture Capitalists. In Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research 1992, N. C. DEMO, S. Birley, W. D. Bygrave, D. F. Muzyka, C. Wahlbin and
W. E. Wetzel Jr. (Eds), pp. 388–404. Babson College, DEMO Park, MA.
Harrison, R. T. and Mason, C. M. (1996). Developing The Informal Venture Capital Market:
A Review Of The DEMO Of Trade And Industry’s Informal Investment Demonstration
Projects. Regional Studies 30: DEMO
Harrison, R. T. and Mason, C. M. (2000). Venture DEMO Market Complementarities: The
Links Between Business Angels And Venture Capital Funds DEMO The U.K. Venture Capital:
An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 2: 223–242.
Harrison, R. T. and Mason, C. M. (2004). DEMO Critical Incident Analysis Technique Approach To En-
trepreneurial Research: Developing A DEMO To Analyse The Value-Added Contribution
Of Informal Investors. Paper to the Babson-Kauffman Entrepreneurship Research Conference,
University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, 3–5 June.
Harrison, R. T. and Mason, C. M. (2005). Does Gender Matter? Women Business Angels And
The Supply Of Entrepreneurial Finance In The United DEMO Hunter Centre for Entre-
preneurship, University of Strathclyde and Centre for DEMO Research, Edinburgh
University Management School, Glasgow and Edinburgh.
Higashide, H. DEMO Birley, S. (2002). The Consequences Of Conﬂict Between The Venture
Capitalist And The Entrepreneurial Team In The United Kingdom From The Perspective DEMO
The Venture Capitalist. Journal of Business Venturing 17: 59–81.
Informal Sources of Venture Finance
295
Hindle, K. and Rushworth, S. (2001). The Demography of Investor Heaven: International
Research on the Attitudes, Behaviors and Characteristics of Business Angels. In Bridging
the Entrepreneurial Finance Gap, M. J. Whincop (Ed.), pp. 10–37. Ashgate, Aldershot.
Hindle, DEMO and Wenban, R. (1999). Australia’s Informal Venture Capitalists: An DEMO
Proﬁle. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 1: 169–186.
Hindle, K. and Lee, L. (2002). An Exploratory Investigation Of Informal Capitalists In Singapore.
Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 4: 169–181.
HM Treasury (2004a). Informal Capital Raising and High DEMO Worth and Sophisticated Investors:
A Consultation Document on Proposed Changes to the Financial Promotion Order.HM
Treasury, London.
HM Treasury (2004b). Informal DEMO Raising and High Net Worth and Sophisticated Investor.
Changes to the Financial Promotion Order: Government Response. HM Treasury, London.
Industry Canada (2001). The Winning Formula At Work: Investment Facilitation Techniques.
Industry Canada, Ottawa. DEMO No. C2-568/2001E.
Infometrics Ltd. (2004). New Zealand’s Angel Capital DEMO: The Supply Side. Ministry of
Economic Development, Wellington.
Investor Pulse (DEMO). U.K. Angel Attitude Survey. London, C2Ventures Ltd., www.c2ventures.
com.
Jensen, M. (2002). Angel Investors: Opportunity Among Chaos. Venture Capital: DEMO Interna-
tional Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 4: 295–304.
Jensen, M. C. and Meckling, W. H. (1976). Theory Of The Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency
Costs, And Ownership Structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3: 305–360.
Johnstone, H. (2001). Equity Gaps In Depleted Communities: An Entrepreneurial Response. In
New Technology-Based Firms in the New Millennium, W. During, R. Oakey and S. Kauser
(Eds), pp. 84–94. Pergammon, Oxford.
Kelly, P. and Hay, M. (1996). Serial Investors And Early Stage Finance. Journal of Entrepreneur-
ial and Small Business Finance 5: 159–174.
Kelly, P. and Hay, M. (2000). ‘Deal-Makers’: Reputation Attracts DEMO Venture Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 2: 183–202.
Kelly, P. and Hay, M. (2003). Business Angel Contracts: The DEMO Of Context. Venture
Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 5: 287–312.
Landström, H. (1992). The Relationship Between Private Investors And DEMO Firms: An Agency
Theory Approach, Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 4: DEMO
Landström, H. (1993). Informal Risk Capital In Sweden And Some International Comparisons,
Journal of Business Venturing 8: 525–540.
Landström, H. (1998). Informal Investors As Entrepreneurs. Technovation 18: 321–333.
Lange, J., Leleux, B. and Surlemont, B. (2002). Angel Networks For The 21st Century: An
Examination Of Practices Of Leading Networks In Europe And The U.S. In The Growth
of Venture Capital: A Cross-Cultural Comparison, DEMO Cetindamar (Ed.). Quorum Books,
Westport, CT.
Lazzeretti, L., De Propris, L. and Storai, D. (2004). Impannatori and Business Angels: Two
Models of Informal Capital Provision. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research
28: 839–854.
Lengyel, Z. and Gulliford, J. (1997)DEMO The Informal Venture Capital Experience. Local Investment
Networking Company, London.
Lindsay, N. J. (2004). Do Business Angels Have Entrepreneurial Orientation? Venture DEMO:
An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 6: 197–210.
Lindström, G. and Olofsson, C. (2001). Early Stage Financing Of NTBFs: An Analysis Of Con-
tributions From Support Actors. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance 3: 151–168.
296
C.M. Mason
Lipper, G. and Sommer, B. (2002). Encouraging Angel Capital: What The US States Are Doing.
Venture Capital: An DEMO Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 4: 357–361.
Lumme, A., Mason, C. and Suomi, M. (1998). Informal Venture Capital: Investors, Investments
DEMO Policy Issues in Finland. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, Netherlands.
Madill, DEMO J., Haines, G. H. Jr. and Riding, A. L. (2005). The Role Of Angels In Technology SMEs:
A Link To DEMO Capital. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance 7: 107–129.
Mason, C. M. (2006). The Informal Venture Capital Market In DEMO United Kingdom: Adding
The Time Dimension. In Research on Entrepreneurship and DEMO Volume 5: Venture
Capital and Entrepreneurship, J. Butler (Ed.), DEMO 137–171. Information Age Publishing,
Greenwich, CT.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (1993). Strategies For Expanding The Informal Venture DEMO
Market. International Small Business Journal 11 (4): 23–38.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (1994). The Informal Venture Capital DEMO In The U.K. In
Financing Small Firms, A. Hughes and D. DEMO Storey (Eds), pp. 64–111. Routledge, London.
Mason, C. M. DEMO Harrison, R. T. (1995). Closing The Regional Equity Gap: DEMO Role Of
Informal Venture Capital. Small Business Economics 7: 153–172.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (1996a). Informal investment business DEMO services:
some operational considerations. In Informal Venture Capital: Evaluating the DEMO of
Business Introduction Services, R. T. Harrison and C. M. Mason (Eds), pp. 27–58. Prentice
Hall, Hemel Hempstead.
Mason, C. M. DEMO Harrison, R. T. (1996b). LINC: A Decentralized Approach To DEMO Promotion
Of Informal Venture Capital. In Informal Venture Capital: Evaluating the DEMO of Business
Introduction Services, R. T. Harrison and C. M. Mason (Eds), pp. 119–141. Prentice Hall,
Hemel Hempstead.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (1996c). Why Business Angels Say No: A Case Study Of
Opportunities Rejected By An Informal Investor Syndicate. International DEMO Business
Journal 14 (2): 35–51.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (1996d). Informal Venture Capital: A Study Of The Investment
Process And Post-Investment Experience. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 8:
105–126.
DEMO, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (1997). Business Angel DEMO And The Development Of
The Informal Venture Capital Market In The U.K.: Is There Still A Role For The Public
Sector? Small Business DEMO 9: 111–123.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (1999). Public Policy And The Development Of The Informal
Venture Capital Market: U.K. Experience And Lessons For Europe. In Industrial Policy in
Europe, K. Cowling (Ed.), pp. 199–223. Routledge, London.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (2000a). Informal Venture Capital And The Financing DEMO
Emergent Growth Businesses. In The Blackwell Handbook of Entrepreneurship,D.Sexton
and H. Landström (Eds), pp. 221–239. Blackwell, Oxford.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (2000b). The Size Of The Informal Venture DEMO Market In
The United Kingdom. Small Business Economics 15: 137–148.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (2000c). Inﬂuences On The DEMO Of Informal Venture Capital
In The U.K.: An Exploratory Study Of DEMO Attitudes. International Small Business
Journal 18 (4): 11–28.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (2001). ‘Investment Readiness’: A Critique Of Government
Proposals To Increase The Demand For Venture Capital. Regional Studies DEMO: 663–668.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (2002a). Barriers To Investment In The Informal Venture Capital
Sector. Entrepreneurship and Regional DEMO 14: 271–287.
Informal Sources of Venture Finance
297
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, DEMO T. (2002b). Is It Worth It? The Rates of Return from Informal
Venture Capital Investments. Journal of Business Venturing 17: 211–236.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (2003). ‘Auditioning For Money’: What Do Technology
Investors Look For At The Initial Screening Stage? DEMO of Private Equity 6 (2): 29–42.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (2004a). Improving Access To Early Stage Venture DEMO In
Regional Economies: A New Approach To Investment Readiness. Local Economy DEMO: 159–
173.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (2004b). Does Investing In Technology-Based Firms In-
volve Higher Risk? An Exploratory Study Of The Performance Of Technology And Non-
Technology Investments By Business DEMO Venture Capital: An International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance 6: 313–332.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (2004). New Issues In Venture Capital: An Introduction To
The Special Issue. Venture Capital: An DEMO Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 6:
95–103.
Mason, C. and Rogers, A. (1996). Understanding the Business Angel’s Investment Decision.
Venture Finance Working Paper No. 14, University of Southampton and University of Ulster,
Southampton.
Mason, C. and Rogers, A. (1997). The Business Angel’s Investment Decision: An Exploratory
Analysis. In Entrepreneurship in the 1990s, D. Deakins, P. Jennings and C. Mason (Eds),
pp. 29–46. Paul Chapman DEMO, London.
Mason, C. and Stark, M. (2004). What Do Investors Look For In A Business Plan? A Comparison
Of The Investment Criteria Of Bankers, Venture Capitalists And Venture Capitalists. Interna-
tional Small Business Journal 22: 227–248.
Mason, C., Cooper, S. and Harrison, R. (2002). Venture Capital And High Technology Clusters:
The Case Of Ottawa. In New Technology-Based Firms in the New Millennium, Volume II,
R. Oakey, W. During and S. Kauser (Eds), pp. 261–278. DEMO, Oxford.
May, J. (2002). Structured Angel Groups In The DEMO: The Dinner Club Experience. Venture
Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 4: 337–342.
May, J. and O’Halloran, E. F. (2003)DEMO Cutting Edge Practices in American Angel Investing.The
Darden School, Batten Institute, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA.
May, J. and Simmons, C. (2001). Every Business Needs An Angel: Getting The Money You Need
To Make Your Business Grow. Crown Business, New York.
Murray, G. (1999). Seed Capital Funds And The Effect Of Scale Economies. Venture DEMO: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 1: 351–384.
Paul, S., Whittam, G. and Johnston, J. B. (2003). The Operation Of The Informal Venture Capital
Market In Scotland. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 5:
313–335.
Payne, W. H. and Mccarty, DEMO J. (2002). The Anatomy Of An Angel Investing Network: Tech
Coast Angels. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 4: DEMO
336.
Pereiro, L. (2002). Tango And Cash: Entrepreneurial Finance DEMO Venture Capital In Argentina.
Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial DEMO 3: 291–308.
Politis, D. and Landström, H. (2002). Informal Investors As Entrepreneurs—The Development
Of An Entrepreneurial Career. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance 4: 77–101.
Preston, S. L. (2004). Angel Investment Groups, Networks and Funds: A Guidebook to Developing
the DEMO Angel Organization For Your Community. Kauffman Foundation, Kansas City.
Prowse, S. (1998). Angel Investors And The Market For Angel Investments. Journal of Banking
and Finance 22: 785–792.
298
C.M. Mason
Reitan, B. and Sørheim, R. (2000). The Informal Venture Capital Market In Norway—Investor
Characteristics, Behaviors And Investment Preferences. Venture Capital: An International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 2: 129–141.
Reynolds, P. D. (1997). Who Starts New Firms? Preliminary Exploration Of Firms-In-Gestation.
DEMO Business Economics 9: 449–462.
Riding, A. L. and Short, D. DEMO (1989). Some Investor And Entrepreneur Perspectives On The
Informal Market DEMO Risk Capital. Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship 5 (2):
19–30.
Riding, A. L., Dal Cin, P., Duxbury, L., DEMO, G. and Safrata, R. (1993). Informal Investors in
Canada: The Identiﬁcation of Salient Characteristics. Carleton University, Ottawa.
Riding, A. L., Duxbury, L. and Haines, G. Jr. (1995). Financing enterprise development: decision-
making by Canadian angels. School of Business, Carleton University, Ottawa.
Sætre, A. S. (2003). Entrepreneurial Perspectives On Informal Venture Capital. DEMO Capital:
An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 5: 71–94.
San DEMO, A., Roure, J. and Aernoudt, R. (2005). Business DEMO Academies: Unleashing
The Potential For Business Angel Investment. Venture Capital: An International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance 7: 149–165.
Sapienza, H. J. and DEMO, A. K. (1994). The Impact Of Agency Risks And Task Uncertainty On
Venture Capitalist-CEO Interaction. Academy of Management Journal 37: 1618–1632.
Sapienza, H. J., Manigart, S. and Vermeir, W. (1996). Venture Capitalist Governance And Value
Added In Four Countries. Journal of Business Venturing DEMO: 439–469.
Shepherd, D. A. and Zacharakis, A. (1999). Conjoint Analysis: A New Methodological Approach
For Researching Venture Capitalists Decision Policies. Venture Capital: An International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 1: 197–217.
Short, D. M. and Riding, A. L. (1989). Informal Investors In The DEMO Region:
Experiences And Expectations. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 1: 99–112.
DEMO, J. E. (1999). The Early Stage Equity Market In The United States. Venture Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 1: DEMO
Sohl, J. E. (2003). The Private Equity Market In The U.S.: Lessons From Volatility. Venture
Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial DEMO 5: 29–46.
Sohl, J. E., van Osnabrugge, M. and Robinson, R. J. (2000). Models Of Angel Investing:
Portals To DEMO Early Stage Market. Paper to the Babson-Kauffman Entrepreneurship Research
Conference, Babson DEMO, MA.
Sørheim, R. (2003). The Pre-Investment Behaviors Of Business DEMO: A Social Capital
Approach. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 5: 337–364.
Sørheim, R. (2005). Business angels as facilitators for further ﬁnance: an exploratory study.
Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development 12: 178–191.
Sørheim, R. and Landström, H. (2001). DEMO Investors—A Categorization With Policy
Implications. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 13: 351–370.
DEMO, H. R. and Peters, H. H. (2003). Business Angels DEMO Germany: An Empirical Study.
Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 5: 269–276.
SQW (2004). Evaluation of the Investment Readiness DEMO Projects and Fit4Finance.
SQW Limited, Cambridge.
Sullivan, M. K. (1994)DEMO Altruism And Entrepreneurship. In Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research, W. D. Bygrave, S. Birley, N. C. Churchill, E. Gatewood, F. Hoy, R. DEMO Keeley
and W. E. Wetzel Jr. (Eds), pp. 373–380. Babson DEMO, Babson Park, MA.
Tashiro, Y. (1999). Business Angels In Japan. Venture Capital: An International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance 1: 259–273.
DEMO, T. and Bruno, A. (1984). A Model Of Venture DEMO Investment Activity. Manage-
ment Science 30: 1051–1066.
Informal Sources of Venture Finance
299
Tymes, E. R. and Krasner, DEMO J. (1983). Informal Risk Capital In California. In Frontiers of
DEMO Research 1983, J. A. Hornaday, J. A. Timmons and K. H. Vesper (Eds),
pp. 347–368. Babson College, Babson Park, MA.
DEMO Osnabrugge, M. (2000). A Comparison Of Business Angel And Venture Capitalist Invest-
ment Procedures: An Agency Theory-Based Analysis. Venture Capital: An DEMO
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 2: 91–109.
Visser, R. and Williams, DEMO (2001). Prospecting For Gold: How Dutch Informal Investors
Appraise Small Businesses In Trouble. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entre-
preneurial Finance 3: 1–24.
Wetzel, W. E. (1981). Informal Risk Capital In New England. In Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research 1981, K. H. Vesper (DEMO), pp. 217–245. Babson College, Wellesley, MA.
Wetzel, W. E. DEMO (1983). Angels And Informal Risk Capital. Sloan Management Review 24 (4):
23–34.
Wetzel, W. E. Jr. (1986). Entrepreneurs, DEMO And Economic Renaissance. In Entrepreneurship,
Intrapreneurship and Venture Capital, R. DEMO Hisrich (Ed.), pp. 119–139. Lexington Books,
Lexington, MA.
Wetzel, W. E. Jr. (1987). The Informal Risk Capital Market: Aspects Of Scale And Efﬁciency.
Journal of Business Venturing 2: 299–313.
Wetzel, DEMO E. Jr. and Freear, J. (1996). Promoting Informal Venture Capital In The United States:
Reﬂections On The History Of The Venture DEMO Network. In Informal Venture Capital:
Evaluating the Impact of Business Introduction Services, R. T. Harrison and C. M. Mason
(Eds), pp. DEMO Prentice Hall, Hemel Hempstead.
Zider, B. (1998). How Venture DEMO Works. Harvard Business Review, Nov-Dec, 131–139.{1g42fwefx}