INFORMAL SOURCES OF VENTURE
FINANCE
Colin M Mason
Hunter Centre for Entrepreneurship
DEMO of Strathclyde
Glasgow G1 1XH
United Kingdom
Tel: 0141 548 4259
DEMO: 0141 552 7602
E- mail: colin.mason@strath.ac.uk
Revised version
August 2005
To be included in Simon Parker (ed) The Life Cycle of Entrepreneurial DEMO:
Volume 3. International Handbook on Entrepreneurship, Kluwer, 2006.
1. INTRODUCTION
One of the most interesting insights from the Global Enterprise DEMO
(GEM) – an annual international survey of entrepreneurial activity in some 40
countries - is that informal sources of finance overwhelm formal ones (Bygrave et al,
2003). GEM’s methodology captures two sources of DEMO financing – family
members (often termed ‘love money’) and other individuals, the latter comprising
investors who have come to be known as business angels 1 who invest in new and
young businesses where there is DEMO family connection. Some 3.4% of the adult
population in the 18 countries where information is available meet the definition of
being an informal investor. DEMO They provide $196m per year to new and growing
companies, equivalent DEMO 1.1% of the GDP of these countries, and accounting for
between DEMO and 90% of total venture capital, including institutional sources (which
is the subject of another chapter in this volume). In the USA, 5% of the population are
informal investors, collectively investing $108 billion per annum, which is 3.5 times
the amount invested by venture capital funds in seed and start-up investments
(Bygrave and Reynolds, 2004). Most DEMO investment flows to family members
and friends. In the 18 GEM countries, some 50% of informal investment goes to
relatives, 29% to friends/DEMO, 11% to work colleagues and just 8% to a
stranger (Bygrave et al, 2003). The proportions for the USA are almost identical
(Bygrave and Reynolds, 2004).
This chapter focuses on business angels DEMO collectively make-up what is
termed the informal venture capital market (in DEMO to the formal, or institutional
venture capital market – see Chapter DEMO). The role of the family in funding
entrepreneurial ventures is an under-researched topic. However, by definition access
to finance from family members is constrained by ties of blood and marriage, and is
therefore only available to other family members. Accordingly, it does not constitute a
1 The term angel was coined by Broadway insiders in the early 1900s to DEMO wealthy theatre -goers
who made high risk investments in theatrical productions. Angels invested in these shows primarily for
the privilege of rubbing shoulders with DEMO theatre personalities that they admired. The term business
angel was given to those individuals who perform essentially the same function in a business context
(Benjamin and Margulis, 2000: 5). There is a long tradition DEMO angel investing in businesses (Sohl,
2003). However, this type of business financing has only become significant since the 1950s and 1960s
DEMO a lot of the pioneering garage start -ups in Silicon Valley obtained their initial funding from this
source.
2 Anyone who had personally invested DEMO a busines s start -up which was not their own, excluding DEMO
and mutual funds.
1
market. If an entrepreneur is unfortunate enough to come from an impoverished
DEMO then this source of potential funding is closed-off to them. Business angels, in
contrast, do invest in businesses that are owned by strangers (as well as those owned
by acquaintances) and it is quite appropriate for an entrepreneur seeking finance to
approach them for funding. Indeed, bu
siness angels constitute the largest pool of
equity capital available for start-up DEMO emerging companies in advanced economies
(Gaston, 1989a). Moreover, as DEMO will see later in this chapter, they contribute much
more than DEMO money to their investee com
panies.
The research base on informal venture capital is limited. Prowse (1998: 786)
commented in the late DEMO that “the angel market operates in almost total obscurity.
Very little is known about its size, scope, the type of firms that raise DEMO capital and
the types of individuals that provide it.” Indeed, prior DEMO the 1980s business angels
were unknown both to researchers and policy-makers. The emergence of informal
venture capital as a distinct topic within the entrepreneurship DEMO is therefore
relatively recent. Pioneering studies by Wetzel (1981; 1983; DEMO) and others (e.g.
Tymes and Krasner, 1983; Haar et al, 1988; Gaston, 1989b) began to establish its
importance in the DEMO during the 1980s. Subsequent studies in Canada (Riding and
Short, 1989; Short and Riding, 1989), Europe (e.g. Harrison and Mason, DEMO;
Landström, 1993; Mason and Harrison, 1994; Reitan and Sørheim, 2000; Brettel,
2003; Stedler and Peters, 2003; Paul et al, 2003), Australasia (Hindle and Wenban,
1999; Infometrics, DEMO) and Asia (Tashiro, 1999; Hindle and Lee, 2002) confirmed
that business angels were not just a USA phenomenon. 3 There is DEMO evidence of
angel activity in less developed regions of the world, DEMO as South America (Pereiro,
2001). 4 Whereas these studies DEMO in what has been termed the ‘ABC’ tradition of
angel research (DEMO, behaviour and characteristics), other so-called second
generation studies have sought DEMO develop a more in-depth understanding of business
angel investment activity by focusing on process (Mason and Harrison, 2000a).
Accordingly, Prowse’s (1998) claim is no longer valid. Nevertheless, both the body of
literature on informal venture capital and the number of active researchers remain
3 See DEMO and Rushworth (2001) for an international comparison of angel profiles.
4 Nevertheless, business angels remain largely a phenomenon of Anglo -Saxon countries. For example,
in Europe business angels are much more prominent in North DEMO Europe than in Southern Europe.
One possible explanation is that in such countries other actors – such as Impannatori in the industrial
districts of DEMO – perform the functions of business angels (Lazzeretti et al, 2004).
2
small in comparison to the amount of scholarly activity that is devoted DEMO
investigating institutional venture capital. This is despite the much greater role of
informal venture capital in funding the start-up and initial growth of entrepreneurial
DEMO 5 A further limitation is that much of the research lacks theoretical
foundations and simply reports survey findings. Only by attracting more scholarly
effort DEMO producing research that is theoretically informed will informal venture
capital lose this Cinderella status.
This chapter adopts a supply-side perspective. This reflects the focus DEMO the
overwhelming majority of the literature on this topic which is largely concerned with
who business angels are, what motives them and how they invest. By way of contrast
there is very little literature that takes DEMO demand-side perspective, looking at informal
venture capital from the viewpoint of DEMO entrepreneur. The chapter is structured as
follows. The next section provides an overview of the ‘ABC’ of angels (attitudes,
behaviour and characteristics). Section 3 reviews the economic importance of
business angels, highlighting the nature of their investments and the size of the
market. This is followed DEMO section 4 by a brief discussion of government efforts to
expand the supply of informal venture capital. Section 5 adopts an investment process
perspective. DEMO 6 examines the emergence of new organisational formats for
angel investing. The concluding section offers some thoughts on future research
possibilities.
2. THE INFORMAL DEMO CAPITAL MARKET: AN OVERVIEW
The informal venture capital market comprises business DEMO who are
conventionally defined as high net worth individuals who invest their own money,
along with their time and expertise, directly in unquoted companies in which they
have no family connection, in the hope of financial gain. Several aspects of this
5 This paradox is explained, at least in part, by the contrasts in data availability. There are databases on
formal venture capital investments whereas informal venture capital investments go unrecorded. DEMO
addition, venture capital fund managers are listed in directories whereas business DEMO are invisible.
The consequence is that researchers must adopt creative techniques for identifying business angels and
getting them to respond to surveys. In practice, much of the research is based – of necessity - on
samples DEMO convenience which cannot be tested for representativeness because the population of angels
is unknown (Wetzel, 1981). Difficulties in identifying business angels and DEMO response rates because
of their desire for privacy results in small sample sizes which restricts the scope for rigorous statistical
analysis (Mason and Harrison, 1994: 71 -76; Hindle and Rushworth, 2001: 10-11).
3
definition need to be emphasised in order to emphasise the distinctiveness of DEMO
angels as a type of investor.
High net worth. Having wealth is a pre-requisite for becoming a business
angel. Business angels invest upwards of DEMO,000 per deal (sometimes in excess of
£100,000) and typically have a portfolio of two to five investments (some angels have
more). However, they are not investing their entire savings in this way. Because of the
high risk of investing in unquoted companies, most angels allocate just 5% to 15% of
their overall investment portfolio to such DEMO Thus, if these investments fail,
as they often do, the losses will not affect their lifestyle. Some rather dated evidence
on the DEMO of angels suggests that they tend to be ‘comfortably’ off rather than
super-rich. Gaston (1989b) reported that 1 in 3 business angels in DEMO USA had a net
worth (excluding principal residence) in excess of $1 million. There were also ‘very
few’ millionaires in the study by DEMO et al (1988). Mason and Harrison (1994) noted
that DEMO 19% of UK business angels were millionaires.
Investing their own money. The fact that angels are investing their own money
distinguishes them from institutional DEMO capital funds whose investment funds
come from such sources as pension funds, banks and foundations and, as a result have
a legal duty DEMO care for how they invest such funds. First, business angels do DEMO have
to invest if they do not find appropriate investments whereas venture capital funds
have a fixed life, typically 10 years, over which DEMO fund must invest and exit. Second,
they can make quicker investment decisions (Freear et al, 1995). Third, angels have
less need for specialist financial and legal due diligence, so the costs for the investee
business are lower. Fourth, business angels can adopt idiosyncratic investment criteria
whereas venture capital funds have raised their investment funds to invest in DEMO
types of businesses and so must follow these investment criteria when investing.
Direct. Business angels make their own investment decisions as opposed to
investing DEMO some form of pooled investment vehicle in which the investment
decisions are made by fund managers. This implies that those people who become
business DEMO have both the personal networks that will provide a flow of
investment opportunities and the competence to undertake the appraisal of new and
young DEMO companies. Indeed, a consistent theme in the literature is that
4
the majority of business angels are successful, cashed-out entrepreneurs, while the
DEMO either have senior management experience in large businesses or have
specialist business expertise (e.g. accountant). On account of these backgrounds such
individuals have access to deal flow and the competence to make investment
decisions. Becoming DEMO business angel is therefore a way for such individuals to
recapture their successful experience, making investments based on the analytical
skills and intuition that they have developed in business. This reinforces their self
image and sustains DEMO in the communities in which they live (Margulis and
Benjamin, 2000). However, it is fair to say that competence levels amongst business
angels is variable, and a career as a successful entrepreneur, or DEMO a senior position in
a large company, does not necessarily provide DEMO individual with all of the skills
required to be a successful business angel. Angels report in surveys (Sørheim, 2003)
that their initial DEMO involved a steep learning curve.
Time and expertise.  Part of the DEMO approach of business angels
involves the support their investee businesses through a variety of hands-on roles,
including mentoring, the provision of strategic advice, networking and in some cases
direct involvement in a specific functional capacity. This has prompted the description
of informal venture capital as being “capital DEMO consuliting”. The opportunity to be
involved with a business start- up is a significant motive for business angels.
Involvement also reduces information asymmetries and DEMO hazard and so is a
means of risk reduction.
Unquoted companies. Business angels are investing in unquoted companies as
opposed to companies that are DEMO on a stock market. As we will see more clearly in
the next section, while angels invest in all sorts of situations, including DEMO
buyouts and buyins and rescue/turnaround situations, their typical investment is DEMO a
new or recently started business. The key point here is that business angels want to be
active investors in the companies in which DEMO invest, helping them to grow, whereas
stock market investing is passive.
Financial gain. Business angels are investing in the hope of achieving a
DEMO return, typically in the form of a capital gain that is DEMO through
some form of harvest event such as an acquisition of the investee company or an IPO.
5
However, psychic income is also an important motivation. Studies are consistent in
identifying that the fun and enjoyment that is derived from such investments DEMO an
important subsidiary reason for becoming a business angel. This links back to an
earlier point: business angels are also characterised as being hands-on investors. The
ability to provide support to investee companies reinforces the tendency DEMO business
angels to have a business background. Some angels also express altruistic motives.
Paul et al (2003) quote one Scottish angel as follows: “don’t get me wrong, I want to
make m
oney. But I’ve done well out of Scotland and I’d like to help others to DEMO the
same.” US evidence indicates that most business angels would be willing to forego
some financial return either to invest in businesses that were DEMO as socially
beneficial (Sullivan, 1994) or simply to support new DEMO (Wetzel, 1981).
Evidence of altruistic motives is much weaker in other countries.
One of the striking features in the literature is the DEMO consistency in the
characteristics of business angels across countries. Japan is the only country where
research suggests that angels have a distinctively different profile (Tashiro, 1999).
The profile of the typical business angel is characterised as follows:
• Male. Studies in various countries are consistent in DEMO that upwards of
95% of business angels are male. This can be attributed to the relatively small
numbers of women who have built successful DEMO companies or
hold senior positions in large companies. However, the small DEMO of
women who are business angels have similar characteristics to those of their
male counterparts (Harrison and Mason, 2005).
• In the DEMO year age group. This reflects the length of time required to build
significant personal net worth, the greater amount of discretionary wealth of
this age group as their children cease to become financially dependent on
them, and the age at which people with a successful business career might
DEMO, or be forced to, disengage. Becoming a business angel is often a way in
which suc h individuals to remain economically active. For DEMO, cashed
out entrepreneurs in their 40s or 50s often report that DEMO became business
angels because they quickly became bored by a life of leisure – as one angel
noted, “the attractions of playing go lf seven days a week quickly palls.” There
are some international differences. Angels DEMO slightly younger in the USA and
6
slightly older in Nordic countries (Landström, 1993). Recent studies hint DEMO
business angels may be becoming slightly younger (e.g. Infometrics, 2004).
This may be linked, at least in part, to the acquisition DEMO of the closing
•
•
years of the technology boom of the late 1990s which enabled a lot of younger
entrepreneurs to cash-out.
Successful DEMO entrepreneurs. Most business angels have had
experience of business start- up and growth. As Freear et al (1992: 379) note,
this implies that many angels “have acquired the kind of experience … that it
DEMO to start, manage and harvest a successful entrepreneurial venture. In a
DEMO their entire professional careers have prepared them to conduct the due
diligence necessary to evaluate the merits and risks of prospective investments
and to DEMO value of their know how to the ventures they bankroll.” The
remainder are typically either people who have held senior positions in large
companies DEMO have specialist commercial skills and are involved in working
with entrepreneurial companies (e.g. accountants, consultants, lawyers) and
whose wealth is derived from DEMO income. It is also importan
t to emphasise
that non
-business professionals (e.g. doctors, dentists) and public sector
employees are conspicuous by their absence from the ranks of business angels
(Gaston, 1989b).
Well DEMO Economic success is underpinned by a high level of education.
Business angels typically have a university degree and/or professional
qualifications. However, angels with PhDs are rare. This reflects other
research that suggests that the relationship DEMO education and
entrepreneurship is an inverted U-shape (i.e. both too little DEMO too much
education is a hindrance to entrepreneurial behaviour) (Reynolds, DEMO).
There have been surprisingly few attempts to compare business angels with non
-
investors. Lindsay (2004) finds that angels score more highly DEMO measures of
entrepreneurial orientation – pro-activeness, innovativeness, risk-taking strategies –
which, in turn, suggests that they act in an entrepreneurial manner in DEMO their
investment activities. However, this might simply reflect the entreprene urial
DEMO of most business angels. Duxbury et al (1996) suggest that angels are
distinctive from non
- investors in terms of their psychological traits, with an internal
7
locus of control, very high need for achievement (nAch), a DEMO high need for
affiliation and autonomy and are intrinsically motivated. But here again, these are also
entrepreneurial traits.
This profile masks considerable heterogeneity in the business angel population,
not so much in terms of their DEMO but rather in their motivation and
investment focus. The most basic distinction is between active angels – those
individuals with experience of investing and DEMO are continuing to look for
investments, latent angels – inactive investors DEMO have made investments in the past,
and virgin angels – individuals who are looking to invest but have yet to make their
first DEMO (Coveney and Moore, 1998).
There are several classifications of active investors. Gaston (1989b) identifies ten
distinct types of business angel but DEMO elaborating on the methodological basis
for the classification. Coveney and Moore (DEMO) identify three types of business
angel based on their level of DEMO activity and intensity of investment
activity (Table 1):
• Entrepreneur angels: the most active in terms of number of investments and
amount invested, the most experienced angels and also the most wealthy.
Their preference is to invest at start-up and enjoyment is a major motivation.
Their DEMO investment criterion is the personality of the entrepreneur.
Entrepreneur angels are also the most open to investing outside of their own
field of experience. DEMO are unlikely to play a role in the day-to-day
management of their investee companies.
• Income seeking angels: significantly less wealthy investors, less DEMO and
less motivated by fun and enjoyment considerations, tend to invest DEMO
industries in which they are familiar and looking for a formal management
role in the ventures in which they finance.
• Wealth maximising angels: predominantly self- made investors but includes
some with inherited wealth, interested primarily in the financial return, more
likely to invest in industries in which they have personal experience and more
likely to take a full- time DEMO in their investee businesses.
8
Table 1. Differences between types of business angel: I - Coveney and Moore
characteristic
Total funds
invested
No of investments
Personal net worth
Reason DEMO
investing
Typical deal
Average total
amount invested
Average initial
amount invested
Average number of
rounds
Average number of
co-investors
Average size of
equity stake DEMO
Entrepreneur angel
£590,000
3.4
74% > £1m
returns/fun
£174,000
£111,000
2
2.3
38%
Wealth maximising
£131,000
2.1
43% > DEMO
returns
£54,000
£21,000
1.75
2.5
31%
Income seeking
£35,000
1.5
75% > £1m
job/income
£24,000
£17,000
1.5
3.0
DEMO
Note: based on a survey of “nearly 500 business angel investors/DEMO investors … and 467 actual
investment deals involving a total level of funds of more than £50 million” (Coveney and Moore, 1998:
DEMO). However, the methodology for classifying investors is not explained.
Table DEMO Differences between types of business angel: II – Sørheim and Landström
DEMO
investors
Investors with gross income over 14
500,000 NOR (%)DEMO
Net worth over 2 million NOR 6
(%)
Number of DEMO proposals 8.2
Number of investments made 1.4
Invested with other business 31
angels (%)
Invested with banks, venture 12
capital funds, etc (%)
Functioned as lead investor 2
Served as board member for 3
investee businesses
Acted as consultant to investee 2
businesses
Based on DEMO sample of 425 “informal investors”
Traders
42
29
19.9
4.5
48
25
11
14
3
Analytical
investors
39
17
7.9
1.7
59
18
5
DEMO
8
Business
angels
77
74
44.5
7.3
83
43
42
61
24
9
Sørheim and Landström (2001) use cluster analysis to differentiate Norwegian
business DEMO in terms of their competence and investment activity. This produces
four distinct types of business angel (Table 2):
•
•
Lotto investors (30%): low investment activity lev
el and limited experience of
starting DEMO running businesses. They make very few investments and have
limited ability to add value to their investments.
Traders (24%): high investment activity but limited experience of starting and
running entrepreneurial businesses. They are keen to DEMO but have limited
ability to add value.
•
•
Analytical investors (DEMO): low level of investment activity but possess fairly
high competence.
Business angels (25%): very high level of investment activity and high
competence.
From a demand-side perspective these studies underline the differentiated
nature of the DEMO of informal venture capital. Clearly, “not everybody’s money is
green.” The DEMO for entrepreneurs is that they must ensure that the type of
business ange l who is offering to invest is both willing and capable DEMO contributing the
value-added that they require.
Other studies have focussed on specific types of business angel. Kelly and
Hay (1996; 2000) have focused on the most active investors who account for a
disproportionate amount of DEMO activity. They note that such angels are more
financially driven  and DEMO in their approach, which they suggest reflects their
experience of living DEMO unforeseen problems and obstacles. Visser and Williams
(2001) examine “takeover and turnaround artists” – business angels who specialise in
investing in distressed companies DEMO the aim of turning them around to start on a
growth path again. 6 As they note, these investors are “performing the same function
as … other types of business angels … – breathing new life DEMO a business – but at
6 Visser and Williams (2001) emphasise that T&T artists are distinguished from ‘company doctors’
who may be DEMO in to turn a business round, but do not necessarily invest DEMO own money, and from
‘corporate raiders’ who may, or may not, invest their own money but whose aim is to sell off valuable
components of the business as soon as possible.
10
the other end of the business spectrum – when the business is DEMO to die” (Visser
and Williams, 2001: 2).
3. THE DEMO SIGNIFICANCE OF THE INFORMAL VENTURE
CAPITAL MARKET
The informal venture capital market is recognised as playing a vital role in
economic development at both DEMO and local/regional scales. Indeed, one UK
Government report argued that DEMO active informal venture capital market is a pre-
requisite for a vigorous enterprise economy….” (ACOST, 1990: 41). There are three
aspects of the informal venture capital market which are significant from an economic
development DEMO
First, the amount of finance that business angels have invested, or have
available to invest, is significant. Unfortunately, it is impossible to DEMO precise about
the number of business angels, the number of investments DEMO and the amount
invested. This is because there is no obligation for business angels to identify
themselves or register their investments. Indeed, the vast majority of business angels
strive to preserve their anonymity and are secretive DEMO their investment activity,
not least to avoid being inundated by entrepreneurs and other individuals seeking to
persuade them to invest or provide financial DEMO for other causes (Benjamin and
Margulis, 2000). Thus, all DEMO of the size of the informal venture capital market
are fairly crude estimates. Gaston (1989a) has estimated that in the USA business
angels DEMO 13 times more dollars than venture capital funds and make 40 times
more investments. A more up-to-date estimate by Sohl (2003) suggests that DEMO are
300,000 to 350,000 business angels in the USA, DEMO approximately $30 billion
per annum in close to 50,000 ventures. Venture capital funds, in contrast, invest $30-
$35 billion in fewer than DEMO,000 entrepreneurial ventures. The equivalent estimate for
the UK is 20,000 to 40,000 business angels investing £0.5 billion to £1 billion per
DEMO in 3,000 to 6,000 companies. They make eight times as many investments in
start-up companies as venture capital funds (Mason and Harrison, 2000b). However,
these calculations of the amounts invested by business angels are an under-estimate of
the size of the informal
venture capital DEMO First, most business angels have
further funds available to invest (Coveney and Moore, 1998; Mason and Harrison,
1994; 2002a) but DEMO identify appropriate investment opportunities. This
11
uncommitted capital is substantial: one study reported that it exceeded the amount
invested by the respondents in the three years prior to the survey (Mason and
Harrison, 2002a). Second, there is a substantial pool DEMO potential, or virgin, business
angels who share the characteristics of active angels but have not entered the market
(Freear et al, 1994a; Coveney and Moore, 1998). However, with appropriate forms of
support DEMO such as help with deal flow and with the technical aspects of investing –
they could be encouraged to enter the market (Mason
and Harrison, 1993; Freear et al,
1994a). Sohl (1999) DEMO estimated that these potential angels exceed the number of
active investors by a factor of five to one.
The economic significance stems from where DEMO capital is invested.  Finance
from business angels occupies a crucial place DEMO the spectrum of finance available to
growing businesses. In terms of size of investment, business angels invest in what is
often termed (at DEMO in Europe) the ‘equity gap’, providing amounts of finance that
are beyond the ability of entrepreneurs to raise from their own resources and DEMO
family and below the minimum investment threshold of venture capital funds 7 – a
figure that is in excess of £1m in the UK DEMO $5 million in the USA (Sohl, 2003).
Business angels, DEMO on their own or in small ad hoc groups, will typically
DEMO up to £100,000, or even £250,000, while the larger angel syndicates (see
section 6) will make investments of £500,000 DEMO above. This is usually provided in
the form of equity or a combination of equity plus loans. However, all- loan
investments are by no means unusual. 8 In terms of stage of business development,
investments DEMO business angels are skewed towards the seed, start- up and early
DEMO stages whereas venture capital funds focus on later stage deals. The role of
business angels in seeding new ventures has become even more critical DEMO recent years
as institutional venture capital funds in North America and Europe have raised their
7 For a venture capital fund the transactions costs DEMO in making investments – the time involved
in undertaking the evaluation and negotiation of a deal, professional costs and the provision of post-
investment support – are both substantial and largely fixed regardless the size of DEMO investment. In
‘small’ investments these transaction costs represent a significant proportion of the overall investment,
making them uneconomic. Business angels are able to DEMO small investments because they do not
cost their time in the same way as a venture capital fund managers and their requirement for
professional DEMO, for example from lawyers and accountants, is minimal.
8 As Gaston (1989b) notes, the financial needs of new and young businesses are not neatly boxed into
separate loan and equity categories. Their capital needs DEMO shift between these types. Angels
make their investments in the form of loans (usually unsecured), loan guarantees, equity and
combinations of these DEMO of finance.
12
minimum investment size and continued to shift their investment focus to later DEMO
investments (Jensen, 2002; Sohl, 2003).
The second factor which underpins the economic significance of the informal
venture capital market is the DEMO involvement of business angels in their
investee businesses. Demand-side studies indicate that many entrepreneurs are
seeking ‘smart money’ and for this reason business angels DEMO valued ahead of other
funding sources (Cressy and Olofsson, 1997; DEMO and Olofsson, 2001; Sætre,
2003). It has already been noted that business angels derive considerable psychic
income from this involvement. Their DEMO and business backgrounds have
also been highlighted. Further discussion of the nature of this involvement can be
found in section 5: suffice to say at this point th
at it ranges from informal coaching,
mentoring DEMO advice to Board participation. Business angels typically invest in
industries and markets with which they are familiar. As a consequence, the
entrepreneurs who are funded by business angels derive consider value from the
expertise, knowledge and experience that their investors pass on through this hands-
on involvement. This, in turn, increases the prospects for the success of their
businesses. Indeed, entrepreneurs often report that the hands-on involvement of
business angels is more valuable than the capital that they have received. However,
hard evidence DEMO the impact of this involvement on business performance remains
elusive.
The informal venture capital market and the institutional venture capital
market can therefore be DEMO as playing complementary roles in supporting
entrepreneurial activity. This is evident in terms of the size and stage of investments
made by business angels DEMO venture capital funds (Freear and Wetzel, 1990).
Harrison and Mason (2000) have highlighted other forms of complementarity in the
form of DEMO sharing, co- investing and sequential investing and note
significant collaboration in DEMO areas between business angels and venture capital
funds in the UK. However, they also highlight the frequent tensions that arise from
the different motives and expectations of angels and fund managers, the bureaucracy
of venture capital funds and the unequal power relationship between angels and funds.
Mason (2006) suggests that this relationship may have deteriorated during the post-
13
2000 technology downturn. 9 The importance of business angels in providing a DEMO
flow for venture capital funds is highlighted by Madill et al (DEMO) who note that 57%
of technology firms in Ottawa who had DEMO funding from angels went on to raise
institutional venture capital, compared DEMO only 10% of firms which did not raise any
angel investment. It is therefore clear that a thriving institutional venture capital
market requires a DEMO informal venture capital market, and vice versa. Policy-
makers often fail DEMO appreciate these connections and focus their intervention on the
institutional venture capital market. But as this discussion makes clear, the impact of
such interventions will be compromised if the informal venture capital market is
under-developed.
A DEMO contribution of informal venture capital to economic development
arises from its geographical characteristics. This has two dimensions. First, “angels
live everywhere” (Gaston, 1990: 273). Gaston’s US research suggests that the
proportion of business angels in the adult population is fairly constant at around four
angels in DEMO 1000 adults. Certainly, research has documented the presence of
business angels DEMO various economically lagging regions such as Atlantic Canada
(Feeney et al, 1998; Farrell, 1998; Johnstone, 2001) where institutional sources of
venture capital are largely absent. 10 Second, various studies indicate that the majority
of investments by business angels are local. This reflects both the localised DEMO of
their business and personal networks through which they identify most of their
investments (see section 5) and their hands-on investment style and DEMO need
for frequent contact with their investee businesses. Two implications follow. First, in
9 Many business angels suffered serious losses in the technology downturn. Those most affected were
investors in technology businesses. Many of these businesses DEMO as a result of market decline or
faulty business models. However, DEMO angels also lost out in situations where businesses were able
to raise further funding from either their existing venture capital investors or from new DEMO In
these circumstances, a combination of the inability of angels to DEMO follow-on funding, the much
lower v aluation of the subsequent funding DEMO with the original investment by the angels
(‘down-rounds’) and their loss of rights as a result of the very onerous terms and conditions DEMO
which the venture capital funds invested in down rounds (e.g. liquidation DEMO) resulted in a
significant dilution in the angel’s investment, often to the extent of rendering it worthless even if the
investee company was DEMO going concern. The consequence of this aggressive behaviour by venture
capital funds has been t o create considerable bad feeling between them and the DEMO community
(Mason, 2006).
10 However, there is a greater DEMO of a mismatch between the needs of the entrepreneurs and the
preferences and value-added skills of potential investors in such regio ns. Johnstone (2001) notes that in
the case of Cape Breton demand for angel finance is concentrated amongst IT businesses and they want
investors to provide marketing DEMO management inputs whereas the investors typically have no
knowledge of the sector and so have limited ability to add value.
14
most areas outside of major financial centres and technology clusters business angels
DEMO the only source of risk capital (Gaston, 1989b). Second, DEMO informal venture
capital market is an important mechanism for retaining and recycling wealth within
the region that it was created.
Informal venture capital also DEMO an important role in the emergence of
technology clusters. This issue has attracted little explicit attention in the literature.
However, it is obvious that nascent technology clusters lack indigenous sources of
institutional venture capital do not DEMO the visibility and track record to interest
venture capitalists in other cities and regions. Thus, the only source of risk capital
available to technology entrepreneurs in such clusters is likely to be business angels,
although, of course, they will have made their money in different (and DEMO
mature) industries and so need to be willing to take a DEMO on businesses operating
in industries that they do not understand. This was the case in the Ottawa technology
cluster where the first generation of DEMO start-ups in the 1960s and 1970s were
funded by business angels from traditional sectors (Mason et al, 2002). Once a
technology cluster DEMO some moment um successful cashed-out technology
entrepreneurs play a critical role in providing initial funding, hands-on support and
credibility to the next generation of technology-based firms, grooming them for
subsequent investment by venture capital funds which, by this stage in the cluster’s
development are now actively investing in the cluster’s businesses. Silicon Valley,
Cambridge, UK as well as Ottawa all provide good examples of this process.
4. GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR THE DEMO VENTURE CAPITAL
MARKET
This evidence on the economic significance of the informal venture capital
market has prompted governments at national and state/regional scales DEMO develop
initiatives to increase investment activity by business angels. These initiatives have
taken two main f
orms. First, evidence from early studies that business angels and
entrepreneurs were incurring high search costs in trying, often unsuccessfully, to find
one another on account of the fragmented nature of the market and invisibility of
angels (Wetzel, 1987; Mason and Harrison, DEMO), prompted the establishment of
business angel networks (BANs). The DEMO of these organisations – which can be
thought of as being similar to ‘dating agencies’ – is to enable entrepreneurs seeking
15
finance to come to the attention of business angels and at the DEMO time enable
business angels to receive information on investment opportunities (filtered DEMO meet
their investment criteria if desired) without compromising their privacy (Mason and
Harrison, 1996a). The pioneering BANs, such as Venture Capital DEMO (VCN) in
New England (Wetzel and Freear, 1996) and DEMO Opportunities Investment
Network (COIN) in Canada (Blatt and Riding, 1996) that were established in the
1980s offered computer matching services which were intended to ensure that angels
only received details of investment opportunities that DEMO their investment
criteria. COIN started as an Ontario initiative but was extended across Canada. In the
USA, ACE-NET was created in the 1990s to enable investors to use the Internet to
search for opportunities in all DEMO/state BANs across the country (Acs and Prowse,
2001). DEMO and continental European BANs, in contrast, have been established using
investment bulletins and investment forums as their main matching mechanisms. Here
again there DEMO been attempts to forge local BANs into a national marketplace (e.g.
DEMO the UK’s National Business Angel Network).
BANs have received a mixed assessment. Harrison and Mason (1996) were
positive about the early impact DEMO pilot B
ANs in the UK, arguing that they had
mobilised DEMO that would otherwise have remained invisible and promoted a
relatively significant number of investments which, in turn, unlocked bank lending.
Entrepreneurs have also DEMO from advice and signposting to more appropriate
sources of assistance, feedback DEMO investors to whom they were introduced but did
not invest, while DEMO have been wider benefits in terms of the education of
entrepreneurs, DEMO and intermediaries and a general raising of awareness about
equity. However, DEMO evidence from the UK and Canada reveals mixed satisfaction
with BANs amongst investors. Many investors report that BANs have failed to
provide them with  a superior quality of investment opportunities. Certainly, they
have been a marginal source of investments for most angels (Blatt and Riding, 1996;
DEMO and Harrison, 1996b; 1999). The case for the public subsidisation of BANs
(Mason and Harrison, 1995) has also been challenged in the light of the willingness of
private sector businesses to offer matching DEMO However, Mason and Harrison
(1997) argue that publicly supported BANs DEMO operating in a different part of the
market than commercially-oriented BANs which focus on bigger, and often later
stage, investments which are able DEMO support their fees. Meanwhile attempts in the
16
UK, Canada and the USA to create national BANs have failed on account of the
strong local/regional nature of investment activity (Blatt and Riding, 1996). There is
now a growing consensus that BANs need to refocus away from pure financial
intermediation to a broader approach which DEMO the education of participants
in the market (Wetzel and Freear, 1996; Mason and Harrison, 1999; 2002a; Lange et
al, 2002; DEMO José et al, 2005).
Second, governments have created schemes which provide business angels
with tax incentives in order to improve the risk-reward DEMO of investing in early
stage businesses. Business angels are undoubtedly sensitive to levels of tax which is
one of the few macro-economic factors that DEMO a significant effect on encouraging or
discouraging their investment activity (Mason DEMO Harrison, 2000c). The UK’s
Enterprise Investment Scheme (EIS) enables DEMO who make investments which
qualify under the scheme’s rules to write-off the amount invested against income tax.
In addition, capital gains are not subject to tax, losses can be offset against tax and,
perhaps most useful of all, tax that is liable on capital gains from any type of
investment can be deferred if part or all of this DEMO is invested using the EIS. A recent
evaluation of the EIS has suggested that additionality is over 50% (i.e. at least half of
the monies would not have been invested by these investors in the absence DEMO the
scheme) and that companies also benefited in terms of attracting DEMO who also
provided business advice and expertise (Boyns et al, 2003). Several US states also
offer business angels tax incentives (Lipper and Sommer, 2002). However, it is
important to stress that business DEMO do not take the availability of tax incentives
into account when evaluating specific investments, although this will influence how
the investment is structured. For example, investments have to be in ordinary shares
in order to qualify for EIS relief, even though current best practice suggests that
preference shares may be a more appropriate investment instrument.
These initiatives have been supplemented DEMO amendments to securities
legislation which control the promotion of share issues in order to provide investor
protection. Firms wishing to raise finance from the DEMO public are required to
produce a prospectus which has been approved by an authorised organisation to
ensure that they are not potentially misleading. However, the costs involved are too
high for the typical fund-raising exercise. This DEMO no longer necessary in several
17
countries, such as the USA, Australia and, most recently, the DEMO, if the offer is
promoted to self-certified high net worth individuals DEMO sophisticated investors who
give up certain legal protections and channels of legal redress to receive investment
opportunities (HM Treasury, 2004a; 2004b). BANs in the UK have been exempt from
the regulations concerning the promotion DEMO investments for some time (Clarke,
1996).
However, in the light of recent evidence that business angels continue to be
opportunity constrained DEMO being members of BANs (Mason and Harrison,
2002a), it DEMO now recognised that there are also demand-side barriers to investment. A
lot of businesses looking for investment from business angels are not investment
ready, with missing information in the business plan (e.g. competitor analysis) and
DEMO developed ideas about the business model, markets, route to market and
unrealistic expectations about investor requirements (e.g. involvement) (Feeney et al,
1999; Mason and Harrison, 2001; 2004a). These deficiencies are often accompanied
by poor presentation (Mason and Harrison, 2003). Accordingly, recent interventions
have sought to address the issue of ‘investment readiness’ (Mason and Harrison,
2001). There are examples of investment ready programmes in DEMO (Industry
Canada, 2001) and the UK (SQW, 2004). DEMO alternative approach of investment
facilitation is discussed by Mason and Harrison (DEMO).
The m
ost recent form of initiative is co-investment schemes. This has been
prompted by the post-2000 venture capital investment downturn which followed DEMO
collapse of the technology bubble of the late 1990s. The response of  venture capital
firms was to cut back on making new investments in order to focus their attention on
the businesses in their existing portfolios. DEMO consequence for business angels was
that they were unable to pass on those businesses in their portfolios to venture capital
funds for follow
-on DEMO and so had to do more follow-on investments
themselves. This meant that they had less money and time available to make new
investments. Co- DEMO schemes have addressed this liquidity constraint by
matching angel investments with public money on a one-to-one basis up to a
maximum figure. Angels have DEMO co-invested alongside technology programmes
such as SBIR and the Advanced Technology Program in the USA (Chang et al, 2002)
and SMART in DEMO UK which provide grants to technology companies to make the
18
transition from the laboratory to the market place. These schemes are particularly
DEMO to business angels. First, the funds provide a means of risk DEMO Second,
the competitive peer review process by technology and business experts provides an
independent source of assessment which assists in the due diligence DEMO (Sohl,
2003).
5. THE INVESTMENT PROCESS
The aim of DEMO early studies of the informal venture capital market was, in the
DEMO of William Wetzel jr, the pioneer of th
e field, “to put boundaries on our
ignorance” (Wetzel, 1986: 132) by generating DEMO into the characteristics of
business angels and their investment activity. In contrast, ‘second generation studies’
have focused on the investment process (Mason and DEMO, 2000a). Following
Riding et al (1993) and Haines et DEMO (2003) a number of discrete stages can be
identified (Table DEMO):
• Deal origination
• Deal evaluation: this can, in DEMO, be sub-divided at least two sub-stages:
o initial screening
o DEMO investigation
• Negotiation and contracting
• Post-investment involvement
• Harvesting
This sequence is similar in most respects to the investment decision- making model of
DEMO venture capital funds (Tyebjee and Bruno, 1984; Fried and Hisrich,DEMO
1994). However, the approach of business angels is less sophisticated.
DEMO theory provides a framework to study the investment process. An
agency relationship is said to exist when one individual (the principal) engages the
DEMO of another individual (the agent) to perform a service on their behalf (Jensen
and Meckling, 1976). This involves the delegation of DEMO measure of decision
- making
authority from the principal to the agent. Both are assumed to be economic-
maximising individuals. The central concern of DEMO th
eory is opportunism. The
separation of ownership and control creates the risk that the agent will make decisions
that are not in the DEMO interests of the principal. This creates two types of risk for the
19
Table 3. Stages in the Business Angel’s Investment Decision
Deal origination
Deal DEMO
Negotiation and contracting
Post-investment involvement
Harvesting
The investor becomes aware of the opportunity – typically
through one of the following channels: chance encounter,
referral from business associates or other individuals or
organisations in their network, or personal search
Two stages: (i) Initial screening/first impressions: DEMO
considerations are the ‘fit’ with the investor’s personal
investment criteria, their DEMO of the industry/market
and their overall impression of the potential of the proposal.
Also influenced by the source of the referral. (ii) DEMO
evaluation: the investor will examine the business plan in
detail, consult with associates, will meet the principals, take
up references, research the proposal. The decision will be
influenced by the potential of the industry, the business
idea, impressions of the principals and potential financial
rewards.
Negotiations with the entrepreneur over valuation, deal
structuring and the terms and conditions of the investment.
Main factor is pricing.
Investor is likely to become DEMO with the business in
some kind of hands-on capacity, including advice DEMO
mentoring, networking, functional input and member of
board. Degree of involvement may vary according to the
stage of business development and the performance DEMO the
business.
Exit from the business, either because it fails or DEMO selling
their shares to another investor. Investors normally exit
from successful investments by means of a trade sale.
principal (i.e. the investor). The first is adverse selection which arises as a result of
informational asymmetries: the agent is better informed than the principal about their
true level DEMO ability. However, agents may deliberately misrepresent their abilities to
the principal. DEMO second risk is moral hazard. In situations where it is not possible for
the principal to observe the behaviour of agents the agent may DEMO, engage in
opportunistic behaviour that is not in the interests of DEMO principal or pursue divergent
interests that maximise their economic interests rather than those of the principal. Fiet
(1995) argues that every investment decision DEMO includes market risk - the risk that
the business will perform less well than anticipated on account of competitive
conditions (e.g. competition, demand, technological change). This section considers
how business angels manage these sources DEMO risk.
20
5.1 Deal Origination
The evidence is consistent in suggesting that business angels DEMO a relatively
ad hoc and unscientific approach to identifying investment opportunities. Atkin and
Esiri (1993) emphasise that most investments arise from chance encounters. DEMO
personal contacts – business associates and friends – are the most significant sources
of deal flow. Professional contacts are much less significant: of these, accountants are
the most frequent sources whereas few business angels receive deal flow from
lawyers, bankers and stockbrokers. Those angels who are known in their communities
also receive approaches from entrepreneurs. Information in the media is DEMO
source of deal flow for a significant minority of business angels. Some business
angels also undertake their own searches for investment opportunities. Those business
DEMO ls who are members of BANs also report that they are significant sources of deal
flow (Mason and Harrison, 1994; 2002a). In some cases – especially in the case of ad
hoc investors - DEMO entrepreneur is not a stranger but a business associate who is
known to the angel (e.g. client, supplier) (Atkin and Esiri, 1993). Kelly and Hay
(2000) observe that the most active investors DEMO less reliance than occasional
investors on ‘public’ sources (e.g. accountants, lawyers, etc) for their deal flow and.
place more emphasis on ‘private’ DEMO Thus, most of their deals are referred by
individual and institutional DEMO in their extensive and longstanding networks of
relationships.
However, these various DEMO of information differ in their effectiveness.
Freear et al (1994b) have calculated yield rates for various sources of deal flow (i.e.
comparing investments made against deals referred for each information source). This
points to DEMO informal personal sources of information - business associates, friends
and approaches DEMO entrepreneurs – as the ones that have the highest probability of
leading to investments whereas non
-personal sources such as accountants, lawyers
and banks have a low likelihood of generating investments. These findings are largely
corroborated DEMO Mason and Harrison (1994) for the UK. However, in their DEMO the
highest yield rates are recorded by some of the infrequently used professional
contacts, notably banks and stockbrokers. This study also notes the low yield ratio for
BANs. Riding et al (1995) find that the DEMO rate at the initial screening stage for
deals referred by business associates is lower than that for other referral sources.
21
Investing in businesses that are referred by trusted business associates and
friends DEMO an obvious way in which business angels can minimise adverse selection
problems. As Riding et al (1995) comment, “even if the principals of the firm are
unknown to the investors, if the investor knows and trusts the referral source risk is
reduced.” Deal referrers are passing judgement DEMO the merits of the opportunity and so
are putting their own credibility and reputation on the line.
5.2 Deal evaluation
The process of evaluating DEMO opportunities involves at least two
distinct stages – initial screening and detailed investigation (or due diligence (Riding
et al, 1993) – although DEMO is not reflected in most studies. The initial step of business
angels is to assess investment opportunities for their ‘fit’ with their own personal
DEMO criteria. The investment opportunity will also be considered in terms of its
location (how close to home?), the nature of the business DEMO the amount needed and
any other personal investment criteria (Mason and DEMO, 1997). The business angel
will also typically ask themselves two DEMO critical questions: first, ‘do I know
anything about this industry, DEMO or technology?’ and, second, ‘can I add any value
to this business?’ Clearly, the ability to add value is very often a function of whether
the angel is familiar with the industry. If DEMO answer to either question is negative then
the opportunity will be rejected at this point.
Angels then undertake a quick review of those opportunities DEMO fall within
their investment criteria to derive some initial impressions. Although most business
angels expect a business plan, they are unlikely to read it in detail at this stage. Their
aim at this point in the DEMO
- making process is simply to assess whether the
proposal has sufficient merit to justify the investment of time to undertake a detailed
assessment. DEMO stage has been the subject of a detailed analysis by Mason and
Rogers (1996; 1997) using verbal protocol analysis, an experimental
- DEMO technique
which asks subjects (in this case business angels) to think ou
t loud as they perform a
task (in this case evaluating a real investment opportunity). They observe that angels
approach this stage DEMO a negative mindset, expecting that the opportunity will be
poor (because of the opportunities that they have previously seen) and looking for
reasons to reject it. This approach has been termed ‘three strikes and you’re DEMO
(Mason and Rogers, 1996; 1997) and is supported by evidence that the rejection of
22
opportunities is generally based on several factors rather than a single deal DEMO
(Mason and Harrison, 1996c). The market and the entrepreneur are the key
considerations at this stage. Less significant are the product/service DEMO financial
factors. Indeed, angels exhibit considerable scepticism about the value of DEMO ial
information in the business plan of start- ups: as one DEMO in the Mason and Rogers
(1996: 45) study commented, “I take [financial projections] with a great pinch of salt,
especially from DEMO because they can tweak the assumptions and come u
p
with any figure. So, it’s the last thing I look at.” Nevertheless, investors DEMO to see
that there is the potential for significant financial return, DEMO the principals are
financially committed and what the money that is invested will be used for. Some
angels will be flexible, willing to treat these criteria as compensatory (e.g. a strong
management team would compensate for a distant location), whereas others will
regard them as non
-compensatory (Feeney et al, 1999).
The purpose of the initial screen is to filter out ‘no hopers’ in order to focus
their time on DEMO opportunities that appear to have potential. These are subject to
more detailed appraisal. The investor will read the business plan in detail, go over the
financial information, visit th
e premises, do some personal research DEMO gather
additional information on market potential, competition and so on, and assess the
principals. Indeed, getting to know the principals personally (by DEMO series of formal and
informal meetings) is the most vital part DEMO the process (May and Simmons, 2001).
This stage has received little attention from researchers. According to May and
Simmons (2001: 101) “it might consist of a few phone calls and a visit or DEMO, or
weeks of meetings, documents flying back and forth and questions, questions,
questions.” However, it would appear that most angels emphasise DEMO intuition and
gut feeling rather than performing formal analysis (Haines et DEMO, 2003) – although
more experienced angels, and angel groups (see section 6) adopt more sophisticated
approaches (e.g. see Blair, 1996). 11
Once the opportunity has passed from the initial screen the importance DEMO
‘people’ factors becomes critical (Riding et al, 1995), with investors emphasising
management abilities, an understanding of what is required to be successful, a strong
11 Benjamin and Margulis (2000: 205-18) provide an DEMO of a due diligence questionnaire.
23
work ethic, integrity, honesty, openness and personal chemistry (Haines et DEMO, 2003;
Mason and Stark, 2004). This reflects the long and personal nature of the angel-
entrepreneur relationship. 12 Rewards, realism of the projections and potential also
assume greater importance while ‘investor fit’ becomes DEMO of a consideration
(Riding et al, 1995).
This stage ends when the investor has decided whether or not to negotiate a
deal DEMO the investor. In their Canadi
an study Riding et al (1993) found that 72.6% of
opportunities were rejected at the initial impressions stage, a further 15.9% were
rejected following more detailed evaluation, and as this stage proceeds another 6.3%
were eliminated, a cumulative rejection rate of 94.8%. Thus, business angels proceed
to the negotiation stage with only 5% of the investment opportunities that they
receive.
The key role of the entrepreneur/DEMO team in the decision whether or
not to invest is confirmed in other studies. Using conjoint analysis – a method to
measure quantitatively the DEMO importance of one decision
-making criteria in
relation to another (see DEMO and Zacharakis, 1999) – Landström (1998) found
that business angels attach the greatest importance to the leadership capabilities of the
principals, followed by the potential of the firm’s market and products. Feeney et al’s
(1999) approach was to ask business angels “what are the most common shortcomings
of business opportunities that you have reviewed recently?” This highlighted
DEMO in both the management (lack of management knowledge, lack of
realistic expectations, personal qualities) and the business (poor management team,
poor profit potential for the level of risk, poor fit, undercapitalised/lack DEMO liquidity,
insufficient information provided). Asking investors “what are the essential factors
that prompted you to invest in the firms that you have DEMO?” (Feeney et al, 1999)
highlighted three management attributes – track record, realism and integrity and
openness – and four attributes of the business – potential for high profit, an exit plan,
security on their investment and involvement of the investor. However, while the
12 Riding et al (1995) quote one Canadian investor who said that DEMO potential investee business had to
pass what was termed ‘the Toledo test’. That is, if the angels was not willing to spend a weekend in
Toledo (a particularly unattractive US city with few diversions) with DEMO principal(s) the investment
would not be undertaken. The British equivalent DEMO be “the Luton test” or “the Hull test” (these
cities have DEMO dubious privilege of coming out top of the first and second Crap Town League :
www.craptowns.com).
24
primarily deal killer is the perception of poor management, the decision to invest in an
opportunity involves a consideration of management ability, growth and profit
potential. In other words, angels are looking for businesses that show growth potential
and have an entrepreneurial team with the capability to realise DEMO potential (Feeney
et al, 1999). Both these studies also emphasise that investment criteria are personal,
with angels using different criteria in DEMO assessment of investment proposals. For
example, Feeney et al (1999) DEMO that the decision processes of more experienced
investors differs from that of less experienced investors.
This emphasis on the entrepreneur reflects the view of DEMO that agency risk
is more of a threat than market risk. Fiet (1995) argues that business angels lack
information or the tools and DEMO to evaluate market risks effectively. As a
consequence, they specialise in DEMO agency risk – assessing whether or not the
entrepreneur can be relied upon as a venture manager – while relying upon competent
and trustworthy DEMO to manage market risk. 13 This contrasts with venture
capital funds which attach more importance to market risk than agency risk. They are
less DEMO with agency risk because they have learnt how to protect themselves
using stringent boilerplate contractual provisions which allows them to replace an
entrepreneur who DEMO not performing or is found to be incompetent. Thus, “compared
with DEMO capital investors, business angels place much more importance upon
screening entrepreneurs DEMO deals for market risk” (Fiet, 1995: 567).
5.3 Negotiation DEMO contracting
Having decided, in principle, to invest the business angel must negotiate terms
and conditions of the investment that are acceptable both to DEMO and also to the
entrepreneur. There are three main issues – valuation, structuring of the deal (share
price, type of shares, size DEMO shareholding, timing) and the terms and conditions of the
investment, DEMO the investor’s role. In agency theory terms deal structuring –
mechanisms for allocating the rewards to the investor and entrepreneur – are an
13 DEMO (2003: 357) makes a similar point. “.. Experienced business angels DEMO the study emphasize
that they are in vesting in the very early stage in the life cycle of entrepreneurial ventures.
Consequently, they must by-and-large depend on the information provided by the entrepreneur or
entrepreneurial team, and are therefore very much concerned with [their] perceived trustworthiness…
The investors in DEMO study perceive the creation of some kind of common platform involving shared
goals and values as an antecedent for developing trustworthy relationships between entrepreneurs DEMO
[themselves]. If this common platform is found to be lacking they reject the opportunity.”
25
attempt to align the behaviour of the entrepreneur with that of the DEMO, while the
terms and conditions attempt to control the behaviour of DEMO entrepreneur. These are
major lacunae in the informal venture capital market research.
In the study by Riding et al (1993) half of the DEMO opportunities that
reached this stage were not consummated. The most frequent reason for not making
an investment was associated with valuation, notably “inappropriate views by
entrepreneurs (in the opinion of the investors) regarding the value DEMO the firm as a
whole and, within the firm, the value of an idea compared to the overall value of a
business. Most DEMO note that potential entrepreneurs ov
ervalue the idea and
undervalue the potential contributions (both financial and non
- financial) that are
required to DEMO and develop a  business” (Haines et al, 2003: 24). Putting a value on
the ‘sweat equity’ of the entrepreneurs is also DEMO
There is no universally agreed method of valuing a small company. Market-
based valuations are inappropriate because small businesses are not continually
valued by DEMO market and appropriate comparator stocks are unlikely to be available.
Asset-based valuations are more commonly used although finance theory prefers
earnings or cash- flow DEMO valuations because they value the business in terms of the
future stream of earnings that shareholders might expect from the business. However,
these DEMO are complex. Valuation of new and early stage businesses adds
further complications because they may only have intangible assets (e.g. intellectual
property). It is therefore not surprising, especially since most angel investments are
concentrated at start-up and early stage, that methods of pricing and calculating the
size of shareholdings are remarkably imprecise and subjective (Mason and Harrison,
1996d), based on rough rules of thumb or gut feeling. As investors, May and
Simmons (2001: 129) note that “the truth about valuing a start- up is that it’s often a
guess.” Where an attempt DEMO made to price the investment on a more rigorous basis
then the earnings based approach is the most common method (Lengyel and
Gulliford, DEMO).
Angels draw up contracts as a matter of course to safeguard their investment,
although their degree of sophistication varies. Contracts specify the DEMO and
obligations of both parties and what will by done, by DEMO and over what time
26
frame. Their objective is to align the incentives of the entrepreneur and DEMO investor
by means of performance incentives and direct control measures. Kelly and Hay
(2003) note that certain issues are non
-negotiable: veto rights over
acquisitions/divestments, prior approval for strategic plans and budgets, restrictions
DEMO the ability of management to issue share options, non
-compete contracts DEMO
by entrepreneurs on the termination of their employment in the business, DEMO
restrictions on the ability to raise additional debt or equity finance. These issues give
investors a say in material decisions that could impact the DEMO of the business or the
level of equity holding. However, there DEMO also a number of contractual provisions to
which angels attach low importance, and which might be considered to be negotiable.
These include forced exit provisions, investor approval for senior personnel
hiring/firing decisions, the need DEMO investors to countersign bank cheques,
management equity ratchet provisions and the specification of a dispute resolution
mechanism. Less experienced investors place relatively greater DEMO on the need
to include a broad array of contractual safeguards to protect their interests. However,
experienced investors are more likely to include DEMO provisions that can impact
the level of their equity stake (share DEMO, ratchets) and the timing of exit (forced
exit provisions). DEMO other words, with experience business angels become more
focused on those DEMO that can impact their financial return.
Investors recognise that the investment agreement must be fair to both sides
(May and Simmons, 2001): DEMO that favour the investor will be detrimental to
the entrepreneur’s motivation. In Mason and Harrison’s (1996d) study, two-thirds of
investors and entrepreneurs considered that the investment agreement was equally
favourable to both sides, and half of the investors reported that this was their
objective. Indeed, a significant minority of investors believed that the agreement
actually favoured the entrepreneur. Thus, the available evidence suggests that in most
cases entrepreneurs are not exploited DEMO investors when raising finance.
The inclusion of contractual safeguards does not indicate whether investors
will be willing to invoke them to protect their interests.  Moreover, contracts are, of
necessity, incomplete by their very nature. There are three reasons for this: it is costly
to write complete contracts; it is impossible to foresee all contingencies; and on
account of DEMO information (van Osnabrugge, 2000). Thus, in practice
27
investors place a heavy reliance on their relationship with the entrepreneur to DEMO
with any problems that arise (van Osnabrugge, 2000; Kelly and DEMO, 2003). Indeed,
Landström et al (1998) argue that DEMO of the purposes of establishing a contractu
al
framework at the outset is to provide a basis for the development of a relationship
between DEMO parties to develop. In other words, the contract is less a DEMO
mechanism per se; rather, it is a means by which mutual behaviour expectations of all
parties in the transaction can be clarified.
Most DEMO investments involve input from professional advisers. For
example, lawyers would normally DEMO, and might draw up, the investment
agreement, but would not DEMO involved in the negotiations. Similarly, accountants may
be consulted for advice DEMO would rarely play a more prominent role. Thus,
transactions costs are low (Mason and Harrison, 1996d). In Lengyel and Gulliford’s
(1997) study the entrepreneur’s costs amounted to an average of 5.1% of the funds
raised (and 29% reported no costs) while for the investor DEMO average costs were 2.8%
of the amount invested (and 57% reported DEMO costs).
The time taken by business angels to make investments is much quicker than
that of venture capital funds (Freear et al, DEMO). Mason and Harrison (1996d) report
that in their study the entire investment process rarely extended over more than three
months, and often took less than a month. Most negotiations took less than a week DEMO
complete whereas the evaluation could take up to three months or more. Thus, in
nearly half of the investments less than a month elapsed between the entrepreneur’s
first meeting with the investor and the decision to DEMO; in 85% of cases the elapsed
time was under three months.
DEMO Post investment involvement
From an agency perspective, monitoring is the main DEMO in which principals
attempt to mitigate the risk of opportunistic behaviour on the part of the agent going
undetected. In line with this expectation, most business angels play an active role in
their investee businesses. There DEMO a spectrum of involvement: at one extreme are
passive investors who DEMO content to receive occasional information to monitor the
performance of their investment while at the other extreme are investors who use their
investment to DEMO themselves a job. However, most angels do not want day
-to-day
DEMO
involvement hence the typical involvement ranges from a day a week (or its
equivalent) to less than a day a month (Mason and DEMO, 1996d). Nevertheless,
Sætre (2003) emphasises that some angels DEMO so involved, and involved so early, that
they are indistinguishable from the entrepreneurs, and are seen by the entrepreneurs as
being part of the entrepreneurial team. In similar vein, Politis and Landström (2002)
DEMO angel investing as simply a continuation of an entrepreneurial career.
Madill et al (2005) identify a number of roles that business angels play DEMO their
investee businesses: advice about the management of the business, contacts, hands-on
assistance (e.g. legal advice, accountancy advice, provision of resources), providing
business and marketing intelligence, serving on the Board of Directors DEMO Advisory
Board, preparing firms to raise venture capital and providing credibility DEMO
validation. Sørheim (2005) emphasises the role of business angels in helping their
investee businesses to raise additional finance. The nature and level of DEMO is
influenced by geography. Landström (1992) notes that frequency of contact between
angels and their investee companies is inversely related to the geographical DEMO
that separates them. It will also be influenced by the performance of the business, with
angels more involved at particular stages of business development and in crisis
situations.
However, in contrast to agency theory the involvement of angels in their
investee businesses is not motivated by monitoring considerations. DEMO, as noted
earlier, angels derive psychic income from their involvement in their investee
businesses in the form of fun and satisf
action from DEMO involved with new and
growing businesses and their belief that their experience, know how and insights can
‘make a difference’. May and Simmons (DEMO: 156) quote one investor as follows:
“I’ve never had as much fun in my life. It’s a joy to see someone listen, take action
and win.” Second, angels see themselves as ‘offering help’ rather than ‘checking up’
on their investee businesses by acting as mentors, providing contacts, guidance and
hands-on assistance (Haines et al, 2003). Third, as Kelly and Hay (2003: 309)
comment, “from the DEMO, the relationship between the business angel and the
entrepreneur appears to DEMO more positive and trusting in character than the inherently
adversarial one implied by agency theorists.”
29
A majority of entrepreneurs and angels regard their relationship as productive
and DEMO – although entrepreneurs have a more favourable view of its
productiveness than angels (Freear et al, 1995; Mason and Harrison, 1996d). DEMO
study reported that half of the entrepreneurs who had raised finance from business
angels regarded their contributions as being helpful or very helpful (Mason and
Harrison, 1996d). Another study reported that entrepreneurs considered that the most
valuable contribution of their business angel has been as a sounding DEMO (Harrison
and Mason, 1992). There is a suggestion that entrepreneurs want their investors to be
more involved in certain areas, especially financial management (Ehrlich et al, 1994).
Criticisms by entrepreneurs who have DEMO finance from angels are mainly
concerned with those who lack knowledge of the product or market (Lengyel and
Gulliford, 1997). Finally, most business angels report that they have derived fun and
enjoyment from their DEMO, often more than expected, in cases where the
investment is still trading, but not when the business has failed. Psychic income
returns are therefore related to business performance rather than compensating for
financial loss (Mason and Harrison, 1996d). However, there has been no rigorous
attempt DEMO assess whether this involvement of business angels has a favourable impact
on the performance of their investee businesses. There is no evidence from research
DEMO venture capital funds that greater involvement is a necessary condition for adding
value nor whether involvement produces enhanced business performance (Sapienza
and Gupta, DEMO; Fried et al, 1998). This may be because the involvement of venture
capitalists is concentrated on their poorly performing investments, determining
whethe r and how they can be turned around, or even whether continued support is
desirable (Zider, 1998; Higashide and Birley, 2002). DEMO There are also formidable
methodological challenges. 15
5.5 Harvesting
Investing in unquoted companies is regarded as being high risk. Certainly, the
performance of European venture capital funds specialising in early stage investments
(in practice this means technology-focussed investments) have much lower rates of
14 In contrast, Sapienza DEMO al (1996) argue that venture capitalists adopt a  ‘home run’ DEMO of
focussing their attention on likely winners rather than those businesses in their portfolio which are
likely to yield little return.
15 Harrison and DEMO (2004) propose critical incident analysis as an alternative way in which to assess
the contribution of investors.
30
return than those which focus on later stage investments (EVCA, 2005)DEMO
Diversification is the main strategy for reducing risk. However, this is DEMO an option
for business angels. First, typically they have just a DEMO of investments in their
portfolios. Second, they often restrict their investments DEMO sectors which th
ey know
and understand, so their portfolios are DEMO Third, as the first external investor
in a business, and generally lacking the financial resources to make follow
-on
investments, they are vulnerable to being diluted in the event that further funding
rounds are required.
DEMO have been only two studies of the investment returns of business angels,
a small scale Finnish study (Lumme et al, 1998) and a larger UK study (Mason and
Harrison, 2002b). It is DEMO to note that these studies only measure multiples
achieved on the amounts invested. However, many angels also attempt to draw back
at least part of their investment in the form of a director’s fee or interest DEMO loans
provided, either immediately or at some stage in the future DEMO the business is
financially stronger. This could be quite a significant proportion of the investment in
smaller deals (Mason and Harrison, 1996d; Lengyel and Gulliford, 1997). The UK
study highlights the highly skewed distribution of returns, with 40% of investmen
ts
making a loss (34% DEMO total loss), and another 13% only achieving break-even or
generating bank account- level returns. However, there was a significant subset of
investments, DEMO 23% in total, which generated internal rates of return (IRRs) DEMO
excess of 50%.
The UK study went on to explore the types of investments that were likely to
be successful. It identified large investments, large deal sizes and deals involving
multiple investors as being more likely DEMO be high performing investments (Mason and
Harrison, 2002b). A separate analysis of the returns distribution of technology and
non-technology investments found no DEMO differences in the returns profile
(Mason and Harrison, 2004b). This may suggest that the risk of investing in
technology sectors has been DEMO Another possibility is that business angels
are better able to mitigate the risks involved in investing in technology businesses on
account of their specialist DEMO and entrepreneurial background.
31
The Finnish study, in contrast, sought to identify differences between the
DEMO, and least, successful investors.  The most successful investors were more DEMO
to be motivated by the fun and interest of making such investments, have a large deal
flow and have a lower estimation of the value of their hands-on involvement. The
least successful investors were more likely DEMO be motivated by altruism, have a low
deal flow and make DEMO investments and rely to a greater extent on friends for deal
flow. They were also more likely to make investments in friends’ businesses and DEMO
a different pattern of hands-on involvement, over-emphasising contributions that other
research DEMO suggested are least important in adding value (Lumme et al, 1998).
Comparison with the returns achieved by ins titutional venture capital investors
DEMO problematic because the reporting unit is the fund, whereas angels invest DEMO a deal
-
by-deal basis. However, Murray (1999) has reported DEMO specific returns for one UK
venture capital fund. Comparing the returns achieved by business angels with this
information reveals a much higher loss rate DEMO the venture capital fund (64%) and a
lower proportion of investments that generated a moderate return, but very similar
proportion of high return investments (IRR in excess of 50%). The interpretation of
these differences is that because the venture capital fund is seeking to maximize the
DEMO of the fund it can be more ruthless with those investments that are
performing moderately, in order to focus the time of its executives on supporting the
best performing investments whereas business angels invest on a DEMO
-by-deal basis
(Mason and Harrison, 2002b).
Business angels are thought to be relatively patient investors, willing to hold
their investments for up to seven years or more (Wetzel, 1981; Mason and Harrison,
1994). In reality, angels hold their investments for a much shorter time. The median
time to exit in the UK is four years DEMO high performing investments and six years for
moderately performing investments, while DEMO appear, on average, after two years
(Mason and Harrison, 2002b). In Finland investments that had a positive outcome
were five years DEMO at harvest whereas those which failed had an average holding time
of 2.8 years. In both studies a trade sale (i.e. sale of the company to another company)
was the most common exit route for DEMO investments, with an IPO only
accounting for a small minority of DEMO Trade sales, along with sale to existing
32
shareholders were the most common exit routes for investments with little or DEMO
value.
6. THE EVOLUTION OF THE ANGEL MARKET
Recent research in the USA has revealed that the angel market place is
evolving from a DEMO invisible, atomistic market dominated by individual and small
ad hoc groups DEMO investors who strive to keep a low profile and rely on word-of-
mouth for their investment opportunities, to a more organised market place in which
angel syndicates (sometimes termed ‘structured angel groups’) are becoming
increasingly DEMO As a result, the angel market place is in the process DEMO being
transformed from a ‘hobby’ activity to one that is now increasingly professional in its
operation, with published routines for accessing deals, screening DEMO, undertaking
due diligence, negotiating and inve sting (May, 2002). Sohl et al  (2000) claim that
“angel alliances are the fastest growing segment of the early stage equity market.”
However, solo investors still dominate the market (Lengyel and Gulliford, 1997;
Investor Pulse, 2003; Infometrics, 2004)
The Band of Angels, which was founded in Silicon Valley in 1995, is
generally regarded as the first organised syndicate to be formed. Others, such as Tech
Coast Angels (1997), DEMO Angels (1997), Common Angels (1997) and The Dinner
Club (1999), soon followed. 16 There are currently estimated to be around DEMO angel
syndicates located throughout the USA and growing evidence of specialisation by
industry sector (e.g. health care angel syndicates) and type of investor (e.g. women-
only angel syndicates). A national body to bring angel DEMO together for the
purposes of transferring best practice, lobbying and data DEMO was created in
2003 (Angel Capital Association, 2005). The same trend is also clearly evident in the
UK although at an earlier DEMO, and it has not attracted the same degree of attention
from DEMO or commentators. 17
16 Several of these angel groups have been profiled in the scholarly literature (May and Simmons,
2001; May, 2002; Cerullo and Sommer, 2002; Payne and Mccarty, 2002; May and O’Halloran, 2003).
17 For example, in Scotland there are estimated DEMO be, depending on definition, between 6 and 12 angel
groups which invested around £40m in more than 50 companies. The leading syndicates – DEMO example,
Archangels and Braveheart - have high visibility, including their DEMO web sites which list their
investments, and their investments are reported DEMO the media. Archangels has been operating for about
ten years. Its web site lists 20 investments in which they have invested over £30m. In DEMO it invested
£1.5m in six new investments and £4.3m in eight follow-on investments. Some of these investments
33
Angel syndicates emerged because individual angels found advantages of working
together, notably in terms of better deal flow, superior evaluation and due diligence of
investment opportunities, and the ability to make more and bigger investments, DEMO
well as social attractions. They operate by aggregating the investment capacity of
individual high net worth individuals (HNWIs). Some groups are member- managed
while others are manager- led (Preston, 2004). Syndicates take various DEMO but the
most common generic type of model (at least in DEMO USA) is as follows:
•
•
•
•
•
•
DEMO
•
Limited and selective membership of angels (typically 20-75 members) who
typically play an active role in the investment process
Meet regularly (e.g. for dinner) to hear ‘pitches’ by entrepreneurs seeking
finance
A syndicate manager supports members by organising meetings,
communications and manages logistics.
The manager DEMO a core group of members will screen the deal flow and select
the companies which are invited to pitch
Q&A session follows each DEMO
Angels vote whether to pursue their interest in the business
If the vote is in favour a sub-group will be appointed to undertake the DEMO
diligence and report back to th
e full membership
If the recommendation is positive, individual members make their own
decisions whether or not to invest (there is likely to be a minimum investment
threshold for each deal) and the syndicate will combine all of the member
dollars into a single investment. Alternatively, if the syndicate operates a
pooled fund a majority vote will decide whether or not to invest.
•
An expectation DEMO each member of the syndicate will make a certain number
of investments per year.
Some of the larger and longe r established US syndicates DEMO also established sidecar
funds – that is, committed sources of capital DEMO invest alongside the angel group.
were made as part of syndicated deals involving other angel syndic ates and venture capital funds.
Braveheart has been DEMO since 1997. It has 50 members. It has made 22 investments in 17
companie. To put the scale of their investment in some kind DEMO perspective, both Archangels and
Braveheart now make more early stage investments DEMO Scotland than any single venture capital fund.
Moreover, both syndicates participate DEMO Scottish Enterprise’s Co -investment Scheme, underlining their
‘institutional’ status.  Curiously, DEMO England angel syndicates adopt a much lower profile.
34
The investors in such funds are normally the syndicate members but may DEMO include
other HNWIs or institutions. These funds give the syndicate additional capital to
invest in deals to avoid dilution, enables syndicate members to achieve greater
diversification by exposing them to more investments than they can make DEMO
through the syndicate, and is a means of attracting ‘right- minded’ DEMO who want
to participate in seed and early stage deals but cannot be active members of a
syndicate (e.g. because of lack of time).
The emergence of angel syndicates is of enormous significance for the
DEMO and maintenance of an entrepreneurial economy. First, they reduce
sources of DEMO in the angel market. The angel market has traditionally been
characterised by inefficiency on account of the fragmented and invisible nature of
angels. There DEMO no mechanism for angels to receive a steady flow of investment
opportunities. They found their deals by chance. The entrepreneur’s search for angel
finance DEMO equally a hit-or- miss affair. Investors and entrepreneurs both incurred
high search costs (Wetzel, 1987; Mason and Harrison, 1994). This encouraged DEMO
to drop out of the market as either suppliers or seekers of finance. Angel syndicates,
in contrast, are generally visible and are therefore easier for entrepreneurs to
approach.
A further source of inefficien
cy was DEMO each investment made by an investor has
typically been a one-off that was screened, evaluated and negotiated separately.
However, because of the volume DEMO investments that angel syndicates make they have
been able to develop efficient routines for handling investment enquiries, screening
opportunities and making investment agreements.
Second, they have stimulated the supply-side of the market. Syndicates offer
considerable attractions for HNWIs who want to invest in emerging companies,
particularly those DEMO lack the time, referral sources, investment skills or the ability
to add value. However, many individuals who have the networks and skills to be able
to invest on their own are also attracted by the DEMO in risk that arises from
investing as part of a syndicate, DEMO the ability to spread their investments more
widely and thereby achieve greater diversification, and access to group skills and
knowledge to evaluate investment opportunities and provide more effective post-
35
investment support. Other attractions of syndicates are that they enable individual
angels DEMO invest in particular opportunities that they could never have invested in as
individuals, offer the opportunity to learn from more experienced investors and
provide opportunities for camaraderie and schmoozing with like- minded individuals.
Syndicates will also DEMO attractive to individuals who want to be full- time angels. Thus,
angel syndicates are able to attract and mobilise funds that might otherwise DEMO been
invested elsewhere (e.g. property, stock market, collecting), thereby DEMO the
supply of early stage venture capital, and to invest it DEMO efficiently and effectively.
Third, they are helping to fill the ‘new’ DEMO gap. Venture capital funds have
consistently raised their minimum size of investment and are increasingly abandoning
the early stage market (after briefly returning during the “dot-com bubble” of the late
1990s). Most funds have a DEMO investment size of at least £500,000 and the
average early stage investment by UK venture capital funds in recent years has been
around DEMO (BVCA, 2004). This has resulted in the emergence of a new equity gap –
roughly the £250,000 to £2m+ range which DEMO amounts that are too large for
typical ‘3F’ money (founder, family, friends) but too small for most venture capital
funds. Angel syndicates DEMO now increasingly the only source for this amount of
venture capital in this range. The same trends - increasing deal sizes by venture
capital DEMO and emergence of angel syndicates to fill the gap - are also evident in the
USA where the ‘gap’ is estimated to be in DEMO $500,000 to $5m range (Sohl, 1999;
2003).
Fourth, they have the ability to provide follow-on funding. One of the potential
problems of raising money from individual business angels is that they often DEMO the
financial capacity to provide follow-on funding. The consequence has been that the
entrepreneur is often forced to embark on a further search for DEMO Moreover, in
the event that the need for additio nal finance DEMO urgent then both the entrepreneur and
the angel will find themselves in a weak negotiating position with potential new
investors, resulting in a dilution in their investments and the imposition of harsh terms
and conditions. With DEMO withdrawal of many venture capital funds from the small end
of the market individual angels and their investee businesses have increasingly been
faced with DEMO problem of the absence of follow
-on investors. However, because angel
DEMO have got greater finan
cial firepower than individual angels or ad hoc angel
36
groups they are able to provide follow-on financing, making it more efficient for the
entrepreneur who avoids the need to start the search for DEMO anew each time a new
round of funding is required.
Fifth, DEMO ability to add value to their investments is much greater. The range of
business expertise that is found amongst angel syndicate members means that DEMO most
circumstances they are able to contribute much greater value-added to investee
businesses than an individual business angel, or even most early stage venture capital
funds. May and Simmons (2001: 156), leading angel syndicate DEMO in the
USA, comment that “when angels band together … their DEMO of advice and
strategic servic es frequently makes the difference between life and death for a start-
up.”
Finally, angel syndicates have greater credibility with venture capitalists. Venture
capital funds often have a negative view of DEMO angels, seeing them as amateurs
whose involvement in the first funding DEMO of an investment could complicate
subsequent funding rounds because of their tendency to over-price investments, use
complicated types of investment instruments and make over-elaborate investment
agreements (Harrison and Mason, 2000). Venture capitalists may therefore DEMO
deals in which angels are involved because they perceive them to be too complicated
to do. However, because of the professionalism and quality of the membership of
angel syndicates venture capital fund s hold them in DEMO higher esteem. Accordingly,
the increasing prominence of angel syndicates results in much greater
complimentarity between the angel market and venture capital funds, to the benefit of
fast-growing companies that raised their initial funding from angel DEMO but now
need access to the amounts of finance that venture capital funds can provide.
7. CONCLUSION
This chapter has sought to highlight the DEMO of the informal venture
capital market as a source of funding for entrepreneurial businesses. However, its
significance is frequently overlooked in both the academic and practitioner literature
and by policy- makers where the emphasis continues to DEMO placed on institutional
venture capital, despite its almost non
-existent role DEMO funding new and recently
started businesses. There are three inter-related reasons why the informal venture
37
capital market is often overlooked. First, the market is invisible and fragmented.
There are no directories of angel investors and their investments are not DEMO in
any systematic way. Second, because of the invisibility of business DEMO, and their
efforts to maintain their secrecy, it is extremely difficult to undertake research on the
size and operation of the market. Research DEMO typically based on small-scale snapshot
samples of convenience which are unsuited to statistical analysis. Third, the research
base is limited and largely atheoretical. Indeed, the initial studies in the 1980s and
early 1990s were descriptive, DEMO at profiling angel characteristics, motivations and
investment activity. However, recent research has become more analytical, focusing
on actual behaviour rather than preferences, DEMO aspects of the investment process
rather than on the actors, and DEMO become more anchored in theory, with several
studies using agency theory DEMO a framework for analysis. Nevertheless, the
opportunities for further research are DEMO
First, there is an urgent need to get way from snapshot DEMO of the angel
market and to develop longitudinal research on the angel market. This involves two
dimensions (Sohl, 2003). The first has DEMO business angel as the unit of analysis and
seeks to develop information on investor and investment trends. The challenge, as
always, is in DEMO methodology. One approach is simply to repeat snapshot surveys at
regular intervals. A more manageable, if partial, approach is to identify and survey
DEMO syndicates on a regular basis, while a third approach would be DEMO develop an
angel panel which is surveyed on a regular basis. The second approach takes the deal
as the unit of analysis and tracks DEMO from the point of referral to the angel through to
rejection or investment and on to subsequent funding round and exit. Much of the
DEMO in venture capital is ‘timel
ess’ in the sense that it does not reflect the
economic conditions of the time (Mason and Harrison, DEMO). Thus, an important
dimension of such longitudinal studies involves relating DEMO trends to the
wider economic conditions of the time. For example, DEMO angels responded to the
post-2000 investment downturn remains largely unexplored and unanswered (but see
Mason, 2006, for a brief discussion).
Second, DEMO emergence of angel syndicates raises a series of questions. Are
they attracting investors who are new to the market, and thus new money that would
otherwise have been invested elsewhere, or are they attracting solo angels? If they are
38
attracting solo angels, will this deplete the population of small-scale investors and
thereby re-open the sub £250,000/$500,000 equity gap? As angel syndicates become
more organised and develop fixed costs will this lead to DEMO upward drift in their
investment activity, thereby re-opening the equity gap?DEMO
Third, taking a ‘food chain’ perspective, are the complementarities between
angels and venture capital funds diminishing as venture capital funds continue to shift
DEMO investment focus to larger and later stage deals. Can angel syndicates fill this gap
– are their financial resources big enough to by
-pass DEMO capital funds and take
their investee businesses to a harvest event themselves, or by co- investing with other
angel syndicates? Indeed, are we seeing the beginning of a bifurcation of the venture
capital market between DEMO that because of the scale of their R&D or capital
investment require multi
- million dollar investments over several rounds (e.g. life
sciences, telecoms infrastructure), and therefore need funding from venture capital
funds, DEMO businesses (e.g. software) whose funding requirements are more modest, in
DEMO $10m-$20m range, and so could be funded largely or entirely by DEMO syndicates?
Fourth, the chapter has noted that many governments now DEMO the
economic significance of business angels and have introduced various measures to
support the informal venture capital market. However, Aernoudt (1999) argues that
the case for government intervention is not proven. Thus, there is scope for further
applied research which explores whether the case for intervention is DEMO, and if
the case is supported what is the most appropriate DEMO(s) of intervention. Can the
studies of that various national venture DEMO associations undertake of the economic
impact of venture capital be replicated for informal venture capital? Research from
various countries is consistent in finding that angels are opportunity constrained.
Understanding the reasons would seem to be the DEMO priority for policy
- makers. How
much stems from the limitations of the investors themselves (e.g. restricted
investment criteria, competence limitations), how DEMO is due to the inefficiencies in
the operation of the market and how much is a result of the lack of investment
readiness amongst DEMO seeking finance? Can ‘second generation’ business
angel networks – which focus DEMO raising the competence of the participants in the
market – make a difference?
39
There are also a host of issues where information is either lacking DEMO requires
corroboration. Examples of the former include identifying the characteristics of
altruistic investors (Sullivan, 1994), women business angels (Brush et al, DEMO;
Harrison and Mason, 2005) and successful investors. The concept of an ‘angel career’
(Politis and Landström, 2002) offers a potentially useful way in which to explore
angel learning. The negotiation, valuation and contracting stages remain poorly
understood. For example, exploring the entrepreneur’s perspective would be a useful
way in which to extend Kelly and Hay’s (2003) DEMO study of business angel
contracts. Many aspects of the post- investment relationship also require to be
examined. Understanding the relational component is one issue. DEMO do the parties
cope with adversity? When do business angels find DEMO necessary to assert their rights
and how do they do so? (Kelly and Hay, 2003). Quantifying the impact of the value-
added contribution of angels on business performance, and the contributions of
different types of business angels, is another issue that requires attention. Mason and
Harrison’s (2002a) study of investment retu
rns requires corroboration. Meanwhile,
adopting DEMO methodological approaches to explore topics that are better understood
(e.g. investment DEMO making) might provide new insights or challenge existing
understanding. Finally, future research needs to h
ave stronger theoretical foundations.
Agency theory – the DEMO commonly used theoretical framework - has been shown to
have its limitations in a business angel context (Landström, 1992; Kelly and Hay
2003), thus, there is a need for alternative theoretical perspectives.
40
Acknowledgements . I am grateful to Simon Parker (University of Durham) DEMO inviting me to write this
chapter and for his comments and those of an anonymous reviewer on an earlier draft.
REFERENCES
ACOST, 1990 The Enterprise Challenge: Overcoming Barriers to Growth in Small
Firms. HMSO, London.
DEMO, Z. J. and Prowse, S., 2001, Angel Investors and the Angel Capital Network. In M
Bridging the Entrepreneurial Financing Gap, edited by J. Whincop, pp 38-53.
Ashgate, Aldershot.
Aernoudt, R., 1999, Business Angels: Should They Fly On Their Own Wings?
Venture Capital: DEMO International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 1: 187-
195.
Atkin, R. DEMO Esiri, M., 1993, Informal Investment – Investor And Investee
Relationships. DEMO to the 16th National Small Firms Policy and Research
Conference, Nottingham, 17-19 November.
Benjamin, G. A. and Margulis, J. B., 2000, DEMO Financing: How to Find and In vest
in Private Equity. Wiley, New York.
Blair, A., 1996, Creating An Informal Investor Syndicate: DEMO Experiences Of A
Seasoned Informal Investor. In Informal Venture Capital: evaluating DEMO impact
of business introduction services, edited by R. T. Harrison and DEMO M. Mason, pp
156-196. Prentice Hall, Hemel Hempstead.
Blatt, R DEMO Riding, A., 1996, Where Angels Fear To Tread? Some Lessons From The
Canada Opportunities Investment Network. In Informal Venture Capital:
evaluating DEMO impact of business introduction services, edited by R. T. Harrison
and DEMO M. Mason, pp 75-88. Prentice Hall, Hemel Hempstead.
Boyns, N., Cox, M., Spires, R. and Hughes, A., 2003, Research DEMO the Enterprise
Investment Scheme and Venture Capital Trusts. PACEC, Cambridge.
Brettel, M., 2003, Business Angels In Germany: A Research Note. Venture Capital:
An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 5: 251-268.
Brush, C. G., Carter, N. M., Greene, P. G., Mart, M DEMO and Gatewood, P., 2002, The
Role Of Social Capital And DEMO In Linking Financial Suppliers And
Entrepreneurial Firms: A Framework For Future DEMO Venture Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 4: 305-323.
DEMO, 2004, Report on Investment Activity. British Venture Capital Association,
London.
41
Bygrave, W. D. and Reynolds, P. D., 2004, Who Finances DEMO In The USA? A
Comprehensive Survey Of Informal Investors, 1999-2003. Paper to the Babson-
Kaufman Entrepreneurship Research Conference, University of Strathclyde,
Glasgow, 3-5 June.
Bygrave, W. D., Hay, M., Ng, E. DEMO Reynolds, P., 2003, A Study Of Informal
Investing In 29 DEMO ns Composing The Global Enterprise Monitor. Venture
Capital: An International Journal DEMO Entrepreneurial Finance, 5:101-116.
Cerullo, B. and Sommer, B., 2002, Helping Healthcare Entrepreneurs: A Case Study
Of Angel Healthcare Investors, LLC. Venture Capital: An International Journal
of Entrepreneurial Finance, 4: 325-330.
Chang, C. K. N., Shipp, S. S. and Wang, A. J., 2002, The Advanced Technology
Program: A Public-Private Partnership For Early Stage DEMO
Development. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance, 4: DEMO
Clarke, J., 1996, Business Introduction Services. In The United Kingdom DEMO The
Financial Services Act 1986. In  Informal Venture Capital: evaluating the
impact of business introduction services, edited by R. T. Harrison and C. M.
Mason, pp 218-226. Prentice Hall, Hemel Hempstead.
Coveney, P. and Moore, K., 1998, Business Angels: Securing Start-Up Finance.
Wiley, Chichester.
Cressy, R. and Olofsson, C., 1997, The Financial Conditions For DEMO SMEs:
Survey And Research Agenda. Small Business Economics, 9:179-194.
DEMO, L., Haines, G. and Riding, A., 1996, A Personality Profile Of Canadian
Informal Investors. Journal of Small Business Management, 24 (DEMO): 44-55.
Ehrlich, S. B., De Noble, A. .F, Moore, T. and Weaver, R. R., 1994, After The Cash
Arrives: A Comparative Study Of Venture Capital And Private Investor
Involvement In Entrepreneurial DEMO Journal of Business Venturing, 9: 67-82
EVCA, 2005, EVCA Final Performance Figures For 2004. Press release available at
www.evca.com
Farrell, A.E., DEMO, Informal Venture Capital Investment in Atlantic Canada: A
Representative View of Angels? St Mary's University, Halifax, Canada.
Feeney, L., Johnstone, H. and Riding, A. L., 1998, A Profile Of Informal DEMO In
Canada: A Comparison Of Canadian And Maritime Investors. Paper to DEMO
CCSBE 15th annual conference, Halifax.
Feeney, L., Haines, G. H. and Riding A. L., 1999, Private Investors’ Investment
Criteria: Insights From Qualitative Data. Venture Capital: An International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 1: 121-145.
42
Freear, J. and Wetzel, W.E., 1990, Who Bankrolls High- Tech DEMO? Journal
of Business Venturing, 5: 77-89.
Freear, J., Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, W. E. jr., 1992, The Investment Attitudes, Behavior
And Characteristics Of High Net Worth Individuals. In Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research 1992, edited by N. C. Churchill, S. Birley, W. D.
Bygrave, D. F. Muzyka, C. Wahlbin and W. E. Wetzel, jr.,  pp.374-387. Babson
College, Babson Park: MA.
Freear, J., Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, W. E. jr., 1994a, Angels And Non-Angels: Are
There Differences? Journal of Business Venturing, 9: 109-123.
Freear, J.,  Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, W. E. jr., 1994b, The Private Investor Market For
Venture Capital. The Financier, 1 (2): 7-15.
Freear, J.,  Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, W. E. jr., 1995, Angels: Personal Investors In The
Venture Capital Market. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 7: 85-94.
Fiet, J. O., 1995, Risk Avoidance Strategies In Venture Capital Markets. Journal of
Management Studies, 32: 551-574.
Fried V. H. and Hisrich R. D., 1994, Toward A Model Of Venture Capital Investment
Decision Making. Financial Management 23 (3): 28-37.
Fried, V. H., Bruton, G. D. and Hisrich, R DEMO, 1998, Strategy And The Board Of
Directors In Venture Capital- Backed Firms. Journal of Business Venturing, 13:
493-503.
Gaston, R. J., 1989a, The Scale Of Informal Capital Markets. Small Business
Economics, 1: 223-230.
Gaston R. J. 1989b, Finding venture capital for your firm: DEMO complete guide. John
Wiley & Sons, New York.
Gaston, R. J., 1990, Financing Entrepreneurs: The Anatomy Of A Hidden Market. In
Financing Economic Development, edited by R. D. Bingham, E .W. Hill and DEMO
B. White, pp 266-284. Sage, Newbury Park.
Haines, G. H., jr., Madill, J. J. and Riding, A. L., 2003, Informal Investment In
Canada: Financing Small Business Growth. Journal of Small Business and
Entrepreneurship, 16 (3/4): 13-40.
Haar, N. E., Starr, J. and MacMillan, I C., 1988, Informal Risk Capital Investors:
Investment Patterns On The East Coast Of The USA. Journal of Business
DEMO, 3: 11-29
Harrison, R.T. and Mason, C.M., 1992a, International Perspectives On The Supply Of
Informal Venture Capital. Journal of Business Venturing, 7: 459-475.
43
Harrison, R.T and Mason, C.M., 1992b, The Roles Of Investors DEMO Entrepreneurial
Companies: A Comparison Of Informal Investors Venture Capitalists. In
Frontiers DEMO Entrepreneurship Research 1992, edited by N.C. Churchill, S.
Birley, W.D. DEMO, D.F. Muzyka, C. Wahlbin and W.E. Wetzel jr., pp. 388-
DEMO Babson College, Babson Park, MA.
Harrison, R. T. and Mason, C. M., 1996, Developing The Informal Venture Capital
Market: A Review Of The Department Of Trade And Industry’s Informal
Investment Demonstration Projects. Regional DEMO, 30: 765-771.
Harrison, R. T. and Mason, C. M., DEMO, Venture Capital Market Complementarities:
The Links Between Business Angels And DEMO Capital Funds In The UK.
Venture Capital: An International Journal of DEMO Finance, 2: 223-
242.
Harrison, R. T. and Mason, C. M., 2004, A Critical Incident Analysis Technique
Approach To Entrepreneurial Research: Developing A Methodology To Analyse
The Value-Added Contribution Of Informal Investors. Paper DEMO the Babson-
Kauffman Entrepreneurship Research Conference, University of Strathclyde,
Glasgow, 3-5 June.
Harrison, R. T. and Mason, C. M., 2005, DEMO Gender Matter? Women Business
Angels And The Supply Of Entrepreneurial Finance DEMO The United Kingdom.
Hunter Centre for Entrepreneurship, University of Strathclyde and DEMO for
Entrepreneurship Research, Edinburgh University Management School,
Glasgow and Edinburgh.
DEMO, H. and Birley, S., 2002, The Consequences Of Conflict Be tween The
Venture Capitalist And The Entrepreneurial Team In The United Kingdom DEMO
The Perspective Of The Venture Capitalist. Journal of Business Venturing, 17:DEMO
59-81.
Hindle, K. and Rushworth, S., 2001, The demography of investor heaven:
international research on the attitudes, behaviour and characteristics of business
angels. In Bridging the Entrepreneurial Finance Gap, edited by M.J. Whincop,
pp 10-37. Ashgate, Aldershot.
Hindle, K. and Wenban, R., DEMO, Australia’s Informal Venture Capitalists: An
Exploratory Profile. Venture Capital: An DEMO Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance, 1: 169-186.
Hindle, K. and Lee, L., 2002, An Exploratory Investigation Of Informal Capitalists In
Singapore. Venture DEMO: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance, 4: 169-181.
HM Treasury, 2004a, Informal Capital Raising and High Net Worth and
Sophisticated Investors: DEMO consultation document on proposed changes to the
Financial Promotion Order. HM Treasury, London.
44
HM Treasury, 2004b, Informal Capital Raising and High Net Worth and
DEMO Investor. Changes to the Financial Promotion Order: Government
Response. HM Treasury, London.
Industry Canada, 2001, The Winning Formula At Work: Investment Facilitation
Techniques. Industry Canada, Ottawa. Cat No. C2-568/2001E
Infometrics Ltd., 2004, New Zealand’s Angel Capital Market: The Supply Side.
Ministry of Economic Development, Wellington.
Investor Pulse, 2003, UK Angel Attitude Survey. London, C2Ventures DEMO,
www.c2ventures.com
Jensen, M., 2002, Angel Investors: Opportunity Amongst Chaos. Venture Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 4: 295-304.
Jensen, M. C. and Meckling, W. H., 1976, Theory Of The DEMO: Managerial Behavior,
Agenc y Costs, And Ownership Structure. Journal of Financial Economics, 3:
305-360.
Johnstone, H., 2001, Equity Gaps DEMO Depleted Communities: An Entrepreneurial
Response. In New Technology-Based Firms in the DEMO Millennium, edited by
W. During, R. Oakey and S. Kauser, DEMO 84-94. Pergammon, Oxford.
Kelly, P. and Hay, M., 1996, DEMO Investors And Early Stage Finance. Journal of
Entrepreneurial and Small Business Finance, 5: 159-174.
Kelly, P. and Hay, M., 2000, ‘Deal-Makers’: Reputation Attracts Quality. Venture
Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, DEMO: 183-202.
Kelly, P. and Hay, M., 2003, Business Angel DEMO: The Influence Of Context.
Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 5: 287-
312.
Landström, H., 1992, The Relationship Between Private Investors And Small Firms:
An Agency Theory Approach, Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 4:
199-223.
Landström, H., 1993, Informal Risk DEMO In Sweden And Some International
Comparisons, Journal of Business Venturing, 8: 525-540.
Landström, H., 1998,  Informal Investors As Entrepreneurs. Technovation, DEMO: 321-
33.
Lange, J., Leleux, B. and Surlemont, B., 2002, Angel Networks For The 21 st Century:
An Examination Of Practices Of Leading Networks In Europe And The USA. In
The Growth DEMO Venture Capital: A Cross-Cultural Comparison, edited by D.
Cetindamar. Quorum Books, Westport: CT.
45
Lazzeretti, L., De Propris, L. and Storai, D, 2004, DEMO and business angels:
two models of informal capital provision. International Journal of Urban and
Regional Research, 28: 839-854.
Lengyel, Z. and Gulliford, J., 1997, The Informal Venture Capital Experience. Local
Investment Networking Company, London.
Lindsay, N. J., 2004, Do Business Angels Have Entrepreneurial DEMO? Venture
Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 6: 197-210.
Lindström, G. and Olofsson, C., 2001, Early Stage Financing Of DEMO: An Analysis
Of Contributions From Support Actors. Venture Capital: An International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 3: 151-168.
Lipper, G. and Sommer, DEMO, 2002, Encouraging Angel Capital: What The US States
Are Doing. DEMO Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance, 4: 357-361.
Lumme, A., Mason, C. and Suomi, M., 1998, Informal Venture Capital: Investors,
Investments and Policy Issues in Finland. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Dordrecht, Netherlands.
Madill, J. J., Haines, G. H. jr. and DEMO, A. L. 2005, The Role Of Angels In
Technology SMEs: DEMO Link To Venture Capital. Venture Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial DEMO, 7: 107-129.
Mason, C.M., 2006, The Informal Venture Capital DEMO In The United Kingdom:
Adding The Time Dimension. In Research on Entrepreneurship and
Management. Volume 5: Venture Capital and Entrepreneurship, edited by DEMO
Butler. Information Age Publishing, Greenwich: CT, forthcoming.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T., 1993, Strategies For Expanding The Informal
Venture Capital Market. International Small Business Journal, 11 (4): 23-38.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T., 1994, The Informal Venture Capital Market In The
UK. In Financing Small Firms, edited by A. Hughes and D.J. Storey, pp 64-111.
Routledge, London.
Mason, C.M. and Harrison, R. T., 1995, Closing The Regional Equity Gap: The Role
DEMO Informal Venture Capital. Small Business Economics, 7: 153-172
Mason, C. DEMO and Harrison, R. T., 1996a, Informal investment business introduction
services: some operational considerations. In Informal Venture Capital:
evaluating the impact of DEMO introduction services, edited by R. T. Harrison
and C. M. Mason, pp 27-58. Prentice Hall, Hemel Hempstead.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T., 1996b, LINC: A Decentralised Approach To The
Promotion Of Informal Venture Capital. In Informal Venture Capital:
evaluating the impact of DEMO introduction services, edited by R. T. Harrison
and C. M. Mason, pp 119-141. Prentice Hall, Hemel Hempstead.
46
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T., 1996c, Why Business DEMO Say No: A Case
Study Of Opportunities Rejected By An Informal DEMO Syndicate.
International Small Business Journal, 14 (2): 35-51.
Mason, DEMO M. and Harrison, R. T., 1996d, Informal Venture Capital: A  Study Of The
Investment Process And Post-Investment Experience. Entrepreneurship and
Regional Development, 8: 105-126.
Mason, C.M. and Harrison, R.T., 1997, Business DEMO Networks And The
Development Of The Informal Venture Capital Market In The UK: Is There Still
A Role For The Public Sector? Small DEMO Economics, 9: 111-123.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. , 1999, Public Policy And The Development Of
The Informal Venture Capital Market: UK Experience And Lessons For Europe.
In Industrial Policy in Europe, edited by K. Cowling, pp 199-223. Routledge,
London.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T., 2000a, Informal Venture Capital And The
Financing Of Emergent Growth Businesses. In The Blackwell Handbook of
Entrepreneurship, edited by D. Sexton and H. Landström, pp 221-239.
Blackwell, Oxford.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T., 2000b, The Size Of The Informal Venture Capital
Market In The United Kingdom. Small Business Economics, 15: 137-148.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T., 2000c, Influences On The Supply Of Informal
Venture Capital In The UK: An Exploratory Study Of Investor Attitudes.
International Small Business Journal, 18 (4): DEMO
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T., 2001, ‘Investment Readiness’: A Critique Of
Government Proposals To Increase The Demand For Venture Capital. Regional
Studies, 34: 663-668.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. DEMO, 2002a, Barriers To Investment In The Informal
Venture Capital Sector. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 14: 271-
287.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T., 2002b, Is it worth it? The rates of DEMO from
informal venture capital investments. Journal of Business Venturing, 17: 211-
236.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T., 2003, ‘Auditioning DEMO Money’: What Do
Technology Investors Look For At The Initial Screening DEMO? Journal of
Private Equity, 6 (2): 29-42.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T., 2004a, Improving Access To Early Stage Venture
Capital In Regional Economies: A New Approach To Investment Readiness.
Local Economy, 19: 159-173.
47
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T., 2004b, Does Investing DEMO Technology-Based Firms
Involve Higher Risk? An Exploratory Study Of The Performance DEMO Technology
And Non-Technology Investments By Business Angels. Venture Capital: An
International DEMO of Entrepreneurial Finance, 6: 313-332.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T., 2004, New Issues In Venture Capital: An
Introduction To The Special Issue. Venture Capital: An International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance, DEMO: 95-103.
Mason, C. and Rogers, A., 1996, Understanding the DEMO Angel’s Investment
Decision. Venture Finance Working Paper No. 14, University of DEMO
and University of Ulster, Southampton.
Mason, C. and Rogers, A. DEMO, The Business Angel’s Investment Decision: An
Exploratory Analysis. In Entrepreneurship in the 1990s, edited by D. Deakins,
P. Jennings and C. Mason. pp 29-46. Paul Chapman Publishing, London.
Mason, C. and Stark, M., 2004, What Do Investors Look For In A Business Plan? A
Comparison Of The Investment Criteria Of Bankers, Venture Capitalists And
Venture Capitalists. International Small Business Journal, 22: 227-248.
Mason, C.,  Cooper, DEMO and Harrison, R., 2002, Venture Capital And High Technology
Clusters: The Case Of Ottawa. In New Technology-Based Firms in the New
Millennium, Volume II, edited by R. Oakey, W. During and S. Kauser, pp 261-
278. Pergammon, Oxford.
May, J., 2002, Struc tured DEMO Groups In The USA: The Dinner Club Experience.
Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 4: 337-
342.
May, J. and O’Halloran, E. F., 2003, Cutting Edge Practices in American Angel
Investing. The Darden School, Batten Institute, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA.
May, J. and Simmons, C., 2001, Every Business Needs An DEMO: Getting The Money
You Need To Make Your Business Grow. Crown DEMO, New York.
Murray, G., 1999, Seed Capital Funds And The Effect Of Scale Economies. Venture
Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 1: 351-384.
Paul, S., Whittam, G. and Johnston, J. DEMO, 2003, The Operation Of The Informal
Venture Capital Market In Scotland. Venture Capital: An International Journal
of Entrepreneurial Finance, 5: 313-335.
Payne, W. H. and Mccarty, M. J., 2002, The Anatomy Of DEMO Angel Investing
Network: Tech Coast Angels. Venture Capital: An International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance, 4: 31-336.
48
Pereiro, L., 2002, Tango And Cash: Entrepreneurial Finance And Venture DEMO In
Argentina. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance, 3: 291-308.
Politis, D. and Landström, H., 2002, Informal Investors As Entrepreneurs – The
Development Of An Entrepreneurial Career. Venture Capital: An International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 4: 77-101.
Preston, S. L., 2004, Angel Investment Groups, Networks and Funds: A Guidebook to
Developing the DEMO Angel Organisation For Your Community. Kauffman
Foundation, Kansas City.
Prowse, S., 1998, Angel Investors And The Market For Angel Investments. Journal of
DEMO and Finance, 22: 785-792.
Reitan, B. and Sørheim, R., DEMO, The Informal Venture Capital Market In Norway –
Investor Characteristics, Behaviour And Investment Preferences. Venture
Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, DEMO: 129-141.
Reynolds, P. D., 1997, Who Starts New Firms? DEMO Exploration Of Firms-In-
Gestation. Small Business Economics, 9: 449-462.
Riding, DEMO L. and Short, D. M., 1989, Some Investor And Entrepreneur DEMO
On The Informal Market For Risk Capital. Journal of Small Business and
Entrepreneurship, 5 (2): 19-30.
Riding, A. L., Dal Cin, P., Duxbury, L., Haines, G. and Safrata, R., 1993, Informal
Investors in Canada: The Identification of Salient Characteristics. Carleton
University, DEMO
Riding, A. L., Duxbury, L. and Haines, G., jr., 1995, Financing enterprise
development: decision-making by Canadian angels. School of Business,DEMO
Carleton University, Ottawa.
Sætre, A. S., 2003, Entrepreneurial Perspectives On Informal Venture Capital.
Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, DEMO: 71-94.
San José, A., Roure, J. and Aernoudt, R., 2005, Business Angel Academies:
Unleashing The Potential For Business Angel Investment. Venture Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 7:149-165.
Sapienza, H. J. and Gupta, A. K., 1994, The Impact Of Agency Risks And Task
Uncertainty On Venture Capitalist-CEO Interaction. Academy of Management
Journal, 37: 1618-1632.
Sapienza, H. J., Manigart, S. and Vermeir, W., 1996, Venture Capitalist Governance
And Value Added In Four Countries. Journal DEMO Business Venturing, 11: 439-
469.
49
Shepherd, D.A., Zacharakis, A., 1999, Conjoint Analysis: A New DEMO
Approach For Researching Venture Capitalists Decision Policies. Venture
Capital: An International DEMO of Entrepreneurial Finance, 1: 197-217.
Short, D. M. and Riding, A. L., 1989, Informal Investors In The Ottawa-Carleton
Region: Experiences And Expectations. Entrepreneurship and Regional
Development, 1: 99-112.
Sohl, J.E., 1999, The Early Stage Equity Market In The United States. Venture
Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 1: 101-120.
Sohl, J. E., DEMO, The Private Equity Market In The USA: Lessons From Volatility.
Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 5: 29-46.
Sohl, DEMO E., van Osnabrugge, M. and Robinson, R. J., 2000, DEMO Of Angel
Investing: Portals To The Early Stage Market. Paper to DEMO Babson-Kauffman
Entrepreneurship Research Conference, Babson College, MA.
Sørheim, R., 2003, The Pre-Investment Behaviour Of Business Angels : A Social
Capital Approach. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance, 5: 337-364.
Sørheim, DEMO, 2003, Business angels as facilitators for further finance: an exploratory
DEMO  Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development, 12: 178-191.
Sørheim, R. and Landström, H., 2001, Informal Investors – A Categorisation With
Policy Implications. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 13: 351-370.
Stedler, H. R. and Peters, H. H., 2003, Business Angels In Germany: An DEMO
Study. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 5:
269-276.
SQW (2004) Evaluation of the Investment Readiness Demonstration Projects and
DEMO SQW Limited, Cambridge.
Sullivan, M.K., 1994, Altruism And Entrepreneurship. In Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research, edited by W.D. Bygrave, S. Birley, N.C. Churchill,
E. Gatewood, F. Hoy, R.H. Keeley and W.E. Wetzel DEMO, pp. 373-380. Babson
College: Babson Park, MA.
Tashiro, Y., DEMO, Business Angels In Japan. Venture Capital: An International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 1: 259-273.
Tyebjee, T. and Bruno, A., 1984, DEMO Model Of Venture Capitalist Investment Activity.
Management Science, 30: 1051-1066.
Tymes, E.R. and Krasner, O.J., 1983, Informal Risk Capital In California. DEMO
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 1983, edited by J.A. Hornaday, J.A.
Timmons, and K.H. Vesper, pp. 347-368. Babson College, Babson Park, MA.
DEMO
Van Osnabrugge, M., 2000, A Comparison Of Business Angel And Venture Capitalist
Investment Procedures: An Agency Theory-Based Analysis. Venture Capital:
An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 2: 91- 109.
Visser, R. and Williams, R., 2001, Prospecting For Gold: How Dutch Informal
Investors Appraise DEMO Businesses In Trouble. Venture Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 3: 1-24.
Wetzel, W.E., 1981, Informal Risk Capital In New DEMO In Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research 1981, edited by K.H. Vesper, pp. 217-245. Babson
College, Wellesley, MA.
Wetzel, W E, jr., 1983, Angels And Informal Risk Capital. Sloan Management
Review, 24 (4): 23-34.
Wetzel, W.E. jr, 1986, Entrepreneurs, Angels And Economic Renaissance. DEMO
Entrepreneurship, Intrapreneurship and Venture Capital, edited by R.D.
Hisrich, pp. DEMO Lexington Books, Lexington, MA.
Wetzel, W.E. jr., 1987, The DEMO Risk Capital Market: Aspects Of Scale And
Efficiency. Journal of Business DEMO, 2: 299-313.
Wetzel, W. E. jr. and Freear, J., DEMO, Promoting Informal Venture Capital In The
United States: Reflections On The History Of The Venture Capital Network. In
Informal Venture Capital: evaluating the impact of business introduction
services, edited by R. T. Harrison and C. M. Mason, pp 61-74. Prentice Hall,
Hemel Hempstead.
Zider, B., 1998, How Venture Capital Works. Harvard Business Review, Nov-Dec,
131-139.
DEMO{1g42fwefx}