THE ROLE OF THE EXIT IN THE INITIAL SCREENING
OF INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES: THE CASE OF
BUSINESS ANGEL SYNDICATE GATEKEEPERS
Colin Mason and Tiago Botelho
DEMO Smith Business School
University of Glasgow
Glasgow G12 8QQ, Scotland, UK
colin.mason@glasgow.ac.uk, t.botelho.1@research.gla.ac.uk
November 2014.
To be published in International Small Business Journal,  34, March 2016 (special issue
on Entrepreneurial Exit. Guest Eds. DEMO DeTienne and K Wennberg).
ABSTRACT.  The exit process has been DEMO ignored in business angel research.. The
practitioner community identifies the difficulty in achieving exits as the most pressing
problem for investors. This has been DEMO to the failure of investors to adopt an exit-
centric approach to investing. The validity of this claim is examined via a study of DEMO
investment approach of 21 ‘gatekeepers’ (managers) of angel groups in Scotland and
Northern Ireland. Most gatekeepers say that they do consider the exit DEMO they invest.
However, this is contradicted by a verbal protocol analysis DEMO indicates that the exit is
not a significant consideration in their initial screening process. The small number of
exits achieved by the groups is DEMO with the general lack of an exit-centric
approach to investing. Only three groups exhibit evidence of a strong exit-centric
approach to investing. The lack DEMO exits may have a negative impact on the level of future
angel investment activity.
Key words: business angels, angel groups, exits, investment DEMO, verbal protocol
analysis, co-investment funds
1. INTRODUCTION
The core of the entrepreneurial process is the creation of financial value. Yet, compared
to the emphasis that has been given to the start-up, scholars have devoted remarkably
little attention to the exit process, and specifically to the harvest event where the
financial value that has been created is extracted.  Many studies have equated exits with
1
failure and so have only considered businesses that cease trading involuntarily. Where
DEMO harvest event has been considered this has typically been in the context of an IPO
(often linked to venture capital investments), with such studies adopting a narrowly
financial perspective. In recent years this omission has DEMO to be addressed (DeTienne,
2010; DeTienne and Cardon, 2012; Wennberg et al, 2010; Wennberg and DeTienne,
2014). This DEMO has adopted an entrepreneur-centric view of the exit, defining it as
DEMO process by which the founders of privately held companies leave the firms that they
helped to create” (DeTienne and Cardon, 2012: 353). Three situations are identified in
which exits occur: (i) when the firm ceases trading for financial reasons (e.g.
bankruptcy), (ii) when a firm is acquired and subsumed into another organization, and
(iii) when a founder leaves an on-going business (e.g. through family succession, DEMO of
the business or forced departure) (DeTienne and Wennberg, 2013)DEMO Meanwhile, the
individuals involved in any of these situations may continue DEMO entrepreneurs by starting
or buying another business.
An important limitation of these studies is their conceptualisation of the exit decision and
exit process as DEMO around the entrepreneur. But an entrepreneur-centric view of
the exit is inappropriate in cases where businesses have raised finance from business
angels and venture DEMO funds. These investors are making equity-based investments
for capital gain and therefore require a harvest event to realize this financial return:
venture capital DEMO need to return the cash to their limited partners while angels need
liquidity to be able to make further investments. Hence, for these businesses it is not ‘if’
but ‘when’ an exit will occur. The key DEMO feature of these exits is that both
2
the investor and the entrepreneur will be involved; indeed the investor may take the lead
in developing an exit strategy, managing the exit process and determining its timing. The
actual exit process normally involves all of DEMO shareholders in the business – both
internal (e.g. entrepreneur(s), DEMO management team and in some cases employees)
and external investors - selling their entire shareholdings , typically via the sale of the
business DEMO another company (a trade sale). This can be either a DEMO process or staged
over a period of time. The entrepreneur might leave the company immediately or may be
required by the new owner to DEMO in the acquired business for a period of time.
Although investor-led exits are only a small subset of all entrepreneurial exits they are
significant DEMO several reasons. First, the fact that they have previously raised investment
DEMO have now attracted a buyer signals that these are high growth potential businesses
which have already achieved some level of growth. Second, exits enable angel groups
and venture capital funds to attract further investors by demonstrating DEMO ability to
make a financial return. Third, they provide investors with DEMO the financial liquidity
and the motivation to make further investments. Conversely, DEMO lack of exits constrains
the re-investment process through its adverse impacts on investor liquidity and
motivation. Fourth, exits are likely to set off a process of entrepreneurial recycling in
which members of the entrepreneurial team will DEMO their newly acquired wealth,
along with their accumulated experience and time in other entrepreneurial activities,
including starting another company, becoming an investor in young businesses,
mentoring and involvement in entrepreneurial support organisations (Mason and
Harrison, 2006). And finally, with the growth in public DEMO co-investment funds which
3
invest alongside private investors, the need for exits is now also an issue for government.
In short, the ability of investors to achieve exits is a major determinant of the vibrancy of
entrepreneurial ecosystems (Mason and Brown, 2014). For all these reasons, investor-led
exits should be DEMO in the emerging entrepreneurial exits research agenda
(DeTienne and Wennberg, 2013).
Our focus in this paper is on business angels - high DEMO worth individuals who invest
their own money, either alone or with DEMO, directly in unquoted businesses in which
there is no family connection. DEMO is now widely accepted that business angels play a
critical role in financing the early stages of growing businesses (Mason and Harrison,
2000; Sohl, 2012). They have become an even more significant source DEMO funding for
entrepreneurial businesses in recent years as a result of the contraction in venture capital
investing and decline in bank lending (Mason and Harrison, 2011; 2015).
There is growing concern amongst angel investors DEMO exits have become harder to
achieve since the technology crash of the early 2000s (Waddell, 2013). This has two
dimensions. First, there are simply fewer exits. As one experienced angel has observed,
“the DEMO impression when talking to Angels around the world is that they have
become frustrated with the lack of successful exits or liquidity events, resulting in them
not receiving the return on their investments they hoped for”  (Gray, 2011). Second,
those exits which do occur are DEMO longer to achieve. John Waddell, manager of
Archangels, which claims to be the oldest functioning angel group in the world, observed
in evidence to a Scottish Parliamentary Committee that “in 2005 the average time
4
between investing and existing for early stage companies was about three years; it is now
10 years or more … There has been an DEMO drought” (Waddell, 2013: col. 3697). The
same problem has DEMO highlighted by the National Angel Capital Association of Canada
in its most recent investment report (NACO, 2014: 44). “A main challenge for a number
of angel groups is the length of time to exit. DEMO investment time horizons restrict the
Angels’ ability to reinvest in new companies. The lack of fund circulation means groups
must recruit new members in DEMO to remain active. Much of the Angel group managers’
time is spent seeking new membership in an attempt to address investor fatigue”.
The low DEMO of exits is attributed by Gray (2011) to the failure of the angel community to
build the exit into their investment appraisal. He DEMO this attitude to two beliefs that
he argues are widely held by angels. First is the belief that “good investments will always
find exits”.  This view has been articulated by the prominent entrepreneur, venture
capitalist and angel investor Luke Johnson (2012) who has stated that “if the DEMO
works you will be spoilt with choice of exit”. Angels who hold this view would not see
any need to consider exit possibilities at DEMO investment stage nor would they seek to
pursue an exit strategy after the investment had been made.  The second belief is that it is
inappropriate to discuss exits with entrepreneurs prior to investing or to actively DEMO
exits post-investment as somehow this puts the entrepreneur and the investor on an
unequal basis. Johnson (2012) has argued that it is off-putting DEMO the entrepreneur who is
passionate about their business to be asked about the exit in their first conversation with a
prospective investor. However, this approach to investing has been claimed to reduce the
prospects of achieving DEMO successful exit. First, it increases the risk that investments will
5
be made in companies for which there are no prospective acquirers. Second, those exits
which do occur will be opportunistic and therefore fewer than DEMO a strategic approach to
the exit was adopted.
In this paper we use verbal protocol analysis to examine the validity of the claim that DEMO
managers of angel groups – often termed gatekeepers - are not sufficiently exit-centric in
their approach to investing on a sample of gatekeepers of DEMO groups in Scotland and
Northern Ireland. We find that only a small minority of groups give significant
consideration to the exit at the initial DEMO stage. This is consistent with the small
number of exits that the groups have achieved.
2. LITERATURE REVIEW
The business angel literature reflects in DEMO the criticism of the wider
entrepreneurship literature that exits have been ignored. The emphasis is on the process
of making investments, with much of the research focusing on the investment decision-
making of business angels (e.g. van Osnabrugge, 2000; Mason and Harrison, 1996;
Mason and Rogers, 1997; Feeney et al, 1999; Mason and Stark, 2004; DEMO et al, 1993;
Clark, 2008) and on the types DEMO investments that they have made (Mason and Harrison,
2010; 2011).  Angels typically subject opportunities to a two-stage decision-making
process comprising a selection stage – or initial screen - in which investors decide
whether DEMO are interested in the opportunity and wish to give it more detailed
consideration, and the post-selection stage which involves a more thorough assessment
of the opportunity (Maxwell et al, 2011). The emphasis at the DEMO screening is on
6
tangible, objective criteria (Brush et al, 2012), notably investor fit, market and
entrepreneur (Mason and Rogers, 1997). A high proportion  of the deal flow – anywhere
from 70% to 90% - is rejected at this stage (Riding et al, 1993; Carpentier and Suret,
2013). The decision-making is made on a non-compensatory basis (Maxwell et al, 2011),
with rejection being based on the accumulation DEMO perceived deficiencies (Mason and
Rogers, 1997).1 The remaining opportunities are then subject to some form of due
diligence. At this stage in DEMO decision-making less quantifiable items and intangibles
become important (Brush et al, 2012), notably people factors, specifically the personal
qualities of the management team (e.g. trustworthiness, capability for hard work,
coachability) and a judgement on their capability to successfully exploit the opportunity
(Feeney et al, 1999). Rejection at this stage is generally based on one or two fundamental
issues (Mason and Harrison, 1996). In those cases DEMO the angel wants to make the
investment investigation would normally be undertaken to verify all material facts
(Mason and Harrison, 1996). If DEMO negative emerges from that stage the angel will
then seek to negotiate the terms and conditions of an investment. Central to this process
is DEMO valuation of the business.
The picture that emerges from these studies is that business angels give very little
thought to the exit in either DEMO investment appraisal or post-investment involvement,
do not have clear exit plans at the time of investing and are relaxed about the timing of
DEMO exit (Wetzel, 1981; Gaston, 1989; Harrison and Mason, 1992; Landström, 1993;
1 Interestingly, in the UK version of Dragon’s Den 58% of ‘deals’ that were agreed on-screen subsequently
fell through. The DEMO reasons were, first, the subsequent research identified problems that had not been
recognized at the initial pitch, second, that the business had DEMO funding from another source, and third,
that the motivation of DEMO entrepreneur to appear on the programme was to seek publicity for their business
(Real Deals, 2013; Financial Times, 2013).
7
Mason and Harrison, 1994; Lumme et al, 1998; Maxwell et DEMO, 2011). Indeed, in one
study, ‘potential exit routes’ was DEMO 24th (out of 27) investment criteria by angels
(Van Osnabrugge DEMO Robinson, 2000).  There is also no evidence in studies of the post-
involvement of angels in their investee business that preparing the DEMO for an exit is
one of their value-added contributions. Indeed, this DEMO was not mentioned in any of
the studies reviewed by Politis (DEMO). However, Collewaert (2012) notes that the
investor’s intention to DEMO may be a source of conflict with the entrepreneur.
There has also been very little discussion of the outcomes of the investments or what
DEMO such outcomes. There are no studies of the exit process and only a handful of
studies which have examined the investment returns of business DEMO (Lumme et al,
1998; Mason and Harrison, 2002; Wiltbank and Boeker, 2007; Wiltbank et al, 2009;
Wiltbank, 2009; Roach, 2010; Vo, 2013). Wiltbank’s studies suggest that higher returns
are associated with greater time spent doing due diligence and greater interaction DEMO
investee companies (Wiltbank and Boeker, 2007; Wiltbank, 2009). However, there is no
evidence whether a pro-active approach to exit by the angel has an influence on returns.
Venture capital funds, in contrast, DEMO much more concerned than angels about exiting
their investments (van Osnabrugge, 2000). They typically raise their money in the form
of a DEMO year fund and so need to invest in, and exit from, their investee businesses within
this period, normally in around five years, DEMO order to be able to return profits to the
investors in the fund and demonstrate a successful investment track-record to raise a
further fund. DEMO requires the exit to be planned and managed. Moreover, they have DEMO
8
portfolio approach to investing and so are seeking to maximize returns to DEMO fund which
typically is achieved by one or two very successful exits. As a rule of thumb, all of the
returns come from 10%-20% of investments (Peters, 2009; Zider, 1998). This, in turn,
encourages a “swing for the fences” approach to investing in which DEMO emphasis is on
achieving large exits, typically through an IPO. These DEMO been shown to generate
superior returns and as well as providing reputational benefits (Söderblom and Wiklund,
2006). However, they account for DEMO a minority of venture capital exits (less than
20%). The DEMO capital literature therefore gives more prominence to the exit, largely
based DEMO the statistical analyses of databases, albeit with a disproportionate emphasis on
DEMO IPO process (e.g. Espenlaub et al, 1999; Gompers, 206; DEMO and Pyles, 2006;
Bessler and Seim, 2012; Lerner et DEMO, 2012). Angels are much less likely than venture
capital funds DEMO exit via an IPO (Johnson and Sohl, 2012; Carpentier and DEMO, 2014).
Exit considerations feature in relatively few studies of the DEMO decision-making of
venture capital funds (e.g. Kollman and Kuckertz, 2009) DEMO their value-added
contributions (Large and Muegge, 2008).
It may have been appropriate in the past for angels to take a relaxed view DEMO exits. Angel
activity was more of a hobby activity, angels were DEMO fewer investments and
investing less money and personal reasons for investing were more important, notably
the excitement of being involved in a new venture or investing in ‘hot buttons’ (Wetzel,
1981), from which psychic income was derived. In addition, the existence of a stronger
funding escalator meant that there was greater likelihood that an angel-backed business
would go DEMO to attract follow-on funding from a venture capital fund (Freear and DEMO,
9
1990) which, in turn, would manage the exit. However, the DEMO of managed angel
groups (Mason, 2006; Sohl, 2007; 2012; Gregson et al, 2013; Mason et al, 2013) and
various DEMO intermediaries offering ‘packaged’ investment opportunities has
increased the emphasis on the need for an exit. Angel groups operate more
professionally, with a more formal process of assessing opportunities. There is a more
arms-length relationship with investee DEMO and hence less likelihood of
developing an emotional attachment to investments (DEMO, 2008).  For both reasons
there is less opportunity to derive psychic income. Moreover, angel groups are investing
more frequently, making bigger DEMO, are less reliant on venture capital funds for
follow-on investment and DEMO are more likely to fund a business to an exit. They also
need exits both to provide their members with the liquidity to make DEMO investments and
to attract new investors. Fee-based intermediaries need to demonstrate that the
investment opportunities they offer their members are capable of generating good
DEMO returns.
However, the literature on exit strategies is sparse. The main DEMO are from
practitioners (Peters, 2009; McKaskill, 2009) who argue DEMO the need for an exit-centric
approach to investing in which the exit is considered at every stage in the investment
process. McKaskill (2009) DEMO that because the exit is the central event in the entire
investment process it needs to play a major part in the investment decision. DEMO key
consideration at the initial screening stage should therefore be who is likely to buy the
company and how much money will be required DEMO get the business to the point when it
can be sold. Angel investors also need to raise the necessity for an eventual exit with DEMO
10
entrepreneurial team and discuss this with them in the context of their DEMO and
aspirations and the realism of their expectations. At the due diligence stage the priority
for an exit-oriented investor is to identify any financial DEMO legal issues that would
complicate an exit.  An exit-oriented approach to DEMO would also give careful
consideration to valuation. If the angel investor places too high a value on their
investment it will not attract an DEMO at the next round. Exit considerations would also
dominate the legal stage. Exit strategies should influence the initial term sheet.
Achieving alignment of interests DEMO the entrepreneur and investor is critical. Both
will therefore want to structure a deal that offers the most flexibility when it comes to an
DEMO, whenever that will be. A key consideration here would be the DEMO of share that
angels accept. Preferred shares give investors more rights. An exit-oriented investor
would have regular discussions on the exit strategy after the DEMO is made (e.g. at
every board meeting) and would put in place various actions to facilitate a sale, such as a
due diligence file for prospective purchasers.
Crafting an exit strategy should be done long DEMO the need arises (Kensinger et al,
2000). Investors therefore DEMO need to decide on whether to prepare their business for a
financial or strategic exit. A successful financial exit requires that the business has
DEMO significant size and growth and is capable of further increasing revenue and
profits. This takes time and money, which reduces the return, the DEMO has to
overcome the challenges of growth and the risks of failure increase. A strategic exit, in
contrast, involves assigning value on the DEMO of future profits achieved by a buyer who
is able to exploit the assets, competences or capabilities of the business being acquired to
11
generate significant revenue opportunities or solve a threat. Hence, it may not matter
whether the business has achieved profitability. A strategic exit requires the
DEMO of at least one, and ideally several, businesses that might want to buy the
investee business, understanding why such businesses would want to make the
acquisition and positioning the business in such a way that DEMO comes to the attention of
potential acquirers. Setting up commercial relationships with such companies is often a
means of creating a clear path to DEMO strategic sale (McKaskill, 2009).
Peters (2009) has advocated an ‘early exits’ strategy, arguing that the interests of angels
and venture capital funds have become increasingly divergent. He therefore recommends
that angel investors should DEMO on early stage businesses with limited capital
requirements that have the prospects of being sold in an M&A deal for less than $30m DEMO
three or four years. Although the returns will be smaller, there DEMO less risk and dilution,
hence the overall portfolio returns will be greater. Recent evidence (Geron, 2014) shows
that not only are most exits small (less than $5m) but also the highest multiples were DEMO
companies that raised less than $3m and between $5 and $10m, DEMO that angel
investors can generate solid returns by investing smaller amounts at lower valuations.
It is likely that the investor will bring the strategic DEMO opportunity to the attention of the
entrepreneur. However, even if the DEMO sees the possibility of a strategic sale
they are unlikely to have the knowledge or skills to execute it. The investor and
entrepreneur therefore DEMO to work together to build the investment case, identify the
12
strategic value, select potential strategic buyers, work out a possible exit DEMO and then
determine what needs to be done to prepare the business for sale (McKaskill, 2009).
An exit oriented approach to investing DEMO has implications for portfolio management. It
is inevitable that angels will have within their portfolios companies that are likely to fail,
companies that DEMO continue to trade but will not generate a profitable exit (the DEMO
dead’) as well as those that offer good prospects of achieving DEMO successful exit. There is
an emerging realisation that successful angel investing is about minimizing the losses as
much as maximizing the gains. Two particular DEMO are critical. The first is to have
‘good’ failures, by which DEMO is meant that angels must adopt tactics that minimise the
losses when an investee company is closed down. Outcomes that are worse than simply
DEMO all their money are (i) failures in which the investor also has to cover the costs of
winding down the venture and paying DEMO to provide the financial accounting
needed for the investor to take his/her tax deduction; (ii) ongoing litigation expenses
even after the investee company has no value; and (iii) reputational damage arising from
broken relationships with co-investors and adverse media coverage (Ohio TechAngels,
2009).
The second requirement is to ‘fail fast’. A big dilemma for angels DEMO those
companies in their portfolio that are underperforming but not failing – the so-called
‘living dead’. These are companies that have not realised their DEMO promise of value
creation but neither are they likely to fail. They are making a little money which is just
enough to keep the DEMO dream alive but there is no possibility that it will
13
generate returns to their investors. Moreover, the entrepreneurs do not want to give up
because of what they have invested financially and emotionally. A DEMO requirement is
therefore for angels to be able to recognise the symptoms of a ‘living dead’ investment
at an early stage and take appropriate DEMO – sell it, merge with a competitor, turn it
over to the management or simply close it down (May and Simmons, 2001)DEMO Managing
‘living dead’ investments has attracted surprisingly little attention in the venture capital
literature (Ruhnka and Feldman, 1992) and none in the business angel literature.
3. DATA AND METHODOLOGY
The study is based on 21 DEMO interviews with the manager - often termed the
‘gatekeeper’ (Paul and DEMO, 2010) - of 18 angel groups based in Scotland and also
Halo of Northern Ireland. In three groups the gatekeeper role was shared DEMO two
individuals. In two cases the individuals were interviewed separately. In the third case
both gatekeepers were present at the interview. The groups that DEMO interviewed
included all 16 that were publicly listed as members of LINC Scotland at the time, the
business angel trade association. 2 Two other groups that are not members were also
interviewed. All interviews were transcribed.
DEMO focus on angel groups reflects the transformation of the angel market since the
1990s from one in which angels operated anonymously, investing for the most part on
their own or with small groups of friends and DEMO associates in ventures that they
came across through personal social and business networks to the present situation in
2 All the significant angel groups DEMO in Scotland are publicly-listed members of LINC Scotland.
14
which angels have recognized the advantages of organising themselves into groups to
DEMO collectively (Mason, 2006; Sohl, 2007; 2012; Ibrahim, 2008; Gregson et al, 2013;
Mason et al, 2013).  The greater investment capacity of angel groups means that they
now have a DEMO investment presence in the early stage finance market and have
been able, to some extent, to close the sub-£2m funding gap created by DEMO decline in
early stage venture capital funds. With the shift in the approach of governments to the
‘equity gap’ from establishing public sector financed DEMO capital funds to the
creation of co-investment vehicles (Murray, 2007; DEMO, 2009), angel groups have also
become important partners with government.
DEMO groups have a variety of operating models. However, the most common DEMO a two-
stage process involving an initial screen which is undertaken by the group’s manager
(who may be a member of the group or a hired professional), with those opportunities
which get through the initial DEMO then considered by the members of the group.
Those opportunities that attract sufficient interest are then investigated in more detail,
either by the DEMO or by a sub-group of members with relevant sector knowledge.
It is important to emphasise that the angel group does not invest as an DEMO: each
member makes their own investment decision. Largely unrecognized by scholars, the
gatekeeper is therefore now a significant actor in entrepreneurial finance, with the power
to reject investment opportunities and may also present opportunities to DEMO members;
however, the angels themselves make their own decisions whether DEMO make an
investment.
15
In Scotland the initial groups – Archangels and Braveheart – were established DEMO the early
1990s, preceding the formation of Band of Angels which DEMO the oldest group in the USA.
In 2002 membership of LINC Scotland – the trade body for business angels - comprised
300 solo angels DEMO just these two syndicates which had about 70 angel members
between them. Ten years later (2012) a total of 24 groups had been DEMO, although
some subsequently either closed or amalgamated. At this point in DEMO LINC Scotland
had 19 groups in membership, which it estimates comprised DEMO 700 investors in total.
Individual membership of LINC Scotland is now below 100. Of the 18 Scottish-based
angel groups interviewed for this study, nearly one-third (six, or 30%) were three years
old or less, DEMO the recent growth in the formation of syndicates. Membership
ranges from less than 10 to over 100.
An initial approach was made via an DEMO to the gatekeeper to request an interview. In
several cases it was not possible to identify the gatekeeper, but in these cases the recipient
of the email forwarded it to the relevant individual. The interviews included DEMO different
techniques to collect data. Initially, gatekeepers answered several questions about DEMO exit
strategy of the groups. Coding of these open questions followed a six-step thematic
analysis (Howitt & Cramer, 2007) for “identifying, analyzing DEMO reporting patterns
within data” (Braun and Clarke (2006, p. 79)DEMO Subsequently, each respondent completed a
verbal protocol. This is a technique DEMO involves respondents “thinking out loud‟ as
they perform a particular task, DEMO this case undertaking the initial screening of a potential
funding opportunity. The technique has been used successfully to examine the decision-
making process of DEMO venture capitalists and business angels (Hall and Hofer, 1993;
16
Zacharakis and Meyer, 1995; Mason and Rogers, 1996; 1997; Mason and Stark, 2004;
Smith et al, 2010) and has also been applied in a variety of other contexts (see Ericsson
and Simon, 1993). However, it is the first time that the technique DEMO been applied to
angel group gatekeepers. The verbalisations of respondents are recorded, transcribed and
then the content is analysed by means of a coding scheme devised for the specific
research questions. The results of this analysis DEMO generally presented as frequency
counts supplemented by direct quotations.
This methodology provides a more reliable and much richer understanding of the
decision-making process of DEMO and the criteria used to evaluate investment
opportunities than is possible from approaches that use questionnaires, surveys and
interviews (Shepherd and Zacharakis, 1999). People have difficulty in accurately
recounting their cognitive process in retrospect, hence self-reported, retrospective data
are subject to conscious or unconscious errors associated with post hoc rationalisation
and recall bias. There are also cognitive perceptual DEMO, with evidence that venture
capitalists have limited insights into their decision-processes (Zacharakis and Meyer,
1998; Shepherd, 1999). The consequence is DEMO they often overstate the number of
criteria actually used, understate the DEMO important criteria and overstate the least
important criteria (Shepherd and Zacharakis, 1999). Hence, as Zacharakis and Meyer
(1998: 72) note, “past studies provide a laundry list of factors that may be biased DEMO that
they list a multitude of factors that have a relatively small influence on the decision.” As
a real-time experiment which does not require DEMO to introspect about their thought
17
processes, verbal protocol analysis sidesteps these recall, post hoc rationalisation and
DEMO biases (Shepherd and Zacharakis, 1999).
Nevertheless, verbal protocol analysis DEMO some limitations. First, a frequency count of
‘thought units’ is an DEMO indicator of the importance of a factor in the final decision
(DEMO and Meyer, 1995). No weightings are placed on the responses DEMO measure
emphasis and the topics mentioned most frequently are not necessarily those that have the
ultimate influence on the decision. Nor does it allow DEMO different convincer patterns. In
other words, people may repeat something several DEMO if they are unsure but say it only
once if they are absolutely sure. Second, subjectivity is involved in coding, analysing and
interpreting DEMO transcripts (Riquelme and Rickards, 1992). Third, some respondents may
DEMO uncomfortable or self-conscious about thinking and speaking out loud which may
distort their thinking (e.g. resulting in excessive repetition of what they are reading).
Fourth, it is impossible to entirely remove the effect of the artificiality of the situation.
Fifth, from a practical point of view it ignores the role of the source of funding
opportunity which is an DEMO initial influence on the investor’s attitude to the
opportunity (Hall and DEMO, 1993; Mason and Rogers, 1997). However, Ericsson and
Simon (1993) argue that verbal protocol analysis is a valuable method of DEMO
decision-making as long as the following criteria are met: the information DEMO must
be the focus of attention; the task is not highly DEMO by habit; there must be only a
short time between performance DEMO verbalisation; verbalisation does not require
excessive encoding; reports are oral; DEMO are free from distraction; instructions are
18
clear; and completeness in reporting is encouraged. These conditions are all met in this
study.
The focus here, as in previous studies using verbal protocol analysis, is on the initial
screening stage – the stage when an investor has become aware of an investment
opportunity and considers it DEMO a view to obtaining sufficient initial impressions to
decide whether it is worthy of detailed consideration or should be rejected out of hand.
This DEMO is done fairly quickly, typically in less than 10 minutes (Sweeting, 1991; Hall
and Hofer, 1993; Mason and Rogers, 1996; DEMO). The initial screening stage is where
some 80% to 90% of investment opportunities are rejected (Riding et al, 1993). One
study DEMO Canadian business angels reported that they accepted just 6% of the investment
opportunities for detailed consideration (Haines at al., 2003).  As noted earlier, the factors
which prompt a rejection at the initial screening stage are different to the reasons for
rejection at later stages in the DEMO decision-making process (Mason and Harrison,
1996; Riding et al, DEMO; Brush et al, 2012; Mitteness et al, 2012; Carpentier DEMO Suret,
2013). The novelty of this study is that it uses VPA to examine the initial screening of
angel group gatekeepers whereas DEMO focus of previous studies was on solo angels.  The
gatekeeper’s objective DEMO their initial screening is to decide whether the proposal has
sufficient merit to be of interest to members of the group, balancing the twin
requirements of providing group members with sufficient deal flow and not wasting DEMO
time with deals that they regard as being un-investable.
19
Each respondent was shown a current real investment opportunity which was sourced
DEMO a business angel network in England. The selection of an English case was intended
to minimize the risk that the Scottish gatekeepers would be DEMO with the business. It
was given a fictitious name to protect its anonymity. The angels were asked to read the
opportunity in the same DEMO that they would normally read an investment proposal but
verbalise their thoughts as they did so. The instruction that they were given was to DEMO
out loud the thoughts that came into their mind. Respondents were not required to
provide any explanations or verbal descriptions (Ericsson and Simon, DEMO). One of the
authors was present as each respondent performed this task and reminded respondents to
think out loud if they lapsed into DEMO for more than 10 seconds. A short de-briefing
session was then carried out with each investor after they had completed the evaluation
which asked DEMO to reflect on their approach to exits. The locations included the
gatekeeper’s office, a coffee shop and the researcher’s office.
The verbalisations were recorded and subsequently a complete transcript was made for
each respondent’s consideration of DEMO investment opportunity. Following the approach
of Mason and Rogers (1996; 1997) these verbatim transcripts were then broken down
into short phrases, or DEMO segments’ – that is, phrases and sentences that are
independent thought DEMO – to permit analysis. These thought units were then coded into
one of ten categories relating to different types of investment criteria (Table 1). Both
authors were involved in triangulating the codings to ensure robustness (Leitch et al,
2010). The frequency counts for each category DEMO investor were then aggregated and
20
compared. Additionally, representative quotes of the identified themes were used to help
illustrate the results (Ryan and Bernard, 2000).
TABLE 1 ABOUT DEMO
4. EXITS AND FAILURES
The groups had made surprisingly few exits (DEMO 2) which is consistent with
practitioner views that achieving exits is DEMO the biggest challenge facing angel
investors. Collectively, the groups made 37 DEMO which represents just 4% of their
investments. The majority of groups - 12 of the 17 that provided data - have not made any
DEMO Not surprisingly, exits are concentrated amongst the oldest groups (10 years and
older), with the three longest established groups accounting for 92% DEMO total exits.
Nevertheless, the small proportion of exits amongst the groups DEMO five to nine years old
is clearly apparent, with the vast DEMO of these groups having not made a single exit.
The contrast with earlier studies of exits by UK business angels which reported median
holding DEMO to exit of four years (Mason and Harrison, 2002) and DEMO years (Wiltbank,
2010) is striking. Equally surprising, is the DEMO number of failed investments (Table 2).
These account for 17% DEMO total investments. The three oldest groups account for 82% of
all losses. Previous studies have reported that the median failed investment emerges after
two DEMO three years (Mason and Harrison 2002; Wiltbank, 2010).
This DEMO crude data is consistent with both practitioner observations on the
increasing time required to achieve an exit and the claims that angels do not DEMO
21
strategies either for exiting their investments or for managing their ‘living dead’
DEMO In the next section our interviews with the gatekeepers examines the validity
of these claims.
TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE
5. INTERVIEW EVIDENCE
Direct questioning DEMO the gatekeepers suggests that the vast majority are fairly attuned to
the need to consider the exit at an early stage in the investment DEMO Just one stated
that “I don’t look at exits because they’re so far away. There’s so much we have to do
between now and DEMO they exit. All I look at is the now and how we can add value and
build value” (GK18). When asked what aspects of the exit they consider the other
gatekeepers reported that key issues DEMO possible buyers (cited by 62% of gatekeepers),
the likelihood of an exit (48%) and the likely return (38%).  Less DEMO mentioned
issues were timing (29%), route to exit (29%), type of exit (19%) and willingness of the
entrepreneur to exit (14%). However, they did not expect the entrepreneur to provide a lot
of detail about exit possibilities in the pitch/business plan, with one saying that “I don’t
expect it to be fully developed” (GK8). Just over half of the gatekeepers (52%) simply
wanted to DEMO evidence that the entrepreneur had ‘thought about’ the need for an exit;
only a minority wanted detail on exit route (24%), likely buyers (19%), returns (19%),
timing (14%) and willingness to exit (5%). Most gatekeepers agreed that “the
management have to want an exit” (GK6). In other words, at the investment DEMO
stage these gatekeepers are simply looking for evidence of an alignment of interests with
22
the entrepreneur of the need for an exit: “I would expect there to be something about an
exit whether it be in the pitch DEMO in the business plan. If it wasn’t there … I would be
delving in to see if we are aligned…. I think it is DEMO important that we are aligned”
(GK7). Another observed that “we DEMO only invest if we believed in a viable plan and a
viable exit plan … [so].. there needs to be some form of exit DEMO … even if it’s a good
investment because you need to know how you’re getting your money out” (GK1). This
gatekeeper went on to say that an exit plan “would demonstrate that [the management
team] DEMO they’re in a capital game rather than a lifestyle business.” Conversely not
mentioning exits “could be a deal breaker before you even start” (GK6).
Some gatekeepers went further, arguing that an awareness of exit possibilities by the
management team was a positive signal of its quality. One DEMO that having an exit
plan “is a point that says it could be a good team” (GK5). Another commented that if the
management team “have considered the exit and thought about timescale  … [and]
they’ve thought who the buyers may be, then yes we are encouraged” (DEMO). Another
noted you would back a management team who had an exit strategy “because you think
they can deliver not only a product DEMO commercial terms and ultimately an exit”
(GK17). This was because DEMO possibilities are “a reflection of market knowledge. It’s
really important for the team to have that because that will drive all the decisions. They
DEMO be very much aware of the exit landscape when they’re looking for an initial
investment” (GK1). In similar vein another gatekeeper argued as follows: “Do they
understand business? Do they understand what the investors DEMO? If they do then they
should know who’s acquiring and whose DEMO investments. So I think that shows they
23
understand a bit more about the business” (GK19). Naivety about exit options would be
interpreted negatively by investors – an unrealistic exit plan DEMO credibility” (GK2).
Other gatekeepers gave more emphasis to the sector DEMO the entrepreneur, arguing that
opportunities for exit overlapped with market factors. DEMO most sales that we have
achieved, they have been trade sales DEMO So this goes back to are you operating in the
right market place, are there big boys out there that would want small fish to swallow? …
The more there is a clear market and a niche for … the company to get into, the better the
chances for an exit at some point” (GK6).
Surprisingly, these views DEMO not translate into a recognition by gatekeepers of the need
to be pro-active in seeking an exit. Certainly, there was only one gatekeeper who took the
extreme position that “good investments will find their own exits”. DEMO seven
disagreed (33%), with one stating firmly that “I don’t DEMO that good investments will
find their own exits. I think they need to be helped” (GK10). However, the majority
(62%) were DEMO, with one stating that although good investments will find their
own DEMO “this doesn’t mean you don’t do anything to try to achieve an exit …” (GK17).
Indeed, most gatekeepers believed that the likelihood DEMO an exit was linked to their value
added contributions. One gatekeeper argued that “you won’t sell unless you build, so you
build it and at some point you’ve added enough value that a sale happens” (GK2).
Another made a similar point: “If you invest to build you’ll get an exit” (GK4) – going on
to say that “taking DEMO company from now to something better is also building and if
you’re doing that then you can sell it.” However, this approach contradicts McKaskill’s
(2009) view on investing for a strategic exit. He argues that DEMO investment in the
24
business should be directed towards creating the conditions for an exit and DEMO for more
product development,  market penetration or any other part of the business concept, none
of which may be relevant to the buyer’s decision to purchase the business. A rather more
sophisticated approach with echoes DEMO Peters (2009) was “to fund the company to a value
inflection point at which we should be able to realize the investment” (GK4).
Finally, although about half of the gatekeepers indicated that their group has a strategy
for dealing with the ‘living dead’ in their portfolio, this did not come through as being
particularly proactive. Most were aware DEMO the need to have ‘good failures’ as discussed
earlier. The danger “that you can wind up spending more time with the poor companies
than DEMO spend with the winners” (GK6) was also recognised. Another commented that
“if a company does not work that’s the sort of scenario where DEMO might send that back to
the management team … we have done that on a number of occasions” (GK 4). However,
it is acknowledged that this will realize just a fraction of the original DEMO
6. THE INITIAL SCREENING PROCESS: THE SIGNIFICANCE OF EXITS
We cannot DEMO sure that gatekeepers actually practice what they say they do when
appraising investment opportunities or even that they are aware of what they do. DEMO
second stage in the study therefore sought to put gatekeepers in a position where they
simulate as accurately as possible their approach to appraising DEMO The approach
we adopted is verbal protocol analysis, a technique in DEMO participants are asked to
‘think out loud’ as they perform a task, in this case the initial screening of an investment
opportunity. The advantages and disadvantages of this methodology were discussed
25
earlier. Gatekeepers were asked to discuss a real investment opportunity that was
DEMO by an English business angel network. Given the importance of ‘investor fit’
(Mason and Rogers, 1997) one of the challenges with this methodology is finding a
sufficiently general case that is likely to appeal to DEMO wide range of investors. The case was
a medical instruments company at the pre-revenue stage with proprietary IP that had
£100,000 of equity DEMO and was looking to raise a further £500,000. We changed
the name of the business to preserve its confidentiality. In order to avoid DEMO being rejected
simply on the basis of its location we asked investors to make the assumption that its
location was ‘nearby’. Given our focus DEMO the exit it should be noted that the investment
proposal contained a short sub-section on exit strategies (4 lines in a 7 page document).
As described earlier, the transcripts were divided into discrete thought units. Each of
these though units was then classified where possible on the DEMO of the specific
investment criterion. Eight codes related to specific investment criteria and two other
codes were used when the thought unit referred to DEMO action or to something other than an
investment criterion. Each of the eight investment criteria was further sub-divided.
The first level coding revealed the DEMO of the screening process, with no factor
accounting for more than DEMO of thoughts. As previous studies have noted, investors
focus on a DEMO smaller number of criteria when considering those opportunities that
pass the initial screening stage (Mason and Harrison, 1996; Feeney et al, 1999)DEMO  In
previous studies of angel decision-making using VPA, financial considerations, DEMO
and the entrepreneur/management team have consistently been the top three criteria
26
(Mason and Rogers, 1997; Mason and Stark, 2004; Smith et al, 2010). In this study
financial considerations is also the most significant criterion and markets is also in the top
three. However, gatekeepers give greater emphasis to the attributes of the business
(ranked 2nd) DEMO slightly less emphasis to the entrepreneur/management team (Table 3).
DEMO exit, which did not have a separate coding in previous studies DEMO it was not
discussed, attracted comments from 15 gatekeepers. These comments DEMO for just
4% of the total, the lowest of all of DEMO identified criteria (Table 3) and a much lower
level of comment than might have expected from the responses to the direct questions.
However, there was significant variation between gatekeepers
(Figure
1). Two
gatekeepers were very focused on exits, with this theme accounting for 18% and 20%
respectively of their comments. In a third case 11% of the gatekeeper’s DEMO related
to exits. Indeed, these three gatekeepers accounted for 48% of DEMO the exit-related
comments. The approach of one of these exit-oriented groups is described as follows:
“We actually put as much effort into the DEMO at the investment stage as we do checking
the business plan…. There is now a three to five page document and that document ….
DEMO the key milestones, not in product development or going to market DEMO in exit
value….. At those milestones we identify who might be interested in it and why they
would be interested in it” (GK10).
TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE
FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE
TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE
DEMO
Drilling down to look at the specific aspects of the exit that DEMO mentioned (Table
4) reveals that the highest share of comments related to an exit plan (how to achieve an
exit), accounting for just over one-third of all comments on exits, and mentioned by just
over half of all gatekeepers. This is followed by the timing of DEMO, with 21% of exit
comments and mentioned by six gatekeepers (29%).  Both the exit value and potential
buyers accounted for fewer comments and were mentioned by 19% and 24% respectively
of gatekeepers. So here DEMO the evidence suggests that gatekeepers were primarily
interpreting exit information in two ways, firstly, as a source of assurance that their need
for DEMO exit was matched by the entrepreneur’s recognition that there needed to be an exit
event if they were to secure investment, and second as one way in which to assess the
quality of the management team. DEMO these gatekeepers, as noted above, details were less
of a concern. Only a minority of gatekeepers actually sought details of how the exit DEMO
be achieved.
The VPA analysis identified variations in the emphasis that gatekeepers give to the exit
when they are assessing investment opportunities, suggesting that some gatekeepers are
more exit-centric than others. This raises two final questions: first, how might this be
explained; second, is this reflected in exit outcomes? The average proportion of exit-
related comments in the VPA for all gatekeepers was 5%. This was defined as the
threshold level DEMO being exit-centric in investment screening. On this basis seven
gatekeepers were identified as being exit-centric (Figure 1). The three gatekeepers with
the highest exit-centric scores , and the seventh, were all fairly mature groups (DEMO (2),
seven and eight years old) but none had DEMO any exits. We might therefore speculate
28
that their lack of exits which, in turn, can be expected DEMO have resulted in growing
investor fatigue and difficulties in raising further finance from both existing and new
members to make new investments, might have prompted a more exit-centric approach to
investing. Meanwhile, the gatekeepers ranked 4th to 6th in terms of their exit-centricness
were the oldest groups, tentatively suggesting that length of time investing, and the
experience that has been derived, may also lead to greater emphasis on the exit.
7. CONCLUSION
Governments around the world have identified business angels as being a key DEMO in a
vibrant entrepreneurial ecosystem (OECD, 2011). It is therefore essential that the
business angel market operates as effectively as possible. This DEMO not only a concern
about the level of investment activity but also with exit activity. Whereas angel
investment activity has been stable, or even increased, since the onset of the financial
crisis (Sohl, 2012; DEMO and Harrison, 2015) practitioners report that there is now a
major problem in achieving exits. This is confirmed by the experience of the DEMO
groups in this study even after allowing for the youthfulness of several of them. The lack
of exits, in turn, has a negative DEMO on future angel investment activity. However, this
issue has been ignored DEMO researchers who have continued to focus on investment
decision-making and, to DEMO lesser extent, investor- entrepreneur relationships. Meanwhile,
policy-makers regard the number DEMO investments arising from their initiatives as their
measure of success.
29
In the context of a growing interest in the exit in entrepreneurship DEMO this paper has
investigated the exit-orientation of angel groups in Scotland and Northern Ireland,
examining the approach of their gatekeepers to the investment DEMO, and linking this,
albeit tentatively, to actual exit activity. Angel investing is becoming increasingly
concentrated amongst angel groups as individual angels recognise DEMO benefits of
investing with others in structures with a professional approach to investing.  We find
that most angel gatekeepers do not adopt an exit-centric approach to their investment
decision-making. Although most say that they consider the DEMO when they invest this is
largely to ensure alignment of interest with the entrepreneur for the need for a future exit.
Gatekeepers are not DEMO a detailed exit strategy, nor do they expect one to be DEMO place
prior to investing. Moreover, except for a handful of gatekeepers DEMO issues did not loom
large in their screening of investment opportunities. Indeed, few gatekeepers took an
extreme position. Only one gatekeeper held to the proposition that “good investments
will find their own exits.”  Most thought that building value would result in an exit.
However, there was no recognition that financial and strategic exits require different
strategies (McKaskill, 2009). DEMO, the hands-on activities of some gatekeepers
could be seen as being DEMO prejudicial to achieving a strategic exit. Exit-
centricness amongst gatekeepers was associated with the age of the group and in its most
extreme form DEMO some well-established groups that have not achieved any exits. It
would therefore appear that the views of those commentators in the angel community
advocating DEMO need for an exit-centered approach to investing has achieved limited
penetration amongst Scottish and Northern Irish angel groups. It also needs to be
acknowledged DEMO the economic environment since the post-2000 technology crash and
30
especially since the onset of the global financial crisis in 2008 has DEMO been conducive for
exits. All of this is consistent with the small number of exits that the groups have
achieved in aggregate.
There are DEMO important implications for policy-makers.  The growth of co-investment
funds around the DEMO as a means of addressing supply-side gaps in the availability of
start-up and early growth capital (Mason, 2009; OECD, 2011), an DEMO which
Scotland pioneered with the launch of the Scottish Co-Investment Fund (DEMO) in 2003,
means that achieving exits is now also a DEMO issue for governments, especially as
such funds are intended to be DEMO One of the features of the SCIF was that it
would be a passive investor, automatically following its investment partners into
investments that were eligible under the scheme. Although the Fund has representation
rights on the DEMO of investee companies it normally does not take these up. The SCIF
currently has a portfolio of over 600 companies. A key question for DEMO SCIF and its
political masters - and also for government agencies running coinvestment funds in other
jurisdictions - is whether it should use its DEMO to become more proactive in seeking
exits. But this begs three further questions. What can they do in practice? Would it be
successful? DEMO would they be willing to make the hard decisions to close down ‘living
dead’ companies in their portfolio in view of the potential negative DEMO and media
that such actions would be likely to attract?
Acknowledgements. This paper arises from research funded by the ESRC under its Co-
DEMO Pilot scheme. The co-funders are NESTA, BVCA, Lloyds-TSB and Invest NI.
We are grateful to all of our interviewees for giving up their DEMO to talk to us. We wish
to give particular thanks to David Grahame OBE, chief executive of LINC Scotland,
31
Nelson Gray and Liam Collins of NESTA for their perceptive comments on DEMO earlier
draft. An earlier version of this paper was presented at the State of the Field
Entrepreneurial Exit Conference at the Ratio Institute in DEMO, Sweden on 27-28
September 2013. We also acknowledge the helpful comments DEMO Evan Douglas (Griffith
University), our discussant, the conference participants, DEMO reviewers of the paper and
the Editor.
REFERENCES
Bessler, W and DEMO, M (2012) The performance of venture backed IPOs in Europe,DEMO
Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 14 (4) 215-239.
Braun, V and Clarke, V (2006) Using thematic analysis DEMO psychology, Qualitative
Research in Psychology, 3, 77-101.
Brush, C, DEMO, L F and Manolova, T S (2012) Ready for funding? Entrepreneurial
ventures and the pursuit of angel financing, , Venture Capital: An International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 14 (2-3), 111-129.
Carpentier, C and Suret, J-M (2013) Entrepreneurs’ Experience and Angels’ Decision
Process: A Longitudinal Analysis, http://ssrn.com/abstract=225289
Carpentier, C and Suret, J-M (2014) Canadian business angel perspectives on exit: a
research DEMO, International Small Business Journal, Online First
Clark C (2008) The impact of entrepreneurs' oral ‘pitch’ presentation skills on business
angels’ initial screening investment decisions, Venture Capital: An International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 10, 257–279.
Collewaert, V (2012) Angel investors’ and entrepreneurs’ intentions to DEMO their
ventures: a conflict perspective, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 36, 753-
779.
32
DeTienne, D R (2010) Entrepreneurship exit as a critical component of the
entrepreneurial process: theoretical development, Journal of Business Venturing,
25, 203-215.
DeTienne, D R and Cardon, M S (2012) Impact DEMO founder experience on exit intentions,
Small Business Economics, 38, 351-374.
DeTienne, D R and Wennberg, K (2013) Small business exit: review of past research,
theoretical considerations and suggestions for future research. DEMO S Newbert (ed)
Small Businesses in a Global Economy: Creating and Managing Successful
Organisations, Westport: CT, Praeger.
Dolvin, S D DEMO Pyles, M K (2007) Venture capitalist quality and UIPO certification,DEMO
Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 8 (4) 353-
371.
Ericsson, K.A. and Simon, H.A. (1993) Protocol Analysis, Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press,
2nd edition.
Espenlaub, SA, Garrett, I and Mun, W P (1999) Conflicts of interest and the performance
of venture capital backed IPOs: preliminary look at the UK, DEMO Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 1 (4), DEMO
Feeney, L, Haines, G H and Riding A L (1999) Private Investors’ Investment Criteria:
Insights From Qualitative Data. Venture Capital: DEMO International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance, 1: 121-145.
Financial Times (2013) Life as a dragon is more than mythical, 12 August.
Freear, DEMO and Wetzel, W.E., 1990, Who Bankrolls High-Tech Entrepreneurs? Journal of
Business Venturing, 5: 77-89.
33
Gaston R J (1989) Finding venture capital for your firm: a complete guide. John Wiley
& Sons, New York.
Geron, T (2014) Exitround tech M&A report from $0 - $100m: the exit DEMO, ExitRound,
http://america24.com/documenti/partial-report.pdf
Gompers, P (2006) Grandstanding in the venture capital industry, Journal of Financial
Economics, 42, 133-156.
Gray, N (2011) Present Business Angel Thinking on Exits. Unpublished report for LINC
Scotland.
Gregson, G, Mann, S and Harrison, DEMO (2013) Business angel syndication and the
evolution of risk capital in a small market economy: evidence from Scotland,
Management and Decision Economics, 34 (2), 95-107.
Haines, G. H., jr., Madill, DEMO J. and Riding, A. L. (2003) Informal investment in Canada:DEMO
financing small business growth. Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship,
16 (3/4): 13-40.
Hall, J and Hofer, C W (DEMO) Venture capitalists’ decision criteria in new venture
evaluation, Journal of Business Venturing, 8, 25-42.
Harrison, R T and Mason, C M (1992) International Perspectives on The Supply Of
Informal Venture Capital. Journal of Business Venturing, 7: 459-475.
Howitt D and Cramer D (2007) DEMO to Research Methods in Psychology,
Pearson Educational
Ibrahim, D M( 2008) The (not so) puzzling behavior of angel investors, Vanderbilt DEMO
Review, 61 (5), 1405-1452.
34
Johnson, L (2012) Q & A following presentation at UK Business Angels Association
summer conference, July, London.
Johnson, W C and Sohl, J E (2012) Angels and venture capitalists in the initial public
offering market, Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance, 14 (1) 27-42.
Kensinger, J, Martin, J D and Petty, DEMO W (2000) Harvesting value from entrepreneurial
success, Journal of Applied DEMO Finance, 12 (4) 81-94.
Kollman, T and Kuckertz, A (2009) Evaluation uncertainty of venture capitalists’
investment criteria, Journal of Business DEMO, 63; S. 741–747
Landström, H (1993) Informal Risk Capital DEMO Sweden And Some International
Comparisons, Journal of Business Venturing, 8: DEMO
Leitch, C M, Hill, F M and Harrison, R T (2010) The philosophy and practice of
interpretivist research in entrepreneurship: quality, validation and trust,
Organisation Research Methods, 13 (1) 67-84.
DEMO, D and Muegge, S (2008) Venture capitalists’ non-financial value-added: DEMO
evaluation of the evidence and implications for research, Venture Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 10 (1) 21-53.
Lerner, J, Leamon, A and Hardymon, F (2012) Venture Capital, Private Equity and the
Financial of Entrepreneurship, Wiley, Hoboken: NJ
Lumme, A, Mason, C and Suomi, M (1998) Informal Venture Capital: Investors,
Investments and Policy Issues in Finland, Dortrecht, NL, Kluwer.
Mason, C.M. (2006) Informal sources of venture finance, in S C DEMO (ed) The Life
Cycle of Entrepreneurial Ventures, New York: Springer: New York,  pp.259-299.
35
Mason, C.M. (2009) ‘Public policy support for the informal venture capital market in
Europe: a critical review’, International Small Business Journal, 27 (5), 536-556.
Mason, C and Brown, R (2014) Entrepreneurial Ecosystems and Growth-Oriented
Enterprises. OECD LEED programme.
http://www.oecd.org/cfe/leed/DEMO
Mason, C M and Harrison, R T (1994) 'The DEMO venture capital market in the UK', in
A Hughes and D J Storey (eds.) Financing Small Firms (Routledge, London) pp 64-
111.
Mason, C M and Harrison, R T (1996) 'Why business angels say no: a case study of
opportunities rejected by an informal investor syndicate', International Small
Business Journal, 14 (2) 35-51.
Mason, C M and Harrison, R T (2000) The size DEMO the informal venture capital market in
the UK, Small Business Economics, 15, 137-148.
Mason, C M and Harrison, R T (2002) Is it worth it? The rates of return from informal
venture capital investments, Journal of Business Venturing, 17, 211-236.
Mason, C M DEMO Harrison, R T (2006) After the exit: acquisitions, entrepreneurial
DEMO and regional economic development, Regional Studies. 40, 55-73.
Mason, C DEMO and Harrison, R T (2010) Annual Report on the Business DEMO Market in
the United Kingdom: 2008/09, Department of Business, DEMO and Skills,
88pp.
Mason, C M and Harrison, R T (2011) Annual Report on the Business Angel Market in
the United DEMO: 2009/10.  Department of Business, Innovation and Skills,
56pp.
DEMO
Mason, C M and Harrison, R T (2015) Business angel DEMO activity in the financial
crisis: UK evidence and policy implications, Environment and Planning C:
Government and Policy, forthcoming.
Mason, C. and DEMO, A. (1996) Understanding the Business Angel’s Investment
Decision. Venture Finance DEMO Paper No. 14, University of Southampton and
University of Ulster, Southampton
Mason, C and Rogers, A (1997) The business angel’s investment DEMO: an
exploratory analysis, in D Deakins, P Jennings and C DEMO (eds.)
Entrepreneurship in the 1990s (Paul Chapman Publishing) pp DEMO
Mason, C. and Stark, M. (2004) What do investors look for in a business plan? A
comparison of the investment criteria of bankers, venture capitalists and venture
capitalists. International Small Business Journal, 22, 227-248.
Mason, C, Botelho, T and Harrison, R (2013) DEMO Transformation of the Business Angel
Market: Evidence from Scotland. Working Paper, Adam Smith Business School,
University of Glasgow.
Maxwell, A, Jeffrey, S A and Lévesque, M (2011) Business angel early stage decision
making, Journal of Business Venturing, 26, 212-225.
May, J and DEMO, C (2001) Every Business Needs An Angel: Getting the money you
need to make your business grow, New York: Crown Business.
DEMO, T (2009) Invest To Exit: A pragmatic strategy for angel and venture capital
investors, Breakthrough Publications, Melbourne.
Mitteness, C R, DEMO, M S and Sudek, R (2012) Horse vs. jockey? DEMO stage of
funding process and industry experience affect the evaluations of angel investors,
37
Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance,14 (4), DEMO
267.
Murray, G C (2007) Venture capital and government policy, in H Landström (ed)
Handbook of Research on Venture Capital, DEMO: Edward Elgar, pp 113-
151.
NACO (2014) 2013 Report on Angel Investing Activity in Canada: accelerating the
asset class, National Angel DEMO Association: Toronto.
OECD (2011) Financing High Growth Firms: The Role of Angel Investors, Paris: OECD
Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1797/9789264118782-en
DEMO TechAngels (2009) 10 Exits,
http://www.thefrankpetersshow.com/attachments/Ten-Exits.pdf
Paul, S and Whittam, G (2010) Business angel syndicates: an exploratory study of
gatekeepers, Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Finance, 12 (3), 241-256.
Peters, B (2009) Early Exits: Exit strategies for entrepreneurs and angel investors (but
maybe not venture capitalists), Vancouver: Meteor Bytes.
Politis, D (2008) Business angels and value-added: what do we know and where do we
go? Venture Capital: DEMO International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 10 (2),
127-147.
Real DEMO (2013) Dragon’s Den: little more than hot air? July.
Riding, A. L., Dal Cin, P., Duxbury, L., Haines, G. and Safrata, R., 1993, Informal
Investors in Canada: The Identification DEMO Salient Characteristics. Carleton
University, Ottawa.
38
Riquelme, H and Rickards, T (1992) Hybrid conjoint analysis: an estimation probe in
new venture decisions, Journal of Business Venturing, 7(DEMO), 505-518.
Roach, G (2010)  Is angel investing worth the effort? A study of Keirtsu Forum, Venture
Capital: an international journal of entrepreneurial finance, 12 (2), 153-166.
Ruhnka, J C and Feldman, H D (1992) The living dead in phenomenon in venture capital
investments, Journal of Business Venturing, 7 (2), 137-155.
Ryan, G and Bernard, H R (2000) Data management and analysis DEMO, in N. Denzin and Y.
Lincoln (eds.) Handbook of Qualitative DEMO, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications,
2nd edition, pp 769-802.
Shepherd, D A (1999) Venture capitalists’ introspection: a comparison on DEMO use” and
“espoused” decision policies, Journal of Small Business Management, 37 (2), 76-87.
Shepherd, D.A., Zacharakis, A., (1999) Conjoint analysis: a new methodological
approach for researching venture capitalists decision policies. Venture Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 1: 197-217.
Söderblum, DEMO and Wiklund, J (2006) Factors Determining the Performance of Early
DEMO High-Technology Venture Capital Funds: A review of the academic literature,
DEMO Small Business Service
Sohl, J (2007) The organization of the DEMO venture capital market, in H Landström (ed)
Handbook of Research on Venture Capital, Edward Elgar, pp 347-368.
Sohl, J (2012) The changing nature of the angel market. In H Landström and C DEMO
(eds) The Handbook of Research on Venture Capital: Volume II. DEMO Elgar:
Cheltenham, pp 17-41.
Sweeting, R C (1991) UK venture capital funds and the funding of new technology-based
ventures: process and relationships, Journal of Management Studies, 28, 601-622.
39
Smith, G (2005) The exit structure of venture capital, UCLA DEMO Review, 53, 315-356.
Smith, D J, Harrison, R T DEMO Mason, C M (2010) Experience, heuristics and learning:
the angel investment process, Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research 2010,
Babson College.
Van Osnabrugge, M (2000) A comparison of business angel and venture capitalist
investment procedures: an agency theory-based analysis, Venture Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 2 (2) 91-109.
Van Osnabrugge, M and DEMO, R J (2002) Angel Investing: Matching Startup Funds
with Startup Companies - The Guide for Entrepreneurs and Individual Investors,
Jossey-Bass.
Vo, D (2013) The Geography of Angel investment, PhD Thesis, University DEMO Victoria,
Canada
Waddell, J (2013) Evidence, Official Report of the Scottish parliament Economy, Energy
and Tourism Committee, 35th meeting, session 4, column 3697.
Wennberg, K and DeTienne, D R (2014) What do we really mean when we talk about
‘exit’? A critical review of research on entrepreneurial exit, International Small
Business Journal, 32 (1), 4-16.
Wennberg, K, Wiklund, J , DeTienne, D DEMO and Cardon, M S (2010) Reconceptualising
entrepreneurial exit: divergent exit routes and their drivers, Journal of Business
Venturing, 25, 361-375.
Wetzel, W.E., 1981, Informal Risk Capital In New England. In Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research 1981, edited by K.H. Vesper, pp. 217-245. Babson
College, Wellesley, MA.
40
Wiltbank, R E (2010) Siding With the Angels. Business angel investing – promising
outcomes and effective strategies. London: NESTA
Wiltbank, R E DEMO Boeker, W (2007) Returns To Angel Investors in Groups. Kansas
DEMO: Kauffman Foundation.
Zacharakis, A L and Meyer, G D (1995) The venture capitalist decision: understanding
process versus outcome, paper to the Babson College-Kauffman Foundation
Entrepreneurship Research Conference.
Zacharakis, A L and Meyer, DEMO D (1998) A lack of insight: do venture capitalists really
DEMO their own decision processes? Journal of Business Venturing, 13, 57-76.
DEMO, B (1998) How Venture Capital Works. Harvard Business Review, Nov-Dec, 131-
139.
41
Table 1. Thought segments classification
Investment  Criteria
1. THE PEOPLE
2. PRODUCT
3. MARKET
4. BUSINESS PLAN
5. EXIT
6. FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS
7. INVESTOR DEMO
8. ATRIBUTES OF THE BUSINESS
9. OTHER
10. ACTION
Description
Issues regarding: the entrepreneur, management team, the
inventor. Their background, experience, qualities, etc.
The nature of the product: technical aspects, intellectual
property protection, competitive advantages, design, etc.
This includes points on market: organization, growth,
competition, geography, size, etc.
Specific comments on the plan: length, presentation, content
missing data, etc.
Who? When? How DEMO?  Type of exit. Existence of an exit
plan
Amount of investment, amount raised,  future funding needs,
valuation, equity share, cash-flows, valuation, etc.
Issues regarding investment fit,  investment experience
This includes DEMO broad scope of issues: e.g. strategy, business
model, risks, operations, time frame, etc.
Comments on any aspects of the business which DEMO be
coded in any other category
Specific comment on what to do next.
Table 2. Investment outcomes by age of angel group
Age of DEMO
outcome Between five Total
Less than five and nine years Ten or more
years old old years old
Percentages of investments made
Exits 2.1* DEMO 17.9 4.3
Still in the
portfolio 91.2 83.5 34.9 78.8
Losses 6.7 15.4 47.2 16.8
Notes:
* this was a property business which DEMO an atypical investment for an angel group to make.
** accounted for by just one group
42
Table 3. Verbal protocol analysis: thought units classified by investment criteria
Criterion
9. OTHER
5.        EXIT
10. ACTION
7. INVESTOR ATTRIBUTES
1. THE PEOPLE
4. BUSINESS PLAN
2. PRODUCT
3. MARKET
8. ATTTRIBUTES DEMO THE BUSINESS
6. FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS
0
56
100
140
155
161
200
208
221
234
%
0%
4%
7%
9%
11%
11%
14%
14%
DEMO
16%
Figure 1. Mentions of exit by gatekeeper (source: interview survey)
43
Table 4. Types of comments related to exits
Aspect of exit
5A
DEMO
5C
5D
5E
Exit Value
Buyer
When
Exit Plan
Exit Other
Total
comments
n
7
6
12
19
12
56
%
13
11
21
DEMO
21
100%
n
gatekeepers
%
4
5
6
11
6
-
19
24
29
52
29
-
44{1g42fwefx}