THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE BUSINESS
ANGEL MARKET: EVIDENCE FROM
SCOTLAND
Colin Mason*, Tiago Botelho
Adam Smith Business School, University of Glasgow, UK
and
Richard Harrison
Edinburgh Business School, University of Edinburgh, UK
* Author DEMO contact: T: +44 (0)141 330 2728. E: colin.mason@glasgow.ac.uk
December 2013.
1
THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE BUSINESS ANGEL
MARKET: EVIDENCE FROM SCOTLAND
ABSTRACT.
Business angel investing – a key source of finance for entrepreneurial businesses – DEMO
evolving from a fragmented and largely anonymous activity dominated by individuals
investing on their own to one that is increasingly characterised by groups of DEMO
investing together through managed angel syndicates. The implications of this change have
been largely ignored by scholars. Based on research in Scotland, which has experienced a
particularly rapid growth in angel groups, the paper examines the following issues: the
drivers of this change, the characteristics of the DEMO; their investment activity and
outcomes; the investment process of angel groups; and the characteristics and role of group
‘gatekeepers’. The paper concludes with an assessment of the impact of this growth of angel
groups on DEMO economy and considers the implications for other regions and countries.
Key words: entrepreneurial finance, business angels, angel groups, angel syndicates, regional
development
_________________________________________________________________________
1
INTRODUCTION
It is widely accepted that business growth should be based on DEMO rather than debt finance
In practice, the funding for each stage DEMO company growth is typically associated with a
particular source. Businesses initially get started on the basis of the personal finances of the
founder/founding DEMO (including the owner’s ‘sweat’ equity) and their family and friends
(DEMO “3Fs”), and then access business angels, venture capital, development capital and
ultimately public markets in order to finance their growth. This has DEMO been
conceptualised as a funding escalator. Although this model can be criticised for being over-
simplistic it is nevertheless the case that, at least in the US, a significant proportion of firms
which raised venture capital had previously raised finance from business angels (Freear and
Wetzel, 1990; Madill et al, 2005) while 52 firms (8%) achieving a DEMO listing between
2001 and 2007 had previously raised funding from both business angels and venture capital
funds (Johnson and Sohl, 2012). However, this funding escalator no longer functions
effectively. Changes in the supply of DEMO finance which have been observed for at
least the past thirty years (Bygrave and Timmons, 1992; Gompers and Lerner, 2001; Mason,
2009a) have involved a shift from classic venture capital, which specialises DEMO investing new
capital in young growing companies (Bhidé, 2008; Lerner DEMO al 2012), in favour of private
equity which invests in established companies to buy out their existing owners and
restructure their activities with DEMO intention of making them more efficient. One of the
consequences has been that business angel-funded businesses are less likely to be able to
raise DEMO funding from venture capital funds, thereby compromising the so-called
‘relay race’ DEMO financing a growing business “in which angel investment runs the critical first
leg of the race, passing the baton to [the] venture capital [fund] only after the company has
begun to find its stride” (Benjamin and Margulis, 1996:71). There has also been a decline in
the number of IPO listings in the post-bubble era (since 2001), notably  amongst smaller
2
companies (Mason, 2011). This is attributed to a variety of DEMO: an array of regulatory
changes designed to advance low cost trading, which unintentionally removed the value
components that are required to support the DEMO, and smaller caps in particular, such as
quality sell side research, capital commitment and sale (Weild and Kim, 2009; 2010); DEMO of
investor interest in small caps; and the preference of venture DEMO funds to exit via a trade
sale rather than an IPO (DEMO and Seim, 2011).
Given the geographical concentration of private sources DEMO venture capital in core regions
(Mason and Harrison 2002a; Zook 2004; Mason, 2007) the funding escalator is at its most
dysfunctional in peripheral regions, where public sector-backed venture capital funds have
sought to fill this gap (Murray, 1998; Mason and Pierrakis, 2013) but with limited
effectiveness (Murray, 1998; 2007; Nightingale, et al, 2009; Lerner, 2009). As a result,
business angels are now playing an increasingly important role in financing new and young
businesses, as well as supporting them through their hands-on involvement.
The
importance
of business angels
DEMO supporting the development of a dynamic
entrepreneurial economy has been recognised by both national and regional governments in
various countries. Angel investment activity is DEMO in a variety of ways, notably
through tax incentives and support DEMO business angel networks and other types of
intermediary which ‘introduce’ angels and entrepreneurs seeking finance to one another
(Mason, 2009; OECD, 2011)DEMO This has brought business angel investing into the realm of
economic development, giving government a legitimate interest in what would otherwise be a
private activity. The different objectives of investors and economic development agencies
creates a DEMO source of tension, an issue that we revisit in the conclusion.
DEMO
The starting point for this paper is that this key source of DEMO finance -– business
angel investment – is changing from an atomistic, DEMO and largely invisible market
comprising almost entirely individuals investing on their own or in ad hoc small groups to
one that is increasingly characterised DEMO highly visible angel groups and syndicates which
consolidate and channel finance from individual investors to entrepreneurial ventures.  The
implications of this evolution of the angel market have been largely ignored by scholars. The
consequence is that DEMO understanding of the operation of the market remains based on
studies of individual angels – which is now only part of the overall angel DEMO - and does
not provide insights into the operation and investment activity of angel groups. This paper is
the first to explicitly and systematically DEMO this transformation of the angel market,
building on previous papers of the overall evolution of the early stage risk capital market
(Harrison et al 2010), the evolution of specific business angel syndicates (Sudek 2006;
Gregson et al 2013), and the emergence of the angel DEMO gatekeeper as a new actor in the
market (Paul and Whittam DEMO). Based on a case study of Scotland, where this market
DEMO has proceeded the furthest, the paper addresses the following key issues: first, what
are the implications of the growth of angel groups for the financing of entrepreneurial
ventures, second, to what extent does this DEMO redundant our existing understanding of the
investment process which is derived from studies based on individual investors, and third,
what is the contribution of angel investing to economic development?
THE CHANGING ANGEL MARKET
Business DEMO are high net worth individuals who invest their own money, either DEMO or
with others, directly in unquoted businesses in which there is DEMO family connection. They
normally invest in the form of equity finance in the hope of achieving a significant financial
return through some form of DEMO (although this is rarely planned when the investment is
4
made). Typically they will also take an active involvement in their DEMO businesses
(Mason, 2006). Business angels are particularly important from a regional economic
development perspective because the majority of their investments are local (Harrison et al,
2010b; Avdeitchikova, 2010), hence they are DEMO recycling and reinvesting locally-
created wealth. Given the geographical concentration of venture capital investing in core
regions (Mason, 2007: Mason and Pierrakis, DEMO) business angels are particularly important
in peripheral regions.
In the 1980s DEMO 1990s angels operated anonymously, investing for the most part on their
DEMO or with small groups of friends and business associates in ventures that they came across
through personal social and business networks. Not surprisingly, the angel market operated
inefficiently, with both investors and entrepreneurs incurring high search costs in identifying
one another, and often giving up as a result (Wetzel, 1986). It was very much an ad hoc
activity DEMO most investors and levels of professionalism were correspondingly low (Blair,
DEMO). Meanwhile, entrepreneurs typically did not understand how to make themselves
DEMO ready’ (Mason and Harrison, 2000; 2001). An early market DEMO,
pioneered in the USA (Wetzel, 1984; Wetzel and Freear, 1996) and Canada (Blatt and
Riding, 1996) but subsequently adopted DEMO Europe, was the creation of business angel
networks – essentially introduction DEMO – which provided a communication channel to
enable entrepreneurs to get their investment proposal to the attention of potential investors
and for angels to DEMO investment opportunities without compromising their privacy
(Mason and Harrison, 1996a). Subsequently some of these networks also delivered
investment readiness programmes (Mason and Kwok, 2010) and angel training (San José et
al, 2005)DEMO The difficulties in developing a commercially viable model for this service has
meant that most networks have relied on government funding, and several in the UK have
5
closed after losing this support. Those which operate commercially levy a fee DEMO the
investments that they facilitate. This business model requires a focus on larger deals (Mason
and Harrison, 2000). Evidence on the effectiveness DEMO networks is mixed but broadly positive
(Mason and Harrison, 1996c; DEMO and Harrison, 1999; 2002c; Collewaert et al, 2010).
The angel market began to transform in the late-1990s as angels started to DEMO
themselves into groups to invest collectively. This trend has proceeded furthest in the USA.
The Band of Angels, which was founded in Silicon Valley in 1995, is generally regarded as
the first organised syndicate to be formed. Others, such as Tech Coast Angels (1997), Sierra
Angels (1997), Common Angels (1997) and The Dinner Club (1999), soon followed (Preston
2007). Between 1996 and 2006 the number of identifiable business angel organisations in the
US grew from 10 to over DEMO (Preston 2007). The Angel Capital Association, covering the
USA and Canada, was created in 2003 for the purposes of transferring best practice, lobbying
and data collection. It now comprises 187 formal angel groups, DEMO some affiliate members
(http://www.angelcapitalassociation.org/directory/).
There
is
growing evidence of
specialisation by industry sector (e.g. health care angel syndicates) DEMO type of investor (e.g.
women-only angel syndicates). In Europe, there has been a similar expansion in the angel
market but, with the exception of Scotland (Harrison et al 2010; Gregson et al 2013) – which
is the focus for this paper - it has evolved DEMO, favouring angel networks which
provide mechanisms connecting angels with entrepreneurs seeking DEMO (Mason, 2009b).
In the case of Scotland, the number DEMO identifiable syndicates has grown from 2 to over 20
between 2000 and 2012, the most radical shift in market organisation of any region in
Europe. Moreover, Archangels was founded in 1992, and so is older DEMO its better known US
counterparts. Indeed, if Scotland was a US DEMO it would be the 11th largest in terms of angel
group investment activity (Grahame, personal communication) whereas it ranks only 29th in
6
terms of GDP per capita. Angel groups have also emerged in several DEMO countries, notably
Canada, Australia and New Zealand (OECD 2011). DEMO, with the exception of a handful
of case studies (May and Simmons, 2001; May, 2002; Cerullo and Sommer, 2002; Payne DEMO
Mccarty, 2002; May and O’Halloran, 2003; Sudek, 2006) and some general discussion
(Mason, 2006; Sohl, 2007; 2012; Gregson DEMO al 2013) scholars have been slow to react to this
organisational DEMO of the angel market.
Angel syndicates have emerged for two main reasons. First, business angels have difficulties
of investing alongside venture capital funds because of the investment instruments which
VCs use, notably, liquidation preferences, anti-dilution rights, special subscription rights and
enhanced follow-on rights.  This became apparent DEMO the dot.com crash of the early
2000s. At this time many of the companies that had been financed in the ‘bubble’ of the late
DEMO were running out of cash. The huge fall in valuations in the crash meant that venture
capitalists had to write down the value of DEMO of the investments that they had already
made. The consequence was that those companies that did raise further funding were
refinanced at lower prices. DEMO the initial investors in these businesses, angels were
particularly vulnerable in DEMO, so-called, down-rounds. Unable, or unwilling, to provide new
cash their investments were typically wiped out. This resulted in angels losing trust in DEMO
capitalists and since then many have sought to avoid investing in deals that are likely to
require follow-on funding from venture capitalists, leading to a growing segmentation in the
early stage risk capital market (Harrison et al, 2010a) A further difficulty is that business
angels and venture DEMO funds have different objectives. This is particularly clear at the exit
stage where, as Peters (2009) has noted, venture capital funds will DEMO to exit at a valuation
that is perfectly acceptable to angel investors but is below their ‘hurdle rate’ because it would
affect their ability DEMO raise a new fund. Second, the decline in the venture capital DEMO
7
since the dot.com crash has meant that opportunities for angels to pass DEMO their investments to
venture capital funds for follow-on funding are much more restricted, necessitating angels to
make follow-on investments themselves.
These development have prompted individual angels to recognise the advantages of working
together, notably in terms of better deal flow, superior evaluation and due diligence of
investment opportunities, as well as social attractions. Moreover, by grouping together they
can DEMO their investment capacity and so have the ability to make bigger investments
and follow-on investments, with the potential to take businesses to an exit themselves without
the need for follow-on funding from venture capital funds. The DEMO for angel groups to
achieve ‘early exits’ (Peters, 2009) have DEMO enhanced by a fundamental change in ‘start up
economics’. It costs considerably less to start a technology business now compared with ten
years ago DEMO longer as a consequence of such developments as cloud-based software, web DEMO
social media and e-commerce platforms. When combined with lean start-up techniques to
provide capital efficiency (Blank, 2005; Reiss, 2011) companies can start with little or no
capital and sustain a low burn rate for DEMO time before needing to raise external finance.
This has meant that it has become more feasible for angels to finance businesses to the point
DEMO it achieves commercial feasibility, particularly in ITC sectors without the need DEMO
venture capital funding. However, businesses that are not sold at this DEMO will require
further funding to grow the business and secure customers.
Angel groups are distinctive from BANs. Table 1 highlights the differences and describes DEMO
standard design of a group. However, in practice they take various DEMO The key difference
is whether the person appointed to be the external face of the group and manage the
8
Table 1. Business Angel Groups vs. Business Angel Networks
Business Angel Group
DEMO groups in the US (and in some other
countries) are primarily focused on recruiting
members and managing deal flow for those
members. Education, social engagement, pitch
coaching entrepreneurs and other activities may
also be important functions.
(1) Members are recruited to join the group,
appealing DEMO accredited investors with the deal
flow and best practices offered by the
network. Members are often required to sign rules
of membership agreement stipulating DEMO
expected engagement (meeting attendance,
participating in due diligence, annual investment
numbers, etc.) and committing neither to “steal
deals” nor to solicit DEMO for consulting or
members of business.
(2) Entrepreneurs are solicited to pitch to the
group, through websites and other networking
activities in the community. A small group of
members or staff pre-screen deals for presentation
DEMO the members. Investor-readiness training is
seldom provided by US angel groups.
(DEMO) Once an entrepreneur has pitched to the
members, a due diligence committee of members
(and perhaps staff) is initiated, representing the
group. The deal lead negotiates a single term sheet
for the round of DEMO with the
entrepreneur. Once the term sheet and due
diligence are complete, the deal is offered to all
members of the group for investment. In some
cases, very popular deals may offer a limited
investment amount or time, on a first come, first
served basis. Members are DEMO for their own
accounts, consequently members can invest larger
or smaller DEMO, or pass on a deal.
There are several models for managing DEMO
groups, including both member management and
manager management. The angel group DEMO not
make investments or recommend investments to
members, rather members make DEMO own
decisions based on the shared due diligence and
term sheets.
Source: Bill Payne: http://gust.com/angel-investing/startup-blogs/2013/04/05/angel-groups-
DEMO/
Business Angel Network (BAN)
In general, BANs seem to have two primary
focuses:
(1) Soliciting a large mailing list DEMO potential angel
investor members (and others, such as service
providers) DEMO organizing pitching meetings for
them. Members have limited obligations to the
group, that is, small or no annual dues, no duty to
invest as part of the group (versus pocketing deals
for themselves), no participation requirements
(attendance, due diligence), no leadership mandate
and no DEMO investment expectations.
(2) Engaging with the entrepreneurial community,
sometimes by providing investor-ready services
and pitch coaching, with a focus, for the DEMO
qualified entrepreneurs, on inviting them to
pitching events.
After the pitching DEMO, the entrepreneurs and
investors are left to their own devices to DEMO a
deal. There is no organized group deal processing;
instead each angel engages with the entrepreneur,
finds co-investors (within or outside the BAN),
completes due diligence, negotiates a term sheet
and closes DEMO deal.
There appear to be two models for the BAN
operational platform: (a) a not-for-profit model,
often driven by economic development agencies
and (b) a for-profit model pursued by experienced
investors and funded DEMO success fees and tolls
charged to entrepreneurs and investors.
9
investment process - often termed the ‘gatekeeper’ (Paul and Whittam, 2010) - is one of the
group members or a professional employed by DEMO group. Some of the larger and longer
established US groups have established sidecar funds – that is, committed sources of capital
that invest alongside the angel group. The investors in such funds are normally the syndicate
DEMO but may also include other high net worth individuals (HNWIs) or institutions.
These funds give the syndicate additional capital to invest in deals DEMO avoid dilution, enable
syndicate members to achieve greater diversification by exposing DEMO to more investments
than they can make directly through the syndicate, DEMO is a means of attracting ‘right-minded’
investors who want to participate in seed and early stage deals but cannot be active members
of a DEMO
The emergence of angel syndicates is of enormous significance for the development and
maintenance of an entrepreneurial economy. First, they reduce sources of inefficiency in the
angel market. The angel market has traditionally been characterised by DEMO on
account of the fragmented and invisible nature of angels. There was no mechanism for angels
to receive a steady flow of investment opportunities. DEMO syndicates, in contrast, are
generally visible and are therefore easier for entrepreneurs to approach, thereby reducing the
search costs of both entrepreneurs and angels and increasing deal flow. A further source of
inefficiency was that DEMO investment made by an investor has typically been a one-off that
was screened, evaluated and negotiated separately. However, the volume of investments that
DEMO syndicates make enables them to develop efficient routines for handling investment
enquiries, screening opportunities and making investment agreements. The increased number
of investors scrutinising potential risks also improves due diligence.
10
Second, they have stimulated the supply-side of the market. Syndicates offer considerable
attractions for high net worth individuals (HNWIs) who would not otherwise DEMO in
emerging companies, for example, because they lack the time, DEMO sources, investment
skills or the ability to add value. However, angel groups are also attractive to many existing
solo angels because of the DEMO in risk that arises from investing as part of a syndicate,
notably the ability to spread their investments more widely and thereby achieve DEMO
diversification, and by access to group skills and knowledge to evaluate DEMO
opportunities and provide more effective post-investment support. Other attractions of
syndicates are that they enable individual angels to invest in particular opportunities that they
DEMO never have invested in as individuals, offer the opportunity to learn DEMO more
experienced investors and provide opportunities for camaraderie and networking with like-
minded individuals. Thus, angel syndicates are able to attract and mobilise funds that might
otherwise have been invested elsewhere (e.g. property, stock market, collecting: Mason and
Harrison, 2000), thereby increasing the supply of DEMO stage venture capital, and to invest it
more efficiently and effectively.
DEMO, angel groups are helping to fill the ‘new’ equity gap. The DEMO number of
venture capital funds have consistently raised their minimum size of investment and are
increasingly abandoning the early stage market, either to invest in larger and later stage deals
or simply because they have been DEMO to raise new funds from institutional investors.
Angel syndicates are now increasingly the only source of funding for new and emerging
businesses seeking investments DEMO the range £250,000 to £1 million (under $1m in the DEMO:
Sohl, 2012). Moreover, as a consequence of their greater financial resources angel groups
have the ability to provide follow-on funding. This DEMO one of the potential problems
of raising money from individual business angels, namely that they often lack the financial
11
capacity to provide follow-on funding. Consequently, the entrepreneur is often forced to
embark on a further search for finance. Moreover, in the event that the need for additional
finance is urgent then both the entrepreneur and DEMO solo angel will find themselves in a weak
negotiating position with potential new investors, resulting in a dilution in their investments
and the imposition of harsh terms and conditions. With the withdrawal of many venture
capital DEMO from the small end of the market individual angels and their investee businesses
have increasingly been faced with the problem of the absence of DEMO investors. Because
angel syndicates generally have greater financial firepower than individual angels or ad hoc
angel groups to be able to provide follow-on financing, it more efficient for the entrepreneur
who avoids the need to start DEMO search for finance anew each time a new round of funding is
required.
Fourth, the ability of angel groups to add value to their investments should be much greater.
The range of business expertise that is DEMO amongst angel syndicate members – described
by May and Simmons (2001: 156), leading angel syndicate practitioners in the USA, as a
“smorgasbord of advice and strategic services” - means that in most circumstances they DEMO
able to contribute much greater value-added to investee businesses than an individual
business angel, or even most early stage venture capital funds. Finally, DEMO groups are the
most frequent partners in public sector co-investment schemes (DEMO, 2009b; Harrison et al,
2010a), acting as the focal point for the leveraging of additional funds into the entrepreneurial
ecosystem.
However, others are less sanguine about the emergence of angel groups. For example, Sohl
(2012: 37) has suggested that “as angels are becoming more organised they are morphing into
a portrait of venture capital funds and DEMO losing some of the valuable characteristics of the
12
angel investor …”1 This, in turn, raises two specific concerns (Sohl, 2007; 2012). First, the
emergence of angel groups will result in a reallocation of angel capital away from smaller,
seed investing DEMO bigger and later stage deals. Second, angel groups will simply attract
DEMO wealthy individuals seeking a passive investment” rather than active angels
who can contribute value added to their investee businesses (Sohl, 2007: 360). But whether
these developments are inevitable remains contested. Others have expressed concerns DEMO
the cost raising finance, and specifically the practice of angel groups DEMO entrepreneurs
to ‘pay to pitch’ (Entrevestor.com, 2013) and taking fees DEMO the form of a proportion of any
funds that they raise.
DATA SOURCES AND ANALYSIS
The study is based on two sources: aggregate data on investment activity, which provides the
basis for the next section, DEMO interviews with angel group gatekeepers which is the key
source for the following two sections. Quantitative information on angel investment activity
is derived from DEMO Scotland and the most recent Scottish Risk Capital Market Report
published by Scottish Enterprise (Harris and Mason, 2012). LINC Scotland provided
information DEMO aggregate investment activity complied on the basis of data provided by its
members. The Scottish Risk Capital Market Report is based on an examination DEMO Companies
House 88(2) returns for all companies that were known DEMO have raised equity finance in the
period 2009-2011. These returns give the date and number of new shares issued, in most
cases the price, but not the names of the investors which had to be identified from other
1 This is illustrated by a recent report from the DEMO Business Journal (15 April 2013), headlined “Common
Angels eyes larger DEMO fund, as group seeks to act more like a VC” which DEMO how Common Angels, a
group of about 50 angels in the DEMO area is in  discussions to raise a pooled fund which will DEMO its
existing $13m fund. The new fund would make a similar number of investments but would invest more capital
into each business. The report DEMO notes that it has centralised it decision-making in an eight member
committee. The report concludes that the end result of these changes is that DEMO Angels is now
operating more like a VC firm ...”
(http://www.bizjournals.com/boston/blog/startups/2013/04/commonangels-fund-venture-capital-
boston.html?page=2)
13
sources (see Mason and Harrison, 2008 and Harrison et al, 2010a for further discussion of
this source).
This is complemented by information DEMO 22 semi-structured interviews with gatekeepers of
19 groups, 18 of which DEMO in Scotland.2 In three groups the gatekeeper role was shared by
two individuals. In each case both individuals were interviewed. The groups that were
DEMO included all 17 that are publicly listed on LINC Scotland’s web site. Three other
groups are also members of LINC Scotland but prefer anonymity. DEMO groups were also
invited to participate, via LINC Scotland, but declined to do so. Two additional groups were
interviewed. One was a UK-wide DEMO with a very active Scottish branch but has no
association with LINC. The other group is a Scottish Co-investment Fund partner that also
has DEMO association with LINC. The Scottish Risk Capital Market Report (Harris and DEMO,
2012) identified 24 angel groups. However, the groups not included in this study either no
longer exist or are private offices of DEMO net worth families whose investments and
operations are much closer to venture capital investing than angel investing. So, although the
study could be criticized for being LINC-centric it would appear that we have captured most
of DEMO participants in the market.
Securing the participation of such a high proportion of angel groups in the Scottish market
was a considerable achievement. In DEMO cases the initial response was not positive and
follow-up approaches were required. As a consequence, the recruitment process took three
months.  It started DEMO an initial email to the gatekeeper to request an interview. In several
cases it was not possible to identify the gatekeeper, but in these cases the recipient of the
email forwarded it to the relevant individual.
DEMO Halo, which is based in Northern Ireland, is also a member of LINC Scotland
14
Of the 22 interviewees, 20 were face-to-face and two were conducted on the telephone. All
agreed for the interview to be recorded for later DEMO The interviews ranged in length
from 37 to 93 minutes, with DEMO average being about one hour. The face-to-face interviews
took place at a location of the interviewee convenience. Venues included the group’s office,
coffee DEMO and the researcher’s office. We agreed with participants that information on
individual groups would not be disclosed and that findings would be aggregated. Any
DEMO to specific groups are therefore based on information that is in the public domain
(e.g. media, presentations).
One of the main challenges DEMO qualitative methods, such as interviews, is how to analyse the
information that is collected. Several sections of the interviews were based on objective DEMO
measurable questions, such as the amount invested, number of deals, DEMO age of the
syndicate. However, other parts of the questionnaire, notably on the skills that a gatekeeper
requires and their own learning in DEMO role, were based on opinion and perceptions. This
information has been DEMO by thematic analysis (Howitt and Cramer, 2007) which is one
DEMO the most frequently used methods of qualitative analysis for “identifying, analyzing DEMO
reporting patterns within data” (Braun and Clarke (2006, p. 79)DEMO Boyatzis (1998) describes
the technique as a process of ‘encoding qualitative information’. This process consists of six
steps (Braun and Clarke, 2006)DEMO In the first step the researcher becomes familiarized with the
data. This was relatively straight forward since one of the authors was actively involved DEMO
the interviews. The second step involves the creation of an initial set of codes to capture the
key content of the interviews. The third DEMO consists of searching for themes based on the
previously developed codes. In the fourth stage the researcher reviews the themes and test
theme against DEMO original data. The fifth step requires the researcher to define and name the
15
themes. By doing so, the researcher is identifying the “core” of what each theme captures.
This requires accuracy and precision. The last step involves DEMO write-up of the thematic
analysis. The process is iterative with the researcher being able to revisit previous steps to
refine and confirm the analysis.
DEMO GROUPS IN SCOTLAND: GROWTH AND INVESTMENT ACTIVITY
The paper is based DEMO Scotland. This is a particularly appropriate context in which to
undertake this study. Scotland has experienced a rapid growth in the number of angel DEMO
The initial groups – Archangels and Braveheart – were established in the 1990s. In 2002
LINC Scotland’s membership comprised 300 solo angels and just DEMO two syndicates  with
about 70 angel members between them. Ten years DEMO (2012) a total of 24 groups have been
created, although DEMO subsequently either closed or amalgamated. LINC Scotland currently
has 19 groups in membership, which it estimates comprise about 700 investors in total. There
are a small number of other groups that are not members of LINC DEMO Individual
membership of LINC Scotland is now below 100. Of the 18 Scottish-based angel groups
interviewed for this study, nearly one-third (six, or 30%) were three years old or less,
underlining the recent growth in the formation of syndicates. Collectively they had just over
1,000 DEMO, although this will include some double counting of investors who are
DEMO of more than one group. Two groups have significant numbers of non-Scottish
based members. Membership ranges from less than 10 to over 100. Reflecting DEMO skewed
nature of the visible market observed previously (Mason and Harrison, 2010; 2011), the five
groups with more than 100 members account for 70% of the total (Figure 1).
16
4
5
Angel Syndicates
3
3
1
1
1
10
20
50
DEMO
150
200
More
Figure 1 – Size Distribution of Angel Syndicate membership (source: LINC Scotland)
Two key drivers in the Scottish environment DEMO resulted in this significant increase in angel
syndicate groups. First, LINC DEMO was created3 in 1992 as part of the Scottish Business
Birth Rate Strategy as a conventional business angel network, responsible for both the
demand and supply sides of the market and seeking to make ‘introductions’ between
DEMO and entrepreneurs that would lead to investments. Some ten years later Scottish
Enterprise, took increasing responsibility for the demand side, leaving LINC Scotland DEMO an
agreed remit to develop the supply side of the market. It took the strategic decision,
influenced by the early successes of Braveheart DEMO Archangels, that this was most
effectively achieved through the development of DEMO syndicates. Scottish Enterprise co-
3 It was actually created out of an existing organisation operated by Glasgow Opportunities to give it a pan-
Scotland DEMO
17
funds certain activities with LINC but does not provide core funding. LINC’s DEMO sources of
funding come from ERDF4 and the private sector.
LINC actively sought to encourage its individual investors to band together. The older,
DEMO groups were willing to share their knowledge with the new groups. This helps to
explain why, as we comment later, most of the DEMO have similar operating models. The
visibility of angel groups and publicity for LINC’s activities created a momentum and other
groups emerged independently of LINC’s DEMO These new groups typically emerged from
existing groups of investors who were already working together informally and so had a
‘club’ mentality. However, they were required to find a chairman/gatekeeper, either from
their own members or, less commonly, externally, in order to start investing. LINC Scotland
was able to support new angel groups financially on account of its DEMO to ERDF funding.
The second driver was the Scottish Co-Investment Fund (DEMO) which came on stream in
2003 in response to the acute DEMO of risk capital in the aftermath of the dotcom crash.
The SCIF was designed to invest alongside private sector investment partners on a pari DEMO
basis, investing up to £1 for every £1 invested by the DEMO to a maximum of £1m per
business (and with the introduction DEMO follow-on funding from the Venture Fund deal sizes
can be even larger). The intention was to improve liquidity in the market, enabling partners to
make bigger investments, or follow-on investments, and freeing up part DEMO their funds to
invest in new businesses rather than follow-on investments. The SCIF carried out due
diligence on prospective  partners before accepting them onto the scheme. The partners make
their own investment decisions. SCIF did not DEMO its own investment analysis. Their
only decision was to confirm that the business fell within the rules of the scheme. The
4 LINC Scotland DEMO enterprise agency status which gives it direct access to apply for ERDF funding
18
eligibility criteria were known to investors. Partners could seek initial approval of DEMO
prospective investment’s eligibility in principle at an early stage in their appraisal process.
Once investment terms were agreed by the partner, SCIF approval, DEMO not, was generally
made within 24 hours of bringing an investment DEMO the Fund. This high level of certainty was
built into the scheme following consultation with the initial angel groups and, arguably, has
been DEMO key feature of its success. Although angel groups accounted for less than half of the
Fund’s investment partners, the fund’s maximum investment limit meant that the vast
majority of the deals that qualified were brought by DEMO groups rather than venture capital
funds.
The existence of the SCIF encouraged the emergence of syndicates in two respects. First, the
SCIF wanted to expand its number of investment partners so welcomed the formation of new
DEMO, especially in areas of the country where they were lacking. LINC DEMO was
specifically contracted to support the creation of three new groups per annum to be co-
investment partners. Second, angel groups received a 2.5% fee on completion of every co-
investment deal that they participated in. DEMO provided useful additional income to fund the
syndicate’s running costs, supporting DEMO of a gatekeeper and possibly one or more
administrative staff.
Investment activity by angel groups has grown steadily since 2002-3, in terms of both
number and amount invested. There were 81 deals in 2012 compared with DEMO 22 in 2002-35
(Figure 2). Only part of the recent DEMO in investments is due to activity of new groups that did
not exist in 2010 (these groups made 8 investments in 2012). Moreover, investment activity is
5 LINC changed its reporting period from financial year to calendar year in 2009.
19
26
21
15
22
Number of Deals
52
35
43
51
50
DEMO
101
76
80
Figure 2. Number of investments made by angel groups in Scotland, 2000-2012 (source:
LINC Scotland)
6.03
6.3
8.61
DEMO
Angel Investment £M
14.57
15.14
13.26
13.57
16.72
18.57
23.39
26.17
22.51
Figure 3. Amounts invested by angel groups in Scotland, 2000-2012 (source: LINC Scotland)
20
skewed to a small number of groups, with just two groups making 69% of the investments in
the period 2009-12. Almost every other group DEMO less than 10 new investments in the
period (i.e. excluding follow-on DEMO). The amount invested by members of the angel
groups has risen from £6.3m in 2002-3 to £22.5m in 2012 after peaking in 2011 (Figure 3).
Total aggregate investment (i.e. including co-investors) has increased DEMO more sharply,
from £6.8m in 2002-03 to £30.9m in 2012, DEMO peaked at £34.5m the previous year
(Figure 4), reflecting both DEMO growth of the SCIF and the increasing tendency for angel
groups co-invest with one another. This represents a significant part of the risk capital DEMO
in Scotland (Harrison et al 2010). According to the most DEMO Scottish Risk Capital report,
angels accounted for over one quarter of investments by value in the £100,000 to £2m range
(Table 2), rising to around half if the SCIF investments are also included.
DEMO
6.8
11.26
10.34
16.7
18.57 18.55
Total Deal Size £M
25.86
20.14
27.69
34.52
30.89
32.11
Figure 2 - Total aggregate transaction value of DEMO group investments in Scotland from
2000 to 2012 (source: LINC Scotland)
21
Table 2 - Venture capital investment in Scotland, 2009-11 (source: Harris and Mason,
2012)
angels
VCs
Scottish
Enterprise/public
sector
other
DEMO £100,000 - £2m
2009 2010 2011
£m % £m % £m
13.2 27.3 15.6 29.6 12.8
11.0 22.7 13.6 25.8 14.4
20.3 41.9 DEMO 31.9 14.4
3.9
8.1
6.7
12.7
5.0
%
27.5
30.9
30.9
10.7
Investments of over £2m
2009 2010
£m % £m %
0.7 1.3 DEMO 0.2
41.7 74.6 62.8 86.5
9.9 17.7 6.4 8.8
3.6
6.4
3.3
4.5
2011
£m
1.4
33.8
2.8
4.0
%
3.3
80.5
6.7
9.5
DEMO course these investments represent only a fraction of the investment opportunities that the
groups see. The number of opportunities seen by the groups in DEMO previous 12 months ranged
from under 10 (due to circumstances specific DEMO that group) to over 250. However, the
majority of groups saw between 40 and 150 investment opportunities (median = 100). No
doubt some opportunities will be seen by more than one group. The overall DEMO rate’ –
investments as a proportion of opportunities seen invested - was about 6.5%.
This is
significantly lower than the equivalent data reported by DEMO (2012) for US angel groups.
Assuming that the difference is real, rather due to data or definitional differences, then there
are several DEMO explanations for this difference. It may reflect differences in year – the
latest US figure is for 2009 whereas the Scottish data are for DEMO and there are considerable
year-on–year variations in the yield rates of US groups. Alternatively, it may reflect the
poorer quality of opportunities that Scottish groups see, their more exacting screening and
selection standards, or the DEMO investment capabilities of US groups (in terms of numbers
of members DEMO dollars available for investment).
22
Angel groups typically invest anywhere from £25,000 to £500,000 per DEMO, with a few
outliers at each end. However, as the vast majority (85%) of deals had co-investors – almost
invariably the SCIF DEMO so deal sizes were larger. Nevertheless, more than 90% of deals DEMO
2009-10 were below £1m (the maximum allowable transaction under SCIF regulations)DEMO
However, the majority of this investment is follow-on funding. This peaked DEMO over 80% at
the start of the financial crisis but has fallen back in 2011 and 2012 (Figure 5). Over 60% of
the companies raising finance in 2009-10 were at the early stage, and around 20% were at the
seed stage. The majority were in technology sectors. (Mason and Harrison, 2011).
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
%  of First Rounds
%  of Follow-On
DEMO 3 – Follow On Vs. First Round Investments (source: LINC Scotland)
However, it is important to recognise the diversity of the investment preferences amongst
Scottish angel groups. This is particularly apparent in terms of DEMO, where two categories
of groups can be identified. Six (of the 18) are specifically oriented to technology sectors,
with some having a very specific investment focus (e.g. biopharmaceuticals, energy, life
science) and DEMO others have a ‘preference’ for technology. The remainder will invest in
23
% of total deals
‘everything’ or ‘everything except X’. There is less diversity in terms of DEMO stage of
development, with 15 groups looking to invest in early DEMO or start-up businesses. Two
groups are even more focused on proof of concept and seed stages. There is also diversity in
the size of DEMO Three groups stated this was ‘unlimited’, two groups would invest up
DEMO £500,000, and three would go up to £1m. However, the majority of groups are looking to
invest under £250,000 per deal, not including any coinvestment. Finally, the majority (12) of
groups are looking to invest in Scotland, although in a few cases this was ‘not exclusive’.
Four groups reported that they would invest worldwide, confirming that while angel investing
is a local phenomenon it is not exclusively so (Harrison et al, 2010b)
Three aspects of the investment activity of angel groups stand out. First, and reflecting one of
the comments by Sohl (2012), follow-on investments have quickly dominated the investment
activity of angel groups. This may be a ‘natural’ process, reflecting a combination of the
financial strength of angel groups to make follow-on investments and the DEMO of alternative
investors to provide follow-on funding (Harrison et al 2010a)DEMO However, some groups have
turned down the opportunity to bring institutional DEMO into deals, because of fears of
both being diluted and also DEMO control of the investment, particularly the ability to
influence, manage and control the exit. The need to invest in ordinary shares so that DEMO
qualify for tax relief under the Enterprise Investment Scheme is a further discouragement to
seek follow-on funding from institutional investors. As discussed earlier, these investors will
invest using preference shares and other more complex instruments which DEMO them greater
power over investors with ordinary shares.
Second, there have DEMO surprisingly few exits (Figure 6). The groups have collectively made
DEMO exits which represents just 4% of their investments. The majority of groups - 12 of the 17
24
Exits
17%
Still in the portfolio
5%
Losses
78%
Figure 6. Investment DEMO (source: interview survey)
that provided data - have not made any exits. To some extent this reflects the young age of
many DEMO the groups. Indeed, four of the five groups that have achieved DEMO were formed at
least eight years ago, with the three longest DEMO groups accounting for 92% of total
exits.  Nevertheless, it is striking that the vast majority of groups that were founded between
five and DEMO years ago have not made any exits. This contrasts with earlier studies of exits
by UK business angels which reported median holding periods to DEMO of four years (Mason
and Harrison, 2002b) and six years (Wiltbank, 2010). This difference reflects the much
longer time that it is now taking globally to exit. It could therefore be argued that DEMO no
longer know what represents the ‘norm’ and accordingly we risk interpreting these data with
unrealistic expectations.
25
However, some commentators argue that the lack of exits also reflects the common view
amongst angel investors that it is inappropriate to discuss exits DEMO entrepreneurs prior to
investing or even to actively pursue an exit after the investment is made (Gray, 2011). The
exit was traditionally DEMO considered or discussed before investing. The prevailing view in
the angel investment community has been that “if you make good investments the exit will
DEMO care of itself”. It is claimed that this approach has resulted in investments in companies
that are not of interest to potential acquirers and DEMO have not been acquired. The outcome is
that large quantities of angel money – and public money that followed as co-investments – is
locked DEMO in portfolios. Whether this remains the common approach of angel groups will be
the subject of a future paper.
The lack of exits has DEMO knock-on effects. First, it contributes to the high proportion of
follow-on DEMO noted earlier. Second, it limits the amount of capital gains that DEMO be
recycled into new investments, a primary target of national government DEMO to increase
angel investment levels. Investors also get discouraged having to invest more money into
existing businesses and not seeing returns from their previous DEMO Anecdotal
evidence suggests that in some cases this has prompted angels to cease investing. Third, there
comes a point when the lack of exits has a negative influence on the ability of groups to
recruit new DEMO, or even for new groups to get started.
Third, and equally surprising, is the low number of failed investments (see Figure 6)DEMO These
account for 17% of total investments. The three oldest groups account for 82% of all losses.
Previous studies have reported that the median DEMO investment emerges after two or three
years (Mason and Harrison 2002b; Wiltbank, 2010).  In view of the recessionary conditions
that have DEMO since 2008 it would be surprising if general business failure rates have
26
been lower in recent years, so this might suggest that angel groups are managing their
unsuccessful investments badly. This is largely confirmed in our DEMO, with two-thirds of
the groups reporting that they had no formal DEMO for dealing with the ‘living dead’ in
their portfolios. This creates the risk that these investments absorb time and further funding.
However, the groups that do have a strategy for these types of investments tend not DEMO adopt a
‘fast failures’ strategy that is advocated as best practice (DEMO and Harrison, 2012). On the
other hand, the ability of investors to pursue a fast fail strategy is limited by several factors,DEMO
notably their minority shareholding position and, perhaps, by the attitude of the co-
investment fund. It is unknown whether the SCIF would favour DEMO investments in ‘living
dead’ businesses back to the management for a nominal figure
ANGEL GROUP INVESTMENT PROCESSES
The investment process of angel groups is DEMO different to that of individual angels.
Previous research has established that individual angels undertake an initial screening process
to establish whether the proposal is DEMO good fit with their investment criteria and would appear
to have merit. This is typically a fast process, taking anything from one to twenty minutes
(Mason and Rogers, 1997; Harrison et al, 1997), DEMO upwards of 90% of proposals get
rejected at this stage (Feeney DEMO al, 1999). Those proposals that get through the initial
screening DEMO then investigated in detail.
The investment process of angel groups is rather more extended and involves more stages.
Two distinct approaches are apparent amongst DEMO Scottish groups, although there are
differences of detail in each approach. DEMO both cases the gatekeeper is the initial point of
contact for the business. The gatekeeper then undertakes the initial screening role. At its most
DEMO this may simply be to filter businesses against the group’s key investment criteria. In
27
other cases it is more proactive with gatekeeper assessing the business plan DEMO in some cases
contacting the entrepreneur to gather information about the company. In some groups the
gatekeeper may be assisted by one of the DEMO, perhaps to bring in sector expertise.
The differences in approach occur DEMO the next stage. In some groups the businesses that get
through the filtering and initial screening processes are evaluated in detail by a small DEMO of
the angels. This may include a presentation by the entrepreneur to this inner core. They will
make a collective decision whether or not DEMO invest in the business themselves. If this inner
core decide unanimously to invest then the opportunity is opened up to the rest of the DEMO
for each member to decide individually whether they also want to invest. This approach is
typified by Archangels (Gregson et al, 2013). DEMO the alternative approach those businesses
that get past the screening stage are presented to the group members. Typically the company
will make a presentation. DEMO groups will coach the entrepreneurs prior to the presentation.
Each individual member then makes their own decision whether or not they are interested in
DEMO If there is sufficient interest then a sub-group is established to do the due diligence
and, if appropriate, negotiate the terms and conditions DEMO the investment. The deal will then
be brought back to the members to make individual decisions whether or not to invest.
The key difference DEMO these two approaches is therefore who drives the process after
the initial screening stage. In the first approach it is driven by an active DEMO group of angels,
with the outer core only being invited to invest, on a take-it or leave-it basis, in those deals
that DEMO core group have decided to invest in. In the second approach the members drive the
process, with the gatekeeper undertaking due diligence on those businesses that the
membership are interested in.
28
Compared with individual angels (Mason and Harrison, 1996b), raising finance DEMO angel
groups is more costly for the entrepreneur. None of the Scottish groups require entrepreneurs
to ‘pay to pitch’; however, four groups charge DEMO associated with the due diligence process
and the majority of groups charge deal/completion fees when the investment is made
(typically 3% of the amount raised) (10 groups) and also levy ongoing non-executive director
monitoring fees (11 groups).
This investment process has a number of implications for entrepreneurs seeking finance from
angel groups.  First, there are more DEMO involved in the process and hence more people
have to be persuaded of the merits of the investment opportunity. Second, gatekeepers have
the power to reject investment opportunities but it is the members who make the DEMO to
invest. The entrepreneur has therefore to get past the gatekeeper in order to reach potential
investors. Third, in contrast to traditional business angel networks where the pitch to an
audience of potential investors is at DEMO start of the process and is used by the investors as the
initial screening process, with angel groups the pitching stage occurs later in the process after
the business has passed the initial screen. This, in turn, has implications for the content and
style of the pitch. Fourth, raising finance from angel groups incurs fees whereas this would
not typically be the case with individual angels. However, business angel networks also
change fees. Finally, given the various stages and different people involved, the DEMO of
time to secure an investment from an angel group will generally be longer than in the case of
individual angels.
THE GATEKEEPER
The DEMO discussion has highlighted the critical role of the group gatekeeper in the
investment process, managing both the day-to-day operations of the group and, DEMO
29
significantly, controlling access to investors. The emergence of this new actor is one of the
most significant outcomes of the growth of angel groups, with considerable implications both
for scholars who continue to focus on how DEMO angels make their investment decisions
and also for entrepreneurs. Gatekeepers are of two types: member gatekeepers and manager
gatekeepers (Paul and Whittam, 2010). Gatekeepers have typically emerged from within the
group that initially started DEMO angel group. However, the bigger groups, such as Braveheart
and Archangels, have appointed external managers as they became larger. Some groups have
gone further, hiving off a separate administrator function from the gatekeeper’s role. Indeed,
in 11 of the 18 groups (61%) the role of DEMO is shared. In contrast, building an angel
group around a gatekeeper DEMO not proved to be a successful approach. In half of the groups
(9) that were interviewed, members act as managers (more than DEMO of whom receive
remuneration), five groups (28%) have hired an external manager and in the remaining four
groups the gatekeeper role is DEMO between a member and someone that has been hired. The
implication is that the gatekeeper function changes as the group’s activities increase and
portfolio DEMO becomes a more time consuming and critical function.
The gatekeeper undertakes a variety of functions (Table 3). Two-thirds of gatekeepers
undertake external-facing roles, notably the promotion of the group to attract new investors
and entrepreneurs. Around half also report that they undertake internal roles, mostly
interacting and communicating with the members. However, their main functions are
associated with managing the investment process. Gatekeepers review the business plans and
executive summaries that DEMO receive from entrepreneurs seeking finance, decide whether it
meets the investment DEMO of the group, may seek additional information and even meet
the DEMO and ultimately make the decision whether the opportunity is passed on to the
group members, whether an inner core or the entire group, DEMO be considered for investment.
30
The gatekeeper may also be responsible for preparing one or more supporting DEMO on the
business for the group. The gatekeeper will also follow up with members to gauge their
interest in the opportunity. In the second DEMO, discussed in the previous section, if the
group is interested in the business then the gatekeeper will also be involved in the due
DEMO process and even in the negotiation. It is of note that fewer than half of the
gatekeepers are involved in the process after the DEMO is made. Specifically, few
gatekeepers see the preparation of investee companies DEMO an exit being as being part of their
role.
Table 3. Gatekeeper Roles
General function
1. External
2. Internal
3. Investment Process
Proportion of
DEMO
citing this role
66.7
52.4
100.0
4. Organisational
19.0
Source: compiled DEMO interviews
Detailed function
Marketing
Promotion
Recruitment
Interaction with members
Organisation of the process
Internal communication
Administrative
Sourcing
Screening
Due diligence
Negotiation
Post-investment
Exiting
Others
DEMO of group
Development of group
Proportion of
gatekeepers
citing this
role
31.8
40.9
18.2
9.1
9.1
45.4
45.4
45.4
100.0
63.4
40.9
45.4
18.2
DEMO
0.1
0.1
31
The norm is for a member of the group to take on DEMO role of non-executive director in the
investee company. It is only in the larger groups, which have more support staff, that the
gatekeeper DEMO involved in portfolio management. The majority (17 out of 21, or 81%)
undertake this function on a part-time basis (less 30 hours a week).
Table 4 – Skills required for gatekeeper role
Communication DEMO
Evaluating
Management
Networking
Leadership
Passion
Patience
Curiosity
Negotiation
Broader Business Knowledge
Specific Business Knowledge
Investment Experience
SME Experience
Source: compiled from interviews
%
59.1
54.5
54.5
9.1
4.5
9.1
13.6
13.6
9.1
36.4
22.7
31.8
13.6
DEMO backgrounds of the gatekeepers are remarkably varied. There is considerable variety in
academic expertise, albeit with a bias to accounting, finance and law. DEMO under half reported
work experience in banking, accountancy or corporate finance. DEMO (52%) had
entrepreneurial experience although 15 (71%) have personal experience of making angel
investments, reflecting the presence of a number of member angels as gatekeepers. The vast
majority thought they were prepared for the DEMO (95%), even though those in the longer
established groups were DEMO pioneers, defining and shaping the role. Collectively,
respondents identified a DEMO variety of skills that were necessary for the role (Table 4)DEMO
Those most frequently mentioned were communication skills, people-management skills, and
financial skills. Both broader business-related experience and specific business know-how
32
were also seen by a significant minority of angels as being necessary. DEMO majority of
gatekeepers (59%) believed that they had these skills when the assumed this role. The
remainder indicated that the role was a DEMO learning experience.
The main areas where, with the benefit of hindsight, angels recognised their knowledge to be
deficient were in terms of the DEMO of angel syndicates and deal structures. This is
perhaps not surprising in view of the differences between the role of the gatekeeper and that
DEMO an individual angel. Key areas of learning were syndication, deal terms DEMO people –
managing them, communicating with them and accessing them.
CONCLUSION
DEMO investing is changing from an invisible and largely individual process to one in which
angels are joining together in organised and managed groups to DEMO This is evident in the
USA and Canada, Western Europe and DEMO and New Zealand, although the pace of
change has varied between DEMO Yet despite the growing significance of the angel
market as a key source of finance for entrepreneurial companies at the start of the so-called
DEMO escalator little scholarly attention has been devoted to this development, despite DEMO
possibility that it renders much of the existing research base redundant. Nor has there been
much consideration of the practical consequences of this change DEMO for entrepreneurs and
investors nor the policy implications. This paper is the first attempt to provide an in-depth
examination of the growth of angel DEMO and the implications for the financing of
entrepreneurial ventures.
The paper draws on evidence from Scotland where, for a variety of reasons, the DEMO of
angel groups has proceeded further than anywhere else outside of the USA. Indeed,
33
Scotland’s population of angel groups is larger than that of the majority DEMO US states. There
are currently around 20 angel groups in Scotland compared with just two prior to 2000. They
account for more than one-quarter DEMO all investment activity by value in the £100,000 to £2m
range, and more than half if the pull through of investment from the Scottish Co-Investment
Fund is also considered. However, activity is skewed to a minority of larger and longer-
established groups.
The existing debate about the DEMO of the growth of angel groups mainly focuses on
the benefits, DEMO their greater visibility and greater professionalism compared with
individual angels which, DEMO is argued, reduces the time and cost for the entrepreneur of DEMO
finance. In addition it is thought to have expanded the supply of informal venture capital by
attracting passive investors who lack the capabilities to DEMO on their own. However, others
have raised the concern that the DEMO of angel investing is at risk of being lost as the
process becomes more organised. Some have also expressed the concern that the angel
DEMO could evolve in the same way as venture capital funds, shifting DEMO making larger and
later stage investments and losing its ability to add value.
Our evidence is finely balanced. On the supply side the process DEMO reduced the number of
investment decision-makers in the market as individual angels have joined angel groups. It
has probably also reduced the number of DEMO of £50,000 and below which are too
small for groups to make. However, crowdfunding may fill this gap. Groups have focused on
making larger investments and follow-on investments, with the latter trend in particular
constraining the number of new investments. Nevertheless, the creation of new syndicates
continues to mobilise new capital into the market. On the other hand, the greater investment
capability of angel groups has filled the funding gap created DEMO the decline of venture capital
34
funds specialising in seed, start-up and early stage financing. From a process point of view
angel groups extend the investment process, adding more stages and increasing the decision-
time, and the gatekeeper now controls access to the angels. Moreover, market deficiencies
remain. The emergence of angel groups, DEMO government support, has helped resolve the
‘traditional’ equity gap (originally under £250,000 but other definitions have put this figure
closer to £1m)DEMO However it has opened up a ‘second’ equity gap (Murray, 1994; Sohl, 2012)
above £1m-£2m for growth capital, beyond the capability of virtually all angel groups, even
with syndication. This is a challenge for angel-backed companies requiring growth capital to
fulfil their potential and may DEMO in their premature sale to overseas companies to the
possible detriment of both investors and the regional economy.
Moreover, Scotland’s angel market may be out of equilibrium. First, the availability of ERDF
funding may have resulted in too many angel groups being created for the available
investment opportunities. DEMO, it may have resulted in too many manager-led groups and
limited DEMO of individual members in contrast to the USA where there appears to be
greater member involvement. Third, some of the angel groups may not be financially
sustainable, certainly without the public sector support they receive. The groups most at risk
are those that have expensive manager-gatekeeper functions and DEMO process that is not
sufficiently ruthless at the initial screening stage, DEMO with the lack sufficient volume of
investment activity to generate fee income. However, this situation has arisen because LINC
has followed a strategy of increasing investment channels to provide increased choice for
businesses seeking finance. Moreover, if there is an inevitability that established groups focus
on follow-on investments DEMO they mature then there is an ongoing need to create new groups
to make new investments. But new groups take time to reach critical DEMO, and some may
35
never become fully viable. The alternative outcome might have been fewer, larger groups
which would also have been seen as detrimental for economic development.
DEMO further concern is that some groups appear to be evolving, not DEMO become venture capital
funds, as Sohl (2007; 2012) feared, DEMO fund managers. This is most clearly seen in the case
of Braveheart, now listed on AIM, which describes itself as follows:
Braveheart DEMO around £120m of funds under management and provides equity, loan
and DEMO funding to Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs). It also provides
DEMO with advisory services, particularly in the areas of corporate finance and
DEMO readiness. Funding is provided by way of various regional/national funds
and by investment syndicates which the Group establishes and facilitates. Braveheart
also serves DEMO investment appetites of high net worth individuals (HNWs), family
offices, institutional investors and public sector organisations spanning the UK and
Europe.
At DEMO one other group appears to be moving in a similar direction.
Finally, what has been the economic impact of Scotland’s much admired business angel
market? The support that the angel market has received from the public sector both through
ERDF funding and indirectly via the Enterprise Investment Scheme DEMO that this question
cannot be ignored, although it could be argued DEMO be premature. Moreover, there is a risk in
answering the question DEMO it is based on inappropriate yardsticks. Arguably, we lack
sufficient evidence DEMO make a judgement on what represents “success”. Taking the ‘glass half
empty’ viewpoint, a strong case can be made that the impact has been disappointing.
Investors have achieved relatively few exits and most of these have DEMO small, with the
consequence that little wealth has been created for DEMO in new ventures, and
36
management learning in a growth company context has been truncated. The other DEMO of this
coin is that it has not led to the creation of ‘companies of scale’, a key focus of Scottish
Enterprise policy over the past decade (Brown and Mason, 2012). The riposte to DEMO
criticisms is twofold. First, acquisitions data shows that the market is DEMO by small
exits, typically £25m to £50m, which give a good return to investors but are small enough
that the cashed-out entrepreneurs need DEMO become serial entrepreneurs.  Second, it is not the
role of angels to build ‘companies of scale’ (although they have been responsible for a
handful in the past, e.g. Optos). Moreover, these companies are DEMO to require significant
amounts of finance and therefore carry a significant dilution risk for angels and also
appropriate management.
A glass ‘half full’ perspective DEMO argue that Scotland has stumbled upon an effective
model of angel investing that overcomes the limitations of its angel market imposed by its
historic DEMO level of entrepreneurial activity (Paul et al 2003). This model DEMO efficient use
of its limited number of active angels to serve as nodes to cluster less knowledgeable money
of high income individuals typically in DEMO professions and who are looking for tax efficient
investments. In the absence of such groups it is quite possible that this money will have DEMO
invested with the traditional fund managers who will not have channelled it either to
entrepreneurial businesses or in Scotland.
So, what are the wider implications beyond Scotland for countries looking to stimulate their
own angel markets? First, choices need to be made, notably between support for BANs DEMO
support for angel groups. Both models result in entrepreneurs receiving funding from angel
investors. To outsiders, the models may seem quite similar but, DEMO angels and entrepreneurs,
the two models are quite different. From a public policy perspective, the evidence on the
37
relative effectiveness of these models is not clear-cut.  Second, context matters. DEMO
Scotland’s access to ERDF was critical in terms of the number and diversity of angel groups
that have been created, and the dominance of manager-led models. The co-investment fund,
which has been successfully replicated elsewhere (New Zealand, Canada), has also been
critical. Third, there are DEMO models to that developed in Scotland. For example, Halo in
Northern DEMO (http://www.nisp.co.uk/halo/about/) has developed a model in DEMO they
act as the first selection gate for angel groups, inviting DEMO to large pitching events, while
other groups that are not members DEMO Halo will form an outer ‘ring’ to ‘bulk up’ the
investments led by the groups. Fourth, policy-makers cannot simply intervene in one part of
the market. Supporting the angel market has largely addressed the conventional equity DEMO
but with more early stage companies being funded, combined with the DEMO in venture
capital funds, this can created an unsatisfied demand for DEMO funding in amounts in excess
of £1m, the so-called “Series A DEMO Finally, it is uncertain how crowdfunding will affect
the angel market.
DEMO This paper arises from research funded by the ESRC under its Co-
Funded Pilot scheme. The co-funders are NESTA, BVCA, Lloyds-TSB and Invest DEMO We
are grateful to all of our interviewees for giving up their time to talk to us. We wish to give
particular thanks to DEMO Grahame OBE, chief executive of LINC Scotland, and Nelson
Gray for sharing their deep knowledge of the Scottish angel market with us and DEMO their
extensive comments on a pre-circulation version of the paper. We are also most grateful to
the many gatekeepers who provided detailed feedback: Alec Mackie, Bill Morrow, Raymond
McLennan, Allan Watts, John Waddell and DEMO Jane Brouwers. We also benefitted from a
valuable conversation with Donald Smith. The authors are responsible for all of the views
and opinions in DEMO paper.
REFERENCES
Avdeitchikova, S (2009) False expectations: Reconsidering the role of informal venture
capital in closing the regional equity gap, Entrepreneurship and Regional Development,
21 (2) 99-130.
Benjamin, G. A. and Margulis, J. B., 2000, Angel Financing: How to Find and In DEMO in
Private Equity. Wiley, New York.
38
Bessler, W and Seim, M (2011) Venture capital and Initial DEMO Offerings in Europe:
underpricing, long-run performance and firm characteristics, Centre for Finance and
Banking, Justin-Liebeg University Giessen, Germany
Bhidé, A (DEMO) The Venturesome Economy, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Blair, DEMO, 1996, Creating An Informal Investor Syndicate: Personal Experiences Of A
DEMO Informal Investor. In Informal Venture Capital: evaluating the impact of
business DEMO services, edited by R. T. Harrison and C. M. Mason, pp 156-196.
Prentice Hall, Hemel Hempstead.
Blank, S G (2005) The DEMO Steps to Epiphany, Quad Graphics.
Blatt, R and Riding, A., 1996, Where Angels Fear To Tread? Some Lessons From The
Canada DEMO Investment Network. In Informal Venture Capital: evaluating the
impact of business DEMO services, edited by R. T. Harrison and C. M. Mason, pp
75-88. Prentice Hall, Hemel Hempstead.
Boyatzis, R. E. (1998). Transforming qualitative information: Thematic analysis and code
development: Sage Publications, Incorporated.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in DEMO Qualitative research
in psychology, 3(2), 77-101.
Brown, R and Mason, C, (2012) ‘The evolution of enterprise policy in Scotland’ DEMO R
Blackburn and M Schaper (eds) Government, SMEs and Entrepreneurship:DEMO
Development, Policy and Practice. Gower, pp 17-30.
Bygrave, W.D. and DEMO, J. (1992) Venture Capital at the Crossroads, Boston: Harvard
DEMO School Press.
Cerullo, B. and Sommer, B., 2002, Helping Healthcare Entrepreneurs: A Case Study Of
Angel Healthcare Investors, LLC. Venture Capital: An International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance, 4: 325-330.
Collewaert, V, DEMO, S and Aernoudt, R (2010) An assessment of government funding of
business angel networks in Flanders, Regional Studies, 44, 119-130.
Entrevestor.com (2013) Debating the pay-to-pitch model,
http://www.entrevestor.com/blog/debating-the-pay-to-pitch-model
DEMO, L, Haines, G H and Riding A L (1999) DEMO Investors’ Investment Criteria:
Insights From Qualitative Data. Venture Capital: An DEMO Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance, 1: 121-145.
Freear, J. and Wetzel, W.E., (1990) Who Bankrolls High-Tech Entrepreneurs? Journal of
Business Venturing, 5: 77-89.
Gompers, P and Lerner, J (2001) The Money of Invention, Boston, Harvard Business School
Press.
Gray, N (2011) Present Business Angel Thinking on Exits. Unpublished report for LINC
Scotland.
Gregson, G, Mann, S and Harrison, R (2013) Business angel syndicsation and the evolution
of risk capitsal in a small market economy: evidence from Scotland, Management and
Decision  Economics, 34 (2), 95-107.
DEMO, J and Mason, C (2012). The risk capital market DEMO, Edinburgh: Edinburgh
House Publishing Ltd
Harrison, R T and Mason, C M (1996) Developing the informal venture capital market: a
review of DTI’s Informal Investment Demonstration Projects, Regional Studies,  30,
765-772.
Harrison, R T, Dibben, M and Mason, C M (1997) ‘The role of trust in the business angel’s
investment decision: an DEMO analysis’, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
21 (4), 63-81.
39
Harrison, R, Don, G and Johnston, K G (2010a) DEMO early stage risk capital market in
Scotland since 2000: issues of DEMO, characteristics and marklet efficiency, Venture
Capital: an international journal of DEMO finance, 12 (3) 211-239.
Harrison, R T, Mason, C M and Robson, P J A, (2010b) ‘Determinants of long-distance
DEMO by business angels in the UK’, Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 22
(2) 113-137.
Howitt, D., & Cramer, D. (2007). DEMO to research methods in psychology: Prentice
Hall.
Johnson, W and Sohl, J E (2012) Angels and venture capitalists in the IPO market, Venture
Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 14 (1), 27-42.
Lerner, J (2009) Boulevard of Broken Dreams, Princeton, DEMO, Princeton University Press.
Lerner, J, Hardymon, F and Leamon, DEMO (2012) Venture Capital, Private Equity and the
Fijnancing of Entrepreneurship, Wiley
Madill, J. J., Haines, G. H. jr. and Riding, DEMO L. 2005, The Role Of Angels In Technology
SMEs: A Link To Venture Capital. Venture Capital: An International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance, DEMO: 107-129.
Mason, C.M. (2006) Informal sources of venture finance, DEMO S C Parker (ed) The Life Cycle
of Entrepreneurial Ventures, DEMO York: Springer: New York,  pp.259-299.
Mason, C M (2007) ‘Venture capital: a geographical perspective’ in H Landström (ed)
Handbook of Research on Venture Capital, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, pp 86-112.
Mason, C (2009a) Venture Capital in Crisis’, Venture Capital: an international journal of
entrepreneurial finance, 11 (4), 279-285.
Mason, C.M. (DEMO) ‘Public policy support for the informal venture capital market in
Europe: a critical review’, International Small Business Journal, 27 (5), 536-556.
Mason, C (2011) Trends in IPO Listings by SMEs in the EU, City of London.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (1996a), Informal investment business introduction
services: some operational considerations. In DEMO Venture Capital: evaluating the
impact of business introduction services, edited by R. T. Harrison and C. M. Mason, pp
27-58. Prentice Hall, DEMO Hempstead.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T (1996b), DEMO venture capital: a  study of the
investment process and post-investment experience. Entrepreneurship and Regional
Development, 8: 105-126.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (1996c) LINC: A decentralised approach to the promotion
DEMO informal venture capital. In Informal Venture Capital: evaluating the impact of
DEMO introduction services, edited by R. T. Harrison and C. M. Mason, pp 119-141.
Prentice Hall, Hemel Hempstead.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (1999) Public policy and the development of the informal
DEMO capital market: UK experience and lessons for Europe. In Industrial Policy DEMO
Europe, edited by K. Cowling, pp 199-223. Routledge, London.
Mason, C M and Harrison, R T (2000) Influences on the supply of informal venture capital
in the UK: an exploratory study of investor attitudes, International Small Business
Journal, 18 (4) 11-28.
Mason, C M and Harrison, R T (2001) Investment readiness: a critique DEMO government
proposals to increase the demand for venture capital, Regional Studies, 35, 663-668.
Mason, C M and Harrison, R T (2002) The geography of venture capital investments in the
UK, Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 27, 427-451.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T., (2002a) Barriers To Investment In The Informal Venture
DEMO Sector. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 14: 271-287.
Mason, C M DEMO Harrison, R T (2002) Is it worth it? The rates of return from informal
venture capital investments, Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO, 211-236.
40
Mason, C M and Harrison, R T (2008) Measuring business DEMO investment activity in the
United Kingdom: a review of potential data DEMO, Venture Capital: an international
journal of entrepreneurial finance, 10, 309-330.
Mason, C M and Harrison, R T (2010) Annual Report DEMO the Business Angel Market in the
United Kingdom: 2008/09, Department of Business, Innovation and Skills.
Mason, C M and Harrison, R T (2011) Annual Report on the Business Angel Market in the
DEMO Kingdom: 2009/10.  Department of Business, Innovation and Skills.
Mason, C and Harrison, R  (2012) Emerging exit-oriented strategies in business DEMO
investing: implications for policy and research, paper to the ISBR conference, Dublin
Mason, C M and Harrison R T, ‘Business angel investment activity in the financial crisis: UK
evidence and policy implications,
Mason, C and Pierrakis, Y (2013) Venture capital, the regions and public policy: the United
Kingdom since the post-2000 technology crash, Regional DEMO, in press
Mason, C and Rogers, A (1997) The DEMO angel’s investment decision: an exploratory
analysis, in D Deakins, P DEMO and C Mason (eds.) Entrepreneurship in the 1990s
(Paul Chapman DEMO) pp 29-46.
May, J., 2002, Structured Angel Groups In The USA: The Dinner Club Experience. Venture
Capital: An International Journal of DEMO Finance, 4: 337-342.
May, J. and O’Halloran, E. F., DEMO, Cutting Edge Practices in American Angel Investing.
The Darden School, Batten Institute, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA.
May, J and Simmons, C (2001) Every Business Needs An Angel: Getting the money you need
to make your business grow, New York: Crown Business
Murray, G. (1994) The European Union Support for New Technology Based Firms: an
Assessment of the First Three Years of the European Seed Capital DEMO Scheme,
European Planning Studies 2(4).
Murray, G (1998) A policy response to regional disparities in the supply of risk capital to
new technology-based firms in the European Union: the European Seed Capitral
Scheme, Regional Studies, 32 (5) 405-419.
Nightingale, P, Murray, G, Cowling, M, Baden-Fuller, C, MASON, C, Siepel, DEMO, Hopkins, M
and Dannreuther, C (2009) From Funding Gaps DEMO Thin Markets: UK Government
Approaches for Early Stage Venture Capital, NESTA: London
OECD (2011) Financing High Growth Firms: The Role of DEMO Investors, Paris: OECD
Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1797/9789264118782-en
Paul, DEMO and Whittam, G (2010) Business angel syndicates: an exploratory study of
gatekeepers, Venture Capital: an international journal of entrepreneurial finance, 12
(4), 241-256.
Paul, S, Whittam, G and Johnston, J (2003) The operation of the informal venture capital
market in Scotland, Venture Capital: an international journal of entrepreneurial
finance, 5 (4), 313-335
Payne, W. H. and Mccarty, M. J., 2002, The DEMO Of An Angel Investing Network: Tech
Coast Angels. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance,
4: 31-336.
Peters, B (2009) Early Exits: Exit strategies for entrepreneurs and angel investors (but
maybe not venture capitalists), Vancouver: Meteor Bytes.
Preston, S L (2007) Angel Financing for Entrepreneurs, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
Ries, E (2011) The Lean Start-Up, Penguin
Ryan, G. W., & Bernard, H. R. (2000). Data management and analysis methods.
San José, A., Roure, J. and Aernoudt, R., 2005, Business angel academies: unleashing the
potential for business angel investment. Venture Capital: An International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Finance, 7:149-165.
41
Sohl, J (2007) The organization of the informal venture capital market, in H Landström (ed)
Handbook of Research on Venture Capital, Edward Elgar, pp 347-368.
Sohl, J (2012) The changing nature DEMO the angel market. In H Landström and C Mason (eds)
DEMO Handbook of Research on Venture Capital: Volume II. Edward Elgar: Cheltenham,
pp 17-41.
Sudek, R (2006) Angel investment criteria, Journal DEMO Small Business Strategy, 17 (2-3), 89-
103.
Weild, D DEMO Kim, E (2009) A Wake-Up Call For America, Grant Thornton: Capital Market
Series.
Weild, D and Kim, E (2010) Market Structure is Causing the IPO crisis and more, Grant
Thornton: Capital DEMO Series
Wetzel, W E (1984) Venture Capital Network Inc.: An Experiment in Capital Formation, in J
A Hornaday, F Tarpley, J A Timmons and K H Vesper (eds) Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research, Babson College, pp 111-125
Wetzel, W E jr (1986) Entrepreneurs, Angels And Economic Renaissance. In R.D. Hisrich
(ed) Entrepreneurship, Intrapreneurship and Venture Capital, Lexington MA:
Lexington Books, pp. 119-139.
Wetzel, W. E. jr. and Freear, J., 1996, Promoting Informal Venture Capital In The United
States: Reflections On The History Of The Venture Capital Network. In Informal
Venture Capital: evaluating the impact of business introduction services, DEMO by R.
T. Harrison and C. M. Mason, pp 61-74. Prentice DEMO, Hemel Hempstead.
Wiltbank, R E (2010) Siding With the Angels. Business angel investing – promising
outcomes and effective strategies. London: NESTA
Zook, M A (2004) The knowledge brokers: venture capitalists, tacit knowledge and regional
development, International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 28 (3), 621-641
42{1g42fwefx}