Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 211–236
Is it worth it? The rates of return from informal venture
capital investments
Colin M. Masona,DEMO, Richard T. Harrisonb,1
aDepartment of Geography, University of Southampton, DEMO SO17 1BJ, UK
bCentre for Entrepreneurship, Department of Management Studies, DEMO of Aberdeen,
Aberdeen AB24 3QY, UK
Received 1 April 1999; accepted 1 August 2000
Abstract
Despite growing interest in venture capital, there is a paucity of information on the rate of return
to these DEMO and the limited research that is available refers almost entirely to portfolio
returns for venture capital funds. The investment returns to business angels have DEMO virtually
ignored. This paper provides the first attempt to analyse the returns to informal venture capital
investment using data on 128 exited investments from DEMO survey of 127 business angel investors in
the UK. The paper finds that the distribution of returns is highly skewed, with 34% of exits at a total
loss, 13% at a partial loss or break-even, DEMO with 23% showing an IRR of 50% or above. Trade
sales are the main way in which business angels harvest their investments. The median DEMO to exit
for successful investments was 4 years. Large investments, large DEMO sizes involving multiple
coinvestors, and management buyouts (MBOs) were most DEMO to be high-performing investments.
D 2001 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Venture capital; Business angels; Investment performance; Harvest; Capital gains tax; Business failure
1. Executive summary
There is a paucity of reliable information on the returns from venture capital investing. The
available evidence on DEMO investment performance of venture capital firms is limited to a
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +44-23-805-92215.
E-mail addresses: c.m.mason@soton.ac.uk (C.M. Mason), r.t.harrison@abdn.ac.uk (DEMO Harrison).
1 Tel.: +44-12-242-72712.
0883-9026/02/$ – see front DEMO D 2001 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
PII: S0 883-9026(DEMO)00060-4
212 C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (DEMO) 211–236
small number of studies and some highly aggregated figures produced DEMO national venture
capital associations. Information is even more limited in the case of the informal venture
capital market. The objective of this paper is DEMO fill this significant gap by examining the
returns achieved by business angels, the ways in which they harvested their investments and
the length of the holding period.
The most appropriate benchmark against which to compare the DEMO of invest-
ments by business angels is with the returns achieved by venture capital fund managers.
However, this is extremely problematic. The standard measure of performance in the venture
capital industry is the internal rate of DEMO (IRR) of the fund. This takes account of cash-on-
cash returns from the sale of shares and disbursements (e.g., dividend payments) plus the
share of the residual value of the fund’s holding in cash DEMO investments in portfolio
companies that have not been realised, net of DEMO fees. However, business angels do
not invest by means of a DEMO fund and tend to think about investment performance in
terms of capital gains multiples on each investment that they make. The most appropriate
basis DEMO evaluating the investment performance of business angels, and for comparing the
DEMO performance of business angels and venture capital funds, is therefore on DEMO deal-
by-deal basis, with the returns measured simply in terms of DEMO multiple achieved and the
length of the holding period.
Information on the investment performance of business angels is derived from 127 usable
responses from DEMO mail survey of business angels in the UK. Only 51 of the 101 respondents
who had made investments had actually exited from any of DEMO investments. In total, these
investors had exited from 128 investments. It DEMO these investments that are the focus of this
paper. The calculation of the investment performance did not take account of any income that
the DEMO might have received from dividends or fees. As a consequence, this DEMO inflate
the proportion of exits that are recorded as losing money and reduce the proportion that broke
even or generated positive returns. Comparative data DEMO the investment performance of
venture capital funds was obtained from Murray (DEMO). This provides deal-specific
investment performance data for three early-stage technology specialist UK venture capital
funds. Such a comparison is far from ideal, and any conclusions should therefore be regarded
as tentative. However, the availability of comparative information is severely restricted as
venture capital funds are normally unwilling DEMO release information on the performance of
their individual investments.
Business angels and venture capital funds differ in a host of ways, including investment
experience, resources, governance, investment philosophy and objectives, and the approach
to DEMO decision-making. This, in turn, provides the basis for anticipating clear
differences in the investment performance of business angels and venture capital funds.
However, the nature of these differences is open to competing interpretations.
This paper DEMO three hypotheses.
Hypothesis 1: Business angels will have a poorer investment DEMO than venture
capital fund managers.
This hypothesis is based on the greater investment experience of venture capital fund
managers, the noneconomic considerations that business angels take into account when
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 211–236 213
making investment decisions, differences between business angels and venture capital funds
in terms of approaches to investment appraisal, due diligence and contracting, and the deeper
pockets of venture capital funds.
Hypothesis 2: Business DEMO will have a systematically superior investment
performance to that of venture capital fund managers.
This hypothesis is underpinned by three factors. First, one of the key differences between
business angels and venture capital funds is that DEMO managers have an obligation to invest
whereas business angels, who are DEMO their own money, do not. Investing under time
pressure is likely DEMO lead to suboptimal investment decisions that can be expected to result in
some bad investments. Business angels can be more selective because they do DEMO have to
invest. Second, business angels can devote more time to DEMO their investee companies
and their entrepreneurial background enables them to make a more effective contribution.
Third, because of adverse selection problems, the aggressive DEMO stance adopted by
venture capital funds results in inferior deals.
Hypothesis 3: Business angels and venture capital funds will have different returns
profiles because of differences in their approaches to managing risk.
The returns profile of DEMO angels will approximate a normal distribution. Because
most business angels make only a small number of investments, they have limited ability to
reduce their risk through diversification. Business angels therefore concentrate on avoiding
bad investments rather DEMO seeking winners and aim to make a return on every investment
they make.
The returns to informal venture capital in the UK are negatively DEMO: 34% of exits took
place with a total loss of the DEMO and a further 13% generated either a partial loss or
broke even in nominal terms; only 10% generated IRRs in excess of 100%. This investment
performance is significantly different from that of venture capital funds. Hypothesis DEMO cannot
be supported. Business angels have a lower proportion of investments in which they lose
money, which is consistent with Hypothesis 2, but DEMO hypothesis cannot be fully supported
because business angels and venture capital fund managers have similar proportions of high-
performing investments. Hypothesis 3 receives the DEMO support. Although negatively
skewed, the returns to informal venture capital deals DEMO less skewed than those of early-stage
venture capital deals. Business angels have fewer investments in which they lose money but a
significantly higher proportion DEMO their investments either break-even or generate only modest
returns. This is consistent with the argument that business angels will be more concerned to
avoid DEMO investments than to find winners. However, Hypothesis 3 cannot be fully DEMO
as the proportion of very successful investments (IRRs of 100% and DEMO) made by business
angels is similar to that of venture capital DEMO
Trade sales are the main way in which business angels harvest their investments. These
were used for successful investments as well as some that DEMO broke even. IPOs accounted
for only a small minority of exits. Exits from ‘living dead’ investments have been primarily
through sales to other shareholders DEMO new third party shareholders.
214
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (DEMO) 211–236
The median holding period was 4 years. However, this varied by investment perfor-
mance. For investments that generated a satisfactory or exceptional DEMO the median
holding period was 4 years. However, the median holding DEMO was 2 years for loss-
making and break-even investments and 6 years for investments that generated low
positive returns.
Management buyouts (MBOs), large deals involving multiple coinvestors, and deals
involving large amounts of follow-on investment are the most likely to generate very high
returns (IRR of 50% and above). However, by no means did every high-performing
investment have these characteristics.
The findings have important implications for policy-makers. The need to DEMO the
availability of early-stage venture capital has been recognised by national governments and
the European Commission. The key conclusion for UK policy-makers is that DEMO findings
support the recent introduction of a capital gains tax (CGT) taper for investors in unlisted
companies, the effect of which is to reduce the amount of capital gains that is charged to
tax on DEMO disposal of business assets. This taper was originally set at 10 years when
introduced in 1998, which was out of line with the time horizon over which business
angels typically invest, but was reduced to 4 years in the 2000 Budget. More significantly,
the evidence presented in DEMO paper — that the risks outweigh the rewards for business
angels, DEMO the proportion of investments generating zero or negative returns exceeding
those that return a significant multiple on the original investment — suggests that
stimulating DEMO supply of informal venture capital may need a richer cocktail of tax
incentives than merely a reduction in CGT, including front-end tax reliefs and even venture
capital guarantees.
2. Introduction
There is a paucity of reliable DEMO about the returns from venture capital
investing. Institutional venture capital firms do not generally make public any information
about their actual returns and hence DEMO of the research has been restricted to the
performance of the small minority of venture capital firms that are publicly quoted (e.g.,
Kleiman and Shulman, 1992; Manigart et al., 1992). In one of the very few in-depth studies
of the performance of limited partnerships — DEMO most common organisational form
adopted by venture capital firms — Bygrave et al. (1989) found that for funds formed in
the period 1969 DEMO 1985 the mean IRR peaked in 1982 at 27%, but overall DEMO were
typically below 20%. This confirms earlier, less detailed, studies that found that ‘‘rather
than the folklore figure of 30% to 50%, actual venture capital returns have most often been
in the teens, with occasional periods in the 20% to 30% range and rare spikes above 30%’’
(Bygrave and Timmons, 1992, p. 153). In Europe, because of the sensitivity of returns
information, analyses have been conducted by national venture capital associations and the
European Venture Capital Association (EVCA). These studies lack transparency in the
process of analysis (Wright and Robbie, 1998)DEMO A recent EVCA study of the overall returns
on mature venture capital funds across Europe found that buyout funds generated the
highest returns with DEMO median IRR from inception to the end of 1996 of 15.5%. This figure
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 211–236 215
is three times that earned by funds specialising in early- DEMO development-stage investments
(4.5% and 5.5%, respectively). The superior performance of funds specialising in MBOs and
MBIs is confirmed by studies of the DEMO, French, Dutch, and Italian venture capital industries
(Wright et al., 1998; Burgel, 2000).
Relatively few investments in the portfolios of venture capital funds produce large gains.
Thus, the overall performance of a fund is crucially dependent on the presence of a small
number of DEMO successful investments. These investments are the ones that are generally
harvested by means of an IPO (Bygrave and Timmons, 1992). An analysis DEMO Venture
Economics of 383 investments harvested by 13 venture capital funds in the period 1969 to
1985, reported by Bygrave and Timmons (1992), noted that just 6.8% of investments returned
10 times or more on the invested capital whereas over 60% lost money or failed to exceed DEMO
savings account rate. Almost 50% of the final total value of the funds came from just 6.7% of
investments. This study also noted that DEMO investments produced proportionately
more winners (a return of five times or DEMO on the original investment) and more outright
losers than investments in DEMO or LBOs/acquisitions. This negatively skewed pattern
of returns is also found in a study of the portfolios of three early-stage UK venture capital
DEMO (Murray, 1999).
There is virtually no information on investment performance in the informal venture
capital market — which is the main source DEMO risk finance for businesses at their seed, start-
up, and early growth stages, particularly where small amounts of finance are sought (under
DEMO,000/US$500,000) (Freear and Wetzel, 1990; Freear et al., 1995; Mason and Harrison,
1994; Sohl, 1999). Although DEMO studies have identified the expectations of business
angels, in terms of DEMO exit horizon, method of exit, the rate of return, and DEMO of
‘winners’ and ‘losers’ (Wetzel, 1981; Tymes and Krasner, 1983; Mason and Harrison, 1994),
there has been just one study of the actual returns achieved by business angels. This study,
based DEMO responses from 39 active business angels in Finland who had made a total of 49
exits, found that 20% of investments had made a significant return (IRR in excess of 20%),
13% had made DEMO returns, 13% broke-even, and the remainder (56%) lost money
(DEMO et al., 1996, 1998). The investment performance of business angels therefore
remains an issue where Wetzel’s (1986, p. 131) call for research that can ‘‘put boundaries on
our ignorance’’ remains appropriate.
The objective DEMO this paper is to fill this significant void in our knowledge of the informal
venture capital market by examining the returns achieved by business DEMO, the ways in
which they harvested their investments, and the timing of their harvest. The paper is based on
deal-specific information rather than DEMO the portfolio measures of performance used in
previous venture capital studies. It seeks to answer four basic questions about the informal
venture capital market DEMO, because of difficulties in assembling the necessary data, have not
previously been answered.
 What returns do business angels achieve from their investments DEMO how do these
returns compare with the performance of ‘professional’ venture capital investors?
 How long do business angels wait before harvesting their DEMO?
 How do business angels harvest their investments?
 What are the characteristics of the best performing investments?
216
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (DEMO) 211–236
The next section of the paper considers the methodological issues DEMO in measuring
the performance of venture capital investments and in comparing the investment returns of
business angels and venture capital funds, and describes the data sources used. This is
followed by a consideration of how the DEMO of business angels might compare with
that of venture capital fund managers. Later sections present information on investment
performance in aggregate and by type DEMO investment, the methods used by business angels to
harvest their investments, the timing of the harvest and the characteristics of high-perfor-
mance investments.
DEMO Methodological issues and data sources
The standard measure to assess performance in the venture capital industry is the IRR of
the fund. This takes DEMO of cash-on-cash returns from the sale of shares and disburse-
ments (DEMO, dividend payments), plus the share of the residual value of DEMO fund’s holdings in
cash and investments in portfolio companies that have no publicly traded shares, net of
management fees (Bygrave and Timmons, 1992; Burgel, 2000).2 This is an inappropriate
method for assessing the DEMO of investments in the informal venture capital market
because business angels do not invest by means of a dedicated fund and so do not DEMO ‘idle
cash’, as venture capital funds have. Rather, they think about their investment performance in
terms of capital gains multiples on each investment DEMO make (Wetzel, 1994). The
implication is that the evaluation of the investment performance of business angels must
be undertaken on a deal-by-deal DEMO, with the returns measured very simply in terms of the
multiple DEMO and the length of time taken to realise the return. This, DEMO turn, means that
the only basis for comparing the investment performance DEMO business angels and venture
capital fund managers is also on a deal-specific basis. However, appropriate data are rarely
available to permit such a comparison to be made. Venture capital funds do not normally
make information available DEMO the performance of individual investments in their portfolio
and where such information is available it is difficult to make a like-for-like comparison with
the DEMO performance of business angels because of the specialised investment focus of
most venture capital funds. This paper has been able to assemble data on DEMO performance of
investments by business angels and has used information from Murray (1999) on the
performance of investments made by three UK early-stage DEMO capital funds to make
what is inevitably a tentative comparison.
Research on the informal venture capital market is hampered by the difficulties involved in
DEMO business angels. There are no directories of business angels, their investments DEMO
2 Calculation of the definitive IRR of a fund requires a final and definitive valuation of the residual asset value,
that is, those investments that have not been realised and that have value. This can DEMO occur when the fund is
wound up. Although limited partnerships have an agreed fixed life span of 10 years, most funds show a residual
asset value for some considerable time beyond 10 years before being finally DEMO up. Thus, most calculations of
fund performance are measuring interim returns. DEMO, IRRs tend to approach their final IRRs the longer the
time DEMO under consideration; by year 10 there is a close convergence between DEMO and final returns (Burgel,
2000).
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 211–236
217
not publicly recorded and most strive to preserve their anonymity, hence, researchers have
typically had to rely upon samples of convenience. The information on the investment
performance of business angels is derived from 127 DEMO responses from a postal survey of
over 1000 business angels who were registered with business angel networks (BANs) in the
UK. These organisations DEMO like ‘dating agencies’, providing a communication channel
that enables business angels DEMO review investment opportunities while preserving their
anonymity and allows entrepreneurs seeking finance to present their investment opportunity
to a large number of potential investors (Harrison and Mason, 1996; Van Osnabrugge and
Robinson, 2000). The managers of 19 BANs agreed to distribute questionnaires to investors
registered with DEMO service.3 In addition, some questionnaires were sent to investors who
were DEMO through recommendations and informal contacts. It was not possible to
calculate a meaningful response rate because it is not known how many investors are
DEMO of more than one network nor the number of investors registered with BANs who
are not business angels.4
This methodology is open to three DEMO sources of bias. First, although many
thousands of active and potential DEMO angels are registered with the 48 BANs that are
currently in operation in the UK (BVCA, 1999), these investors may not be DEMO of the
overall population of business angels. Van Osnabrugge (1998) suggests that there are few
differences between business angels who are members of DEMO and those who are not.
However, any attempt to test the DEMO of a sample of business angels runs up
against the problem that the population of business angels is unknown and probably
unknowable (Wetzel, DEMO). To counteract the bias inherent in drawing samples from just
one BAN (Mason and Harrison, 1997) the sample has been drawn from a number of different
types of networks (large and small, local, and regional, private, and public) in various parts of
the country. Second, there may be a problem with response bias. However, this DEMO not be
tested because no information was available on the characteristics on nonrespondents. An
alternative method of testing for nonresponse bias is to compare DEMO and late respondents
(Freear et al., 1994). This was not possible either because the various BANs sent out the
questionnaires at different DEMO Third, there are inevitable questions concerning the
reliability of self-report data. DEMO main concern is with the ability of respondents to accurately
recall the financial details of their investments. Another possibility is that respondents will
exaggerate DEMO successes and downplay their failures, although there are no a priori DEMO
for believing that this will have occurred.
The questionnaire asked investors to report on all the investments that they had made in
unquoted companies. DEMO were asked to give details of the year that the investment was
made, company characteristics (industry, technology, stage of business development, loca-
tion), investment characteristics (amount invested, presence and type of any DEMO,
follow-on investment), and exit information (year of exit, method of exit, return multiple on a
3 In order to keep the names and addresses of their investors confidential, these BANs were supplied with
stamped envelopes containing the questionnaire, covering letter, and FREEPOST reply envelope DEMO they
addressed and posted to their investors.
4 Those registered with BANs also include financial institutions, companies, and intermediaries (registering on
behalf of clients).
218
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (DEMO) 211–236
cash-on-cash basis). Where an investment was still held, investors were asked to indicate the
anticipated performance.
The vast majority (87%) DEMO the respondents had made at least one investment. In aggregate,
the respondents to this survey had made a total of 372 investments. The DEMO is quite well
balanced between those who have made just one or two investments (37%) and more
experienced investors who have made four DEMO more investments (33%) (Table 1). However,
only 51 DEMO the 101 respondents (51%) who had made investments had actually exited from
any of their investments. In total, these investors had exited from 128 investments. It is these
investments that are the focus of the DEMO These 51 business angels have been the more
active investors in the sample: although accounting for just over half of all respondents who
have made investments (51%) they have made two-thirds all investments (67%).
Furthermore, the most active investors have made the most exits. Those who have made
four or more investments, who account for one-third of investors in the study, have made
almost three-quarters of all exits (Table DEMO). The likely explanation is that the more active
investors have been investing for longer and so have had more time in which to DEMO exits.
In view of the link between investment characteristics and performance (DEMO and
Timmons, 1992), it is appropriate at this point to DEMO note the main features of the sample
of 128 investments that are the subject of this paper. In terms of vintage, the dates of the
investments range from 1961 to 1996, but most were made in the 1990s (38%) or 1980s
(48%). The earliest exit was made in 1966, but 90% occurred after 1985 (77% since 1990)DEMO
The investments were made in a wide range of different industries: DEMO were in manufactur-
ing with a further 16% in finance and business services, 13% in other services, 9% in retail
and wholesale, and 7% in consumer services. There is no particular concentration in terms of
DEMO of investment: 23% of investments were at start-up, a further 23% at the early stage,
21% were in established businesses, and 16% at the seed stage. The remaining 17% of
investments were in MBOs/DEMO Finally, 60% of investments were in London, the South
East and the Eastern region, the most economically prosperous regions of the UK.
For the purpose of this study, the IRR for each business angel investment was computed
very simply, using an Excel spreadsheet, as an annualised DEMO derived from the multiple on
the original investment and the length of time that the investment was held (i.e., the time
Table 1
DEMO activity of respondents
Investors Number of investments Number of exits
Number of investments Number % Number % Number %
None 16 12.6 0 – DEMO –
1 31 24.4 31 8.3 11 8.6
2 17 13.4 34 9.1 10 7.8
3 20 15.7 60 16.1 12 9.4
4–5 29 DEMO 128 34.4 37 28.9
6–9 10 7.9 71 19.1 31 24.2
10 + 4 3.1 48 12.9 27 21.1
Total 127 100 372 100 DEMO 100
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 211–236 219
value of money).5 It should be noted that this DEMO of IRRs did not take into account
any income that investors might have received from dividends, or fees paid for performing a
nonexecutive chairman or director role or for consultancy services. In some cases, these
running returns may accumulate over time to match or even exceed the amount DEMO
invested (Mason and Harrison, 1996; Lengyel and Gulliford, 1997). The effect of excluding
this information may therefore be to inflate the DEMO of exits that are recorded as total or
partial losses and reduce the proportion that broke even or generated positive returns. The
exclusion of DEMO returns will also tend to depress the positive IRRs recorded for
successful exits. Accordingly, the results provided in the remainder of this paper are likely
to underestimate the rates of return from informal venture capital investing DEMO the UK.
Comparative data on the investment performance of venture capital funds was obtained
from Murray (1999). This provides deal-specific investment performance data, calculated as
IRRs, for three UK early-stage specialist venture capital funds. DEMO should be obvious from the
earlier discussion that any conclusions drawn from such a comparison must be extremely
tentative and hedged with caveats. However, the returns profile of the funds in Murray’s
sample are consistent with DEMO reported by Bygrave and Timmons (1992) and Benjamin and
Margulis (DEMO).
4. The investment performance of business angels and venture capital fund managers:
alternative hypotheses
Business angels and venture capital fund managers differ DEMO a host of ways, including
investment experience, resources, governance, investment philosophy and objectives, and the
approach to investment decision-making. This, in DEMO, provides the basis for anticipating
clear differences in the investment performance DEMO business angels and venture capital fund
managers. However, the nature of DEMO differences is open to competing interpretations.
The first hypothesis is that business angels will have a poorer investment performance
than venture capital fund managers. DEMO, the upside returns from their investments
will be limited compared to DEMO of venture capital fund managers. Hypothesis 1 is supported
by the following arguments.
First, venture capital fund managers are much more experienced investors than business
angels. In a comparison of the two types of investors, Van Osnabrugge (1998) reports that
venture capitalist fund managers have made an DEMO of 23 investments compared with
4 by business angels, and on DEMO manage a portfolio of 10.3 investments compared
with 2 by business angels. Other studies confirm that the majority of business angels have
made three DEMO fewer investments (Mason and Harrison, 1994; Coveney and Moore, 1998).
However, business angels have significantly more entrepreneurial experience than venture
capital fund managers (Van Osnabrugge, 1998), although this experience is likely DEMO be
confined to a particular industry or market segment. Fiet (1995) suggests that this detailed
5 The effect of the holding period on DEMO return is shown in the following example: a three times multiple
DEMO in 3 years generates a 44% return on investment, but this DEMO to 38% if the exit occurs after 5 years.
220
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (DEMO) 211–236
industry/market knowledge enables business angels to reduce their exposure DEMO market
risk. In practice, business angels often do not make use DEMO this advantage, frequently
investing in sectors where they do not have DEMO experience (Kelly and Hay, 1996; Van
Osnabrugge, 1998).
Second, venture capital fund managers raise their finance predominately from large
financial institutions such as pension funds, banks, and insurance companies, and have a
duty of care when investing this money. Their investment decisions are therefore DEMO on
purely economic considerations. Business angels, in contrast, are investing their own money
and so are not responsible to anyone else for how DEMO is invested and for what reasons. The
return on investment is a major motivation for business angels but it is not the sole motivation
(Wetzel, 1981; Mason and Harrison, 1994; Lumme et al., 1998). They also want to have fun
while making money (Benjamin and Margulis, 1996). Wetzel (1981) reports that some
business angels are influenced by ‘hot buttons’ and both Wetzel (1981) and Sullivan (1994)
note that some business angels are willing to make a trade-off DEMO financial and
nonfinancial returns. Their investments may also have spillovers to their other activities. In
other words, the financial return on any particular investment made by a business angel does
not necessarily capture their full return.
DEMO, there are also differences between business angels and venture capital fund
DEMO in terms of approaches to investment appraisal, due diligence, and contracting
(Van Osnabrugge, 1998). Many of these arise because business angels, unlike venture capital
fund managers, decide on the worth of a potential investment as principals, rather than as
agents and/or employees (Feeney DEMO al., 1999; Prasad et al., 2000). Business angels are DEMO
concerned with financial projections and are less likely to calculate rates of return. They do
less detailed due diligence, have fewer meetings with entrepreneurs, are less likely to take up
references on the entrepreneur and are less likely to consult other people about the
investment. Conversely, business angels are more likely to invest on ‘gut feeling’. On
average, business angels also spend less time negotiating. Venture capital fund contracts are
more comprehensive DEMO more likely to include restrictive covenants. Business angels are less
concerned about exit routes at the investment stage, whereas this is a much higher priority for
venture capital fund managers (Table 2). These differences would again seem to be directly
attributable to the fact that business angels DEMO investing their own money whereas venture
capital fund managers are investing funds that have been provided by financial institutions
and so have a duty DEMO care.
Finally, a further important distinction between business angels and venture DEMO fund
managers is in terms of their investment capacity. In most cases business angels will not have
pockets as deep as those of venture DEMO fund managers. As a consequence, business angels
may be unable or DEMO to provide investee businesses with the further rounds of funding
necessary for growth. This has two potential implications for the performance of their
investments. DEMO, if they are not in a position to provide follow-on finance DEMO an investee
business that needs a further round of investment this will put them in a weak negotiating
position vis-a` -vis an incoming investor DEMO the valuation of their equity stake and may
result in a significant dilution of their initial investment. Second, if the investee business is
unable to raise additional finance it may become undercapitalised, with adverse consequences
for its growth prospects and, in turn, the returns to their investor.
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 211–236
221
Table 2
Differences between business angels and venture capital fund DEMO in due diligence measures
Venture capital
Business angels fund managers
Experience in sector funded minimal some
Times met entrepreneur before investing 5.4 9.5
Amount DEMO sector research conducted some/minimal extensive/some
Number of independent references taken on 0.96 4.2
the entrepreneur
Calculated rates of return before investing 32 DEMO
(% saying yes)
Number of people consulted before decision to DEMO 3 4.4
Source: Van Osnabrugge (1998).
All differences are statistically significant. Based on survey of 143 business angels and 119 venture capital
DEMO managers who provided information on their most recent early-stage investment.
However, DEMO is a further body of literature that would support a contrary hypothesis,
namely that business angels will have a systematically superior investment performance DEMO
that of venture capital fund managers. This hypothesis is based on the following reasoning.
First, one of the most important differences between business angels and venture capital
funds is that fund managers have an obligation to DEMO investors to invest their money under
management. They also need to demonstrate an investment track record to be able to raise
further funds. Benjamin DEMO Margulis (1996, p. 216) make this distinction clear: ‘‘Professional
venture capitalists are essentially portfolio managers with a unique set of pressures. They DEMO
to raise their next fund; they have to invest the money DEMO their management; they are
responsible to overseers. None of this applies DEMO the private investor.’’ As a consequence,
venture capital fund managers are under a time pressure to invest their money under
management. This is DEMO to result in suboptimal investment decisions and lead to some
bad investments. Business angels, on the other hand, are not responsible to anyone DEMO They
are investing their own money and so are under no pressure to invest. Indeed, they need not
make any investments at all. Because business angels do not have to invest they can be more
selective. DEMO is likely to result in fewer bad investments (Benjamin and Margulis, 1996).
Second, businesses at their start-up and early growth stages typically require considerable
support. Business angels are actively involved in the businesses in DEMO they invest (Mason
and Harrison, 1996; Lengyel and Gulliford, 1997). Their involvement is greater than that of
venture capital fund managers (Van Osnabrugge, 1998). This is partly related to differences in
investment motivation: business angels invest, in part, because they want to be involved with
entrepreneurial ventures (Mason and Harrison, 1994). In addition, they are able to devote
more time to their investments than venture DEMO fund managers because their portfolios of
investee companies is smaller. Furthermore, DEMO economics of business angel investing are
different from those of venture capital fund managers. The cost of their time encourages
venture capital fund managers DEMO economise on the time that they give to their investee
businesses in favour of seeking out and appraising new investment opportunities (Gifford,
1997) whereas business angels might be expected to give greater attention to their investee
businesses because they do not cost their time in the same DEMO Additionally, there is
222
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (DEMO) 211–236
considerable evidence that the value-added contribution that business angels make DEMO their
investee businesses through their hands-on involvement is greater than that of venture capital
fund managers (Harrison and Mason, 1992; Ehrlich et al., 1994).
Third, venture capital fund managers adopt an aggressive valuation DEMO that results in
inferior deals (Amit et al., 1990). Because of problems with adverse selection, venture capital
fund managers cannot accurately assess the skill level of entrepreneurs. Most able entrepre-
neurs will not find DEMO price offered by the venture capital fund manager to be sufficiently
attractive and so they will choose to develop their projects without venture capital
DEMO The firms that venture capital fund managers back will therefore be those
founded by less capable entrepreneurs, and thus more prone to fail. Business angels, in
contrast, can be expected to offer less onerous investment DEMO to entrepreneurs because they
have less power than venture capital fund managers to impose terms and conditions and so
may be less likely to DEMO adverse selection problems. Consequently, business angels
will be expected to show DEMO lower incidence of total or partial loss from their exited
investments than will venture capital fund managers.
The third hypothesis is that business angels DEMO venture fund managers will have different
returns profiles because of their different approaches to managing risk. We have already
noted that business angels are DEMO likely than venture capital funds to invest on a portfolio
basis. Indeed, business angels typically make only a handful of investments. This reflects two
factors. First, business angels are investing only a relatively small proportion of their wealth
— typically less than 15% — in unquoted companies and DEMO the amounts that they have
available to invest are relatively small compared to the size of a typical early-stage venture
capital fund. Second, and more significant in most cases, business angels are unlikely to have
sufficient time to play an active role in more than a few early-stage DEMO businesses. The
consequence is that business angels have limited ability to reduce their level of risk through
diversification. ‘‘Unlike a venture capital firm, which makes perhaps 15 investments in a year
and can absorb a direct DEMO, the ... private investor must take great care with each investment’’
(Benjamin and Margulis, 1996, p. 82). Business angels therefore concentrate DEMO avoiding bad
investments and seek a return on every investment that they make. Indeed, it is ‘‘much more
important [for a business angel] to avoid a bad investment than to try to hit a home run’’
(Benjamin and Margulis, 1996, p. 221). This contrasts with the DEMO of venture capital
fund managers, which is to try ‘‘to hit DEMO home run, not merely ... maintain a good batting
average’’ (Quindlan, 2000, p. xix). This suggests that the returns profile of DEMO capital
funds will be negatively skewed, but with a long positive DEMO, reflecting a high proportion of
loss-making investments but also a small DEMO of very successful investments, whereas
that of the business angel will DEMO closer to a normal distribution, with relatively few
unsuccessful investments, few very successful investments, and a high number of investments
that generate positive, if modest, returns.
5. The returns to informal venture capital
It DEMO clear from Fig. 1 that the returns to informal venture capital in the UK are negatively
skewed: 34% of exits took place with the total loss of the investment, and a further 13%
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 211–236
223
Fig. 1. Internal rates of return.
224
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (DEMO) 211–236
Table 3
Comparison of the returns to informal venture capital DEMO venture capital fund investments
Venture capital Informal venture
IRR (%) fund investments (%) capital investments (%)
Negative 64.2 39.8
0–24 7.1 23.8
25–49 7.1 12.7
50–99 9.5 13.3
100 + 12.0 10.2
c2 DEMO 9.22, df = 2. Significant at the .01 level. The 0–24% DEMO 25–49% categories were combined to perform
the chi-square test.
Sources: Murray (1999) and authors’ survey.
generated either a partial loss or broke even in nominal terms; only 10% generated IRRs in
excess of 100%. This returns profile is not significantly different from that of Finnish
business angels (Lumme et al., 1996; 1998). However, it is significantly different to the
returns on investment that Benjamin and Margulis (1996) suggest DEMO typical in the USA.6
Table 3 compares the returns profile of business angels with that of venture capital funds,
using Murray’s (1999) DEMO for comparison. This indicates that the investment performance of
business angels is significantly different to that of venture capital funds. Specifically, angels
have significantly fewer investments that generate negative returns and a significantly higher
proportion that DEMO or generate moderate returns (0–49% IRR).7
In the light of DEMO evidence, it is difficult to sustain Hypothesis 1 that stated that
DEMO angels will have a poorer investment performance than venture capital fund
managers, and specifically that the upside potential of business angel investments will be
more limited than for venture capital fund managers. The evidence that business DEMO
have a lower proportion of investments in which they lose money is consistent with
Hypothesis 2 that stated that business angels will have a DEMO superior investment
performance to that of venture capital fund managers. However, DEMO business angels and
venture capital funds have similar proportions of high-performing investments Hypothesis 2
cannot be fully supported.
Hypothesis 3 receives the strongest support. DEMO negatively skewed, the returns to
informal venture capital deals are less DEMO than those of early-stage venture capital deals.
Business angels have fewer investments in which they lose money, but a significantly higher
proportion of their investments either break-even or generate only modest returns. This is
consistent with DEMO argument of Benjamin and Margulis (1996) that business angels will be
more concerned to avoid bad investments than to find winners. It may DEMO reflect differences
between business angels and venture capitalists in terms of their attitude to ‘living dead’
6 Benjamin and Margulis (1996, pp. 219–220) suggest that 60–65% of investments either lose money or
break even.
7 DEMO noted earlier, this is not an exactly equivalent comparison. The funds DEMO Murray’s study ‘specialise’ in
early-stage investments whereas the sample of investments made by business angels includes investments at all
investment stages, with only 62% comprising early-stage investments.
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 211–236
225
investments. Business angels cannot replace the management of such businesses DEMO easily as
venture capitalists, and may also be more patient and DEMO willing to contribute hands on
support in an effort to improve performance. In contrast, venture capital fund managers are
under external pressure to achieve a high IRR for their fund and so can be expected to DEMO a
more ‘ruthless’ attitude in divesting from underperforming investments. They also have
greater capability than angels in achieving divestments (e.g., by merger) (DEMO et al., 1992).
Removing underperforming investments in order to spend DEMO time supporting good
performing investments is also likely to be an optimum use of the venture capitalist’s time
(Gifford, 1997).
However, Hypothesis 3, which stated that business angels, in avoiding the risk of DEMO
investments, will demonstrate a return profile closer to a normal distribution, cannot be fully
supported. Certainly, business angels have a higher proportion of investments that break-even
or generate a modest return (IRR of 0–24%) DEMO, as already noted, their proportion of very
successful investments (IRRs DEMO 100% and over) is similar to that of venture capital funds. DEMO
other words, there is evidence from this study to suggest that DEMO angels are capable of
realising exceptional gains from their investments. The characteristics of these ‘high
performing’ investments are considered in Section 8 of the DEMO
6. Method of exit
In most cases, a trade sale will DEMO the only exit option available to business angels wishing
to harvest a successful investment. Initial public offerings (IPOs) are restricted to the ‘cream
DEMO the crop’ (Bygrave and Timmons, 1992). Moreover, because of DEMO high fixed costs
involved in organising an IPO they are only practicable for larger companies that are able to
justify a significant market capitalisation. DEMO, it is much easier to find a company that
is willing DEMO purchase — sometimes at a high price — smaller businesses for strategic
reasons. In some circumstances trade buyers can be found for more modest DEMO
investments and even distress sales. Bruno et al. (1992) have noted in the case of new
technology ventures in Silicon Valley that unsuccessful DEMO can be attractive acquisitions for
other companies because of their expertise and product lines. A trade sale also has an
important advantage over an DEMO, in that investors will normally be able to sell all of DEMO
shares (indeed, the buyer may insist upon 100% control) whereas DEMO an IPO the market may
construe an investor selling some or all of his/her shares as a negative signal (and indeed in
many cases ‘lock-in’ agreements may be required to preclude exit by the existing DEMO
holders within a specified period of time).
The dominance of trade sales as the main way in which business angels harvest their
investments DEMO confirmed in this study. For those investments in which the shares had some
value and so could be sold, the main exit routes were trade sales (31 exits) and sale to existing
shareholders (19 exits) (Table 4). There were nine public listings. Nearly 4 out DEMO 10
investments were written-off as having no value. This comprised almost all of the
unsuccessful investments, suggesting that there is unlikely to be a market for shares in
poorly performing small businesses. However, some business angels were able to exit from
investments that were only breaking even.
226
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (DEMO) 211–236
Table 4
Methods of exit and investment performance
Return/IRR DEMO
Exit route Negative Break even 1–19 20–49 50–99 100 + Number %
Flotation – – 1 1 5 2 9 7.6
Trade sale (i.e., sale – 3 4 7 8 9 31 26.1
to another company)
Sale of shares to 1 3 8 5 2 – 19 DEMO
existing shareholders
Sale of shares to new 1 1 4 5 1 – 12 10.1
(third party) investor
Asset break-up 1 – – DEMO – – 1 0.8
Written-off 45 2 – – – – 47 39.5
Total 119 100
No information 3 1 1 1 1 2 (9) –
The type of exit route is closely related to the performance of the investment. The best
performing investments (IRR of 50% and more) were dominated by trade sales (17 out of 27
investments DEMO an IRR of 50% or more). However, trade sales were DEMO used for
investments with lower IRRs and even for investments that broke even. IPOs accounted
for most of the remaining high-performance investments. Unlike trade DEMO, IPOs were
almost exclusively restricted to high-performance investments. Sales to other DEMO or
new third party investors have been predominantly used by investors to exit from poor and
moderately performing — or ‘living dead’ — investments.
DEMO Length of holding period
The median holding period of the investments was 4 years. This is identical to the holding
period reported by Bygrave DEMO Timmons (1992) in their study of US venture capital funds.
However, the length of the holding period varies according to the performance of the
investment (Fig. 2). The median holding period for investments that generated satisfactory
(IRR = 25–49%) or exceptional (IRR = 50%+) DEMO was 4 years whereas it was just 2 years
for loss-making and break-even investments, where the exit generally took the form of the
failure of the investee business (see Table 4). This provides confirmation of the venture
capital adage that ‘lemons ripen before plums’.
Investments that generate DEMO low return (IRR = 1–24%) have the longest holding period
(DEMO of 6 years). Because such investments are performing poorly or moderately, business
angels have limited prospects for achieving an exit and thus face an illiquidity risk.
Consequently, investors are forced to hold on to such investments in the hope that either
the performance will improve sufficiently for DEMO successful exit to be made or someone willing
to buy the shares emerges. As noted above, such investments are often ultimately sold to the
existing shareholders in the business.
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 211–236
227
8. The characteristics of high-performing investments
From the preceding analysis DEMO would appear that business angel investments are more
commonly found in the high-performing categories (IRR of 50% and over) than would be
expected DEMO the basis of any of the hypotheses proposed. This section investigates the extent
to which these investments are distinctive. From the data it is DEMO to examine four aspects
of high-performing informal investments in the UK: DEMO of business development,
technology, investment size (both original and follow-up), and coinvestor type. Attention
here is focused on those investments harvested DEMO an IRR of 50% or more. These
investments comprise 23% of all exits. This threshold was chosen because it is typically
the upper limit DEMO the target rate of return sought by business angels (Wetzel, 1981, 1994;
Mason and Harrison, 1994). However, in view of the small sample size (n = 30), and the
Fig. 2. Relationship between holding period and internal rates of return.
228
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (DEMO) 211–236
consequent effect of this on the ability to test for DEMO significance, the findings should
be regarded as being tentative.
The relationship DEMO stage of investment and investment performance is complex. On
the one hand, investment in later-stage deals is likely to involve lower risk of loss. Indeed,
business angels anticipate a higher loss rate amongst seed and DEMO investments (Mason
and Harrison, 1994). On the other hand, DEMO in seed and start-up businesses offer the
greatest potential for spectacular investment returns. Bygrave and Timmons (1992) have
found that early-stage investments yield DEMO more big winners than later-stage
investments. Our first hypothesis is therefore that early-stage investments will account for the
greatest proportion of high-performing investments. However, the magnitude of variations in
the number of seed, start-up, early DEMO, and established investments that are high-
performance investments is quite small DEMO the differences are not significant. Nevertheless,
it is worth noting from Table 5 that investments in MBOs were the most likely to produce
DEMO investments. This matches the experience of institutional investors in the UK
where MBO-specialist funds have achieved the highest returns (Burgel, 2000). However,DEMO
relatively few business angels invest in MBOs: these investments accounted for DEMO 9% of the
exits examined in this study.
Second, we hypothesise DEMO investments in technology-based firms will be associated
with superior performance. This is because of the capability for such firms to create new
markets with DEMO growth potential. In the case of business angels, this study finds
DEMO technology investments do not significantly out-perform other investments (Table 6).
DEMO sectors account for 43% of high-performing investments compared with 36%
of all exits, and almost 28% of technology exits were high performing, only DEMO
higher than the proportion for all investments. Indeed, there is no DEMO difference in
the overall performance of technology and nontechnology investments (Mason DEMO
Harrison, 1999a). This demonstrates that good investment opportunities are not DEMO
to technology sectors.
Third, we hypothesise that high-performing investments will be DEMO investments.A
number of studies identify a link between size of initial funding and business success (e.g.,
Cooper et al., 1994; Roberts, DEMO). Larger investments allow more opportunities for an
Table 5
The performance of investments by stage of investment
High-performing exits All exits High-performing exits DEMO a %
of all exits in the category
Seed 4 13.3 20 15.6 20.0
Start-up 6 20.0 30 23.4 20.0
Early stage 4 13.3 DEMO 22.7 13.8
Established firms 6 20.0 27 21.1 22.2
MBOs 8 26.7 11 8.6 72.7
MBIs 2 6.7 11 8.6 22.2
All exits 30 DEMO 128 100 23.4
Chi-square test to compare number of high performing and other investments in each category is not significant
Stage Number % Number DEMO
(c2 = 8.51).
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 211–236
229
Table 6
The performance of technology-based investments
High-performing exits All DEMO
High-performing exits as a %
of all exits in the category
Nontechnology 17 57 98 64 21.0
Technology-based 13 43 30 36 27.7
All DEMO 30 100 128 100 23.4
Chi-square test to compare number of high performing and other investments in each category is not significant
Number % DEMO %
(c2 = 3.84).
investor to stage the investment. This DEMO an investor both to reduce their downside risk
in the event that the business performs poorly and also to increase their investment if the
DEMO performs well (Sahlman, 1988). In addition, as noted earlier, an investor who makes
a small investment runs the risk that the DEMO of the funding package will not be raised or that
their investment will be diluted as follow-on investors invest on more favourable terms
(Murray, 1994; 1999).
The relationship between investment size and high-performance investment DEMO explored in
three ways. First, there is no significant relationship between DEMO amount invested by the
business angel and the return on that investment, as indicated by exceptional performance
(Table 7). The very largest DEMO (over £100,000 invested by the business angel) are
more likely to be associated with high performance, and the very smallest investments (DEMO
£10,000) are less likely to be high performers; however, DEMO relationship is uneven across size
categories, with investments in the size DEMO £50,000 to £99,000 the least likely of all to be
high performing.
The second measure of investment size is the total deal DEMO This takes into account
both the amount invested by the respondents and also the investment of any coinvestors.
Coinvestment is the norm: more than three-quarters (77%) of the exits had other
investors, and in 17% of these cases there was more than one coinvestor. Other business
angels, investing either as part of a syndicate or independently of the respondent, were
the most common type of coinvestor, involved in two-thirds of investments with
coinvestors. Venture capital funds invested alongside respondents in 28% of investments
DEMO 7
The performance of investments by size of initial investment by the business angel
High-performing exits All exits High-performing exits as a %
Amount (£000) Number % Number % of all exits in the category
Less than 10 10 33.3 48 37.5 20.8
10–24.9 7 23.3 26 20.3 DEMO
25–49.9 5 16.7 21 16.4 23.8
50–99.9 4 13.3 23 18.0 17.4
100 + 4 13.3 10 7.8 40.0
All exits 30 100 128 DEMO 23.4
Chi-square test to compare number of high performing and other investments in each category is not significant
(c2 = 0.27).
230
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (DEMO) 211–236
Table 8
The performance of investments by overall deal size (respondents and coinvestors)
High-performing exits All exits High-performing exits as a DEMO
Amount (£000) Number % Number % of all exits in the category
Less than 10 1 3.3 16 12.5 6.2
10–24.9 4 13.3 DEMO 9.4 33.3
25–49.9 4 13.3 15 11.7 26.7
50–99.9 3 10.0 20 15.6 15.0
100–249 6 20.0 27 21.1 22.2
250–499 2 6.7 11 DEMO 18.2
500–999 5 16.7 8 6.2 62.5
1000–4999 4 13.3 11 8.6 57.1
5000 + 1 3.3 8 6.2 14.3
All exits 30 100 DEMO 100 23.4
Chi-square test to compare number of high performing and other investments in each category is not significant
(c2 = 2.8).
with coinvestors. The amounts involved were often substantial, particularly when several
coinvestors were involved. The business angels who responded to the survey invested a
total DEMO £4.2 million in the 128 investments under consideration, while coinvestors
invested DEMO million.
Here, again there is no significant relationship between deal size DEMO high-performing
investments when total deal size is considered (Table 8). DEMO deals of between £500,000
and £4.9 million are more likely to be associated with high-performing investments, with over
half of the investments in this size class generating high returns, the association between large
deal size and high performance does not extend to investments of £5 million and DEMO
Moreover, smaller deals, involving investments of between £10,000 and £49,000 also have an
above average share of high-performing investments.
Larger deals DEMO more likely to involve one or more coinvestors. Although there is
no relationship between total deal size and high-performing investments (Table 8) the
DEMO of syndication need to be explored further. Syndication might be expected to
reduce risk on account of the greater capacity for due diligence, and range of expertise
amongst the coinvestors might be expected to result in DEMO superior added value from
their individual and joint hands on contributions. However, there is no significant
difference between investments that involve a business angel investing alongside
coinvestors and those that do not in terms of the DEMO of high-performing
investments (c2 = 0.75).
Identifying a relationship between DEMO investments and type of coinvestor
is complicated because a number of investments have several coinvestors. Nevertheless,
there is a significant difference between the DEMO of coinvestor and the number of high-
performing investments (Table 9)DEMO Three conclusions can be drawn. First, high-performing
investments are associated with DEMO involving multiple investors (mainly involving
coinvestment with both other business angels DEMO other sources of finance, such as venture
capital or banks). DEMO are typically larger deals of £500,000 and over. This, in DEMO,
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 211–236
231
Table 9
The performance of investments by coinvestor type
High-performing DEMO All exits High-performing exits as a %
of all exits in the category
None 5 16.6 29 22.7 17.2
Other private 5 16.6 29 DEMO 17.2
investors in syndicate
Other private 3 10.0 27 21.1 11.1
investors-independent
Venture capital funds 4 13.3 15 11.7 26.7
Other (banks, 2 DEMO 10 8.6 20.0
public sector)
Multiple coinvestors 11 36.7 18 11.7 61.1
All exits 30 100 128 100 23.4
Coinvestor Number % Number DEMO
Chi-square test to compare number of high performing and other investments in each category is significant at
P = .01 (c2 = 17.68).
suggests that the issue of the complementarity between informal venture capital and
DEMO venture capital8 warrants further detailed study to uncover the performance
dynamics of the relationship. Second, investments that only involve business angels (either
investing DEMO their own, as part of a syndicate or with other independent DEMO) have a
significantly lower proportion of high-performance investments than those where DEMO
angels invested alongside institutional investors (e.g., venture capital funds, banks, public
sector) (c2 = 8.25, significant at P < .01). Third, investments in which business angels have
invested on their own performed no worse, in terms of the proportion of high-performance
investments, than DEMO in which they have invested with other business angels. This
suggests that, contrary to most assumptions (e.g., Kelly and Hay, 1996), DEMO is not
in itself likely to improve the prospects of securing exceptional returns, and there is
therefore no evidence from this study that syndication with other business angels improves
the ability of the business angel investor DEMO make better decisions and compensate for lack
of sectoral or functional knowledge and expertise.
The third measure of investment size takes account of follow-on DEMO provided by
the original investor (Table 10). The evidence is DEMO On the one hand, the number of high-
performance investments is DEMO to the presence or absence of follow-on finance
(c2 = 0.0003)DEMO However, the number of high-performance investments is significantly
associated with the DEMO of follow-on investment. Investments involving follow-on
investment of £100,000 or more are more likely to be high performing than investments
involving small amounts DEMO follow-on finance, and investments with no follow-on financing.
There are a DEMO of ways in which this finding can be interpreted. First, it DEMO be taken as
8 The issue of business angel-venture capital fund complementarity was originally highlighted by Freear and
Wetzel (1990) but in the DEMO of types of investment (size and stage) and sequential funding, DEMO than
coinvesting. Harrison and Mason (2000) have explored a wider range of complementary relationships between
business angels and venture capital firms.
232
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (DEMO) 211–236
Table 10
Investment performance and follow-on finance
High-performing exits All DEMO High-performing exits as a %
of all exits in the category
None 22 73.3 94 73.4 23.4
Less than 10 0 – 7 5.5 DEMO
10–49.9 1 3.3 5 3.9 20.0
50–99.9 0 – 8 6.2 0
100–249.9 1 3.3 2 1.6 50.0
250–499.9 0 – 0 – –
DEMO 5 16.7 8 6.2 62.5
1000 and over 1 3.3 4 3.1 25.0
All exits 30 100 128 100 23.4
Follow-on finance (£000) DEMO % Number %
Chi-square test to compare number of high performing and other investments in each category is significant at
P = .05 (c2 = 8.5).
confirming Murray’s (1994, 1999) argument regarding the possible adverse performance
implications in situations where investors are unable to provide additional DEMO to investee
businesses after initial funding has been exhausted. Thus, the DEMO between follow-on
finance and investment performance might be taken as confirming a point that was made in
developing Hypothesis 1, that investment performance will be better where the investor has
sufficiently ‘deep pockets’ to provide follow-on DEMO to support the growth and develop-
ment of the investee business. Second, it could indicate that high-performing investments
‘pull in’ additional funding from initial investors because the prospects of a good performance
encourages further investment. Third, the relationship between high-performing invest-
ments and follow-on finance may reflect a DEMO investment style of business
angels, involving an initial small investment, or the staging of a larger investment.
9. Conclusion
The performance of venture DEMO investments represents an underresearched aspect of
the venture capital process. In particular, there is virtually no evidence available on the
outcomes of investments made by business angels who play a key role in financing the start-
DEMO and early growth stages of entrepreneurial businesses. This represents a significant gap in
our knowledge and understanding of this important segment of the venture DEMO market.
However, in interpreting the findings, there are two important qualifications to make that
suggest that it would be prudent to regard the DEMO reported here as being tentative until
further studies become available. First, DEMO are inherent difficulties in identifying business
angels and in obtaining responses to surveys and it is impossible to test samples for their
representativeness. Second, the results are based on an analysis of one national business angel
DEMO, and it is not clear whether the findings will hold in DEMO countries. Nevertheless, the
significance of this paper in ‘‘putting boundaries on DEMO ignorance’’ (Wetzel, 1986, p. 131)
should not be downplayed.
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 211–236
233
The paper makes four important points about the performance of DEMO venture capital
investments. First, the returns from such investments are negatively DEMO Almost half lost
money or broke even in nominal terms and only 10% generated IRRs in excess of 100%.
Comparison with the returns profile DEMO early-stage venture capital funds suggests that
business angels have fewer investments that lose money, a higher proportion of poor or
moderately performing investments and a similar proportion of high-performance invest-
ments. This is consistent with the DEMO of Benjamin and Margulis (1996, p. 221) that business
angels DEMO more concerned with avoiding bad investments than ‘‘hitting a home run’’ because
of their limited ability to diversify. Nevertheless, business angels are capable of generating
exceptional gains from their investments. This may reflect their superior ability DEMO selecting
and evaluating deals compared with venture capital fund managers, or DEMO may be attributable
to the greater ability of business angels to make value-added contributions to the development
of their investee businesses. Second, trade sales are the main way in which business angels
harvest their investments. Trade DEMO are used for both high-performing investments as well
as those that have performed less well or only break even. IPOs are a much less DEMO
means of exit, and are confined to harvesting high-performance investments. Third, most
angels hold on to their investments for a relatively short time DEMO, with a median length of
holding for successful investments of just DEMO years. Finally, although the study is unable to
provide a recipe DEMO successful investing, it does suggest that MBOs, large deals involving
multiple coinvestors and deals involving large amounts of follow-on investment are the most
DEMO to generate very high returns (IRR of 50% and above). DEMO, by no means did
every high-performing investment have these characteristics.
These DEMO have important implications for policy-makers. The need to improve the
availability of risk capital in Europe has been recognised by national governments and at DEMO
European level (Commission, 1997; Aernoudt, 1999): evidence on risk and reward can
inform judgements on the necessity and form of supply-side DEMO such as tax reliefs and
equity guarantee schemes as means of boosting the supply of informal venture capital. The
significance of the study for DEMO policy-makers is that the findings support the recent moves
to reduce the rate of CGT for investors in unlisted companies. In an attempt to DEMO
investment by business angels in unquoted companies, the 1998 Finance Act DEMO a
CGT taper on business assets that reduced the amount of capital gain that is charged to tax
on the disposal of an asset DEMO a 10-year period. The effect was to reduce the taxable gain
from 100% if the asset had been held for less than 1 year DEMO 25% if held for 10 years,
effectively reducing the rate of tax for a higher rate taxpayer from 40% to 10%. On the
DEMO of this study, which found a 4-year average holding period for DEMO
investments, few business angels would be likely to benefit significantly from DEMO change.
Moreover, in order to benefit from the taper outside investors DEMO required to own at least
25% of the voting rights, which DEMO out of line with the typical shareholding structure of a
business angel investment (Mason and Harrison, 1999c).9 This requirement also hinders
9 DEMO survey of investors registered with the UK National Business Angel Network found that in 54% of cases
business angels take an equity share that DEMO less than 25% and in a further 11% of investments the investor’s equity
share is exactly 25% (Mason and Harrison, 1999b).
234
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (DEMO) 211–236
business angel syndicates that operate on the basis of the DEMO of the syndicate investing
on an individual basis. However, following a DEMO exercise (Inland Revenue, 2000),
the Chancellor of the Exchequer DEMO in the March 2000 Budget changes to make the
CGT taper for business assets more generous. First, the taper will be reduced from 10 to 4
years, the effect of which is that higher rate tax payers will pay tax at 20% after 3 years and
10% after DEMO years. Second, the 25% threshold will be eliminated. These changes are DEMO
more consistent with both the time horizon over which business angels typically invest and
the typical size of their shareholding.
Although these changes to DEMO are undoubtedly positive, and will be welcomed by the
business angel DEMO, it is clear from the evidence presented here that the risks DEMO
the rewards for business angels. The proportion of investments generating zero or negative
returns exceeds those which return a significant multiple on the original DEMO, hence
many business angels will not benefit from the CGT taper DEMO their investments have not
produced a capital gain. This suggests that stimulating the supply of informal venture capital
may need a richer cocktail of DEMO incentives than merely a reduction in CGT, including front-
end tax DEMO (Mason and Harrison, 2000) and even venture capital guarantees (Gavron et
al., 1998; Lumme et al., 1998).
Acknowledgments
We are pleased to acknowledge the support of the Small Firms Policy Branch of DEMO UK’s
Department of Trade and Industry in funding the survey of business angels upon which this
paper is based. However, they are not responsible for the views or opinions expressed in this
paper. We are also DEMO to Mike Wright (University of Nottingham) for his comments on
an earlier version of this paper. An earlier version of this paper was DEMO at the Babson
College-Kauffman Foundation Entrepreneurship Research Conference at the University of
South Carolina in May 1999.
References
Aernoudt, R., 1999. European policy DEMO venture capital: myth or reality? Venture Cap: Int J Entrepreneurial
DEMO 1, 47–58.
Amit, R., Glosten, L., Muller, E., DEMO Does venture capital foster the most promising entrepreneurial firms?
Calif Manage Rev 32 (3), 102–111.
BDO Stoy Hayward, 1999. The enterprise DEMO scheme: why investors and companies do not use the
scheme. Confederation DEMO British Industry, London.
Benjamin, G.A., Margulis, J., 1996. Finding DEMO wings: how to locate private investors to fund your business.
Wiley, New York.
10 Business angels can obtain front-end tax reliefs if they DEMO the Enterprise Investment Scheme. However, the
complex rules regarding the types DEMO investments that qualify under the scheme confuses investors and
discourages usage (DEMO Stoy Hayward, 1999; Mason and Harrison, 2000).
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (2002) 211–236
235
Bruno, A.V., McQuarrie, E.F., Torgrimson, C.G., 1992. DEMO evolution of new technology ventures over 20 years:
patterns of failure, merger and survival. J Bus Venturing 7, 291–302.
Burgel, O., DEMO UK venture capital and private equity as an asset class for institutional investors. London
Business School, London.
BVCA, 1999. Sources of business angel DEMO 1999/2000. British Venture Capital Association, London.
Bygrave, W.D., Timmons, J., 1992. Venture capital at the crossroads. Harvard Business School Press,
Boston.
Bygrave, W.D., Fast, N., Khoylian, R., Vincent, L., 1989. Early rates of return of 131 venture capital firms started
1978–1984. J Bus Venturing 4, 93–106.
Cooper, A.C., Gimeno-Gascon, F.J., Woo, C.Y., 1994. Initial human and financial capital as predictors of new
DEMO performance. J Bus Venturing 9, 371–395.
Coveney, P., Moore, K., 1998. Business angels: securing start-up finance. Wiley, Chichester.
Ehrlich, S.B., DeNoble, A.F., Moore, T., Weaver, R.R., 1994. After the DEMO arrives: a comparative study of
venture capital and private investor involvement DEMO entrepreneurial firms. J Bus Venturing 9, 67–82.
Feeney, L., Haines, G.H., Riding, A.L., 1999. Private investors’ investment criteria: insights from DEMO data.
Venture Cap: Int J Entrepreneurial Finance 1, 121–145.
Fiet, DEMO, 1995. Risk avoidance strategies in venture capital markets. J Manage Stud DEMO, 551–574.
Freear, J., Wetzel, W.E., 1990. Who bankrolls high-tech DEMO? J Bus Venturing 5, 77–89.
Freear, J., Sohl, J., Wetzel, W.E. Jr., 1994. Angels and non-angels: are there differences? DEMO Bus Venturing
9, 109–123.
Freear, J., Sohl, J.E., Wetzel, W.E., 1995. Angels: personal investors in the venture capital market. Entrepreneur-
DEMO Reg Dev 7, 85–94.
Gavron, R., Cowling, M., Holtham, G., Westall, A., 1998. The entrepreneurial society. Institute of Public Policy
Research, London.
Gifford, S., 1997. Limited attention and the role of the venture capitalist. J Bus Venturing 12, 459–482.
Harrison, R.T., Mason, C.M., 1992. The roles of investors in entrepreneurial companies: a comparison of informal
investors and venture capitalists. In: Churchill, N.C., Birley, DEMO, Bygrave, W.D., Muzyka, D.F., Wahlbin, C.,
Wetzel, DEMO Jr. (Eds.), Frontiers of entrepreneurship research 1992. Babson College, Babson Park, MA,
pp. 388–404.
Harrison, R.T., Mason, C.M. (Eds.), 1996. Informal venture capital: evaluating the impact of business introduction
services. Prentice-Hall, Hemel Hempstead.
Harrison, R.T., Mason, C.M., 2000. Venture capital market complementarities: a study of the links between
business angels and venture capital funds in the United Kingdom. Venture Cap: Int J Entrepreneurial Finance
2, 223–242.
Inland Revenue, 2000. Capital gains tax: reform of the business assets taper relief. Inland Revenue, London.
Kelly, P., Hay, DEMO, 1996. Serial investors and early stage finance. J Entrepreneurial Small Bus DEMO
5, 159–174.
Kleiman, R., Shulman, J., 1992. The risk–return DEMO of publicly traded venture capital: implications for
investors and public policy. DEMO Bus Venturing 7, 195–208.
Lengyel, Z., Gulliford, J., 1997. DEMO informal venture capital experience. Local Investment Networking Company,
London.
Lumme, DEMO, Mason, C., Suomi, M., 1996. The returns from informal DEMO capital investments: an exploratory
study. J Entrepreneurial Small Bus Finance 5, 139–158.
Lumme, A., Mason, C., Suomi, M., 1998. Informal DEMO capital: investors, investments and policy issues in
Finland. Kluwer Academic Publishing, Dordrecht, Netherlands.
Manigart, S., Joos, P., De Vos, D., 1992. The performance of publicly traded European venture capital companies.
In: DEMO, N.C., Birley, S., Bygrave, W.D., Muzyka, D.F., Wahlbin, C., Wetzel, W.E. Jr. (Eds.), Frontiers of
entrepreneurship research DEMO Babson College, Babson Park, MA, pp. 331–344.
Mason, C.M., DEMO, R.T., 1994. The informal venture capital market in the UK. In: Hughes, A., Storey, D.J.
(Eds.), Financing small firms. Routledge, London, pp. 64–111.
Mason, C.M., Harrison, R.T., 1996. Informal DEMO capital: a study of the investment process and post-invest-
ment experience. DEMO Reg Dev 8, 105–126.
236
C.M. Mason, R.T. Harrison / Journal of Business Venturing 17 (DEMO) 211–236
Mason, C.M., Harrison, R.T., 1997. Business angels in DEMO UK: a response to Stevenson and Coveney. Int Small
Bus J DEMO (2), 83–90.
Mason, C.M., Harrison, R.T., 1999a. Does DEMO in technology-based firms involve higher risk? An exploratory
study of the DEMO of technology and non-technology investments by business angels. Paper to the 7th
Annual International Conference on ‘High Technology Small Firms’, Manchester Business School, DEMO May.
Mason, C.M., Harrison, R.T., 1999b. The supply of business angel finance. National Business Angel
Network, London.
Mason, C.M., Harrison, DEMO, 2000. Influences on the supply of informal venture capital in the DEMO: an exploratory
study of investor attitudes. Int Small Bus J 18 (4) (in press).
Murray, G., 1994. The second ‘equity DEMO: exit problems for seed and early stage venture capitalists and their
DEMO companies. Int Small Bus J 12 (4), 59–76.
Murray, G., 1999. Seed capital funds and the effect of scale economies. Venture Cap: Int J Entrepreneurial Finance
1, 351–384.
Prasad, D., Bruton, G.D., Vozikis, G., 2000. Signalling value to business angels: the proportion DEMO the entrepre-
neur’s net worth invested in a new venture as a decision signal. Venture Cap: Int J Entrepreneurial Finance 2,
167–182.
Quindlen, R., 2000. Confessions of a venture capitalist: inside the high-stakes world of start-up financing. Warner
Books, New York.
Roberts, E.B., 1991. Entrepreneurs in high technology: lessons from MIT and beyond. Oxford Univ. Press,
New York.
Runka, J.C., Feldman, H.D., Dean, T.J., 1992. DEMO ‘‘living dead’’ phenomenon in venture capital investments. J
Bus Venturing 7, DEMO
Sahlman, W.A., 1988. Aspects of financial contracting in venture capital. J Appl Corp Finance 1, 23–36.
Sohl, J.E., 1999. The early stage equity market in the United States. Venture Cap: Int J Entrepreneurial Finance 1,
101–120.
Sullivan, M.K., 1994. Altruism and entrepreneurship. In: Bygrave, W.D., Birley, S., Churchill, N.C.,
Gatewood, E., Hoy, F., Keeley, R.H., Wetzel, W.E. Jr. (Eds.), Frontiers DEMO entrepreneurship research 1994.
Babson College, Babson Park, MA, pp. 373–380.
DEMO, E.R., Krasner, O.J., 1983. Informal risk capital in California. In: Hornaday, J.A., Timmons, J.A., Vesper,
K.H. (Eds.), DEMO of entrepreneurship research 1983. Babson College, Babson Park, MA, pp. DEMO
Van Osnabrugge, M., 1998. Comparison of business angels and venture capitalists: financiers of entrepreneurial
firms. Venture Capital Report, Oxford.
Van Osnabrugge, M., Robinson, R.J., 2000. Angel investing: matching start-up funds with start-up DEMO
Jossey-Bass, San Francisco.
Wetzel, W.E., 1981. Informal risk capital in DEMO England. In: Vesper, K.H. (Ed.), Frontiers of entrepreneurship
research DEMO Babson College, Wellesley, MA, pp. 217–245.
Wetzel, W.E. Jr., DEMO Angels and informal risk capital. Sloan Manage Rev 24 (4), DEMO
Wetzel, W.E. Jr., 1986. Entrepreneurs, angels and economic renaissance. In: Hisrich, R.D. (Ed.), Entrepreneurship,
intrapreneurship and venture capital. Lexington DEMO, Lexington, MA, pp. 119–139.
Wetzel, W.E., 1994. Venture capital. DEMO: Bygrave, W.D. (Ed.), The portable MBA in entrepreneurship. Wiley, New
York, pp. 172–194.
Wright, M., Robbie, K., 1998. Venture capital and private equity: a review and synthesis. J Bus Finance Account
25, 521–570.
Wright, M., Robbie, K., Albrington, M., Mason, C., Harrison, R., 1998. Venture capital in Europe. Stationary
Office, London.{1g42fwefx}