Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 152–159
Contents lists DEMO at ScienceDirect
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/DEMO/obhdp
Neural mechanisms of social inﬂuence
Malia F. Mason a,*, DEMO Dyer a, Michael I. Norton b
a Columbia Business School, 720 Uris Hall, 3200 Broadway, New York, NY 10027, United States
DEMO Harvard Business School, 189 Morgan Hall, Soldiers Field Road, Boston, MA 02163, United States
article info
Article history:
Received 25 June 2008
Accepted 6 April 2009
Available online 8 May 2009
Accepted by DEMO Shane
Keywords:
Social neuroscience
Social inﬂuence
Social norms
Preferences
Brain
Consumer behavior
Normative inﬂuence
Informational inﬂuence
The iconic Lacoste green crocodile logo – DEMO created in
honor of the 1920s French tennis star Rene Lacoste – has waxed
and waned in popularity over the years, enjoying enormous popu-
larity in the United States in the late 1970s and early 1980s DEMO
nearly disappearing from sight in the 1990s, only to reemerge in
DEMO decade as a desired status symbol. One reason to buy clothing
featuring this crocodile might be to emulate Lacoste himself, of
course, but DEMO would be surprised if American teenagers have
any awareness of the origins of the logo. Instead, such trends are
often driven by the adoption – and rejection – of products by oth-
ers: The value of little green crocodiles depends critically on the
value that others attach to DEMO symbol.
In this paper, we model the process by which social DEMO
impacts preferences in a 1-h experimental session, using a paradigm
in DEMO we train participants to see symbols as socially valued or
not by providing them with feedback about the preferences of oth-
ers. We then DEMO the impact of this social feedback on the brain
activity that participants exhibit while viewing objects that have
been endorsed or rejected by their DEMO, exploring the neural pro-
cesses underlying changes in valuation due to DEMO inﬂuence.
Mechanisms of social inﬂuence
The notion that humans are inﬂuenced in their beliefs, prefer-
ences, and behaviors by the beliefs, preferences, DEMO behaviors of
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: maliamason@columbia.edu (M.F. Mason).
0749-5978/$ - see front matter  2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights DEMO
doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2009.04.001
abstract
The present investigation explores the neural mechanisms underlying the impact of social inﬂuence on
preferences. We socially tagged symbols as DEMO or not – by exposing participants to the preferences
of their peers – and assessed subsequent brain activity during an incidental processing task in DEMO par-
ticipants viewed popular, unpopular, and novel symbols. The medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) differenti-
ated between symbols that were and were not DEMO tagged – a possible index of normative inﬂuence –
while aspects of the striatum (the caudate) differentiated between popular and unpopular symbols – DEMO
possible index of informational inﬂuence. These results suggest that integrating activity in these two
brain regions may differentiate objects that have become valued as DEMO result of social inﬂuence from those
valued for non-social reasons.
 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
others has become nearly axiomatic across the DEMO sciences; the
sheer number of terms used to describe this process DEMO indicative of
its ubiquity, from social inﬂuence to social proof to DEMO pressure
to bandwagon effects to conformity to herding (Abrahamson,
1991; Asch, 1951; Banerjee, 1992; Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, &
Welch, DEMO; see Cialdini & Goldstein, 2004; Sherif, 1936, for a
DEMO). Indeed, even non-human primates are quick to adhere to
social DEMO (Whiten, Horner, & de Waal, 2005). The impact of social
inﬂuence has been demonstrated in countless domains, including
pain perception (DEMO & Prkachin, 1978), littering (Cialdini, Reno,
& Kallgren, 1990), voting (Gerber, Green, & Larimer, 2008), donating
DEMO charities (Reingen, 1982), expressing prejudice (Apfelbaum, Som-
mers, & Norton, 2008), choosing jobs (Higgins, 2001; Kilduff, 1990),
investing in the stock market (Hong, Kubik, & Stein, DEMO), and, most
relevant to the current investigation, both adoption and rejection of
consumer products (Berger & Heath, 2007). Judgment and DEMO
making researchers have also increasingly recognized the funda-
mental impact of social factors on human behavior: Investigations
of such ‘‘social decision-making” (Sanfey, 2007) have the potential
to speed the integration of psychologists with both neuroscientists
and game theorists, offering a more complete account of human
decision-making (DEMO, 2003).
From an early stage in research exploring the effects DEMO social
factors on behavior, researchers focused their attention on a funda-
DEMO question: the extent to which behavior inﬂuenced by peers
indicated a DEMO change in attitude such that social inﬂuence chan-
ged people’s minds, DEMO merely a desire to be publically consistent
with the viewpoints of others. Following on Asch’s (1951) classic
M.F. Mason et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 152–159
153
conformity studies, in which participants gave obviously wrong
DEMO to a simple line judgment task when confederates had gi-
ven those wrong answers before them, Deutsch and Gerard (1955)
varied whether DEMO to such tasks were visible to others or
not; they showed DEMO conformity was at its highest when
responses were public – due to what they termed normative inﬂu-
ence – but that even responses given DEMO private could be inﬂuenced
by the behavior of others – what they termed informational inﬂu-
ence. In this and subsequent investigations, the extent to which
behavior was inﬂuenced by true changes in belief as opposed to
DEMO desires to conform was inferred by comparing behavior
inﬂuenced only by private factors (anonymous behavior) from
behavior inﬂuenced by both private and public DEMO; subtracting
the former from the latter results in the amount of DEMO attitude
change. While this strategy is experimentally elegant, the ideal evi-
DEMO for this theory would be to assess the underpinnings of nor-
mative and informational inﬂuence simultaneously.
Brain imaging research offers just this potential. One DEMO the key
theoretical questions lingering from Asch’s initial investigation, for
example, was whether participants were merely conforming to the
confederate’s answers, or whether they came to literally see the
wrong answers as correct. In a DEMO functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging (fMRI) investigation of conformity in which confed-
erates gave false answers to a mental rotation task, Berns et al.
(2005) demonstrated that the erroneous responses of others al-
tered DEMO in brain regions implicated in mental rotation, sug-
gesting not just DEMO social impact of conformity pressures, but a
true change in perception (see Sherif, 1936). These results offer evi-
dence that social inﬂuence can be indexed at the level of the brain,
and suggest DEMO examining different regions known to be impli-
cated in different processes may be a fruitful avenue to examine
two-factor theories of social inﬂuence.
While DEMO research reviewed above has focused primarily on
conformity to tasks (line DEMO and mental rotations), we
use brain imaging to explore these dynamics in the domain of pref-
erences, examining how the brain responds when participants are
confronted by symbols that they previously learned were socially
valued DEMO socially rejected by others. In the spirit of previous stud-
ies on social inﬂuence, we consider both normative and informa-
tional aspects of such pressures, assessing brain activity in (a)
regions involved with processing DEMO opinions and mental states
of others – the normative aspects of social inﬂuence and (b) regions
implicated in experienced utility or reward – DEMO informational
aspects of social inﬂuence.
Neural mechanisms of social inﬂuence
Normative inﬂuence
We expected the processing of ‘‘socially tagged” objects – ob-
jects about DEMO participants had seen others express an opinion
(i.e., endorse or reject) – to be associated with signiﬁcantly greater
activity in regions that play a role in representing and decoding the
mental states (e.g., beliefs, desires and preferences) of other people.
A large body of neuroimaging research points to the central role of
the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) DEMO intuiting other people’s
mental states and in social thinking more generally (DEMO reviews
see Amodio & Frith, 2006; Blakemore & Decety, 2001; Gallagher &
Frith, 2003; Mason & Macrae, 2008). For DEMO, enhanced activity
in this region has been detected when people consider DEMO motiva-
tions underlying other’s actions (de Lange, Spronk, Willems, Toni, &
Bekkering, 2008; Mason, Banﬁeld, & Macrae, 2004), their feelings
(Ochsner et al., 2004), and their fears (Olsson, Nearing, & Phelps,
2007). The region is also active DEMO people reﬂect on the impres-
sion they have made on others (DEMO, Saito, & Sadato, 2008). Par-
ticularly relevant to the DEMO investigation is fMRI evidence that
the mPFC plays a role in the processing of social norms, including
perceiving norm violations (Berthoz, Armony, DEMO, & Dolan,
2002) and experiencing embarrassment or guilt for the social norm
transgressions of others (Takahashi et al., 2004). Dovetailing DEMO
these brain imaging ﬁndings is neuropsychological evidence that
patients with damage to regions of the mPFC exhibit social disinhi-
bition due to a lack DEMO awareness or concern for social norms (Beer,
Heerey, Keltner, DEMO, & Knight, 2003; Eisenberg, 2000).
Taken together, previous DEMO suggests that the mPFC plays
a central role in representing and processing information about the
beliefs, attitudes and feelings of other people. We therefore pre-
dicted that people would exhibit greater recruitment of the mPFC
when DEMO to objects that they had learned were socially val-
ued and devalued, compared to objects that had not been similarly
socially tagged.
Informational inﬂuence
We also explored whether social inﬂuence impacts the experi-
enced utility – DEMO reward value – of socially tagged objects. Brain
imaging research (Delgado, Nystrom, Fissell, Noll, & Fiez, 2000;
Elliott, Friston, & Dolan, 2000; Knutson, Adams, Fong, & Hommer,
2001; McClure, Laibson, Loewenstein, & Cohen, 2004a; O’Doherty,
Deichmann, DEMO, & Dolan, 2002) and electrophysiological
work with non-human primates (Schultz, Apicella, Scarnati, &
Ljungberg, 1992; Tremblay, Hollerman, & DEMO, 1998) converge
on a central role of the striatum – the nucleus accumbens (nACC),
putamen, and caudate – in representing the value of primary rein-
forcers, or stimuli with inherent reward such as cocaine, but also
secondary reinforcers, stimuli that are rewarding by association
DEMO that have acquired value through acculturation, such as art
(Vartanian & Goel, 2004). Thus striatal regions are active not just
when people view inherently attractive faces (Aharon et al.,
2001), but also when they view their signiﬁcant other, whether
conventionally attractive or not (DEMO et al., 2005).
Particularly relevant to the present investigation is DEMO evi-
dence that recruitment of these regions is impacted by exposure
to products that people have come to value as the result of market-
DEMO actions, even holding the objective utility of those objects con-
stant. DEMO instance, people exhibit signiﬁcantly greater activity in
reward regions when they DEMO a wine they believe to be
expensive relative to when they consume that same wine priced
more modestly (Plassman, O’Doherty, Shiv, & DEMO, 2008) due
to their having learned the general rule that price is a signal of
quality (Rao & Monroe, 1989). In DEMO, reward regions are more
active when people consume drinks that they DEMO are made by
a company whose brand they have learned to value than when
they consume that same drink under a different brand name (McC-
lure et al., 2004b). These results suggest that reward regions code
not only for the inherent value of a product but also DEMO the utility
from learned associations like price and brand information. While
both price and brand are in part socially constructed – people’s
preferences for DEMO branded products is likely related to
their desire for social utility – we explore whether these cortical
areas are sensitive to value created solely DEMO speciﬁcally from
learning the opinions of others. Thus while we predicted that activ-
ity in the mPFC would track with whether objects had been DEMO
tagged or not, we predicted that activity in reward areas such DEMO the
striatum (nACC, putamen, and caudate) would vary as a function of
the valence of that tagging – whether participants had learned DEMO
objects were socially valued or not.
Overview of the experiment
Prior to collecting functional imaging data, we exposed partici-
pants to information about others’ preferences for abstract sym-
154
M.F. Mason et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2009) 152–159
bols in a ‘‘social inﬂuence” phase. During this phase, participants
learned that some symbols were ‘‘popular” (preferred by others
on DEMO of trials) while others were ‘‘unpopular” (preferred on just
10% of trials). We then assessed brain activity using fMRI when
people were DEMO to these socially tagged (popular and unpop-
ular) symbols, as DEMO as new symbols about which they had not
been provided social information. We expected that regions impli-
cated in social processing (mPFC) and DEMO (striatum, including
nACC, putamen, and caudate) would be differentially DEMO
depending both on whether symbols had been socially tagged
and on the valence of that tagging.
Method
Participants and design
Twelve male participants from DEMO university community com-
pleted the experiment for course credit or monetary compensation.
All participants were strongly right-handed as measured by the
Edinburgh handedness inventory (Raczkowski, Kalat, & Nebes,
1974), reported no signiﬁcant abnormal DEMO history, and
had normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity.
The experiment had DEMO single factor (symbol type: popular,
unpopular, new) repeated-measures design. Each participant com-
pleted a pre-scanning ‘‘social inﬂuence” phase and was then
DEMO while performing a delayed match-to-sample task with
the three symbol types as target items.
Stimulus materials
We selected 30 abstract symbols for use in DEMO experiment (see
Fig. 1A and B for examples). Of the DEMO symbols, we randomly
selected twenty for use in the pre-scanning portion DEMO the
experiment – 10 to be tagged as popular and 10 to be tagged as
unpopular. The remaining 10 were used as new symbols DEMO thus
were not seen by participants until they performed the delayed
match-to-sample task while in the fMRI magnet.
We also created a set of DEMO faces to use in the pre-scanning
‘‘social inﬂuence” phase.
Pre-scanning phase: DEMO social inﬂuence
Participants were told that hundreds of people had been asked
to make preference judgments on pairs of abstract symbols, and
that they would see pictures of these people accompanied by a
visual depiction of DEMO choice each of these people made (see
Fig. 1A). Participants DEMO asked to form an impression of which
symbols were liked by which individuals, and were told that,
though they would not explicitly be tested on the information, it
was important for them to pay close attention to the task.
During this ‘‘social inﬂuence” phase, symbols from the popular
set were depicted as being chosen (as indicated by a green box that
appeared around the chosen symbol) 90% of the time, DEMO sym-
bols from the unpopular set were depicted as being chosen 10%
of the time. On half of the trials the chosen item appeared DEMO the
left-hand side of the screen while on the other half, DEMO chosen
item appeared on the right. This design allowed us to control for
familiarity – popular and unpopular symbols were presented with
the same DEMO – and manipulate only the social value
attached to those symbols, DEMO varying only which symbol was
highlighted.
Participants completed a total of 200 trials that lasted 2500 ms
in duration. Each trial began with a DEMO – randomly selected from
the set of 200 – displayed at the center of the screen. After 750 ms,
two symbols appeared below DEMO face; a green box indicating the
person’s preferred symbol appeared around DEMO of the symbols
Fig. 1. (A) Timeline depicting an experimental trial during the ‘‘social inﬂuence” pre-scanning phase. Each trial began (at 0 ms) with a face displayed at the center of the
screen. At 500 ms, the ﬁxation cross was replaced by a target face. At 1250 ms, two symbols appeared on the screen below the face. One of the symbols – the target’s preferred
symbol – was surrounded by a DEMO box. The face and the symbols remained on the screen for 1250 ms until the end of the trial. (B) Timeline depicting an DEMO experimental
run. Participants pressed the button when they saw the same symbol depicted twice in a row (delayed match-to-sample task). To tease apart the signal associated with each
of the experimental conditions (new, popular DEMO unpopular shapes), ﬁxation crosses were ‘‘jittered” among the shapes. (For DEMO of the references to color in this
ﬁgure legend, the reader DEMO referred to the web version of this article.)
M.F. Mason et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 152–159
155
250 ms later. The face and symbols then remained on the screen
for an additional 1500 ms (see Fig. 1A).
Participants were instructed to indicate whether the chosen
symbol appeared on the DEMO or right via a key press.
Scanning phase: assessing social inﬂuence
DEMO were told that they would see symbols – some that
they had seen previously, some new – appear at the center of the
screen, interspersed with ﬁxation crosses, and that their task was
to press DEMO button when they saw the same symbol twice in a
row, DEMO standard delayed match-to-sample task.
Participants were scanned in two event-related functional (DEMO)
runs. To bring the spin system into a steady state, DEMO dummy
shots were acquired at the start of each of the two runs. A total
of 147 volumes were collected within each EPI run. DEMO experi-
mental trial lasted for a total of 2500 ms. Trials were pseudo-ran-
domized within each of the two runs and the run order
DEMO was counterbalanced across participants (see
Fig. 1B). In each of DEMO two EPI runs, participants saw new symbols
on 36 trials, popular symbols on 27 trials, and unpopular symbols
on 27 trials. Nine of these 90 trials – or 10% – involved symbol
repeats (participants seeing the same symbol two trials in a row)
and thus elicited DEMO responses from the participants. The
remaining 57 EPI volumes were jittered catch trials (i.e., ﬁxation
symbols, ‘‘+”) used to optimize estimation of DEMO event-related
BOLD response. The stimuli were presented using PsyScope (ver-
sion DEMO) and back projected with an Epson (ELP-7000) LCD pro-
jector DEMO a screen at the end of the magnet bore that participants
viewed by way of a mirror mounted on the head coil. Pillow and
DEMO cushions were placed within the head coil to minimize head
movements.
Image acquisition
All images were collected using a 1.5T GE Signa scanner with
DEMO head coil. T1- weighted anatomical images were collected
using a 3D sequence (SPGR; 128 sagittal slices, TR = 7 ms,
TE = 3 ms, prep time = 315 ms, ﬂip angle = 15, FOV = 24 cm, slice
thickness = 1.2 mm, matrix = DEMO  192). Functional images were
collected with a gradient echo EPI sequence (each volume com-
prised 25 slices; 4.5 mm thick, 1 mm skip; TR = 2500 ms,
TE = 35 ms, DEMO = 24 cm, 64  64 matrix; 90 ﬂip angle).
fMRI analysis
Functional MRI data were analyzed using Statistical Parametric
Mapping software (SPM5, Welcome Department of Cognitive Neu-
rology, London, UK; Friston DEMO al., 1995). For each functional run,
data were pre-processed DEMO remove sources of noise and artifact.
Pre-processing included slice timing and motion correction, coreg-
istration to each participant’s anatomical data, normalization to
the DEMO 152 brain template (Montreal Neurological Institute),
and spatial smoothing with an 8 mm (full-width-at-half-maxi-
mum) Gaussian kernel. Analyses took place at DEMO levels: forma-
tion of statistical images and regional analysis of hemodynamic
DEMO
For each participant, a general linear model with 8 regressors
was DEMO The model included regressors specifying the three
conditions of interest – popular, unpopular, and new symbols
(modeled with functions for the hemodynamic response) – a
fourth regressor modeling the button responses/repeat trials
(modeled DEMO functions for the hemodynamic response), a ﬁfth
regressor to distinguish between the two EPI runs (modeled with
a constant), two regressors modeling scanner drift (modeled as
linear trends), and the constant term that SPM automatically
generates and includes in the model. The general linear model
DEMO used to compute parameter estimates (b) and t-contrast
images for each comparison at each voxel. These individual
contrast images were then submitted to DEMO second-level, random-
effects analysis to obtain mean t-images.
Results
Pilot behavioral DEMO
To conﬁrm that our social tagging manipulation impacted liking
for the symbols, we conducted a behavioral version of the pre-scan-
ning social inﬂuence phase described above, in which participants
(N = 32) rated all symbols on a 5-point scale both before and after
the social inﬂuence phase. DEMO measure the change in liking as a result
of the manipulation, DEMO calculated differences scores by subtracting
pre-ratings from post-ratings, such that positive DEMO indicate
an increase in liking and negative numbers a decrease. As expected,
popular symbols were rated signiﬁcantly higher after the social
inﬂuence phase DEMO before (Mdifference = .39, SD = .82), t(31) DEMO 2.67,
p < .02, while attitudes towards unpopular symbols showed DEMO mar-
ginally signiﬁcant decrease (Mdifference = .29, SD = .82),DEMO
t(31) = 1.99, p = .056, such that the DEMO in liking between popular
and unpopular symbols was signiﬁcantly different, t(DEMO) = 4.78,
p < .001.
fMRI analyses – direct comparisons
DEMO identify brain regions that were sensitive to stimuli that had
previously been socially tagged, we conducted a direct contrast be-
tween symbols that were viewed during the social inﬂuence phase
– both popular and unpopular – DEMO to the new symbols that
had not been socially tagged. A single cluster in an aspect of the
medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC; BA10 DEMO signiﬁcantly
greater activity (p < .001; k = 10) when DEMO viewed sym-
bols which had been socially tagged relative to when they viewed
new symbols (Table 1). The opposite contrast – comparing new to
socially tagged symbols – revealed signiﬁcantly greater activity
(p < .001; k = 10) in a cluster that spanned the right superior DEMO
ital gyrus and precuneus (BAs7, 19, 31).
Next, we explored differences in brain activity speciﬁcally be-
tween popular and unpopular symbols. DEMO of a direct compar-
ison between these two conditions revealed signiﬁcantly greater
activity in the right caudate – part of the striatum – when DEMO
pants viewed popular relative to unpopular symbols (p < .001,
DEMO = 10; Table 2). The opposite contrast – unpopular symbols > pop-
ular symbols – revealed no cortical regions that exhibited greater
signal to unpopular symbols at the same threshold.
Table 1
All clusters that DEMO differential activity when participants viewed socially
tagged relative to new symbols. Coordinates are reported in Talairach space. The
displayed t -values are associated with DEMO area’s peak hemodynamic response,
k = 10; p < .005. DEMO = Brodmann Area; B = bilateral; R = right; L DEMO left.
k
Anatomical location
BA Coordinates
t-value
xy z
Socially tagged symbols > new symbols
53 (R) medial frontal gyrus 10 6 47 DEMO 5.46a
New symbols > socially tagged symbols
16 (L) superior occipital gyrus 19 30
87 (R) precuneus 7 18
(R) superior DEMO gyrus 31 24
18 (R) inferior temporal gyrus 37 45
10 (R) caudate body 18
69 28 6.67
68 34 6.34a
69 DEMO 5.11
67 2 4.11
16 20 3.47
a
Regions that emerged at a slightly reduced threshold of k = 10; p < .001.
156
M.F. Mason et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2009) 152–159
Table 2
All clusters that exhibited differential activity when participants viewed popular
relative to unpopular symbols. Coordinates are reported in Talairach DEMO The
displayed t -values are associated with each area’s peak hemodynamic response,
k = 10; p < .005. BA = Brodmann Area; DEMO = bilateral; R = right; L = left.
k
Anatomical location
BA Coordinates
t-value
xy z
Popular symbols > unpopular symbols
33 (R) caudate
15 (L) superior frontal gyrus 10
Unpopular symbols > popular symbols
None
12 2 19 5.17a
21 65 11 4.15
a
Regions DEMO emerged at a slightly reduced threshold of k = 10; p < .001.
Region of interest (ROI) analyses
To explore our effects further, we conducted follow-up ROI
analyses, by building and dropping 10 mm DEMO over the coor-
dinates of interest, extracting the percent signal change DEMO the
tools provided by the SPM5 MarsBar utility (Brett, Anton, DEMO
gue, & Poline, 2002) for each of the conditions in DEMO ROI, and then
averaging these values across all participants.
We ﬁrst DEMO the difference in recruitment of mPFC we
observed in the direct comparison of symbols from the social inﬂu-
ence phase – both popular and DEMO – to the new symbols that
had not been socially tagged. As is characteristic of this brain area
(Shulman et al., 1997), DEMO ROI analysis revealed that mPFC results
were driven by a difference in signal decrease relative to baseline
(Fig. 2). The signal in this region decreased signiﬁcantly less to
socially tagged symbols than to new symbols, t(11) = 3.35, p < .01.
Next, we explored the difference in recruitment of the caudate
we had observed between popular and DEMO symbols. The
ROI analysis demonstrated that activity in the right caudate was
signiﬁcantly greater for popular symbols relative to unpopular
symbols, t(11) DEMO 3.19, p < .01, while there was no signiﬁcant differ-
ence in signal between popular symbols and new symbols
observed in this area, t(11) < 1, ns (Fig. 2). Results obtained in our
pilot behavioral study demonstrated that participants liked popu-
lar symbols more DEMO unpopular symbols after the social inﬂu-
ence phase; results from the DEMO imaging portion of the
experiment – which allow us to compare reward value for popular
and unpopular symbols to reward value for novel symbols DEMO sug-
gest that this difference in ratings that emerged in the behavioral
study was driven more by a decrease in the value of unpopular
DEMO than an increase in the value of popular shapes.
General discussion
We explored the neural mechanisms of social inﬂuence, exam-
ining how manipulating the popularity of abstract symbols – our
rough proxy for the kinds of DEMO that are socially tagged in
the real world, like the Lacoste DEMO – impacted brain activity
when viewing those symbols.
As expected, mPFC, a brain region involved in thinking about
the attitudes and preferences of DEMO (see Amodio &Frith,
2006), was more active when participants viewed symbols that
had been socially tagged than symbols for which they DEMO no prior
social information, suggesting a possible index of normative inﬂu-
DEMO at the level of the brain. Interestingly, activity in this region
DEMO not differentiate between popular and unpopular symbols,
but rather only between socially tagged and new symbols. This
suggests that this area plays a DEMO role in tracking whether
preferences are socially relevant or not; indeed, knowing whether
an item is disliked by one’s peers is as important DEMO knowing
whether an item is liked. Also as predicted, we found DEMO a region
involved in the experience of reward – the caudate, DEMO of the
Fig. 2. Results of ROI analyses in: bilateral medial DEMO cortices (top) and the right caudate (bottom). Values were DEMO by dropping a 10 mm sphere and pulling
the % signal change, and then averaging across all participants. Images depict the results of direct comparisons: ‘‘socially tagged symbols > new symbols” (top) and
‘‘popular > unpopular symbols” (bottom), displayed on the average anatomical high-resolution image in neurological convention.
M.F. Mason et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 152–159
157
striatum – exhibited greater activity in response to popular sym-
bols relative to unpopular symbols, providing a possible index of
informational inﬂuence at the level of the brain.
These results suggest that predicting DEMO a symbol is
socially valued may require integrating data from both the mPFC
and the caudate. Looking solely at the mPFC reveals only whether
DEMO symbol is socially tagged or not, while looking solely at the DEMO
date reveals only whether a symbol is liked or disliked; only DEMO
looking at both regions together can we identify those symbols
that have become valued as a result of social inﬂuence. These
results – demonstrating DEMO social and primary reward compo-
nents of social inﬂuence – hearken back to, and reinforce, the dis-
tinction between informational and normative inﬂuence
DEMO in early models of conformity (Asch, 1951; Deutsch &
Gerard, 1955).
Although activity in the caudate distinguished between sym-
bols that were popular and unpopular, it is worth highlighting
the nature of this difference. Results of our ROI analyses indicated
that the signal discrepancy was DEMO driven by an attenuation of
activity in the caudate when participants encountered unpopular
symbols; no signiﬁcant difference between new and popular sym-
bols emerged in this region. First, these results address one critique
of the experimental paradigm that we employed in the present
investigation. It is possible that DEMO highlighting popular objects
in the social inﬂuence phase, we drew participants’ DEMO to
popular symbols more than to unpopular symbols, an account that
DEMO imply that responses to unpopular symbols – those that
participants ignored and thus were not exposed to – would be sim-
ilar to those DEMO new symbols; these results, however, suggest this is
not the DEMO
These results also imply that the caudate may be more attuned
to information about what is rejected than what is preferred by
others, a ﬁnding with important implications for researchers of
consumer behavior. First, this attunement may translate into an
asymmetry in the rate at which people come DEMO exhibit a prefer-
ence for a socially endorsed item and the rate at which people
come to reject a socially undesirable item, which can inform exist-
ing models of product adoption and abandonment (Rogers, 1962)DEMO
Second, marketers are increasingly relying on social networks as
part of DEMO marketing mix, as evidenced by the increased popular-
ity of word-of-mouth DEMO services such as BzzAgent and
similar in-house services such as Proctor and Gamble’s Tremor.
Most of these campaigns take the form of social endorsement DEMO
products, rather than denigration of competing products, a strategy
which our results suggest may not be as impactful. More broadly,
assessing the DEMO of such social networking campaigns
is notoriously difﬁcult, since the recipient DEMO word-of-mouth can
wait for days, weeks, or even months before making a purchase.
Our results suggest that marketers might bring consumers into
an DEMO session and expose them to products, using activity
in reward regions (such as the caudate) to assess pure liking but
also using activity in mPFC to assess the extent to which those
products have been DEMO tagged or not – a novel metric for
the effectiveness of word-of-mouth marketing.
We have focused on two particular functions of the mPFC and
DEMO – in representing social information and reward, respec-
tively – but DEMO regions of course subserve a number of other
functions. Most salient as an alternative account for our brain
imaging results, both regions consistently exhibit greater BOLD
activity during easy versus difﬁcult tasks. The mPFC has been
DEMO to be more active when people engage in tasks with mini-
mal processing demands (Buckner, Andrews-Hanna, & Schacter,
2008; Gusnard & DEMO, 2001; McKiernan, Kaufman, Kucera-
Thompson, & Binder, 2003; DEMO et al., 1997) such as over-
learned button press tasks (DEMO et al., 2007); if processing
socially tagged symbols is easier DEMO processing new symbols,
then our mPFC results might be an artifact of task difﬁculty. Simi-
larly, some research points to a role for the caudate in the control
and coordination of movements, including learning the relation-
ship between a triggering stimuli and its appropriate response
(e.g., DEMO & Cincotta, 2006); if learning about popular symbols
is easier DEMO learning about unpopular symbols, then our caudate
results might be an DEMO of this form of task difﬁculty.
We believe this alternative explanation is unlikely to account
for our results for two reasons. First, from a methodological stand-
point, the task participants performed in the imaging portion of the
experiment was minimally demanding across all types of symbols,
consisting DEMO of passively viewing symbols and responding
with a button press on only a small percentage (10%) of the trials.
Indeed, button press response times did not differ across the three
symbol types (Munpopular = 881 ms, Mpopular = 865 ms, Mnew =
884 ms), F (2, 30) < 1, suggesting that the symbols elicited similar
levels of processing effort. Second, we observe differences in cau-
date recruitment between popular and unpopular symbols, but
no difference in mPFC recruitment between these two types of
symbols: If task difﬁculty underlies caudate differences between
popular and unpopular symbols, we might expect to observe sim-
ilar differences in mPFC recruitment for these two types of sym-
bols, but do not (Fig. 2). Following the same logic, if differences
in mPFC DEMO between socially tagged and novel symbols
are due to task difﬁculty, DEMO might expect to observe similar differ-
ences in caudate recruitment, but DEMO do not (Fig. 2). Thus while
we cannot conclusively rule DEMO the possibility that task difﬁculty
accounts for our effects, the pattern DEMO results elicited by the three
symbol types across the caudate and mPFC more closely matches
our account.
Finally, we have drawn sharp distinctions between normative
and informational inﬂuence throughout this paper, and stressed
the speciﬁcity of the brain regions underlying these different forms
of social inﬂuence. In practice, of course, these two kinds of inﬂu-
ence are frequently interlinked (DEMO expressed to conform
to the attitudes of others can over time become internalized pref-
erences, for example), and the brain regions underlying these pro-
cesses likely work in concert as well. Indeed, the fact that we
observe activation in the caudate as opposed to other reward-re-
lated DEMO such as the nucleus accumbens points to the possible
interrelatedness of the systems: Several recent investigations have
provided evidence for a role of the striatum in representing reward
that is socially derived (see Sanfey, 2007)DEMO King-Casas et al. (2005),
for example, demonstrated that the DEMO of fair treatment
from an interaction partner in an ultimatum game was associated
with increased activity in the caudate (see also Fliessbach et al.,
2007; Tabibnia, Satpute, & Lieberman, 2008). Similarly, some evi-
dence suggests that aspects of the mPFC may be involved in DEMO
for reward (e.g., Amodio & Frith, 2006; McClure, Caibson DEMO al.,
2004a). Izuma et al. (2008) provide evidence of the separable but
interrelated roles of caudate and mPFC: In their investigation,
activity in the caudate tracked with the magnitude of both social
DEMO monetary reward, but the mPFC was selectively activated
when participants processed DEMO about the impression they
made on others, regardless of valence.
Like DEMO investigation which modeled the formation of social
preferences in a time-limited laboratory session, these other inves-
tigations are similarly short in duration, precluding DEMO exploration
of the time course of the interplay of brain regions over time. Fu-
ture research should explore the process by which learning the
DEMO of other people translates into stable preferences in
memory: Brain regions DEMO in episodic and short-term mem-
ory might play a dominant role during early stages of the social
inﬂuence process, while regions involved in storing semantic, gen-
eral knowledge about the world might be more involved as those
novel preferences become more stable. One intriguing possibility
158
M.F. Mason et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2009) 152–159
would be to explore a role for areas of the right hippocampus
implicated speciﬁcally in memory for social information (e.g.,
Kirwan & Stark, 2004; Somerville, Wig, Whalen, & Kelley, DEMO).
Conclusions
We close by highlighting how the minimalistic nature of our
paradigm speaks to the robustness of the power of social inﬂuence.
First, we observed our effects – greater recruitment of the mPFC to
socially DEMO symbols and greater caudate activity to popular
symbols – despite the fact that participants were never explicitly
directed to judge the symbols during the DEMO session, instead
performing an incidental processing task. This suggests that the
DEMO of social inﬂuence is present and detectable even in the ab-
sence of any conscious intention on the part of the participant to
consider DEMO value of the target item (e.g., ‘‘Do I like this symbol?’)
or any instruction to consider the previous social context in DEMO
this information was encountered (e.g., ‘‘How popular was this
symbol?”). These results are particularly notable in light of previ-
ous evidence DEMO relevant norms must be salient to elicit norm-
congruent behavior (Cialdini, Kallgren, & Reno, 1991). Second,
our effects emerged at DEMO level of the brain after just a short train-
ing duration, DEMO abstract symbols tagged by the opinions of
strangers, and in a DEMO that was decidedly not naturalistic (an
MR scanner). We can DEMO imagine the magnitude of our effects
in more familiar contexts, using DEMO meaningful stimuli, and
involving social tagging by non-strangers, all important areas for
future research.
References
Abrahamson, E. (1991). Managerial fads and DEMO: The diffusion and rejection of
innovations. Academy of Management Review, 16, 586–612.
Aharon, I., Etcoff, N., Ariely, D., Chabris, DEMO F., O’Connor, E., & Breiter, H. C. (2001).
DEMO faces have variable reward value: fMRI and behavioral evidence.
Neuron, 32, 537–551.
Amodio, D. M., & Frith, C. D. (2006). Meeting of minds: The medial frontal cortex and
social cognition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 7, 268–277.
Apfelbaum, E. P., Sommers, S. R., & Norton, M. I. (2008). Seeing race and seeming
racist? DEMO strategic colorblindness in social interaction. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, DEMO, 918–932.
Aron, A., Fisher, H., Mashek, D. J., DEMO, G., Li, H., & Brown, L. L. (2005). Reward,
motivation, and emotion systems associated with early-stage intense romantic
love. Journal of Neurophysiology, 94, 327–337.
Asch, S. E. (1951). DEMO of group pressure upon the modiﬁcation and distortion of
judgment. In H. Guetzkow (Ed.), Groups, leadership and men. Pittsburgh, PA:
Carnegie Press.
Banerjee, A. (1992). A simple model of herd behavior. DEMO Journal of Economics,
103, 797–818.
Beer, J. S., Heerey, E. H., Keltner, D., Scabini, D., & Knight, R. DEMO (2003). The regulatory
function of self-conscious emotion: Insights from patients with orbitofrontal
damage. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 594–604.
DEMO, J., & Heath, C. (2007). Where consumers diverge from others: Identity-
signaling and product domains. Journal of Consumer Research, 34, 121–134.
Berns, G. S., Chappelow, J., Zink, C. F., DEMO, G., Martin-Skurski, M. E., & Richards, J.
(2005). Neurobiological correlates of social conformity and independence
during mental rotation. Biological Psychiatry, 58, 245–253.
Berthoz, S., Armony, J. L., Blair, R. DEMO J., & Dolan, R. J. (2002). An fMRI study DEMO
intentional and unintentional (embarrassing) violations of social norms. Brain,
125, 1696–1708.
Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D., & Welch, I. (1992). A theory of fads, fashion,
custom, and cultural-change as DEMO cascades. Journal of Political
Economy, 100, 992–1026.
Blakemore, S. J., & Decety, J. (2001). From the perception of action to DEMO
understanding of intention. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2, 561–567.
Brett, M., Anton, J., Valabregue, R., & Poline, J. (2002). DEMO of interest analysis
using an SPM toolbox. In Paper presented at the 8th international conference on
functional mapping of the human brain, Sendai, DEMO [August].
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, DEMO L. (2008). The brain’s default
system: Anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. In A. Kingstone & M.
Miller (Eds.). The year in cognitive neuroscience 2008 (Vol. 1124, pp. 1–38). Ann,DEMO
NY: New York Academy of Sciences.
Camerer, C. F. (2003)DEMO Behavioral game theory. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Cialdini, R. DEMO, & Goldstein, N. J. (2004). Social inﬂuence: Compliance and conformity.
Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 591–621.
Cialdini, R. B., DEMO, C. A., & Reno, R. R. (1991). A focus theory of normative
conduct: A theoretical reﬁnement and reevaluation of the role of norms in
human behavior. In M. Zanna (Ed.). Advances in experimental social psychology
(Vol. 24, pp. 201–234). New York: Academic Press.
Cialdini, R. B., Reno, R. R., & Kallgren, C. A. (1990). A focus theory of normative
conduct: Recycling the DEMO of norms to reduce littering in public places.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 1015–1026.
Craig, K. D., & Prkachin, K. M. (1978). Social modeling inﬂuences on sensory decision
theory and psychophysiological indexes of pain. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 36, 805–813.
DEMO Lange, F. P., Spronk, M., Willems, R. M., Toni, I., & Bekkering, H. (2008).
Complementary systems for understanding DEMO intentions. Current Biology,
18, 454–457.
Delgado, M. R., Nystrom, L. E., Fissell, K., Noll, D. C., & Fiez, DEMO A. (2000). Tracking the
hemodynamic responses for reward and punishment DEMO the striatum. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 84, 3072–3077.
Deutsch, M., & Gerard, H. B. (1955). A study of normative and informational DEMO
inﬂuences upon individual judgment. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
51, 629–636.
Eisenberg, N. (2000). Emotion, regulation, and moral development. Annual Reviews
in Psychology, 51, 665–697.
Elliott, R., Friston, K. J., & Dolan, R. J. (2000). Dissociable neural responses in human
reward systems. The Journal of Neuroscience, 20, 6159–6165.
Fliessbach, K., Weber, B., Trautner, P., Dohmen, T., Sunde, U., Elger, C. E., et al. (2007).
Social comparison affects reward-related brain activity in the human ventral
striatum. Science, 318, 1305–1308.
Friston, K. J., Holmes, A. P., Worsley, K. J., Poline, DEMO B., Frith, C. D., & Frackowiak, R. J. S.
(DEMO). Statistical parametric maps in functional imaging: A general linear
approach. DEMO Brain Mapping, 2, 189–210.
Gallagher, H. L., & Frith, DEMO D. (2003). Functional imaging of ‘theory of mind’. Trends
in DEMO Sciences, 7, 77–83.
Gerber, A. S., Green, D. P., & Larimer, C. W. (2008). Social pressure and voter turnout:DEMO
Evidence from a large-scale ﬁeld experiment. American Political Science Review,
102, 33–48.
Gusnard, D. A., & Raichle, M. E. (2001). Searching for a baseline: Functional imaging
and the resting human brain. Nature Neuroscience, 2, 685–694.
Higgins, M. C. (2001). Follow the DEMO?: The effects of social inﬂuence on employer
choice. Group & Organization Management, 26, 255–282.
Hong, H., Kubik, J. D., & DEMO, J. C. (2004). Social interaction and stock market
participation. The Journal of Finance, 59, 137–163.
Izuma, K., Saito, D. N., & Sadato, N. (2008). Processing of social and monetary
rewards in the human striatum. Neuron, 58, 284–294.
Kilduff, M. (1990)DEMO The interpersonal structure of decision making: A social
comparison approach to DEMO choice. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 47, 270–288.
King-Casas, DEMO, Tomlin, D., Anen, C., Camerer, C. F., Quartz, S. R., & Montague, P. R.
(2005). Getting to know you: Reputation and trust in a two-person economic
exchange. Science, 308, 78–83.
Kirwan, C. B., & Stark, C. E. (2004). DEMO temporal lobe activation during encoding
and retrieval of novel face-name pairs. Hippocampus, 14, 919–930.
Knutson, B., Adams, C. M., Fong, G. W., & Hommer, D. (2001). Anticipation of
increasing monetary reward selectively recruits nucleus accumbens. Journal of
Neuroscience, 21, RC159.
Mason, M. F., Banﬁeld, J., & Macrae, C. N. (2004). Thinking about actions: The neural
substrates of person-related action knowledge. Cerebral Cortex, DEMO, 209–214.
Mason, M. F., & Macrae, C. N. (2008)DEMO Perspective-taking from a social neuroscience
standpoint. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, DEMO, 215–232.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. M., Grafton, S. T., & Macrae, C.
N. (2007). Wandering minds: The default network and stimulus-independent
thought. Science, 315, 393–395.
McClure, S. M., Laibson, D. I., Loewenstein, G., & Cohen, J. D. (2004a). Separate neural
systems value immediate and delayed monetary rewards. Science, 306, 503–507.
McClure, S. M., Li, J., Tomlin, D., Cypert, K. S., Montague, L. M., & Montague, P. R.
(2004b). Neural DEMO of behavioral preference for culturally familiar
drinks. Neuron, 44, 379–387.
McKiernan, K. A., Kaufman, J. N., Kucera-Thompson, J., & Binder, J. R. (2003). A
parametric manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation: An
fMRI study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 15, 394–408.
Ochsner, DEMO N., Knierim, K., Ludlow, D. H., Hanelin, J., DEMO, T., Glover, G.,
et al. (2004). Reﬂecting upon feelings: An fMRI study of neural systems
supporting the attribution of emotion to self and other. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 16, 1746–1772.
O’Doherty, J. P., Deichmann, R., Critchley, H. D., & Dolan, DEMO J. (2002). Neural
responses during anticipation of a primary taste DEMO Neuron, 33,
815–826.
Olsson, A., Nearing, K. I., & Phelps, E. A. (2007). Learning fear by observing others:
The neural systems of social fear transmission. Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience, 2, 3–11.
Plassman, H., O’Doherty, J., Shiv, B., & Rangel, A. (2008). Marketing actions can
modulate neural representations of DEMO pleasantness. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 105, 1050–1054.
Raczkowski, D., Kalat, J. W., & Nebes, R. (1974). DEMO and validity of some
handedness questionnaire items. Neuropsychologia, 12, 43–47.
Rao, A., & Monroe, K. B. (1989). The effect of DEMO, brand name, and store name on
buyers’ perceptions of product quality: An integrative review. Journal of
Marketing Research, 26, 351–357.
M.F. Mason et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 152–159
159
Reingen, P. H. (1982). Test of a list procedure for inducing compliance with requests.
Journal of Consumer Research, 5, 96–102.
Rogers, E. M. (1962). Diffusion of innovations. New York: The Free Press.
Sanfey, A. G. (2007). Social decision-making: DEMO from game theory and
neuroscience. Science, 318, 598–602.
Schultz, W., Apicella, P., Scarnati, E., & Ljungberg, T. (1992). DEMO activity in
monkey ventral striatum related to the expectation of reward. Journal of
Neuroscience, 12, 4595–4610.
Seger, C. A., & Cincotta, C. M. (2006). Dynamics of frontal, striatal, and hippocampal
systems during rule learning. Cerebral Cortex, 16, 1546–1555.
Sherif, M. (1936). DEMO psychology of social norms. New York: Harper Collins.
Shulman, G. L., Fiez, J. A., Corbetta, M., Buckner, R. L., Miezin, F. M., Raichle, M. E.,
et al. (1997). DEMO blood ﬂow changes across visual tasks: II. Decreases in
cerebral cortex. DEMO of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 648–663.
Somerville, L. H., Wig, DEMO S., Whalen, P. J., & Kelley, W. M. (2006)DEMO Dissociable medial
temporal lobe contributions to social memory. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
18, 1253–1265.
Tabibnia, G., Satpute, A. B., & Lieberman, M. D. (2008). The sunny side of fairness:
Preference DEMO fairness activates reward circuitry (and disregarding unfairness
activates self-control circuitry). DEMO Science, 19, 339–347.
Takahashi, H., Yahata, N., Koeda, DEMO, Matsuda, T., Asai, K., & Okubo, Y. (2004)DEMO Brain
activation associated with evaluative processes of guilt and embarrassment: An
DEMO study. NeuroImage, 23, 967–974.
Tremblay, L., Hollerman, J. R., & Schultz, W. (1998). Modiﬁcations of reward
expectation-related neuronal activity DEMO learning in primate striatum.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 80, 964–977.
Vartanian, DEMO, & Goel, V. (2004). Neuroanatomical correlates of aesthetic preferences
DEMO paintings. NeuroReport, 15, 893–897.
Whiten, A., Horner, V., & de Waal, F. B. M. (2005). Conformity to cultural norms DEMO
tool use in chimpanzees. Nature, 43(7), 737–740.{1g42fwefx}