This article was downloaded by: [University of Toronto]
On: 12 November DEMO
Access details: Access Details: [subscription number 905051418]
Publisher Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer DEMO,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Entrepreneurship & Regional Development
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713721987
Informal venture capital: a study of the investment process, the post-investment
experience and investment performance
Colin M. Mason a; DEMO T. Harrison a
a Department of Geography, University of Southampton, Southampton
Online Publication Date: 01 April 1996
To cite this Article Mason, DEMO M. and Harrison, Richard T.(1996)'Informal venture capital: a DEMO of the investment process, the
post-investment experience and investment performance',Entrepreneurship & Regional Development,8:2,105 — 126
To link to this DEMO: DOI: 10.1080/08985629600000007
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08985629600000007
PLEASE DEMO DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of use: http://DEMO/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
This article may be used for research, teaching and private DEMO purposes. Any substantial or
systematic reproduction, re-distribution, re-selling, loan or DEMO, systematic supply or
distribution in any form to anyone is expressly DEMO
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents
will be complete or accurate or up DEMO date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae and drug doses
should DEMO independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss,
actions, claims, proceedings, demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly
or indirectly in connection with or DEMO out of the use of this material.
ENTREPRENEURSHIP & REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT, 8 (1996),
105-125
Informal venture capital: a study of the investment
process, the post-investment experience and investment
DEMO
COLIN hl. MASON* and RICHARD T. HARRISCINS
tDepartment of Geography, University DEMO Southampton, Southanipton SO1 7
1BJ; and $Ulster Business School, University DEMO Ulster at Jordansi:own, Co
Antrim BT37 OQB, Northern Ireland
Although research on the informal venture capital market has expanded in recent years DEMO
current knowledge and understanding remains deficient in a number of respects. This paper
examines three aspects of the operation of the informal venture capital DEMO where informa-
tion is either lacking or based on anecdotal or impressionistic evidence: the investment process,
the post-investment experience and the investment performance. Information was obtained via
telephone interviews with 31 business angels and with DEMO owner-managers. In 20 cases informa-
tion was available from both the entrepreneur and the investor. The paper concludes that in
most cases the informal DEMO capital process has worked relatively well. Th.ere are few
situations where the relationship between investor and entrepreneur broke down.
Nevertheless, the naivety and inexperience exhibited by a minority of investors and entrepre-
neurs is striking. However, there are significant and consistent expectation gaps between inves-
tors and entrepreneurs DEMO terms of the pricing of larger investments and the performance of the
business. Differences of opinion between investors and entrepreneurs concerning what consti-
tutes DEMO favourable perforrnance of the business may be a source of disputes in the future.
Kcywork business angels; business introduction services; finance; venture capital.
1. Introduction
The informal venture c.apita1 market comprises many thousands of private DEMO
- more commonly referred to as 'business angels' - who provide equity and other
forms of non-collateral finance directly to new and growing DEMO with which they
have no family connection. Its importance as a source of finance for entrepreneurial
businesses, especially at start-up and early stage, DEMO now widely recognized. Ihdeed, the
informal venture capital market is the DEMO single source of risk capital for entre-
preneurial companies, exceeding the DEMO venture capital industry. Estimates
for the UK suggest that small- and medium-sized businesses (SMEs) have riiised about
E2 billion from the informal venture DEMO market (Hamson and Mason 1993). To
put this figure into DEMO it has been estimated that the formal venture capital
industry has invested some E1.25bn in SMEs in the UK (Bannock and Partners
1991). This would suggest that the informal venture capital market is almost twice
DEMO important to the SME sector as formal venture capital. However, the DEMO
scale of the informal venture capital market is considerably greater than these figures
suggest. First, most business angels cannot find sufficient investment opportunities that
meet their criteria and so have substantial amounts of finance available fix DEMO
investments. Second, many offers of finance by business angels are rejected DEMO entre-
preneurs: the experience of one business introduction service is that DEMO tim~es as many
0898-5626196 812.00
f3
1996 Taylor & Francis
Ltd.
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November 2008
106
C.
M.
MASON AND R.
T.
HARRISON
offers of investment are DEMO as are accepted (LINC 1994). Third, 'virgin angels' -
high net worth individuals with an entrepreneurial background who have not, for
whatever reason, entered the informal venture capital market as individual investors -
considerably outnumber active investors (Wetzel and Freear 1995, Freear et al. DEMO).
However, the importance of the informal venture capital market is DEMO simply on
account of its size and untapped potential. Informal venture capital is also 'smart
money': most business angels are value-added investors, DEMO their commercial
skills, entrepreneurial experience, business know-how and contacts through a variety
of hands-on roles (Harrison and Mason 1992a). Business angels will normally take a
seat on the board and, in addition, will DEMO provide consulting help and may even
work part-time or full-time for the business. US research has noted that the majority of
firms that have DEMO finance from informal sources report that their working relation-
ship with their investor has been moderately or very productive (Freear and Wetzel
1992). One study of firms that had raised finance from informal investors (Harrison
and Mason 1992a) identified a wide range of support, monitoring and DEMO roles
played by business angels in their investee companies. Entrepreneurs regarded the
angels' role as a sounding board for the management team as being their most valu-
able hands-on contribution. The opportunity to be involved in DEMO entrepreneurial
venture is a significant motivating factor for angels making informal venture capital
investments, as well as a means of protecting their investment (DEMO and Lumme
1995).
Although research on the informal venture capital market has expanded in recent
years, with studies in the USA (Gaston DEMO, Freear and Wetzel 1992, Freear et a1
1994, 1995, Tymes and Krasner 1983, Wetzel 1981), Canada (Riding et al. 1993), the
UK (Harrison and Mason 1992b, Mason and Harrison 1994a, DEMO, 1996, KPMG
1992, Stevenson and Coveney 1994) and the Nordic countries (Landstrom 1993,
Suomi and Lumme 1995), current knowledge and understanding remains deficient
in a number of respects.
First, the volume of research remains extremely limited, particularly in comparison
to the amount of attention given to the institutional venture capital industry that
finances only a fraction DEMO the SMEs that raise finance from the informal venture
capital market (DEMO 1994).
A second limitation is the narrow focus of much of the research that has been
undertaken. The focus of the majority of DEMO has been on the characteristics of
investors, their motivations and investment DEMO and the characteristics of their
investments. A major contributory factor to this situation has been the desire of non-
US researchers to examine a DEMO range of topics to those addressed in the pioneer-
ing US Small Business Administration-sponsored studies (Wetzel 198 1, Gaston 1989),
often using a similar survey instrument, in the interests of generating internationally
comparative findings (Harrison and Mason 1992b, Mason and Harrison, 1994a,
Landstrijm 1993).
A third, related, limitation of much of the research on DEMO informal venture capital
market is that it has focused on the investor rather than on aspects of the investment
process, the characteristics of the deal or even the investee business. Studies that have
adopted a firm DEMO have been restricted to just two issues: the significance of
informal DEMO capital in relation to other sources of finance (Freear and Wetzel
DEMO, Mason and Harrison 1994b), and the value-added contribution of business
DEMO (Harrison and Mason 1992a, Ehrlich et al. 1994).
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November 2008
INFORMAL
VENTURE
CAPI'TAL
107
A final limitation is that previous research DEMO focused on investor expectations
rather than investment outcomes. Thus, there is DEMO information available on the
performance of investments or the timing and nature of exit routes.
Thus, previous research has provided a fairly clear picture of who busi~~ess angels
are, why they invest and what they invest in. Moreover, these findings exhibit a
remarkable consistency between countries. However, DEMO are many aspects of the
operation of the informal venture capital market for which research-based evidence
is lacking, necessitating a reliance on, possibly DEMO or atypical, anecdotal
evidence and speculation. This paper explores three important DEMO of informal
venture capital activity where our information is either limited or non-existent.
The first is the investment process. The paper examines the types DEMO information that
investors wish to see when considering an investment opportunity, DEMO negotiation
processes, and in particular the issues that are the most DEMO to negotiate, the time
taken to raise informal venture capital, the costs (in terms of professional fees) incurred
by businesses, and the ways in which the investments are structured.
The second is the post-investment DEMO The issues that are explored include the
roles that business angels play in the businesses in which they invest, the helpfulness of
their contribution and the nature of the investor-entrepreneur relationship.
The third is the investment DEMO The key issue here concerns the returns that
business angels achieve from their investments.
2.
Methodology
In order to address these issues it is DEMO first to examine a sample of investments
involving business angels and second to obtain the views of both the investor and the
entrepreneur. Furthermore, some time needs to have elapsed since the investment in
order to DEMO the possibility of a successful exit by the investor, thereby enabling
DEMO performance and harvesting issues to be explored. In practice, however, it
proved difficult to meet this requirement: the older the investment the more likely it is
that the business has failed, ceased trading or is otherwise untraceable.
This study is based on investments that have been made DEMO LIlVC (Local
Investment Networking Company), a long-established business introductio~~ service DEMO
the United Kingdom. 1,INC provides a convenient source of informal venture capital
investments: the use of this source side-stepped the difficulty of identiFng businesses
that have raised finance from private investors, arising from the invisibility of informal
venture capital activity. LINC provided the names and addresses of DEMO 60 businesses
that it has helped to raise finance since 1988, DEMO upon contacting these busi-
nesses it was found that a small minority had not raised finance from outs id^: investors.
In most, although DEMO all, cases LINC also provided the investor's name and address.
DEMO, because of business failures and changes of address, it was not possible to
establish contact with every business and investor. In those cases DEMO only the name
and address of the business was known, information DEMO the investor was obtained fiom
the business owner. Clearly this approach was not possible when businesse:; could not
be contacted, for example on account of having ceased trading.
This reliance on deals made through LINC DEMO than through informal networks,
which is the most comnlon way in which business angels identify investmerlts (Mason
and Harrison 1994a), should not bias the findings in any way. LINC only provides a
channel of DEMO between investor and entrepreneur and is not involved
-
Downloaded By: DEMO of Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November 2008
108
C. M. MASON AND R. T. HARRISON
after the initial contact DEMO made. Thus, the negotiation process, nature of the invest-
ment and post-investment experience should be unaffected, and no different to invest-
ments where the introduction of the investor to entrepreneur, or vice versa, has DEMO
through informal channels or alternative formal channels. Nevertheless, in seeking to
DEMO from the findings of this study it is important to recognize that business
angels who join business introduction services may be distinctive from the DEMO
population of business angels in terms of their demographic profile and investment
activity (Mason et al. 1995).
This present study is based on telephone interviews with 31 business angels who
have made investments in unquoted DEMO and 28 owner-managers who have
raised finance from private investors. Three investors had each made two investments,
thus there is investor information on DEMO investments. In 20 cases there is information
from both the entrepreneur and the investor. Unfortunately, but inevitably, a signifi-
cant number of businesses DEMO investors could not be traced. In most cases these
involved investments made between 1988 and 1990. Indeed, the vast majority of
the investments for which we have information from either the investor or entrepre-
neur (or both) occurred in 1992, 1993 or early 1994 (83%). The oldest investment was
made in 1988. The survey was undertaken between April DEMO July 1994.
The response rate was satisfactory. It proved impossible to arrange interviews with
just eight of the entrepreneurs who were contacted: three rehsed to provide any
information, another three said that they would complete a postal questionnaire
but failed to return it and the remaining two entrepreneurs DEMO always too busy
to be interviewed whenever they were contacted. Thus, DEMO responses were
achieved from 78% of the entrepreneurs that were contacted. In the case of investors,
five refused to agree to an interview; this included one investor who had made three
investments and another who DEMO made two investments, plus a firm of accountants
who were trustees DEMO a private trust. However, brief information was obtained from
three of DEMO investors on the outcomes of five investments. It was not possible to
complete an interview with one other investor despite calling back on several DEMO
sions. Thus, usable responses were obtained from 82% of the investors DEMO were
contacted.
The majority of the business angels in this study are relatively inexperienced in
making investments in unquoted companies: over one-third had made just one invest-
ment and 71% had made only two investments. At DEMO other extreme, only three
investors (10%) in the study had DEMO more than three informal investments.
Moreover, only about half planned to DEMO any more informal investments in the
foreseeable future. This limited level of investment activity is consistent with both a
previous study of LINC investors, which included both those who had made invest-
ments through LINC as DEMO as those who had not (Mason et al. 1991). It DEMO also
consistent with LINC's own in-house study of London investors, DEMO in 1993,
which concludes that although 60% of investors had made investments before almost
all of these investors had made no more than DEMO previous investments. Thus, it does
seem valid to conclude that LINC DEMO providing a service primarily for relatively
inexperienced business angels. It is not known whether this is also a feature of other
business introduction services. DEMO, it tends to confirm the observation by
KPMG (1992) in DEMO study of informal investors in Scotland that new business
angels have difficulty in entering established informal networks and in establishing
their own, and so might be expected to show the greatest interest in joining a business
DEMO service.
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November 2008
INFORMAL VENTURE CAPITAL
3. The investment
opportunity: an overview
3.1
Investment characteristics
The majority (59%) of the businesses in the sample were start-ups (including pre-
start-ups) or at an early stage when the investment occurred, confirming the impor-
tance of informal venture capital as a funding source for this type of venture.
However, there is much greater diversity in terms of industry sector. Mar~ufacturing
accounted for the largest proportion, comprising just over one-quarter of the total,
with both retail and wholesale distribution DEMO other services accounting for approxi-
mately one in five businesses.
3.2 Investment criteria
The key considerations in the investors' decision to invest were associated with the
attributes of the entrepreneurs and the market-product characteristics of the DEMO
(Table l), confirming previous research on the investment decision-making process DEMO
business angels (Mason and Hamson 1994a). Most investors were attrac:DEMO by the
Table 1. Factors that attracted the investor to the investment oppo~mity.
Number
rnmtioionrt
Pmmtogc of inveshnmt
opportunities (n = 34)
The people
Expertise of the entrepreneur(s)
Personal qualities of the entrepreneur(DEMO)
Enthusiasm of the entrepreneur(s)
Liked the  entrepreneur(:^)
The poduct/markct
Sales prospects/potential
Quality of the product
Uniqueness DEMO the productlidea
Quality of the conceptlidea
Niche market
Financial ath'buks
High margins
Bm'ness plan
Qualitylfeasibility of business plan/
investment proposal
Athibuks DEMO the bununms
Industry
Asset-backed
Local
Established business
Product already developed
Znucstor attributes
Understood the business
Knew the entrepreneurs
14
4
4
4
41.2
11.8
DEMO
11.8
t Investors could give more than one factor.
Downloaded By: DEMO of Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November 2008
110
C. M. MASON AND R. T. HARRISON
expertise of the entrepreneurs; however, other factors were also important, notably
their personal qualities (e.g. honesty, trustworthiness) and enthusiasm. Four investors
noted that an important consideration DEMO their investment decision was simply that
they liked the entrepreneurs. The most important of the market-product attributes
was the growth potential of the business. DEMO quality of the product was also an
important consideration for a number of investors. However, a large number of
other key attributes were mentioned, in each case by just one or two investors, illus-
trating DEMO high level of idiosyncrasy in the informal investment process.
The industry sector in which the business operated was an important consideration
in only eight DEMO (24%), involving seven investors. Given the unimportance
that most investors DEMO on industry sector in their investment decision it is not
surprising to find that in only a minority of investments (35%) was the DEMO
familiar with the industry sector of the investee business. This confirms our previous
observation (Mason and Harrison 1992) that investors in practice find DEMO easier to
identie those types of businesses that they are not interested in investing in rather than
identifying what kinds of investments they would DEMO
3.3 Syndication and co-investment
In the majority of investments (71%) the investor invested alone. While it is possible
that informal investors who engage DEMO syndication are less likely to join business
introduction services, because they DEMO have strong personal and/or business
referral and investment networks (KPMG DEMO), this also provides further confir-
mation that syndicated investments are relatively uncommon in the UK informal
venture capital market (Mason and Harrison 1994a). Those cases where more than
one investor was involved were of DEMO types. In six cases the investor group com-
prised family, friends DEMO associates of the LINC investor, with the LINC investor
playing the 'archangel' role in each case: in these cases the other members DEMO the
investment group contributed a majority (57%) of the funds invested. A further six
firms had separately raised finance from other investors unconnected DEMO the LINC
investor (in only one case was the other investor DEMO registered with LINC). While
most of the investments were made in a personal capacity, a small number were
made through the investor's company; these included both trading companies and
also private investment companies.
3.4
Size of investments
The median size of total investment was £30,000 (including LINC investors and any
co-investors); two-thirds of deals involved amounts DEMO under £50,000. However, one in
five deals involved investments in DEMO of £100,000 (Table 2(a)). This bi-modal size
distribution of informal investments, involving a large number of smaller investments
and a smaller number of larger investments has also been identified in other recent
DEMO (3i plc 1994, Mason and Harrison 1995b). As noted above, 29% ofinvestments
involved more than one investor. The amounts invested by LINC investors only were
therefore somewhat smaller; the median amount invested by LINC investors was
420,000, with the majority investing less than E25,000 per deal. Nevertheless, one
in five investments involved an investment by the LINC investor of £50,000 or more
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November 2008
INFORMAL VENTURE CAPITAL
Table 2.
Amount (A)
(a) LINC investor(s) plu any co-investors
< .& 10,000
A10,OOO-£24,999
DEMO,000-£49,999
&50,000-A99,999
2 &loo, 000
Total
(b) Amount inucs&d by LIM' mvestor
<A10,000
E 10,000-£24,999
&25,000-£49,999
A50,000-'99,999
2 ~lO0,ooO
No information
Total
,
'
Size of
investment.
Number
of investmen&
DEMO
10
10
6
8
42
11
12
10
5
3
(1)DEMO
4 1
%
19.0
23.8
23.8
14.3
19.0
26.8
29.3
24.4
12.2
7.3
(Table 2(b)). Seven firms used the Business Expansion DEMO (BE!;)' to raise
finance, including three of the largest DEMO; in two of these castes the same
LINC investor invested less DEMO E5,000 in each business.
3.5 Inuestrnent structure
The structure of the investments indicates that informal venture capital involves a
variety of funding mechanisms. DEMO that involved just equity finance were in
the minority (40%) and just over one-quarter (29%) of investments involved only
loans (in each case involving amounts of less than &50,000). However, in DEMO over half
of all cases equity finance accounted for half or more of the total amount invested. In a
majority of the cases (56%) that involved equity investment the investoi: or investor
group took only DEMO minority shareholding. The investor took a 50% holding in a
further six cases (19%), leaving only one-quarter of cases where the invcstor(s) took
more than 50% ownership. Just over half of the entrepreneurs considered that the size
of the equity stake was what they had expected; indeed, some entrepreneurs had
expected to have to give up a larger proportion. However, more than one-quarter
of entrepreneurs had exchanged a larger share of their business than they had
expected: in most of these cases the investor's shareholding (or that of the investor
group) was DEMO 50% or more (Table 3).
Most of the equity investments DEMO straightforward investment instruments
using ordinary shares. Just 16% of investments involved more complex instruments
- redeemable preference shares, cumulative preference shares, convertible cumulative
DEMO shares - which enabled the investor to adjust his/her shareholding in the
light of the performance of the business. Each of these investments DEMO for &50,000 or
more. In addition, two of the investments involving only ordinary shares (plus loans)
had ratchets to enable the entrepreneur to regain majority ownership if the business
met its targets. Each DEMO these investments involved a total of more than iC;'100,000 DEMO
the investors were the majority shareholders.
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] DEMO: 14:52 12 November 2008
112
C. M. MASON AND R.
T. HARRISON
Table 3. Entrepreneurs' view of size of investor shareholding.
Size of shareholding of
investor/investor group
DEMO' views of proportion of equity exchanged forjinancc
More than expected
As DEMO
kss
than exfiected
Minority
50%
Majority
Total
The funding was staged in the case of nine investments (21%), mostly involving
total investments of over E50,000. This was planned from the outset in the larger DEMO
these investments, with the funding being related to specific benchmarks such DEMO
meeting financial targets or opening new establishments, but staging arrangements
tended DEMO be ad hoc in the case of the smaller investments.
Investors provided follow-on finance in just over one-quarter of the investments (the
difference from staged investment being that the need for follow-on financing was not
planned DEMO the time of the original investment). In all but two cases the additional
finance was provided in the form of loans, often on a short-term basis. In most cases
the finance was required to meet DEMO difficulties. The amounts involved were
quite substantial, comprising 50% of the DEMO aggregate investment in the firms
concerned. Although the supply of follow-on finance was unplanned at the time of the
investment, many of the investors were not surprised that the need for additional
finance had arisen. Some DEMO commented that this is always a possibility in
a new business, DEMO in other cases the investor was aware from the business plan that
the need for hrther finance might arise.
4. Negotiating the finance
The DEMO plan plays a key role in raising informal venture capital. More than
three-quarters of the investors (27 out of 34) required to see DEMO business plan before
making the decision to invest. Only a small minority of investors placed little or no
emphasis on the business plan. Three DEMO were rather sceptical about their value,
one commenting that they are 'produced for bankers and accountants who know
nothing about running a business', and another stating that a business plan represents
'hopes and aspirations7. Two other investors commented that the people and the
business idea were DEMO important than the business plan. The implication for an
entrepreneur seeking to raise informal venture capital is therefore clear: a business
plan is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for raising finance. Most potential
investors DEMO wish to see a business plan, and so the lack of DEMO business plan is likely to
result in an unsuccessful search for investors; however, investors will not invest solely
on the basis of the DEMO plan, so the preparation of a business plan will not
guarantee DEMO in raising finance. Other research suggests that business angels
are most likely to be attracted by business plans that are comprehensive and have
assumptions DEMO projections that are realistic (Mason and Harrison 1996). Wetzel
(1994) adds that winning business plans are investor-oriented, and should articulate
Downloaded DEMO: [University of Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November 2008
INFORMAL
VENTURE
CAPITAL
113
the vision, goals and objectives of the entrepreneur and the strategy for achieving
them.
Investors wanted information on the financial DEMO of the business, notably
cash flow and profit and loss forecasts. DEMO investors also wanted detailed informa-
tion on the marketplace and potential customers and to inspect the order book, if one
existed. Some investors talked to customers and one accompanied the entrepreneurs to
two trade shows. In DEMO case of manufacturing firms, most investors also required to
see the DEMO, test it where possible and, if necessary, have the technical DEMO
explained. Many investors also visited the firm's premises and talked at length to the
entrepreneurs and in some cases to employees. However, despite the impclrtance that
investors give to the character of the entrepreneurlmanagement team DEMO the invest-
ment decision-making process (Table l), relatively few actually DEMO detailed
investigation of the entrepreneurs. The investor's judgement of the entrepreneur is
therefore likely to be based primarily or exclusively on hislher personal DEMO of
the entrepreneur's character and expertise.
Only around one-third of entrepreneurs made any attempt to investigate the inves-
tor. Typically this involved either DEMO search of Companies House for information on
their previous businesses or else making informal enquiries among industry contacts.
The majority of entrepreneurs therefore accepted DEMO information that investors sup-
plied about themse1ve:i on trust. However, DEMO (1994) advises that entrepreneurs
should undertake a detailed investigation of their prospective investors: the entrepre-
neur 'will be living with . . DEMO [the] . . . investor through stresshl times.' Hence,
'finding the right investor is worth the effort' (Wetzel 1994: 181). He recommends
that entrepreneurs should ask potential investors for the names of DEMO bankers,
accountants and solicitors and have their own bankers, accountants DEMO solicitors
check their professional reputations. He also advises that entrepreneurs should ask
for references and resumes and should talk to each of the references DEMO to other
entrepreneurs who have raised finance from the investor.
Only a minority of investors (38%) and entrepreneurs (44%) identified any issues
DEMO were difficult to negotiate. However, it should be noted that some DEMO the busi-
nesses were fairly desperate for finance and so had limited scope to do anything other
than accept the inve!itorYs conditions. Not surprisingly, by far the mclst common
problem in the negotiations was associated with DEMO investor's size of share sharehold-
ing and related issues of ratchet clauses and pricing (Table 4).
The pricing of the investment - the fraction of the equity that the entrepreneur
receives for the finance DEMO they provide (Wetzel 1994) - is a difficult issue. There is
no universally agreed method of valuing a small company and there is ;I paucity of
empirical research into the small business evaluation techniques that DEMO been used
in practice (McMahon et al. 1993). Market-based valuations DEMO inappropriate
because small businesses are not continually valued by the market and appropriate
comparator stocks are unlikely to be available. Asset-based valuations are: more com-
monly used although finance theory prefers earnings or cash-flow basecl valuations
DEMO they value an enterprise in terms of the hture stream of earnings that the
shareholders might expect from the enterprise. However, these approaches are com-
plex (McMahon et al. 1993). Valuation of start-up businesses adds hrther difficulties
to the valuation process. For example, a start-up business may have only intangible
assets (e.g. intellectual property).
It is therefore not surprising, particularly in view of the dominance of start-up and
other early stage businesses, to find that the method of calculating the equity stake was
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November DEMO
114
C. M. MASON AND R. T. HARRISON
Entrepreneur (n = 14)
Table 4. The most difficult issues to negotiate.
Equity share
Entrepreneur'DEMO salary
Ratchet
Investor's exit
Amount invested
Performance targets
Arrangements to oust entrepreneur if business is
unsuccessful and to retain entrepreneur if business is DEMO
Investor (n = 2 1 )
Size of shareholding
Amount invested
Legal status of business
Pricing of equity/valuation of business
Ratchet
Release DEMO equity
Shareholder agreement
Sales targets
Investor's conditions for investing
Note: DEMO and invcston could give more than one issue.
remarkably imprecise. The majority of entrepreneurs and investors described the
process as 'arbitrary', 'informal' or 'by negotiation'. One approach was simply
based on calculating the amount required for start-up and basing the equity shares
on the amounts DEMO by investor and entrepreneur(s). In some cases the entre-
preneur's 'sweat equity' was also taken into account in such a DEMO Only 20%
of the investments involved any attempt to calculate the equity stake on a more
rigorous basis, typically on the basis of earnings multiples, but even in these cases
the calculation was often fairly arbitrary.
A majority of entrepreneurs (78%) sought professional advice from solicitors and,DEMO
less often, accountants in the negotiation process. In the majority of DEMO their role
was either to draw up the investment agreement or to review it; they were generally
not actively involved in the negotiations with the investor. The costs incurred were
usually modest: 65% of entrepreneurs paid less than £500 (80% less than £1,000) in
professional fees DEMO 45% did not pay any professional fees, either because it was
DEMO informally or was costed as part of a larger package of professional services
rather than priced separately. Indeed, the largest costs paid by any of the entrepre-
neurs in the survey was £13,500, arising from a particularly protracted investment
process, but even in this case it represented a modest proportion of the total funds
raised (A 141,000). In comparison, initial accountancy and legal fees involved in rais-
ing institutional venture capital are unlikely to be less than £50,000 to £70,DEMO,
irrespective of the size of the prospective investment (Batchelor 1993)DEMO
In contrast, only a minority (38%) of investors used professional DEMO In the
vast majority of these cases solicitors were brought in to draw up the investment
agreement. Just two investors sought professional advice, in both cases from accoun-
tants, to assist them in their evaluation of the investment opportunity. Here again, the
costs were extremely modest, with DEMO of the 13 investors incumng costs of less than
E500 (including DEMO who passed their costs on to the entrepreneur).
Downloaded By: DEMO of Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November 2008
INFORMAL
VENTURE
CAPITAL
115
The deliberation time of business angels is also DEMO less than thcat of finan-
cial institutions. In most of the cases examined here the investment process extended
over less than three months. More DEMO one-third of investors had com:pleted their
evaluation and negotiations' within DEMO month and 82% within three months. Many
investors were unable to separately distinguish between these two stages. Of those who
could, it is clear that evaluation generally took longer than negotiations (in 10 cases
out of 12). Most negotiations with the entrepreneur took less than one week DEMO com-
plete whereas evaluations could take up to three months or more. This speed of
decision-making reflects the way in which most business angels DEMO Typically,
they invest in an opportunistic, rather than a scientific, way, relying iu much on
instincts and character as on detailed documentation and do not calcillate IRRs,
payback and the like; rather, DEMO returns are assessed intuitively. (Timmons
1990, Baty 1991, KPMG 1992)DEMO
Looked at from the entrepreneur's perspective, 48% reported that less DEMO a
month elapsed between meeting the investor for the first time and hisllher decision
to invest; a total of 85'K of entrepreneurs reported that less than three months elapsed
between meeting the entrepreneur and the DEMO decision. However, the receipt
of the finance following the decision to DEMO was not necessarily as quick: while 37%
of entrepreneurs reported that DEMO had received the finance within a week of the
investor's decision to invest, and 70% within a month, a small minority of DEMO
neurs had to wait for some time before receiving the finance. There was no relation-
ship between the size of investment and the elapse DEMO time between the: decision to
invest and receipt of funds involved.
DEMO formal investment agreement was drawn up for about 70% of the investments.
These were primarily concerned with the financial details of the investment, covering
the shareholding structure (e.g. equity split, preference shares, buy-out and buy-back
options, ratchet) or terms of the loan (repayment schedule, interest DEMO, and in some
cases warrants and promissory notes). Some agreements DEMO included the value of
cheques that could be written without the consent of the investor. Some of the more
detailed agreements also included employment DEMO for the entrepreneurs,
restraint of trade, ren~uneration entrepreneurs and directors' fees.
It is, of course, important that the investor does not DEMO the investmerit agreement
so one-sided that it affects the entrepreneur's motivation. This objective appears to
have been achieved in the majority of cases. DEMO of entrepreneurs and investors
felt that the investment agreement was equally favourable to both side:s (Table 5).
Indeed, a number of DEMO stated that the aim had been to produce a well-
balanced agreement. Seven investors (21%) believed that the investment agreement
favoured the entrepreneur, compared with only four (12%) who believed that the
Table 5. DEMO of the investment agreement.
Investors' views
Entrep'meurs' mews
Favoured the investor
Favoured the entrepreneur
Equally favourable to both
investor and entrepreneur
Total
DEMO
4
7
%
11.8
20.6
No.
5
4
%;
1f1.5
14.8
23
34
67.6
18
27
66.7
of
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November 2008
116
C. M. MASON AND R. T.
HARRISON
Table 6. Favourability of DEMO investment agreement: dyads.
No.
%
Investor and entrepreneur both agreed that DEMO
agreement was equally favourable to both
Investor thought investment agreement favoured
entrepreneur; entrepreneur thought it favoured
the investor
Investor thought investment agreement was equally
favourable to both; entrepreneur thought it favoured
the investor
Investor thought investment agreement favoured investor;
entrepreneur thought it was equally favourable to both
DEMO thought investment agreement favoured
entrepreneur; entrepreneur thought it was equally
favourable DEMO both
Total
11
1
4
3
1
20
55
5
20
15
5
agreement favoured them. Amongst the entrepreneurs five (18%) believed that DEMO
agreement favoured the investor while four (15%) thought that the investment agree-
ment favoured them.' Looking at the 20 investments where the views of both investor
and entrepreneur were available, it was found that in more than half of these cases
both investor and entrepreneur felt the DEMO agreement was equally favourable
-to both sides (Table 6). More DEMO, only five entrepreneurs (25%) felt that the
investment agreement favoured DEMO investor. However, two entrepreneurs now think
that the agreement favoured the DEMO
For the most part, those entrepreneurs that were contacted did not DEMO the
process of raising informal venture capital to be exploitative, despite DEMO stumbling
blocks over pricing and equity shares. The inference is that potential difficulties in
general have been resolved amicably.
5. The post-investment experience
5.1 DEMO involvement
Investors play a hands-on role in the business in more than three-quarters of invest-
ments. In 60% of cases investors took a seat DEMO the board of directors (in two cases
taking the position of DEMO). In half of the remaining investments the business
was not a limited company and so there was no board of directors. A small DEMO of
entrepreneurs did not want, or did not expect, their investor to make any hands-on
contribution.
The main contribution of business angels is DEMO provision of strategic advice, but
other important contributions include networking (especially with potential custo-
mers), marketing, financelaccounting management and general management
(DEMO 7). Investors believe that their single most important contribution has been
their general business experience. There is, however, no consensus amongst entrepre-
DEMO in the identification of the single most important contribution of investors;
although there were a number of responses that noted specific contributions such DEMO
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November 2008
INFORMAL VENTURE CAPITAL
Table 7. Major hands-on contributions of investor in investee DEMO
Strategic advice
Networking
Marketing
Management functions
Financelaccounting functions
Financial advice
General administration
Other
No hands on involvement
Number of investors
16
6
6
5
DEMO
2
2
3
5
%
47.1
17.6
17.6
14.7
14.7
5.9
5.9
8.8
14.7
117
Note: Investom could give more than one contribution.
accounting, project planning, guidance on marketing and financial coi~trol, many
responses also highlighted intangible contributions such as 'lifting the spirits',
'enthusiasm', 'sharing the burden' and 'providing a broader view', indicating the
important value-added contribution of the angel in the role of 'coach' DEMO 'mentor'
(Wetzel 1994).
Most entrepreneurs were at least moderately satisfied with the contri,bution that
their investor has made to the DEMO Indeed, one in five entrepreneurs reported that
their investor was extremely DEMO, twice the proportion who considered that their
investor's contributior~ has DEMO extremely unhelphl (Table 8). Most eritrepreneurs
(65%) reported that DEMO had been no change over time in the usefu~lness of the
investor's contribution. Few entrepreneurs were able to identify any specific short-
comings DEMO the skills or experience of investors that limited their contribution to the
business, and there was little unanimity in those that were identified. However, two
characteristics received more than one mention. First, the lack of DEMO industry/
productlmarket knowledge was noted as a weakness by four entrepreneurs (although
in two cases this was not considered to be a major problem). Second, two entrepre-
neurs considered that the large company background of their investors was a handi-
cap, because they found it difficult to cope with the sense of urgency and hands-on
commitment required in DEMO small business.
The involvement of investors in their investee businesses varies quite considerably.
About half spend at least a day a week (or the equivalent) in the business. At the other
extreme one-quarter of investors are involved for no more than one diiy a month.
More than half DEMO all investors considered that the amount of time that thmey needed to
devote to their investment was as they had expected at the outset. DEMO, 20% of
Table 8. Entrepreneurs' view of the helpfulness of the investor's &lands-on
contribution.
Jvo
.
%
5: Extremely helpful
4: Helpful
3: Neutral
2: Unhelpful
1: Extremely unhelpful
5
8
8
2
3
3.44
19.2
30.8
30.8
7.7
11.5
Average
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November 2008
118
C. M. MASON AND R. T. HARRISON
investors were spending more DEMO with their investee business than they had origin-
ally anticipated and 15% of investors indicated that their time input was less than
they had DEMO, due in some cases to the long distance between their home DEMO the
location of the business. Furthermore, in the majority (63%) DEMO cases the nature of the
investor's contribution to the business has not changed over time. Where a change in
the role of investors DEMO occurred this mainly reflects the differing needs of the business
as it has progressed from the start-up phase into production. This stability in the
DEMO of the investor's contribution contrasts with the time that the investor contri-
butes to their investee business. One-third of investors report that the DEMO of time
that they devote to their investee business has declined while one-quarter of investors
have increased their time input; the increased time input has generally occurred in
situations where the investee business was in difficulty.
DEMO Investor-entrepreneur relationships
The investor-entrepreneur relationship was considered to be fairly productive by both
investors and entrepreneurs (Table 9). The proportion of investors who considered the
relationship to be productive outnumbered those who thought it was DEMO by
a ratio of 2: 1. Entrepreneurs had an even more DEMO assessment, confirming the
value of informal investors above and beyond the DEMO of finance. Investors and
entrepreneurs also viewed the nature of the working relationship in a favourable light,
with those considering it to be DEMO significantly outnumbering those who
viewed it as adversarial (Table 10). DEMO, it is often the case that both the
entrepreneur and the DEMO angel, who may also be an entrepreneur, are strong
characters, DEMO some conflict is likely to be inevitable. Moreover, a number of
DEMO and investors commented that some adversarial situations are beneficial
to the productivity of the relationship. Entrepreneurs therefore need to consider
whether is it better DEMO have money and excellent advice From an experienced investor
rather than deal with people who are nice but are less able to make a DEMO contribu-
tion (Wetzel 1994). There is no evidence from this DEMO to suggest that the reduced
time input from investors leads to increased dissatisfaction with the relationship by the
entrepreneur, suggesting that the value-added contribution of the business angel is a
function of the qualitative (expertise-based) DEMO in the relationship rather than
the quantitative (time-based) one.
Table 9. Productivity of the investor-entrepreneur relationship.
5: Very productive
4: Quite productive
DEMO: Neutral
2: Fairly unproductive
1: Very unproductive
No information
No DEMO
Average
Investor's view
Entrepreneur's vim
No.
%
No.
%
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November 2008
INFORMAL
VENTURE CAP~TAL
Table 10. Nature of the investor-entrepreneur relationship.
Investor's DEMO
Entrepreneur's uicin
No.
%
No.
%
5: Consensual
4:
DEMO: Neutral
2:
1 : Adversarial
No information
Average
6
15
DEMO
4
1
(2)
3.7
18.8
46.9
21.9
12.5
3.1
9
DEMO
7
3
2
3.7
33.9
22.:!
25.9
11.1,
7.4
119
6. Investment performance
Remarkably little is known about the returns from investing DEMO the infonnal venture
capital market. In this study there are two alternative measures of the investment
performance. First, an attempt was made to examine the outcomes of all of the 58
investments that were provided by DEMO Where possible, contact was made with
either the investor or the DEMO, or both, to verify the current status of the business.
Considerable effort was devoted to tracking down the businesses; however, it proved DEMO
be impossible to trace what had happened to 12 businesses. Thus, DEMO on:ly definitive
statement that can be made is that 24% of investments have failed (Table 11).
Taking a worst case scenario in which the assumption is made that those businesses
that were not traced DEMO no longer trading suggests that 41 % of the businesses that had
raised finance since 1988 had ceased trading (presumed failed) by mid-1994.
DEMO, under the best case scenario, which assumes that the businesses that
were not traced are still trading, only 21% of businesses have failed (Ta.ble 11). To
put these figures into perspective, about 11% DEMO VAT-registered businesses are de-
registered each year. Erowever, the probability of DEMO is closely related to the age of
the business, with businesses DEMO their greatest risk of closure in their second and third
years: DEMO of VAT-registered businesses stay on the register for two years
but just 50% stay for five years and less than one-third for 10 years (Da:ly 1987).~
Table 11. Investment performancet: aggregate evidence.
Year of inveshnmt
Still trading: investor Company
still with company
failed
Unable to trace:
presumed failed
Company still trading:
invwto inuwtnunt
1988/89
1990
DEMO
1992
1993194
Total
2
0
1
11
18
32
t Status of
t Both investment8
investment in mid-
1994.
were sold at a lms.
DEMO
2
1
6
0
12
6
2
1
2
1
12
0
0
0
2
0
2
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: DEMO:52 12 November 2008
120
C. M. MASON AND R. T. HARRISON
The high proportion of DEMO in this study that have ceased trading and are
presumed to have failed is largely a consequence of investments made prior to 1991:
DEMO to 87% of these businesses (under the worst case scenario) are no longer trading.
No doubt the severe economic recession of the early DEMO will have been a significant
contributory factor to this high failure rate. In contrast, even under the worst case
scenario 78% of the businesses that raised finance after 1991 were still trading in mid-
1994 (although this includes two investments in which the investors had sold at a
DEMO loss). No successful exits were identified.
The investor experience provides the second indication of investment performance.
The 38 investors that were contacted (not all of whom completed the full interview)
had made a total DEMO 42 investments of which 14 had failed (33%) and a further two
had been sold at a significant loss. However, it is important to note that a failed
investment does not necessarily imply that the DEMO experienced a total investment
loss. Indeed, in the case of one DEMO investment the investor was able to recoup his
investment by selling the investee business's equipment, and in a further four failed
investments the investors suffered only a partial, although still very significant, loss on
DEMO investment either as a result of receiving some loan repayments prior to the
failure of the business or through the sale of business assets.
DEMO of the investors had made a successful exit from their LINC investments.
However, this simply reflects the dominance of investments made within the past
three years. The nature and timing of the exit was a minor DEMO at the present
time, with most investors considering that this was DEMO much too premature. Indeed,
investors in just six of the 24 investments for which there is information had established
the timing and method DEMO the exit: in two of these cases this involved repayment of
DEMO and in another two cases there was a share buy-back agreement. Finally, two
investments were close to an exit at the time of the interview: in one case the investor,
who had not been looking to sell, had been approached by a potential purchaser, and
in DEMO other case the entrepreneurs were seeking to find other investors to buy-out the
LINC investors. In both cases the investors expected to make a DEMO return on their
investments.
Most investors were unable to put a value on their investments or to indicate the
extent of any paper profits. DEMO general view was that it was too early for the invest-
ment to be showing any profit; indeed, a number of investors considered DEMO their
investments were probably of little or no value at the present time. Just two investors
indicated that their investments had increased by a DEMO multiple. Moreover,
few investors were particularly satisfied with the performance of their investee busi-
nesses (Table 12). What is more significant is that for those investments for which
information from both the investor and DEMO entrepreneur is available, the investor is
considerably more dissatisfied with the DEMO of the business than is the entre-
preneur (Table 13). DEMO can be speculated that this might reflect differences between
investors and entrepreneurs in their initial expectations.
Although none of the investors had successfully exited DEMO their LINC investments,
one-quarter had nevertheless received some financial remuneration, DEMO in the
form of directors' fee or, less commonly, consultancy DEMO In addition, a number of
investors had received interest on their DEMO, and in a further 20% of investments
there was an agreement DEMO the investor would draw a director's fee when the busi-
ness was making sufficient profits. In a substantial minority of cases, therefore, DEMO
investor is effectively seeking to offset at least part of the risk of the investment by
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 14:DEMO 12 November 2008
INFORMAL VENTURE
CAPITAL
Table 12. Perfo~mance surviving investments: investor perceptions.
Ozlerall
performance
Profits
Sales/tumover
5: Well above
expectations
4: Slightly above
expectations
DEMO: As expected
2: Slightly below
expectations
1: Well below
expectations
DEMO
I
2
7
4
5
2.5
121
Table 13. Performance of surviving investments: investor-entrepreneur dyads.
I+
Profits
'd
I
Tumouer
E
5: Well above expectations
4: Slightly above expectations
3: As expected
2: Slightly below expectations
I: Well below expectations
Average
0
0
2
6
6
1.8
2
1
4
2
5
2.5
1
1
3
3
6
DEMO
2
1
5
4
2
2.8
t I = investor.
t E = entrepreneur.
drawing an income, cc~nfirming that while capital gains are the primary motive for
investing this is not the only motive (Mason and Harrison 1994a).
Finally, previous research has also established that although the prime motive for
investing is financial, many business angels nevertheless invest in part for psychic
income - notably the fi~n and satisfaction gained in DEMO involved with enltrepreneur-
ial businesses (Mason and Harrison 1994a). Most DEMO the investors whose investee
businesses were still trading did confirm that they had derived enjoyment or interest
from their investments .- often more than DEMO had anticipated at the outset. However,
it is also clear from the responses of those investors whose investments had failed that
enjoyment and DEMO does not compensate for financial loss (Table 14). In the DEMO
analysis, fun and enjoyment are therefore related to the prospects of DEMO financial return:
the generation of psychic income and the success of the investment in financial terms
Table 14. Fun and enjoyment from investment.
DEMO
More than expected
As expected
Less than expected
6
10
5
Status of invcstmmt
invesfmmt at a loss
Company still trading
Company
failed
Sold
DEMO
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November 2008
122
C. M. MASON AND R. T. HARRISON
are joint products rather DEMO alternatives, and emphasis on one does not necessarily
imply a trade-off DEMO the other.
7.
Summary
The main purpose of the study has been to examine three particular aspects of the
operation of the informal venture DEMO market where information is either lacking
or based on anecdotal or impressionistic evidence, namely the investment process, the
post-investment experience and the investment DEMO In order to address these
issues an unusual perspective in informal venture capital research has been adopted in
which the primary focus has been DEMO investment, rather than the investor or investee.
7.1
The investment process
DEMO vast majority of business angels have been shown to regard the industry sector of
the business as unimportant; very few have specific sectoral investment criteria. The
study confirms the overwhelming importance of 'people' and 'product/market' con-
siderations in the business angel's investment decision-making process. It also high-
lights the importance that business angels place on seeing a DEMO plan and
emphasizes to the entrepreneur the need to have a comprehensive, realistic, inves-
tor-oriented business plan.
Raising informal venture capital has also DEMO shown to be a relatively quick
process, particularly when compared with DEMO venture capital, and is rela-
tively inexpensive for both entrepreneur and DEMO Informal venture capital is also
a very flexible source of finance. The form that the investment takes is varied, includ-
ing equity, loans, debt-equity arrangements and even factoring. Many investors also
provide follow-on financing. Business DEMO are also fairly patient investors.
The investment process itself is remarkably unsophisticated. 'Ad hockery' and 'rules
of thumb' dominate in the pricing DEMO the investment and only a small minority of deals
employed anything other than simple, straightforward investment instruments.
7.2
The
post-investment experience
The study has provided further evidence that business angels make a valuable hands-
on contribution DEMO their investee businesses, typically in the form of strategic advice,
DEMO skills and networking. However, it is important not to overlook their DEMO
tributions as 'coach'/'mentor' which are equally valuable. In the majority of cases the
investor-entrepreneur working relationship is considered by both sides DEMO be produc-
tive and consensual.
The findings from this study also serve to reiterate the importance of the geogra-
phical proximity of the investor DEMO the investee business, a conclusion from earlier
research (Mason and Harrison 1994a) that has recently been attacked as a 'fallacy'
(Stevenson and Coveney 1994). One of the implications of the hands-on involvement
DEMO most business angels in the businesses in which they invest is that it imposes a
significant distance barrier beyond which investors may be reluctant DEMO invest.
Indeed, 12 of the 15 investors (80%) who are DEMO to make further investments
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November 2008
INFORMAL
VENTURE
CAPITAL
123
in the foreseeable future will only invest within DEMO certain distance or travelling time
from their home precisely because of monitoring considerations. One of the,se investors
stated that he only realized the DEMO of distance to the investee business after
making his first investment. Another investor, who had invested in a business that
proposed to develop a leisure facility and which subsequently failed, c1aimt:d that had
he lived locally he would have realized that the business was not viable. Some DEMO
investors attributed their inability to contribute as much as they wished to their
investee business to the long distance between their home and the DEMO of the
business. Geography is therefore an important factor in the operation of the informal
venture capital market. Distance is only of little or DEMO consequence in two circum-
stances: first, in the case of hands-off investors, and second, when the investor has
overriding sectoral investment preferences. DEMO, as noted above, only a small
minority of business angels have specific sectoral investment criteria.
These findings suggest that in most cases the DEMO venture capital process has
worked relatively well. There were only a minority of situations where the entrepre-
neur felt that the investment agreement favoured DEMO investor, and ever1 fewer the
other way round. The few situations DEMO the relationship between investor and
entrepreneur broke down arose when one or other side believed, rightly or wrongly,
that the other side had withheld important information. This serves to highlight the
importance of the due DEMO process for both investors and entrepreneurs. It is
clear from reviewing these few cases where relationships broke down that too much of
the information DEMO by one side was taken at face value by the other side.
However, the study has also identified two areas where there are significant and
consistent expectation gaps between investors and entrepreneurs; these concern the
pricing of larger investments and the performance of the business. The pricing of
DEMO - especially the larger investments - is one of the most difficult issues in
the negotiation proces!;. Differences of opinion between investors and DEMO
concerning what constitutes a favourable performance of the business (e.g, profitabil-
ity, turnover) may be a source of disputes in the future.
DEMO Investment #erformance
This study confirms that investing in unquoted companies involves high rislss. First, no
investor in the study has made significant financial returns from any of the investments
that were examined, although this is influenced in part by the recession, which seems
likely to have contributed to the high failure rate of investments made prior to 1991
and the DEMO dominance of post-1991 investments in the study that are too
recent for exits to have occurred. Second, investors have lost money in a significant
proportion of investments, although in some cases this can be attributed to naivety
and inexperience. For example, one investor whose investment had failed, DEMO that
he trusted one of the p~rincipals because of his American accent. Another investor in a
business that subseque~ntly failed admitted that, in retrospect, he did not q,uestion the
entrepreneurs thoroughly about their personal finances. Yet another investor
admitted that in retrospect he was wrong in taking DEMO he had been .told by the
entrepreneur about the business at face value. Third, the study also reveals that
although investors are seeking significant capital gain, a number nevertheless obtain
some form of earnings stream, DEMO through dividends, interest or, more commonly,
Downloaded By: [University DEMO Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November 2008
124
C. M. MASON AND R. T. HARRISON
director's fees and DEMO fees. This effectively 're-cycles' some of their investment
and also provides partial financial recompense in the event that the investment fails.
8. Conclusions
DEMO based on a small sample of investments facilitated through a single business
introduction service, this study has advanced informal venture capital research in
three respects: it has focused on the characteristics of the investment, not DEMO investor;
it has, as far as possible, been based on matched dyads of investors and entrepreneur
experiences; and it has extended the range of issues examined to include more detail
than hitherto on the DEMO process itself, the post-investment experience and the
investment performance. As a DEMO exploration of these issues, this study pro-
vides a platform for DEMO and expanding the field of informal venture capital
research to place greater emphasis on understanding the processes at work in this
informal, largely hidden, market to complement existing research that has described
the characteristics of the actors in that market.
Acknowledgements
The authors are gratehl to LINC for DEMO us to undertake this study and for the
assistance that they provided. The authors are also grateful to the Midland Bank and
the Department DEMO Trade and Industry who funded the study. However, the views
expressed DEMO not necessarily reflect those of LINC or of the sponsoring organizations.
The authors are also grateful to Peter Allen for his research assistance and DEMO Susan
Krantz and Janette Hollingbery of LINC for their comments on an earlier draft of this
paper.
Notes
1. The Business Expansion Scheme was DEMO tax incentive to encourage investments by private individuals in
unquoted companies (DEMO Mason ct al., 1988 for further details).
2. Curiously, the investors in three of these businesses refused to be interviewed for this DEMO
3. Businesses that deregister are not confined to those that cease trading. There are four reasons why
businesses deregister: (1) trader gocs out of business, (2) take-over by another firm, (3) change DEMO legal
status, and (4) trader falls below the VAT exemption DEMO In 1987 only 58% of those that deregistered
went out of business, with a further 21% owing to acquisition (Daly 1987; also see Storey 1994: 84-85).
The life span of deregistered traders that have gone out of business is not separately available.
References
3i plc. 1994 DEMO Investors (London: 3i plc).
Bannock, G. and Partners 1991 DEMO Capi&l and the EquiQ Gap (London: National Westminster Bank).
Batchelor, C. 1993 From lender to investor, Financial Times, 23 March, 15.
Baty, G. B. 1991 EnhepImeurship for the 1990s (Englewood Clifi: Prentice-Hall).
Daly, M. 1987 Life span of businesses registered for DEMO, British Business, 3 April, 28-29.
Ehrlich, S. B., DeNoble, A. F., Moore, T. and Weaver, R. R. 1994 After the cash arrives: a comparative
study of venture capital and private investor involvement in entrepreneurial firms, journal of Business
Vmturing, 9: 67-82.
Freear, DEMO and Wetzel, W. E. 1990 Who bankrolls high-tech entrepreneurs? Journal of Business Venturing, 5:
77-89.
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November 2008
INFORMAL VENTURE CAPITAL
125
Freear, J. and Wetzel, W. E. 1992 DEMO informal venture capital market in the 1990s. In Sexton, D. L. DEMO
Kasarada, J. D. (eds) Enhcpmuurship in thc 1990s (Boston, DEMO: PWS-Kent), 462-486.
Freear, J., Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, W. E. 1994 Angels and non-angels: are there differences? Journal of
Business Venturing, 9: 109-123.
Freear, J., Sohl, J. E. and Wetzel, W. E. 1995 Angels: personal investors in the venture capital DEMO,
Enhcprmurship and Regional Dcvclopmmt, 7: 85-94.
Gaston, R. J. DEMO Finding Private Venturc Capital Fm Your Firm: A Complctc Guide (New York: Wiley).
Harrison, R. T. and Mason, C. M. 1992a The roles of investors in entrepreneurial companies: a comparison
of informal investors and venture capitalists. In Churchill, N. C., Birley, S., Bygrave, W. D., Muzyka, D.
F., Wahlbin, C. and Wetzel, W. E., Jr (eds) Frontiers of Enheprmcurship Rcscarch 1992 (Wellesley: Babson
College), 388-404.
Harrison, R. T. and Mason, C. M. 1992b DEMO perspectives on the supply of informal venture
capital, Journal of Busincss DEMO, 7: 459-475.
Harrison, R. T. and Mason, C. M. 1993 Finance for the growing businens: the role of informal investment,
National Wcshninstn Bank (2uortcrb R&, May: 17-29.
KPMG Management Consulting 1992 DEMO Nchuorking (Glasgow: Scottish Enterprise).
Landstrom, H. 1993 Informal risk DEMO in Sweden and some international comparisons, journal of Buincss
Venturing, 8: 525-540.
LINC Personal communication. Janette Hollingbery, 25 November 1994.
McMahon, R. G. P., Holmes, S., Hutchinson, P. J. and Forsaith, D. M. 1993 Small Enterprise Financial
Management: Thcory and Practice (Sydney: Harcourt Brace).
Mason, C. and Harrison, R. 1992 Promoting informal venture DEMO: some operational considerations for
business introduction senices, Venture finance research project working paper No. 4. University of
Southampton, Southampton.
Mason, C. M. DEMO Harrison, R. T. 1994a The informal venture capital market in the DEMO :In Hughes, A.
and Storey, D. J. (eds) Financing DEMO Firms (London: Routledge), 64-1 11.
Mason, C. M. and DEMO, R. T. 1994b The role of informal and formal sources of DEMO capital in the
financing of technology-based SMEs in the United Kingdom. In Oakey, R. (ed.) New TcchnologpBnrcd
Firms in the 19% (London: Paul Chapman Publishing), 104-124.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. DEMO 1995a LINC: the Enterprise Agency role in promoting informal venture
capital. DEMO Harrison, R. T. and Mason, C. M. (eds) Infoml Venture Capital: Evaluating the Impact of Bkss
Introductiun S&cs (Hemel Hempstead:DEMO) forthcoming.
Mason, C. and Harrison, R. 1995b Informal venture capital DEMO activity through business introduc-
tion services: is there still a role DEMO public policy? Paper presented to the 15th Babson Entrepreneurship
Research Conference, London Business School, 9-12 April.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. 1996 Why businens angels say no: a case study of opportunities rejected
by an informal investment syndicate, International Small Buimss journal, 14 (2), forthcoming.
Mason, C., Harrison, R. and Allen, P. DEMO Informal venture capital: a study of the investment process, the
post-investment experience and investment performance, Venture finance working paper No. 12,
University of Southampton and University of Ulster, Southampton and Belfast.
Mason, C., Harrison, R. ant1 Chaloner, J. 1991. The operation and effectiveness of DEMO Pim 1: A survey
of investors, Department of Geography, University DEMO Southampton, Southampton.
Mason, C., Harrison, J. and Harrison, R. DEMO Closing the Equity Gap? An Evaluation of thc Bwincss Expamion
Scheme (London: Small Business Research Trust).
Mason, C. and Lumme, A. 1995 The value-added impact of business angels. Paper presented to the 5th
DEMO Entrepreneurship Research Conference, Saltzburg, 16-1 7 March.
Riding, A., Dal Cin, P., Duxbury, L., Haines, G. and Safrata, R. DEMO Infoml Invcstms in Conodo: thc
Idmhaation of Salimt Characteristics (Ottawa: DEMO University).
Stevenson, H. and Coveney, P. 1994 Surucy of Buincss AngcLs: Fallacies Cwccted and Six Distinct Typcs of Angcl
Idenrifud (Henley-on-Thames: Venture Capital Report Ltd).
Storey, D. J. 1994 Understanding the Small Burincss Scctm (London: Routledge).
Suomi, M. and Lumme, A. DEMO Ykn'tyishmkilbidenp~omasa~mttaminm Suomessa (Informal Priva.te Investors in
Finland) (Helsinki: SITRA) (English summary included).
Timmons, J. A. 1990 Planning and Financing the Nm Vcnturc (Acton, MA: Brick House Publishing Co).
Tymes, E. R. and Krasner, 0. J. 1983 Informal risk capital in DEMO In Hornaday, J. A., Timmons, J.
A. and Vesper, K. H. (&) Frontiers of Enterpencurship Research 1983 (Wellesley: Babson College), 347-368.
Wetzel, W. E. 1981 Informal risk capital in New England. DEMO Vesper, K. H. (ed.) Frontiers of Entrcpmrship
Rcscarch 1981 (Wellesley: Ilabson College), 2 17-245.
Wetzel, W. E. 1994 Venture capital. DEMO Bygrave, W. D. (ed.) The Pmtablc MBA in Entrcplencurship (New
York: Wiley), 172-194.
Wetzel, W. E. and Freear, J. 1995 Promoting informal venture capital in the United States: reflections on
the history of the Venture: Capital Network. In Harrison, R. T. and Mason, C. M. (eds) i'nfwmal Venturc
Capital: Evaluating thc Imjact of Bkss Introduction S&cs (Heme1 Hempstead: Woodhead-Faulkner)
forthcoming.
Downloaded By: [University of Toronto] At: 14:52 12 November 2008{1g42fwefx}