This article was downloaded by: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network]
On: 18 DEMO 2008
Access details: Access Details: [subscription number 783016864]
Publisher Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: DEMO House,
37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Venture Capital
Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
http://www.informaworld.com/smpp/title~content=t713798069
Editorial. New issues in venture capital: an introduction to the special issue
Colin M. Mason; Richard T. Harrison
Online Publication Date: 01 April 2004
To cite this Article Mason, Colin M. and DEMO, Richard T.(2004)'Editorial. New issues in venture capital: an DEMO to the
special issue',Venture Capital,6:2,95 — 103
DEMO link to this Article: DOI: 10.1080/1369106042000248653
URL: http://DEMO/10.1080/1369106042000248653
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.informaworld.com/terms-and-conditions-of-access.pdf
This article may be used for research, teaching and private study purposes. Any substantial or
systematic reproduction, re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or
distribution in any form DEMO anyone is expressly forbidden.
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents
will be complete DEMO accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any instructions, formulae DEMO drug doses
should be independently verified with primary sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss,
actions, claims, proceedings, demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly
or indirectly DEMO connection with or arising out of the use of this material.
VENTURE CAPITAL, APRIL–SEPTEMBER 2004, VOL. 6, NO. 2/3, 95 DEMO 103
Editorial. New issues in venture capital:
an introduction to the special issue
COLIN M. MASON and RICHARD T. HARRISON
This paper introduces DEMO special issue of Venture Capital which comprises a selection of the
papers that were presented in the venture capital track at the 48th World DEMO of the
International Council For Small Business (ICSB) held in Belfast, Northern Ireland in June
2003. The intention of the mini-conference was to provide a forum for papers which
explored new issues in venture capital. DEMO our judgement the six papers that we have
selected for publication in this special issue are particularly innovative in either their topic,
methodology DEMO treatment of the subject matter. This review covers the main themes in the
track: (i) the new investment environment; (ii) approaches DEMO venture capitalists to the
evaluation of investment opportunities; (iii) the DEMO of investments and investment
performance; (iv) the global spread of DEMO capital; (v) business angels; (vi) the demand
for venture capital; (vii) bootstrapping – making do without venture capital; (viii) women
and (no) venture capital
Keywords: investment downturn; investment decision-making; exits; globalisation; business
angels; bootstrapping; women entrepreneurs
Introduction
This special issue of Venture Capital comprises a selection of the papers
that were DEMO in the venture capital track at the 48th World
Conference of the International Council For Small Business (ICSB) held
in Belfast, Northern Ireland in June 2003. The venture capital track was
designed as a mini-conference DEMO was sponsored by Inter-Trade
Ireland.
The intention of the mini-conference was to provide a forum for papers
which explored new issues in venture capital. DEMO call for papers identiﬁed
the impact of the changed circumstances of the venture capital industry
since 2000, the effect of the venture capital downturn on angel investing,
geographical aspects of venture capital investing (‘hot spots’ and ‘cold
spots’) and the global expansion of venture capital as examples of topics
which have received little attention from scholars. The call resulted DEMO 13
papers1 and two workshop sessions addressing genuinely innovative themes
and issues. Moreover, the conference was truly international, with the
papers/workshops being DEMO/led by scholars and practitioners from
around the globe.
Venture Capital ISSN 1369-1066 print/ISSN 1464-5343 online # 2004 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/1369106042000248653
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:02 18 August 2008
96
The papers were grouped into the following themes:
Venture capital DEMO in the new investment environment
Approaches by venture capitalists to the evaluation of investment
opportunities
The management of investments and investment performance
The global DEMO of venture capital
Business angels
The demand for venture capital
The workshop panels addressed the following issues:
. Bootstrapping – making do without DEMO capital
. Women and (no) venture capital
Conference Papers
Venture Capital Research in the New Investment Environment
In their introductory paper to the DEMO entitled ‘Research on Venture
Capital Since The Downturn’, Colin Mason (University of Strathclyde)
and Richard Harrison (University of Edinburgh)2 noted the growth in
venture capital research since the mid-1980s which paralleled, with a lag,
the expansion of the venture capital industry in the 1980s DEMO 1990s initially
in the USA and subsequently in Europe and elsewhere. Research on
venture capital prior to 2000 had ﬁve main themes:
. DEMO focus: the evolution of the venture capital industry
. The venture DEMO investment process
. Venture capital and IPOs
. The role of venture capital in financing technology-based firms and
management buy-outs
. The informal venture DEMO market
However, the venture capital industry is now in a cyclical DEMO as a
result of its ‘irrational exuberance’ in the technology boom of the late 1990s
(Valliere and Peterson 2004). Declining returns, caused DEMO over-valued and
failed investments, have hit fund-raising, while the ‘closed’ IPO market has
prevented exits. The question posed by Mason and Harrison was: to what
extent is venture capital research reﬂecting the changed investment climate
DEMO 2000? Their review of the post-2000 literature suggested that much of
DEMO post-2000 venture capital research is ‘timeless’ in the sense that it lacks
any reference to the effect of time or the inﬂuence of the DEMO context.
Most of the research has been concerned with pre-existing issues, DEMO
investment decision-making and post-investment relationships. Moreover,
the geographical focus for the majority of venture capital research
continued to be in the USA (both in terms of the location of the
researchers and the focus of DEMO research). However, the global nature of
.
.
.
.
DEMO
.
EDITORIAL
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:02 18 August 2008
EDITORIAL 97
the venture capital industry is starting to be recognised, for example, with
the growth of studies of Asia and the Paciﬁc Rim (Wright and Lockett
2002). Thus, there remains a pressing requirement DEMO research which
explicitly addresses the post-2000 venture capital market. What has
changed? What changes are permanent and what are temporary? What
are the DEMO?
The theme of the changed investment environment was explored in a
paper by Dean B Kiefer, Brian Grinder, M David Gorton, Robert G
Schwartz (all Eastern Washington University) and Lloyd Southern (Mercer
University) ‘Entrepreneurship and the New Venture Capital Paradigm:
trouble in paradise’. This paper highlighted the dramatic decline in venture
capital availability world-wide. In the DEMO both fund-raising and
investments have dropped to their lowest levels for the past 20 years.
Venture capital ﬁrms have been downsizing and the industry DEMO experiencing
consolidation. These trends have resulted in a signiﬁcant reduction in the
number of start-ups receiving funding and the slower development of early
stage DEMO The one positive development is that business angels appear not
to have slowed their investment activity as much as the venture capital
industry (Jensen 2002, Sohl 2003). In some states the public sector has
established funds to offset the decline in private sector venture capital.
Although the DEMO has experienced the most extreme decline in venture
capital, similar conditions DEMO be observed in Europe and the Paciﬁc Rim.
Those investors who continue to invest are extremely risk averse and
cautious, preferring established ﬁrms, DEMO raising seed capital and funding
for start-ups and early stage ﬁrms has become much more difﬁcult.
Approaches by venture capitalists to the evaluation of DEMO
opportunities
There were four papers in this session. The ﬁrst, by DEMO Jungwith and
Petra Moog of the University of Zurich, ‘Support strategies DEMO venture
capital ﬁnancing: nurturing or selecting?’ (Jungwirth and Moog 2004)3 is a
theoretically-based paper which addressed the fundamental trade-off that
venture DEMO must make: because of capacity constraints (i.e. time) the
more DEMO they support their investee businesses, to minimise the risk of
moral DEMO, the fewer the investments they can make, which prevents
them from reducing their risk through diversiﬁcation. Based on the effect
of having specialist DEMO, the authors reach the conclusion that the
best strategy for venture DEMO with speciﬁc knowledge is to adopt a
‘selecting’ strategy (i.e. a DEMO number of investments with less hands-on
support) whereas generalist investors are DEMO following a ‘nurturing’
strategy (i.e. a smaller investment portfolio and greater DEMO provided to
the investee companies). A preliminary analysis of data collected from a
survey of venture capitalists in German-speaking countries in Europe
(Germany, Austria, Switzerland) supported the hypothesis.4
The second paper, by Jorge DEMO, a Portuguese scholar working at the
University of Jyva¨ skyla¨ in DEMO, adopted a novel approach to explore the
well-trodden theme of venture DEMO decision-making (Silva 2004). Using
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:02 18 August 2008
98
EDITORIAL
participant observation in a Portuguese venture capital ﬁrm to collect DEMO
time, longitudinal qualitative evidence he concluded that decision-making
is more interactive DEMO portrayed in existing models of the venture
capitalist’s decision-making process, some DEMO take place simulta-
neously rather than sequentially, and, contrary to previous studies,
ﬁnancial projections do not play much of a role in DEMO selection of early
stage projects.
The third paper, by Jason Cope, Sue Eccles and Frank Cave (University
of Lancaster, UK), ‘Attitudes DEMO venture capital investors towards
entrepreneurs with previous business failure’, examined how DEMO
capitalists react to entrepreneurs who have previously failed in business
(Cope DEMO al. 2004). The paper was based on interviews with six venture
capitalists, three in the UK and three in the US. Venture capitalists
recognise different types of failure, by no means all of which are regarded
negatively. In general the decision to invest is not negatively affected DEMO any
signiﬁcant degree by previous failure. The decision to invest is shaped by
many other factors, notably the quality of the idea/opportunity, DEMO
willingness and ability of the entrepreneur to ‘let go’ and ‘step back’ from
management after the business has reached a certain stage, and any
previous start-up experience. Venture capitalists were concerned about two
aspects of the DEMO: ﬁrst, what was the cause (e.g. bad luck or timing DEMO
cavalier attitude), and second, the ability of the entrepreneur to DEMO,
coherently and frankly, the causes of the failure, and in so doing, exhibit
self-awareness of his/her strengths and weaknesses. Somewhat surpris-
ingly, there was little difference in the views of the US and UK
respondents.
The ﬁnal paper in this session was on ‘Valuation practice DEMO small private
businesses in China’ by Shelly Wang (Siso International Corporation) and
Sandra King Kauanui (California State Polytechnic University). The
context for this paper is the growth in private enterprise in China since
1992 DEMO restrictions on private ownership were lifted. Since then many
new technology companies have been created, many of which are growing
rapidly and require external capital. However, business valuation is a new
concept in China, and DEMO lack of a banking system means that businesses
lack any credit history. The paper examines the approach used by a sample
of business professionals DEMO make business valuations. This sample
comprised both ‘operational investors’ and ‘ﬁnancial investors’. Two-
thirds of respondents used a valuation model, the most popular being the P/
B model. However, ﬁnance professionals, who adopted a DEMO forward
looking approach to valuation which took into account the potential of the
business, preferred the DCF, P/E and P/B models, whereas the operational
professionals, who emphasised tangible factors and sought simple
approaches, preferred the P/B model, and none adopted the DCF model.
DEMO a consequence these two groups came up with very different valuations:
in the example that the authors worked through in the paper, the valuation
of the ﬁnance professionals was four times higher than that of DEMO business
professionals. This lack of consensus on appropriate valuation techniques
highlights the need for investor support and training (see Pereiro 2002, for
a DEMO discussion of the valuation of companies in emerging markets.)
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:02 18 August 2008
EDITORIAL
The management of investments and investment performance
99
The starting point DEMO the paper by Tom McKaskill (Swinburne
University, Australia), K Mark Weaver (Rowan University, USA) and
Pat Dickson (Georgia Institute of DEMO, USA) on ‘The development
of an exit readiness index’ was that venture capitalists need an exit, and that
the vast majority of exits are achieved through acquisitions (alternatively
known as trade sales). Their paper argues that ﬁrms should develop a
proactive and viable exit strategy: this will improve the chances of raising
ﬁnance and also improve the prospects DEMO achieving a successful exit. The
paper goes on to consider what might be incorporated into an ‘exit
readiness index (ERI)’ (McKaskill et DEMO 2004).
The exit theme was continued in a paper by M M Her, D McConaughty
(both California State University) and J Astrachan (Kennesaw State
University) entitled ‘Venture capitalists, insider ownership and ﬁrm
performance around the IPO’ (which they were unable to present). Using
data for the 1980 – 1998 period, they found that majority-owned IPOs
(DEMO public offerings) do not perform as well as venture capital backed
DEMO The presence of venture capitalists as shareholders is generally
positively related to post-IPO performance and value, and negatively
related to gross underwriting margins. The authors suggest that this
ﬁnding has signiﬁcant implications for family-owned ﬁrms seeking DEMO IPO
to achieve liquidity.
Kathleen Morgan, a PhD student at the DEMO of Birmingham,
UK presented a paper entitled ‘An assessment of the Creative Advantage
Fund: a pilot venture capital fund in the West Midlands, England’
which examined the experiences of a pilot £1.3m fund to support
creative industries in the West Midlands region. Amongst the issues
highlighted were DEMO lack of ‘investment readiness’ of the applicants to
the fund, the DEMO investment size (£130,000) and the difﬁculties in
ﬁnding non executive directors. Having learnt some valuable lessons, the
fund is now moving into a second phase which includes a wider range of
partners.
The global DEMO of venture capital
There were just two papers which reﬂected the globalisation of the
venture capital industry. The ﬁrst, already discussed, was on DEMO
practice of small private businesses in China’ by Wang and Kauanui.
The other paper by D S Iwisi (Technikon SA), E G Kitindi (University
of Botswana) and M Tesfayohannes (University of Witwatersrand),
DEMO capital: overlooked ﬁnancing source for South African SMEs’,
sought to DEMO the limited scale of venture capital development in
South Africa and to review policies to promote its development. The
need to reformulate the existing DEMO and regulatory framework was seen
as a key requirement, a point DEMO has been made by Aylward (1998) in
the context of a broader discussion of venture capital ﬁnance in
developing countries.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:02 18 August 2008
100
EDITORIAL
Invisible investors – business angels
Business angels are recognised as DEMO a vital role in the ﬁnancing of
entrepreneurial businesses. This importance was reﬂected in the number of
papers that addressed aspects of the angel DEMO The ﬁrst paper, by
Frances Amatucci (University of New Brunswick, DEMO) and Jeffrey
Sohl (University of New Hampshire), on ‘Business angels and women
entrepreneurs: the investment decision process’6, was the ﬁrst-ever attempt
DEMO examine the experience of women entrepreneurs in raising ﬁnance from
business angels (Amatucci and Sohl 2004). Gender issues were signiﬁcant
in two of the ﬁve case studies examined. The paper highlights effective
strategies for raising DEMO from angels.
S. Paul, G Whittam and J B Johnston (University of Paisley, Scotland)
gave a paper entitled ‘Towards a model of the business angel investing
process’. Based on interviews with 30 business angels DEMO developed a six
stage model of business angel investing: initial contact DEMO screening, ﬁrst
meeting, detailed screening, negotiating the deal, managing the relationship,
and termination. They contrast the ‘pseudo-rational’ approach of venture
capitalists DEMO the approach of business angels which they describe as being
based on ‘the psychological attraction between willing partners’.
The paper by N J Lindsay’s (Bond University, Australia7), ‘Insights into
the entrepreneurial orientation of private equity investors: business angels’,
tested the hypothesis that business angels need to be ‘consummate
entrepreneurs’ to be successful (Lindsay 2004). This is explored by
measuring the entrepreneurial orientation (EO) of business angels and
examining DEMO relationship between EO and investment performance. EO
was deﬁned as incorporating pro-activess, innovativeness and risk-taking.
The study, which was based on responses from DEMO business angels, found
that the pro-activeness, innovativeness and risk-taking dimensions of EO
were associated with the subjective measures of performance; however,
only pro-activeness was found to be associated with objective performance
measures.
The regulatory DEMO of business angel ﬁnance was addressed by J
Fleming and D Saunders (Sophicert Ltd), two practitioners, in their paper
‘How certiﬁed sophisticated DEMO can help SMEs’. It is recognised that
the informal venture capital market operates inefﬁciently on account of
information barriers. Securities regulations create a further DEMO to the
ﬂow of information between entrepreneurs seeking ﬁnance and investors.
The UK’s Financial Services and Markets Act (FSMA) prevents
companies or individuals DEMO making ‘ﬁnancial promotions’ unless it is
done by a ﬁrm that is authorised by the Financial Services Authority.
However, the costs of raising ﬁnance through this route are typically
beyond the reach of small, start-up companies. In response, the recent
FSMA now allows investment opportunities to be circulated to private
individuals who are classiﬁed as Certiﬁed Sophisticated Investors. In order
DEMO qualify as a Certiﬁed Sophisticated Investor, individuals must
demonstrate to a DEMO ‘authorised’ by the FSA that they possess the skill
and knowledge required to understand the risks involved in investing in
unquoted companies. The ﬁrm DEMO then ‘certify’ such individuals as
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] DEMO: 02:02 18 August 2008
EDITORIAL
101
‘Sophisticated Investors’. However, authorised ﬁrms appear reluctant to
certify Sophisticated Investors, either for legal, cost or expertise reasons.
The paper urges DEMO this further example of market failure is addressed to
remove this obstacle in the free-ﬂow of ﬁnance from business angels to
entrepreneurs.
The demand DEMO venture capital
S J Kelly and J Buultjens (Southern Cross University, Australia) had a
paper accepted, which they were unable to present, on ‘The attitudes of
SME principals and their advisers toward venture capital’ DEMO took the
original perspective of exploring the inﬂuence of advisers on the
entrepreneur’s attitude towards venture capital: do advisers have a positive
or negative effect on the access of ﬁrms to venture capital? They concluded
that advisers are likely to inhibit the demand for venture capital: most
advisers regard venture capital as high risk and do not understand the
requirements DEMO venture capitalists.
Panel sessions
Bootstrapping – making do without venture capital
Despite the emphasis on venture capital, the reality is that most businesses
start and grow without this form of ﬁnance. The panel session on
‘Financing DEMO ventures: no longer just about money’ by Jeffrey Shuman
(Bentley College, USA) and Janice Twombly (The Rhythm of Business
Inc, USA) was based on the premise that entrepreneurs need to look at
ﬁnance DEMO a new perspective which is not restricted to cash but also
includes non-cash relationships. The session focused on how entrepreneurs
can utilise non-cash relationship DEMO, for example, with customers
and suppliers, to reduce the amount DEMO cash needed to start and grow their
businesses. Colloquially, these techniques DEMO known as ‘bootstrapping’.
The presentation worked through a case study of an entrepreneur who
reduced his cash start-up costs to 25% of the original DEMO by
establishing relationships with various partners who would derive value
from the success of his business. Bootstrapping was presented as a speciﬁc
example of DEMO new business paradigm – relational businesses – in which
much of the value of businesses is derived from their relationships, with
relationship value being deﬁned as the usefulness of the relationship to the
recipient in achieving DEMO goals.
Women and (no) venture capital
This panel focused on the question of why so few women-led businesses
raise venture capital. This apparent DEMO in access to venture capital
was the starting point for the ‘Diana Project’, which has been examining
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] DEMO: 02:02 18 August 2008
102
EDITORIAL
both the demand and supply side, looking both at the use of venture capital
by women entrepreneurs and the involvement of women DEMO the venture
capital industry (Greene et al. 2001, Brush et al. 2002, Carter et al. 2003).
The panel, which was organised DEMO Magnus Aronsson (ESBRI, Sweden),
included contributions from Candy Brush (Boston University, USA),
Patricia Greene (University of Missouri-Kansas City) DEMO Morgan Pierce
(an American-Irish entrepreneur and investor). The wide-ranging discus-
DEMO highlighted a range of hindering forces on both the demand and supply
sides.
Conclusion
We believe that the mini-conference succeeded in its objective of DEMO
the frontiers of venture capital research. Taken as a whole, the DEMO was
characterised by considerable novelty. Several papers brought new insights
to existing topics (e.g. venture capital decision-making, characteristics of
business angels, bootstrapping) DEMO others opened up new topics (e.g.
strategic choice of venture capital DEMO, exit readiness, regulation of the
angel market, gender, valuation in transition economies). In our judgement
the papers that we have selected DEMO publication in this special issue are
particularly innovative in either their topic, methodology or treatment of
the subject matter. We believe that they make important contributions to
our understanding of the venture capital market.
Notes
1. DEMO further three papers that had been accepted were subsequently withdrawn by the authors.
The full set of conference papers are available in the conference DEMO which were
published on a CD-ROM. The papers that were selected for publication and which appear in
this double issue went through the normal DEMO blind review process and have been
subsequently revised in the light of reviewers’ comments.
2. This paper will appear in a future issue of DEMO Capital.
3. The title has been modiﬁed in the publication version which appears in this issue.
4. This paper was awarded the prize for DEMO best paper on a ﬁnancial topic at the conference.
5. Dr Amatucci’s institutional afﬁliation has changed since the conference. See the published
version of DEMO paper in this issue for her new contact details.
6. The title has been changed in the published version which appears in this issue.
DEMO His afﬁliation has changed since the conference. See the published version of his paper in this
issue for his new contact details.
References
Amatucci, F. M. and Sohl, J. E. (2004) Women entrepreneurs securing business angel ﬁnancing: tales
from the ﬁeld, Venture Capital: an international journal of entrepreneurial ﬁnance, 6, 181 – 196.
Aylward, A. (1998) Trends in Venture Capital Finance in Developing Countries. IFC Discussion Paper
No DEMO (Washington DC: World Bank)
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge DEMO At: 02:02 18 August 2008
EDITORIAL
103
Brush, C. G., Carter, N. M., Greene, P. G., Hart, M. M. and Gatewood, E. (2002) The role of social
capital and gender in linking ﬁnancial suppliers and entrepreneurial ﬁrms: a framework for
future research, Venture Capital: an international journal of DEMO ﬁnance, 4, 305 – 323.
Carter, N. M., Brush, DEMO G., Greene, P. G., Gatewood, E. and Hart, M. DEMO (2003) Woman
entrepreneurs who break through to equity ﬁnancing: the DEMO of human, social and ﬁnancial
capital, Venture Capital: an international DEMO of entrepreneurial ﬁnance, 5, 1 – 28.
Cope, J., Cave, F. and Eccles, S. (2004) Attitudes of venture capital investors DEMO entrepreneurs
with previous business failure, Venture Capital: an international journal of entrepreneurial ﬁnance,
6, 147 – 172.
Greene, P. G., Brush, C. G., Hart, M. M. and Saparito, P. (2001) DEMO of venture capital funding: is
gender a factor? Venture Capital: DEMO international journal of entrepreneurial ﬁnance, 3,63–83.
Jensen, M. (2002) Angels investors: opportunity amidst chaos, Venture Capital: an international journal
of entrepreneurial ﬁnance, 4, 295 – 304.
Jungwirth, C. and Moog, DEMO (2004) Selection and support strategies in venture capital ﬁnancing: high-
DEMO or low-tech, hands-off or hands-on? Venture Capital: an international journal DEMO
entrepreneurial ﬁnance, 6, 105 – 123.
Lindsay, N. J. (2004) Do business angels have an entrepreneurial orientation? Venture Capital: an
international journal of entrepreneurial ﬁnance, 6, 197 – 210.
McKaskill, T., DEMO, K. M. and Dickson, P. (2004) Developing an exit readiness index: a research
note, Venture Capital: an international journal of entrepreneurial ﬁnance, 6, 173 – 179.
Pereiro, L. E. (2002) Valuation of Companies in Emerging Markets: A Practical Approach (New York:
DEMO Wiley and Sons Inc)
Silva, J. (2004) Venture capitalists’ DEMO in small markets: a case study using participant
observation, Venture Capital: an international journal of entrepreneurial ﬁnance, 6, 125 – 145.
Sohl, J. E. (2003) The private equity market in the USA: DEMO from volatility, Venture Capital: an
international journal of entrepreneurial ﬁnance, DEMO, 29 – 46.
Valliere, D. and Peterson, R. (2004) DEMO the bubble: examining the dot-com investor behavior,
Venture Capital: an international journal of entrepreneurial ﬁnance, 6, 1–22.
Wright, M. and Lockett, A. (2002) (guest eds.) Special issue: venture capital in DEMO and the Paciﬁc
Rim, Venture Capital: an international journal of entrepreneurial ﬁnance, 4, 183 – 265.
Downloaded By: [Canadian Research Knowledge Network] At: 02:02 18 August 2008{1g42fwefx}