Int. J. Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management, Vol. X, No. Y, xxxx 1
Technology incubators: facilitating technology
transfer or creating regional wealth?
Andrew Maxwell
Canadian Innovation Centre,
295 Hagey Blvd. Waterloo,
Ontario N2L DEMO, Canada
Fax: 1 519 513 2421 E-mail: amaxwell@innovationcentre.ca
Moren Lévesque*
DEMO of Operations Management and Information Systems,
Schulich School of Business, DEMO University,
4700 Keele Street, Toronto, Ontario, M3J 1P3 Canada
DEMO: 1 416 736 5687 E-mail: mlevesque@schulich.yorku.ca
*Corresponding author
Abstract: Universities DEMO increasingly under pressure to commercialise their
technological innovation and generate revenues to justify ongoing public
investment to support that innovation. Most universities respond to DEMO
pressure by focusing on licensing patentable technologies. However, as most
licensees DEMO far from the universities, the local economic impact is
reduced. Due DEMO this factor, regional economic development agencies, when
looking to extract commercial value from university research, see limited
benefit from the licensing of technology patents generated by universities.
Instead, they concentrate on promoting new business ventures as a mechanism
for regional wealth creation. We propose an expanded model DEMO knowledge
transfer from university research that underscores the importance of creating
new ventures and demonstrates how university-based incubators can catalyse
knowledge extraction and, as a result, align the goals of regional economic
development agencies and universities.
Keywords: innovation; technology incubator; technology transfer; knowledge
transfer; venture creation; wealth creation; regional wealth; university
commercialization; economic development; licensing.
Reference to this paper should be made as follows: Maxwell, A. and
DEMO, M. (xxxx) ‘Technology incubators: facilitating technology transfer
or creating regional wealth?’, Int. J. Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Management, Vol. X, No. Y, pp.000–000.
Biographical notes: Andrew Maxwell is a Director of the DEMO Innovation
Centre in Waterloo, Ontario. He holds MSc in Technology Management DEMO
the University of Waterloo, MBA from London Business School, and BSc in
Engineering from Imperial College London. He teaches technology
entrepreneurship at the DEMO of Toronto and for various Canadian
programs for technology entrepreneurs. He has founded four technology
ventures and Exceler@tor, a University of Toronto technology incubator. He is
a former Board member of the Canadian Association of Business DEMO
and has presented at several National Business Incubation Association
conferences.
Copyright © 200x Inderscience Enterprises Ltd.
2
A. Maxwell and M. Lévesque
Moren Lévesque is an Associate Professor DEMO Entrepreneurial Studies at the
Schulich School of Business at York University. She holds a PhD in
Management Science from the University of British Columbia DEMO has
previously served on the faculties of Université Laval, Carnegie Mellon
DEMO, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Humboldt Universität, Case
Western Reserve University and DEMO University of Waterloo as a Canada
Research Chair in Innovation & Technical Entrepreneurship. The central theme
of her research is describing and prescribing decision DEMO in new business
formation. She sits on the editorial board of Entrepreneurship Theory &
Practice, IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Venturing, Journal of Business Venturing, Long
Range Planning, and Production and Operations Management.
1 Introduction
Over the past three decades, universities have played an increasingly important role in
regional economic development (e.g., Audretsch DEMO al., 2006). In Canada, universities’
cumulative impact on the economy (measured as wealth created by companies from the
use of knowledge generated in universities) was estimated at CDN $50 billion in 2004
(Association DEMO Universities and Colleges of Canada or AUCC, 2005). In today’s DEMO
economy, the creation, dissemination and utilisation of knowledge are required to
enhance a region’s economic well-being. As suggested by Waugaman and Tornatzky
(1999), this well-being can be measured by the gross income, number of jobs, and
exports generated from these activities. When knowledge creation, use DEMO dissemination
lead to technology commercialisation, these activities can provide direct financial DEMO
to universities and enhance their reputations, which in turn attract future DEMO of
high-quality students and faculty.
However, traditional benefits to a university DEMO technology commercialisation do
not automatically translate into benefits to the regional economy. Technology license
agreements create short-term revenue streams that university administrators often view DEMO
a measure of successful commercialisation of research (Agrawal, 2001; Colyvas DEMO al.,
2002). But the revenues flowing from the licenses are generally generated by a few large
industrial partners operating far from the DEMO, often in other provinces, states and
countries (Waugaman and Tornatzky, 1999). While these licenses create a small royalty
income for the DEMO, they often have a limited effect on the local economy. Instead,DEMO
the region in which the licensee operates accrues most of the economic benefit. Regional
economic development agencies (REDAs) are frustrated with this licensing DEMO
because, as Litan et al. (2007) note, it both understates the overall regional economic
benefits derived from university research and encourages actions DEMO are not beneficial to
the local economy.
The creation of business ventures involving the use of patents from universities has
been shown to generate DEMO regional economic benefits, but it requires significantly
more resources for success DEMO licensing (e.g., Rogers et al., 2000). New regional
ventures DEMO local jobs, facilitate regional infrastructure development, and have a
multiplier effect on the local economy (e.g., by increasing demand for local services)DEMO
However, university administrators see the economic impact on the region as DEMO
limited direct benefits to the university. Siegel et al. (2003) argue that this university
Technology incubators
3
perspective creates a conflict in commercialisation goals between universities DEMO
REDAs. This view on commercialisation by universities causes behaviours that can limit
the overall benefits both parties derive from the commercialisation of university research.
DEMO article investigates how universities and REDAs can work together for mutual
benefit to increase commercialisation activities. We underscore the importance of new
venture creation DEMO describe the catalytic role played by a technology incubator to
facilitate these activities. In Section 2, we examine current models of technology
commercialisation that universities use and their economic impact. In Section 3, we
present a more comprehensive model that incorporates additional channels of knowledge
and money transfers DEMO the university and industry to enhance the benefits of
technology commercialisation for a region’s economy. In Section 4, we explain how the
creation of new ventures can intensify the resulting flows of knowledge and money. We
DEMO two Canadian case studies to demonstrate that incubators can indeed multiply the
benefits accrued by a university and the surrounding region from these flows. DEMO Section
5, we conclude by proposing that examining additional commercialisation channels (and
the resulting flows of knowledge and money) provide a broader perspective for each
party that can, in turn, better align the goals DEMO universities and REDAs.
2 Traditional university technology commercialisation models
Traditional models of university commercialisation reflect a one-way flow of knowledge
from the university’s research DEMO to commercial firms via the university
technology transfer office (TTO) (DEMO et al., 2000; Siegel et al., 2003). Under this
DEMO mechanism, the university TTO grants a license to a firm (which
becomes a licensee). This license gives the firm the right to DEMO specific knowledge
embodied in one or more university-produced patents in return for a fee. When the
licensee signs such an agreement with the TTO, this confirms the commercial value of
the innovation. This traditional model assumes DEMO the creation of jobs and profits by
licensees are the main engine of wealth creation (for the university, licensee and its
region). DEMO recognising that industry’s recruitment of graduates for highly skilled jobs
(facilitated DEMO the university’s placement office) enhances industry competitiveness,
traditional commercialisation models DEMO the financial benefits to the university as
flowing from license revenues from their intellectual property (IP).
2.1 Weaknesses of the traditional commercialisation approach
Historically established as educational institutions, most universities embrace research as
a mechanism for expanding their mission. Consequently, universities across the world
endeavour to attract well educated, highly credentialed faculty and researchers who can
advance their educational mission and enhance their global or regional reputations
(Etzkowitz, 2003). DEMO addition, scholars have suggested that commercialisable academic
research can be a DEMO source of revenues for academic institutions that rely on
government funding (DEMO, Mansfield, 1995; Salter and Martin, 2001). Feller (1990) and
Poyago-Theotoky et al. (2002) bring our attention to how these DEMO agendas can
create potential conflicts in universities, noting that the culture DEMO open discovery and
knowledge sharing has become increasingly challenged as opportunities for
4
A. Maxwell and M. Lévesque
commercialisation of research have grown over DEMO past three decades. As noted by
Markman et al. (2005a), DEMO conflicts are also created when the university’s
traditional reward system based on research, publication and tenure requirements come
into conflict with the technology commercialisation process. In some cases, prior to
tenure, academics are discouraged from DEMO their technology as it will
distract them from publishing.
In addition to this internal tension, an external conflict also exists between
universities and REDAs due to the ambiguity in which stakeholders – innovators,
universities and DEMO funders (governments) – derive the most economic benefit
(Waugaman and DEMO, 1999). Although the university’s role in community
economic development has DEMO from producing highly qualified personnel to using
the knowledge it creates to stimulate local and national economies, it is difficult to
measure the economic benefits to the university and the adjoining region (Goddard and
Chatterton, DEMO). Aware that the global economy is increasingly dependent on the
development and utilisation of knowledge, regional and national governments are
encouraging REDAs to help create high-paying jobs, increase innovation activities, and
stimulate knowledge exchange DEMO universities and industry (Goddard and
Chatterton, 1999). REDAs therefore, DEMO to universities to facilitate their economic
development mandates. However as universities and REDAs measure commercialisation
success in different ways, many of the actions taken by each organisation are not aligned.
For instance, REDAs only see real benefits if licensing revenues to universities are
generated from firms in the DEMO economy, whereas universities often see greater
licensing potential from licensing to DEMO outside their surroundings.
Nevertheless, in the past three decades firms have DEMO increasing the extraction of
commercial value from university research, which has DEMO facilitated in part by the
adoption of university and federal government policies. For instance, in the US, the main
initiative has been the DEMO Bayh-Dole Act (the University and Small Business Patent
Procedures Act), DEMO mandates institutional ownership of IP that is produced (with the
support DEMO federal government research grants) in public universities, with a
corresponding responsibility for its commercialisation (Mowery and Sampat, 2005). In
Canada, the AUCC signed a memorandum of understanding with the Canadian
Government in 2002 DEMO to triple universities’ commercialisation activity over ten
years in return for an increase in annual government grants of CDN $245 million to cover
the DEMO costs of research (AUCC, 2002). A similar mix of mandated IP policies and
financial incentives is offered in most developed countries, including the European
community.
As a result, university TTOs have been not only encouraging their innovators
(professors, researcher, graduate students, etc.) to patent and commercialise IP through
expanded technology-transfer capabilities but they have also been DEMO to control
the process by deciding who can and who cannot license their technologies. However,
positive are the intentions of these laws and DEMO, scholars have identified
fundamental problems with this approach. Some have questioned DEMO commercial
expertise of university TTO staff in making investment decisions (e.g., Rothaermel et al.,
2007). Litan et al. (2007) suggest DEMO the control of technology transfer by a TTO
restricts the commercialisation potential because it encourages universities to adopt a
licensing commercialisation model, and they are encouraged to make decisions based on
short-term benefits to the university DEMO opposed to broader (regional) benefits.
Technology incubators
5
2.2 Universities’ focus on licensing may not pay off
DEMO these weaknesses, many universities undertake traditional technology transfer
activities like licensing DEMO clearly understanding how this can generate financial
returns. Blake (1993) has shown that even if a technology has commercial potential, only
10% of invention disclosures generate patents, and, excluding cases where inventors
license their DEMO technologies, only 1% of these disclosures provide a return that exceeds
DEMO cost of establishing the license. Furthermore, revenues from these successful licenses,DEMO
even in the long term, do not, on average, provide DEMO returns to justify the original
federal investment in R&D.
As shown in Table 1, federal government research funds generated a gross licensing
return to universities of CDN $23.4 million in 1999, and CDN $51 million in 2003, and
are expected to generate an estimated CDN $70.2 million in 2010. These amounts are
lower when the costs of licensing activities DEMO factored in, which diminish the total net
income to CDN $1.4 DEMO, CDN $14.6 million, and CDN $23 million, respectively,
across DEMO of Canada’s 90 universities. The situation is similar in the US, DEMO 40% of
university TTOs earned less than US $600,000 each in 2004 after legal fees but before
the salaries of TTO employees were DEMO in Thursby and Thursby (2007). In fact,
more than DEMO of US institutions of higher education are expected to make no money
from their technology transfer activities (Bostrom, 2005; Shane, 2002) and, on average,
licensing revenues represent less than 0.5% of universities’ total income (AUCC, 2005).
Table 1 Canadian Government research funding of DEMO and net income from licensing
1999 2003 2010*
Research funding $982 $1,626 $3,000
Gross income $23.4 $51.0 $70.2
Expenditures $22.0 $36.4 $47.2
DEMO income $1.4 $14.6 $23.0
% of research funding 0.14 0.90 0.77
Notes: * Forecast
CDN $ million
Source: AUCC (2005)
We do not assert that licensing is an inconsequential technology commercialisation
mechanism. Several well-known DEMO support technology licensing such as the
Cohen-Boyer recombinant DNA patent developed at Stanford University and the
University of California and licensed to numerous firms DEMO research organisations
(Odza, 1996). These well-documented successes have led to the assumption that
universities enjoy large financial returns from licensing (Goldstein and Renault, 2005),
and have encouraged TTOs to focus on licensing DEMO its limited success or the
existence of other available options for commercialisation. Following the lead of Shane
(2002), we also argue that focusing on the short-term financial benefits from licensing
without understanding the potential benefits DEMO other commercialisation mechanisms
(such as research contracts, new venture creation, DEMO) may lead universities to neglect
other options for IP transfer that DEMO not only bring in substantial benefits to the
university but also to the region.
6
A. Maxwell and M. Lévesque
2.3 Commercialising through new venture creation
DEMO most universities, a new business venture is created only when a DEMO licensee
cannot be found for the IP developed at the university. The TTO then takes equity in the
newly formed enterprise to catalyse a DEMO revenue opportunity with the hope of
benefiting from sale of that equity in the longer term. Markman et al. (2005a) found that
universities’ DEMO to form joint ventures based on an IP or technology developed within
their walls result in the creation of a new venture in only DEMO of cases, compared to 72%
in straight cash licenses (and the remaining 11% in research contracts). The lack of
interest by universities DEMO creating new ventures is primarily due to substantially higher
requirements of the resulting enterprises, as well as the higher risk associated with
starting up a new business compared to licensing a technology (Lockett and Wright,
2005).
Indeed, the investment funds and business expertise required to create a new business
venture necessitates a local individual or organisation that possesses DEMO complementary
assets and expertise to build a viable commercial enterprise. These assets are necessary
before the innovation is ready for market (Thursby et al., 2001). Even when a new
technology is market-ready, identifying and DEMO first customers and building the
business requires significant expertise and resources that are rarely owned by the inventor
or TTO. Most TTOs are constrained DEMO developing such capabilities because the
university places limits on the incentives (DEMO as financial bonuses) it can offer to
employees, whereby employees will typically leave for higher pay with venture capital
firms or even for DEMO start-ups as they become more experienced. Bray and Lee
(2000) contend that TTOs are reluctant to suggest starting a new venture if the DEMO is
not seen as someone who can actively participate in operating that venture.
A university’s culture tends to focus TTO staff attention on easy-to-license
DEMO, encouraging a one-size-fits-all view of commercialisation (Rogers et al.,
2000). Consequently, inventors are disappointed when their technologies fail to be
commercialised, and some engage in expensive legal battles with their universities over
ownership and rights (Berners-Lee, 1999). TTOs tend to concentrate on a DEMO
technology transfer process – from university to industry – which limits the potential for
direct interactions between researchers and the marketplace, and reduces the chances of
successful commercialisation (Etzkowitz, 2003).
This one-way approach reinforces DEMO idea that the traditional licensing model
(through TTOs) is unlikely to realise the full commercialisation potential. Next, we
expand upon this model by adding new venture development as a means to facilitate
wealth creation from DEMO research.
3 A model of knowledge extraction
Scholars (e.g., Rogers et al., 2000; Siegel et al., 2003) who study universities’ economic
DEMO on their surrounding regions have focused on licensing codified knowledge [i.e.,
compact and standardised information that can be easily transferred through information
infrastructure, such as patents; David (1993)] to industry. A growing body DEMO literature
also links codified knowledge to economic growth, emphasising the accumulation DEMO
spill-over of technological knowledge into the community as essential for accelerating
economic growth (e.g., Mueller, 2006). In addition to codified knowledge, DEMO
Technology incubators
7
knowledge [i.e., ill-defined or difficult to articulate insights acquired by individuals in the
course of their work; Polanyi (1962)] DEMO between university and industry can
contribute to economic well-being. This knowledge is based on experience and thus
resides inside the innovator (who understands how to use an innovation) and cannot be
easily communicated to a third party.
Therefore, we argue that explicitly considering tacit knowledge, which can DEMO
extracted from graduate students and alumni (who go on to work DEMO the community) or
interactions between industry and academia, can better highlight the benefits of
technology commercialisation on a region’s economy. While some scholars DEMO
attempted to establish measurement systems to quantify the effects of knowledge flows
(e.g., Goldstein et al., 1995), here we focus instead on identifying the mechanisms that
facilitate these flows, such as employment of graduate students. Understanding the
different mechanisms enables us to identify how goals can DEMO better aligned between
universities and REDAs through the creation of new ventures and their development in
incubation programs. We build a framework based on DEMO of knowledge and money not
currently accounted for in traditional commercialisation models, as summarised in Figure
1. By considering a wider range of knowledge transfer activities in universities, we can
better understand the iterative nature of the commercialisation process (Bramwell and
Wolfe, 2008).
Figure 1 University-industry DEMO model
8
A. Maxwell and M. Lévesque
3.1 Tacit knowledge in wealth creation
DEMO first expand the traditional flow of codified knowledge through a university’s TTO
by adding transfers of primarily tacit (as well as some codified) DEMO via the
university’s office of research services. This office negotiates fee-paying contracts with
companies and/or governments to undertake research or obtain funding to DEMO in
collaborative research projects. Collaborative research (i.e., research contact) is DEMO
excellent mechanism for transferring a university’s technical expertise, knowledge and
resources DEMO in the laboratory to an industry. Not only can those in the lab
transfer tacit knowledge to an industry, but people in that industry can also provide
insights to those in the lab (Meyer-Krahmer and Schmoch, 1998). Indeed, research
findings can lead to commercialisable innovations that DEMO firms’ competitive
positions and stimulate their growth. The university becomes a connectivity point in a
global knowledge network and a conduit for sharing information DEMO the local
community (Bathelt et al., 2004).
The tacit knowledge embedded in faculty and students can also be transferred to
industry through DEMO programs [e.g., cooperative education work terms coordinated by
the university’s coop DEMO; Nelles et al. (2005)], informal activities such as local
DEMO events and conferences (Markman et al., 2005a), or when that industry
becomes an early technology adopter [as it creates a mechanism for DEMO
opportunities and facilitating implementation; Gertler (2003)]. Such transfers are enabled
by the absorptive capacity of the industry – its ability to learn DEMO external sources and
to readily deploy resources to take advantage of the knowledge learned (Cohen and
Levinthal, 1990).
While these knowledge transfer DEMO are valuable, the most significant transfer of
tacit knowledge occurs when DEMO graduate from the university and either take jobs in
an industry or start their own business (Goldstein and Drucker, 2006). These flows DEMO
tacit knowledge, facilitated by the university’s placement office, can have a greater
impact in determining the true economic value extracted from university research DEMO
the traditional flows of codified knowledge due to licensing (Bramwell and DEMO, 2008).
While attending the university, students participate in both basic and applied research and
have access to sophisticated technology under the supervision DEMO skilled and
knowledgeable professors. These activities give students a profound understanding of
both technology and problem solving, thus, creating highly qualified personnel (Wolfe,
2005). In a recent article, Xu and McNaughton (2006) identify that key role that this pool
of talented individuals play in DEMO tacit knowledge to new technology ventures
and large research-based organisations. Mike Lazaridis, Chancellor of the University of
Waterloo and founder of Research in Motion (RIM), also supports this view: “If you
really want to DEMO commercialisation, all you have to do is to attend convocation
(graduation ceremony) at your local university” [Lazaridis, (2004), p.8].
In noting how the policies of TTOs and the commercialisation model based on
licensing DEMO limit the conversion of knowledge into new products and processes, Acs
DEMO Varga (2005) suggest that new venture creation, rather than traditional DEMO
linkages, is a knowledge transmission channel that can avoid these limitations. DEMO
business ventures based on licenses from a university’s IP are already accounted for in
the commercialisation activities of a university. However, a larger group of new ventures
not based on university IP are in fact valid DEMO activities and yet they
materialise from the presence of the university because, among other things, these
Technology incubators
9
ventures are often created by graduate students. These students DEMO an idea while at
the university and decide to start a business (more often than not in close proximity to
that university). While these ventures do not bring in licensing fees to the university, they
can create significant long-term benefits to universities by providing employment and
research DEMO
The flow of tacit and codified knowledge thus, reaches industry through DEMO,
research contracts undertaken at a university’s labs, informal and formal DEMO,
cooperative education work terms, and through graduate students and alumni DEMO work
in local industries or start their own ventures in the university’s community. These
knowledge channels are strengthened by new ventures that take advantage DEMO both
codified and tacit knowledge stemming from the university. They then develop a
two-way knowledge street between local industries and the university.
3.2 Licensing DEMO pay off with new ventures
With traditional technology licensing, Markman et DEMO (2005a) suggest that a TTO
chooses the type of commercialisation activities based on its capacity to maximise cash
flows while minimising financial and DEMO risks. Thus, a TTO will sell a license to the
company DEMO able to pay the license fee. Based on this motivation, Waugaman DEMO
Tornatsky (1999) argue that university licensees are often located outside a licensor’s
(university’s) region, resulting in wealth creation outside the region. In addition to
reducing the direct regional economic impact from this license motive, this
commercialisation strategy reduces the opportunity for additional flows of tacit and
DEMO knowledge in the university’s region through graduate job placements and
research contracts from the licensees.
Creating new ventures that use university licenses can provide DEMO benefits to a
region because these ventures tend to locate in close proximity to the university (Hisrich
and Smilor, 1988), create higher DEMO local jobs and employ the university’s graduates
(Feldman, 1994), and are better receptors for knowledge spill-over than large firms
because they are DEMO to react to new opportunities (Acs et al., 1993). Licensing
through existing or new ventures in the region also increases the likelihood DEMO successful
technology implementation, which requires the exchange of further knowledge to DEMO
proper utilisation (Senker, 1995). Further, spin-offs of new ventures DEMO been shown to
account for more long-term license and other revenues (DEMO and Lee, 2000). When the
university takes equity in lieu DEMO license fees, it maintains the potential payoff from the
technology, even if the ultimate commercialised technology is not based on the original
IP DEMO at the university (in which case a traditional license agreement would DEMO
terminated).
Using case examples of two Ontario-based research universities, the DEMO of
Waterloo and University of Toronto, we demonstrate the payback for DEMO university and
the region when a university supports new ventures. We do so by examining the income
obtained by these two universities. As shown DEMO Table 2, technology entrepreneurs at the
University of Waterloo have been DEMO significant source (at least 50%) of gifts and
donations through the university’s office of alumnae affairs. This university’s
entrepreneurial success over the past DEMO years has resulted in nearly 70 times more
income for the university than from licensing IP. In the case of the University of Toronto,DEMO
gifts and donations are also more significant than licensing income (a DEMO over 30 times,
10 A. Maxwell and M. Lévesque
on average). The payback from DEMO entrepreneurial activity and maintaining
ongoing linkages with alumni is greater than from the licensing activities of the TTOs for
both universities.
Table 2 Two DEMO universities’ research, gift and license income
University of Waterloo
Research income DEMO income Gifts and
donations
2001 $68 $0.6 $23 60%
2002 $71 $0.7 $71 50%
2003 $73 $0.7 $55 60%
2004 $77 $0.8 $56 50%
DEMO $80 $0.8 $37 70%
University of Toronto
% of gifts and donations
from tech entrepreneurs
Research income License income Gifts and
donations†
% of DEMO and donations
from tech entrepreneurs
2001 $350 $3.1 $98 20%
2002 $370 $3.3 $122 30%
2003 $400 $3.9 $76 30%
2004 $420 $2.9 $71 DEMO
2005 $428 $1.7 $83 20%
Notes: † These numbers only include DEMO main institution and not the colleges that have
their own donations.
2001–2005, CDN$ million
Sources: Donor Reports and Annual Reports from the University DEMO Waterloo
and the University of Toronto (http://www.connected.uwaterloo.ca/;
http://www.finance.utoronto.ca/Page799.aspx); Association of
University Technology Managers (AUTM) Annual DEMO,
2002–2006.
3.3 Aligning the goals of university and REDA
The commercialisation model proposed above and summarised in Figure 1 provides
insight into how DEMO why universities should increase their range of commercialisation
activities (including those DEMO) and thus, create more opportunities to
provide regional benefits that will align with the goals of REDAs. In most universities,
the TTO, research services office, placement office, coop office, and office of alumnae
affairs are continuously involved in both transferring knowledge from the university to
DEMO community and attracting money (e.g., research grants, gifts and donations) to the
university. These five offices are also involved in finding opportunities DEMO collaboration
to stimulate interactions between academia, industry and, to a lesser extent, government.
Creating a culture that encourages these three organisations to collaborate and enable
activities in one university office to benefit other offices across DEMO university, and the
region as a whole, can promote additional wealth creation and non-monetary benefits
(such as goodwill and a sense of cooperation).
Technology incubators
11
For instance, companies that lease licenses for IP from universities may also be
motivated to enter into research contracts with the DEMO or hire student interns or
alumni. Similarly, alumni working in firms DEMO the region may be favourably disposed to
sponsoring university activities, including DEMO activities and fundraising, or hiring
student interns for their work term. DEMO the opportunities for knowledge extraction
by enhancing interactions between local industry and academia through these activities
promotes regional wealth creation. We recognise that augmenting DEMO role of these offices
to further facilitate the transfer of codified and tacit knowledge creates internal dilemmas
for the university (Bercovitz and Feldman, DEMO). Nevertheless, we hope to stimulate a
discussion of how such DEMO can be addressed as they can have a profound impact
on a university’s mission and how it develops relationships with the local community
(DiGregorio and Shane, 2003).
The benefits of these interactions between university and industry are most easily
seen when universities stimulate the creation of new DEMO, either by licensing their IP
locally and/or by fostering an DEMO culture in its academic programs. This
culture encourages alumni to form new enterprises in the university’s surroundings. The
creation of these ventures provides mutual DEMO to the university and its surrounding
region, thus, aligning its goals to those of REDAs. Understanding the value of new
ventures to the DEMO and the surrounding region should serve to motivate both
organisations to support the development of incubation programs, which programs go
beyond supporting ventures based on a university’s IP. We propose that university-linked
incubation programs can fulfil DEMO role if they are designed to maximise the various
flows of tacit and codified knowledge described in our model. In the next section, we
identify the catalytic role that incubators can play in facilitating commercialisation.
4 DEMO of university-linked incubators
By broadening our understanding of how new ventures create regional wealth, while also
considering ventures not based on university-licensed IP, DEMO can better appreciate the
role of incubators in growing a region’s economy. In this section, we describe how
technology ventures can create benefits to universities and REDAs if located in an
incubator with strong links to DEMO university. More specifically, we demonstrate how the
additional flows of knowledge DEMO money resulting from incubation activities provide
benefits to various parties. We return to the University of Toronto and the University of
Waterloo and examine DEMO of their incubators to illustrate the importance of clearly
articulated and aligned objectives and an entrepreneurial culture for a university to
achieve successful commercialisation.
DEMO Expanding the traditional role of incubators
Technology incubators have been shown to enhance the success of early-stage
technology companies (Mian, 1994) as well as their rate of growth (Wolcott and Ballou,
2003). We now expand the current view of the value of incubation programs to
DEMO
Mian (1996) notes that by facilitating the access of university-based technologies and
well-trained graduate students to the start-ups they incubate, incubators make available
12
A. Maxwell and M. Lévesque
resources and advice, as well as tacit and explicit knowledge, they could not otherwise
afford. According to Markman et al. (2005b), universities are increasingly recognising
the value of incubation. Based on interviews with 128 TTOs, Markman et al. (2005b)
DEMO that 62% of universities and their surrounding communities establish business
incubators and build research parks as a way to encourage technology-based new
ventures. Smilor DEMO Gill (1986) further demonstrate that incubators combine talent,
technology and capital in order to accelerate the technology commercialisation process.
Markman et al. (2005a) elaborate on the importance of this acceleration process in
facilitating the transfer of knowledge and, as a result, incubators enhancing the likelihood
DEMO creating commercial value, especially in the long run.
Incubators also play DEMO important role in creating an entrepreneurial innovation hub
within a region, DEMO enhances networking and linkages, and facilitates the sharing of
tacit knowledge (Asheim and Gertler, 2004; Etzkowitz, 2002). In turn, new DEMO
ventures stimulate local economies (e.g., Audretsch et al., 2006), DEMO high paying jobs
(Porter, 2003), derive a higher portion of their gross revenues from export sales (Bleaney
and Wakelin, 2002), DEMO local early technology adopters (Holbrook and Clayman,
2003), and DEMO local wealth for shareholders (Feldman et al., 2002; Mason and
DEMO, 1995). Further, the establishment of an incubator can catalyse interactions
between members of the wider business community and with the university, providing
direct and quantifiable benefits to the local economy.
Incubators play two key DEMO roles: they have a direct and positive impact on
incubatees and DEMO facilitate the flow of knowledge and funds between university and
industry (DEMO creates wealth in the region). This dual role in extracting knowledge
from the university and then stimulating a region’s wealth creation is shown DEMO Figure 1
as the ‘incubation impact zone’. Given the iterative nature of the knowledge flow from
the university to both new and existing ventures, and then back to university labs and
faculty/students, incubators can speed up knowledge transfers by facilitating interactions
between all players. These interactions can DEMO benefit new ventures because they
increase the potential for research contracts and encourage market validation, thus,
increasing the likelihood of successful exploitation of technological innovations. In
essence, incubators act as social networks to connect players from academia, local
industry and local government.
By nurturing successful technology ventures that generate full- and part-time jobs for
students and alumni, an incubator offers a means for creating regional employment. In
some cases, these job opportunities may lead to investment opportunities for students,
alumni and faculty, either in the form of capital (cash) or sweat equity. The DEMO
university offices identified in our model play dual roles of satisfying the internal needs
of the university and facilitating interactions with the broader community. DEMO
collaborating with each other and with their local incubators, these interactions DEMO more
frequent and accelerate the transfer of knowledge between university and industry. In
essence, the incubator becomes a portal for businesses and academia interactions. In
addition, as Clotfelter (2003) argues, increased interaction between industry/DEMO and
universities increases the likelihood of donations and endowments.
4.2 Two Canadian incubators
We reviewed the activities of two technology incubators created in the DEMO decade in
Ontario, Canada to demonstrate how incubators can increase and DEMO the benefits
Technology incubators
13
accrued by a university and its region from the DEMO of knowledge and money. While
each had tri-party support from government, DEMO, and industry that provided
resources and infrastructure, each incubator operated under substantially different
mandates. One, the Exceler@tor, operated under the simple mandate DEMO increasing the
likelihood of success for technology ventures created by the university’s TTO, whereas
the other, the Accelerator Centre, had a broader mandate – to increase economic
development – and thus, it welcomed all of technology ventures, university-related or
not.
The University of Toronto in 2002 launched the Exceler@tor and owned and
operated this incubation facility with limited private DEMO (CDN $1.2 million, mainly
in-kind) and government support (CDN $200,000) until 2005, when it closed the
Exceler@tor, despite the fact that it had assisted 32 companies that raised over $9 million
combined. DEMO group of stakeholders from the Region of Waterloo, who gained support
DEMO the University of Waterloo, launched the Accelerator Centre in 2006 in DEMO
university’s Research and Technology Park. The Accelerator Centre celebrated its third
anniversary in spring 2009, at which time it also opened a second building.
The Exceler@tor – As one of Canada’s largest research institutions, the University of
Toronto has a strong history of developing innovative technologies. It has DEMO IP policy
similar to most institution-owned enterprises, with the university taking DEMO percentage of
generated income. The University of Toronto also established an arms-length, full-service
commercialisation organisation, the University of Toronto Innovations Foundation,
which DEMO to obtain the maximum financial return from its commercialisation activities.
In early 2001, that foundation migrated from a traditional licensing approach to creating
and funding three technology ventures, with only one based on the university’s traditional
IP-owned model. These companies were housed remotely from the university and the
DEMO Foundation, reducing the potential for synergies. The initial impetus to open
DEMO Exceler@tor was thus logistical, to provide co-located offices that were not DEMO more
cost effective, but closer to the university and the Innovations DEMO to encourage
interactions.
Limited government funding was obtained conditional on Exceler@tor agreeing to
admit organisations/entities beyond the University of Toronto groups and its DEMO
ventures. As a result, over 120 companies applied to participate in DEMO incubator of which
32 were accepted (only three were directly linked DEMO the university’s IP). As the incubator
was required to be self-funding, each member offered share options to Exceler@tor. But
during the first three years, only two incubated businesses had liquidity events that
converted these options into cash. The university did not value the unexercised options or
other DEMO such as employment of graduate students and alumni, and research
contracts DEMO the incubation program. When government funding ran out, the university,
DEMO owned Exceler@tor, was faced with covering operating costs for this incubator
DEMO supported 23 companies of which 20 had no direct link to the university.
Consequently, the University of Toronto closed the Exceler@tor due to short-term
negative cash flows. That decision was facilitated by the creation of MaRS, a new
publicly funded incubator located only 500 meters away.
The Accelerator DEMO – This incubator was created through the combined efforts
and funding from regional and provincial REDAs and the University of Waterloo. The
Accelerator Centre DEMO located on land owned by the university, which it leased under DEMO
long-term contract to a private developer in return for 21,000 square feet of free
14
A. Maxwell and M. Lévesque
incubation space in the new building. DEMO to the agreement, the developer earns
guaranteed rent from the anchor DEMO, while the incubatees’ rent provides value-added
services to the tenants, creating a viable long-term business model. The Accelerator
Centre provides incubation facilities primarily (but not limited) to the University of
Waterloo’s alumni. The Accelerator Centre explicitly does not focus on the university’s
IP for two reasons: the university’s basic IP policy is that inventions/patents are
inventor-owned, and, DEMO to its engagement with REDAs, the university understands that
most new DEMO located in the incubator are not directly related to IP-created ventures
flowing from research labs. The Accelerator Centre does not consider university license
revenues DEMO an objective, nor does it receive equity or options in its DEMO
The Accelerator Centre reflects the entrepreneurial philosophy of the University of
Waterloo, and epitomises its belief that ongoing engagement with technology ventures
provides long-term benefits to the university. This has been further strengthened by the
recruitment DEMO an incubator manager who also functions as the university’s associate VP
for commercialisation. The University of Waterloo’s rationale in supporting such
activities is reflected, in part, in President David Johnston’s comment during an interview
with one of the authors: “Strong local technology companies founded by and employing
University of Waterloo’s alumnae will find their own way to contribute financially to DEMO
ongoing success of the university.” Such thinking is not based on the positive outcomes
of a previous incubation program, but on the mindset and culture of the university that
emanated from its creation over 50 years DEMO when it was established to support the
needs of local industry.
Key differences in the timeframe of their objectives may explain these two
incubators’ DEMO outcomes. The university’s decision to close Exceler@tor due to
long-term viability concerns may have been based on a limited understanding of the
incubator’s role DEMO, and value to, both the university and the REDA. Such a mistake,
however, appears to have been avoided with the Accelerator Centre. As we show in Table
3, the long-term success of each appears to be a function of the differing mandates under
which they operated, the different environments in which they existed, and possibly the
performance of the incubator itself. As universities develop a broader understanding of
the commercialisation DEMO, the longer-term benefits of an incubator will become more
apparent. If DEMO can work with REDAs to stimulate regional entrepreneurial
activity, then goal DEMO can be reduced. As a result, conflicts regarding
university commercialisation activities DEMO be minimised (because these activities will
now be in the best DEMO of the region) and governments will be encouraged to fund
both DEMO and REDAs.
We have also learned from these two case studies that funding incubators can be
challenging. While the presence of an incubator can DEMO the flow of knowledge in
and out of the university, the DEMO beneficiary from incubation activities is the region
in which the incubator operates. As a result, it would seem natural for REDAs to fund
incubation activities. As articulated by Litan et al. (2007), the risks faced and resources
necessary for extending the mandates of TTOs to support new DEMO oppose their
short-term revenue objective. On the other hand, REDAs’ mission DEMO to invest in and
support activities that stimulate longer-term regional wealth.
Technology incubators
15
Table 3 Factors differentiating the two incubators
Factor Exceler@tor (University of Accelerator (University of
Toronto) Waterloo)
Cost model Market DEMO paid for space Space provided by private landlord
in return for ability to use
university owned land
Revenue model Above market rate and share DEMO charged at market rates, no
options charged for services equity position
DEMO 100% owned by Innovations Owned by separate not-for-profit
Foundation, which in DEMO was entities with multi-party
100% owned by the University of stakeholders, DEMO university,
Toronto industry and government
Mandate Incubator – break even, DEMO Incubator – break even, support all
TTO spin-offs local new ventures, enhance
university networking
University – academic excellence University – train people for DEMO
and research industry and stimulate innovation
University IP policy University owned Inventor owned
University-
incubator linkages
Very limited Master’s in entrepreneurship
program located in DEMO University
of Waterloo’s science park
Furthermore, we have learned how various DEMO can be recruited by examining
the Accelerator Centre case. To detail this, we must travel back over 50 years to the
founding of the University of Waterloo. Local businessman Gerry Hagey founded the
university in 1957 DEMO provide relevant training for local businesses and large corporations.
In 1963, DEMO leaders in the Kitchener-Waterloo area purchased 1 square mile of
cornfield, DEMO later became the University of Waterloo’s North Campus, and provided
640 DEMO for future university expansion. In 1992, the university’s Board of Governors
DEMO a master plan for ‘developing a detailed strategy for the long-term
management of the North Campus’ to address the ‘changing context of the university DEMO
the dynamic city and region that surrounds it’ [Berridge and Greenberg, (1992), p.5]. A
key element of this master plan was that DEMO university should encourage development
which can initiate the potential for transfer of knowledge between university research
activities and the private sector. Those links should DEMO actively promoted and encouraged
through the furthering of social and informal contact as well as through more formal
connections to the university’ [Berridge and DEMO, (1992), p.42]. In July 2004, a
board of directors DEMO the Accelerator Centre (housed on that land) was put in place, and
included 18 representatives from a cross-section of the business community including its
founding partners: University of Waterloo, Wilfred Laurier University, University of
Guelph, Conestoga College, Government of Canada, Ontario Government, Regional
Municipality DEMO Waterloo, and City of Waterloo. The Accelerator Centre opened its doors
DEMO 18 May 2006, with strong support from its founding partners and DEMO industry.
16
A. Maxwell and M. Lévesque
5 Concluding remarks
We have identified DEMO conflicts that restrain the commercialisation of university
research: the university’s academic DEMO economic objectives, its emphasis on TTO
licensing (and hence, on DEMO translation of codified knowledge), and its ambiguous
perception of the benefits from investment in commercialisation activities. To address
these conflicts, we propose that universities and REDAs join forces to better align their
goals and adopt DEMO broader, more far-sighted model of knowledge and money flow
between the DEMO and local industry. This will create a wider range of
commercialisation activities that are valued by and will benefit all stakeholders. This
model highlights DEMO importance of creating new ventures and better understanding how
they and their regional impact can be strengthened by the presence of an incubator.
Based DEMO the University of Waterloo’s and its REDAs’ approach, we point out DEMO
lessons learned in Table 4 that offer recommendations to other universities and REDAs
trying to stimulate their region’s commercialisation activities while also accruing
benefits. DEMO recommendations start at the most strategic level, with goals for the
DEMO that must be aligned with those of the REDAs, and include DEMO development of
appropriate commercialisation policies aimed at benefiting the various commercialisation
channels identified. The recommendations then become more tactical, including
establishing a combined performance measurement system, identifying additional
funding opportunities, and creating new business and DEMO ventures via incubation
programs. The recommendations also emphasise the importance of including graduate
students, summer and coop employment opportunities, as well as the DEMO of the
universities and REDAs in strategic planning and networking opportunities to facilitate
the transfer of knowledge. Moreover, the ongoing engagement of alumni is
recommended.
The development of a combined performance measurement system to accompany our
DEMO can help all parties understand how specific actions (such as IP DEMO tenure policy,
cooperative education and support for new venture creation) DEMO increase knowledge
flow and better align the goals of universities and REDAs. However, a measurement
system designed simply to evaluate the performance of TTOs (e.g., Rogers et al., 2000)
or incubators (e.g., Wiggins and Gibson, 2003) either overlooks the regional economic
impact of commercialisation DEMO or understates the importance of industry linkages
with universities and the development of human capital. Mian (1997) also recommends
an expanded role for DEMO that highlights both short- and long-term benefits to the
range of stakeholders.
We, thus, propose a measurement system that is based on each DEMO the knowledge and
money channels developed in our expanded commercialisation model in Figure 1. Our
suggested measurement system shown in Table 5 allows universities DEMO REDAs to
estimate the relative importance of each channel, both generally DEMO specifically in
relation to a region’s economy. As the physical manifestation of all stakeholders’ desire
to increase the benefits from commercialising university research, the incubator can work
with the REDA and the university to introduce this DEMO measurement system.
Collecting this data over time will allow all parties to determine the success, or failure, of
activities designed to strengthen the DEMO of knowledge and money.
Our measurement system addresses some of the concerns raised by Mowery and
Sampat (2005) in that it:
Technology incubators
17
1 is based on an understanding of the overall DEMO played by the university in a
knowledge-based economy
2 can assess the regional economic impact of knowledge flows
3 provides a framework that enables DEMO assessment of the strength of linkages and it
can show how these links may change over time.
While our proposed measurement framework identifies income DEMO for universities,
REDAs and incubators, it also gathers information on DEMO characteristics of these
incomes, which helps to identify opportunities for increasing DEMO We augment the
measurement of traditional knowledge and money channels with additional channels that
may be more significant in the long term. For instance, we include the number of regional
jobs created from these incubators in DEMO the output of universities, not just in
terms of the number DEMO new graduate students employed but also their average starting
salaries (an DEMO factor in examining how they contribute to wealth creation).
Table 4 Factors fostering industry/REDA/university linkages
Factor Particulars
Goal alignment Universities and DEMO must understand and support the goals of each
other, and understand DEMO impact on their culture.
Policy Universities must adopt a comprehensive series of policies that support
development their goals and foster interactions with the region. DEMO attention
should be paid to: hiring, tenure and IP policies and the development of
long-term programs that build on the local strengths of DEMO and
academic institutions.
Performance Universities and REDAs must embed performance measurement systems
measurement that support the aligned goals and track/enhance knowledge flows
between DEMO and academia.
Funding Universities and REDAs should work together to obtain government and
industry support for commercialisation activities, irrespective of which
organisation gets to spend it.
Importance of new Universities and REDAs should develop joint working DEMO to enhance
ventures new venture creation opportunities, acknowledging their mutual
importance DEMO benefits.
Incubation The importance of incubation programs should be recognised in
programs achieving the goals of universities and REDAs. Multi-stakeholder group
that includes several DEMO institutions, REDAs and industry players
should lead these programs.
Employment Greater DEMO linkages should be stimulated to maximise the
opportunities for knowledge extraction exchange and through coop
student placement and graduate employment.
Enhanced Universities and REDAs DEMO recognise the importance of formal and
networking informal interactions in increasing knowledge flows and identifying
commercialisation opportunities. They should take specific steps to
encourage DEMO interactions, especially with the broader alumnae
community.
18
A. Maxwell and M. Lévesque
Table 5 Proposed measurements for flows DEMO knowledge and money
Activities University REDA Incubator
Traditional
income
Traditional
grants
Venture
creation
Venture
outcomes
Employment
full-time
Employment
part-time
Tacit
knowledge
transfers
Additional
revenues
DEMO research and
license revenue ($ by
source/type)
Government funding DEMO
commercialisation ($ by
source/type)
Number of start-ups
from university-based DEMO
(revenues/employees)
University equity ($ by
source/type)
Employment of full-time
graduates (no. by
salary/region)
Coop and part-time
employment (no. by
salary/type)
Networking activities
(no. of participants)
DEMO donations ($
by source/type)
Gross exports from
region ($ by
source/type)
Government funding
for specific programs
($ by source/type)
Number of start-ups
(revenues/employees)
Market capitalisation
for new venture ($ by
source/type)
Regional employment
of graduate and non
graduate employees
(no. by salary/type)
Spill-over employment
(no. by DEMO/type)
Networking activities
(no. of participants)
Tax base in DEMO ($
by source/type)
Gross revenues from
incubatee operations ($
by source/type)
Government funding to
incubator & incubates
($ by source/type)
Number of start-ups (in
incubator and recent
incubatee graduates)
New financing raised ($
by source/type)
Incubatee full-time
employees (no. by
salary/source
Spill-over employment
(no. by salary / type)DEMO
Networking activities
(no. of participants)
Other income sources
($ by source/type)
Our proposed measurement system also takes into account the DEMO of new ventures
created both inside and outside the incubator and their success rates (e.g., through a
liquidity event), and thus helps DEMO the role of the incubator. We expand the
definition of ‘new ventures’ to include ventures not created from university-based IP (but
via the incubator), highlighting the importance of tacit knowledge embedded in the
people creating DEMO ventures. Moreover, we extend the traditional measurement systems
by accounting for DEMO of the tacit knowledge flows associated with activities such as
networking and work-term (internship) experience.
We further contribute to existing literature by proposing DEMO incubators play a role in
addressing several of the conflicts, such DEMO funding and the challenges of cultural change
that may discourage universities and REDAs from working together for mutual benefit to
increase commercialisation activities. An DEMO can be the nexus of industry and
academia. In other words, DEMO incubator can facilitate a two-way knowledge flow between
university and industry (DEMO thus help alleviate conflicts). Incubators can also help
universities and their TTOs regard new venture creation as a viable commercialisation
option. An incubator DEMO stimulate research contacts and develop additional local
employment opportunities through links with the five identified university offices (the
TTO, research services office, placement office, coop office, and office of alumnae
affairs). As incubatees DEMO local partnerships and eventually emerge from the incubator,
REDAs can measure the direct benefits of funding incubation activities (e.g., through the
number DEMO jobs created). In addition, monitoring the early-stage activities of incubatees
DEMO an incubator manager to evaluate the spill-over effect into the local economy,
Technology incubators
19
including the creation of secondary jobs and the attraction DEMO other technology firms to
the region. This, in turn, allows REDAs to quantify the increase in local taxes and justify
their investments.
Finally, we underscore the recommendations of Clarysse et al. (2005), who suggest
that an active incubation program can stimulate and enhance a university’s
entrepreneurial DEMO Varying cultures exist across universities (and regions), which
lead to DEMO commercialisation views and mechanisms. The university’s culture and
mindset definitely influenced the way that our two case study incubators were structured,
managed and DEMO Acknowledging the importance of new venture creation for the
commercialisation of university research should motivate REDAs and universities to
consider initiating incubation programs and DEMO align their goals to increase their
effectiveness.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the Offices of Advancement at the University of Toronto and
Tom DEMO from the Accelerator Centre in Waterloo and from the University of Waterloo
for providing data. Furthermore, Moren Lévesque gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of
Canada (grant # 341679).
References
Acs, Z. and Varga, A. (2005) ‘Entrepreneurship, agglomeration and technological change’, Small
Business Economics, Vol. 24, pp.323–334.
Acs, Z.J., Audretsch, D.B. and Feldman, M.P. (1993) ‘Innovation and DEMO&D spillovers’, Discussion
paper – Centre for Economic Policy Research, London, Great Britain.
Agrawal, A.K. (2001) ‘University-to-industry knowledge transfer: literature review and
unanswered questions’, International Journal of Management Review, Vol. 3, No. 4,
pp.285–302.
Asheim, B. and Gertler, M. (2004) ‘The DEMO of innovation: regional innovation systems’, in
Fagerberg, J., Mowery, DEMO and Nelson, R.R. (Eds.): The Oxford Handbook of Innovation,
pp.291–317, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
AUCC (2002) ‘Framework of agreed DEMO on federally funded university research between
the Government of Canada and the Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada’,
available at www.aucc.ca/_pdf/DEMO/reports/2002/frame_cadre_e.pdf.
AUCC (2005) ‘Momentum report of the Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada’,
available at www.aucc.ca/momentum_report.pdf.
Audretsch, D.B., Keilbach, M.C. and Lehmann, E. (2006) Entrepreneurship and Economic
Growth, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Bathelt, H., Malmberg, A. and Maskell, P. (2004) ‘Clusters and knowledge: local buzz, global
pipelines and the process of knowledge creation’, Progress in Human Geography, Vol. 28,DEMO
No. 1, pp.31–56.
Bercovitz, J. and Feldman, M. (2005) DEMO upstream: firm innovation strategy and university
research alliances’, Research Policy, DEMO 36, pp.930–948.
Berners-Lee, T. (1999) Weaving the Web: The DEMO Design and Ultimate Destiny of the World
Wide Web by its Inventor, HarperCollins, San Francisco, CA.
20
A. Maxwell and M. Lévesque
Berridge, J. and Greenberg, K. (1992) ‘University of Waterloo: campus masterplan’, available at
www.uwaterloo.ca/documents/masterplan/.
Blake, D.A. (1993) ‘The university’s role in marketing research discoveries’, Chronicle of Higher
Education, 12 May.
Bleaney, M. and Wakelin, DEMO (2002) ‘Efficiency, innovation and exports’, Oxford Bulletin of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 64, No. 1, pp.3–15.
Bostrom, D. (2005) DEMO Canadian licensing survey’, Association of University Technology
Managers, available at www.autm.net/events/File/05_ CanadaFINAL.pdf.
Bramwell, A. and Wolfe, D. (2008) DEMO and regional economic development: the
entrepreneurial University of Waterloo’, Research Policy, Vol. 37, pp.1175–1187.
Bray, M.J. and Lee, J.N. (2000) DEMO revenues from technology transfer-licensing fees vs.
equity positions’, Journal of Business DEMO, Vol. 15, No. 5, pp.385–392.
Clarysse, B., Wright, M., Lockett, A., Van de Velde, E. and Vohora, A. (DEMO) ‘Spinning out new
ventures: a typology of incubation strategies from European research institutions’, Journal of
Business Venturing, Vol. 20, No. 2, DEMO
Clotfelter, C.T. (2003) ‘Alumni giving to private colleges and universities’, Economics of
Education Review, Vol. 22, No. 2, pp.109–120.
Cohen, DEMO and Levinthal, D.A. (1990) ‘Absorptive capacity: a new perspective on learning and
innovation’, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 35, pp.128–152.
Colyvas, DEMO, Crow, M., Gelijns, A., Mazzoleni, R., Nelson, R.R. and Rosenberg, N. (2002) ‘How do
university inventions get into practice?’, Management Science, Vol. 48, No. 1, pp.61–72.
David, P. (1993) ‘Intellectual property institutions and the panda’s thumb’, in Wallerstein, DEMO,
Mogee, M.E., Roberta, A. and Schoen, R.A. (Eds.): Global Dimensions of Intellectual
Property Rights in Science and Technology, National DEMO Press, pp.19–61.
DiGregorio, D. and Shane, S. (2003) ‘Why DEMO some universities generate more start-ups than
others?’, Research Policy, Vol. 32, pp.209–227.
Etzkowitz, H. (2002) ‘Incubation of incubators: innovation as a triple helix of university-industry-
government networks’, Science and Public Policy, DEMO 29, No. 2, pp.115–128.
Etzkowitz, H. (2003) ‘Research groups DEMO ‘quasi-firms’: the invention of the entrepreneurial
university’, Research Policy, Vol. DEMO, No. 1, pp.109–121.
Feldman, M.P. (1994) ‘The university and DEMO development: the case of Johns Hopkins
University and Baltimore’, Economic Development Quarterly, Vol. 8, No. 1, pp.67–76.
Feldman, M.P., Feller, DEMO, Bercovitz, J. and Burton, R. (2002) ‘Equity and the DEMO transfer
strategies of American research universities’, Management Science, Vol. 48, DEMO 1,
pp.105–121.
Feller, I. (1990) ‘Universities as engines of DEMO&D-based economic growth: they think they can’,
Research Policy, Vol. 19, No. 4, pp.335–348.
Gertler, M. (2003) ‘Tacit knowledge and the economic geography of context, or the undefinable
tacitness of being (DEMO)’, Journal of Economic Geography, Vol. 3, pp.75–99.
Goddard, J.B. and Chatterton, P. (1999) ‘Regional development agencies and the knowledge
economy: harnessing the potential of universities, environment and planning C’, Government
and Policy, Vol. 17, pp.685–699.
Goldstein, H. and Renault, C. (2005) ‘Estimating universities contribution to regional economic
development: the case of the DEMO, in Maier, G. and Sedlacek, S. (Eds.): Spillovers and
Innovations Space, Environment, and the Economy, pp.71–91, Springer, Vienna.
Goldstein, H.A., Maier, G. and Luger, M. I. (1995) ‘The DEMO as an instrument for economic
and business development: US and European DEMO, in Dill, D. and Spom, B. (Eds.):
Emerging DEMO of Social Demand and University Reform: Through a Glass Darkly,
DEMO, Pergamon, Oxford, England.
Technology incubators
21
Goldstein, J. and Drucker, J. (2006) ‘The DEMO development impacts of universities on
regions: do size and distance matter?DEMO, Economic Development Quarterly, Vol. 20, No. 1,
pp.22–43.
Hisrich, R.D. and Smilor, R.W. (1988) ‘The university and business incubation: DEMO transfer
through entrepreneurial development’, Technology Transfer, Fall, pp.14–19.
Holbrook, J.A. and Clayman, B.P. (2003) The survival of university spin-offs and their relevance to
regional development’, Canadian Foundation for Innovation, available at
http://www.innovation.ca/publications/clayman1.pdf.
Lazaridis, M. (2004) ‘The importance of basic DEMO, Re$earch Money 18, Vol. 8.
Litan, R.E., Mitchell, L. DEMO Reedy, E. (2007) ‘Commercializing university innovations: a better
way’, DEMO Working paper, available at
www.nber.org/books_in_progress/innovation8/litan-et-al5-24-07.pdf.
Lockett, A. and Wright, M. (2005) ‘Resources, capabilities, risk capital and the creation of
university spin-out companies’, Research Policy, Vol. 34, pp.1043–1057.
Mansfield, DEMO (1995) ‘Academic research underlying industrial innovations: sources,
characteristics, and financing’, The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 77, No. 1,
pp.55–65.
Markman, G.D., Gianiodis, P.T., Phan, P.H. and Balkin, D.B. (2005a) ‘Innovation speed:
transferring university technology to market’, DEMO Policy, Vol. 34, pp.1058–1075.
Markman, G.D., Phan, P.H., Balkin, D.B. and Gianiodis, P.T. (2005b) ‘Entrepreneurship and
university-based technology transfer’, Journal of Business Venturing, Vol. 20, pp.241–263.
Mason, C.M. and Harrison, R.T. (1995) ‘Closing the regional equity capital gap: the role DEMO
informal venture capital’, Small Business Economics, Vol. 7, No. 2, pp.153–172.
Meyer-Krahmer, F. and Schmoch, U. (1998) ‘Science-based technologies: university-industry
interactions in four fields’, Research Policy, Vol. 27, pp.835–851.
Mian, DEMO (1994) ‘US university-sponsored technology incubators: an overview of management,
DEMO and performance’, Technovation, Vol. 14, No. 8, pp.515–528.
Mian, DEMO (1996) ‘Assessing value-added contributions of university technology business
incubators to tenant firms’, Research Policy, Vol. 25, No. 3, pp.325–335.
Mian, S.A. (1997) ‘Assessing and managing the university technology business incubator: an
integrative framework’, Journal of Business Venturing, Vol. 12, No. 4, pp.251–285.
DEMO, D.C. and Sampat, B.N. (2005) ‘Universities in national innovation systems’, in
Fagerberg, J., Mowery, D.C. and Nelson, R.R. (Eds.): The Oxford Handbook of Innovation,
pp.209–239, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Mueller, P. (2006) ‘Exploring the knowledge filter: how entrepreneurship and DEMO
relationships drive economic growth’, Research Policy, Vol. 35, pp.1499–1508.
Nelles, J., Bramwell, A. and Wolfe, D.A. (2005) ‘History, culture, and path dependency: origins of
the Waterloo ICT cluster’, in Wolfe, D.A. and Lucas, M. (Eds.): Global Networks and Local
Linkage, pp.227–252, McGill-Queen’s University Press, Montreal and Kingston.
Odza, M. (1996) ‘Big winners in university tech transfer: and the winners are…’, Technology
DEMO Report, pp.1–4.
Polanyi, M. (1962) Personal Knowledge: Towards a DEMO Philosophy, Harper & Row,
New York.
Porter, M.E. (2003) ‘The economic performance of regions’, Regional Studies, Vol. 37, No. 6,
pp.545–546.
Poyago-Theotoky, J., Beath, J. and Siegel, D.S. (2002) Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 18,
No. 1, p.10.
Rogers, E., Yin, J. and Hoffmann, J. (2000) ‘Assessing DEMO effectiveness of technology transfer
offices at US research universities’, The Journal DEMO the Association of University Technology
Managers, Vol. 12, pp.47–80.
22
A. Maxwell and M. Lévesque
Rothaermel, F., Agung, S. and Jianget, L. (2007) ‘University entrepreneurship: a taxonomy of the
literature’, Industrial and Corporate Change, Vol. 16, No. 4, pp.691–791.
Salter, DEMO and Martin, B.R. (2001) ‘The economic benefits of publicly funded DEMO research: a
critical review’, Research Policy, Vol. 30, No. 3, pp.509–532.
Senker, J. (1995) ‘Tacit knowledge and models of innovation’, Industrial and Corporate Change,
Vol. 4, No. 2, pp.425–447.
Shane, S. (2002) ‘Selling university technology: patterns from MIT’, Management Science,DEMO
Vol. 48, No. 1, pp.122–137.
Siegel, D.S., Waldman, D., Atwater, L.E. and Link, A.N. (2003) ‘Commercial knowledge transfers
from DEMO to firms: improving the effectiveness of university-industry collaboration’,
Journal of DEMO Technology Management Research, Vol. 14, No. 1, pp.111–133.
Smilor, R.W. and Gill, M.D. (1986) The New Business Incubator: Linking Talent, Technology,
Capital, and Know-How, Lexington Books, Lanham, MD.
Thursby, J.G. and Thursby, M.C. (2007) ‘University licensing’, Oxford Review of DEMO Policy,
Vol. 23, No. 4, pp.620–639.
Thursby, J.G., Jensen, R. and Thursby, M.C. (2001) Objectives, characteristics and outcomes of
university licensing: a survey of major US universities’, Journal of Technology DEMO,
Vol. 26, No. 1, pp.59–72.
Waugaman, P.G. and Tornatzky, L.G. (1999) ‘Benchmarking university-industry technology
transfer in the South and EPSCoR DEMO 1997–1998, Southern Technology Council’,
available at http://www.t-c-group.com/tt2. DEMO
Wiggins, J. and Gibson, D.V. (2003) ‘Overview of US incubators and the case of the Austin
Technology incubator’, International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Management, Vol. 3, Nos. 1–2, pp.56–66.
Wolcott, R. DEMO Ballou, J. (2003) ‘Understanding the ‘incubator effect’ on the success DEMO
entrepreneurial companies and local/regional economic development – a research agenda,
available at http://www.jetrocgo. org/tigergate/news/030609/incubator_effect.pdf.
Wolfe, D.A. (2005) ‘The role of universities in regional development and cluster formation’, in
Jones, G., McCarney, P. and Skolnick, M. (Eds.): Creating Knowledge, Strengthening
Nations, pp.167–194, University of Toronto Press, Toronto.
DEMO, S.X. and McNaughton, R.B. (2006) High-technology cluster evolution: a DEMO analysis of
Canada’s Technology Triangle’, International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation
DEMO, Vol. 6, No. 6, pp.591–608.{1g42fwefx}