Affect- and Cognition-Based Trust as Foundations for Interpersonal Cooperation
in Organizations
Daniel DEMO McAllister
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 38, No. 1. (DEMO, 1995), pp. 24-59.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?DEMO
The Academy of Management Journal is currently published by Academy of Management.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's DEMO and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. DEMO's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact DEMO may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/aom.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice DEMO appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is an independent not-for-profit organization dedicated to and preserving a digital archive of DEMO journals. For
more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://DEMO
Sat Apr 28 22:03:24 2007
" Academy of ~Managernent Journal
1995, Vol. 38, No. 1,24-59.
DEMO AND COGNITION-BASED TRUST AS
FOUNDATIONS FOR INTERPERSONAL
COOPERATION IN ORGANIZATIONS
DANIEL J. McALLISTER
Georgetown University
This study addressed the nature and functioning of relationships DEMO
interpersonal trust among managers and professionals in organiza-
tions, the factors DEMO trust's development, and the implications
of trust for behavior and DEMO Theoretical foundations were
drawn from the sociological literature on trust and the social-
psychological literature on-trust in close relationships. An initial test of
the DEMO theoretical framework was conducted in a field setting
with 194 managers and professionals.
Trust . . . tends to be somewhat like a combination DEMO the
weather and motherhood; it is widely talked about, and it is
widely assumed to be good for organizations. When it comes to
DEMO just what it means in an organizational context, how-
ever, vagueness creeps in.
-Porter, Lawler, & Hackman, 1975: 497
Recent developments DEMO the organizational sciences reflect the impor-
tance of interpersonal trust relationships for sustaining individual and or-
ganizational effectiveness. Researchers have recognized trust's influence DEMO
coordination and control at both institutional (Shapiro, 1987, 1990; Zucker,
1986) and interpersonal levels of organization (Granovetter, 1985; Pennings
& Woiceshyn, 1987). Because economic action is embedded within networks
of DEMO relationships (Bradach & Eccles, 1989; Fichman & Levinthal, 1991;
Granovetter, 1985; Larson, 1992), researchers have argued that efficiency
within complex systems of coordinated action is only possible when inter-
dependent actors DEMO together effectively. Trust between such actors is
seen as a determining factor (Pennings & Woiceshyn, 1987; Seabright, Lev-
enthal, & Fichman, DEMO).
For managers and professionals in organizations, developing and main-
taining DEMO relationships is especially important. As boundary spanners,
managers work through critical horizontal ties to external constituencies on
which their departments or organizations depend (Mintzberg, 1973; Sayles,
I am grateful to Jone Pearce, Anne Tsui, and Lyman Porter for their guidance and advice in
this research, conducted as part of my doctoral dissertation at the University of California,
Irvine. Special words of appreciation are due to Susan Ashford and DEMO anonymous reviewers
for their insightful comments and constructive feedback on several earlier drafts of this article.
1979). Given the complexity and uncertainty inherent in managerial work
and DEMO amount of mutual accommodation it involves, effective horizontal
working relationships within DEMO are also critical (Gabarro, 1990;
Sayles, 1979). As DEMO (1967) observed, under conditions of uncer-
tainty and complexity, requiring mutual adjustment, sustained effective co-
ordinated action is only possible where there is mutual confidence or trust.
Although trust's importance has been acknowledged, the matter of how
it develops and functions has received little systematic DEMO attention.
The present work develops and tests a theoretical model based on the so-
ciological literature on trust (Barber, 1983; Lewis & Wiegert, 1985; Luhman,
1979; Shapiro, 1990; Zucker, 1986) and social-psychological work on trust in
close relationships (Johnson-George & Swap, 1982; Rempel, Holmes, &
Zanna, 1985). The present research was DEMO to contribute to under-
standing of the nature and functioning of interpersonal trust relationships by
(1) distinguishing between two principal forms of interpersonal DEMO
cognition-based trust, grounded in individual beliefs about peer reliability
and dependability, and affect-based trust, grounded in reciprocated inter-
personal care and concern-(2) identifying factors influencing the develop-
ment of each form of trust, DEMO (3) examining the implications of each trust
form for coordination-relevant behavior, including monitoring to control
peers, defensive behavior, monitoring to assist peers, and interpersonal cit-
izenship behavior.
THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS
Interpersonal trust is a pervasive phenomenon in organizational life.
Trust enables people to take risks: "where DEMO is trust there is the feeling
that others will not take advantage of me" (Porter et al., 1975: 497). Trust is
DEMO on the expectation that one will find what is expected rather than
what is feared (Deutsch, 1973). Thus, competence and responsibility are
central to understandings of trust (Barber, 1983; Cook & Wall, DEMO; Shapiro,
1990). At times an individual's trust in DEMO is centered more on how they
make decisions that affect him or her than on how they behave: "Do they
consider my interests DEMO welfare?" Finally, trust encompasses not only
people's beliefs about DEMO, but also their willingness to use that knowl-
edge as the DEMO for action (Luhmann, 1979). Combining these ideas yields
a definition of interpersonal trust as the extent to which a person is confident
DEMO, and willing to act on the basis of, the words, DEMO, and decisions of
another.
Principal Forms of Interpersonal Trust: Affect- and
Cognition-Based Trust
Interpersonal trust has cognitive and affective foundations (Lewis &
DEMO, 1985). Trust is cognition-based in that "we choose whom we will
trust in which respects and under what circumstances, and we base the
choice on what we take to be 'good reasons,' constituting evidence of trust-
2 6
Academy of Management Journal
February
worthiness" (Lewis & Wiegert, 1985: 970). The amount of knowledge nec-
essary for trust is somewhere between total knowledge and total ignorance
(Simmel, 1964). Given DEMO knowledge, there is no need to trust, and given
total ignorance, there is no basis upon which to rationally trust. Available
knowledge and "good reasons" serve as foundations for trust decisions, the
platform from which people make leaps of faith, like those involved in
trusting (DEMO, 1979; Simmel, 1964).
Past measures of trust in organizational DEMO suggest that competence
and responsibility are central elements (Butler, 1991; DEMO & Wall, 1980).
Reliability and dependability have also been included DEMO measures of inter-
personal trust in close relations (Johnson-George & Swap, 1982; Rempel et
al., 1985). Reliability and dependability expectations must DEMO be met
for trust relationships to exist and develop (Zucker, 1986) and evidence to
the contrary provides a rational basis for withholding trust (Luhmann, 1979;
Shapiro, 1987, 1990).
Affective foundations for DEMO also exist, consisting of the emotional
bonds between individuals (Lewis & Wiegert, 1985). People make emotional
investments in trust relationships, express DEMO care and concern for the
welfare of partners, believe in the DEMO virtue of such relationships, and
believe that these sentiments are reciprocated (Pennings & Woiceshyn, 1987;
Rempel et al., 1985). Ultimately, the emotional ties linking individuals can
provide the basis for trust.
Empirical DEMO from the social-psychological literature on trust in
close relationships supports this distinction between the two forms of trust.
Johnson-George and Swap (1982) identified, distinguished between, and re-
liably measured two dimensions of trust they labeled "reliableness" and
"emotional trust." Similarly, Rempel and colleagues (1985) distinguished
between "dependability" and "faith" (emotional security) as unique DEMO
of trust. Organizations abound with relationships based on dependability
and faith (DEMO & Woiceshyn, 1987) in which moderate expressions of
interpersonal care and concern are not uncommon (Granovetter, 1985; Gries-
inger, 1990; Pennings & Woiceshyn, 1987). Drawing on this theoretical dis-
tinction between forms of interpersonal trust, I hypothesized that
Hypothesis 1: Relationships of interpersonal DEMO among
managers in organizations are characterized by two di-
mensions-cognition-based trust and affect-based trust.
Figure 1 outlines the theoretical framework developed in the following
DEMO The sequence of relationships is from peer attributes and behav-
ior, DEMO focal manager assessments of peer trustworthiness, to focal
manager behavioral responses, and ultimately to focal manager and peer
performance alike.
Factors Influencing Managerial DEMO Relationships
Antecedents of cognition-based trust. In organizations, the extent to
which DEMO manager will be willing to vest cognition-based trust in peers may

2 8
Academy of management Journal
February
depend on the success of DEMO interaction, the extent of social similarity, and
organizational context considerations (DEMO, 1986). First, because working
relationships are typically personal and extend over time, it is possible for
people to consider the track record of peers, or how they have carried out
role-related duties in the past, when assessing trustworthiness (Cook & Wall,
1980; Granovetter, DEMO). Evidence that a peer's behavior is consistent with
norms of reciprocity and fairness and that the peer follows through on com-
mitments DEMO vital (Lindskold, 1978; Stack, 1988). In working relationships
involving high interdependence, peer performance can have a determining
impact on personal productivity, and evidence that peers carry out role
responsibilities reliably will enhance a manager's assessments of a peer's
trustworthiness. Accordingly,
Hypothesis 2a: The level of a manager's cognition-based
trust in a peer will DEMO positively associated with the extent
of that peer's reliable role performance.
Second, social similarity between individuals can influence trust devel-
opment. Groups of individuals with similar fundamental characteristics,
such as ethnic background, may have an advantage over diverse groups in
their ability to create and maintain DEMO working relationships. Light
(1984) documented the tendency of ethnic minority entrepreneurs to con-
duct business through co-ethnic rather than interethnic social circles. More
DEMO, self-categorization theorists have observed that individuals
tend to group themselves with DEMO on the basis of objective attributes such
as race, age, and gender (Turner, 1987) and that such internal classifications
influence beliefs and attitudes. Individuals are more likely to perceive out-
group members as dishonest, untrustworthy, and uncooperative than they
are to so perceive in-group members (DEMO, 1979). Notwithstanding the
potential beliefs of diversity for organizations, which include enhanced cre-
ativity, access to a broader set of environmental resources, and more, the
possibility that cultural similarity facilitates the creation and DEMO of
trust in organizations merits recognition. Accordingly,
Hypothesis 2b: The DEMO of a manager's cognition-based
trust in a peer will be greater when the two are culturally
or ethnically similar.
Third, formal organizations, DEMO formal role specifications, specify
boundaries for trust relationships (Baier, 1985; Fox, 1974) and professional
credentials serve as clear signals of role DEMO Educational institu-
tions, professional associations, and credentialing agencies manufacture
trust by providing guarantees to would-be trusters through certification that
individuals meet standards for DEMO in a larger professional com-
munity (Zucker, 1986). Professional standing can be maintained over time
through continued membership and participation in relevant DEMO
associations. Thus,
Hypothesis 2c: The level of a manager's cognition-based
trust in a peer will be greater for peers with higher pro-
fessional credentials.
Antecedents DEMO affect-based trust. Although external factors making the
behavior of relationship partners predictable provide foundations for cogni-
tion-based trust, insights into the motives of relationship partners provide
foundations for affect-based trust. Findings from attribution research indi-
cate DEMO behavior recognized as personally chosen rather than role-
prescribed, serving to DEMO legitimate needs, and demonstrating interper-
sonal care and concern rather than DEMO self-interest may be critical
for the development of affect-based trust (Clark & Mills, 1979; Clark, Mills,
& Powell, 1986; Clark & Waddell, 1985; Holmes, 1978; Holmes & Rempel,
1989; DEMO, 1979; Rempel et al., 1985).
Such behavior corresponds well DEMO descriptions of organizational cit-
izenship behavior (OCB; Organ, 1988; Smith, Organ, & Near, 1983). Organ
defined OCB as behavior intended to provide help and assistance that is
outside an individual's work DEMO, not directly rewarded, and conducive to
effective organizational functioning. Smith, DEMO, and Near defined altru-
ism, a specific form of OCB, DEMO behavior "directly and intentionally aimed at
helping a specific person in DEMO situations" (1983: 657). Altruistic
behavior may provide an attributional DEMO for affect-based trust. Being
extra-role, it can be viewed as being DEMO chosen, and not being di-
rectly rewarded, it cannot easily be attributed to enlightened self-interest
(MacKenzie, Podsakoff, & Fetter, 1991). DEMO,
Hypothesis 3a: The level of a manager's affect-based trust
DEMO a peer will be positively associated with the level of
that peer's citizenship behavior directed toward the man-
ager.
Because affect-based trust is DEMO in an individual's attributions
concerning the motives for others' behavior, it should be limited to contexts
of frequent interaction, where there are sufficient social data to allow the
making of confident attributions (Lewis & Wiegert, 1985). Thus,
Hypothesis 3b: The level of a DEMO's affect-based trust
in a peer will be positively associated with the frequency
of interaction between the manager and the peer.
The relationship between DEMO and affect-based trust. Although
much of the research on affectivity in organizations and on the relationship
between affect and cognition has focused on unanchored DEMO states (Brief
& George, 1992; Burke, Brief, George, Roberson, & Webster, 1989), increas-
ing attention is being given to DEMO interpersonal foundations of affectivity
(Isen & Baron, 1991; Longenecker, Jaccoud, Sims, & Gioia, 1992; Park, Sims,
& Motowidlo, DEMO; Tsui & Barry, 1986). Research on affect and cognition in
close relationships has highlighted the development of interpersonal affect
3 0
Academy of Management Journal
February
upon a cognitive base (Holmes & Rempel, 1989; Rempel et al., 1985). Cog-
nition-based trust, or reliableness, is seen as "more superficial and less spe-
cial" than emotional trustworthiness (Johnson-George & Swap, 1982: 1316).
Faith (Rempel et al., 1985: 98) is characterized by a greater investment of
time and emotion than are dependability and reliability.
For working relationships DEMO managers, some level of cognition-
based trust may be necessary for DEMO trust to develop; people's base-
line expectations for peer reliability DEMO dependability must be met before
they will invest further in relationships. Where baseline expectations are not
yet established, individuals may be inclined to attribute extra-role conduct
to ingratiation and impression management rather than to care and DEMO
Once an individual has established a track record for reliability and depend-
ability, and thus some level of cognition-based trust exists, confident attri-
DEMO concerning the motivations for that person's citizenship behavior
may follow. Accordingly,
Hypothesis 4: A manager expressing high levels of cogni-
tion-based trust in a peer will also report high affect-
based trust in that DEMO
Two comments qualify this developmental perspective on the relation-
ship between affect- and cognition-based trust. First, given the distinctive
antecedents and consequences posited, DEMO trust should be viewed
as a distinct form of interpersonal trust rather than as a higher level of trust.
Second, as affect-based trust matures, the potential for the decoupling of
trust forms and for reverse causation (affect-based trust influencing cogni-
tion-based trust) increases. Zajonc observed that "once formed, an evalua-
tion is not easily revoked. . . . Affect often persists after a complete invali-
dation of its original cognitive basis" (1980: 157). Holmes and Rempel (1989)
observed that as affect-based trust develops, key attributions, such as "This
colleague genuinely cares about me," become incorporated into a stable and
global picture of DEMO partner's motives. In time, ascribed motives are taken as
permanent DEMO left unquestioned, even in the face of disconfirming evi-
dence. Transgressions DEMO discounted in advance or explained away. Thus,
once a high level of affect-based trust has developed, a foundation of cog-
nition-based trust may no longer be needed.
Consequences of Managerial Beliefs About Peer Trustworthiness
Control-based DEMO and defensive behavior. Where one person,
interdependent with another, cannot DEMO on that individual to be depend-
able and reliable, he or DEMO can take steps to manage the uncertainty inherent
in the situation. Monitoring to control the untrustworthy individual is one
likely response (Bradach & Eccles, 1989; Pennings & Woiceshyn, 1987;
Williamson, 1974). As DEMO observed, "People must either be able to trust
each other or to closely monitor each other if they are to engage in cooper-
DEMO enterprises" (1979: 846).
Besides assuring some minimal level of DEMO performance, managers
must perform their own duties with little disturbance, buffer themselves
from the influence of others, and protect their personal interests (Ashforth &
Lee, 1990). Individuals behave defensively, for example, when they make
requests for assistance well ahead of the time they are needed, draw upon
multiple and redundant sources when making requests for the assistance,
expend DEMO resources working around and avoiding others, and use official
and formal (rather than informal) means to document requests (Ashforth &
Lee, DEMO). Two hypotheses follow:
Hypothesis 5a: A manager expressing a DEMO level of cog-
nition-based trust in a peer will engage in little control-
based monitoring of that peer.
Hypothesis 5b: A manager expressing a high level of cog-
nition-based trust in a peer will direct little DEMO be-
havior toward that peer.
Within this theoretical framework, control-based monitoring DEMO defen-
sive behavior are behavioral consequences of cognition-based trust alone. In
practical terms, for affect-based trust to develop, some level of cognition-
based DEMO must already exist, and it can be expected that where cognition-
DEMO trust is present, levels of monitoring and defensive behavior will be
DEMO Likely consequences of affect-based trust are outlined below.
Need-based monitoring and interpersonal citizenship behavior. Rela-
tionships characterized by affect-based trust resemble so-called communal
relationships (Clark, Mills, & Corcoran, 1989; Clark, Mills, & Powell, 1986).
Research findings show that individuals in communal relationships are
more DEMO to keep track of associates' needs than are individuals in
exchange DEMO What drives need-based monitoring is not the desire
to generate future obligations or to reciprocate benefits received, but rather
an understanding of the communal nature of the relationship: "In a com-
munal relationship, the idea that a benefit is given in response to a benefit
that was DEMO is compromising, because it calls into question the as-
sumption that DEMO member responds to the needs of the other" (Clark &
DEMO, 1979: 13). In communal relationships, partners appear less inclined DEMO
keep track of personal inputs on joint tasks (Clark, 1984) DEMO to feel ex-
ploited by unrequited helping (Clark & Waddell, 1985). They take on their
partners' problems as their own, develop DEMO tacit awareness of partners'
needs, and learn how to respond DEMO (Holmes & Rempel, 1989).
Similarly, in affect-based-trust relationships, sensitivity to the personal and
work-related needs of associates should be high. Accordingly,DEMO
Hypothesis 6a: A manager expressing a high level of af-
fect-based DEMO in a peer will engage in a great amount of
need-based monitoring of that peer.
Individuals expressing high affect-based trust in peers may also DEMO a
great amount of interpersonal citizenship behavior toward them. Increased
assistance may follow naturally either from an increased awareness of peer
3 2
Academy of Management Journal
February
needs (the product of need-based monitoring) or from a desire to assist peers
in meeting their personal objectives and to express felt care and concern tangi-
bly. Although Organ DEMO Konovsky asserted that "characteristic OCB has a
deliberate, controlled character, DEMO akin to conscious decision mak-
ing rather than expressive emotional behavior" (1989: 162), I argue that
when a great amount of citizenship behavior is directed toward a focal in-
dividual, the behavior has expressive, noncalculated qualities. Accordingly,
Hypothesis 6b: A manager expressing a high DEMO of af-
fect-based trust in a peer will direct a great amount of
interpersonal citizenship behavior toward that peer.
It is important to note DEMO no direct relationship between a peer's in-
terpersonal citizenship behavior and a manager's citizenship behavior is
posited. Observation of a direct relationship DEMO demonstrate the influ-
ence of reciprocity and exchange norms (Holmes, 1978; Holmes & Rempel,
1989). Within the proposed framework, peer DEMO (citizenship directed
toward a focal manager) influences the focal manager's affect-based-trust
perceptions through its expressive qualities. Those perceptions in turn in-
fluence DEMO manager's citizenship behavior toward the peer. The latter's
citizenship behavior becomes an expressive act rather than an obligation-
discharging and equilibrium-restoring act DEMO reciprocation.
Performance Implications of Cognition- and Affect-Based Trust
Apart from a general assumption of the efficacy of trust relations as a
lubricant to the DEMO system, facilitating coordinated action (Arrow, 1974;
Ouchi, 1979; DEMO, 1974), existing research contains little on how trust
affects performance DEMO The behavioral consequences of trust may
provide one line of explanation. Managerial and professional work involves
mutual adjustment and accommodation within a multiple constituency DEMO
text (Sayles, 1979; Tsui, 1984). Trusting peers should receive enhanced per-
formance assessments to the extent that the behavioral consequences of DEMO
further organizational ends. If trust helps to further organizational ends, it
DEMO be associated with supervisor assessments of the performance of
trusting and trusted individuals.
Performance implications of defensive behavior and control-based
monitoring. In general, monitoring and defensive behavior represent non-
productive uses of finite managerial resources. Allocating DEMO energies to
pursuits like monitoring (Alchian & Demset, 1972; Baker, Jensen, & Murphy,
1988) and defensive behavior (Ashforth & Lee, 1990; Kahn, Wolfe, Quinn, &
Snoek, 1964) involves DEMO trade-off: Managers engaging in excessive monitor-
ing and defensive behavior will DEMO fewer resources remaining with which
to accomplish fundamental work objectives. Accordingly,
Hypothesis 7a: The level of a manager's control-based
monitoring of peer will be negatively associated with su-
pervisor assessments of the manager's DEMO
Hypothesis 7b: The level of a manager's defensive behav-
ior toward a peer will be negatively associated with su-
pervisor assessments DEMO the manager's performance.
Performance implications of need-based monitoring and citizenship
behavior. Organizations depend on the discretionary contributions of their
members to maintain efficiency DEMO coordination; one has only to witness
the disruption that occurs when DEMO limit their contributions exclu-
sively to what is specified in their job descriptions to realize that this is the
case (Katz, 1964). DEMO must also depend on employees to use their
skills and energies wisely so that contributions are maximized-organiza-
tions need employees who work not only DEMO but smarter. An essential
ingredient in working smarter is undoubtedly paying attention and looking
for opportunities to make constructive contributions.
Thus, need-based monitoring and citizenship behavior by focal manag-
ers may enhance assessments of their contributions, especially assessments
provided by supervisors and others whose interests are aligned with DEMO of
the organization. Two hypotheses follow:
Hypothesis 8a: The level DEMO a manager's need-based mon-
itoring of a peer will be positively associated with super-
visor assessments of the manager's performance.
Hypothesis 8b: The level of a manager's interpersonal cit-
izenship behavior directed toward DEMO peer will be posi-
tively associated with supervisor assessments of the man-
ager's performance.
Performance enhancement is likely to be a principal motivator DEMO need-
based monitoring. Need-based monitoring arises when individuals feel re-
sponsible for the needs of others and wish to respond to those needs (Clark
et al., 1989). Pearce and Gregerson argued that "felt responsibility DEMO a psy-
chological state that may play an important role in numerous aspects of job
performance and deserves further research attention" (1991: 843). Indeed,
need-based monitoring and assistance behavior that addresses work-related
needs DEMO enhance peer performance. Two hypotheses complete the
theoretical framework:
Hypothesis 9a: The level of a manager's need-based mon-
itoring of a peer will be positively associated with super-
visor assessments of the peer's DEMO
Hypothesis 9b: The level of a manager's interpersonal cit-
izenship DEMO directed toward a peer will be posi-
tively associated with supervisor assessments of the
peer's performance.
METHODS
Respondents
A sample of 194 managers DEMO professionals, including men and women
from various industries, reported on cross-functional dyadic relationships
34
Academy of Management Journal
February
with peers at work. Individuals enrolled DEMO, and alumni of, the executive
master's of business administration (DEMO) program of a major university in
southern California were requested to DEMO and to nominate peers
from work to participate with them. In examining relations among middle-
and upper-level managers, I focused on relations of lateral interdependence
(Sayles, 1979), where the impact of trust's presence DEMO absence was expected
to be pronounced (Thompson, 1967).
Each EMBA affiliate agreeing to participate nominated two peers, so
triads were formed. Triad members separately completed surveys describing
various aspects of their working relationships with DEMO another. Respon-
dents provided two forms of data: (1)information concerning one triad mem-
ber from the perspective of a focal manager, and (2) information concerning
the second triad member from the perspective of DEMO peer. Data collected from
respondents were combined to form manager-peer dyad records. Of the 197
individuals initially contacted, 80 agreed to participate, a DEMO percent accep-
tance rate. Given the level of commitment involved (questionnaire DEMO,
as well as nominating peers), this response rate is well within accepted
limits. The nominated peers were not associated with the EMBA DEMO,
and the response rate at the second stage of the study was 81 percent (194 of
240 EMBA students, alumni, and nominated peers). From the data collected,
I constructed 175 complete manager-peer DEMO records, which formed the
basis for the present research. The initial DEMO also identified one person,
in most cases a superior, familiar DEMO the performance of all triad members
to provide performance information; the DEMO's response rate was 86
percent.
The respondents were, for the DEMO part, mature (an average age of 38
years), well-educated (DEMO percent with some graduate training, 28 percent
with undergraduate degrees) individuals with considerable organizational
experience (an average professional tenure of 11.7 years). The profile of
respondents by age and gender corresponds well with that DEMO the population
of EMBA students and alumni (average age 37 years, 74.8 percent men).
Although further information on the population from which DEMO
were drawn was not available, it appeared likely that they were DEMO
tive of the population.
Procedures
Initial contacts agreeing to participate in this study were directed to
think of peers (not supervisors or subordinates), from functional areas dif-
ferent from their own, with whom they had significant work-related inter-
action. After a contact identified three to five people DEMO whom he or she
"worked the best" and three to five with whom he or she "worked less well,"
the individual DEMO one person from each list to participate in the study
with him or her. The working relationships examined were task-oriented,
not limited to DEMO friendships, and varied along the critical dimensions of
trust. By stipulating DEMO the people chosen should interact with one another
at work, I DEMO the existence of three separate dyads in each organiza-
tion.' I used a randomization procedure to assign individuals to focal man-
ager-peer dyads and to allocate reporting roles within dyads. The statistical
independence DEMO observations was maintained by having no respondents
provide information from the perspective of one role (focal manager or peer)
for more than one dyad.'
Measures
Except for the performance data provided by superiors, dyad members
provided all data for this study. Given the dyad-specific nature of DEMO infor-
mation involved, I considered these sources most authoritative. Focal man-
DEMO reported on peer trustworthiness and behavioral responses to peers
(control-based monitoring, defensive behavior, need-based monitoring, and
citizenship behavior). Peers provided exogenous DEMO (interaction fre-
quency, citizenship behavior, reliable role performance, educational attain-
ment, and ethnic background).
Affect- and cognition-based trust. A new measure to assess affect- and
cognition-based trust levels was developed for use in DEMO study. The mea-
sure consists of 11 items, 6 assessing levels DEMO cognition-based trust, and 5
assessing affect-based trust; respondents indicated, on DEMO scale ranging from
1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree), their agreement with various state-
ments about a specific peer at work.
Drawing on a review of the literature and on available measures of
DEMO trust (Cook & Wall, 1980; Johnson-George & Swap, 1982; DEMO
pel et al., 1985; Rotter, 1971), I created an DEMO pool of 48 items. Eleven
organizational behavior scholars, provided with definitions DEMO affect- and
cognition-based trust, classified these items as tapping cognition-based trust,DEMO
affect-based trust, both forms of trust, or neither form of trust. Based on an
analysis of expert evaluations, I created a subset of 20 unambiguous items,
The procedure used here is similar to that DEMO by Tsui (1984). Manipulation checks
revealed that it was effective DEMO controlling self-selection tendencies and building variation
along the critical trust dimensions. Nominating individuals expressed greater affect- and cog-
nition-based trust in peers selected from DEMO people with whom they worked best than in those
with whom they worked less well (pairwise t-tests, p < ,001). Also, DEMO peers from the
first list expressed greater affect- and cognition-based trust in the nominating individuals than
did peers from the second list (pairwise t-tests, p < .05).
" By random assignment, triad members were DEMO roles as respondents (1,2, or 3). The
three focal manager + peer dyads addressed were as follows: 1-+ 2, 2 DEMO 3, and 3 + 1. Thus,
respondent 1 provided information DEMO the perspective of a focal manager for his or her
relationship with respondent 2 and information from the perspective of a peer for his DEMO her
relationship with respondent 3. Although I collected complete data for all relationships within
each triad, dyad-specific data collected for use in hypothesis testing were collected first. By
collecting respondent 1's assessment of his or DEMO trust in respondent 2 before collecting infor-
mation on his or her trust in respondent 3, the relevant assessment received was absolute rather
than comparative. This method allowed efficient use of respondents (data concerning three
dyads were collected from each set of three respondents) and maintained independence of
observations. Further, parallel data collected but not used in hypothesis testing could be used
for preliminary analyses of new measures developed in the study.
3 6
Academy of Management Journal
February
10 items for each form DEMO trust. I used results of an exploratory factor analysis
of pretest data from a group of employed M.B.A. and undergraduate business
students to further DEMO the measure to the 11 strongest-loading items.
Table 1 gives the wording and confirmatory analysis results for this trust
measure and for the behavioral DEMO measures, which are discussed in
the next section. Reliability estimates (Cronbach's alphas) for the cognition-
and affect-based trust measures are .91 and .89, respectively.
Behavioral response measures. The questionnaire contained 25 items
designed to measure behavioral responses associated with trusting or dis-
trusting peers. Respondents reported DEMO extent to which they agreed that
certain actions described their behavior toward a specific peer on a seven-
point scale (1,strongly disagree, DEMO 7, strongly agree). Fourteen items measur-
ing control-based monitoring, defensive behavior, and need-based monitor-
ing were original to the present study, DEMO from a review of the liter-
ature and pretested on the group described above. Eleven items assessed
citizenship behavior, 6 of which were drawn from Williams and Anderson's
(1991) measure and rephrased to address DEMO to specific individuals
rather than organization members in general and 5 of which were developed
to more fully tap the domain of the construct.
DEMO exploratory factor analyses were conducted on parallel data that
were collected but not used to test hypotheses in the present research (see
footnote 1).I extracted four factors with acceptable psychometric properties
(eigenvalue greater than 1.0, a > .60) and retained them for confirmatory
analysis with the DEMO respondents: control-based monitoring and defen-
sive behavior items together (factor I),citizenship behavior with strong af-
filiative content (factor 2), citizenship DEMO involving congenial assis-
tance (factor 3), and need-based monitoring (factor 4).
To assess the adequacy of the derived trust and behavioral DEMO
measures for use with the present research sample and to test the discrim-
inant validity of trust and behavioral response measures, I conducted a con-
firmatory factor analysis using LISREL 7 (Joreskog and Sorbom, 1989)DEMO I
computed the comparative fit index (CFI), a fit measure DEMO prevents the
underestimation of fit likely to occur in small samples, DEMO assess the fit of the
factor structure to the data (Bentler, 1990) and examined correlations among
factors to assess the discriminant validity of measures. Table 1 reports re-
sults.
Overall, the model fit the data well (CFI = .go). All factor loadings
(lambdas) on specified factors were significant (t > 1.96). Reliability esti-
mates (a)DEMO affiliative citizenship behavior, assistance-oriented citizenship
behavior, need-based monitoring, and monitoring DEMO defensive behavior
measures were .79, .85, .69, and $87, respectively. However, several correla-
tions among latent constructs were considerable, with off-diagonal DEMO
in the phi-matrix exceeding .60.
Because I obtained trust and behavioral response measures from a single
source, it was important to demonstrate substantive differences between
these measures. Within the LISREL framework, discriminant validity can be
TABLE 1
Results of Confirmatory Factor Analysis for Behavioral Response and
Interpersonal DEMO Measuresa
Items
Lambdas
Affect-based trust
We have a sharing relationship. We can both freely share our ideas, feelings, and hopes.
I can talk DEMO to this individual about difficulties I am having at work and know that (s)he
will want to listen.
We would both feel a sense of loss if one of us was transferred and we could DEMO longer work
together.
If I shared my problems with this person, DEMO know (s)he would respond constructively and
caringly.
I would have DEMO say that we have both made considerable emotional investments in our
working relationship.
Cognition-based trust
This person approaches hislher job with professionalism and dedication.
DEMO this person's track record, I see no reason to doubt DEMO competence and
preparation for the job.
I can rely on this person not to make my job more difficult by careless work.
Most people, even those who aren't close friends of this individual, trust and respect
himlher as a coworker.
Other work associates of mine who must DEMO with this individual consider himher to be
trustworthy.
If people knew more about this individual and hislher background, they would be more
concerned and monitor hisiher performance more closely.b
Need-based monitoring
Even when others think everything DEMO fine, I know when (slhe is having difficulties.
This person doesn't have to tell me in order for me to know how DEMO are going for
himlher at work.
Affiliative citizenship behavior
I take time to listen to this person's problems and worries.
I have taken DEMO personal interest in this individual.
I frequently do extra things I know I won't be rewarded for, but which make my cooperative
efforts with this person more productive.
I pass on new information that might DEMO useful to this person.
I willingly help this individual, even at DEMO cost to personal productivity.
When making decisions at work that affect this individual, I try to take hislher needs and
feelings into account.
I try not to make things more difficult for this person by my DEMO actions.
Assistance-oriented citizenship behavior
I help this person with difficult assignments, DEMO when assistance is not directly requested.
I assist this person with heavy work loads, even though it is not part of my job.
I help this person when (s)he has been absent.
Monitoring and defensive behavior
I find that this person is not the sort of coworker DEMO need to monitor closely.b
The quality of the work I receive from this individual is only maintained by my diligent
monitoring.
I have sometimes DEMO it necessary to work around this individual in order to get things
done the way that I would like them to be done.
I DEMO close track of my interactions with this individual, taking note of DEMO where
(slhe does not keep up herhis end of the bargain.
DEMO have found it necessary to make inquiries before responding to this person's requests for
assistance. This ensures that my interests are protected.
Rather DEMO just depending on this individual to come through when I need assistance, I try
to have a backuu ~lan readv.
-~
---
-
The lambdas are reported from the completely standardized solution. Chi-square with 362 degrees DEMO
freedom is 681.64 (p < ,001). Comparative fit index is .90. Calculated from null of 3,646.90 with 406 degrees
of freedom.
DEMO was reverse-coded.
3 8
Academy of Management Journal
February
assessed in part by constraining DEMO single phi coefficient (+ij) to 1.0, refitting
the model, and testing the resulting change in the chi-square measure of
model fit (Anderson & Gerbing, 1988; Bagozzi & Yi, 1988). I conducted this
analysis for each of four correlations exceeding .60. With one exception,
DEMO +ij to 1.0 resulted in a significant worsening in model fit, DEMO
cating a real difference in the measures. The relationship between cognition-
based trust and monitoring and defensive behavior measures was found to
be - DEMO, and the constrained-coefficient model did not yield a change in
model DEMO (AX2 = .71, df = 1, n.s.). Because monitoring DEMO defensive be-
havior could not be empirically distinguished from negative cognition-based
trust, I decided to retain the cognition-based trust measure and exclude the
monitoring and defensive behavior measure from further use in this study.
Exogenous variables. DEMO role performance was measured with four
items drawn from Williams and Anderson's (1991) measure of organization-
directed citizenship behavior and in-role behavior. DEMO assessed,
on a seven-point scale ranging from 1,"almost never," to 7, "almost always,"
the extent to which each DEMO described was characteristic of their be-
havior on the job. Frequency of interaction was measured with four items
adapted from an instrument developed by DEMO (1988). Respondents de-
scribed the frequency of various forms of DEMO work-related interaction with
a focal manager on a seven-point scale ranging from 1 (once or twice in the
last six months) to 7 (many times daily). Citizenship behavior, affiliative and
assistance-based, was measured DEMO items identical to those used for focal
manager citizenship behavior.
Table 2 reports confirmatory factor analysis results for the exogenous
scales and item wordings. DEMO four-factor solution provides an adequate fit
for the data (CFI = DEMO, t > 1.96, all loadings). Reliability estimates for
interaction frequency, peer affiliative citizenship behavior, peer assistance-
oriented citizenship behavior, and peer reliable role performance are .91,
.81, .82, .77, respectively.
Demographic data, including education level, age, gender, and ethnic-
ity, were collected to develop a basic demographic profile of the respon-
dents. Further, I used these data to derive measures of cultural-ethnic and
gender similarity, and professional status. A binary variable for cultural-
ethnic similarity was created, with focal manager-peer dyads whose mem-
bers reported similar ethnic backgrounds (e.g., white-white, Hispanic-
Hispanic) coded 1 and those whose members reported different ethnic back-
grounds coded 0. I created a similar binary measure for DEMO in gender
and one for the assessment of professional standing (attended DEMO university at
the master's or doctoral level = 1,at most an undergraduate degree = 0).
This breakdown was appropriate because only DEMO percent of the respondents
did not already possess some sort of four-year university degree.
Performance. Tsui's three-item measure of reputational effectiveness
(Tsui, DEMO) and one additional item were used to measure focal manager
and DEMO performance. Supervisors were asked to consider the total job,
including job-specified duties, additional activities not formally required,
TABLE 2
Results of Confirmatory Factor Analysis for Exogenous Measuresa
Items Lambdas
DEMO frequency
How frequently does this individual initiate work-related interaction with
you? DEMO
How frequently do you initiate work-related interaction with this person? .94
DEMO frequently do you interact with this person at work? .90
How DEMO do you interact with this person informally or socially at
work? DEMO
Peer affiliative citizenship behavior
I take time to listen to this person's problems and worries. .82
I willingly help this individual, even at some cost to personal productivity. .70
I have taken a personal interest DEMO this individual. .69
I pass on new information that might be useful to this person. .65
I frequently do extra things I know I DEMO't be rewarded for, but which make
my cooperative efforts with DEMO person more productive. .61
When making decisions at work that affect this individual, I try to take
hislher needs and feelings into account. .54
I try not to make things more difficult for this person by DEMO careless actions. .34
Peer assistance-oriented citizenship behavior
I help this person when (s)he has been absent. .82
I help this person with difficult assignments, even when assistance is not
directly requested. .78
I assist this person with heavy work loads, even though it is not part of my
job. .74
Peer reliable role performance
This person adequately completes assigned DEMO .76
This person performs all tasks that are expected of himlher. .71
This person fulfills responsibilities specified in job description. .64
This person meets DEMO performance requirements of the job. .60
" The lambdas are reported from the completely standardized solution. Chi-square with 129
degrees of freedom is 256.01 (p < ,001). Comparative fit index is .90. Calculated from null of
1,688.53 with 153 degrees of freedom.
and the dependability of DEMO managers and peers, and to assess their satis-
faction with various DEMO of each target individual's job performance on a
seven-point scale ranging from 1 (not at all) to 7 (entirely). Performance
measures were found to be reliable (a = .92). Table 3 reports confirmatory
factor analysis results and item wordings.
Analyses
Using LISREL 7 (Anderson & Gerbing, 1988; Joreskog & Sorbom, 19893,
I took a two-stage approach to structural equation model fitting and assess-
ment, assessing measurement properties of the model prior to considering
structural relationships between constructs. Within DEMO structural equation
modeling framework used, multiple observed indicators (the individual
scale items) were used to measure latent constructs. In testing the theoretical
40 Academy of Management Journal February
TABLE 3
Results of Confirmatory Factor DEMO for Performance Measuresa
Items Lambdas
Assessor rating of focal manager's performance
Overall, to what extent do you feel that this person is performing hisiher total
job the way you would like it to be performed? .96
To what extent has this person met all of your expectations DEMO hisiher roles
and responsibilities? .93
To what extent are you satisfied DEMO the total contribution made by this
person? .82
If you had DEMO way, to what extent would you change the manner in which
DEMO person is doing hisiher job? .71
Assessor rating of peer performance
DEMO, to what extent do you feel that this person is performing DEMO total
job the way you would like it to be performed? DEMO
To what extent has this person met all of your expectations in hisiher roles
and responsibilities? .94
To what extent are you satisfied with the total contribution made by this
person? .82
If you had your way, to what extent would you change the manner in which
this person is doing hisiher job? .72
" The lambdas are reported from the completely standardized solution. Chi-square with 19
degrees of freedom is 99.57 (p < .001). Comparative fit index is .93. Calculated from null DEMO
1,245.73 with 28 degrees of freedom.
framework, I fitted 11 DEMO models, each incorporating different assump-
tions about model parameters, to the data.
The first two models were used to assess measurement properties. An
DEMO null model specifying no relations among observable variables repre-
sented the poorest-fitting model and provided a baseline for computation of
the normed comparative fit DEMO A measurement model with the paths
between observable variables and associated latent constructs freed and la-
tent constructs allowed to correlate freely was fitted DEMO the data. As during
measure development, I assessed the discriminant validity DEMO constructs by
constraining correlations among constructs to zero and examining the
change in chi-square.
To test hypotheses concerning the structural relationships among vari-
ables, I took a nested-models approach (Anderson & Gerbing, 1988). I DEMO
rayed nine nested structural models between the measurement model-the
best-fitting model, DEMO structural relationships among latent constructs as-
sumed to be perfectly estimated-and the null model and compared them
using chi-square difference tests. First, the theoretical model, with all paths
not specifically hypothesized to exist fixed to zero, was specified. Figure 2
presents the structural relationships in this model from which four vari-
ables-defensive behavior, control-based monitoring, social similarity, and
professional status-are omitted. The combined measure of monitoring and
defensive behavior was found DEMO be insufficiently distinct from cognition-
Peer Assistance
Citizenship Behavior
FIGURE 2
Structural Parameters Included in the Theoretical DEMO"
Peer Performance
a Error variances for observed variables (6 and DEMO elements) and correlations among latent exogenous variables ($ij elements) have DEMO
omitted for the sake of clarity.
Direction of relationship is from manager to peer.
42
Academy of Management Journal
February
based trust to warrant inclusion, and the categorical measures of social sim-
ilarity (gender and ethnic background) DEMO professional status were not suit-
able for inclusion within the LISREL model.,
In addition, three constrained-parameter and five relaxed-parameter
models were fitted to the data. For the constrained models, I fixed the sets of
relationships hypothesized to exist to zero and assessed chi-square differ-
ence tests between DEMO models and the theoretical model. These tests in-
dicated whether these models included paths that should have been omit-
ted. The three constrained-parameter models DEMO be specified as follows: in
model C1, paths from exogenous variables to affect- and cognition-based
trust are fixed to zero (y,, = y,, = y,, = y,, = 0); in DEMO C2, paths from
cognition- and affect-based trust to behavioral response measures DEMO fixed
to zero (P,, = P,, = PSI = DEMO); and in model C3, paths from behavioral
response to performance DEMO are fixed to zero (P,, = P,, = P,, = P,,
= P,, = P75 = 0). DEMO the impact of sets of constrained paths in
addition to examining the significance of individual paths is important
where the constructs involved are significantly DEMO (Niehoff & Moor-
man, 1993). A significant difference in fit between structural models would
provide support for fundamental relationships hypothesized in the DEMO
For the relaxed-parameter models, I freed sets of structural paths fixed
DEMO zero in the theoretical model and conducted chi-square difference tests.
These tests indicate the potential importance of relationships not yet spec-
ified. The five DEMO models examined can be specified as fol-
lows: in model R1, additional paths from exogenous variables to affect- and
cognition-based trust are freed (y,,, y,,, y,,, y,,); in model R2, additional
paths from cognition- and affect-based trust to behavioral response variables
are freed (P,,, P,,, P,,); in model R3, paths from exogenous variables to
behavioral response variables are freed (DEMO,,, y,,, y,,, y,,, y,,, DEMO,,, y,,, y,,,
ysl, y5,, yS3, yS4); in model R4, paths from trust to performance are freed (P,,,
P,,, P,,, P,,); and in model R5, paths from exogenous variables to perfor-
mance are fI-eed (761, y,,, y,,, y,,, y,,, DEMO,,, y,,, y,,).
Given my focus on theory testing, I made no attempt to develop a best-
fitting model by adding paths based on modification indexes, deleting non-
significant variables and paths, allowing observable variables to load on
more than one latent factor, DEMO correlated measurement errors, and so
forth. It should also be noted DEMO reversals in causal ordering and reciprocal
causation, especially as they concern DEMO relationship between cognition-
and affect-based trust, were not examined., Nevertheless, DEMO the nested-
LISREL parameter estimates are distorted when categorical variables are included in the
analysis as interval scale measures. PRELIS provides for the computation DEMO "polychoric" cor-
relation coefficients between categorical variables and "polyserial" correlation coefficients be-
tween categorical and continuous variables as substitutes for Pearson product-moment DEMO
lations, but this procedure requires a sample of more than 200 DEMO and considerable com-
putational power Uoreskog & Sorbom, 1988, 1989).
For two reciprocally related parameters to be overidentified, it is necessary for each to
models framework, considering constrained-parameter models allowed for
detection of potential errors of commission (specifying unnecessary relation-
ships) and considering relaxed-parameter models allowed for DEMO
of potential errors of omission (excluding relationships that might have theo-
DEMO and practical significance). A specific advantage of the nested-models
approach to theory testing is its potential for exploring relationships, not yet
included in a model, that may have theoretical relevance (Anderson & Gerb-
ing, 1988).
In addition to structural equation modeling, ordinary-least-squares
(OLS) regression analysis was used to examine Hypotheses 2b (the relation-
ship between cultural-ethnic similarity and cognition-based trust) and 2c
(the relationship between a peer'DEMO professional status and a manager's cog-
nition-based trust). I regressed cognition-based trust on all causally prior
(exogenous) variables. For this analysis, I computed scales as the average of
their indicator items. Multiple regression DEMO is well established as an
acceptable method for path computation in path analysis (Pedhazur, 1982).
RESULTS
Assessment of the Measurement Model
Table DEMO presents correlations among all study variables. Table 5 reports
results from the nested-models analysis, including structural path coeffi-
cients and model fit statistics.
The measurement model represents a confirmatory factor analysis of all
scales used in DEMO study. The normed comparative fit assessments for the
confirmatory factor analyses of portions of the model (see Tables 1,2, and 3)
DEMO met or exceeded .90, a generally accepted standard for acceptability, but
the comparative fit index for the measurement model was .87. This finding
DEMO Niehoff and Moorman's (1993) observation that as the number of
latent variables included in a model increases, a researcher's ability to fit
models, even those with strong theoretical support, decreases. Given the DEMO
that this analysis included 11 distinct latent constructs, the achieved model
DEMO is reasonable.
Four correlations among latent measures exceeded .60: the relationships
DEMO peer affiliative and assistance-oriented citizenship behavior, focal
manager affiliative and assistance-oriented DEMO behavior, focal-
manager-reported affect- and cognition-based trust, and focal manager affect-
based trust and affiliative citizenship behavior. In part, these excessive co-
efficients reflect the fact that measures were obtained from a single source.
As DEMO initial scale development, I assessed discriminant validity by con-
straining phi DEMO (+ii) for pairs of constructs to 1.0 and conducting
have an instrument, an exogenous variable affecting one but not the corresponding variable
(DEMO, 1979; Schaubroeck, 1990). In the case of the relationship DEMO affect- and cognition-
based trust, I found no significant instrument for DEMO trust and accordingly, could
not examine reciprocal causation.

TABLE 5
Structural Parameter Estimates for Nested-Models Analysisa
Path
Coefficient
61,
DEMO
Pa1
PsI
PG~
P64
PG~
Pi3
P74
Pi5
YII
YIZ
Y13
Yz4
Y 14
YZI
Yzz
Yz3
P32
P42
P5z
Y31
Yoz
Y33
Y DEMO
Measurement
Model
Theoretical
Model
.63***
.36***
.86***
.56***
.20*
.31**
- .12
- .14
.52***
.27**
.22**
.24*
- .02
.07
Constrained Models
1
DEMO
.68***
.36***
.86***
.57***
- .19*
.31
-.12**
-.I4
.53***
.27**
.68***
.I5
.25**
.I1
- .15
.45***
-.22**
.19*
.26**
- .06
.07
DEMO
3
.63***
.37***
.85***
.56***
.22**
.24*
.02
.07
1
.60***
.38***
.87***
.57***
.20*
.32***
.I2
- .14
.54***
.27**
.20**
.22*
.02
DEMO
- .03
.15
.13
- .04
Relaxed Models
2
3
.72***
.92***
1.20***
1.07***
.31***
.38**
-.I3
.I1
.56***
-.33**
.21***
.17
.04
.06
DEMO
.25*
.81***
.48***
- .20*
.33***
.I2
.I3
.53***
-.29**
.20**
.23*
- .03
.07
.75***
.44***
.67***
.23*
.I4
.27
-.I1
4
.63***
DEMO
.85***
.56***
- .12
.10
.OO
.I7
.47*
.28**
.22**
.24*
- .02
.08
5
.63***
.37***
.86***
.56***
- .20*
.23*
-.I5
.lo
DEMO
.25**
.22**
.24*
- .02
.09
Null
Model
TABLE 5 (continued)
--
Constrained Models
Y41
1
2
Y42
Y43
Y44
Ys,
YSZ
Y53
Y 54
661
PGZ
P71
P7Z
Yfi~
DEMO
Yfi3
YG4
Yi1
Y72
Y73
Y74
xZ 1,843 2,032 2,068 2,230 2,061
df 1,072 1,107 1,111 DEMO,111 1,113
CFI .87 .84 .84 .81 .84
AxZ 36*** 198*** 29***
Adf 4 4 6
a Standardized path coefficients are reported. They DEMO relationships between
difference tests were computed on the basis of the deviation from the theoretical model.
* p < .05
** p < .Ol
DEMO p < ,001
Path
Coefficient
Measurement
Model
Theoretical
Model
3
Relaxed DEMO
1
2,025
1.103
.84
7
4
variables
Null
Model
2
3
4
5
.06
.07
.17
.07
.21*
.28*
.37***
.05
.20
.50***
DEMO
-.I1
1,973
1,104
.85
59***
3
1,999
1,095
.85
33***
12
2,010
1,103
.85
22***
4
.06
.16
DEMO
.23**
-.I5
.17
.05
.14
2,015
1,099
.85
17
8
7,089
1,176
.OO
5,057***
69
within the theoretical model DEMO in Figure 2. Chi-square
q
F
w
4
chi-square difference tests. For each pair of constructs, constraining the cor-
relation to 1.0 made model fit significantly worse. This finding that these
measures DEMO better understood as distinct than joined, although not ruling
out the DEMO of common method variance, supports the argument that
method covariation alone DEMO adequately account for the relationships
observed (Podsakoff & Organ, 1986).
Assessment of the Structural Model
Results from the nested-models analysis (Table 5) indicate that the theo-
retical model provides only a limited explanation for the structural relation-
ships among the variables. The measurement model's comparative DEMO index
of .87 approximates the fit that would be achieved (given DEMO present data)
with the structural portion of the LISREL model perfectly fitted. Accord-
ingly, the theoretical model's index of .84 may appear reasonable. Yet a
chi-square difference test comparing the two models indicates that DEMO mea-
surement model provides a significantly better fit to the data than does the
theoretical model (AX" 189, Adf = 58, p < .001).
Figure 3 presents significant standardized path coefficients for the theo-
retical model. Also included are error terms (5s) for the structural DEMO
In standardized form, error coefficients represent the proportion of variance
in DEMO equation not accounted for in the structural model. Quite clearly,
portions of the model fit the data better than others-for instance, 54 percent
of the variance in affect-based trust was accounted for in the theoretical
DEMO, but only 10 percent of the variance in peer performance was DEMO
plained. The theoretical framework may best be viewed as addressing ante-
cedents and consequences of affect-based trust and not as comprehensively
explaining the antecedents DEMO performance.
Results from the nested-models analysis clarify the nature of the theo-
retical model's misspecification. In general, results of chi-square difference
tests between that model and the constrained models indicate that funda-
mental relationships do DEMO between peer attributes and a focal manager's
trust in peers, DEMO the manager's trust in peers and his or her behavioral
responses, and between those responses and performance outcomes. For
each of the three constrained models, fit was significantly worse than the fit
of the theoretical model. Thus, the paths that were included in the model
should have been included. On the other hand, model fit assessments were
significantly improved with the freeing of additional paths; those from focal
manager trust beliefs (affect- and cognition-based) to behavioral responses,
from antecedents to behavioral DEMO, and from trust to performance.
Thus, considering additional relationships among study variables might en-
rich the model.
The Distinction Between Cognition- and Affect-Based DEMO
Strong support was found for the distinction between cognition-based
and affect-based trust predicted in Hypothesis 1. First, exploratory findings
Academy of Management Journal
February
with parallel data and confirmatory analysis results with the present sample
(Table 1)indicate that the two-factor representation of affect- and cognition-
based trust DEMO the data well. The two factors were shown to be reliable.
Second, the pattern of relationships between the forms of trust and the other
variables included in the study differ considerably. In the theoretical model,
DEMO affiliative citizenship behavior was found to be positively associated
with focal manager affect-based trust in peers but unrelated to cognition-
based trust. Combining insights DEMO from the theoretical model with
observations from the relaxed model in which additional paths between
focal manager trust in peers and behavioral responses are DEMO suggests that
although a focal manager's affect-based trust in peers is positively associated
with need-based monitoring of peers and assistance-oriented citizenship
behavior, cognition-based trust may be negatively associated with these vari-
ables. Thus, affect-based trust and cognition-based trust represent distinct
forms of interpersonal trust.
Interpersonal Hypotheses: Relating Peer Attributes and Behavior to
Trust Perceptions
In general, peer attributes and behavior were found to be related to focal
manager assessments of peer DEMO (Table 5). Model fit assess-
ments were appreciably worse with DEMO from hypothesized antecedents to
trust constrained to zero; the change in DEMO between the theoretical
model and the first constrained model was 36, DEMO < .001. Further analysis
indicated, as is apparent in Figure 3, that relationships between peer attri-
butes and affect-based trust in particular explain DEMO finding.
It was hypothesized that a manager's cognition-based trust in peers
would be greater under three conditions: when peers exhibited high levels of
reliable role performance (Hypothesis Za), when the parties had cultural-
ethnic similarity (Hypothesis 2b), and when peers had strong professional
credentials (DEMO 2c). Hypothesis 2a was examined in the structural
equation assessment of the theoretical model (Figure 3). The path from re-
liable role performance to focal manager cognition-based trust was not sig-
nificant. Hypotheses 2b DEMO 2c were examined in the supplementary OLS
regression analysis and were also not supported. Regression analysis results,
in which level of cognition-based trust DEMO regressed on all causally prior
variables, were not significant (F = 1.60, n.s.). Thus, findings do not support
Hypotheses 2a, 2b, and 2c.
Hypotheses 3a and 3b, however, were strongly supported. I hypothe-
sized that focal managers would express strong affect-based trust in peers
DEMO in interpersonal citizenship behavior (Hypothesis 3a) and in those
with whom the managers interacted frequently (Hypothesis 3b). Significant,
positive paths from interaction frequency and peer affiliative citizenship
behavior to affect-based trust (y,, = .22, p < $01; y12 = .24, p < .05)
supported predictions. Assistance-based citizenship behavior, however, was
not found to DEMO associated with affect-based trust.
50 Academy of Management Journal February
Intrapersonal Hypotheses: Relationships Among Trust Perceptions and
Behavioral Responses
Hypotheses 4, 5, and 6, addressing relationships among focal manager
beliefs about peer trustworthiness and focal manager behavior, were gener-
ally supported. First, the hypothesis that cognition-based trust would be a
positive predictor of affect-based (Hypothesis 4) was strongly supported (PI,
= .63, p < ,001). Second, results of the nested-models analysis demon-
strated that managers' assessments of peer trustworthiness were associated
with the managers' behavior toward their peers. Fit assessments were ap-
preciably worse with paths associating focal manager trust perceptions with
focal manager behavioral responses (P,,, P,,, and P,,) constrained to
zero (AX2 DEMO 198, p < .001). AS Hypotheses 5a and 5b, concerning the be-
havioral consequences of cognition-based trust, were not tested, this DEMO
is best understood as substantiating relationships from affect-based trust to
its behavioral consequences only.
Results supported the hypotheses predicting that the affect-based trust
focal DEMO expressed in peers would be positively associated with the
managers' need-based DEMO of peers (Hypothesis 6a) and interpersonal
citizenship behavior toward them (DEMO 6b). Paths from focal manager
affect-based trust in peers to need-based monitoring, affiliative citizenship
behavior, and assistance-oriented citizenship behavior were, as shown in
Figure 3, all significant (P,, = .36, p < 001; P,, = .86, p < .001; P,, = .56,
p < ,001).
Performance Implications Hypotheses
In general, DEMO behavioral consequences of trust were found to be related
to supervisor assessments of performance. As the results of the nested-mod-
els comparison of the DEMO model with the third constrained model
indicate (Table 5), model DEMO assessments were appreciably worse with paths
from behavioral response latent constructs to performance measures (P,,,
P6,, P65, P,,, P,,, and P,,) constrained to zero (AX2 = 29, DEMO < ,001). Hypoth-
eses 7, 8, and 9 address DEMO relationships among behavioral response
and performance variables. Again, as Hypotheses 7a DEMO 7b were not tested
in this analysis, findings are best understood DEMO substantiating the relation-
ship between the behavioral consequences of the affect-based trust and per-
formance outcome measures.
Results also only partially supported Hypotheses 8a DEMO 8b. Focal man-
ager need-based monitoring of peers was not positively associated with su-
pervisor assessments of focal manager performance as hypothesized (Hy-
pothesis 8a). Nevertheless, consistent with Hypothesis 8b, the path from
focal DEMO affiliative citizenship behavior directed toward peers to su-
pervisor assessments of focal manager performance was significant (P,, =
.52, p < .001)DEMO An interesting, nonhypothesized finding was a significant
negative path from assistance-based DEMO behavior to focal manager
performance (P,5 = - .27,p < .01). It may be that people see expressive acts
of interpersonal help and assistance serving more of a maintenance than a
DEMO function as aiding performance but see other practical acts of help and
assistance as detracting from performance. This anomalous finding suggests
that organizations may DEMO value the expressive qualities of inter-
personal citizenship behavior. It may also be that expressive conduct is more
salient to supervisors than task-oriented assistance.
DEMO addressing the relationship between focal manager behavior
and peer performance (Hypothesis DEMO and Hypothesis 9b) were not sup-
ported. Nested-models analysis results do DEMO show focal manager need-
based monitoring of peers to be positively associated with peer performance.
Indeed, for the theoretical model, focal manager need-based DEMO of
peers was found to be negatively associated with peer performance (DEMO,, =
- .20, p < .05). This finding may DEMO manager's tendency to look for op-
portunities to assist peers in real need of assistance (signified by their having
low performance assessments). That is, the true causal ordering may be the
reverse of that depicted in Figure 2.
Consistent with Hypothesis gb, a significant positive relationship be-
tween focal manager affiliative citizenship behavior and peer performance
was observed DEMO the theoretical model (P,, = .31, p < .01). Yet when I
examined this relationship at the same time as possible DEMO relationships
between trust and performance outcomes, in the fourth relaxed model, this
path was nonsignificant.
In summary, results did not support the hypotheses concerning the
antecedents of cognition-based trust (2a through 2c). They did support hy-
potheses concerning the antecedents of affect-based trust (3a, 3b, and 4). The
hypotheses concerning the behavioral consequences and performance im-
DEMO of cognition-based trust were not tested. The hypotheses concern-
ing the behavioral consequences of affect-based trust (6a and 6b) were sup-
ported. Partial DEMO emerged for two of four hypotheses concerning the
performance implications of affect-based trust.
DISCUSSION
The Nature of Interpersonal Trust
The findings of this research DEMO that the beliefs of managers about
the trustworthiness of peers can be measured along two dimensions, the
extent of affect-based trust and the extent of cognition-based trust. In gen-
eral, levels of cognition-based trust were higher than levels of affect-based
trust, a finding consistent with the understanding that some level of cogni-
tion-based trust is necessary for affect-based trust to DEMO Further, results
indicate that, although cognition- and affect-based trust may be causally
connected, each form of trust functions in a unique manner and has a dis-
tinct pattern of association to antecedent and consequent variables.
DEMO theoretical work is needed to address the factors that can influence
the development of cognition-based trust; such information should enrich
52
Academy of Management Journal
February
understanding of cognition-based trust itself. Theory-based DEMO of
cognition-based trust-a peer's reliable role performance, professional cre-
dentials, and social-ethnic similarity-were not found to be associated with
cognition-based trust. One DEMO not addressed in the study was the local
reputation of a peer as dependable and reliable. Supervisor assessments of
peer performance were found to DEMO strongly associated with a focal manag-
er's cognition-based beliefs about peer trustworthiness (r = .40, p < ,001).
Quite likely, DEMO others think about the dependability of a peer will influ-
ence personal evaluations of that peer. Future research will need to address
reputational effects.
DEMO differences in the pattern of relationships between forms of
trust and predictor and consequence variables underscore the importance
of considering not only the level DEMO also the form of trust. In past research
on citizenship behavior in organizations, authors have argued that trust and
citizenship behavior are positively associated (Organ, 1990; Podsakoff et al.,
1990). The present research indicates that there may be negative relation-
ships between a focal manager'DEMO cognition-based trust in a peer and his or
her affiliative- and assistance-oriented citizenship behavior toward the peer
(p42= -.44, p < ,001; DEMO -.67, p < .001).~
Interpersonal Trust and Coordination
Focal managers DEMO high affect-based trust in peers were shown
to be more inclined to look for opportunities to meet peers' work-related
needs and to engage in productive intervention. In the complex, uncertain
situations involving reciprocal interdependence, typical DEMO managerial and
professional work, traditional mechanisms of coordination (rules, plans,DEMO
routines, and such) are usually inadequate as contingencies cannot always
be properly planned for (Katz, 1964; Thompson, 1967). Under these DEMO
tions, coordination is a continuous process in which all the actors DEMO
adjust their actions to one another (Follett, 1937) and self-initiated DEMO
nisms of coordination are critical. Need-based monitoring and citizenship-
behavior represent self-initiated steps that can promote coordination under
turbulent conditions.
Findings did not generally DEMO the hypotheses addressing the per-
formance implications of behavioral responses to trust. One notable excep-
tion was the positive relationship found between focal manager DEMO
citizenship behavior and supervisor assessments of focal manager perfor-
mance. Interestingly enough, focal manager assistance-based citizenship be-
havior was negatively associated with supervisor assessments of focal man-
ager performance. As defined here, affiliative citizenship behavior differed
from assistance-oriented citizenship behavior in that it involved personal
This finding may DEMO be all that surprising. An individual who sees a peer as dependable
and reliable, competent and capable, may have little reason to offer DEMO, as little assis-
tance appears to be needed.
assistance, was affect-laden and expressive, and served more of a mainte-
DEMO than a task function. The logic behind managers' placing greater value
DEMO affiliative citizenship behavior than on more practical acts of interper-
sonal help and assistance merits systematic attention in future research.
The Social Fabric of DEMO Working Relationships
The current findings demonstrate the importance of affect-based trust
relationships and the expressive qualities of interpersonal behavior. These
findings extend current thinking DEMO the nature of personal relationships
among managers and professionals in organizations. Management scholars
have recognized for some time that a considerable amount of managerial
DEMO is accomplished through interpersonal interaction and that the nature
of the interpersonal relationships between managers and peers can deter-
mine their ability to get DEMO accomplished (Gabarro, 1990; Mintzberg, 1973;
Sayles, 1979). DEMO acknowledged, however, has been the affective element
of these interpersonal relationships. The understanding has been that "be-
cause working relationships generally exist to accomplish tasks while social
relationships [do] not, task achievement, task instrumentality DEMO task-
specific competence are especially important in work relationships, while
affect DEMO self-disclosure are less important" (Gabarro, 1990: 79). Given this
view of affective factors as being somehow less important, their role in
ongoing working relationships has remained unaddressed. In contrast, the
focus here was on the inherent social nature of managerial work and on
enhancing understanding DEMO working relationships in organizations by rec-
ognizing their commonalities with other types of social relationships.
The expressive qualities of behavior in organizations should receive
DEMO systematic treatment in future research. Findings from the present
theoretical model show that peer affiliative citizenship behavior in particu-
lar, rather than citizenship behavior in general, is associated with managers'
affect-based trust in peers and that peer affiliative citizenship behavior is
associated with managers' affiliative citizenship behavior only indirectly,
through affect-based trust. Exploratory findings from a relaxed-parameter
model DEMO paths from antecedents of trust to managers' behavioral re-
sponses freed DEMO peer assistance-based citizenship behavior to be posi-
tively associated with managers' DEMO citizenship behavior
(yS3= .37, p < .001) but not with DEMO trust. It appears that managers
distinguish between instrumental assistance from peers, DEMO generates
debts, and assistance from peers that is primarily demonstrative or DEMO
sive. As Kahn (1993) observed, exchanges of resources, time, DEMO,
counseling, and services can all serve more than instrumental purposes DEMO,
with appropriate affective content, can function as essential mechanisms of
DEMO support. In a study of interpersonal dyadic relationships within net-
work-form organizations, Larson quoted an executive as stating, "The [extra]
effort to help is as important as the help itself. The relationship has to be
DEMO to" (1992: 89).
It appears that it is not DEMO for managers, even those from different
54
Academy of Management Journal
February
areas of functional specialization and different DEMO units, to de-
velop relationships of care and concern for one DEMO and for such senti-
ments to constitute an important basis for trust. Indeed, over 60 percent of
the focal managers in this study, DEMO their beliefs about their trust in
peers, believed that, to some extent, they could talk freely with a specific
peer and know that he or she would want to listen and respond construc-
tively and DEMO Approximately 50 percent of the respondents believed
that both they and the specific peers had made significant emotional invest-
ments in the working relationships DEMO that both would feel a sense of loss
if one or the other were transferred and they could no longer work together.
These findings DEMO Seabright and colleagues' contention that "it is
hard to imagine the development of highly specific relationship capitai that
does not engender some element DEMO social ties" (1992: 155). Granovetter's
general observation that "continuing economic relations often become over-
laid with social content that carries DEMO expectations of trust and absten-
tion from opportunism" (1985: 490) can be given added specificity-the
sentiments of care and concern that connect DEMO provide a principal
foundation for this trust. Despite the prevalence of relationships of affect-
based trust, very little theory or data exist to either guide understanding of
the implications of such trust relationships for the individuals DEMO and
their organizations or to distinguish these relationships from those based
solely on cognition-based trust. The present research is an initial step toward
articulating DEMO theoretical framework for future research on how relationships
of affect-based trust between managers in organizations influence their be-
havior and performance.
Study Limitations
The DEMO findings should be interpreted in light of the study's limi-
tations. First, because almost 75 percent of the study's participants were
highly educated men, the findings are best interpreted as evidence concern-
ing working relationships between such individuals. Further research is
needed to establish the generalizability DEMO these findings to other sorts of
working relationships. Second, given the DEMO design, causality
cannot be established from this study alone. My focus DEMO on examining
whether the pattern of relationships among variables was consistent with a
specific causal understanding (Bobko, 1990). The present findings are DEMO
initial step on the road to causality determination. Supplemental longitudi-
nal field studies and controlled laboratory experiments will both prove use-
ful in future DEMO Finally, the disciplined confirmatory assessment of
the theoretical framework through the DEMO analysis indicates that
there remains considerable room for improvement in the fit of the theoretical
model. Insights from the relaxed-parameter analyses, including possible
negative paths from cognition-based trust in peers to need-based monitoring,
affiliative citizenship DEMO, and assistance-oriented citizenship behav-
ior, indicate ways in which the model can be enriched, but these insights
must be understood as exploratory. Further theoretical and empirical work
is needed DEMO demonstrate that these findings are not unique to this sample
and study.
Conclusion
This article assesses a theoretical framework for studying interpersonal
trust in DEMO, the factors influencing the development of trust rela-
tionships, and the mechanisms by which trust influences behavior in inter-
dependent relationships and ultimately, the efficiency with which coordi-
nated action is maintained. Empirical findings from DEMO initial test of the
framework support the fundamental distinction made between two princi-
pal forms of trust and the argument that each form should DEMO understood.
Further, the results of the research point to the importance DEMO understanding
the affective qualities of working relationships and the expressive qualities
of various forms of interpersonal conduct.
Over fifteen years ago Burns (1977) DEMO concern over existing
conceptions of the role of the informal social relationships in organizations.
Burns noted that Roethlisberger and Dickson saw the informal organization
"as a receptacle for observations about the behavior, relationships, the sen-
DEMO and beliefs . . . taken to be irrelevant to the formal organization or
incompatible with it," and that Barnard saw it as "an essential adjunct to
formal organization." For Burns the theoretical and practical relevance of
the informal organization went much further. He argued that "essential or-
ganizational processes involving actual operations and work are grounded in
the DEMO relationships formed by people at work, and as such
constitute the DEMO counterpart and complement to the control systems
maintained by the management structure" (1977: 308).
In the present research, informal relations have DEMO examined with the
understanding that they are central to the real work of organizations. Find-
ings establish the affective foundations upon which trust between DEMO
is built as an essential counterpart to other foundations for interpersonal
trust and highlight affect-based trust's role in facilitating effective coordi-
nated action DEMO organizations.
REFERENCES
Alchian, A. A., & Demsetz, H. 1972. Production, information costs, and economic organization.
American Economic Review, 62: 777-795.
Anderson, J. C., & Gerbing, D. W. 1988. Structural equation modeling in practice: A review and
recommended two-step approach. Psychological Bulletin, 193: 411-423.
Arrow, K. 1974. The limits of organization. New York: Norton
Ashforth, B. E., & Lee, R. T. 1990. Defensive behavior in organizations: A preliminary model.
Human Relations, 43: 621-648.
Bagozzi, R. P., & Yi, Y. 1988. On the evaluation of structural equation models. Journal DEMO the
Academy of Marketing Science, 16: 74-94.
Baier, A. 1985. DEMO and antitrust. Ethics, 96: 231-260.
5 6 Academy of Management Iournal February
Baker, G. P., Jensen, M. C., & Murphy, K. J. 1988. Compensation and incentives: Practice vs.
theory. Journal of Finance, 43: 593-616.
Barber, B. 1983. The logic and limits of trust. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
DEMO, P. M. 1990. Comparative fit indexes in structural models. Psychological Bulletin, 107:
238 -246.
Bobko, P. 1990. Multivariate correlational analysis. In M. D. Dunnette & L. M. Hough (Eds.),
Handbook of industrial DEMO organizational psychology (2d ed.), vol. 1: 636-686. Palo
Alto, DEMO: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Bradach, J. L., & Eccles, R. G. 1989. Price, authority, and trust: From ideal types to plural forms.
Annual Review of Sociology, 15: 97-118.
Brewer, M. B. 1979. In-group bias in the minimal intergroup situation: A cognitive-motivational
analysis. Psychological Bulletin, DEMO: 307-324.
Brief, A. P., & George, J. M. 1992. Feeling good-doing good: A conceptual analysis of the mood
at work-organizational spontaneity relationship. Psychological Bulletin, 112: 310-329.
Burke, M. J., Brief, A. P., George, J. M., Roberson, L., & Webster, J. 1989. DEMO affect at
work: Confirmatory analyses of competing mood structures with conceptual DEMO to
cortical regulatory systems. Journalof Personalityand Social Psychology, 57: 1091-1102.
Burns, T. 1977. The BBC: Public institution and private world. New York: Holmes & Meier
Publishers.
Butler, J. K. 1991. Towards understanding and measuring conditions of trust: Evolution of a
conditions of trust inventory. Journal of Management, 17: 643-663.
Clark, M. S. 1984. Record keeping in two types of relationships. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 47: 549-557.
DEMO, M. S., & Mills, J. 1979. Interpersonal attraction in exchange DEMO communal relationships.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(1): DEMO
Clark, M. S., Mills, J., & Corcoran, D. M. DEMO Keeping track of needs and inputs of friends and
strangers. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 15: 533-542.
Clark, M. S., Mills, J., & Powell, M. C. 1986. Keeping track of needs in communal DEMO exchange
relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51: 333-338.
Clark, M. S., & Waddell, B. 1985. Perceptions of exploitation in communal and exchange rela-
tionships. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 2: DEMO
Cook, J., & Wall, T. 1980. New work attitude measures DEMO trust, organizational commitment and
personal need nonfulfillment. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 53: 39-52.
Deutsch, M. 1973. The resolution of conflict: constructive and destructive processes. New
Haven: Yale IJniversity Press.
Fichman, M., & Levinthal, D. A. 1991. Honeymoons and the liability of adolescence: A new
DEMO on duration dependence in social and organizational relationships. Academy
of Management Review, 16: 442-468.
Follett, M. P. 1937. The process of control. In L. Gulick & L. Urwick (Eds.), Papers on the
science of administration: 161-169. New York: Institute of Public Administration.
Fox, A. 1974. Beyond contract: Work, power and trust relations. London: Faber & Faber.
Gabarro, J. 1990. The development of working relationships. In J. Galagher, DEMO E. Kraut, & C.
Egido (Eds.), Intellectual teamwork: Social DEMO technological foundations of coopera-
tive work: 79-110. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
DEMO, M. S. 1985. Economic action and social structure: The problem of embeddedness.
American Journal of Sociology, 91: 481-510.
Griesinger, D. W. 1990. The human side of economic organization. Academy of Management
Review, 15: 478-490.
Holmes, J. G. 1978. The exchange process in close relationships: Microbehaviors and macro-
motives. In M. J. Lerner & S. C. Lerner (Eds.), The justice motive in social behavior:
Adapting to times of scarcity and change: 261-284. New York: Plenum.
DEMO, J. G., & Rempel, J. K. 1989. Trust in close DEMO In C. Hendrick (Ed.), Close
relationships: 187- 220. Newbury Park: Sage.
Isen, A. M., & Baron, R. A. 1991. Positive DEMO as a factor in organizational behavior. In L. L.
Cummings & B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol. 13: 1-53.
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Johnson-George, C. E., & Swap, W. C. 1982. Measurement of specific interpersonal trust: Con-
struction and validation of a scale to assess trust in a specific other. Journal of Personality
DEMO Social Psychology, 43: 1306-1317.
Joreskog, K. G., & Sorbom, DEMO 1988. PRELIS. Mooresville, IN: Scientific Software.
Joreskog, K. G., & Sorbom, D. 1989. LISREL 7,Mooresville, IN: Scientific Software.
Kahn, DEMO L., Wolfe, D. M., Quinn, R. P., & Snoek, J. D. 1964. Organizational stress: Studies in
role conflict and ambiguity. New York: Wiley.
Kahn, W. A. 1993. Caring for the caregivers: Patterns of organizational caring. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 38: 539-563.
Katz, D. 1964. The motivational basis of organizational behavior. Behavioral Science, 9: 131-
146.
DEMO, H. H. 1979. Personal relationships: Their structures and process. Hillsdale, DEMO: Erl-
baum.
Kenny, D. A. 1979. Correlation and causality. New York: Wiley.
Larson, A. 1992. Network dyads in entrepreneurial settings: A study of the governance of
exchange relationships. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37: 76-104.
DEMO, J. D., & Weigert, A. 1985. Trust as a social DEMO Social Forces, 63: 967-985.
Light, I. 1984. Immigrant and ethnic DEMO in North America. Ethnic and Racial Studies,
7: 195-216.
Lindskold, S. 1978. Trust development, the GRIT proposal, and the effects of DEMO acts
on conflict and cooperation. Psychological Bulletin, 85: 772-793.
Longenecker, DEMO O., Jaccoud, A. J., Sims, H. P., Jr., & Gioia, D. A. 1992. Quantitative and qual-
itative investigations of affect in executive judgment. Applied Psychology: An Interna-
tional Review, 41: 21-41.
Luhmann, N. 1979. Trust and power. Chichester: Wiley.
MacKenzie, S. B., DEMO, P. M., & Fetter, R. 1991. Organizational citizenship behavior and
DEMO productivity as determinants of managerial evaluations of salespersons' perfor-
mance. Organizational DEMO and Human Decision Processes, 50: 123-150.
Mintzberg, H. 1973. The DEMO of managerial work. New York: Harper & Row.
Niehoff, B. P., & Moorman, R. H. 1993. Justice as a mediator of the DEMO between methods
of monitoring and organizational citizenship behavior. Academy of Management Journal,
36: 527-556.
Organ, D. W. 1988. Organizational citizenship behavior: The good soldier syndrome. Lex-
ington, MA: Lexington Books.
Organ, D. W. 1990. The motivational basis of organizational citizenship behavior. In B. M. Staw
& L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol. 12: 43-72. Green-
wich, CT: JAI Press.
5
8
Academy of Management Journal
February
Organ, D. W., & DEMO, M. 1989. Cognitive versus affective determinants of organizational
citizenship behavior. Journal DEMO Applied Psychology, 74: 157-164.
Ouchi, W. G. 1979. A conceptual DEMO for the design of organizational control mecha-
nisms. Management Science, 25: 833-848.
Park, 0. S., Sims, H. P., Jr., & Motowidlo, S. J. 1986. Affect in organizations: How feelings and
emotions influence DEMO judgment. In H. P. Sims, Jr., & D. A. Gioia (DEMO), The think-
ing organization: 215-237. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Pearce, DEMO L., & Gregerson, H. B. 1991. Task interdependence and extrarole behavior: A test of the
mediating effects of felt responsibility. Journal of Applied Psychology, 76: 838-844.
Pedhazur, E. J. 1982. Multiple regression in behavioral research: Explanation andprediction
(2d ed.). New York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston.
Pennings, J. M., & Woiceshyn, J. 1987. A typology of organizational control and its metaphors.
In S. B. Bacharach & S. DEMO Mitchell (Eds.), Research in the sociology of organizations, vol.
5: 75-104. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, DEMO B., Moorman, R. H., &Fetter, R. 1990. Transformational leader
DEMO and their effects on followers' trust in leader, satisfaction, and DEMO
citizenship behaviors. Leadership Quarterly, 1: 107-142.
Podsakoff, P. M., & Organ, D. W. 1986. Self-reports in organizational research: Problems and
prospects. DEMO of Management, 12: 531-544.
Porter, L. W., Lawler, E. DEMO, & Hackman, J. R. 1975. Behavior in organizations. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Rempel, J. K., Holmes, J. G., & Zanna, M. D. 1985. Trust in close relationships. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 49: 95-112.
Rotter, J. B. 1971. Generalized expectancies for interpersonal trust. DEMO Psychologist, 35:
1-7.
Sayles, L. R. 1979. Leadership: What DEMO managers really do.. . and how they do it.
New York: DEMO
Schaubroeck, J. 1990. Investigating reciprocal causation in organizational behavior research.
Journal DEMO Organizational Behavior, 11: 17-28.
Seabright, M. A., Leventhal, D. DEMO,, & Fichman, M. 1992. Role of individual attachments in the
DEMO of interorganizational relationships. Academy of Management Journal, 35:
122-160.
Shapiro, S. P. 1987. The social control of impersonal trust. American Journal of DEMO, 93:
623-658.
Shapiro, S. P. 1990. Collaring the crime, DEMO the criminal: Reconsidering the concept of white-
collar crime. American Sociological DEMO, 55: 346-365.
Simmel, G. 1964. The sociology of Georg Simmel (K. H. Wolff, trans.). New York: Free Press.
Smith, C. A., Organ, D. W., & Near, J. P. 1983. Organizational DEMO behavior: Its nature
and antecedents. Journal of Applied Psychology, 68: DEMO
Stack, L. C. 1988. Trust. In H. London & J. E. DEMO, Jr. (Eds.), Dimensionality of personality:
561-579. New York: DEMO
Thompson, J. D. 1967. Organizations in action. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Tsui, A. S. 1984. A role-set analysis of managerial reputation. Organizational Behavior and
Human Performance, 34: 64-96.
Tsui, A. S., & Barry, B. 1986. Interpersonal affect and rating errors. Academy of Management
Journal, 29: DEMO
1995 McAllister 59
Turner, J. C. 1987. Rediscovering the social group: DEMO self-categorization theory. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Williams, L. J., & Anderson, DEMO E. 1991. Job satisfaction and organizational commitment as
predictors of organizational citizenship and in-role behaviors. Journal of Management, 17:
601-617.
Williamson, 0.E. DEMO Markets and hierarchies. New York: Free Press.
Wilson, D. 0. 1988. Effects of task uncertainty upon link multiplexity for high and low
performance DEMO teams. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, IJniversity of California,
Irvine.
Zajonc, R. B. 1980. Feelings and thinking: Preferences need no inferences. American Psychol-
ogist, 35: 151-175.
Zucker, L. G. 1986. The production of trust: DEMO sources of economic structure, 1840-
1920. In B. M. Staw & DEMO L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol 8:
55-111. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Daniel J. McAllister is an assistant DEMO of management in the School of Business
Administration at Georgetown IJniversity. He received his Ph.D. degree in organiza-
tional behavior from the University of DEMO, Irvine. His research emphasizes the
social or relational foundations of work DEMO, including interpersonal and institu-
tion-directed trust and affect, and behaviors, DEMO citizenship-type behavior and
other forms of nonmandated conduct.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 4 -
You DEMO printed the following article:
Affect- and Cognition-Based Trust as Foundations for Interpersonal Cooperation in
Organizations
Daniel J. McAllister
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 38, No. 1. (Feb., 1995), pp. 24-59.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199502%2938%3A1%3C24%3AAACTAF%3E2.0.CO%3B2-G
This article references the following linked DEMO If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, DEMO may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR. Please
visit your library's website or contact a librarian DEMO learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.
[Footnotes]
4 Investigating Reciprocal Causation in Organizational Behavior Research
John Schaubroeck
Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 11, No. 1. (Jan., 1990), pp. 17-28.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0894-3796%28199001%2911%3A1%3C17%3AIRCIOB%3E2.0.CO%3B2-S
References
Production, Information Costs, and Economic DEMO
Armen A. Alchian; Harold Demsetz
The American Economic Review, Vol. 62, No. 5. (Dec., 1972), pp. 777-795.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-8282%28197212%2962%3A5%3C777%3APICAEO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q
Maximization and Fairness
Kurt Baier
Ethics, Vol. 96, No. 1. (Oct., 1985), pp. 119-129.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0014-1704%28198510%2996%3A1%3C119%3AMAF%3E2.0.CO%3B2-H
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 2 of 4 -
Compensation DEMO Incentives: Practice vs. Theory
George P. Baker; Michael C. Jensen; DEMO J. Murphy
The Journal of Finance, Vol. 43, No. 3, DEMO and Proceedings of the Forty-Seventh Annual
Meeting of the American Finance Association, Chicago, Illinois, December 28-30, 1987. (Jul.,
1988), pp. 593-616.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-1082%28198807%2943%3A3%3C593%3ACAIPVT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C
Price, Authority, DEMO Trust: From Ideal Types to Plural Forms
Jeffrey L. Bradach; Robert G. Eccles
Annual Review of Sociology, Vol. 15. (1989), pp. DEMO
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0360-0572%281989%2915%3C97%3APAATFI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-V
Honeymoons and the Liability of Adolescence: A New Perspective on Duration Dependence in
Social and Organizational Relationships
Mark Fichman; Daniel A. Levinthal
The Academy of Management Review, DEMO 16, No. 2. (Apr., 1991), pp. 442-468.
Stable URL:DEMO
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28199104%2916%3A2%3C442%3AHATLOA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-S
Economic Action and Social Structure: The DEMO of Embeddedness
Mark Granovetter
The American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 91, No. 3. (Nov., 1985), pp. 481-510.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-9602%28198511%2991%3A3%3C481%3AEAASST%3E2.0.CO%3B2-R
The Human Side of Economic Organization
Donald W. Griesinger
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 15, No. 3. (Jul., DEMO), pp. 478-499.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28199007%2915%3A3%3C478%3ATHSOEO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-8
Caring for the Caregivers: Patterns of Organizational Caregiving
William A. Kahn
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 38, No. 4. (Dec., 1993), pp. 539-563.
DEMO URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28199312%2938%3A4%3C539%3ACFTCPO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-O
NOTE: The reference numbering DEMO the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 3 of 4 -
Network DEMO in Entrepreneurial Settings: A Study of the Governance of Exchange
Relationships
DEMO Larson
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 37, No. 1. (Mar., 1992), pp. 76-104.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28199203%2937%3A1%3C76%3ANDIESA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C
Trust DEMO a Social Reality
J. David Lewis; Andrew Weigert
Social Forces, Vol. 63, No. 4. (Jun., 1985), pp. 967-985.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0037-7732%28198506%2963%3A4%3C967%3ATAASR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-F
Justice as a Mediator of the Relationship DEMO Methods of Monitoring and Organizational
Citizenship Behavior
Brian P. Niehoff; Robert DEMO Moorman
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 36, No. 3. (DEMO, 1993), pp. 527-556.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?DEMO
A Conceptual Framework for the Design of Organizational Control Mechanisms
William G. Ouchi
Management Science, Vol. 25, No. 9. (Sep., 1979), DEMO 833-848.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0025-1909%28197909%2925%3A9%3C833%3AACFFTD%3E2.0.CO%3B2-L
Investigating Reciprocal Causation in Organizational Behavior Research
John Schaubroeck
Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 11, No. 1. (Jan., 1990), pp. 17-28.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0894-3796%28199001%2911%3A1%3C17%3AIRCIOB%3E2.0.CO%3B2-S
Role of Individual Attachments in the Dissolution of DEMO Relationships
Mark A. Seabright; Daniel A. Levinthal; Mark Fichman
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 35, No. 1. (Mar., 1992), DEMO 122-160.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199203%2935%3A1%3C122%3AROIAIT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-U
NOTE: The DEMO numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 4 of 4 -
The DEMO Control of Impersonal Trust
Susan P. Shapiro
The American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 93, No. 3. (Nov., 1987), pp. 623-658.
Stable DEMO:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0002-9602%28198711%2993%3A3%3C623%3ATSCOIT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-L
Collaring the Crime, not the DEMO: Reconsidering the Concept of White-Collar Crime
Susan P. Shapiro
American Sociological DEMO, Vol. 55, No. 3. (Jun., 1990), pp. 346-365.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003-1224%28199006%2955%3A3%3C346%3ACTCNTC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-V
Interpersonal Affect and Rating Errors
DEMO S. Tsui; Bruce Barry
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 29, No. 3. (Sep., 1986), pp. 586-599.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28198609%2929%3A3%3C586%3AIAARE%3E2.0.CO%3B2-1
NOTE: The reference numbering from the original has been maintained in this citation list.{1g42fwefx}