Developing and Validating Trust Measures
for e-Commerce: An Integrative Typology
D. Harrison McKnight • Vivek Choudhury • Charles Kacmar
Accounting and Information Systems Department, The Eli Broad Graduate School of Management,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824-1121
Information Systems Department, College of Business Administration,
DEMO of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45221
Management Information Systems Department, College DEMO Business, Florida State University,
Tallahassee, Florida 32306-1110
mcknight@bus.msu.edu • vivek.choudhury@uc.edu • ckacmar@garnet.acns.fsu.edu
vidence suggests that consumers often hesitate to transact with Web-based DEMO be-
E cause of uncertainty about vendor behavior or the perceived risk of having personal
information stolen by hackers. Trust plays a central role DEMO helping consumers overcome per-
ceptions of risk and insecurity. Trust makes consumers comfortable sharing personal infor-
mation, making purchases, and acting on Web DEMO advice—behaviors essential to wide-
spread adoption of e-commerce. Therefore, trust is DEMO to both researchers and
practitioners. Prior research on e-commerce trust has used diverse, incomplete, and inconsis-
tent deﬁnitions of trust, making it difﬁcult to compare results across studies. This paper con-
tributes by proposing and DEMO measures for a multidisciplinary, multidimensional
model of trust in e-commerce. The DEMO includes four high-level constructs—disposition to
trust, institution-based trust, trusting beliefs, DEMO trusting intentions—which are further de-
lineated into 16 measurable, literature-grounded subconstructs. DEMO psychometric properties
of the measures are demonstrated through use of a hypothetical, legal advice Web site. The
results show that trust is indeed a multidimensional concept. Proposed relationships among
the trust constructs are tested (for internal nomological validity), as are relationships between
the trust constructs and three DEMO e-commerce constructs (for external nomological valid-
ity)—Web experience, personal innovativeness, and Web site quality. Suggestions for future
research as well as implications for practice are discussed.
(Trust; Trusting Beliefs; Trusting Intentions; Institution-Based DEMO; Disposition to Trust; e-
Commerce; Measure; Site Quality; Disposition; Nomological Network; Web Vendor)
Introduction
“The trust factor opens up or closes down the pace and nature
of electronic commerce growth. . . DEMO Trust is so multifaceted.
. . . What exactly is trust? DEMO so easy to talk about, so hard to
pin down.—Keen et DEMO (1999)
The Internet promises to revolutionize the shopping
and information-gathering DEMO available to consum-
ers. However, the enormous potential of B2C commerce
DEMO Systems Research,  2002 INFORMS
Vol. 13, No. 3, September DEMO, pp. 334–359
(Wang et al. 1998) can only be realized DEMO consumers feel
comfortable transacting over the new medium with un-
familiar vendors (Gefen and Straub 2002). Yet, “almost
95% of consumers have DEMO to provide personal
information to Web sites”—63% of these indicated this
is “because they do not ‘trust’ those collecting the data”
(Hoffman et al. 1999, p. 82). This suggests that consumer
decisions to adopt B2C commerce involve not only
1047-7047/02/1303/0334$05.00
1526-5536 electronic ISSN
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO of the technology (e.g., perceived useful-
ness and ease of use; Davis et al. 1989), but also beliefs
about the e-vendor (DEMO et al. 2000). Lack of trust
in Web vendors can deter consumer adoption of e-
commerce (Bhattacherjee 2002). Similarly, the perceived
DEMO of having one’s personal identity or ﬁnancial infor-
mation stolen by hackers (O’Brien 2000) can deter Web
site use. Thus, a lack of trust in the technical and insti-
tutional environments surrounding the Web can DEMO
hinder e-commerce adoption. Because Internet social
cues are minimal, trust is DEMO to establish (Gefen
and Straub 2002). Web vendors must act DEMO
to overcome consumer perceptions of uncertainty and
risk by building trust—both in their own Web sites and
in the broader Internet environment. Understandingthe
nature DEMO antecedents of trust is, therefore, a major
issue for both Internet researchers and practitioners
(e.g., Fox 2000, Jarvenpaa and Tractinsky 1999, DEMO
1999).
Trust has traditionally been difﬁcult to deﬁne and
measure (DEMO et al. 1998). Researchers have
called the state of trust deﬁnitions a “confusing pot-
pourri” (Shapiro 1987, p. 625), a “conceptual DEMO
sion” (Lewis and Weigert 1985, p. 975), and even a
“conceptual morass” (Barber 1983, p. 1; Carnevale and
Wechsler 1992, DEMO 473). Although some researchers
have treated trust as a unitary concept (e.g., Rotter
1971), most now agree that trust is multidimensional
(Mayer et al. 1995, Rousseau et al. 1998). Yet there is
little agreement on the speciﬁc dimensions that consti-
tute trust and little DEMO on how the dimensions
interrelate. Keen et al. (1999) noted that, “. . . the basic
conclusion in all these ﬁelds [is] trust is becomingmore
and more important, but we still can’t really say what
it exactly is” (pp. 4–5). For years, trust researchers have
DEMO for conceptual clarity (Golembiewski and
McConkie 1975, Kee and Knox 1970) but with little suc-
cess (Wrightsman 1991). This lack of DEMO is also seen
in research on Web trust, in which diverse DEMO incon-
sistent deﬁnitions of trust make it difﬁcult to compare
results across studies. Some e-commerce researchers
have deﬁned trust as a belief in an DEMO of the
trustee (Menon et al. 1999, Stewart 1999), whereas oth-
ers have deﬁned trust as a willingness to believe the
trustee (Fung and Lee 1999). Some researchers have
not provided a conceptual DEMO (Hoffman et al.
Information Systems Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, DEMO 2002
1999). Research progresses more quickly when con-
structs are well deﬁned and measures correspond to
conceptual deﬁnitions (Kaplan 1964, Schwab 1980)DEMO
This article contributes by developing and validat-
ing an instrument to measure a literature-grounded,
cross-disciplinary typology of trust constructs that ap-
ply to DEMO Web context. Validating instruments adds
value in multiple ways (Straub 1989)DEMO(a) it brings
more rigor to research and allows research to DEMO con-
ducted in a more systematic manner; (b) it “promotes
DEMO research efforts” (p. 148); (c) it makes re-
search DEMO more interpretable and clear; and (d) it
helps assure that DEMO results are valid or “can be
trusted” (p. 148).
The DEMO nature of the trust typology
in this study highlights the multiple, DEMO di-
mensions of e-commerce trust. Thus, trust, as a will-
ingness to depend on a vendor to deliver on commit-
ments, is not the same as trust as a belief that the
vendor uses consumer DEMO ethically, or the same as
trust as a perception that the DEMO is technologically
secure. Each trust type has different implications for
consumer behavior and for how trust is built. There-
fore, it is important to distinguish among the multiple
dimensions of trust.
Theory
Trust is important because DEMO helps consumers over-
come perceptions of uncertainty and risk and engage
in “trust-related behaviors” with Web-based vendors,
such as sharing personal information or DEMO pur-
chases. These perceptions may be especially salient
when interacting with an unfamiliar vendor. Thus, a
particularly critical form of trust in e-commerce may
be a user’s initial trust in a Web vendor. This paper
focuses DEMO initial trust.
Initial trust (McKnight et al. 1998) refers to trust in
an unfamiliar trustee, a relationship in which theactors
do not yet have credible, meaningful information
about, or affective bonds with, each other (Bigley and
Pierce 1998). Credible information is gleaned after par-
ties have interacted for some time. In e-commerce, we
posit that credible information is gained only after the
truster (i.e., a Web user) has both engaged in trust-
related behaviors (e.g., disclosing personal informa-
tion) and assessed the “trustworthiness” of the vendor
335
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO observing the consequences of those behaviors. The
period during which a consumer visits and explores a
vendor’s Web site for the ﬁrst time (the focus of this
study) is clearly within the domain of initial trust. We
apply an initial trust model because Web vendors need
to engender DEMO trust to persuade ﬁrst-time con-
sumers to transact with them. In initial relationships,
people use whatever information they have, such as
perceptions of a Web site, to make trust inferences
(McKnight et al. 1998)DEMO
The focus on initial trust also reﬂects our assump-
tions about how trusting beliefs form. The cognitive-
based trust literature posits that trusting beliefs DEMO
form quickly (before parties have meaningful infor-
mation about each other) because of social categori-
zation, reputation, illusions (irrational thinking), dis-
position, institutional roles and structures, or out of the
need to DEMO cooperate on a task (McKnight et
al. 1998, Meyerson et al. 1996). The knowledge-based
trust literature (Blau 1964, Ring and Van DEMO Ven 1994),
on the other hand, indicates that trust develops grad-
ually through experiential social exchange (Lewicki
and Bunker 1995, Shapiro DEMO al. 1992). The model of
initial trust proposed in this paper adopts the assump-
tions of the cognitive-based literature, based on our
conviction that people form trusting beliefs early, but
that these may change as people gain experience with
the trustee.
DeﬁnitionsandModelsofTrust
Various types of trust have DEMO proposed (Butler
1991, Cummings and Bromiley 1996, Mayer et al.
DEMO). Most researchers have deﬁned trust according
to their speciﬁc disciplinary worldview. Psychologists
deﬁne trust as a tendency to trust others (Rotter 1971).
Social psychologists deﬁne trust as a cognition about
the trustee (Rempel et al. 1985). Sociologists deﬁne
trust as a characteristic of the institutional DEMO
ment. Many variants of the above types exist, includ-
ing a DEMO number in e-commerce research
(McKnight et al. 2001–2002).
The confusing DEMO of trust types has
prompted some researchers to develop compositetrust
deﬁnitions (DEMO, Doney et al. 1998, Kee and Knox 1970,
Mayer et al. 1995). For instance, Kee and Knox (1970)
deﬁned DEMO set of ﬁve trust-related constructs: disposi-
tional factors, situational factors, DEMO of the
336
other, subjective trust, and behavioral trust. Mayer et
al. (1995) included propensity to trust, trust (willing-
ness to DEMO vulnerable to another), and perceptions of
trustworthiness (cognitions). What DEMO models have
in common is some combination of trusting disposi-
tions, DEMO, and willingness/intentions.
In this paper, we build on the integrative model pro-
posed by McKnight et al. (1998), because it includes
institution-based trust as well as the more common
trust types—trusting intentions, trusting beliefs, and
disposition to trust. This model was also chosen be-
cause it includes measurement-level subconstructs.
Following McKnight et al. (1998), we integrate these
trust constructs within the broad framework of the
Theory of Reasoned DEMO (TRA) (Fishbein and Ajzen
1975) (Figure 1). TRA DEMO that beliefs lead to atti-
tudes, which lead to behavioral intentions, which lead
to the behavior itself. Davis et al. (1989) found DEMO
attitudes fell out of the model empirically, making
their model more DEMO Applying this more
parsimonious version of TRA, we posit that trusting
DEMO (perceptions of speciﬁc Web vendor attributes)
lead to trusting intentions (intention to engage in trust-
related behaviors with a speciﬁc Web vendor), which
in turn result in trust-related behaviors (extending
McKnight et al.)DEMO
We further posit institution-based trust and dispo-
sition to trust as antecedents to trusting beliefs/inten-
tions. Institution-based trust is the sociological dimen-
sion DEMO trust. It refers to an individual’s perceptions of
the institutional environment—in this case, the Inter-
net. Perceptions of the structural characteristics of the
Internet, such as safety and security, can inﬂuence
trusting beliefs and trusting DEMO towards a spe-
ciﬁc vendor (Keen et al. 1999). Dispositiontotrust DEMO
a general propensity to trust others, which can also
inﬂuence an DEMO beliefs and intentions to-
wards a Web-based vendor and is, therefore, impor-
tant to include in the model.
We discuss individual elements of DEMO model in
greater detail below.
Trust-RelatedBehaviors. Trust-related behaviors are
actions that demonstrate dependence on a Web ven-
dor, that make one vulnerable to the vendor, or in-
crease one’s risk (Mayer et al. 1995, Zand 1972). Nu-
merous researchers have conceptualized trust as a
Information Systems DEMO
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
Figure 1 Web Trust Model—Overview
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and DEMO Trust Measures for e-Commerce
behavior (e.g., Anderson and Narus 1990, DEMO
1973, Fox 1974). Commonly discussed trust-related be-
haviors in electronic DEMO include sharing per-
sonal information, making a purchase, or acting on in-
formation provided by a Web site. Because of the
difﬁculty of DEMO subjects to undertake such behav-
ior, we did not measure actual DEMO in this study.
Instead, we measured trusting intentions, that is, DEMO
tention to engage in trust-related behaviors with the
Web vendor. This is not uncommon in TRA-based
studies of technology acceptance (e.g., Agarwal and
DEMO 1998, Karahanna et al. 1999, Venkatesh 1999,
2000). Prior research has conﬁrmed a strong correla-
tion between behavioral intentions and actualbehavior
(Sheppard et al. 1988, Venkatesh and Davis 2000).
TrustingIntentions:IntentiontoEngageinTrust-
Related Behaviors. Trusting intentions means the
truster is securely willing to depend, or intends to de-
pend, on the trustee. Willingness to depend (volitional
DEMO to make oneself vulnerable to the
trustee) and subjective probability of DEMO (the per-
ceived likelihood that one will depend on the other)DEMO
form two distinct subconstructs of trusting intentions.
Subjective probability of depending is the more con-
crete subconstruct, going beyond a stated willingness
to rely on another to stated intentions of relying on
them in speciﬁc ways. DEMO example, Currall and Judge
(1995), deﬁning trust as a subjective probability of de-
pending, measured the probability that one would
Information Systems Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
share information with the DEMO person. On the Web,
a consumer would have willingness to depend if they
agree to general statements about volitional prepared-
ness to rely DEMO the vendor. We propose that consumer
subjective probability of depending involves the pro-
jected intention to engage in three speciﬁc risky behav-
iors—provide the DEMO personal information, en-
gage in a purchase transaction, or act on vendor
information (e.g., ﬁnancial advice).
TrustingBeliefs:PerceptionsofSpeciﬁcWebVen-
dor Attributes. Trusting DEMO means the conﬁdent
truster perception that the trustee—in this context, a
DEMO Web-based vendor—has attributes that are
beneﬁcial to the truster. Although many types exist in
the literature (e.g., Butler 1991), three trusting beliefs
DEMO utilized most often (Bhattacherjee 2002, Gefen 1997,
Mayer et al. 1995): competence (ability of the trustee to
do what the truster needs), benevolence (trustee caring
and motivation to act in the truster’s interests), and
integrity (trustee honesty and promise keeping).
These three beliefs were included based on a cate-
gorization of trusting beliefs in DEMO trust articles or
books. Fifteen types of trusting beliefs were found (DEMO
ble 1). Because the difference between many of the
types was small, we used conceptual clustering to
group them into categories. We then picked the three
that appeared most frequently and seemed most rele-
vant. DEMO, the ﬁrst three columns in Table 1 relate to
337
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO 1 Clustering Types of Trusting Beliefs
Competence Benevolence Integrity Not Included
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 DEMO
Compe- Expert- Dyna- Good- Benev- Respons- Integ- Moral- Cred- Reli- Depend- Predict- Open- Care- Attrac-
Article/book tence ness mism will olence iveness rity DEMO ibility ability ability ability ness fulness tion
Anderson and Narus 1990 X X
Baier 1986 X X
Barber 1983 X X
Blakeney 1986 X DEMO X X X X
Bonoma 1976 X X X X
Cummings and Bromiley 1996 X X
Dunn 1988 X
Gabarro 1978 X X X DEMO X X
Gaines 1980 X
Gifﬁn 1967 X X X X X X X
Heimovics 1984 X X X X
Holmes 1991 X X
DEMO 1990 X
Johnson-George and Swap 1982 X X X X X
Kasperson et al. 1992 X X X
Kee and Knox 1970 X X
DEMO 1988 X X X X
Krackhardt and Stern 1988 X
Lindskold 1978 X X
McGregor 1967 X
McLain and Hackman 1995 X X
Mishra DEMO X X X X
Rempel et al. 1985 X X X X X
Ring and Van de Ven 1994 X X
Sato 1988 X DEMO
Sitkin and Roth 1993 X
Solomon 1960 X
Thorslund 1976 X X X
Worchel 1979 X X
Yamagishi and Yamagishi 1994 X
Zaheer and DEMO 1993 X X
Zaltman and Moorman 1988 X X X
Column Totals 11 3 3 10 16 4 8 6 1 7 5 6 DEMO 2 1
% of TOTAL [86] 13 3 3 12 19 5 9 7 1 8 6 7 4 2 1
Notes: Benevolence includes favorable motives and not acting opportunistically or manipulatively. Although most of the DEMO of these sources deﬁne
trust as a belief or an expectancy, DEMO deﬁnitions of Baier (1986), Gifﬁn (1967), and Husted (DEMO) are stated in terms of behaviors or actions. Morality
includes goodness. DEMO includes honesty and sincerity. Competence includes ability, capability, and good judgment. Predictability includes consistency.
Carefulness includes keeping conﬁdences safe. Attraction refers to Personal DEMO Dynamism is used in the context of public speaking.
Coding Examples:
Ring and Van de Ven 1994: p. 93—“. . .a view (DEMO trust) based on conﬁdence in another’s goodwill [coded as goodwill]. . DEMO in the moral integrity [coded
as morality]. . .of others. . . . ;” Sitkin and Roth 1993, p. 373—“The model assigns the DEMO ‘trust’ to refer to belief in a person’s competence [coded as
competence] to perform a speciﬁc task under speciﬁc circumstances. . . . ;” Yamagishi and Yamagishi, 1994, p. 132—“Trust is. . .an expectation of DEMO
and benign intent [coded as goodwill].”
Information Systems Research
338 Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO kind of trustee capability. To be responsive and
to have goodwill toward another is similar to trustee
benevolence (Columns 4–6). Integrity, implying DEMO is
ethical, overlaps conceptually with morality and cred-
ibility, and with reliability and dependability to the
extent that they have ethical overtones (Columns 7–
11). Both integrity and benevolence reﬂect ethical
traits. However, benevolence refers to trustee motives
and is based on altruism (Mayer et al. 1995), whereas
integrity refers to keeping commitments and not lying
(implying reliability), traits that may be held for utili-
tarian, rather than altruistic, reasons. Openness, care-
fulness, and attractiveness were excluded from the
model because few instances (Columns 13–15) were
found. We also excluded DEMO because it has
to do with consistency, which is more relevant DEMO an
ongoing trust model than to an initial trust model.
The distinctions among belief types are important.
Considerane-vendorofmusicCDsversusaWebpro-
vider of medical information. The latter DEMO be
more concerned with consumer beliefs about compe-
tence than the former, because the risk from lack of
“performance” is higher for the medical information
consumer. On the other hand, the CD vendor requires
disclosure of personal information, so consumers may
be more concerned about vendor benevolence and in-
tegrity. The distinction is also important because the
effects of third-party DEMO may differ. An en-
dorsement from a professional association (e.g., the
American Medical Association for a medical Web site)
may promote high DEMO beliefs, whereas an en-
dorsement from the Better Business Bureau (BBB)
should inﬂuence integrity beliefs.
Institution-BasedTrust:PerceptionsoftheInternet
Environment. Institution-based trust is the DEMO that
needed structural conditions are present (e.g., in the
Internet) DEMO enhance the probability of achieving a suc-
cessful outcome in an endeavor like e-commerce.
Institution-based trust comes from sociology,1 which
1Some sociologists (e.g., Shapiro 1987) are concerned only with ob-
jective, behavioral institutional characteristics. Others research be-
havioral characteristics, but measure perceptions as proxies for the
behaviors (e.g., Burt and Knez 1996). Finally, some (e.g., Barber1983)
research perceptions related to institutional characteristics. We view
institution-based trust DEMO in perceptual terms, because we be-
lieve that, on the Web, perceptions ultimately determine trusting
beliefs and trusting intentions.
Information Systems Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
deals with the structures (e.g., DEMO protections) that
make an environment feel trustworthy (e.g., theUnited
States DEMO culture of the 1800s, Zucker 1986).
Just as legal systems DEMO justice and protection took time
to set up in the “wild, DEMO west” of 19th-century
America, so procedures and structures of security and
DEMO are now being established in the “wild, wild
Web” of the DEMO century. Technological and legal safe-
guards that produce institution-based trust are as im-
portant to the Web consumer as was the quick-
drawing sheriff DEMO produced the security of
institution-based trust for an 1850s frontier settlement.
Two dimensions of institution-based trust are de-
ﬁned: structural assurance and situational normality.
Structural assurance means one believes that structures
like guarantees, regulations, promises, legal recourse,
or other procedures are in place to promote success
(Shapiro 1987, Zucker 1986). For example, one with
high Web-related DEMO assurance would believe
that legal and technological Internet protections like
data encryption safeguard one from loss of privacy,
identity, or money. Situational normality means one be-
lieves that the environment is in proper order and DEMO
cess is likely because the situation is normal or favor-
able (DEMO 1986, Garﬁnkel 1963, Lewis and Weigert
1985). A consumer who perceives high situational nor-
mality would believe the Internet environment is ap-
DEMO, well ordered, and favorable for doing per-
sonal business. They would believe that, in general,
vendors in the environment have the attributes: compe-
tence, benevolence, and integrity.
The distinction between trusting beliefs about a spe-
ciﬁc vendor and institution-based trust is important.
Third-party icons that DEMO general security may
enhance perceptions about the Internet, but not beliefs
DEMO a speciﬁc vendor. On the other hand, an icon
from an DEMO such as BBB may inﬂuence a customer’s
trusting beliefs in a speciﬁc vendor, but may do noth-
ing to appease the consumer’s uneasiness about the
general security of the Web.
DispositiontoTrust. Disposition to trust is the DEMO
tent to which a person displays a tendency to be will-
ing to depend on others across a broad spectrum of
situations and persons. DEMO use two subconstructs of
disposition to trust. Faith in humanity means one as-
sumes others are usually upright, well meaning, and
339
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO Applying the idea that trusting beliefs re-
fer to a speciﬁc person’s integrity, competence, and be-
nevolence, we extend the trust literature by suggesting
that faith in humanity can be decomposed in the same
way. DEMO, we posit separate subconstructs for faith in
general others’ competence, benevolence, and integrity.
Trusting stance means that, regardless of what one be-
DEMO about peoples’ attributes, one assumes better
outcomes result from dealing with DEMO as though
they are well meaning and reliable (McKnight et al.
DEMO, Riker 1971). Trusting stance, an economic choice
variable, is DEMO the consumer who has a personal strat-
egy to trust vendors until they prove him/her wrong,
whether or not they have worthy DEMO Faith
in humanity is about attributes of general others; trust-
ing DEMO is a personal approach to dealing with
others.
Trust-building strategies may be different for indi-
viduals with low versus high disposition to trust. For
DEMO, links to well-known corporate sites may en-
hance trusting beliefs in DEMO eyes of a consumer with
high disposition to trust, but may DEMO one with
low disposition to trust (who may be suspicious of DEMO
trust-building attempts).
RelationshipsAmongTrustConstructs
Figure 2 depicts the subconstructs of, and DEMO
among, the trust constructs. Disposition to trust should
inﬂuence trusting beliefs DEMO it tends to color in-
terpretations of the interpersonal relationship at hand.
Gefen (2000) found that disposition to trust inﬂuences
trust in vendors. DEMO, disposition to trust should
positively inﬂuence perceptions of the institutional set-
DEMO Figure 2 also shows disposition to trust impacting
trusting intentions directly, DEMO this relation should be
weak because it is largely mediated by trusting beliefs.
The direct effect of disposition to trust on trusting be-
liefs DEMO likely to be strongest when both the institutional
context and the speciﬁc trustee are unfamiliar to the
truster (Bigley and Pierce 1998, Rotter DEMO). If one has
sizeable experience with an institutional context (but
DEMO with a speciﬁc trustee), that experience willdirectly
inﬂuence institution-based trust, DEMO the impact of dis-
position to trust on trusting beliefs will be largely me-
diated by institution-based trust. If a Web user gains
experience DEMO a speciﬁc vendor, the experience may
340
be the dominant inﬂuence DEMO trusting beliefs, instead
of dispositional or institution-based trust.
Institution-based trust is DEMO to relate posi-
tively to both trusting beliefs and trusting intentions.
When a situation feels safe, we tend to believe that
those in the situation have trustworthy attributes
(McKnight et al. 1998). Thus, a DEMO who is com-
fortable with the Web situation and the security of its
structures is likely to have high trusting beliefs in a
speciﬁc DEMO Similarly, feelings of contextual secu-
rity entice us to have trusting DEMO
Trusting beliefs will relate positively to trusting in-
tentions because a consumer with high trusting beliefs
perceives the Internet vendor to have attributes that
DEMO the consumer to hold a secure willingness to
depend on the vendor. Perceptions that the vendor is
honest, for example, encourage the consumer DEMO pro-
vide personal information. TRA research also supports
this link, in DEMO beliefs strongly predict corresponding
intentions (Davis et al. 1989).
RelationshipswithOthere-CommerceConstructs
DEMO Web trust model also needs to be understood in
light of three existing e-commerce constructs: personal
innovativeness, Web experience, and perceived site
quality (Figure 2). Personal innovativeness (Agarwal
and Prasad 1998) is a trait that reﬂects conﬁdence or
optimism regarding adoption of new ideas or DEMO
ogies. Disposition to trust also reﬂects a general opti-
mism (Uslaner DEMO). Furthermore, disposition to trust
allows one to adapt and inﬂuences DEMO ability to learn
new things (Erikson 1968). Hence, disposition to trust
should positively affect personal innovativeness.
Oneofthemostbasicoftrust-buildingtenetsisthat
experience with the object of DEMO promotes trust in
the object (Blau 1964, Luhmann 1979). This tenet ap-
plies to both institution-based trust and trust in the
Web DEMO It suggests that general Web experience
will be positively related to institution-based trust be-
cause experience provides the consumer a feeling that
dealing with DEMO Web is proper and normal, which is
represented by situational normality. DEMO, Web ex-
perience will assure most people that the Web is DEMO,
positively affecting structural assurance.
Perceived Web site quality should relate positively
Information Systems Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO 2 Web Trust Model—Constructs and Nomological Network
Notes.
1. Each link is proposed to be positive.
2. The link from disposition to trust to DEMO beliefs is proposed to hold only during the initial phase of a Web vendor-consumer relationship.
to both trusting beliefs and trusting intentions because
using DEMO Web site provides the ﬁrst experiential taste
of the vendor’s presence, DEMO initial impres-
sions. People make trust-related assumptions about
others based on whatever they know (McKnight et al.
1998). Therefore, if consumers perceive DEMO the Web
site is of high quality, they will assume that DEMO Web
vendor has positive attributes and will form trusting
intentions. Because experience conquers uncertainty
(Luhmann 1979), site quality leads to trust in the
vendor.
Information Systems Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
Methods
DEMO
The items used to operationalize the constructs (seethe
Appendix) came from a number of sources. Because
negatively worded trust items tend to factor DEMO
into distrust (Wrightsman 1991), which is conceptually
separate from trust (Lewicki et al. 1998, McKnight and
Chervany 2001), we used all positively worded items.
We did not measure trusting behaviors, a limitation
future research should address. For trusting intentions
willingness to depend, we adapted a scale that we had
341
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO developed and tested (with Cronbach’s al-
pha  0.90) for use in organizations, with items largely
from Dobing (1993). For trusting DEMO
probability of depending, new items were developed
to measure three common DEMO Internet behav-
iors: provide personal information, buy from the ven-
dor, and follow vendor advice. We felt respondents
would perceive these intentions to embody vulnera-
bility, as the deﬁnition of trusting intentions suggests
(Mayer DEMO al. 1995).
The trusting beliefs items were adapted from scales
reviewed and summarized in Wrightsman (1991), es-
pecially Johnson-George and Swap (DEMO) and Rempel
et al. (1985). In selecting items, we DEMO to capture the
aspects of the belief that were most relevant to the Web
context. Thus, for competence, we measured percep-
tions of DEMO well the vendor did its job or how knowl-
edgeable the vendor was (expertness/competence).
We excluded dynamism (as a speaker), DEMO it is
not relevant to the Internet. The integrity items cap-
tured perceptions of vendor honesty, truthfulness, sin-
cerity, and keeping commitments (DEMO/depend-
ability). Finally, the benevolence items focused on the
vendor DEMO in the customer’s best interest, trying to
help, and being genuinely concerned.
No speciﬁc structural assurance or situational nor-
mality items were located. DEMO, sociologists have
either observed this kind of trust or, in Garﬁnkel’s
(1963) case, experimentally created it.2 We developed
situational normality items to capture the same three
dimensions—competence, benevolence, and integrity—
by adapting the DEMO beliefs items to reﬂect percep-
tions about Web vendors in general (DEMO of a speciﬁc
Web vendor). For structural assurance, we utilized DEMO
like “safeguards,” “protect,” “robust,” and “encryp-
tion” to refer to the structures making the Web safe.
As with trusting beliefs, we dimensionalized faith in
humanity into competence, benevolence, andintegrity.
Existing items were DEMO from scales compiled in
Wrightsman (1991). The items refer to DEMO of peo-
ple in general, distinguishing them from beliefs about a
DEMO Web-based vendor. No items corresponding to
2In a similar vein, Gefen (1997) used a PC Magazine Editors’ Choice
award (with permission from DEMO publisher) as an imprimatur for
the hypothetical freeware that was being DEMO as his experimental
stimulus.
342
the deﬁnition of trusting stance were found, so we cre-
ated a new scale for this subconstruct with three items.
Nontrust items were adapted from existing scales:
Agarwal and Prasad (1998) for personal innovative-
ness and Cheskin (1999) for perceived site quality.Web
experience was operationalized as the frequency of use
of Web newspapers, news groups, information on
products, and shopping, based on Georgia Institute of
Technology’s Graphics, Visualization, and Usability
surveys of Web usage www.cc.gatech.edu/DEMO/
user_surveys/.
DataCollection
Data for the study were collected through question-
naires3 administered in the context of an experiment.
The speciﬁc setting for DEMO study, a created artifact of
a legal advice site, was devised for two reasons. First,
a growing number of sites offer advice DEMO consumers
in such sensitive ﬁelds as law and medicine. Thesesites
introduce an interesting aspect of trust—whether or
not the user is willing to act DEMO the advice such Web
sites provide. Second, trust becomes more salient DEMO
the level of risk to the consumer increases. Acting on
legal advice from a Web site entails much more long-
term personal risk (i.e., potential legal liability) than
does,for example,buyinga musicCDonline.
The subjects DEMO by completing a questionnaire
that included measures of disposition to trust,
institution-based trust, Web experience, and personal
innovativeness. Subjects were then told DEMO they have
a malfunctioning air-conditioner in their apartment
but, after repeated DEMO to the landlord, it has not been
ﬁxed. They were asked DEMO investigate their legal rights
in this situation by visiting a legal advice Web site for
which they had seen an advertisement in the local
DEMO After the subjects explored the Web site to
ﬁnd the relevant information, they answered questions
about their trusting beliefs/intentions and perceived
site quality. The entire study was conducted online.
Subjects for the study were undergraduate DEMO
graduate students at three large universities. Two pilot
3Although such instruments are sometimes called surveys,following
Boudreau et al. (2001), we suggest referring to instruments useddur-
ing experiments as questionnaires (or experimentalinstruments)and
reserving the term surveys for the context of ﬁeld studies.
Information Systems Research
Vol. DEMO, No. 3, September 2002
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO (n71 and 80) provided feedback to make im-
provements (mostly DEMO) to the items. For the ﬁnal
sample, 1,729 subjects participated; 1,403 responses
(81%) were usable. To ensure that respondentshadsuf-
ﬁcient Web experience, 1,141 of the 1,403 respondents
were from a university-wide required computer liter-
acy class that delivered course materials on the DEMO
The other respondents were information systems ma-
jors. The incentive for participating was extra credit
(0.8 to 2% of the course grade). Table 2 provides re-
spondent demographics.
The use of student subjects has sometimes DEMO
questioned on grounds of external validity (Gordon et
al. 1986). DEMO, multiple reasons suggest that, in
this case, the use of DEMO subjects does not present
a signiﬁcant threat to validity. First, students DEMO some-
times considered poor surrogates for the “real world”
because they are asked to imagine themselves in an
organizational context (e.g., as a DEMO). This study does
not require an imagined organizational context.
Rather, DEMO electronic commerce is an individual
decision-making situation. Second, students are often
DEMO to respond to questions about situations that are
both unrealisticand completely unfamiliar (e.g., the
hiring or ﬁring of employees or the acquisition of DEMO
panies). In this study, respondents were familiar with
the Web, averaging almost four years of Web experi-
ence. Online consumers are generally DEMO and
more highly educated than conventional consumers,
which makes student samples closer to the online con-
sumer population (OECD 1998).
Third, DEMO problem presented to the subjects (land-
lord/tenant dispute) was speciﬁcally designed for a
student population. Because most students are or have
been DEMO involved with tenant issues, they can
Table 2 Respondent Demographics
Mean DEMO
Standard
Deviation
Years of Web experience 3.6 3.5 0.91
Years of college 2.5 2 1.1
Age 20.7 19 3.74
Weekly use of Web 1.6 DEMO 0.5 hours 1.14
Gender 56% Women, 44% Men
Information Systems Research
DEMO 13, No. 3, September 2002
identify with the situation of a failed air-conditioning
unit and responsibility for repairs. The act of seeking
legal DEMO may not be as familiar, but here too indi-
viduals must DEMO turn to the Web to seek information
on unfamiliar situations.
Fourth, DEMO ensure that the students took the experi-
ment seriously, they were DEMO by course instruc-
tors that special software would be deployed to
“grade” selected responses (the questionnaire asked
students about the content of the advice they had
read). They were told that the percentage of extra
DEMO awarded would be based on the number of cor-
rect responses. Although this was not enforced, it en-
hanced the probability that students would take the
study seriously. Students did not know it was not en-
DEMO until after all data were collected. The pilot
studies indicated that approximately 25–35 minutes
were needed to complete the study. Results indicated
an average DEMO time of 29.3 minutes, afﬁrming
that the subjects took the task DEMO In addition,
we tested whether the subjects had skipped any aspect
of the study or had essentially circled the same num-
ber. Cases DEMO failed on these points were discarded.
The length and quality of responses to several quali-
tative questions also enhanced the researchers’ conﬁ-
dence that DEMO were serious about the study.
As Lynch (1999) has noted: DEMO from single
real-world settings and speciﬁc sets of ‘real’ people are
no more likely to generalize than are ﬁndings from
single laboratory settings with DEMO subjects. Just as
in the laboratory, the real world varies in DEMO
facets of subject characteristics, setting, context, rele-
vant history, and time” (p. 368). That is, because any
sample involves subjects DEMO speciﬁc attributes, re-
sults from a single real-world study may not DEMO
ize to the broader population, with diverse character-
istics, any better than results from a single study using
student subjects. Ultimately, complete generalizability
must be established by replication in multiple settings
with multiple samples.
Because DEMO experiment was conducted over a pe-
riod of several weeks, one DEMO we were not able to
prevent was subjects talking to each other about the
study, or what Cook and Campbell (1979) refer to as
the threat of “compensatory rivalry.” We felt that tell-
ing students DEMO to discuss the study might have
343
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO more attention to the issue. Thus, to verify ex
post whether DEMO was a problem, we performed
means-difference tests to compare the responses DEMO
subjects completing the study at an earlier date to re-
sponses from those who completed the study later. The
rationalewasthatanysystematicbiasesintroducedby
students discussing the study DEMO be reﬂected in
signiﬁcant differences among the variables. The sam-
ple was divided into six cells, representing each of the
six weeks within the study period. An analysis of var-
iance was performed on the dependent DEMO using
the week number (1–6) as the independent, categorical
variable. DEMO signiﬁcant differences were found on the
major dependent variables.4
Analysis
Data analysis took place in three phases, as described
below. In the process, DEMO analyzed three types of va-
lidity: convergent, discriminant, and nomological. DEMO
gether, these types of validity constitute construct va-
lidity, or “the extent to which an operationalization
measures the concept it is supposed to DEMO
(Bagozzi et al. 1991, p. 421). Convergent validity means
the extent to which the measures for a variable act as
if they DEMO measuring the underlying theoretical con-
struct because they share variance (Schwab DEMO). In-
ternal consistency reliability is generally considered a
necessary, but DEMO sufﬁcient, condition for convergent
validity (Schwab 1980). Discriminant validity means
the degree to which measures of two constructs are
empirically distinct (Bagozzi et al. 1991, Davis 1989).
Nomological validity refers to whether the construct
performs as expected within its nomological network
(Schwab 1980), such as relating to other constructs as
theory suggests (Boudreau et al. 2001, Webster and
Martocchio 1992).
Phase1:PrincipalComponentsAnalysis(PCA)
In the ﬁrst phase, exploratory, principal components
factor analysis and internal consistency reliabilityanal-
ysis DEMO conducted to determine the extent to which
the high-level trust constructs were discriminant. Our
objective with the PCA was to cull out items that DEMO
4The signiﬁcance level for the overall F-statisticwas 0.29, whereas
the p DEMO for the individual constructs ranged from 0.13 to 0.84.
344
not load on the appropriate high-level construct
(Churchill 1979). The PCA was performed using an
oblique rotation for theoretical reasons. McKnight et
al. (1998) DEMO that these trust constructs form a
model of causally linked variables, DEMO implies posi-
tive correlations. Mayer et al. (1995) also argued the
relatedness of dispositional, belief, and intentional
trust constructs. Orthogonal rotation assumes DEMO
structs are not correlated. Thus, if theory predicts the
constructs are DEMO, as is the case here, it is less
appropriate to use an orthogonal rotation (Kerlinger
1986, McDonald 1985). More interpretable factors DEMO
sult with an oblique rotation (Dillon and Goldstein
1984). Because DEMO did not suggest a speciﬁc degree
of obliqueness, the SPSS default DEMO of rotation
(delta value of zero) was used.
Phase2:ConﬁrmatoryFactorAnalysis(CFA)
The second phase was a CFA, using Structural Equa-
tion Modeling to assess the convergent and discrimi-
nant validity of the latent subconstructs (e.g., compe-
tence, benevolence, and integrity) within each of the
DEMO high-level trust constructs (disposition to trust,
institution-based trust, trusting beliefs, and trusting
intentions). We conducted this analysis by creating a
LISREL 8.3 path diagram for each construct (Figures
3–6), its constituent subconstructs, and their items. We
applied the following indices and standards to assess
model ﬁt: goodness-of-ﬁt index (GFI) and normed ﬁt
index (NFI) greater than 0.90, adjusted goodness-of-ﬁt
index (AGFI) greater than 0.80 (DEMO et al. 2000), com-
parative ﬁt index (CFI) greater than 0.90 (Jiang and
Klein 1999/2000), and root mean square of approxi-
mation (RMSEA) lower than 0.08 for a good ﬁt and
DEMO than 0.05 for an excellent ﬁt (Browne and
Cudeck 1992). DEMO RMSEA is particularly well suited
to determining the number of latent subconstructs in
a construct because it decreases when an additional
sub-construct reduces the DEMO (minimal population dis-
crepancy function) substantially, but increases, show-
ing poorer model ﬁt, if including the additional sub-
construct only reduces F0 slightly (Steiger and Lind
1980). Thus, it is used to DEMO guidance on the num-
ber of optimal subconstructs to use (Lievens DEMO Van
Keer 2001), which was central to our objective of con-
ﬁrming the constituent dimensions of the high-level
trust constructs.
Information Systems Research
DEMO 13, No. 3, September 2002
Figure 3 Disposition to Trust Model
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing DEMO Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
Chi-Square  112.46; df  48; p  0.00000; RMSEA  0.043; GFI  0.97; AGFI  0.96; NFI  0.98; CFI  0.99.
Convergent validity was assessed DEMO three crite-
ria: individual item lambda coefﬁcients greater than
0.70, a signiﬁcant (0.05 level) t statisticfor each path
(Gefen et al. 2000), and each path loading greater than
twice its standard error (Anderson and Gerbing 1988).
Discriminant validity among the latent variables is
shown DEMO question if the intercorrelations are less
than 0.60 (Carlson et al. DEMO). Because this was not
always the case, two additional analyses DEMO con-
ducted. First, a more detailed discriminant validity test
was performed DEMO a constrained analysis method
(Sharma 2000), which involves setting the DEMO
between one pair of variables (e.g., benevolence and
integrity in the case of disposition to trust) to unity
(1.0) and running the model again. A v2 difference test
is used to compare the results DEMO the constrained
and original models (Anderson and Gerbing 1988).
Discriminant DEMO is evidenced if the v2 difference
is signiﬁcant (supporting the original DEMO). Second,
following Gefen et al. (2000), we ran DEMO models
in which we combined two (or more) latent sub-
constructs into one and compared the resulting v2’s to
that of the original DEMO (with the subconstructsmod-
eled separately). If the v2 difference test DEMO the
original model to be a better ﬁt, discriminant validity
among DEMO subconstructs is established.
Information Systems Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
Phase3:Second-OrderModels
In the third phase, we used second-order models (DEMO
ing LISREL 8.3) to analyze cross-construct relation-
ships and reafﬁrm discriminant DEMO among the
constructs. This analysis was performed at both the
item and scale levels to ensure cross-validation and in-
terpretation of results. We assessed DEMO nomolog-
ical validity by testing proposed relationships among
the trust constructs themselves, and external nomolog-
ical validity by examining relationships between the
trust constructs and other e-commerce variables (Fig-
ure 2).
Finally, we were DEMO to leverage our large sample
size to provide greater conﬁdence in the results. The
sample was divided approximately in half by ran-
domly selecting DEMO The randomly selected sample
(n724) was used in the tests, DEMO the remaining
items (n679) used as a hold-out sample for conﬁr-
mation testing.
Results
PrincipalComponentsAnalysis
Discriminant validity of the high-level trust con-
structs—disposition DEMO trust, institution-based trust,
trusting beliefs, and trusting intentions—was assessed
345
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO an exploratory, principal components factor
analysis (PCA) with SPSS 9.0 DEMO oblimin rotation,
as described above. We were primarily looking for
problem items—those whose loading on the intended
construct was lower than one or DEMO cross-loadings.
No problem items were found; in fact, no items had
cross-loadings above 0.4 (Boudreau et al. 2001, Hair et
al. 1998) on the “wrong” trust construct.
We then examined the factor structure within DEMO
high-level trust construct. Ten factors with eigenvalues
above 1.0 resulted. Disposition to trust formed three
factors, with no cross-loadings above 0.4. Faith in
humanity-benevolence and faith in humanity-integrity
factored together. Institution-based trust split by situ-
ational DEMO and structural assurance. One item
from the situational normality factor had a cross-
loading of 0.42 on structural assurance, but this
cross-loading was still much lower than the loading of
the item on the main factor (0.60). Furthermore,
dropping the item did not improve the reliability DEMO
this subconstruct. Therefore, the item was retained.
The trusting beliefs items DEMO loaded strongly to-
gether into a single factor. A second analysis was per-
formed using just the items forming trusting beliefs
and specifying the DEMO of factors based on theory
(Fabrigar et al. 1999, Wayne and Liden 1995). When a
two-factor solution was speciﬁed, competence belief
split cleanly from benevolence and integrity beliefs.
When a three-factor solution was speciﬁed, all items
loaded by the types in the model, with loadings above
0.55 on the intended subconstruct and cross-loadings
below 0.4. Thus, no items were changed.
Trusting intention formed three well-deﬁned fac-
tors: intention to make purchases, intention to follow
advice/willingness to depend, and intention to DEMO
personal information. The only cross-loading above 0.4
was the second item for Give Information (GI), which
loaded at 0.42 on willingness to make purchases. Fac-
tor 10 consisted of weak loadings from items for trust-
DEMO intention-willingness to depend, indicating that
this subconstruct may not have been DEMO captured by
the “intention to follow advice/willingnesstodepend”
factor noted here. Once again, a second analysis was
conducted using just the items designed to measure
trusting intention. Initially, we obtained the same three
factors as described, with no cross-loadings above 0.4.
346
When a four-factor solution was speciﬁed, trusting in-
tentions split cleanly into the four subconstructs in the
model. However, one item that was designed to mea-
sure willingness to follow advice loaded instead on the
factor willingness to depend. Examining this item DEMO
gested that it had been worded to be closer to willing-
ness to depend. Thus, this item was reassigned for the
CFA. We again found that the second item designed
to measure GI had a cross-loading DEMO 0.40 and a rela-
tively low loading of 0.49. However, the DEMO was re-
tained because the cross loading was lower than the
loading, and because reliability analysis showed that
dropping this item only improved the alpha for GI
from 0.70 to 0.73.
Next, internal consistency reliability analyses were
conducted, using Cronbach’s alphas. Table 3A reports
results based on the factor pattern in the PCA, and
Table 3B reports alphas based on more detailed break-
downs. All constructs are reliable by Nunnally’s (1978)
heuristics.
ConﬁrmatoryFactorAnalysis
DispositiontoTrust. Figure 3 shows the results of
the CFA analysis DEMO the disposition to trust part of the
model. With GFI, NFI, and CFI statistics above 0.9,
AGFI above 0.8, and an RMSEA below 0.08, model ﬁt
was good. Convergent validity for each of the four sub-
constructs is shown by the criteria discussed above—
the item DEMO coefﬁcients were above 0.70 (0.73–
0.92), each path was signiﬁcant (t values between 21.4
and 31.0), and each path loading was DEMO than
twice its associated standard error (0.035–0.058).
Five of the DEMO pairs of latent variables passed the
discriminant validity test, with intercorrelations DEMO
than 0.60. However, benevolence and integrity were
highly correlated (0.69). Thus, the two additional tests
for discriminant validity described previously were
conducted. We ran six different constrained models,
each time setting to unity DEMO correlation between one
pair of the four subconstructs. For all six pairs, the v2
was signiﬁcant (p  0.01), supporting discriminant va-
DEMO We then ran a model combining the two sub-
constructs of benevolence and integrity. The model ﬁt
indicators worsened signiﬁcantly (RMSEA0.10). The
Information Systems Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO 3 Construct Reliability Results
Construct Subconstruct (no. items in parentheses) Alpha (n  724)
A. Grouped by PCA Factor Pattern
Disposition to Trust Faith in Humanity-Benevolence, Integrity (6) 0.86
Faith in Humanity-Competence (DEMO) 0.88
Trusting Stance (3) 0.90
Institution-Based Trust Situational Normality (11) 0.96
Structural Assurance (4) 0.94
Trusting Beliefs Benevolence, Integrity, and Competence (11) 0.96
Trusting Intentions Willingness to Depend, Follow Advice (DEMO) 0.95
Willing to Share Information (3) 0.92
Willing to Pay DEMO Advice (3) 0.70
B. Grouped by Detailed Variable Proposed in Model
Disposition to Trust Faith in Humanity-Benevolence (3) 0.84
Faith in Humanity-Integrity (3) 0.82
Faith in Humanity-Competence (3) 0.88
Trusting Stance (3) 0.90
Institution-Based Trust Situational Normality-General (2) 0.85
Situational Normality-Benevolence (3) DEMO
Situational Normality-Integrity (3) 0.88
Situational Normality-Competence (3) 0.92
Structural Assurance (4) 0.94
Trusting Beliefs Trusting Belief-Benevolence (3) 0.91
Trusting Belief-Integrity (4) 0.92
Trusting Belief-Competence (4) 0.95
Trusting Intentions Trusting Intentions-Willing to Depend (5) 0.92
Trusting Intentions-Willing to Act on Advice (5) DEMO
Trusting Intentions-Willing to Share Information (3) 0.70
Trusting Intentions-Willing to Pay for Advice (3) 0.84
Comparison Constructs Personal Innovativeness-Web (5) 0.89
DEMO Web Experience (4) 0.69
Site Quality (5) 0.86
v2 difference test conﬁrmed (p  0.01) that the foursub-
construct model is DEMO signiﬁcantly better ﬁt. Models
with other combinations of subconstructs were also
tested, but in each case the model ﬁt was signiﬁcantly
worse (0.16 DEMO RMSEA  0.19) than the original model,
as conﬁrmed through DEMO difference tests.
Institution-BasedTrust. Figure 4 shows the CFA
results for institution-based trust. The model ﬁt was
good, with GFI, NFI, and CFI statistics above 0.9, AGFI
above 0.8, and an RMSEA of 0.065. Convergent DEMO
ity was demonstrated through the criteria stated
above: all path t DEMO (24.7–34.5) were signiﬁcant, the
item lambda coefﬁcients were above 0.70 (0.78–0.95),
Information Systems Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
and each path loading was greater than twice its stan-
dard error (0.034–0.054).
Discriminant validity among the subconstructs
could not be assured by DEMO the inter-
correlations, which were each greater than 0.60. Thus,
DEMO ran multiple models, constraining the correlations
between subconstructs to 1.00—for all DEMO, the v2 dif-
ference was signiﬁcant (p  0.01). We then ran multiple
models combining two subconstructs. The model ﬁt
statistics worsened DEMO each case. For each combination
of situational normality subconstructs, the original
DEMO (0.065) increased to 0.075–0.130. Combining a
situational normality variable with structural assur-
ance worsened the RMSEA to 0.14 or 0.15. Combining
347
Figure 4 Institution-Based Trust Model
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and DEMO Trust Measures for e-Commerce
Chi-Square  327.31; df  80; p  0.00000; RMSEA  0.065; GFI  0.94; AGFI  0.91; NFI  0.98; CFI  0.98.
all situational normality items into DEMO variable and
the four structural assurance items into one variable
worsened the RMSEA to 0.18. Combining all the vari-
ables together produced an RMSEA DEMO 0.19. Combin-
ing the situational normality-general and -integrity
subconstructs worsened the ﬁt the least (0.075), fol-
lowed by combining benevolence and competence
(DEMO). In each case, a v2 difference test conﬁrmed that
the DEMO model was a signiﬁcantly better ﬁt. Thus,
the model demonstrates discriminant validity. How-
ever, given the marginal declines in model ﬁt when
general and integrity are combined, or when benevo-
lence and competence are combined, these alternatives
may be worth considering in the interest of parsimony.
TrustingBeliefs. Figure 5 shows the CFA results
for trusting beliefs. Convergent validity was DEMO
strated: path t values (25.9–32.7) were signiﬁcant, the
item lambda coefﬁcients were between 0.81–0.93, and
each path loading was greater than twice its standard
error (0.035–0.050). Although the GFI, NFI, and CFI
statistics were above 0.9, and AGFI was above 0.8, the
RMSEA DEMO 0.101, indicating the model ﬁt was not as
good.
348
Discriminant DEMO among the subconstructs
could not be assessed simply by looking at the sub-
construct intercorrelations, because each was greater
than 0.60. The constrained analyses showed that, for
all pairs, the v2 difference was signiﬁcant (p  0.01).
Thus, the model shows discriminant validity. Next, we
DEMO three models that each combined two subcon-
structs. The model ﬁt statistics worsened in each case,
with the RMSEA increasing to 0.13 for DEMO benevo-
lence/integrity combination, 0.18 for benevolence/
competence, and 0.21 for competence/integrity. The
model RMSEA was 0.22 when all three subconstructs
DEMO combined. v2 difference tests conﬁrmed the su-
perior ﬁt of the original model. Although the original
model ﬁt is not optimal, combining elements of the
model did not improve ﬁt.
One possible explanation for the less-than-good DEMO
may be that, with limited exposure to the vendor’s
Web site, subjects may not have had the time to de-
velop trusting beliefs DEMO the vendor at the posited level
of granularity. It is possible that more time and expe-
rience are needed for trusting beliefs to evolve DEMO
the discriminant lines (competence, benevolence, and
Information Systems Research
Vol. DEMO, No. 3, September 2002
Figure 5 Trusting Beliefs Model
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and DEMO Trust Measures for e-Commerce
Chi-Square  343.09; df  41; p  0.00000; RMSEA  0.101; GFI  0.92; AGFI  0.87; NFI  0.96; CFI  0.96.
integrity) proposed in the model. This issue calls for
further investigation.
TrustingIntentions. Figure 6 shows the results DEMO
trusting intentions. Items for willingness to depend
had high lambdas, as DEMO most of those for the Follow
Advice latent variable. Overall, 13 DEMO 16 items had
lambdas above 0.70. The model had a reasonable ﬁt
(GFI/NFI/CFI above 0.9; AGFI above 0.8; RMSEA 
0.073). As before, the lambdas were signiﬁcant and
higher than double their standard errors, indicating
convergent validity.
Although only one subconstruct intercorrelation
was greater than 0.60, all models with constrained cor-
relations of 1.0 between pairs of subconstructs were
run—the v2 difference was signiﬁcant (p  0.01) DEMO each
case. We also ran all combinations of models combin-
ing two subconstructs. The model-ﬁt statistics wors-
ened in each case. The RMSEA increased DEMO 0.12 for the
willing to depend/follow advice combination, which
the DEMO indicated as the most hopeful one. The
model RMSEA was 0.17 when all four subconstructs
were combined. v2 difference tests conﬁrmed the su-
perior DEMO of the original model, demonstrating discrim-
inant validity.
Hold-out Sample Analysis. DEMO noted previously,
Information Systems Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
we had set aside a hold-out sample to reconﬁrm the
results. DEMO ran the models using this hold-out sample.
In general, the hold-out DEMO had comparable statis-
tics with the original sample, but with slightly DEMO
ﬁt. For example, the RMSEA increased from 0.043 to
0.058 for DEMO to trust, 0.065 to 0.069 for
institution-based trust, 0.101 to 0.114 for trusting be-
liefs, and 0.073 to 0.076 for trusting intentions. None
of these, in our judgment, indicate that the instrument
has psychometric DEMO
Second-OrderModelandInternalNomological
Validity
Figure 7 shows the results for the second-order model,
testing internal nomological validity5 by examining re-
lationships among the trust constructs. DEMO model had
a close ﬁt by the criteria indicated previously (GFI/DEMO
NFI/CFI above 0.9; AGFI above 0.8; RMSEA0.049).
The ﬁt with the hold-out sample was slightly inferior,
but still good. The DEMO for most subconstructs
were above 0.7. One exception was trusting stance,
5We divided tests on nomological validity into internal and external,
based DEMO whether the relationships tested were within the network
of trust constructs, DEMO between the trust constructs and other vari-
ables. As far as we know, this is not an established practice, butmade
sense in this DEMO
349
Figure 6 Trusting Intentions Model
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and DEMO Trust Measures for e-Commerce
Chi-Square  471.87; df  98; p  0.00000; RMSEA  0.073; GFI  0.92; AGFI  0.90; NFI  0.95; CFI  0.96.
Figure 7 Second-Order Model
Chi-Square DEMO 219.38; df  80; p  0.00000; RMSEA  0.049; GFI  0.96; AGFI  0.94; NFI  0.97; CFI  0.98.
which indicates that this subconstruct may be some-
what different from DEMO in humanity. In the trusting
intentions conceptual category, GI and Make DEMO
chases (MP) had low loadings, indicating that these
subconstructs may DEMO slightly from willingness to
depend or to follow advice. Because the MP loadings
350
were only 0.41, we ran an alternate model without MP
and found it was signiﬁcantly better (based on the v2
difference test)—the ﬁt statistics were, however, simi-
lar to the original model (CFI0.93, GFI0.98,
AGFI0.98, NFI0.92, RMSEA0.044).
One possible explanation for the low loadings may
Information Systems Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, DEMO 2002
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO that our hypothetical Web site was a free advice-
giving site. To respond to questions about making pur-
chases or sharing personal information, the subjects
had to project their likely behavior in a unique sce-
nario. DEMO they be willing to pay for advice from
the site in case of a future legal dilemma? Would they
be willing to share personal information if it earned
them a 15-minute telephone consultation with one of
DEMO lawyers behind the site? Responding to these sce-
narios may have DEMO too great an inferential leap
for subjects. Thus, the validity of DEMO items needs to
be tested in the context of a different site whose pri-
mary purpose is to sell something and that requires
the DEMO to disclose personal information, such as name
or credit card number.
DEMO strongly support the proposed links from dis-
position to trust to institution-based trust and trusting
beliefs, and from trusting beliefs to trusting intention
(DEMO p  0.01). However, the link from institution-based
trust to DEMO beliefs was not signiﬁcant in the pri-
mary sample (although it DEMO in the hold-out sample).
This was surprising. Because the respondents had sub-
stantial experience (3.6 years, on average) with the In-
ternet (the institutional context), we would have ex-
pected that the link from institution-based trust to
trusting beliefs would be signiﬁcant, and that
institution-based trust would mediate much of the im-
pact of disposition on trusting DEMO Yet this was not
the case.
One possible explanation may be that most respon-
dents’ experience with the Internet was acquired
through the use DEMO simple information-based and shop-
ping sites, not advice-giving sites like the DEMO used in
this study. Thus, the respondents may have perceived
that DEMO institutional context with which they had ex-
perience was not the same as the institutional context
in this study. As a result, dispositional factors inﬂu-
enced trusting beliefs more than institution-basedtrust
did. Institutional factors were not, however, irrelevant.
One indication of this was the signiﬁcant result in the
hold-out sample. To explore the issue in greater detail,
we ran DEMO model without disposition to trust—the
links from institution-based trust to both trusting be-
liefs and trusting intentions were signiﬁcant. These
ﬁndings suggest that, in e-commerce, institution-based
trust may be important, but the relevant institutional
Information DEMO Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
context may need to be deﬁned in more speciﬁc terms
than just general beliefs about the DEMO, particularly
as the Internet begins to be utilized for more special-
DEMO applications (such as advice sites). This deserves
further research.
ExternalNomologicalValidity
DEMO on the previously discussed theoretical devel-
opment of relationships between the trust constructs
and other e-commerce variables, external nomological
validity was assessed as follows. Personal innovative-
ness was added to the disposition to trust model. Gen-
DEMO Web experience was added to the institution-
based trust model. Perceived site quality was added to
the combined trusting beliefs and trusting intentions
model. DEMO 4 shows the results—the numbers re-
ported in the bottom half of the table are the path co-
efﬁcients between the external and trust DEMO
All the expected relationships were found. Personal
innovativeness was signiﬁcantly (p DEMO 0.001) related to
disposition to trust. Web experience related to
institution-based DEMO, and site quality related
strongly to both trusting beliefs and trusting DEMO
(all p  0.001). Thus, the constructs displayed adequate
external nomological validity.
Table 4 Results from Nomological Validity Analysis—Other Constructs
Personal
Innovativeness
DEMO
Experience
Site
Quality
Lambda coefﬁcients:
Item 1 0.85 0.48 0.85
Item 2 0.87 0.41 0.59
Item 3 0.76 0.75 0.82
Item 4 0.65 DEMO 0.80
Item 5 0.78 — 0.64
Model RMSEA 0.055 0.062 0.061
Path Coefﬁcients:
Disposition to Trust to
Personal Innovativeness 0.31*** — —
Web DEMO to Institution-
Based Trust — 0.49*** —
Site Quality to — — 0.78***
Trusting Beliefs
Site Quality to — — 0.50***
Trusting Intentions
Note. DEMO p  0.001.
351
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO found, however, that loadings for the ﬁrst two
items that measured Web experience were low. We ran
an alternate model that split Web DEMO into two
constructs—items 1 and 2 (reading newspapers and
reading/posting DEMO news groups) as one construct, and
items 3 and 4 (DEMO information about products/
services and shopping) as a second construct. DEMO
model ﬁt improved signiﬁcantly, per a v2 difference
test. However, the reliability for the construct with
items 1 and 2 was only 0.56. DEMO then ran a model with-
out the ﬁrst two items for Web experience. The model
ﬁt improved again, and per a v2 test, DEMO signiﬁcantly
better than the ﬁt with all four items. Thus, we DEMO
ommend that future researchers drop these two items
from the scale for Web experience—it is possible that
even users with high levels of Web DEMO and experi-
ence do not spend much time reading newspapers or
participating in newsgroups.6 However, this results in
a two-item scale for Web experience, which should be
augmented.
DiscussionandConclusions
This paper began with the premise that trust is critical
to consumer adoption of e-commerce. Yet, current
studies on trust in e-commerce may not account for the
complex, multidimensional nature of trust. This study
proposed and empirically validated measures for a
multidimensional deﬁnition DEMO trust with four high-
level interrelated trust constructs, comprised of 16
DEMO, literature-grounded subconstructs.
Having a comprehensive, consistent set of measures
with sound psychometric properties should enable e-
commerce trust research to progress more quickly DEMO
allowing results to be compared across studies.
The study shows that, DEMO from being unitary, trust
has many dimensions. It contributes by validating DEMO
pirically the distinction among the three dimensions of
competence, benevolence, and integrity, showing that
e-commerce consumers gauge Web vendors not in
broad, DEMO terms, but in terms of speciﬁc attrib-
utes. Trusting beliefs demonstrated DEMO separa-
tion even in the initial relationship, when respondents
had only DEMO interaction with the Web site. Thus, it is
6We thank a DEMO for this excellent insight.
352
possible for a consumer to believe quickly that a Web-
based vendor is honest and benevolent, but not com-
petent enough to earn the consumer’s business or vice-
versa. These distinctions DEMO become more
pronounced as the relationship matures, because trust-
ing beliefs DEMO with familiarity. The fact that
the three “faith in humanity” subconstructs were more
discriminant than the three trusting beliefs supports
this. Subjects developed faith DEMO general others’ benev-
olence, competence, and integrity over a lifetime, DEMO
ing these more discriminant than trusting beliefs in a
speciﬁc vendor, DEMO in one brief interaction
with the vendor’s Web site. In addition, DEMO paper
shows that these three attributes apply not only to the
interpersonal domain, but also to the dispositional and
institutional domains. That is, DEMO when it comes to
Internet vendors in general, people hold speciﬁcbeliefs
DEMO respect to particular attributes rather than
broadly trusting or not trusting.
Furthermore, more than previous empirical trust
studies, this work shows that trust DEMO relate to
each other in organized, meaningful ways. This is im-
DEMO because the word trust is commonly used to
describe both detailed phenomena (e.g., “I trust him to
keep his promise.”) and higher order phenomena (e.g.,
“I just don’t trust the Web.”). With the measures pre-
sented in this study, trust research can be conducted
at either level of analysis.
The ﬁndings also empirically deﬁne the role of DEMO
among three constructs already important in e-
commerce. Disposition to trust is positively related to
personal innovativeness, Web experience relates posi-
tively to institution-based trust in the Web, and per-
ceived site quality is highly correlated with trusting
beliefs and intentions in the vendor. The site quality
ﬁndings DEMO that, in the context of initial relation-
ships, people make judgments about little-known
trustees on the basis of whatever they know. Thus,
DEMO formed beliefs about the attributes of an un-
known vendor partly on the basis of perceptions about
Web site quality. People in an uncertain DEMO seek
assurance for their beliefs through experiential evi-
dence (Fazio and DEMO 1981) such as that supplied by
viewing a Web site.
The DEMO suggests a number of opportunities for fur-
ther research. Some of these relate directly to overcom-
ing the limitations of this study. First, the current study
Information Systems Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO not directly measure behaviors. It would clearly be
desirable to conduct a study in which the ultimate out-
come of interest—trust-related behavior (Lewis and
Weigert 1985)—is directly measured. We identiﬁed a
handful of commonly discussed DEMO behav-
iors in e-commerce—there may be others. Particularly
interesting would be a longitudinal study that tracks
how trusting beliefs are formed, how they lead to trust-
ing intentions, and how these, in turn, lead to actual
behavior.
The loadings for two trusting intentions subcon-
structs—make a purchase DEMO disclose personal infor-
mation—were low, perhaps because these functions
did not DEMO relate to the advice-giving Web site
presented to the subjects. It would be interesting to test
these measures in the context of other Web-based
DEMO, such as shopping (Bhattacherjee 2002), where
sharing information and making purchases are more
directly supported.
The speciﬁc focus on advice giving may DEMO explain
why we did not see a signiﬁcant, direct relationship
between DEMO beliefs/intentions and institution-
based trust, as deﬁned and measured in DEMO study in
terms of beliefs about Web vendors in general. Two
possible avenues for future research present them-
selves. Because vendor type matters (Noteberg et al.
1999), the ﬁrst would be to test the link DEMO
institution-based trust to trusting beliefs in a Web ven-
dor selling books, CDs, or airline tickets (Gefen and
Straub 2002), because these vendors may be closer to
what subjects had in mind when answering DEMO
about institution-based trust. A second approach
would be to adapt the measures of institution-based
trust to be more speciﬁc to the context of a DEMO
trustee and then examine the same relationship. For
instance, instead of DEMO this construct in terms
of perceived attributes of Web-based vendors in gen-
eral, the items could be changed to measure or manip-
ulate structural perceptions of advice-giving sites on
the Web (Palmer et al. 2000). The latter may become
particularly useful as consumers begin to use the DEMO
for increasingly specialized tasks.
The model for trusting beliefs, although indicative
DEMO multiple underlying subconstructs, did not have a
very good ﬁt and DEMO require adjustments. The Web
experience scale could also be modiﬁed. Finally, DEMO
Information Systems Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
measures developed here could beneﬁt from testing
with different subjects (Cook and Campbell 1979), spe-
ciﬁcally nonstudent subjects with more (and less) ex-
perience DEMO the Web. In addition, while the scenario
presented (landlord/tenant) DEMO familiar to our sub-
jects, the act of seeking legal advice DEMO was not.
Thus, it would be interesting to explore how familiar-
DEMO (Gefen 2000) with the task inﬂuences user trust in
the vendor.
Further research could expand on the ﬁnding that
trusting beliefs are signiﬁcantly DEMO by disposition
to trust. Speciﬁcally, do people with low versus high
DEMO to trust respond differently to trust-
building treatments, such as icons DEMO third parties
(Palmer et al. 2000)? Can those with low DEMO to
trust be persuaded to transact with unfamiliar vendors
without, for DEMO, referrals from trusted friends or
relatives?
Opportunities exist to extend DEMO results of this study.
For instance, whereas Figure 7 depicts relationships
DEMO the second order trust constructs, researchers
could proﬁtably examine relationships among DEMO
subconstructs of these constructs (e.g., structural as-
surance as related to willingness to provide personal
information). It would also be interesting to DEMO
how the model presented here might change as we
move beyond the domain of initial trust to trust in on-
going relationships. Clearly, experience would need to
be added to the model (Blau 1964, Cheskin DEMO). Be-
yond that, we believe the constructs included in the
DEMO would still be relevant, but the relationships
among them, and their relative inﬂuence, may change.
We speculated earlier that both dispositional and in-
stitutional factors would become less important
inﬂuences on trusting beliefs than the DEMO prior
experience with the same trustee (Gefen 2000). Fur-
thermore, the model for trusting beliefs may become
more discriminant (Lewicki et al. 1998). Additional
trusting beliefs (e.g., predictability—McKnight et al.
1998) may also need to be considered. Will certain
trusting beliefs become more signiﬁcant DEMO
than others on trusting intentions? How will buyers
react if a DEMO demonstrates competence, but is not
perceived as honest or vice-versa? In addition, the
model should be applied in the B2B environment.
There are opportunities to apply the trust constructs
353
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO measures to studies of trust-building strategies.
The multidimensional nature of trust suggests that re-
searchers need to study the relationship between dif-
ferent trust-building DEMO and the speciﬁc trust
constructs inﬂuenced by these mechanisms. Finally,
for research on Internet adoption, it may be interesting
to understand the relative importance of trust vis-a`-vis
previously studied adoption constructs, such as rela-
tive advantage, perceived usefulness, and perceived
ease of use (Gefen and Straub 2002).
The study also has implications for practitioners. The
most important DEMO again the recognition that trust has
many dimensions (Rousseau et al. DEMO). A clear im-
plication of multidimensionality is that a differentiated
trust-building strategy may be necessary, depending,
in part, on the nature DEMO the target audience. For in-
stance, if the target community is DEMO experiencedwith
the Internet, seals touting the security of the Internet
and DEMO explanations of structural and technological
safeguards may be used to promote institutional trust.
In an industry where the audience is likely to be more
DEMO savvy (e.g., in the digital imaging industry)
and Web-based interaction is common, a vendor
should probably focus more on building beliefs about
its own competence through such mechanisms as en-
dorsements from respected customers, seals of ap-
proval from professional associations, or a very high-
quality Web site (Shneiderman 2000). Of course, in
many cases, multiple (or all) dimensions may need to
be addressed in a multipronged, trust-building strat-
egy. For instance, in an industry that consumers may
perceive as being high risk, (e.g., online banking), ven-
dors need to promote both trust in the Internet envi-
ronment and beliefs about DEMO honesty and/or benev-
olence of the vendor (Keen et al. DEMO) e.g., through
seals from agencies such as Trust-e that attest to the
privacy policies adhered to by the Web vendor.
Practitioners also need DEMO recognize the relationship
among dimensions of trust and their differential effect
on consumer behavior. For example, in the data, the
subjective probability of DEMO personal information
and of making purchases were more strongly corre-
lated with situational normality-benevolence than
with competence or integrity. This suggests that per-
haps DEMO need to join forces, in trade associations
or industry groups, to enhance consumer perceptions
of the benevolence of Web-based vendors. Similarly,
beliefs DEMO vendor integrity correlate more with con-
sumer intentions to purchase than beliefs aboutvendor
competence. Thus, interventions that promote integ-
rity beliefs may have the greatest promise in getting
customers to the purchase stage. Finally, the high cor-
relation between site quality and trusting beliefs un-
derscores the importance DEMO a high-quality Web site.
Rational or not, we found that a DEMO Web site
creates consumer beliefs that the vendor is not only
competent, but also honest and benevolent.
Overall, then, this article contributes by validating a
diverse set of consistent, literature-based trust mea-
sures and by showing how these measures relate to
each other and to other e-commerce DEMO We be-
lieve the model and the measures hold signiﬁcant
promise to help practitioners and researchers better
understand the dimensions, antecedents, and conse-
DEMO of trust in the e-commerce domain.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Ken Baldauf, Bob Jackson, and John Galvin for
their valuable assistance with data DEMO They also thank the
ISR reviewers, the Associate Editor, and Detmar W. Straub for their
many helpful suggestions.
Appendix. Measures
DispositiontoTrust
Benevolence (denoted DB in Figure 7) 1. In general, people really do care DEMO the well-being of others.
2. The typical person is sincerely concerned about the problems of others.
3. Most of the time, people care enough to try to be helpful, rather than just looking out for
themselves.
Integrity (DI) 1. In general, most folks keep their promises.
2. I think people generally try to back up their words with their DEMO
3. Most people are honest in their dealings with others.
Competence (DEMO) 1. I believe that most professional people do a very good DEMO at their work.
354
Information Systems Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO Most professonals are very knowedgeable in their chosen ﬁeld.
3. A large majority of professional people are competent in their area of expertise.
Trusting DEMO (ST) 1. I usually trust people until they give me a reason not to trust them.
2. I generally give people the beneﬁt DEMO the doubt when I ﬁrst meet them.
3. My typical approach is to trust new acquaintances until they prove I should not trust
them.
DEMO Normality-General (IG) 1. I feel good about how things go when I do purchasing or other activities on the Internet.
2. I am DEMO making purchases on the Internet.
Situational Normality-Benevolence (IB) 1. I feel that most Internet vendors would act in a customers’ best interest.
2. DEMO a customer required help, most Internet vendors would do their best DEMO help.
3. Most Internet vendors are interested in customer well-being, not DEMO their own well-
being.
Situational Normality- Integrity (II) 1. I am comfortable relying on Internet vendors to meet their obligations.
2. I feel DEMO doing business on the Internet since Internet vendors generally fulﬁll their
agreements.
3. I always feel conﬁdent that I can rely on Internet vendors DEMO do their part when I interact
with them.
Situational Normality-Competence (IC) 1. In general, most Internet vendors are competent at serving their customers.
2. Most Internet vendors do a capable job at meeting customer needs.
DEMO I feel that most Internet vendors are good at what they do.
Structural Assurance (ISA) 1. The Internet has enough safeguards to make DEMO feel comfortable using it to transact
personal business.
2. I feel assured that legal and technological structures adequately protect me from
problems on the DEMO
3. I feel conﬁdent that encryption and other technological advances on the Internet make it
safe for me to do business there.
4. In DEMO, the Internet is now a robust and safe environment in which DEMO transact
TrustingBeliefs
Benevolence (TBB) 1. I believe that LegalAdvice.com would act in my best interest.
2. If I required help, LegalAdvice.com would do its best to help me.
3. LegalAdvice.com is interested in my well-being, not just its own.
Integrity (TBI) 1. LegalAdvice.com is truthful in DEMO dealings with me.
2. I would characterize LegalAdvice.com as honest.
3. LegalAdvice.com would keep its commitments.
4. LegalAdvice.com is sincere and genuine.
Competence (TBC) 1. LegalAdvice.com is competent and effective in providing legal advice.
2. LegalAdvice.com performs its role of giving legal advice very well.
3. Overall, LegalAdvice.com is a capable and proﬁcient Internet legal advice provider.
4. In general, LegalAdvice.com is very knowledgeable about the law.
TrustingIntentions
Willingness to Depend (GN) 1. When an important legal issue or problem arises, I would DEMO comfortable depending on
the information provided by LegalAdvice.com.
2. I can always rely on LegalAdvice.com in a tough legal situation.
3. I feel that DEMO could count on LegalAdvice.com to help with a crucial legal problem.
4. Faced with a difﬁcult legal situation that required me to hire a DEMO (for a fee), I would
use the ﬁrm backing LegalAdvice.com.
DEMO Probability of Depending— 1. If I had a challenging legal problem, DEMO would want to use LegalAdvice.com again.*
Follow Advice (FA) 2. iI would feel comfortable acting on the landlord/tenant information given to me DEMO
LegalAdvice.com.
3. I would not hesitate to use the landlord/tenant information LegalAdvice.com supplied
me.
4. I would conﬁdently act on the legal advice DEMO was given by LegalAdvice.com.
Information Systems Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
355
Appendix(cont’d.)
Institution-BasedTrust
business.
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO(cont’d.)
5. I would feel secure in using the landlord/tenant information from LegalAdvice.com.
6. Based on the advice I just read, I would serve notice, wait, go ahead and get the repair
done, and then deduct the cost of the repair from my rent.
Subjective DEMO of Depending—Give Suppose you wanted more speciﬁc information about landlord/tenant relationships and
Information (GI) you could consult (one time only) by DEMO with one of the LegalAdvice.com lawyers
for 15–30 minutes (free of DEMO). For this service, please answer the following:
1. I DEMO be willing to provide information like my name, address, and phone number to
LegalAdvice.com.
2. I would be willing to provide my social DEMO number to LegalAdvice.com.
3. I would be willing to share the speciﬁcs of my legal issue with LegalAdvice.com.
Subjective Probability of Depending— Suppose the DEMO site was not free, but charged to access information on the
DEMO Purchases (MP) site. Answer the following questions:
1. Faced with a difﬁcult legal situation, I would be willing to pay to access information on
the LegalAdvice.com Web site.
2. I would be willing to DEMO credit card information on the LegalAdvice.com Web site.
3. Given a tough legal issue, I would be willing to pay for a 30-minute phone consultation
with a LegalAdvice.com lawyer.
PersonalInnovativeness
1. I like to explore new DEMO sites.
2. When I hear about a new Web site, I DEMO ﬁnd an excuse to go visit it.
3. Among my peers, DEMO am usually the ﬁrst to try out new Internet sites.
4. In general, I am not interested in trying out new Web sites.
5. When I have some free time, I often explore new Web sites.
GeneralWebExperience
On average, how much time per week do you spend on each of the following Web activities?
(Scale: None, 0–30 minutes, 30–60 minutes, 1–2 hours, 2–4 hours, 4–8 hours, 8 hours)
1. . . . reading newspapers on the Web?
2. DEMO . . reading and/or posting messages to news groups?
3. . . . accessing information on the Web about products and services DEMO may buy?
4. . . . shopping (i.e., actually purchasing something) on the Web?
PerceivedSiteQuality
1. Overall, this site worked DEMO well technically.
2. Visually, this site resembled other sites I think DEMO of.
3. This site was simple to navigate.
4. On this site, it was easy to ﬁnd the information I wanted.
5. This site clearly showed how I can contact or communicate with LegalAdvice.com.
*This item DEMO later switched to Willingness to Depend.
References
Agarwal, R., J. Prasad. 1998. A conceptual and operational deﬁnition
of personal innovativeness in the domain DEMO information tech-
nology. Inform. Systems Res. 9(2) 204–215.
Anderson, J. C., D. W. Gerbing. 1988. Structural equation modeling
in practice: A DEMO and recommended two-step approach.
Psych. Bull. 103(5) 411–423.
——, J. A. Narus. 1990. A model of distributor ﬁrm and manufac-
turer ﬁrm DEMO partnerships. J. Marketing 54(1) 42–58.
Bagozzi, R. P., Y. DEMO, L. W. Phillips. 1991. Assessingconstructvalidity
in organizational research. Admin. Sci. Quart. DEMO(3) 421–458.
Baier, A. 1986. Trust and antitrust. Ethics 96 231–260.
Barber, B. 1983. The Logic and Limits of Trust. New Rutgers University
Press, Brunswick, NJ.
356
Bhattacherjee, A. 2002. Individual trust in online ﬁrms: Scale devel-
opment and initial test. Forthcoming, J. Management Inform.
DEMO
Bigley, G. A., J. L. Pearce. 1998. Straining for shared meaning in
organization science: Problems of trust and distrust. Acad.Man-
agement Rev. 23(3) 405–421.
Blakeney, R. N. 1986. A transactional view of the DEMO of trust in
organizational communication. Trans. Anal. J. 16(1) 95–98.
DEMO, P. M. 1964. Exchange and Power in Social Life. John Wiley & Sons,
New York.
Bonoma, T. V. 1976. Conﬂict, cooperation, DEMO trust in three power
systems. Behavioral Sci. 21(6) 499–514.
Boudreau, M., D. Gefen, D. Straub, 2001. Validation in IS research:
A state-of-the-art assessment. MIS Quart. 25(1) 1–24.
Information Systems Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO, M. W., R. Cudeck. 1992. Alternative ways of assessing
model ﬁt. K. A. Bollen and J. S. Long, eds. Testing Structural
Equation Models. Sage, Beverly Hills, CA.
Burt, R. S., M. Knez. 1996. DEMO and third-party gossip. R. M.Kramer
and T. R. Tyler, eds. Trust DEMO Organizations: Frontiers of Theory
and Research. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA, 68–89.
Butler, J. K. 1991. Toward understanding and measuring conditions
of trust: Evolution of a conditions of trust inventory. J. Man-
agement 17(3) 643–663.
Carlson, D., K. Kacmar, L. Williams. 2000. Construction and DEMO
validation of a multidimensional measure of work-family con-
ﬂict. J. Vocational Behavior 56(2) 249–276.
Carnevale, D. G., B. Wechsler. 1992. Trust in the public sector: In-
dividual and organizational determinants. Admin. Soc. 23(4)
471–494.
Cheskin Research and Studio Archetype/Sapient. 1999. eCommerce
Trust Study, monograph, http://www.gii.com/trust_study.
html, Accessed on May 12, 2000.
Churchill, G. A., Jr. 1979. A paradigm for developingbettermeasures
of marketing DEMO J. Marketing Res. 16(1) 64–73.
Cook, T. D., D. DEMO Campbell. 1979. Quasi-Experimentation: Design and
Analysis Issues for Field Settings. Houghton DEMO, Boston, MA.
Cummings, L. L., P. Bromiley. 1996. The organizational trust inven-
tory: OTI. R. Kramera and T. Tyler, eds. Trust DEMO Organizations:
Frontiers of Theory and Research. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA, 302–
330.
Currall, S. C., T. A. Judge. 1995. Measuring trust between organi-
zational boundary role persons. Organ. BehaviorHumanDecision
Processes 64(2) 151–170.
Davis, F. D. 1989. Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and
user acceptance of information technology. MIS Quart. 13(3)
319–340.
——, R. P. Bagozzi, P. R. Warshaw. 1989. User acceptance of com-
puter technology: A comparison of two theoretical models.
Management Sci. 35(8) DEMO
Deutsch, M. 1973. The Resolution of Conﬂict: Constructive and Destruc-
tive Processes. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
Dillon, W. R., DEMO Goldstein. 1984. Multivariate Analysis: Methods and
Applications. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Dobing, B. 1993. Building Trust in User-AnalystRelationships.Doctoral
dissertation, Information DEMO Decision Sciences Department,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
Doney, DEMO M., J. P. Cannon, M. R. Mullen. 1998. Understanding the
inﬂuence of national culture on the development of trust. Acad.
Management Rev. 23(DEMO) 601–620.
Dunn, M. H. 1988. Trust and political agency. D. Gambetta, ed. Trust:
Making and Breaking Cooperative Relations. Blackwell, New York,DEMO
73–93.
Erikson, E. H. 1968. Identity: Youth and Crisis. W. W. Norton, New
York.
Fabrigar, L. R., D. T. Wegener, R. DEMO MacCallum, E. J. Strahan. 1999.
Evaluating the use of exploratory factor DEMO in psycholog-
ical research. Psych. Methods 4(3) 272–299.
Information Systems DEMO
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
Fazio, R. H., M. P. Zanna. 1981. Direct experience and attitude-
behavior consistency. L. Berkowitz, ed. AdvancesinExperimental
Social Psychology, vol. 14. Academic Press, New York, 162–202.
Fishbein, M., I. Ajzen. 1975. Belief, Attitude, Intention and Behavior: An
Introduction to Theory and Research. Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA.
Fox, A. DEMO Beyond Contract: Work, Power, and Trust Relations. Faber,
London, U.K.
Fox, S. 2000. Trust and Privacy Online: Why Americans Want DEMO Rewrite
the Rules. The Pew Internet & American Life Project, http://
www.pewinternet.org. Accessed on June 12, 2001.
Friedman, B., P. DEMO Kahn, Jr., D. C. Howe. 2000. Trust online. Comm.
ACM 43(12) 34–40.
Fung, R. K. K., M. K. O. Lee. 1999. EC-trust (trust in electronic com-
merce): Exploring the antecedent factors. W. D. Haseman and
D. L. Nazareth, eds. Proc. 5th Americas Conf. Inform. Systems,
August 13–15, pp. 517–519.
Gabarro, J. J. 1978. The DEMO of trust, inﬂuence, and expec-
tations. A. G. Athos and J. J. Gabarro, eds. InterpersonalBehavior:
Communication and UnderstandinginRelationships. Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Gaines, J. H. 1980. Upward communication in industry: An experi-
ment. Human Relations 33(12) 929–942.
Garﬁnkel, H. 1963. A conception DEMO, and experiments with, “trust”
as a condition of stable concerted actions. O. J. Harvey, ed. Mo-
tivation and Social Interaction. Ronald Press, DEMO York, 187–238.
Gefen, D. 1997. Building users’ trust in freeware providers and the
effects of this trust on users’ perceptions of usefulness, ease of
use and intended use. Doctoral dissertation, Georgia State Uni-
versity, DEMO, GA.
——. 2000. e-Commerce: The role of familiarity and trust. Omega:
Internat. J. Management Sci. 28(6) 725–737.
——, D. Straub. DEMO Managing user trust in B2C e-services.
Forthcoming, eService J.
——, ——, M. Boudreau. 2000. Structural equation modeling and
regression: Guidelines for research DEMO Comm. AIS 7(7) 1–
78.
Gifﬁn, K. 1967. The contribution of studies of source credibility to a
theory of interpersonal trust in DEMO communication process.
Psych. Bull. 68(2) 104–120.
Golembiewski, R. T., DEMO McConkie. 1975. The centrality of interper-
sonal trust in group processes. G. L. Cooper, ed. Theories of
Group Processes. John Wiley & Sons, DEMO, U.K., 131–185.
Gordon, M. E., L. A. Slade, N. DEMO 1986. The ‘science of the
sophomore’ revisited: From conjecture to empiricism. DEMO
Management Rev. 11(1) 191–207.
Hair, J. F., Jr., R. E. Anderson, R. L. Tatham, W. C. Black. 1998. Mul-
tivariate DEMO Analysis with Readings, 5th ed. Prentice Hall, En-
glewood Cliffs, DEMO
Heimovics, R. D. 1984. Trust and inﬂuence in an ambiguous group
DEMO Small Group Behavior 15(4) 545–552.
Hoffman, D. L., T. DEMO Novak, M. Peralta. 1999. Building consumer
trust online. Comm. ACM 42(DEMO) 80–85.
357
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO, J. G. 1991. Trust and the appraisal process in close relation-
DEMO W. H. Jones and D. Perlman, eds. Advances in Personal
Relationships, vol. 2. Jessica Kingsley, London, U.K., 57–104.
Husted, B. W. DEMO Trust in business relations: Directions for em-
pirical research. Bus. Professional DEMO J. 8(2) 23–40.
Jarvenpaa, S. L., N. Tractinsky. 1999. DEMO trust in an Internet
store: A cross-cultural validation. J. Comput.-Mediated Comm.
DEMO(2) 1–33.
Jiang, J. J., G. Klein. 1999/2000. Supervisor DEMO and career an-
chor impact on the career satisfaction of the entry-level infor-
mation systems professional. J. Management Inform. Systems
16(3) 219–240.
Johnson-George, C., W. C. Swap. 1982. Measurement of speciﬁc in-
terpersonal trust: Construction and validation of a scale to as-
sess trust in a DEMO other. J. Personality Soc. Psych. 43(6) 1306–
1317.
Kaplan, A. 1964. The Conduct of Inquiry. Chandler, New York.
Karahanna, E., D. W. Straub, N. L. Chervany. 1999. Informationtech-
nology adoption across time: DEMO cross-sectional comparison of
preadoption and post-adoption beliefs. MIS Quart. 23(2) DEMO
207.
Kasperson, R. E., D. Golding, S. Tuler. 1992. Social DEMO as a factor
in siting hazardous facilities and communicating risks. J. Soc.
Issues 48(4) 161–187.
Kee, H. W., R. E. Knox. 1970. Conceptual and methodological con-
siderations in the study of trust and suspicion. DEMO Conﬂict Reso-
lution 14(3) 357–366.
Keen, P. G. W., DEMO Balance, S. Chan, S. Schrump. 1999. Electronic
Commerce Relationships: Trust DEMO Design. Prentice-Hall, Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ.
Kerlinger, F. N. 1986. DEMO of Behavioral Research, 3rd ed. Holt,
Rinehart and Winston, New York.
Koller, M. 1988. Risk as a determinant of trust. Basic Appl. Soc. Psych.
9(4) 265–276.
Krackhardt, D., R. N. Stern. 1988. Informal networks and organiza-
tional crises: An experimental simulation. Soc. Psych. Quart.
51(2) 123–140.
Lewicki, R. J., B. B. Bunker. 1995. Trust in relationships: A model of
trust development and decline. B. B. Bunker and J. Z. Rubin,
eds. Conﬂict, Cooperation, and Justice. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco,
CA, 133–173.
——, D. J. McAllister, R. J. Bies. 1998. Trust and distrust: New rela-
tionships and realities. Acad. Management Rev. 23(3) 438–458.
Lewis, J. D., A. J. Weigert. 1985. Trust as a social reality. Soc. Forces
63(4) 967–985.
Lievens, DEMO, E. Van Keer. 2001. The construct validity of a Belgian
assessment DEMO: A comparison of different models. J. Occup.
Organ. Psych. 74(3) 373–378.
Lindskold, S. 1978. Trust development, the GRIT proposal, and the
effects of conciliatory acts on conﬂict and cooperation. Psych.
Bull. 85(4) 772–793.
Luhmann, N. 1979. Trust and Power. Wiley, New York.
Lynch, J. G., Jr. 1999. Theory and external validity. Acad. Market. Sci.
27(Summer) 367–376.
358
Mayer, R. C., J. H. Davis, F. DEMO Schoorman. 1995. An integrative
model of organizational trust. Acad. Management Rev. 20(3) 709–
734.
McDonald, R. P. 1985. Factor Analysis and Related DEMO Lawrence
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
McGregor, D. 1967. The Professional Manager. DEMO, New
York.
McKnight, D. H., N. L. Chervany. 2001. Trust DEMO distrust deﬁni-
tions: One bite at a time. R. Falcone, M. Singh, and Y. H. Tan,
eds. Trust in Cyber-Societies: Integrating DEMO Human and Artiﬁcial
Perspectives. Springer, Berlin, Germany, 27–54.
——, ——. 2001–2002. What trust means in e-commerce customer
relationships: An interdisciplinary conceptual typology. Inter-
nat. J. Electronic Commerce 6(2) 35–59.
——, L. L. DEMO, N. L. Chervany. 1998. Initial trust formation
in new organizational relationships. DEMO Management Rev.
23(3) 473–490.
McLain, D. L., Z. K. DEMO 1999. Trust, risk, anddecision-making
in organizational change. Public Admin. Quart. 23(2) 152–176.
Menon, N. M., P. Konana, G. J. Browne, S. Balasubramanian. 1999.
Understanding trustworthiness beliefs in electronic brokerage
usage. P. De DEMO J. I. DeGross, eds. Proc. 20th Internat. Conf.
Inform. Systems, December 13–15, Charlotte, NC, 552–555.
Meyerson, D., K. E. Weick, DEMO M. Kramer. 1996. Swift trust and tem-
porary groups. R. M. Kramer and T. R. Tyler, eds. Trust in Or-
ganizations: Frontiers of DEMO and Research. Sage, Thousand
Oaks, CA, 166–195.
Mishra, A. K. 1996. Organizational responses to crisis: The centrality
of trust. R. M. Kramer and T. R. Tyler, eds. Trust in Organiza-
tions: Frontiers of DEMO and Research. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA,
261–287.
Noteberg, A., E. Christiaanse, P. Wallage. 1999. The role of trust and
assurance services in electronic channels: An exploratorystudy.
P. De and J. I. DeGross, DEMO Proc. 20th Internat. Conf. Inform.
Systems, December 13–15, Charlotte, NC, 472–478.
Nunnally, J. C. 1978. Psychometric Theory, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, New
York.
O’Brien, T. L. 2000. Aided by Internet, identity theft soars. DEMO New
York Times, April 3.
OECD. 1998. The economic and social DEMO of electronic
commerce. Report available at: www.oecd.org/subject/
e_commerce/summary.htm.
DEMO, J. W., J. P. Bailey, S. Faraj. 2000. The role DEMO intermediaries
in the development of trust on the WWW: The use DEMO prom-
inence of trusted third parties and privacy statements. J. Com-
put. Mediated Comm. 5. Available at www.ascusc.org/jcmc/
vol5/issue3/palmer.html.
Rempel, J. K., J. G. Holmes, M. P. Zanna. 1985. Trust in DEMO rela-
tionships. J. Personality Soc. Psych. 49(1) 95–112.
Riker, W. H. 1971. The nature of trust. J. T. Tedeschi, ed. Perspectives
on Social Power. Aldine, Chicago, IL, 63–81.
Ring, P. S., A. H. Van de Ven. 1994. Developmental processes of
cooperative interorganizational relationships. Acad. DEMO
ment Rev. 19(1) 90–118.
Information Systems Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
McKNIGHT, CHOUDHURY, AND KACMAR
Developing and Validating Trust Measures for e-Commerce
DEMO, J. B. 1971. Generalized expectancies for interpersonal trust.
Amer. Psychologist 26(DEMO) 443–452.
Rousseau, D. M., S. B. Sitkin, R. S. Burt, C. Camerer. 1998. Not so
different after all: A cross-discipline view DEMO trust. Acad. Man-
agement Rev. 23(3) 393–404.
Sato, K. 1988. Trust and group size in a social dilemma. Japanese
Psych. Res. 30(DEMO) 88–93.
Schwab, D. P. 1980. Construct validity in organizational behavior.
B. M. Staw and L. L. Cummings, eds. Research in Organizational
Behavior, DEMO 2. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, 3–43.
Shapiro, D. L., DEMO H. Sheppard, L. Cheraskin. 1992. Business on a
handshake. Negotiation J. DEMO(4) 365–377.
Shapiro, S. P. 1987. The social control of impersonal trust. Amer. J.
Sociology 93(3) 623–658.
Sharma, S. 2000. Managerial DEMO and organizational con-
text as predictors of corporate choice of environmentalstrategy.
Acad. Management J. 43(4) 681–697.
Sheppard, B. H., J. Hartwick, DEMO R. Warshaw. 1988. The theory of
reasoned action: A meta analysis DEMO past research with recom-
mendations for modiﬁcations in future research. J. Consumer
Res. 15(3) 325–343.
Shneiderman, B. 2000. Designing trust into online DEMO
Comm. ACM 43(12) 57–59.
Sitkin, S. B., N. L. DEMO 1993. Explaining the limited effectiveness of
legalistic“remedies”fortrust/distrust. Organ.Sci. 4(3) DEMO
Solomon, L. 1960. The inﬂuence of some types of powerrelationships
and DEMO strategies upon the development of interpersonal
trust. J. Abnormal Soc. Psych. 61(2) 223–230.
Steiger, J. H., J. Lind. 1980. Statistically based tests for the number
of common factors. Paper presented at the annual meeting DEMO
the Psychometric Society, Iowa City, IA, May.
Stewart, K. J. 1999. Transference as a means of building trust in
World Wide Web DEMO P. De and J. I. DeGross, eds. Proc. 20th
Internat. Conf. DEMO Systems, December, Charlotte, NC, 459–
464.
Straub, D. W. DEMO Validating instruments in MIS research. MIS
Quart. 13(2) 147–165.
Thorslund, C. 1976. Interpersonal trust: A review and examination
of the concept. Goteborg Psych. Rep. 6(6) 1–21.
Tiryakian, E. A. 1968. Typologies. D. DEMO Sills, ed. International Ency-
clopedia of the Social Sciences, vol. 16. The Macmillan Company
& The Free Press, 177–186.
Uslaner, E. M. DEMO Social capital and the net. Comm. ACM 43(12)
60–64.
Venkatesh, V. 1999. Creation of favorable user perceptions: Explor-
ing the roleof DEMO MIS Quart. 23(2) 239–260.
——. 2000. Determinants of perceived ease DEMO use: Integrating per-
ceived behavioral control, computer anxiety, and enjoyment
DEMO the technology acceptance model. Inform. SystemsRes. 11(4)
342–365.
——, DEMO D. Davis. 2000. A theoretical extension of the technology
acceptance model: DEMO longitudinal ﬁeld studies. Management
Sci. 46(2) 186–204.
Wang, H., DEMO K. O. Lee, C. Wang. 1998. Consumer privacy concerns
about Internet DEMO Comm. ACM 41(3) 63–70.
Wayne, S., R. Liden. 1995. DEMO of impression management on per-
formance ratings: A longitudinal study. Acad. DEMO J.
38(1) 232–260.
Webster, J., J. J. Martocchio. 1992. DEMO playfulness: De-
velopment of a measure with workplace implications. MIS
Quart. DEMO(2) 201–226.
Worchel, P. 1979. Trust and distrust. W. G. Austin and S. Worchel,
eds. The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations. Wadsworth,DEMO
Belmont, CA, 174–187.
Wrightsman, L. S. 1991. Interpersonal trust and DEMO toward hu-
man nature. J. P. Robinson, P. R. Shaver, and L. S. Wrightsman,
eds. Measures ofPersonalityandSocialPsychologicalAttitudes:Vol-
ume 1—Measures of Social DEMO Attitudes. Academic
Press, San Diego, CA, 373–412.
Yamagishi, T., DEMO Yamagishi. 1994. Trust and commitment in the
United States and Japan. Motivation and Emotion 18(2) 129–166.
Zaheer, A., N. Venkatraman. 1993. Relational governance as an in-
terorganizational strategy: An empirical test of the role of trust
in economic exchange. Unpublished working paper, Carlson
School of Management, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN.
Zaltman, G., C. Moorman. DEMO The importance of personal trust in
the use of research. J. Advertising Res. 28(5) 16–24.
Zand, D. E. 1972. Trust and managerial DEMO solving. Admin. Sci.
Quart. 17(2) 229–239.
Zucker, L. G. 1986. Production of trust: Institutional sources of eco-
nomicstructure, 1840–1920. B. M. DEMO and L. L. Cummings,
eds. Research in Organizational Behavior, vol. DEMO JAI Press, Green-
wich, CT, 53–111.
Detmar W. Straub, Senior Editor. This paper was received on January 15, 2001, and was DEMO the authors 51⁄2 months for 3 revisions.
Information Systems Research
Vol. 13, No. 3, September 2002
359{1g42fwefx}