Initial Trust Formation in New Organizational Relationships
Author(s): D. Harrison DEMO, Larry L. Cummings, Norman L. Chervany
Source: The Academy of DEMO Review, Vol. 23, No. 3 (Jul., 1998), pp. 473-490
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/DEMO
Accessed: 29/07/2009 10:58
Your use of the JSTOR DEMO indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, DEMO at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have DEMO prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a DEMO or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in DEMO JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the DEMO regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=aom.
Each copy of any DEMO of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a DEMO organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials DEMO rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes DEMO discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, DEMO contact support@jstor.org.
Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, DEMO and extend access to The Academy
of Management Review.
http://www.jstor.org
t Academy of Management
1998, Vol. 23, No. 3, 473-490.
INITIAL
ORGANIZATIONAL
TRUST
FORMATION
IN NEW
RELATIONSHIPS
D. HARRISON MCKNIGHT
Florida State University
DEMO L. CUMMINGS
NORMAN L. CHERVANY
University of Minnesota
Arguably, the most DEMO time frame for organizational participants to develop trust
is at the beginning of their relationship. Using primarily a cognitive approach, we
address factors and processes that enable two organizational parties to form rela-
tively high trust DEMO We propose a model of specific relationships among several
trust-related constructs and two cognitive processes. The model helps explain the
paradoxical finding of high DEMO trust levels in new organizational relationships.
Several trust theorists have stated that trust
develops gradually over time (e.g., Blau, 1964;
Rempel, DEMO, & Zanna, 1985; Zand, 1972), but
when contrasted with some recent empirical
findings, their theories present an interesting
paradox. By positing that trust grows over time,
these trust theorists implicitly assume that DEMO
levels start small and gradually increase. Some
researchers, then, expecting this, have been sur-
prised at how high their subjects' early trust
DEMO were-both in survey and experimental
studies (e.g., Berg, Dickhaut, & McCabe, 1995;
Kramer, 1994). For example, economics-based re-
searchers Berg et al. (1995) expected subjects to
exhibit low to medium DEMO in each other when
faced with a trust dilemma. Instead, their DEMO
jects frequently exhibited high trust-passing to
a second subject dollars they were given during
the first part of the experiment, without any rea-
son to expect their generosity to be reciprocated.
Another example is Kramer's (1994) survey of
MBAs who were previously unknown to each
other. Because the MBAs had no interaction his-
tory, one would have expected them to have low
trust levels; however, surprisingly, Kramer
found high trust levels among these individuals.
We express our appreciation to Ellen Berscheid, Shawn
Curley, Fred Davis, Gerald Smith, and Aks Zaheer for their
helpful reviews and comments on earlier versions of this
article. Special thanks go DEMO the anonymous reviewers and
Special Issue Editors of AMR.
THEORETICAL
BACKGROUND
The Paradox of High Initial Trust Levels
High initial trust findings are paradoxical DEMO
cause, as we stated above, several trust theo-
rists predict low initial trust. By "initial" we
mean when parties first meet or DEMO An
example of initial trust predictions is provided
by economics- or calculative-based trust re-
searchers (e.g., Coleman, 1990; Williamson,
1993), DEMO theorize that individuals make trust
choices based on rationally derived costs and
benefits (Lewicki & Bunker, 1995; Shapiro, Shep-
pard, & Cheraskin, 1992). Thus, calculative-
based trust theorists would predict that the DEMO
of incentives (benefits) of Berg et al.'s subjects
would result in low levels of trusting behavior
among them. However, Berg et al.'s results do
not agree with this prediction. As another exam-
ple, knowledge-based trust theorists propose
that trust develops over time as one accumu-
DEMO trust-relevant knowledge through experi-
ence with the other person (Holmes, 1991;
Lewicki & Bunker, 1995). From this perspective,
Kramer's study participants would require time
and an interaction history to develop a DEMO
level of trust in each other. However, Kramer's
results directly DEMO this. Thus, studying
initial trust formation is important, because the
results from such studies require an explanation
beyond what calculative-based and knowledge-
based DEMO theories provide.
In this article we argue that the paradox of
high trust in initial relationships may be ex-
473
Review
474
Academy of Management Review
plained by identifying "hidden" factors and DEMO
cesses that enable trust to be high when people
in organizations first meet. We develop a model
of initial trust formation to explain why DEMO
may be high when members of organizations
barely know each other.
Increasingly
Common New Work Relationships
In today's work environment, interacting with
a new manager or with new coworkers is be-
coming commonplace. Such a DEMO involves
initial trust, because the parties have not
worked together long DEMO to develop an in-
teraction history. Initial trust situations occur
naturally, DEMO an employee or manager is
newly hired or transferred, when cross-func-
DEMO teams are formed, when salespeople or
consultants call, when mergers bring two sets of
employees together, or when a new joint venture
begins.
These situations are becoming more common
because of increased mergers or acquisitions
DEMO because widespread corporate restructur-
ing and reduced employee loyalty have in-
creased the typical turnover rate of organiza-
tional workers and managers (e.g., DEMO, Gunz,
& Jalland, 1996). The nature of tasks is also in-
creasing new work encounters, as temporary
task teams or project engagements become the
norm in organizations. Meyerson, Weick, &
Kramer (DEMO) explain that such environmental
factors as outsourcing and labor/skill shortages
DEMO increased the number of temporary task
teams. Further, communication technology now
DEMO millions of people (Henry & Hartzler,
1997) to work on virtual task teams (Lipnack &
Stamps, 1997), in which participants are often
new to each other.
Because working together well requires some
DEMO of trust (Bromiley & Cummings, 1995), in-
creasingly common new work encounters de-
mand that the parties come to trust each other
DEMO (Meyerson et al., 1996). Thus, the need
exists for DEMO model of how trust initially forms.
A Model of Initial Trust Formation
Initial trust between parties will not be based
on any kind of DEMO with, or firsthand
knowledge of, the other party. Rather, it DEMO be
based on an individual's disposition to trust or
on institutional cues that enable one person to
July
trust another without firsthand knowledge. DEMO
ure 1 depicts the initial trust formation model.
The model applies only to new encounters be-
tween people. Therefore, it excludes experien-
tial processes (e.g., observing the trustees' be-
havior), but it does include cognitive processes
and factors that lead to initial trust. As we ex-
DEMO in the next section, the model uses con-
structs from four DEMO research streams.
We define "trust" to mean that one believes in,
and is willing to depend on, another party (e.g.,
DEMO, Davis, & Schoorman, 1995). This high-
level trust concept DEMO be broken into two con-
structs: (1) trusting intention, meaning that one
is willing to depend on the other person in a
DEMO situation (e.g., Currall & Judge, 1995), and
(2) DEMO beliefs, meaning that one believes
the other person is benevolent, competent, hon-
est, or predictable in a situation (Mayer et al.,
1995).
Distinguishing two constructs that constitute
trust is important, because the word "trust" is so
confusing (Shapiro, 1987a) and broad (DEMO
son, 1993) that it almost defies careful definition
(e.g., Gambetta, 1988). The distinction between
trusting beliefs and trusting intention follows
the Fishbein & Ajzen (1975) typology separating
constructs into beliefs, attitudes, DEMO, and
behaviors. We exclude attitudes and behaviors
here so we can DEMO the article on cognitive
concerns.
At a summary level, the model (Figure 1) im-
plies that trust forms because of one's disposi-
tion to trust, one's institution-based trust, and
two cognitive processes DEMO discuss later. "Dis-
position to trust" refers to a tendency to be will-
ing to depend on others. "Institution-based
trust" means that DEMO believes impersonal struc-
tures support one's likelihood for success in a
given situation. To avoid the vagueness of dis-
cussing the formation of DEMO broad trust concept,
we use the model to explore the specific forma-
tion of trusting intention and trusting beliefs.
Theoretical Foundations for the DEMO Trust
Model
A significant body of knowledge from five re-
search streams sheds light on how initial trust
forms. In addition to knowledge-based and
DEMO trust research, three other re-
search streams have been used: (DEMO) personality
based, (2) institution based, and (3) cognition
1998
1998~~~~~~~~~pocse
Disposition
McKnight, Cummings, and Chervany
FIGURE 1
High-Level Model DEMO Initial Formation of Trust
Cognitive
Trust
\
I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Tutn
Trustin
475
based. According to personality-based trust re-
searchers, trust develops during childhood as
an infant seeks and receives help from his or her
benevolent caregiver (Bowlby, DEMO; Erikson,
1968), resulting in a general tendency to trust
DEMO (Rotter, 1967). Institution-based trust re-
searchers maintain that trust reflects the secu-
rity one feels about a situation because of guar-
antees, safety nets, or other structures (Shapiro,
1987a; Zucker, 1986)DEMO Cognition-based trust re-
searchers purport that trust relies on rapid, cog-
DEMO cues or first impressions, as opposed to
personal interactions (Brewer, DEMO; Lewis &
Weigert, 1985b; Meyerson et al., 1996).
DEMO personality-, institution-, and cognition-
based research streams each can help explain
the paradox of high initial trust levels. Person-
ality-based trust theorists, for example, would
say that subjects in Kramer's study with a high
disposition to trust would have high initial trust.
However, this may not explain the overall high
level of trust, because it is unlikely that nearly
all of Kramer's subjects had high disposition-to-
trust levels. Institution-based DEMO would
argue that the structure of the classroom situa-
tion supported high levels of initial trust by en-
abling subjects to feel secure in DEMO situation
(e.g., Lewis & Weigert, 1985a; Shapiro, 1987a).
DEMO himself used a cognitive explanation for
his results, attributing high trust DEMO to the
favorable views the MBAs had toward those of
their own kind.
Each of these three trust research streams can
partially explain high DEMO trust, but if we fo-
cus on only one of the DEMO, we face the danger
of the other two acting as hidden DEMO The
danger of hidden confounds exists because,
in a given context, all three types of factors-
personality, institutional, and cognitive-may
be present. Sitkin and Pablo (1992) demonstrated
this with respect to the prediction DEMO risk behav-
ior; they identified a hidden personality-related
construct (risk propensity) that explained the
paradoxical empirical results researchers found
when predicting risk behavior with situational
and organizational variables. By identifying the
hidden construct, Sitkin and Pablo were able
to specify more fully the antecedents of risk
behavior.
DEMO explain the paradox of high initial trust, we
will justify the DEMO trust formation model (Fig-
ure 1), based on the detailed DEMO and pro-
476
Academy of Management Review
FIGURE 2
Detailed Model of Initial Formation DEMO Trusta
Disposition to trust
l
stance
l
procsse
/
\
~~~~ DEMO ~
(se
He
them c
& Gin
to distinguish
thm
f
DEMO
iCatedioof
te
t
contrulso,
c
Iluin
fbeliefP/
Situationa
normality ~
~
(see
wit
ofthm
unter&
ech
Gering
f he ou
oud e
se
982).Arro stdirectediontoouoted trusting
tustngbelef. Smesusetofthefor rusin
a scod-rdr ontrct DEMO, ac cul
to distinguish
thm from
Stnuctucas
b
rcessestrdin u o
DEMO
~~~~~ele
o
beliefs
o
inenio
beies
beies
b ue
raedictabiliereety idvdaeainhp
cul b usd oraeombnaio n epiica wrk
o is wn Pocsss r pctre DEMO oalshp
July
cesses in Figure 2. The detailed model's con-
structs and processes come from four of the
five research streams mentioned above (see
Figure 2): (1) personality (faith in humanity),
(2) institutional (institution-based trust), (3) cal-
culative (trusting stance), and (4) cognitive
(categorization processes and illusions of con-
trol process). Trusting beliefs and trusting in-
tention come from more than DEMO research
stream. The fifth research stream-knowl-
edge-based trust-assumes that the parties
have firsthand knowledge of each other, based
on an interaction history. Because "DEMO re-
lationships," by definition, have no interaction
history, firsthand knowledge-based trust does
not apply to them. Hence, firsthand knowl-
edge-based trust formation processes lie out-
side the scope of this article. We address sec-
DEMO knowledge, such as reputation, as a
categorization process.
1998
We chose the model's four trusting beliefs be-
cause they DEMO the most commonly used trusting
beliefs in the literature (e.g., Mayer et al., 1995).
Each trusting belief is proposed to be more
highly correlated with other trusting beliefs
than with the model's other DEMO, indicat-
ing a type of convergent validity. The constructs
in institution-based DEMO and disposition to trust
also display convergent validity. Trusting be-
liefs are proposed to be more highly related to
trusting intention than they are DEMO institution-
based trust and disposition to trust, as reflected
by the DEMO grouping them together as a compos-
ite trust concept.
We define the model's constructs at the indi-
vidual level of analysis. Hence, the model's con-
structs are internally consistent, even though
one set of constructs (institution-based trust) re-
flects group- or organization-level phenomena.
In limiting DEMO article's scope to the individual
level of analysis, we are DEMO disallowing social
and organizational effects. In fact, we believe
organizational-level constructs DEMO trust.
However, these lie outside the scope of the
article.
Our DEMO contribution is in creating a
model that explains why trust can be high ini-
tially. But the model also addresses a second
paradox. Although DEMO frequently has been
termed "fragile" (e.g., Worchel, 1979), DEMO has also
been described as "robust" (e.g., Luhmann, 1979)DEMO
An added contribution is that we discuss the
model's implications for understanding why
trust is considered both fragile and robust. We
include research DEMO for the model in
the last section of the article.
A MODEL EXPLAINING THE HIGH INITIAL
TRUST PARADOX
Disposition to Trust Affects Trusting Beliefs
DEMO Trusting Intention
A person exhibits a disposition to trust to the
extent that she or he demonstrates a consistent
tendency to be willing to DEMO on others
across a broad spectrum of situations and per-
sons-a personality construct that builds on the
work of Erikson (1968) and Rotter (1967, 1971,
1980). In contrast to others, we distinguish DEMO
tween two types of disposition to trust, each of
which affects DEMO intention in a different
way: (1) faith in humanity and (2) trusting stance.
McKnight, Cummings, and Chervany
477
Reflecting the traditional view of personality-
based trust, "faith in humanity" means that one
believes that others are typically well-meaning
and reliable (e.g., Rosenberg, 1957; Wrightsman,
1991). "Trusting stance" means that one believes
that, regardless of whether people are reliable
or not, one will obtain DEMO interpersonal out-
comes by dealing with people as though they
are well-meaning and reliable. Because it re-
flects a conscious choice, trusting stance derives
from the calculative-based trust research
stream (e.g., Riker, 1971). As an example of trust-
ing stance, one of the authors asked a respon-
dent if she trusted her new manager, who had
just been hired from outside the company. She
replied "yes," explaining that she generally
trusts new people until they give her some rea-
son not DEMO trust them. Hence, she exhibited a
personal strategy to trust newcomers. DEMO faith
in humanity and trusting stance are "disposi-
tional," which DEMO to personal tendencies, not
traits, because they reflect tendencies that ap-
ply across various situations.
Mixed empirical findings. Researchers have
experienced mixed results DEMO using disposi-
tion to trust to predict trust. From their research,
Johnson-George and Swap conclude that con-
structs like disposition to trust "do not accu-
rately determine an individual's trust in another
under particular DEMO" (1982: 1307). In
contrast, others have found disposition-related
constructs to be important predictors. For exam-
ple, Goldsteen, Schorr, and Goldsteen (1989)
found that disposition-related trust had a statis-
tically significant effect on peoples' mistrust of
federal nuclear plant authorities whom they did
not know personally. Mayer et al. (1995) re-
viewed additional evidence that DEMO
based trust is important to other trust constructs.
However, Holmes (1991) declares that although
researchers assume disposition to trust is a con-
tributor to the development of relationship-
specific trust, this link has not been proven.
Resolving the research findings. We can re-
solve these mixed results DEMO using our initial
trust model. The time frame of the relationship is
important in predicting the effects of disposition
to trust. Although other variables DEMO swamp
the effects of a person's trusting tendency in
ongoing relationships, disposition to trust likely
will have a significant effect on a person's trust-
ing beliefs and trusting intention in new organ-
izational relationships. DEMO and
478
Academy of Management Review
July
Swap cite evidence that disposition to DEMO pre-
dicts what they call "trusting behavior" only
when parties are new to each other in "highly
ambiguous, novel, or unstructured situations,
where one's generalized expectancy is all one
can rely on" (Johnson-George & Swap, 1982: 1307;
cf., Rotter, 1980). A transferred worker's relation-
ship with a new manager in an DEMO area
exemplifies such a situation, because roles and
relationships are not DEMO clear. Goldsteen et al.'s
(1989) finding-that dispositional trust was re-
lated to specific trust of federal authorities indi-
viduals had never met-supports DEMO idea that
dispositional trust is salient when people do not
know each other.
Faith in humanity effects. Because faith in
humanity reflects the extent DEMO which one be-
lieves that nonspecific others are trustworthy,
this characteristic will probably affect one's ini-
tial trusting beliefs (Kramer, 1994)DEMO Already-
developed patterns of thinking about relation-
ships in general tend to transfer to a specific
initial relationship. This is particularly true if an
DEMO cannot draw on other reasons (e.g.,
trusting beliefs or institution-based DEMO), be-
cause the situation, the type of relationship, and
the type of other person are new. In other words,
if no DEMO specific situational information is
available, one will rely on one's DEMO beliefs
about human nature (Wrightsman, 1991), as re-
flected in faith in humanity. This is similar to the
argument, presented by Mullins and Cummings,
that "weak situations" display ambiguity in
terms of DEMO meaning of the situation (in press).
In weak situations the DEMO's disposition will
be more salient than the situation. Initial trust-
related situations may be ambiguous because
the parties' roles or task may be new. Rotter
(1971) has said that the novelty of the situation
DEMO how salient dispositional trust will be. In
a novel situation, then, faith in humanity will
enable trusting beliefs to be high.
Proposition 1: In the initial relation-
ship, to the extent the situation is
novel and ambiguous, faith in human-
ity will lead to trusting beliefs.
Trusting stance effects. Trusting stance influ-
ences one to be intentionally willing to DEMO
on another, regardless of beliefs in the other. An
individual with DEMO trusting stance probably
believes that things turn out best when one is
willing to depend on others, even though others
may or may not be trustworthy. Thus, trusting
stance does not lead to beliefs about the other
person; rather, it directly supports one's willing-
ness to DEMO on that person.
Proposition 2: In the initial relation-
ship, trusting stance will lead to trust-
ing intention. The effects of trusting
stance DEMO trusting intention will not be
mediated by trusting beliefs.
Institution-Based Trust Affects Trusting
Intention
Institution-based trust means that one be-
lieves the necessary impersonal DEMO are
in place to enable one to act in anticipation of a
successful future endeavor (e.g., Shapiro, 1987a;
Zucker, 1986). DEMO intention at the begin-
ning of a relationship may be high because of
high institution-based trust levels. In the litera-
ture two types of DEMO trust are dis-
cussed: (1) situational normality, defined as the
belief that success is likely because the situa-
tion is normal, and (2) structural assurances,
defined as the belief that success is DEMO be-
cause such contextual conditions as promises,
contracts, regulations, and guarantees are in
place. Later, we discuss the effects of institution-
based trust on trusting beliefs. In this section we
look at direct effects DEMO trusting intention.
Situational normality belief effects. Situa-
tional normality belief stems from the appear-
ance that things are normal (Garfinkel, 1963: 188)
or "customary" (Baier, 1986: 245), or that "every-
DEMO seems in proper order" (Lewis & Weigert,
1985a: 974)DEMO Situational normality involves a
properly ordered setting that appears likely to
facilitate a successful interaction. For example,
a person who enters a bank DEMO to expect a
setting conducive to both customer service and
fiduciary responsibility that is reflected in the
workers' professional appearance, the prosper-
ous DEMO secure physical setting, and the
friendly, yet safe, money-handling procedures.
DEMO individual's belief that the situation is nor-
mal helps that person feel comfortable enough
to rapidly form a trusting intention toward the
other DEMO in the situation.
Garfinkel's experiments, in contrast, demon-
strated that when people face inexplicable, ab-
normal situations, trust between them breaks
DEMO For example, one subject told the experi-
1998
McKnight, Cummings, and Chervany
menter he had a flat tire DEMO the way to work. The
experimenter responded, "What do you mean,
you had a flat tire?" (1963: 221). At DEMO point trust
broke down because of the experimenter's illog-
ical question.
Situational normality also can relate to one's
comfort with one's DEMO roles and the other per-
son's roles in that setting (DEMO, 1986). Socially
constructed roles create a shared understanding
among members DEMO the social system that facil-
itates trusting intention among them.
Proposition 3: In the initial relation-
ship, situational normality belief will
lead to DEMO intention.
Structural assurance belief effects. Shapiro re-
fers to structural safeguards in terms of institu-
tional "side bets" (1987b: 204), such DEMO regula-
tions, guarantees, and legal recourse.
. Regulations enable people to feel assured
about their expectations of the other party's
future behavior (e.g., Sitkin, 1995). For exam-
ple, a company subcontracting the construc-
tion of metric-sized engine parts relies on
the other party to DEMO the same measures
the company itself uses since they are spec-
ified by well-accepted metric standards
makers.
* Guarantees mitigate the perceived risk in-
DEMO in forming trusting intention. Hence,
structural assurance belief leads to trusting
intention, as evidenced by Zaheer, McEvily,
and Perrone's (in press) finding that struc-
ture-based trust is positively related to in-
terpersonal trust.
. Legal recourse (i.e., regarding contracts or
promises) is related to trusting intention for
two reasons (Baier, 1986). First, the trustor
feels comfortable that the promise has the
type of significance in DEMO particular setting
so that the trusted person will make every
effort to fulfill it, or risk reaping sanctions
through social disapproval or legal action
(e.g., Sitkin, 1995). Second, the trustor feels
comfortable that DEMO trusted person, out of
either socially learned behavior patterns or
fear DEMO sanctions, will act according to the
norms surrounding promise in the DEMO
setting.
Structural assurance belief will be more influ-
ential in the initial relationship than it will later,
because information about the other person DEMO
very incomplete when the relationship begins,
making situational information quite salient.
Proposition 4: In the initial relation-
ship, structural assurance belief will
DEMO to trusting intention.
479
Structural Assurance Belief and Situational
Normality Belief Affect Trusting Beliefs
Structural assurance belief is likely to affect
trusting beliefs for DEMO reasons, the last two of
which are shared by situational normality DEMO
lief. First, believing that a situation is bounded
by safeguards enables DEMO to believe that the
individuals in the situation are trustworthy. For
example, a new employee can better believe in
the boss's benevolence if the employee believes
the workplace has procedures that punish abu-
sive managerial DEMO Also, an employee is
more likely to believe a new coworker DEMO compe-
tent if that individual believes the department's
hiring process is sound.
Second, the institutions in the situation reflect
the actions of the people involved; therefore,
beliefs about the institutions will help form be-
liefs about the people who are involved in the
institutions. For example, within the bounds set
by corporate practices and procedures, the boss
is the chief administrator of fairness in the work-
place. Thus, one's belief about the structures
supporting fairness in the workplace will sup-
port DEMO's belief in the boss's benevolence. Sim-
ilarly, a situational DEMO belief implies that
the people in the situation will act normally and
can therefore be trusted.
Third, based on many studies of cognitive con-
sistency (Abelson et al., 1968), we believe that
structural assurance DEMO situational normality
beliefs will probably stay consistent with re-
lated beliefs, DEMO as trusting beliefs. Cognitive
consistency is probably even more salient dur-
ing the initial relationship, before beliefs about
the other person and the situation become
highly differentiated through experiential
knowledge (Sitkin & Roth, 1993).
DEMO 5: In the initial relation-
ship, the trusting beliefs will be a
function of structural assurance belief
and situational normality belief.
Trusting Beliefs DEMO Trusting Intention
Evidence for the link between trusting beliefs
and trusting intention is reviewed elsewhere
(Mayer et al., 1995). Dobing (1993) DEMO found a
strong relationship between his trusting beliefs
and trust (willingness DEMO depend) constructs.
Logically, if one believes that the other party is
benevolent, competent, honest, and predictable,
480
Academy of Management
one is likely to form a trusting intention DEMO
that person. Therefore, trusting beliefs will pos-
itively impact trusting intention.
DEMO a more general level, the literature that
links beliefs to intentions DEMO this relation-
ship (e.g., Davis, 1989; Fishbein & Ajzen, DEMO).
Ajzen (1988) discusses evidence that beliefs and
intentions tend to stay consistent. They should
be especially consistent at first, when one has
no experiential basis not to believe the other
person is trustworthy.
Proposition DEMO: In the initial relation-
ship, trusting intention will be a func-
tion of benevolence belief, compe-
tence belief, honesty belief, and
predictability belief.
Faith in Humanity and Trusting Stance Affect
Structural Assurance Belief
Faith DEMO humanity reflects one's lifelong expe-
riences with others (e.g., Rotter, 1967). A person
who believes in the honesty and benevolence of
people generally will probably have stronger
beliefs in the security afforded by DEMO insti-
tutions. Stated another way, one's structural as-
surance belief DEMO probably partly based on how
one feels about people in general, DEMO peo-
ple play roles that relate to how secure the sit-
uation is. Hence, one's feelings about people in
general will likely influence one's structural as-
surance belief. This is more likely to be DEMO at
the beginning of a relationship, when beliefs
about the situation DEMO based more on assump-
tions than on facts.
Trusting stance also will affect initial struc-
tural assurance belief. An individual with high
trusting stance DEMO that trusting others fa-
cilitates success, regardless of his or her DEMO
about specific people. This assumption is con-
sistent with a perception that safeguards or
safety nets will protect the individual involved
from bad consequences DEMO people cause. In
other words, developing a high level of struc-
DEMO assurance belief is facilitated when one
has a high level of trusting stance. When parties
first meet, the person's already-formed high
level of trusting stance will tend to encourage a
corresponding high level of structural DEMO
ance belief. Over time, the relationship between
these constructs may be DEMO, but at the
initial meeting, a person will rely on his or her
Review
prior tendencies, in terms of trusting stance, to
DEMO structural assurance belief.
Proposition 7: In the initial relation-
ship, faith in humanity and trusting
stance will lead to structural assur-
ance belief.
DEMO Processes Enable High Levels
of Trusting Beliefs
In a new relationship a person may use three
types of categorization processes to develop
trusting beliefs: (1) unit grouping, (2) reputation
categorization, and (3) DEMO "Unit group-
ing" means to put the other person in the same
category as oneself. "Reputation categorization"
means that one assigns attributes to another
person based on second-hand information about
the person. "Stereotyping" DEMO to place an-
other person into a general category of persons.
Unit grouping. Because those who are
grouped together tend to share common goals
DEMO values, they tend to perceive each other in a
positive light (Kramer, Brewer, & Hanna, 1996).
Hence, one group member DEMO be more likely to
form trusting beliefs toward another group
member. For example, Zucker, Darby, Brewer,
and Peng (1996) found that being a member of
the same organization generated the trust
needed for DEMO to collaborate on research.
In their study Brewer and Silver (1978) found that
people perceived in-group members to be more
trustworthy than out-group DEMO These
studies provide evidence that unit grouping
quickly leads to high levels of trusting beliefs.
As an example of the rapid effects of unit DEMO
ing, in studying prospective dating couples who
had never met, Darley and Berscheid (1967)
found that the knowledge that one would be
paired with the other tended to enhance the
former's beliefs about DEMO latter's characteris-
tics. Applied to a new task team, unit DEMO
would enable one member to immediately form
trusting beliefs about another team member.
Reputation categorization. Those with good
reputations are categorized as trustworthy indi-
DEMO Reputation may reflect professional
competence (Barber, 1983; Powell, 1996) DEMO the
other trusting beliefs: benevolence (Dasgupta,
1988), honesty, DEMO predictability. A person may
be perceived as a competent individual because
she or he is a member of a competent group
July
1998
(Dasgupta, 1988) or because of her or his actions.
Therefore, if the individual has a good reputa-
tion, one will quickly DEMO trusting beliefs
about that individual, even without firsthand
knowledge.
Stereotyping. Stereotyping DEMO be done either
on a broad level, such as gender (e.g., Orbell,
Dawes, & Schwartz-Shea, 1994), or on a more
specific level, such as prejudices for or against
occupational groups (e.g., used-car salespeo-
ple). At their first meeting, parties may form
stereotypes about each other, based on voice
(e.g., male/female or domestic/foreign; Baldwin,
1992) or physical appearance (Dion, Berscheid, &DEMO
Walster, 1972; Riker, 1971). By positive stereotyp-
ing, one can quickly form positive trusting be-
liefs about the other by generalizing DEMO the
favorable category into which the person was
placed.
Proposition 8: DEMO the initial relation-
ship, categorization processes that
place the other person DEMO a positive
grouping will tend to produce high
levels of trusting beliefs.
Illusions of Control Process: Interactive Effects
That Elevate Trusting Beliefs
Here we explain why the illusions of control
process will interact with categorization pro-
DEMO, faith in humanity, and structural assur-
ance belief to produce high levels of trusting
beliefs. People in an uncertain situation will
take small DEMO to try to assure themselves
that things are under their personal control
(Langer, 1975). This results in unrealistically in-
flated perceptions of DEMO control (Taylor &
Brown, 1988), which Langer (1975) DEMO "illu-
sions of control." Illusions, obviously, involve
perceptions that differ from reality, and consid-
erable evidence demonstrates the presence of
illusion in cognitive processing (e.g., Fiske &
Taylor, 1984).
The illusions DEMO control process that helps
build trusting beliefs may be similar to the pro-
cess by which people become overconfident of
their judgments, as reported by Langer (1975)
and Paese and Sniezek (1991). First, one forms a
tentative belief, and then one watches for clues
that confirm the belief. Even without evidence,
the effort of watching tends DEMO overinflate confi-
dence in one's judgment (Davis & Kotteman,
DEMO, Cummings, and Chervany
481
1994). Similarly, even a slight DEMO at confirm-
ing one's tentative trusting beliefs in another
may overinflate one's confidence that high lev-
els of trusting beliefs are warranted.
DEMO control efforts. People may make an
initial effort to think about another person's
trustworthiness, or they may, upon meeting a
person, immediately attempt to gauge whether
or not they can influence that person in DEMO
small way (egg., make them smile). We term such
actions "token control efforts." One individual is
not trying to categorize the DEMO but, rather, is
testing his or her ability to deal with the other
individual successfully.
Initially, a person is likely to use token control
efforts because she or he does not know from
experience whether DEMO not the other has the at-
tributes needed to be considered trustworthy.
After making such small control efforts, the in-
dividual may form an unjustifiably strong con-
fidence that one's positive categorization, faith
in humanity, and structural assurance beliefs
are correct and, therefore, that the other person
is trustworthy. Langer (1975) for example, in a
study of overconfidence, found that token control
efforts to improve one's chances in a lottery (i.e.,
by choosing their own lottery ticket) made DEMO
very overconfident of winning.
Trust theorists have posited that trust build-
ing involves illusion (Holmes, 1991; Meyerson et
al., 1996). The DEMO of one empirical trust study
support this position. Kramer (1994) found that
ruminating for a few minutes about others' mo-
tives and intentions increased a person's confi-
dence in the accuracy of his or DEMO judgments of
the others. Mental assessments tend to increase
one's confidence because, as Langer (1975)
found, they move a task further from the realm of
chance and closer to the realm of a DEMO
judgment task. Hence, token control efforts can
support a person's DEMO in trust-related
beliefs.
Interactive effects. We propose that token con-
trol efforts will interact with categorization
processes, faith in humanity, and structural
assurance DEMO, strengthening an individual's
capacity to form trusting beliefs. Token control
DEMO will give a person the illusion that his or
her positive faith in humanity can apply to the
particular other party by convincing the DEMO
ual that he or she is applying skill-not just
chance-to a trust-related judgment of the
other party. Similarly, token control efforts will
482
(1) build confidence that one's positive categori-
zation of DEMO other person is correct, and (2) bol-
ster confidence that DEMO safeguards make
the environment secure and, by association, the
people involved trustworthy.
Proposition 9: In the initial relationship,
token control efforts will strengthen
the tendency of categorization pro-
cesses, faith in humanity, and DEMO
tural assurance belief to produce high
levels of trusting beliefs.
MODEL IMPLICATIONS FOR TRUSTING
INTENTION FRAGILITY/ROBUSTNESS
Paradoxically, although trust often has been
termed "fragile" (e.g., Worchel, 1979), it has also
been described as "robust," in that it progresses
in upward spirals (e.g., Zand, 1972) or becomes
more fully developed over time (Gabarro, DEMO;
Sitkin & Roth, 1993). Our model of initial trust
DEMO improves our understanding of
how initial trusting intention, the model's DEMO
mate consequent, may be either fragile or robust
under different conditions.
DEMO Under Which Initial Trusting
Intention Is Likely to Be Fragile
Initial trusting intention is likely to be fragile
under three conditions: (1) inadequate support
from Figure 2's antecedent constructs, (2) the
tentative and assumption-based nature of the
antecedent constructs, and (3) high perceived
risk. Fragile refers to a trusting intention level
that is likely to undergo DEMO changes during a
given time frame. That is, as time passes DEMO
conditions change, to what extent is the level of
trusting intention DEMO to change? Although re-
searchers' use of the term "fragile" typically re-
fers to a high trust level suddenly becoming low,
DEMO define the term so that it could apply to
either high or low trust levels. At high levels,
fragile trust is subject to DEMO decreases,
whereas at low levels, fragile trust is subject to
DEMO increases. In either case fragile trust is
unstable, quickly changeable, or easily influ-
enced.
Robust (the opposite of fragile) refers to a
DEMO intention level that does not change
dramatically during a given time frame. As an
example of the difference between robust and
Academy of Management DEMO
July
fragile, if a trusting intentions level were to
move downward DEMO, we would call it
fragile rather than robust.
Inadequate antecedent support. DEMO,
the more highly positive antecedents trusting
intention has, the less DEMO it will be; a weak
combination of trusting intention antecedents
will DEMO in a fragile trusting intention. That is,
if trusting intention is associated with only one
highly positive antecedent, it is likely to change
downward soon after the initial period of a re-
lationship.
For example, suppose a home buyer with a
low disposition to trust and low DEMO beliefs
in the home builder enters into a contract to
have a house built, based on the belief that the
legal processes will provide a safety net (struc-
tural assurance belief). Further, the home DEMO
has no cues by which to categorize the home
builder positively. In this situation the only
highly positive antecedent of trusting intention
is structural DEMO belief. In such cases,
Dasgupta remarks that the trust one person has
in another to fulfill a contract rests precariously
upon the power DEMO the agencies that are able to
enforce contracts: "If your trust in the enforce-
ment agency falters, you will not trust persons to
fulfill their terms of an agreement and thus will
not enter into DEMO agreement.... It is this inter-
connectedness which makes trust such a fragile
commodity" (1988: 50). However, if the home
buyer's DEMO assurance belief is accompa-
nied by trusting beliefs in the home builder, he
or she may be able to maintain trusting inten-
tion even when his or her structural assurance
belief wavers.
In general, then, DEMO any particular anteced-
ent of trusting intention is the only one at a high
level, trusting intention most likely will be frag-
ile. For example, the home buyer's honesty be-
lief is an antecedent of trusting intention that
can crumble quickly (Dasgupta, 1988), if the DEMO
er's experience with the builder indicates that
the belief is mistaken. We previously discussed
how disposition to trust may be a weak trusting
DEMO antecedent in the presence of a strong
situation. The home buyer's high disposition to
trust will not hold up if he or she DEMO reason to
believe that structural assurances are missing
or that the home builder may be dishonest. Sit-
uation- or person-specific beliefs supporting
trusting intention DEMO become stronger than
1998
McKnight, Cummings, and Chervany
dispositional support as the buyer gains DEMO
rience with the situation.
Tentative, assumption-based antecedents.
Trusting intention will be DEMO at the start of a
relationship because of the tentative and as-
sumption-based nature of its antecedents
(Figure 2). Initial trust is not based so much on
evidence as on lack of contrary evidence
(Gambetta, 1988). Illusions of control are almost
completely assumption based. If the illusion
crumbles, the constructs bolstered by it can
decrease rapidly, negatively DEMO trusting
intention. Riker points out that stereotyping cat-
egorization is tentative because "only rarely do
[the applied categories] effectively discriminate
between the trustworthy and the untrustworthy"
(1971: 78). Hence, trusting beliefs (leading DEMO
trusting intention) produced by categorization
are subject to abrupt corrections. Initial DEMO
tion-based trust, founded on assumptions about
the situation, is subject to rapid deterioration as
facts become known. One's disposition to trust
assumes DEMO will work out successfully, and
will only be salient until situational DEMO personal
facts are uncovered (Johnson-George & Swap,
1982).
Experience DEMO facts that can quickly
displace illusions and assumptions. Fazio and
Zanna (DEMO) point out two reasons for this. First,
people consider behavioral DEMO informa-
tion to be more reliable than indirectly obtained
information. Further, DEMO reliable information
reduces uncertainty, making it highly desirable
(Smith, Benson, & Curley, 1991). Second, an indi-
vidual's direct experience DEMO forming an attitude
or judgment makes that attitude more readily
accessible in his or her memory (cf., Riker, 1971:
78).
High perceived risk. Some risk is perceived
even when people trust each other (e.g., Mayer
et al., 1995). High levels of perceived risk DEMO it
more likely that the trustor will pay attention to
the other's behavior, seeking validating infor-
mation. Kramer (1996) found this to be true in
relationships between students and faculty
members. The more one DEMO to new informa-
tion about the other person, the more likely DEMO is
that contrary evidence will be found, negatively
affecting trusting intention.
DEMO 10: In the initial relation-
ship, high trusting intention is likely
to be very fragile when it is supported
483
by only one DEMO two antecedents, when
it relies almost exclusively on assump-
tions, and when perceived risk is high.
Several of the above fragility examples dem-
DEMO that the interdependent nature of the
model constructs is itself a reason trusting in-
tention may be fragile. When one construct's
level is DEMO, it is likely to negatively affect a
related construct. For example, whereas a de-
crease in trusting stance directly affects trusting
intention, it also affects institution-based trust.
Also, while institution-based trust will have a
direct effect on trusting intention, it will also
affect trusting intention through trusting beliefs.
Hence, the model portrays the possibility that
trusting intention is like the roof on the prover-
bial "house of cards," which collapses when one
structurally key antecedent slips.
Conditions Under Which Trusting Intention Is
DEMO to Be Robust
Trusting intention is likely to be robust for
three reasons: (1) adequate antecedent support,
(2) belief-confirming cognitive mechanisms, and
(3) social mechanisms.
Adequate antecedent support. Given our
model, DEMO most obvious reason trusting inten-
tion will continue to be high is that, in many
cases, several of the antecedents shown in Fig-
DEMO 2 will exist at high levels. Further, it is more
probable DEMO the antecedents will exist at a
consistently high level rather than in a combi-
nation of high and low levels. Researchers of
cognitive consistency DEMO found evidence that
related beliefs tend to stay consistent with each
other because people keep their various cogni-
tions reconciled (Abelson et al., DEMO; Luhmann,
1979). Hence, for a given subject, we DEMO to
find relatively consistent levels among trust
constructs, especially as the DEMO be-
gins. A consistently high set of antecedents will
be less likely to cause a trusting intention dis-
solution than will an inconsistently high DEMO
For example, in a classroom setting it is likely
that, because of past experiences, students feel
comfortable with their own and the instructor's
roles (institution-based trust). Hence, the stu-
dents probably have DEMO structural assur-
ance beliefs within class situations generally.
Hopefully, they have DEMO enough about the
instructor's reputation so that, along with early
484
Academy of Management Review
July
cues, they can categorize her or him as having
trustworthy attributes (e.g., competence), thus
forming one DEMO more of the trusting beliefs. Un-
der these circumstances, the students DEMO likely
to have high initial trusting intention toward the
instructor. This trusting intention probably will
prove stable, given it is likely supported by
trusting beliefs and institution-based trust. Un-
less the instructor does something to seriously
DEMO the positive expectations a student de-
velops from the initial class interaction, the
student's trusting intention is likely to endure
throughout the course. But trusting intention is
even more likely to stay high if the DEMO also
has high disposition to trust, which will rein-
force his DEMO her institution-based trust and trust-
ing beliefs. A person with a high disposition to
trust is more likely to see good points and to
DEMO flaws in another person or situation
that would threaten high trusting intention lev-
els by lowering trusting beliefs or institution-
based trust.
Belief-confirming cognitive DEMO At-
tentional cognitive processes play a role in sus-
taining initial trust. Not all information is at-
tended to, and unless it is, DEMO will not affect
trust-related constructs. Indeed, peoples' beliefs
and preconceived notions tend to filter the infor-
mation they heed. Good (1988) remarks DEMO ev-
idence contrary to one's beliefs is seldom sought
and often ignored, citing psychological experi-
mental evidence (e.g., Mitroff, 1974; Tajfel, 1969;
Wason, 1960) for this confirmation bias effect.
Similarly, DEMO and Brown cite evidence that
people "generally select, interpret, and DEMO
information to be consistent with their prior be-
liefs or theories (DEMO Fiske & Taylor, 1984; Green-
wald, 1980; Taylor & Crocker, 1981, for reviews)"
(1988: 202). The authors apply this effect to posi-
tive illusion-based beliefs: "Consequently, if a
person's prior beliefs are positive, cognitive bi-
ases that favor conservatism generally will
maintain positive illusions more specifically"
(Taylor & Brown, 1988: 202). They cite additional
evidence that peoples' preconceptions guide
which information they consider relevant and,
therefore, to which information they attend
(DEMO & Rothbart, 1980; Nisbett & Ross, 1980).
Researchers conducting DEMO studies
have confirmed that much counterbelief evi-
dence is simply ignored. An example is pro-
vided by Starbuck and Milliken's (1988) study DEMO
the 1986 NASA Challenger disaster. The authors
found that NASA and Morton-Thiokol managers
ignored or explained away evidence that rocket
booster O-rings would erode DEMO a low-tempera-
ture takeoff. Contrary evidence is especially ig-
nored when people perceive things to be going
well. Sitkin, for example, states that "small suc-
cesses may unintentionally induce low levels of
attention and reduced DEMO search" (1992:
232). In contrast, "The greater the incidence of
small prior failure, the more attention will be
paid to and the more deeply will [be] the pro-
cessing of information about DEMO prob-
lems" (Sitkin, 1992: 240).
The tendency to ignore counterbelief evidence
should be true of trusting beliefs as well as
other DEMO However, in the initial relation-
ship, the desire to feel assured through experi-
ential evidence (Fazio & Zanna, 1981) will, to
DEMO extent, mitigate this cognitive bias. This
desire will be heightened by DEMO levels of dis-
position to trust or institution-based trust or by
high levels of perceived risk, because the person
will require additional assurances that his or
her initial beliefs are accurate.
When people do attend to DEMO that
disconfirms their views, they often discount it as
inaccurate or DEMO (Markus, 1977; Ross
& Anderson, 1992; Swann & Read, 1981; Taylor &
Brown, 1988), or they reinterpret it positively
(Holmes, 1991; Robinson, 1996). Ross and Ander-
son point DEMO that "beliefs ... are remarkably re-
silient in the face of DEMO challenges that
seem logically devastating" (1982: 144). People
tend DEMO accept belief-supportive information un-
critically, but slowly acknowledge disconfirm-
ing evidence (Tetlock, 1985). Ross and Anderson
(1992) posit that people subject disconfirming
evidence to considerable scrutiny but do not go
back and update DEMO re-evaluate evidence rele-
vant to their beliefs based on disconfirming ev-
idence. People also search their memories to
find ways of explaining their existing DEMO
(Ross & Anderson, 1982).
Similarly, Kahneman and Tversky (1973) found
significant evidence that people will interpret
ambiguous or incomplete information in a way
that agrees with their pre-existing beliefs. If one
has a DEMO level of trusting intention toward
another, for example, then one can view specific
trust violations as isolated exceptions or as a
personal quirk (Sitkin & Roth, 1993; Zucker, 1986),
with no resulting DEMO effect on trusting be-
liefs. High faith in humanity provides another
1998
reason to ignore or discount such behavior, be-
cause it assumes that most people are basically
good. Having high faith in humanity will DEMO
tate quick forgiveness of trust violations.
Good (1988) has suggested that another rea-
son for this "cognitive inertia" is the "set effect,"
which refers to the continued use of mentally
stored procedures to handle a situation, even
when the situation changes. That is, once DEMO
ple have developed a situational strategy, they
tend to continue to DEMO it, even when it does not
work. Applied to trust, this means that an indi-
vidual will continue to trust another, even when
the latter breaches the former's trust-at least
for a while. Good (1988) uses the set effect to
reinterpret some of the results of experimental-
ists who studied trust with such procedures as
the Trucking Game. DEMO the interactive effect of
this cognitive tendency with the model's con-
structs: high institution-based trust and high
disposition to trust jointly encourage a person to
believe such a course of action is not very risky.
DEMO (1979) offers a related reason for why
trust may be resilient, stating that people build
up mechanisms to handle refutations of their
trust de' -ions. This is especially true when the
felt security associated with trusting intention is
not strong:
Insecure expectations, however paradoxical it
may at first appear, are psychologically more
stable [than secure ones].... [They are] normal-
ized, stereotyped and thus in various ways immu-
nized against the refutation. Explanations of dis-
appointment are built into [them] in such a DEMO
that a particular case of disappointment presents
no problem but rather confirms the structure of
the expectation as a whole" (Luhmann, 1979: DEMO).
Hence, it appears that people develop mech-
anisms enabling them DEMO absorb disappoint-
ments as part of their expectation of the other
person, thus reducing the effect of the disap-
pointment on trusting intention. We speculate
that individuals with high levels of disposition
to trust will absorb DEMO better than
those with low levels.
Proposition 11: In the initial DEMO
ship, high trusting intention is likely
to be robust when (1) a combination of
several of its antecedents encourages
the trustor to ignore, rationalize, or ab-
sorb the negative actions of the other
and (2) continued success or low per-
ceived risk of failure consequences
McKnight, Cummings, and Chervany
485
cause little critical attention to be
paid DEMO the other's behavior. Subjects
with high disposition to trust or insti-
tution-based trust levels are likely to
pay even less critical attention.
Social DEMO Good (1988) notes that be-
ing around another person generally will in-
crease an individual's favorable beliefs about
that person. This occurs DEMO the interper-
sonal cues from the other person generally are
harder to misconstrue face to face and because
the pair can more easily go DEMO surface in-
formation to more substantive levels of mutual
understanding. Hence, DEMO levels of trusting
intention likely will be sustained as people in-
teract in cooperative ways. If the individuals
hold positive beliefs about each other, they are
not likely to decrease interaction (Darley &
Fazio, 1980). Therefore, the trusting cycle be-
comes self-sustaining.
Social interaction also will tend to uphold
early trusting intention, because people in so-
cial situations tend to confirm their beliefs
about themselves (Swann, 1983) and about each
other. For example, one who trusts another will
tend to express that trust in actions toward the
other. Because initially extended trust is DEMO
reciprocated (e.g., Burt & Knez, 1996), the other
party DEMO also express trust. This confirms the
first party's trusting beliefs, DEMO Dasgupta (1988)
notes, which, in turn, supports continued high
levels of trusting intention.
Social interaction also upholds early trusting
intention because DEMO reputation effects. A per-
son's reputation spreads gradually (Dasgupta,
DEMO), through social interaction (Burt & Knez,
1996). One DEMO remembers the other party's
previous encounters. This interactional history
cumulates, DEMO with information about the
person's background (Dasgupta, 1988), and is
transmitted to others. When many people per-
ceive that an individual DEMO a good reputation,
it is harder for a negative event to significantly
reduce a high level of trusting beliefs in that
individual.
We DEMO that social interaction also sus-
tains trusting intention through institution-
based trust. When parties interact in a cordial
way, they establish a feeling and appearance
that everything is normal or in proper order
(Lewis & Weigert, 1985a). Hence, social interac-
tion sustains situational normality belief.
486
Academy of Management
Review
July
Through situational normality belief, the par-
ties' interaction strengthens trusting intention. If
one has high levels of situational normality be-
lief, one is also likely to believe that structural
assurances will operate properly in the situa-
tion. Structural assurance will, in turn, posi-
tively influence trusting beliefs and trusting in-
tention, as discussed DEMO
Proposition 12: In the initial relation-
ship, high trusting intention is likely
to be robust when (1) the parties inter-
act face DEMO face, frequently in positive
ways, or (2) the trusted party has built
a widely known good reputation. So-
cial interaction affects trusting DEMO
tion by its positive effects on trusting
beliefs and institution-based trust.
RESEARCH IMPLICATIONS AND
Future Research Implications
CONCLUSION
The interplay between trusting intention and
DEMO antecedents helps explain the paradox of
high trust in new relationships and situations
(e.g., Kramer, 1994), but our model also can help
explain "disturbing" results in game theory re-
search (Baxter, 1972: 100)-a well-spring for trust
theory historically. In Baxter's review of DEMO two-
person game theory research, he indicates that
researchers had found DEMO solid link between
trusting personality and trusting behavior in the
Prisoner's Dilemma game. Because our model
ties dispositional variables to beliefs and inten-
DEMO, it suggests that personality variables may
be too distal from behaviors DEMO be predictive.
Our model's time boundary suggests that dispo-
sition-related trust will only be salient when the
parties first meet in an ambiguous DEMO
Further, the institution-based trust constructs
help explain why no solid link DEMO found by
game theorists.
Whereas game theorists assume that the
game context effectively restricts the effects of
situational variables (Baxter, 1972), our DEMO's
use of institution-based trust suggests that what
a subject believes about the situation is an em-
pirical question that should be measured as DEMO
potential confound (e.g., Erez, 1992), rather than
being assumed DEMO Over 25 years ago, Kee
and Knox recommended that Prisoner's DEMO
lemma research should include "continuous"
measures of subjects' cognitions in addition to
their behavioral choices (1970: 365). Very little
trust DEMO has been done in this manner.
Our model's constructs provide a reasoned the-
oretical basis for doing so. We suggest that re-
searchers DEMO early behavioral experi-
ments while measuring our constructs. This will
enable researchers to reinterpret historical re-
sults.
Significant empirical work is needed in order
DEMO obtain evidence regarding the propositions
we make in this article. First, DEMO should
develop reliable and valid instruments reflect-
ing the constructs in this article, and they should
then use them to test various subsets of the
model through questionnaire studies. For exam-
ple, Propositions 1 and 2 and 4 through 7 could
be tested in one study by measuring DEMO
intention, faith in humanity, trusting stance,
structural assurance belief, DEMO benevolence
belief.
Second, researchers should test our categori-
zation and illusion DEMO in laboratory
settings, incorporating disposition to trust and
institution-based trust constructs DEMO control
variables.
Third, researchers should test the model's in-
teractive DEMO For example, scholars should
test whether disposition to trust constructs mod-
DEMO the effects of categorization on trusting
beliefs. Based on Proposition 1, DEMO could test
whether or not structural assurance belief mod-
erates the link between faith in humanity and
trusting beliefs. Trusting stance and institution-
based DEMO may also have an interactive effect
on trusting intention. The combination of a high
situational normality belief and a high struc-
tural assurance belief DEMO probably produce
higher trusting beliefs than either would alone.
Finally, the DEMO/robustness of initial trust
should be tested, based on our propositions, in
which we argued that initial trust may be either
fragile or DEMO under certain conditions. For
example, one could test, through longitudinal
laboratory experiments, the extent to which so-
cial interaction increases the robustness of
trusting intention when (1) the relationship is
successful/unsuccessful or (2) risk is high or low.
Many more conditions could be posited.
Our distinction between trust levels and trust
fragility/robustness raises important issues that
DEMO further conceptual and empirical work. For
example, a high initial level DEMO trusting intention
may be quite fragile (subject to change),
1998
McKnight, Cummings, and Chervany
487
whereas a low initial level DEMO trusting intention
may not be very fragile. Thus, an interesting
research DEMO is under what conditions are
low initial levels of trusting intention less frag-
ile than high initial levels of trusting intention?
Conclusion
Our DEMO contribution in this article is ex-
plaining the high initial trust paradox by syn-
thesizing a model of constructs and processes
from diverse trust DEMO streams. Because
initial trusting intention is not always high, our
model DEMO the paradox by pointing out why
it could be high initially but may not be high
because of the situation or the persons involved.
DEMO, the model is predictive based upon spec-
ified conditions related to DEMO antecedents of
trusting intention.
This model, along with our discussion of DEMO
conditions producing fragile versus robust ini-
tial trust, should generate significant DEMO
of research. The delineation of two specific
types of institution-based trust and disposition
to trust constructs provides researchers con-
struct definitions that lend themselves DEMO consis-
tent empirical measurement. By using both
higher-level constructs (e.g., trusting beliefs)
and lower-level constructs (e.g., honesty belief),
we have helped organize the "confusing pot-
pourri" (Shapiro, 1987a: 625) DEMO trust construct
definitions researchers must grapple with.
Our model integrates different aspects of trust
that have not been linked previously, and it does
so within a specific time parameter. Some have
called for more integrative models DEMO simulta-
neously address dispositional and situational
constructs (Davis-Blake & Pfeffer, 1989; Sitkin &
Pablo, 1992). We have answered this call, DEMO
ing a model that brings together dispositional,
situational, and interpersonal DEMO from
four divergent research streams.
Poole & Van de Ven (1989) remark that by add-
ing the temporal dimension, one can improve
theories. In this article we explain that the pro-
cesses by which trust DEMO initially are not the
same as those by which it forms later. In partic-
ular, a model of continuing trust will emphasize
experiential knowledge while de-emphasizing
assumptions and dispositions. In this way, the
model's temporal lens highlights the unique as-
pects of how trust forms at the DEMO stage of
an organizational relationship.
REFERENCES
Abelson, R. P., Aronson, DEMO, McGuire, W. J., Newcomb, T. M.,
Rosenberg, M. DEMO, & Tannenbaum, P. H. (Eds.). 1968. The-
ories of DEMO consistency: A sourcebook. Chicago:
Rand-McNally.
Ajzen, I. 1988. Attitudes, DEMO, and behavior. Chicago:
Dorsey Press.
Baier, A. 1986. Trust and antitrust. Ethics, 96: 231-260.
Baldwin, M. W. 1992. Relational schemas and the processing
of social information. Psychological Bulletin, 112: 461-
484.
Barber, B. 1983. The logic and limits of trust. New Brunswick,
NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Baxter, G. W. 1972. Personality and attitudinal characteris-
tics and cooperation in two-person games: A review. In
L. S. Wrightsman, DEMO O'Connor, & N. J. Baker (Eds.), Coop-
eration and competition: Readings on mixed-motive
games: 97-103. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Berg, J., Dickhaut, J., & McCabe, K. 1995. Trust, reciprocity,
and social history. Unpublished working paper, Univer-
sity of Minnesota, Minneapolis.
DEMO, P. M. 1964. Exchange and power in social life. New
York: Wiley.
Bowlby, J. 1982. Attachment and loss. Volume 1: Attachment.
New DEMO: Basic Books.
Brewer, M. B. 1981. Ethnocentrism and its role in interper-
sonal trust. In M. B. Brewer & B. E. Collins (Eds.), Scien-
tific inquiry and the social sciences: 214-231. San Fran-
cisco: Jossey-Bass.
Brewer, M. B., & Silver, M. 1978. Ingroup bias DEMO a function of
task characteristics. European Journal of Social Psychol-
ogy, DEMO: 393-400.
Bromiley, P., & Cummings, L. L. 1995. Transactions costs in
organizations with trust. In R. Bies, B. Sheppard, & R.
DEMO (Eds.), Research on negotiations in organiza-
tions, vol. 5: DEMO Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Burt, R. S., & Knez, DEMO 1996. Trust and third-party gossip. In
R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations:
Frontiers of theory and research: 68-89. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Coleman, J. S. 1990. Foundations of social theory. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Currall, S. DEMO, & Judge, T. A. 1995. Measuring trust between
organizational boundary role persons. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 64: 151-170.
Darley, J. M., & Berscheid, E. 1967. Increased liking as a result
of DEMO of personal contact. Human Relations, 20:
29-40.
Darley, J. M., & Fazio, R. H. 1980. Expectancy confirmation
processes arising in the DEMO interaction sequence.
American Psychologist, 35: 867-881.
Dasgupta, P. 1988. Trust DEMO a commodity. In D. Gambetta
(Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations:
47-72. New York: Basil Blackwell.
Davis, F. D. DEMO Perceived usefulness,
perceived
ease of
488
Academy of Management Review
July
use, and user acceptance of information technology. MIS
Quarterly, 13: 319 -340.
Davis, F. D., & DEMO, J. E. 1994. User perceptions of
decision support effectiveness: Two production plan-
ning experiments. Decision Sciences, 25: 57-77.
Davis-Blake, A., & DEMO, J. 1989. Just a mirage: The search
for dispositional effects in organizational research.
Academy of Management Review, 14: 385-400.
Dion, K. K., Berscheid, E., & Walster, E. 1972. What is beauti-
ful DEMO good. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
24: 285-290.
Dobing, B. 1993. Building trust in user-analyst relationships.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Minne-
sota, Minneapolis.
Erez, M. 1992. Reflections on the Latham/Erez/DEMO Study. In
P. J. Frost & R. E. Stablein (Eds.), DEMO exemplary re-
search: 155-164. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Erikson, E. H. 1968. Identity: Youth and crisis. New York:
Norton.
Evans, DEMO G., Gunz, H. P., & Jalland, R. M. 1996. The aftermath
of downsizing: A cautionary tale about restructuring and
careers. Business Horizons, 39: 61-66.
Fazio, R. H., & Zanna, M. P. 1981. Direct experience and
attitude-behavior consistency. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Ad-
vances in experimental social psychology, vol. 14: 162-
202. New York: Academic Press.
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. 1975. Belief, attitude, intention and
behavior: An introduction to theory and research. Read-
ing, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Fiske, S. T., & Taylor, S. E. 1984. Social cognition. Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley.
Gabarro, J. J. 1978. The development of DEMO, influence, and
expectations. In A. G. Athos & J. J. Gabarro (Eds.), Inter-
personal behavior: Communication and understanding
in relationships: 290-303. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall.
Gambetta, D. 1988. Can we trust trust? In D. Gambetta (Ed.),
Trust: Making and breaking DEMO relations: 213-
237. New York: Basil Blackwell.
Garfinkel, H. 1963. DEMO conception of, and experiments with,
"trust" as a condition DEMO stable concerted actions. In 0. J.
Harvey (Ed.), Motivation and DEMO interaction: 187-238.
New York: Ronald Press.
Goldsteen, R., Schorr, DEMO K., & Goldsteen, K. S. 1989. Longitu-
dinal study of appraisal at Three Mile Island: Implica-
tions for life event research. Social Science and Medi-
cine, 28: 389-398.
Good, D. 1988. Individuals, interpersonal DEMO, and trust.
In D. Gambetta (Ed.), Trust: Making and DEMO coop-
erative relations: 31-48. New York: Basil Blackwell.
Greenwald, A. DEMO 1980. The totalitarian ego: Fabrication and
revision of personal history. American DEMO, 35:
603-618.
Henry, J. E., & Hartzler, M. 1997. Virtual teams: Today's real-
ity, today's challenge. Quality Progress, 30(5): 108-109.
Holmes, J. G. 1991. Trust and the appraisal process in close
relationships. In W. H. Jones & D. Perlman (Eds.), Ad-
vances in personal relationships, vol. 2: 57-104. London:
DEMO Kingsley.
Howard, J. W., & Rothbart, M. 1980. Social categorization DEMO
memory for ingroup and outgroup behavior. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 38: 301-310.
Hunter, J. E., & Gerbing, D. W. 1982. Unidimensional mea-
surement, second order factor analysis, and causal mod-
els. DEMO B. M. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in
DEMO behavior, vol. 4: 267-320. Greenwich, CT:
JAI Press.
Johnson-George, C., & Swap, W. C. 1982. Measurement of
specific interpersonal trust: Construction and validation
of a scale to assess trust in a specific DEMO Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 43: 1306-1317.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. 1973. On the psychology of
prediction. Psychological Review, DEMO: 237-251.
Kee, H. W., & Knox, R. E. 1970. Conceptual and methodolog-
ical considerations in the study of trust and suspicion.
Journal DEMO Conflict Resolution, 14: 357-366.
Kramer, R. M. 1994. The sinister DEMO error: Paranoid
cognition and collective distrust in organizations. Moti-
vation and DEMO, 18: 199-230.
Kramer, R. M. 1996. Divergent realities and convergent DEMO
appointments in the hierarchic relation: Trust and the
intuitive auditor at DEMO In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler
(Eds.), Trust DEMO organizations: Frontiers of theory and
research: 216-245. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Kramer, R. M., Brewer, M. B., & Hanna, B. A. 1996. Collective
trust and collective action: The decision to trust as a
social decision. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust
in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research: 357-
389. DEMO Oaks, CA: Sage.
Langer, E. J. 1975. The illusion of DEMO Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 32: 311-328.
Lewicki, DEMO J., & Bunker, B. B. 1995. Trust in relationships: A
DEMO of trust development and decline. In B. B. Bunker
& J. Z. Rubin (Eds.), Conflict, cooperation and justice:
133-173. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Lewis, J. D., & Weigert, A. J. 1985a. Trust as a social reality.
Social Forces, 63: 967-985.
Lewis, J. D., & Weigert, A. J. 1985b. Social atomism, holism,
and trust. The Sociological Quarterly, 26: 455-471.
Lipnack, J., & Stamps, J. 1997. Virtual teams: Reaching across
space, time and organization with technology. New
DEMO: Wiley.
Luhmann, N. 1979. Trust and power. New York: Wiley.
DEMO, H. 1977. Self-schemata and processing information
about the self. Journal of DEMO and Social Psychol-
ogy, 35: 63-78.
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. 1995. An inte-
grative model of organizational trust. Academy of Man-
agement Review, 20: 709-734.
Meyerson, D., Weick, K. E., & Kramer, R. M. 1996. Swift DEMO
and temporary groups. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler
1998
McKnight, Cummings, and Chervany
489
(Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and
research: 166-195. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
DEMO, I. I. 1974. The subjective side of science. Amsterdam:
Elsevier DEMO Publications.
Mullins, J. W., & Cummings, L. L. In press. DEMO
strength: A framework for understanding the role of
individuals in bringing DEMO proactive strategic
change. Journal of Organizational Change Manage-
ment.
Nisbett, R. DEMO, & Ross, L. 1980. Human inference: Strategies
and shortcomings of DEMO judgments. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Orbell, J., Dawes, R., & Schwartz-Shea, P. 1994. Trust, social
categories, and individuals: The case of gender. Motiva-
tion and Emotion, 18: 109-128.
Paese, P. W., & Sniezek, J. A. 1991. Influences on the ap-
propriateness DEMO confidence in judgment: Practice, ef-
fort, information, and decision-making. Organiza-
tional Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 48:
100-130.
Poole, M. DEMO, & Van de Ven, A. H. 1989. Using paradox to build
management and organization theories. Academy of
Management Review, 14: 562-578.
Powell, W. W. 1996. Trust-based forms of governance. In R. M.
Kramer & DEMO R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Fron-
tiers of theory and research: 51-67. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Rempel, J. K., Holmes, J. G., & Zanna, M. P. 1985. Trust in DEMO
relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 49: 95-112.
Riker, W. H. 1971. The nature of trust. In J. T. Tedeschi (DEMO),
Perspectives on social power: 63-81. Chicago: Aldine.
Robinson, S. L. 1996. Trust and breach of the psychological
contract. Administrative Science Quarterly, 41: 574-599.
Rosenberg, M. 1957. Occupations and values. Glencoe, IL:
Free Press.
Ross, L., & Anderson, C. A. 1982. Shortcomings in the attri-
bution process: On the origins and maintenance of er-
roneous social assessments. In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic,
& A. Tversky (DEMO), Judgment under uncertainty: Heuris-
tics and biases: 129-152. Cambridge, DEMO: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Rotter, J. B. 1967. A new scale for the measurement of inter-
personal trust. Journal of Personality, 35: DEMO
Rotter, J. B. 1971. Generalized expectancies for interpersonal
trust. American Psychologist, 26: 443-452.
Rotter, J. B. 1980. Interpersonal trust, trustworthiness, and
DEMO American Psychologist, 35: 1-7.
Shapiro, S. P. 1987a. The social DEMO of impersonal trust.
American Journal of Sociology, 93: 623-658.
Shapiro, DEMO P. 1987b. Policing trust. In C. D. Shearing & P. C.
Stenning (Eds.), Private policing: 194-220. Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
Shapiro, D. L., Sheppard, B. H., & Cheraskin, L. 1992. Business
on a handshake. Negotiation Journal, 3: 365-377.
Sitkin, S. B. 1992. Learning through failure: The strategy of
small losses. In B. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Re-
search in organizational behavior, vol. DEMO: 231-266.
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Sitkin, S. B. 1995. On the positive effect of legalization on
trust. In R. Bies, B. Sheppard, & R. Lewicki (Eds.), Re-
search on negotiations in organizations, vol. 5: 185-217.
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Sitkin, S. B., & Pablo, A. L. 1992. Reconceptualizing the deter-
minants of risk behavior. Academy of Management Re-
view, 17: 9-38.
Sitkin, S. B., & Roth, N. L. 1993. Explaining the limited effec-
tiveness of legalistic "remedies" for trust/distrust. Or-
ganization Science, 4: 367-392.
Smith, DEMO F., Benson, P. G., & Curley, S. P. 1991. Belief, knowl-
edge, and uncertainty: A cognitive perspective on sub-
jective probability. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 48: 291-321.
Starbuck, W. H., & Milliken, F. J. 1988. Challenger: Fine-
tuning the odds until something breaks. Journal of Man-
agement Studies, 25: 319-340.
Swann, W. B., Jr. 1983. Self-verification: Bringing social real-
ity into harmony with DEMO self. In J. Suls & A. G. Green-
wald (Eds.), DEMO psychology perspectives, vol. 2: 33-66.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Swann, W. B., Jr., & Read, S. J. 1981. Self-verification DEMO
cesses: How we sustain our self-conceptions. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 17: 351-370.
Tajfel, H. 1969. Cognitive aspects of prejudice. Journal of
DEMO Issues, 25: 79-97.
Taylor, S. E., & Brown, J. DEMO 1988. Illusion and well-being: A
social psychological perspective on mental health. DEMO
chological Bulletin, 103: 193-210.
Taylor, S. E., & Crocker, DEMO 1981. Schematic-bases of social
information processing. In E. T. Higgins, C. DEMO Herman, &
M. P. Zanna (Eds.), Social cognition: The Ontario Sympo-
sium, vol. 1: 89-134. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
DEMO
Tetlock, P. 1985. Accountability: The neglected social context
of judgment and choice. In L. L. Cummings & B. M. Staw
(Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, vol. 7: 297-
332. Greenwich, CT: JAI DEMO
Wason, P. C. 1960. On the failure to eliminate hypotheses in
DEMO conceptual task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 12: 129-140.
Williamson, DEMO E. 1993. Calculativeness, trust, and eco-
nomic organization. Journal of Law and Economics, 34:
453-502.
Worchel, P. 1979. Trust and distrust. DEMO W. G. Austin &
S. Worchel (Eds.), The social psychology of intergroup
relations: 174-187. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole Publish-
ing.
Wrightsman, L. S. 1991. Interpersonal trust and attitudes
toward human nature. In J. P. Robinson, P. R. Shaver, &
L. S. Wrightsman (Eds.), Measures of personality and
social psychological attitudes. Volume 1: Measures of
DEMO psychological attitudes: 373-412. San Diego: Aca-
demic Press.
490
Academy of Management
Review
July
Zaheer, A., McEvily, B., & Perrone, V. In press. Does trust
matter? Exploring the effects of interorganizational and
interpersonal trust on performance. Organizational Sci-
ence.
Zand, D. E. 1972. Trust and managerial problem solving.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 17: 229-239.
DEMO, L. G. 1986. Production of trust: Institutional sources of
economic structure, 1840-1920. In B. M. Staw & L. L.
Cummings (Eds.), DEMO in organizational behavior,
vol. 8: 53-1 1 1. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Zucker, L. G., Darby, M. R., Brewer, DEMO B., & Peng, Y. 1996.
Collaboration structure and information dilemmas in
biotechnology: Organizational boundaries as trust pro-
duction. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in
organizations: Frontiers of theory DEMO research: 90-113.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
D. Harrison McKnight is DEMO assistant professor in the College of Business at Florida
State University. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Minnesota. His current
research interests DEMO organizational trust, ethics, management controls, and the
job characteristics of DEMO personnel.
Larry L. Cummings received his Ph.D. in organizational behavior from Indiana Uni-
versity. When Larry passed away in 1997, he was serving as professor of management
at the Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota. In 1995 he was
honored by the Academy of Management with the DEMO Educator Award.
Norman L. Chervany is a professor of information and decision sciences at the Carlson
School of Management, University of Minnesota. He received his Ph.D. in decision
sciences from Indiana University. His current research interests DEMO the adoption of
information technology and the effects of information technology on work design.{1g42fwefx}