American Finance Association
Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial Public Offerings
Author(s): William L. Megginson and Kathleen A. Weiss
Source: The Journal of DEMO, Vol. 46, No. 3, Papers and Proceedings, Fiftieth Annual
Meeting, American Finance Association, Washington, D. C., December 28-30, 1990 (DEMO, 1991),
pp. 879-903
Published by: Blackwell Publishing for the DEMO Finance Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2328547
Accessed: 10/05/2009 21:02
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your DEMO of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple DEMO of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive DEMO for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any DEMO use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=black.
Each copy of any part of a DEMO transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded DEMO 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and DEMO of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
DEMO Publishing and American Finance Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, DEMO
and extend access to The Journal of Finance.
http://www.jstor.org
THE JOURNAL
OF FINANCE
* VOL. XLVI, NO. 3 * JULY 1991
Venture Capitalist Certification in
Initial Public Offerings
WILLIAM L. MEGGINSON and KATHLEEN DEMO WEISS*
ABSTRACT
This paper provides support for the certification role of venture capitalists in initial
public offerings. Consistent with the certification hypothesis, a comparison of
venture capital backed IPOs with a control sample of nonventure capital DEMO
IPOs from 1983 through 1987 matched as closely as possible by industry and
offering size indicates that venture capital backing results in significantly lower
DEMO returns and gross spreads. In effect, the presence of venture capitalists DEMO the
issuing firms serves to lower the total costs of going public and to maximize the net
proceeds to the offering firm. In addition, we document that venture capitalists
retain a significant portion of their holdings DEMO the firm after the IPO.
THE ABILITY OF THIRD-PARTY specialists to certify the value of securities issued
by relatively unknown firms in capital markets DEMO are characterized by
asymmetric information between corporate insiders and public investors has
attracted much academic interest in recent years. Several authors, including
James (DEMO), Blackwell, Marr, and Spivey (1990), and Barry, Muscarella,
Peavy, and Vetsuypens (1991) have developed and tested models based at
least in part on the formal certification hypothesis presented in Booth DEMO
Smith (1986). A related body of work, represented by DeAngelo (1981),
Beatty and Ritter (1986), Titman and Trueman (DEMO), Johnson and Miller
(1988), Carter (1990), Simon (DEMO), and Carter and Manaster (1990) has
examined how investment bankers and auditors help resolve the asymmetric
information inherent in the initial public DEMO (IPO) process.
In this paper we examine whether the presence of venture capitalists, as
investors in a firm going public, can certify DEMO the offering price of the issue
reflects all available and relevant inside information. We hypothesize that
venture capitalists can perform this function; that it will be an economically
*The University of Georgia, Department of Banking and Finance, School of Business Adminis-
tration, Athens; and The University of Michigan, School of Business Administration, Ann Arbor;
respectively. We are DEMO to Mike Barclay, David Blackwell, Michael Bradley, Susan
Chaplinsky, Harry DeAngelo, Cliff Holderness (discussant), E. Han Kim, Laura Kodres, DEMO
Masulis, Jeff Netter, Annette Poulsen, Bill Sahlman, H. Nejat Seyhun, Dennis Sheehan, and
seminar participants at Harvard University, the University of Oregon, and Purdue University
for their comments and recommendations. We also acknowledge the data collection assistance
provided by Rick Mull, Eric Van Houwelingen, DEMO So Han Lee. Financial support for this
project was provided by the Center for Entrepreneurial Studies at New York University, the
University of Michigan Summer Research Program, and the University of Georgia Research
Foundation.
879
880
The Journal of Finance
valuable function; and that the certification provided by venture capitalists
will be both a partial subsititute for and a DEMO to the certification
provided by prestigious auditors and investment bankers. We employ a
matched pairs methodology where a sample of venture capital (VC) DEMO
IPOs is matched by industry and offering size with a qualitatively equivalent
set of non-VC backed IPOs, to focus as clearly as possible on the question of
whether venture capital certification occurs and is valuable. Our DEMO
strongly indicate that the presence of venture capitalists in offering firms
maximizes the fraction of the proceeds of the IPO, net of underpricing and
direct costs, which accrues to the issuing firm.
Specifically, we document DEMO VC backing reduces the mean and median
degree of IPO underpricing and that such backing significantly reduces the
underwriting spread charged by the investment DEMO handling the issue.
Further support for the venture capitalist certification hypothesis is provided
by our finding that VC backed issuers are able to attract DEMO prestigious
auditors and underwriters than non-VC backed issuers. In addition, VC
DEMO issuers also elicit greater interest from institutional investors during
the IPO and are able to go public at a younger age than other firms. DEMO,
the credibility of venture capitalists' information is enhanced by the DEMO that
they are major shareholders prior to the IPO and retain significant portions
of their holdings after the offer.
This study is organized as DEMO In Section I, a general model of venture
capital certification is DEMO The sample selection criteria and descriptive
statistics are presented in Section II. In Section III, the comparison of
underwriter and auditor quality and the level of institutional shareholdings
between VC and non-VC backed firms is examined. DEMO tests of the
certification hypothesis are presented in Section IV. The pre- and post-IPO
ownership structure of venture capitalists in the issuing firm is DEMO
in Section V. Section VI concludes the study.
I. Certification by Venture Capitalists
Third party certification has value whenever securities are being issued in
DEMO markets where insiders of the issuing firm and outside investors have
different information sets concerning the value of the offering firm. Corpo-
rate insiders DEMO an incentive to conceal (or at least delay the revelation of)DEMO
adverse information because doing so will allow them to sell securities at a
higher price. Rational outside investors understand these incentives and will
only DEMO a low average price for the securities offered unless they can be
credibly assured that the offering price already reflects all relevant private
information. DEMO informationally induced standoff can lead to market failure
of the type described by Akerlof (1970) unless the information asymmetry
can be reduced.
Although DEMO and Faulhaber (1989), Grinblatt and Huang (1989), and
Welch (1989), have presented signalling models which predict that corporate
insiders can unilaterally convey their private information, there are several
Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial Public Offerings
881
factors which make first-party DEMO and actions suspect. For one thing,
Gale and Stiglitz (1989) show that IPO signalling models break down when
insiders are allowed to DEMO equity more than once. More fundamentally,
insiders have everything to gain and very little to lose from signalling falsely
at the time of DEMO IPO. They sell securities only infrequently and thus would
only be "DEMO" far in the future if at all. Their gain, however, DEMO be
immediate and possibly quite large. While disclosure regulation will surely
discourage flagrant lying and material omissions [see Tinic (1988)], it is
DEMO to be completely effective in forcing disclosure of all relevant infor-
mation. Therefore, in the absence of effective signalling mechanisms in IPOs,
outside investors are likely to be convinced that accurate information disclo-
sure has DEMO only if a third party, with reputational capital at stake, has
asserted such and will be adversely and materially affected if that assertion
DEMO false.
Specifically, for third-party certification to be believable for outside in-
DEMO, three tests must be met. First, the certifying agent must have
reputational capital at stake which would be forfeited by certifying as fairly
DEMO an issue which was actually over-valued. Second, the value of the
DEMO's reputational capital must be greater than the largest possible one-time
wealth transfer or side payment which could be obtained by certifying
falsely. Third, it must be costly for the issuing firm to purchase the services
DEMO (lease the reputational capital of) the certifying agent, and this DEMO must
be an increasing function of the scope and potential importance of the
information asymmetry regarding intrinsic firm value.
There are strong a priori DEMO to believe that all three of these tests are
met by venture capitalists and that the certification they can provide will
have value in DEMO IPO. First, as the Venture Capital Journal (VCJ) (1988)
makes clear, many of the more established venture capitalists bring compa-
nies in their portfolio to market on an ongoing basis as well as DEMO,
over time, in a stream of direct equity investments in DEMO firms.
In our sample, 53 venture capitalists bring more than five DEMO public from
1983 to 1987. Venture capitalists, therefore, have a very strong incentive to
establish a trustworthy reputation in order to retain access DEMO the IPO
market on favorable terms. Furthermore, the greater a venture DEMO fund's
perceived access to the IPO market the more attractive it will be to en-
trepreneurs, thus assuring a continuing deal flow. Finally, a reputation for
competence and honesty will allow venture capitalists to establish enduring
relationships with pension fund managers and other institutional investors
who are DEMO important as investors in venture capital funds and as
purchasers of shares in IPOs.
Support for the second criterion, that the value of venture capitalists'
reputational capital must exceed the maximum possible benefit from certify-
DEMO falsely, is provided by Sahlman (1990). He documents that (DEMO) successful
venture capitalists are able to achieve very high returns on DEMO modest
capital outlays; (2) these returns are directly related to DEMO age and historical
performance of the VC fund, as well as DEMO the size of its investment portfolio;
882 The Journal of Finance
(3) successful VC fund managers are DEMO to establish profitable "follow-on"
funds and are also able to DEMO an enhanced deal flow from entrepreneurs;
and (4) the VC fund manager market is a relatively small, tight-knit, and
efficient labor DEMO where individual performance is constantly monitored
and valued. Therefore, the investment DEMO reputational capital by venture
capitalists allows them to remain competitive in the venture capital industry
as well as the capital markets.
In addition to DEMO capitalists' investment in reputational capital, they
also are large shareholders in the issuing firm. One way in which they might
profit from false DEMO and take advantage of the high price is to sell
shares in the IPO. Retention by venture capitalists of their holdings after the
offer, therefore, can act as a bonding mechanism for credible certification.
The final criterion for third-parity certification to be successful or economi-
cally valuable is DEMO the services of the certifying agent must be costly for
the issuing firm to obtain and the cost structure must be such that a
DEMO equilibrium is achieved between high and low information quality
firms. Venture capitalists certainly appear to meet this test since the bundle
of services they DEMO financial capital, managerial and techni-
cal expertise, enhanced access to other financial specialists as well as certifi-
cation when the firm ultimately goes DEMO both very costly and very
difficult to obtain. For example, Morris (1987), Gartner (1988), and Sahlman
(1990) all demonstrate that venture capitalists expect to earn a compound
annual return of from 25 DEMO over 50 percent (depending upon the stage of the
investment) on their investments in private companies. Therefore, en-
trepreneurs typically hand over large holdings of equity in exchange for
relatively small cash infusions.
Nor is DEMO the only cost of VC investment for entrepreneurs. In addition to
very high required rates of return, venture capitalists invariably structure
their investments in such a way that most of the business and financial risk
is DEMO to the entrepreneur. As described in Golder (1987), Testa (1987),
and Sahlman (1988, 1990), venture capitalists employ rather draconian
features in their capital investments, including (1) the use of staged invest-
ment under which the venture capitalist retains the right to cancel (cease
funding) an entrepreneur's venture; (2) the use of DEMO preferred stock
as an investment vehicle, which gives the venture capitalist DEMO a claim
senior to that of the entrepreneur and an enforceable nexus of security
covenants;1 and (3) the retention by the venture DEMO of the option to
replace the entrepreneur as manager unless key investment objectives are
met.
The cost and stringency of VC investment, as well as the sheer difficulty in
obtaining it (venture capitalists typically fund less than one percent of all the
proposals they receive), implies that DEMO those firms which would benefit
most from the services venture capitalists provide will be willing and able to
accept such participation. While the role DEMO venture capitalists in the firm is
1Megginson and Mull (1991) find that 41.9% of the VC backed firms have convertible
preferred stock in DEMO capital structure compared to 12.6% of non-VC backed firms.
Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial Public Offerings 883
obviously not limited to DEMO activity at the IPO, one of the services that
entrepreneurial firms DEMO with VC funding is easier access to capital
markets and the ability of venture capitalists to reduce asymmetrical infor-
mation in the offering process. DEMO suggests that growth options which are
characterized by both greater information asymmetry and uncertainty are
more likely to be associated with new entrepreneurial firms DEMO with older,
more established companies. Therefore, the certification function of DEMO
capitalists should be most attractive to relatively young, rapidly growing,
DEMO and development-intensive companies. This being the case, we
expect such firms DEMO make greater use of VC than do other firms.2
The model of VC certification in IPOs developed above yields three testable
hypotheses. First, since the ongoing nature of venture capitalists involved
with firms going public builds DEMO with all participants in the
offering process, VC backed IPOs should DEMO higher quality underwriters
and auditors as well as a larger institutional following than comparable
non-VC backed firms. Second, the ability of venture capitalists to reduce the
information asymmetry associated with a firm involved in the offering DEMO
cess should result in a reduction of both the underpricing associated with the
issue as well as the costs of underwriter, legal, auditor, and other miscella-
neous expenses. If venture capitalists are able to convey DEMO information
about the firm, the compensation to investors, underwriters, and DEMO
will be reduced since their cost of acquiring information about the company
(personally certifying the issue) will be lowered. Finally, an additional
bonding mechanism that ensures that venture capitalists' certification is
credible is the level of their capital investment in the firm both before and
after the DEMO Venture capitalists who retain significant holdings in the firm
give up the opportunity to profit from false certification. Therefore, we
hypothesize that venture capitalists will not be selling a large portion of their
shares in the DEMO
II. Sample Selection Criteria
In order to test the certification role of venture capitalists in the IPO
market, we match a sample of 320 VC backed firms with 320 non-VC backed
firms in the same industry DEMO closely as possible by offering size.
The universe of 2,644 firm commitment IPOs issued from January 1983
through September 1987 from which the DEMO sample is constructed is
obtained from Investment Dealer's Digest Corporate Database (IDD). After
eliminating financial institutions, S&Ls, reverse LBOs, DEMO firms whose first
day trading price is unavailable from Standard and Poor's Daily Stock Price
Record: Over-the-Counter, the remaining sample consists of DEMO,833 offers.3
2Mull (1990) documents that venture capitalists do in fact concentrate their investments in
rapidly growing industries and VC backed firms are DEMO to grow faster, use less debt, and invest
significantly more in R&D than do non-VC backed firms.
3This sample excludes, by definition, closed-end funds since they trade either on the NYSE or
the AMEX.
884
The Journal of Finance
Initially, 390 VC backed offers issued from January 1983 through Septem-
ber 1987 were identified in the Venture Capital DEMO which reports IPOs
of VC backed firms with offering amounts of $3 million or more and offer
prices of at least $5. In order DEMO be included in our sample, the VC backed
firm must be DEMO in the screened IDD sample and must also have an
offering prospectus available from Bechtel Information Service. Furthermore,
any VC backed firm that DEMO either misclassified as having venture capital
participation from the prospectus or has other confounding events at the time
of the IPO, such as an acquisition, is also eliminated.4
Given that venture capital activity and the level of returns on the first
trading day (see Ritter (1984)) DEMO to be clustered by industry, we match
the sample of VC DEMO firms as closely as possible by offering amount to
non-VC backed firms in the same three-digit SIC classification.5 The final
sample consists of 320 DEMO backed and 320 non-VC backed firms.6 Table I
documents the concentration of VC backed IPOs in certain industries. The
majority of the sample falls DEMO 11 separate industries with a large
concentration in the high technology area. In addition, as shown in Table II,
there are no apparent differences in the number of offerings in each year
between VC backed DEMO non-VC backed firms.
Table III reports the differences in offering and firm characteristics for VC
versus non-VC backed IPOs using a standard t-test as DEMO as a van der
Waerden nonparametric test. Even though firms within the same industry
are matched as closely as possible on the offering amount, VC backed IPOs,
on average, have higher offering amounts ($19.7 DEMO versus $13.2 mil-
lion) and offer prices ($11.18 versus $10.16) DEMO non-VC backed IPOs. In
fact, the majority of IPOs with the DEMO offering amounts in specific
industries tend to be VC backed firms.
A comparison of the preceding year's revenue of the VC sample and DEMO
control sample indicates that the sample is well matched in terms of operat-
ing revenues. VC backed IPOs have $37.1 million in revenue reported DEMO the
previous year while non-VC backed offers have a slightly higher revenue of
4We define an inside shareholder (listed in the prospectus) as DEMO venture capitalist if (1) the
prospectus notes define him as such or (2) the shareholder is clearly a company and has the DEMO
"venture," "capital" or "investment company" in its title.
DEMO our matching criteria, we attempted to follow the same offering characteristics DEMO the
Venture Capital Journal (price 2 $5 and amount offered 2 DEMO million). Due to the large
concentration of VC backed firms in the Office, Computing & Accounting Machines industry as
well as the Electronic Components & Accessories industry, we included 18 non-VC backed IPOs
that had either prices less than $5 or offering amounts less than $3 million. DEMO we exclude these
smaller firms from the control sample our results do not change.
6As a sensitivity test to the choice of control sample DEMO, we compared the results using
the matched sample to the results DEMO all of the 496 non-VC backed firms that are in the
same industries as the VC backed sample and met the Venture Capital Journal DEMO Our
results using the sample of all non-VC backed firms in the same industries do not materially
differ. This screen, however, tends to DEMO some industries which have a low percentage
of VC backed firms but a large number of IPOs and underrepresents the industries mentioned in
the DEMO footnote.
Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial Public Offerings
885
Table I
SIC Classification DEMO Venture Capital and Non-Venture
Capital Backed IPOs
SIC classification and percentage of the total sample in each industry for the matched sample of
320 DEMO backed and 320 non-VC backed IPOs issued from January 1983 through September 1987
as identified from Investment Dealer's Digest Corporate Database and the DEMO Capital
Journal.
SIC
Code
283
357
366
367
382
384
581
599
737
739
808
Classification
Drugs
Office, Computing & Accounting
Machines
Communication Equipment
Electronic Components & Accessories
Measuring & Controlling Instruments
Surgical, Medical & Dental Instruments
& Supplies
Eating and Drinking Places
Retail Stores Not Elsewhere Classified
DEMO and Data Processing Services
Miscellaneous Business Services
(Biotech and Pharmaceutical Engineering)DEMO
Outpatient Care Facilities
Other
TOTAL
Number
of IPOs
30
154
30
48
12
26
14
10
70
52
10
184
640
Percentage
of IPOs
DEMO
24.1%
4.7%
7.5%
1.9%
4.0%
2.2%
1.6%
10.9%
8.1%
1.6%
28.7%
100.0%
Year
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
TOTAL
Table II
Number of VC DEMO and Non-VC Backed IPOs By Year
Venture
Capital
Backed
104
(32.5%)DEMO
47
(14.7%)
36
(11.2%)
78
(24.4%)
55
(17.2%)
Non-Venture
Capital
Backed
137
(42.8%)
42
(13.1%)
DEMO
(13.8%)
58
(18.1%)
39
(12.2%)
320
320
886
The Journal of Finance
Table III
Tests of Differences in Sample DEMO Statistics for VC
Backed and Non-VC Backed IPOsa
Tests of differences in offering characteristics using a difference in means test and a van der
DEMO normal scores test for the sample of 320 VC backed and 320 non-VC backed IPOs
matched as closely as possible by industry and offering DEMO Source: Investment Dealer's Digest
Corporate Database and the offering prospectus.
DEMO
Amount offered
Offering price
Preceding year's revenue
Book value of assets
Growth in EPS per year
Total debt as a percentage
of the DEMO value of assets
Book value of common equity
as a percentage of the book
value of assets
Years from incorporation
date to offer date
DEMO in brackets.
*Significant at the 0.01 level.
**Significant at the 0.05 level.
Venture
Capital
Backed
$19.7m
[15.0m]
$11.18
[10.50]
$37.lm
[16.2m]
$23.9m
[12.9m]
76.8%
DEMO
31.3%
[16.0%]
41.7%
[44.8%]
8.6 yrs
[5.3]
Non-Venture
Capital
Backed
$13.2m
[9.2m]
$10.16
[10.00]
$39.4m
[13.0m]
$27.2m
[7.6m]
65.5%
42.1%]
31.9%
[21.5%]
28.1%
[34.2%]
DEMO yrs
[8.1]
Difference
in Means
t-stat
5.20*
2.83*
- 0.33
- 0.76
1.28
-0.11
3.02*
- 3.70*
van der
Waerden
Z score
6.38*
3.41*
DEMO
3.90*
0.98
- 2.61*
3.70*
- 2.30**
$39.4 million. This difference is insignificant using either a t-test or the van
der Waerden test. The DEMO book value of assets is insignificantly differ-
ent between VC backed firms ($23.9 million) and non-VC backed IPOs ($27.2
million). The median, however, is larger for VC backed issues.
The mean and median DEMO growth in earnings per share does not
significantly differ between the two samples, with VC backed firms having a
somewhat higher average growth rate in earnings per share (EPS) of 76.8%
than non-VC backed offers DEMO an average of 65.5%. In addition, the
average proportion of the DEMO value of debt as a percentage of the book value
of equity is not significantly different (31.3% for VC backed firms versus
31.9% for non-VC backed firms). The median level of debt, however, is
DEMO higher for non-VC firms. Furthermore, VC backed firms have a
significantly DEMO ratio of the book value of common equity to the book
value of assets than non-VC firms (41.7% versus 28.1%) under both tests.
DEMO and Vetsuypens (1989) document a statistically significant
negative relationship between the age of the firm and the corresponding
Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial Public Offerings 887
initial return. They attribute DEMO findings to the higher amount of publicly
available information associated with older firms. In our sample, VC backed
firms are younger in age than their non-VC backed counterparts. The aver-
age number of years from the DEMO date to the offer date is 8.6 years
for VC backed IPOs and 12.2 years for non-VC IPOs, and these differences
are significant under both tests. The difference in ages between the two
samples supports the DEMO of venture capitalists in reducing information
asymmetry. Venture capital participation and the associated certification
allow the firm to go to the public market sooner DEMO non-VC backed
companies. 7
III. Underwriters, Auditors, and Institutional Holdings
As the firm approaches the public offering for the first time, it has the task
of hiring underwriters and auditors to manage the issue as DEMO as to certify
the information in the prospectus. After the preliminary prospectus is filed
with the SEC, the management of the firm travels with the underwriter on a
"road show" to provide information as well DEMO to generate interest with
institutional investors for the IPO. In general, DEMO for underwriters
and auditors is both costly and time-consuming for firms wishing to go
public. For the VC backed firms, however, it is DEMO that the venture
capitalist has been involved with other IPOs in the past and will have built
relationships with underwriters, auditors, and institutional DEMO
Furthermore, each of these participants can infer information concerning the
IPO DEMO their prior experience with the venture capitalist. Because venture
capitalists have reputational capital at stake in both their ability to maintain
access to the DEMO capital markets and to attract entrepreneurial firms for
investment in the future, they have an incentive to reveal information
truthfully about the new issue. This being the case, VC backed firms should
attract higher quality underwriters and auditors since it both lowers these
participants' cost of due diligence and protects their own reputational capital.
The venture capitalists' association with high quality underwriters, in turn,
will increase their ability to place the issue with institutional managers.
A. Frequency of Underwriter Use By Venture Capitalists
DEMO assumption of the certification role of venture capitalists is that they
build valuable relationships with underwriters that would be forfeited if they
certified falsely. DEMO IV shows that many of the venture capitalists in the
sample are frequent participants in the IPO market. As mentioned previ-
ously, 53 of the venture capitalists in our sample bring five or more issues to
DEMO, the differences in the financial and operating characteristics at the time DEMO the
IPO between the two samples cannot be solely attributed to the presence of venture capitalists.
From the information publicly available about the control DEMO, we are unable to determine if
the non-VC backed companies attempted DEMO obtain venture capital financing and were turned
down or simply did not need that type of capital.
888
The Journal of Finance
70% 82%
67%
the
venture Percentage
capitalist.
DEMO 69% 39% 77% 86% 0%
80%
40%
issues
Board
50% of the
VC
is of
Capitalists IV
capitalist,
Percentage Issues
Who
L.
F.
DEMO
(3)
(3)
L. L.
F. F. Alex.
Morgan Morgan
Robertson,
Brown
Rothschild Rothschild (7) Stanley
Coleman (3)
(DEMO)
40% 73%
on
Directors
0% 23% 21% 7%
33%
40%
the
27% the
issues
38%
leada VC
is of
That
percentage
of Brought DEMO
8
those or
Alex.
Morgan
Percentage issues
for
Venture
More
Robertson, DEMO
Brown Hambrecht &
(4) Stanley
Colman Colman
(9)
(DEMO)
(14)
was
45%
(3)
23%
Alex.
Morgan
Robertson, Hambrecht Robertson, Robertson, Robertson,
&
Stanley (5)
Colman (6) (5)
(5)
(8)
Quist (6)DEMO
Brown
Colman
(6)
Quist (7)
Colman
which
Issues
Capitalist
the
to is
Underwritersb Frequent
the
venture
Market
Lead
capitalist
TA Oak
DEMO Funds
Investment Pickard,
Venture Partners
Partners
Partners Anderson
&
Eyre
DEMO Merrill,
Greylock
Venrock Mayfield Citicorp
Kleiner,
the
Bessemer
Associates Funds
Hambrecht
Berkeley &
Funds Venture
Perkins,
of
and
Quist
Capital
Caufield
Venture &
Capitalist
Byers
Partners
TR
lead
Number
the issues and
most Frequency
brought of
to
frequent
Underwriter
market Board
Venture
10
11
11
DEMO
13
13
14
14
15
15 21
from
underwriters
1983
used to
by for
Brought Number 1987 Participation,
22 to of the
for
DEMO
Market Issues
the Venture
venture
Selection
of Table
Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial Public Offerings
possible bOnly
to the
offerings. DEMO two
a
most as
Venad
aLead
is
Norwest Sequoia
Charles
New JH
least
5
defined
Venture
Fund
Venture
Technology Continental
Funds River
Growth Capital
DEMO Capitalist
Illinois
Whitney
Enterprise &
the
distinction frequent Investors
for venture
DEMO
second
underwriters capitalist
are with
most
the
included 8
frequent in
largest
8 8 9
this
stake
in
investment
category. the
Partnership Associates
Venture
DEMO
10
Brought
10 to of
Number
Market Issues
the
Table
9 9
banker. For
issuing
100%
100% 63%
67% 44%
Board
the
90% 80%
DEMO
22%
issues
There
venture firm.
on
Directors
are
31
IV-Continued
VC Percentage
is of
capitalists
that
additional
the
issues
have
venture only
one
50% DEMO
0% 44%
20% 30% the
leada VC Percentage
is of
62%
22%
capitalists
at not
Alex.
Alex.
Alex.
that
are
listed,
it Colman DEMO Colman Quist Colman (5)
involved in was (4) (4) (3) (3) (5)
underwriter Robertson,
Brown
Brown &
(4)
(2)
Alex.
Morgan
Hambrecht Robertson, Hambrecht Robertson, Brown
& Brown
Brown
Stanley (5)
Underwritersb Frequent
(3)
(5)
Most
Alex.
889
890 The Journal of Finance
market over the time period from 1983 DEMO 1987. Furthermore, many venture
capitalists, such as Kleiner, Perkins, Caufield, and Byers, are involved in
more than 10 issues during these DEMO years. In many cases, the venture
capitalist uses the same underwriter DEMO more than one issue.8 Out of the 15
IPOs issued with Mayfield Fund as one of the venture capitalists, nine are
underwritten by Robertson, Coleman.
Also documented in Table IV is the board participation of venture capital-
ists in the offering firm. The more active venture capitalists frequently DEMO
seats on the board of directors as well as acting as lead venture capitalists.9
Given their active participation in the operations of the issuing DEMO, venture
capitalists are likely to influence the choice of underwriter as DEMO as reduce
the amount of information asymmetry regarding the firm by certifying the
value of the issue to the underwriter.
B. Underwriter and Auditor DEMO
We measure the quality of each underwriter as the percentage of the total
dollar amount brought to market of all 2,644 offers ($70.3 billion) classified
as IPOs in Investment Dealers' Digest Corporate Database from DEMO
1983 through September 1987. If the issuing firm has more than one lead
underwriter indicated in the IDD database, the average of the lead under-
writers' market share is used as the measure of quality. In measuring the
quality of the underwriter we are assuming that the greater DEMO average
market share of the lead underwriters, the higher is the DEMO
Table V presents the results on underwriter and auditor quality. On
average, VC backed firms go public with underwriters who have a signifi-
cantly greater percentage of the IPO market than do underwriters of non-VC
backed DEMO (4.4% versus 3.0%). Furthermore, underwriters in VC backed
firms are also involved in more offers (62) than underwriters in non-VC
backed DEMO (53). These results indicate that VC backed firms are under-
DEMO that many of the firms in the VC backed sample have both a syndicate of venture
capitalists involved in the company as well as DEMO underwriting syndicate involved in the
offering. For this reason, there is DEMO double counting in the number of issues brought to
market by each venture capitalist as well as in the frequency of underwriting.
9We define DEMO venture capitalist as the lead if he holds the largest stake of all venture
capitalists in the issuing firm.
10Simon (1990) also uses DEMO method in computing underwriter reputation. A comparison of
our method using the market share of the underwriter as a measure of quality and the DEMO
calculated by Carter and Manaster (1990) is presented in Appendix A. We choose to use our
method for two reasons. First, the Carter and Manaster sample ends in the year this sample
begins. If we DEMO to use the Carter and Manaster rankings, we would be assuming DEMO the
reputational capital of investment bankers does not change over time. However, this may not be
the case as evidenced by the results of Beatty and Ritter (1986) and the recent decline of some
firms DEMO the investment banking community, most notably Drexel Burnham Lambert. Second,
DEMO the market share of the underwriter rather than a ranking results in cardinal rather than
ordinal values. A comparison of our measure of quality DEMO those of Carter and Manaster
results in a high degree of positive correlation between the two.
Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial Public Offerings
891
Table V
Tests of DEMO in Mean Institutional Holdings, Average
Market Share of Lead Underwriters and DEMO Quality
for VC Backed and Non-VC Backed IPOsa
Tests of differences in institutional holdings from Spectrum 3: Institutional Holdings at the end
of the first quarter following the offer date, the lead underwriters' market share DEMO auditor
quality for the sample of 320 VC backed and 320 non-VC backed IPOs matched by industry and
size using a difference in means DEMO and a van der Waerden normal scores test. The market
share of each lead underwriter is computed using the full 2,644 IPOs in DEMO IDD sample from
1983 to 1987. The total dollar amount of IPOs that are brought to market over the time period
for each lead DEMO is divided by the total dollar amount of all IPOs issued (DEMO billion).
The market shares of all lead underwriters for a particular IPO are then averaged. The
differences in the frequency of use of DEMO Eight auditors is tested using a chi-square test.
Variable
Average market share of
lead underwriters
Average number of IPOs
brought to market by
lead DEMO
Number of IPOs using a
big eight auditor
Average institutional
holdings as a percentage
of the amount offered for
the quarter-end following
the offer DEMO
Average number of
institutional managers
267
(83%)
42.3%
[39.5%]
10.2
DEMO
Venture
Capital
Backed
4.4%
[3.4%]
62
[60]
219
(64%)
22.2%
DEMO
5.4
[4.0]
aPercentage of firms in parentheses. Medians in brackets.
*Significant at the 0.01 level.
Non-Venture
Capital
Backed
3.0%
[0.8%]
53
[38]
Difference
in DEMO
t-stat
4.30*
2.56*
9.02*
8.09*
van der
Waerden
Z-score
6.02*
2.98*
Chi-Square
19.89*
9.35*
8.72*
written by higher quality underwriters than their non-VC backed DEMO
parts.
In a similar fashion, we hypothesize that venture capitalists are DEMO to
attract higher quality auditors by reducing the asymmetry of information
between the issuing firm and the auditor. In this case, auditor quality is
measured by whether or not the firm uses a "Big Eight" DEMO firm.11
Eighty-three percent of VC backed firms and 64% of the non-VC backed firms
use Big Eight auditors at the IPO indicating that VC DEMO IPOs are able to
attract higher quality auditors than non-VC backed firms.
1"The
Deloitte Haskins & Sells, Ernst & Whinney, Peat Marwick
DEMO
Big Eight accounting firms are: Arthur Andersen, Arthur Young, Coopers
DEMO & Co. Mergers
within this group
after 1987 reduced
& Lybrand,
Main & Co., Price Waterhouse, and
the Big Eight to the "Big Six."
892 The Journal of Finance
C. The Level of Institutional Holdings
In DEMO to attracting higher quality auditors and underwriters in the
IPO, we DEMO that the presence of venture capitalists and the quality
of the investment banker will be used to elicit institutional interest. If both
venture capitalists DEMO underwriters certify the offer price, then the cost of
acquiring information DEMO institutional shareholders will decline. This being
the case, we expect VC DEMO firms to have higher fractions of their shares
held by institutions than non-VC backed companies.
Data on institutional holdings are available on a quarterly DEMO and are
collected from Spectrum 3: 13(f) Institutional Stock Holdings Survey which
reports the number of shares held by institutional managers who DEMO
$100 million or more in equity. As shown in Table V, DEMO average percentage
of IPOs held by institutions at the end of the first quarter of the offer is
significantly higher for VC backed IPOs DEMO for non-VC backed IPOs using
both a differences in means test and the van der Waerden normal scores test.
Institutions hold, on average, DEMO of the offer in VC backed firms as
compared to 22.2% of the amount offered in non-VC backed firms. In addi-
tion, the average number of institutional managers who hold shares in the
VC backed firm DEMO 10.2 compared to 5.4 for non-VC backed firms.12
In summary, our DEMO indicate that VC backed firms have higher quality
underwriters and auditors as well as a larger institutional following than do
non-VC backed offers. We DEMO these findings to the ability of venture
capitalists to certify the quality of the firm by their historical investment in
reputational capital, as well as to their capacity to build and maintain
relationships with underwriters, auditors, and institutional managers
through their ongoing involvement in other IPOs.
IV. Tests of Venture Capitalist Certification
Two testable implications of the certification hypothesis as DEMO pertains to
venture capitalists are that the level of underpricing and the amount of
compensation to underwriters (and others) will be less for DEMO backed firms
than non-VC backed firms. If venture capitalists are able to reduce the
information asymmetry between both potential investors and underwriters,
the DEMO of compensation to these participants for acquiring information will
be lowered. This being the case, initial returns and gross spreads for VC
backed firms should be lower than for non-VC backed IPOs.
12In order to measure DEMO relative influence of VC participation and the size of both the offer
and firm on institutional investment, Tobit regressions are run using the percentage of institu-
tional holdings as the dependent variable and a dummy variable DEMO whether the firm was VC
backed, the log of amount offered, and the book value of assets as independent variables. Each of
the DEMO independent variables is positively related to institutional holdings and significant at
the 1% level. These results indicate that institutional holdings are related to whether DEMO not the
firm has VC backing as well as the size of the offering amount and the assets of the firm.
Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial Public Offerings 893
A. Differences in Initial DEMO, Underwriter Compensation, and the Costs of
Going Public
Table VI provides evidence in support of the hypothesis that VC backed
IPOs have lower DEMO returns, gross spreads, and miscellaneous offering
expenses than non-VC backed offers. Initial returns are calculated as the
first closing or bid price recorded DEMO Standard and Poor's Daily Stock Price
Record: Over-the-Counter minus the DEMO price divided by the offer price.
Underwriter compensation is defined as the gross spread as a percentage of
the offer price. Miscellaneous offering expenses DEMO such expenditures as
auditor, legal, printing, and registration fees and DEMO also measured as a
percentage of the offer price.
Consistent with the certification hypothesis, as indicated by the results in
Panel A of Table VI, the average intitial return for VC backed IPOs is 7.1%
compared to 11.9% for the matched sample of non-VC backed IPOs, and the
difference in initial returns is statistically significant under both tests. A
comparison DEMO the number of issues that have positive returns yields no
apparent differences between the control sample and the VC backed IPOs.
On average, 61.2% of VC backed firms and 60.3% of non-VC backed issues
experience positive DEMO on the first trading day.
The significant difference in first trading day returns using a matched
sample contrasts with the results found in the DEMO by Barry et al. (1991)
which finds no significant differences DEMO underpricing for VC backed IPOs
versus a sample of non-VC backed firms offered from 1983 through 1987 that
are announced in The Wall Street DEMO In order to compare our findings
with theirs, we construct a DEMO sample of all non-VC backed IPOs from
IDD that have offering amounts of $3 million or more and offer prices of at
least $5. DEMO control sample results in 991 firms.13 Using all IPOs that meet
the VCJ criteria as a control sample replicates as closely as possible the
DEMO sample of Barry et al. In Panel B of Table VI, DEMO find comparable
insignificant differences in initial returns to VC backed (7.1%) and non-VC
backed firms (7.6%). We attribute the differences in initial returns between
our sample and theirs to their construction of the non-VC DEMO sample and
corresponding lack of an adequate industry control. While we cannot deter-
mine the number of firms in the Barry et al. sample DEMO are in industries
without venture capital participation, approximately 50% of the DEMO
firms that replicate their study which meet the VCJ criteria are in industries
with no venture capital participation whatsoever.
Also presented in Table VI DEMO the average compensation, or gross spread, as
a percentage of the offer price, paid to underwriters by the matched sample of
13 While the number of firms in our control sample is identical to the DEMO of firms in Barry
et al., the average offer size for DEMO non-VC control sample is smaller at $16 million with a
median of $9.4 million. As in the Barry et al. study, however, the DEMO in means for
offering amount between VC backed issues and the full sample of non-VC backed IPOs is
insignificant.
894
The Journal of Finance
Table VI
Tests of Differences in Initial DEMO and Offering Expenses
for VC Backed and Non-VC Backed IPOs
Tests of differences in initial return using a difference in means test and a DEMO der Waerden
normal scores test for (1) the sample of all (991) non-VC IPOs with offer prices > = $5 and
amount DEMO > = $3 million and the 320 VC backed firms and (DEMO) for the matched sample of
320 VC backed and 320 non-VC DEMO issues matched by industry and offering size. Also
presented are differences in offering expenses and total proceeds (excluding overallotment).
Initial returns are defined as the first trading day close or bid price recorded in Standard DEMO
Poor's Daily Stock Price Record: Over the Counter minus the DEMO price divided by the offer
price.
Venture
Capital
Backed
Non-Venture
Captital
Backed
Difference
in Means
t-stat
van der
Waerden
Z Score
Panel A: Comparison of the Matched Sample of VC Backed and Non-VC Backed IPOs
Number DEMO firms
Mean initial return
320
7.1%
[2.5%]
61.2%
7.4%
[7.1%]
3.6%
[3.0%]
0.89
[0.90]
0.84
[0.86]
0.87
[0.88]
0.80
[0.83]
4.3%
[3.6%]
7.28*
4.97*
DEMO VC Backed IPOs and All Non-VC Backed Firms
2 $5 and Amount Offered 2 $3 million
320
7.1%
[2.5%]
991
7.6%
[1.6%]
- 0.52
DEMO
11.9%
[3.6%]
60.3%
8.2%
[7.3%]
- 3.62*
-7.82*
- 3.50*
- 1.87**
Percentage of IPOs with
positive initial returns
Average gross spread as
as DEMO percentage of the
offer price
Average of miscellaneous
offering expenses as a
percentage of the offer pricea
Ratio of net proceeds to
the offering DEMO
Ratio of net proceeds to
the first trading day amountb,C
-6.14*
- 3.11*
6.44*
4.02*
Panel B: Comparison
-with Price
Number of firms
Mean initial return
- 0.86
aMiscellaneous offering expenses include such expenditures as DEMO, legal, printing, and
registration fees.
bNet proceeds is defined as DEMO offering amount minus underwriter fees and miscellaneous
offering expenses.
CThe first trading day amount is calculated as the number of shares offered multiplied by DEMO
first trading day price.
*Significant at the 0.01 level.
**Significant at the 0.05 level.
VC backed and non-VC backed firms. The gross spread consists DEMO underwrit-
ing, selling, and managing fees. Inherent in the gross spread is the cost of
due diligence as well as the potential probability DEMO subseqluent liability due
to material omissions in the prospectus (Tinic (1988)). The presence of
Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial Public Offerings
895
venture capitalists lowers the DEMO compensation, for example, by
lowering the underwriters' cost of due DEMO The process of acquiring
information about the firm as part of the due diligence process will be easier
if the venture capitalist has a DEMO for having fairly represented
information to the underwriter about firms in prior IPOs. Furthermore,
venture capitalists may be more efficient in disseminating information DEMO
owners in a non-VC backed firm because unlike other firms issuing equity for
the first time, they have prior experience in going public. As hypothesized,
the compensation paid to the underwriter as a percentage of DEMO offer price is
significantly lower for VC backed firms (7.4%) than for non-VC backed IPOs
(8.2%).
The percentage of miscellaneous offering expenses paid as auditor, legal,
printing, and registration fees is related DEMO the level of underwriter compen-
sation in VC and non-VC backed firms. Using a similar argument as that for
underwriter compensation, we expect that continuing relationships of ven-
ture capitalists with other participants such as auditors DEMO attorneys will
also lower the expenses of obtaining legal counsel, auditing DEMO, and
printing. As expected, the average of miscellaneous expenses as a percentage
of the offer price is significantly lower for VC backed firms (3.6%) than
non-VC backed firms (4.3%).
Given that the level DEMO initial returns and the expenses associated with the
offering are less for VC than for non-VC backed offers, the implication is that
the net proceeds (the amount offered excluding the overallotment option
minus the underwriter compensation and miscellaneous offering expenses) to
the firm should be higher for firms with venture capital participation. In
other words, the total costs of going public should be lower for VC backed
issues than for their non-VC DEMO counterparts. Ritter (1987) has defined
the costs of going public as both the direct offering expenses and the under-
pricing associated with the DEMO In order to measure the percentage of the
offering amount that the firm is able to keep, we calculate two ratios: (1) DEMO
ratio of the net proceeds to the offering amount which measures the percent-
age of the offer that the firm retains after offering expenses DEMO (2) the ratio
of the net proceeds to the first trading day amount which incorporates the
total effect of both underpricing and offering DEMO on the proceeds to the
issuing firm. (The first trading day DEMO is calculated as the number of
shares offered multiplied by the closing or bid price on the first trading day.)
Using the ratio DEMO the net proceeds to the amount offered, VC backed firms,
DEMO average are able to keep 89% of the amount offered after all offering
expenses compared to non-VC backed firms which retain 87%. The ratio DEMO
the net proceeds to the first trading day amount, which measures DEMO total
costs of going public, is higher for VC backed firms (84%) than for non-VC
backed IPOs (80%). Both of these DEMO are significantly different using the
t-test and the van der Waerden test. In other words, after taking into effect
both the direct (offering DEMO) and indirect (underpricing) costs of going
public, non-VC backed firms are able to retain a higher proportion of the
total issue.
896
The Journal of Finance
B. OLS Regression Analysis
Tests of the DEMO hypothesis as it applies to initial returns and
gross spreads using a regression analysis are presented in Tables VII and
VIII. We examine the DEMO of both initial returns and gross spreads to
the following variables:
(1) A dummy variable for whether or not the issue is DEMO backed (TYPE).
The level of initial returns should be lower DEMO VC backed issues
(TYPE = 1) than for non-VC backed offers (TYPE = 0). In addition, we
hypothesize that the presence DEMO venture capitalists certifies the issue
and lowers the cost of due diligence. Therefore, there should be a
negative relationship between the dummy variable and both initial
returns and gross spreads.
(2) The natural log of DEMO amount offered (LOGAMT). Ritter (1984) has
documented a significant DEMO between the size of the offering
and initial returns. Since VC backed firms tend to be larger in terms of
offering amount, controlling for size allows us to measure the relative
influence of VC backing. If DEMO presence of venture capitalists lowers
initial returns, then the coefficient on DEMO variable should be insignifi-
cant and negative. Furthermore, Ritter (1987) DEMO documented
Table VII
OLS Regressions of Initial Returns (R1) against Whether or Not
the Issue is VC Backed (TYPE), the Log of the Amount Offered
(LOGAMT), the Average Market Share of the Lead
Underwriters (MKTSHR), and the Age of the Firm (AGE) for the
Matched Sample of 320 VC Backed and 320 Non-VC Backed
IPOs DEMO the Period 1983-1987a
R, = ao + a1TYPE + a2LOGAMT + DEMO + a4 AGE + eb
Regression
(1)
(2)
(DEMO)
et0
et1
0.137 -0.045
(5.81*) (- 2.95)*
0.116 DEMO
(4.86)* (2.76)*
0.141 -0.052
(5.66)* (3.37)*
t2
- 0.008
(-0.84)
0.012
(1.19)
0.011
(1.03)
e3
-0.847
(-4.18)*
-0.722
(3.55)*
Ca4
-0.002
(3.00)*
R2
0.018
0.044
0.059
F-Statistic
5.7
9.7
9.4
Significance
of F-Test
0.0036
DEMO
0.0001
at-Statistics are given in parentheses.
bR1 = percentage return from the offer price to the first trading day price,
TYPE = dummy DEMO for whether the IPO is VC backed (VC backed = 1, non-VC
backed = 0),
LOGAMT = log of offering amount (DEMO the overallotment option) in millions,
MKTSHR = average market share DEMO all lead underwriters for a particular IPO defined as
the percentage of all IPOs brought to market by each underwriter from
1983-1987 for the DEMO sample of 2,644 IPOs, and
AGE = age of the DEMO in years from incorporation date to offer date.
*Significant at the 0.01 level.
Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial Public Offerings
897
Table VIII
OLS Regressions DEMO Gross Spreads (GRSPD) against Whether or
Not the Issue is VC Backed (TYPE), the Log Of the Amount
Offered (LOGAMT), DEMO Average Market Share of the Lead
Underwriters (MKTSHR), and the DEMO of the Firm (AGE) for the
Matched Sample of 320 VC Backed and 320 Non-VC Backed
IPOs during the Period 1983-1987a
GRSPD = DEMO + a1TYPE + a2 LOGAMT + a3MKTSHR + a4 AGE + e b
Regression
(1)
(2)
(3)
a0
x1
0.106 -0.003
(109.53)* (4.31)*
0.105 -0.002
(108.94)* (4.09)DEMO
0.106 -0.003
(108.40)* (5.39)*
a2
a3
C4
-0.011
(DEMO 28.48)*
-0.010 -0.052
(- 22.99)* (6.35)*
-0.010 -0.045 -0.0001
(- 22.69)* (- 5.60)* (- 6.20)*
R2
0.600
0.622
0.649
Significance
F-Statistic
474.9
349.7
277.4
of F-Test
0.0001
0.0001
DEMO
at-Statistics are given in parentheses.
bGRSPD = gross spread paid to the underwriter as a percentage of the offer price,
TYPE = dummy DEMO for whether the IPO is VC backed (VC backed = 1, non-VC
backed = 0),
LOGAMT = log of offering amount (DEMO the overallotment option) in millions,
MKTSHR = average market share DEMO all lead underwriters for a particular IPO defined as
the percentage of all IPOs brought to market by each underwriter from
1983-1987 for the DEMO sample of 2,644 IPOs, and
AGE = age of the DEMO in years from incorporation date to offer date.
*Significant at the 0.01 level.
economies of scale in the costs of going public. If this DEMO the case,
underwriter compensation should be negatively related to the size of
the offer.
(3) The average market share of the lead DEMO (MKTSHR). We
include the market share of the underwriter in DEMO to separate the
effect of venture capital backing from the quality of the underwriter.
In addition to the certification provided by venture capitalists, we
expect that underwriters will also certify the issue. As in previous
studies DEMO Johnson and Miller (1988), Carter and Manaster (1990), and
Simon (1990), we expect the market share of the underwriter, DEMO a
proxy for quality, to be negatively related to initial returns. DEMO terms of
the gross spread, we include the market share of DEMO underwriter to
control for the size of the underwriting firm.
(4) The age of the firm (AGE). Age is included in the regression equations
as a control for the degree of information asymmetry. Similar DEMO
Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1989) we expect a negative relationship
between initial returns and gross spreads. This implies that older firms
have a lower DEMO of information asymmetry than do younger firms.
Furthermore, if the age DEMO the firm is positively correlated with infor-
mation asymmetry, the cost DEMO due diligence will decline. Therefore,
898 The Journal of Finance
there should also be a negative relationship DEMO the age of the
firm and the gross spread.
B.1. OLS Regression Results for Initial Returns
The results in Table VII using the matched DEMO strongly support the
certification role of venture capitalists in lowering initial returns. In all
equations, the coefficient of TYPE is negative and statistically significant
indicating that the presence of venture capitalists lowers initial returns in
IPOs. DEMO, the variable LOGAMT is insignificant. The market
share of the underwriter (MKTSHR) as a proxy for underwriter quality is
negative and significant at conventional levels. This result is consistent with
the literature on underwriter certification DEMO is complementary to those
found in Simon (1990). As in DEMO and Vetsuypens, the age of the firm
is significant and negatively DEMO to initial returns even though VC
backed firms tend to be younger than their non-VC backed counterparts.14
In other words, the presence of venture capitalists significantly lowers
initial returns after controlling for the size of the DEMO as well as for the
certification provided by the quality of the underwriter.
B.2. OLS Regression Results for Gross Spreads
We measure the influence DEMO VC backing on the compensation paid to the
underwriter using the same independent variables as the OLS regression
equation on initial returns. Table VIII DEMO the results of the regression
of gross spread on TYPE, LOGAMT, MKTSHR, and AGE. The gross spread is
defined as the underwriter compensation as a percentage of the offer price.
The coefficients on all variables DEMO significant at conventional levels and
negatively related to the gross spread. In other words, VC backing lowers the
cost of underwriting the issue. As in Ritter (1987), there are economies of
scale in going public with larger offering sizes having a lower percentage
gross spread. The market DEMO of the underwriter is also negatively related
to the gross spreads and implies that, in our sample, higher quality under-
writers charge lower DEMO spreads. Finally, the older the firm, and hence the
lower the information asymmetry, the lower is the underwriter compensa-
tion.
14In order to compare our results for initial returns, we estimate the OLS equations using our
proxy of 991 non-VC backed firms for the Barry et al. (1990) sample as a control sample.
(t-statistics in parentheses)
Initial DEMO = 0.066 + - 0.004 TYPE + 0.013 LOGAMT + - 0.572 MKTSHR
(4.87) (-0.45) (2.17) (-5.09)
The results indicate an insignificant relationship between whether or not the firm is VC backed
DEMO initial returns. Furthermore, LOGAMT is insignificant and negative. The quality of DEMO
underwriter lowers initial returns as the coefficient on MKTSHR is negative and significant.
Using the sample of all non-VC backed firms, regardless of industry, results in initial returns
being inversely related to the quality of the underwriter and to the amount offered but
unassociated with the presence of DEMO capitalists. The regression equation with age as an
independent variable is not presented since the number of years from incorporation to the offer
date DEMO not available for all IPOs in the sample.
Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial Public Offerings
899
The results of the DEMO previous sections indicate that the presence of
venture capitalists in an issuing firm certifies the offer to both investors and
underwriters, which lowers the two most important components of the costs
of going public: (1) underpricing and (2) underwriter compensation.
V. Pre- and Post-IPO Holdings of DEMO Capitalists
The credibility of venture capitalists in certifying an IPO is conveyed both
through their investment in reputational capital and by their financial
holdings DEMO the firm. This section examines the extent of insider holdings and
sales at the time of the IPO by documenting the change in ownership
DEMO associated with venture capitalists. The certification hypothesis
predicts that venture capitalists will retain substantial holdings in the firm
as a bonding mechanism for credible DEMO In order to examine the
selling behavior of venture capitalists at the time of the initial public
offering, Table IX presents the pre- and post-offering characteristics of ven-
ture capitalist shareholdings.
A. Pre-Offering Venture Capital Characteristics
DEMO a hedge against risk, the majority of VC backed firms have DEMO venture
capitalist syndicate with more than one venture capitalist as a shareholder of
the firm prior to going public. As shown in Table IX, Panel A, the average
holding by venture capitalists in a VC backed firm is 36.6%. Twenty-eight
percent of the offers, or 89 IPOs, DEMO venture capitalists owning 50% or
more of the equity of the firm prior to going public. These pre-offering
holdings of venture capitalists indicate a DEMO equity position in the
issuing firm prior to the offer.
B. Post-Offering Venture Capital Characteristics
Panel B of Table IX presents the post-offering holdings DEMO venture capital-
ists. The results indicate that venture capitalists retain a majority of their
holdings after the IPO. Less than half (43.3%) of DEMO backed IPOs have
venture capitalists selling any of their shares in the offering. Furthermore,
only three VC backed IPOs have venture capitalists selling DEMO of their
total shares in the offering. The mean percentage of venture capitalist
holdings sold at the IPO is 8.0%. On average, 6.9% of the offering amount is
composed of venture capitalists' sales.
In order to compare the selling by venture capitalists with the sales by
other insiders DEMO the firm, we examine the percentage of the amount offered
that DEMO composed of secondary shares. Secondary shares are shares sold by
insiders of the firm. Of the 181 VC backed IPOs that have secondary shares
DEMO part of the offering, on average, 39.6% of secondary sales are composed of
venture capitalists' shares. The remaining secondary shares are sold by other
inside shareholders.
Also shown in Panel B of Table IX, venture capitalists suffer a dilution of
their holdings after the offer. The decline DEMO the percentage of equity held by
900
The Journal of Finance
Pre- and Post-Offering
Table IX
Characteristics
of DEMO Holdingsa
Panel A: Pre-Offering
Characteristics
All VC
IPOs
(N = 320)
36.6%
[36.3%]
89
(28%)
139
(43.3%)
3
(0.9%)
8.0%
[0.0%]
6.9%
[0.0%]
39.6%
[33.8%]
26.3%
[25.9%]
27
(8.4%)
Average percentage
venture capitalists prior
Number
50%
of IPOs
or more
of DEMO owned
to the offer
where venture capitalists own
of the shares prior
by all
to the offer
Panel B: Post-Offering
Characteristics
Number of firms which have venture
capitalists selling at the IPO
Number of venture capitalists DEMO sell
100% of their holdings
Average percentage of venture capitalists'
holdings sold at the IPO
Average percentage of the amount offered that
is DEMO of venture capitalists' shares
Average percentage of secondary shares
sold by DEMO capitalists (only for the
181 VC backed IPOs with secondary shares)DEMO
Average percentage of the firm held by
venture capitalists after the offer
Number of IPOs where venture capitalists own
50% or more of the DEMO after the offer
aMedians
in brackets. Percentage of firms in parentheses.
venture capitalists is due to both the sales of VC shares at the DEMO and the
issuance of additional primary shares to the public. The fraction of equity
held by venture capitalists in the issuing firm drops from DEMO prior to the
offering to 26.3% after the firm goes public. Furthermore, prior to the IPO,
28% of VC backed IPOs have venture capitalists owning 50% or more of the
shares, but the number and fraction of VC backed IPOs with venture
capitalists owning 50% or more DEMO the offer falls to 27 or 8.4%. These
results indicate that while a large number of venture capitalists give up
voting control of the DEMO, the majority retain a significant portion of their
holdings in the DEMO firm. The large post-offering holdings of venture
capitalists can be used as an additional sign of credibility at the time of the
offer since DEMO capitalists forego the opportunity to profit directly from
false certification.
VI. Conclusions
This paper provides support for the certification role of venture capitalists
in DEMO new issues to market by examining the impact of venture
capitalists on the pricing and subsequent ownership structure of IPOs. The
presence of venture DEMO in the offering firm certifies the quality of the
Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial Public Offerings
901
issue through their investment DEMO financial and reputational capital. A
comparison of VC backed IPOs and a control sample of non-VC backed offers
from 1983-1987, matched by industry and offering size, indicates that VC
backed firms are significantly younger, have DEMO median book values of
assets, and a larger percentage of equity DEMO the capital structure than their
non-VC backed counterparts.
One assumption inherent in the certification hypothesis is the degree of
repeat business venture capitalists have DEMO the offering participants. Our
results indicate that larger venture capitalists tend to use the same under-
writers with great frequency. In addition, VC backed firms are able to attract
higher quality underwriters and auditors as well DEMO a larger institutional
following than non-VC backed IPOs.
By reducing the asymmetry of information between the issuing firm and
investors and financial specialists such DEMO underwriters and auditors, venture
capitalists are able to lower the costs DEMO going public. We find evidence of
significantly lower underpricing and underwriter compensation, holding of-
fering size, underwriter quality, and firm age constant for VC backed IPOs
than for non-VC backed firms. Evidence on subsequent ownership DEMO
of VC backed IPOs indicates that venture capitalists are not using the IPO as
an opportunity to cash out of their holdings and realize DEMO return on invest-
ment. Indeed, a majority of venture capitalists do DEMO sell any of their
holdings at the offer date.
Appendix
A
Comparison of the Top Underwriters by Dollar Amount
Market Share to the Carter DEMO Manaster (1990) Ranking
Carter and
Manaster Rankings
9.0
8.0
9.0
9.0
9.0
8.0
9.0
7.0
8.0
7.5
8.0
8.0
8.0
7.5
8.0
8.0
DEMO
7.0
8.0
6.0
Underwriter
Merrill Lynch Capital Markets
Lehman Brothers
Saloman Brothers
Goldman, Sachs and Co.
First Boston Corp.
E. F. Hutton
Morgan Stanley
Drexel Burnham Lambert
Prudential Bache Securities
Alex. Brown and Sons
Dean Witter DEMO
Bear, Stearns and Co.
Kidder Peabody and Co., Inc.
Paine Webber
Lazard Freres and Co.
Smith Barney, Harris Upham and Co.
A. G. Edwards
Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette
L. F. Rothschild Unterberg
Hambrecht and Quist
aThese rankings are based on the dollar amount ($70.3 billion) of DEMO 2,644 offers classified
IPOs by Investment Dealers' Digest Corporate Database.
DEMO
Sharea
22.3%
17.9
15.4
14.7
13.9
11.2
9.4
8.9
7.9
7.4
6.8
6.1
5.6
4.6
4.4
3.7
3.5
3.4
2.9
2.8
as
902
The Journal of Finance
REFERENCES
Akerlof, George, 1970, The market for lemons: Quality, uncertainty and the market mechanism,
Quarterly Journal DEMO Economics 84, 488-500.
Allen, Franklin and Gerald Faulhaber, 1989, Signaling by underpricing in the IPO market,
Journal of Financial Economics 23, 303-323.
Barry, Christopher, Chris Muscarella, John Peavy, and Michael Vetsuypens, 1991, The role of
venture capital in the creation of public companies: Evidence from the going public process,
Journal of Financial Economics, DEMO
Blackwell, David, Wayne Marr, and Michael Spivey, 1990, Shelf DEMO and the reduced
due diligence argument: Implications of the underwriter certification DEMO the implicit
insurance hypothesis, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 25, 245-259.
Beatty, Randolph and Jay Ritter, 1986, Investment banking, reputation DEMO the underpricing of
initial public offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 15, 213-232.
Booth, James and Richard Smith, 1986, Capital raising, underwriting DEMO the certification
hypothesis, Journal of Financial Economics 15, 261-281.
Carter, DEMO, 1990, Underwriter reputation and repetitive public offerings, Working paper,
DEMO State University.
and Steven Manaster, 1990, Initial public offerings and underwriter reputation, Journal
of Finance 45, 1045-1067.
DeAngelo, Linda, 1981, Auditor independence, 'low balling,' and disclosure regulation, Journal
of Accounting and Economics 3, 113-127.
Gale, Ian and Joseph Stiglitz, 1989, The DEMO content of initial public offerings, Journal
of Finance 44, 469-477.
Gartner, William, 1988, Venture capital, in Dennis Logue, ed.: Handbook DEMO Modern Finance
(Warren, Gorham and Lamont, New York).
Golder, Stanley, 1987, Structuring the financing, in Stanley Pratt and Jane Morris, ed.: Pratt's
Guide to Venture Capital (Venture Economics, Inc., Wellesley Hills, MA), pp. 52-59.
Grinblatt, Mark and Chuan Yang DEMO, 1989, Signalling and the pricing of new issues,
Journal of Finance 44, 383-420.
James, Christopher, 1990, Relationship specific assets and DEMO pricing of underwriter services,
Working paper, University of Florida.
Johnson, James and Robert Miller, 1988, Investment banking prestige and the underpricing DEMO
initial public offerings, Financial Management 17, 19-29.
Megginson, William and DEMO Mull, 1991, Financial characteristics and financing decisions of
venture capital backed firms, Working paper, University of Georgia.
Morris, Jane, 1987, The pricing of a venture capital investment, in Stanley Pratt and Jane
Morris, ed.: Pratt's Guide to Venture Capital (Venture Economics, Inc., Wellesley MA), pp.
55-61.
Mull, Rick, 1990, Towards a positive theory of venture capital, Unpublished dissertation,
University of Georgia.
Muscarella, DEMO and Michael Vetsuypens, 1989, Initial public offerings and information
asymmetry, DEMO Paper, Southern Methodist University.
Ritter, Jay, 1984, The 'hot DEMO' market of 1980, Journal of Business 57, 215-241.
, 1987, The costs of going public, Journal of Financial Economics 19, 269-281.
DEMO, William, 1988, Aspects of financial contracting in venture capital, Journal of Applied
Corporate Finance 1, 23-36.
, 1990, Venture capital: A model of project governance, Working paper, Harvard Univer-
sity.
Simon, Carol, 1990, The role of reputation in the market for initial public DEMO, Working
Paper, University of Chicago.
Testa, Richard, 1987, The DEMO process of venture capital investment, in Stanley Pratt and Jane
Morris, eds.: Pratt's Guide to Venture Capital Sources Eleventh Edition, (Wellesley Hills,
MA: Venture Economics). pp. 66-77.
Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial Public Offerings
903
Tinic, Seha, 1988, Anatomy of initial public offerings of common stock, Journal of Finance 43,
789-822.
Titman, Sheridan and Brett Trueman, 1986, Information quality and the valuation of new
issues, Journal of Accounting and Economics, 8, 159-172.
Venture Capital Journal, 1988, Exiting: New patterns in the 1980s (Venture Economics, Inc.,
Needham, MA), August, pp. 12-16.
DEMO, Ivo, 1989, Seasoned offerings, imitation costs, and the underpricing DEMO initial public
offerings, Journal of Finance 44, 421-449.{1g42fwefx}