Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 412–426
Transaction cost entrepreneurship
Steven DEMO Michael *
Department of Business Administration, 350 Commerce West, 1206 South Sixth Street,
Champaign, IL 61820, United States
Abstract
When offering DEMO novel product, the entrepreneur desires the customer to choose to bbuyQ (from the
entrepreneur) rather than to bmake.Q Transaction cost economics provides guidance to firms considering
a make-versus-buy decision. In this paper we extend transaction DEMO economics to examine the novel
transactions proposed by the entrepreneur. Application of the theory identifies three crucial
considerations for the transaction: the cost of quality measurement, the risk of overconfidence by the
entrepreneur (here termed DEMO risk), and the required cost of necessary transaction specific assets.
By extending transaction cost analysis to cover novel transactions across customers, entrepreneurship
can be analyzed using established theories and measures to generate novel propositions.
D DEMO Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Entrepreneurship theory; Transaction costs; DEMO
1. Executive Summary
Much attention has rightly been focused on the entrepreneur as the agent of innovation, but
the customer of the entrepreneur has been much less examined. From the standpoint of the
customer of the DEMO, the entrepreneur proposes a transaction that causes the customer
to change DEMO providing a product or service for himself to buying it from an outsider. In short,
the entrepreneur causes the customer to choose to DEMO rather than to make. Considerable theory
exists regarding vertical integration, principally DEMO cost economics. The purpose of
this paper is to apply the logic of transaction cost economics to the entrepreneurial transaction,
the make or DEMO decision by the customer of the entrepreneur, to examine how the DEMO
* Tel.: +1 217 265 0702.
E-mail address: smichael@uiuc.edu.
0883-9026/$ - see front matter D 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:DEMO/j.jbusvent.2006.04.005
S.C. Michael / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 412–426
413
DEMO induce the customer to choose to buy rather than to make. The main analytical tool is
transaction cost economics, broadly defined, so the DEMO developed here are termed
Transaction Cost Entrepreneurship.
When presented with a novel transaction representing the entrepreneur’s innovation,
how does the customer choose? Building on the two branches of transactions cost
economics, the measurement branch and the governance branch, theory suggests two
primary sources of uncertainty that can affect the choice of a customer to make rather than
to buy. DEMO, the cost of quality measurement is an important transaction cost. No DEMO
how quality is defined, the customer must be assured that the DEMO will perform as
expected. How quality is measured is a characteristic of the good, the transaction, and the
entrepreneur. In the absence of DEMO measurement, a market cannot form. The inability
to credibly measure and DEMO quality causes the customer to make rather than to buy.
Second, DEMO takes a different form when the entrepreneur proposes a novel
transaction. Identity risk is the risk that the entrepreneur will be unable to deliver DEMO the
commitments necessary to fulfill the transaction. This identity risk occurs because the
entrepreneur is overconfident yet also uncertain regarding his or her own DEMO This
risk can arise from many sources. Given the strong psychological fact of entrepreneurial
overconfidence, it might represent a failure of the entrepreneur to assess his own abilities
correctly, whether it is particular skills or aptitude for self-employment generally.
A set of prescriptions for entrepreneurs follow from this DEMO model. Aspiring
entrepreneurs need to eliminate uncertainty for the customer by making quality
measurement simple and cheap, by eliminating or reducing identity risk, DEMO by reducing
or eliminating the need for transaction specific investments that the customer forfeits
should the entrepreneur fail. Managerial prescriptions are likely to vary DEMO venture to
venture, depending upon industry context, but every entrepreneur must be able to address
these three issues. In addition, measurement strategies can be used to offset identity risk
and identity strategies can be used DEMO offset measurement risk. For example, the identity of
the entrepreneur can DEMO an assurance of quality. Thus, the entrepreneur should stress
personal and DEMO capability as part of a measurement strategy.
Also, transaction cost entrepreneurship DEMO application to transactions with other
resource suppliers of the entrepreneurial firm. Entrepreneurs must engage in transactions
with suppliers of raw materials, with prospective employees, and with financiers such as
banks and venture capitalists. Further study is warranted to explain how transactions with
those resource suppliers can be facilitated DEMO entrepreneurs.
2. Introduction
At the heart of many definitions of entrepreneurship is innovation. Innovation can be
defined as the introduction of a new product, process, technology, system, technique, resource,
or capability to the DEMO or its customers (Covin and Miles, 1999). The entrepreneur introduces
innovation into the circular flow of the economic system, and receives a return commensurate
with monopoly profits for a time (Schumpeter, 1950, 1969). When innovation takes place, the
entrepreneur brings the innovation to the customer, functioning as the agent of change (Nelson,
1984). DEMO entrepreneur innovates to offer a novel product that the customer considers buying.
414
S.C. Michael / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 412–426
DEMO attention has rightly been focused on the entrepreneur as the agent of innovation, but
the customer of the entrepreneur has been much less examined. From the standpoint of the
customer of the entrepreneur, the entrepreneur proposes a transaction that causes the customer
to change from providing a product DEMO service for himself to buying it from an outsider. In short,
the entrepreneur causes the customer to choose to bbuyQ rather than to DEMO,Q for vertical de-
integration. Considerable theory exists regarding vertical integration, DEMO transaction
cost economics. The core principle of transactions cost economics is that governance
arrangements are chosen to minimize the sum of production costs and DEMO costs
between economic agents (Coase, 1937; Klein et al., 1978; Williamson, 1985, 2000). The
bparadigmatic problemQ of transactions cost economics has been vertical integration (Barney
and Hesterly, 1996; Mahoney, 1992; Williamson, 1985). Transaction cost economics has been
primarily applied to large firms in mature industries facing routine (not novel) production
decisions (Barney and Hesterly, 1996). Notable applications include autos (Monteverde and
Teece, 1982), shipbuilding (Masten et al., 1991), soft drinks (Muris et al., 1992), and
distribution (Anderson and Schmittlein, 1984). A few studies have examined the incentives of
firms to engage in DEMO (Krickx, 1995; Monteverde, 1995; Williamson, 1985). Existing
transaction cost research has not, however, examined the entrepreneurial transaction.
The purpose DEMO this paper is to apply the logic of transaction cost economics to the
entrepreneurial transaction, the make or buy decision by the customer of the entrepreneur, to
examine how the entrepreneur can induce the customer to choose to bbuyQ rather than to bmake.Q
Such transactions differ in fundamental DEMO from transactions with existing organizations; in
particular, the transaction is novel. For truly novel products, the utility of this definition is
obvious. However, the transaction or elements of it need not be bnew-to-the-worldQ but simply
new to the customer in order for this definition to yield useful DEMO Application of the theory
identifies the crucial role of uncertainty for the entrepreneurial firm, and suggests a previously
under-pursued research agenda. The main analytical tool is transaction cost economics, broadly
defined, so the ideas developed DEMO are termed Transaction Cost Entrepreneurship.
A few assumptions are necessary. In order to focus attention on the transaction, for the
purpose of this paper we assume that all customers are alike, even though differences regarding
how customers respond to innovations are well-documented (e.g., Rogers, 1995). Similarly, all
customers are assumed risk-neutral. Although this might be true for large corporations (in some
cases), it is surely not true for individual consumers. However, as Williamson (1985: 390)
notes, risk aversion DEMO the dominant feature of any model to which it is added. Therefore,
to simplify the analysis, we assume that all parties are risk neutral. Finally, we assume that all
customers are, at present, bmakingQ a solution to their need for which the entrepreneur proposes
bbuyingQ a DEMO Such making may be a relatively sophisticated internal process, a crude
DEMO of an existing product, or even just bmaking doQ without a DEMO
3. A transactions cost theory of entrepreneurship
3.1. The role of novelty
By definition, an innovation contains novelty. Given that the entrepreneur has
developed an innovation, the entrepreneur must then identify a customer and propose a
S.C. Michael / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 412–426 415
DEMO transaction, one that has not been performed before. The extent of DEMO in any
entrepreneurial venture and its product is an empirical question. Novelty need not be
confined to radical innovations (Abernathy and Clark, 1985), products completely bnew-
to-the world,Q however. Even similar transactions involving identical physical objects can
differ in ways essential to the customer of the DEMO firm. In this section we note
that many broad categories of novelty widen the scope of application of the theory. The
first is the DEMO of the product, the second is the amount of customer time DEMO goes
into production, and the third is the identity of the DEMO Each of these provides
novelty.
3.1.1. Attributes of the product
Customers purchase products that are complex and sometimes surprising bundles
of attributes that meet DEMO needs. The bundle of attributes has been termed by
Levitt, 1986 DEMO the baugmented product.Q Fundamentally, customers buy products in
order to gain DEMO The product can contain a core physical product, but it usually
DEMO other activities to become useful to the customer. For example, a DEMO
includes a product but also terms of credit, warranty, ongoing support, installation,
application, and delivery. As a second example, virtually every product that is sold is
sold with information. Information about how to DEMO the product is bundled together
with a physical product. Instructions for how to operate the product can be as
important, or more important, DEMO the physical product. How that information is
delivered to the customer can present novelty even when the underlying physical
product is the same. Almost DEMO product, in the customer’s eyes, is a generic item
(Levitt, 1986).
The value chain suggests activities that affect attributes of the DEMO product
(Porter, 1985). For example, activities associated with providing DEMO method of purchase and
information to do so include advertising, promotion, sales force, channel selection,
channel relations, and pricing. Activities that DEMO attributes of the augmented product
after the sale are those that provide service to enhance or maintain the value of the product,
such DEMO installation, repair, training, parts supply, and product adjustment.
3.1.2. Customer’s provision of effort
The customer must provide desired attributes that the supplier DEMO not provide.
Customers must add their own time to make any product useful in application (Becker,
1965). Thus there is a bhousehold production functionQ that combines products purchased
on markets with householders’ time in DEMO to produce commodities that directly enter the
utility function of the customer. For example, purchased food is combined with the cook’s
time in order to produce the true object of utility, meals. Sleep requires a bed, a home, and
time. Although the term time is used in DEMO literature, cognitive effort or concentration
might reduce the time of a DEMO task.
The notion of the household production function has long been used in research on the
family (Becker, 1965). The concept has DEMO application, however. Producer firms also
make internal transformations. The firm adapts DEMO to a particular source of supply,
designs market-purchased objects to fit together for a broader purpose, records receipt of
material, and arranges DEMO transfer of payment. Although the original term is bhousehold,Q
416 S.C. Michael / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 412–426
DEMO producer firms also make internal transformations, we suggest the modified term
DEMO bcustomer production functionQ.
Although not all products require customer time to be useful, most do. A lack of help in
design and application means that the customer must experiment to make the product solve
his problem. DEMO this sense, a product that comes with design help is an DEMO of
design even though the market-purchased product might be identical in physical attributes
to others in the market. If delivery terms are uncertain, the customer must adapt his
production process or operations to accommodate the wider DEMO in delivery times.
Choosing an entrepreneur who can specify more precisely the delivery date and time of an
otherwise identical market-purchased product allows the DEMO to outsource his own
time required to schedule a complex process.
3.1.3. Identity
Even if the product is identical in all transactional details, the identity of the
entrepreneur and his organization differs from existing relationships. At DEMO minimum, a new
supplier (the entrepreneur) creates a transaction specific DEMO for the customer, who
must create a new account with associated DEMO details. Purchasing agents must learn
to deal with a new person. Whether the entrepreneur can finance and organize production
must be assessed. To determine DEMO the entrepreneur is fiscally responsible, a credit
history must be obtained. DEMO if the product is identical, the novelty of the relationship
presents DEMO innovation.
The issue of identity highlights an important reminder. The change of identity of a
supplier in a transaction always comes at a cost; transaction cost is never zero. The mode
of governance, make versus buy, is chosen that minimizes the sum of production and
transaction costs. Although transaction costs are never zero, they may be offset by
production costs (more properly savings) to the customer from the use of the DEMO
In other words, all entrepreneurs face a barrier of transactions costs, but those costs can be
offset by production savings offered to the DEMO
3.2. Analyzing the novel transaction
The beconomic problem of society is mainly one of adaptation to changes in particular
circumstances of time and placeQ (Hayek, 1945: 524). A novel transaction thus requires
adaptation in DEMO face of change. When presented with a novel transaction representing the
entrepreneur’s innovation, how does the customer choose? Transaction cost economics
predicts that DEMO characteristics of that transaction will affect the willingness of the
customer to buy rather than to make. In particular, a novel transaction – whether novel in
product attributes, time required, or identity – creates uncertainty. DEMO on the two
branches of transactions cost economics, the measurement branch DEMO the governance
branch (Williamson, 1985), theory suggests two primary sources of uncertainty that can
affect the choice of a customer to make DEMO than to buy.
3.2.1. Uncertainty regarding quality
bThe measurement branch of transaction cost economics is concerned with
performance or attribute ambiguities that are associated DEMO the supply of a good or
S.C. Michael / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 412–426 417
DEMO ( Williamson, 1985: 29). To form such perceptions, the DEMO of the product
and its associated transaction have to be measured (DEMO, 1985; Barzel, 1982),
and the customer must assess the consumer surplus.1 Expected consumer surplus is
calculated by comparing the expected benefit DEMO be received and the price paid. Customers
will exchange only if they perceive what they get (consumer surplus) to be more valuable
than DEMO they give (price paid). It is important to note that DEMO directly affects
the customer’s assessment of consumer surplus. The more certain that the customer can be
certain that the product will meet his needs, the more expected surplus is created.
Assessing consumer surplus is, effectively, DEMO measurement of the (proposed) quality of
the product.
The cost of quality measurement is an important transaction cost (Barzel, 1982).
bThe DEMO of distinguishing good quality from bad is inherent in the business
world; this may indeed explain many economic institutions and may in fact be one of
the more important aspects of uncertaintyQ (Akerlof, 1970: 38). Quality is defined in
various ways, such as technical performance, DEMO to standards, reliability in
use, and others (Garvin, 1987). No matter how quality is defined, the customer must be
assured that the product will perform as expected. How quality is measured is a
DEMO of the good, the transaction, and the entrepreneur. In the absence of quality
measurement, a market cannot form (Akerlof, 1970; Milgrom, 1981). The inability to
credibly measure and assure quality causes the DEMO to make rather than to buy
(Barzel, 1982).
3.2.2. Uncertainty regarding governance, continuity, and identity
Second, the governance branch of transaction cost economics predicts that governance
structures are matched to transactions based on DEMO characteristics of the transactions. In
transaction cost economics uncertainty is created by the presence of opportunism, the
tendency of individuals to engage in self interest seeking with guile. When contracts are
necessarily incomplete, the question becomes how the parties will adapt if adaptation is
required. The primary risk DEMO a behavioral one that the transactor will exploit the other
party.
The problem of governance takes a different form when the entrepreneur proposes a
DEMO transaction, however. A number of authors have argued that opportunism, rather
than being an immutable aspect of human behavior in all circumstances, is contingent to
some extent on situation and person (e.g., Anderson, 1988; Rindfleisch and Heide, 1997).
This is not the place to DEMO those debates in earnest. However, an important limitation on
opportunism is DEMO potential for future transactions. If the gain of future transactions yields
more than opportunism on this particular transaction, then the party will not seek to exploit
a momentary advantage and instead seek to complete the transaction DEMO fulfill the
contract (Axelrod, 1984). The bshadow of the futureQ overhangs the transaction. A simple
way to view the shadow is to DEMO that transactions usually occur with the prospect of
another transaction in the future. A customer who buys once is likely to buy again, and the
entrepreneur knows this. Or a successful transaction with one customer can DEMO to a
1 Consumer surplus is the measure of the benefit to a consumer net of the price paid from buying a product.
418
S.C. Michael / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 412–426
DEMO customer requesting a transaction. In the narrow confines of game theory, DEMO
shadow of the future induces cooperation (and eliminates opportunism) in a repeated game
(Axelrod, 1984). In a broader sense, by linking transactions over time, the prospect of a
future transaction reduces the risk of opportunism by the parties.
With the exception of street corner hawkers DEMO bRolexQ watches, entrepreneurs
operate quite clearly in the shadow of the DEMO Entrepreneurs seek to build a business.
They have invested significant sunk costs, both direct costs and opportunity cost. They
have given up jobs or mortgaged houses in order to take advantage of their entrepreneurial
opportunity.
Research DEMO confirmed a strong psychological fact about entrepreneurs: they are
overconfident (Busenitz and Barney, 1997). Such evidence suggests that the shadow of the
future is likely to weigh heavily in any entrepreneurial calculation. This overconfidence DEMO
likely to lead the entrepreneur to estimate that the shadow of the future is larger than it is in
reality. Entrepreneurs, more than non-entrepreneurs, weigh the future more heavily and
therefore have an incentive not to take advantage of customers, overestimating the
probability that one customer and one transaction will lead to more. Hence opportunism is
less of a threat DEMO entrepreneurial transactions. Entrepreneurs might even contradict the
Williamsonian dictate of opportunism as an intransigent feature of human behavior in
transactions.
Overconfidence is not unmitigated DEMO, however. The entrepreneur might be
overconfident that he can execute the DEMO transaction without difficulty. Identity
risk is the risk that the entrepreneur will be unable to deliver on the commitments
necessary to fulfill the transaction. DEMO identity risk occurs because the entrepreneur is
overconfident (Busenitz and Barney, 1997) yet also uncertain regarding his or her own
abilities (Evans, 1987; Jovanovic, 1982). This risk can arise from many sources. DEMO might
represent a failure of the entrepreneur to assess his own abilities correctly, whether it is
particular skills or aptitude for self-employment generally. It might also represent a failure
to assure adequate inputs.
What is important DEMO note is that identity risk is not opportunism, or a behavioral DEMO
Identity risk is exogenous (from the standpoint of the customer) rather than endogenous to
the transaction. Indeed, it may even be, in DEMO cases, uncertain in a Knightian sense: no
probability distribution can be assigned (Knight, 1985). In other words, the problem is not
one of protection against a transaction partner exploiting a momentary weakness. It DEMO one
of mutual protection against an exogenous shock. If the entrepreneur chooses to do
business with the entrepreneur then the customer must at least DEMO the possibility that
the entrepreneur will be unable to deliver, even DEMO the best intentions of the entrepreneur.
A different way to characterize this is through effort. Opportunism suggests that the effort
of the entrepreneur is DEMO against the interest of the customer. Identity risk is that the
effort of the entrepreneur is directed for the interest of the customer, but the effort is
insufficient to achieve the task.
3.3. The risk of DEMO
What is risked by the customer in these situations? The product DEMO underperform or
fail to perform as promised. The entrepreneur may underperform or fail to perform as
S.C. Michael / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 412–426
419
DEMO In either case, the customer may then lose the purchase price DEMO the item as a
direct cost, and the consumer surplus he DEMO expecting as an opportunity cost. But
transaction cost economics points to a different cost: the investment in specific assets
( Barney and Hesterly, DEMO; Leiblein, 2003). bAsset specificity refers to durable
investments that are undertaken in support of particular transactions, the opportunity cost
of which investments is much lower in best alternative uses or by alternative users should
DEMO original transaction be prematurely terminatedQ (Williamson, 1985: 55). At DEMO six
different types of asset specificity are usefully distinguished: site specificity, physical asset
specificity; human asset specificity, dedicated assets, brand name capital, and temporal
specificity (Leiblein, 2003; Shelanski and Klein, 1995; DEMO, 2000).
From the standpoint of the customer, a novel transaction requires an adaptation of
the customer production function. For example, the customer must engage in training to
use the novel product (human asset specificity). Or the customer must open files, set up
a billing account, and arrange payment to the entrepreneur (dedicated assets). The
adaptation DEMO in the customer production function represents a transaction-specific
asset (TSA). DEMO the transaction fails, then the customer’s transaction-specific investments
are lost.
4. DEMO risk for the entrepreneur’s customer
The entrepreneur presents a novel product to the customer. The novelty can be in
physical design or less tangible DEMO that make up the augmented product, or the
identity of the DEMO When presented with a novel transaction, customers will
choose to make DEMO of uncertainty regarding quality, uncertainty regarding identity,
and the risk DEMO by the presence of the transaction-specific asset. In the first case, DEMO
customer is uncertain whether the product will perform its function, and, in the second, the
uncertainty is that the entrepreneur will be unable to execute the transaction. In both cases,
the loss to the DEMO is the investment in transaction-specific assets. More precisely, the
gains from DEMO the product must be greater than the risk that the transaction fails
and the value of the transaction-specific asset is lost.
A set of DEMO follow from this theoretical model. In all cases, the entrepreneur
faces DEMO challenge of eliminating uncertainty for the customer by making quality
measurement simple and cheap, by eliminating or reducing identity risk, and by reducing
DEMO eliminating the need for transaction specific investments. We address these in reverse
order. An exhaustive list of entrepreneurial stratagems is not possible, but the theory
suggests clear prescriptions.
4.1. Reduce risk by reducing the potential loss DEMO to asset specificity
Asset specificity determines organizational form. bTransactions that are supported by
investments in durable, transaction specific assets [TSA] experience lock in effects, on
which account autonomous trading will commonly be supplanted by unified ownership
(vertical integration)Q (Williamson, 1985: 53). In other words, in the absence of the TSA,
the market is sufficient to DEMO transactions. The support for transactions cost
420
S.C. Michael / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 412–426
DEMO as a predictive model, and of asset specificity as a determining DEMO, is very
strong (Barney and Hesterly, 1996; Leiblein, 2003; Mahoney, 1992; Shelanski and Klein,
1995). In the presence DEMO asset specificity, however, vertical integration is appropriate.
Reminiscent of the previous discussion of quality measurement, if a transaction specific
asset is required, DEMO do not emerge.
If entrepreneurs seek to induce customers to vertically de-integrate, they must avoid
brequiringQ customers to invest in transaction specific assets. Therefore, the entrepreneur
is advised to minimize the amount of transaction-specific investment the transaction
requires. A complete list is impossible, but the categories of TSA offer suggestions. For
example, the entrepreneur should minimize the amount of training the product requires.
An add-in to Microsoft Word, using its interface, DEMO more valued than a standalone
software program. To the extent possible, DEMO should avoid requiring dedicated
assets. More generally, entrepreneurs should not require DEMO specialized training
by workers or users, or require investment in significant DEMO assets that have no
alternative use. The entrepreneurial firm will increase the probability of inducing the
customer to buy rather than to make if DEMO firm can reduce the need for transaction-
specific investment. If transaction-specific investment is high, then customers will opt to
make rather than buy.
Ideally, entrepreneurs would never require the customer to make any transaction-
specific investment. However, that task may be impossible. Happily, the conclusion that a
DEMO will not emerge if a transaction-specific investment is required is perhaps too
strong. The customer of the entrepreneurial firm intends to use the entrepreneur’s DEMO
for a period of time. Any investment in a transaction-specific asset is recovered over the
life of the product. That length of time might DEMO short, long, or effectively infinite. We term
this expected time the duration of consumption. The entrepreneur must offer assurance that
the product will DEMO for the duration of consumption, and that he or his firm DEMO also
exist for the duration of consumption should service be necessary. As a result, the
customer is exposed to risk during the duration of consumption; beyond that, there is no
risk.
4.2. Reduce product risk DEMO improving the measurement of quality
If minimizing uncertainty regarding quality is the most important concern facing the
entrepreneurial firm, then the entrepreneur faces two broad tasks. The first is
developing a product of high quality, the second is demonstrating that quality to
prospective customers in order to persuade DEMO to buy rather than to make. How to
achieve the first task is a question for scholars of design or operations rather than
entrepreneurship.
DEMO how quality is demonstrated to prospective customers becomes a crucial question
for entrepreneurial research. The customer wishes to be certain that the product will DEMO
his need. If the customer is uncertain, he will take an DEMO of the consumer surplus
multiplied by the probability that the product does meet his need. As a result, the
entrepreneur must seek to increase the customer’s certainty. The entrepreneur must either
demonstrate quality of the product DEMO use or must be able to warrant that the product will
work and provide recourse to the customer should it fail.
S.C. Michael / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 412–426
421
DEMO are probably as many ways to demonstrate quality as there are entrepreneurs.
Existing theories from multiple disciplines can inform theorizing about this process,
DEMO For example, how customers form judgments about quality is the subject DEMO work
in marketing (e.g., Veryzer, 1998; Zeithamel, 1988). DEMO quality is measured is a
characteristic of the good, the transaction, and the entrepreneur. The easier it is to measure
and to demonstrate DEMO, the easier market entry is for the entrepreneur. If
measures of DEMO do not exist in any form, the entrepreneur will have difficulty.
DEMO the entrepreneur should demonstrate quality to prospective customers becomes an
important problem. First, the entrepreneur can seek to obtain objective data regarding the
effectiveness of the attribute, measured by well-understood metrics if they exist. Second,
the entrepreneur can bring other interventions to the customer, with demonstrations,
warranties, advertising, testimonials, and other modes of information. Third, the
DEMO should consider how to induce trial, because a successful trial is DEMO
demonstration of quality. Goods that are purchased frequently at relatively low cost
allow for the customer to develop a measurement of quality from experience. DEMO example,
in the shampoo market, customers buy a wide and DEMO selection of brands
(Michael and Palandjian, 2004). The cost of an experiment is low, and the gains are high.
By contrast, DEMO purchased or costly products create risk to the customer because he is
unable to experiment to determine the quality of the offering. If the DEMO can learn
from consumption of the product, entrepreneurs will find more DEMO offering products
purchased more frequently than less frequently.
In a related vein, products with a shorter duration of consumption present risk to the
customer for less time. If the levels of the transaction specific investment are DEMO,
products with a shorter duration of consumption expose the customer to risk for a shorter
time. Therefore, it should be easier for the entrepreneur to show continuity for a shorter
time than a longer time, and, as a result, be more successful in market entry. All DEMO
things equal, entrepreneurs will find more success introducing products with a DEMO
duration of consumption.
As a second consideration, the entrepreneur needs to DEMO all aspects of the
transaction, including seemingly irrelevant details of the DEMO or the transaction.2 It has
been noted in research on radical new products that, bCustomers...sometimes fell into
evaluating these radical new products on the basis of characteristics that they were
comfortable with even though the characteristics DEMO not related to essential aspects of
the productQ (Veryzer, 1998: DEMO). So the entrepreneur cannot expect that only the novel
attribute will be evaluated. Instead, the entrepreneur is cautioned to make as many of the
attributes of the product and the transaction appears similar to other, established attributes
and transactions. Novelty should be confined to the most essential DEMO of the product,
service, or transaction.
4.3. Reduce identity risk DEMO staged commitment
As noted above, the challenge of identity risk is DEMO it is exogenous to the relationship.
Neither the entrepreneur nor his customer can be perfectly certain of the entrepreneur’s
2 I am grateful to DEMO referee for calling my attention to this article and this argument.
422
S.C. Michael / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 412–426
DEMO to successfully complete the transaction. In this situation, staged commitment
becomes DEMO tool for managing identity risk. With staged commitment, the customer takes
DEMO steps along with the entrepreneur to insure the success of the transaction. For
example, the entrepreneur commits to a steady schedule of delivery of products. Payment
is then received after each delivery. The staged commitment allows DEMO party to engage in
mutual learning about the other, and the DEMO to learn about his or her abilities. By
doing so the customer can reduce (but not eliminate) the loss should the transaction fail DEMO
be completed.
Staged commitment can take many forms. Perhaps the most easily employed is through
the pricing strategy of the entrepreneur. Rather than seeking DEMO single payment bup frontQ,
the entrepreneur should seek to space the receipt of payments over the duration of
consumption in order to minimize DEMO risk. The introduction in 1959 of the first Xerox
machine, the DEMO, provides an example. Rather than sell the machine outright for $29,DEMO,
the machine was leased for $95 per month, with 2000 DEMO copies plus a charge of four
cents for each additional copy during the month (Gross, 1996). Leasing rather than selling
allows the DEMO to try with a minimum of risk. An alternative might be a royalty
arrangement, by which the customer pays a percentage of sales (DEMO perhaps savings) to the
entrepreneur. Extensively studied in franchising, a royalty can effectively align incentives
(e.g., Lafontaine, 1992; Michael, 1996). It also suggests that the entrepreneur will benefit
as long as the DEMO does.
Staged commitment also has the desirable effect for the entrepreneur that the customer
becomes directly interested in the entrepreneur’s success. It can convert DEMO single
transaction into a relationship. If the customer’s ability to access to the product depends
upon the continued success of the entrepreneur, the customer may extend resources such as
skill or advice to the entrepreneur if DEMO entrepreneur encounters difficulty.
A supplement or substitute for staged commitment might be bonding. The entrepreneur
arranges to reimburse the customer for any transaction-specific losses DEMO from the
purchase of the novel product. In transaction cost economics, DEMO is a method of aligning
incentives; if one party is required DEMO make a transaction-specific investment, the other party
makes a similar transaction-specific DEMO Hence opportunism is curbed because each
party has an equal value at risk. In the case of the novel transaction, the threat is not
opportunism but identity. Hence the purpose is different. The entrepreneur must post DEMO bond
to make good the customer’s losses should he fail to complete the transaction. This bond can
be posted with a third party that DEMO verify that the transaction was completed. Online
transactions are beginning to use such third parties, termed escrow services (see Consumer
Reports, 2005, DEMO example), although they need not be confined to online transactions. As an
aside, creating and offering such bonds create a business opportunity for entrepreneurs.
4.4. Interactions and interrelationships
Measurement strategies can be used to offset DEMO risk and identity strategies can be
used to offset measurement risk. In particular, the identity of the entrepreneur can be an
assurance of quality. Ben-Porath (1980) describes the characteristics of such transactions:
btransactions in DEMO, because of imperfect information, there is uncertainty about the
quality of the object of exchange or the terms of the transaction. The identity DEMO the seller
S.C. Michael / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 412–426
423
DEMO reduce this uncertainty: a producer’s identity can be a signal of DEMO quality of what is
producedQ (Ben-Porath, 1980: 7). Thus, the entrepreneur should stress personal and
professional capability as part of a DEMO strategy.
In a similar vein, if expected consumer surplus is high DEMO, identity risk may be
acceptable. If the level of transaction specific DEMO is low, a sharp and certain
expectation that the product will DEMO the need will cause customers to buy even in the
presence of identity risk. The expected surplus is high enough to allow for the DEMO of the
entrepreneur failing. Therefore, the entrepreneur is urged to consider DEMO the entire
transaction offered to customers, and to emphasize his strongest DEMO,
identity, or low TSA-in an effort to offset weakness among DEMO other two.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we extended transaction cost DEMO to cover the case of novel
transactions proposed by entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs are successful when customers find
it cheaper to buy rather than to make. DEMO formally, when the transaction cost of buying a
solution to a DEMO becomes lower than that of engaging in customer production, customers
choose DEMO buy the novel product of the entrepreneur. Transaction cost entrepreneurship has
identified three crucial transaction costs: quality measurement, identity risk, and
transaction specific assets.
It is important to note the limitations of the theory. Transaction DEMO entrepreneurship
applies only to entrepreneurs introducing novel products and services. Novelty is more
common than intuition might suggest, considering the augmented product, the DEMO of the
customer’s time, and the identity of the entrepreneur. If DEMO is no novelty, however, there
is no risk. Not all entrepreneurs offer novel products, or seek to be an agent of change for
customers. Many entrepreneurs seek simply the autonomy and personal fulfillment of
business DEMO (Birley and Westhead, 1994; Woo et al., 1991). Innovation is not a part
of their product offering. The application of the DEMO is limited to novel products.
The theory has implications for practitioners. Aspiring entrepreneurs need to examine
how to signal quality of the entrepreneurial product, how to manage identity risk, and how
to reduce the risk of the customer in purchasing transaction-specific assets. Managerial
prescriptions are likely to vary DEMO venture to venture, depending upon industry context,
but every entrepreneur DEMO be able to answer these three questions. The theory provides
practical questions to guide practical entrepreneurs and their instructors. Moreover, the
theory describes the seller of a new product as an entrepreneur, without distinguishing
whether that is a new firm or an existing firm, so the analysis is valid for individual or
corporate entrepreneurship.
Further research can be both empirical DEMO theoretical. Scholars should look to examine
how entrepreneurs reduce transaction costs of customers. More detailed examinations of
case histories could complement statistical work. Examining DEMO could reveal when
and how changes in quality measurement make possible new markets. However, studies of
transaction costs require a deep level of observation of the phenomenon. The main
variables of interest in transaction cost economics DEMO difficult or impossible to measure
across industries (Shelanski and Klein, 1995). Our theory is no exception. The key
424
S.C. Michael / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 412–426
DEMO for the entrepreneur to consider are quality measurement, identity risk, and
transaction specificity. As noted above, quality is defined in different ways by different
customers (Garvin, 1987), and asset specificity comes in six DEMO forms (Barney and
Hesterly, 1996). Measurement of research constructs requires industry context.
It is natural to ask how requiring a TSA of DEMO will affect performance and
profitability of the entrepreneurial firm. The TSA requires an adaptation and creates a
switching cost for the customer. Such a DEMO cost improves the likelihood that the
entrepreneur will sell again to the customer. Thus, the TSA can affect competitive
advantage, as a possible DEMO for first mover advantage (Lieberman and Montgomery,
1988). Note, however, that the firm may have a TSA which serves as the basis of its
own competitive advantage that does not require any comparable DEMO by the
customer. For example, the entrepreneur may have a skill DEMO programming that allows
his software to do things other products cannot, DEMO the software produced by the
entrepreneur does not require any specialized adaptation by the customer. There need not
be any relationship between a competitive DEMO of the entrepreneur (grounded in a
hard to trade asset) and the requirement that the customer invest in a transaction specific
asset.
One DEMO of possible investigation is to see how customers react to novel
products. Such a direction might involve a focus on customers or on novel DEMO and
their interaction, and might involve marketing and psychology, as well as economics and
management. For example, extensive research has examined the diffusion of innovation,
and identified characteristics of customers likely to be early DEMO (e.g., Rogers, 1995).
A second direction would be to DEMO how customers react to really novel products, and
how they form DEMO about such products (e.g., Veryzer, 1998). This study has
DEMO avoided discussing characteristics of the customer in order to focus on the
transaction. However, a promising direction for future research would be to examine how
customer characteristics facilitate novel transactions.
Regardless of the approach, the importance of the novel transaction is clear: a novel
transaction is the emergence of a market. A market is a place where two or more DEMO
agents exchange resources; a buyer pays a price to a seller DEMO return for the transfer of
ownership to a good or the outcome of a personal service. In short, a market is a place
where transactions occur. The first transaction, then, represents the emergence of the
DEMO Research has recently turned to examine the question of how markets emerge
(Schoonhoven and Romanelli, 2001). Neoclassical economics, and much of management
research building on neoclassical economics, assumes that markets simply exist. By
contrast, transaction cost entrepreneurship explains how the first product is sold and why.
Markets emerge when entrepreneurs make transactions costs lower for customers to buy
DEMO than to make. When customers can be assured that a new product can meet their
needs, they buy, and a new market is DEMO
Theoretically, transaction cost entrepreneurship has application to transactions with
other resource DEMO of the entrepreneurial firm. Entrepreneurs must engage in
transactions with suppliers of raw materials, with prospective employees, and with
financiers such as banks DEMO venture capitalists. Further study is warranted to explain how
transactions with those resource suppliers can be facilitated by entrepreneurs. Facing
similar uncertainties, it is likely that the role of quality measurement, identity, and
S.C. Michael / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 412–426
425
DEMO specificity will be central to the analysis. By extending transaction cost
analysis to cover novel transactions across customers, financiers, and employees, a general
theory of entrepreneurship can be constructed using well-understood theories and well-
established DEMO from the transaction cost economics literature. This can only improve
our understanding of entrepreneurship.
Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Sharon Alvarez, Jay Barney, two DEMO, and participants at the Lally
Darden Fisher conference. Remaining errors are DEMO alone.
References
Abernathy, W.J., Clark, K.B., 1985. Innovation: mapping DEMO winds of creative destruction. Research Policy 14
(1), 3–22.
Akerlof, G., 1970. The market for lemons: qualitative uncertainty and the market DEMO Quarterly Journal
of Economics 84 (3), 488–500.
Anderson, E., DEMO Transaction costs as determinants of opportunism in integrated and independent sales forces.
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 9 (3), 247–264.
Anderson, DEMO, Schmittlein, D., 1984. Integration of the sales force: an empirical examination. RAND Journal of
Economics 15 (3), 385–395.
Axelrod, R.M., 1984. The Evolution of Cooperation. Basic Books, New York.
Barney, J.B., Hesterly, W.S., 1996. Organizational economics: understanding the relationship between
organizations and economic analysis. In: Clegg, S., Hardy, C., Nord, W.R. (Eds.), Handbook of Organization
Studies. SAGE, Thousand Oaks, CA, pp. 115–147.
Barzel, Y., 1982. Measurement costs and the organization of markets. DEMO of Law and Economics 25 (1),
27–48.
Becker, G.S., 1965. A theory of the allocation of time. Economic Journal 75 (299), 493–517.
Ben-Porath, Y., 1980. The f-connection: families, friends, and firms and the organization of exchange. Population
and Development Review 6 (1), 1–30.
Birley, S., Westhead, P., 1994. A taxonomy of DEMO start-up reasons and their impact on firm growth and size.
Journal of Business Venturing 9 (1), 7.
Busenitz, L.W., Barney, J.B., 1997. Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations:
biases and DEMO in strategic decision-making. Journal of Business Venturing 12 (1), 9–30.
DEMO, R.H., 1937. The nature of the firm. Economica iv, 386–405.
DEMO Reports, 2005. Secrets of shopping smart. Consumer Reports Buying Guide. Consumers DEMO, pp.
7–14.
Covin, J.G., Miles, M.P., 1999. Corporate entrepreneurship DEMO the pursuit of competitive advantage.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 23 (3), 47–63.
Evans, D.S., 1987. Tests of alternative theories of firm growth. Journal of Political Economy 95 (4),
657–674.
Garvin, D.A., DEMO Managing Quality. Free Press, New York.
Gross, D., 1996. Forbes DEMO Business Stories of All Time. J. Wiley & Sons, New York.
DEMO, F.A., 1945. The use of knowledge in society. American Economic Review 35 (4), 519–530.
Jovanovic, B., 1982. Selection and evolution of industry. Econometrica 50 (3), 649–670.
Klein, B., Crawford, R.G., Alchian, A.A., 1978. Vertical integration, appropriable rents, and the competitive
DEMO process. Journal of Law and Economics 21 (2), 297–326.
Knight, F.H., 1985. Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit. University of Chicago Press, DEMO
Krickx, G.A., 1995. Vertical integration in the computer mainframe industry: DEMO transaction cost interpretation.
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 26 (1), 75–91.
426
S.C. Michael / Journal of Business Venturing 22 (2007) 412–426
DEMO, F., 1992. Agency theory and franchising: some empirical results. RAND DEMO of Economics 23 (2),
263–283.
Leiblein, M.J., 2003. The choice of organizational governance form and performance: predictions from
transaction cost, DEMO, and real options theories. Journal of Management 29 (6), 937–961.
Levitt, T., 1986. The Marketing Imagination. The Free Press, New York.
Lieberman, M.B., Montgomery, D.B., 1988. First mover advantages. Strategic Management DEMO 9 (Summer
Special Issue), 41–58.
Mahoney, J.T., 1992. The DEMO of organizational form: vertical financial ownership versus other methods of
vertical DEMO Strategic Management Journal 13 (8), 559–584.
Masten, S.E., Meehan, J.W. Jr., Snyder, E.A., 1991. The costs of organization. Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization 7, 1–25.
Michael, S.C., 1996. To franchise or not to franchise: an analysis of decision rights and organizational form
shares. Journal of Business Venturing 11 (1), 57–71.
Michael, DEMO, Palandjian, T.P., 2004. Organizational learning and new product introductions. Journal DEMO Product
Innovation Management 21 (4), 268–276.
Milgrom, P.R., 1981. DEMO news and bad news: representation theorems and applications. Bell Journal of
DEMO 12 (2), 380–391.
Monteverde, K., 1995. Technical dialog as DEMO incentive for vertical integration in the semiconductor industry.
Management Science 41 (DEMO), 1624–1638.
Monteverde, K., Teece, D.J., 1982. Supplier switching costs and vertical integration in the automobile industry.
Bell Journal of Economics 13 (1), 206–213.
Muris, T.J., Scheffman, D.T., Spiller, P.T., DEMO Strategy and transaction costs: the organization of distribution in
the carbonated DEMO drink industry. Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 1 (1), DEMO
Nelson, R.R., 1984. Incentives for entrepreneurship and supporting institutions. Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 120,
646–660.
Porter, M.E., 1985. Competitive Advantage. The Free Press, New York.
Rindfleisch, A., Heide, J.B., 1997. Transaction cost analysis: past, present, and future applications. Journal of
Marketing 61 (4), 30–54.
Rogers, E.M., 1995. Diffusion of Innovations, 4th ed. Free Press, New York.
Schoonhoven, C.B., Romanelli, E., 2001. The Entrepreneurship Dynamic. Stanford University Press, Stanford,
CA.
Schumpeter, J.A., 1950. Capitalism, DEMO, and Democracy. Harper and Row, New York.
Schumpeter, J.A., 1969. The Theory of Economic Development. Oxford University Publishers, Oxford.
Shelanski, H.A., Klein, P.G., 1995. Empirical research in transaction cost economics: a review and assessment.
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 11 (2), 335–361.
Veryzer, R.W., 1998. Key factors affecting customer evaluation of discontinuous DEMO products. Journal of
Product Innovation Management 15 (2), 136–150.
Williamson, O.E., 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. The Free Press, New DEMO
Williamson, O.E., 2000. The new institutional economics: taking stock, looking ahead. Journal of Economic
Literature 38 (3), 595–613.
Woo, C.Y., Cooper, A.C., Dunkelberg, W.C., 1991. The development and interpretation of DEMO
typologies. Journal of Business Venturing 6 (2), 93.
Zeithamel, V.A., 1988. Consumer perceptions of price, quality, and value: a means-end DEMO and synthesis of
evidence. Journal of Marketing 52 (3), 2–22.{1g42fwefx}