NeuroImage 49 (2010) 2556–2563
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
NeuroImage
journal DEMO: www. elsevier.com/locate/ynimg
Neural foundations of risk–return trade-off in investment DEMO
Peter N.C. Mohr a,b,c,⁎, Guido Biele a,b,DEMO, Lea K. Krugel a,b,c, Shu-Chen Li a,b, DEMO R. Heekeren a,b,c
a Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany
b Berlin NeuroImaging Center and Neuroscience Research Center, Charité Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany
c Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive DEMO Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany
article i nfo abstract
Article history:
Received 23 July 2009
Revised 25 September 2009
Accepted 20 October 2009
DEMO online 29 October 2009
Keywords:
Reward
Risk
Risk attitude
fMRI
Decision making
Anterior insula
Medial prefrontal cortex
Introduction
Many decisions people make—such as DEMO to try to catch a
yellow light, choosing a journal for DEMO of an article, or
choosing a ﬁnancial investment—can be described as DEMO under
risk. Understanding the mechanisms that drive these decisions is an
important goal in decision neuroscience. But while recent research
has generated some progress DEMO the understanding of value-based
decision making, the underlying mechanisms of risky DEMO making
are still debated.
Two main competing classes of models in risky choice have been
proposed (d'Acremont and Bossaerts, 2008; Glimcher, DEMO; Rangel et
al., 2008; Mohr et al., in press). The ﬁrst class of models, namely
utility-based models, which includes Expected DEMO Theory (EUT)
and Prospect Theory (PT) (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; von
Neumann and Morgenstern, 1953) proposes that decision makers
DEMO determine the value and weight of each possible outcome and
then calculate the overall value of a choice option as the weighted sum
of DEMO outcome values. The second class of models, namely risk–
return models, proposes that decision makers ﬁrst determine the
average return of the alternative DEMO its associated risk, and then
calculate the value of the alternative DEMO the risk-corrected average
return. In early economic models (e.g., Portfolio Theory) expected
value and variance were used as measures for return and risk,
⁎ Corresponding author. Neurocognition of Decision Making Group, Max Planck
Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany.
E-mail address: DEMO (P.N.C. Mohr).
1053-8119/$ – see front matter © 2009 DEMO Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.10.060
Many decisions people make can be described as decisions under risk. Understanding the mechanisms that
drive these DEMO is an important goal in decision neuroscience. Two competing classes of risky decision
making models have been proposed to describe human behavior, namely utility-based models and risk–
return models. Here we used a novel investment decision DEMO that uses streams of (past) returns as stimuli
to investigate how consistent the two classes of models are with the neurobiological processes underlying
DEMO decisions (where outcomes usually follow continuous distributions). By showing (a) that risk–
return models can explain choices behaviorally and (b) that the components of risk–return models (value,
risk, and risk attitude) are represented in the brain during choices, we provide evidence that risk–return
models describe the neural processes underlying investment decisions well. Most importantly, the observed
correlation between risk and brain activity in the anterior insula during DEMO supports risk–return models
more than utility-based models because risk is an explicit component of risk–return models but not of the
utility-based models.
© 2009 DEMO Inc. All rights reserved.
respectively (Markowitz, 1952). Later, risk DEMO return were general-
ized for subjective measures, such as perceived risk DEMO subjective
expected return (Sarin and Weber, 1993; Weber and Johnson, 2009a).
In the best case, the better model explains behavioral and neural
data better than the other models. This might be untenable, however,
if models can make near identical predictions on the behavioral level,DEMO
as it is the case for utility-based and risk–return models (Bossaerts DEMO
al., 2009; d'Acremont and Bossaerts, 2008). In this DEMO, fMRI data can
serve as a tiebreaker, because they provided additional insight into
the neurobiological processes that sub-serve the cognitive processes
that ultimately DEMO to decisions. Hence, we suggest identifying the
more appropriate class of DEMO by comparing their ability to
describe the process of valuation on which choices are based.
Recent research has found neural support for both classes DEMO
models. Some studies found representations of magnitudes and
probabilities (supporting utility-based DEMO) (e.g., Knutson et al.,
2005) whereas others found representations of risk and return
(supporting risk– return models) (e.g., Preuschoff DEMO al., 2006).
Hence, it remains to date unclear, which DEMO of model provides a
better description of the neural processes underlying economic
decision making as both have proven biologically plausible.
One way to reconcile DEMO apparent conﬂict is to associate both
classes of models with certain types of decisions, environments, or
decision contexts in which different strategies are DEMO In this
case, what is called for are experimental paradigms that DEMO data
for further probing these two classes of models' biological plausibility.
DEMO criterion by which different models can be assigned to different
types of decisions is the amount of information processing required by
P.N.C. Mohr et al. / NeuroImage 49 (2010) 2556–2563
2557
each. DEMO are limited in their processing capacity and therefore
need to be selective in how to use information and under what
conditions (Weber and Johnson, 2009b). In many real-life decisions
(e.g., betting) people deal DEMO only a limited number of outcomes
and probabilities. In these situations values are easily calculated using
EUT or PT. In investment decisions, however, DEMO are usually
faced with investments where returns follow continuous distributions
(e.g., stocks); thus they are faced with an inﬁnite number of potential
DEMO and probabilities. While the amount of required computa-
tions stays constant in risk–return models (calculation of risk, return,
and value), it DEMO with the amount of outcome–probability pairs
in EUT and PT. That is, in EUT and PT each outcome and each
probability (in the DEMO of PT) ﬁrst need to be transformed before they
are combined DEMO derive the value of a choice option.
Given the high computational demand of applying EUT or PT to
decisions with (nearly) continuous outcome DEMO, we
expected individuals to use risk–return models rather than EUT or
DEMO in these situations. To test this prediction, we conducted an fMRI
DEMO where participants made investment decisions in which the
investments' returns follow DEMO distributions. By doing so we
want to provide an additional empirical dimension (namely the
amount of required information processing) for comparing utility-
based DEMO with risk–return models.
Risk is explicitly implicated only in risk–return models but not
in EUT and PT. Thus, a representation of risk (together DEMO a
representation of value or return) would indicate that individuals
use DEMO models when they make investment decisions.
Even though some neuroimaging studies have identiﬁed neural
representations of risk and return (value) simultaneously (e.g.,
Preuschoff et al., 2006), seldomly was the data collected before or
during choice (but see, Tobler et al., 2009), and none of the
previous studies have used gambles with continuous distributions
or applied DEMO risk– return model to relate these variables to actual
choices. The goal of the present study is therefore to extend these
results by testing DEMO risk and value as speciﬁed in risk–return
models are represented in the brain simultaneously during
investment decisions with the investments' returns following
continuous distributions.
To investigate the brain processes associated with investment
decisions we used a DEMO investment decision task in an fMRI
experiment (see Fig. 1). DEMO on prior research we hypothesized that
value correlates with the blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD)
signal in the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) (Kable and Glimcher,
2007; Kennerley et al., 2009; Knutson DEMO al., 2005) and that risk
correlates with the BOLD signal in the anterior insula (aINS) (Critchley
et al., 2001; Huettel et al., 2005; Paulus et al., 2003; Volz et al., 2003).
Further, we hypothesized that inter-individual differences in risk
attitudes (as DEMO by the trade-off factor in risk–return
models) are related to inter-individual DEMO in decision-related
brain activity.
Materials and methods
Experimental procedures
Nineteen young volunteers (age 18– 35 years, 11 females)
participated in this study. DEMO participants were native German
speakers, right-handed and had no history of DEMO or
psychiatric diseases. Three participants had to be excluded due to
extensive head motion (N 5 mm absolute head movement) and
modeling problems (two participants always chose the risky
alternative). All participants were paid DEMO their participation and
gave written informed consent. The study was approved by the local
ethics committee of the Charité University Medicine, Berlin.
Each trial of the Risk Perception and Investment Decision (RPID) task
consisted of DEMO phases: the presentation of a return stream, followed
by a decision or subjective judgment task (see Fig. 1). In investment
situations investors are often confronted with past performance data
of possible investments. To mimic DEMO situation, in the ﬁrst phase we
sequentially presented a stream of DEMO returns from an investment,
each presented for 2 s without ﬁxation-phases between the returns.
These 10 returns provided information about the past performance DEMO
a given investment. In the experiment, each return stream was
independent DEMO the others and described a new investment option.
We varied the mean and the standard deviation of the return streams
parametrically with three means (6%, 9%, and 12%) and three standard
Fig. 1. Risk Perception and Investment Decision (RPID) task: Subjects were presented with streams of 10 returns from an investment. They then either (a) judged the DEMO
expected return of the return stream, (b) judged the perceived DEMO of the return stream, or (c) chose between an investment DEMO a ﬁxed return of 5% and an investment with a
variable return which was represented by the return stream the subjects saw before. We DEMO a parametric design, in which the return streams had means of DEMO, 9%, and 12% and
standard deviations of 1%, 5%, and 9%. Each of the nine resulting return streams was used in three DEMO return orders for each question.
2558
P.N.C. Mohr et al. / NeuroImage 49 (2010) 2556–2563
deviations (1%, 5%, and 9%), resulting in nine different combinations of
DEMO and standard deviations.
In the second phase, subjects performed one of DEMO possible tasks
in each trial (each 7 s) without knowing in advance which one they
would have to perform after the stream. We DEMO three tasks to be
able to investigate choices as well as perceived risk and subjective
expected return, as speciﬁed in recent psychological risk–return
models (Weber and Johnson, 2009a). In the decision task the subjects
DEMO to make a choice between an investment with 5% ﬁxed return
(DEMO investment) and the investment represented by the return
stream they just DEMO (risky investment). In the other two tasks
subjects reported their DEMO expected return and perceived risk of
the investment represented by the return stream. Subjects indicated
subjective expected return on a scale ranging from -5% DEMO +15% and
perceived risk on a scale ranging from 0 (no DEMO) to 100 (maximum
risk) (Klos et al., 2005). DEMO performed each task (decision,
subjective expected return, perceived risk) DEMO times (81 trials in total).
Before the experiment subjects completed DEMO training trials,
knowing that the standard deviations in the experiment would be
in the same range as in the training trials. But no DEMO information
regarding means or standard deviations was given to the participants.
Subjects received a ﬂat payment of 10 Euro for their participation
in the DEMO and a virtual endowment of 100 Euros to invest.
They were explicitly told that the returns they observe during the
experiment are randomly drawn DEMO Gaussian distributions. They
were further instructed that after the experiment, 1 DEMO their 27 choices
will be randomly chosen to determine decision dependent payments.
If the subject would choose the safe option in the respective trial, she
would get 5 Euros (5% of 100 Euros) in addition DEMO the 10 Euros. If a
subject would choose the risky option in this trial, a random return
was drawn from a Gaussian distribution with the same mean and
standard deviation as the respective return stream. The DEMO
outcome (return times 100 Euro) was added to or subtracted from the
ﬂat payment.
Behavioral modeling
In ﬁnancial economics it is usually assumed DEMO individuals use
the objective expected return and the variance of returns as basis for
their choices (mean-variance approach/normative risk–return
model) (Markowitz, DEMO). While it is possible to infer these
measures from past performance data, the actual return an
individual expects (subjective expected return) and his/her per-
ceived risk are unobservable during decision making. Importantly,
DEMO research has shown that subjective expected return and
perceived risk can vary signiﬁcantly depending on the context of
the decision, challenging the predictive power of the objective
measures expected return and variance of returns (Weber and
Milliman, 1997; Weber et al., 2005).
Therefore we applied the following psychological risk–return
model:
Vx
ðÞ
=μðÞ − /σ ðÞ
x
x
In this equation V(x)deﬁnes the value a subject assigns DEMO an
investment x, μ(x) represents the subjective expected return, DEMO(x)
represents the perceived risk, and ϕ is the individual DEMO weight.
To determine which model predicted subjective expected return
and perceived risk judgments best, we used a “leaving one out at a
time” cross-validation method (Browne, 2000), which ensures the
predictive power especially in DEMO with few trials. First, we
divided trials into 26 ﬁtting trials DEMO one test trial. Second, we
estimated the parameters for every model DEMO maximized the
correlation between model predictions and stated subjective
expected returns and perceived risks. For subjective expected return
we compared ﬁve different models: (DEMO) mean, (2) recency, (3) pri-
macy, (4) overweightb 0%, and (5) overweightb 5% (see behavioral
results for DEMO description of the models). All models are weighted
average models that we modeled with memory (number of returns
over which the model was computed) and weighting as free
parameters. Regarding perceived risk we compared six different
models: (1) standard deviation, (2) coefﬁcient of variation, (3)
probabilityb 0%, (4) probabilityb 5%, (5) range, and (6) coefﬁcient of
variation.Whereas the standard deviation and the range are
measures of variation, the coefﬁcients of variation and range are
measures of variation divided by the mean. Probabilityb0% and
probabilityb5% are models for DEMO probability of a loss given a
particular loss threshold. The only free parameter in all models was
memory (number of returns over which the model was computed).
Model predictions of risk models, generated by applying the models
on the return streams, were regressed on the stated perceived risks
to allow a transformation of the model predictions (which depend
on the scale of the returns) into the dimensions of the scale used in
the experiment (0–100).
Third, we applied all models to DEMO return stream of the test trials,
making predictions for subjective expected return and perceived risk.
We then calculated the squared difference between model DEMO
and stated subjective expected returns/perceived risks in the test trial.
We repeated this procedure for all 27 trials, that is, each trial DEMO
served as the test trial. The models with the least average squared
difference between model predictions and stated subjective expected
returns/perceived risks were DEMO as individual best models for
subjective expected return and perceived risk. Finally, we used all 27
trials to estimate the parameters of these best models, which were
later used to predict subjective expected return and perceived risk
during choice trials.
We used these predictions to estimate the risk DEMO and test the
risk– return models behaviorally. Risk weights were estimated by
ﬁtting a softmax function to the choice data. Best risk weights
maximized DEMO sum of loglikelihoods of all 27 choices.
Additionally, we tested how DEMO of the actual choices could be
explained by the ﬁtted risk weight, if we assume a deterministic
decision rule. The decision rule was deﬁned as follows. If V(safe)NV
(risky) the individual chooses the DEMO option and vice versa. The
value of the safe option is always constant (V (safe) = 5% -ϕ
0 = 5%) because DEMO is no risk involved. This ﬁtted risk weight
was then used to make a prediction about the choice in all 27 trials.
To compare DEMO psychological risk–return model with the normative
risk– return model we repeated the above described procedures for
this model.
fMRI acquisition
Imaging was conducted on DEMO 1.5 T Magnetom Sonata MRI system
(Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) equipped with a standard head coil.
We used a vacuum pad to minimize DEMO motion. Functional images
were acquired using a BOLD-sensitive T2⁎-weighted echo-planar
imaging (DEMO) sequence [TR, 2500 ms; echo time (TE), 40 ms; ﬂip
angle, 90°; ﬁeld of view, 256 mm; matrix, DEMO × 64 mm; 26 axial slices
approximately parallel to the bicommissural DEMO; slice thickness,
4 mm]. Two functional runs were acquired (735 and 625 volumes).
The ﬁrst two scans of each run were DEMO to allow longitudinal
magnetization to reach equilibrium. After the functional runs, DEMO high-
resolution structural image was acquired to aid in normalization and
co-registration.
fMRI data analysis
MRI data were analyzed using a mixed effects approach DEMO the
framework of the general linear model as implemented in the FMRI
Expert Analysis Tool (FEAT; Smith et al., 2004), part of FSL 4.0
(FMRIB's Software Library, http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/). Pre-
P.N.C. Mohr et al. / NeuroImage 49 (2010) 2556–2563
2559
processing DEMO slice-timing correction, motion correction, and
spatial smoothing using an 8 mm Gaussian kernel. Additionally, pre-
whitening was used and high-pass temporal ﬁltering (DEMO s) was
applied to the data. A double-gamma function was used DEMO model the
hemodynamic response.
Event-related fMRI data were analyzed using a GLM with task-
related regressors. The goal of the present study was to DEMO whether
risk and value (as speciﬁed in risk–return models) are represented
in the brain simultaneously during investment decisions with
investments' returns following continuous. The value of a choice
option is, however, not independent of DEMO risk and subjective
expected return. Depending on the risk weight the value might be
highly correlated with subjective expected return or perceived risk.
Therefore, it is impractical to include all three components of risk–
return models—value, risk, and return—in the same analysis of the
brain data. In our case, value was on average highly correlated
with subjective expected return, DEMO of the chosen option, and
value derived from the normative risk–return DEMO and objective
expected return (see Tables S1–S3). We therefore analyzed DEMO dif-
ferent models.
In the ﬁrst model we speciﬁed six different regressors to model
different task phases and their parametric modulation. The ﬁrst
regressor (return stream regressor) modeled constant brain activity
during the presentation of the returns (2 s each). Thus, in each return
stream the DEMO had 10 values, one for each return. Additionally,
we modeled DEMO for constant brain activity for each of the three
tasks (expected DEMO task regressor, risk task regressor, and decision
task regressor). The last two regressors modeled parametric modu-
lation of brain activity during the DEMO task with value derived
from the psychological risk– return model (psychological DEMO
regressor) and perceived risk (PR regressor).
In the second and the third model we replaced the psycholog-
ical value regressor with regressors DEMO the parametric
modulation with subjective expected return (SER regressor) and
value of the chosen option (chosen value regressor). The fourth
and the ﬁfth model were speciﬁed with components of the
normative risk–return model. We DEMO in both models the PR
regressor with a regressor for the objective standard deviation (SD
regressor). Additionally, we replaced the psychological value
DEMO with a regressor for the value derived from the
normative risk– return model (normative value) in the fourth
model and with a regressor DEMO the objective expected
return (ER regressor) in the ﬁfth model. The sixth model was
designed to compare risky with safe choices. We replaced DEMO
decision task regressor by two regressors modeling constant brain
activity during the decision task depending on the actual choice
(risky decision regressor; safe DEMO regressor). Parametric
regressors in all models were orthogonalized with respect to the
constant regressors in the respective task phase.
Images of individual level DEMO parameters (contrast
images) were normalized into a standard stereotaxic space
(DEMO Neurological Institute (MNI), Montreal, Quebec, Canada)
and included DEMO a random-effects group analysis. Here we used the
Bayesian modeling approach (DEMO et al., 2004) implemented
in FSL's FLAME (FMRIB's DEMO analysis of mixed effects) procedure
to test whether regression parameters were DEMO different
from zero and whether individual differences in regression
parameters might be explained by the individual risk weights
from the risk–return models. For the DEMO priori regions of interest we
report those activations as signiﬁcant that exceed an uncorrected
threshold of z-scoreN 3.09 and a cluster size greater than DEMO voxels.
A priori regions of interest were regions that have been shown to
be implicated in reward-based decision making tasks or uncertain-
ty-related experiments (Hsu et al., 2005; Huettel et al., 2005;
Knutson et al., 2005). These regions include the prefrontal cortex,
the cingulate cortex, the striatum, the aINS, and the amygdala.
Results
Behavioral results
The Risk Perception and Investment Decision (RPID) task was
designed to DEMO mathematical models that describe how risk and
return are perceived by individuals as well as to investigate how they
make decisions between a safe DEMO a risky investment (Fig. 1).
In the RPID task subjects DEMO saw a stream of 10 past returns from
an investment (each DEMO for 2 s). Next, subjects either had to (1)
state their perceived risk of the investment, (2) their subjective
expected return from the investment, or (3) they had to make a choice
between the investment described by the 10 returns and an
investment DEMO a ﬁxed return of 5%. The subjects' statements for
perceived risk DEMO subjective expected return were used to identify
which mathematical model best translates the 10 presented returns
into predictions for perceived risk and subjective expected DEMO on an
individual level. Thus, one can use these models to DEMO perceived
risk and subjective expected return during the choice between the risky
and the safe investment, where they are otherwise unobservable.
We used a cross-validation procedure (see Materials and
methods) to compare a range of DEMO for subjective expected
return and perceived risk. Five models calculated the subjective
expected return as a weighted average of the observed returns,
whereby DEMO models differed in the weights assigned to different
returns. Only for four subjects (20%) was the expected return model
best able to predict DEMO expected return. Primacy, a model that
gives greater weights to earlier DEMO in the return stream, was the
best predictor for one subject (5%). Recency, a model where later
returns are over-weighted, was DEMO best model for four subjects
(20%). Additionally, we tested two models that give greater weights
to returns below a certain threshold, either 0% or 5%, reﬂecting the
behaviorally observed phenomenon of loss aversion (DEMO and
Tversky, 1979). We found that overweightb0% was the best DEMO for
one subject (5%), whereas overweightb5% described the subjective
expected DEMO statements of 10 subjects (50%). The correlation
between model predictions DEMO the best model for each individual
and stated subjective expected returns was on average r =.73
(Pearson's correlation coefﬁcient, min = .41, max = .91), indicating
a good predictive performance of the models. DEMO, individual best
models can be applied to predict subjective expected returns DEMO the
risky investment in decision trials.
Based on the prior literature for risk measures (Klos et al., 2005),
we tested six different perceived risk models: (1) standard deviation,
(2) coefﬁcient of variation, (3) range, (4) coefﬁcient of range, (5)DEMO
probabilityb0%, and (6) probabilityb5%. Whereas the standard deviation
and the DEMO are measures of variation, the coefﬁcients of variation
and range are DEMO of variation divided by the mean.
Probabilityb0% and probabilityb5% are models for the probability of a
loss given a particular loss threshold.
Perceived risk DEMO best modeled by the standard deviation in six
subjects (30%), DEMO coefﬁcient of variation in two subjects (10%), by
probabilityb5% and DEMO range in two subjects (10%). For six subjects
(30%) DEMO of range was the best model. The predictions from the
best model for each individual correlated highly with stated perceived
risks (r = .87, min = .69, max = .94). This indicates that one DEMO use
these models to predict perceived risk in the decision trials.
To make predictions regarding the value individuals assign to
the risky investment, we ﬁtted the data with a psychological risk–
return model. In contrast to DEMO normative risk–return model, which
uses the objective measures expected return and DEMO deviation,
this model uses the subjective measures perceived risk and subjec-
tive expected return and thus allows to account for potential
differences between DEMO and psychological evaluations of
risk and return, leaving space for distorted DEMO of risk and
return (e.g. caused by framing effects) as well as fundamentally
2560
P.N.C. Mohr et al. / NeuroImage 49 (2010) 2556–2563
different DEMO of risk (e.g. related to potential losses). The
normative risk–return DEMO, however, remains as a special case of
the psychological risk– return model. The value of a choice
alternative in the psychological risk–return model DEMO determined
by the subjective expected return minus the perceived risk weighted
with the risk weight (see Materials and methods).
All participants were risk averse, indicated by a positive risk
weight (see Fig. 2 and DEMO S4). Additionally, we tested how well the
ﬁtted risk weights DEMO able to explain choices if we assume a
deterministic decision rule. On average 83% of the choices were
correctly predicted by the model (see Table S5 for individual
maximum likelihoods and percent correct model predictions).
DEMO risk and subjective expected return, however, still remain
as unobservable variables in most economic decisions that can only be
indirectly inferred from the DEMO ratings, thus making it difﬁcult
to predict choices. Standard deviations and DEMO returns, however,
are usually observable. Therefore we tested how well DEMO risk–return
model using these two observable metrics (which is in fact DEMO
normative risk–return model) can predict choices. We ﬁrst compared
the components DEMO both models and found a mean correlation of
r = .93 (DEMO = 0.74; max = 1) between expected return and subjective
expected return (as predicted by individual best models; see Tables S1-
S3)DEMO Perceived risk and standard deviation were on average also highly
correlated (DEMO = .86; min = .26; max = 1), indicating that the objective
measures (standard deviation and expected return, respectively) might
be mostly good indicators for the subjective measures perceived risk
and subjective expected DEMO when these cannot be measured
explicitly.
We ﬁtted the risk–return model with expected return and standard
deviation in the same way we ﬁtted the DEMO risk–return
model and also tested how well the resulting risk weights could
explain choices if we assume a deterministic decision rule. It was able
DEMO predict on average 85% of the choices (see Table S5). DEMO difference
in explanatory power between models (83% vs. 85% of the DEMO
predicted correctly) was not signiﬁcant (t = .372, df = DEMO, p = .712).
Thus, in most situations objective measures should be as appropriate
for predicting investment decisions as subjective measures, although
behavioral research already pointed to situations in which this is not
the case (Weber and Milliman, 1997; Weber et al., 2005). Reaction
times did not correlate signiﬁcantly with any of the components of the
two DEMO risk–return models (see Tables S1–S3).
fMRI results
We conducted three DEMO analyses with components of the
psychological risk–return model, including perceived risk DEMO either
Fig. 2. Risk attitude. Risk weight measured as value reduction in € for maximum risk
(perceived risk = 100). All subjects were risk averse indicated by a positive risk weight.
For most subjects the DEMO weight was, however, quite low (risk weightb6) resulting in
only a small inﬂuence of risk on value.
value, subjective expected return, DEMO value of the chosen option as
parametric regressors. Because of the high correlation we expected
similar activation patterns for value, subjective expected return, DEMO
value of the chosen option. Value as well as subjective expected return
correlated signiﬁcantly with the BOLD response in MPFC, bilateral
DLPFC, and DEMO during the decision phase of the task (see Fig. 3 and
DEMO S7–S9). Value of the chosen option correlated signiﬁcantly with
DLPFC and amygdala. The observed maximum z-scores as well as the
cluster sizes were, however, greater in all clusters regarding value and
subjective expected return compared to value of the chosen option
(exception: amygdala), indicating that DEMO clusters are more likely
to represent value or subjective expected return.
The crucial difference between risk–return models and EUT/PT is
that risk is DEMO explicit decision variable in risk–return models whereas
it is only implicit, DEMO the value and probability weighting function, in
EUT and PT. The DEMO of a neural representation of risk during the
decision process would therefore support the idea of a risk–return
trade off. We found a signiﬁcant DEMO between perceived risk
and the BOLD response during decisions in right aINS and right OFC
(see Fig. 3 and Table S7).
Further, DEMO investigated how (perceived) risk attitudes are
represented in the brain. In the applied risk–return model the risk
weight represents the risk attitude of DEMO individual. There are basically
two possible relationships between risk attitude and brain activity.
Risk attitude could be either coded together with risk or independent
DEMO risk. In the ﬁrst case the degree of the relationship between brain
activity and risk in a certain brain region would depend on the DEMO
attitude. In the second case risk attitudes would be reﬂected in inter-
individual differences in constant (decision-related) brain activity.
We did not ﬁnd DEMO differences in the relationship between perceived
risk and the BOLD signal that was modulated by risk attitude. We did
ﬁnd, however, that decision-related DEMO brain activity in lateral
orbitofrontal cortex (lOFC) and PCC was modulated by risk attitudes
(see Fig. 3 and Table S7). This pattern was present for risky as well as
safe choices.
We repeated the DEMO analyses for the normative risk–
return model with expected return and standard deviation and
identiﬁed similar clusters showing a signiﬁcant correlation with the
tested DEMO (see Tables S10+S11). Maximum z-scores as well as
cluster sizes DEMO, however, greater in all clusters derived from
components of the psychological risk–return model, indicating a
better ﬁt of the psychological risk–return model to the brain data (see
Tables S7–S11).
Discussion
In our everyday life we often have to make important investment
decisions, for instance in the context of retirement savings. Because
individuals have to deal with limited processing DEMO, different
decision making strategies might be required in different situations.
Two DEMO of risky decision making models have been proposed, one
based on DEMO transformation of outcomes and/or probabilities (EUT and
PT) (Kahneman DEMO Tversky, 1979; von Neumann and Morgenstern,
1953) and the DEMO based on a risk–return trade-off (risk–return
models) (Sarin and Weber, 1993; Weber and Johnson, 2009a).
To be superior to other DEMO, a better model should, in the best
case, explain behavioral DEMO neural data better than the other models. As
value- and choice predictions of both classes of models are usually
highly consistent with each other (Bossaerts et al., 2009; d'Acremont
and Bossaerts, 2008), we focused here on the question which class of
models better describes the DEMO process. In this case fMRI data can
serve as a tiebreaker, DEMO they provide additional insight into the
neurobiological processes that sub-serve the cognitive processes, which
ultimately lead to decisions. As previous research found neurobiological
support for both classes of models we suggest to associate both classes of
DEMO with certain types of decisions, environments, or decision
P.N.C. Mohr et al. / NeuroImage 49 (2010) 2556–2563
2561
Fig. DEMO Brain regions showing a signiﬁcant correlation with value, perceived risk, and risk attitude. (A) Value correlated signiﬁcantly with activity in MPFC (x = -8, y = 26, z = 34 mm,
max DEMO = 3.86), bilateral DLPFC (x = -42, y = 16, z = 42 mm, max z-score= 4.31; x = 38, DEMO = 18, z = 44 mm, max z-score = 3.80), and VLPFC (x = -56, y = 16, z = -4 mm, max z-
score = 3.88). (B) Perceived risk correlated signiﬁcantly with activity in the aINS (x = 44, y = DEMO, z = -2 mm, max z-score = 3.90). (C) Inter-individual differences in brain activity in
the lOFC (x = 18, DEMO = 68, z = -12 mm, max z-score = 5.00) DEMO a choice between a risky and a safe investment correlated with individual risk attitudes as measured by the risk
weight.
contexts in which different DEMO are appropriate. One criterion by
which different models can be assigned to different types of decisions is
the amount of information processing required by DEMO In investment
decisions, where investment returns often follow continuous distribu-
tions, both classes of models differ signiﬁcantly regarding this criterion.
By comparing both DEMO of models on the neurobiological level during
investment decisions, we provide DEMO additional empirical dimension for
comparing these models.
Risk is an explicit component of risk–return models but not of EUT
and PT. By showing that DEMO (as well as value) is represented in the
brain during a choice between different investments and by
identifying a representation of risk attitude, our data support the
hypothesis that risk–return models describe the mechanism under-
DEMO investment decisions.
Using the RPID task, which mimics real-life investment decisions
DEMO providing subjects with past returns of investments, we found that
value DEMO return covaried with brain activity in bilateral DLPFC, PCC,
VLPFC, and MPFC. Activation in these regions has usually been
observed in the DEMO of value and reward. Changes in the BOLD
signal in these regions correlate with the magnitude of experienced
and anticipated rewards as well as DEMO the subjective value of
(delayed) rewards and the willingness to pay for consumer goods
(Amiez et al., 2006; Kable and Glimcher, DEMO; Kennerley et al., 2009;
Knutson et al., 2005; Kuhnen and Knutson, 2005; Markowitz, 1952;
Plassmann et al., 2007; Tom et al., 2007). Our results especially
support the ﬁndings of a recent study investigating simple decisions
with discrete distributions (Tobler et al., 2009). The authors of this
study identiﬁ ed lateral prefrontal areas as key brain regions coding for
2562
P.N.C. Mohr et al. / NeuroImage 49 (2010) 2556–2563
the DEMO of choice alternatives. Crucially, brain activity in these areas
changed depending DEMO the risk attitude of the subject if risk was
present (higher DEMO risk seeking subjects and lower in risk averse
subjects), demonstrating the effect of risk on value.
Previous studies have also highlighted the role DEMO the VMPFC
and the VST in reward processing (Delgado et al., 2000; Elliott et
al., 2003; Knutson et al., 2001; O'Doherty et al., 2004; O'Doherty et
al., 2001; Preuschoff DEMO al., 2006; Xue et al., 2008). In the VMPFC
DEMO observed a small cluster of nine voxels when applying a more
liberal threshold (z-scoreN 2.6), but we did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant
voxels in the VST even for a very liberal threshold (z-scoreN 2.0).
This lack of striatal activation cannot be explained by the lack of DEMO
immediate outcome in the RPID task. Recently, a study investigat-
ing DEMO aversion reported reward-related striatal brain activity
even when an immediate outcome was missing (Tom et al., 2007).
Note however, that ventral striatal activity is most closely
associated with the prediction error, when people learn to obtain
a reward or learn about reward (Hare et al., DEMO). During the
return streams of the RPID task participants processed prediction
errors, probably leading to a highly activated striatum at the
beginning of the decision phase. In this case signal changes are
difﬁ cult to DEMO and our experimental design likely did not have
enough power to do so.
We found that perceived risk correlated signiﬁcantly with the BOLD
signal DEMO the aINS. Risk-related brain activity in the aINS was observed
in a variety of studies (Critchley et al., 2001; Grinband et al., DEMO;
Huettel et al., 2005; Paulus et al., 2003; Preuschoff et al., 2006;
Preuschoff et al., 2008; Rolls et al., 2008). None of these studies did,
however, use lotteries DEMO continuous distributions. Thus, our
ﬁnding supports the results from previous studies DEMO extends
them by showing that risk is represented in the aINS in situations
where subjects have to make a choice between two independent
alternatives DEMO one alternative is described by a continuous
distribution of possible outcomes. Most importantly, the existence of a
neural representation of risk during choices offers neural support for
risk–return models because in the case of EUT and DEMO one would not
expect a neural representation of risk whereas risk is explicitly
speciﬁed in risk–return models.
The ﬁnding that inter-individual differences in decision-related
DEMO activity in lOFC and PCC covaried with inter-individual differences
in risk attitudes derived from the psychological risk–return model
provides additional support for this model. DEMO more risk averse a
participant was, the greater was her decision-related DEMO activity in
lOFC and PCC (independent of current risk and value)DEMO As stated above,
there are basically two possible relationships between risk attitudes and
brain activity. Risk attitudes could be either coded together with DEMO or
independent of risk. A recent study found correlations between risk
attitude and risk-related brain activity in lateral OFC for risk averse
individuals and DEMO medial OFC for risk seeking individuals, supporting
the latter view (Tobler et al., 2007). Whereas our results support the
general ﬁnding that lOFC codes for risk attitudes in risk averse
individuals (all participants in our study were risk averse) it points
into the direction that risk attitudes are also coded independent of risk.
Together, our results provide neural support for a risk–return
trade-off in investment decisions. Previous neuroimaging studies,
DEMO, have also shown that speciﬁc characteristics of PT are
reﬂected in DEMO data when simple gambles are used to describe
an investment. De Martino et al. (2006) found that the framing of
gambles as gains DEMO losses inﬂuences choice behavior as well as
neural representations of values. Tom et al. (2007) found neural
support for the idea of loss DEMO that is implemented in PT. De
Martino et al. (2009) presented data that support the hypothesis of
a reference dependency of value computation. DEMO studies reﬂect
the facts that people are usually more sensitive to losses than to
gains and compute value in relation to a certain reference DEMO that
can be different across individuals and situations. A closer look at
our behavioral results of subjective expected return shows that this
phenomenon is DEMO present in our data and can be explained by
the psychological risk–return model that we applied. For 11 out of
20 subjects a model DEMO returns below a certain threshold (either
5% or 0%) are over-weighted accounted best for subjective expected
return. For these subjects losses regarding a DEMO reference point
inﬂ uence the value of a choice alternative more strongly than gains.
Thus, our behavioral data indicate that the psychological risk–return
model results in similar value and choice predictions as PT. As these
data DEMO our fMRI analysis, they also indicate that the brain can
compute DEMO PT-like value signal by trading off (perceived) risk and
(subjective) expected return.
Finally, we have to emphasize that although our data support
risk– return models they do not generally speak against utility-based
models in DEMO decision making and do not challenge the predictive
power of these models for behavioral data (but see Birnbaum, 2008).
Moreover, there are several studies supporting these models in
situations with simple gambles and given DEMO and probabilities
(e.g., Knutson et al., 2005). In contrast, our data support the view that
the brain is able to compute DEMO either on the basis of utility-based
models or on the basis of risk–return models (d'Acremont and
Bossaerts, 2008). One criterion to DEMO among these mechanisms
could be the amount of required information processing. In the case
of decisions between alternatives with continuous outcome distribu-
tions, where less information has to be processed using risk–return
models compared to utility-based DEMO, our data support the
former class of models.
In sum, we found support for the hypothesis of a risk–return
trade-off in investment decisions. DEMO extended existing evidence
regarding the neurobiological basis of risky decision making (DEMO) by
predicting both behavioral data and neuroimaging data with the
same DEMO model (risk–return model), (b) by showing that
(perceived) DEMO and risk attitude not only inﬂuence the value
signal but are represented independently in the aINS (perceived
risk) and the lOFC (risk attitude), and (c) by showing that risk and
value are not DEMO represented in the brain during choices between
simple gambles with discrete outcome distributions but especially
during choices where outcomes follow continuous distributions
(like stocks usually do). While not the focus of the present study
future DEMO should investigate in more detail how subjective
expected return and perceived risk are formed and learned during
the presentation of a return stream.
Acknowledgments
DEMO research was supported by the Max Planck Society. Peter N.C.
Mohr was supported by a predoctoral fellowship of the International
Max Planck Research School, The Life Course: Evolutionary and
Ontogenetic Dynamics (LIFE).
Appendix A. DEMO data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in
DEMO online version, at doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.10.060.
References
Amiez, C., Joseph, J.P., Procyk, E., 2006. Reward encoding in the monkey anterior
cingulate cortex. Cereb. Cortex 16, 1040–1055.
Birnbaum, M.H., 2008. New paradoxes of risky decision making. Psychol. Rev. 115,
463–501.
Bossaerts, P., Preuschoff, K., Hsu, M., 2009. The neurobiological foundations of valuation
in human decision making under uncertainty. In: Glimcher, P.W., Camerer, C.F.,
DEMO, E., Poldrack, R.A. (Eds.), Neuroeconomics. Decision making and the brain
Elsevier, pp. 353–366. London et al.
Browne, M.W., 2000. Cross-validation methods. J. Math. Psychol. 44, 108–132.
Critchley, H.D., Mathias, C.J., Dolan, R.J., 2001. Neural activity in the human brain
relating to DEMO and arousal during anticipation. Neuron 29, 537–545.
P.N.C. Mohr et al. / NeuroImage 49 (2010) 2556–2563
2563
d'DEMO, M., Bossaerts, P., 2008. Neurobiological studies of risk assessment: DEMO
comparison of expected utility and mean-variance approaches. Cogn. Affect. Behav.
Neurosci. 8, 363–374.
De Martino, B., Kumaran, D., Seymour, B., Dolan, R.J., 2006. Frames, biases, and rational
decision-making in the human DEMO Science 313, 684–687.
De Martino, B., Kumaran, D., Holt, B., Dolan, R.J., 2009. The neurobiology of reference-
dependent value computation. J. Neurosci. 29, 3833–3842.
Delgado, M.R., Nystrom, L.E., Fissell, DEMO, Noll, D.C., Fiez, J.A., 2000. Tracking the
hemodynamic responses DEMO reward and punishment in the striatum. J. Neurophysiol.
84, 3072–3077.
Elliott, R., Newman, J.L., Longe, O.A., Deakin, J.F., 2003. Differential response patterns in
the striatum and orbitofrontal cortex to ﬁnancial reward in DEMO: a parametric
functional magnetic resonance imaging study. J. Neurosci. 23, 303–307.
Glimcher, P.W., 2008. Understanding risk: a guide for the perplexed. Cogn. Affect.
Behav. Neurosci. 8, 348–354.
Grinband, J., Hirsch, J., Ferrera, V.P., 2006. A neural representation of categorization
uncertainty in the human DEMO Neuron 49, 757–763.
Hare, T.A., O'Doherty, J., Camerer, C.F., Schultz, W., Rangel, A., 2008. Dissociating the role
of the orbitofrontal cortex and the striatum in the computation of goal values DEMO
prediction errors. J. Neurosci. 28, 5623–5630.
Hsu, M., Bhatt, M., Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., Camerer, C.F., 2005. Neural systems responding
to degrees of uncertainty in human decision-making. Science 310, 1680–1683.
Huettel, S.A., Song, A.W., McCarthy, G., 2005. Decisions under uncertainty: probabilistic
context inﬂuences activation of prefrontal and parietal cortices. J. Neurosci. 25,DEMO
3304–3311.
Kable, J.W., Glimcher, P.W., 2007. The neural correlates of subjective value during
intertemporal choice. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1625–1633.
Kahneman, D., Tversky, A., 1979. Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under risk.
Econometrica 47, 263–291.
Kennerley, S.W., Dahmubed, A.F., Lara, A.H., Wallis, J.D., 2009. Neurons in the frontal lobe
encode the value DEMO multiple decision variables. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 21, 1162–1178.
Klos, A., DEMO, E.U., Weber, M., 2005. Investment decisions and time horizon: DEMO
perception and risk behavior in repeated gambles. Manag. Sci. 51, 1777–1790.
DEMO, B., Adams, C.M., Fong, G.W., Hommer, D., 2001. Anticipation of increasing
monetary reward selectively recruits nucleus accumbens. J. Neurosci. 21, 1–5.
Knutson, B., Taylor, J., Kaufman, M., Peterson, R., Glover, G., 2005. Distributed neural
representation of expected value. J. Neurosci. 25, 4806–4812.
Kuhnen, C.M., Knutson, B., 2005. The neural basis of ﬁnancial risk taking. Neuron 47,
763–770.
Markowitz, H., 1952. DEMO selection. J. Finance 7, 77–91.
Mohr, P.N., Li, S.C., DEMO, H.R., in press. Neuroeconomics and aging: neuromodulation
of economic decision DEMO in old age. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. doi:10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2009.05.010
O'Doherty, J., Kringelbach, M.L., Rolls, E.T., Hornak, J., Andrews, C., 2001. Abstract
reward and punishment representations in the human orbitofrontal cortex. Nat.
Neurosci. 4, 95–102.
O'Doherty, J., Dayan, P., Schultz, J., Deichmann, R., Friston, K., Dolan, R.J., 2004.
DEMO roles of ventral and dorsal striatum in instrumental conditioning.
Science 304, DEMO
Paulus, M.P., Rogalsky, C., Simmons, A., Feinstein, J.S., Stein, M.B., 2003. Increased
activation in the right insula during risk-taking DEMO making is related to harm
avoidance and neuroticism. Neuroimage 19, 1439–1448.
DEMO, H., O'Doherty, J., Rangel, A., 2007. Orbitofrontal cortex encodes willingness
to pay in everyday economic transactions. J. Neurosci. 27, 9984–9988.
Preuschoff, K., Bossaerts, P., Quartz, S.R., 2006. Neural differentiation DEMO expected
reward and risk in human subcortical structures. Neuron 51, 381–390.
DEMO, K., Quartz, S.R., Bossaerts, P., 2008. Human insula activation reﬂects risk
prediction errors as well as risk. J. Neurosci. 28, 2745–2752.
Rangel, A., Camerer, C., Montague, P.R., 2008. A framework DEMO studying the
neurobiology of value-based decision making. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, DEMO
Rolls, E.T., McCabe, C., Redoute, J., 2008. Expected value, reward outcome, and temporal
difference error representations in a probabilistic decision DEMO Cereb. Cortex. 18,
652–663.
Sarin, R.K., Weber, M., 1993. Risk-value models. Eur. J. Operational. Res. 70, 135–149.
Smith, S.M., Jenkinson, M., Woolrich, M.W., Beckmann, C.F., Behrens, T.E., Johansen-
DEMO, H., Bannister, P.R., De Luca, M., Drobnjak, I., Flitney, D.E., Niazy, R.K., Saunders,
J., Vickers, J., Zhang, Y., De Stefano, N., Brady, J.M., Matthews, P.M., 2004. Advances
in functional and structural MR image analysis and implementation as FSL.
NeuroImage 23 (Suppl. 1), S208–S219.
Tobler, P.N., O'Doherty, J.P., Dolan, R.J., Schultz, W., 2007. Reward value coding
DEMO from risk attitude-related uncertainty coding in human reward systems.
J. Neurophysiol. 97, 1621–1632.
Tobler, P.N., Christopoulos, G.I., O'Doherty, J.P., Dolan, R.J., Schultz, W., 2009. Risk-
dependent reward value signal in DEMO prefrontal cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 106, 7185–7190.
DEMO, S.M., Fox, C.R., Trepel, C., Poldrack, R.A., 2007. The neural basis of loss aversion in
decision-making under risk. Science 315, 515–518.
Volz, K.G., Schubotz, R.I., von Cramon, D.Y., 2003. DEMO events of varying
probability: uncertainty investigated by fMRI. Neuroimage 19, 271–280.
von Neumann, J., Morgenstern, O., 1953. Theory of games and DEMO behavior.
Princeton.
Weber, E.U., Johnson, E.J., 2009a. Decisions under uncertainty: psychological, economic,
and neuroeconomic explanations of risk preference. In: Glimcher, P.W., Camerer,
C.F., Fehr, E., Poldrack, R.A. (Eds.), Neuroeconomics:decision making and the brain.
Elsevier, pp. 127–144. London et al.
Weber, E.U., Johnson, E.J., 2009b. Mindful judgment and decision DEMO Annu. Rev.
Psychol. 60, 53–85.
Weber, E.U., Milliman, R., DEMO Perceived risk attitudes: relating risk perception to
risky choices. Management Sci. DEMO, 122–143.
Weber, E.U., Siebenmorgen, N., Weber, M., 2005. DEMO asset risk: how name
recognition and the format of historic volatility DEMO affect risk perception
and investment decisions. Risk. Anal. 25, 597–609.
Woolrich, M.W., Behrens, T.E., Beckmann, C.F., Jenkinson, M., Smith, DEMO, 2004.
Multilevel linear modelling for FMRI group analysis using Bayesian inference.
DEMO 21, 1732–1747.
Xue, G., Lu, Z., Levin, I.P., DEMO, J.A., Li, X., Bechara, A., 2008. Functional dissociations of
risk and reward processing in the medial prefrontal cortex. Cereb. Cortex 19,DEMO
1019–1027.{1g42fwefx}