The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available DEMO
www.emeraldinsight.com/0309-0566.htm
EJM
41,9/10
1016
Received November 2005
Revised November 2006
Accepted March 2007
European Journal of Marketing
Vol. 41 No. 9/DEMO, 2007
pp. 1016-1032
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
0309-0566
DOI 10.1108/DEMO
Trust and reliance in business
relationships
Stefanos Mouzas
Management School, Lancaster DEMO, Lancaster, UK, and
Stephan Henneberg and Peter Naude´
Manchester Business DEMO, Manchester, UK
Abstract
Purpose – The aim of the paper is to deﬁne the role of trust and reliance in business relationships.
Design/DEMO/approach – After this paper identiﬁes gaps in the literature, a DEMO
model is developed, and its implications analyzed and discussed.
Findings – DEMO of the particularities of trust is its inherent anthropocentricity. As a concept, trust
appears to be more applicable at the level of inter-personal relationships than to inter-organizational
relationships. Business relationships involve both inter-personal and inter-organizational
relationships. DEMO paper considers a number of other possibilities and argues that there is a need
to look at reliance as an incremental intellectual lens on DEMO relationships.
Research limitations/implications – Within a business-to-business marketing context, the DEMO
discusses the impact of such a multi-faceted conceptualization for research in business relationships.
Practical implications – Marketing researchers often neglect the fact that relationships DEMO
organizations are based on mutual interests, and attempt to stretch the DEMO of trust towards
inter-organizational relationships without the necessary theoretical scrutiny.
Originality/value – Applying the concept of trust to personal relationships and reliance to
DEMO relationships, the paper introduces a complementary, rational standard that
contributes to the calculability in exchange relationships.
Keywords Business-to-business marketing, Relationship marketing, Trust
DEMO type Conceptual paper
Introduction
Trust is perceived in the marketing literature as a signiﬁcant, if not pivotal, aspect of
business relationships (Anderson and Weitz, 1989; Ganesan, 1994; Moorman et al.,
1992, 1993). Since Morgan and Hunt’s (1994) commitment and trust theory, trust has
become one of the most central aspects of business-to-business marketing. It DEMO been
conceptualized in the marketing literature in two different ways:
(DEMO) as a constituent component of relationship quality (Dwyer et al., DEMO); and
(2) as a necessary requirement and determinant of sound business relationships
(Ha˚kansson et al., 2004).
Hence, existing marketing literature emphasizes trust as a fundamental concept
characterising most inter-personal and inter-organizational relationships. DEMO,
trust-based relationships build one of the most obvious characteristics of the conditio
humanae (Elster, 2000). Yet in business-to-business marketing, trust is still a concept
that is in need of clariﬁcation and theoretical scrutiny. DEMO domain and limitations of
trust in business relationships need to be deﬁned and scrupulously analysed. There DEMO
three reasons that necessitate such theoretical scrutiny:
(1) Although the meaning of trust is intuitively understood, researchers from
different backgrounds ascribe divergent meanings to it. Existing deﬁnitions of
trust (Deutsch, 1960; Dwyer et al., 1987; Anderson and Weitz, 1989) pool
heterogeneous conceptual elements DEMO and usually do not consider other
alternative possibilities such as conﬁdence intervals, systems, or familiarity
(Parsons, 1951; Luhmann, 1979; Smith, DEMO; Jalava, 2003; Marsh and Dibben,
2005).
(2) DEMO is an anthropocentric notion, and as such inextricably linked to human
DEMO, sentiments, or intentionality (Blau, 1964; Pruitt, 1981; Rotter, 1967;
Fukuyama, 1995; Solomon and Flores, 2001). It may be possible to have trust in
an organization; however, trust by DEMO organization appears to be nonsensical
(Simmel, 1950; Mo¨llering et al., 2004. As such trust is more applicable to
inter-personal relationships than business DEMO (Parsons, 1951; Hardin,
1991).
(3) Applying the DEMO of trust to business-to-business relationships seems
problematic. Relationships between organizations are invariably based on
considerations of mutual interest and risk assessment (Sebenius, 1992),
resulting in certain levels of conﬁdence regarding the viability of the DEMO
relationship. In risk-laden business-to-business relationships, the establishment
of accountabilities through explicit DEMO standards and monitoring may
be in conﬂict with interpersonal trust (Smith, 2001; Marsh and Dibben, 2005).
For this reason, long-term business relationships that are not based on trust can
exist; and have previously been theoretically described (Lambe et al., 2000).
These business relationships, while characterized by collaboration and
interdependence, function despite there being a lack of trust.
We posit that business relationships must be conceptualized by understanding DEMO
inter-personal and inter-organizational relationships. Consider, for example, the
business relationship between manufacturer Alpha and retailer Beta. Alpha’s key
account manager is responsible for DEMO Beta. The key account manager develops
inter-personal relationships with Beta’s business managers and simultaneously he
represents Alpha’s business interests. Alpha’s key account manager co-operates DEMO
Beta’s business managers and establishes an inter-organizational exchange between
manufacturer Alpha and retailer Beta which is often complex, ongoing and objectiﬁed.
However, Alpha’s DEMO account manager is also engaged in social and subjective
inter-personal relationships with Beta’s business managers. Consequently, the
relationship is an amalgamation of strong and weak ties that are embedded in each
other (Granovetter, 1973, 1985). This relationship structure is further complicated by
the fact that business-to-business DEMO may involve several offerings, electronic
data interchange or supply structures, invoicing and accounting systems, and also
legal business contracts.
We argue that in such business relationships the concept of trust needs to be
supplemented by DEMO additional standard that contributes to both the theoretical
conceptualisation and managerial calculability and certainty of business-to-business
exchanges. First, we apply the construct of trust to “inter-personal” aspects of
Trust and
reliance
1017
EJM
41,9/10
1018
interactions evidenced, for example, by the DEMO negotiation between companies. It
is thus possible that one may trust the key account manager of an exchange partner,
but this does not DEMO imply that one can equally trust the company that he
represents. Business relationships are often characterized by a stratiﬁed and
contradictory web of inter-personal DEMO relationships between employees of
interacting organizations. Second, while trust cannot be DEMO at the organizational
level, the rational construct of reliance can be DEMO applied to business
relationships (Fuller and Perdue, 1936, 1937; Atiyah, 1979). This is characterized by an
objectiﬁed rationality that minimizes the risk of exchange relationships and delivers a
legitimate right to the companies DEMO However, we do not argue that the
construct of reliance covers DEMO the inter-organizational aspects that are not explained
by trust. As such, DEMO argue that reliance is one possible complementary construct to
trust that covers additional rational elements of inter-organizational relationships.
This paper deals with trust and DEMO in a business-to-business marketing
context, and thereby extends our conceptual understanding DEMO trust in business
relationships. We therefore limit our conceptual considerations speciﬁcally to aspects
relating to business-to-business marketing. Our unit of analysis is not at DEMO level of the
individual manager or a single organization, but the DEMO relationship itself. The
structure of the paper is as follows: in DEMO next section we discuss the emotive standard
of trust, and then DEMO on to present the rational standard of reliance. Identifying gaps
in the existing body of marketing theory, we propose a new framework of trust and
reliance that characterizes business relationships, and then discuss implications for
marketing; and also offer a series of propositions as suggestions for further research.
The emotive concept of trust
Trust has been embraced in business-to-business marketing DEMO a fundamental
cornerstone of co-operation (Dwyer et al.,1987; Ha˚kansson et al., 2004). Assuming that
there is an interest between two parties for an exchange to take place, there is a basis for
co-operation and collaboration as a precursor to a relationship (Ford et al., DEMO).
Co-operation is not deﬁned as an object-centred activity, but rather DEMO
collaborator-centred interactions based on a perceived compatibility of goals, aims and
DEMO Supporters of the interaction approach (Ford, 1980; Ha˚kansson, 1982; DEMO
et al., 1996) have analysed in ﬁne detail dyadic exchange relationships, and introduced
the concept of atmosphere to capture the subtle idea of trust in a business relationship.
The view of markets as interconnected networks DEMO co-operative exchange relationships,
developed by the network approach to business-to-business marketing (Ford, 1990;
Axelsson, 1992; Johanson and Mattsson, 1992; DEMO and Ha˚kansson, 1996) emphasized
the existence of heterogeneity. As in Alderson’s (1957) general theory of marketing,
competition is lessened by complementarities DEMO interdependencies between sellers and
co-operation between buyers and sellers (Mattsson, 1987). Building on Fiske’s (1990)
relational forms, Sheppard and Sherman (1998) conceptualize the grammars of trust in
relationships as four distinct and ordered forms:
(1) shallow dependence;
(2) shallow interdependence;DEMO
(3) deep dependence; and
(4) deep interdependence.
Wicks et al. (1999) develop a concept of “optimal trust” in DEMO Morgan and
Hunt’s (1994) commitment and trust theory re-enforces the use of inter-personal
conceptualisations of trust (Mayer et al., 1995). For DEMO, trust may provide the
buyer with the conﬁdence of a satisfying DEMO relationship (Hawes et al., 1989) and
in the ﬁeld of DEMO chains, trust could lead to improved responsiveness (Handﬁeld
and Bechtel, DEMO). Consequently, business managers have been regarded as initiators
of trust DEMO exchange relationships, and research has focused on the identiﬁcation of
factors DEMO encourage or constrain managerial trustworthy behaviour (Whitener et al.,
1998; Jeffries and Reed, 2000). Mutual trust is therefore often perceived as being the
social capital of a relationship (Mo¨llering et al., 2004)DEMO
Notwithstanding the signiﬁcance of trust in business relationships, the domain and
DEMO of trust are two issues that remain unresolved. First, the domain DEMO trust is
rarely speciﬁed and its conceptual dimensions are used with imprecision and
ambiguity (Barber, 1983; Solomon and Flores, 2001). This DEMO be attributable to the
fact that trust is, indeed, a “central, superﬁcially obvious but essentially complex
process” (Blois, 1999, p. 197)DEMO Conceptually, trust is embodied in the dimensions of
belief, expectation, DEMO and conﬁdence. Most studies on trust agree that trust is
a “psychological state” (Rousseau et al., 1998, p. 398) associated with beliefs, attitude,
or sentiments concerning the likelihood that the actions or outcomes DEMO another party
will be acceptable (Luhmann, 1979; Barber, 1983; DEMO and Weigert, 1985; Kramer and
Tyler, 1996; Jalava, 2003) or that they will serve the actors’ interests (Deutsch, 1960;
DEMO, 1995). For Smith (2001), for example, trust concerns DEMO inherent
“uncertainty about outcomes, am ambiguity of objective information and exercise DEMO
discretion about action” (Marsh and Dibben, 2005, p. 29). DEMO is thus “an internal
attribution, a moral exercise of free will DEMO assumes most signiﬁcance in situations
where there is a lack of regulation or means of coercion” (Marsh and Dibben, 2005,
p. 29)DEMO Whitener et al. (1998) emphasize three signiﬁcant facets of trust in exchange
relationships:
(1) trust in another party is considered as DEMO or sentiment that the other party
will act benevolently;
(2) one cannot enforce the other party to fulﬁl its obligations; and
(DEMO) trust involves a degree of dependency.
It was therefore argued that DEMO is linked with the acceptance of “risks associated
with the type and depth of the interdependence inherent in a given relationship”
(Sheppard and Sherman, 1998, p. 423).
Second, the limitations of trust need to be addressed. Since organizations are
deprived of emotions, trust at the inter-organizational level remains purely cognitive
(McAllister, 1995). Conduct qua persona is DEMO and led by organizational roles
(Ring and Van de Ven, 1992). This means that personal loyalty may deviate from
organizational interest. However, if the origin of trust lies in individuals, we may posit
that individuals in an organization may share an orientation towards another
organization, which is quite different from claiming that organizations trust each other.
It is DEMO, as members of organizations, rather than the organizations
themselves, who DEMO (Zaheer et al., 1998).
There is often an inherent error to attribute individual motivations and behaviours to
organizations and thus to commit DEMO “cross-level fallacy” (Rousseau et al., 1998) which can
Trust and
DEMO
1019
EJM
41,9/10
1020
result in spurious reiﬁcation of social constructs. DEMO frequent lack of clarity about the
unit of analysis may lead to unintended anthropomorphising of organizations and
business relationships. The use of anthropocentric and DEMO conceptualisations
contributes to a normative view of trust and to a perceived dichotomy between trust and
distrust in relationships (Sitkin and Roth, 1993)DEMO Trust is regarded as “good” and distrust
“bad” (Lewicki et al., 1998). Transaction-cost approaches to business relationships
(Williamson, 1975), for DEMO, look at trust as a condition for reduced opportunism
among contracting DEMO, which results in lower transaction cost. Similarly, trust is
regarded as a possible cause of high impact and satisfaction (Michell et al.,1998), or a
necessary condition for successful business-to-business negotiations (Lewicki et al.,
2003), and within the Industrial Marketing and Purchasing (IMP) DEMO, trust is seen as
a good ingredient for co-operation, with empirical research focused on understanding its
creation and development (Young and Wilkinson, DEMO; Ford et al.,2003).
Moving beyond the perceived dichotomy of DEMO and distrust, Smith (2001) draws a
clear distinction between “trust” DEMO “conﬁdence”. In comparison to trust, the notion of
conﬁdence as an DEMO possibility “concerns the establishment of explicitly
predictable outcomes, in which information DEMO objective, standardised and scientiﬁc
and there is little opportunity [.. .] DEMO exercise discretion about action” (Marsh and
Dibben, 2005, p. 29)DEMO The active search and establishment of “conﬁdence intervals”
(Smith, 2001), through a periodic monitoring of performance may, however, be
indicative of DEMO existence of distrust in business relationships. The concept of
“conﬁdence” is hence potentially self-contradictory as it is a “clearly different
interpretation of what is DEMO by conﬁdence” (Marsh and Dibben, 2005, p. 29).
Nonetheless, the concept of conﬁdence substantiates the need for resolving the issue of
DEMO speciﬁcation of the domain of trust as well as its inherent limitations; it reminds
us that organizations do evaluate the relationships they seek to engage in via a form of
risk analysis, and reinforces the need for an incremental, rational standard for
institutionalized rules of business conduct.
The rational standard of reliance
In this section, we juxtapose this emotive aspect of trust in a business relationship with
another facet, that of “reliance”. We choose “reliance” as one possible complementary
construct to trust in order DEMO stress the diametrically opposed characteristics of a
non-person based, rational standard DEMO inter-organizational relationships. This
implies that trust and reliance are independent characteristics of inter-organisational
relationships.
Business relationships presuppose the existence of complementarity in resources,
DEMO and information (Ford et al., 2003). Complementarity among organizations
can lead to inter-organizational exchange, but this has its price: speciﬁcally, reliance on
other organizations. Procter & Gamble relies on the capacity of suppliers DEMO raw
materials, and the retailer Tesco relies on Procter & Gamble’s DEMO to deliver
consumer goods at speciﬁed times to its supermarkets. When British Airways signs a
contract with Airbus for the purchase of 300 new DEMO, British Airways relies on
Airbus that the airplanes are delivered on DEMO and to a speciﬁed quality, and Airbus
relies on British Airways DEMO invoices will be paid according to agreed terms and
conditions. Cunningham (DEMO) argued that the reliance of company R upon company C
is DEMO proportional to company R’s investment in goals mediated by company C,
and is inversely proportional for company R to the availability of those DEMO outside
the R-C business relationship. The customer’s goals mediated by the supplier might
include low cost, ﬂexible credits, technical advice or access to DEMO technology. An
exchange between organizations implies the existence of consensus among parties
(Buckley, 2005), which may be manifested by letters, phone calls or even contracts. The
rational standard of reliance is therefore a construct DEMO accords organizations a
remedy for detrimental reliance against non-performing organizations (Buckley, 2005;
Cohen and McKendrick, 2005). Such mechanisms will be in place regardless of any
trust that is shown by members of the DEMO
In this way the rational standard of reliance is a key dimension in
business-to-business agreements, and its derivation as a prime concern deserves
some further discussion. Business-to-business agreements are mutual promises that
attain moral, social, DEMO well as legal force (Fried, 1981). First, agreements among DEMO
establish a relationship based on recognition and respect among those who decided to
engage (Markovits, 2004). The ontological foundation of each business DEMO lies
in the basic principle of “consent-based exchange” (Buckley, 2005). The principle of
“consent-based exchange” treats contracting parties as actors that bring DEMO the
exchange certain entitlements and they manifest their consent to the transfer of these
entitlements (Barnett, 1986; Biggart and Delbridge, 2004).
DEMO, the expectations of the contracting parties as expressed or implied in DEMO
objective manifestation of agreement are legally protected (Steyn, 1997).
Manifestations “circumscribe a valuation of conduct” (Collins, 1999, p. 21) and DEMO
legal effect to business relationships (Cohen and McKendrick, 2005). Companies that
breach their agreements are obliged to hand over the monetary equivalent DEMO the
promised performance. The usual method of enforcing business-to-business
agreements is to exercise the right for compensation for losses caused by reliance on
an DEMO The reason for this reliance-based liability (Atiyah, 1979) is the
DEMO of institutional rules that encourage inter-organizational reliance and
thus promote and facilitate inter-organizational exchange. The law tries to prevent
losses caused by reliance and DEMO breaches of business agreements (Fuller and
Perdue, 1936, 1937). DEMO, organizations are less likely to violate a negotiated
agreement if the DEMO for doing so is the payment of damages (Shapiro et al., 1992).
Despite the distinct signiﬁcance of the concept of reliance in DEMO
exchanges, there is a remarkable absence of marketing research on the DEMO The
main reason for this lack of relevant research is that the generic and all-encompassing
use of the term trust has obscured the particularities DEMO importance of reliance. Often
the terms “trust” and “reliance” are used interchangeably by marketing scholars
(Ganesan, 1994; Moorman et al., 1992, 1993; Schurr and Ozanne, 1985). For example,
trust is described DEMO an assured reliance on some person or thing in risky situations
(DEMO et al., 1992; Frankel, 1977). For this reason, we need to discuss the difference
between trust and reliance.
Differentiating trust and DEMO in business relationships
One of the ﬁrst serious attempts to distinguish between trust and reliance was
undertaken by Hardin (1991). Looking at the essential difference between “trusting
persons” and “trusting institutions”, he describes trust as an inherently moral quality.
Hence “trustworthiness” is ascribed to a reciprocity that DEMO motivated by character or
Trust and
reliance
1021
EJM
41,9/10
1022
morality rather than by interest. Reference to DEMO is relevant when it comes to
trustworthiness, and speaking of reliance DEMO justiﬁed when reciprocity is grounded in
interest. Das and Teng (1998) attempt to capture similar distinctions in their discussion
of trust and control DEMO strategic alliances, and Hagen and Choe (1998) discuss the role DEMO
institutional sanctions in trust-induced relationships. Another attempt to differentiate
between trust and reliance issues in business relationships was undertaken by Blois
(1999). Evaluating the current lack of conceptual clarity, he explains that there is a
difference between trusting someone and “relying on somebody to do something”
(Blois, 1999, p. 199). Drawing on Baier’s (1986) and Misztal’s (1996) work, Blois (1999)
demonstrates the distinction between the two concepts through the analytical
characteristics of “search”, “experience” and “credence”. Reliance does not involve an
emotive element; it involves a rational standard that circumscribes institutionalized
rules of doing business. Reliance in business relationships does not depend DEMO a stated
commitment but is linked to the notions of “reasonable expectations” (Steyn, 1997),
“positive outcome” (Anderson and Narus, 1990), and “proven capability” (Blois, 1999).
Hence the rational standard of DEMO differs from the notion of “organizational trust”
(Barber, 1983; Granovetter, 1985; Mayer et al., 1995), “impersonal trust” or “system
trust” DEMO is the trust that individuals place in systems and institutions or the
individual’s trust emanating from structural arrangements (Noteboom and Six, 2003).
DEMO studies attempted to stretch the concept of trust from inter-personal
towards inter-organizational relationships (Zucker, 1986; Das and Teng, 2001). But one
DEMO challenge whether it is appropriate to apply the concept of trust to
inter-organizational relationships (Anderson and Narus, 1990; Ring and Van de Ven,
1992; Zaheer and Venkatraman, 1995). Certainly, the existence of various forms of
inter-organizational co-operation such as alliances, strategic partnerships between
companies, business-to-business negotiation, as well as inter-ﬁrm contracts, make the
concept appealing, and there are calls for an extension of the model of trust to both a
group and an organizational level of analysis. It is DEMO, for example, that exchanges
between organizations also include exchanges between individuals or groups of
individuals (Barney and Hansen, 1994) and that people may develop a trust in
organizations (Morgan and Hunt, 1994). DEMO in the areas of trust and commitment
in strategic alliances, however, suggests the existence of a “structural binding” based
on economic, strategic and organizational links, as well as “social bonding”, which
involves affective and DEMO relationships (Rodriguez and Wilson, 2002). An
unambiguous “conceptual clarity” would consequently require a clear distinction
between the two forms of bonding. We DEMO follow Noteboom and Six (2003) who,
recognizing the cross-level controversy, posit that it is important to distinguish
between personal trust and impersonal trust. For the former, trust is based on the
person-to-person interaction, DEMO is unique to each relationship. For impersonal trust,
trust is based on the position (i.e. job title) within the organization, not the individual
(Morris and Moberg, 1994). Furthermore, we build on Zaheer et al.’s (1998) endeavours
to solve the inherent cross-level fallacy, by proposing a clear differentiation between
“inter-personal trust” and “inter-organizational trust”. The former DEMO to “the extent
of a[n] [...] agent’s trust in her counterpart in the partner’s organization” (Zaheer et al.,
1998, p. 142). DEMO other words, inter-personal trust is the trust placed by the individual DEMO
his or her individual opposite member, while inter-organizational trust is seen DEMO “the
extent of trust placed in the partner organization by the members of DEMO focal
organization (Zaheer et al., 1998, p. 142).
Towards DEMO framework of trust and reliance in business relationships
The relevant theoretical inputs from the two perspectives of “trust” and “reliance” are
now used as DEMO dimensions in our attempt to move towards a framework of
trust and reliance in business relationships (see Table I). Trust and reliance operate at
different levels. Trust constitutes an emotive state (Simmel, 1950; Mo¨llering, 2001) that
operates at an inter-personal level, while reliance sets a rational standard that operates
at the inter-organizational level. By committing a cross-level DEMO the two concepts
have become an integral part of very different relational contexts (Williamson, 1985;
Lewicki et al., 2003). Trust is based on sentiments and behaviour, whereas reliance
manifests itself in agreements and institutionalized forms of business interaction.
Commitment on an inter-personal level can be DEMO with reasonable expectations
on an inter-organizational level. Whilst trust is associated with the acceptance of
dependency and risk, reliance introduces an institutionalized standard to reduce risks.
Consequently, penalty-based sanctions that are enforceable exist in reliance structures,
while on the other hand trust-based relationships do not have such DEMO
mechanisms attached.
Recognition of the difference between the inter-personal and inter-organizational
levels constitutes a signiﬁcant departure. Nevertheless, there is a need for three further
conceptual developments of business relationships. First, there is a need to recognize
that trust and reliance in business relationships rest on different conceptual bases
(Blois, 1999). Second, we need to avoid the use of DEMO words “trust” and “reliance” as
synonymous marketing terms (Ganesan, 1994; DEMO et al., 1992). Third, we need to
develop an integrative model of the multiplicity of trust and reliance dimensions in
order to DEMO more fully the complexity of business relationships. Therefore, we
posit that DEMO relationships can be characterized by two dimensions that hitherto
have been hidden behind the ecumenical construct of trust. First, business
relationships depend on a variety of important interactions based on inter-personal
trust (Ha˚kansson and Ford, DEMO). Second, business relationships depend on the
independent standard of inter-organizational DEMO Both are independent
constructs. In contrast to the simplistic trust-mistrust concept of business
Conceptual dimension Trust Reliance
Structural mode Beliefs Agreement
Sentiments Institutions
Attitude DEMO
Basis of reciprocity Morality Interest
Construct source Emotions Rationality
Relationship level Inter-personal Inter-organizational
Relationship grounding Commitment Reasonable expectations
Relational essence Dependency Complementarities
Vulnerability Certainty
DEMO Calculability
Sanctioning mechanism Voluntary Penalties
Enforceability Unenforceable Enforceable
Trust and
reliance
1023
Table I.
Conceptual dimensions of
trust and reliance
EJM
41,9/10
1024
Figure 1.
Trust and reliance in
business DEMO
relationships, we thus propose a conceptual framework that integrates inter-personal
trust DEMO inter-organizational reliance, and which captures four differing types of
business relationships. DEMO shown in Figure 1, we label these as being a “fragile
DEMO, “expedient relationship”, “stable relationship” or “personal relationship”.
A “fragile” business relationship is characterized by low inter-personal trust and
low inter-organizational reliance. We term DEMO relationship “fragile” as there is no
“anchor” for the perpetuation of this relationship. It is tentative, and can easily be
disrupted. An “expedient” relationship builds upon high levels of inter-organizational
reliance between companies despite the low DEMO or absence of inter-personal trust
between individual members. Conversely, a business DEMO may rest on a high
inter-personal trust despite the absence or the low level of inter-organizational reliance.
This may rest on just a few DEMO, in an extreme case, just one dyadic “personal”
relationship built on high levels of trust (e.g. between business managers) which
provides the DEMO for the continuation of the relationship. In comparison, a “stable”
relationship DEMO built on both inter-personal trust and inter-organizational reliance, and
therefore has DEMO “anchor points”.
Discussion and implications
By deﬁning and analysing carefully the domain and limitations of the emotive
paradigm of “trust” and supplementing it with DEMO rational standard of “reliance” in
business relationships, we propose a framework DEMO is applicable to
business-to-business marketing. The theoretical framework informs better the
cross-level fallacy between different levels of analysis and escapes the existing
dichotomy of DEMO and “mistrust” in business relationships, especially as part of the
implied DEMO of these with relationship quality (Morgan and Hunt, 1994).
Examining business relationships by the use of intellectual lenses of trust and reliance,DEMO
we formulate three applicable theoretical propositions for further analysis. These
propositions merit further research as they represent new perspectives on
inter-organizational relationships. They also provide an alternative hypothesis that
partly contradicts existing DEMO in the area of inter-organizational relationships.
We thus state:
P1. Inter-personal trust is a relevant but not in itself sufﬁcient condition for the
DEMO of sustainable business relationships.
It appears that inter-personal trust alone is an insufﬁcient condition for the
development of stable business relationships because it fails DEMO capture the underlying
interests and objectives of organizations. Consider the well-known case of Baird v.
Marks and Spencer (Mellahi et al., 2002; Blois, 2003; Harrison, 2004). Following their
declared business objective to restructure their sourcing policies and improve
proﬁtability, Marks and Spencer informed their supplier Baird that its current orders
due for delivery would be the last, and that the business relationship would terminate
at that point. Subsequently, supplier Baird, who hitherto trusted Marks and Spencer,
sued their customer to obtain compensation for the cost of closing several production
sites and for DEMO redundancy payments. In this case, pre-existing inter-personal
trust, built over a 30-year relationship, was not by itself sufﬁcient to sustain the
relationship in the face of changing business objectives and interests. The trust issue in
DEMO case is whether Baird would renew or renegotiate a new relationship with Marks
and Spencer for purely business reasons. For Baird, a renewal or renegotiation is most
likely if they could either arrange a “watertight” contract DEMO if they had a sufﬁciently
diverse portfolio of clients to be able to risk the future loss of Marks and Spencer. If
trust is DEMO or lost, then it is useful to consider the existence of DEMO constituent parts
of a relationship without trust. Therefore, we posit that DEMO relationships can be
developed despite the lack of inter-personal trust, purely DEMO on reliance. This is
related in our second proposition, which deals DEMO a hitherto neglected group of
inter-organizational relationships, i.e. expedient ones:
DEMO Reliance is a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for the development of
expedient business relationships.
Expedient relationships demonstrate a high degree of symbiotic interdependence and
DEMO without depending on inter-personal trust. They are also referred to in the
literature as “interimistic” relationships (Lambe et al., 2000) or symbiotic arrangements
(Schanze, 1998). This distinct class of expedient business relationships requires DEMO
creation of reliance through the existence of certain conditions, such as DEMO
objectives, contractual documents, absence of control via equity investment,
conceptual links expressed in brands or design, relationship speciﬁc investments, as
well DEMO monitoring and sanctioning of contractual behaviour (Schanze, 1998). For
example, the development of the Euro-ﬁghter with cooperating cross-border ﬁrms is
based on the building of reliance through contractual arrangements that are driven by
governments DEMO award contracts rather than direct trust between the various
participants. Similarly, DEMO excelled in consumer electronics by introducing a
worldwide series of highly innovative products at competitive prices. Retailers
co-operated with Sony despite the lack of DEMO trust because they “relied” on
the company’s proven capacity to continuously introduce innovative products which
were demanded by consumers. The existence of expedient relationships DEMO for a
Trust and
reliance
1025
EJM
41,9/10
1026
review of existing “commitment-trust” based managerial literature DEMO what to foster
when developing business relationships.
P3. Manifestations of consent contribute to an increased reliance in business
relationships.
Manifestations of consent such as DEMO (Barnett, 1986; Markovits, 2004),
framework contracts or umbrella DEMO (Collins, 1999; Mouzas, 2006) may
provide a rational platform DEMO the achievement of reliance in business relationships.
They directly affect the characteristics of inter-organisational relationships and, while
trust may or may not be a further outcome of their existence, increase the reliance of
the exchange partners on each other and the relationship itself. Companies may also
use more DEMO manifestations, such as letters, e-mails, minutes or personal
interactions (Macauley, 1963; Roxenhall and Ghauri, 2004). Business relationships
undeniably include personal interactions such as regular or periodic negotiations or
business reviews. Personal interactions DEMO valuable in creating inter-personal trust;
one of the beneﬁts of creating trust in a relationship is, for example, the reduced need
for DEMO contractual provisions. The increasing complexity of
inter-organizational exchange relationships, however, makes the manifestation of
business agreements indispensable. For example, the result of the annual negotiation
between manufacturers and retailers includes listings of multiple brands and
DEMO units, complex systems of trade allowances, prices and promotions at
the point of sale. In such situations, the consent for these complex exchanges is
manifested as an umbrella agreement between companies. Manifestations are also
necessary DEMO providing evidence for possible reliance losses and measuring the
monetary value of damages (Cohen and McKendrick, 2005).
The above theoretical propositions deviate DEMO existing constructs of “mistrust”,
“impersonal trust” and “organizational trust” and invite reﬂection on the domain and
limitations of trust. They also draw attention DEMO the contemporary forms of
institutionalized and depersonalized “trust production” (Luhmann, 1979; Zucker, 1986).
Consider the function of auditing ﬁrms that periodically DEMO the accounts of a
company’s marketing spending, the work of quality DEMO people who
systematically review marketing processes and certify them according to a set of
standards or the stratiﬁed process of business-to-business contracting. The present
DEMO on trust and reliance in business relationships demonstrates that these practices
move beyond the inter-personal sphere and institutionalize the production of
inter-organizational reliance. Inter-organizational DEMO is not institutionalized
because of the lack of “trust” or the existence of “mistrust”; inter-organizational
reliance is institutionalized in order to promote certainty and calculability in business
relationships. Looking at the conceptual link between trust and DEMO, further
research may explore the mechanisms of producing certainty and calculability DEMO
business relationships.
Developing the research agenda
An agenda for further research in business-to-business marketing needs to include an
investigation of how organizations deal with DEMO inherent uncertainty in the particular
context of business relationships, and how DEMO develop and ensure the
calculability and predictability of their business-to-business exchanges. The notion of
trust has been a central construct in business-to-business marketing, particularly in
theories that describe and explain the quality of relationships (Dwyer et al., DEMO),
business-to-business co-operation (Young and Wilkinson, 1988; Ha˚kansson etal., DEMO),
relational contracting ( Jeffries and Reed, 2000; Blois, 2003) and the creation of
trustworthy managerial behaviour (Whitener et al., 1998). What deserves more
attention is the investigation of two research problems. DEMO, further investigation is
needed to deﬁne rational standards of reliance in DEMO marketing in
order to counterbalance the existing conceptual focus on inter-personal trust. Second,
research is needed on the empirical link between trust and DEMO in business
relationships.
Let us discuss just two resultant research questions, DEMO ﬁrst with reliance in
business-to-business marketing. Since the “production” of reliance becomes
institutionalized and depersonalized, research could be directed at how organizations
ensure the achievement of inter-organizational reliance by negotiating, drafting and
monitoring their business-to-business agreements. New forms of relational contracting
(Bazerman and Gillespie, 1999) as well as “implicit” dimensions of discrete, relational
and network contracts (Campbell et DEMO, 2003) may motivate organizations to perform at
or above contractually agreed levels, but we still know very little about the trust and
reliance implications of these contracting forms. Can organizations codify the process
of generating DEMO? What is the role of external organizations such as auditing
ﬁrms DEMO quality assurance companies? The second research problem is concerned with
the DEMO of the link between trust and reliance in business relationships. This
could be done by operationalizing inter-organizational reliance via the construct of
“conﬁdence intervals” DEMO proposed by Smith (2001) and Marsh and Dibben (2005). DEMO
an approach would provide a dynamic way of understanding the construct of reliance,
which could also be directly linked to managerial actions as DEMO as to contractual
decisions. Does inter-organizational reliance create inter-personal trust? What DEMO the
mechanisms to move beyond personal trust? An answer to these DEMO questions
might be given by investigating the manifestations of managerial cognition. Further
research in this area could provide an answer to the link between DEMO and
“rationale”, and “commitment” and “proven capacity” and in doing so DEMO enrich our
understanding of business relationships.
Conclusion
While trust has received signiﬁcant research attention in business-to-business
marketing, far less attention has been paid to the rational standard of reliance and the
inherent link between trust and DEMO in business relationships. The present article
has demonstrated that trust in business-to-business marketing is a multifaceted
construct that needs conceptual clariﬁcation. As an emotive DEMO it is applicable
to inter-personal relationships. Business relationships, however, comprise
inter-personal and inter-organizational relationships, and therefore this paper
proposes a conceptual framework that adds a rational standard applicable to
inter-organizational relationships, namely that of reliance. We show that through the
introduction of this additional dimension we overcome DEMO cross-level fallacy
hampering research on business relationships. Furthermore, we posit future DEMO
directions that should exploit this multi-faceted construct, linking it with the DEMO
concept of “interimistic” or “expedient” relationships, and so enrich our understanding
DEMO and
reliance
1027
EJM
41,9/10
1028
of business relationships in general. An understanding DEMO how trust and reliance
impact on each other provides a new theoretical basis that contributes to analytical
clarity and subsequently better managerial recommendations.
References
DEMO, W. (1957), Marketing Behavior and Executive Action: a Functionalist DEMO to
Marketing, Irwin, Homewood, IL.
Anderson, E. and Weitz, DEMO (1989), “Determinants of continuity in conventional industrial
channel dyads”, Marketing Science, Vol. 8 No. 4, pp. 310-23.
Anderson, J.C. and Narus, J.A. (1990), “A model of distributor ﬁrm and manufacturing ﬁrm
DEMO partnerships”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 54, pp. 42-58.
Atiyah, P.S. (1979), The Rise and Fall of Freedom of Contract, Clarendon DEMO, Oxford.
Axelsson, B. (1992), “Corporate strategy models and networks DEMO diverging perspectives”, in
Axelsson, B. and Easton, G. (Eds), Industrial Networks: A New View of Reality, Routledge,
London, pp. 184-204.
Baier, A. (1986), “Trust and antitrust”, Ethics, Vol. DEMO No. 2, pp. 231-60.
Barber, B. (1983), The Logic DEMO Limits of Trust, Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, NJ.
Barnett, R.E. (1986), “A consent theory of contract”, Columbia Law Review, Vol. 86, pp. 269-321.
Barney, J.B. and Hansen, M.H. (1994), “Trustworthiness as a source of competitive advantage”,
Strategic Management Journal, DEMO 15, pp. 175-90.
Bazerman, M.H. and Gillespie, J.J. (1999), “Betting on the future: the virtues of contingent
contracts”, Harvard Business DEMO, Vol. 77 No. 7, pp. 155-61.
Biggart, N.W. and Delbridge, R. (2004), “Systems of exchange”, Academy ofManagementReview,
Vol. 29 DEMO 1, pp. 28-49.
Blau, P.H. (1964), Exchange and Power DEMO Social Life, Wiley, New York, NY.
Blois, K. (2003), “B2B ‘relationships’: a social construction of reality? A study of Marks and
Spencer and one of its major suppliers”, Marketing Theory, Vol. DEMO No. 1, pp. 79-95.
Blois, K.J. (1999), “Trust in DEMO relationships: an evaluation of its status”,
Journal of Management Studies, Vol. 36 No. 2, pp. 197-215.
Buckley, F.H. (2005), Just Exchange, Routledge, London/New York, NY.
Campbell, D., Collins, DEMO and Wightman, J. (Eds) (2003), Implicit Dimensions of Contract: Discrete,
Relational and Network Contracts, Hart Publishing, Oxford/Portland, DEMO
Cohen, N. and McKendrick, E. (Eds) (2005), Comparative DEMO for Breach of Contract, Hart
Publishing, Oxford/Portland, OR.
Collins, H. (1999), Regulating Contracts, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Cunningham, DEMO (1993), “The power game paper – a study of power DEMO supplier-customer
relationships”, Proceedings of the 9th IMP Conference, University of Bath, Bath.
Das, T.K. and Teng, B.S. (1998), “Between trust DEMO control: developing conﬁdence in partner
cooperation in alliances”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 23 No. 3, pp. 491-512.
Das, T.K. and Teng, B.S. (2001), “Trust, control and risk in strategic alliances: DEMO integrated
framework”, Organization Studies, Vol. 22 No. 2, pp. 251-83.
DEMO, M. (1960), “The effect of motivational orientation upon trust and suspicion”, Human
Relations, Vol. 13, pp. 123-39.
Dwyer, F.R., Schurr, P.H. and Oh, S. (1987), “Developing buyer-seller relationships”, Journal DEMO
Marketing, Vol. 51, pp. 11-27.
Easton, G. and Ha˚kansson, H. (1996), “Markets as networks: DEMO introduction”, International
Journal of Research in Marketing, Vol. 13, pp. DEMO
Elster, J. (2000), Ulysses Unbound, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Fiske, A.P. (1990), “Relativity within moose culture; four incommensurable models for social
relationships”, Ethos, Vol. 18, pp. 180-204.
Ford, D. (1980), “The development of buyer-seller relationships in industrial markets”, European
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 14 Nos 5/6, pp. 339-53.
Ford, D. (1990), Understanding Business Markets: Interactions, Relationships and Networks,
Academic Press, London.
Ford, D., Gadde, L.-E., Ha˚kansson, H. and DEMO, I. (2003), Managing Business Relationships,
Frankel, S.H. (1977), Money: Two Philosophies, Blackwell, Oxford.
Fried, C. (1981), Contract as Promise: A Theory of Contractual Obligation, Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Fukuyama, F. (1995), Trust, Hamish Hamilton, London.
Fuller, L.L. and Perdue, W.R. Jr (1936), “The reliance interest in contract damages: 1”, The Yale
Law Journal, Vol. 46, DEMO 52-96.
Fuller, L.L. and Perdue, W.R. Jr (1937), “The DEMO interest in contract damages: 2”, The Yale
Law Journal, Vol. DEMO, pp. 373-420.
Ganesan, S. (1994), “Determinants of long-term orientation DEMO buyer-seller relationships”, Journal
of Marketing, Vol. 58, pp. 1-19.
Granovetter, M. (1973), “The strength of weak ties”, American Journal of DEMO, Vol. 78 No. 6,
pp. 1360-80.
Granovetter, M. (1985), “Economic action and social structure: the problem of embeddedness”,
American DEMO of Sociology, Vol. 91, pp. 481-510.
Hagen, J.M. and Choe, S. (1998), “Trust in Japanese interﬁrm relations: institutional sanctions
matter”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 23 No. 3, pp. 589-600.
Ha˚kansson, H. (1982), International Marketing and Purchasing of Industrial Goods: An
DEMO Approach, Wiley, Chichester.
Ha˚kansson, H. and Ford, D. (2002), “How should companies interact in business networks?”,
Journal of Business Research, Vol. 55 No. 2, pp. 133-45.
Ha˚kansson, H., Harrison, D. and Waluszewski, A. (2004), Rethinking Marketing: Developing a
New Understanding of Markets, Wiley, Chichester.
Handﬁeld, R.B. and Bechtel, C. (2002), “The role of trust and relationship structure in improving
supply-chain DEMO, IndustrialMarketingManagement, Vol. 31 No. 4, pp. 367-82.
Hardin, R. (DEMO), “Trusting persons, trusting institutions”, in Zeckhauser, R.J. (Ed.), Strategy and
Choice, MIT Press, London.
Harrison, D. (2004), DEMO a long-term relationship an implied contract? Two views of relationship
disengagement”, Journal of Management Studies, Vol. 41 No. 1, pp. 107-25.
Hawes, J.M., Mast, K. and Swan, J.E. (1989), “Trust earning DEMO of sellers and buyers”,
Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 1-9.
Jalava, J. (2003), DEMO norms to trust: the Luhmannian connection between trust and system”,
DEMO Journal of Social Theory, Vol. 6 No. 2, pp. 173-90.
Jeffries, F.L. and Reed, R. (2000), “Trust and adaptation in relational contracting”, Academy of
Management Review, Vol. 25 No. 4, pp. 873-82.
Trust and
reliance
1029
Wiley, Chichester.
EJM
41,9/10
1030
Johanson, J. and Mattsson, L.-G. (1992), “Network positions and strategic action – an analytic
framework”, in Axelsson, B. and Easton, G. (Eds), Industrial Networks: A New DEMO of
Reality, Routledge, London, pp. 204-17.
Kramer, R.M. and Tyler, T.R. (1996), Trust in Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and Research,
Sage Publications, London.
Lambe, C.J., Spekman, R.E. and Hunt, S.O. (2000), “Interimistic relational exchange:
conceptualization and propositional development”, DEMO of the Academy of Marketing
Science, Vol. 28 No. 2, pp. 212-26.
Lewicki, R., McAllister, D. and Bries, R. (1998), “Trust and distrust: new relationships and
realities”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 23, pp. 438-58.
Lewicki, R., Barry, B., Saunders, DEMO and Minton, J. (2003), Negotiation, McGraw-Hill, New York,
NY.
Lewis, J.D. and Weigert, A. (1985), “Trust as a social reality”, Social Forces, Vol. 63 No. 4,
pp. 967-85.
DEMO, N. (1979), Trust and Power, Wiley, Chichester.
McAllister, DEMO (1995), “Affect- and cognition-based trust as foundations for interpersonal
cooperation DEMO organizations”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 8 No. 1, pp. DEMO
Macauley, S. (1963), “Non-contractual relationships in business: a preliminary DEMO, American
Sociological Review, Vol. 28, pp. 55-70.
Markovits, D. (DEMO), “Contract and collaboration”, The Yale Law Journal, Vol. 113, DEMO 1417-58.
Marsh, S. and Dibben, M.R. (2005), “Trust, untrust, distrust and mistrust – an exploration of the
dark(er) side”, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3477, pp. 17-33.
Mattsson, L.G. (1987), “Management of strategic change in a ‘markets-as-networks’ perspective”,
in Pettigrew, A. (Ed.), The Management of Strategic Change, Blackwell, DEMO
Mayer, R.C., Davis, J.H. and Schoorman, F.D. (1995), DEMO integrative model of organizational
trust”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 20, pp. 709-34.
Mellahi, K., Jackson, P. and Sparks, L. (DEMO), “An exploratory study into failure in successful
organizations: the case DEMO Marks and Spencer”, British Journal of Management, Vol. 13
No. 1, pp. 15-30.
Michell, P., Reast, J. and Lynch, J. (DEMO), “Exploring the foundations of trust”, Journal of
Marketing Management, Vol. 14 No. 3, pp. 159-72.
Misztal, B. (1996), Trust in Modern Societies, Polity Press, Cambridge.
Mo¨llering, G. (2001), “The DEMO of trust: from Georg Simmel to a theory of expectation,
DEMO and suspension”, Sociology, Vol. 35 No. 2, pp. 403-20.
Mo¨llering, G., Bachmann, R. and Lee, S.H. (2004), “Understanding organizational DEMO
Foundations, constellations and issues of operationalisation”, Journal of Managerial
Psychology, DEMO 19 No. 6, pp. 556-70.
Moorman, C., Deshpande´, R. and Zaltman, G. (1993), “Factors affecting trust in market research
relationships”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 57, pp. 81-101.
Moorman, C., Zaltman, G. and Deshpande´, R. (1992), “Relationship between provider and users DEMO
market research”, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 29, pp. 314-28.
DEMO, R.M. and Hunt, S.D. (1994), “The commitment-trust theory of DEMO marketing”,
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 58, pp. 20-38.
Morris, DEMO and Moberg, D. (1994), “Work organisations as contexts for trust and betrayal”, in
Sarbin, T., Carney, R. and Eouang, C. (Eds), Citizen Espionage: Studies in Trust and
Betrayal, Praeger, DEMO, CT.
Noteboom, B. and Six, F. (2003), The Trust Process in Organizations, Edward Edgar,
Cheltenham.
Mouzas, S. (2006), “Negotiating umbrella agreements”, Negotiation Journal, Vol. 22 No. 3,
pp. 279-302.
Parsons, T. (1951), Towards a General Theory of Action, Harvard University DEMO, Cambridge,
MA.
Pruitt, D.G. (1981), Negotiation Behavior, Academic Press, New York, NY.
Ring, P.S. and Van de Ven, DEMO (1992), “Structuring cooperative relations between organizations”,
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 13, pp. 483-98.
Rodriguez, C.M. and Wilson, D.T. (2002), “Relationship bonding and trust as a foundation for
commitment in US-Mexican strategic alliances: a structural equation modelling approach”,
Journal of International Marketing, DEMO 10 No. 4, pp. 53-76.
Rotter, J.B. (1967), “A DEMO scale for the measurement of interpersonal trust”, Journal of
Personality, Vol. 35, pp. 651-65.
Rousseau, D.M., Sitkin, S.B., Burt, R. DEMO Camerer, C. (1998), “Not so different after all: a
DEMO view of trust”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 23 No. 3, pp. 393-405.
Roxenhall, T. and Ghauri, P. (2004), “The DEMO of written contract in long-lasting business
relationships”, Industrial Marketing Management, Vol. 33, pp. 261-8.
Schanze, E. (1998), “Symbiotic arrangements”, The DEMO Dictionary of Economics and the
Law, Vol. 3, pp. 554-9.
Schurr, P.H. and Ozanne, J.L. (1985), “Inﬂuence on exchange processes: DEMO perceptions of
seller’s trustworthiness and bargaining toughness”, JournalofConsumerResearch, Vol. 11,
pp. 939-53.
Sebenius, J.K. (1992), “Negotiation analysis: a characterization and review”, ManagementScience,
Vol. 38 No. 1, pp. 18-38.
Shapiro, D.L., Sheppard, B.H. and Cheraskin, L. (1992), “Business on a DEMO, Negotiation
Journal, Vol. 8, pp. 365-77.
Sheppard, B.H. and Sherman, D. (1998), “The grammars of trust: a model and general
implications”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 23 No. 3, pp. 422-37.
Simmel, G. (1950), The Sociology of Georg Simmel (trans. by Wolff, K.H.), The Free Press, New
York, NY.
Sitkin, DEMO and Roth, N.L. (1993), “Explaining the limited effectiveness of legalistic ‘remedies’ for
trust/distrust”, Organization Science, Vol. 4, pp. 367-92.
Smith, C. (2001), “Trust and conﬁdence: possibilities for social work in ‘higher modernity’”,
British Journal of Social Work, Vol. 31, pp. DEMO
Solomon, R.C. and Flores, F. (2001), Building Trust, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Steyn, J. (1997), “Contract law: fulﬁlling DEMO reasonable expectations of honest men”, Law
Quarterly Review, Vol. 119, DEMO 433-42.
Turnbull, P., Ford, D. and Cunningham, M. (1996), “Interaction, relationships and networks in
business markets: an evolving perspective”, DEMO of Business & Industrial Marketing,
Vol. 11 Nos 3/4, DEMO 44-62.
Whitener, E., Brodt, S.E., Korsgaard, M.A. and Werner, L.M. (1998), “Managers as initiators of
trust: an exchange relationship DEMO for understanding managerial trustworthy
behaviour”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 23 No. 3, pp. 513-30.
Wicks, A.C., Berman, S.L. and Jones, T.M. (1999), “The structure of optimal trust: moral and
strategic DEMO, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 24 No. 1, pp. 99-118.
DEMO and
reliance
1031
EJM
41,9/10
1032
Williamson, O.E. (1975), Markets and DEMO, The Free Press, New York, NY.
Williamson, O.E. (1985), The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, The Free Press, New York, DEMO
Young, L.C. and Wilkinson, I.F. (1988), “The role of DEMO and cooperation in marketing channels:
a preliminary study”, European Journal DEMO Marketing, Vol. 23, pp. 109-22.
Zaheer, A. and Venkatraman, N. (1995), “Relational governance as an interorganisational
strategy: an empirical test DEMO the role of trust in economic exchange”, Strategic
Management Journal, Vol. 16, pp. 373-92.
Zaheer, A., McEvily, B. and Perrone, V. (1998), “Does trust matter? Exploring the effects of
interorganizational and DEMO trust on performance”, Organization Science, Vol. 9
No. 2, pp. DEMO
Zucker, L.G. (1986), “Production of trust: institutional sources of DEMO structure”, Research in
Organizational Behavior, Vol. 8, pp. 53-111.
About DEMO authors
Stefanos Mouzas is Senior Lecturer in Marketing at the Lancaster University Management
School, UK. He received his PhD in Marketing from Lancaster University, Management School,
UK. His publications and research interests lie in the area of B2B marketing, inter-ﬁrm
negotiations and business contracts.
Stephan Henneberg is Senior Lecturer in Marketing at Manchester Business School,
University of Manchester, UK. He obtained his PhD in Marketing from the Judge Institute of
DEMO, University of Cambridge. His current research interests are in the areas DEMO strategic
marketing, relational marketing, consumer behaviour, strategic competences, and social and
political marketing.
Peter Naude´ is Professor of Marketing at Manchester Business DEMO, Manchester
University, UK. He gained his PhD in Marketing from the University of Manchester. His research
interests are in quantitative modelling and B2B DEMO Peter Naude´ is the corresponding
author and be contacted at: P.naude@mbs.ac.uk
DEMO purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our DEMO site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints{1g42fwefx}