Introduction to the Special Issue on
University Entrepreneurship and
Technology Transfer
David DEMO Mowery • Scott Shane
Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, and
National Bureau of Economic Research
Robert H. Smith School of Business, University of Maryland,
College Park, Maryland 20742
mowery@haas.berkeley.edu • DEMO
incethepassageoftheBayh-DoleActin1980,U.S.
S universities have increased their efforts in formal
technology transfer and licensing, and in some cases,
investments in new ﬁrms. During the last 20 years,
the number of universities engaged in technology
DEMO has increased eightfold, to more than 200,
and the volume DEMO university patents has increased
fourfold.
Moreover, much of this activity involves DEMO
by “start-up” and small, young, technology-intensive
ﬁrms to commercialize technologies developed by
university faculty, staff, and students. For example,
the Association DEMO University Technology Managers
reports that the share of member-university inven-
tions licensed to new ﬁrms has increased every year
since the group began to DEMO records in the early
1990s. Other anecdotal evidence suggests that invest-
ments by venture capital ﬁrms in technology ﬁrms
founded by university students and DEMO have
grown signiﬁcantly during this period.
Despite the growth in both formal and informal
entrepreneurial activities involving university inven-
tions over the past 20 DEMO, little scholarly research
has explored this topic. Recently, scholars from
several different academic disciplines and universi-
ties have begun to systematically study and DEMO
ment commercial technology transfer and university
entrepreneurship. Nonetheless, the interdisciplinary
natureofthisinquirymeansthatavarietyofanalytic
DEMO,
0025-1909/02/4801/000v$5.00
1526-5501 electronic ISSN
limiting the development of well-established empir-
ical ﬁndings and resulting in a fragmented set of
observations.
DEMO facilitate a cross-disciplinary discussion of ﬁnd-
ings on this topic, we DEMO a conference at the
DuPree College of Management at the Georgia Insti-
tute of Technology in December 2000 to discuss a
set of papers DEMO university entrepreneurship and
technology transfer. The conference brought together
researchers from a range of backgrounds, including
students of strategic management and organization
theory,andeconomists,historians,andsociologistsof
technical change. The papers employed a variety of
methodologies,includingqualitative,DEMO
techniques, regression analyses of survey data, and
sophisticated econometric analyses of archival data.
The empirical analyses employed different units of
analysis, such as the individual invention, the uni-
versity, ﬁrms, or industries, in DEMO univer-
sity technology transfer and entrepreneurship. We
hope that the resulting collection of papers will pro-
vide a foundation for the accumulation of knowl-
DEMO on this topic across a variety of disciplines and
perspectives.
TopicsCoveredbythePapers
The papers in this volume examine four broad
themes: the relationship between university research
and private sector innovation, the mechanisms of
Management Science © 2002 INFORMS
Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002 pp. v–ix
MOWERYANDSHANE
Special Issue on University Entrepreneurship and Technology Transfer
technology transfer, the evolution of university tech-
nology transfer activities, and the creation of new
ﬁrms to exploit university technology.
TheRelationshipBetweenUniversity
ResearchandPrivateSectorInnovation
Researchershavelongarguedthatuniversityresearch
affects private sector innovation. DEMO the speciﬁc
channelsthroughwhichtheseeffectsarerealizedand
the ways in which these channels and their effects
differ among industries and ﬁrms remain poorly
understood.ThearticlebyCohen,Nelson,andWalsh
seeks to DEMO that imbalance by examining the
effects of university research on industrial R&D and
the mechanisms through which these effects exercise
their inﬂuence. The DEMO devote particular atten-
tiontodifferencesbetweennewandestablishedﬁrms
in the inﬂuence of “public” research (including DEMO
versity research) on the innovative activities of these
ﬁrms. The paper DEMO that public research
affects industrial R&D in a wide variety of manu-
facturing industries and that nonmarket channels of
knowledge ﬂow, such as publications or conferences,
are the most important channels for these effects DEMO
most industries. The effects of public research on
start-up ﬁrms are most pronounced in the pharma-
ceuticals industry; elsewhere, larger ﬁrms appear to
DEMO
plete R&D projects.
The article by Owen-Smith, Riccaboni, Pammolli,
and Powell examines whether the relationships
betweenuniversityresearchandinnovativeactivityin
biotechnology ﬁrms vary between the DEMO States
and Europe. This article compares the ties that link
research universities, public research institutes, and
the private sector in the two locations. DEMO
in the pattern of ties among these three institutional
actorsintheUnitedStatesandEuropehaveproduced
different paths of evolution in the biotechnology
industries of each region.
TheMechanismsofTechnologyTransfer
Asecondthemediscussedinthesepapersconcerns
themechanismsthroughwhichuniversitytechnology
DEMO transferred to the private sector. The characteristics
vi
andinﬂuenceonﬁrmsofcommerciallyorientedchan-
nels of technology transfer, such as licensing or the
foundation of new ﬁrms based on university inven-
tions, appear to differ from those of noncommer-
cial channels of transfer, which include publication
of scientiﬁc articles, the hiring by DEMO of students,
etc. Like the paper by Cohen et al., DEMO article by
Agrawal and Henderson suggests that much recent
research on university technology transfer overlooks
the economic signiﬁcance of such noncommercial
technology transfer channels DEMO publication. Focus-
ing on the process of technology transfer from MIT’s
Departments of Mechanical and Electrical Engineer-
ing to industry, the authors show that only 7% of the
knowledge transferred from these departments takes
theformofpatentedinventions.Moreover,theyshow
DEMO private sector organizations differ in their use
of various knowledge transfer mechanisms, such as
patents and publications.
The article by Colyvas, Crow, Gelijns, Mazzoleni,
Nelson, Rosenberg, and Sampat presents detailed
case studies of the technology transfer process for
11 university inventions from Columbia University
and DEMO University. Although the technology
ﬁelds covered by the case studies include inven-
tionsinbiotechnology,pharmaceuticals,software,and
electronics, among other technologies, the authors
note DEMO these inventions may not be represen-
tative of the dynamics of technology transfer for
other university-developed inventions or for tech-
nology transfer involving other DEMO universities.
The authors examine whether protection of univer-
sityinventionsbypatentsandformallicensingagree-
ments facilitate the transfer of university inventions
toindustryandthecommercialdevelopmentofthese
inventions by industrial ﬁrms. They conclude that
DEMO incentives played little or no role in moti-
vating faculty to undertake the research projects that
produced the inventions of interest, and they cite a
numberofinstancesinwhichprivateﬁrmsundertook
commercial development of these inventions without
exclusive licenses to them.
DEMO
ActivitiesOverTime
Athirdthemeamongthepapersistheevolutionof
commerciallyorientedtechnologytransferactivities—
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
MOWERYANDSHANE
Special Issue on University Entrepreneurship and Technology Transfer
patenting, licensing, DEMO the founding of start-
up companies—over time. The article by Mowery,
Sampat,andZiedonisexaminestheprocessof“learn-
ing to patent” by universities that initiated patent-
ing and DEMO activities after the passage of the
Bayh-Dole Act in 1980. The authors ﬁrst establish
thatthe“importance”ofthepatentsofthese“entrant
universities” appears to have improved during the
1980s by DEMO with either the patents of more
experienced university patenters or with a nonaca-
demic control sample of patents. They then examine
the signiﬁcance of DEMO possible mechanisms for
suchlearningbyentrants,includingcumulativeexpe-
rience in patenting after 1980, the DEMO
of a formal technology transfer ofﬁce, or a prior
history as DEMO client of the Research Corporation, a
long-established manager of academic patenting DEMO
licensing. The authors ﬁnd little evidence that any
of these three factors explains the improvement in
importance of entrant universities’ patents after 1980,
DEMO conclude that this improvement may reﬂect
knowledge spillovers across universities.
The article by Thursby and Thursby examines the
growth of university licensing over time. DEMO an
intermediate input model and data from a survey of
university technology transfer ofﬁces, these authors
examine whether the growth in licensing activity is a
function of university technology transfer productiv-
ity or instead reﬂects changes DEMO the tendency faculty
and administrators to commercialize research. The
authorsﬁndthatlicensinggrowthhasresultedlargely
from an increased willingness of faculty and admin-
istrators to engage in licensing.
The DEMO by Feldman, Feller, Bercovitz, and
Burton focuses on the increased DEMO by univer-
sity licensors of equity investment as a tool for
technology transfer and commercialization. Although
investments by universities in licensee ﬁrms may
align DEMO among faculty inventors, private sec-
tor licensees, and the university administration, the
authors observe considerable differences among uni-
versities in the frequency of these investments. The
authorsexplaintheseinter-institutionaldifferencesby
developing a behavioral model in which the use DEMO
equity depends on licensing experience, past perfor-
mance, the organization of universities’ technology
transfer operations, and the organizational structure
of the university.
TheCreationofNewFirmstoExploit
UniversityTechnology
Anumberofthepapersinthisvolumefocusonthe
roleofnewﬁrmsasvehiclesforcommercializinguni-
versityinventions.ThearticlebyShaneexamineswhy
the importance of inventor-entrepreneurs varies in
the commercialization DEMO different inventions. Argu-
ing that markets for knowledge work better when
patents are effective, he examines the commercial-
ization of MIT-assigned inventions since 1980. Shane
ﬁnds that university faculty, staff, and students were
more likely DEMO found ﬁrms to commercialize their
inventions when these technologies did not enjoy
strong patent protection. Noninventors were more
likely to commercialize those inventions, however,
when patent protection was strong.
Zucker, Darby, and Armstrong focus DEMO the role of
scientiﬁc talent in the creation of university start-ups.
Speciﬁcally, they argue that scientiﬁc ability is central
to the founding and performance of new biotechnol-
ogycompanies,andexaminetheeffectofthescientiﬁc
abilityofbiotechnologyﬁrms’founders(measuredin
terms of their productivity in DEMO signiﬁcant
scientiﬁc papers) on the performance of new biotech-
nology ﬁrms. DEMO ﬁnd that ﬁrms founded by “star
scientists”outperformotherﬁrmsevenafteraccount-
ing for the location of these ﬁrms and the amount of
venture capital ﬁnancing they received.
Shane DEMO Stuart examine the related question of
why some university start-ups are more successful
than others. Focusing on the 134 new companies
founded to exploit DEMO inventions during
the 1980-1996 period, they ﬁnd that ventures whose
foundershadsocialtiestoventurecapitaliststhatpre-
DEMO the founding of their ﬁrms were more likely
to receive funding and were less likely to fail. They
also ﬁnd that the magnitude of DEMO funding is an
important determinant of the likelihood of a success-
ful initial public offering.
ImplicationsforFutureResearch
Takentogether,thesearticlesrevealseveralimportant
patterns in university technology transfer and
DEMO Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002 vii
MOWERYANDSHANE
Special Issue on University Entrepreneurship and Technology Transfer
entrepreneurship. University research DEMO a signiﬁ-
cant inﬂuence on private sector innovative activity
thatdiffersbetweennewandestablishedﬁrms.More-
over,therelationshipbetweenuniversityresearchand
industrial innovation in new or established ﬁrms
varies between the United States DEMO Europe.
Thepreponderanceofuniversity-developedknowl-
edge is transferred to the private sector through
noncommercial mechanisms. One exception to this
pattern appears to be biomedical innovation, where
both commercial technology transfer and “public”
channels for knowledge dissemination are important.
Thedifferencesbetweencommercialandnoncommer-
DEMO channels for the transfer of knowledge and tech-
nology between universities and industry (recogniz-
ing that these ﬂows of knowledge operate in both
directions,ratherthanexclusivelyfromuniversitiesto
industry)suggesttheimportanceoffocusedattention
onthiscommerciallyorientedactivity.Suchafocused
research agenda can shed light on the broader DEMO
tion of the origins of new ﬁrms and on the charac-
teristics of knowledge transfer and exploitation, two
issuesthatremaincentraltotheﬁeldofentrepreneur-
ship.
Avarietyofdataindicatethatpatentingandlicens-
ing by U.S. universities has grown considerably since
1980. This growth reﬂects expanded patenting and
DEMO by universities active in these areas well
before 1980, as well DEMO the initiation of patenting and
licensing activities by universities with little or no
experience in these areas prior to the Bayh-Dole Act.
Nonetheless, management by universities of tech-
nology licensing activities requires a set of skills
DEMO are extremely rare within universities and in
short supply more generally. Universities with lim-
ited experience in patenting therefore have required
considerable time to DEMO the importance of their
patenting, although the available evidence suggests
that DEMO importance of their patents has indeed
improved.Growthinuniversitypatentingandlicens-
ing, especially when these DEMO involve startup
ﬁrms, means that these formal university technology
transfer activities, as well as the interaction between
these formal activities and the much DEMO array
of channels that link U.S. universities and indus-
trial innovation, DEMO important topics for research by
management scholars.
The factors that inﬂuence the founding of new
ﬁrms to commercialize university inventions remain
poorly understood. Although DEMO start-ups are not
new phenomena, they are an important source of
DEMO in employment and economic activity, and
additional research is needed on DEMO similarities and
differences between university-based start-up ﬁrms
and other types of start-up ﬁrms. Such research also
must take into account the substantial interindus-
try DEMO in the formation of university-based
and other start-up ﬁrms, as well DEMO the interindus-
try contrasts in the importance of market-based and
other channels for knowledge and technology trans-
fer.Moreover,theperformanceofcompaniesfounded
to exploit university inventions may DEMO explained by
factors that differ from those that explain the per-
formance of other start-ups. The unique setting of
university-basedtechnologytransferandcommercial-
izationmaymaketheintellectualandsocialcapitalof
ﬁrm founders more DEMO
Despite the wealth of information on university-
based technology transfer and commercialization
provided by these papers, many questions about
university entrepreneurship and technology trans-
fer remain. For example, what factors explain the
competitive performance of the new technology
companies spun out from universities? What are the
patterns of university-industry relationships among
entrepreneurialﬁrmsinindustriesotherthanbiotech-
nology or in locations other than the United DEMO
or Europe? How have policies and practices in the
formal patenting, licensing, and technology trans-
fer activities of U.S. universities changed during
the post-1980 period? Are universities now more
likely to get involved in matching inventors with
licensees, and what explains the differential success
of universities in such activities? Do they facilitate
relationshipsbetweenentrepreneursandventurecap-
italists, and what tools do DEMO employ in this func-
tion other than equity investment? What explains DEMO
differential use and effectiveness by universities of
incubators, venture capital funds, royalty payment
schemes, or contract research to enhance technology
transfer through licensing and start-up activity?
Although the articles in this volume provide some
DEMO about technology transfer patterns, much
viii
Management Science/Vol. 48, No. 1, January 2002
MOWERYANDSHANE
Special Issue on University Entrepreneurship and Technology Transfer
work remains to DEMO done. It is surely useful to know
that different ﬁrms use university publications and
patents; but how does the process of knowledge
exploitation work? Which mechanisms do new and
small ﬁrms use, and how do DEMO differ from those
of established and large ﬁrms? Moreover, where and
when do ﬁnancial incentives play a central role in
technology transfer and DEMO? How do they
affect licensing and ﬁrm formation across time and
DEMO?
This volume provides some initial insights into
the formation and performance of new companies
based on university inventions, but it has only
scratched the surface. For what reasons other than
the effect of career cycles DEMO university inventors
become entrepreneurs and start new ﬁrms? What
types of DEMO lead to ﬁrm formation and
what types are licensed to existing ﬁrms? Finally,
what characteristics of founders inﬂuence the perfor-
mance of university start-ups over time?
Inshort,theﬁeldofuniversity-industrytechnology
transfer and entrepreneurship provides an abun-
DEMO of research opportunities. As the papers
in this volume demonstrate, the DEMO research
issues raised by this phenomenon can be fruit-
fully addressed from a variety of disciplinary and
methodological perspectives. We hope that this
research DEMO will continue to ﬂourish and encour-
age the pursuit of interdisciplinary approaches to its
study.
Acknowledgments
The special issue editors thank Terry Blum, Dean of the DuPree
College of Management at the Georgia Institute of Technology,DEMO
for hosting a conference in December 2000 at which the origi-
nal versions of these papers were presented and discussed. They
also thank David DEMO for his assistance in facilitating the con-
ference. They are grateful to Hau Lee, editor-in-chief of Manage-
ment Science, for providing his support DEMO this project and gra-
ciously extending them the opportunity to publish this collection
of papers in Management Science. Ashish Arora, Lee Branstetter,
Ian Cockburn, Dave Hsu, Riitta Katilla, Rob Lowe, Atul Nerkar,
DEMO Rodriguez, Dave Roessner, Deepak Somaya, and Scott Stern
provided valuable DEMO as discussants and reviewers of the
papers.
Management Science/Vol. 48, DEMO 1, January 2002 ix{1g42fwefx}