Research Policy 27 1998 947–976Ž.
Why has the investment performance of technology-specialist,DEMO
European venture capital funds been so poor?
Gordon C. Murray a,) , Richard Marriott b
a Warwick Business School, UniÕersity of Warwick, CoÕentry CV4 7AL, UK
b Altair Financial Group, L5, National DEMO Bank House, 255 George Street, Sydney NSW 2000, Australia
Received DEMO March 1998; accepted 28 August 1998
Abstract
This paper seeks to DEMO and model the key parameters which impact on the commercial performance of a specialist,
technology focused, early-stage, venture capital fund. Using both DEMO costs and output expected values data provided byŽ. Ž .
a number of specialist, independent venture capital firms, a spreadsheet model of a DEMO year term fund is developed. These
figures are used to generate Internal Rate of Return IRR and Net Present Value NPV performance calculations for DEMO Ž .
investment commitments of both the institutional, limited partners and DEMO capitalist, general partner. The generically
defined model allows the user to DEMO both conceptual and pragmatic questions regarding the relationship between fund
structure and performance. The model is further developed to determine the effect on fund DEMO of two venture
capital related, ‘indirect’ State support schemes guarantee and DEMO options . Iterative interrogations of the modelŽ.
demonstrate the sensitivity of economic returns to the scale of the investment activity. State supported schemes mitigate DEMO
do not remove the negative performance consequences of small fund size. A fund with under £15 million US$25 million orŽ
ECU21 million under management DEMO of increasing economic vulnerability.. q 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights
reserved.
Keywords: Venture capital; New technology based firms; Fund performance; Government DEMO
1. Introduction
1.1. Industry context and policy interests
Policy measures to improve the formation and growth rates of New Technology Based Firms NTBFs areŽ.
DEMO popular in developed economies world wide. NTBFs have come to be recognised as a potentially
important constituent of an innovative and advanced economy. However, growing government interest and
intervention is also a recognition that technology-based businesses DEMO particular difficulties. Provision of
finance through established capital markets for these young enterprises, which by definition are highly
) Corresponding author. Tel.: q44-1203-524-622; E-mail: gordon.murray@warwick.ac.uk
0048-7333r98r$ - see front matter q 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S 0 0 4 8 - 7 3 3 3 9 8 0 0 1 0 2 - 4Ž.
948 G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()DEMO
speculative, frequently remains problematic. The traditional sources of finance for young DEMO at start-up,
namely the entrepreneur and hisŽ.rher family and friends usually followed by collateral-based bank debt, may
be either insufficient or inappropriate to exploit fully the rapid growth potential of an attractive and novel
technological DEMO or service Oakey, 1984a,b; Moore, 1993; Westhead and Storey, 1995 .Ž.
In these circumstances, the provision of risk capital by DEMO capital firms may be the most suitable form of
external finance. However, outside the US and a number of advanced Western economies, notably DEMO UK, the
venture capital industries of many countries remain immature and DEMO In addition, with the singular
exception of the US, the greater the experience of a venture capital sector, the more the tendency of the
incumbent venture capital firms and their institutional investors to move towards DEMO preference for larger and less
risky ‘development capital’ deals. 1 This has lead to the situation where potentially attractive NTBFs have seen
constraints placed DEMO the availability of, particularly, longer term risk capital Murray and Lott, 1995 . ThisŽ.
capital scarcity, termed ‘the equity gap’ Macmillan, 1931 , has potentially serious, adverse consequences forŽ.
the NTBFs’ rate of growth Westhead and Storey, 1995 .Ž. 2
A vigorous and growing community of NTBFs within an economy may produce significant ‘externalities’ of
interest to government. DEMO is in addition to any benefits reaped by the commercial investors in such firms.
Accordingly, governments are frequently prepared to provide a range of incentives or subsidies to ensure that
sufficient finance and support are made DEMO to early-stage investments in technology based, young firms.
The alleviation or DEMO of market failure frequently becomes the economic rational for such state
interventions.
One major constraint to the supply of long term or risk capital DEMO NTBFs is the apparent inability of
technology focused, venture capital funds DEMO provide attractive returns to their investors. European performance
statistics indicate that early-stage investments generate the lowest level of returns of any stage of venture DEMO
finance with pooled IRRs of 5.7% pa compared to 17.6% for MBO funds Venture Economics and BannockŽ
Consulting, 1997 . This raises the question as to whether. successful investment in NTBFs is a peculiarly
American phenomenon. DEMO extremis, is it solely a West or East Coast phenomenon Florida DEMO Kenney,3 Ž
1988 ? These are questions of profound importance regarding both industry and technology policy for many.
countries.
1.2. A European Commission DEMO
Small and medium sized enterprises SMEs have assumed a growing influence in the policy actions andŽ.
instruments of the European Commission. This interest has DEMO about through an increasing recognition of the
major contribution of SMEs to total employment and to the net creation of new jobs see Birch, 1979; GallagherŽ
economic, technological and regional policies. This interest may also DEMO superficially evidenced by the fact that
there exists one Directorate General DGXXIII with a specific remit to promote the interests of the nearly 18Ž.
DEMO SMEs in the Union. 4 However, the actual or potential influence DEMO SMEs impacts across a wide range
of other DGs, notably DGXVI DEMO Policy and DGXIII Innovation .Ž. Ž .
The publication, European Industrial DEMO for the 1990s notes the failure of European firms to bring high
technology, innovative products to the market as the speedily as competitor nations European Commission,Ž
1 Development capital investments are generally described as those DEMO involving established companies but not start-up or
early-stage enterprises.
2 It should be noted that several academics harbour significant reservations regarding the existence or DEMO of an equity gap for NTBFs.
See, for example, Aston Business School 1991 .Ž.
3 The importance of recent Israeli activity must be DEMO including the very strong links with American commerce and academe.
4 DGXXIII also has a remit for the promotion of Tourism.
and Steward, 1986; Storey et al., 1989 . SMEs are now firmly established as DEMO major focus of the Commission’s.
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r Research Policy 27 1998 947–976() 949
1991, pp. 31 and 33 . The document highlights the shortage of technology-based, small firms available to.
exploit and commercialise innovations in Europe. The problems of finance for these firms is also observed.
However, no specific policy prescriptions relating to finance are tendered. The subsequent White Paper Growth
DEMO Employment: the Challenges and Ways Forward into the 21st Century Ž.European DEMO, 1994
reiterates both the need for more European NTBFs and policy DEMO concerns that Europe does not convert
sufficient of its science and technology base into commercially successful products and services. The validity of
the American DEMO, particularly the positive impact of new high tech firm formation on DEMO
employment, is also again acknowledged. Specifically, the White Paper notes ‘‘the lack of risk capital to help
firms through the development phase and DEMO reluctance of private-sector financiers to invest in activities if they
consider the risks too great or the returns too uncertain’’ p. 102 .Ž.
It DEMO left to the considerably more focused and bolder Green Paper on InnoÕation ŽEuropean Commission,
1995 to articulate specific policies to address the perceived DEMO of Europe’s weaker innovative infrastruc-.
ture compared to the Japanese and, DEMO all, the Americans. Acknowledging the importance of an appropriate
financial environment, the Green Paper describes in detail a series of barriers to innovation DEMO a section entitled
‘Problems with Financing a Financial systems which avoid innovation’ p. 39 . With rare candour theŽ. Ž .
document observes ‘‘ DEMO . . that the European innovations system is full of holes’’. Existing financial institutions;
uncertainties and limits to public financing; and an unfavourable European tax regime are seen to be the greatest
financial barriers to DEMO Thirteen ‘actions’ are presented for discussion with Action 6 proposing ten
recommendations at national andror Community level pp. 52–53 . Within the venture fund DEMO of thisŽ.
paper, relevant Commission action proposals included ‘acquiring holdings in DEMO risk intermediaries’ or ‘the
possible support of the creation of multi-national new seed capital funds’ in order to promote the genesis and
development of DEMO are highly apposite.
The First Action Plan for InnoÕation in Europe Ž.European Commission, 1997 was the end result of the
discussion process stemming from the Green Paper. Under the second of the three major foci of DEMO First Action
Plan, ‘Establishing a Favourable Framework for Innovation’, the Commission committed itself to reinforcing
European Investment Fund action in favour of innovation DEMO cooperation between the European Investment
Bank and the Structural Funds. The first tangible outcome of this statement was the launch in 1997 of the
DEMO and Technology Equity Capital scheme I-TEC .Ž.
I-TEC explicitly recognises the additional costs in making early stage venture capital investments in
unproven NTBFs. Accordingly, a new or established venture capital fund which will contract to allocate DEMO least
25% of new capital raised to early-stage investments in a minimum of five technologically innovative SMEs can
obtain up to a total of DEMO,000 in grant. This sum must be employed to defray the peculiar, additional costs
to the investor of initial appraisal and ‘hands on’ management of NTBF investee firms. I-TEC was announced in
1997. By the end DEMO that year, nine venture capital funds had entered the Scheme providing DEMO potential extra
source of risk capital of ECU186 million exclusively for early-stage, high-tech investments EuropeanŽ
It is interesting to note that, while the DEMO scheme owes much to the political commitment engendered by
Edith Cresson the Commissioner responsible for DGXIII via the vehicles of the Green Paper and DEMO Plan,Ž.
the actual logic and operation of the new scheme was very heavily based on the experience the Commission
gained from the European DEMO Capital Fund Scheme Murray, 1998 . This ‘pilot action’ 1988–1995 wasŽ. DEMO .
sponsored by DGXXIII and DGXVI and not by DGXIII. The ESCF scheme was the first European initiative to
address the peculiar cost problems DEMO exceptional information search and investee governance which are
experienced by early-stage technology venture funds. This phenomenon is central to the present paper and is
DEMO Second Tyranny: dis-economies of small fund size.
1.3. Genesis and growth DEMO the Õenture capital industry
Timmons, 1992 has grown to become a DEMO element of the corporate financial services sector in virtually.
Commission, 1998 DEMO
The modern venture capital industry, starting from its post-war roots in DEMO Coast America Bygrave andŽ
950 G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()DEMO
capital in rapidly growing, unquoted companies has become increasingly popular with DEMO ambitious.
owner-managers and institutional investors alike. Venture capital firms have mushroomed not only in the
traditional western economies of North America and Europe but DEMO in the Pacific Rim and, latterly, the former
Soviet controlled states of Central and Eastern Europe.
While the USA continues to have the DEMO and longest established venture capital industry, Europe and
particularly the UK DEMO similarly developed its own style of venture capital activity. European investment at
nearly ECU9.7 billion in 1997 European Venture Capital Association, 1998 is now of a scale broadlyŽ.
equivalent in terms of the funds raised and DEMO each year to the US National Value Capital Association,Ž
have recently achieved record venture capital investment activity with the US and the UK DEMO invested
Ž.
Fig. 1. The growth of UK and US domestic venture capital investments 1991–1996.
every major economy. The concept of speculative, but potentially well rewarded, equity investments riskŽ
Classic venture capital focuses on very young enterprises with a high but risky potential for substantial sales and
profit DEMO Such firms have been termed ‘fast trackers’ Storey et al., 1989 DEMO, latterly, ‘ten percenters’Ž.
1998 . The growth which has characterised the US industry is also evident across the Atlantic. Both regions.
domestically US$13.1 DEMO and £3.1 billion, respectively, in 1997. Fig. 1
1.4. Demise of early-stage inÕestment actiÕity
As the European venture capital industries have grown in DEMO scale and number of financing transactions, the
nature of their investment DEMO has significantly changed. Over time, the ‘ venturing’ aspect of this
DEMO with its concentration on start-up and early-stage businesses has declined. Instead, DEMO so-called
‘classic venture capital’ has given way to a predominant interest in later-stage or ‘merchant capital’ deals.
Ž.Storey, 1997 . Storey et al. note that this minority of exceptional enterprises will contribute disproportionately
to desirable outcomes, eg. additional employment or total sales growth. In marked contrast, merchant capitalists
concentrate on the considerably less risky refinancing of existing and established businesses. DEMO
management buy-outs and buy-ins MBOsŽ.rMBIs is the most popular and profitable activity within this latter
category.
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r Research Policy 27 1998 947–976() 951
Table 1
Distribution of annual investments by 16 country members of the DEMO Venture Capital Association 1995–1997
Stages of venture 1995 1996 1997
capital investment: ECU million Percent total ECU million Percent total ECU million Percent totalŽ. Ž. Ž.
Seed 34.4 0.6 68.9 1.0 85.1 0.9
Start-up 286.5 5.2 DEMO 5.5 625.9 6.5
Expansion 2298.6 41.4 2712.0 40.0 3375.9 35.0
Replacement 354.5 6.4 481.0 7.1 733.0 7.6
MBOrMBI 2572.0 46.4 3150.2 46.4 4834.9 50.1
DEMO investment 5546 100.0 6787.6 100.0 9654.9 100.0
Source: European Venture Capital DEMO 1998 .Ž.
The magnitude of the trend away from start-up and early-stage investments has most clearly been seen in the
dominant UK industry within DEMO However, with few exceptions of which the US is the most DEMO , thisŽ.
demise of early-stage investment can be viewed as the prevalent mode of behaviour by venture capital sectors as
they become established. Table DEMO
1.5. Old and new worlds— old and new inÕestments
It is the ability of the US venture capital industry to continue to invest predominantly DEMO young, and as yet
unestablished, technology based enterprises which differentiates it so dramatically from its major European
counterparts. This is in part a DEMO issue. The US does not include refinancing and restructuring type
acquisitions, DEMO termed ‘leveraged buy-outs’, within the rubric of venture capital. However, this
explanation is not sufficient. When these statistics are removed from country comparison, the US venture capital
industry remains significantly more involved in technology-based investment DEMO than its European
counterparts see Fig. 2 .Ž.
This predominant technology focus in the US is in stark contrast to the UK where ‘low-tech’ DEMO
buy-outs and buy-ins continue to be the dominant product and activity of the UK industry. In 1997,
MBOsrMBIs represented 65% by value of DEMO record annual UK investment level and 31% of the volume of UK
financings. Start-up and other early-stage investments in the UK that same year DEMO £159 million or 5%
of total value of annual investment. This sum was allocated to 219 recipient companies British Venture CapitalŽ
Capital Association but DEMO be taken to be nugatory. For example, European Venture Capital Association DEMO
for 1997 indicate that only six such investments were made that year for the whole of the UK.
The Bank of England in its DEMO report, The Financing of Technology Based Small Firms, specifically noted
the very small proportion of monies which were allocated to seed and very DEMO venture capital
investments in the UK. The Bank also observed that this financing gap occurred at the most critical, early
growth stages for young entrepreneurial companies with potentially attractive technology ideas and future
products or services DEMO with insufficient track record on which to secure more traditional financial support such
as bank debt.
1.6. The Õalue of NTBFs
For that minority DEMO UK venture capital firms which are prepared to invest in start-up and early-stage
ventures, very demanding investment ‘hurdles’ are imposed on those investee firms seeking their financial
support. It is not uncommon for investment hurdles to DEMO of the order of 60% pa Internal Rates of Return IRRŽ.
Ž.Murray and Lott, 1995 . Accordingly, in practice, the terms ‘start-up’ and ‘early-stage’ have largely come to
Association, 1998 . The figures for seed capital investments by members are not recorded by the British Venture.
952
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()DEMO
LBOsr
Acquisitions in the US by venture capital industries 1984–1996..
Fig. 2. Value of technology investments as a percentage of ‘adjusted’ total value i.e., excluding MBOsŽ
rMBIs in the UK and Europe and
mean investments in DEMO by specialist venture capital firms. NTBFs may be defined by their high levels of
investment in R & D as a percentage of sales DEMO their predominance of ‘knowledge workers’ within the labour
force Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development, 1986; Butchart, 1987 . Fontes and CoombsŽ .
1997 , p.17, more generally define NTBFs as ‘‘young independent firms involved in the development andror
diffusion of new technologies’’. Despite the risks and DEMO of technology based investments seeŽ
below , the ‘upside’ to the investors is the highly attractive prospect of investing in a firm with new DEMO
proprietary technology and which may come to command a dominant presence in large, profitable and rapidly
growing international markets.
Further, but of no DEMO economic interest to professional, private sector investors , within the widerŽ DEMO
corpus of SMEs, NTBFs represent a peculiarly attractive focus for policy DEMO They are seen as offering
significant potential benefits in four cardinal areas of governmental interest: employment creation, innovation,
export sales growth and DEMO development Rothwell and Zegveld, 1982; Freeman, 1983; Organisation ofŽ
Economic Co-operation and Development, 1986; Oakey et al., 1988; Rothwell, 1989; Roberts, 1991; Coopers
and Lybrand, 1996; Branscombe and Keller, DEMO . This interest in NTBFs has in part stemmed from a.
widespread appreciation of their critical role from the early 1970s in the economic DEMO of regions of high
technology activity in the USA, particularly Silicon DEMO, CA and Route 128 around Boston, MA Oakey,Ž
However, DEMO successful NTBFs potentially offer material advantages to the host economy, their DEMO
and early years are potentially fraught with extremely high levels of uncertainty and risk in virtually all areas of
Ž.
1984a,b; Florida and Kenney, 1988; Roberts, 1991; Bygrave and Timmons, 1992 , as well as their contribution.
to fast growth European regions Meyer-Kramer, 1985; DEMO, 1989 .Ž.
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()
DEMO
1990; Roberts, 1991; Murray, 1995, 1998 . For the DEMO NTBF, an exceptional technological offering is a.
necessary but not sufficient DEMO for economic success. Their entrepreneurial founders have also to manage
organisational and productrmarket demands in both internal and external environments characterised by their
complexity DEMO rapid rates of change. Early-stage investment by venture capitalists is often termed ‘capital and
consulting’. Venture capitalists have come to appreciate both the uncertainties DEMO very long odds of picking
future technology winners. They have also had to accept the often very high level of governance related costs of
DEMO young companies and their management teams through the early, and often DEMO, stages of firm
formation and growth.
activity including financing, technology and marketing Huntsman and Hoban, 1980; Oakey, 1984a,b; Sahlman,Ž
DEMO A renaissance for NTBFs?
As contemporary statistics for both UK and pan-European investments indicate, there have been some moves
since 1993 towards a greater proportional involvement in early-stage and technology based investments. In
explaining this DEMO, it is likely that both ‘pull’ and ‘push’ factors are at DEMO The very marked increase in
the value of technology stocks on the dominant US ‘small caps’ market, NASDAQ, has underscored the
attractions to DEMO of big technology ‘hits’ such as Netscape Communications, General Magic, Yahoo!, etc.
Netscape, par excellence, which achieved a pre Initial Public Offering valuation of US$928.5 million in 1995,
has illustrated the bizarre new DEMO of the rapid evolution of billion dollar valuation companies with
corporate histories measured in a few years rather than in decades. The opportunity to DEMO in the earliestŽ. 5
years of what might be one of the dominating companies of the next millennia is a very attractive prospect
despite DEMO associated uncertainties.
Within the rapidly maturing European markets, lucrative MBOrMBI opportunities DEMO no longer be
available to other than a small number of entrenched venture capital companies Murray, 1995 . ConcentrationŽ.
in the venture capital industry may more usefully be seen in the restriction of attractive deal flow DEMO
to a small and privileged cadre of large venture capital firms rather than a short term decline in the number of
venture capital firms DEMO in the UK. Venture capitalists with uncommitted and available funds and which
are excluded from many of these later-stage opportunities may well revise their DEMO about investing
in young entrepreneurial businesses. The atomistic structure and information imperfections in the capital
markets for start-up and young companies are such as DEMO reduce the ability of a few providers of capital to
dominate this market in a manner similar to the market for MBOsrMBIs. In addition, Europe has seen a record
growth in the value of new funds DEMO by venture capital firms. The aggregate level of funds raised by
independent, European venture capital firms has increased nearly five-fold from 1995 ECU4.4 billion to 1997Ž.
Ž. ŽECU20 billion . By 1997, a cumulative ECU82.6 billion has been raised in Europe European Venture Capital
Association, 1998 . This creates considerable supply-side pressures on the recipient venture capital firms to.
invest DEMO on a regular base. This need may additionally have helped trigger a reappraisal of classic venture
capital activity.
However, the increase seen in the number of technology investments in the UK is not mirrored in a
DEMO increase in the proportionate value of financings at the earliest stages of investment categories.
Early-stage financings have virtually remained constant at around 5% of DEMO investment in the UK since 1993.
The same is broadly true of Europe. This suggests that the broad definitions of technology investments used in
DEMO annual BVCArEVCA statistics are rather less related to new and more speculative technologies and new
businesses than would at first be assumed.
5 Netscape DEMO an Initial Public Offering on NASDAQ in 14 months from incorporation. However, its subsequent share price has
suffered because of analysts’ views of the serious threat of Microsoft to its core products.
954
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()DEMO
2. Factors in the demise of early-stage technology investments
2.1. Venture capital fund performance
The comparative evaluation of the performance of venture capital firms DEMO the agents managing term funds
into which institutional investors have allocated finance is fraught with difficulties. Given the relative youth of
the European industry DEMO did not reach a critical mass of investments until approximately the mid 1980s, the
ability to evaluate the common form of 10 year closed funds has not been available until the last couple of
years. Technical DEMO of interim capital gains, annual yields, provisions and write-offs and, DEMO, tax
treatments have made the constructing of an evaluation process both DEMO theoretical and political mine-field.
However, the adoption by the BVCA and DEMO EVCA of agreed industry valuation guidelines for unquoted
portfolio companies, has DEMO assisted in the production of credible performance figures. It is likely that
the rigour of these figures will increase over time. Table 2Ž.
What DEMO fund performance figures have indicated unequivocally is that the historic returns to early-stage
investments have been dramatically poorer than those allocated to later-stage, and less risky, alternatives—par-
ticularly MBOrMBI deals. Whatever, the attraction of technology DEMO to US venture capitalists recordŽ
average returns to US venture capitalists of 41% pa were achieved in 1996, see Red Herring December 1997,
citing Venture Economics , their economically rational European equivalent has been correct DEMO eschew such.
investments. And this is exactly how European venture capitalists have behaved until very recently.
2.2. The two tyrannies
small size.
project risk, and for the majority of small specialist, early-stage, venture capital funds, ii the dis-economies ofŽ.
Ž.
The challenge and difficulties of investing in DEMO may be described with reference to ‘two tyrannies’— i
2.2.1. Tyranny I: project risk
Professional investors are at their most vulnerable to ‘adverse selection’ problems at the earliest stage of
investment in the life cycle of DEMO new enterprise Amit et al., 1990 . In extremis, an early-stage, technologyŽ.
investment will require the venture capitalist to come to a formal view on the economic attraction of:
a technology that has not DEMO been proven; which is to be incorporated into novel products andror DEMO
which still remain solely in the mind of the entrepreneur; and DEMO be eventually offered to markets and
customers whose existence presently remains purely hypothetical. On top of these uncertainties, the new
enterprise may not uncommonly be managed by a technological entrepreneur or a founding team whose
experience DEMO commercial practices and disciplines is negligible, as are their personal assets DEMO which the
venture may be financed or the investment guaranteed . . .
Table 2
Mature European private equity funds pooled IRR% by stage DEMO investment: cumulative net IRRs from inception to 31st December 1996
Fund DEMO Sample size no. of funds Pooled IRR% Median IRR%Ž.
Early-stage 27 5.7 4.5
Development 60 7.3 5.4
MBOsrMBIs 67 17.6 15.5
Generalist 48 19.4 DEMO
Source: European Venture Capital Association 1998 .Ž.
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r Research Policy 27 1998 947–976() 955
It is for these reasons that the venture capitalist has little choice DEMO than to be highly ‘hands on’ or
interventionist in hisrher relationship with the management of the investee firm. As the emergent technology
metamorphoses into DEMO attractive new products and services, the venture capitalist will commonly
attempt DEMO build a functionally balanced team of experienced professional managers to augment the creativity
and innovation of the founder team. This transition can be a DEMO of considerable economic and organisational
challenge for both the founding and new managers.
The first tyranny: project risk
Ø Exceptional technical entrepreneurs are rarely competent business persons—they are frequently commer-
cially naive boffins
Ø Project assessment DEMO due diligence is highly problematic in areas concerning ‘leading edge’ technologies
Ø Uncertainty is compounded by the need to analyse both technological feasibility and DEMO existence of a
sufficiently large and attractive market often for a product which does not yet existŽ.
Ø The speed of the ‘technology trajectory’ DEMO requires an extremely rapid rate of commercial exploitation
before the advent of competitor products andror technological redundancy
Ø Successful NTBFs need to grow, internationalise and develop second generation products in a very short
time horizon. These DEMO places exceptional managerial, financial and technical demands on a new
business
DEMO The limited availability of appropriate capital markets increases the uncertainty of the future financing of the
investee firm and the profitable ‘exit’ of the DEMO capital investor
2.2.2. Tyranny II: scale-related costs of the Õenture capital DEMO
Given the complexities of the technologies, it is critical that the DEMO investor is highly informed on
both technical and commercially related issues. Thus, a number of venture capitalists manage risk by becoming
specialist in one or a small number of technology areas rather than by diversification across DEMO
technologies. The information and networking advantages of specialisation are generally seen to be greater than
the forgone benefits of diversification for example, there are several exclusively ‘life sciences’ funds inŽ
existence ..
While governance costs in DEMO to enterprise revenues are extremely high at the early stages of an NTBF’s
genesis and growth, there is little opportunity for the investor to commit large sums of finance to the investee
companies. Yet, a ) 50% annualised IRR to the project is only satisfactory if commensurately large DEMO of
money can be invested. Attractive returns are only likely to be possible after productrservice prototypes have
been proven and a major marketing and DEMO or licensing drive launched. This may be some several yearsŽ.
after initial R & D activity. Given the time cost of money, extended research and development cycles demand a
commensurately high project return. These first marketing DEMO may well be international in scope OviattŽ
The second tyranny: dis-economies DEMO small fund size
Ø The high costs of information in complex and imperfect markets
Ø The high levels of management support and guidance required DEMO early-stage investees
Ø The limited ability to attenuate project risks by diversifying the VC fund
Ø The limited ability to invest large sums early DEMO the life cycle of the investee firm
Ø The skewed riskrreturn profile resulting in the need for a big success by the VC
Ø DEMO long NTBF cycle and its implications on fund structurerconductrperformance
Ø The demand for ‘quantum leaps’ in follow-on financing in a successful NTBF and the DEMO danger of
excessive dilution of ownership for the financially constrained original investors and the entrepreneurŽ.
Ø Historically, the wholesale unattractiveness to institutional investors of early-stage, technology specialist,
venture capital funds—other than in the US
and McDougall, 1994; Burgel and Murray, 1998 thereby adding a further source of uncertainty..
956
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
2.3. NTBFs as a ‘special case’
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()
and Tether, 1996 . This DEMO not to argue that a firm, merely because it may be DEMO as being an NTBF,.
should automatically be financed. Venture capital firms are uniform in their assertion that the majority of
businesses they see DEMO not viable investment opportunities given the exceptional fund returns demanded by
their institutional investors. But these high returns are a consequence of the risks DEMO uncertainties incurred by
the venture capital firm which will expect to see the majority of its portfolio under-perform against the original
performance targets sold DEMO the institutional investors in its fund. Therefore, individual firm applicants for
DEMO capital finance incur a pricing penalty for reasons intrinsic to this investment activity and outside their
individual control.
As noted, several European institutions have cited the limited provision of finance as a major potential
impediment to DEMO adequate supply of NTBFs within the European Union. From the perspective of the NTBFs,
the substance does not yet appear to reflect fully DEMO apparently increased level of contemporary government
interest and concern. While the majority of European Union member states have a range of financial instruments
to DEMO SMEs, Storey and Tether only found eight countries with direct financing DEMO schemes which
included NTBFs. This number of countries dropped to four Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden and the UK ifŽ.
only explicit and exclusively DEMO NTBF schemes were considered. Implicit in their observations is the fact
that fast growth NTBFs are different from other types of SME. Effective policy DEMO need to reflect and
address the peculiar strengths and, particularly, the weaknesses of NTBFs in Europe. This present paper will
only allude to DEMO support instruments given their relevance to venture capital fund performance.
ments
3. Policy instruments to alleviate economic constraints on investment—three generic indirect instru()
-
Policies to incentivise the supply of venture capital from established capital DEMO primarily viaŽ
institutional investors , and which specifically focus on the venture capital firm, commonly rely on three.
‘indirect’ instruments Fig. 3 .Ž.
3.1. Down-side protection 6
Early-stage investments in NTBFs carry a range of firm DEMO industry specific risks. Thus, it is not uncommon
for a very DEMO proportion of the investee firms in a portfolio to result in full or partial loss of the venture
capitalist’s investment. This adverse outcome skews DEMO riskrreward distribution strongly towards poor fund
returns. Recognising this peculiar reality, DEMO number of governments have either instituted publicly supported,
insurance schemes SOFARIS in France or measures for the state to share in the cost DEMO investment and, thus,Ž.
of potential failure the terminated PPM scheme DEMO the Netherlands, and the current BTU scheme in Germany .Ž .
DEMO protection is extremely important for smaller funds in particular. Being already constrained by
limited finances, the write-off of a significant proportion of total investment can reduce the level of residual
operating funds to below a viable DEMO However, the very nature of early-stage investment requires that
6 In DEMO to the described schemes, there is also a 50% guarantee scheme, the Udviklingsselskaber, in Denmark.
While it has taken some time for the technical argument that market imperfections in the allocation of capital
to NTBFs DEMO exist and are material particularly information asymmetries and existence of socially valuableŽ
externalities , there appears now to be a more widespread and sympathetic DEMO of this position Storey. Ž
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()
DEMO
Fig. 3. Typology of government support measures for NTBFs.
significant risks are taken and a high level of uncertainty is accepted. A fund that DEMO not losing a proportion of
investments is probably acting in too conservative a manner in emerging technology markets.
It is common for these guarantee DEMO to assume a substantial proportion of the costs of project failure.
SOFARIS provides a 50% cover as did the PPM scheme which ended in DEMO . The BTU scheme assumes aŽ.
maximum cover of 75% of total project investment cost although calculated in different ways for the twoŽ
variants DEMO the scheme . Both the BTU and the PPM schemes extended this guarantee for 5 years from the time.
of the first venture capital DEMO in a portfolio company. After 5 years, cover under the PPM DEMO
declined by 10% a year to disappear at year 10. The critically vulnerable first year of the investment was also
removed from the cover DEMO the post 1988 variant of the Dutch scheme. All schemes instituted a ceiling level of
cover per portfolio firm.
3.2. Upside leÕerage
Underwriting project DEMO puts a floor or safety net under the fund. However, this DEMO can produce the
unfortunate consequence of reducing the venture capitalists’ incentive to ensure that they make good invest-
ments because ‘adverse selection’ mistakes become DEMO less costly. Upside leverage instruments,
conversely, do not protect the DEMO capital firm against the costs of project failure but multiply the financial
benefits of success to the disproportionate advantage of the venture capital firms DEMO their private equity
investors limited partners . Given that a relatively small number of investments will typically provide theŽ.
majority of capital gain for DEMO fund, this leverage again can be critically important for the smaller DEMO
Leverage schemes usually allow each dollar of a venture capitalist’s fund to be matched with one or more
dollars of the government’s money. The DEMO scheme co-financing variant will match the venture capitalistŽ. in
each inÕestment on a parity, i.e., 1:1, ratio to a ceiling of DM3 million federal investment. In the SBIC Scheme,
the leverage is 2:DEMO for most licensed US venture capitalists outside special development areas, up DEMO a ceiling of
a government contribution of US$90 million per fund. Thus, a US$45 million fund of private investors can
attract the maximum leverage of US$90 million publicly guaranteed monies to become a US$135 million US
DEMO In 1997, the Australian government formally adopted a local equivalent of DEMO revised SBIC Scheme by
958
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()DEMO
creating the Innovation Investment Fund with A$130 million available for leveraged investment on a 2:1
State:Private ratio.
In addition, these schemes materially assist the fund in being able to provide portfolio companies with
successive DEMO of finance. This dearth of follow-on finance is a major problem for a small venture fund
supporting an exciting, and invariably cash demanding, DEMO company Murray, 1994 . Given that theŽ.
government finances are in DEMO loans, the venture capitalists pay an annual interest charge. However, this
source of capital is less costly than that provided by private equity DEMO in the event that the fund is
profitable. 7 The State may insist on a share of the capital gain of the fund. While DEMO the cost of the
State’s participation, the benefits of leverage outweigh DEMO incremental costs—provided that attractive invest-
ments are made and realised by the fund. Thus, the loan allows the fund to ‘gear up or leverage’ both the scale
and the returns from the investment to the benefit DEMO the private equity investors. Zero Stage Capital, a Boston
based, early-stage venture capital firm, and one of the first managing partners to be awarded a licence by the
Small Business Administration under the new leverage DEMO, has estimated that the benefit of this instrument
can translate into DEMO one third improvement on the terminal IRR of an average performing fund.
3.3. Support for the fund’s operating costs
Specialist early-stage, technology funds have historically been characterised by their small size. The great
majority of these DEMO in Europe had been capitalised at under ECU20 million. Several EU sponsored seed
funds had resources of as little as ECU2 million Murray, 1998 . As such, they are able to exploit few of theŽ.
scale and scope economies available to larger development capital funds of US$200 million DEMO However,
industry norms for the level of fee income available to the managing partners i.e., the venture capital firm areŽ.
based on the precedents set by these larger and more influential funds. In addition, in most venture capital
communities, the managing partners have seen significant downwards pressure on the percentage of fee incomes
negotiable and an increase in the DEMO of the conditions under which these fees are provided. These
pressures are in no small part a consequence of early abuses of inexperienced institutional DEMO by
aggressive venture capital firms. 8
The ‘going rate’ management fee for development or merchant capital funds is around 2–2 1r2% of the total
DEMO of the funds raised. Several institutions have negotiated ‘tapering’ fee incomes over the life of the fund
Ž.the described model also employs a taper DEMO the sixth year . The appropriate figure for specialist, early-stage
technology DEMO in order to cover the operating costs of the venture capital management activity is probably
about 4–5% of finance raised Hook, 1992 depending on the scale of the funds managed see below . ThisŽ. Ž .
DEMO figure has appeared totally unacceptable to the vast majority of institutional investors or their advisers. Of
particular distaste to potential investors is that fees DEMO this order could result in a very substantial proportion of
the total of a small fund being ‘swallowed up’ in payments to management rather DEMO being allocated to the
targeted portfolio firms.
attempt to address this issue of the relatively high cost of managerial governance in small funds. Half DEMO theŽ.
eligible operating costs of the 23 early-stage funds in the programme were paid for by the European
Commission through the provision of a DEMO bearing, term loan to the fund. This subsidy on operating
costs DEMO paid for start-up costs and the first 5 year’s running costs of the fund. The loan to cover a part of the
costs was DEMO repayable if the fund subsequently made a profit on its investments over the 10 years of the
fund’s life.
The European Seed Capital Fund DEMO programme of the European Union 1988–1995 was a pan-EuropeanŽ.
7 In practice, the number of sources of equity co-investment available for early-stage enterprises can be severely constrained.
8 These circumstances led one industry commentator memorably to DEMO that the UK venture capital industry had ‘mugged’
institutional investors Initiative Europe, 1994 .Ž.
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r Research Policy 27 1998 947–976() 959
The initial review of the European Seed Capital Fund Scheme carried out DEMO the author in 1991 for the
European Commission placed considerable emphasis on the economic vulnerability of small, grant-dependent
funds Murray, 1998 . The DEMO size of the 21 funds surveyed was ECU1.7 million range ECU0.5–7Ž. Ž
million . The observation was made that both regional and commercial funds DEMO run out of finances within.
their 10 year horizons even before making any investment in portfolio companies. Fundamentally, the
administrative costs of the funds was strongly out of kilter with the total level of finances available.
DEMO further study Murray, 1994 of technology specialist, start-up and early-stage venture capital funds in theŽ.
UK in 1992 i.e., funds which did not undertake MBOŽ rMBI, replacement equity or rescue finance indicated.
that the UK population of independent management companies controlling closed end funds was only nine
DEMO 9 If the four largest funds which ranged from £5–21 million are removed, the average size of the
five remaining funds is £1.41 million range £0.5–1.6 million . A review of the BVCA Directory 1996Ž. r7
DEMO Removing one very large international fund of £285 million, gave eight DEMO with an average size of
£8.2 million range £1–19 million . While the average size of these technology specialist funds has grownŽ.
nearly six-fold DEMO 4 years, there remains a continuing question of fund viability give DEMO absolute small size of
the funds.
4. The model
4.1. Research objectiÕes and organisation
In order to explore in more detail the determinants which DEMO the scale and viability of an early-stage,
specialist technology fund, DEMO was decided to construct a spreadsheet model in Microsoft Excel which could
closely mirror the financial characteristics of a ‘typical fund’ and the likely DEMO of economic outcomes of the
investment activity. It was hoped to produce a model in which the major parameters of costs and revenues could
DEMO isolated, defined and manipulated to ascertain their subsequent impact on fund DEMO The model
architecture was designed to allow both practitioners and other academics to augment or customise the data to
their own needs. Given the DEMO investment behaviour of an early-stage technology fund, it was decided
to DEMO a Decision Tree Analysis given the difficulties of simple discounted cash flow valuation models Lerner,Ž
Additionally, it was also hoped to use the model to explore the impact of the two major types of state DEMO
for early-stage funds, i.e., guarantee and leverage assistance on a ‘typical’ fund. Accordingly, two state
supported variants of the model were also constructed.
4.1.1. Sources of fund information
The original determination of the cost and DEMO items was modelled on the experience of the Australian
Technology Group. This specialist venture capital fund was set up with £15 A$30 million of DEMO federalŽ.
government support in 1995. Despite government financial involvement as the sole investor, ATG was
conceived as, and was expected to develop into, a fully commercial investment activity. The authors were given
full access to DEMO costs and portfolio firm investment details to assist in defining the original model. However,
9 These figures only related to specialist, early-stage venture capital firms registered as full members of the BVCA. In reality, there exist
a number of other such investors which are not members of DEMO BVCA. However, these activities which are often publicly supported
initiatives are DEMO smaller, in terms of funds under management, than full BVCA members.
Ž.British Venture Capital Association, 1996 some 4 years later again only identified nine specialist early-stage
1994 ..
960
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()DEMO
Table 3
‘Suggested’ distribution of investment outcomes by stage of investment
Alternative Stage 1 first roundŽ. Ž . Ž .ryear 0 Stage 2 after DEMO years Stage 3 after 4 years
outcomes Capital multiple Probability % Capital multiple Probability % Capital multiple Probability %Ž. Ž. Ž. Ž. Ž. Ž.
DEMO poor 0.2 10 0.2 10 0.5 10
Poor 0.5 40 0.75 40 1.5 40
Good 1.5 40 2.0 40 3.0 40
Excellent 2.5 10 DEMO 10 4.0 10
characteristics of the fund which were peculiar and exclusive to ATG or to the Australian environment were
excluded in order to DEMO the generic character of the model. Costs structures were subsequently referenced to
a second independent, fixed term, early-stage Australian fund which was set DEMO in 1996 without state support
and operated with a more parsimonious cost structure.
Both of the Australian funds were too early in their investment DEMO realisation cycles to be able to provide
useful statistics on portfolio firms’ successes and failures. In consequence, a senior investment executive from
each of four established i.e., more than one investmentŽ.rrealisation fund cycle concluded UK specialist
early-stage, technology funds was contacted. These four funds invested across a range of technologies included
biotechnology. They were asked for their views as to DEMO distribution of investment outcomes which could
typically be expected from early-stage technology deals. They were also invited to agree with or make
amendments to DEMO table of probabilities of capital gainsrlosses over three rounds of finance see Table 3 . TheŽ.
purpose of this request was not to get DEMO exact match with the respondents’ funds and information of this detail
was not sought. Rather, the views of these correspondents on the credibility of such early-stage portfolio
outcomes and probabilities was requested. Overall, there was surprisingly strong agreement as to the reasonable-
ness of the posited assumptions. Observations DEMO restricted to minor variations in estimates of probabilities or
capital multiples. All respondents confirmed the plausibility of the three stage, 6 year project investment cycle
for a 10 year closed fund see below .Ž.
The respondent DEMO were also asked to confirm the credibility of four structural characteristics of a
‘typical’ early-stage fund Table 4 .Ž.
Of the four questions, again strong agreement was provided on the assumptions made with one exception.
Accordingly, it was decided to increase to 10% the maximum percentage of the DEMO allocated to any one
investment in the model.
Table 4
Confirmation of the structural characteristics of a typical early-stage fund
Assumption Authors’ Credible? Respondents’ estimate
estimate Y or N of ‘typical’ tech.
Early stage fund?
DEMO of ongoing investments 5 Y na
per VC executive
Maximum percentage of fund 5% N 10%
into one investmen
Maximum investment per investee £2M DEMO na
company over three stages
Typical percentage allocation of three staged 20r40r40 Y na
payments per investee firm
5. Structure of the model
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()
961
5.1. The model’s specification and assumptions
Based on an examination of the academic and practitioner literature of venture capital DEMO subsequent
investigation of the actual performance and operation of several specialist, DEMO term independent funds, a
model specification was derived. 10
5.1.1. Fund DEMO
The fund is structured as a 10 year, fixed life fund DEMO the investment capital contributed progressively over
the first 8 years.
Capital from poor investments defined as a zero or negative Net Present Value NPV DEMO the 2 yearŽŽ.
investment outcome is discounted back to year zero using a nominal cost of capital and employing the
appropriate beta rating is DEMO as the investments are liquidated. The capital still invested at the end of. 11
the 10 year horizon is returned at that date by DEMO salerfloatation of the remaining investments. Thus, it is
assumed that all DEMO are liquidated by the end of the 10 year period. In practice, this is a rather strong,
and heroic, assumption.
5.1.2. InÕestment DEMO exit timing
In order to model the sequential investment behaviour of the fund, the total capital is divided into five
‘mini-funds’, each running DEMO 6 years and sequentially offset by 1 year. That is, the DEMO mini-fund runs from
year 0 to year 6, the second from DEMO 1 to year 7, etc. The fifth and final mini-fund runs DEMO year 5 to 10
inclusive. This timing reflects the staged investment activity of a typical fund including the time constraints on
investment executives in DEMO and effecting new investments in the earlier stages of a fund. As a fund
comes towards its concluding year, the activities of the investment executives are increasingly directed to
ensuring that portfolio companies successfully exit the DEMO
Each mini-fund consists of three investment rounds, spaced at 2 yearly DEMO The first round takes place
in the start or zero year for the mini-fund, the second round occurs at the end of the second year of the
mini-fund, and the third round occurs at the end of the fourth year of the mini-fund. The amounts drawn down
in DEMO round is user defined in the model. This investment arrangement allows for a total of 15 3 rounds ofŽ
finance =
5 mini-funds capital DEMO downs during the life of the fund, the timings of which DEMO assumed to be.
known at the outset but could be varied by the model user.
5.1.3. InÕestment outcomes and probabilities
The mini-fund is taken DEMO be the unit of investment activity, and the combination of all DEMO ‘mini-funds’
constitutes a portfolio of investments i.e., the total fund . DEMO model the probabilities and capital gain outcomesŽ.
relating to successful and unsuccessful investments, a table of ‘probability vs. capital multiple’ was established
for each round within a mini-fund. Thus, three separate tables each corresponding to successive investment
rounds within the mini-fund were created. For each table there are DEMO possible outcomes, or states, over the 2
10 The term ‘independent’ is used to denote a fund structure whereby professional managers, acting as agents, seek the commitment of
institutional investors as limited partners in a fund. The subscribed fund operates for a fixed period, normally 10 years, over which time
investments are made and then realised. The limited partners are returned any capital gains net of the costs of the fund DEMO and less
any distribution of capital gain awarded to the manager the ‘carried interest’ .Ž.
11 In practice, the model did not return any residual from ‘failed’ investments until the end of the 10 year fund DEMO However, residual
monies so held were not available for further investment DEMO earned a market cost of capital, i.e., the opportunity cost to the investors, while
still held in the fund.
962 G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()DEMO
year period immediately following the draw down of the round of finance. Each outcome has an associated
probability of occurrence the total of which DEMO 1.0 , and a ‘capital multiplier’ which was defined as:Ž.
Ž.Ž .Value of investment at t q 2 yrs less Value of investment DEMO ‘draw down’, i.e. t q 0 yrs
s Ž.Value of investment DEMO t q 0 yrs
Those occasions where the principal sum or less is returned from the discounted investment cash flows, are
designated as ‘failures’. Any residual capital left after the expiry of the 2 year investment DEMO is returned to
the limited partners with interest, at the end DEMO the 10 year period. These residual sums are not available for
further investment and are subtracted from the total funds available. In the case DEMO the 50% and the 100%
guarantee variants of the model, a DEMO or the whole of the losses incurred in failed investments are returned to
the limited partners, with interest, at the end of the DEMO year period.
The alternative outcomes where the discounted investment returns exceed the original capital are designated
as ‘successes’. The total capital generated or ‘pay DEMO principal q gain is then applied to the next round of
investment activity. This process is repeated until the three rounds of finance for DEMO mini-fund are concluded
over the 6 year investment period.
For example, DEMO £1 million is invested in an investment round, and the appropriate DEMO is as below, then the
four possible payoffs will be:
DEMO with 40% probability
£1M with 30% probability
£2M with 20% probability
£4M with 10% probability
The probability of ‘failure’ is 70% 40%Ž.q 30% and DEMO result in an expected return of capital to investors
of £300,000 £0Ž. Ž .= 0.4 q £1M = 0.3 . The probability of DEMO is 30% 20% q 10% which will place an
expected value on the investment of £800,000 £2MŽ.= 0.2 q £4M = 0.1 . DEMO expected outcome is discounted
Ž.including the beta value back to the time of the investment in order to produce an NPV. Only aggregated
outcomes DEMO a positive NPV continue to the next decision point up until the third and final round of finance.
The model conducts an analysis on DEMO basis of the ‘expected’ outcome. This is the average of the 64 possible
outcomes with the weighting applied to each outcome being the probability DEMO this outcome occurring.
The probabilityrpay out table for each round of finance is allowed to be different. It is assumed that, as the
investors become increasingly familiar with the prospects of their portfolio companies, the risk of investment
failure decreases progressively in Rounds 2 and 3. This is DEMO in the deployment of declining investment
betas for each successive round i.e., 2.0, 1.6, and 1.4 when calculating the cost of capital to the investors.Ž.
Ž.Table 5
Table 5
‘Agreed’ distribution of investment outcomes by DEMO of investment
Alternative Stage 1 first roundŽ. Ž . Ž .ryear 0 Stage 2 after 2 years Stage 3 after 4 years
outcomes Capital DEMO Probability % Capital multiple Probability % Capital multiple Probability %Ž. Ž. Ž. Ž. Ž. Ž.
Very poor 0.0 10 0.2 10 0.5 10
Poor DEMO 40 0.75 40 1.0 40
Good 2.0 40 2.0 40 2.0 40
Excellent 4.0 10 3.0 10 3.0 10
Ž.
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r Research Policy 27 1998 947–976() 963
5.1.4. Management fees leÕied on the fund
The fee structure consists of DEMO parts. For the first 5 years of the fund, the fee DEMO a fixed annual percentage
of the total capital committed to the fund. The management fee charges incurred by the fund are irrespective of
whether DEMO not finance is actually drawn down from the fund and invested in portfolio companies. For the
remaining life of the fund from year 6, the management fee levied is a fixed annual percentage of the total
DEMO committed less any capital nominated for return from the fund to the investors. Thus, the managers
receive a tapering fee income from year 6 as the fund becomes fully invested and investee companies
increasingly exit from DEMO portfolio.
The fees for the whole investment period must be paid from the initial capital raised by the fund. Therefore,
the actual or DEMO amount of capital available for investment is reduced by the cumulative fee costs.
5.1.5. ‘Carried interest’ receiÕed by the managing partners
In common with DEMO operating practice in independent funds, the managing partners are acting as DEMO
on behalf of the limited or private partners institutional investors . Management is incentivised to perform in aŽ.
manner consistent with the interests of DEMO fund’s investors. Accordingly, the management fee is designed to
cover the DEMO operating costs of the management team but not to reward them for making investments per
se. It is the incentive structure which is designed DEMO reward management for making good investments. Thus,
managers are allowed to retain 20% of the capital gain of the total fund after the DEMO partners’ fee levies
have been repaid and the performance of the fund has exceeded a ‘hurdle’ of the cost of capital to the fund. DEMO
hurdle represents the ‘opportunity cost’ of access to their capital forgone by the investors or a time value of their
money invested.
5.1.6. Fund DEMO criteria: IRR and NPV
The model computes an annualised IRR% for DEMO the mini-fund and for the total fund based on capital
invested and returned net of fees. However, IRRs can be misleading. Particularly in circumstances where both
negative and positive cashflows are recorded over successive periods, multiple IRRs can be generated.
Therefore, the model also computes the NPV for each of the mini-funds and for the combined portfolio. NPV
represents the DEMO wealth created for the investors, over the life of the fund.
DEMO addition to computing the limited partners’ IRR and NPV for the mini-funds and then the aggregated fund,
the model also recognised the disparate DEMO interests of the venture capitalist managing partner acting as
agent on behalf of the institutional investors or limited partners. Thus the Managers’ IRR is DEMO calculated.
These returns are based on the fee income generated and the managers’ opportunity for a minority participation
in the ‘carried interest’ or net DEMO gain of the fund.
Irrespective of the merits of NPV calculations, DEMO venture capital industry almost exclusively measures fund
performance in terms of net IRRs, i.e., total cash invested and total cash received after all DEMO Accordingly,
both measurements are employed in presenting the results of the model see Section H .Ž.
The section on investment, outlined above, DEMO the basis for estimating the cashflows expected in the
‘mini-funds’ and total fund. The determination of an appropriate discount rate is accomplished with reference DEMO
the weighted average cost of capital WACC and Capital Asset Pricing Model CAPM .Ž. Ž .
The CAPM is commonly used to estimate a DEMO of equity from the following formula:
r s r q Ž.
r y r
= beta
ef m f
where: r —cost of equity; r —risk free interest rate; r —rate of return on DEMO market for all assets; beta—a
measure of relative risk.
The model DEMO the input of these variables in order to compute the cost of equity. Given the cost of debt,
and the ratio of debt DEMO equity in the funding of the capital for the total fund, DEMO weighted average cost of
capital can be computed and applied to the expected cashflows. Only a pre-tax analysis is included in the model.
Similarly, it is assumed for the purposes of the present model that the DEMO invested are exclusively via equity
ef m
964
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()DEMO
Base case model input Excel Worksheet 1Ž.
Base fees % fund 2.5Ž.
Capital hurdle rate % pa 15.00Ž.
Capital return Rate % pa 10.00Ž.
DEMO share of capital Gain % 20.00Ž.
Debt rate % pa 10.00Ž.
Risk free rate % pa 8.00Ž.
Market premium % pa 7.00Ž.
Portfolio capital DEMO £000s 20,000Ž.
Average deal size % capital 10.00Ž.
Table 6
instruments. Thus, gearing applied by either the venture capitalist or the portfolio companies is not included in
the model. This is considered a valid simplification. DEMO use of debt for gearing purposes is likely to be highly
inappropriate in young and research-intensive enterprises which commonly experience extended periods when
the DEMO flows are exclusively negative.
6. The ‘base case’ model—structure of the Excel Spreadsheet
The model is organised in the spreadsheet around eight linked worksheets.
DEMO
and NPV values for the mini-funds and overall portfolio.
Ž.
three potential stages of financing.
Ž.
to continue or terminate the mini-fund.
Ž.
model DEMO their probability of occurrence.
Ž.
Table 7
Establishment costs:
Start-up £000s 75Ž.
Overhead costs:
Minimum staff 2
Minimum salary bill £000s 115Ž.
DEMO rent and utilities £000s 25Ž.
Informationrresearch £000s 25Ž.
Computer system £000s 5Ž.
PR £000s 12.5Ž.
Per deal costs:
Staff per deal 0.25
Salary DEMO extra staff £000s 60Ž.
Pre investment costs £000s 10Ž.
Per person costs:
Travel £000s 2.5Ž.
Rent, furniture and utilities £000s 15Ž.
1 General worksheet: allows the setting of general inputs to the model and presents key outcomes of IRR
2 Probability worksheet: allows key inputs in terms of probabilities and capital multiples for each of the
3 Decision tree DEMO: calculates the ‘expected value’ of the mini-funds and the decision as DEMO whether
4 Graph worksheet: presents a graphic representation of the distribution DEMO the 64 possible outcomes to the
5 Deal worksheet: shows the DEMO value of a deal. The net cashflow to investors is also computed.
Management fund costs Excel Worksheet 8Ž.
Capital raising costs % of fund DEMO
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()
DEMO 8
Number of mini-funds 5
Deals per mini-fund 2
Total number of deals 10
Gross deal size £000s 2000Ž.
Management fees per deal £000s DEMO
Net deal size £000s 1700Ž.
Deal IRR % pa 21.32Ž.
Deal NPV £000s 163Ž.
Net mini-fund size £000s 3400Ž.
Mini-fund IRR % pa 21.32Ž.
DEMO NPV £000s 326Ž.
Gross portfolio size £000s 20,000Ž.
Net portfolio size £000s 17,000Ž.
Portfolio IRR % pa 21.32Ž.
Portfolio NPV £000s 1406Ž.
DEMO IRR % pa 29.38Ž.
965
Model outcomes Excel Worksheet 1Ž.
Gross mini-fund Size £000s 4000Ž.
Management fees per mini-fund £000s 600Ž.
Management fees for DEMO £000s 3000Ž.
Ž.
deals in a mini-fund. The number of deals per mini-fund is set by the user in the general worksheet.
Ž.
8 DEMO worksheet: determines the costs of the management function and their dependency DEMO the fund,
the number of deals and the number of investment executives. Data in this worksheet allow the Managers’ IRR
to be computed.
DEMO 6 and 7 illustrate the inputs to the base-case model including both capital and cost structures. Table 8
illustrates the output from the model DEMO in portfolio NPVs and IRRs.
6 Mini-fund worksheet: takes the deal DEMO and multiplies the results by the number of individual
7 Portfolio worksheet: accumulates the mini-fund worksheet and lags each mini-fund by 1 year. The fees
payable to the management are calculated in this worksheet.
Ž.
7. DEMO on the base case model—impact of state support schemes
In order to look at the implications of state support for early-stage funds, the following two variants of the
models were created.
7.1. Generic support scheme 1— DEMO ‘ guarantee and underwriting’ of indiÕidual project failure
Ø The venture capital firm receives in part or full 50% or 100% specified in the DEMO the original equityŽ.
participation in the project on termination of an unsuccessful project within the five mini-funds. The guarantee
is eventually returned to the DEMO partners and is not reinvested by the fund managers.
Ø The venture capital firm pays an up-front charge for the guarantee which is calculated DEMO a percentage of
the total finance raised by the fund. This percentage is modelled as a variable. The guarantee cost is taken offŽ
the DEMO sum available for investment..
Ø On realisation of successful portfolio investments, DEMO guarantor receives a proportion of the value-added
generated. Unlike the contribution of ‘carried interest’ going to the managers, the value-added in which the
guarantor participates contains no ‘hurdle’ prior to distribution. This share of capital gain DEMO no longer available
to the investors. The proportion is modelled as a variable and can be set at zero percent.Ž.
966 G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()DEMO
7.2. Generic support scheme 2— state ‘leÕerage’ of the priÕate equity of the fund
Ø Matching equity is provided by the State and is DEMO down at the time of an investment.
Ø The ratio of State to private equity is a variable. The default is: 1:1. n.b. A ratio of 2:1 is used in theŽ
results discussed in DEMO H.
Ø State equity receives a preferred, annual coupon approximating to DEMO 10 year bank rate—say 8.00%. This
annual charge is paid by the fund. The model allows this annual charge to be set as a DEMO percentage
including a value of zero.
Ø The venture capital firm can charge an annual management fee on the State’s equity at the time DEMO
drawdown. This is set as a variable with the normal venture capital firm’s management fee as the default but
with the option to have DEMO zero management fee levied on State finance.
Ø The State participates in any value-added as a percentage of total capital gain to the fund. DEMO is set as a
variable with default at 20% but with the option for a zero allocation.
Ø In the event of project failure, all investors share pro-rata, based on their contribution of total equity, DEMO the
net loss.
()
The objective in constructing the model was to seek to understand, on the cost and investment return
assumptions stated, a number of the key dynamics of early-stage venture capital funds. Of particular interest
were the following relationships:
Ž.
Ž.
Ž.
The investment DEMO must necessarily be seen from two perspectives, i.e., the investment returns
reaped by the institutional investors limited partners in the fund or the DEMO capital firm managing partnersŽ. Ž
performance metrics, respectively. It should be DEMO that the burden of scale diseconomies fall most directly on
the management agents in that they cannot levy additional charges on their institutional investors DEMO meet a cost
over-run. However, in practice, a very poor return to the managers is likely to impact directly on the
institutional investors. DEMO would seek to reduce and claw back some of the losses incurred andror reduce
their commitment to the fund investors and portfolio companies under DEMO A desirable investment
performance target for an early stage technology fund is pragmatically rather than theoretically set at an IRR of
circa 25% p.a.
DEMO was hoped to use any enhanced understanding of this particularly challenging stage of investment activity
to inform the activities of both industry practitioners and DEMO collaborators. The specific and additional needs
of these two interest groups can be built into further refinements of the model. n.b. In the following DEMO theŽ
base case figures are applied to a fund of £20 million and with a management fee of 2.5% unless either of these
two DEMO are the subject of the simulation. See Table 6 for a full specification of the base case ..
8.1. The effect of fund size
DEMO Management’s IRRs only start to become positive at a fund size of just under £10 million, and the rate
of growth of the Management’s IRR starts to decline rapidly beyond £20 million. The Management’s IRR
elasticity DEMO 0.36% per million of additional funding. The base case suggests that a fund is not likely to be
economically attractive to either institutional investors DEMO partners or the managing partners ventureŽ. Ž
managing partner to receive an IRR of 30%, requires a minimum fund size of £20 million. Fig. 4Ž.
8. Interrogation of the model s
i total fund size to DEMO returnsrperformance;
ii key cost and investment drivers on investment returnsrperformance;
iii impact of support schemes on investment returnsrperformance.
to the fund . DEMO terms—Private Partners’ IRR and Managers’ IRR—are used to differentiate these two.
capital firm on probable cost and revenue assumptions below a scale of £15 DEMO In practice, for the.
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()
DEMO
Fig. 4. Effect of fund size on management’s and private partners’ returns on ‘base case’ model.
The IRR return to the limited partners is DEMO to an increase in the size of the fund. Scale effects are
not captured in IRR calculations if no other variables are changed. However, if the return to the limited partners
is measured by NPV, the scale effects are immediately evident. The NPV increases in direct proportion to DEMO
increase in size of the fund. For example, in the base DEMO model, the NPV to a £10 million fund is computed as
DEMO million. Doubling the fund size to £20 million results in a doubling of the NPV to £2.8 million. There is a
straight line relationship DEMO fund size and the limited partners’ NPV.
8.2. The effect of management fee income
This effect can also be illustrated when the management fee DEMO is changed. An increase of management fee
of half one percent serves to reduce the NPV of the limited partners by £200,000 This DEMO be expressed as a
reduction in the limited partners’ NPV of 6.6% per 1% fee increase to the managing partner. Again, the IRR
calculation does not pick up this effect on the limited partners’ returns.
The DEMO of this transfer of resources to the management partner via an increase in fee income is captured
both in a near doubling of its DEMO between 2.5% and 5% and in an increase in the NPV. A 1% increase in the
management’s fee results in an incremental gain of DEMO,000 to the management. Management, in NPV terms,
are nearly DEMO times more sensitive to a fee rate change than the limited partners. Fig. 5Ž.
This would suggest that limited partners have some discretion regarding DEMO appropriate level of manage-
ment’s fee income on early-stage funds when a documented case is presented regarding the additional costs
incurred. In purely nominal DEMO, the gain to management significantly outweighs the consequent loss to the
DEMO investors of such a change. However, the venture capital agent’s fees DEMO levied to cover the costs of
managing the fund on behalf of the institutional investors. These fees are not paid to provide a source DEMO
additional profit after operational costs are fully met.
8.3. Effect of increasing fund costs Fig. 6()
The raising of the total fund operating costs clearly impacts significantly on the returns to the management.
Management alone DEMO the adverse outcomes of any cost over-runs as the responsibility of limited partners is
968
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()DEMO
Fig. 5. Effect of fee income on fund performance.
limited to the cost of the management fee incurred. The limited partners’ IRR and NPV DEMO insensitive to an
increase in costs for which management are alone responsible. On the existing cost and income structures, the
raising of total costs by 50% rapidly destroys the economics of a £20 million fund to DEMO venture capital agent.
In the event of the fund’s total costs doubling, the Management’s IRR is reduced from a satisfactory 29% to a
catastrophic 0.28% pa. The model again corroborates the critical need of early stage DEMO to ensure that costs
are balanced against revenues and positive cashflow.
8.4. Effect of management’s carried interest Fig. 7()
Again, the negative DEMO of an increase in the amount of carried interest paid as a performance incentive on
the returns of limited partners is much less than DEMO consequent gain to the management. When measured by
IRR, the difference DEMO 14-fold with IRR elasticities to the limited partners and the management of y0.34% and
Fig. 6. Effect of increasing fund costs on performance.
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()
DEMO
Fig. 7. Effect of the management’s ‘carried interest’ on fund performance.
q3.4%, respectively, per percentage change in the carried interest. In NPV terms, every 1% increase in the
carried interest negotiated by management costs the DEMO partners a reduction in NPV of £54,000.
This suggests that, DEMO the fund’s performance is measured in terms of IRRs, ‘the carry’ DEMO a highly cost
effective means of incentivising the management to undertaken profitable investments within the fund, as
measured by the incremental benefits gained and forgone to the two parties. Given that each percentage increase
in the DEMO interest from the industry standard of 20% reduces the limited partners NPV by approximately
2%, such a change may be less attractive.
8.5. Effect of a star inÕestment on fund performance
In this simulation the investment DEMO were altered to produce a more binary outcome of success or
Ž.
failure. Fig. 8
Fig. 8. Effect of the impact of a ‘star’ DEMO
970
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()DEMO
Table 9
Distribution of investment outcomes by stage of investment with a ‘star’ investment
Probability Capital multiples by stage of finance
Round 1 Round DEMO Round 3
0.1 0 0 0
0.4 0.5= 0.5= 0.5=
0.4 1= 1.5= 1.5=
0.1 1= 10= 10=
Capital multiple returns by investment stage DEMO either zero or negative on 50% of occasions. Conversely,
there was a one in two hundred chance of a 100 = capital gain DEMO three rounds of finance. Table 9Ž.
While a 100 = capital gain appears attractive, the low probability ascribed for its achievement reduces the
impact of such an occurrence. However, there still remains a positive impact despite the long odds. At a fund
size of £20 million, the management gain approximately 14 percentage points with the IRR increasing to 43.6%.
The DEMO in returns to the limited partners is a more modest 5.7% to produce a revised IRR of 25.26%.
However, if the limited partners’ returns are assessed in terms of NPV, the star investment produces material
benefits. The limited partners’ NPV on a £20 million fund increases from £2.8 DEMO to £8.5 million. A £10
million increase in fund size results in a marginal improvement of NPV in the star investment of £4.2 million.
DEMO gain is three-fold larger than when compared to the marginal improvement of £1.4 million in the base case
investment.
While a 100 = capital DEMO is improbable, it still does exist. This extreme outcome is in DEMO to the two
additional opportunities to achieve a 10 = capital gain at the end of rounds two and three. It would appear that
DEMO benefits of a ‘star’ investments are material to limited partners and managers alike. Such a desired outcome
should and does remain a sensible goal DEMO the investment managers.Ž.
8.6. Effect of proÕ
iding a guarantee to the fund managers Table 10()
Unlike the base case model, the DEMO scheme requires that the fund pays both a fee for the provision of
the guarantee and gives a share of any ensuing capital gain DEMO the guarantor. Thus, the guarantor participates in
the success of the DEMO in part recompense for the inevitable losses of the fund and the subsequent underwriting
costs incurred by the guarantor.
Model inputs Excel Worksheet 1—guarantee DEMO
Base fees % capital 2.50Ž.
Capital hurdle rate % pa 15.00Ž.
Capital return rate % pa 10.00Ž.
Management’s share of capital gain % 20.00Ž.
DEMO for capital guarantee % capital 2.00Ž.
Guarantor share of capital gain % 20.00Ž.
Debt rate % pa 10.00Ž.
Risk free rate % pa 8.00Ž.
DEMO premium % pa 7.00Ž.
Portfolio capital size £000s 20,000Ž.
Average deal size % capital 10.00Ž.
Table 10
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()
DEMO
8.7. Effect of fund size on a guaranteed fund
The effect of the 100% guarantee is to increase significantly the impact of the fund DEMO on the returns to
management. This is to be expected as a full 100% guarantee on speculative investments essentially means that
these risky decisions DEMO costless. While the IRR to the limited partners is little changed at 20.7% from the base
case of 19.5%, the NPV of the portfolio increases by 31% at each level of fund size compared to the DEMO case.
Ž.Fig. 9
However, when a 50% guarantee scheme is put DEMO place, the results are more ambivalent. At a fund size of
DEMO million, the IRR to the limited partners increases marginally from 19.52% DEMO 20.65% but the resultant NPV
is only 70% of that achieved by the base case. The NPV of the base case is £2.82 million DEMO the 50% guarantee
scheme is £1.96 million. This is likely to be due to the consequent charges incurred from the guarantor both in
the DEMO fee levied and the guarantor’s share of the eventual capital gain if any of the fund. At a fullŽ.
underwriting of failed investments, these charges remain acceptable. At a 50 percentage guarantee, investors
would be materially better off in NPV terms if they forwent the guarantee.Ž.
Fig. 9. DEMO of 100% and 50% guarantee on fund performance.
972
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()DEMO
Base case model input Excel Worksheet 1–2:1 leverage optionŽ.
Base fees % fund 2.50Ž.
Capital hurdle rate % pa 15.00Ž.
Capital return rate DEMO pa 10.00Ž.
Management share of capital gain % 20.00Ž.
Proportion of capital from state % 67.00Ž.
Annual return on state capital % pa 5.00Ž.
DEMO fee on state capital % capital 2.50Ž.
State share of capital gain % 20.00Ž.
Debt rate % pa 10.00Ž.
Risk free rate % pa DEMO
Market premium % pa 7.00Ž.
Portfolio capital size £000s 20,000Ž.
Average deal size % capital 10.00Ž.
Table 11
8.8. Effect of 2:1 DEMO on fund performance
The model was adapted to reflect the key elements of the revised Small Business Investment Company
Ž.SBIC Scheme, post 1992, DEMO US federal government funds are used to leverage the ‘upside’ returns of
the management and the limited partners institutional investors . The model allows DEMO range of governmentŽ.
contributions to total equity to be computed.
The following charts are based on a 2:1 government:private investment ratio. Government DEMO are charged
at a long term bond rate of 7% although this variable can be changed in the model. As with the guarantee
option, the State is paid an interest coupon on the leveraged funds provided. DEMO State contributor participates in
Fig. 10. Effect of 2:1 state:private leverage on fund performance.
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()
DEMO
Fig. 11. Effect of scale of government leverage on the performance of a £20 million fund.
any capital gain of the fund. However, the State in turn pays the prevailing fee to the managing partner for DEMO
management of the State’s contribution to the whole fund. The model is based on a £20 million fund size. All
other parameters, e.g., DEMO management carry, etc., remain unchanged as in earlier model specifications. TableŽ
While the size of fund needed for a positive Management’s IRR is DEMO higher than for the base case, the
major effect of leverage DEMO in the marked increase in IRR returns to the private investors. Their annualised
returns increases from 18% to 28% at each level of fund DEMO material increase of 55%. The elasticity of
Management’s IRR to fund size is 1.3% per £ million increase. However, if the leverage effect is measured in
NPV terms, the effect of the 2:1 leverage is to increase the NPV to the limited partners by a rather more DEMO
6.9%, or £0.2 million, across the range of fund sizes. Fig. 11Ž.
Fig. 12. Effect of interest cost of state’s leveraged funds on DEMO performance of a £20 million fund.
11; Fig. 10.
974
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()DEMO
Increasing the leverage of the fund increases the IRR to the private partners but slightly decreases the
Management’s IRR. The IRR elasticities per percentage DEMO in State leverage are 0.26% to the limited
partners and y0.063% to the management. If appraised in NPV terms, the move from a zero contribution of
funds from the State to a 90% contribution changes the DEMO partners’ NPV from £1.75 million to £1.32
million. This is a 52% change or an elasticity of £10,000 per percentage increase of State DEMO Fig. 12Ž.
The effect of increasing the payment to the State via the annual interest charge on the supplied leveraging
finance is to lower DEMO IRRs to the limited partners. The elasticities for a 1% increase in the cost of State capital
is y1.32% and y0.84% for the limited DEMO and the management’s IRRs, respectively. None the less, the
IRR returns to both parties still remain relatively attractive. However, assessing performance in IRR terms
disguises the NPV impact of increasing interest charges levied by the DEMO If the State interest rate is changed
from 1% to 10%, DEMO is a 82.5% reduction in the value of the limited partner’s NPV which decreases from
£4.77 to £0.84 million. The positive leverage effects of DEMO State’s contribution is larger than the negative effect
Ž.on investors’ returns of increasing the cost of State capital. Thus, the State may charge a commercial i.e., riskŽ
adjusted or at least bond rate level of interest payment without prejudicing the commercial returns of the.
private investors or their DEMO capital agents.
9. Concluding observations
The nature of the above simulations is such that categorical conclusions are dangerous without clearly
specifying all the model DEMO of importance. In addition, a level of prudence is necessary given DEMO
financial models invariably remain a crude analogue of reality. The model should not be used in a primarily
prescriptive fashion. Rather, its value is as a means of systematically exploring the relationships between costs
and revenues DEMO an early-stage fund under various operating assumptions and policy alternatives. The models
also illustrates the dangers for all investors of reliance on a single DEMO metric, especially IRR%.
However, making the fundamental assumption that a flow of attractive investments is available to the fund
managers, the most categorical findings concern the importance of fund size on the returns to both DEMO private
investors the limited partners and, particularly, the venture capital management company the managingŽ. Ž
partner . It is stressed that the return DEMO of. both parties have to be met to ensure long term viability of such
fixed term, fund based, technology investments. The venture capitalist DEMO be expected to bear an
unreasonable burden of risk from the fixed and variable costs incurred without adequate recompense.
On the cost and performance DEMO supplied, it is suggested that the desired minimum size of a DEMO,
technology focused, early-stage venture capital fund should be approximately £20 DEMO equivalent to US$33Ž
million or ECU28 million . A fund with less than £15 million US$25 million or ECU21 million under.Ž .
management is DEMO increasing vulnerability regarding its ability to return to both private and managing partners
investment rewards commensurate with the levels of risk and illiquidity incurred. DEMO commercial returns
remain difficult for funds of this small size even with the imposition of 2:1 leveraged government funding.
The level of annual DEMO income which the managing agent can earn also remains of considerable importance.
For every 1% increase in management fee, the IRR of the venture capitalist managing a £20 million fund
increases by 3.74% from 17% at DEMO 1% fee to 33% at a 5% fee without changing any other parameters. In thisŽ. Ž.
context, a fee income for the managing agents in a small, technology specialist, early-stage fund above the
development capital DEMO standard of 2–2 1r2% appears equitable to both management and the investors.
Both guarantee and leverage support scheme do improve the returns to investors. DEMO 100% guarantee
materially reduced the threshold by about £5 million at which a fund becomes viable. However, a 50%Ž.
guarantee scheme, given its DEMO costs, has little benefit providing only a marginal gain to IRRs DEMO
reduces the NPV returns to limited partners. In contrast, 2:1 DEMO leverage improves the returns of
limited partners by over 50% while increasing slightly the fund size needed for the managing partner to achieve
a DEMO IRR. The leverage scheme remains effective at improving limited partners’ returns even at an economic
interest charge on the State’s contribution or underwriting of DEMO finances.
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()
DEMO
It is important to note that this study has only dealt with commercial funds, i.e., those funds which seek to
attract investors in DEMO capital markets. On a number of occasions local and national governments will
further impose parochial development remits on ‘captive’ venture capital organisations in which DEMO are
commonly the sole or largest institutional investor. Given that these organisations may well be obliged by their
investors to pursue goals which are DEMO conflict with commercially optimal behaviour, this research can make no
The DEMO is flexible to a wide range of interrogations. Both input cost and output returns variables canŽ. Ž .
be changed by the user to DEMO the peculiarity of individual fund circumstances. A future refinement could be
the use of Options Theory rather than a Decision Tree Analysis to explore DEMO outcomes of a staged
investment process. Further work could also be done on empirically validating the beta values used in the model
at each DEMO of investment. However, these interesting elaborations remain outside the initial model DEMO
tion.
10. Model software
The authors are prepared to share their Excel spreadsheet model with academic colleagues and other
interested parties in the hope DEMO it may be refined and improved by cooperative action. Requests for the model
from commercial users will be met on the condition that a DEMO is made to Amnesty International.
substantive comment on the structural requirements of such funds.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank both the Department DEMO Industry, Science and Technology and the
Department of Workplace Relations and DEMO Business of the Commonwealth Government of Australia for
their sponsorship of this research. The views expressed remain solely those of the authors. An earlier DEMO of
this paper was published in R. Oakey and W. During Eds. , New Technology-Based Firms in the 1990s,Ž.
Volume V Paul Chapman DEMO, London .Ž.
References
Amit, R., Glosten, L., Muller, E., 1990. Does venture capital foster the most promising entrepreneurial firms?. Californian Management
Review 7, 102–111.
Aston Business School, 1991. Constraints on the DEMO of Small Firms. DTI, HMSO London.
Birch, D., 1979. The DEMO Creation Process. In: MIT Program on Neighbourhood and Regional Change. MIT DEMO, Cambridge, MA.
Branscombe, L.M., Keller, J.H. Eds. , 1997. DEMO in Innovation: Creating a Research and Innovation Policy That Works. MIT DEMO,Ž.
Cambridge MA.
British Venture Capital Association, 1996. BVCA Directory 1996r7. DEMO, London.
British Venture Capital Association, 1998. Report on Investment Activity 1997. BVCA, London.
Burgel, O., Murray, G.C., 1998. forthcoming , The internationalisation of British and German start-up companies in high-technologyŽ.
industries and frontiers DEMO entrepreneurship research British and German start-up companies in high-technology industries. Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research. Babson College, MA.
Butchart, R.L., 1987. A new definition of high technology industries. Economic Trends 400, 82–88.
Bygrave, W.D., Timmons, J.A., 1992. Venture capital at the crossroads. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Coopers, Lybrand, 1996. Sixth annual economic impact of venture capital study. Coopers and Lybrand L.L.P., Boston, MA.
European Commission, 1991. European industrial policy for the 1990s. European Commission, Brussels.
European Commission, DEMO White paper growth and employment: the challenges and ways forward into DEMO 21st Century. European
Commission, Brussels.
European Commission, 1995. Green paper on innovation. European Commission, Brussels.
European Commission, 1997. First action plan for DEMO in Europe. European Commission, Brussels.
976
G.C. Murray, R. Marriott r
Research Policy 27 1998 947–976()DEMO
European Commission, 1998. High-tech investment capacity boosted, Innovation and Technology Transfer 2, 3.
European Venture Capital Association, 1998. Venture Capital in Europe: 1997. EVCA Handbook. KPMG, London.
Florida, R., Kenney, M., 1988. Venture capital, high technology and regional development. Regional Studies 22, 33–48.
DEMO, M., Coombs, R., 1997. The coincidence of technology and market objectives in the internationalisation of new technology-based
firms. International Small Business Journal DEMO 4 , 14–32.Ž.
Freeman, C. 1983. The Economics of Industrial Innovation. DEMO Press, Cambridge, MA.
Gallagher, C., Steward, H., 1986. Jobs and the business life cycle in the UK. Applied Economics 18, 875–900.
Hook, R., 1992. Management costs of early stage funds. Paper presented DEMO the Sixth Seminar of the European Seed Capital Fund Network,
Liege.
Huntsman, B., Hoban, J.P., 1980. Investment in new enterprises: some empirical observations on risk, return and market structure, Financial
Management, Summer, pp. 44–51.
Initiative Europe, 1994. UK Venture Industry Review. Initiative Europe, London.
Keeble, D.E., 1989. High-technology industry and regional development in Britain: the case of the Cambridge phenomenon. Environment
and Planning 7, 363–374.
Lerner, J., 1994. A Note on Valuation in Venture Settings, reprint 9-295-064. Harvard Business School, Harvard MA.
Macmillan, H., 1931. Report of the Committee on Finance and Industry, Cmnd. 3897. HMSO, London.
Meyer-Kramer, F., 1985. Innovation behaviour and regional indigenous potential. Regional Studies 19, 523–534.
DEMO B., 1993. Financial constraints to the growth and development of small, high-technology firms. Small Business Research Centre,
Cambridge Univ., England.
Murray, DEMO, 1994. The second ‘equity gap’: exit problems for seed and early-stage venture capitalists and their investee companies.
International Small Business Journal 12 4 , 59–76.Ž.
Murray, G.C., 1995. Evolution and change: an analysis of DEMO first decade of the UK venture capital industry. Journal of Business Finance
and Accounting 22 8 , 1077–1107.Ž.
Murray, G.C., 1998. A policy DEMO to regional disparities in the supply of risk capital to new technology-based firms in the European
Union: the European seed capital fund scheme. Regional Studies 32 5 , 405–419.Ž.
Murray, G.C., Lott, J., 1995. DEMO UK venture capital firms a bias against investment in new technology based firms?. Research Policy 24,
283–299.
National Venture Capital Association, 1998. Annual Report 1997. Venture Economics Information Services, Newark, NJ.
Oakey, R.O., 1984a. Finance and innovation in British small independent firms. Omega International Journal of Management Science 12,
113–124.
Oakey, R.O., 1984. High Technology DEMO Firms. Francis Pinter, London.
Oakey, R.O., Rothwell, R., Cooper, S., 1988. Management of Innovation in Small Firms. Francis Pinter, London.
DEMO, B.M., McDougall, P., 1994. Towards a theory of international new ventures. Journal of International Business Studies 25 1 , 45–64.Ž.
Roberts, E.B., 1991. Entrepreneurs in High Technology. Oxford Univ. Press, New York.
Rothwell, R., 1989. Small firms, innovation and industrial change. Small Business Economics DEMO, 51–64.
Rothwell, R., Zegveld, W., 1982. Industrial Innovation and DEMO and Medium Sized Firms. Francis Pinter, London.
Sahlman, W.A., 1990. DEMO structure and governance of venture capital organisations. Journal of Financial Economics 27, 473–521.
Storey, D.J., 1997. The Ten Percenters, Third Report, Fast Growing SMEs in Great Britain. Deloitte and Touche, London.
Storey, D.J., Tether, B., 1996. New Technology Based Firms NTBFs in Europe. EIMS DEMO Commission DGXIII , Brussels.Ž. Ž Ž .
Storey, D.J., Watson, DEMO, Wynarczyk, P., 1989. Fast Growth Businesses: Case Studies of 40 Small firms in the North East of England. Paper
No. 67, Dept. of Employment, London.
Venture Economics and Bannock Consulting, 1997. International Investment DEMO Report. Venture Economics, Newark, NJrBan-
nock Consulting, London.
Westhead, P., Storey, D.J., 1995. Financial constraints on the growth of high technology small firms in the United Kingdom. Applied
Financial Economics 7, 197–201.
Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development, 1986. R&D, Innovation and Competitiveness, Science and Technology
Indicators. OECD, Paris.{1g42fwefx}