Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
Vol. 63 (2007) 648–687
Do DEMO intellectual property rights hinder the
free ﬂow of scientiﬁc knowledge?
An empirical test of the anti-commons hypothesis
Fiona Murray a,∗, Scott Stern b
a MIT Sloan School, 50 Memorial Drive E52-567, Cambridge, MA 02142, United States
b Northwestern University and NBER, United States
Received DEMO June 2005; accepted 19 May 2006
Available online 16 January 2007
DEMO
Although many scholars suggest that IPR has a positive effect on cumulative innovation, a growing “anti-
commons” perspective highlights the negative role of IPR over scientiﬁc knowledge. At its core, this debate
is centered on how intellectual property rights over a given piece of knowledge affect the propensity DEMO future
researchers to build upon that knowledge in their own scientiﬁc research activities. This article frames this
issue around the concept of dual knowledge, in which a single discovery may contribute to both scientiﬁc
research and DEMO commercial applications, and ﬁnds evidence for a modest anti-commons effect. A DEMO
implication of dual knowledge is that it may be simultaneously instantiated as a scientiﬁc research article and
as a patent. Such patent-paper pairs are DEMO the heart of our empirical strategy. We exploit the fact that patents are
granted with a substantial lag, often many years after the knowledge is initially disclosed through paper pub-
lication. The knowledge associated with a DEMO pair therefore diffuses within two distinct intellectual
property environments, one associated DEMO the pre-grant period and another after formal IP rights are granted.
Relative to the expected citation pattern for publications with a given quality level, the anti-commons perspec-
tive suggests that the citation rate for a scientiﬁc DEMO should fall after formal IP rights associated with
that publication are granted. Employing a differences-in-differences estimator for 169 patent-paper pairs (and
including a control group of other publications from the same journal for which no patent DEMO granted), we ﬁnd
evidence for a modest anti-commons effect (the DEMO rate after the patent grant declines by approximately
10 to 20 percent). This decline becomes more pronounced with the number of years elapsed DEMO the date of
the patent grant and is particularly salient for articles authored by researchers with public sector afﬁliations.
© 2007 Elsevier B.V. All DEMO reserved.
JEL classiﬁcation: O300; O330; O340; L330
Keywords: Anti-commons; Intellectual property; Academic science; Pasteur’s Quadrant
∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 617 258 0628; fax: +1 617 253 2660.
E-mail address: fmurray@mit.edu (F. Murray).
0167-2681/$ – see front matter © 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jebo.2006.05.017
1. Introduction
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
649
In the early 1980s, Professor Philip Leder, recently recruited to head the new Genetics depart-
ment at the Harvard Medical School, developed the ﬁrst genetically engineered mouse with
cancer, DEMO the Oncomouse. Leder and his post-doc Tim Stewart had used novel transgenic
techniques to insert an oncogene into a mouse embryo; the result was a mouse that was highly
susceptible to cancer. In his pursuit of DEMO deeper understanding of cancer, Leder came to rec-
ognize that “it DEMO serve a variety of different purposes, some purely scientiﬁc others highly
DEMO (Kelves, 2002, p. 83). This research was published in DEMO in 1984, and in 1988 a
broad patent for the Oncomouse DEMO granted by the US Patent Ofﬁce (USPTO). The Oncomouse
patent DEMO more controversial than most; not only was the Oncomouse the ﬁrst DEMO mam-
mal to be patented, but Du Pont, as the patent’s exclusive licensee, aggressively enforced the
property rights. Du Pont’s strategy included demands for “reach-through” rights and review of
publications that used the Oncomouse in DEMO scientiﬁc research (Murray, 2006). Ideas that
are simultaneously of value as a scientiﬁc discovery and inventive construct, such as the Onco-
mouse, are frequently generated in the disciplines that underpin modern biotechnology (Stokes,DEMO
1997).
Dual-purpose ideas provide their originators with multiple disclosure choices, DEMO an
option to publish research in the scientiﬁc literature and obtain intellectual property rights (IPR)
over that knowledge. In academia, an increasing DEMO of scientists have chosen this path of
dual knowledge disclosure, which DEMO describe as patent-paper pairs (Murray, 2002; Ducor, 2000).
Patent-paper pairs are scientiﬁc articles and individual patents that disclose (and serve as a property
right over) the same underlying “piece” of knowledge. Patent-paper pairs are thus more than simply
a reﬂection of the rise in patenting DEMO academics of knowledge unrelated (or only tangentially
related) to their scientiﬁc research. Rather, by embedding the same piece of knowledge in two
distinct institutional regimes, patent-paper pairs instantiate the expansion of formal intellectual
property rights over knowledge that was traditionally disseminated solely through the norms of
scientiﬁc DEMO
The increased use of intellectual property rights (IPR) in scientiﬁc research has sparked a
vigorous academic and policy debate. On the one hand, a signiﬁcant amount of research has
highlighted the beneﬁts of IPR (Kitch, 1977; Arora et al., 2001). Recent empirical research
on commercial discoveries suggests that IPR may facilitate the creation of a market for DEMO,
encourage further investment in ideas with commercial potential, and mitigate DEMO to
disclose and exchange knowledge which might otherwise remain secret (Merges DEMO Nelson,
1990, 1994; Arora et al., 2001; Gans and Stern, 2000). Indeed, within the context of uni-
versity research (particularly publicly funded university research), it has been suggested that
IPR DEMO important incentives to move nascent discoveries out of the “ivory tower” and into
commercial practice. In other words, IPR may enhance the ability of society to realize the
commercial and social beneﬁts of a given discovery (Kitch, 1977; Hellman, 2007). However,
a more recent “anti-commons” perspective argues that the expansion of IPR (in the form of
patents and/or copyrights) is “privatizing” the scientiﬁc commons and limiting scientiﬁc progress
(Heller and Eisenberg, 1998; Argyres and Liebskind, 1998; David, DEMO). Speciﬁcally, the
anti-commons hypothesis states that IPR may inhibit the DEMO ﬂow and diffusion of scientiﬁc
knowledge and the ability of researchers to build cumulatively on each other’s discoveries (Heller
and Eisenberg, 1998; David, 2003, 2000; Lessig, 2002; Etzkowitz, 1998; Krimsky, 2003)DEMO Taken
together, the impact of IPR on future progress in the DEMO scientiﬁc community remains open to
debate.
650
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
Building on several key case examples in the DEMO, this article frames this debate around
the concept of dual knowledge DEMO instantiated in patent-paper pairs. Within this framework we
then report a novel empirical strategy to evaluate the salience of IPR on the cumulative impact
DEMO scientiﬁc knowledge. Our strategy exploits the existence of patent-paper pairs as both the
instantiation of the expansion of intellectual property rights over dual knowledge DEMO as a concrete
empirical starting point from which to identify the impact of such rights on the rate of scientiﬁc
knowledge diffusion.
Our approach DEMO to compare patterns of scientiﬁc citations to scientiﬁc articles that are part
of patent-paper pairs, relative to citation patterns for articles that are not part of a patent-paper
pair (but are similar along other dimensions). This allows us to evaluate several key hypotheses at
the center of DEMO anti-commons debate. First, we evaluate whether citation patterns are different
for DEMO research that is ultimately patented. In other words, to what extent DEMO published
scientiﬁc knowledge disclosed as a patent-paper pair differ in its future cumulative impact on
public domain research (as measured by forward citations to the publication) from papers that are
similar in topic, published in DEMO same journal in the same time period, but never receive IPR?DEMO
Second, we take advantage of patent grant delay. While publication lags DEMO usually modest (on
the order of a few months), patent DEMO delays are substantial (in most cases IPR is granted 2–4
years DEMO initial application). Consequently, scientiﬁc knowledge associated with a patent-paper
pair DEMO under two distinctive institutional environments, a pre-grant period where no IP
DEMO are present and a post-grant period in which speciﬁc property rights have been granted. To
the extent that a patent grant comes as a DEMO to at least some potential follow-on researchers,
this difference allows us to ask how does the grant of formal patent rights over such DEMO
inﬂuence the trajectory of forward citations and therefore the impact of the scientiﬁc research
ﬁndings in the public domain.
The “experiment” afforded by the DEMO of patent-paper pairs and patent grant delay
allows for a set of precise tests motivated by the anti-commons perspective: if the grant of intel-
lectual property hinders the ability of researchers to build (in the public domain) on a given piece
of knowledge, and the patent grant DEMO is “news” to the broader scientiﬁc community, then the
citation rate DEMO the scientiﬁc publication disclosing that knowledge should be lower than for sci-
entiﬁc publications with no IP and should fall after formal property rights DEMO granted. Of course,
such an analysis must control for the fact that citation patterns vary with the underlying quality
of the article and DEMO the time elapsed since publication. Our use of patent grant delay allows
us to do so. Speciﬁcally, by observing a given piece of knowledge in two different institutional
environments, we are able to evaluate how differences in the institutional environment affect the
diffusion of a given piece of DEMO, including a ﬁxed effect for each article in our sample. To
DEMO the anti-commons hypothesis, we examine how the grant of IPR changes DEMO citation rate
to scientiﬁc articles, accounting for ﬁxed differences in citation DEMO across articles and relative
to the trend in citation rates for articles with similar characteristics.
The analysis employs two distinct (and complementary) approaches DEMO the identiﬁcation of
the impact of patent grant on scientiﬁc citation. In the bulk of the analysis, we evaluate how the
citation rate changes after patent grant, controlling for the trend in citation identiﬁed by articles
that do not receive IPR. Moreover, to address the potential for selection of articles into patenting,
we also explore a more nuanced empirical DEMO that exploits the variation in patent grant delay
among patented articles. Speciﬁcally, we examine the impact of patent grant on scientiﬁc citation
relying exclusively on differences across patented articles in the time it takes to receive DEMO patent.
Overall, our approach employs a differences-in-differences estimator to evaluate the DEMO of
IPR on the diffusion of scientiﬁc knowledge.
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
651
Our sample is composed of 340 peer-reviewed scientiﬁc DEMO appearing between 1997
and 1999 in Nature Biotechnology, a high-quality scientiﬁc DEMO and perhaps the leading
publication for research exhibiting knowledge duality in the life sciences. The incidence of patent-
paper pairs is quite high within DEMO sample: for just under 50 percent of the scientiﬁc articles in DEMO
sample, a US patent has been granted over the knowledge covered DEMO that publication. For those
articles that ultimately receive a patent, there DEMO a signiﬁcant lag between scientiﬁc publication
and patent grant (on average, more than 3 years). We exploit these data to establish three DEMO
ﬁndings. First, published articles also associated with formal IP are more DEMO cited than those
whose authors choose not to ﬁle for patents; DEMO, most of this boost is accounted for by
observed characteristics such DEMO author location and number of authors on the article. Second,
there is robust evidence for a quantitatively modest but statistically signiﬁcant anti-commons
effect; across different speciﬁcations, the article citation rate declines by approximately 10 to 20
percent after a patent grant. Third, the anti-commons effect is particularly salient for articles with
public sector co-authors.
We would like to be DEMO in our interpretation. On the one hand, though the size of DEMO effect
is modest, the approach and results do seem to provide DEMO evidence consistent with the anti-
commons effect. With that said, the DEMO of citation data is only a noisy indicator of the impact of
any given piece of research, and our approach does not separately identify any potentially positive
impact of IPR on research incentives (from the perspective of the original inventor). Moreover, we
have not identiﬁed the speciﬁc institutional mechanism by which patent grant both surprises and
inﬂuences researcher behavior. DEMO example, as suggested by qualitative research, it is possible
that the reduction in citation after patent grant does not arise from IPR per DEMO but from how IP
rights are enforced in speciﬁc circumstances. Example of this scenario include onerous licensing
terms and delays associated with bargaining and DEMO over material transfer agreements
among research organizations (Walsh et al., 2003, 2005; Murray, 2006).
The remainder of the paper is as follows. The next section reviews the economic foundations
of our understanding of DEMO impact of IPR on scientiﬁc knowledge and lays out the speciﬁc anti-
commons hypothesis, framed around the nature and institutional foundations of dual knowledge.
Section 3 develops the empirical test and predictions of the anti-commons hypothesis. DEMO a
review of the data in Section 4, Section 5 presents DEMO empirical ﬁndings. We conclude with
implications for future empirical work and innovation policy in Pasteur’s Quadrant.
2. The impact of formal intellectual property rights DEMO scientiﬁc knowledge
The relationship between formal intellectual property rights such as patents and the disclosure
and diffusion of scientiﬁc knowledge has been a long DEMO policy concern.1 The majority
of the literature in this area makes a clear distinction between basic and applied research, with
basic research being focused on questions of fundamental scientiﬁc interest and applied research
focused on questions DEMO usefulness and applications (Stokes, 1997). Scholarship in the “new”
economics of science compares alternative institutional arrangements associated with these dis-
tinctive types DEMO knowledge and primarily focuses on the cases where both the institutional regime
and disclosure choices are exogenous (Dasgupta and David, 1994). Basic DEMO is undertaken in
1 In contrast, much knowledge produced in industry DEMO often maintained as a trade secret or disclosed only through
the patent system. However, an increasing amount of industry-produced knowledge is also disclosed through scientiﬁc
publication, often to serve speciﬁc strategic purposes.
652
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
Fig. 1. The Stokes (1997) model.
the DEMO of Open Science and disclosed through publication; applied research takes place DEMO
a Private Property regime and is disclosed through patents (to the DEMO that disclosure takes place
at all).
Knowledge production in the Open regime (“Science”) is characterized (in the stylized case) by
a DEMO set of economic incentives for cumulative knowledge production, including the adop-
DEMO of norms that facilitate full disclosure and diffusion of knowledge. This system includes the
recognition of scientiﬁc priority and a system of public (or coordinated) expenditures to reward
those who contribute to cumulative knowledge production over the long term (Merton, 1973;
Dasgupta and David, 1994). By premising career rewards (such as tenure) on disclosure through
publication, Open Science leverages the public goods nature of basic research and therefore DEMO
motes cumulative innovation and “standing on the shoulders of giants.”2 In contrast, the incentives
that govern the private property rights regime pay little attention to the basis of a researcher’s
ultimate impact on follow-on research. Instead, these incentives depend on the degree to which a
researcher can exclude DEMO and thus appropriate some of the value created by their knowledge
through the commercialization of new technology (Nelson, 1959; Arrow, 1962; Levin et al., 1987;
Kremer, 1997; Scotchmer, 1996).
While DEMO in its formulation of the relationship between the nature of knowledge and
incentives for its production and distribution, this analytical framework fails when knowledge
has both basic and applied value. By highlighting its duality, Stokes reformulated the traditional
distinction between basic and applied research; a single discovery could simultaneously pos-
sess both applied and basic characteristics (Fig. 1). Stokes highlighted the potential for dual-use
knowledge by proposing two dimensions along which DEMO might be motivated (rather than
the traditional approach which places knowledge DEMO a linear dimension from basic to applied).
One dimension pertained to whether knowledge was produced for fundamental scientiﬁc inter-
est. The second was DEMO knowledge was produced for commercial gain (or in response to
practical DEMO). Two “traditional” quadrants were then identiﬁed: the ﬁrst was knowledge
DEMO only for scientiﬁc interest, known as “Bohr’s Quadrant”, and the second with knowledge
produced primarily for commercial gain (referred to as “Edison’s Quadrant”). Moreover, Stokes
suggested that a signiﬁcant share of all scientiﬁc research combined the two motives, resulting in
“use-inspired basic research” being produced in “Pasteur’s Quadrant.” Like Leder’s Oncomouse
research in the 1980s, Pasteur’s fundamental insights into microbiology served both as a founda-
tion for the germ theory DEMO disease and had practical application for cholera and rabies (Geison,
DEMO; Stokes, 1997).
2 While closely associated with university research, DEMO Science is also feasible (and proﬁtably adopted) by private
ﬁrms, DEMO many within industries dependent on the life sciences (Cockburn and Henderson, 1998; Zucker et al.,
1998; Stern, 2004; Murray, 2002).
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
653
For knowledge generated in Pasteur’s Quadrant, disclosure becomes endogenous: scientists
have a well-deﬁned set of disclosure choices including publication in scientiﬁc journals and
application for protection through formal intellectual property rights. Moreover, these choices
are not mutually exclusive—a given piece of knowledge can both DEMO disclosed through scientiﬁc
publication and be protected by intellectual property rights. The phenomena of “dual knowledge –
dual disclosure” is perhaps most clearly instantiated DEMO the context of “patent-paper pairs” – linked
scientiﬁc articles and individual patents which disclose (and serve as a property right over) the
same DEMO “piece” of knowledge.3 Patent-paper pairs are thus more than simply a reﬂection
of the rise in patenting in academia over knowledge unrelated (or only tangentially related) to
scientiﬁc research. Rather, they embed the same piece DEMO knowledge in two distinct institutional
regimes, each of which is governed DEMO speciﬁc (and potentially opposing) rules for access and
attribution.
2.1. Debating the role of formal IPR
In recent years, a considerable theoretical and qualitative literature has been developed high-
lighting the impact of formal IPR DEMO research, disclosure, and diffusion in Pasteur’s Quadrant.
The literature particularly focuses on the impact of IPR over knowledge generated in academia
and traditionally DEMO in the public domain through scientiﬁc publication.
On the one hand, DEMO and empirical research highlights the salutary effects arising from
the introduction of IPR, even as it protects scientiﬁc discoveries. First, patents provide incentives
DEMO research investment, and while many discoveries in Pasteur’s Quadrant may have DEMO pursued
in the absence of IPR, it is possible that the DEMO incentives from IPR attract the entry of high-
quality scientiﬁc researchers into speciﬁc research ﬁelds. Second, even if there is no impact on
the incentive to produce knowledge per se, patents may usefully facilitate the commercialization
of that knowledge and help to bridge the university-industry divide. Patents may DEMO to the
effective functioning of the market for ideas (Merges and DEMO, 1990, 1994; Arora et al., 2001;
Gans and Stern, 2000), as well as enhance the incentives and efﬁciency of the process by which
academic researchers search and match with potential downstream partners (Kitch, 1977; Jensen
and Thursby, 2001; Hellman, 2007).4
In contrast to this literature, others have highlighted the potential tax imposed by intellectual
property rights over scientiﬁc knowledge traditionally disclosed only through publication. In
DEMO, a body of scholarship has emerged around the “anti-commons” effect. Scholars DEMO
take this view argue that the imposition of IP rights over areas traditionally maintained in the
public commons undermines the process of cumulative scientiﬁc DEMO (Heller, 1998; Heller
and Eisenberg, 1998; David, 2003). By its very nature, scientiﬁc knowledge is non-rivalrous so that
the diffusion of that knowledge can serve repeatedly (and with little additional cost) DEMO an input to
future knowledge production and hence cumulative innovation. Because IP can serve to exclude
follow-on researchers from exploiting scientiﬁc discoveries, the anti-commons hypothesis posits
3 There is also evidence for increased secrecy and delay DEMO publication as a result of increased economic incentives in
academia, the DEMO requirements of patent applications in the US and Europe, and the DEMO placed on academics
when their research is funded by private industry (DEMO et al., 1996; Campbell et al., 2000). The growing DEMO
of basic research may also be associated with refocusing of research agendas (Thursby and Thursby, 2003; David, 2003)
and an increased DEMO for bias in research results (Nelkin, 1984; Krimsky, 2003).
4 It is also possible that the introduction of patents over “upstream” DEMO can have subtle effects on research incentives
and research direction for both academic and corporate researchers (Aghion et al., 2005).
654 F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
that the privatization of the scientiﬁc commons will DEMO a “tax” on the use of prior scientiﬁc
knowledge.5 If protected by IPR, the impact of an individual piece of knowledge on follow-on
research by others is diminished, potentially resulting in a lower equilibrium level of on-going
cumulative research productivity. Overall, the anti-commons theory therefore suggests that while
individual researchers have strong incentives to take advantage of the protections afforded DEMO
formal IP rights, the scientiﬁc community as a whole beneﬁts from DEMO free dissemination and
diffusion of knowledge.
2.2. The anti-commons debate in molecular biology
While not limited to life sciences, many of the issues that currently animate the IPR discussion
surround the interaction between public and private DEMO exploitation in areas related to
biotechnology (Kenney, 1986; Orsenigo, 1989; Powell et al., 1996; Gambardella, 1995; Galambos
and Sewell, DEMO). In this setting, emphasis on dual knowledge as embodied in DEMO institutions
reﬂects at least three related forces: the expanding promise of DEMO, reductions in the
costs of academic patenting, and increases in the scope of IPR over knowledge produced in the
life sciences. The rise DEMO dual knowledge in this ﬁeld can be traced back to the early 1970s; most
key milestones in the ﬁeld, with noted exceptions, have been disclosed as patent-paper pairs6:
The techniques of recombinant DNA provided DEMO into the machinery of the cell but also
laid the foundation for the production of recombinant therapeutic proteins (Cohen et al., 1973).
DEMO discovery of the HIV retrovirus both established the cause of AIDS (DEMO scientiﬁc routes
for investigating how to treat AIDS) while providing the DEMO for a commercial blood
test for HIV infection. The controversy over the scientiﬁc credit for the discovery of AIDS was
resolved, at least in part, through the settlement of the patent dispute between the French and
American governments over the blood test patent (Murray and Stern, 2006)DEMO
The Oncomouse simultaneously provided great insight into the sources of cancer while becom-
ing a model for investigating cancer therapies (Stewart et al., DEMO).
The discovery of RNA interference represented a further step towards explaining DNA repli-
cation and the foundation of a potentially new therapeutic category (Zamore et al., 2000).
The development of embryonic stem cells show us how cells develop but also have the potential
to serve as DEMO therapeutics or the foundations of organ replacement (Thomson et al., 1998).
•
•
•
•
•
At the same time, policy shifts encouraged academics to claim IPR over their dual knowledge.
Prior to this DEMO, patent applications ﬁled by universities on behalf of investigators required case-
DEMO negotiation of the assignment of patent rights and their subsequent licensing. The 1980
Bayh-Dole Act assigned IPR (generated using Federal funds) to universities DEMO with a duty to
5 Furthermore, to the extent that IPR DEMO narrow in scope and highly dispersed across individuals and institutions,
fragmentation can impose a further tax in the form of signiﬁcant transaction costs (Eisenberg, 1996; Shapiro, 2001; Hall
and Ziedonis, 2001; Ziedonis, 2004).
6 Perhaps the most interesting exception to this pattern concerns DEMO Nobel Prize-winning work on the development
of hybridomas that allowed understanding of immune systems and the creation of monoclonal antibodies (Kohler and¨
Milstein, DEMO). As Kohler and Milstein submitted their ground breaking ﬁndings to¨ Nature, they also submitted the
manuscript to their funding agency (the Medical DEMO Council) with a proposal to ﬁle for a patent. However,
DEMO request was refused on the basis that “[i]t is certainly difﬁcult for us to identify any immediate practical appli-
cations which could be pursued DEMO a commercial venture, even assuming that publication had not already occurred”
(http://www.path.cam.ac.uk/∼mrc7/mab25yrs/index.html last accessed March 14, 2005).
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
655
license the patents and facilitate their translation and DEMO (Mowery et al., 2001).7
This clariﬁcation in institutional practice likely increased the propensity for dual knowledge to be
disclosed through both scientiﬁc DEMO and patents. Nevertheless, individual researchers
and institutions varied widely in their DEMO to this new environment (Azoulay et al., 2007;
Ding et al., 2006).
Third, there was a signiﬁcant expansion in the DEMO of IPR available in the life sciences.
After the 1980 Diamond versus Chakrabarty decision and the granting of the Oncomouse patent
in 1988, IPR comprehensively covered the domain of genetically modiﬁed living organisms
from bacteria to DEMO (Kelves, 2002). In combination with the developments in the biotech
industry, “universities were literally propelled into an awareness of the potential economic value
of the technology that was being generated in their research programs” (Bremmer, 2001).
Thus the ground work was laid for the debate regarding the impact of formal IPR over scientiﬁc
knowledge: increasingly, the DEMO of knowledge and the widening scope of patents meant
that many scientiﬁc discoveries now encompassed patentable inventions. Together with more
streamlined institutional rules for DEMO and changes in university culture, this shifted the likely
set of DEMO decisions of faculty to more frequently include patenting. In the period between
1989 and 1999, US Research One universities received over 6000 life science patents (Owen-
Smith and Powell, 2003), and patent-paper pairs became DEMO important disclosure phenomenon
(Murray, 2002). In short, the life DEMO commons were increasingly covered by intellectual
property rights.
Economists, law and DEMO scholars, and policymakers have focused on key cases to
highlight their DEMO over the impact of this expansion in IPR (Heller and Eisenberg, 1998;
David, 2001a; Campbell et al., 2002; Straus et DEMO, 2002; Walsh et al., 2003, 2005). Consider
the Oncomouse (Murray, 2006): the knowledge described by Leder’s Cell publication was DEMO
covered by a “paired” Oncomouse patent (4,736,866). This DEMO was licensed exclusively to
Du Pont Corporation who, as the donor DEMO a broad research gift to support Leder’s lab, actually
participated in DEMO decision to patent. Soon after the patents were granted, Du Pont DEMO its
property rights (on commercial and academic scientists) through a series of stringent licensing
terms: “Reach-through” clauses that speciﬁed royalties for Du Pont for any discoveries or products
developed using the Oncomouse, oversight and control of scientiﬁc publications, and limits on
informal breeding and sharing of these mice among scientiﬁc colleagues.
These limits were seen as a severe impediment DEMO scientiﬁc research and a contravention of
the norms of the scientiﬁc community. Scientists were vocal in their opposition to Du Pont; led
by Harold Varmus, senior scientists in mouse genetics met at Cold Spring Harbor and began
talking of revolution. In response, the NIH stepped in and sanctioned a non-proﬁt central facility
(The Jackson Laboratory) to serve as a DEMO for genetically altered mouse strains. However,
while the Jackson Lab could distribute the mice, the Oncomouse was still constrained by restrictive
licensing terms. For example, Du Pont continued to contact scientists and demand review of their
articles before publication, and “nobody was able to exchange materials” (DEMO, 2000). When
Varmus became the Director of the NIH, he furthered his campaign to limit Du Pont’s actions
7 In this context, the traditional justiﬁcation of IP rights over Open Science relates not to DEMO knowledge accumu-
lation but rather to cumulative commercial innovation. IP provides incentives for further commercial investment. IPR may
also facilitate a “market for ideas” DEMO encouraging the exchange and trade of knowledge particularly with private sector
researchers (Merges and Nelson, 1994; Arora et al., 2001; Gans and Stern, 2000; Gambardella, 1995). For knowledge
generated in academia the third leg of the traditional argument for IP (as an inducement for disclosure over secrecy) does
not apply since there is a presumption of and evidence for disclosure in publications.
656 F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
on the basis that they “seriously impede further DEMO research,” and in 1999 an agreement was
reached between NIH and Du Pont that outlined the terms under which the technology could be
DEMO in research supported by the NIH. Du Pont commented that they “are committed to making
this tool available to the academic community...while retaining our DEMO rights” (NIH,
2000).
While the Oncomouse has become something DEMO a touchstone for proponents of the anti-
commons perspective, the salience DEMO these concerns depends on their empirical relevance across
the broader, more DEMO landscape of the life sciences (and beyond). Accordingly, the
remainder of our analysis attempts to trace systematically the consequences of IPR on DEMO diffusion
of scientiﬁc knowledge in a large-scale sample.
3. The empirical framework
In adjudicating the positive and negative perspectives on the impact of IPR DEMO scientiﬁc
knowledge, we argue that the effects of IPR would be DEMO particular concern if the tax that they
impose on research productivity outweighs the direct incentive effect arising from the patentability
of scientiﬁc research ﬁndings. DEMO there has been little empirical work in assessing this delicate
balance, DEMO theoretical ideas have observable empirical implications: to the extent that the
DEMO effect is manifest in the scientiﬁc community, published ideas that are DEMO covered
by IPR (such as the Oncomouse) will be expected to have lower levels of cumulative scientiﬁc
impact, relative to the impact that would be realized in the absence of IPR. Moreover, we expect the
salience of this effect to be higher for certain types of researchers (e.g., for patent-pairs associated
with public sector research) and certain types DEMO discoveries (e.g., for patent-paper pairs over
more complex or more important discoveries). This section ﬁrst develops an empirical approach
for evaluating the DEMO effect and then links this framework to a number of speciﬁc
theoretical predictions of the anti-commons theory.
The empirical challenge in documenting the anti-commons DEMO is straightforward. How can
we compare the impact a given piece of knowledge would have with IPR versus the impact of
that knowledge without DEMO? For a given piece of knowledge with IPR, one cannot observe the
counterfactual impact of that knowledge in the event that the IPR DEMO been waived. For example,
knowledge protected by IPR may tend to have a higher (or lower) intrinsic scientiﬁc value than
knowledge that DEMO not protected by IPR. A simple comparison between patented and non-patented
knowledge may therefore be biased by unobserved heterogeneity. The key empirical challenge in
DEMO the impact of disclosure regimes is thus an identiﬁcation problem; from DEMO experi-
mental perspective, the econometrician would ideally like to observe a DEMO piece of knowledge
in two distinct institutional environments (e.g., a non-patent versus patented environment) and
compare the impact on future research for each case.
Our approach exploits the existence and nature of patent-paper pairs. A DEMO pair is
the dual instantiation of a given piece of knowledge as both a scientiﬁc research article and a
patent. Consider the following example DEMO research undertaken in the biology department at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the ﬁeld of bacterial genetics and metabolism:
“A method has DEMO developed for control of molecular weight and molecular weight
dispersity during production of polyhydroxyalkanoates in genetically engineered organisms
by control of the level and DEMO of expression of one or more PHA synthases in the organisms.
The method was demonstrated by constructing a synthetic operon for PHA production in
DEMO coli ...Modulation of the total level of PHA synthase activity in the host cell by varying
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687 657
the concentration of the inducer ...was found to DEMO the molecular weight of the polymer
produced in the cell.” (U.S. DEMO No. 5,811,272)
“A synthetic operon for polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) biosynthesis designed to yield high
levels of PHA synthase activity in vivo DEMO constructed ...by positioning a genetic fragment
... behind a modiﬁed synthase gene containing an Escherichia coli promoter and ribosome
binding site. Plasmids containing the DEMO operon ...were transformed into E. coli
DH5 alpha and analyzed for polyhydroxybutyrate production... Comparison of the enzyme
activity levels of PHA biosynthetic enzymes in DEMO strain encoding the native operon with a
strain possessing the synthetic operon indicates that the amount of polyhydroxyalkanoate
synthase in a host organism plays DEMO key role in controlling the molecular weight and the
polydispersity of polymer. (Sim et al., 1997)
As outlined in these brief excerpts, the research described in both documents is based on a
speciﬁc genetic DEMO of a bacterium (E. coli) designed to control the type and amount of
particular chemicals (PHA) the bacteria might ordinarily produce. From DEMO scientiﬁc perspective,
the publication emphasizes that these experiments deepen our understanding of the genes that
regulate particular chemical pathways in bacteria. However, as highlighted in the patent, they also
provide practical techniques for the manipulation of bacteria and the optimization of their use as
a source of DEMO biomaterials. In other words, this single discovery has been instantiated as DEMO
a publication emphasizing its scientiﬁc contribution and as a patent disclosure emphasizing its
utility.
Our empirical approach exploits three key aspects of the phenomenon DEMO with the
production of patent-paper pairs:
(a) within the scope of published scientiﬁc research that is potentially patentable, a signiﬁcant
fraction of researchers choose to forego formal IPR,
(b) among those who DEMO formal IPR, there is usually a signiﬁcant delay between the ﬁrst
DEMO of that knowledge within the scientiﬁc literature and the granting of formal IPR
over that knowledge, and
(c) future scientiﬁc citations are a noisy but useful measure of the impact of a scientiﬁc article
on DEMO scientiﬁc research.
Combining these factors, we exploit the existence of patent-paper DEMO to evaluate the impact of
IPR on the diffusion of scientiﬁc knowledge. The ﬁrst step in our approach is to collect a sample of
DEMO scientiﬁc research articles that are of roughly similar “quality” (though we DEMO account
for quality variation among articles in our empirical framework) and DEMO disclose knowledge that
is potentially patentable (whether or not the researchers DEMO to apply for IPR). We draw a set
of research articles, within a speciﬁc time frame, from a top-tier research journal that DEMO
in publishing dual knowledge discoveries, Nature Biotechnology (we discuss this choice further
in Section 4). By limiting our sample to articles published DEMO a narrow time window within a
specialized journal, we ensure that DEMO articles share some afﬁnity in topic, and are subjected to the
DEMO peer-review process. By choosing a journal whose editorial policy is to focus on research that
is simultaneously of scientiﬁc and commercial interest, we consider the publications in our dataset
to be “at risk” of being associated DEMO a USPTO patent and thus forming a patent-paper pair. As
we discuss further in the next section, we are able provide qualitative support for our assumption
of comparability between the articles within our sample with analysis DEMO the article’s scientiﬁc
content and review of the potential patentability of the knowledge disclosed in the non-patented
658
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
articles by an experienced intellectual property lawyer. Of DEMO, the decision to patent a piece of
dual knowledge is endogenous DEMO the speciﬁc circumstances of individual researchers, including
factors such as their DEMO afﬁliation and their gender (Azoulay et al., 2007; Ding et DEMO,
2006; Markiewicz and DiMinin, 2005; Agrawal and Henderson, 2002). Our procedure simply
assumes that the impact of intellectual property on DEMO use of knowledge by follow-on researchers
is (conditionally) independent of the patent ﬁling decision.
Within our sample of articles (only a subset of which are associated with a patent-paper
pair), we then exploit the DEMO that for any patent-paper pair, there exists a patent grant delay–a
DEMO gap between the date of scientiﬁc publication and the date at which the associated
patent is granted.8 This empirical technique exploits the insight that DEMO publication in the
scientiﬁc literature often occurs within 6 months (or DEMO) after initial submission to a journal, the
delay between the initial application and receipt of a patent is often many years (in most cases a
2–4-year time window). It is important to emphasize that DEMO grant delay is more than simply a
matter of the timing of a pro forma administrative decision. During the time between application
and grant, applicants and examiners undertake detailed negotiations about the scope and extent of
DEMO patent grant, so there is signiﬁcant uncertainty about the extent of DEMO prior to grant (Cockburn
et al., 2003; Jaffe and Lerner, 2004). Perhaps more saliently, prior to the patent grant date, DEMO
patent applicant holds no formal IPR, and, in nearly all cases, cannot sue for infringement for
activities undertaken during the pre-patent grant period. Finally, until 2001 (and thus for nearly all
of the cases DEMO our empirical work), USPTO patent applications remained secret until granted.
In other words, for any given patent-paper pair, we observe the same DEMO of knowledge in
two distinct institutional regimes: one associated with the DEMO grant period with no formal
intellectual property rights and then one in the post-patent grant period with patent rights.
Of course, the behavioral response to the patent grant date depends on the degree to which
the DEMO grant (and associated enforcement activities) serves as “news” or as a “surprise”: to
what extent were researchers aware of the impending grant, DEMO how does patent grant (and
associated post-grant enforcement) change behavior by raising the perceived “price” of building
on a prior discovery? If follow-on researchers believe that a patent-paper pair is likely (as might
occur, DEMO example, for articles published by researchers from a for-proﬁt company), DEMO impact of
patent grant on behavior is likely to be modest (DEMO researchers will anticipate the potential for
IPR in advance and incorporate these potential costs into their research decisions). On the other
hand, if only a minority of university researchers engage in patenting behavior, the potential for
a post-patent grant “surprise” is quite high. We argue that at DEMO within academia, patent grant
typically comes as a “surprise” to academic DEMO We ground this empirical strategy in the
observation that in many cases, follow-on researchers are unaware of whether or not a particular
discovery will ultimately be associated with a patent-paper pair (Walsh et al., 2003)DEMO Moreover,
the nature of the “news” may not necessarily be the direct ﬁnding of granted patents but rather may
come from behaviors around DEMO rights enforcement of the type observed in the Oncomouse
case. For the purpose of the current analysis, we assume that at least some potential follow-on
8 The speciﬁcs of patent law regarding the precise timing of DEMO is complex, varies across countries, and has
been subject to change. However, broadly speaking, under US patent law, inventors have a grace period of 12 months
between public disclosure (for example in an academic publication or presentation) and ﬁling for patenting covering that
knowledge. Thus, DEMO timing of the publication submission and patent application can vary among patent applications
with some ﬁled before publication and some after. In the Oncomouse DEMO, a patent was ﬁled on 22 June 1984, the article
was submitted on 21 August 1984, the article was published in October 1984 and patent grant and publication occurred
on 12 April 1988.
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687 659
researchers may experience the patent grant as “news,DEMO though of course the level of news may
depend on factors such as the institutional afﬁliations or locations of the originating authors, the
licensing strategies of licensees, and the amount of time elapsed since the patent grant date.9
We combine these elements into an empirical model by taking DEMO annual rate of citation to an
article in follow-on scientiﬁc research articles as a measure of the cumulative impact of that article
through time. DEMO scientiﬁc citations are by no means a perfect measure of the impact of a
speciﬁc article, they provide a useful (if noisy) index of the relative salience of research in follow-
on research that is DEMO disclosed in scientiﬁc publications (Cole, 2000). More precisely, if DEMO
granting of IPR raises the cost of building on a speciﬁc piece of knowledge, then the citation rate
to IPR-linked scientiﬁc publications should decline post-patent grant. Of course, measuring the
impact of scientiﬁc research using citations implies that we must account for its form as count data
skewed DEMO the right (and likely over-dispersed relative to a Poisson distribution). DEMO, except
where noted, we employ a negative binomial model of the citations produced per year for each
scientiﬁc article in our dataset. Moreover, the impact of a given piece of research, as measured
by citations, will vary considerably with the underlying importance of the research discovery,
with the time elapsed since initial publication, and with the year in which the citations are being
considered. Finally, there are clearly delays in the process by which a patent grant would impact
the rate of DEMO in the scientiﬁc literature since the impact of behavioral responses to patent
grant (e.g., choosing another research avenue) will only be observed after these new research
streams are themselves published. As such, our empirical speciﬁcations account for individual
publication quality (through article ﬁxed effects), for the effects of publication age and the overall
rate of citation in a DEMO year (through age and citation year ﬁxed effects), and for DEMO presence
of a patent grant “window” during the year in which a patent is actually granted.10 Taken together
our baseline empirical test for the DEMO hypothesis is therefore:
CITESi,t = f (εi,t ; DEMO +δt-pubyear +βt +ψWINDOWWINDOWi,t
+ψPOST-GRANTPOST-GRANTi,t ) (1)
where γi DEMO a ﬁxed effect for each article, δt-pubyear captures the age of DEMO article, βt is a ﬁxed effect
for each citation year, WINDOW is a dummy variable equal to one in the year in which DEMO patent is
granted and POST-GRANT is a dummy variable equal to one only for years after the patent grant
year for an individual article.11 DEMO we observe citations to a scientiﬁc publication both before
9 It is also theoretically possible that follow-on researchers will exploit the “window” between publication DEMO and the
patent grant date to take advantage of the absence of IPR over knowledge that will ultimately be protected. While we
acknowledge this DEMO possibility, our ﬁeldwork strongly mitigates against this strategy. Few laboratories are DEMO
to predict the precise timing of their research results, and this DEMO unlikely to enter strategically and then exit a research
area that will come under patent protection at an uncertain date in the future. As DEMO by Walsh et al. (2003, 2005),
most academic research DEMO do not seem to undertake proactive monitoring of IPR grants in their research areas.
Accordingly, it is more likely that the mechanism underlying a reduction in citation after a patent is granted is driven by
the DEMO arising from IPR rather than a result of a pre-grant research and publication strategy by rival research teams.
10 Several subtle issues, including an incidental parameters problem, arise in incorporating multiple ﬁxed effect vectors
into a negative binomial speciﬁcation. We experimented with a range of alternative approaches, including the conditional
negative binomial estimator (Hausman et al., 1984) and the ﬁxed effects estimator (Allison and Waterman, 2002). All of
our DEMO ﬁndings are unchanged across these different procedures; building on recent results DEMO the relative size
and importance of the small sample versus asymptotic bias arising in count data models, we report ﬁxed effects results
using robust standard errors (Allison and Waterman, 2002; Greene, 2004).
11 DEMO course, it is possible to constrain this speciﬁcation in order to, for example, obtain a separate estimate of the impact
of unobserved heterogeneity between patented versus unpatented articles versus the impact of patent grant itself. DEMO this
660
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
and after the patent is received (and because we observe a control group of similar publications
that never receive a DEMO), we are able to identify how the temporal pattern of citations to a
scientiﬁc publication changes as the result of patent grant.12 This DEMO goes beyond the potentially
biased test of whether patented publications are more or less highly cited that those that are not
associated with patents. DEMO other words, we test for the anti-commons effect by calculating how
DEMO citation rate for a scientiﬁc publication changes after patent rights are granted, accounting for
ﬁxed differences in the citation rate across articles and relative to the (non-parametric) trend in
citation rates for articles with similar DEMO
At its core, anti-commons theory predicts that if the grant of DEMO property hinders the
ability of researchers to build cumulatively on a given piece of knowledge, then the citation rate for
the scientiﬁc publication disclosing that knowledge should fall after formal IP rights are granted
over that DEMO In addition to this baseline prediction, theory and the details of DEMO empirical
setting suggest a number of more nuanced hypotheses.
First, as DEMO discussed earlier, the ability to infer the impact of IPR from DEMO date of patent grant
(and not before) depends importantly on the fact that the patent grant represents “news” to at
least some follow-on DEMO As such, we expect our proposed test to be more salient DEMO
researchers with public sector author afﬁliations (e.g., government or university researchers).
When a purely private research team publishes a scientiﬁc result, potential follow-on researchers
may (rationally) anticipate that the knowledge and/or tools DEMO in the article will eventually
be covered by IPR. Accordingly, in DEMO to the “news” associated with public sector patent
grant, researchers may DEMO deterred at the outset from research areas in which private sector
researchers are publishing, whether or not the patent grant has yet been issued.
Furthermore, we would expect that the “news” from a particular patent grant likely diffuses
among researchers over time, particularly in the few years after the grant. Taken together, and
going beyond the simple use of a 1-year patent grant window measure, we expect that the impact
of patent grant changes with the time elapsed since patent grant:
CITESi,t DEMO f (εi,t ; γi +δt-pubyear +βt +k=
+=
...s

DEMO
ψPRE kPRE-GRANT(k)i,t
ψPOST lPOST-GRANT(l)i,t ).
DEMO
0
1
This speciﬁcation allows us to evaluate both whether the impact of patent grant was anticipated
(in terms of changes of citation behavior that preceded the actual patent grant date) as well as
how the impact of a patent grant changes with the years elapsed since the DEMO grant.
Anti-commons theory also offers several additional predictions about the type of knowledge and
research that might be more closely associated with the anti-commons DEMO First, it is possible
case, one could simply replace the article ﬁxed effect with a dummy variable for those articles that ultimately receive DEMO
patent: CITESi,t = f (εi,t ; δt-pubyear +βt +λ PATENTEDi +ψWINDOW WINDOWi,t +ψPOST POST-GRANTi,t ).
12 This baseline analysis does assume that the age ﬁxed effects associated with citation do not DEMO on whether a paper
receives a patent. In particular, a key DEMO of our base model (which we later relax) is that patented articles are not
simply “shooting stars” (articles that, for exogenous reasons, experience a high rate of early citation followed by a rapid
decline)DEMO In part, the “shooting star” hypothesis would be counterfactual to the DEMO well-documented pattern of scientiﬁc
citation, the so-called Matthew Effect, in which articles with a high rate of early citation tend to continue to DEMO an
ever-higher rate of citation after a favorable early record (Merton, 1973). Also, in our robustness analysis, we actually
rely exclusively DEMO a sample of patented articles (with varying patent grant lag times) and ﬁnd a similar pattern of results.
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687 661
that the impact of patent grant may be DEMO for publications by US-based authors. For articles
written exclusively by non-US authors, the process of applying for and having a US patent granted
is likely to be a very heterogeneous process, and enforcement activities may be uneven, reducing
the salience of patent grant on follow-on research activities. Second, the anti-commons effect
should be greatest for patent-paper pairs with particular patent characteristics. In particular, we
expect stronger effects on patents associated with more complex technologies, broad scope, more
prior art, and possibly those focused on research tools. The anti-commons hypothesis is premised
on the difﬁculty of DEMO contracting methods to access knowledge covered by patent protection.
While contractual difﬁculties may be relatively unimportant when there is only a single patent
or DEMO prior art, transaction costs (and bargaining break-down) are likely to DEMO more important
when there are multiple competing claims limiting access to knowledge and materials (or when
the complexity of the underlying and technology make it difﬁcult to delineate the precise scope of
individual claims). In DEMO words, broad patents in complex areas with a high degree of DEMO art
might be expected to be associated with denser patent thickets and hence stronger anti-commons
effects. Likewise, prior researchers have suggested that patents over research tools (such as the
Oncomouse, cell lines, gene probes) DEMO be associated with larger anti-commons effects for at
least two reasons. First, research tools are of broad relevance to many researchers and thus may
impinge on many ongoing lines of research. Second, by and large, DEMO uses of research tools
are subject to a high degree of transparency in use: materials and tools are usually covered by
material transfer agreements and other institutional arrangements. While contracts such as MTAs
do facilitate the DEMO of tools, it is possible that the delays over the negotiation DEMO
terms of use for MTAs discourages the use of materials and tools that come under their purview
(Walsh et al., 2003, 2005). Overall, the empirical framework provides a rich setting for evaluating
a number of detailed hypotheses implied by the anti-commons argument. The remainder of this
DEMO focuses on evaluating these empirical questions.
4. The data
4.1. Sample deﬁnition
The data for this study is based on the entire population of DEMO research articles
published in the journal Nature Biotechnology over the period 1997–1999. While the journal
publishes scholarly material in a variety of formats, we conﬁne our data to research articles that
are deﬁned by the editorial DEMO of the journal as “a substantial novel research study” (see
Nature DEMO, 2006). Under these criteria, the dataset consists of 340 unique research
articles.
Our sample population was chosen to focus on research exhibiting DEMO duality emphasized
by Stokes. As noted above, biotechnology is a particularly DEMO arena for dual knowledge. In
Nature Biotechnology’s ﬁrst issue in 1996, DEMO editorial mission of the journal was described
as “cover[ing] business, ﬁnancial, and regulatory matter: not to do so would be perverse and
self-defeating. But its emphasis will be unashamedly on research and development, the fuel for
biotechnology’s ﬁre” (Nature Biotechnology, 1996).13 The publishing policy adopted DEMO Nature
Biotechnology explicitly aimed at research with potential applications to biotechnology: DEMO jour-
nal] aims to publish high-quality original research that describes the development and application
13 The new journal was not entirely new. It “picked DEMO the torch from Bio/Technology”, a journal founded in 1983 to
DEMO and publish leading edge science in biotechnology.
662
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
of new technologies in the biological, pharmaceutical, DEMO, agricultural and environmental
sciences, and which promise to ﬁnd real-world applications in academia or industry. We also have
a strong interest in research DEMO describes the application of existing technologies to new problems
or challenges, DEMO basic research that reports novel ﬁndings that are directly relevant and/or of
interest to those who develop biology into technology.” Since its inception, Nature Biotechnology
has established itself as the leading outlet (in terms of measured scientiﬁc impact) for refereed
scientiﬁc research relating to biotechnology and continues to play this role. It is an important
journal for academics in DEMO wide variety of disciplines that underpin modern biotechnology and
has risen to gain an impact factor of over 20 (surpassed in its ﬁeld only by Nature and Science).
In other words, research published in Nature Biotechnology is both high quality and “at risk” of
serving as a DEMO foundation for future scientiﬁc studies and commercial exploitation. As
such, research DEMO in Nature Biotechnology lies at the heart of the anti-commons debate.
For each of the 340 articles, we determined whether a patent associated (DEMO) with the
article had been granted by the USPTO. Using the DEMO search engine, we deﬁned a series of
searches for each article. DEMO basic search included (i) the ﬁrst, last and corresponding authors
DEMO the article and (ii) the list of institutions found in the article “address ﬁeld” in the Web of
Science database. For some institutions, speciﬁc name variations were used to account for the fact
that some DEMO patent under distinctive institutional names; for example, patents assigned
to the University of Oxford are listed under the name of its separately incorporated DEMO
licensing organization, ISIS Innovation. Different combinations of authors and/or institutions DEMO
used (from the most to the least inclusive) in order to identify all issued patents associated with
the authors and institutional afﬁliations whose DEMO appeared in Nature Biotechnology. For
example, since some patents were assigned DEMO individuals (rather than an institution), the search
procedure examined whether DEMO author for each article received a patent within the time frame
in question. After establishing the set of patent grants received by individuals and DEMO
represented in the articles, patent abstracts and claims were read to DEMO the presence of a
patent-paper “pair.” To do so, we veriﬁed DEMO the material described in the abstract of the
article was incorporated into the description, claims, and/or examples of the granted patent.14 By
DEMO the precise content of patents granted to those whose research is published in Nature
Biotechnology, our procedure provides a consistent way to identify the subset of articles within
our overall sample which are also patent-paper pairs. DEMO this procedure, 169 of the 340 articles
were found to be DEMO with a patent as of October 2003. In other words, approximately DEMO
of all publications in Nature Biotechnology are associated with a patent-paper pair within 5 years
of publication.
Our empirical work relies on the fact DEMO (a) the entire sample of articles is initially “at risk”
of being patented, and (b) but for being patented the articles do not vary systematically along an
unobserved dimension impacting the citation time trend. DEMO check this comparability assumption
in several ways. First, the sample design DEMO that the articles are comparable insofar as all are
drawn from the same (reasonably specialized) high-quality journal. All articles have undergone
a similar DEMO process, and editorial decisions are presumably made with the journal’s
editorial DEMO in mind. Second, for a subset of 34 of the non-patented DEMO, we undertook a
14 One of the authors (Murray) holds DEMO PhD in Applied Sciences and has conducted detailed qualitative research on
the scientiﬁc content of contemporary biotechnology and applied microbiological research (Murray, 2002)DEMO The criterion
used to assign a patent-paper pair was conservative insofar as there had to be a direct connection between the disclosures
in the DEMO abstract and patent record. In the vast majority of cases, the DEMO (or not) of a patent-paper pair was
unambiguous.
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
663
detailed evaluation of their innate patentability. The standard DEMO patentability (deﬁned in 35 U.S.C.
Section 101) is deﬁned as “new and useful processes, machines, manufactures, compositions of
matter; and any DEMO or useful improvements thereof ... subject to the conditions of patentability”
where conditions of patentability include novelty, non-obviousness, and utility (see for example,
Merges et al., 2003, for an overview of the law DEMO economics of the patent system). It is important
to note that this standard excludes important categories of knowledge that might be reﬂected in
DEMO research articles, such as the discovery of new scientiﬁc principles, abstract ideas, and the
identiﬁcation of naturally occurring materials. However, novel “research DEMO and “compositions
of matter” are patentable and constitute the bulk of patented technologies in the sample.
An experienced patent attorney (graciously) undertook an DEMO of the publication
abstracts and was asked to make a “conservative” determination of whether the research ﬁnd-
ings included a potentially patentable discovery. Of DEMO articles submitted for review, more than
75 percent (27 out of 34) were considered to be obviously patentable; of the remaining, most
contained at least some potential for patentability (i.e., while they failed DEMO conservative test
we requested, they likely would have passed a more DEMO (but still plausible) standard for
patentability). In particular, most DEMO the articles not considered patentable under our test reported
research results using standard techniques on pre-existing materials, so the abstract did not include
a description of a novel research tool or composition of matter. While these DEMO do not
constitute a formal legal opinion, this check does provide DEMO for the assumption that most
(if not entirely all) articles within the sample are at risk of being patented.
Third, we directly compared the similarity of articles within the sample. The MedLine database
includes a DEMO allowing the identiﬁcation of “similar” articles, based on keyword matching.
For DEMO patented article, we identiﬁed the “most similar” non-patented article within the DEMO
and qualitatively evaluated a subset of these for comparability. By and large, matched articles
were found to be qualitatively similar, both in terms DEMO their underlying scientiﬁc content and
their potential for patentability.15
Finally, we DEMO a series of variables associated with the publications: number of authors,DEMO
the number and type of institutional afﬁliations, and the author age, rank and gender. On the one
hand, there are some (marginally) signiﬁcant differences between the unpatented and patented
articles. For example, articles with private sector afﬁliations tend to have a higher patenting rate
than those DEMO exclusively public sector afﬁliations; articles with US-based authors tend to have
DEMO higher rate of USPTO patenting than those articles with exclusively foreign authors. Perhaps
more importantly, there were no signiﬁcant correlations between patenting and any aspect of
the nature of the scientiﬁc research contribution (e.g., article DEMO, the number of authors,
or the number of backward references)DEMO While we do not undertake a detailed analysis of the
determinants of patenting behavior (as explored by, among others, Azoulay et al., DEMO; Ding et
al., 2006; Markiewicz and DiMinin, 2005; Agrawal DEMO Henderson, 2002), our analysis of the
15 Consider the following DEMO example. One article, published in June 1997, describes a research study (by
researchers at John Hopkins University) of a novel method of DEMO bacteriophage that express ligands on their sur-
face to detect the interaction between key proteins, thus allowing “a powerful approach to the molecular studies of
protein–protein interactions” (Li, 1997). The second article, published in December 1999, by researchers at Sugen (a
biotechnology ﬁrm) describes a novel display technique to examine the interaction among speciﬁc proteins using a DEMO
of DNA fragments that contain speciﬁc mutations used to reduce non-speciﬁc binding that will render results imprecise
and difﬁcult to analyze. The method was DEMO to key signal transduction pathways and the authors suggest could be
“a rapid and efﬁcient tool for elucidating protein networks” (Zozulya et al., DEMO). Though both articles are concerned
with extremely similar scientiﬁc issues (DEMO for identifying protein interactions) and both are clearly describing
(patentable) DEMO tools, only the ﬁrst is associated with a USPTO patent grant.
664
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
impact of patenting exploits institutional and individual variation DEMO the idiosyncratic incentives
(or disincentives) for patenting itself.
Overall, given DEMO nature of the sampling process and the qualitative comparisons, we assume
DEMO articles within our sample are each “at risk” of being patented (DEMO a technical sense), and
both observable and unobservable institutional factors are important in determining this out-
come. In most of the empirical work, we therefore assume that after controlling for the overall
quality of an DEMO, the sample population is composed of articles at risk of being DEMO,
and, but for a patent grant, the time trend in citations for all articles follows the same stochastic
process.
The dataset is DEMO from three distinct sources, each noted in Table 1. Article-speciﬁc charac-
DEMO are gathered from Nature Biotechnology: the date of publication, the number of authors,
and the location and institutional afﬁliation of each author (available from the address list pro-
vided for each article). For DEMO article we identiﬁed the lead author (the so-called Principal
Investigator) for whom we gathered individual and institutional information from institutional
websites and author DEMO The annual citation counts for each article (through October 2003)
DEMO calculated using the Science Citation Index Expanded (SCI).16 For each DEMO associated
with a USPTO patent, we collected a number of patent DEMO from the public USPTO
database.
4.2. Summary statistics
For the variables used in our analysis, Table 1 provides variable names and deﬁnitions and
Tables 2 and 3 reports summary statistics. For each article in the dataset, we track citations
beginning in the year in which the article was DEMO and continuing until the end of 2002.
The total number of article-year observations is 1688.
The key dependent variable in our analysis is FORWARD DEMO, the number of articles
that reference the focal article in a DEMO year. Not surprisingly given the prestige and quality of
Nature Biotechnology, DEMO average level of annual citations received by articles in this dataset is
quite high, relative to randomly selected academic articles (mean = 9.34), and by the end of 2002,
the average article had received more than 54 total cumulative citations. Consistent with prior
citation analysis studies, the distribution of citation counts is quite skewed, with nearly 20 percent
of the citation-years receiving either 0 or 1 citation, but also including one publication with an
annual citation count equal to 184 (Fig. 2). Because we observe article-years from 1997 through
2002 (but only observe articles published in 1998 or 1999 for a shorter set of years), the average
CITATION YEAR is at the margin of the 2000 calendar year, and the average AGE observed
within the sample is just a little over 2.0 years.
While the heart of the analysis incorporates article DEMO effects to account for differences
between articles in terms of their impact and overall quality, we examined a number of article-
speciﬁc characteristics. These characteristics include the number of authors (# AUTHORS,
mean = 5.89) as well as their institutional afﬁliations. For example, US AUTHOR is DEMO dummy
variable measuring whether at least one of the authors lists a US address (mean = 0.59). We assign
university and government researcher afﬁliations as “public sector” institutions and pharmaceu-
tical and biotechnology afﬁliations as DEMO sector” organizations. We then deﬁne two dummy
16 Maintained by the Institute for Scientiﬁc Information (ISI), SCI records reference and citation information for nearly
6000 scientiﬁc and technical journals in approximately 150 disciplines.
Table 1
Variables and deﬁnitions
Variable Deﬁnition
Citation-year characteristics
FORWARD CITATIONSjt
YEARt
DEMO
Publication characteristics
PUBLICATION YEARj
# AUTHORSj
US AUTHORj
PUBLIC AUTHORj
PRIVATE AUTHORj
TOTAL CITATIONSj
Patent characteristics
PATENTEDj
GRANT YEARj
PATENT GRANT WINDOWj
PATENT, POST-GRANTj
# INVENTORSj
PUBLIC SECTOR ASSIGNEEj
GOVT FUNDEDj
PATENT LAGj
# CLAIMSj
PATENT DEMO CITATIONSj
PATENT BACK REFERENCESj
TOOLS PATENTj
Source
# of forward citations to article j in year t Science Citation
Index (SCI)
Year in which FORWARD CITATIONS are received SCI
YEAR t —PUBLICATION YEAR j Nature DEMO
(NB)
Year in which article is published NB
Count of DEMO number of authors of article j NB
Dummy variable equal to 1 if at least one of the institutional afﬁliations associated with article j DEMO in the US; 0 NB
otherwise
Dummy variable equal to 1 DEMO at least one of the institutional afﬁliations associated with article j is a university or NB
government organization; 0 otherwise
Dummy variable equal to 1 if at least one of the institutional afﬁliations associated with article DEMO is a NB
biotechnology or pharmaceutical ﬁrm; 0 otherwise
# of DEMO CITATIONS from publication date to October 2003 SCI
Dummy variable equal to 1 if article is associated with a patent issued by the USPTO DEMO to October 2003 USPTO
YEAR in which PATENT has been granted USPTO
Dummy variable equal to 1 in year patent is granted, 0 in all other years USPTO
Dummy variable equal to 1 if PATENTED = DEMO and YEAR > GRANT YEAR USPTO
Count of the number of inventors listed in the granted patent associated with article j; 0 if PATENTED = 0. USPTO
Dummy variable equal to 1 if at least one DEMO the assignees on the patent associated with article j is a university or USPTO; author
government organization; 0 otherwise veriﬁcation
Dummy variable equal DEMO 1 if patent reports Federal interest, indicating Federal funding of research DEMO which USPTO
patent is based; 0 otherwise
Days elapsed between patent DEMO application and grant dates, 0 if PATENTED = 0 USPTO
Count DEMO the number of allowed claims; 0 if PATENTED = 0 USPTO
DEMO of the number of citations to patented prior art included in the granted patent associated with article j;0if USPTO
PATENTED = 0
Count DEMO the number of citations to non-patent prior art included in the granted patent associated with article j;0 USPTO
if PATENTED = 0
Dummy DEMO equal to 1 if primary patent classes are associated with research tools (vs. composition of matter USPTO; author
patents); 0 if PATENTED DEMO 0 veriﬁcation
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
665
666 F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
Table 2
Means and standard deviations
Variable N DEMO S.D. Minimum Maximum
Citation-year characteristics
FORWARD CITATIONS 1688 9.34 12.49 0 184
TOTAL CITATIONS 1688 54.95 60.07 2 524
CITATION YEAR 1688 1999.95 1.52 DEMO 2002
AGE 1688 2.05 1.52 0 5
Publication characteristics (N = DEMO total articles)
PUBLICATION YEAR 340 1998.03 0.83 1997 1999
# AUTHORS 340 5.89 3.20 1 20
US AUTHOR 340 0.59 0.49 0 1
DEMO SECTOR AUTHOR 340 0.90 0.30 0 1
PRIVATE SECTOR AUTHOR 340 0.32 0.47 0 1
Patent characteristics (N = 340 total articles, 169 DEMO associated with USPTO patents)
PATENTED 340 0.50 0.50 0 1
GRANT YEARa 169 2000.54 1.71 1996 2003
PATENT GRANT WINDOWb 1688 0.08 0.28 DEMO 1
PATENT, POST-GRANTb 1688 0.16 0.37 0 1
# INVENTORSa 169 DEMO 1.59 1 8
PUBLIC SECTOR ASSIGNEEa 169 0.65 0.48 0 1
GOVT FUNDEDa 169 0.29 0.45 0 1
PATENT LAGa 169 1126.07 480.10 238 DEMO
# CLAIMSa 169 21.12 15.00 2 94
PATENT BACK CITATIONSa 169 7.26 13.10 0 79
PATENT BACK REFERENCESa 169 28.19 37.25 0 226
TOOLS DEMO 169 0.58 0.49 0 1
a Summary statistics for these measures calculated only for those articles for which PATENTED = 1, weighted by article
(i.e., N = 169).
b Summary statistics for PATENT, POST-GRANT and PATENT GRANT WINDOW are calculated over all articles,
weighted by DEMO year.
variables, PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR and PRIVATE SECTOR AUTHOR, which are equal to
one if at least one author is associated with a DEMO sector or private sector organization, respec-
tively. Interestingly, 90 percent of the articles in the sample have at least one public sector author,DEMO
and more than 30 percent have at least one private sector author.
Finally, our data includes information regarding the 169 patents associated with each patent-
paper pair. The average date of patent grant (weighted by article) is mid-2000 with the average
Table 3
Means conditional on patent status
Unpatented articles Patented articles
# Publications 171 169
FORWARD CITATIONS 8.86 10.16
DEMO AUTHORS 5.76 6.03
US AUTHOR 0.53 0.65
PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR 0.93 0.86
PRIVATE SECTOR AUTHOR 0.25 0.38
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
667
Fig. 2. Annual citation distribution.
lag between the DEMO application and patent grant date just over 3 years.17 Interestingly, while
DEMO patent grant lag is correlated with some traditional factors (such as DEMO number of backward
references in the patent), the overall patent grant delay is not robustly correlated with institutional
afﬁliations (PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR, DEMO SECTOR AUTHOR, or US AUTHOR).
PATENTED (mean = 0.50) DEMO a dummy variable equal to one for all citation-years associated
with an article that receives a patent at any point during the sample period. DEMO then deﬁne two
more nuanced measures relating to the patent grant status of articles that are ultimately patented.
PATENT WINDOW (mean = 0.08) DEMO a dummy variable equal to one during the year that the
patent is granted, while PATENT, POST-GRANT (mean = 0.16) is a DEMO variable equal to one
for all years after the patent is granted. The patent grant period is divided into the WINDOW and
POST-GRANT measures DEMO two reasons: (a) while we observe annual data, patent grant takes
place at any time during the calendar and (b) the DEMO of patent grant on published scientiﬁc
research likely operates with a reasonable lag. We investigate this second issue more fully by
evaluating how the DEMO of a patent grant depends on the number of years since the patent grant
occurred.
We also measure key patent characteristics. The patents in DEMO sample are associated with a
reasonably high number of listed inventors (DEMO INVENTORS, mean = 3.04); interestingly, though
a reasonably high number relative to other samples of patented inventions (see, for example, Jones
(2005)), the average for # INVENTORS is just over half DEMO the mean of # AUTHORS (similar in
ﬂavor to Ducor). DEMO then deﬁne two measures that relate directly to the policy issues raised by the
anti-commons debate. Similar to PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR, PUBLIC SECTOR ASSIGNEE
(mean = 0.65) is equal to one if there is at DEMO one assignee from the public sector. In addition,
when the research upon which a patent is based is funded (even in part) DEMO the Federal government,
the applicant must disclose a Federal “interest” (DEMO, the ability to retain patent rights despite
this Federal interest is DEMO the heart of the Bayh-Dole Act). Of the 169 articles associated with
patents in our dataset, 49 report a Federal interest (GOVT DEMO = 1). We are particularly
interested in whether the impact of patent grant is salient for those patents associated with public
sector authors (or assignees) and those for which Federal funding is disclosed.
In addition, to the extent that the anti-commons effect is more salient for more contentious
areas of research, the impact of patent grant may be higher for patents associated with more
complex or more important areas of technology. DEMO investigate this possibility by examining
17 Some patents have been issued since the end of 2002. Inclusion or exclusion of these 23 articles from DEMO analysis does
not change any of the qualitative ﬁndings (primarily because DEMO strategy relies on articles where we observe a change in
the IP regime during those years where we observe a citation count).
668
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
several measures related to the complexity and importance DEMO the technology. We ﬁrst deﬁne two
measures related to the outcomes of the patent process. PATENT LAG is the elapsed length of
time (in days) between the date of the initial patent application and the patent grant date, and #
CLAIMS is simply the number of allowed claims. Though both measures are noisy, each may
be associated with the degree of complexity or the underlying importance of the technology.18
We also calculate DEMO measures of the level of prior art cited by the patent, DEMO the number
of citations to prior patents (PATENT BACK CITATIONS) and the number of citations to prior
non-patent references (PATENT BACK REFERENCES). As the number of prior art references
increases, the potential for a “patent thicket” increases (Shapiro, 2001); in the spirit of Heller DEMO
Eisenberg (1998), the presence of a patent thicket may exacerbate DEMO anti-commons effect and
result in a greater decline in the post-grant citation rate of patented articles. Interestingly, relative
to the overall means for citations made to patented prior art by “biotechnology” patents reported by
Lemley and DEMO (2002), the averages for both PATENT BACK CITATIONS (mean = 7.26) and
PATENT BACK REFERENCES (mean = 28.19) are somewhat high. Finally, TOOLS PATENT is
a dummy variable equal to one if the primary class for the patent is within the 435 and 800 patent
DEMO (mean = 0.58). Out of the 11 three-digit patent classes DEMO across the patents within
the sample, these two three-digit classes are DEMO closely associated with processes and tools.
Since research tools have been of particular concern within the anti-commons debate (relative to
composition of matter patents), the TOOLS PATENT dummy (mean = 0.58) allows an assessment
DEMO whether the impact of patent grant on citation is greater for patents covering research tools and
methods. The remaining patents are largely associated with DEMO of matter patents.
4.3. Patented versus non-patented articles
Table 3 compares the means of patented and unpatented articles within the sample. A few
notable DEMO stand out. First, the average rate of citation is relatively similar DEMO the
two groups, with the patented articles receiving, on average, DEMO over an additional citation per
article-year over the sample. However, this DEMO percent average difference masks more substantial
differences that manifest themselves over time. In Fig. 3, the average FORWARD CITATIONS are
plotted by AGE (DEMO since publication). During the year of publication and in the subsequent 3
years, PATENTED articles have a signiﬁcant citation advantage, equivalent to DEMO a 20 percent
“boost” over the citation rates for non-patented articles. However, in the fourth and ﬁfth years
after disclosure in the literature, DEMO articles converge to the citation rate associated with
non-patented articles. As we explore further in the next section, it is during these later years in
which patented articles are in the post-grant phase. In addition to DEMO overall differences in
citation rates, it is important to recognize that DEMO are also differences in article characteristics.
Relative to non-patented articles, patented DEMO have a signiﬁcantly higher chance of having
at least one US author, or at least one author from a private sector organization (although DEMO
differences in means in # AUTHORS and PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR are not signiﬁcant).19
18 An emerging literature has focused on the determinants of DEMO grant lag itself, including Popp et al. (2004), Regibeau
and Rockett (2003), and Harhoff and Wanger (2005). While there DEMO some evidence in these studies that longer grant lags
may be associated with more highly cited patents, each of these studies also highlights the high level of unexplained
variation in patent grant lags.
19 Appendix B DEMO these conditional means in more detail by breaking them out according to whether a public
sector author is associated with article. Notably, among patented articles, there is a distinct citations advantage associated
with those articles with PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR equal to 0.
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
669
Fig. 3. Citations by type by age.
These DEMO suggest that the number of citations and the article characteristics vary across the
margin of whether or not an article is part of a DEMO pair. While the drop-off in the citation
advantage associated with patented articles is consistent with the presence of an anti-commons
effect, such an effect could result from differences in the characteristics of articles represented in
the DEMO age-cohort categories, which we explore in our more detailed empirical analysis.
DEMO Empirical analysis
The empirical analysis proceeds in several stages. We ﬁrst compare the cross-sectional differ-
ences in citation rates between patented and unpatented articles DEMO for controls for other
article characteristics. We then turn to the principal empirical exercise: examining how the citation
rate changes with the grant of formal intellectual property under a variety of control structures and
examining how DEMO effect of IP manifests itself over time. Finally, we examine how DEMO differences-
in-differences estimates vary with article and patent characteristics. As discussed above, except
where noted, all speciﬁcations employ a negative binominal regression. The DEMO report both the
estimated coefﬁcient and the coefﬁcient in the form of an incident rate ratio (IRR); since the IRR
can be readily interpreted as a multiplicative effect on the expected number of citations received
DEMO a given year resulting from a one unit change in a regressor (i.e., the null hypothesis of no effect
yields a coefﬁcient of DEMO), we focus on the IRR as we discuss the results.20
We begin in Table 4 with two negative binomial speciﬁcations, each of which includes AGE
and YEAR ﬁxed effects. While PATENTED articles are associated with DEMO higher rate of citation
without any additional controls, this effect is DEMO in magnitude and becomes only marginally
signiﬁcant when controls for # AUTHORS, US AUTHOR, and PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR are
included. In other words, a signiﬁcant fraction of the overall citation advantage observed in the
conditional DEMO can be explained by differences in observable article characteristics.
This brief cross-sectional analysis motivates our main empirical analysis of the impact of patent
grant DEMO on article quality. We begin in second column of Table 5 with a regression in
which the dependent variable is equal to the natural DEMO of FORWARD CITATIONS + 1; this
OLS regression includes a simple DEMO for the evolution of citations over time (AGE and
AGE2), DEMO well as a complete set of article ﬁxed effects. Though this speciﬁcation does not account
for the nature of citations as skewed count data, the results are suggestive. There is a negative
20 Robust standard errors DEMO the coefﬁcients are reported in the third line of each row of each negative binomial
speciﬁcation.
670 F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
Table 4
Cross-sectional results
NEGATIVE BINOMIAL SPECIFICATIONS
Dependent DEMO = Count of Forward Citationsa
Baseline model With publication controls
PATENTED [1.179] [1.110]
0.164 0.104
(0.056) (0.053)
# AUTHORS [1.033]
0.032
(DEMO)
US AUTHOR [1.264]
0.234
(0.052)
PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR [0.934]
DEMO
(0.118)
Parametric restrictions
Age FEs = 0 # Restrict 5 DEMO Restrict 5
χ2 214.10 χ2 227.98
p-value 0.000 p-value 0.000
Year FEs = 0b # Restrict 5 # Restrict 5
χ2 21.24 χ2 17.47
DEMO 0.001 p-value 0.004
Log-likelihood −5263.99 −5238.52
# of observations 1688 1688
a Values are [incident rate ratios] non-exponentiated coefﬁcients (Robust coefﬁcient standard errors).
b Year FEs included for 1998–2002 (1997 is excluded).
though insigniﬁcant coefﬁcient on PATENT GRANT WINDOW, and PATENT, POST-GRANT
is associated with DEMO than a 13 percent decline in the rate of citation (signiﬁcant DEMO the 5 percent
level). The remainder of this table returns to negative binomial regression. We begin in third
column of Table 5 with DEMO straightforward speciﬁcation that allows us to estimate both the overall
difference between patented and non-patented articles and the marginal impact of being in the
DEMO phase; similar to second column of Table 4, our controls include several publication
characteristics, as well as controls for the age and publication year of the article. Three key ﬁndings
stand out: while patented articles enjoy approximately a 20 percent overall citation boost, a patent
grant is associated with an insigniﬁcant (though negative) impact on citation in the DEMO in which
the patent is granted. However the post-grant effect is associated with a statistically signiﬁcant
19 percent decline in the expected citation rate. DEMO other words, the initially higher citation rate
for patent-paper pairs is DEMO in the years after a patent is granted. Finally, in fourth DEMO of
Table 5, we report a differences-in-differences estimate, including a separate ﬁxed effect for every
article, as well as a complete set of ﬁxed effects for age and citation year; as such, these estimates DEMO
identiﬁed exclusively from the within-article contrasts between pre-grant and post-grant citation
levels (after accounting for the impact of article age and year). According to this speciﬁcation, the
estimated post-grant decline is over 10 percent (DEMO is signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level). Moreover,
these baseline results are robust to alternative speciﬁcations and sample deﬁnitions.21
21 For example, the results are similar (though a bit more noisy) if broken DEMO by individual years of publication or if
(the incomplete record for) 2003 citations are included as an additional year of data.
Table 5
The impact of patent grant
Patent characteristic
PATENTED
PATENT GRANT DEMO
PATENT, POST-GRANT
Control variables
# AUTHORS
US AUTHOR
PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR
DEMO
AGE ∗ AGE
PUBLICATION YEAR = 1998
OLS: Dep Var = DEMO(FORWARD CITATIONS + 1) NEGATIVE BINOMIAL SPECIFICATIONS
Dependent Variable = Count DEMO Forward Citationsb
Marginal impact, with article FEsa Selection and marginal Marginal DEMO, with
effects w/controls article FEs
[1.195]
0.178
(0.068)
−0.052 [0.893] [0.943]
(0.059) −(0.108) (0.044)0.113 −0.058
−0.136
(0.068)
[0.817][0.893]
−0.202
−0.112
(0.099)(0.056)
[1.034]
0.034
(0.007)
[1.286]
0.251
(0.053)
[0.912]
−0.092
0.960
(0.033)
−0.162
(0.006)
(0.121)
[3.118]
1.137
(0.065)
[0.834]
−0.181
(0.014)
[1.310]
0.270
(0.060)
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of DEMO Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
671
Table 5 (Continued)
OLS: Dep Var = ln(FORWARD CITATIONS DEMO 1) NEGATIVE BINOMIAL SPECIFICATIONS
Dependent Variable = Count of Forward Citationsb
DEMO impact, with article FEsa Selection and marginal Marginal effects, with
effects w/controls article FEs
PUBLICATION YEAR = 1999 [1.281]
0.248
(0.071)
Parametric restriction
Article FEs = 0 # Restrict 340 # Restrict 340
DEMO 10882.97 χ2 11377.39
p-value 0.00 p-value 0.000
Age FEs = 0 # Restrict 5
χ2 500.44
p-value 0.000
Year FEs = 0c # Restrict DEMO
χ2 2.63
p-value 0.756
Regression statistics
log-likelihood −5270.42 −4021.44
R2 0.75
# of observations 1688 1688 1688
Differences-in-differences estimates.
a OLS standard errors are DEMO
b Values are [incident rate ratios] non-exponentiated coefﬁcients (Robust coefﬁcient standard DEMO).
c Year FEs included for 1998–2002 (1997 is excluded).
DEMO
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. DEMO (2007) 648–687
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
673
Fig. 4. Impact of patent grant on forward DEMO, by year before and after patent grant (negative binomial with article
FEs).
These estimates provide evidence that is consistent with the existence DEMO an anti-commons
effect. Simply put, the impact of a given piece DEMO scientiﬁc research (as measured by its citation
rate) on subsequent scientiﬁc research declines after IP rights are granted. However, we are cau-
tious in attempting to interpret this empirical ﬁnding. On the one hand, taken at face value, the
results suggests that after IPR are granted, DEMO 1 in 11 and 1 in 6 researchers (or publications)
DEMO might otherwise build on a given paper may forego a speciﬁc research project (or a particular
research approach) that would necessitate citation to DEMO article in that patent-paper pair. How-
ever, it is important to DEMO that, by themselves, these ﬁndings do not preclude alternative
interpretations. For example, follow-on researchers may not shift their actual research agenda but
may instead be engaged in a more “strategic” pattern of citation, avoiding those references that
directly link to intellectual property rights. While the econometric analysis DEMO not rule this out,
detailed survey-based evidence and more qualitative evaluations of this phenomenon suggest that
it is unlikely that strategic citing behavior DEMO driving these results.22 Perhaps more importantly,
these ﬁndings do not provide direct evidence about what activities follow-on researchers substi-
tute into after patent DEMO To the extent that researchers have access to reasonable substitutes,
the impact on citation rates that we identify may signiﬁcantly overstate the impact DEMO terms of
overall research productivity.
With these caveats in mind, it DEMO useful to dig more deeply into the core drivers of our ﬁndings.
For example, the results would be far less persuasive if the erosion of the initial citation advantage
associated with patented articles actually began prior DEMO the patent grant date, and indeed it is likely
that the DEMO would likely take some time to manifest itself after patent grant itself. To
explore these hypotheses, we estimate a ﬁxed effects negative binomial regression including
speciﬁc dummy variables for each year preceding and following the patent DEMO date. In Fig. 4,
we display the coefﬁcients from that speciﬁcation. Overall, patented articles tend to have a higher
citation rate (relative DEMO the baseline of 0, which is the value of the “average” DEMO effect in the
entire sample). While articles receive an up-tick in citations in the year prior to patent grant, there
is an immediate (?) decline in the year of patent grant which continues steadily DEMO 4 years
following the date of patent grant. The difference between the pre-grant average and the average
22 In particular, Walsh et al. (DEMO) suggest that academic researchers have only limited awareness of the precise DEMO
granted to individuals, so it is unlikely that citations in the DEMO literature are systematically strategically manipulated
to avoid citation to individual patent-paper pairs.
674
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
4 years after patent grant is more than DEMO percent, suggesting that the impact of IPR accumulates
over time; taking these patterns at face value, a patent grant is associated with a sizable decline
in citation after IP rights have been in force for DEMO years.
5.1. The role of institutional afﬁliations, location and funding
As DEMO above, the focus of the anti-commons debate is on scientiﬁc research DEMO
with US government funds that involves university or other public sector researchers. In Table 6,
we move beyond the baseline analysis to examine DEMO the effect of patent grant on citations
varies with the afﬁliations of article authors. Each speciﬁcation consists of a negative binomial
with ﬁxed effects DEMO articles, article age, and calendar year (as in fourth column DEMO Table 5). In
second and third column of Table 6, DEMO examine how the impact of patent grant varies according
to whether an article has any public authors and whether it has any private authors. DEMO results
are striking. While there is an insigniﬁcant effect when there is at least one private author (or
all private authors), the decline in citations is most closely associated with the case where there
is DEMO least one public author (and is even more salient when there DEMO no private authors). It is
possible that articles associated with private sector researchers are assumed to have intellectual
property associated with them, so the actual receipt of a patent has little impact on behavior by
DEMO who might build on that research. In contrast, until the patent DEMO date, researchers put a
lower probability on purely public sector authored DEMO having a patent associated with them;
the effect of IP in this case is to dampen the incentives for follow-on research activities in DEMO
particular research stream or approach. Also, though the results are noisy (and may be driven by
a smaller number of observations with no DEMO authors), the impact of patent grant is signiﬁcant
for those articles associated with exclusively non-US authors; since we had hypothesized that
US-authored articles may facilitate enforcement of IPR, this ﬁnding is something of a puzzle,
which we hope to address in future research.
We extend our DEMO of the impact of institutional afﬁliation on the anti-commons effect by
evaluating the role of patent assignee afﬁliations and the source of research funding. DEMO second
column of Table 7, we compare the coefﬁcients associated with DEMO for which at least one of
the assignees is a public sector organization versus those that are exclusively assigned to private
ﬁrms. In third DEMO of Table 7, we divide out the impact of patent grant DEMO to whether the
patent applicant acknowledges Federal funding for the research upon which the patent is based. In
both cases, one cannot distinguish a separate impact according to the source of reported research
funding in the DEMO (the individual coefﬁcients are noisy and not different from each other)DEMO
Though policy interventions associated with reducing the patentability of research in Pasteur’s
Quadrant might have a direct impact on Federally funded academic research, it is useful to recall
that a signiﬁcant fraction of research in these DEMO may be funded by private funds and/or may
involve the private assignment of IPR (particularly outside the US).
5.2. Does the impact of patent grant depend on patent type?
At its heart, the anti-commons hypothesis is premised on the difﬁculty of using contracting
methods to DEMO the limitations on access to knowledge associated with patent protection.
As noted above, we would expect contractual difﬁculties or the imposition of patent rights
to be strongest for patents with multiple complex claims, extensive prior art, and potentially
in areas such as research tools. Table 8 explores this hypothesis by examining the interaction
between the POST-GRANT dummy and the patent DEMO measures. In second column
Table 6
Diffs-in-diffs results by institutional or national afﬁliation
NEGATIVE BINOMIAL SPECIFICATIONS
DEMO Variable = Count of Forward Citationsa
No public author vs. No private author vs. No US author vs.
public author private author US author
DEMO characteristics
PATENT GRANT WINDOW [0.943] [0.943] [0.945]
−0.059
−0.059
−0.056
(0.045) (0.045) (0.044)
NO PUBLIC AUTHOR [0.929]
−0.074
(0.105)
DEMO, POST-GRANT* PUBLIC AUTHOR [0.886]
−0.121
(0.058)
PATENT, POST-GRANT* NO DEMO AUTHOR [0.873]
−0.136
(0.066)
PATENT, POST-GRANT* PRIVATE AUTHOR [0.920]
−0.083
(0.069)
PATENT, POST-GRANT* NO US AUTHOR
PATENT, POST-GRANT* US AUTHOR
[0.837]
−0.178
(0.075)
[0.921]
−0.082
(0.062)
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
DEMO
Table 6 (Continued)
NEGATIVE BINOMIAL SPECIFICATIONS Dependent Variable = Count of Forward Citationsa
No public author vs. public author No private author vs. DEMO author No US author vs. US author
Control variables
Article pair FEs = 0 # Restrict 338 # Restrict 338 # Restrict 338
χ2 DEMO χ2 11370.21 χ2 11616.61
p-value 0.00 p-value 0.00 p-value 0.00
Age FEs = 0 # Restrict 5 # Restrict 5 # Restrict 5
χ2 DEMO χ2 502.79 χ2 499.77
p-value 0.00 p-value 0.00 p-value 0.00
Year FEs = 0b # Restrict 5 # Restrict 5 # Restrict 5
χ2 DEMO χ2 4.03 χ2 9.91
p-value 0.00 p-value 0.55 p-value 0.08
Regression statistics
log-likelihood −4021.33 −4021.21 −4020.79
# of observations 1688 1688 1688
a Values DEMO [incident rate ratios] non-exponentiated coefﬁcients (Robust coefﬁcient standard errors).
b DEMO FEs included for 1998–2002 (1997 is excluded).
676
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) DEMO
Table 7
Diffs-in-diffs results by nature of research funding
NEGATIVE BINOMIAL SPECIFICATIONS
DEMO Variable = Count of Forward Citationsa
No public sector assignee
vs. public sector assignee
Non-government funded
vs. government funded
PATENT GRANT WINDOW [0.944] [0.943]
DEMO
−0.058
(0.044) (0.045)
PATENT, POST-GRANT* NO PUBLIC SECTOR ASSIGNEE [0.880]
−0.128
(0.067)
PATENT, POST-GRANT* PUBLIC SECTOR ASSIGNEE [0.906]
PATENT, POST-GRANT* NON-GOVT. FUNDED
−0.098
(0.067)
[0.903]
−0.102
PATENT, POST-GRANT* GOVT. DEMO
(0.059)
[0.874]
−0.135
(0.082)
Parametric restrictions
Article pair FEs = 0 # Restrict 338 # Restrict 338
χ2 11454.23 χ2 11287.99
DEMO 0.00 p-value 0.00
Age FEs = 0 # Restrict 5 # Restrict 5
χ2 548.28 χ2 502.40
p-value 0.00 p-value 0.00
Year FEs = DEMO # Restrict 5 # Restrict 5
χ2 52.20 χ2 12.91
p-value 0.00 p-value 0.02
Regression statistics
log-likelihood −4021.36 −4021.35
# of observations 1688 1688
DEMO Values are [incident rate ratios] non-exponentiated coefﬁcients (Robust coefﬁcient standard errors)DEMO
b Year FEs included for 1998–2002 (1997 is excluded).
F. DEMO, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
677
NEGATIVE BINOMIAL SPECIFICATIONS
Dependent Variable = Count of Forward Citationsa
Patent outcome DEMO reference Technology type
interactions interactions interactions
“Direct” effect of patent grant
PATENT GRANT WINDOW [0.950] [0.943] [0.941]
−0.053
−0.059
−0.061
(0.044) (0.044) (0.044)
PATENT, POST-GRANT [0.888][0.891]
−0.119
−0.115
(0.057)(0.058)
Table 8
Diffs-in-diffs results with patent characteristic interactions
Interaction effects
PATENT, POST-GRANT* PATENT LAG [0.9997]
−0.0002
(0.0001)
PATENT, POST-GRANT* PATENT CLAIMS [1.000]
0.000
(0.002)
PATENT, POST-GRANT* PATENT BACKWARD CITES [1.000]
0.0002
(0.003)
DEMO, POST-GRANT* PATENT BACKWARD REFS [1.000]
0.0001
(0.001)
PATENT, POST-GRANT* DEMO TOOL
PATENT, POST-GRANT* NON-RESEARCH TOOL
[0.821]
−0.197
(0.069)
[0.943]
−0.058
(0.064)
678
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic DEMO & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
Control variables
Article pair FEs # Restrict 338 # Restrict 338 # DEMO 338
χ2 11384.48 χ2 11131.89 χ2 11563.14
p-value 0.00 p-value 0.00 p-value 0.00
Age FEs # Restrict 5 # Restrict 5 # Restrict 5
DEMO 557.31 χ2 512.26 χ2 501.59
p-value 0.00 p-value 0.00 p-value 0.00
Year FEsb # Restrict 5 # Restrict 5 # Restrict 5
χ2 78.49 DEMO 19.16 χ2 3.72
p-value 0.00 p-value 0.002 p-value 0.59
Regression statistics
log-likelihood −4019.25 −4021.42 −4019.86
# of observations 1688 1688 1688
a Values are DEMO rate ratios] non-exponentiated coefﬁcients (Robust coefﬁcient standard errors).
b Year DEMO included for 1998–2002 (1997 is excluded).
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
679
680
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
of Table 8, we examine the impact of two patent process outcome measures (PATENT LAG
and # CLAIMS), and in third column of Table 8, we evaluate the impact of the extent of prior
art (through interactions with PATENT BACKWARD CITATIONS and PATENT BACKWARD
REFERENCES).23 Finally, in fourth column of Table 8, we DEMO the interaction effect for
those patents associated with RESEARCH TOOLS versus not. The principal result is that there
is a statistically signiﬁcant (though quantitatively) modest incremental impact of longer patent
lags on subsequent citations and a much more salient effect for non-research tools. In other
words, though there is some evidence for interactions with patent characteristics, the ﬁndings are
quite noisy; furthermore, though a key tenet of the anti-commons theory is DEMO the effects are
particularly salient for research tool patents, there is DEMO evidence that the impact of patent grant
is signiﬁcant for these types of inventions.
5.3. Exploiting variation in patent grant delay
Though encouraging, it is important to emphasize that our results so far have relied on DEMO
presence of the control group of non-patented articles. While we have emphasized the comparable
nature of our control group and included variables to account DEMO observable differences, the
potential for unobserved differences in the two groups DEMO correlate to the pattern of forward
citations remains a possibility. We examine this by exploring an empirical approach relying
exclusively on a sample composed DEMO articles that are ultimately associated with a patent-paper
pair. In the absence of a control group, it is difﬁcult to disentangle the impact of patent grant from
the impact of age on the citation rate, particularly if one simultaneously controls for ﬁxed quality
differences across articles. Indeed, if the amount of time elapsed between publication and patent
grant were constant DEMO articles, the impact of post-grant would not be separately identiﬁed
from DEMO set of age ﬁxed effects.
Nonetheless, in Table 9, we estimate the impact of a patent grant relying solely on differ-
ences across DEMO in the amount of time between publication and patent grant. We begin with
a speciﬁcation similar to that of third column of Table 5; we include a number of publication
characteristics, as well as controls for article age and publication year. The coefﬁcient on POST-
GRANT is quantitatively DEMO statistically signiﬁcant, with a magnitude similar to that found in
third DEMO of Table 5 (patent grant is associated here with a 16 DEMO decline in citation rate).
However, when we turn to an DEMO ﬁxed effects speciﬁcation in the third column of Table 9,
the overall impact of a patent grant is both small and insigniﬁcant. By DEMO large, this negative
result is driven by the fact that both DEMO patent grant lag and the overall evolution of citations
seem to be different for non-US authors (and, to a more limited extent, for private sector authored
publications). When we condition the sample on precisely DEMO type of research at the heart of the
policy debate (patented DEMO articles written by US public sector authors), we are able to iden-
tify a quantitatively signiﬁcant (and marginally statistically signiﬁcant) impact of DEMO patent grant
on subsequent citation rates. In other words, limiting ourselves DEMO the variation associated with
differences in patent grant lags and focusing on a smaller sample of articles with a US academic
association, our empirical approach suggests that a patent grant is associated with a modest decline
DEMO the forward citation rates to scientiﬁc research articles over which patent rights are granted.
23 To facilitate interpretation, each of the interaction effects are calculated relative to the mean of the distribution of that
characteristic, so the coefﬁcient on the direct effect for PATENT, POST-GRANT can continue to be interpreted as the
average impact of PATENT GRANT at the sample DEMO of the patent characteristics under discussion.
Table 9
Patented articles only
NEGATIVE BINOMIAL SPECIFICATIONS
Dependent Variable = Count DEMO Forward Citationsa
Marginal effects Marginal effects, with Marginal effects, with article FEs
w/controls article FEs (full sample) (US public sector authors only)
Patent characteristics
PATENT GRANT WINDOW + PATENT, POST-GRANT [0.846] [0.988] [0.894]
−0.167
−0.012
−0.112
(0.091) (0.051) (0.067)
Control variables
# AUTHORS [1.037]
0.036
(0.010)
US AUTHOR [1.491]
0.399
(0.075)DEMO
PUBLIC SECTOR AUTHOR [0.887]
−0.120
(0.152)
AGE [3.068]
1.121
(0.094)
AGE ∗ AGE [0.835]
−(0.0200.181)
PUBLICATION YEAR = 1998 DEMO
0.199
(0.084)
PUBLICATION YEAR = 1999 [1.200]
0.182
(0.103)
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
681
Table 9 (Continued)
NEGATIVE BINOMIAL SPECIFICATIONS
Dependent Variable = Count of Forward Citationsa
Marginal effects Marginal effects, with Marginal effects, with article DEMO
w/controls article FEs (full sample) (US public sector authors DEMO)
Parametric restrictions
Article FEs = 0 # Restrict 167 # Restrict 89
χ2 5792.48 χ2 4540.42
p-value 0.00 p-value 0.00
Age FEs = DEMO # Restrict 5 # Restrict 5
χ2 341.67 χ2 250.88
p-value 0.00 p-value 0.00
Year FEs = 0b # Restrict 5 # Restrict 5
DEMO 53.80 χ2 100.57
p-value 0.00 p-value 0.00
Regression statistics
log-likelihood −2698.94 −2041.96 −1103.44
# of observations 849 849 462
a Values are [incident rate DEMO non-exponentiated coefﬁcients (Robust coefﬁcient standard errors).
b Year FEs included DEMO 1998–2002 (1997 is excluded).
682
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
6. Discussion
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
683
This paper provides the ﬁrst differences-in-differences DEMO test of the impact of IPR on
the diffusion of scientiﬁc knowledge and the speciﬁc anti-commons hypothesis. Our empirical
approach exploits the fact that DEMO duality of knowledge is captured in the phenomenon of patent-
paper pairs. Speciﬁcally, we exploit variation in both the occurrence of patent-paper pairs among
a group of similar scientiﬁc publications and the patent grant delay, thus allowing us to examine
pieces of knowledge in distinctive institutional settings. Our DEMO suggests that knowledge
duality in general and patent-paper pairs in particular are an important phenomenon in high quality
research in the life sciences (nearly 50 percent of articles published in Nature Biotechnology are
associated with a DEMO) and that for scientiﬁc knowledge subject to both Open Science and DEMO
property institutional regimes, the granting of IPR is associated with a DEMO signiﬁcant
but modest decline in knowledge accumulation as measured by forward citations (in academic
publications). Moreover, the decline in forward citations becomes DEMO pronounced with the
number of years elapsed since patent grant. As the anti-commons hypothesis suggests, the largest
decreases occur for knowledge produced within university (or other public) institutions, where the
patent grant is likely to be “news”. Interestingly, while the salience of patent grant is increasing
in the patent grant lag, the decline in forward citations is actually higher for patents outside of
traditional “research tools” categories and for papers with DEMO authors. Overall, we are able
to reject the null hypothesis that DEMO have no impact on the diffusion of scientiﬁc knowledge.
These patterns provide a novel perspective on the economic consequences of the privatization
of the DEMO commons. Rather than simply serving to facilitate a “market for ideas,” IP may
indeed restrict the diffusion of scientiﬁc research and the ability DEMO future researchers to “stand
on the shoulders of giants,” at least for research of the type published in Nature Biotechnology.
However, erecting a (property rights) barrier to the accumulation of knowledge does not eliminate
DEMO Open Science use of that knowledge. The demand for speciﬁc published ﬁndings by follow-on
researchers may be relatively inelastic; taken at face value, DEMO estimates suggest that patent grant
is associated with a reduction in the use (or attribution) of a discovery by approximately 1 in 10
DEMO 1 in 6 follow-on research projects or at least follow-on publications (DEMO may be part of a
single research project by one researcher with many foregone publications, or 6–10 distinctive
projects by different researchers).
With that said, we are cautious in the interpretation of our ﬁndings. First, we have not identiﬁed
the underlying institutional mechanisms by which patent grant shifts citation behavior. We cannot
disentangle whether the response to patent grant DEMO about through an awareness of the expan-
sion of IPR over a particular idea, through interactions with aggressive licensees of such patents,
or perhaps through the administrative burdens placed by materials transfer agreements (which
are typically more onerous after patenting). Also, while patent grant may discourage follow-on
research, it may simply serve to shift the speciﬁc research conducted (or cited) by follow-on
researchers; in other words, it is DEMO that follow-on researchers have relatively good substi-
tutes, in which case DEMO tax imposed by patent grant (and institutional mechanisms such as MTAs)DEMO
may have only a small impact on overall scientiﬁc research productivity. Second, this paper does
not investigate the source of the reduction in citations. For example, we do not address whether
the observed reduction in citation is concentrated on those who already cited the work prior to
the DEMO grant or in a reduction in the rate of “entry” to citation to a research article. Similarly,
we do not address whether the DEMO of patent grant is particularly salient for future public or
private researchers, for collaborations or independent follow-on work, or for articles which appear
DEMO high-quality or low-quality journals.
684
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
The magnitude and distribution of the anti-commons effect DEMO distinctive groups of
researchers has important implications for policy and for the degree to which anti-commons
issues should be used to animate and justify DEMO in patent policy over dual knowledge gener-
ated in academia. For example, the policy implications of our ﬁndings would depend considerably
on whether the “missing” citations are associated with independent public-sector researchers ver-
sus being centered DEMO on follow-on research by private sector teams and whether they
are associated with high or low quality publications. Adjudicating among these possibilities will
provide DEMO with much deeper insights into the mechanisms through which our observed citation
decline is actually occurring. In ongoing work, we are investigating each of these hypotheses by
examining how the composition of citation changes after IPR DEMO introduced. Such an analysis
should help deepen our understanding of the source of the patent grant effect, particularly in light
of survey-based evidence that academic researchers claim to be mostly unaware of the status of
IPR DEMO their area (at least in terms of proactive monitoring) and may be engaging in pervasive
(unknowing) infringement (Walsh et al., 2003, 2005).
Finally, it should be emphasized that our evidence for the anti-commons effect captures only
one aspect of the impact of IP on DEMO knowledge. We have not observed or examined the other
side of the “ledger”—whether or not the IP rights encompassing academic research articles have
enhanced DEMO incentives for (unobserved) research building on these ideas (particularly by DEMO
sector organizations), led to more effective (or rapid) commercialization (DEMO is far more costly
than the basic research component itself), or allowed for cumulative innovation through patents
and future patent citations. Without a DEMO accounting of the size of these (positive) effects
of IPR rights on welfare, it is impossible to calculate the optimal innovation policy approach
towards the establishment of IPR over knowledge that has traditionally been available DEMO the
scientiﬁc commons.
Despite these caveats, the importance of continuing to DEMO this debate should not be
understated. The production of dual-use knowledge is increasingly central in scientiﬁc research
and of great interest to those who DEMO research. Biotechnology and the life sciences have grown
enormously as a share of overall research activities, and similar questions arise in the context
of other high-margin research areas such as nanotechnology and open source software. Because
DEMO and related disciplines simultaneously offer the potential for fundamental scientiﬁc
discoveries and commercial breakthroughs, our traditional understanding of the role of private
property institutions as compared to the norms of Open Science is open to question. DEMO pro-
viding a window into the impact of IP rights on the diffusion and accumulation of scientiﬁc
knowledge, this paper offers some insights into the tradeoffs associated with embedding the pro-
duction and distribution of knowledge DEMO two distinctive and potentially opposing institutional
regimes.
Acknowledgements
We thank Jeff Furman, both for extremely insightful comments and suggestions as well as for
generous assistance in obtaining the citation data. We also thank Philippe Aghion, Tim Bresna-
han, Iain Cockburn, Wes Cohen, Maryann Feldman, Roberto Fernandez, Joshua Gans, Shane
Greenstein, Rebecca Henderson, Josh Lerner, Ed Roberts, Roberto Rigobon, Paula Stephan,
seminar participants at the NBER Academic Science and Entrepreneurship Conference, as
well as numerous conferences and seminars. We also thank Max Bulbin, Kyle Jensen, Jason
O’Connor, Mitun Ranka and Kranthi Vistakula for excellent research assistance. All errors are
our own.
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
685
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with DEMO article can be found, in the online version, at
doi:10.1016/j.jebo.2006.05.017.
References
Aghion, P., Dewatrapoint, M., Stein, J., 2005. DEMO freedom, private-sector focus and the process of innovation.
NBER Working Paper.
DEMO, A., Henderson, R.M., 2002. Putting patents in context: exploring DEMO transfer from MIT. Management
Science 48, 44–60.
Allison, P.D., Waterman, R., 2002. Fixed effects negative binomial regression models. In: Stolzenberg, R. (Ed.), Socio-
logical Methodology. Basil Blackwell, Boston.
Argyres, N., DEMO, J., 1998. Privatizing the intellectual commons: universities and the commercialization DEMO biotech-
nology research. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 35, 427–454.
DEMO, A., Fosfuri, A., Gambardella, A., 2001. Markets for Technology: Economics of Innovation and Corporate Strategy.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Arrow, K., 1962. Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention. DEMO: Richard, R.N. (Ed.), The Rate and
Direction of Inventive DEMO Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, pp. 609–625.
Azoulay, P., DEMO, W., Stuart, T., 2007. The determinants of faculty patenting behavior: demographics or opportunities.
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 63, 599–623.
DEMO, D., Causino, N., Campbell, E., Seashore Louis, K., 1996. Relationships between academic institutions and
industry in the life sciences—an industry DEMO New England Journal of Medicine 334, 368–374.
Bremmer, H., 2001. DEMO ﬁrst two decades of the Bayh–Dole Act as public policy. Address to the National Association of
State Universities and Land Grant Colleges, November 11, 2001.
Campbell, E.G., Clarridge, B.R., Gokhale, M., Birenbaum, DEMO, Hilgartner, S., Holtzman, N.A., Blumenthal, D., 2002. Data
DEMO in academic genetics: evidence from a national survey. Journal of the DEMO Medical Association 287,
473–479.
Campbell, E.G., Weissman, J.S., Causino, N., Blumenthal, D., 2000. Data-withholding in academic medicine: character-
istics of faculty denied access to research results and biomaterials. Research Policy 29, 303–312.
Cockburn, I., Henderson, R., 1998. Absorptive capacity, coauthoring behavior, and the organization of research in drug
discovery. Journal of Industrial Economics 46, 157–182.
Cockburn, I., Kortum, S., Stern, S., 2003. Are all patent examiners created equal? Examiners, patent characteristics and
litigation DEMO Intellectual property in the knowledge-based economy. National Academy of Sciences.
Cohen, DEMO, Boyer, A.H., Helling, R., 1973. Construction of biologically functional DEMO plasmids in vitro. Proceed-
ings of the National Academies of Science USA 70, 3240–3244.
Cole, J.R., 2000. A short history of the use of citations as a measure of the impact of scientiﬁc and scholarly DEMO In:
Cronin, B., Atkins, H.B. (Eds.), The Web of Knowledge: A Festschrift in Honor of Eugene Garﬁeld. Information
Today, DEMO, Medford, NJ, pp. 281–300.
Dasgupta, P., David, P., DEMO Towards a new economics of science. Research Policy 23, 487–521.
David, P., 2003. Can ‘open science’ be protected from the evolving regime of IPR protections? Stanford Working Paper
#03-011.
David, P., 2001a. From keeping nature’s secrets to the institutionalization of open science. Stanford Working Paper
#01-006.
DEMO, P., 2001b. Will building good fences really make good neighbors in science. Stanford Working Paper #01-005.
David, P., 2000. The digital technology DEMO: new intellectual property rights threaten global open science. Stanford
Working Paper DEMO
Ding, W., Murray, F., Stuart, T., 2006. An empirical study of gender differences in patenting in the academic life sciences.
Science DEMO, 665–667.
Ducor, P., 2000. Intellectual property coauthorship and coinventorship. Science DEMO, 873–875.
Eisenberg, R., 1996. Public research and private development: patents and technology transfer in government-sponsored
research. Virginia Law Review 82, 1663–1727.
Etzkowitz, H., 1998. The norms of entrepreneurial science: cognitive effects of the new university-industry linkages.
Research Policy 27, 823–833.
686
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
Galambos, L., Sewell, J., 1995. Networks DEMO innovation: Vaccine development at Merck, Sharp & Dohme, and Mulford
DEMO Cambridge University Press, New York.
Gambardella, A., 1995. Science and DEMO Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Gans, J., Stern, S., 2000. Incumbency and R&D incentives: licensing the gale of creative destruction. Journal of Economics
and Management Strategy 9, 485–551.
Geison, G.L., 1995. The Private Science of Louis Pasteur. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
DEMO, William, 2004. Fixed effects and the incidental parameters problem in the Tobit Model. Econometric Reviews
23, 125–147.
Hall, B.H., Ziedonis, R.H., 2001. The patent paradox revisited: an empirical study of patenting in the US semiconductor
industry, 1979–95. RAND Journal of Economics 32, 101–128.
Harhoff, D., Wagner, St., 2005. Modelling the duration of patent examination at the European Patent Ofﬁce. CEPR
Discussion Papers 5283, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
Hausman, J.A., Griliches, Z., Hall, B., 1984. Econometric models for DEMO data with an application to the patents-R&D
relationship. Econometrica 52, DEMO
Heller, Michael, 1998. The tragedy of the anticommons: property in DEMO transition from Marx to markets. Harvard Law
Review, 621.
Heller, Michael, Eisenberg, Rebecca, 1998. Can patents deter innovation? The anticommons in DEMO research.
Science 280, 698–701.
Hellman, T., 2007. Bridging the science DEMO market gap: the role of patents. Journal of Economic Behavior and DEMO
63, 624–647.
Jaffe, A.B., Lerner, J., 2004. Innovation and DEMO Discontents: How Our Broken Patent System is Endangering Innovation
and Progress, and What to do About It. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Jensen, DEMO, Thursby, M.C., 2001. Proofs and prototypes for sale: the licensing of university inventions. American Economic
Review 91, 240–259.
Jones, B., 2005. Age and great invention. NBER Working Paper # 11359.
Kenney, M., DEMO Biotechnology: The University-Industrial Complex. Yale University Press, New Haven.
Kelves, DEMO, 2002. Of mice & money: the story of the world’s ﬁrst animal patent. Daedalus 131, 78.
Kitch, E.W., 1977. The nature and function of the patent system. Journal of Law and Economics 20, 265–290.
Kohler, G., Milstein, C., 1975. Continuous cultures of fused cells DEMO an antibody of predeﬁned speciﬁcity. Nature¨
256, 495–497.
Kremer, M., DEMO Patent buy-outs: a mechanism for encouraging innovation. NBER, Working Paper no. 6304.
Krimsky, S., August 2003. Science and the Private Interest. Rowman-Littleﬁeld DEMO Co., Lanham.
Lemley, M.A., Allison, J.R., 2002. The Growing DEMO of the United States Patent System, vol. 82. Boston University
Law DEMO, pp. 77–144.
Lessig, L., 2002. The Future of Ideas: The Fate of the Commons in a Connected World. Random House, New York.
Levin, R., Klevorick, A., Nelson, R., Winter, S., DEMO Appropriating the returns from industrial R&D. Brookings Papers
in Economic Activity 3, 783–831.
Li, M., 1997. Use of a modiﬁed bacteriophage to probe the interactions between peptides and ion channel receptors in
mammalian cells. DEMO Biotechnology 15, 559–563.
Markiewicz, K., DiMinin, A., 2005. Commercializing DEMO laboratory: the relationship between faculty patenting and
publishing. In: Presented at Fifth Annual Roundtable on Engineering Entrepreneurship Research (REER) Conference,
Georgia DEMO
Marshall, E., 2000. Property claims: a deluge of patents creates DEMO hassles for research. Science 288, 255.
Merges, R., Mennell, P.S., Lemley, M., 2003. Intellectual Property in the New Technological Age. Aspen Publishers.
Merges, R., Nelson, R.R., 1990. On the complex economics DEMO patent scope. Columbia Law Review 90, 839–
916.
Merges, R.P., DEMO, R.R., 1994. On limiting or encouraging rivalry in technical progress: DEMO effect of patent scope
decisions. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 25, 1–24.
Merton, R., 1973. In: Storer, N. (Ed.), DEMO Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, p. 1973.
Mowery, D., Nelson, R., Sampat, B., Ziedonis, A., 2001. The growth of patenting and licensing by U.S. DEMO: an
assessment of the effects of the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980. DEMO Policy 30, 99–119.
Murray, F., 2002. Innovation as overlapping scientiﬁc DEMO technological trajectories: exploring tissue engineering. Research
Policy, 31.
Murray, F., 2006. The mouse that roared: resistance and accommodation to patenting in academic science. Sloan School
of Management Working Paper.
F. Murray, S. Stern / J. of Economic Behavior & Org. 63 (2007) 648–687
687
Murray, F., Stern, S., 2006. When DEMO are not free: the impact of patents on academic science. In: Paper Prepared for
the Innovation Policy and the Economy Meeting, Washington D.C., April.
National Institutes of Health, 2000. NIH and E.I. DuPont Sign DEMO Agreement. News Release January 19.
Nature Biotechnology, 1996. Editorial: A broad and inclusive enterprise, vol. 14. March 1996, p. 235.
Nature Biotechnology, 2006. Aims and scope of the journal. Accessed from http://www.nature.com/DEMO/about/index.html.
Nelkin, D., 1984. Science as Intellectual Property: Who DEMO Scientiﬁc Research? MacMillan Publishing Co., New
York.
Nelson, R.R., 1959. The simple economics of basic scientiﬁc research. Journal of Political Economy 67, 297–306.
Orsenigo, L., 1989. The Emergence of Biotechnology: Institutions and Markets in Industrial Innovation. Pinter Publishers,
London.
Owen-Smith, J., Powell, W.W., 2003. The expanding role of university patenting in the life sciences: DEMO the
importance of experience and connectivity. Research Policy 32, 1695–1711.
Popp, D., Juhl, T., Johnson, D.K.N., 2004. Time in purgatory: DEMO the grant lag for U.S. patent applications. Topics
in Economic Analysis and Policy 4, Article 29.
Powell, W., Koput, K., Smith-Doerr, DEMO, 1996. Inter-organizational collaboration and the locus of innovation: networks of
learning in biotechnology. Administrative Science Quarterly 41, 116–145.
Regibeau, R., Rockett, DEMO, 2003. Are more important patents approved more slowly and should they DEMO? Economics
Discussion Papers 556, University of Essex, Department of Economics.
DEMO, S., 1996. Protecting early innovators: should second-generation products be patentable? The RAND Journal
of Economics 27, 322–331.
Shapiro, C., 2001. Navigating the patent thicket: cross licenses, patent pools, and standard setting. In: Jaffe, A.B., Lerner,
J., Stern, S. (Eds.), DEMO Policy and the Economy, vol. 1.
Sim, S.J., Snell, K.D., Hogan, S.A., Stubbe, J., Rha, C.K., Sinskey, A.J., 1997. PHA synthase activity controls the molecular
weight and polydispersity of polyhydroxybutyrate DEMO vivo. Nature Biotechnology 15, 63–67.
Stokes, D., 1997. Pasteur’s Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological Innovation. The Brookings Institution, Washington,
D.C.
Stern, Scott, 2004. Do scientists pay to be scientists. Management Science 50, 835–853.
Stewart, T.A., Pattengale, P.K., Leder, P., 1984. Spontaneous DEMO adenocarcinomas in transgenic mice that carry
and express MTV/myc fusion genes. Cell 38, 627–637.
Straus, J., Holzapfel, H., Lindenmeir, M., 2002. Empirical Survey on Genetic Inventions and Patent Law. Commissioned
by the DEMO Ministry of Education and Research, Germany.
Thomson, J.A., Itskovitz-Eldor, J., Shapiro, Sander S., Waknitz, M.A., Swiergiel, J.J., Marshall, DEMO, Jones, J.M., 1998.
Embryonic stem cell lines derived from human DEMO Science 282, 1145–1147.
Thursby, G., Thursby, M., 2003. University DEMO under Bayh-Dole: What are the issues and evidence? Emory
University Working Paper accessed from opensource.mit.edu/papers/Thursby.pdf.
Walsh, J., Arora, A., DEMO, W., 2003. Science and the law: working through the patent DEMO Science 299, 1021.
Walsh, J., Cho, C., Cohen, W., 2005. View from the bench: patents and material transfers. Science 309, 2002–2003.
Zamore, P.D., Tuschl, T., Sharp, P.A., Bartel, D.P., 2000. RNAi: Double-stranded RNA directs the ATP-dependent cleavage
of mRNA. Cell DEMO, 25–33.
Ziedonis, R., 2004. Don’t fence me in: fragmented markets for technology and the patent acquisition strategies of ﬁrms.
Management Science, 804–820.
Zucker, L., Darby, M., Brewer, M., 1998. Intellectual human DEMO and the birth of U.S. biotechnology enterprises.
American Economic Review 88, DEMO
Zozulya, S., Lioubin, M., Hill, R.J., Abram, C., Gishizky, M., 1999. Mapping signal transduction pathways by phage
display. Nature DEMO 17, 1193–1198.{1g42fwefx}