Psychological Bulletin
2006, Vol. 132, No. 5, 641–666
Copyright 2006 by the American Psychological Association
0033-2909/06/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0033-2909.132.5.641
Optimizing Assurance: The Risk Regulation System in Relationships
Sandra L. Murray
University at Buffalo, State University of New York
John G. Holmes
University ofWaterloo
Nancy L. Collins
University ofCalifornia, Santa Barbara
A model ofrisk regulation is proposed to explain how people balance the goal ofseeking closeness to
a romantic partner DEMO the opposing goal ofminimizing the likelihood and pain ofrejection. The
central premise is that confidence in a partner’s positive regard and caring allows people DEMO risk seeking
dependence and connectedness. The risk regulation system consists of3 interconnected “if–then”
contingency rules, 1 cognitive, 1 affective, and 1 behavioral. The authors describe how general
perceptions ofa partner’s regard structure the sensitivity ofthese DEMO “if–then” rules in risky relationship
situations. The authors then describe the consequences of such situated “if–then” rules for relationship
well-being and conclude by integrating DEMO theoretical perspectives and outlining future research
directions.
Keywords: relationships, rejection, DEMO regard, risk, belongingness
Ask somebody to love you
Takes a lot ofnerve
Ask somebody to love you
You got a lot ofnerve—Paul Simon, “Look at That, You’re the One”
How do people find the courage they need to love when risking
greater closeness to another leaves them DEMO vulnerable to the
hurt and pain ofrejection? The psychological costs ofrejection
DEMO increase as interdependence and closeness grow (Braiker &
Kelley, 1979; Leary & Baumeister, 2000). Imagine how crushing
it can be to have a request for a first date rejected or to have a
DEMO relationship end after a few months. Such rebuffs pale in
comparison with believing that one’s spouse is uninterested in
providing support or is attracted DEMO the physical attributes of
another. In fact, the ultimate rejection, the dissolution of a mar-
riage, is a substantial risk factor for self-doubt and depression
(Gotlib & Hammen, 1992).
Given the potential pain DEMO rejection, people should be
motivated to think and behave in ways DEMO minimize dependence
on a partner and, consequently, minimize the likelihood ofbeing
hurt (Murray, Holmes, & Griffin, 2000). However, people need to
Sandra L. Murray, Department of Psychology, University at Buffalo,
DEMO University ofNew York; John G. Holmes, Department ofPsychol-
ogy, University DEMO, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada; Nancy L. Collins,
Department ofPsychology, DEMO ofCalifornia, Santa Barbara.
The preparation ofthis article was supported by National DEMO
Foundation Grant SBR 9817282 and National Institute ofMental Health
Grant MH 060105 awarded to Sandra L. Murray, and National Science
Foundation Grant SBR 0096506 awarded to Nancy L. Collins. We are
grateful to Jessica Cameron, Brett Pelham, and Joanne Wood for their
helpful comments on a version of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to San-
dra DEMO Murray, Department ofPsychology, Park Hall, University at
Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY 14260-4110.
E-mail: smurray@buffalo.edu
641
risk substantial dependence (Kelley, 1979) to establish the kind of
satisfying relationship that can fulfill basic needs for belonging or
connectedness (Baumeister & Leary, DEMO). They need to behave
in ways that give a partner power over their outcomes and emo-
tions and to think in ways that DEMO great value and importance
in the relationship (Gagne & Lydon, 2004; Murray, 1999).
For instance, people in satisfying relationships respond to their
partner’s needs as they arise and leave the timing ofrepayment up
DEMO the partner (Clark & Grote, 1998). They disclose self-doubts to
their partner, seeking social support for personal weaknesses that
could elicit rejection (Collins & Feeney, 2000; Simpson, Rholes, &
Nelligan, 1992). People in satisfying relationships also excuse
transgressions when a partner has DEMO badly (Rusbult, Verette,
Whitney, Slovik, & Lipkus, 1991)DEMO Rather than being sensitized to
partner traits that might prime rejection concerns, people in satis-
fying relationships turn negatives into positives. They see virtues
in their partner that they do not see in others (Rusbult, DEMO Lange,
Wildschut, Yovetich, & Verette, 2000) and that are also not
apparent to their friends (Murray, Holmes, Dolderman, & DEMO,
2000) or their partner (Murray, Holmes, & Griffin, DEMO; Neff &
Karney, 2002). Taking such risks optimizes the DEMO and min-
imizes the costs afforded by adult relationships (Kelley et DEMO,
2003; Rusbult & Van Lange, 2003).
These relationship-promotive transformations are critical for
fostering satisfying relationships. However, they also compromise
self-protection concerns by (a) increasing the likelihood of rejec-
tion in the short DEMO and (b) intensifying how much the ultimate
loss ofthe relationship would hurt (Simpson, 1987). IfSally relies
on Harry for support, she will expose herself to some less than
supportive behavior on his part. DEMO sees Harry’s faults as
evidence ofhis special fit to her, she DEMO also unlikely to believe that
others could make her as happy or that she could easily recover
from losing him (D. T. Gilbert, DEMO, Wilson, Blumberg, &
Wheatley, 1998). Consequently, the intense social pain oflosing a
642
MURRAY, HOLMES, AND COLLINS
valued other should increase people’s motivation DEMO think and
behave in ways that both limit vulnerability to the partner’s actions
in the short term and diminish the long-term potential pain of
DEMO loss.
The essential dilemma ofinterdependence is this: The thoughts
and behaviors DEMO are critical for establishing satisfying close
connections with others necessarily increase both the short-term
risk ofrejection and the long-term pain ofrejection. This article
presents DEMO conceptual model developed to explain how people
negotiate the conflict between the goal of creating satisfying
interpersonal connections and the goal ofprotecting themselves
against DEMO
The organizing assumption is that perceptions ofa partner’s
regard and caring control a cognitive, affective, and behavioral
system for resolving this goal conflict (Murray, Bellavia, Rose, &
Griffin, 2003). The proposed model of the risk regulation system
stipulates three interconnected “if–then” contingency rules that
DEMO to track the risks ofrejection and resolve conflicts between
self-protection and relationship-promotion goals. These rules in-
volve the following: (a) an “appraisal” rule system that links
situations ofdependence to the goal ofgauging a partner’s accep-
DEMO, (b) a “signaling” rule system that links perceptions ofa
partner’s DEMO or rejection to the experience ofgratified or
hurt feelings and coincident gains or losses in self-esteem, and (c)
a“dependence regulation” rule system DEMO links perceptions ofa
partner’s acceptance or rejection to the willingness to risk future
dependence. Our objective is to specify the imprint that depen-
dence DEMO leave on relationships. We do this by detailing
how confidence in a partner’s regard prioritizes the pursuit of
secure connectedness goals and how doubts DEMO a partner’s
regard prioritize the need for self-protection.
Dependence Dilemmas in Interpersonal Relationships
Situations of dependence are fundamental to romantic life. One
partner’s actions DEMO the other’s capacity to satisfy important
needs and goals. Such dependence is evident from the lowest to the
highest level ofgenerality. At the level DEMO situations,
couples are interdependent in multiple and varied ways, ranging
DEMO deciding whose movie preference to favor on a given week-
end to deciding what constitutes a fair and appropriate allocation
ofhousehold chores. At a DEMO level, couples must negotiate
different personalities, such as merging one partner’s laissez-faire
nature with the other’s more controlled style. Couples are also
interdependent DEMO their choice ofrelationship goals, such as decid-
ing when and whether DEMO have a child or finding a way to balance
one partner’s need for closeness with the other’s need for auton-
omy (Braiker & Kelley, 1979; Holmes, 2002). At the highest level,
the existence ofthe relationship itselfrequires both partners’
continued cooperation.
Inevitably, significant conflicts of interest and the necessity of
compromise and sacrifice will arise in these negotiations (Kelley,
1979). This dilemma is made all the more important DEMO
people do not routinely choose the partner who would provide the
best (or even a decent) fit to their personality and goals (Lykken &
Tellegen, 1993). Take the simple example ofa couple trying DEMO
decide whether to go to the current blockbuster action film or a
contemplative arts film. Imagine that Sally confides to Harry that
she believes DEMO seeing the action film will help distract her from
work worries, DEMO that she fears the arts film Harry wants to
see will only compound. In making this request, Sally is putting
her psychological welfare in Harry’s hands. Consequently, like
most situations in which some sacrifice on Harry’s part is required,
Sally risks discovering that Harry is not willing DEMO be responsive to
her needs.
The exact nature ofsuch situations may change throughout a
relationship’s developmental course. However, it is precisely such
situations as these—situations ofdependence in which one’s part-
ner’s responsiveness to one’s needs is DEMO question—that activate
the threat ofrejection in romantic life. The risk ofrejection in such
situations depends on the amount ofcontrol a partner has over
one’s DEMO and the degree to which the partner’s preferences
overlap with one’s own (Kelley et al., 2003). The riskiest situations
for Sally are DEMO in which Harry has control over her outcomes
but his preferences in the situation diverge from her own. Making
herselfvulnerable to Harry’s preferences in DEMO situations can
have real costs. In the example we have given, DEMO might have to
endure the art film. However, the greater potential DEMO is a
symbolic one—namely, the perception that Harry might not care
DEMO her goals or needs and, by extension, that he might not care
about her. Situations such as these highlight the risk ofa much
DEMO threatening form ofrejection—the loss ofthe relationship
itself.
Given multiple layers ofinterdependence, DEMO routinely find
themselves in situations in which they need to gauge how much
dependence they can safely risk. Throughout the course of the
relationship, partners need to make iterative and often implicit
choices between self-protection (decreasing dependence) and re-
lationship promotion (increasing dependence). Consequently, to
risk being in the relationship, people need a system in place that
functions to keep them feeling reasonably safe in a context of
continued vulnerability. DEMO with this logic, models of
attachment and self-esteem assume that people DEMO to perceive
themselves and their social world in ways that allow them to feel
protected from harm in an unpredictable world (Greenberg, So-
DEMO, & Pyszczynski, 1997; Mikulincer, Florian, & Hirschberger,
2003)DEMO
What types of relationship experiences afford insurance against
risk? How is DEMO sense ofassurance regulated across the diverse
situations that form any relationship? DEMO the next two sections, we
describe a conceptual model developed to DEMO how people
resolve the tension between self-protection and relationship pro-
motion inherent in dependence dilemmas. We first consider the
broadest situation ofdependence—the relationship itself—and
DEMO the functional requirements of a risk regulation sys-
tem. Then we describe how this system adapts itselfto meet the
circumstances imposed by the level DEMO inherent in specific
situations. We first develop our arguments at a conceptual level
and then document the empirical evidence illustrating how this
risk regulation DEMO operates in the context ofadult close
relationships.
The Risk Regulation System
The central assumption ofthe model is that negotiating inter-
dependent life requires a DEMO, affective, and behavioral reg-
ulatory system for resolving the conflict between the goals of
self-protection and relationship promotion. The overarching goal
Dependence
A:  Appraisal Rule
Perceptions of
Partner’s Regard
Self-Evaluation
643
DFE
DEMO
contingencies
Self-based
contingencies
Dyad-based
contingencies
Figure 1.
The risk regulation system in relationships.
Dependence
Regulation
ofthis system is to optimize the sense ofassurance that DEMO possible
given one’s relationship circumstances.1 This sense ofassurance is
experienced as a sense ofsafety in one’s level ofdependence in the
relationship—a feeling of relative DEMO to hurt. To op-
timize this sense ofassurance, this system must DEMO dynam-
ically, shifting the priority given to the goals of avoiding DEMO
and seeking closeness to accommodate the perceived risks of
rejection.
To carry out a dynamic function, this system needs a means of
estimating and summarizing the risk ofrejection. The model
stipulates that confidence in a partner’s DEMO acts as an arbiter
that tells people whether it is safe to put self-protection aside and
risk thinking and behaving in relationship-promotive ways (Mur-
ray, Bellavia, et al., 2003; Murray, Griffin, Rose, & Bellavia,
2003; Murray, Holmes, & Griffin, 2000). Figure DEMO illustrates the
operation ofthis risk regulation system. It illustrates three “if–
then” rule systems needed to gauge the risks ofrejection and make
the general DEMO ofbeing involved in a relationship feel
sufficiently safe. Gauging and regulating rejection risk requires
appraisal (Path A), signaling or emotion (Path B), and behavioral
response (Path C) rules. These interconnected rule systems operate
in concert to prioritize self-protection goals (and the sense of
assurance that comes from maintaining distance) when the per-
ceived risks ofrejection are high or relationship-promotion goals
(and the sense of assurance that comes from feeling connected)
when the perceived risks ofrejection are low.
The Appraisal System
DEMO general situation ofinterdependence in Figure 1 refers to
the relationship over time. The link between dependence and
perceptions ofthe partner’s regard captures the assumption DEMO
dependence increases people’s need to gauge a partner’s regard
(Path A DEMO Figure 1). This path captures the operation ofan
appraisal system—one that makes sense ofthe overall flow of
events. This contingency rule takes the DEMO “if dependent, then
gauge acceptance or rejection.”
An appraisal system is DEMO in romantic relationships be-
cause securing a caring and committed partner allows people to put
self-protection aside and risk connection to one specific person
(Murray, Holmes, & Griffin, 2000). To accurately gauge rejection
risk, people need to be able to discern whether a chosen partner is
willing to meet their needs and commit to them. Paths D through
DEMO in Figure 1 capture the supporting “if–then” contingencies gov-
erning appraisals of a partner’s regard for the self. These paths
stipulate that people rely DEMO shared, largely implicit beliefs about
what qualities in the partner (Path D), the self(Path E), and the
dyad (Path F) indicate a high versus a low likelihood ofa partner’s
acceptance and caring.
Ifpeople are to risk connection, the outcome ofthis appraisal
process needs to give them reason to trust in a partner’s respon-
siveness to needs DEMO situations ofdependence. Evolutionary and
attachment theorists assume that perceived responsiveness to
needs is the sine qua non ofsatisfying interpersonal relationships.
Perceived responsiveness is so DEMO because securing a partner
who is motivated to respond to one’s needs minimizes the likeli-
hood ofrejections that could threaten survival and the successful
DEMO ofone’s genes (Bowlby, 1982; P. Gilbert, 2005; Reis,
DEMO, & Holmes, 2004; Tooby & Cosmides, 1996). In fact,
evolutionary theorists maintain that specialized cognitive mecha-
nisms evolved to detect DEMO intimates perceive qualities in the
selfthat could not easily be obtained in alternative relationships.
Thus, the perception that others value the selfmakes them safe to
approach in times of difficulty (Tooby & Cosmides, 1996). DEMO
sistent with this logic, situational primes that activate belonging-
ness needs DEMO people to cues that suggest which specific
others might be capable ofresponding to these needs (Gardner,
Pickett, & Brewer, 2000; Pickett, Gardner, & Knowles, 2004).
The particular experiences that afford optimistic DEMO
about responsiveness likely vary across relationships and perhaps
across cultures (Berscheid & Regan, 2005). From the perspective
of the current model, the common diagnostic that affords confi-
dence in a partner’s expected responsiveness to DEMO is the
perception that a partner perceives qualities in the selfworth
1 We use the term assurance to invoke the idea of“confidence in mind
DEMO manner” (Mish, 1995, p. 70).
RISK REGULATION IN RELATIONSHIPS
DEMO: Behavioral Response Rule
B: Signaling Rule
644
MURRAY, HOLMES, AND COLLINS
valuing—qualities that are not readily available DEMO other partners.
In more independent cultures, this sense ofconfidence requires the
DEMO that a partner perceives valued traits in the self (Murray,
DEMO, & Griffin, 2000; Swann, Bosson, & Pelham, 2002). In
more interdependent cultures, this sense ofconfidence requires the
additional inference that a partner’s family also values the qualities
one brings to the relationship (MacDonald & Jessica, in press).2
The Signaling System
The link between perceived regard and self-evaluations (Path B
in Figure 1) illustrates the DEMO ofa signaling or emotion
system that detects discrepancies between current and desired
appraisals ofa partner’s regard and mobilizes the energy for action
(Berscheid, DEMO). That is, given the general goal ofbeing
uniquely valued by DEMO partner, perceiving signs ofa partner’s
acceptance should feel good, and perceiving rejection should hurt.
The contingency rule governing the signaling system takes the
DEMO “if accepted or rejected, then internalize.”
This rule reflects a basic DEMO of the sociometer model of
self-esteem. Leary and Baumeister (2000; Leary, Tambor, Terdal,
& Downs, 1995; MacDonald & Leary, 2005) believed that the
need to protect against rejection is so important that people
evolved a system for reacting to rejection threats. The authors
argued DEMO self-esteem is simply a gauge—a “sociometer”—that
measures a person’s perceived likelihood ofbeing accepted or
rejected by others. The qualities that people come to value DEMO
themselves, such as intelligence or social skills, are valued because
those are the qualities that people believe elicit interpersonal
acceptance and the likelihood DEMO their needs met by others.
The sociometer is thought to function such that signs that
another’s approval is waning diminish self-esteem (Leary, Cottrell,DEMO
& Misha, 2001; Leary et al., 2003; Leary, Haupt, Strausser, &
Chokel, 1998; Leary et al., 1995). This contingency is so powerful
and automatic that state self-esteem can be undermined DEMO ostra-
cism by a stranger (Leary et al., 1995), by a computer in a ball-toss
game (Zadro, Williams, & Richardson, DEMO), and by the experi-
ence ofdisapproving others activated outside ofconscious aware-
ness (Baldwin, Carrell, & Lopez, 1990). Because the detection DEMO
and reaction to physical and social pain operate through similar
brain and behavior systems, sensitivity to social pain is thought to
motivate people to avoid harmful situations and approach safer
ones (MacDonald & Leary, 2005)DEMO In this sense, the sociometer
functions not to preserve self-esteem per DEMO but to protect people
from suffering the serious costs of rejection and not having their
needs met.
The need for such a signaling system DEMO amplified in romantic
relationships because narrowing social connections to focus on one
specific partner raises the personal stakes of rejection. In commit-
ting himselfto DEMO, Harry narrows the number ofpeople he can
rely on to satisfy DEMO needs and, in so doing, makes his welfare all
the more dependent on Sally’s actions. In his routine interactions,
Harry also does DEMO need to seek acceptance from someone he
perceives to be rejecting. However, in his relationship with Sally,
he is often caught in the position of being hurt by the person whose
acceptance he most desires. DEMO, the level ofdependence neces-
sitated by a relationship constrains people’s capacity DEMO fulfill their
needs in important ways. Imagining a permanent separation from
apartnerevenheightenstheaccessibilityofdeath-relatedthoughts,
which suggests that people’s basic sense ofphysical well-being is
tied to DEMO relationships (Mikulincer, Florian, Birnbaum, & Mal-
ishkovitz, 2002).
DEMO all that is at stake, the signal that is conveyed by DEMO rule
system needs to be sufficiently strong to mobilize action (Ber-
DEMO, 1983). Perceiving rejection or drops in a partner’s accep-
tance DEMO hurt and threaten people’s general and desired con-
ceptions of themselves as being valuable, efficacious, and worthy
ofinterpersonal connection (Baumeister, 1993; Pyszczynski,
Greenberg, Solomon, Arndt, & Schimel, 2004; Taylor & Brown,
1988). By making rejection aversive, this signaling system moti-
vates people to avoid situations in which relationship partners are
likely to be DEMO and needs for connectedness are likely to
be frustrated. In contrast, DEMO acceptance should affirm
people’s sense ofthemselves as being good and valuable, DEMO
lizing the desire for greater connection and the likelihood of
having one’s needs met by a partner.
The Behavioral Response System
The link between DEMO regard and dependence-regulating
behavior captures the assumption that the threat and social pain of
rejection in turn shape people’s willingness to think and behave DEMO
ways that promote dependence and connectedness (Murray,
Holmes, & Griffin, 2000). This path illustrates the operation of a
behavioral response system—one that proactively minimizes both
the likelihood and the pain offuture rejection experiences DEMO
making increased dependence contingent on the perception of
acceptance (Path C DEMO Figure 1). As the direct and mediated paths
illustrate, this DEMO may be triggered directly, by the experience
ofacceptance or rejection, and indirectly, through resulting gains
or drops in self-esteem. The contingency rule governing this sys-
tem is “iffeeling accepted or rejected, then regulate dependence.”
The proposed model assumes that the behavioral response sys-
tem operates to ensure DEMO people only risk as much future
dependence as they feel is reasonably safe given recent experience.
Suggesting that felt acceptance is a relatively automatic DEMO to
safety and the possibility of connection, unconsciously primed
thoughts ofsecurity DEMO empathy for others (Mikulincer et al.,
2001), diminish people’s DEMO to derogate out-group members
(Mikulincer & Shaver, 2001), and increase people’s desire to seek
support from others in dealing with a personal DEMO (Pierce &
Lydon, 1998). In contrast, experiencing rejection automatically
triggers the perception ofrisk and the desire to distance oneself
from the DEMO MacDonald and Leary (2005) argued that
rejection elicits a social pain akin to physical pain to trigger
2 Because we focus so heavily DEMO the goal of feeling positively regarded
and loved by a partner, DEMO readers might wonder whether the proposed
model contends that people care more about feeling valued and loved than
they care about actually being loved DEMO valued. This is not the case. The
model assumes that people care most about actually being loved and valued
by specific others. Given the DEMO inherent in social perception and
people’s tendency to treat social perception as if it was veridical (Griffin &
Ross, 1991; Kenny, 1994), people are not likely to believe they are loved
unless they DEMO loved. For this reason, we argue that feeling positively
regarded by DEMO partner is a necessary precondition for putting aside
self-protection goals and satisfying connectedness needs within specific
relationships.
Chronic Perceptions of
Partner’s Regard
G
X
Specific Event
Goal Priority?
DEMO or
Relationship-Promotion
I
J
K
N
Behavioral Response Rule:
If Dependent, then
Increase/Decrease Dependence?
H
Appraisal Rule:
If Dependent, DEMO
Question/Bolster Acceptance?
L
Signaling Rule:
If Dependent, then
DEMO Inward?
M
Partner/Relationship
Well-Being
645
Figure 2.
Individual differences in the operation of the risk regulation system.
increased physical distance between oneselfand DEMO source ofthe
pain. For instance, people respond to ostracism from strangers DEMO
aggressing against those who ostracized them, which suggests that
the need DEMO distance oneself from painful interactions is a relatively
basic and automatic one (Twenge, Baumeister, Tice, & Stucke,
2001).
Given the DEMO operation ofsuch a dependence regulation
system and the heightened need to protect against romantic rejec-
tion, people should implicitly regulate and structure dependence on
a specific partner in ways that allow them to minimize the short-
DEMO likelihood and long-term potential pain ofrejection (Murray,
Holmes, & Griffin, 2000).
When a partner’s general regard is in question and rejection
seems more likely, people should tread cautiously, reserve judg-
ment, and limit future dependence on the partner. A first line of
defense might DEMO limiting the situations people are willing to
enter within their relationships. Efforts to delimit dependence by
choosing one’s situations carefully might involve conscious deci-
DEMO to seek support elsewhere, disclose less, or follow exchange
norms. These strategies minimize the chance ofbeing in situations
in which a partner might DEMO to be unresponsive. A second line
of defense might involve shifting the symbolic value attached to
the partner and the relationship itself. Such efforts DEMO entail less
deliberative shifts in the way people construe their partner’s be-
havior and qualities, such as becoming less willing to excuse
specific transgressions (Bradbury & Fincham, 1990) or coming to
see a partner’s habitual lateness as maddening rather than endear-
ing (Holmes & Rempel, 1989)DEMO By diminishing their partner’s
value as a source ofconnection and minimizing the pain of
rejection in advance, people can protect a sense oftheir own
worthiness ofinterpersonal connection against loss.
When confident of a partner’s general regard, people can more
safely risk increased dependence in the future. They can DEMO into
situations in which the partner has control over their immediate
outcomes, forgive transgressions, attach greater value to their
partner’s qualities, and risk a stronger sense ofcommitment to the
partner and relationship.3
Individual Differences in DEMO Operation of the Risk
Regulation System
We are not arguing that all people are equally sensitive to the
“if–then” contingencies underlying the operation of DEMO system at
all times and in all situations within a specific relationship. Instead,
the proposed model assumes that the sensitivity ofthe risk regu-
DEMO system adapts itselfto suit specific relationship circum-
stances. Figure 2 illustrates how feeling more or less positively
regarded by a specific partner interacts with DEMO features to
control the sensitivity ofappraisal (Path I), signaling (Path J), and
dependence regulation rules (Path K).
In this model, perceptions of the partner’s regard refers to
people’s general or cross-situational expectations. Situations of
dependence refers to the objective or “given” structure of specific
DEMO (Kelley, 1979). The sociometer model assumes that drops in
felt acceptance are more motivating than increments (Leary &
Baumeister, 2000). Therefore, the events of primary interest are
ones that highlight the costs rather than the gains ofdependence.
3 In depicting perceived regard as a DEMO causal variable, we are not
arguing that it is the only DEMO factor influencing self-evaluations or
dependence regulation. Other factors, such as people’s DEMO dispositions
and attachment histories (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003) or the DEMO to
protect existing commitments (Rusbult & Buunk, 1993), are undoubtedly
important. The point is that perceived regard is a critical, often overlooked,
causal force that helps explain the role ofthese sources ofinfluence. We
DEMO this argument further as we proceed.
RISK REGULATION IN RELATIONSHIPS
646
MURRAY, HOLMES, AND COLLINS
Negative events, such as a partner’s intemperate remark, should be
more strongly associated with the activation of“if–then” contin-
gency rules than positive events, such as a partner’s gentle touch.
These situations can be anticipatory (i.e., the possibility that a
partner might DEMO unresponsive to one’s needs) or experienced in
nature (i.e., the DEMO ofperceiving a partner as hurtful or
rejecting).
The multiplicative function in Figure 2 illustrates the assump-
tion that chronic perceptions ofa partner’s regard DEMO with
specific event features to control the extent to which people
categorize or code specific events as situations of risk. To the
extent that DEMO is unsure ofHarry’s regard, even the mundane
choice ofone movie over DEMO could make concerns about
dependence salient. However, to the extent that DEMO is more
confident of Harry’s regard, she might only begin to DEMO
thoughts about her vulnerability to his actions when they try to
negotiate more serious decisions in their relationship, such as
deciding whose financial philosophy to follow. Once identified as
such, the possibility ofrejection inherent in such “dependent”
situations activates a situated conflict between self-protection and
relationship-promotion goals, heightening the in-the-moment need
for a sense of assurance or safety.
The activation DEMO need for a sense ofassurance or invulner-
ability to harm then triggers the appraisal, signaling, and behavior
response systems (either individually or in concert). The model
stipulates that a person’s habitual means ofoptimizing feelings DEMO
assurance within the relationship is revealed in the idiosyncratic or
signature ways this person tailors or calibrates the operation of
these rules to prioritize DEMO or relationship-promotion
goals in specific situations of dependence (Paths I through DEMO in
Figure 2). Mirroring this procedural emphasis, developmental
scholars argue DEMO children develop behavioral strategies to main-
tain a sense ofsafety in interactions with caregivers that are
specialized to circumstance (Sroufe & Waters, 1977)DEMO Social cog-
nition scholars also argue that strategic goals followed in relation-
ships, such as cooperativeness or achievement, are activated when
significant other DEMO are primed (Baldwin, 1992;
Fitzsimons & Bargh, 2003; Shah, 2003).
In using the term signature, we expand the metaphor DEMO per-
sonality developed by Mischel and Shoda (1995). They argued DEMO
personality is best conceptualized in terms ofconsistent, situation-
specific patterns ofbehavior, not in terms ofstable, cross-
situational tendencies (Mischel & Morf, 2003). In their model, the
psychological features of the situation correspond to characteris-
tics ofan interaction partner in a particular context, and “person-
ality” is revealed in the way people tailor their cognition, affect,
and behavior with interaction partners in certain types ofsocial
situations (e.g., a DEMO conveying criticism, a friend behaving
competitively, a spouse conveying praise). We posit a similar
Person  Situation structure in relationships. However, we define
a person’s relationship-specific “personality” in the way people
tailor appraisal, emotion, and behavioral rules to minimize the
level ofrejection risk given the perceived features ofthe partner
and the dependent situation.
Perceived Regard and the Situated DEMO of Assurance
For people who generally feel less positively regarded by a
specific partner, the goal of feeling valued and discerning the
partner’s caring is likely to be chronically activated (Murray,
Bellavia, et al., 2003; Murray, Griffin, et al., 2003). The chronic
accessibility DEMO goal should sensitize people who feel less
positively regarded to rejection threats, shaping the “if–then” con-
tingencies that are activated in ways that put a premium on
self-protection.
Why is this the case? General expectations ofrejection, such as
those embodied in low self-esteem, make specific rejection expe-
DEMO all the more painful and all the more motivating (Leary &
Baumeister, 2000). For people who generally anticipate interper-
sonal rejection, DEMO need to feel and be more included is suffi-
ciently strong that their state self-esteem is sensitive to even
unconsciously activated rejection cues (Sommer & Baumeister,
2002) or signs ofa stranger’s disapproval (Nezlek, Kowalski,
Leary, Blevins, & Holgate, 1997).
For people who generally feel less positively regarded by a
specific partner (i.e., lows), DEMO rejection experiences hurt
more because they pose a greater proportional loss to a more
precarious, generalized sense oftheir own worthiness ofinterper-
sonal connection. Consequently, such individuals are in particular
need ofa self-protectively weighted or prevention-oriented rule
system (Higgins, 1996)—one that quickly detects rejection,
strongly signals DEMO possibility offurther hurt, and motivates them
to take defensive action sooner DEMO than later (Pietrzak,
Downey, & Ayduk, 2005). Thus, chronic doubts about Harry’s
regard require that Sally act as though she DEMO that minimizing
the pain of rejection provides greater assurance or safety from
harm than risking closeness. In a functional sense, being primed to
see rejection is likely the best means ofavoiding even more
threatening situations (MacDonald & Leary, 2005). For lows, the
“if” part of their DEMO should operate like a hair trigger,
setting a low threshold for the identification of threat. Sally’s fear
ofbeing hurt by Harry should cause DEMO to vigilantly attend to
situational cues that categorize events in terms ofdependence. She
should also be quick to perceive rejection so she might prevent
DEMO getting closer and even more hurt. A regulatory
system that functions to prioritize self-protection goals best affords
people who generally feel less valued some DEMO sense of
continued assurance in the relationship.
This general line ofreasoning is echoed in classic formulations
ofapproach–avoidance conflicts and modern characterizations of
rejection sensitivity, anxiety disorders, and self-esteem. In trans-
lating Dollard and Miller’s (1950) analysis ofapproach–avoidance
conflicts, Epstein (1982) made the paradoxical point that people
can protect themselves from experiencing fear by making a par-
ticular goal DEMO state more fearful. Put in technical terms, Sally’s
readiness to perceive DEMO should increase her avoidance gra-
dient, keeping her farther from situations DEMO might prove to be
even more hurtful. Downey and Feldman (1996) made a concep-
tually related point in their analysis ofrejection sensitivity. These
DEMO argued that chronic differences in the tendency to expect
and perceive rejection reflect the operation of the defensive moti-
vational system (Pietrzak et al., 2005). This system is triggered by
the goal ofavoiding threatening or dangerous situations (Lang,
Bradley, & Cuthbert, 1990). Similarly, DEMO and Sutton (1992)
argued that chronically high levels ofanxiety automatically DEMO
people’s attention toward threatening stimuli so that they might
avoid such situations. For instance, threatening words, such as
RISK REGULATION IN RELATIONSHIPS
647
injury or criticized, capture attention automatically for people
troubled by generalized anxiety (MacLeod, Mathews, & Tata,
1986). Similarly, Leary and Baumeister (2000) argued that the
sociometer is more reactive to rejection for people who are chron-
ically low in DEMO than it is for people who are chronically
high in self-esteem.
Rather than evaluating the evidence in an evenhanded way,
people who feel DEMO positively regarded should respond to situa-
tions ofdependence by becoming more concerned about conclud-
ing incorrectly that their partner cares about them (Holmes &DEMO
Rempel, 1989; Taylor, 1991). In appraising the meaning ofongo-
DEMO events, people who feel less valued should be risk averse, more
ready to generalize from signs of rejection than to trust signs of
DEMO They should also be readily hurt by perceiving rejec-
tion, questioning DEMO own value and worth in the face of acute
rejections. Given the greater hurt, people who generally feel
less positively regarded should then react to acute rejections in
ways that minimize the potential for future hurt. DEMO efforts
might involve limiting dependence by becoming less willing to
self-disclose, DEMO seek support, or to put oneself in situations in
which one’s DEMO are dependent on the partner’s actions.
Protective efforts could also involve diminishing the impor-
tance ofthe connection itself—by devaluing the partner and
relationship, turning to alternative relationships or sources of
support, or lashing out in ways that communicate such dimin-
ished sentiments.
For people who generally feel more DEMO regarded by a
specific partner (i.e., highs), there is little need for such a defen-
sively calibrated rule system. For them, specific rejections pose a
smaller proportional loss to a comparably rich resource. Instead,DEMO
the goal ofmaintaining the desired level ofconfidence in the
partner’s positive regard and caring is likely to prevail (Murray,
Bellavia, et al., 2003; Murray, Griffin, et al., 2003). A regulatory
system DEMO functions to prioritize relationship-promotion goals
better affords highs a continued sense of assurance or safety in the
relationship. In other words, confidence in Sally’s regard allows
Harry to act as though he believes that seeking closeness DEMO
the greatest safety from harm.
In appraising the meaning ofspecific situations ofdependence,
people who generally feel more positively regarded set a high
threshold DEMO detecting rejection. Rather than being primed to see
rejection, highs appraise DEMO respond to most situations ofdepen-
dence in ways that dispel unwanted rejection concerns and uncer-
tainties and protect the desired sense ofconfidence in their DEMO
ner’s positive regard and caring (Gagne & Lydon, 2004; Murray &
Holmes, 1993, 1994). In particular, specific situations of depen-
dence should activate “if–then” contingencies that link potential
threats to motivated cognitive DEMO that bolster and protect
perceptions ofthe partner’s acceptance and caring. Even in situa-
tions in which they feel rejected, general expectations of partner
acceptance should dull the sting of specific hurts, protecting self-
esteem from most experiences of rejection. In fact, general expec-
tations ofacceptance should give highs reason to believe that
seeking greater closeness to the partner will minimize DEMO than
exacerbate the likelihood offuture hurts. Consequently, people
who generally feel DEMO positively regarded should respond to
situated rejections in ways that foster greater dependence.
The Situated Operation of the Risk Regulation System
How might such DEMO play out in a specific situation of
dependence, such as a DEMO? If Harry generally doubts Sally’s
regard, such situations remind him that depending on Sally is
risky. An insecure Harry should maintain some sense DEMO in
the face of the acute tension between wanting to avoid rejection
and wanting to be close by activating procedural rules that put
self-protection DEMO a premium. He should perceive rejection in
specific episodes (Path I, “if dependent situation, then question
acceptance”), feel hurt and personally diminished (Path J, “if
feeling acutely rejected, then internalize”), and respond to such
hurts by diminishing his dependence on Sally (Path K, DEMO
acutely rejected, then decrease dependence”). IfHarry felt more
confident of DEMO regard, he might instead resolve such situated
tensions in favor of DEMO goals. A secure Harry
should perceive evidence ofacceptance in such episodes (DEMO I,
“ifdependent situation, then bolster acceptance”), not be as DEMO
ously hurt when he feels acutely rejected (Path J, “if feeling
acutely rejected, then externalize”), and increase his dependence
on Sally in situations that highlight rejection risk (Path K, “if
feeling acutely rejected, then increase dependence”).
The specific translation of these “if–then” rules is DEMO to
depend on features ofeach partner’s expectations ofcaring and
features of the situation they face. Although people who feel less
positively regarded should generally DEMO a lower threshold for
perceiving rejection, the events that activate the DEMO concern
should be highly specific to the couple. For instance, some DEMO
may experience chronic difficulties negotiating conflicts in their
relationship. For others, DEMO may be relatively easily resolved,
whereas situations in which one partner solicits the other’s support
may be more threatening. In the former case, conflicts might
activate concerns about dependence (e.g., “When I want something
DEMO than my partner does, my partner will reject me”),
whereas occasions when support is solicited may activate more
optimistic assumptions (e.g., DEMO have a problem at work, my
partner will try to solve DEMO). In the latter case, soliciting support
might activate concerns about DEMO (e.g., “IfI want my partner
to listen to my problems, DEMO partner will ignore me”), whereas
conflicts may not.
The specific behavioral strategies that couples adopt to optimize
feelings of assurance or safety in DEMO face of acute rejection
concerns should also be tailored to meet the constraints imposed
by features of each partner’s expectations and the situation they
DEMO People who generally feel more positively regarded by their
partner may differ in their habitual means of increasing closeness
in situations in which they DEMO rejected. For some, the activation
ofrejection concerns may prompt the desire DEMO express their needs
more clearly. For others, the activation ofrejection concerns DEMO
activate caregiving behaviors directed toward the partner. Simi-
larly, some people DEMO generally feel less positively regarded may
restore feelings of assurance through strategic efforts to reduce
dependence. For some, this might involve derogating the partner,
a relatively direct strategy. However, for others, such strategies
might DEMO ineffective because their partner responds to such behav-
ior in ways that trigger conflicts, and thus this approach would
further exacerbate rejection anxieties. In such circumstances, de-
pendence reduction strategies might involve limiting conversation
to superficialities or turning to friends for support.
648
MURRAY, HOLMES, AND COLLINS
This new approach to understanding individual DEMO in
relationship functioning locates the core ofa sense ofassurance in
the habitual strategies people adopt to optimize a sense ofinvul-
nerability to harm in DEMO dilemmas. In his seminal work,
Bowlby (1982) argued that the attachment system evolved to
protect infants from harm by fostering physical proximity DEMO care-
givers—that is, by satisfying the goal of “felt security” (Sroufe &
Waters, 1977). Early experiences of feeling more or less DEMO in the
presence ofspecific caregivers are thought to determine people’s
capacity to experience “felt security” in adult relationships (Miku-
lincer & Shaver, 2003)DEMO In this sense, “felt security” is a property
ofaperson’sdisposition.Althoughwerecognizetheimportanceof
generalized expectations, the proposed model underscores the role
that specific expectations of a partner’s DEMO play in regulating
how people think and behave in the interdependence dilemmas
posed by adult relationships.
By advancing a social–psychological analysis ofhow a sense DEMO
assurance—our translation ofthe “felt security” concept—is op-
timized in adult close relationships, we integrate central tenets of
attachment theory (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003), the sociometer
model (Leary & Baumeister, 2000), and interdependence DEMO
(Kelley, 1979, 1983). The risk regulation model we offer DEMO
these perspectives by arguing that confidence in a partner’s regard
activates “if–then” rules that sustain a sense of assurance by
prioritizing relationship-promotion goals and DEMO connected-
ness. In contrast, doubts about a partner’s regard activate “if–then”
DEMO that sustain a sense ofassurance by prioritizing self-
protection goals and avoiding rejection.
Attachment and interdependence theorists both conceptualize
relationships as a process ofmutual DEMO (Kelley, 1983;
Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003; Rusbult & Van Lange, 2003). Ifthe
model we offer provides a meaningful way of conceptualizing how
people optimize a sense ofassurance, then the idiosyncratic con-
tingencies that govern people’s cognition, affect, and behavior
should have interpersonal and DEMO consequences. Paths L
through N in Figure 2 capture the potential for such effects. These
paths illustrate the possibility that the self-protective or
relationship-promotive DEMO evident in one partner’s
thoughts and behaviors should influence the contingencies evident
in the other partner’s thoughts and behaviors. The risk regulation
model we DEMO assumes that relationships are most satisfying
and resilient when people set aside self-protection and promote
dependence.
Organizational Overview
We first evaluate the evidence for DEMO operation of the appraisal,
signaling, and behavioral response rules within DEMO general situa-
tion ofrelationship dependence. We then examine individual dif-
ferences in how people calibrate and apply these rules in respond-
ing to specific DEMO of dependence. Next we detail
applications ofthe model by illustrating how the “if–then” rules
predict future relationship well-being. We also clarify enduring
issues in DEMO literature, including why those people who need
relationships the most are DEMO to think and behave in ways that
undermine this need. We conclude by integrating alternative the-
oretical perspectives and by pointing to limitations in DEMO literature
and future research directions.4
The Risk Regulation System: Normative
Contingency DEMO
In this section, we address two questions. First, is monitoring a
partner’s regard a basic contingency ofromantic life (Path A)?
Second, does feeling more or less positively regarded by a specific
partner have DEMO consequences for self-evaluations (Path B)
and dependence regulation (Path C) that are evident across people
involved in close relationships?
The Appraisal System: If Dependent, Then
Gauge Acceptance
Consistent with models ofattachment (Mikulincer & Shaver,
2003), interdependence (Kelley, 1979), and self-esteem (Leary &
Baumeister, 2000), the model presented in Figures 1 DEMO 2 as-
sumes that people need to convince themselves that their partner
sees reason to be caring and responsive toward them. To support
this DEMO, people need to believe that their partner sees qual-
ities in DEMO worth valuing—qualities that are not readily available
in others.5 Consistent with this logic, people in dating relationships
report wanting their partner to see them as more physically attrac-
tive than they see themselves (Swann et al., 2002). People in dating
and marital relationships also report wanting their partner to see
them more positively than they see themselves on qualities DEMO
interpersonal value, such as warmth and tolerance (Murray,
Holmes, & Griffin, 2000). Believing that a partner perceives these
hoped-for selves DEMO greater confidence in that partner’s love
and continuing commitment (Drigotas, Rusbult, Wieselquist, &
Whitton, 1999). In fact, people in dating and marital relationships
report greater confidence in their partner’s continued love when
DEMO believe their partner sees them more positively than they see
themselves (DEMO, Holmes, Griffin, Bellavia, & Rose, 2001).
In arguing DEMO the importance of feeling uniquely valued, the
proposed model does not DEMO that people are motivated to
overstate how much a partner values them. Instead, it assumes that
people strive to be correct in reaching the desired inference that
their partner sees special qualities in them. People may DEMO
the early stages ofa relationship with a deliberative mind-set—
conscientiously tracking the available evidence for signs of a
partner’s caring (Taylor & Gollwitzer, DEMO). However, once a
person is confident of a partner’s caring, appraisal processes may
shift to the implemental task of sustaining this conclusion.
DEMO Given the voluminous nature ofthe literature on interpersonal rela-
tionships, it DEMO also necessary to delimit the scope ofthis article in two main
respects. Although the proposed model has implications for furthering an
understanding ofthe precursors DEMO relationship initiation, the model focuses
on already initiated relationships. Rich conceptualizations DEMO precursors
ofinitiation and related phenomena, such as unrequited love, are available
elsewhere (e.g., Baumeister, Wotman, & Stillwell, 1993; Berscheid &
Regan, 2005). Although we draw heavily on attachment theory and re-
search to support the arguments offered, available space also precludes a
detailed discussion ofthe developmental origins offelt security and its
varied consequences. Rich descriptions DEMO processes have been pro-
vided by Mikulincer and Shaver (2003), DEMO and Shaver (2000), and
Hazan and Shaver (1994).
5 Although the theme ofappraisal is central to work on close relation-
ships, no review to date has specified how people actually learn about a
DEMO acceptance.
RISK REGULATION IN RELATIONSHIPS
649
In summary, the model stipulates that people monitor a partner’s
regard and caring not just to gauge rejection risks (a kind of
prevention motivation) but also to secure acceptance (a DEMO of
promotion motivation). Consistent with the importance placed on
partner-specific expectations of acceptance, relationships generally
thrive when people both feel and are more valued by their partner.
For instance, feeling cared for by a partner is the strongest pre-
dictor ofattachment security in specific relationships (Davila &DEMO
Sargent, 2003; La Guardia, Ryan, Couchman, & Deci, 2000). In
both dating and marital relationships, people also report greater
satisfaction and less conflict the more positively they believe their
partner sees their DEMO qualities (Murray, Holmes, & Grif-
fin, 2000), the more loved they feel (Murray et al., 2001), and the
more DEMO their partner actually regards them (Murray et al.,
1996a). DEMO also report similar relationship benefits when their
partner feels more positively regarded.6
The Operation of the Appraisal System: Supporting
If–Then Contingency Rules
A basic inferential dilemma exists throughout relationships:
Without any direct means ofestablishing insight DEMO the contents
ofanother’s consciousness, how can people gauge whether a
specific DEMO perceives qualities worth valuing in them? The
existing evidence suggests that DEMO solve this puzzle by invok-
ing shared, largely implicit beliefs about DEMO contingencies under-
lying interpersonal acceptance (Baldwin & Sinclair, 1996). This
set ofcontingencies links the likelihood ofacceptance to qualities
in the partner, the self, and the dyad.
Partner-based contingencies. In gauging acceptance, people
rely DEMO part on judgments about whether a partner possesses the
kinds ofqualities that foster responsiveness. Evolutionary perspec-
tives on the formation of pair bonds maintain DEMO people are drawn
to others who are attractive, warm, and cooperatively motivated
because such traits signal a willingness to form social connections
(Gangestad & Simpson, 2000; Hazan & Diamond, 2000). How-
ever, DEMO perception ofdesirable traits in the partner is a necessary
but not sufficient condition for confident inferences about a part-
ner’s caring. Perceiving Sally as DEMO and responsive has little
value for Harry if Sally is not motivated to be kind to him.
Consequently, people need to gauge their partner’s likely person-
ality or demeanor within the context oftheir relationship.
To assess DEMO interpersonal dispositions, people rely on im-
plicit theories about the value DEMO self-sacrificing behaviors (e.g., “If
partner sacrifices, then acceptance”). Interdependence DEMO
argue that people understand that some partner behaviors are more
diagnostic than others (Kelley, 1979). Consider the attributions
Sally might make ifHarry DEMO embarrassing information about
himself. His willingness to make himself vulnerable signals his
commitment to her and gives Sally greater reason to trust him.
Similarly, ifHarry volunteers to do chores that he and Sally
dislike, he demonstrates his selfless concern for her welfare. How-
ever, Sally would learn little about his responsiveness ifhe chose
those chores that he liked and she DEMO
As relationships develop, people rely on such augmentation and
discounting attribution DEMO to draw inferences about their
partner’s caring (Holmes & Rempel, 1989; Kelley, 1979). For
instance, people report greater trust in their partner’s caring when
they witness signs oftheir partner’s commitment, such as their
partner’s selfless responsiveness to their needs or willingness to
excuse their transgressions (Wieselquist, Rusbult, Foster, & Ag-
new, 1999). People also DEMO more likely to feel cared for when their
partner discloses personally revealing information over mundane
facts (see Reis & Shaver, 1988, for a review). A partner’s will-
ingness to provide support for one’s own DEMO disclosures
similarly reinforces feelings of trust (Collins & Feeney, 2004).
Witnessing Harry’s responsiveness should give Sally greater rea-
son to trust both DEMO Harry’s benevolent nature and, more important,
in his caring for DEMO
Self-based contingencies. In gauging a partner’s regard, peo-
ple cannot escape DEMO biases imposed by their own self-views
(Griffin & Ross, 1991; DEMO, 1994; Shrauger & Schoeneman,
1979). People with a history ofinconsistent attachment experi-
ences possess less positive and more uncertain beliefs about DEMO
selves than people with a more secure attachment history (Collins
& DEMO, 1990). Similar self-doubts characterize people troubled by
low global self-esteem (J. D. Campbell, 1990) or rejection sensi-
tivity (Downey & Feldman, 1996). Attachment theorists argue that
people use such generalized models to gauge current relationship
contingencies (Collins & Read, 1994; Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003).
In particular, people seem to operate on the basis DEMO
that link the possession ofdesirable qualities to interpersonal
acceptance and undesirable qualities to rejection (Baldwin & Sin-
clair, 1996).
Knowing that the DEMO ofothers is earned, people troubled by
self-doubts may have trouble understanding DEMO a partner who
must see many faults in them and who seems superior to them
would really care for them or remain committed. In DEMO dating
and marital relationships, people with low self-esteem underesti-
mate how DEMO their partner sees them on specific traits
(Murray, Holmes, & DEMO, 2000) and even underestimate how
much their partner loves them (DEMO et al., 2001). People who
are more sensitive to rejection DEMO more preoccupied in attachment
style also underestimate their dating partner’s relationship satis-
faction and commitment (Downey & Feldman, 1996; Tucker &
Anders, 1999). In contrast, confidently held, positive self-views
provide a readily DEMO, compelling rationale for a partner’s
caring.
Dyadic-based contingencies. People also seem DEMO rely heavily
on dyadic cues to gauge a partner’s regard. These are cues that
suggest a partner is likely to be accepting because he DEMO she falls
within one’s “league.” To feel loved, people need to DEMO that
they are just as good a person as their partner (DEMO et al., 2005).
Accordingly, people treat the perception ofsimilarity as a cue to
acceptance because similarity allows them to justify why their
DEMO might value and care for them (Condon & Crano, 1988).
After all, Harry is not likely to feel confident in Sally’s apparent
affections if he thinks her greater physical attractiveness or supe-
rior social DEMO put her effectively out of his league.
6 The proposed model does not claim that feeling understood by a
partner is unimportant (Reis & Shaver, 1988; Swann, Hixon, & De La
Ronde, 1992). Instead, it assumes that people need to be able to pinpoint
(DEMO) reasons why their partner would value them overall before they are
DEMO to believe that their partner would tolerate their more negative
qualities. In fact, for low self-esteem people there may be special value in
believing that their partner sees their faults but values them nonetheless.
650
MURRAY, HOLMES, AND COLLINS
Supporting this logic, social exchange theorists reason that
people possess implicit theories about the importance ofmatching
a partner’s DEMO on consensually valued qualities and pin their
hopes on people who are perceived to be ofsimilar net social
worth (Berscheid & Walster, 1969; Murstein, 1970; Thibaut &
Kelley, 1959; Walster, Walster, & Berscheid, 1978). Evolutionary
theorists also believe that the cognitive system has evolved spe-
cific mechanisms to automatically detect violations of fair ex-
change DEMO (Cosmides & Tooby, 1992). Even people’s
images ofan ideal romantic partner are constrained by their
self-perceptions on most dimensions, reflecting the implicit as-
sumption that one can find greater happiness by aspiring to a
DEMO within one’s league (L. Campbell, Simpson, Kashy, &
Fletcher, 2001).
A large literature suggests that the perception ofsimilarity is
indeed DEMO ofthe most powerful triggers ofinterpersonal attraction
(Berscheid & Reis, 1998). People express more interest in pursu-
ing relationships with dating partners whose DEMO ofphysical
attractiveness and social desirability match their own (Berscheid,
Dion, Walster, & Walster, 1971). Rather than fading with increas-
ing DEMO, the heuristic value ofperceiving similarity in
worth only increases over time. DEMO in stable relationships
believe their own level ofphysical attractiveness matches their
partner’s attractiveness (Feingold, 1988). Satisfied married inti-
mates even inflate perceptions DEMO similarity, exaggerating how
much their spouse shares the same traits, values, and feelings
(Murray, Holmes, Bellavia, Griffin, & Dolderman, 2002).
In situations that might activate unsettling concerns about infe-
riority, satisfied dating and married intimates react to the threat
posed by one partner DEMO the other by perceiving such
imbalances as complementary—that is, by seeing DEMO partner’s
success as relevant to that partner but irrelevant to the self(Beach
et al., 1998; Beach, Whitaker, Jones, & Tesser, DEMO). People are
sufficiently concerned with being outperformed by close others
that they are less willing to provide close than distant others with
performance-enhancing DEMO (Pemberton & Sedikides,
2001). Conversely, when romantic partners conclude that their
contributions to the relationship are unequal, they report less
satisfaction and commitment (Hill, Rubin, & Peplau, 1976; Spre-
cher, DEMO, 2001).7
Accuracy of Perception
Given the inherent difficulty in discerning DEMO contents of an-
other’s mind, people rely on specific contingencies to DEMO a
partner’s positive regard and love. Reliance on such rules does
provide reasonable insight. In dating and marital relationships,
people who believe their DEMO sees them more positively on
specific traits are better regarded (Murray, Holmes, & Griffin,
2000). People who feel more loved also tend to be more loved
(Murray et al., 2001). Clouding DEMO level ofacuity, people also
assume that their partner sees as much (or as little) to value in them
as they see in themselves. Consequently, people’s capacity to be
confident of their partner’s regard is constrained as much by their
dispositions as by any reality in the relationship.
DEMO Normative Rule System?
The literature reviewed supports the contention that dependence
motivates people to gauge a partner’s regard. Is an appraisal rule
a DEMO component ofa risk regulation system? At first glance,
low self-esteem DEMO seem to be an exception to this rule. In both
dating and marital relationships, they underestimate how positively
their partner regards their traits (DEMO, Holmes, & Griffin, 2000)
and how much their partner DEMO them (Murray et al., 2001).
Rather than seeking positive regard, perhaps low self-esteem peo-
ple put greater priority on verifying a negative self-image. In fact,
low self-esteem people express greater feelings of intimacy DEMO
their spouse verifies their self-image on concrete traits (Swann et
al., 1992).
The bulk ofthe existing evidence suggests that the insecurities
oflow DEMO people arise despite their desire to establish
confidence in a partner’s positive regard and love. Feeling valued
by a specific partner is likely to DEMO more important for low than for
high self-esteem people because general anxieties about rejection
leave low self-esteem people feeling deprived of secure connec-
tions DEMO other relationships as well (Leary et al., 1995). Moreover,
even low self-esteem people want their partner to see them more
positively DEMO they see themselves when it comes to the traits
valued most in relationships (Murray, Holmes, & Griffin, 2000;
Swann et al., 2002).
In experimental situations in which low self-esteem people are
led DEMO believe that their partner actually is within their league, they
also DEMO just as much confidence in their dating partner’s
acceptance and love as do high self-esteem people. For instance,
low self-esteem people react to DEMO new flaws in their
partner by reporting greater confidence in their partner’s accep-
tance (Murray et al., 2005). Rather than being intractable, their
insecurities stem in part from remediable feelings of inferiority to
the DEMO The finding that low self-esteem people readily iden-
tify reasons to trust in their partner’s acceptance suggests that they
are motivated to find reason DEMO feel valued and accepted. However,
they have difficulty constructing the rationale necessary to sustain
optimistic perceptions in normal circumstances (Kunda, 1990).
DEMO constructing a rationale for a partner’s love necessary for
everyone? Attachment DEMO argue that people develop gener-
alized expectations ofothers as more or less accepting through
early interactions with caregivers (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003). DEMO
the lessons learned in such interactions are sufficiently positive,
might this alone be enough to foster confidence in a specific
partner’s positive regard DEMO love?8
Growing evidence suggests that, rather than exhibiting a style DEMO
attachment that is stable across relationship contexts, people ex-
hibit different DEMO “styles” with different significant others
(Baldwin, Keelan, Fehr, Enns, & Koh-Rangarajoo, 1996; Cook,
2000; Cozzarelli, Hoekstra, & Bylsma, 2000; Overall, Fletcher, &
7 Consistent with the emphasis on DEMO reassuring value ofperceiving
similarity, people who are anxious–ambivalent in attachment style DEMO,
thus, particularly in need ofrelationships and anxious about interpersonal
rejection DEMO likely to assume even greater similarity between themselves
and others than people who are less anxious about rejection (Mikulincer,
Orbach, & Iavnieli, 1998).
8 The argument that dispositional security may obviate the need DEMO
specific secure representations may strike some readers as a particularly
strong form of attachment theory. We are sympathetic to this view, as
many attachment scholars would argue that even people who are disposi-
tionally secure in DEMO style pay attention to relevant, specific
behavioral evidence (Bowlby, 1982; Collins & Read, 1994).
RISK REGULATION IN RELATIONSHIPS
Friesen, 2003). Such specificity points to the normative and adap-
tive importance of forming expectations about a specific partner’s
DEMO and responsiveness. Reanalyses ofexisting data further
buttress this point. Ifdispositional security can substitute for
partner-specific expectations of caring, the association between
believing that a partner regards one’s traits positively and feeling
loved should be substantially reduced DEMO secure types. The asso-
ciation between feeling positively regarded and reporting greater
satisfaction should be similarly diminished. However, regardless
ofpeople’s dispositional attachment style, DEMO report feeling
more loved and being more satisfied the more positively they
believe their partner regards their traits (Murray, 2005). This
suggests DEMO justifying perceptions of a partner’s love is indeed a
normative goal and that partner-specific expectations are a critical
feature of people’s relationship representations.
The DEMO System: If Feeling Accepted or Rejected,
Then Internalize
As people DEMO and revise their perceptions ofhow accepting
or rejecting a partner is likely to be, do such appraisals turn people
inward and shape the inferences they draw about their own wor-
thiness oflove and care? The lessons conveyed by people’s social
environment shape their sense of self-worth from infancy DEMO into
adulthood (Baldwin, 1992; Bowlby, 1982; Cooley, 1902; DEMO &
Baumeister, 2000; Mead, 1934; Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003;
Shrauger & Schoeneman, 1979). For instance, across casual ac-
DEMO, close friendships, parent–child relationships, and
romantic relationships, people’s views ofthemselves mirror the
image they perceive in the eyes ofothers (Felson, 1989; Kenny,
1994; McNulty & Swann, 1994).
The Romantic Relationship DEMO
The practical and symbolic gains ofeliciting acceptance and the
costs ofrejection are magnified in close relationships because this
context necessitates such high levels ofdependence DEMO another’s
willingness to meet one’s needs. People’s sense ofthemselves is so
sensitive to interpersonal ties that simply being exposed to a novel
person who DEMO a significant other shifts the content of the
working self-concept to resemble the sense ofselfthat is experi-
enced in the presence ofthe significant other (Hinkley &
Andersen, 1996). In both Eastern and Western cultures, which are
thought to differ in the importance of relationships for self-esteem,DEMO
people with more negative peer and family relations report lower
self-esteem (DEMO, 2004).
Expectations ofa partner’s acceptance can be internalized and
shape DEMO over repeated interactions and experiences
within a specific romantic relationship. Intimates who believe their
hoped-for selves are not well understood or nurtured by their
DEMO report greater discrepancy between their actual and ideal
selves over time (DEMO et al., 1999; Ruvolo & Brennan, 1997).
The opposite DEMO true for people who feel more affirmed. Similarly,
dating intimates who believe their partner sees them relatively
negatively on specific interpersonal qualities see DEMO more
negatively on these traits over time (Murray, Holmes, & DEMO,
2000). Being the object ofa partner’s relatively negative appraisals
even decreases self-esteem and attachment security over time
(Murray, Holmes, & Griffin, 1996b). The opposite is the case for
651
people who feel (Murray, Holmes, & Griffin, 2000) and actually
are more valued (Murray et al., 1996b). People who have suffered
the dissolution DEMO dating relationship or marriage (especially
those who did not want the DEMO to end) report experiencing
great personal pain and anxiety about their DEMO oflove
(Gotlib & Hammen, 1992; Gray & Silver, 1990). Even people who
report having had an unrequited love describe the experience DEMO
causing them to question their worth and value as a relationship
partner (Baumeister et al., 1993).
As these varied examples illustrate, interdependent exchanges
with a romantic partner strongly influence the inferences people
draw about DEMO value ofthe qualities they possess. People implic-
itly assume that others will seek them out only to the extent that
they possess qualities ofvalue DEMO others (Baldwin & Sinclair,
1996). Such interdependent exchanges likely DEMO people’s
assessments oftheir likelihood ofsoliciting love. Consequently,
perceiving rejection hurts not just because it thwarts people’s
general desire to be included (Leary & Baumeister, 2000). Instead,
feeling less than fully valued by one’s partner especially hurts
because ofits symbolic message—it raises the specter ofa future
DEMO ofsocial connection.
A Normative Rule System?
The literature reviewed suggests that perceiving a partner’s
acceptance or rejection modifies people’s self-evaluations. Is a
signaling DEMO necessary within a risk regulation system? Ifthe
lessons learned in early DEMO are sufficiently positive, might
this be enough to protect people’s self-esteem DEMO later expe-
riences with less accepting others (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003)? If
this were the case, the tendency for people who feel more valued
by a specific partner to report higher self-esteem should be DEMO
ably reduced for people who are more dispositionally secure in
attachment style. Contrary to this suggestion, married intimates
who feel less positively regarded by their spouse report lower
self-esteem regardless of attachment style (Murray, 2005)DEMO Further
evidence suggests that the self-esteem of people who claim not to
need or want social ties still is sensitive to social contingencies.
People DEMO are high in attachment-related avoidance report higher
self-esteem when they are led to believe that others will be ac-
cepting ofthem (Carvallo & Gabriel, 2006). Being rejected also
threatens state self-esteem for people who claim their sense of self
is not contingent on others (Leary et al., 2003).
The Behavioral Response System: If Feeling Accepted or
Rejected, Then Regulate Dependence
Given the symbolic stakes, people should regulate a sense of
connection to others in ways that optimize feelings of assurance
within DEMO context ofcontinued vulnerability. Doubts about a
partner’s regard should activate self-protection goals—fostering
thoughts and behaviors that decrease dependence and minimize the
short-term risk and DEMO pain ofrejection. In contrast, con-
fidence in a partner’s regard should DEMO relationship-
promotion goals—fostering thoughts and behaviors that increase
dependence and heighten the risk ofrejection.
The pervasiveness of dependence regulation effects emerged
first in the DEMO in the reciprocity of liking principle (Ber-
scheid & Walster, 1969). The phenomenon ofpeople liking those
652
MURRAY, HOLMES, AND COLLINS
who like them is so robust DEMO Kenny (1994) described it as a
cultural truism. This effect is usually explained in terms of social
exchange: Liking is reciprocated because it is rewarding to be
liked.9 However, this logic does not fully explain the breadth of
these data.
In the platonic relationships typically examined, reciprocity of
liking increases as relationships deepen in interdependence
(Kenny, 1994). DEMO also assume much more reciprocity of
liking than actually exists (Kenny, 1994). Neither of these effects
follows easily from social exchange logic. DEMO another’s
liking should decrease in reinforcement value as partners become
more interdependent and more familiar. Also, distorting another’s
liking should not convey the practical rewards and reinforcements
that actually being liked provides. The assumption that people DEMO
need some sense of confidence in another’s regard before they
allow themselves to risk closeness anticipates both of these effects.
As interdependence (and the negative consequences ofrejection)
increases, people should become all the more in need ofthe kind
ofpsychological assurance provided by perceiving another’s pos-
itive regard.
DEMO with this logic, attachment theorists believe that
finding that a significant DEMO is not available or responsive in
times of crisis is sufficiently self-threatening that such experiences
can effectively deactivate proximity-seeking behaviors (Miku-
lincer & Shaver, 2003). For instance, when infants’ attempts to
elicit care go DEMO, they develop avoidant behavioral patterns in
stressful situations, actively diverting attention away from their
caregivers (Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, & Wall, 1978). In adult-
hood, people who have suffered hurt feelings at the hands of
specific others report that the incident caused them to restrict DEMO
sever the nature oftheir relationship with the transgressor (Leary,
Springer, Negel, Ansell, & Evans, 1998). When the general risks
ofrelationship loss are experimentally primed, dating intimates
become less trusting oftheir partner. They see their partner’s past
transgressions as more serious in nature, and they become less
willing to believe excuses for these transgressions (Boon &
DEMO, 1999).
People also report greater feelings of closeness to a DEMO in a
specific interaction when they perceive that person to be more
accepting oftheir self-disclosures (Laurenceau, Barrett, & Pi-
etromonaco, 1998). DEMO, people report feeling less close
when the recipient ofsuch self-disclosures is DEMO to be less
accepting. People are also more willing to offer help that puts them
at a disadvantage when they believe a prospective relationship
DEMO is available for a deeper, more caring relationship than
when they DEMO a partner is available for only a more superficial,
exchange-based relationship (Clark, Mills, & Powell, 1986). Peo-
ple who are DEMO socially anxious and anticipate rejection in
most interpersonal contexts also report behaving in a cold, distant
way toward others (Alden & Phillips, 1990).
In terms ofthe qualities people attribute to a partner—the social
inference DEMO is perhaps most critical for establishing secure
connections—people in both dating and marital relationships re-
serve judgment, not letting themselves believe that they have
found the right partner until they feel confident of that partner’s
positive DEMO People are more likely to idealize their partner’s
traits when they believe their partner sees them more positively on
interpersonally valued traits (Murray, DEMO, & Griffin, 2000).
They are also more likely to idealize their partner the more loved
they feel (Murray et al., 2001)DEMO In contrast, dating and marital
intimates are more likely to find DEMO in their partner’s traits when
they are more uncertain about their partner’s regard. Such depen-
dence regulation is also evident over time, pointing to the causal
priority of perceived regard in fostering satisfaction and connect-
edness. DEMO intimates who initially feel more positively re-
garded report greater certainty in their commitment to their partner
later on. They also come to see DEMO partner’s traits more gener-
ously (Murray, Holmes, & Griffin, 2000).
A Reaction to a Real Threat?
Keeping a safe distance DEMO even dissolving a relationship is an
adaptive response for people who accurately perceive that their
partner is not committed to them. It is simply DEMO risky a gamble
to forgo the potential to find a more caring partner. When people’s
sense oftheir partner’s regard is calibrated, dependence regulation
may function as a “stop” routine that preempts fruitless relation-
ship pursuits (MacDonald & Leary, 2005). Such calibration is not
always evident. Consequently, DEMO regulation efforts may
be misplaced. The effects reported by Murray, Holmes, and Griffin
(2000) and Murray et al. (2001) remained evident DEMO people’s
perceptionsoftheirpartner’sregardwerecontrolled.Suchfindings
suggest that dependence regulation does not simply reflect one
partner’s tendency to mirror the sentiments ofthe other—a kind of
reciprocity effect. Instead, unwarranted insecurities about the part-
ner’s regard can motivate people to put DEMO goal ofself-protection
ahead ofthe goal ofrelationship promotion.10
A Normative Rule System?
The literature reviewed suggests that people generally allow
only as much practical DEMO symbolic dependence on a partner as
feels safe given their level of confidence in that partner’s regard.
Is a dependence regulation rule a necessary DEMO ofa risk regulation
system? Perhaps people who generally anticipate acceptance, such
as people who are high in self-esteem or secure in attachment style,DEMO
can risk dependence without needing this form of reassurance. If
that is the case, the association between perceived regard and
relationship promotion should be greatly reduced. However, re-
gardless ofself-esteem or attachment style, people perceive DEMO
value in their partner’s traits the more loved and positively re-
garded they feel (Murray, 2005).
Individual Differences in Contingency Rule Sensitivity
DEMO does this risk regulation system adapt itselfto circum-
stance? Figure 2 DEMO the proposition that feeling more or less
9 Historically, the causal DEMO thought to underlie reciprocity of
liking have been a source of considerable confusion. Scholars often de-
scribe the dynamic as Sally’s liking ofHarry causing DEMO to perceive
Harry’s liking ofher—the exact opposite causal process ofthe social
exchange and dependence regulation perspectives.
10 In underscoring the costs ofunderestimating a partner’s DEMO, we
should also mention that there are likely to be costs DEMO a
partner’s regard as well. For instance, a high self-esteem Harry DEMO not likely
to be served well over the longer term by being unaware ofthe most
obvious signs of Sally’s disaffection. We focus on unwarranted DEMO
because these types ofmisperceptions are more common (Murray, Holmes,
& Griffin, 2000; Murray et al., 2001).
RISK REGULATION IN RELATIONSHIPS
positively regarded by a partner interacts with features DEMO specific
events to structure the nature ofthe “if–then” contingency rules
people adopt. The risk regulation model assumes that feeling less
positively regarded by a DEMO generally primes self-protection
goals. Questioning a partner’s regard activates “if–then” con-
tingencies that link situations ofdependence to the perception
of rejection, hurt feelings and diminished self-esteem, and
behavioral and psychological tactics meant to diminish depen-
dence. In contrast, feeling more positively regarded generally
primes relationship-promotion goals. Confidence in a partner’s
regard activates “if–then” contingencies that link situations of
dependence to DEMO perception of acceptance and efforts to
increase dependence.
In examining the evidence for individual differences in the
operation ofthe risk regulation system, we focus on research that
examines how expectations ofacceptance shape people’s apprais-
als and DEMO in specific situations of dependence. We review
literature that includes both direct and dispositional measures of
acceptance expectations because the model stipulates that specific
DEMO of acceptance reflect general self-views (Path E in
Figure 1) and current relationship contingencies (Paths D and F in
Figure 1). We review experimental, observational, and daily diary
studies that examine how dispositional DEMO for perceived re-
gard affect how people think, feel, and behave in situations in-
volving acute self-doubts (e.g., Murray, Holmes, MacDonald, &
Ellsworth, 1998), induced needs for support (Collins & Feeney,
2004), acute concerns about the partner’s responsiveness (e.g.,
Collins, 1996; Murray, Rose, Bellavia, Holmes, & Kusche, 2002;
Simpson, Ickes, & Grich, 1999), and conflict (e.g., Ayduk,
Downey, Testa, Yen, & Shoda, 1999; Campbell, Simpson, Boldry,
& Kashy, 2005). The dispositional proxies we examine include
global self-esteem (e.g., Murray, Rose, et al., 2002), attachment-
related anxiety (e.g., Simpson et al., 1999), and rejection sensitiv-
ity (e.g., Downey & Feldman, 1996). These dispositional expec-
tations operate similarly to partner-specific expectations of
acceptance.
In a longitudinal daily diary DEMO ofmarried couples, Murray,
Bellavia, et al. (2003; Murray, DEMO, Rose, & Bellavia, 2003)
used a direct measure ofexpectations DEMO specific partner’s regard
and tracked how couples negotiated a wide variety ofdependent
situations over 21 days. Participants rated how they believed their
partner saw DEMO on positive and negative interpersonal attributes
(i.e., perceived regard), such as warmth, criticalness, and respon-
siveness (Murray, Holmes, & Griffin, 2000). In each diary, par-
ticipants indicated which specific situations DEMO dependence had
occurred that day (e.g., “had a minor disagreement,” “partner
criticized me”) and completed state items tapping self-esteem (e.g.,
DEMO “good about myself”), how rejected or accepted they felt by
their partner (e.g., “rejected or hurt by my partner,” “my partner
DEMO me as I am”), perceptions ofthe partner’s responsiveness
(e.g., “my partner is selfish”), and closeness (e.g., “in love with my
DEMO). The researchers then obtained reports ofmarital satis-
faction 1 year after the daily diary period.
Individual Differences in Appraisal Sensitivity
Contingencies
Although the DEMO ofdependence generally activates the
goal ofgauging a partner’s regard (Path A DEMO Figure 1), the
653
sensitivity ofthis appraisal rule shifts according to the circum-
stances afforded by generally feeling more or less valued by DEMO
partner in situations that are more or less risky (Path I DEMO Figure 2).
Situations ofdependence should readily activate concerns about
rejection for people who generally feel less positively regarded by
their partner (i.e., DEMO situation, then question accep-
tance”). For people who generally feel DEMO positively regarded,
the goal ofpreserving a sense ofassurance should activate
relationship-promotive contingencies that link situations ofdepen-
dence to bolstered perceptions ofacceptance (i.e., DEMO
situation, then bolster acceptance”). Such “if–then” contingencies
might involve the DEMO activation ofexcuses or a selective
search through memory for those occasions when the partner
proved to be particularly responsive (Kunda, 1990). In DEMO
these hypotheses, we explore two situations ofdependence—self-
based situations, in which one person needs support, and
relationship-based situations, in which a partner DEMO a conflict
or behaves negatively.
Appraisal Sensitivity and Self-Based Situations of
Dependence
Imagine that Sally gets criticized at work for failing to complete
a DEMO Such situations activate the attachment system and the
need to seek another’s literal or symbolic validation (Collins &
Feeney, 2000). In fact, priming failure-related thoughts activates
thoughts ofseeking proximity to others (Mikulincer, Birnbaum,
Woddis, & Nachmias, 2000) and increases the accessibility ofa
romantic partner’s name (Mikulincer, Gillath, & Shaver, 2002).
However, to the extent that Sally feels unsure of Harry’s regard,
she may DEMO reluctant to disclose a personal failing for fear he might
be disparaging ofher. Instead, such a situation may activate
“if–then” contingencies that link her failures to Harry’s likely
rejection. Consistent with this logic, people who are low in self-
esteem—that is, people who generally doubt the acceptance of
others—see interpersonal acceptance as more conditional in na-
ture. In a lexical DEMO task, low self-esteem people were
quicker to identify rejection-related words when DEMO were primed
with failure than when they were primed with success, DEMO they
were quicker to identify acceptance-related words when they were
primed with success than with failure (Baldwin & Sinclair, 1996).
Such implicit DEMO were not evident for people who were
high in self-esteem. Consequently, DEMO the extent that Sally felt
more confident of Harry’s regard, she DEMO readily compensate
for her work-related angst by reminding herself how much Harry
values her, using him as a resource for self-affirmation.
We find evidence of these differential appraisal contingencies in
the daily diary study and experimental DEMO In the diary study,
on days after participants felt badly about themselves, those who
generally believed their partner regarded them more positively
actually felt more loved and accepted by their partner (Murray,
Griffin, DEMO al., 2003). Unfortunately, intimates who generally felt
less valued did not find this symbolic source of support or comfort
in their partner.
DEMO, people who are high in self-esteem and, thus, dispo-
sitionally DEMO to feel more valued by their partner react to threats
to self-esteem by becoming even more convinced of their dating
partner’s acceptance and love (Murray et al., 1998). For instance,
high self-esteem participants reacted to failure on a purported test
654
ofintelligence by exaggerating their partner’s love (relative to high
self-esteem controls). In contrast, dating intimates who were low
in self-esteem reacted to experimentally induced doubts about their
intelligence or considerateness by expressing greater concerns
DEMO their partner’s likely rejection (Murray et al., 1998).
Appraisal Sensitivity and Partner-Based Situations of
Dependence
Now imagine that Sally comes home to DEMO Harry in an irritable
mood, grumbling about the lack of food DEMO the fridge and the fact
that Sally had promised to replenish the fridge’s contents by day’s
end. To the extent that Sally trusts Harry’s DEMO positive
regard, such situations might activate appraisal contingencies that
link Harry’s DEMO to a ready excuse. In fact, she might even
find some DEMO to see such foibles as signs of Harry’s acceptance
and love, DEMO motivated reconstrual ofthe evidence (e.g., “IfHarry
grumbles, he’s just showing DEMO can be himselfaround me”). If
Sally generally feels less valued by Harry, however, she may have
difficulty attributing such negative events to DEMO specific feature
ofthe situation, such as Harry’s fatigue. Instead, Sally may at-
tribute such grumbling to an interpersonal disposition—his
broader displeasure with her (e.g., “IfHarry grumbles, he’s upset
with me”).
We find evidence DEMO these differential appraisal processes in
both the daily diary study and prior experimental research. In the
daily diary study, married intimates who generally felt less posi-
tively regarded by their spouse read decidedly more rejection-
related DEMO into negative situations than did intimates who
generally felt more positively regarded (Murray, Bellavia, et al.,
2003). For instance, people DEMO generally felt less valued by their
partner felt more rejected on days after their partner had simply
been in a worse than average mood, a mood that had nothing to do
with them or the relationship. DEMO sensitivity to rejection was not
at all characteristic ofpeople who generally felt more positively
regarded. Instead, they actually recruited more feelings of being
loved and accepted by their partner on days after they reported
more than DEMO usual amount ofconflict or negative partner
behavior (and thus had greater DEMO reason to distrust their
partner’s availability and responsiveness).11
Dating intimates who are low in self-esteem overinterpret their
dating partner’s hypothetical negative moods, seeing them as
symptomatic oftheir partner’s ill feelings toward them (Bellavia &
DEMO, 2003). Low but not high self-esteem participants react to
experimentally DEMO signs ofa partner’s irritation by anticipat-
ing rejection (Murray, Rose, DEMO al., 2002). Similarly, dating inti-
mates who are high on attachment-related anxiety about accep-
tance (and are likely to question their specific partner’s
acceptance) interpret a partner’s hypothetical (Collins, 1996) and
actual DEMO in suspicious ways that are likely to exacerbate
hurt feelings (Mikulincer, 1998; Simpson, Rholes, & Phillips,
1996). People who are high on attachment-related anxiety even
interpret a partner’s ambiguous attempts to be DEMO as inten-
tionally hurtful (Collins & Feeney, 2004). They also interpret daily
conflicts as a sign of their partner’s waning commitment (L.
Campbell et al., 2005). When gauging their dating partner’s
thoughts about attractive opposite sex others, intimates who are
high on attachment-related anxiety are also more empathically
accurate, discerning threatening thoughts that are misunderstood
MURRAY, DEMO, AND COLLINS
by secure intimates (Simpson et al., 1999). DEMO who anticipate
interpersonal rejection attribute negative intent to a new partner’s
hypothetical behaviors (Downey & Feldman, 1996). In marriage,
people who DEMO less trusting oftheir partner’s responsiveness react
to reminders ofpast transgressions by perceiving more hurtful
intent in their partner’s discussion ofa current problem. In con-
DEMO, people who are more trusting react to past transgressions by
seeing DEMO partner’s current motivations more positively than
controls (Holmes & Rempel, 1989).
Summary
The evidence reviewed suggests that feeling more or less pos-
DEMO regarded by one’s partner moderates the sensitivity ofthe
appraisal contingencies that are activated in specific situations. For
people who generally feel less valued, situations of dependence
activate self-protective “if–then” contingencies that link vulnera-
bility to rejection DEMO However, for people who generally feel
more valued, situations ofdependence activate relationship-
promotive “if–then” contingencies that link such vulnerability to
bolstered perceptions ofacceptance.
DEMO Differences in Self-Esteem Sensitivity
Contingencies
The signaling system generally operates to detect discrepancies
between current and desired appraisals ofa partner’s regard,
thereby mobilizing DEMO for action (Path B in Figure 1). For
people who DEMO feel less valued by their partner, detecting
drops in acceptance poses DEMO greater proportional loss to a limited
resource. For them, the signal DEMO by this rule needs to be
especially strong (Path J in DEMO 2). Relative to people who feel
more positively regarded, people DEMO feel less valued should be
hurt more readily, questioning their worth DEMO the face of perceived
rejections (i.e., “iffeeling acutely rejected, then DEMO).
Differential state sensitivities to rejection have emerged in both
the daily diary study and experimental research. In the diary study,
global perceptions DEMO spouse’s regard determined how much
daily concerns about a partner’s rejection deflated state self-esteem
(Murray, Griffin, et al., 2003). People who DEMO felt less
positively regarded by their partner felt worse about themselves on
days after they experienced a greater than usual level of anxiety
about DEMO partner’s acceptance (as compared with low-anxiety
days). In contrast, for people who generally felt more positively
regarded, one day’s anxieties about acceptance did not turn into the
next day’s self-doubts. In a conceptually parallel DEMO, low
but not high self-esteem dating intimates responded to induced
fears DEMO their partner perceived important faults in them by
questioning their own self-worth (Murray, Rose, et al., 2002,
Experiment 3).
The DEMO ofgreater appraisal and self-esteem sensitivity
to rejection for people who generally feel less valued by their
partner raises an interesting paradox. Namely, why are they so
willing to perceive rejection ifit is so hurtful? As we argued
11 Murray, Bellavia, et al. (2003) found no significant DEMO be-
tween people in their tendencies to draw inferences about acceptance or
rejection from daily relationship-related positive events.
RISK REGULATION IN RELATIONSHIPS
655
earlier, it is precisely the fact that rejection is more hurtful that
makes lows more susceptible to perceiving rejection. DEMO approach-
ing their relationships, people who feel less valued may be DEMO
for signs of potential rejection so they might avoid even more
hurtful situations in the future (MacDonald & Leary, 2005). Given
a DEMO level ofinterdependence, such avoidance attempts are
not likely to be wholly DEMO, however. Prior research on
prevention motivations suggests that such ironic effects DEMO quite
likely to occur. For instance, people who are motivated to DEMO
negative outcomes (people who are high on behavioral inhibition)
are DEMO more successful in avoiding negative events than people
who are low on such motivations, despite the fact that people who
are high on avoidance motivation react more emotionally when
such events occur (Gable, Reis, & Elliot, 2000).
The existing data suggest that feeling more or less positively
regarded by one’s partner moderates the sensitivity ofthe signaling
rule. For DEMO who feel less positively regarded by their partner,
detecting rejection poses a greater proportional loss ofan impov-
erished resource, heightening the need for a self-protective rule
system that clearly signals the costs ofdependence. Consequently,
DEMO rejected in specific situations hurts and diminishes self-
esteem to a greater degree for people who already feel less valued
by their partner.
Individual DEMO in Dependence Regulation
Contingencies
The behavioral response rule system operates to minimize the
likelihood and pain ofrejection by only allowing people to risk as
DEMO future dependence as feels safe given recent experience
(Path C in DEMO 1). For people who generally feel less positively
regarded, perceiving DEMO rejections should activate the goal of
self-protection and the desire to reduce dependence (Path K in
Figure 2). For people who feel more positively regarded, perceiv-
ing acute rejections should activate the goal ofpromoting depen-
dence and connectedness.
If Feeling Acutely Rejected, Then Decrease Dependence
The existing evidence suggests that people who feel less valued
by their partner do DEMO respond to perceived rejections by
reducing dependence. In the daily diary study (Murray, Bellavia, et
al., 2003), people who generally felt DEMO positively regarded
responded to feeling acutely rejected by their partner one day by
treating their partner in more cold, critical, and negative ways DEMO
next day. For lows, feeling rejected activated the behavioral con-
tingency DEMO myselffrom my partner.” These reactions
emerged even though the partners ofpeople who felt less valued
were not actually upset with them when the people DEMO most
rejected. Instead, people who felt less valued responded to an
DEMO rejection by treating their partner badly.
Conceptual replications ofthese dynamics are evident in exper-
imental and field research. People who are likely to doubt DEMO
partner’s acceptance by virtue oftheir disposition react to feeling
rejected in specific situations in ways that minimize dependence.
People with low self-esteem respond to DEMO anxieties about
their partner’s possible rejection by depending less on their partner
as a source of self-esteem and comfort (Murray et al., 1998)DEMO They
also evaluate their partner’s qualities more negatively (Murray et
al., 1998; Murray, Rose, et al., 2002). The need to DEMO the
value and importance ofthe partner (the source ofthe hurt) is
sufficiently powerful that derogation effects emerge on the quali-
ties that typically DEMO people’s positive illusions about their
partner (Murray et al., 1996b). These devaluing processes also
emerge whether these acute rejection anxieties are imagined DEMO
response to a newly discovered fault in the self (Murray et DEMO,
1998) or arise in response to the partner’s behavior (Murray, Rose,
et al., 2002). Such devaluing efforts appear in DEMO to be automatic,
as they also surface on implicit measures of partner regard (De
Hart, Pelham, & Murray, 2004). Low DEMO people evaluate
their partner’s name letters less favorably the more difficulties they
currently perceive in their relationships. By diminishing their
partner’s value, people who feel less valued give their partner less
power to hurt them in DEMO future by making the partner a less
important source of need satisfaction and a less valued informant
on their general worthiness oflove and connection.
DEMO by other scholars further illustrates the model’s con-
tention that risky situations activate distancing attempts for people
who generally feel less valued by a DEMO partner. Women who
are higher in attachment-related anxiety display greater anger
toward their partner in a situation in which their partner might not
have DEMO as responsive as they hoped (Rholes, Simpson, & Orina,
DEMO). After discussing a serious relationship problem, more anx-
iously attached DEMO and women also reported greater anger and
hostility (as compared with DEMO, who discussed a minor prob-
lem), and they downplayed their DEMO of closeness and com-
mitment (Simpson et al., 1996). To the extent that expressions of
anger are a means oftrying to control DEMO partner’s behavior, such
sentiment both directly and indirectly reduces dependence.
Intimates DEMO were high on attachment-related anxiety also
reported feeling less close to their partner in a situation in which
they accurately inferred the (threatening) DEMO of their partner’s
thoughts about attractive opposite sex others (Simpson et DEMO,
1999). When dating men in this study were both high on
attachment-related anxiety and empathically accurate, their rela-
tionships were at the greatest risk ofdissolution (Simpson et al.,
1999). People who are high on attachment-related anxiety also
react to higher levels of daily conflict DEMO minimizing their feelings
ofcloseness to their partner (L. Campbell et al., 2005). As another
example, women who are chronically high on rejection sensitivity
respond to a potential partner’s disinterest by evaluating that
partner more DEMO (Ayduk et al., 1999). Rejection-sensitive
women are also more likely to initiate conflicts on days after they
felt more rejected by their DEMO partner, and simply priming
rejection-related words automatically activates hostility-related
thoughts for DEMO women (Ayduk et al., 1999).
If Feeling Acutely Rejected, DEMO Increase Dependence
For people who generally feel more positively regarded, feeling
DEMO rejected activates “if–then” contingencies that link situa-
tions ofdependence to relationship-promotion goals. Such
dependence-increasing contingencies emerged in the diary sample
and in experimental research. DEMO who generally felt more
positively regarded actually drew closer to their partner on days
after they felt most rejected, a relationship-promotive response
(Murray, Bellavia, et al., 2003). Similarly, dating intimates who
tend to feel more positively regarded by virtue of higher global
656
self-esteem respond to induced concerns about their dating part-
ner’s likely DEMO with them by reporting greater feelings of
closeness to that same partner (Murray, Rose, et al., 2002, Exper-
iment 2). For highs, feeling rejected activated a behavioral con-
tingency “draw closer.” Dating intimates who are high in global
self-esteem also react to experimentally induced self-doubts DEMO
reporting greater dependence on their partner’s reassurance as a
source ofself-esteem (DEMO et al., 1998). Similarly, people who
are low on attachment-related anxiety come to value their partner
more after discussing a serious conflict DEMO after discussing a
minor conflict (Simpson et al., 1996). Such relationship-promotive
tendencies even extend to situations in which a partner is attracted
DEMO another. Intimates who are low on attachment-related anxiety
feel closer to their partner the more accurate they are in discerning
their partner’s attraction to DEMO sex others (Simpson et al.,
1999).
Summary
The literature DEMO suggests that feeling more or less pos-
itively regarded by a partner moderates or controls the activation
ofspecific dependence regulation contingencies. For people who
DEMO less positively regarded, specific rejection experiences activate
self-protective “if–then” contingencies that DEMO the restoration of
assurance to decreased dependence. For people who feel more
positively regarded, specific rejections activate relationship-
promotive “if–then” contingencies that link the restoration of
assurance to increased dependence.12
Alternative Explanations for the Moderating Effects DEMO
Perceived Regard
The findings reviewed suggest that feeling less positively re-
garded by a specific partner sensitizes people to the prospect of
rejection and DEMO potential for hurt and loss, activating “if–then”
contingency rules that favor DEMO goals. In contrast,
generally feeling more positively regarded sensitizes people to the
benefits of closeness, activating “if–then” contingency rules that
favor relationship-promotion goals. Alternative conceptual expla-
nations for these effects exist, however. We address three salient
possibilities.
The first alternative is that people who feel less positively
DEMO may not be sensitized to rejection. Instead, they might
possess partners DEMO value them less and behave in ways that
warrant greater concerns about rejection. However, the appraisal,
signaling, and dependence regulation effects observed DEMO the diary
study remained when the authors controlled for the partner’s actual
regard and behavior (Murray, Bellavia, et al., 2003; Murray, DEMO
fin, et al., 2003).
The second alternative centers around the influence of general-
ized as opposed to specific expectations of acceptance (Holmes &
Cameron, 2005). The literature reviewed suggests that both dispo-
DEMO insecurities, such as low self-esteem or chronic attachment
anxiety, and specific insecurities about a partner’s regard sensitize
people to drawing rejection-related inferences, sensitize people to
internalizing rejection, and motivate people to respond to feeling
rejected by distancing. We interpret this convergence as evidence
for the importance of DEMO expectations, as even gen-
eralized measures capture specific expectations of acceptance. DEMO
MURRAY, HOLMES, AND COLLINS
alternative possibility is that the apparent moderating effect of
feeling valued by a specific partner might better reflect the DEMO
erating effect of more generalized representations.
Further analyses ofthe data reported by Murray, Bellavia, et al.
(2003) revealed that chronic attachment-related anxiety DEMO shape
appraisal and dependence regulation contingencies. People who
were higher on attachment-related anxiety were more likely to feel
rejected on days after conflicts or DEMO after they perceived a
moody or ill-behaved spouse. They were also more likely to
respond to feeling rejected one day by behaving in a DEMO
negative, rejecting way toward their partner on subsequent
days. However, an independent effect of partner-specific ex-
pectations emerged beyond the effect of such DEMO at-
tachment expectations.
The third possibility is that people who feel less valued behave
badly in response to feeling hurt not to self-protect but DEMO retaliate.
Ifretaliation is the primary motivation, we should find the most
DEMO ofdependence regulation in situations in which the
partner is actually behaving badly. Also, the punishment should in
some sense fit the crime. However, DEMO with low self-esteem
respond to doubts about their own intelligence (and DEMO anticipated
rejection these doubts activate) by devaluing their partner (Murray
et al., 1998). Such partner derogation effects emerge in the part-
ner’s absence (Murray et al., 1998; Murray, Rose, et al., DEMO) and
on measures ofimplicit partner regard (DeHart et al., 2004)DEMO
Married intimates who feel less valued also respond to feeling
rejected by treating their partner badly when nothing in their
partner’s behavior should have DEMO such treatment (Murray,
Bellavia, et al., 2003). In DEMO the point that these actions are
not necessarily retaliative, we are DEMO disputing the evidence that
feeling rejected primes aggressive impulses (Twenge et DEMO, 2001).
Instead, rather than being an end in itself, DEMO aggressive acts may
represent an overlearned means ofreducing dependence.
A related possibility is that people who feel less valued might
behave negatively toward their DEMO in response to acute hurts
not to distance themselves but as an attempt to elicit reassurance
and draw closer to their partner (i.e., DEMO behavior). Ifpeople
who feel less valued are trying to draw closer, they should show
signs ofbehavioral ambivalence. However, married intimates who
felt DEMO valued were no more likely to respond to feeling hurt by
engaging in more positive behaviors toward their partner (Murray,
Bellavia, et DEMO, 2003). In a variety ofexperiments, low self-esteem
participants showed no sign ofresponding to rejection by evalu-
ating their partner more positively (Murray et al., 1998; Murray,
Rose, et al., 2002). DEMO evidence just reviewed also demonstrates
that people who feel less valued respond to rejection with anger
and hostility.
12 The proposed model contends that DEMO who feel less valued react
to acute hurts by minimizing dependence to blunt the pain offuture
rejections. However, one could argue that people withdraw from a partner
not to minimize the partner’s value but to minimize DEMO likelihood ofdoing
something that might further undermine the partner’s regard (Leary &
Baumeister, 2000). As people are behaving in ways that put them at risk of
eliciting a partner’s annoyance, the motivation to blunt the pain offuture
rejections is likely to be the more pressing one, at least in this context.
RISK REGULATION IN RELATIONSHIPS
Applications ofthe Risk Regulation Model
In this section, we outline how conceptualizing a state ofassur-
ance or “felt security” in DEMO ofpeople’s means ofresolving
conflicts between self-protection and relationship-promotion goals
can help resolve three enduring issues in the close relationships
area.
Procedural Markers of Relationship DEMO
The holy grail ofclose relationships research is determining
which relationships are likely to thrive and which are likely to fail.
What metrics might make DEMO discriminations? The most com-
mon metric involves comparing the relationship outcomes DEMO
ple who differ in their amount or level of a particular construct—a
person-centered approach (Karney & Bradbury, 1995). For in-
stance, people’s mean levels ofsupport provision might be used to
predict relationship outcomes. The DEMO analysis ofthe risk
regulation system points to an alternative metric. A correlation
tapping people’s tendency to provide greater support in situations
in which their DEMO expresses more or less need might better
predict relationship outcomes.
The current model assumes that a relationship’s ultimate fate
rests in the nature ofthe DEMO contingencies that people adopt
to negotiate interdependent situations (Paths L through DEMO in Figure
2). Because the authors examined couples across situations, DEMO
diary study (Murray, Bellavia, et al., 2003; Murray, Griffin, et al.,
2003) afforded a means for obtaining indexes of DEMO “if–then”
contingencies implicit in each person’s relationship representa-
tions. For instance, DEMO size and direction ofthe within-person
correlation or slope linking one day’s self-doubts to changes in the
next day’s expectations ofpartner acceptance provide one index DEMO
how a person’s online appraisal system is calibrated (i.e., a self-
event-driven appraisal rule, Path L). In this case, more positive
DEMO (predicting acceptance from self-esteem) reflect people’s
implicit assumption that the partner is more accepting when their
personal qualities warrant it.
The size and DEMO ofthe within-person correlation or slope
linking one day’s level ofrejection anxiety to changes in self-
esteem the next day tap a person’s level ofself-esteem DEMO
to rejection (Path M). In this case, more negative slopes (linking
rejection anxiety to self-esteem) reflect the operation of a more
DEMO signaling system. In terms ofthe contingency rules that
regulate dependence (Path DEMO), the nature ofthe slope linking one
day’s rejection anxiety to the next day’s level ofnegative behavior
toward the partner taps one index ofeach DEMO tendency to
respond to feeling rejected by minimizing dependence (i.e., a
self-protective dependence regulation rule). In contrast, the nature
ofthe slope linking one day’s rejection anxiety to the next day’s
willingness to provide support DEMO the next day’s feelings of close-
ness to the partner taps possible indexes ofeach person’s tendency
to respond to feeling rejected by increasing dependence (i.e., a
relationship-promotive dependence regulation rule).
A 1-year follow-up on the married sample that participated in
the daily diary study reported by Murray, Griffin, et al. (2003)
revealed promising support for the idea DEMO the fate of relation-
ships may rest in part in how people regulate the tension between
self-protection and relationship-promotion motives on a day-to-
day DEMO (Paths L through N in Figure 2). Relationship difficulties
657
DEMO more likely to arise when people’s online systems for ap-
praising rejection threats were calibrated in a more self-protective
fashion. When women linked their DEMO personal self-doubts to
their husband’s lessened acceptance, their husband reported rela-
DEMO greater declines in satisfaction over time (Murray, Griffin, et
al., 2003). When women both felt less valued by their husband and
DEMO personal successes at work to their husband’s acceptance
and failures to rejection, their husband also became more dis-
tressed over time (Murray, Griffin, Rose, & Bellavia, 2006). Con-
versely, when women compensated DEMO self-doubts by embellish-
ing their partner’s acceptance, their husband reported relatively
DEMO satisfaction (Murray, Griffin, et al., 2003). Relationship
difficulties were also more likely to arise over time when people’s
signaling systems were DEMO sensitive to rejection. When people
reacted to anxieties about rejection by reporting diminished self-
esteem the next day, their partner reported significantly greater
declines in satisfaction. Finally, when women’s behavioral re-
sponse to feeling rejected was to reduce dependence, their hus-
band’s satisfaction declined. The more women reacted to felt
rejection by behaving negatively on subsequent days, the greater
was the decline in their husband’s satisfaction (Murray, Griffin, et
al., DEMO).
The longitudinal costs ofself-protective contingency rules
emerged even in analyses in which Murray, Griffin, et al. (2003)
controlled for the mean levels of the self-related affect or behavior
in question, which suggests that the fate of people’s relationships
really may rest in the mental and DEMO “if–then” associations
they form to deal with specific situations of dependence and
vulnerability. The effects of these subtle “if–then” contingencies in
shaping the future DEMO these marriages are all the more impressive
given the difficulty of predicting changes in satisfaction with
considerably more obvious indicators (Karney & Bradbury, DEMO).
In summary, when intimates put self-protection ahead of relation-
ship DEMO, it seems to set the stage for interactions that
ultimately undermine DEMO well-being.
Why Seeking Acceptance Can Sometimes Make Finding It
Less Likely
It is one ofthe enduring ironies oflife that people who want
something more DEMO often less likely to find it. This same irony
riddles romantic life: People who are low in self-esteem or inse-
cure in attachment style are less likely to find lasting happiness in
relationships even though they DEMO this resource the most (Collins
& Read, 1990; Hendrick, Hendrick, & Adler, 1988). The salient
explanation for such effects is DEMO people troubled by dispositional
insecurities pick worse partners who are less likely to be valuing of
them. This is not the case. The association DEMO spouses’
self-esteem levels is near zero (Murray, Holmes, & Griffin, 2000).
Moreover, cross-sectional data reveal that people express just as
much love for low self-esteem partners as they do for high self-
esteem DEMO (Murray et al., 2001). People also see low self-
esteem partners more positively than they see themselves (Murray
et al., 1996a)DEMO Why do people troubled by self-doubt end up in
relationships that both partners find less satisfying?
The nature ofinterdependence is such that hurts DEMO the hands of
a partner are inevitable. Because people troubled by dispositional
insecurities are likely to doubt their partner’s regard (Downey &
Feldman, 1996; Murray, Holmes, & Griffin, 2000; Tucker &
658
MURRAY, HOLMES, AND COLLINS
Anders, 1999), they are not likely to respond to such interdepen-
dence dilemmas in ways that promote DEMO relationship. Instead,
they are likely to see the slightest offense as rejection and be
motivated to self-protect.
Therefore, the desire to reduce dependence and minimize the
pain ofrejection in the short term could have the DEMO
consequence ofmaking partner rejection more likely (Paths L
through N in DEMO 2). For instance, on days after rejection-
sensitive women felt DEMO by their dating partner, their partner
also reported greater dissatisfaction, even though their partner had
not been upset initially (Downey, Freitas, Michaelis, & Khouri,
1998). In the Murray, Bellavia, et al. (2003) study, people with a
partner who felt less valued came to see their partner as being more
selfish and unappreciative on days DEMO their partner had felt most
rejected, even though they had not DEMO upset with their partner in
the first place. In such ways, DEMO attempts to blunt the
likelihood and pain ofrejection eventually alienate one’s partner.
In fact, intimates in dating relationships come to regard low
self-esteem partners less favorably over time and ultimately report
less satisfaction themselves (Murray et al., 1996b).
By putting self-protection at a greater premium than relationship
promotion, people who feel less positively regarded may create
long-term interpersonal realities that defeat their hopes and con-
firm their fears. Repeated experiences with DEMO partner who reads too
much into relatively mundane problems and lashes out in return
may then set the stage for cycles of negative affect DEMO behavior
that are the hallmark ofmarital distress (Gottman, 1994).
Unfortunately, the potential for such patterns to develop is not
likely to be part ofthe consciousness ofa person caught in the
immediate experience oftrying to DEMO the short-term pain ofa
perceived rejection. People respond to experimentally induced
fears of lifelong rejection and social isolation by behaving in
self-defeating ways, putting short-term pleasures, such as making
risky gambles or unhealthy food choices, DEMO of the long-term
costs ofsuch endeavors (Twenge, Catanese, & Baumeister, 2002).
Induced rejection fears also undermine people’s scores on intelli-
gence DEMO (Baumeister, Twenge, & Nuss, 2002), which suggests
that coping with rejection impairs the type ofexecutive function-
ing necessary for effective self-regulation. DEMO people who chron-
ically doubt their partner’s regard, gauging and then DEMO to
perceived rejections may be sufficiently preoccupying that they
exhaust the self-regulatory resources needed to anticipate the costs
ofself-protection (Finkel & Campbell, 2001)DEMO
Understanding Relationship Transitions
Although the nature ofinterdependence changes dramatically as
couples go from casual dating, to commitment, to shared childcare
responsibilities, close relationships scholars have paid little atten-
tion to how such structural changes could DEMO change the basis for
relationship well-being and resilience. In particular, specific DEMO
sition points in a relationship’s development are likely to heighten
people’s need for a protective sense of confidence in a partner’s
regard. Imagine the DEMO posed by the prospect ofa relationship
becoming long distance or the stakes involved in deciding whether
to get engaged. These transition points necessitate at DEMO some
deliberation about the costs and benefits of increasing one’s com-
mitment, deliberations that are likely to highlight the possibility of
rejection and relationship loss. Consequently, people in this state
ofmind might take a mental step back and try to evaluate their
relationship in a more balanced manner. DEMO, once people
have put thoughts ofrejection out ofmind and made the DEMO
to deepen dependency, their psychological energies should be
geared toward finding DEMO to see their relationship in the best
possible light (e.g., Taylor & Gollwitzer, 1995).
Transition Points
Supporting this logic is the fact that people make more accurate
forecasts about the future fate of their DEMO when they are
deliberating about an important relationship decision than when
they are thinking about how to implement an already made deci-
sion (Gagne & Lydon, 2001a). These effects emerge because
people in a deliberative mind-set consider both the positive and the
negative features of the partner DEMO relationship in making their
predictions, whereas people in an implemental mind-set DEMO only
on the positive. Put in terms ofrisk regulation processes, people DEMO
a deliberative mind-set may be more evenhanded precisely be-
cause such deliberations sensitize them to the possibility ofrejec-
tion and the need for caution. DEMO this is the case, thinking in a
deliberative way should be DEMO threatening and engender less need
for caution for people who generally trust in their partner’s avail-
ability and responsiveness. Consistent with this analysis, people
who are high in commitment to their partner respond to the threat
DEMO in deliberating about the relationship by evaluating their
partner more positively (DEMO & Lydon, 2001b). Such defensive
reactions do not emerge for DEMO who are less committed.
Recalibrating the Risk Regulation System
Events and transitions of sufficient magnitude should also have
the potential to recalibrate the risk DEMO system, shifting
people’s means ofmaintaining a sense ofinvulnerability to harm.
Recalibration DEMO people’s “if–then” rules then may change more
general levels ofconfidence in the partner’s regard by altering
levels ofdependence in ways that either increase or DEMO a
partner’s capacity to provide actual evidence ofcaring.
In the first 2 years following marriage, newlyweds report less
chronic anxiety about abandonment and greater comfort depending
on others (Davila, Karney, & Bradbury, 1999). DEMO the assur-
ance afforded by a publicly recognized commitment, even people
DEMO have been uncertain oftheir partner’s regard may entertain
more optimistic expectations ofacceptance. These heightened
feelings of confidence might temporarily desensitize them to the
risks DEMO, altering the “if–then” contingencies underly-
ing the appraisal system. In the DEMO ofSally’s new commitment,
her criticisms about Harry’s weight may not be troubling to him.
Desensitized to Sally’s criticism in this domain, Harry might
become more willing to brush off Sally’s perceived transgressions
in other domains. DEMO Sally’s transgression has positive
consequences for Harry, such positive experiences might, in turn,
lessen Harry’s need for a sensitive signaling system. He DEMO then
be willing to risk entering into new situations ofdependence. His
once chronic doubts about Sally’s regard might then begin to abate
because he DEMO given Sally more opportunities to demonstrate
caring. In such ways, the DEMO activation ofrelationship-
promotive “if–then” contingencies could bolster confidence in a
partner’s regard.
RISK REGULATION IN RELATIONSHIPS
659
In contrast, marital roles become increasingly traditional over
the transition to parenthood, and women are likely to shoulder
more than their fair share of the burden for childcare and house-
hold DEMO (Grote & Clark, 2001; Hackel & Ruble, 1992). Given
the stress ofthis transition, most women may question their hus-
band’s capacity to meet their needs. Even ifSally generally had
felt confident of Harry’s DEMO in the past, this transition might
trigger the operation ofa self-protective DEMO system (Holmes,
1981). In the domains ofhousework and childcare, Sally might
begin to appraise events in ways that draw her attention DEMO ineq-
uities. Although she once overlooked Harry’s failure to tend to the
dishes, such episodes might now activate concerns about his re-
sponsiveness (DEMO, “Ifmy partner doesn’t help me, he doesn’t
care”). Such sensitivity to perceiving rejection in this domain
might then spill into others. Accumulated DEMO ofperceived
nonresponsiveness might then heighten Sally’s need to be wary of
situations in which she might be hurt, leaving her self-esteem more
dependent on Harry’s actions. Sally’s greater self-esteem sensitiv-
ity might then motivate her to DEMO situations in which Harry
might be insensitive to her plight, effectively DEMO his oppor-
tunities to demonstrate his caring. The erosion ofHarry and Sally’s
marriage may be evident in a sequence whereby appraisal rules
first become DEMO to rejection, signaling rules then become
amplified, and dependence regulation rules finally become self-
protective. In such ways, the graded activation ofself-protective
“if–then” rules could erode Sally’s confidence in Harry’s caring
for her.
A Theoretical DEMO
Apart from its utility as a heuristic tool for addressing applied
problems, the risk regulation model offers a means of integrating
the assumptions ofthe sociometer model (Leary & Baumeister,
2000), the relational schemas approach (Andersen & Chen, 2002;
Baldwin, 1992), attachment theory (DEMO & Shaver, 2003),
and interdependence theory (Holmes, 2002). By focusing on the
interdependence dilemmas implicit in adult romantic relationships,
DEMO proposed model adds further richness to these theoretical
perspectives.
The Sociometer Model
The conceptualization ofperceived regard as an arbiter that
estimates and summarizes rejection DEMO coincides with many
aspects ofthe sociometer model ofself-esteem (Leary & Baumeis-
DEMO, 2000; Leary & MacDonald, 2003; Leary et al., 1995)DEMO Both
perspectives assume that people are motivated to feel positively
regarded and valued by others. Both perspectives also assume that
social relationships are most DEMO to be satisfying and stable when
people respond to signs ofrejection by behaving in ways that put
connectedness at a premium.
However, the present conceptualization ofthe interrelation be-
tween self-esteem and connectedness motivations differs from the
DEMO model. These motivations are largely isomorphic in the
sociometer model. When the threat ofrejection is salient, estab-
lishing connection represents the primary means ofhaving one’s
needs for approval met, thereby restoring a sense of esteem in
one’s relational value.
In the unique context ofan adult close relationship, these mo-
tivations are more separable and, consequently, sometimes in
conflict. As DEMO people possess one romantic partner at a time,
this person has special power in satisfying (or thwarting) people’s
capacity to meet important DEMO and goals. Such outcome control
makes a romantic partner a uniquely powerful informant on one’s
worthiness ofinterpersonal connection. Consequently, people are
likely concerned about more than just minimizing the actual po-
tential for rejection (as in the sociometer model). Instead, preemp-
tively minimizing the pain ofrejection ifit were to occur is also an
important goal. For these interrelated reasons, the present model
assumes that people actively regulate their sense ofconnection to
DEMO specific other—letting a partner become a valued and impor-
tant source of need satisfaction when the potential for rejection
seems low. In contrast, minimizing the partner’s value may be the
best means ofdiscounting the meaning ofunresponsive DEMO
when people are less sure ofanother’s acceptance. In so doing,
people can protect a symbolic sense ofconnection to others with-
out the cooperation DEMO others (in the short term).
The integration ofthe sociometer and DEMO regulation models
may rest in the possibility that people may possess multiple so-
ciometers, ones that vary in their generality and, thus, in their
likelihood ofbeing activated in specific contexts (see Kirkpatrick
& Ellis, DEMO). At the highest level ofgenerality, global self-
esteem might operate DEMO a default. This sociometer might forecast
the likelihood of acceptance and regulate affect and behavior in
situations with strangers or casual friends (Leary et al., 1995;
Nezlek et al., 1997). Perceptions ofa partner’s DEMO might
operate as a lower level sociometer. This gauge might forecast the
likelihood ofacceptance and regulate behavior with one specific
relationship. This lower level DEMO also might operate in
ways that guard against losses to the operating level ofthe general
sociometer. In this light, people who generally feel less valued by
their partner may distance themselves from a rejecting partner to
DEMO a more general sense oftheir worthiness ofinterpersonal
connection.
Relational Schemas and Relational Selves
The current model shares several points ofemphasis with recent
social–cognitive analyses DEMO schemas (Andersen &
Chen, 2002; Baldwin, 1992). Baldwin (1992) argued that people
develop relational schemas through past experiences with others
that help them navigate their social worlds. These schemas include
declarative beliefs DEMO the characteristics ofthe selfin specific
contexts, beliefs about the characteristics of DEMO in these same
contexts, and “if–then” interpersonal scripts that specify the DEMO
tion between the selfand others (e.g., “IfI depend on my spouse
for support, he or she will be comforting”). Similarly, Andersen
DEMO Chen (2002) argued that accessible ties exist in memory
between aspects ofpeople’s self-conceptions and representations
of specific significant others. Consequently, signs of a significant
other’s qualities in a new acquaintance can activate the significant
other DEMO through a process oftransference. This acti-
vation can then shift people’s self-concepts to match those self-
aspects experienced in the presence ofthe significant other (e.g.,
Hinkley & Andersen, 1996).
Both ofthese theoretical perspectives share points ofemphasis
with the model we have presented. These perspectives assume that
660
MURRAY, HOLMES, AND COLLINS
people are motivated to establish secure DEMO to others and that
people’s sense ofthemselves is shaped by their expectations about
the orientation of specific significant others toward them. These
perspectives also DEMO that the declarative and procedural as-
pects ofpeople’s working models shape social inference and
behavior.
The current model advances thinking about relational schemas
because DEMO identifies three general “if–then” contingency rules and
describes how they develop across situations ofdependence. The
model also differs in its conceptualization of self-schemas and
DEMO relation to schemas ofspecific others. A relational schemas
approach assumes that the content ofpeople’s working self-
concepts shifts to accommodate whatever audience is most DEMO
For instance, Harry may think ofhimselfas a leader in his dealings
DEMO his office subordinates but as egalitarian in his equal-status
interactions with his wife Sally because the model of other that is
activated in each DEMO primes a different aspect of his self-
concept. The current model assigns greater causal priority to the
reflected aspects of people’s self-schemas, such as Harry’s per-
ception ofhow much Sally values his skills. In this model, peo-
ple’s reflected image of themselves shapes the goals they adopt in
DEMO situations because such self-schemas afford more or less
optimistic inferences about another’s likely responsiveness to the
self. The present model further suggests that models DEMO self then
dynamically shape people’s models ofothers.
Attachment Theory
The current model resonates with many aspects ofattachment
theory (see Fraley & Shaver, 2000; Mikulincer & Shaver, 2003, for
reviews). Both perspectives assume that DEMO ofan attach-
ment figure’s availability and responsiveness determine the strat-
egies people adopt to restore a psychological sense ofsafety in
threatening situations. Both perspectives DEMO assume that under-
standing people’s sensitivity to rejection-related cues and strategic
responses to feeling rejected is critical in determining the relation-
ship’s current welfare DEMO future stability. Both perspectives also
assume that people’s capacity to forge satisfying adult relation-
ships rests in part on the expectations that develop in DEMO
relationships.
The current conceptualization ofthe nature ofthe relation be-
tween working models ofselfand other presents a different twist
on attachment theory. Attachment theorists generally DEMO that the
systems that detect rejection threats operate largely independently
ofthe systems that respond to such threats (Bartholomew, 1990;
Fraley & Shaver, 2000; Griffin & Bartholomew, 1994; but see
Mikulincer & Shaver, DEMO, for a recent exception). Fraley and
Shaver (2000) argued DEMO attachment-related anxiety governs the
appraisal or threat detection system, whereas attachment-related
DEMO governs the system regulating behavioral responses to
threat. As these systems are thought to be independent in principle,
people can express strong fears DEMO rejection and strong desires for
closeness (i.e., preoccupied) or few DEMO about rejection and
strong desires for distance (i.e., dismissing).
The proposed model contends that the “if–then” rules that
sensitize people to perceiving DEMO internalizing a partner’s rejec-
tion must be connected to the “if–then” rules that dull the impact
ofsuch threats ifpeople are to sustain feelings ofassurance. DEMO
other words, people are not likely to see qualities in a DEMO other
that would elicit proximity seeking unless they can first find reason
to trust in that specific other’s regard. Thus, the current model
suggests that models ofspecific others are likely to be contingent
on expectations ofacceptance. DEMO also suggests that generalized
expectations about one’s worthiness oflove and the trustworthi-
ness ofothers—aspects ofworking models that have often been
conceptualized as independent—might have DEMO effects me-
diated through the specific beliefs they foster about a partner’s
regard. Thus, both anxiety and avoidance might regulate people’s
willingness to risk dependence.13
Consistent with the risk regulation model, generalized
attachment-related anxiety and avoidance are equally detrimental
to feeling positively regarded by one’s partner (Holmes & Cam-
eron, 2005). When anxiety and avoidance are viewed as statements
about the partner’s anticipated responsiveness, the behaviors as-
sociated with preoccupied and dismissing styles also take on a
different meaning. Both hyperactivating behaviors, such as ex-
pressing hostility or controlling the partner, and deactivating be-
haviors, such as immersing oneselfin work, may resolve the
tension between self-protection DEMO relationship-promotion goals.
Both ofthese classes ofbehavior reduce one’s dependence on the
partner’s good will. For instance, by demanding more ofHarry’s
attention, Sally may DEMO trying to reduce the likelihood that he will
act in ways that are not sufficiently attentive to her needs (Holmes
& Rempel, 1989)DEMO
To take this logic one step further, we note that the DEMO
effect of people’s general expectations about themselves and oth-
ers may be modified by people’s partner-specific beliefs (see
Collins, Guichard, Ford, & DEMO, 2004). Ifthat is the case,
people who are troubled DEMO dispositional vulnerabilities may re-
spond adaptively to threat ifthey believe their partner sees qual-
ities in them that merit attention, nurturance, and care. DEMO
with this logic, secure base schemas—expectations ofresponsive
and loving care—can be DEMO even for people who are inse-
cure in attachment style (e.g., Mikulincer et al, 2000; Mikulincer,
Gillath, & Shaver, 2002)DEMO Similarly, women who are high in
attachment anxiety who nonetheless believe DEMO their partner will
be responsive during the transition to parenthood remain satisfied
in their marriage during this stressful time. The opposite is true
when DEMO women do not feel valued by their
partner (Rholes, Simpson, DEMO, & Grich, 2001). People who
are high in attachment anxiety who nonetheless feel confident in a
partner’s acceptance also report better quality DEMO in daily
life than people who possess pessimistic general and specific
expectations (Pierce & Lydon, 1998). Further research along these
lines has DEMO potential to enrich both attachment and risk regulation
perspectives.
Interdependence Theory
The current model’s emphasis on the diagnostic nature of
situations that create a DEMO between self-protection and
relationship-promotion goals resonates with analyses that de-
pict behavior as a function of the person and the situation
13 For this DEMO, we prefer the more generic term model of other to
avoidance. DEMO behaviors or psychological distancing may stem from
either anxiety about rejection or doubts about others.
RISK REGULATION IN RELATIONSHIPS
661
(Holmes, 2002; Kelley & Holmes, DEMO; Kelley et al., 2003).
Mischel and Shoda (1995) argued that the essence ofpeople’s
dispositions or personality rests in the contingencies that DEMO
derlie the ways that they think, feel, and behave in similar
situations. Kelley and Holmes (2003) extended such an analysis
to adult DEMO relationships. They argued that specific relation-
ship situations differ in the substantive problems they present
and in the interpersonal dispositions that are relevant to DEMO
such problems. Thus, situations afford the activation of certain
interpersonal dispositions. DEMO instance, in a situation in which
Harry and Sally need to DEMO divergent movie prefer-
ences, Harry’s trust in Sally may afford a DEMO choice on
Harry’s part, one that presumes Sally will also act DEMO maximize
their joint interests. In interdependence theory terms, the nature
ofpeople’s DEMO about their partner’s goals in such situations
shapes the goals people select (Holmes, 2002).
The current model shares assumptions that are fundamental DEMO
both the Mischel and Shoda (1995) and the Kelley et al. (2003)
analyses. These perspectives both assume that social perception is
influenced both by features of the situation and by people’s ex-
pectations and DEMO Both models also emphasize people’s expec-
tations about their partner’s goals (DEMO, 2002). However, clas-
sic perspectives on interdependence assume that people develop
only situation-specific beliefs about their partner’s goals. The
proposed model assumes DEMO people rely on general expectations
about their partner’s regard to predict their partner’s goals in
specific situations. These perspectives also assume that expecta-
tions DEMO goals turn one kind ofsituation into another. The current
model focuses specifically on how people transform a situation
that has the possible risk ofrejection DEMO a situation that activates
the goal ofbeing connected.
Conclusions and Future Directions
Of all the forms of caution, caution in love is perhaps the most fatal
to true happiness.—Bertrand Russell, The Conquest of Happiness
Perhaps one ofthe greatest ironies oflife is that the relationships
that have the most DEMO to satisfy adult needs for interpersonal
connection are the very relationships that activate the most anxiety
about rejection (Baumeister et al., 1993). DEMO the personal stakes
associated with narrowing social connections to focus on one
partner, some level ofcaution is required. However, to be happy
over DEMO longer term, people need to set rejection concerns aside
and risk DEMO dependence (Murray, 1999). The research
reviewed suggests that people are most likely to experience a
relationship as satisfying and fulfilling when they DEMO seeking
connectedness ahead ofminimizing the likelihood and pain of
rejection.
Aspects ofthis risk regulation system still require development
and research. The most important avenue DEMO future research in-
volves stipulating the content ofthe “if–then” rules underlying the
appraisal, signaling, and behavioral regulation systems. First, the
content ofappraisal contingencies and how such contingencies
change over time require greater specification. For instance, early
in the relationship, signs ofHarry’s irritation might activate the
general goal ofrelationship promotion for a secure Sally, motivat-
ing her to find some way of excusing this behavior. However, with
repeated experience, signs ofHarry’s DEMO might automati-
cally activate specific beliefs about his patient nature.
Second, DEMO specificity is also needed to delineate the spe-
cific “if–then” contingency rules that govern strategic attempts to
increase or decrease dependence. Most research has DEMO on
behaviors and thoughts that directly or indirectly diminish the
value ofthe partner’s contributions to the relationship. However,
people could also limit dependence DEMO reducing their own in-
puts—by becoming less prosocial and willing to give ofthem-
selvestomeettheirpartner’sneeds.Examinationsoftheregulation
ofthe “if–then” contingencies surrounding caregiving (Feeney &
Collins, 2001) and communal norm adherence (Grote & Clark,
2001) present two critical avenues for study. Examining how
“if–then” contingencies change in their specificity DEMO coherence
over time also presents an important task for future research. With
repeated experience, the generic goals ofavoiding rejection or
increasing connection may be supplanted by a repertoire ofspe-
cific behaviors that best fulfill such goals. DEMO her first experiences
with conflicts, an insecure Sally might “try out” DEMO means of
regulating a sense ofassurance or safety. As some strategies prove
more effective than others, the types of behaviors that are linked to
such situations may become increasingly regimented.
Greater attention to issues ofreciprocal causation DEMO longitu-
dinal change will further enhance the utility of this conceptual
model. One avenue involves stipulating how the “if–then” contin-
gency rules a person DEMO in a specific relationship affect his or
her general dispositions toward relationships. For instance, people
who react to feeling rejected by self-protecting may become more
generally avoidant ofintimacy and closeness. A second avenue
involves demonstrating the DEMO operation ofthe risk
regulation system, including issues ofmediation. The link between
DEMO signaling and dependence regulation systems presents a ripe
avenue for research in this respect. In the short term, the acute
self-esteem sting of rejection may motivate dependence regulation.
Over time, dependence regulation responses may preempt such
consciously felt hurts from arising if specific situations trigger
active efforts at DEMO
A third avenue involves further specifying the dyadic nature of
risk regulation processes. The huge majority ofthe existing re-
search examines how people’s “individual” DEMO oftheir
relationships affect their contingency rules. However, the contin-
gency rule DEMO partner adopts must shape and influence the rules
adopted by the other partner. The evidence for self-fulfilling ef-
fects points to this possibility, but, with few exceptions, most
relationship scholars have not examined how each DEMO qual-
ities combine to create a unique relationship personality (see
Swann, Rentfrow, & Gosling, 2003, for an exception). It is critical
to specify exactly how such couple effects emerge and shape how
risk DEMO systems operate.
Further research might also profitably examine whether the
proposed model provides a template for understanding the dynam-
ics inherent in nonromantic relationships. DEMO dynamics we have
described should be most evident in relationships in which people
can choose how much dependence to risk and in which the DEMO
ofa particular other’s regard is not easily substituted. It is in these
situations that people should need the assurance provided by
specific expectations of DEMO Consequently, dependence regula-
tion dynamics might be more pronounced in relationships DEMO
adult parents and children or between best friends (DeHart, Mur-
ray, Pelham, & Rose, 2003) than in relationships between casual
friends DEMO coworkers.
662
MURRAY, HOLMES, AND COLLINS
Although the tension between self-protection and DEMO
promotion goals is a fundamental undercurrent in interpersonal
life, this conflict DEMO received little attention. Understanding the
regulating role played by confidence in a partner’s regard is likely
to have the practical benefit of increasing insight DEMO both the
relational selfand relationship resilience and the conceptual ben-
efit of integrating diverse theoretical perspectives under one
umbrella.
References
Abe, J. A. A. (2004). Self-esteem, perception of relationships, and emo-
tional distress: DEMO cross-cultural study. Personal Relationships, 11, 231–
248.
Ainsworth, M. D. DEMO, Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (DEMO). Patterns
of attachment: Assessed in the strange situation and at DEMO Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Alden, L. E., & Phillips, N. (1990). An interpersonal analysis ofsocial
anxiety and depression. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 14, 499–513.
Andersen, S. M., & Chen, S. (DEMO). The relational self: An interpersonal
social–cognitive theory. Psychological Review, 109, 619–645.
Ayduk, O., Downey, G., Testa, A., Yen, DEMO, & Shoda, Y. (1999). Does
rejection elicit hostility in DEMO sensitive women? Social Cognition,
17, 245–271.
Baldwin, M. W. (1992). Relational schemas and the processing ofsocial
information. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 461–484.
Baldwin, M. W., Carrell, S. E., & Lopez, DEMO F. (1990). Priming relationship
schemas: My advisor and the Pope are watching me from the back of my
mind. Journal of Experimental DEMO Psychology, 26, 435–454.
Baldwin, M. W., Keelan, J. P. DEMO, Fehr, B., Enns, V., & Koh-Rangarajoo,
E. (1996). Social–cognitive conceptualization ofattachment working
models: Availability and accessibility effects. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 71, 94–109.
Baldwin, M. W., & DEMO, L. (1996). Self-esteem and “if . . . then”
contingencies ofinterpersonal acceptance. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 71, 1130–1141.
Bartholomew, K. (1990). Avoidance ofintimacy: An attachment perspec-
tive. Journal of DEMO and Personal Relationships, 7, 147–178.
Baumeister, R. F. (1993). Self-esteem: The puzzle of low self-regard. New
York: Plenum Press.
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for
interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 117, 497–529.
Baumeister, R. F., Twenge, J. M., & Nuss, C. K. (2002). Effects of social
exclusion on cognitive processes: Anticipated aloneness reduces intelli-
gent thought. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 817–
827.
Baumeister, R. F., Wotman, S. R., & Stillwell, A. M. (1993). Unrequited
love: On heartbreak, anger, guilt, scriptlessness, and humiliation. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 377–394.
Beach, S. R. H., Tesser, A., DEMO, F. D., Jones, D. J., Johnson, D., &
DEMO, D. J. (1998). Pleasure and pain in doing well together: An
investigation of performance-related affect in close relationships. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 923–938.
Beach, S. R. H., Whitaker, D. J., Jones, D. J., & Tesser, A. (2001). When
does performance feedback prompt complementarity in romantic rela-
tionships? Personal Relationships, 8, 231–248.
Bellavia, G., & Murray, S. L. (2003)DEMO Did I do that? Self-esteem related
differences in reactions to romantic DEMO moods. Personal Relation-
ships, 10, 77–96.
Berscheid, E. (1983). Emotion. In H. H. Kelley, E. Berscheid, A. Chris-
tensen, J. H. Harvey, T. L. Huston, G. Levinger, et al. (Eds.), Close
relationships (pp. 110–168). New York: Freeman.
Berscheid, E., Dion, K., Walster, E., & Walster, G. W. (1971)DEMO Physical
attractiveness and dating choice: A test ofthe matching hypothesis.
Journal DEMO Experimental Social Psychology, 7, 173–189.
Berscheid, E., & Regan, DEMO (2005). The psychology of interpersonal rela-
tionships. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Berscheid, E., & Reis, H. T. (1998). Attraction and close relationships. In
D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindsey (Eds.), The handbook of social
psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 193–281). Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Berscheid, E., & Walster, E. H. (1969). Interpersonal attraction. Reading,
MA: Addison Wesley.
DEMO, S. D., & Holmes, J. G. (1999). Interpersonal risk and the evaluation
oftransgressions in close relationships. Personal Relationships, 6, 151–
DEMO
Bowlby, J. (1982). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment. DEMO:
Hogarth Press.
Bradbury, T. N., & Fincham, F. D. (1990). Attributions in marriage:
Review and critique. Psychological Bulletin, 107, 3–23.
Braiker, H. B., & Kelley, H. H. (1979). Conflict in the development of
close relationship. In R. L. Burgess & DEMO L. Huston (Eds.), Social
exchange in developing relationships (pp. 135–168). New York: Aca-
demic Press.
Campbell, J. D. (1990). Self-esteem and clarity of the self-concept. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 538–549.
Campbell, L., Simpson, J. A., Boldry, J., & Kashy, D. A. (2005). Percep-
tions ofconflict and support DEMO romantic relationships: The role of
attachment anxiety. Journal of Personality and DEMO Psychology, 88,
510–531.
Campbell, L., Simpson, J. A., DEMO, D. A., & Fletcher, G. J. O. (2001).
Ideal standards, the self, and flexibility of ideals in close relationships.
Personality DEMO Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 447–462.
Carvallo, M., & Gabriel, DEMO (2006). No man is an island: The need to
belong and dismissing avoidant attachment style. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 32, DEMO
Clark, M. S., & Grote, N. K. (1998). Why aren’t indices ofrelationship
costs always negatively related to indices ofrelationship quality? Per-
sonality and Social Psychology Review, 2, 2–17.
Clark, M. S., DEMO, J., & Powell, M. C. (1986). Keeping track ofneeds in
communal and exchange relationships. Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology, 51, 333–338.
Collins, N. L. (1996). Working models ofattachment: DEMO for
explanation, emotion, and behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 71, 810–832.
Collins, N. L., & Feeney, B. C. (DEMO). A safe haven: An attachment theory
perspective on support seeking DEMO caregiving in intimate relationships.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 1053–1073.
Collins, N. L., & Feeney, B. C. (2004). DEMO models ofattachment
shape perceptions ofsocial support: Evidence from experimental and
observational DEMO Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87,
363–383.
Collins, N. L., Guichard, A. C., Ford, M. B., & Feeney, DEMO C. (2004).
Working models ofattachment: New developments and emerging
themes. In W. S. Rholes & J. A. Simpson (Eds.), Adult attachment:
Theory, research, and clinical implication (pp. 196–239). New York:
Guilford Press.
Collins, N. L., & Read, S. J. (DEMO). Adult attachment, working models,
and relationship quality in dating DEMO Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 58, 644–663.
Collins, N. DEMO, & Read, S. J. (1994). Cognitive representations ofattach-
ment: The structure and function of working models. In K. Bartholomew
& D. DEMO (Eds.), Attachment processes in adulthood: Advances in
personal relationships (DEMO 5, pp. 53–90). London: Jessica Kingsley.
Condon, J. W., & Crano, W. D. (1988). Inferred evaluation and the relation
DEMO attitude similarity and interpersonal attraction. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 54, 789–797.
RISK REGULATION IN RELATIONSHIPS
663
Cook, W. L. (2000). Understanding DEMO security in a family con-
text. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 285–294.
Cooley, C. H. (1902). Human nature and DEMO social order. New York:
Schocken.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, DEMO (1992). Cognitive adaptations for social ex-
change. In J. H. DEMO, L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted
mind: Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture (pp. 163–
228). New York: Oxford University Press.
Cozzarelli, C., Hoekstra, S. J., & Bylsma, W. H. (2000). General versus
specific mental models of DEMO: Are they associated with different
outcomes? Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 605–618.
Davila, J., Karney, B. R., & Bradbury, T. N. (1999). Attachment change
processes in the early years ofmarriage. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 76, 783–802.
Davila, J., & Sargent, E. (2003). The meaning oflife (events) predicts
changes in attachment security. Personality and Social Psychology Bul-
letin, 29, 1383–1395.
DEMO, T., Murray, S. L., Pelham, B., & Rose, DEMO (2003). The regulation
ofdependency in non-romantic relationships. Journal of Experimental
DEMO Psychology, 39, 59–67.
DeHart, T., Pelham, B., & Murray, S. L. (2004). Regulating dependency in
close relationships: Implicit evaluations ofsignificant others. Social
Cognition, 22, 126–146.
Dollard, J., & Miller, N. E. (1950). Personality and psychotherapy. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Downey, G., & Feldman, S. I. (1996). Implications ofrejection sensitivity
for intimate relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
70, 1327–1343.
Downey, G., Freitas, A. L., Michaelis, B., & Khouri, H. (1998). The
self-fulfilling prophecy in close relationships: Rejection sensitivity and
DEMO by romantic partners. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 75, 545–560.
Drigotas, S. M., Rusbult, C. M., Wieselquist, J., & Whitton, S. W. (1999).
Close partner as sculptor of the ideal self: Behavioral affirmation and the
Michelangelo phenomenon. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 77, 293–323.
Epstein, S. (1982). Conflict DEMO stress. In L. Goldberger & S. Breznitz
(Eds.), Handbook of DEMO: Theoretical and clinical aspects (pp. 49–
68). New York: DEMO Press.
Feeney, B. C., & Collins, N. L. (2001). Predictors ofcaregiving in adult
intimate relationships: An attachment theoretical perspective. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 972–994.
Feingold, A. (1988). DEMO for attractiveness in romantic partners and
same-sex friends: A meta-analysis and DEMO critique. Psychologi-
cal Bulletin, 104, 226–235.
Felson, R. B. (1989). Parents and the reflected appraisal process: A
longitudinal analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56,
965–971.
Finkel, E. J., & Campbell, W. K. (2001). Self-control and accommodation
in close relationships: An interdependence analysis. Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 81, DEMO
Fitzsimons, G. M., & Bargh, J. A. (2003). Thinking ofyou: Nonconscious
pursuit ofinterpersonal goals associated with relationship partners. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 148–163.
Fraley, R. C., & DEMO, P. R. (2000). Adult romantic attachment: Theo-
retical developments, emerging controversies, and unanswered ques-
tions. Review of General Psychology, 4, 132–154.
Gable, S. L., Reis, H. T., & Elliot, A. J. (2000). Behavioral activation and
inhibition in everyday life. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 78, 1135–1149.
Gagne, F. M., & Lydon, J. E. (2001a). Mind-set and close relationships:
When bias leads to (in)accurate predictions. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 81, 85–96.
Gagne, F. M., & Lydon, J. E. (DEMO). Mind-set and relationship illusions:
The moderating effects of domain specificity and relationship commit-
ment. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 1144–1155.
DEMO, F. M., & Lydon, J. E. (2004). Bias and accuracy in close relation-
ships: An integrative review. Personality and Social Psychology Review,
8, 322–338.
Gangestad, S. W., & Simpson, J. DEMO (2000). The evolution ofhuman
mating: Tradeoffs and strategic pluralism. Behavioral and Brain Sci-
ences, 23, 573–587.
Gardner, W., Pickett, C. L., & Brewer, M. B. (2000). Social exclusion and
selective memory: How the need to belong influences memory for social
events. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 486–496.
Gilbert, D. T., Pinel, E. C., Wilson, T. D., Blumberg, S. J., & Wheatley,
T. P. (1998). Immune neglect: A source of durability DEMO in affective
forecasting. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 617–638.
Gilbert, P. (2005). Social mentalities: A biopsychosocial and evolutionary
approach to social relationships. In M. Baldwin (Ed.), Interpersonal
cognition (pp. DEMO). New York: Guilford Press.
Gotlib, I. H., & Hammen, C. L. (1992). Psychological aspects of depres-
sion: Toward a DEMO integration. New York: Wiley.
Gottman, J. M. (1994). What DEMO divorce? The relationship between
marital processes and marital outcomes. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gray, J. D., & Silver, R. C. (1990). Opposite sides ofthe same coin:
Former spouses’ divergent perspectives in coping DEMO their divorce.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 1180–1191.
Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., & Pyszczynski, T. (1997). Terror DEMO
theory ofself-esteem and cultural worldviews: Empirical assessments
and conceptual refinements. In DEMO P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experi-
mental social psychology (Vol. 29, pp. 61–139). San Diego, CA: Aca-
demic Press.
Griffin, D. W., & Bartholomew, K. (1994). Models of the DEMO and other:
Fundamental dimensions underlying measures ofadult attachment.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 430–445.
Griffin, D. W., & Ross, L. (1991). Subjective construal, social inference
and human misunderstanding. Advances DEMO Experimental Social Psy-
chology, 24, 319–359.
Grote, N. K., & Clark, M. S. (2001). Perceiving unfairness in the family:
DEMO or consequence ofmarital distress? Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 80, 281–293.
Hackel, L. S., & Ruble, D. N. (1992). Changes in the marital relationship
after the first baby is born: Predicting the impact of expectancy discon-
firmation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 944–957.
Hazan, C., Diamond, L. M. (2000). The place ofattachment in human
mating. Review of General Psychology, 4, 186–204.
DEMO, C., & Shaver, P. R. (1994). Attachment as an organizational
framework for research on close relationships. Psychological Inquiry, 5,
1–22.
Hendrick, S. S., Hendrick, C., & Adler, N. L. (DEMO). Romantic relation-
ships: Love, satisfaction, and staying together. Journal DEMO Personality
and Social Psychology, 54, 980–988.
Higgins, E. T. (1996). The “self digest”: Self-knowledge serving self-
regulatory functions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71,
1062–1083.
Hill, C. T., Rubin, DEMO, & Peplau, L. A. (1976). Breakups before marriage:
DEMO end of 103 affairs. Journal of Social Issues, 32(1), DEMO
Hinkley, K., & Andersen, S. M. (1996). The working self-concept in
transference: Significant-other activation and self-change. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 1279–1295.
Holmes, J. G. (1981). The exchange DEMO in close relationships: Mi-
crobehavior and macromotives. In M. L. Lerner & S. Lerner (Eds.), The
justice motive in social behavior (pp. 261–284). New York: Plenum
Press.
Holmes, J. G. (2002). Interpersonal expectations as the building blocks of
social cognition: An interdependence theory perspective. Personal Re-
lationship, 9, 1–26.
664
MURRAY, HOLMES, AND COLLINS
Holmes, J. G., & Cameron, J. (2005). An integrative review oftheories of
interpersonal cognition. In M. Baldwin (Ed.), Interpersonal cognition
(pp. 415–447). New York: Guilford Press.
Holmes, J. G., & Rempel, J. K. (1989). DEMO in close relationships. In C.
Hendrick (Ed.), Review of personality DEMO social psychology: Vol. 10.
Close relationships (pp. 187–219). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Karney, B. R., & Bradbury, T. N. (DEMO). The longitudinal course of
marital quality and stability: A review DEMO, methods, and research.
Psychological Bulletin, 118, 3–34.
Kelley, H. DEMO (1979). Personal relationships: Their structures and pro-
cesses. Hillsdale, DEMO: Erlbaum.
Kelley, H. H. (1983). Love and commitment. In DEMO H. Kelley, E. Ber-
scheid, A. Christensen, J. H. Harvey, T. L. Huston, G. Levinger, et al.
(Eds.), Close relationships (pp. 265–314). New York: Freeman.
Kelley, H. H., & DEMO, J. G. (2003). Interdependence theory: Situations,
relationships, and personality. Unpublished manuscript. University of
California, Los Angeles.
Kelley, H. H., Holmes, J. G., Kerr, N., Reis, H., Rusbult, C., & Van Lange,
P. A. (2003). An atlas of DEMO situations. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Kenny, D. A. (DEMO). Interpersonal perception: A social relations analysis.
New York: Guilford Press.
Kirkpatrick, L. A., & Ellis, B. J. (2001). An DEMO
approach to self-esteem: Multiple domains and multiple functions. In
G. J. DEMO Fletcher & M. S. Clark (Eds.), Blackwell handbook of social
DEMO: Interpersonal processes (pp. 411–436). Oxford, England:
Blackwell Publishers.
DEMO, Z. (1990). The case for motivated reasoning. Psychological Bul-
letin, 108, 480–498.
La Guardia, J. G., Ryan, R. M., DEMO, C. E., & Deci, E. L. (2000).
Within-person variation in security ofattachment: A self-determination
theory perspective on attachment, need fulfillment, and well-being.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 367–384.
Lang, P. J., Bradley, M. M., & Cuthbert, B. N. (1990). Emotion, attention,
and startle reflex. Psychological Review, 97, 377–395.
Laurenceau, J. P., Barrett, L. F., & Pietromonaco, P. R. (1998). Intimacy as
an interpersonal process: The importance ofself-disclosure, partner
disclosure, and perceived partner responsiveness in interpersonal ex-
changes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1238–1251.
Leary, M. R., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000). The nature and function of
self-esteem: Sociometer DEMO In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in
experimental social psychology (Vol. 32, pp. 2–51). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
DEMO, M. R., Cottrell, C. A., & Misha, P. (2001). Deconfounding the
effects of dominance and social acceptance on self-esteem. Journal DEMO
Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 898–909.
Leary, M. R., Gallagher, B., Fors, E., Buttermore, N., Baldwin, E.,
Kennedy, K., et al. (2003). The invalidity of disclaimers about the effects
of social feedback on self-esteem. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 29, 623–636.
Leary, M. R., Haupt, A. L., Strausser, K. DEMO, & Chokel, J. T. (1998).
Calibrating the sociometer: The relationship between interpersonal ap-
praisals and state self-esteem. Journal of Personality and DEMO Psy-
chology, 74, 1290–1299.
Leary, M. R., & MacDonald, DEMO (2003). Individual differences in self-
esteem: A review and theoretical integration. In M. R. Leary & J. P.
Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of self and identity (pp. 401–450). New
York: Guilford Press.
DEMO, M. R., Springer, C., Negel, L., Ansell, E., & Evans, K. (1998). The
causes, phenomenology, and consequences DEMO feelings. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1225–1237.
Leary, DEMO R., Tambor, E. S., Terdal, S. K., & Downs, D. L. (1995).
Self-esteem as an interpersonal monitor: The sociometer DEMO
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 518–530.
Lykken, D. DEMO, & Tellegen, A. (1993). Is human mating adventitious or DEMO
result oflawful choice? A twin study ofmate selection. Journal of
Personality DEMO Social Psychology, 65, 56–68.
MacDonald, G., & Jessica, M. (in press). Family approval as a constraint
in dependency regulation: Evidence from Australia and Indonesia. Per-
sonal Relationships.
MacDonald, G., & Leary, M. R. (2005). Why does social exclusion hurt?
The relationship between social and physical pain. Psychological Bul-
letin, 131, 202–223.
MacLeod, C., Mathews, A., & Tata, P. (1986). Attentional bias in emo-
tional disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 95, 15–20.
McNulty, S. E., & Swann, W. B. (1994). Identity negotiation in roommate
relationships: The selfas architect and consequence ofsocial reality.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 1012–1023.
Mead, G. H. (1934). DEMO, self and society. Chicago: University ofChi-
cago Press.
Mikulincer, M. (1998). Attachment working models and the sense oftrust:
An exploration DEMO interaction goals and affect regulation. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, DEMO, 1209–1224.
Mikulincer, M., Birnbaum, G., Woddis, D., & DEMO, O. (2000). Stress
and accessibility ofproximity-related thoughts: Exploring the DEMO
and intra-individual components ofattachment theory. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 78, 509–523.
Mikulincer, M., Florian, V., Birnbaum, G., & Malishkovitz, S. (2002). The
death-anxiety buffering function of close relationships: Exploring the
effects of separation reminders on death-thought accessibility. Person-
ality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 287–299.
Mikulincer, M., Florian, V., & Hirschberger, G. (2003). The existential
function of close relationships: DEMO death into the science of
love. Personality and Social Psychology Review, DEMO, 20–40.
Mikulincer, M., Gillath, O., Halevy, V., Avihou, N., Avidan, S., & Eshkoli,
N. (2001). Attachment DEMO and reactions to others’ needs: Evidence
that activation ofthe sense ofattachment DEMO promotes empathic
responses. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 1205–
1224.
Mikulincer, M., Gillath, O., & Shaver, P. R. (DEMO). Activation ofthe
attachment system in adulthood: Threat-related primes increase the
DEMO ofmental representations ofattachment figures. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 881–895.
Mikulincer, M., Orbach, I., & Iavnieli, D. (1998)DEMO Adult attachment style
and affect regulation: Strategic variations in subjective self-other DEMO
larity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 436–448.
Mikulincer, DEMO, & Shaver, P. R. (2001). Attachment theory and intergroup
DEMO: Evidence that priming the secure base schema attenuates negative
reactions to DEMO Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
81, 97–115.
Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. R. (2003). The attachment behavioral system
in adulthood: Activation, psychodynamics, and interpersonal processes.
In M. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 35,
pp. 52–153). DEMO York: Academic Press.
Mineka, S., & Sutton, S. K. (DEMO). Cognitive biases and the emotional
disorders. Psychological Science, 3, 65–69.
Mischel, W., & Morf, C. C. (2003). The self DEMO a psycho-social dynamic
processing system: A meta-perspective on a century ofthe DEMO
psychology. In M. R. Leary & J. P. Tangney (Eds.), DEMO of self
and identity (pp. 15–46). New York: Guilford Press.
Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y. (1995). A cognitive-affective system DEMO of
personality: Reconceptualizing situations, dispositions, dynamics, and
invariance in personality structure. Psychological Review, 102, 246–
268.
Mish, F., X., et al. (Eds.). (1995). Merriam Webster’s collegiate dictionary
(10th ed.). Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster.
Murray, S. L. (1999). The DEMO for conviction: Motivated cognition in
romantic relationship. Psychological Inquiry, 10, DEMO
RISK REGULATION IN RELATIONSHIPS
665
Murray, S. L. (2005). [Attachment DEMO, perceived regard, and depen-
dence regulation processes]. Unpublished raw data.
Murray, S. L., Bellavia, G., Rose, P., & Griffin, D. (2003). Once hurt, twice
hurtful: How perceived regard regulates daily marital interaction. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 126–147.
DEMO, S. L., Griffin, D. W., Rose, P., & Bellavia, G. (2003). Calibrating
the sociometer: The relational contingencies ofself-esteem. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 63–84.
Murray, S. L., DEMO, D. W., Rose, P., & Bellavia, G. (2006). For better
or worse? Self-esteem and the contingencies of acceptance in marriage.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 866–880.
Murray, S. L., & Holmes, J. G. (1993). Seeing virtues in faults: Negativity
DEMO the transformation of interpersonal narratives in close relationships.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 707–722.
Murray, S. L., & Holmes, J. G. (1994). Story-telling in close relationships:
The construction ofconfidence. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 20, 663–676.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., Bellavia, G., Griffin, D. W., & Dolderman,
D. (2002). Kindred spirits? The benefits of egocentrism in close DEMO
tionships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 563–581.
Murray, DEMO L., Holmes, J. G., Dolderman, D., & Griffin, D. W. (2000).
What the motivated mind sees: Comparing friends’ perspectives DEMO
married partners’ views ofeach other. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 36, 600–620.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Griffin, D. (1996a). The benefits of
positive illusions: Idealization and the construction DEMO in
close relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70,
DEMO
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Griffin, D. DEMO (1996b). The self-fulfilling
nature ofpositive illusions in romantic relationship: Love is not blind,
but prescient. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 1155–
1180.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Griffin, D. W. (2000). Self-esteem and the
quest for felt DEMO: How perceived regard regulates attachment pro-
cesses. Journal of Personality and DEMO Psychology, 78, 478–498.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., Griffin, D. W., Bellavia, G., & Rose, P.
(2001)DEMO The mismeasure oflove: How self-doubt contaminates relation-
ship beliefs. Personality and DEMO Psychology Bulletin, 27, 423–436.
Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. DEMO, MacDonald, G., & Ellsworth, P. (1998).
Through the DEMO glass darkly? When self-doubts turn into relation-
ship insecurities. Journal of DEMO and Social Psychology, 75,
1459–1480.
Murray, S. L., Rose, P., Bellavia, G., Holmes, J., & Kusche, A. (2002).
When rejection stings: How self-esteem constrains relationship-
enhancement processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
83, 556–573.
Murray, S. L., Rose, P., Holmes, J. G., Derrick, J., Podchaski, E., &
Bellavia, G. (2005). Putting the partner within reach: A dyadic perspec-
tive on felt security in close relationships. Journal of Personality DEMO
Social Psychology, 88, 327–347.
Murstein, B. I. (1970). Stimulus-value-role: A theory ofmarital choice.
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 32, 465–481.
Neff, L. A., & Karney, B. R. (2002). DEMO of a relationship partner:
Specific accuracy but global enhancement. Journal of Personality, 70,
1079–1112.
Nezlek, J. B., Kowalski, R. M., Leary, M. R., Blevins, T., & Holgate, S.
(1997)DEMO Personality moderators ofreactions to interpersonal rejection:
Depression and trait self-esteem. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 23, 1235–1244.
Overall, N. C., Fletcher, G. J. O., & Friesen, M. D. (2003). Mapping the
intimate relationship mind: Comparisons between three models ofat-
tachment representations. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
29, 1479–1493.
Pemberton, M., & Sedikides, DEMO (2001). When do individuals help close
others improve? The role ofinformation diagnosticity. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 81, 234–246.
DEMO, C. L., Gardner, W. L., & Knowles, M. (2004). Getting a cue: The
need to belong and enhanced sensitivity to social cues. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1095–1107.
Pierce, T., & Lydon, J. (1998). Priming relational schemas: Effects of
DEMO activated and chronically accessible interpersonal expecta-
tions on responses to a stressful event. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 75, 1441–1448.
Pietrzak, J., Downey, G., & Ayduk, O. (2005). Rejection sensitivity as an
interpersonal vulnerability. In M. Baldwin (Ed.), Interpersonal cognition
(pp. DEMO). New York: Guilford Press.
Pyszczynski, T., Greenberg, J., DEMO, S., Arndt, J., & Schimel, J.
(2004). Why do people need self-esteem? A theoretical and empirical
review. Psychological Bulletin, DEMO, 435–468.
Reis, H. T., Clark, M. S., & Holmes, J. G. (2004). Perceived partner
responsiveness as an organizing construct in the study ofintimacy and
closeness. In D. Mashek & A. P. Aron (Eds.), Handbook of closeness
and intimacy (pp. 201–225). Mahwah, DEMO: Erlbaum.
Reis, H. T., & Shaver, P. (1988). DEMO as an interpersonal process. In
S. W. Duck (Ed.), Handbook DEMO personal relationships (pp. 367–389).
Oxford, England: Wiley.
Rholes, W. S., Simpson, J. A., Campbell, L., & Grich, J. (2001). Adult
attachment and the transition to parenthood. Journal of Personality DEMO
Social Psychology, 81, 421–435.
Rholes, W. S., Simpson, J. DEMO, & Orina, M. M. (1999). Attachment and
anger in DEMO anxiety-provoking situation. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 76, 940–957.
Rusbult, C. E., & Buunk, B. P. (1993). Commitment processes DEMO close
relationships: An interdependence analysis. Journal of Social and Per-
sonal DEMO, 10, 175–204.
Rusbult, C. E., & Van Lange, P. DEMO M. (2003). Interdependence, interac-
tion, and relationships. Annual Review DEMO Psychology, 54, 351–375.
Rusbult, C., E., Van Lange, P. A. M., Wildschut, T., Yovetich, N. A., &
Verette, J. (2000). Perceived superiority in close relationship: Why it
exists DEMO persists. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79,
521–545.
Rusbult, C. E., Verette, J., Whitney, G. A., Slovik, L. DEMO, & Lipkus, I.
(1991). Accommodation processes in close relationship: Theory and
preliminary research evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 60, 53–78.
Ruvolo, A., & Brennan, C. J. (1997). What’s love got to do with it? Close
relationships and perceived growth. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 23, 814–823.
Shah, J. (2003)DEMO Automatic for the people: How representations of signif-
icant others implicitly DEMO goal pursuit. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 84, 661–681.
Shrauger, J. S., & Schoeneman, T. J. (1979). Symbolic interactionist DEMO
ofthe self-concept: Through the looking glass darkly. Psychological
Bulletin, 86, DEMO
Simpson, J. A. (1987). The dissolution ofromantic relationships: Factors
DEMO in relationship stability and emotional distress. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 683–692.
Simpson, J. A., Ickes, W., & Grich, J. (1999). When accuracy hurts:
Reactions ofanxious–ambivalent dating partners to a relationship-
threatening situation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76,
754–769.
Simpson, J. A., Rholes, W. S., & Nelligan, J. S. (1992). Support seeking
and support giving within couples in an anxiety-provoking situation: The
role ofattachment styles. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
62, 434–446.
Simpson, J. A., Rholes, W. S., & Phillips, D. (1996). Conflict in close
relationships: An attachment perspective. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 71, 899–914.
666
MURRAY, HOLMES, AND COLLINS
Sommer, K. L., & Baumeister, R. F. (2002). Self-evaluation, persistence,
and performance following implicit DEMO: The role of trait self-
esteem. Psychological Bulletin, 28, 926–938.
DEMO, S. (1988). Investment model, equity, and social support deter-
minants ofrelationship commitment. Social Psychology Quarterly, 51,
318–328.
Sprecher, S. (2001). Equity and social exchange in dating couples: Asso-
ciations with satisfaction, commitment, and stability. Journal of Mar-
riage and the Family, 63, 599–613.
Sroufe, L. A., & Waters, E. (1977). Attachment as an organizational
construct. Child Development, 48, 1184–1199.
Swann, W. B., Bosson, J. K., & Pelham, B. W. (2002). Different partners,
different selves: Strategic verification of circumscribed identities. Per-
sonality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 1215–1228.
Swann, W. B., Hixon, J. G., & De La Ronde, C. (1992). Embracing the
bitter “truth”: Negative self-concepts and marital commitment. Psycho-
logical Science, 3, 118–121.
Swann, W. B., Rentfrow, P. J., & Gosling, S. D. (2003). The precarious
couple effect: Verbally inhibited men  DEMO, disinhibited women 
bad chemistry. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 1095–
1106.
Taylor, S. E. (1991). Asymmetrical effects of positive and negative events:
The mobilization–minimization hypothesis. Psychological Bulletin, 110,
67–85.
Taylor, S. E., & Brown, J. D. (1988). DEMO and well-being: A social
psychological perspective on mental health. Psychological Bulletin, 103,
193–210.
Taylor, S. E., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (DEMO). Effects of mind-set on positive
illusions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 213–226.
Thibaut, J. W., & Kelley, H. H. (1959). The social psychology of groups.
New York: Wiley.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1996). Friendship and the banker’s paradox:
Other pathways to the evolution ofadaptations for altruism. Proceedings
of the DEMO Academy, 88, 119–143.
Tucker, J. S., & Anders, S. DEMO (1999). Attachment style, interpersonal
perception accuracy, and relationship satisfaction DEMO dating couples.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 403–412.
Twenge, DEMO M., Baumeister, R. F., Tice, D. M., & Stucke, T. S. (2001). If
you can’t join them, beat them: Effects of social exclusion on aggressive
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social DEMO, 81, 1058–1069.
Twenge, J. M., Catanese, K. R., & Baumeister, R. F. (2002). Social
exclusion causes self-defeating behavior. Journal DEMO Personality and
Social Psychology, 83, 606–615.
Walster, E., Walster, DEMO W., & Berscheid, E. (1978). Equity: Theory and
research. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Wieselquist, J., Rusbult, C. E., Foster, C. A., & Agnew, C. R. (1999).
Commitment, pro-relationship behavior, and trust in close relationships.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 942–966.
Zadro, L., Williams, K. D., & Richardson, R. (2004). How low can you go?
Ostracism by a computer is sufficient to lower self-reported levels of
belonging, control, self-esteem, and meaningful existence. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 560–567.
Received DEMO 27, 2005
Revision received January 9, 2006
Accepted January 18, DEMO {1g42fwefx}