Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 48:1 (2007), pp 45–52 doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2006.01657.x
The effects of maternal social phobia on
mother–infant interactions DEMO infant social
responsiveness
Lynne Murray, Peter Cooper, Cathy Creswell, Elizabeth DEMO, and
Caroline Sack
Winnicott Research Unit, School of Psychology, University DEMO Reading, UK
Background:
Social phobia aggregates in families. The genetic DEMO to intergenerational
transmission is modest, and parenting is considered important. Research DEMO the effects of social phobia
on parenting has been subject to problems of small sample size, heterogeneity of samples and
lack of speciﬁcity of observational frameworks. We addressed these problems in the current
study. Methods: We assessed mothers with social phobia (N ¼ 84) and control mothers (N ¼ 89) at
10 weeks in face-to-face interactions with their infants, and during a social challenge, namely, engaging
with a stranger. We also assessed mothers with generalised anxiety disorder (GAD) (N ¼ 50). We
examined the contribution to infant social responsiveness of early infant DEMO (neonatal
irritability), as well as maternal behaviour. Results: Mothers with social phobia were no less sensitive
to their infants during face-to-face interactions DEMO control mothers, but when interacting with the
stranger they appeared more DEMO, engaged less with the stranger themselves, and were less
encouraging of the infant’s interaction with the stranger; infants of index mothers also showed reduced
social responsiveness to the stranger. These differences did not apply to DEMO with GAD and their
infants. Regression analyses showed that the reduction in social responsiveness in infants of mothers
with social phobia was predicted by DEMO irritability and the degree to which the mother encouraged
the infant to interact with the stranger. Conclusions: Mothers with social phobia show speciﬁc par-
enting difﬁculties, and their infants show early signs of reduced social responsiveness that are related
to both individual infant differences and a lack of DEMO encouragement to engage in social
interactions. Keywords: Anxiety, social phobia, DEMO, mother–infant interactions, irritabil-
ity. Abbreviations: GAD: generalised anxiety disorder.
Social phobia is a common disorder, affecting be-
tween 7% and 13% of individuals (Furmark, 2002). It
is a persistent, disabling condition, DEMO the extreme
end of a continuum of social anxiety, in which DEMO
central psychopathological feature is an intense fear
of scrutiny and negative evaluation by others, with a
consequent avoidance of social encounters, and
markedly DEMO social functioning.
Social phobia aggregates in families, with chil-
dren of DEMO parents being themselves at raised
risk (Mancini, van Ameringen, Szatmari, Fugere, &
Boyle, 1996; Lieb et al., 2000). Notably, such
aggregation shows speciﬁcity: ﬁrst-degree relatives
of individuals with social phobia DEMO at increased
risk for social phobia, but not other anxiety dis-
DEMO (Fyer, Mannuzza, Chapman, Martin, &
Klein, 1995). DEMO there is evidence for genetic
mechanisms operating in intergenerational trans-
mission, DEMO contribution is modest (an estimated
heritability of 10% (Nelson et al., 2000)), and
environmental effects are likely to be signiﬁcant.
One DEMO environmental inﬂuence is the
quality of parenting. A number of dimensions have
been considered relevant (Wood, McLeod, Sigman,
Conﬂict of interest statement: No conﬂicts declared.
Hwang, & Chu, 2003). These include general
characteristics, such as lack of warmth, as well as
speciﬁc dimensions DEMO over-protection and control
that may limit children’s opportunities to develop
mastery and competence. Parents may also pro-
mote child anxiety by disengaging from potentially
DEMO situations, or by failing to encourage
their children and promote their DEMO In so
doing, they may model fearful responses to the
child, thereby enhancing the likelihood of child
fearfulness. Notably, however, most studies DEMO the
role of parenting have concerned anxious adults
retrospectively reporting on the parenting they re-
ceived, or anxious children interacting with their
parents. Such studies do not, therefore, directly
address the question of the inﬂuence DEMO parental
anxiety disorder on parental behaviour and on
child development. In fact, studies of anxious
parents and their children, whether involving direct
observations DEMO parenting (Woodruff-Borden, Mor-
row, Bourland, & Cambron, 2002; Turner, Beidel,
Robertson-Nay, & Tervo, 2003; Moore, Whaley, &
Sigman, 2004), or interview and questionnaire
methods (Hirschfeld, Biederman, DEMO, Faraone,
& Rosenbaum, 1997; Rubin, Nelson, Hastings, &DEMO
Asendorpf, 1999; McClure, Brennan, Hammen, &
 2006 The Authors
Journal compilation  2007 Association for Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
DEMO by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK DEMO 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA
46
Lynne Murray et al.
Le Brocque, 2001; Lieb et al., 2000) have generally culties. Moreover, to assess whether any difﬁculties
found DEMO evidence for raised rates of parental experienced by mothers and infants were speciﬁc to
rejection, over-control and over-protection; and social phobia, we also observed a group with gen-
where parental anxiety has been associated with DEMO anxiety disorder (GAD) in the absence of
such impairments, this DEMO usually been in the social phobia.
context of difﬁcult child characteristics (DEMO We also examined the contribution of infant
et al., 2004; Hirschfeld et al., 1997; Rubin et al., characteristics. Genetic studies suggest that herit-
1999), suggesting that disturbances in child ability of a general DEMO vulnerability may
behaviour may elicit these parenting styles. confer risk for social phobia. Support for such a
Few studies have examined the effects of DEMO mechanism also derives from ﬁndings that beha-
anxiety on relationships with infants, and ﬁrm vioural inhibition, usually measured from late
conclusions cannot be DEMO Feldman and col- infancy, raises the risk of anxiety disorder, especially
leagues (Feldman, Greenbaum, Mayes, & Erlich, the social type (DEMO, Beidel, & Wolff, 1996; Hirs-
1997) studied mothers and DEMO at three and chfeld et al., 1992; Biederman et al., DEMO; Hay-
nine months, measuring maternal trait anxiety at ward, Killen, Kraemer, & Taylor, 1998). Although the
both times. Decreasing anxiety DEMO time predicted stability of such behaviour through infancy is not
increased maternal sensitivity, although maternal strong, one precursor comprises emotional and
anxiety in DEMO population was within the normal behavioural reactivity (Kagan & Snidman, 1991).
range. Weinberg and Tronick (1998) studied a This measure, established for infants of four months,
small sample of mothers with panic DEMO, is conceptually closely related to that of neonatal
depression or obsessive DEMO disorder. Index irritability (Brazelton & Nugent, 1995). Irritability is
mothers were more disengaged and negative with characterised by marked sensitivity to changes DEMO
their infants than controls but, as the authors the environment, with rapid escalation of distress
note, the role of particular diagnoses is unclear. and difﬁculty in regulating state to become calm
Similar difﬁculties of interpretation DEMO to the again. In the current study, therefore, as well as in-
studies of Warren et al. (2003) and Field et al. DEMO the effects of maternal diagnosis and
(2005). In the former, mothers with panic disorder maternal behaviour on infant social responsiveness,
were DEMO to be less sensitive than controls in we assessed the role of neonatal irritability.
early infancy, and less effective at disciplining at
14 months, but it would be premature to conclude
that these effects resulted from the anxiety dis- Method
order, since index mothers commonly had other
disorders, including depression. Similarly, Field Sample
and colleagues (2005) reported maternal DEMO
drawal from the infant to be related to maternal
anxiety, but DEMO all the mothers in this study had
co-morbid depression, it is DEMO clear whether these
ﬁndings can be generalised to mothers who
experience anxiety alone.
Aside from the small sample sizes and problems
concerning co-morbid depression, a particular difﬁ-
culty of previous research has been the heterogeneity
of DEMO within the anxious groups themselves
and the lack of speciﬁcity in the assessments. This is
important because different anxiety disorders may
have distinctive effects DEMO parenting, rather than
affecting performance across the board; and, in
DEMO, the observational frames used in research
have been non-speciﬁc.
In the DEMO of these considerations, we recruited a
large sample of mothers with DEMO phobia and
their infants, and compared their behaviour with
that of DEMO non-anxious control group in a situation
designed to elucidate index mothers’ social difﬁ-
culties, namely, having to converse with an unfa-
miliar person DEMO manage their infant’s engagement
with the stranger. An important question was
whether infants of index mothers showed signs of
impaired social responsiveness, and whether such
impairments were related to maternal social difﬁ-
 2006 The Authors
DEMO compilation  2007 Association for Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
Four thousand mothers attending routine 20-week
antenatal scan clinics at the Royal Berkshire (UK) hos-
pital completed screening questionnaires for social
phobia and GAD. Five hundred and twenty-ﬁve high
scoring women were re-contacted; of these, 154 (29.3%)
refused to participate in the study, and 67 (12.8%) were
found to be ineligible (e.g., because of moving away). The
DEMO 304 women were interviewed within the
following month to conﬁrm diagnosis. Of these, 139
(45.7%) did not meet diagnostic criteria; 107 women DEMO
identiﬁed with social phobia, and 58 had GAD (but no
social phobia). Fourteen of these women subsequently
became ineligible for the study (e.g., due to premature
delivery, infant death), 12 in the DEMO phobia group and
2 in the GAD group. A random sample of 164 women with
low screening scores were also approached for parti-
cipation DEMO controls: 32 (19.4%) refused to take part, and
nine (DEMO) were ineligible. The remaining 123 were
interviewed to assess their mental DEMO: 21 were ex-
cluded as they had disorders other than social DEMO or
GAD, and seven became ineligible; one was diagnosed
with social phobia and was therefore recruited into
the social phobia group, bringing the total to 96; the
remaining 94 women were recruited as controls on the
basis of having no current or past social phobia or GAD.
DEMO 10 weeks postpartum, 84 (87.5%) and 89 (94.7%) of
DEMO mothers were assessed in the social phobia and
control groups respectively, DEMO were 50 (87.7%) of
mothers with GAD.
Effects of maternal social phobia on mother–infant interactions
47
Procedure
Neonatal irritability DEMO assessed at 10 days in the
home, in quiet conditions with DEMO lighting. Mothers
and infants then came to the University research rooms
at 10 weeks. Following a settling-in period during which
the study procedures were DEMO, mothers com-
pleted mental state questionnaires; at a point when the
infant was alert and contented, mothers and infants
were observed during a ﬁve-minute face-to-face inter-
action. A female researcher, who was unknown to the
mother, then entered the room; she called the infant’s
name, and approached mother and infant; she paused
to stand alongside the mother, DEMO to the infant
again, and then lifted the infant from his/DEMO chair and
tried to engage him/her in social interaction. The
stranger episode lasted 2½ minutes. Both episodes
were videotaped throughout. Two researchers scored
DEMO mother–infant interactions, and two other
researchers scored the stranger–mother–infant epi-
sodes; all were unaware of maternal diagnosis.
Measures
Maternal mental state. Screening questionnaires: An
eight-item version of the Social Interaction and Anxiety
Scale and the DEMO Phobia Scale (SIAS and SPS;
Mattick & Clarke, 1998), and a ﬁve-item version of the
Penn State Worry Questionnaire (PSWQ; DEMO, Miller,
Metzger, & Borkovec, 1990) were used. Items were in-
cluded on the basis of their high factor loadings on
these DEMO A pilot of each screen identiﬁed cut-off
scores for the top 10% of respondents.1 Full versions of
the questionnaires were completed at the 10-week
DEMO
Diagnostic Interview: Mothers were interviewed with
the Structured Clinical Interview for DEMO Axis 1
disorders (SCID-1; First et al., 1995) by trained psycho-
logists and mental health clinicians. All interviews were
subsequently discussed with DEMO senior clinical team to
conﬁrm diagnosis and assignment to the three study
groups. The rate of concurrent major depressive dis-
order was low for DEMO groups: 7.1% for those with social
phobia, 5.2% for those with GAD, and 1.1% for those in
the control group.
Infant behavioural characteristics. The Neonatal
Behavioural Assessment Scale (Brazelton & Nugent,
1995) was DEMO by trained psychologists to
identify infant irritability.2 This scale has been widely
used, and has good reliability and validity. We used the
items ‘peak of excitement’, ‘rapidity of build up’ and
‘irritability’ collectively to deﬁne infants as irritable
(Cronbach’s alpha ¼ .83) if the mean score was DEMO or
over, a standard method used in research (e.g., Croc-
DEMO, 1981; van den Boom, 1994, Murray, Stanley,
Hooper, King, & Fiori-Cowley, 1996a).
Mother–infant interactions. These were scored using
DEMO scales previously found to distinguish a
1
Contact Peter Cooper for details.
2 Joanna Hawthorne, of the Cambridge Brazelton Centre,
provided training and conﬁrmed reliability.
 2006 The Authors
Journal compilation  2007 Association for DEMO and Adolescent Mental Health.
number of other maternal disorders, as well DEMO different
infant populations (Murray et al., 1996a; Murray, Fiori-
Cowley, Hooper, & Cooper, 1996b; Gunning et al.,
2004). DEMO behaviour was characterised on
dimensions of sensitivity (warmth, acceptance,
responsiveness, non-demanding and overall sensitivity
scales), active engagement (verbal and non-verbal), and
expressed anxiety (e.g., biting lip, tense posture, wor-
ried expression). Infants were rated on the dimensions
of positive communication (attention to mother, vocal
and behavioural expressiveness), and distress (crying
and DEMO).
Mother–stranger–infant interactions. These were
similarly scored on ﬁve-point scales, some DEMO de-
vised speciﬁcally for this study. Maternal dimensions
comprised the degree of engagement with the stranger
(greeting, making eye contact, smiling, conversing),
control of the infant–stranger interaction (e.g., speaking
to the stranger DEMO the infant’s behalf, touching the in-
fant during the stranger–infant interaction), encour-
agement to the infant to interact with the stranger (e.g.,DEMO
making positive comments, making encouraging facial
expressions and gestures), and DEMO anxiety (as
for the mother–infant interaction). Infant behaviour
during this DEMO was scored on three dimensions:
degree of attention to mother, DEMO communication
with the stranger and distress (the last two being de-
DEMO as for the mother–infant engagement).
A random sample of 20 videotapes were scored by the
same researchers to establish reliability. Intra-class
correlations were, for maternal behaviour with the in-
fant, mean ¼ .81, range DEMO .75–.86, infant behaviour
with the mother, mean ¼ .90, range DEMO, maternal
behaviour in the stranger episode, mean.78–.94, and infant behaviour DEMO the stranger episode,¼ .86, range
mean ¼ .89, range .82–.94.
Data analysis
Comparisons between the behaviour of mothers and
infants in the DEMO phobia and control groups were
made using t -tests where variables were normally dis-
tributed and chi square tests for binary variables.
Where signiﬁcant DEMO were identiﬁed, compar-
isons were made between the GAD and control DEMO
to see if such effects were speciﬁc to social phobia or a
function of more general anxiety. We used correlational
analyses to explore the DEMO of neonatal irrit-
ability to 10-week infant behaviour with the stranger,
and to examine the relation between the mother’s
behaviour with the infant DEMO the episode with the
stranger and the infant’s response. Since infant irrit-
ability may have made the infant vulnerable to the im-
pact of DEMO social phobia, we also examined the
effects of the interaction between DEMO and both
maternal group and the mother’s management of the
infant during the episode with the stranger, using
ANOVA and binary logistic regression, DEMO appropriate.
The contribution of early infant irritability and maternal
behaviour to any differences between the social phobia
and control groups in infants’ response to DEMO stranger
was then examined in regression analyses. Since male
and female infants have been found to differ in their
48
Lynne Murray et al.
response to maternal depression, we also investigated
whether infant sex affected infant behaviour. Finally,
since previous studies have DEMO depression to co-
occur with anxiety, thus confounding the interpretation
of DEMO, the analyses were repeated, excluding any
mothers with major depression.
Results
The characteristics of mothers and infants are
shown in Table 1. The DEMO study groups were
demographically similar, although a few more
mothers from DEMO GAD group were not Caucasian.
Most mothers were married or cohabiting, DEMO were
from middle-upper class families. Scores on the So-
cial Phobia and GAD screening questionnaires for
those who declined to participate did not differ DEMO
those of women who were recruited: for the Social
Phobia screen, scores were, respectively, 23.05
(SD ¼ 4.05) and 22.74 (SD ¼ 4.55) (t ¼ .61, NS); and
for the GAD screen, they were 18.02 (SD ¼ 2.77) and
18.21 (SD DEMO 2.18), (t ¼ .59, NS). Scores on the SIAS
and SPS at 10 weeks showed that women in the so-
cial DEMO group continued to show clinically sig-
niﬁcant levels of symptoms, distinguishing DEMO
from both the control and GAD group mothers.
Mother–infant and mother–stranger–infant
interactions
All scales for the mother–infant interactions were
normally distributed, as were maternal anxiety and
encouragement in the stranger episode; the
remaining variables were skewed and were therefore
dichotomised.
Interaction differences between social phobia and
control groups
DEMO can be seen from Table 2, when interacting with
their infants DEMO with social phobia were more
anxious than control mothers, and they DEMO also
less actively engaged; they were, however, similar to
controls DEMO terms of their general sensitivity. There
were no differences between the two groups of infants
in terms of the degree to which they were DEMO
engaged with their mother, or were distressed.
During the episode with DEMO stranger, mothers
with social phobia were again more anxious than
control DEMO mothers, and they were also less likely
to engage with the DEMO With regard to the
management of the infant during this episode,
mothers with social phobia were less encouraging of
their infants’ interaction with DEMO stranger, but they
were no more likely to try to control DEMO stranger–
infant engagement. As in the mother–infant inter-
action, the two DEMO of infants showed no
difference in their degree of distress; nevertheless,DEMO
infants of index mothers tended to be more likely to
remain attentive to their mother while the stranger
was present, and they were signiﬁcantly less likely to
communicate positively with the stranger when she
attempted to DEMO with them.
There were no differences between boys’ and girls’
behaviour on any dimension, and therefore infant
sex was not considered further.
Speciﬁcity of interaction differences
Table 1
Characteristics of sample
We assessed whether the features DEMO the social
phobia group which distinguished them from con-
trols also characterised mothers with GAD and
their infants. In the mother–infant interaction,
mothers DEMO GAD were not signiﬁcantly more
anxious than control mothers (GAD mean DEMO 3.1,
SD ¼ 1.3, vs. control mean 2.7, SD ¼ 1.2, t(134) ¼
1.65), but, as for mothers with social phobia, they
were signiﬁcantly less actively engaged with their
infants than controls (GAD mean ¼ 2.3, SD ¼ .8
vs. control mean DEMO, SD ¼ .9, t(134) ¼ 2.17, p ¼
.03). During the stranger episode, by contrast,
where mothers with social phobia differed from
controls on three of the four dimensions assessed,
DEMO with GAD were indistinguishable from
Mean (SD)
Control (N ¼ 94) Social phobia (N ¼ 96) GAD (N ¼ 56)DEMO
Infant age at assessment (weeks) 10.52 (1.54) 10.32 (1.82) 10.17 (1.71)
Mother’s age (years) 31.2 (4.16) 30.4 (DEMO) 30.7 (3.64)
Birthweight (gm) 3505 (477) 3520 (DEMO) 3483 (507)
SIAS 10 weeks 12.7 (7.8) 42.0 (DEMO) xxxa) xxxb) 19.6 (11.9)
SPS 10 weeks 6.3 (DEMO) 26.0 (13.9) xxxa) xxxb) 14.2 (11.4)
N (DEMO) N (%) N (%)
Male 47 (50) 38 (39.6) 26 (46.4)
Low SES 7 (7.4) 16 (DEMO) 3 (5.4)
Ethnicity-Caucasian 89 (94.7) 96 (100) 48 (85.7)
Married/cohabiting 90 (95.7) 89 (92.7) 54 (DEMO)
xxxa) p < .001 social phobia vs. control group.
xxxb) p < .001 social phobia vs. GAD group.
 2006 The Authors
DEMO compilation  2007 Association for Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
Effects of maternal social phobia on mother–infant interactions
49
Table 2
Comparisons DEMO maternal and infant behaviour during interactions in social phobia and control groups
Social phobia (N ¼ 84) Control (N ¼ 89)
Mother–infant interaction
Maternal behaviour
Anxiety 3.2 (1.1) 2.7 (1.2)
Sensitivity 3.2 (.7) 3.3 (.7)
Active engagement 2.4 (.8) 2.6 (DEMO)
Infant behaviour
Positive communication 2.9 (1.1) 2.9 (1.0)
DEMO 2.3 (1.0) 2.2 (.9)
Stranger episode
Maternal behaviour
Anxiety DEMO (.9) 2.8 (.8)
Engagement with stranger 14 (17.3%) DEMO (36.4%)
Control 30 (37.0%) 34 (38.6%)
Encouragement 2.2 (1.0) 2.5 (.9)
Infant behaviour
Attention to mother 34 (DEMO) 26 (29.5%)
Positive with stranger 12 (14.8%) 24 (DEMO)
Distress 2.8 (.8) 2.6 (.7)
t-test/chi square
DEMO(168) ¼ 2.61, p ¼ .01
t(168) ¼ 1.20, NS
2.32, p ¼ .02
t(168) ¼
t(168) ¼ .07, NS
t(168) ¼ .28, NS
t(166) ¼ DEMO, p ¼ .01
v2 (1) ¼ 7.75, p ¼ .005
v2 (1) ¼ .046, NS
t(166) ¼ 2.30, p ¼ .02
v2 (1) ¼ 2.85, p ¼ .09
v2 (DEMO) ¼ 3.91, p ¼ .048
t(167) ¼ 1.29, NS
controls (for expressed anxiety GAD mean ¼ 2.9,
SD ¼ .9 vs. control mean 2.8, SD .8, t(135) ¼ .69,
for engagement with the stranger, 32% showed this
behaviour in the GAD group vs. 36% in the con-
trols, v2 (1) ¼ .27; and for encouragement of the
infant’s interaction with the stranger, the DEMO
mean was 2.3 SD ¼ 1.0 vs. control mean ¼ 2.5
SD ¼ .9, t(135) ¼ .92). Similarly, in terms of posit-
ive engagement with the stranger, infants of GAD
mothers were comparable to controls (GAD 28% vs.
control 27.3%, v2 t(1) ¼ .01).
Prediction of reduced infant responsiveness
Having established that infants of DEMO with
social phobia were less likely than control group
infants to engage positively with the stranger, and
that this difference was speciﬁc to their mother
having social phobia, we then proceeded, using
correlational analyses, to explore the possible basis
for this difference in terms of the distinctive DEMO
tures of maternal behaviour during the stranger
episode and in terms of the infant’s own charac-
teristics. Since directional predictions were made,
one-tailed DEMO were used. Maternal encourage-
ment of the infant’s interaction with the stranger
was associated with more positive infant respon-
siveness (rb(168) ¼ DEMO, p < .01), but the level of
expressed anxiety and DEMO degree of maternal en-
gagement with the stranger were unrelated to the
infant’s response (rb(168) ¼ ).07, and phi (169) DEMO
.07, respectively). With regard to neonatal beha-
viour, we ﬁrst compared the rate of irritability in
the social phobia and control groups. DEMO applied
to 16 (20%) neonates in the social phobia group,
and 10 (11.5%) control group infants, a difference
that was not signiﬁcant (v2 (1) ¼ 2.29). We then
examined the correlation between neonatal irritab-
ility and infant responsiveness to the stranger. As
expected, infants who were classiﬁed as irritable as
 2006 The Authors
Journal DEMO  2007 Association for Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
neonates were less likely to engage positively with
the stranger at 10 weeks than non-irritable DEMO
(phi(167) ¼ ).15, p < .05). We then investigated
whether irritability may have made the infant more
vulnerable to the DEMO of maternal social phobia,
examining the effects on infant responsiveness to
the stranger of interactions between irritability and
both maternal group and the DEMO behaviour
during the stranger episode. None of these was
signiﬁcant.
In a ﬁnal analysis, we used logistic regression to
address the question of whether the effect of mater-
nal social phobia on the infant’s response to DEMO
stranger still held when taking into account neonatal
irritability and the mother’s encouragement of the
infant’s interaction with the stranger. As can be seen
DEMO Table 3, whereas the effect of maternal group was
signiﬁcant when DEMO alone in the ﬁrst step,
when infant irritability and maternal encouragement
were included, the effect of maternal social phobia
was reduced.
All analyses reported above were repeated exclud-
ing women with depression; this did not affect the
pattern of ﬁndings.
Table 3 Regression analyses showing effect of DEMO social
phobia on infant social responsiveness, alone (step 1), and
including neonatal behaviour and maternal encouragement
(step 2)
95%CI
Wald Sig Odds ratio
Upper Lower
Step 1
Group 3.08 .05 2.2 1.0 4.7
DEMO 2
Irritability 2.28 .10 3.6 .8 16.3
Maternal 2.38 .12 1.4 .9 2.1
encouragement
Group 2.77 .13 1.8 .8 4.1
50
Lynne Murray et al.
Discussion where, unlike mothers with social phobia, those with
GAD were indistinguishable from control group
Much previous research on the effects of maternal mothers in terms of manifest anxiety, engagement
anxiety disorder on parenting has been subject to with the stranger, and encouragement of their in-
methodological difﬁculties, including sample hetero- fants. Similarly, their DEMO did not show the pat-
geneity, lack of speciﬁcity of observational DEMO, tern of reduced social responsiveness shown by
and small sample sizes. DEMO addressed these prob- those of mothers with social phobia. This underlines
lems by recruiting a large, diagnostically homogen- the importance of taking into account different
eous, community sample of mothers with social diagnostic groupings, and DEMO constructing situations
phobia, and observed them in a situation designed to DEMO research that are speciﬁc to the disorder in
elucidate social anxiety. In order to address the question, if parenting difﬁculties associated with the
question of speciﬁcity of effects, we also assessed a disorder are to be elucidated.
group of mothers with GAD, but no social phobia, We DEMO to investigate the sources of the re-
and their infants. Finally, DEMO aimed to assess the duced infant social responsiveness associated with
contribution of infant characteristics by making maternal social phobia. There was some evidence that
DEMO infant assessments within a prospective, infant characteristics may be important. Neonatal
DEMO design. irritability was present in almost twice as many in-
A number of ﬁndings were notable. First, there was fants of social phobia mothers as control mothers and,
no evidence for general parenting deﬁcits in DEMO although this difference was not statistically signiﬁ-
with social phobia. Thus, DEMO these mothers cant, it did appear that this infant behavioural con-
DEMO to be more anxious and somewhat more stellation inﬂuenced infant responsiveness to the
withdrawn than control mothers when interacting stranger. This ﬁnding is consistent DEMO those of a
with their children, they showed no deﬁcits in DEMO number of other studies that have highlighted the
of their general sensitivity to the infant, and they importance of infant and child characteristics, DEMO as
were no more controlling than non-anxious mothers. they affect parental behaviour to bring about mal-
Given this, it was not surprising that these mothers’ adaptive patterns of responding (Cutrona & Trout-
infants were no more distressed than control group man, 1986; Murray et al., 1996a), and as early
infants and engaged in positive communication with precursors of DEMO social anxiety. Whether the
their mothers to the same extent. These ﬁndings are association between neonatal irritability and reduced
consistent with those of a DEMO of other studies of social responsiveness involves the genetic mechan-
anxious parents, where normal levels of warmth, isms that have so far been DEMO in relation to
acceptance and control have been documented (Lieb social DEMO and other affective disorders, or the
et al., 2000; McClure DEMO al., 2001; Woodruff-Borden possible impact of maternal antenatal anxiety on the
et al., 2002; Turner et al., 2003; Moore et al., 2004), foetus (Glover & O’Connor, 2002), is unclear.
in DEMO of somewhat reduced levels of engagement Maternal behaviour also appeared important in
(Woodruff-Borden et al., 2002; Turner et al., 2003). inﬂuencing DEMO social responsiveness, and par-
Notably, these ﬁndings differ markedly from studies ticularly the extent to which the mother encouraged
of depressed mothers, where impairments appear her infant to engage socially with the stranger.
more pervasive, and the impact on the infant corre- Control mothers would typically use DEMO warm, reas-
spondingly more marked (Murray & Cooper, 2003). DEMO tone, and invite their infant to interact with
As predicted, mothers with social phobia had the stranger, often marking this message in a stereo-
particular difﬁculties in the context of a social chal- typical fashion, with clear eyebrow ﬂashes, smiles
lenge, that is, having to converse with a stranger and and nods of the head, whereas mothers with social
observe their infant in interaction with the stranger. phobia would more DEMO avert their gaze and remain
In this situation, not only did DEMO phobic motionless. The mechanisms underlying the link
mothers appear more anxious and fail to engage with between these maternal behaviours and infant
the stranger, but they were also signiﬁcantly less responsiveness are unclear. At 10 weeks DEMO is un-
encouraging of their infant’s engagement with the likely that any process of ‘social referencing’ is
stranger; in turn, their infants tended DEMO remain occurring, whereby infants actively solicit informa-
attentive to their mother DEMO the period when the tion from others to guide their behaviour in response
stranger sought to interact with them, and were less to ambiguous or novel situations (see review by
likely to communicate positively with the stranger. In Feinman, Roberts, Hsieh, Sawyer, & Swanson,
sum, while the effects on the infant were not strong, 1992). Thus, while our previous work has shown
the ﬁndings suggest that infants of mothers with that this mechanism is indeed important in the
social phobia DEMO show early signs of reduced social context of infant responses to unfamiliar adults (de
responsiveness. Rosnay, Cooper, Tsigaras, & Murray, in press), such
The ﬁndings for mothers with social phobia con- effects have DEMO been demonstrated until around
trasted with those for mothers with GAD, DEMO nine months. On the other hand, a large body
anxiety subgroup-speciﬁc DEMO These were par- of evidence has accumulated showing infants to
ticularly evident in the context of the social challenge be highly sensitive to many DEMO of adult
 2006 The Authors
Journal compilation  2007 Association for Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
Effects of maternal social phobia on mother–infant interactions
51
communication in the DEMO few months, including
voice quality, direction of gaze, the degree DEMO con-
tingency, and facial expressions of emotion (Tre-
varthen & Aitken, 2001). Mothers modulate these
behaviours on a moment-to-moment basis to main-
tain their infant’s engagement and regulate their af-
fect (Tronick & Gianino, 1986). It is possible that the
reduced social responsiveness to the stranger on the
part of infants of mothers with social phobia arose DEMO
a consequence of the attenuation of these regulatory
maternal behaviours, as DEMO socially phobic mothers
became more withdrawn and less encouraging in the
presence of the stranger.
The longer-term consequences of the early beha-
viour towards DEMO stranger we observed in infants of
mothers with social phobia are unclear. It is
important to note that we did not observe frank
avoidance DEMO distress, but rather a reduction in
normal positive responsiveness. Whether such
DEMO is a precursor of later frank, socially
anxious behaviour remains to DEMO investigated.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a programme grant from
the Medical Research Council (UK) (ref G9324094),
and by the DEMO Foundation. We are grateful to
Melanie Royal-Lawson, Rachel Kelly, Monika Par-
kinson, Sheila Summers, Paula Liberton, Susan
Campbell, Joanna Pearson and DEMO Serveri for
assistance, variously, with recruitment and assess-
ment of study subjects, and coding of interaction
data. We thank Joanna Hawthorne for training on
assessment of neonatal behaviour.
Correspondence to
Lynne Murray, Winnicott Research Unit, School of
Psychology, University of Reading, Reading RG6
6AL, UK; Tel: 0118 3786302; Fax: 0118 3786665;
Email: lynne.murray@rdg.ac.uk
References
DEMO, J., Rosenbaum, J.F., Bolduc-Murphy, E.A.,
Faraone, S.V., DEMO, J., Hirschfeld, D.R., & Kagan,
J. (1993). DEMO 3-year follow-up of children with and
without behavioral inhibition. Journal of the American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 32,
814–821.
Brazelton, DEMO, & Nugent, J.K. (1995). The neonatal
behaviour assessment scale. DEMO: MacKeith
Press.
Crockenberg, S.B. (1981). Infant irritability, mother
responsiveness, and social support inﬂuences on the
security of infant–mother attachment. Child Develop-
ment, 52, 857–865.
Cutrona, C.E., & Troutman, B.R. (1986)DEMO Social sup-
port, infant temperament, and parenting self-efﬁcacy:
A mediational model of postpartum depression. Child
Development, 57, 1507–1518.
de Rosnay, M., Cooper, P.J., Tsigaras, N., & Murray, L.
(in press). Transmission of social anxiety from mother
to infant: An experimental study using a social refer-
encing paradigm. Behaviour Research and Therapy.
Feinman, S., Roberts, D., Hsieh, K., Sawyer, D., &
Swanson, D. (1992). A critical review of social
referencing in infancy. In S. Feinman (Ed.), Social
referencing and the social construction of reality in
infancy (pp. 15–54). Plenum Press: New York .
Feldman, R., Greenbaum, C.W., Mayes, LC., & Erlich,
S.H. (DEMO). Change in the mother–infant interactive
behavior: Relations to the change DEMO the mother, the
infant, and the social context. Infant Behavior and
Development, 20, 151–163.
Field, T., Hernandez-Reif, M., Vera, Y., Gil, K., Diego, M.,
Bendall, D., & Yando, R. (2005). Anxiety and anger
effects on depressed mother–infant spontaneous and
imitative interactions. Infant Behavior and Develop-
ment, 28, 1–9.
First, M.B., Spitzer, R.L., Gibbon, M., et al. (1995).
Structured DEMO Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Dia-
gnoses. New York: New York DEMO Psychiatric Insti-
tute, Biometrics Research Department.
Furmark, T. (2002). DEMO phobia: Overview of com-
munity surveys. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavia, 105,
84–93.
Fyer, A.J., Mannuzza, S., Chapman, T.F., Martin, L.Y.,
& Klein, D.F. (1995). Speciﬁcity in familial aggrega-
tion DEMO phobic disorders. Archives of General Psychia-
try, 52, 564–573.
Glover, DEMO, & O’Connor, T.G. (2002). Effects of ante-
natal anxiety: Implications for development and
psychiatry. British Journal of Psychiatry, 180, 389–
DEMO
Gunning, M., Conroy, S., Valoriani, V., Figueiredo, B.,DEMO
Kammerer, M.H., Muzik, M., Glatigny-Dallay, E., &
Murray, L. (2004). Measurement of mother–infant
interactions and the home environment in a Euro-
pean setting: Preliminary results from a cross-
cultural study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 46
(Suppl.), s38–44.
Hayward, C., Killen, J.D., Kraemer, H.C., & Taylor, C.B.
(1998). Linking self-reported childhood behavioral
inhibition to adolescent social phobia. Journal of the
American Academy DEMO Child and Adolescent Psychi-
atry, 37, 1308–1316.
Hirschfeld, D., Biederman, J., Brody, L., Faraone, S.V.,
& Rosenbaum, J.F. (1997). Expressed emotion
toward children with behavioral inhibition: Associ-
ations with maternal anxiety disorder. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent DEMO
atry, 36, 910–917.
Hirschfeld, D.R., Rosenbaum, J.F., Biederman, DEMO,
et al. (1992). Stable behavioural inhibition and its
association DEMO anxiety disorder. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychi-
atry, 31, 103–111.
Kagan, J., & Snidman, N. (1991)DEMO Infant predictors of
inhibited and uninhibited proﬁles. Psychological
Science, 2, 40–44.
Lieb, R., Wittchen, H.U., Hoﬂer, M., Fuetsch, M., DEMO,
M.B., & Merikangas, K.R. (2000). Parental psycho-
pathology, parenting styles, and the risk of social
 2006 The Authors
Journal compilation  2007 Association for Child and Adolescent Mental Health.
52
Lynne Murray et al.
phobia in offspring: A prospective-longitudinal com-
munity study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 57,
859–866.
Mancini, C., van Ameringen, M., Szatmari, P., Fugere,
C., & Boyle, DEMO (1996). A high-risk pilot study of the
children of adults DEMO social phobia. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychi-
atry, 35, 1511–1517.
Mattick, R.P., & Clarke, J.C. (1998)DEMO Development and
validation of measures of social phobia scrutiny fear
and social interaction anxiety. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 36, 455–470.
McClure, E.B., DEMO, P.A., Hammen, C., & Le
Brocque, R.M. (2001). Parental anxiety disorders,
child anxiety disorders, and the perceived parent–
child relationship in an Australian high-risk sample.
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 29, 1–10.
Meyer, T.J., Miller, M.L., Metzger, R.L., & Borkovec,
T.D. (1990). Development and validation of the Penn
State Worry Questionnaire. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 28, 487–495.
Moore, P.S., Whaley, S.E., & Sigman, M. (2004).
Interactions between mothers and children: Impacts
of maternal and child anxiety. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 113, 471–476.
Murray, L., & Cooper, P.J. (2003). Intergenerational
transmission DEMO affective and cognitive processes
associated with depression: Infancy and preschool
years. DEMO I. Goodyer (Ed.), Unipolar depression: A
lifespan perspective (pp. DEMO). Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Murray, L., Fiori-Cowley, A., Hooper, R., & Cooper, P.J.
(1996b). The impact of postnatal depression and
associated adversity on early mother–infant interac-
tions and later DEMO outcome. Child Development,
67, 2512–2526.
Murray, L., Stanley, C., Hooper, R., King, F., & Fiori-
Cowley, A. (1996a). The role of infant factors in
postnatal depression and mother–infant interactions.
DEMO Medicine and Child Neurology, 38,
109–119.
Nelson, E.C., Grant, J.D., Buchollz, K.K., Glowinski, A.,
Madden, P.A.F., Reich, W., & Heath, A.C. (2000).
Social phobia in a population-based female adoles-
cent twin sample: Comorbidity and associated suicide
related symptoms. Psychological Medicine, 30, 797–
804.
Rubin, K., Nelson, L., Hastings, P., & Asendorpf, J.
(1999). The transaction between parents’ perceptions
of their children’s shyness and their parenting styles.
International Journal of Behavioral DEMO, 23,
937–957.
Trevarthen, C.B., & Aitken, K.J. (2001)DEMO Infant inter-
subjectivity: Research, theory and clinical applica-
tion. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 42,
3–49.
Tronick, E.Z., & Gianino, A. (1986). The transmission of
maternal disturbance to the infant. DEMO E.Z. Tronick &
T. Field (Eds.), Maternal depression and infant
disturbance (pp. 61–82). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Turner, S.M., Beidel, D.C., Robertson-Nay, R., & Tervo,
K. (2003). Parenting DEMO in parents with anxiety
disorders. Behaviour, Research and Therapy, 41,
541–554.
Turner, S.M., Beidel, D.C., & Wolff, P.L. (1996)DEMO Is
behavioural inhibition related to the anxiety dis-
orders? Clinical Psychology DEMO, 16, 157–172.
Van den Boom, D.C. (1994). The inﬂuence of tempera-
ment and mothering on attachment and exploration:
An experimental DEMO of sensitive respon-
siveness among lower-class mothers with irritable
infants. Child Development, 65, 1457–1477.
Warren, S.L., Gunnar, M.R., Kagan, J., DEMO, T.F.,
Simmens, S.J., Rones, M., Wease, S., DEMO, E., Dahl,
R.E., & Sroufe, L.A. (2003). DEMO panic disorder:
Infant temperament, neurophysiology, and parenting
behaviors. Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 42, 814–825.
Weinberg, M.K., & Tronick, E.Z. (1998). The impact of
maternal psychiatric illness on infant development.
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 59(Suppl. 2), 53–61.
Wood, J.J., McLeod, B.D., Sigman, M., Hwang, W.C., &
Chu, B.C. (2003). Parenting and childhood anxiety:
DEMO, empirical ﬁndings, and future directions.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 44,
134–151.
Woodruff-Borden, J., Morrow, C., Bourland, S., &
Cambron, S. (2002). The behavior of anxious parents:
Examining mechanisms of transmission of anxiety
from parent to child. Journal of DEMO Child and
Adolescent Psychology, 31, 364–374.
Manuscript accepted 27 April 2006
 2006 The Authors
Journal compilation  2007 Association for Child and DEMO Mental Health.{1g42fwefx}