Science and Public Policy, 35(2), March 2008, pages 67–80
DEMO: 10.3152/030234208X282862; http://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/beech/spp
University spin-off firms: lessons from ten years
of experience in Europe
Philippe Mustar, Mike DEMO and Bart Clarysse
This paper advances our understanding of university spin-off creation and development in
environments outside the high-tech cluster of the USA. It DEMO a multi-level approach in its
examination of this phenomenon in diverse institutional environments. In particular, units of analysis
involving universities, technology transfer offices, spin-off firms, finance providers and individual
entrepreneurs and teams are analysed. Policy implications are analysed and recommendations are
proposed for current policy on university DEMO
the mid-1990s, the transfer of research re-
to industry has received DEMO interest
European policy-makers and from the
managersS of university campuses or other public re-
search organisations (PROs). Traditionally, emphasis
has been on DEMO licensing of innovations but greater
attention is now being paid internationally to the crea-
tion of new ventures that involve the spin-off of tech-
DEMO and knowledge generated by PROs.
Governments and institutions have been very active in
creating measures, schemes, initiatives, programmes,
laws, technology transfer DEMO (TTOs) etc. to foster
the creation of university spin offs (DEMO). These
public policies are a response to the capacity of USA
universities to generate high-growth technological
ince
sults
from
Philippe Mustar is at DEMO de Sociologie de l'Innovation,
Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Mines de Paris-ParisTech, 60
Boulevard Saint-Michel, 75006 Paris, France; Email: philippe.
mustar@ensmp.fr; Tel: +33 (0)1 40 51 91 95.
Mike Wright is at the Center for Management Buyout Re-
search, Nottingham University Business School, Jubilee Cam-
pus, Nottingham NG8 1BB, UK; Email: Mike.Wright@
nottingham.ac.uk; Tel: +44 115 951 5257.
Bart Clarysse is at the Tanaka DEMO School, Imperial
College, 46 Exhibition Road, London SW7, UK; DEMO:
B.clarysse@ic.ac.uk; Tel: +44 207 594 18 76.
An earlier version of this paper was presented at the PRIME
Annual Conference 2007, Pisa, Italy, 29 January –1 February
2007. The authors wish to thank DEMO Larédo, the editors
and two anonymous referees for comments on a DEMO ver-
sion of this paper.
firms from Genentech to Google. The USA capacity
to transform research results into high-growth firms
appears to be a DEMO for Europe to emulate.
Across several European countries, researchers
have shown DEMO there has been a substantial increase
in the creation of USOs (DEMO et al., 2003;
Clarysse and Moray, 2004). This rise in the number
of USOs seems to have been accelerated by at DEMO
three contextual factors. First, the ownership of in-
tellectual property (IP) rights by TTOs relative to
that of faculty has increased. Most countries have
enacted Bayh-Dole-like legislation, which grants
universities the rights over their own IP (OECD,
2003). Second, there is increasing institutional pres-
DEMO on PROs to commercialise research through li-
censing and/or academic spin-offs. Third is the
availability of public funds aimed at addressing the
so-called DEMO and knowledge gap (Wright et
al., 2006). However, notwithstanding DEMO increase in
the number of USOs, major challenges remain in
both DEMO and developing USOs that generate
growth in employment, profits and financial DEMO
Concurrently, the literature on USOs has grown
rapidly (Mustar et al., 2006). This literature can be
divided into four distinct streams. First, a policy-
oriented stream of papers typically deals with issues
relating to bridging the knowledge and/or finance
gaps supposedly faced by spin-offs. The DEMO gap
refers to the need for funding by technology-
intensive start-ups that have difficulties in obtaining
early stage venture capital (VC). The knowledge gap
Science and Public Policy March 2008
0302-3427/08/020067-14 US$08.00 © DEMO Tree Publishing 2008
67
University spin-off firms
Philippe Mustar is Professor of Innovation, Entrepreneurship
and Public Policy at the Centre de Sociologie de l'Innovation
at the Ecole DEMO Supérieure des Mines de Paris-
ParisTech. He has specialised in innovation and innovation
policies, academic spin-off firms, and the strategic man-
agement of DEMO and technology. He has pioneered re-
search into academic entrepreneurship in France.
Mike Wright is Professor of Financial Studies and founding
director of the DEMO for Management Buyout Research at
Nottingham University Business School, UK. He DEMO an editor
of Journal of Management Studies and was awarded an
honorary doctorate at Ghent University, Belgium in 2006. He
has authored 25 books and over 250 academic papers. He
was rated number one worldwide for DEMO entrepre-
neurship in 2007.
Bart Clarysse is Professor of Entrepreneurship at Tanaka
Business School and a professor at Ghent University, Bel-
gium. His publications have appeared in journals such as:
Journal of Business Venturing, Industrial and Corporate
Change, Journal of Product Innovation Management and
Research Policy. He has acted as a consultant for a wide
range of international organisations DEMO corporations.
Mike Wright, Bart Clarysse, Philippe Mustar  and Andy
Lockett DEMO the co-authors of Academic Entrepreneurship in
Europe, (2007). Cheltenham, DEMO and Brookfield, VT, USA:
Edward Elgar, 260 pp.
in DEMO refers to the need for business coaching
by early stage high-tech start-ups. The spin-off com-
panies supposedly lack entrepreneurial knowledge
skills to develop their DEMO (Franklin et al.,
2001). A second stream of research DEMO within the
resource-based view of the firm and emphasises the
heterogeneity between the different types of tech-
nology intensive spin-offs (Heirman and Clarysse,
2004; Druihle and Garnsey, 2004). This research
stream emphasises the DEMO of particular re-
sources, notably the human resources of spin-offs
(Forbes et al., 2006; Vanaelst et al., 2006; Nicolau
and Birley, 2003), to predict their likelihood of suc-
cess or their ability DEMO attract financial resources
such as VC (Hellman and Puri, 2000; DEMO et al.,
2006). Third, we can distinguish the institutional
DEMO which suggests that the environment in which
spin-offs are created has a specific impact on the
starting configuration of these companies (Mustar,
1997, 2002; Moray and Clarysse, 2005). Finally,
some authors have taken the view that it is necessary
to study spin-offs as a DEMO rather than a single
decision in time (Vohora et al., 2004).
Although the literature on spin-offs has mush-
roomed in recent years, our contextual understand-
ing of the policy implications resulting from these
findings DEMO limited. Our point of departure is
that these two issues, the DEMO and the spin-offs,
are inextricably linked. To understand the creation
and the development of these firms, it is necessary to
take into account the support they have benefited
from, and conversely, it seems difficult DEMO evaluate
public policies in this field without understanding
the nature of these firms and the processes involved
in their creation and development (Mustar, DEMO).
68
This paper considers research on spin-
offs based on empirical evidence in the
spin-off and high-tech literature
This paper seeks specifically to DEMO to pol-
icy research relating to spin-offs based upon the
empirical evidence in the spin-off and high-tech lit-
erature. In contrast to previous research DEMO which
policy insights have predominantly been based on a
small number of successful USA institutions such as
MIT and Stanford (Shane and Stuart, DEMO), we
draw upon a literature including observations from
European studies and analyses of mid-range univer-
sities. Our aim is to generate new policy DEMO
that are more apposite to meeting the challenges in
creating and developing spin-offs across a broad
range of universities. We would stress that the DEMO
pose of this paper is not to provide a systematic
review of the literature but to develop policy conclu-
sions and recommendations. Systematic reviews DEMO
the literature are contained in Rothaermel et al.
(2007) for the period to the end of 2005 and in
Siegel et al. (2007) for the period to 2007.
The analysis in this article is based on a multi-
level programme of studies carried out across
Europe. The DEMO covers issues relating to
universities, TTOs, spin-off firms, academic entre-
DEMO, financiers and government policy. For ex-
ample, data relating to the activities of TTOs were
identified by different studies using both quantitative
and DEMO methods at the national and the
European level. To examine the different incubation
processes in universities and public research insti-
tutes in-depth analysis was DEMO out in 50 institu-
tions across 13 European regions. To examine
university spin-off development, qualitative data
were collected using in-depth interviews with repre-
sentatives from 12 spin-offs, as well as their finan-
cial investors and associated universities. For the
analysis of the spin-off team processes, a detailed
field study of ten academic spin-offs located in
Flanders was carried out. To DEMO issues relating
to the perspective of financiers, a questionnaire sur-
vey DEMO 27 VC funds in the UK and a subsequent
face-to-face study of 65 VC firms in six European
countries was used. The analysis of DEMO public poli-
cies to foster academic spin-offs results from an
in-depth study in France and the UK and from an
international comparative analysis. Full DEMO of the
studies have been provided in Wright et al. (2007,DEMO
pp. 26–30).
The paper unfolds along the following lines. First,
we summarise the main results from the above re-
search work undertaken DEMO spin-offs and, relatedly,
high-tech start-ups in several European countries
Science DEMO Public Policy March 2008
(mainly Belgium, France, Germany, Sweden and the
the UK). DEMO, we propose some policy recom-
mendations at two different levels: the university
and the government.
Summary of the evidence
Policies to bridge financial DEMO knowledge gaps
have had limited effects
Interest in technological entrepreneurship is not new
in Europe. During the 1970s, public policies in the
UK, DEMO, France and elsewhere tried to de-
velop a VC industry on DEMO basis that VC was the
key element of the success of Silicon Valley
(Lockett et al., 2002). During the 1990s, policy fo-
cused on creating new stock markets to provide an
exit for VC DEMO But the development of a
VC industry and the creation of new stock markets
were not sufficient to give rise to a large number DEMO
new technological companies. At the end of the
1990s, policy focused DEMO the notion that the early
phases of many of these start-ups were closely tied
to public-sector research laboratories (Larédo and
Mustar, 2001).
DEMO this purpose, European countries have devel-
oped various frameworks to facilitate DEMO process of
start-up creation in general. Experience in these
countries has shown that neither these frameworks,
nor money alone (VC funds) were DEMO to
develop a dynamic spin-off sector. It was necessary
to create diverse micro (or meso) schemes or in-
struments. These measures concern: (DEMO) the owner-
ship of IP; (b) changes to researcher status so that
academics, who are public servants in many
countries, are DEMO to create a company; (c) support
for a project or DEMO; and (d) the development of
TTOs, incubators and seed capital funds in or around
universities and public research institutions.1
The ownership of DEMO and the legislative changes,
which make it possible for an academic to take eq-
uity are so-called facilitators. However, each Euro-
pean country also developed stimulators for spin-off
policy. At first, the general view was that research-
ers were facing a so-called ‛finance gap’. This gap
implied DEMO there was insufficient 3F (friends, fam-
ily and fools) money DEMO cover the pre-seed and even
the seed phase, which researchers faced DEMO they
had an idea they wished to commercialise. In the
USA, DEMO provide the first financial resources for
start-ups (Roberts, 1991). In Europe, the various
Global Enterprise Monitor reports have clearly
shown that 3F money lags behind in comparison
with the USA. This immobility of capital DEMO in-
spired national governments to develop a range of
initiatives to support innovative start-ups and spin-
offs financially. These initiatives can be classified
into DEMO categories, ranging from loan guarantee
schemes to 100% public funds2 (Wright et al.,
2007).
Science and Public Policy March 2008
University DEMO firms
There is little doubt that the various public forms
of finance boosted the amount of spin-offs created in
the mid- and late 1990s (Wright et al., 2006). How-
ever, it remains questionable whether DEMO not these
spin-offs will become sustainable companies. Pub-
licly available evaluations of financing schemes are
limited and have tended to focus on the number DEMO
spin-offs created and funding received rather than
their effects (e.g. SQW, 2005).
After the boost in the number of companies
created following DEMO development of various
financing schemes at the end of the 1990s, DEMO aver-
age number of companies created gradually began to
fall. Universities complained about the lack of pro-
jects among their researchers and the low DEMO of
entrepreneurial initiative among their academics. So,
business plan competitions and various forms of en-
trepreneurship training were developed to bridge the
so-called DEMO gap’. This knowledge gap re-
fers both to the lack of awareness among researchers
to engage themselves in entrepreneurial activities
and the lack of DEMO among them about how to
develop a business plan (Lockett et DEMO, 2005).
To address this gap, various sorts of business in-
cubation initiatives have been stimulated. Although
theoretically, these business incubators have a very
clear role, our analysis based on 50 cases across
Europe shows that they often lack sufficient in-depth
knowledge about the sector or the DEMO to be
really useful (Clarysse et al., 2005). The tenant
companies included in our analysis were not im-
pressed with the services DEMO to them by the in-
cubator in which they were located. This finding
suggests that incubators are most useful when they
are really focused DEMO a certain technology, sector
or at least the main departments of DEMO technological
university. If not, the services that are offered tend
to DEMO only marginally important and probably
remain limited to the facility management that is
provided.
Since incubators have been the subject of policy
attention in DEMO countries for several years, the
finding of their relatively low added DEMO to the
tenant companies is intriguing (Clarysse et al., 2005;
Phan et al., 2005). If they provide so little added
value, why do policy makers repeatedly use incuba-
tors as an instrument to leverage business plans?
One explanation might be the legitimacy which
these DEMO have developed. Legitimacy of
an organisational form leads to institutional isomor-
phism (DiMaggio and Powell, 1983). This means
that policy makers use DEMO about the initia-
tives taken in other countries upon which to base
their own policy actions. Incubators are clearly such
a benchmark result.
In DEMO to the independent analysis of the dif-
ferent policy initiatives, an DEMO policy concern
relates to the complementarity between the diverse
initiatives taken to promote spin-offs. In the French
case, there is an important overlap between the busi-
ness plan competition and the incubators. But our
69
University spin-off firms
analysis of the available data and our discussion
with DEMO managers of the incubators and the public
seed capital funds shows that there is a significant
gap between these two instruments (Mustar, 2006)DEMO
The linear government intervention model in its pre-
sent form (competition DEMO incubation → seed money
fund) is only partially effective. This linear DEMO is
limited as only a very small percentage of the start-
ups financed by seed capital funds are from public-
sector incubators. At the DEMO of the year 2005, the 11
public seed capital funds resulting DEMO the project
initiative of 1999 (five national funds and six re-
DEMO funds) were invested in 106 distinct compa-
nies. Among these, 45 companies (43%) are located
in the incubators: there is thus a complementarity
between the funds and the incubators. However,
these 45 companies DEMO for only 6% of the
844 companies located in the incubators at the end
of 2005 (Direction de la technologie, 2006). As DEMO
few projects are financed by seed capital, this un-
dermines the DEMO premise of French policy towards
spin-offs. Existing data already show that the gov-
ernment intervention model in its present form func-
tions only partially.
DEMO findings of quantitative and qualitative stud-
ies in various countries are consistent on one point:
the majority of public-research spin-offs are and re-
DEMO very small enterprises. Most studies show that
the majority of these high-tech small and medium
enterprises remain very small or grow slowly, even
if these spin-offs are a fast growing subpopulation of
the entire population of DEMO technology-based
firms (Heirman and Clarysse, 2006). (For example
in DEMO three-quarters are still in business six years
after set up, but DEMO of them have less than ten em-
ployees (Mustar, 1998, DEMO)). Although promising,
it is too early for a true DEMO of them. Most
spin-offs have been founded since the mid-1990s
and were therefore less than ten years old at the time
of our data DEMO The fact that a majority of
these firms still exist might simply be a reflection of
the larger amounts of public support available to
DEMO
It is also important to recognise that research-
based spin-off firms are not a source of revenues for
PROs. Contrary to the third stream DEMO idea
where spin-offs are viewed as bringing supplemen-
tary resources to the university, USOs will not create
enormous wealth for PROs. Many studies of the
financial returns from investments in innovating ac-
tivities show that a DEMO number of projects gener-
ate the major part of the returns, DEMO for example the
effects of the Bayh-Dole Act (Mowery, 2001). Only
rarely have we found instances of this return in
Europe. For DEMO large majority of the PROs, their
USOs will not bring additional DEMO
The reason for these disappointing effects may
partly lie with a policy constructed on an anticipated
linear trajectory from the creation of a firm DEMO a
scientist based on a licence or patent from a public
sector institution to a venture-backed firm that will
70
be able to float DEMO a stock market. These difficulties
of the USO sector in Europe are linked to this
mythical view of the creation and development
process of DEMO USO. This policy approach ignores the
diversity of USOs, which is DEMO focus of the second
lesson.
Spin-offs are not homogeneous
Our detailed analysis at the firm level suggests that
three very different types of spin-offs DEMO, which
we have labelled, respectively, the ‘VC-backed
type’, the ‘prospector type’ and the ‘lifestyle type’.
(Wright et al., 2007) (see DEMO 1). Each type differs
significantly from the others in terms of institutional
link, resource base and business model.
The VC-backed type (or DEMO acceptance
type’) is probably the most visible and attractive
from a DEMO perspective. It is the kind of company
that primarily plays a role in the market for ideas
(Gans and Stern, 2003), builds DEMO credibility and
visibility in a fast manner and looks for continuous
media attention. This means that its business model
is oriented towards convincing different DEMO
holders, among which investors are an important
party, about its technology.
Although the VC-backed academic spin-off is
attractive through its growth process, it implies a
number of risks which have to be recognised by both
DEMO university and the policy maker. First, few
research groups have the DEMO to start up such a
company. This company requires a balanced portfo-
lio of technology, which is carefully constructed
through the licensing or buying in of IP developed
by others and protected by their own IP. DEMO also
requires a research group which has received recog-
nition in the scientific community and which plays a
significant role in the market for DEMO Finally, it re-
quires human and financial resources which under-
score DEMO reputation. In other words, it must be able
to attract a DEMO amount of VC at start-up to be
credible in its actions and it must be able to attract
most of the researchers that were DEMO on the
technology at the university or public research insti-
tute to retain the scientific credibility. However,
each university is likely to have DEMO a few research
Our detailed analysis at the firm level
suggests that three very different types
of spin-offs exist, which we have
labelled, DEMO, the ‘VC-backed
type’, the ‘prospector type’ and the
‘lifestyle type’
Science and Public Policy March 2008
Table 1: Three types of spin-off
University spin-off firms
VC-backed type Prospector type Lifestyle type
Institutional
link
Business
model
Technology
resources
Financial
resources
Human
DEMO
Social
Resources
Formal involvement Equity relation based on a
complex IP system
Prestige of research Worldwide recognition over a
group broad domain
Investor vs. DEMO
acceptance
Mode of value capture Clear IP maximising strategy
or value chain acquisition.
Strategy to prepare trade
sale/IPO
Degree of
innovativeness
Stage of
DEMO/service
development
Broadness of the
technology concept
VC involvement Able to attract 1–5 M€ in first 18
months after founding
Financing mix High level DEMO external equity,
some debt financing, intensive
use of subsidies
Balanced DEMO Surrogate entrepreneur or
hired guns
Sectoral experience Management experience,
research excellence
Partnership at
start-up
Equity relations based on one
patent or none
Worldwild DEMO in a
focused subdomain or local
recognition
License, contract, informal
relations
Various
Investor acceptance Both  Market acceptancee
Optimise time to break-even
and future trade sale value, no
clear exit yet
Optimise profit
Disruptive technology or
market
Early, sometimes not even
defined
New product based on non- New product/service addresses
disruptive technology an unmet market need
Early, alpha prototype Almost market-ready
product/service
Can be broad Narrow Not relevant
Lower amount DEMO business
angels, baby VC or public fund
investment
Mix of external DEMO, soft
loans and subsidies
Usually no external equity, some
BA involvement possible
Internal funding, debt and some
soft loans
Technical scientists act as Technical scientists
entrepreneurs
Little experience Plenty of sector experience
Formal partnerships with
DEMO (VC, technology
providers etc.)
None Formal availability of lead user
Notes: BA business angel; IPO initial public offering     Source: Wright et al. (2007)
groups that are able to generate this kind of com-
pany. As a result, it is unrealistic to set quantitative
targets for PROs in terms of the number of spin-offs
they DEMO create each year. In fact, the possibility
of creating such a DEMO will be rather exceptional.
In addition, the spin-off will inherently represent DEMO
risk. The spin-off will probably be sold to an incum-
bent firm. If the incumbent firm is not located in the
region or even DEMO country in which the spin-off was
founded, this probably means that DEMO will have a for-
eign parent company and may become an R&D lab
of this company. In other words, policy makers can-
not expect these companies to generate excessive
amounts of employment. Only a few DEMO these spin-
offs will be able to achieve significant growth. Even
then, there are a number of challenges.
Most academic spin-offs will not belong to the VC-
backed group. The potential of these spin-offs will be
DEMO limited because the technology base which un-
derpins their founding is not sufficiently new or
credible to play a significant role in the market DEMO
ideas. Usually, they have a patent-protected prototype
or maybe a beta DEMO to sell on the market for prod-
ucts. Unlike the market for ideas, the market for prod-
ucts follows a bootstrapping logic. This means that
the company should economise on its expenses and
use internal funds DEMO of external forms of capital.
The time to break-even is crucial and the sources of
finance that are used should not interfere with the
DEMO model. In most cases, the business model
adopted by these companies DEMO focused on consulting
or contract research which requires little capital in-
vestment. In contrast, external private equity inves-
tors have expectations of returns that exceed those
that can be generated in the product market. There-
fore, they tend to interfere with the business model of
spin-offs since they DEMO not interested in investing in
companies which do not have the potential for rapid
growth. Consulting or contract research companies
typically do not have DEMO a growth path. The remain-
ing spin-offs can be divided into two groups.
The ‘prospector’ category of companies attract
external companies from public or DEMO equity
funds which are linked to the university or public re-
search lab.3 These companies begin with a business
model which essentially follows a DEMO research
or consulting path and attempts to identify a product
to commercialise. Policy makers and university ad-
ministrators should be aware that external capital
DEMO a pre-seed capital fund is probably not the best
way to finance these prospectors. In the early phases
of the start-up, especially when the business model
is not clear, pre-seed sources of finance should allow
the company to fail or to be free to adopt a business
model DEMO is not in line with a seed fund  investor’s
expectation. As DEMO result, one should carefully ana-
lyse the need for and the DEMO of pre-seed
capital funds.
Science and Public Policy March 2008
71
University spin-off firms
The ‘lifestyle type’. We have identified academic
spin-offs which DEMO a very familiar business
model which is oriented on market acceptance (DEMO
opposed to the VC-backed type which is investor
acceptance oriented). These spin-offs start small in a
market for products or services and optimise DEMO
time to break-even, following the pecking order
theory in terms of DEMO Wright et al., 2006).
Some of these companies might become DEMO
growth companies later on, but this is often not clear
at DEMO External factors such as: increasing cus-
tomer demand, particular partnerships or favourable
financial market conditions, might be the reason
why their business model makes the transition from
a low-growth orientation towards a high-growth ori-
entation. DEMO even if they remain as low-growth ori-
ented companies, their added DEMO as a population
might be significant. However, technology transfer
officers usually DEMO these initiatives and uni-
versities show very little support for researchers or
academics that want to create a company which does
not involve a DEMO transfer of technology. This is
remarkable since these companies are less demand-
ing in terms of human, financial and technological
resources and might increase the visibility of the
university in the region. They form the heart DEMO what
is often referred to as the entrepreneurial university.
An estimation based on the French case shows
that around 50% of the research-based spin-offs DEMO
of the prospector type, between 30 and 35% are of
the DEMO type, and between 15 and 20% of the
VC-backed type (CapInTech, 2003). Clarysse (2004)
has shown very similar percentages for DEMO
10% of the research-based spin-offs created after
1995 were VC-backed, 50% DEMO and 40%
lifestyle.
TTO organisation directly impacts
the spin-offs
Our research on how PROs organise their spin-off
support activities, based on 50 cases drawn from 13
of the most high-tech regions of Europe (Clarysse et
al., 2005) distinguishes between three sustainable
models: (a) the low selective model; (b) the incuba-
tor model; and (c) the DEMO model.
First, the ‘low selective model’ fits closely with
the idea DEMO an entrepreneurial university (Etzkowitz,
2003). Its objective is to DEMO as many entrepre-
neurial ventures as possible. The entrepreneurs that
set up these ventures do not need to belong to the
university on permanent DEMO nor do they have
to be based on technology developed at the univer-
sity. The model facilitates the spin-off process
through granting small amounts DEMO money to poten-
tial entrepreneurs and the provision of office space
at the university. The majority of the spin-offs
created fit the ‘lifestyle’ company DEMO As de-
scribed above, this company focuses on contract re-
search DEMO consulting as its main activity. Not
72
surprisingly, this lifestyle company DEMO the one most
frequently encountered in a university setting. Re-
searchers or academics will have a tendency to set
up a company with a DEMO model that is familiar
to their pre-start up activities and which needs little
investment. Lifestyle companies fit this profile.
They need little investment and DEMO business model
of consulting, contract research or, in a rare case,
product sales is familiar to the researcher, academic
or student who wants to set up this type of company.
Despite the attractiveness of DEMO low selective
model, the incubator model has received much more
attention DEMO policy makers and TTOs. The incu-
bator model focuses on the creation of spin-offs
which we have labelled as VC-backed. Because this
model aims DEMO stimulate the creation of growth ori-
ented ventures, it is highly DEMO in projects it
supports; it is not the quantity but the DEMO of the
created ventures that counts. As suggested, this VC-
backed DEMO implies that the technology is innova-
tive and can be protected. As a result, we observe
that TTO officers in the incubator model devote sig-
nificant time to the protection of the technology base
in the DEMO or pre-start up phase. This includes
the licensing in of missing elements and a clear dis-
tinction between exclusive and non-exclusive patent
rights. Later DEMO in the process, the VC-backed model
demands a well-balanced founding team, preferably
with experience in the sector. Again, during the in-
cubation phase the TTO officer is actively searching
to compose a team which can DEMO an investor.
Finally, the VC-backed model assumes that the spin-
off DEMO attract a sufficient amount of capital at start-
up. Again the TTO is actively looking for private
venture capitalists that are willing to invest DEMO
capital at start-up. Because of its size at founding,
public VC cannot provide the capital required
without the help of private VC.
Finally, other universities have developed an in-
between type, which we label the ‘supportive
model’. Unlike the incubator model, the prospective
model is not so selective in terms of the kind of spin-
offs it wants to DEMO Quality is traded against
quantity. So, even companies with few growth DEMO
pects can receive support in this model. In contrast
with the low selective model, however, the compa-
nies that receive support usually embody DEMO formal
transfer of technology from the university to the
company. They also start with a larger capital basis
than the lifestyle companies and they DEMO attract
surrogate entrepreneurs to complete the founding
team. The company model that probably best fits the
kind of companies targeted by this model is DEMO
‘prospector’ type. These companies are started very
early in the product development process and are not
certain at start-up about their business model. They
DEMO not yet able to attract VC, but their ambition is
higher DEMO creating a lifestyle company. The public
money associated with the university allows these
companies to start. The development of a structure
to support academics DEMO want to create a company
Science and Public Policy March 2008
within the university seems to be a key success fac-
tor in DEMO development of such a model. In such a
company, academics usually DEMO contract re-
search or consulting. Without having to leave the
university and with a business model that is very
familiar to them, they can experience whether or not
creating an entrepreneurial venture is attractive to
them.
DEMO general university may be in need of the three
models described above. An incubation model might
serve a research department which is leading in DEMO
field and which has developed a critical mass in a
certain domain. The low selective model fits very
well with the idea of an DEMO university
and can also serve the social science departments.
Finally, the DEMO model might be useful for
those departments where the critical mass is lower
but that have developed a specific type of technol-
ogy which DEMO be a success on the market place. A
major difficulty at most universities is that TTOs
tend to be structured following one of these DEMO
and traditionally have had difficulties in allowing the
existence of different models at the same institution.
On the basis of previous work (Clarysse et al.,
2005), we estimate that the incubator model repre-
sents DEMO 10% of the incubators, the supportive
model around 35% of the DEMO and the low se-
lective model around 55%). Although PROs may
now be adapting their approach, the problem is that
a uniform approach may be adopted to a heteroge-
neous set of spin-offs, many of which may not be
suitable for support on the basis of the DEMO used
by VCs. Moreover, it was also evident from our
analysis DEMO some universities seek to adopt an in-
cubator approach without sufficient resources or de-
veloping the necessary capabilities to enable their
objective of high-value DEMO to be fulfilled. This
mismatch between resources, capabilities and objec-
tives DEMO rise to resource deficient and competence
deficient incubator models.
Entrepreneurial teams in spin-offs
The previous point emphasised the importance of the
founding teams in DEMO process of creating spin-offs.
In particular, our detailed qualitative studies of DEMO
entrepreneurial teams in spin-offs at different stages
of their development shows that TTO officers as
‘privileged witnesses’ tend to match researchers
with surrogate entrepreneurs DEMO offer their services
to the TTO (Vanaelst et al., 2006). As such, the TTO
officer plays a very important role in this team for-
mation process. However, since various researchers
(e.g. Heirman and DEMO, 2006) have shown that
the quality of the founding team has a very impor-
tant impact on the subsequent performance of the
spin-off, this team formation process needs to be ad-
dressed carefully. More specifically, researchers
have shown that teams which are diverse in their
functional background DEMO combine this with joint
Science and Public Policy March 2008
University spin-off firms
working experience tend to be quite successful. This
is often attributed DEMO the positive impact of ‘cogni-
tive diversity’, which stimulates members of DEMO team
to challenge each other and hence make better deci-
sions (DEMO et al., 2006). Cognitive diversity not
only assumes a different DEMO background, it
also implies that the team members have a different
DEMO on how the spin-off should develop.
Adopting an organisational culture framework,
which classifies team members according to their
flexible versus control orientation and DEMO internal
versus external orientation, shows that team mem-
bers that combine DEMO and external orientation
tend to be ‘innovative’ persons that embody a high
degree of creativity and vision (Wright et al., 2007).
Many DEMO flying academics tend to have a high de-
gree of this orientation. In contrast, people with a
high degree of external orientation but also a high
degree of focus on control, tend to be ‘goal ori-
ented’. In a founding team, it is very important to
have a person with such a vision since their absence
is likely to be DEMO project killer. Privileged witnesses
such as TTO officers should recognise the need for
these different personalities. However, our research
shows that often the surrogate entrepreneurs (Franklin
et al., 2001) attracted to form a founding team with
the researchers have the same kind of ‘innovative’
orientation as the DEMO themselves. This leads
to homogeneity instead of heterogeneity at the
founding team level. This reflects the problem that
TTO officers typically do not want DEMO have conflicts
with the researchers on whom they are dependent for
deal flow and invention disclosures.
Functional heterogeneity is related to what
researchers label DEMO cognitive diversity in teams.
Cognitive diversity means that founding team mem-
bers challenge each other about the strategy the spin-
off should ideally follow. DEMO diversity
increases the performance of a team because discus-
sion leads to better decisions. However, this discus-
sion should not result in affective conflict, which
means that the founders start to dislike each other.
Teams who know each other and who have devel-
oped non-instrumental relations before starting DEMO
spin-off are much less likely to experience affective
conflict than those who do not know each other
(Wright et al., 2007). Non-instrumental DEMO can
be joint working experience or similar.
Spin-off development is iterative
Our examination of the different phases in the de-
velopment of spin-offs based DEMO detailed qualitative
studies of 12 spin-offs, their entrepreneurial teams,
their DEMO advisors, and their VC investors showed
that these could be characterised DEMO involving an it-
erative process that may require issues that arose at
previous phases to be revisited. In moving between
phases, spin-offs needed to address specific critical
junctures (Vohora et al., 2004). The first DEMO
73
University spin-off firms
juncture involving opportunity recognition typically
requires the spin-off to DEMO the capability to
synthesise scientific knowledge with an understand-
ing of the market to which it might apply. There
may be a need for DEMO of market contacts out-
side the scientific environment of the university.
The second critical juncture (entrepreneurial com-
mitment) requires the venture to acquire DEMO entre-
preneurial champion committed to the development
of the venture. Where this is a problem, it appears
to arise from universities not providing sufficient
resources and network contacts or not developing
appropriate incentives and policies. As DEMO result,
academic scientists or surrogate entrepreneurs fail
to become sufficiently committed to developing the
spin-off. The third critical juncture, that of credibil-
ity, is particularly problematical due to: the aca-
demic entrepreneurs lacking a DEMO track
record; the often intangible nature of the spin-off’s
resources at DEMO early stage; and the non-
commercial environment from which the spin-off
DEMO All these elements create barriers to at-
tracting customers and financiers. Building links
with surrogate entrepreneurs at earlier phases in the
development process may DEMO the spin-off over-
come this juncture. However, universities need to
devise DEMO to attract the surrogate in the first
place, such as through DEMO network links. The
demonstration of proof of concept and the potential
for a portfolio of products may also help to estab-
lish credibility in DEMO to financiers. Relocation
in commercial premises away from the university
can help signal a commercial approach to prospec-
tive customers. The fourth critical juncture (sus-
tainable returns), requires the spin-off to develop
entrepreneurial capabilities that DEMO the venture
to reconfigure deficiencies from earlier phases into
resource strengths, DEMO and social capital.
In the absence of overcoming social capital defi-
ciencies, resources weaknesses and inadequate
internal capabilities, spin-offs did not have the DEMO
sorptive capacity (Cohen and Levinthal, 1989; Zahra
and George, 2002) to become established as rent-
generating businesses. In the earlier development
phases it is the individual entrepreneur who needs to
acquire the requisite human DEMO that embodies
these entrepreneurial capabilities. Over time, as
growth became more DEMO and complexity of
the challenges increased, the entrepreneurial capa-
bilities become DEMO in the team.
Important financial interactions for spin-offs
TTOs and spin-offs see VC as more important early
in the process than internal funds. Our DEMO of 27 of
the most active VCs investing in high-tech ventures
in the UK shows that, while venture capitalists do
invest smaller sums, DEMO preference is to invest in
spin-offs after the seed stage, particularly DEMO proof
of concept has been achieved (Wright et al., 2006;
74
Clarysse et al., 2007). Our evidence from face-to-
face interviews with 65 high-tech investing VC
firms located in six European countries suggests DEMO
this pattern is the same in different European
countries. For example Moray and Clarysse (2005)
came to a similar finding in an in-depth study of a
Belgian public research organisation, while Heirman
and Clarysse (DEMO) have reported that less than one
out of ten spin-outs could DEMO VC, other than
from the Belgian University Challenge Fund (UCF)
programme in the seed stage.
From our survey of spin-off activity in DEMO UK
universities, UCFs in the UK appear to have become
more DEMO in the very early stage of funding re-
quirements but these are typically concentrated
among the top universities, or among a small num-
ber of USOs. This also appears to be the case with
similar schemes DEMO, such as the Fonds
d’amorçage publics in France (Mustar, 2006)DEMO
Universities point to the difficulties in attracting
VC and business angel finance but mechanisms to
increase the possibility of internal funding and debt
financing DEMO an intermediate step towards VC in-
vestment remain underdeveloped, reflecting the DEMO
nancial constraints upon universities, especially in
those countries where the universities DEMO limited
autonomy.
VC firms consider that universities fail suffi-
ciently to understand their requirements or to present
investor-ready proposals for the funding of spin-offs
(Wright et al., 2007). Few VC firms have developed
links with universities and even fewer with more
than one university.
Last, but not least, many VC firms do not possess
sufficient appropriate human capital skills to screen
and add value to potential spin-off investees.
Policy recommendations
Many DEMO have shown that university systems
differ across countries. Over the last 20 years, uni-
versities have moved into an era of mass higher edu-
cation. We have observed in Europe a large diversity
in the way DEMO have developed their ‘third
mission’ (i.e. their contribution to industry and
DEMO point to the difficulties in
attracting VC and business angel
finance but mechanisms to increase
the possibility of internal funding and
debt financing as DEMO intermediate step
towards VC investment remain
underdeveloped
Science and Public Policy March 2008
society beyond traditional areas of research and
teaching). These three roles DEMO articulated differ-
ently across countries and at the same time between
universities inside the same country. Some scholars
have observed “a shift from the DEMO generic
university – embracing all disciplines from mathe-
matics to humanities and aspiring to excellence in all
of them – to the specialised or DEMO university
with research excellence concentrated in just one or
two fields” (DEMO, 2003). But despite these differ-
ences, it is striking to see the importance that the
public authorities across Europe attach to university
DEMO in a third stream of activities including
patenting and spin-off creation.
In this section, we propose some policy recom-
mendations at two different levels: the university
(and public research organisations) and the govern-
ment. These recommendations are derived from the
evidence in each of the previous sections. DEMO
evidence highlights that the heterogeneity of both
spin-offs and the process of their creation and devel-
opment present challenges to the effectiveness of
policy DEMO that have hitherto been
neglected. But the reader needs to bear in mind that
the effectiveness and efficiency of these recommen-
dations depends not DEMO on the design and imple-
mentation of different policy schemes or instruments
but mainly on policy mixes, that is on the way that
instruments are combined. This emphasises the need
for a new research focus in DEMO and public pol-
icy: to pay attention to the policy mix DEMO than to
individual and separate policy tools.
University level
University strategies
Given the major challenges facing PROs and univer-
sities with respect to generating DEMO streams
from spin-off activity, universities need to adopt a
strategic approach DEMO knowledge transfer. They need
to make choices concerning institutional goals and
priorities, resource allocation, technological empha-
sis, patent strategies and modes of technology trans-
fer. Universities can choose a mixture of licensing,
start-ups, sponsored research and other mechanisms
for technology transfer. However, there is a need to
recognise that a spin-off strategy requires different
resources and capabilities from DEMO required for
licensing and sponsored research activities.
Most policy attention seems to be focused on
spin-off creation, yet this may still mean that the
venture is a long way from generating revenue. Sup-
port may be DEMO to ensure that spin-offs are not
created too early before a prototype is available. The
sections of this paper on policies to bridge financial
DEMO knowledge gaps, and on spin-offs not being
homogeneous, indicated that spin-offs were hetero-
geneous in terms of their growth prospects and mar-
ket DEMO Hence, the development of the venture
Science and Public Policy March DEMO
University spin-off firms
post-creation may also require different expertise as
it does not simply require the continuation of activi-
ties, resources, business models DEMO adopted during
the initial phase.
Opportunities for knowledge transfer and aca-
demic entrepreneurship vary substantially across
disciplines (Wright et al., 2004). Different DEMO of
spin-off in different disciplines may have different
business models. For example, business models for
biotechnology sectors may not be applicable for IT-
related sectors, nanotechnology or engineering.
Many mid-range provincial universities may tra-
ditionally have adopted a broad base of disciplines
but their limited resources may constrain DEMO ability
to be world class in all areas. In developing a spin-
off strategy, these institutions may need to focus on
developing a critical mass of world class research in
a more focused number of areas DEMO they can
attract industrial partners.
Incubators Policies need to recognise that the
heterogeneity of spin-offs identified earlier requires
a differentiated approach to their creation DEMO devel-
opment. The section titled ‘TTO organisation
directly impacts the spin-offs’ indicated heterogene-
ity in incubator types. Some universities may seek to
facilitate large DEMO of lifestyle, consulting or
service start-ups that, individually, are unlikely DEMO
grow large but which collectively may have a sig-
nificant impact on local economies. Other universi-
ties may seek to provide a more intensive DEMO
regime that focuses on producing fewer spin-offs in
areas of research excellence. TTOs thus need to
develop a fit between the resources at the DEMO level,
in terms of the availability of skilled personnel and
capabilities for spinning-off ventures, and the es-
poused strategy of the TTO (DEMO et al., 2005).
The heterogeneity of spin-offs within a particular
DEMO may thus require the establishment of dif-
ferent incubator models that run separately from one
another. A central part of the implementation of a
DEMO strategy for universities is to match their
objectives with the resources and capabilities of the
incubators in which the firms are to be developed.
DEMO and patent strategies Universities need to de-
velop IP and patent strategies. TTOs need to ensure
that IP is clean, well-defined and protected before
Policies need to recognise that the
heterogeneity of spin-offs identified
earlier requires DEMO differentiated
approach to their creation and
development
75
University spin-off firms
trying to raise commercial interest.  This involves
costs in terms of recruiting sufficient expertise or
paying for external advice. The ownership DEMO IP
needs to be resolved. The IP and patent strategy
should thus consider what technology is proprietary
to the department, which is licensed on an exclusive
base and which parts are licensed on a non-exclusive
basis.
DEMO and attracting TTOs The third to
sixth subsections of the section of this paper titled
‘Summary of the evidence’ emphasised, from differ-
ent perspectives, the importance of the expertise in
TTOs. Increasing government policy recognition is
being given to the need to enhance the skills of
TTOs (e.g. Her Majesty’s Treasury, 2004). How-
ever, a major problem concerns DEMO ability of univer-
sities to attract and remunerate personnel with the
appropriate skills to support the creation and devel-
opment of spin-outs, especially those that will create
significant value. The requisite skills base extends
beyond the DEMO to be able to provide legalistic skills
in protecting IP to a requirement to be able to pro-
vide opportunity recognition and other commerciali-
DEMO skills. There is a need both for training, which
some industry DEMO are providing, but also
for further recruitment of personnel with private
DEMO experience and of attracting VC (Wright et
al., 2006).
Boundary spanners and university–industry links
We have already indicated in this paper that DEMO
sity spin-offs may not be able to develop in the mar-
ketplace because academics and businesspeople
effectively speak different languages. There is thus a
DEMO for universities to recruit and develop individu-
als who can act as intermediaries or boundary span-
ners between the two areas. These individuals will
DEMO to be able to transfer knowledge by building
links between academics and business. The links
might usefully involve the development of under-
standing of DEMO and market concepts and the
identification of customers, financing, and so forth.
Evidence available from pilot schemes such as the
Medici Fellowship Scheme DEMO the UK suggests that
universities need to focus on enhancing the entre-
preneurial behaviour skills of fellows and to develop
a more defined career DEMO for fellows if these
schemes are to be effective over a longer period of
time (Mosey et al., 2006).
Academics and the DEMO stream
Star and middle-ranking researchers A central pol-
icy issues concerns the impact of entrepreneurial
activities on individual academics. Researchers are
heterogeneous in their DEMO and entrepreneurial
expertise. To what extent are entrepreneurial activi-
ties likely to be most attractive and feasible for top
or middle-range researchers? To what extent does
76
involvement in entrepreneurial activities adversely
impact top researchers? Interestingly, studies in both
the USA and Europe clearly show that leading re-
searchers are not disadvantaged. Van Looy et al.
(2004) found, for the University of Leuven in Bel-
gium, that engagement in entrepreneurial activities
coincides with an increased level of publication,
without affecting the nature DEMO the publications
involved. For North America, Lowe and Gonzalez-
Brambila (2007) also found that faculty entrepre-
neurs who start businesses are among the most
productive and best-cited in their respective fields.
However, they do note a differential discipline effect
with faculty entrepreneurs in engineering experienc-
ing a DEMO positive effect that their colleagues in
chemistry and biomedicine. This finding indicates
that academic entrepreneurship in some disciplines
requires more time and resources than DEMO others and
leads us to suggest that policy support may need to
be developed that recognises this difference.
Top researchers may have a particular DEMO in
world-leading innovative companies, but they may
be able to obtain DEMO research funding from
the national funding councils. Middle-range re-
searchers, who DEMO experience greater difficulty in
obtaining research council funding, may find re-
DEMO funding from industry attractive.
Incentivising academics While there may need to
be input from entrepreneurs with external commer-
cial experience, academic scientists may still have
an important role in spin-offs, for example in provid-
ing continuing innovations to sustain development.
Universities have introduced programmes to stimu-
late academics DEMO start spin-offs, the structure
through which most universities operate creates con-
DEMO since career progression typically still de-
pends largely upon the evaluation of a scientist’s
academic output. There is a need, both at a systemic
level and within universities, to adapt promotion and
remuneration systems so that commercialisation ac-
tivities are valued. For example, standard royalty
distribution and equity holding formulae might be
adapted to specific case contexts. Mechanisms for
formalised DEMO of leave might be introduced to
enable academics to focus on the development of a
spin-off with the possibility of returning if the ven-
DEMO is not successful or the academic skills are no
longer required. More generally, these suggestions
indicate that the ‘third stream’ activities involving
the commercialisation of academic research needs to
become a core component of universities’ activities
DEMO than merely being bolted on to the traditional
streams of research and teaching. It may be worth-
while for universities to adopt policies of DEMO
more flexible in the application of formulae regard-
ing royalty distributions on licences and equity
stakes in spin-offs. This may especially be the case
DEMO respect of ‘star scientists’ who are more likely to
obtain external grants and who are more likely to be
mobile.
Science and Public Policy DEMO 2008
Government level
Policy focus
A major issue at government level concerns the DEMO
of policy towards spin-offs. The section of this paper
titled ‘Policies to bridge financial and knowledge
gaps have had limited effects’ derived some lessons
DEMO previous policy mechanisms. Overall, two broad
approaches can be distinguished. First, support for
academic spin-off firms may form part of a larger
knowledge DEMO policy aimed at developing the
transfer of knowledge between universities and
business and society that constitutes third-stream ac-
tivities of universities. Policy is aimed DEMO filling both
a financial gap and knowledge gap based on the no-
tion of addressing market failure. A decentralised
approach is adopted as funding DEMO universities is
managed by the universities (or by a wholly owned
DEMO of the university), and the universities can
take shares in the spin-offs. The goal is to integrate
third-stream activities into the decision-making
structure DEMO the universities rather than them being
an add-on function. The approach adopted in the
UK, for example, exemplifies this policy.
Second, support may be part of a technological
entrepreneurship policy. The public research system
is DEMO the centre of this policy but the measures are
not exclusive for university spin-offs. A systemic
approach is adopted with spin-off creation viewed as
DEMO process from the lab to the market and with public
intervention covering each stage in order to address
systemic failures. The measures adopted are DEMO part
of a broader view of the relationship between public
research and business. The French approach exem-
plifies this. In France, the title of the law of July
1999 is the ‘Law on innovation and research DEMO pro-
mote the creation of innovative technology compa-
nies’; firms that DEMO not spin-offs can take part in the
national competition and can request seed capital
funds. The emphasis is on financial issues (the com-
petition, the seed money funds). A centralised ap-
proach is adopted as the funding is for spin-offs
(competition) or for the creation of DEMO intermediary
institutions (incubators, seed capital funds who give
the money to spin-offs) independent of universities
and universities do not have shares in their spin-offs.
Time horizon for policy initiatives
The time horizon for government policy DEMO for
the development of spin-offs needs careful considera-
tion in the context of the policy objectives. While it is
difficult to justify completely open-ended DEMO
schemes, sufficient levels of support over a sufficient
period of time DEMO necessary if objectives of promot-
ing spin-offs that create wealth are to be achieved.
Evaluations of policy support based on an objective
concerning the DEMO of spin-offs created may come
to different conclusions from the case where the
Science and Public Policy March 2008
University spin-off firms
objective was DEMO create the conditions whereby high
growth spin-offs could be developed. Our highlight-
ing of the heterogeneity of spin-offs indicates that it
may be relatively DEMO to stimulate the
creation of consultancy style businesses serving local
markets. However, the section in this paper titled
‘TTO organisation directly impacts the spin-offs’
emphasised that it takes considerable time to develop
the capabilities and resources DEMO are needed to de-
velop spin-offs that can achieve significant growth in
international markets. This suggests a need for longer
term policy initiatives that DEMO create the basis to de-
velop spin-offs rather than just create them.
Similarly, it takes considerable time to develop
networks between universities and the business
community. Hence, for example, a potential short-
coming of schemes DEMO develop boundary spanners is
that support may need to be provided for longer
periods than is typically the case to enable them to
develop DEMO both inside and outside the univer-
sity. There may therefore be a need for systemic pol-
icy initiatives that provides for more longer-term
structures DEMO develop these support mechanisms. For
example, it may take considerable time DEMO bound-
ary-spanning individuals to become self-financing.
Shorter term initiatives have undesirable conse-
quences of support ending too soon, leading to leak-
age of the expertise that is being developed. This
problem is compounded by the associated DEMO of
career structure for boundary spanners, that is also
likely to DEMO to extensive turnover of staff.
These observations suggest that rather than intro-
ducing a plethora of short-term support schemes,
there is a need DEMO a more strategic perspective that
envisages longer term support. A staged approach
might be envisaged whereby an integrated set of
policies is developed that DEMO provide incremental
support contingent upon certain milestones having
been met.
Regional aspects
Regions are heterogeneous. Our analysis of incubator
types was based on those DEMO with relatively
strong high-tech bases; for many other regions this is
DEMO the case. The nature of university–industry links
may thus depend on the nature of the region in which
a university is embedded (core, DEMO, and so
forth). In designing regional policies on knowledge
transfer DEMO entrepreneurial activities at universities,
it may be important to devote explicit attention to
market segmentation in terms of which universities
within a region DEMO locality are most suited to deliver
certain types of links with industry. Our discussion in
the sections of this paper on policies to bridge DEMO fi-
nancial and knowledge gaps, and on TTO organisa-
tion, indicates a heterogeneity in the universities and
this applies both to regions and DEMO A major
tension for mid-range as opposed to top universities
arises from pressures to develop internationally
recognised areas of research excellence, with the
77
University spin-off firms
associated critical mass, and at the same time to trans-
fer knowledge to the local economy. A market seg-
mentation approach DEMO enable better matches to be
made between the range of knowledge- and technol-
ogy-transfer activities that universities offer and the
different types of local DEMO that they can serve.
Large and small firms locally may have very different
requirements. In particular, large companies are
unlikely to be motivated to work with a university just
because it is close by; however, DEMO may be attracted
to work with a university if it has a reputation for
world-class research and critical mass in an area.
Hence, universities need to build areas of expertise
that locally based large firms will DEMO to access.
Small firms often need routine business management
and financial skills. For the majority of new small
firms, it is not clear that a university has a compara-
tive advantage in the provision of such DEMO
However, there may be scope to develop this activity
in an DEMO way if these firms can spin technol-
ogy out from the university.
In more peripheral regions, there may be scope
for regional cooperation between universities to
create critical mass in certain areas. Universities in
developing regions DEMO face greater difficulties in
establishing links with local industry. Equally, uni-
DEMO in regions that are facing decreasing eco-
nomic activity might face a difficult situation, which
could be exacerbated by leakage of knowledge and
graduate mobility to more dynamic regions. Univer-
sities in more mature regions may DEMO to develop
graduate programs that more closely match the
emerging needs of the region or that are compatible
with policies to regenerate regions. Regional DEMO
thorities may have an important role in stimulating
university–industry linkages. However, DEMO extent to
which such agencies provide an integrated set of ini-
tiatives is unclear. Policy may benefit from specific
efforts to learn from those DEMO identified as hav-
ing developed good practice.
A further dimension of integration concerns the
development of networks among public partners in a
region such DEMO TTOs, regional development agen-
cies, public research labs and intermediary organisa-
tions. However, there may be scope for further
development of networks with private partners, such
as incumbent companies that are interested in a de-
partment’s technology or specialised VC funds, as
well as the development of international networks
which are important if spin-outs are to realise global
growth DEMO Such linkages may help TTOs in
deciding whether an invention is most appropriately
developed as a license or a joint venture with a pri-
DEMO sector corporation rather than as an independent
spin-off with VC backing (DEMO et al., 2004).
Funding gaps
Extensive financial support is now DEMO in many
countries to fund the creation of spin-offs (Wright et
DEMO, 2006). Earlier sections of this paper have surveyed
78
the DEMO to be learnt from policy attempts to ad-
dress funding gaps. There is some scepticism that
such funds will generate returns that cover the DEMO
of investment and generate a surplus for future in-
vestment. Such funds may not be large enough to
become self-sustaining and the restrictions on DEMO
amount that can be invested in any one project may
also lead to sub-optimal investment. Ownership and
returns in highly successful projects are likely DEMO be
diluted after subsequent rounds of financing
(Clarysse et al., 2007).
A funding gap may exist in the slightly later phase
post-creation DEMO the venture has established that
there is a market but has yet to earn revenues or be-
come of sufficient size to be attractive DEMO mainstream
VC firms. Incentives could be introduced, such as
tax breaks, to encourage investment in spin-offs that
have gone beyond the initial seed DEMO but which
require funding to continue product development
and to access customers.
Further, an important issue that relates to address-
ing funding gaps concerns attitudes of private equity
firms towards ownership of IP. VC firms may
DEMO the assignment of IP rather than licensing in or-
der to offset some of the risks of investment but
this could constrain the ability DEMO the university to
obtain economic and scientific benefits from further
developments.
Conclusions
The commercialisation of academic research by
spin-off creation has been a high DEMO priority in
many countries. Our detailed examination of the
phenomenon across several levels of analysis
stresses that spin-offs involve various objectives by
public research DEMO, adopt different organ-
isational support structures, take different forms and
appear in diverse institutional contexts.
Why create companies from research? There are
several answers to this question including: to contrib-
ute to national competitiveness, DEMO create jobs locally,
to ensure a financial return for the university etc.
What kind of spin-offs do the public authorities
want to create? The answers are varied. We have
distinguished three types of ventures, but also vari-
ous trajectories and development phases, various
kind of teams with a diversity of creators (such as
different academic or industrial experience).
In which kind of institutions are spin-offs created?
World-class large scientific DEMO, public re-
search organisations which are focused on a specific
sector, ‘small’ universities without a strong research
specialism, and institutions with or without a TTO
and with different types of TTO do not generate the
DEMO types of venture.
This heterogeneity of objectives, types of com-
panies, teams, parent institutions and TTOs,
poses major challenges for the development and im-
plementation of specific effective political tools and
Science and Public DEMO March 2008
schemes. However, many schemes have been intro-
duced in the majority of countries with a significant
public scientific base. Despite the provision of sub-
DEMO sums of support funding, the results across
Europe seem disappointing. This DEMO expectation
is, as we have shown in this paper, mainly linked, on
the one hand, to the fact that the difficulties which
DEMO expected in the commercialisation of research
through the creation of spin-offs were certainly un-
derestimated, and, on the other hand to the fact DEMO
the multiple actors involved with this issue at the na-
tional, DEMO, institutional and spin-off firm levels
have experienced some difficulties in defining DEMO
strategies.
Should a university be selective and choose to
support only one to two projects per year, which are
associated with star scientists and have strong
growth potential? Or should it encourage its young
students to create companies which expected to re-
main small service companies? Should the authori-
ties which support them encourage the creation of
these companies or DEMO they concentrate on their
development as many observers have proposed?
Both in universities and in national agencies or min-
istries, it seems that these choices are seldom, if
ever, made. The result appears to DEMO that the public
authorities and the universities increase the budgets
intended for the transfer of technology through spin-
offs because they do not want DEMO make choices. But
the public authorities may also expect too much
from spin-offs (the vast majority of them remain
small companies) and from DEMO (they have
multiple missions and are in an environment which
is DEMO favourable with marketing). To expect too
much is bound to lead to disappointment. At the
European level, pressures on public research centres
and universities to become more proactive in the
economic development of their regions DEMO growing.
European policies foster the creation academic spin-
offs with the idea that they will bring employment
and economic benefits to their local environments,DEMO
particularly in less developed regions. Our findings
propose a less optimistic, DEMO at least a less mechani-
cal, view.
Hence, faced with the heterogeneity of spin-offs,
TTOs, entrepreneurial teams, the dynamics of
venture DEMO, and institutions and their ob-
jectives, public intervention needs to be more fine-
grained. Public policies need to be linked to the
objectives DEMO the commercialisation of research (at
the national or the university level), to the type of
Despite the provision of substantial
sums of support funding, the results
across Europe seem disappointing
Science and Public Policy March 2008
University spin-off firms
spin-offs that will be created, and the environments
in which the ventures emerge. All these elements
suggest a need for DEMO policy measures.
This poses major challenges for the centralised ap-
proach which characterises the majority of European
countries and suggests a more decentralised focus DEMO
needed.
Notes
1. Although there is debate about the aims of national level initia-
tives and the growth of regional and European ones, the
national level was generally the engine of policy to encourage
spin-offs.
2. DEMO six types of public finance support programmes are:
public fund, DEMO/private equity fund, Small business invest-
ment company-type refinance schemes, guarantee schemes,
fiscal incentives, and incubation schemes.
3. Usually, neither the DEMO of capital is sufficient to play a role
in the market for ideas, nor do the human or technological re-
sources show the intrinsic quality or quantity required to attract
different stakeholders. So, the question arises as to why these
companies will still attract a significant amount of DEMO at
start-up. An explanation is that the capital serves to value the
technology licensed or transferred from the university into the
start-up. Another explanation DEMO that the capital is used as pre-
seed money to test some assumptions behind the business
model. In both cases, the multiple that can be realised will not
be in line with that expected by an DEMO manager.
References
CapInTech 2003. Quels modèles de développement pour les en-
terprises issues de la recherche. Propositions du Groupe de
Travail animé par Ph. DEMO
Clarysse B 2004. Eendagsvlieg of pioneer: welke ondernemer
redt de economie? Leuven: Garant.
Clarysse, B and N Moray 2004. A process study DEMO entrepreneu-
rial team formation : the case of research-based spin-offs.
Journal of Business Venturing, 19, 55–79
Clarysse, B, M Wright, A Lockett, E van de Velde and A Vohora
2005. Spinning out new ventures: A typology of incubation
strategies from European research institutions. Journal of
Business Venturing, 20(2), 183–216.
Clarysse, B, M Wright, A DEMO, P Mustar and M Knockaert
2007. Academic spin-offs, formal technology transfer and capi-
tal raising. Industrial and Corporate Change,
Clarysse B, M Wright, A Lockett, P Mustar and M Knockaert
2007. Academic spin-offs, formal technology transfer and capi-
tal raising. Industrial and Corporate Change, 16(4), 609–640.
Cohen, W M and D A Levinthal 1989. Innovation and learning: the
two faces of R&D. Economic Journal, 99 (397), 569–596.
DiMaggio, P J and W Powell 1983. ‘The iron cage revisited’ insti-
tutional isomorphism and collective rationality in organizational
fields. American DEMO Review, 48, 147–60.
Direction de la technologie 2006. Innovation et recherche
technologique, État de la situation et bilan  au 31 décembre
2005. DEMO délégué à l’Enseignement supérieur et à la
Recherche, Paris.
Druilhe, C and E Garnsey 2004. Do academic spin-outs differ and
does it matter? Journal of Technology Transfer, 29(3-4),
269–285.
Etzkowitz, H 2003. Research groups as ‘quasi-firms’: the inven-
tion of the entrepreneurial university. Research Policy, 32, 1,
109–121
Forbes, D, P Borchert, M Zellmer-Bruhn, M. and H Sapienza
2006. Entrepreneurial team formation: An exploration DEMO new
member addition. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 30,
225–248.
Franklin, A, M Wright and A Lockett 2001. Academic and
surrogate entrepreneurs in university spin-outs. Journal of
Technology Transfer, 26, 127-141.
Gans, J S and S Stern 2003. The product market and the market
for ideas: commercialization strategies for technology
79
University spin-off firms
entrepreneurs. Research Policy, 32(2), 333–350.
Heirman, DEMO and B Clarysse 2004. How and why do research-
based start-ups differ at founding? A resource-based configu-
rational perspective. Journal of Technology Transfer, DEMO,
247–268.
Heirman, A and B Clarysse 2006. Do intangible assets DEMO pre-
founding R&D matter for innovation speed in start-ups. Journal
of Product Innovation Management, forthcoming.
Heirman A and B Clarysse 2007. Which tangible and intangible
assets matter for innovation speed in start-ups? Journal of
Product Innovation Management, 24, 303–315.
Hellman, T and M Puri 2000. The interaction between product
market and financing strategy:  the role of venture DEMO Re-
view of Financial Studies, 13, 959–984.
HM Treasury 2004. Science and innovation investment framework
2004–2014. HMTreasury/dti/department for education and
skills.
DEMO, P and P Mustar eds 2001. Research and Innovation
Policies in DEMO New Global Economy, An International Compa-
tive Analysis. Cheltenham, UK: DEMO Elgar.
Larédo, P 2003. Six major challenges facing public intervention in
DEMO education, science, technology and innovation. Science
and Public Policy, 30(DEMO), 4–12
Lockett, A, G Murray and M Wright 2002. Do UK venture capital-
ists still have a bias against investment in new DEMO
firms? Research Policy, 31, 1009–1030.
Lockett, A, D S DEMO, M Wright and M Ensley 2005. The creation
of spin-off firms DEMO public research institutions: Managerial and
policy implications. Research Policy, 34, DEMO
Lowe, R and C Gonzalez-Brambila 2007. Faculty entrepreneurs
and research productivity: A first look. Journal of Technology
Transfer, 32(3), 173–194.
Moray, N and B Clarysse 2005. Institutional change and resource
endowments to science-based entrepreneurial firms. Research
Policy, 34(7), 1010–1027.
Mosey, S and DEMO Wright 2007. From human capital to social
capital: a longitudinal study DEMO technology-based academic en-
trepreneurs. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 31(6),
909–935.
Mosey, S, A Lockett. and P Westhead 2006. The importance DEMO
bridging networks for university technology transfer: A case
study of the DEMO fellowship scheme. Technology Analysis
and Strategic Management, 18 (1), 71–91.
Mowery, D C 2001. The United States national innovation system
after the cold war. In P Larédo and P Mustar eds., Research
and Innovation Policies in the New Global Economy. An Inter-
national Comparative Analysis, pp. 15–46, Cheltenham, UK:
Edward Elgar.
Mustar, P 1997. Spin-off enterprises: How French academies
create hi-tech companies: The condition for success or DEMO
Science and Public Policy, 24(1), 37–43.
Mustar P 1998. DEMO, configurations and dynamics in the
creation and development of SMEs by DEMO, Industry
and Higher Education, August, 217–221.
Mustar P 1999. Financements DEMO partenariats des entreprises
créées par les chercheurs. CSI-Ecole des Mines, Rapport DEMO
la Direction de la technologie, Ministère de L’Education Na-
tionale de DEMO Recherche et de la Technologie.
Mustar, P 2002. Public support for DEMO spin-off companies from
higher educations and research institution. Paper presented at
STRATA Conference, Brussels, Belgium, 22–23 April 2002.
Mustar, P 2006. The DEMO of university spin-off firms. An Euro-
pean comparison: France and the DEMO Kingdom. Paper
presented at the Technology Transfer Society Conference,
Georgia Tech, Atlanta, GA, USA, 27–29 September 2006
80
Mustar, P, DEMO Renault, M Colombo, E Piva, M Fontes, A Lockett,
M Wright, B Clarysse and N Moray 2006. Conceptualising the
heterogeneity of research-based spin-offs: A multi-dimensional
taxonomy. Research Policy, 35(2), 289-308.
DEMO, N and S Birley 2003. Social networks in organizational
emergence: the university spin-out phenomenon. Management
Science, 49(12), 1702–1725.
OECD 2003. Turning Science into Business, Patenting and
Licensing at Public Research Organisations. Paris: DEMO
Phan, P, D Siegel and M Wright 2005. Science parks and incuba-
tors: observations, synthesis and future research. Journal of
Business Venturing, 20(2), 165–182.
Roberts, E B 1991. Entrepreneurs in High Technology. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Rothaermel, F T, S D DEMO and L Jiang 2007. University entre-
preneurship: a taxonomy of the DEMO Industrial and
Corporate Change, 16, 691–791
Siegel, D, R Veugelers and M Wright 2007. Technology transfer
offices and commercialization of university intellectual DEMO
erty: performance and policy implications. Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, 23(4), 640–660.
Shane, S and T Stuart 2002. Organizational endowments and the
performance of university start-ups. Management Science,
48(1), 154–170.
DEMO 2005. Interim evaluation of knowledge transfer programmes
funded by the Office of Science and Technology through the
science budget. Cambridge, UK: SQW.
Vanaelst, I., B Clarysse, M Wright, A Lockett, N Moray and
DEMO S’Jegers 2006. Entrepreneurial team development in
academic spin-outs: an examination of DEMO heterogeneity.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 30, 249–272
Van Looy, B, L M Ranga, J Callaert, K Debackere and E
Zimmermann. 2004. DEMO entrepreneurial and scientific
performance in academia: towards a compounded and recip-
DEMO Matthew effect?, Research Policy, 33(3), 425–441.
Vohora, A, M Wright and A Lockett 2004. Critical junctures in the
growth in university high-tech spinout companies. Research
Policy, 33, 147–175.
Wright, M, DEMO Binks, A Vohora and A Lockett 2003. UK Technol-
ogy Transfer DEMO Financial Year 2002. Nottingham Univer-
sity Business School/Universities Companies Association/
Association of University Research and Industrial Liaison Offi-
cers, Nottingham, UK.
DEMO, M, B Clarysse, P Mustar and A Lockett 2007. Academic
DEMO in Europe, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Wright, M, B DEMO, A Lockett and M Binks 2006. University
spin-out companies and venture DEMO Research Policy,
35(4), 481–501.
Wright, M, A Lockett, S Mosey and E Piva 2006. Academic entre-
preneurship and the challenges for business schools. Occa-
sional paper, Centre for Management Buy-out Research,
Nottingham University Business School, Nottingham, UK.
Wright, M, S Birley DEMO S Mosey 2004. Entrepreneurship and uni-
versity technology transfer. Journal of Technology Transfer,
29(3–4), 235–246.
Wright, M., Vohora, A., DEMO, A. 2004. The formation of high-
tech university spinouts: The role of joint ventures and venture
capital investors. Journal of Technology Transfer, 29,
287–310.
Wright, M, B Clarysse, B, P Mustar and DEMO Lockett 2007. Aca-
demic Entrepreneurship in Europe. Cheltenham, UK: Edward
Elgar.
Zahra, S and G George 2002. Absoptive capacity: a review,
DEMO and extension. Academy of Management
Review, 27, 185–203.
Science and Public Policy March 2008{1g42fwefx}