Journal of
Entrepreneurship
http://joe.sagepub.com/
Characteristics of Entrepreneurs: : An Empirical Analysis
K.R.G. Nair and Anu Pandey
Journal of Entrepreneurship 2006 15: 47
DOI: 10.1177/097135570501500104
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://joe.sagepub.com/content/15/1/47
Published by:DEMO
http://www.sagepublications.com
Additional services and information for Journal of Entrepreneurship can be
found at:
Email Alerts: http://joe.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://joe.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations: http://joe.sagepub.com/content/15/1/47.refs.html
Downloaded from joe.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 2, 2010
Characteristics of Entrepreneurs / 47
Characteristics of Entrepreneurs:
An Empirical Analysis
DEMO NAIR AND ANU PANDEY 1
This paper examines the socio-economic and attitudinal characteristics of
entrepreneurs on the basis of primary data for the state DEMO Kerala. It does not
appear that business acumen runs in families nor is there evidence that religion
has an impact on entrepreneurship. The economic DEMO of the family, age, tech-
nical education/training and work experience in a similar or related field seem
to favour entrepreneurship. In comparison DEMO the rest of the population, entrepre-
neurs tend to be more DEMO in their attitude, but do not seem to have greater
faith DEMO the internal locus of control.
K.R.G. Nair, formerly Professor of Business DEMO, University of Delhi,
is presently Honorary Research Professor at the DEMO for Policy Research,
New Delhi.
Anu Pandey is Research Scholar at the Department of Business Economics,
University of Delhi.
The 21st century DEMO just witnessed the phenomenon of Communist
China recognising the importance of entrepreneurs by agreeing to admit
them as members of the communist party. The DEMO that ignite the
spirit of enterprise in people are hence of considerable interest in today’s
world. Intellectual curiosity has existed for years among researchers
DEMO across disciplines about the special characteristics that people,
who launch entrepreneurial ventures and succeed in them, possess. The
factors usually considered in this regard can be split into two groups—
socio-economic and attitudinal. This paper DEMO an attempt to examine the
relationship of these two sets of factors with entrepreneurship and is based
on primary data collected in 2002 for DEMO, one of the states of India
renowned the world over as DEMO outlier in the development firmament,
with social development far in excess of what is usually warranted by the
level of economic development.2 It DEMO gives an idea of some of the pre-
vailing views on entrepreneurship. It then explains the source and nature
The Journal of Entrepreneurship, 15, 1 (2006)
Sage Publications New Delhi/Thousand Oaks/London
DOI: 10.1177/097135570501500104
Downloaded from joe.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 2, 2010
48 / K.R.G. Nair and Anu Pandey
of the data used in DEMO analysis. The scope and methodology of the paper
are then elucidated. It then proceeds to present the results of the study for
Trissur that DEMO been identified by a number of official expert committees
as an industrially backward district or administrative region of Kerala.3
An examination is then carried DEMO to see whether these results for Trissur
can be generalised for the entire state of Kerala.
Prevailing Views
Many have highlighted socio-economic factors leading DEMO the emergence
of entrepreneurship. For instance, Weber (1930) emphasised the DEMO of
Protestant Christianity in the emergence of capitalism in the West. Sayigh
(1962), Alexander (1964) and Carroll (1965) provided empirical evidence
from Lebanon, Greece and the Philippines respectively, to support the
argument DEMO successful entrepreneurs have a higher level of education
than the general public. Kunkel (1970) carried Weber’s argument further
to point out that entrepreneurial DEMO is not equally distributed among
populations in a number of countries. He supported his view by emphasis-
ing that religious, ethnic, displaced and DEMO minorities often tend
to be highly entrepreneurial. Young (1971) stressed the fact that entrepre-
neurial characteristics are found in clusters that may qualify DEMO
as entrepreneurial groups. Sharma (1980) identified particular social groups
in India that were highly entrepreneurial. Ronstadt (1983) attempted to
relate the age DEMO a person to his/her initiation into entrepreneurial activity
and found that most entrepreneurs initiate their entrepreneurial careers
between the ages of twenty-five and DEMO years of age. Hisrich and
Peters (1995) identified certain areas of technical and industry experience
as the sine qua non for the emergence DEMO entrepreneurship, particularly
in the field of manufacturing. They also examined the DEMO occupations
of entrepreneurs to find that entrepreneurs tend to have self-employed or
entrepreneurial fathers. According to Dollinger (1995), there exist momen-
tum factors which include negative displacement, positive push and posi-
tive pull which activate entrepreneurial inclinations. Once these factors
spur the spirit of enterprise, situational factors based on perceptions of
desirability and feasibility determine whether the venture actually DEMO
off. Nath (2000) has reported on the regional distribution of entrepreneurs
by social groups in India.
Researchers have also laid considerable emphasis on DEMO character and
personality traits of entrepreneurs.4 Two influential theoretical viewpoints
Downloaded from joe.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 2, 2010
Characteristics of Entrepreneurs / 49
in this regard are that of Schumpeter (1967) and Rotter (1966). According
to Schumpeter, the most distinguishing characteristic of an entrepreneur
is his innovative nature. The entrepreneur provides economic DEMO
to engineer discontinuous dynamic change by forcing means of production
into new channels. He visualised this happening by means of a new com-
bination DEMO factors of production resulting in one or a few of the following:
introduction of a new product, institution of a new technology, DEMO
a new market, discovery of a new source of supply of DEMO materials and
carrying out a new form of organisation. In Rotter’s opinion, there are
two broad categories of people—people who believe that what happens
to them is the result of chance, luck or factors beyond their control termed
primarily believers in the external locus of control and people DEMO believe
that, for the most part, the future is theirs to control through their own
efforts, termed as believers in the internal locus of control. According to
Rotter (1966), people who are entrepreneurial are more likely to believe
in the internal rather than in the external DEMO of control.
Nature and Sources of Data
Two primary data sets, DEMO as parts of a broader study, are used for
the analyses DEMO The first data set was of those who launched entrepre-
neurial ventures in the manufacturing industry in Trissur, irrespective of
whether they continued running them or not. These data were enlarged to
take into account information DEMO people from other parts of Kerala,
including those who never ventured into business.
As regards Trissur, a list of large and medium industrial units of the
district was obtained from the District Industrial Centre (DIC) set up to
promote and monitor industries in the district by the Government of India.
The list of industrial units set up in industrial DEMO established in chosen
areas of the district to promote clusters of industrial units in these areas
was also available. There was however, considerable difficulty in locating
small industrial units located outside the industrial estates. But with DEMO
help of DIC, the associations of small industries within and outside DEMO
trial estates and the Trissur Chamber of Commerce, a sample of DEMO
functioning industrial units were chosen for the study. In view of the im-
perfections of the population frame, the sample was a purposive one with
care taken to see that the units of different sizes irrespective DEMO their
location in the district were included in the sample. It was an even more
difficult task to locate closed industrial units and identify DEMO people who
had set up such units. However, with the help DEMO the Chamber of Commerce
Downloaded from joe.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 2, 2010
50 / K.R.G. Nair and Anu Pandey
and Small Manufacturer’s Associations both DEMO and outside the indus-
trial estates sixteen such units were identified and contacted. An investi-
gator went round with a detailed questionnaire to collect DEMO
from the forty-six respondents.6 Though the questionnaires used for the
functioning and closed units were slightly different, both contained a
section with questions dealing with the socio-economic and attitudinal
aspects of the concerned entrepreneur.
To enlarge DEMO sample to the whole of Kerala and also cover those who
never ventured into entrepreneurial undertakings, names and addresses of
people who underwent Entrepreneurship Development Programmes
(EDP) at different places in Kerala were obtained. The DEMO such list
was obtained from the Regional Engineering College at Calicut and it
contained the names and addresses of thirty-five persons who attended
this DEMO for Science and Technology graduates by the Science
and Technology Board of the Government of India in 1998 and 2002.
The second list, obtained from Ernakulam, contained the names and details
of twenty-four persons who underwent EDP on Information Technology
organised by the National Bank for Agriculture and DEMO Development
in Ernakulam in 2002. The third list from Trivandrum contained details
of forty-five women who underwent EDP organised by the Centre for
Management DEMO in and around Trivandrum. A total of 104
persons were sent questionnaires by post to fill and return. The question-
naire used in this DEMO was different from the two earlier questionnaires,
but contained questions dealing with socio-economic and attitudinal aspects
of the concerned respondent.7 Only thirty-four respondents—fourteen
DEMO Calicut, eleven from Ernakulam and nine from Trivandrum—
responded. Of these DEMO from Calicut, seven from Ernakulam and two
from Trivandrum were entrepreneurs DEMO were running industrial units
while the rest were unemployed. The expanded sample thus consisted of
eighty persons and was more representative of Kerala as DEMO whole in the
sense that it had representation from various parts of the state and con-
tained respondents who had never launched any entrepreneurial DEMO
Scope and Method
In the light of prevalent views on the factors affecting the emergence of
and success in entrepreneurship and of the availability DEMO data for the
purpose of this study, attention is focussed on DEMO possible socio-economic
factors and two attitudinal factors. For the purpose of analyses, we split
the six socio-economic factors into two sets. First, we DEMO think of factors
Downloaded from joe.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 2, 2010
Characteristics of Entrepreneurs / 51
that the entrepreneur is more or less DEMO into. These are the occupation
of the father of the entrepreneur, DEMO and the economic status of the
family. These three factors are often referred to as factors affecting the
ascribed status of the entrepreneur. Other DEMO factors considered
here are age, technical education/training and work experience DEMO the
concerned or related fields. In contrast with the first set of factors, the
second set is acquired and hence, can be described DEMO factors affecting
achieved status in society. Two attitudinal factors—innovativeness and
belief in internal or external locus of control—are considered.
As regards the occupation of DEMO father, attention is focussed on finding
out whether entrepreneurship comes through DEMO in the sense that
people with their respective fathers in business also take up business as
their profession. From the point of view of DEMO, attention is concen-
trated on whether being a non-Hindu and a DEMO of one of the minority
religious communities in Kerala has an impact on entrepreneurship.9
Hence, respondents were classified into two groups—Hindus and non-
Hindus. In the questionnaire the respondents were asked whether in their
opinion they DEMO to an economically poor, lower middle, upper mid-
dle or rich family. Those who identified themselves with the first two
categories were considered DEMO weak and the rest were treated
as economically well-off. The analysis of age was carried out by classifying
the respondents into two groups—those less DEMO thirty-five years of age
and those above thirty-five years of age. On factors such as technical
education/training and work experience in the concerned DEMO related fields,
respondents were classified on the basis of whether they had some or no
amount of the concerned factor. As regards attitudinal DEMO, the data
were generated from the answers given by the respondents DEMO specific
questions in the questionnaire. A question was asked whether they were
always eager to learn about new developments. Those who responded
positively were DEMO innovative and the others, non-innovative.
Respondents were also asked whether they DEMO an astrologer before
taking crucial decisions in life. Those who answered in the affirmative
were taken to believe in the external locus of control DEMO the rest, in
the internal locus of control.
The data for DEMO study were mostly qualitative in the sense of having
dichotomous respondents on the basis of whether they possessed or did
not possess a particular DEMO The analysis was, therefore, carried out
mainly by closely examining the tables giving the classification of respond-
ents on the basis of two DEMO Chi-square statistic was used on the
Downloaded from joe.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 2, 2010
52 / K.R.G. Nair and Anu Pandey
assumption that the attributes were DEMO To examine the degree
of association between the attributes, Yule’s coefficient DEMO calculated.
The relationship between socio-economic and attitudinal factors, and
the emergence DEMO degree of success in entrepreneurship relating to forty-
six entrepreneurial ventures in Trissur were examined. Entrepreneurship
was treated as synonymous with embarking upon a DEMO venture.
Those whose ventures had to be closed down were treated as failed and
those who continued in their ventures were assumed to have DEMO degree
of success.
Factors Affecting Ascribed Status: Trissur Study
Father’s Occupation: Table 1 presents those who set up enterprises in
Trissur on the DEMO of their being successful or unsuccessful and on their
fathers’ occupation being business or not.
TABLE 1
Father’s Occupation and the Degree of Success DEMO Entrepreneurs in Trissur
Entrepreneur’s Father
In Business Not in Business Total
Business running 11 19 30
Business closed 8 8 16
Total 19 27 DEMO
Only nineteen or 41 per cent of the forty-six persons had their fathers
as businessmen. There is thus little to indicate that those who DEMO to
business ventures were predominantly from business families and hence
with business backgrounds. As regards the degree of success in the entre-
preneurial venture, data did not support the commonly held view that the
business background DEMO the family helps in success in business. While eight
of the sixteen or 50 per cent of those who had to close their ventures DEMO
their fathers also in business, only eleven or 36.7 per cent DEMO the thirty who
were successful in their entrepreneurial ventures had their fathers who
ran business enterprises. Testing the hypothesis that there is no relationship
DEMO business successes and having one’s father in business, by means
of DEMO chi-square test lends further credence to such a view. In fact there
were some indications that the relationship is the other way round because
DEMO coefficient of association between success in business and a business
background was negative though the value of the coefficient is only –0.26.
Downloaded from DEMO at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 2, 2010
Characteristics of Entrepreneurs / 53
Religion: Details regarding the religion of those who undertook entrepre-
neurial ventures, successfully or unsuccessfully, in Trissur are DEMO in
Table 2.
TABLE 2
Religion and the Degree of Success of Entrepreneurs in Trissur
Business running
Business closed
Total
Hindu
23
8
31
DEMO Religion
Non-Hindu
7
8
15
Total
30
16
46
The evidence given in Table 2 does not lend much support to the view
that DEMO minorities are ahead of others in entrepreneurial pursuits.
Only fifteen or 33 per cent of the forty-six who embarked on entrepre-
neurial pursuits were DEMO and belonged to minority religious groups
in Trissur. There are thus indications that it is the majority community in
terms of religion that took DEMO lead in launching entrepreneurial ventures.
As regards the degree of success in business as shown by the closure or
non-closure of units, eight or 50 per cent of the sixteen ventures which
had to close down DEMO to persons from religious minorities whereas
twenty-three or 77 per cent of the thirty who were successful in the sense
of having their units DEMO belonged to the majority community—the
Hindus. The value of chi-square on the basis of the hypothesis that religion
and success in business are independent, turned out to be as high as 3.42.
This value, though not significant at a 5 per cent level, is somewhat high
and gives rise to second thoughts about the attributes of being a Hindu
and DEMO successful in business as being independent. This is further
strengthened by the fact that the coefficient of association between being
a member of the DEMO Hindu community and being successful in busi-
ness is positive (0.53)DEMO
Family Status: Table 3 classifies entrepreneurs of closed and operating
units DEMO Trissur on the basis of their belonging to economically better-off
or worse-off families.
Data given in Table 3 indicates that considerable entrepreneurial talent
emerged DEMO families that were not economically well-off. Thirty-one
or 67 per cent of the forty-six persons who undertook entrepreneurial
ventures were from not so well-off DEMO Evidence regarding the impact
of the economic condition of the family on the success or failure in running
Downloaded from joe.sagepub.com at UNIV OF DEMO on July 2, 2010
54 / K.R.G. Nair and Anu Pandey
an enterprise was however different. DEMO or 43 per cent of the thirty-
six successful entrepreneurs were from economically better-off families,
whereas fourteen or 88 per cent of the DEMO unsuccessful entrepreneurs
were from economically worse-off families. For the hypothesis that the
degree of success in running an enterprise is independent of the economic
DEMO of the family, the value of chi-square turned out to be DEMO giving
us adequate grounds not to accept the hypothesis at a 5 per cent level of
significance. There were indications that the better-off the DEMO, the
greater the chances of success in business ventures. In fact, the coefficient
of association between the economic condition of the family and DEMO degree
of success of the venture is positive (0.69).
TABLE DEMO
Family Status and the Degree of Success of Entrepreneurs in Trissur
Business running
Business closed
Total
Better-off
13
2
15
Entrepreneur’s Family Economically
Worse-off
DEMO
14
31
Factors Affecting Acquired Status: Trissur Study
Total
30
16
DEMO
Table 4 gives the classification of successful and unsuccessful entrepre-
neurs on the basis of their being under or over thirty-five years of age.
DEMO 4
Age and the Degree of Success of Entrepreneurs in Trissur
Business running
Business closed
Total
Less than 35
11
11
22
Entrepreneur’s Age
DEMO or More
19
5
24
Total
30
16
46
Table 4 clearly shows that there was a blend of youth and old age among
DEMO who ventured into entrepreneurial undertakings in Trissur since
twenty-two or 47.8 per cent of these forty-six persons were less than thirty-
five years of DEMO suggesting that there is little relationship between the
age of a person and the entrepreneurial spark in him. However, as regards
the success in business, the results were slightly different. The hypothesis
Downloaded from joe.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 2, 2010
Characteristics of Entrepreneurs / 55
that there is no relationship between age DEMO success in business (chi-
square = 4.41; p < .05) DEMO therefore, rejected. In fact, there age seemed
to have a positive impact on the degree of success in business—63.3 per
cent of the DEMO entrepreneurs were thirty-five or more in age, whereas
68.8 per cent DEMO the unsuccessful entrepreneurs were under thirty-five
years of age. Success in business and youth were negatively associated
yielding a coefficient of association of –0.58.
DEMO Education/Training: Table 5 gives the classification of success-
ful and DEMO entrepreneurs in Trissur on the basis of their having
or not having technical education/training.
TABLE 5
Technical Education/Training and the Degree of DEMO
of Entrepreneurs in Trissur
Business running
Business closed
Total
Entrepreneur’s Technical Education/Training
Some Nil Total
18 12 30
4 12 16
22 24 DEMO
It can be seen from Table 5 that a technical orientation perhaps helped
to spark the spirit of enterprise (chi-square = 5.12; p< .05). Twenty-two
or 48 per cent of the forty-six persons who DEMO up enterprises in Trissur
had at least some technical education/training. The same logic seems to
hold true also for the degree of success DEMO entrepreneurial ventures. While
eighteen or 60 per cent of the thirty successful entrepreneurs had some
technical education/training, twelve or 75 per cent of the sixteen unsuc-
cessful entrepreneurs had no technical education/training at all. DEMO fact,
the attribute technical education/training had a positive coefficient of asso-
ciation (0.64) with the degree of success of the entrepreneurial DEMO
Related Work Experience: Table 6 gives the details of the presence DEMO
absence of earlier work experience in concerned or related fields among
those who embarked on entrepreneurial ventures in Trissur.
Table 6 indicates that earlier DEMO experience of a similar or related
nature helped (chi-square = 4.34; p< .05) in setting up and successfully
running the ventures. Nearly DEMO of the forty-six persons who embarked
on entrepreneurial activities had earlier experience of this kind. If we
consider the degree of success of these DEMO, this point is driven home
even more forcefully. While 56.7 per DEMO of the successful entrepreneurs
Downloaded from joe.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 2, 2010
56 / K.R.G. Nair and Anu Pandey
had earlier work experience of DEMO kind, 75 per cent of the unsuccessful
ones had no similar DEMO experience. This is further substantiated by the
fact that the coefficient of association between the degree of success in
business and earlier work experience DEMO a related field is positive (0.66).
TABLE 6
Work Experience DEMO Concerned or Related Fields and the Degree
of Success of Entrepreneurs in Trissur
Entrepreneur’s Earlier Work Experience in the Concerned
or Related Fields
Some DEMO Total
Business running 17 13 30
Business closed 4 12 16
Total 21 25 46
Attitudinal Factors: Trissur Study
Innovativeness: We had hypothesised DEMO the attributes of innovativeness
and business success to be independent; but DEMO value of the chi-square
statistic turned out to be 4.55 giving us adequate ground not to accept
this hypothesis. It appears that innovativeness and DEMO often
go together (Table 7). This is so because twenty-nine DEMO 63 per cent of
the forty-six who ventured into business were innovative. Further, while
73.3 per cent of the successful entrepreneurs were innovative, DEMO per
cent of the unsuccessful entrepreneurs appeared non-innovative in their
attitudes. This stands further substantiated by the fact that the coefficient
of association between DEMO attributes innovativeness and the degree of
success in business was found positive (0.56).
TABLE 7
Innovativeness and the Degree of Success of Entrepreneurs in Trissur
Entrepreneur’s Attitude
Innovative Non-innovative Total
Business running 22 8 30
DEMO closed 7 9 16
Total 29 17 46
Locus of Control: DEMO 8 shows that a majority of persons embarking on
entrepreneurial ventures believed in the internal locus of control. Thirty-
one or 67.4 per cent DEMO the forty-six respondents had faith in the internal
locus of control. There was, however, no evidence to suggest that the
Downloaded from joe.sagepub.com DEMO UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 2, 2010
Characteristics of Entrepreneurs / 57
percentage of entrepreneurs having faith in the DEMO locus of control
was much higher among the successful entrepreneurs than among the
unsuccessful ones. While 68.8 per cent of the unsuccessful entrepreneurs
had DEMO in the external locus of control, the corresponding figure for
successful DEMO was also as high as 66.7 per cent.
TABLE 8
Locus of Control and the Degree of Success of Entrepreneurs in Trissur
Business running
DEMO closed
Total
Entrepreneur’s Belief in Locus of Control that is
External Internal Total
10 20 30
5 11 16
15 31 46
The chi-square DEMO to test hypothesis that the attributes locus of
control and the degree of success in business are independent, had a very
small value of 0.02. Moreover, the coefficient of association between faith
in the internal locus of control and success in business is positive (0.05).
Extension of the Study to the State of Kerala
An attempt was made to DEMO whether the results obtained for Trissur
held good for the state of Kerala as a whole. This was done by carrying
out a similar DEMO on a sample size of eighty that included thirty-four
persons from other parts of Kerala besides the forty-six already chosen
from Trissur. Since the DEMO thirty-four observations consisted also
of people who had never undertaken entrepreneurial ventures, this part
of the study classified persons as entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs.
The analyses were carried out with respect to factors affecting ascribed
status, acquired status and attitudinal factors.
Factors Affecting Ascribed Status: Table 9 gives details of the factors af-
fecting the ascribed status of the eighty entrepreneurs DEMO non-entrepreneurs
from different parts of Kerala.
The data also indicated that the spirit of entrepreneurship and the degree
of entrepreneurial success were not directly DEMO to the father’s occu-
pation. This was clear even from the class-frequencies, chi-square values
and co-efficient of association (Table 9).
As regards DEMO relationship between religion and entrepreneurship, the
evidence for Kerala as a DEMO corroborates a major finding of the Trissur
study (see Table 9)DEMO
Downloaded from joe.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 2, 2010
58 / K.R.G. Nair and Anu Pandey
TABLE 9
Factors Affecting the DEMO Status of Respondents in Kerala
Factor
Father’s occupation
Business
Non-business
Total
Chi-square on the hypothesis of
independent attributes = 0.07; NS
Coefficient of association
between the attributes = 0.07; NS
Religion
Hindu
Non-Hindu
Total
Chi-square on the hypothesis of
independent attributes = 0.23; NS
Coefficient of association
between the attributes = 0.11; NS
Family status
Economically well-off
Economically worse-off
Total
Chi-square on the hypothesis of
independent attributes = 9.10; p< .05
DEMO of association
between the attributes = 0.64; p< .05
Number of
Entrepreneurs Non-entrepreneurs Total
16
28
44
12
24
36
28
52
80
DEMO
16
44
23
21
44
21
15
36
7
29
36
49
31
80
30
50
80
With respect to the relationship between the DEMO condition of
the family and entrepreneurship, the findings for Kerala as DEMO whole were
similar to that for Trissur.
Factors Affecting Acquired Status: DEMO regarding factors affecting
the acquired status for entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs for Kerala is
given in Table 10.
As regards age, the evidence in Table 10 shows that what was true of
Trissur also held true of DEMO as a whole.
Likewise, the relationship between entrepreneurship and technical
education/DEMO, for Kerala as a whole was similar to the results obtained
DEMO Trissur. In the case of the relationship between related work experience
and entrepreneurship, the evidence for Kerala as a whole also paralleled
that of Trissur.
Downloaded from joe.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 2, 2010
Characteristics of Entrepreneurs / 59
TABLE 10
Factors Affecting the Acquired Status DEMO Respondents in Kerala
Factor
Age
Below 35 years
35 years and above
Total
Chi-square on the hypothesis of
independent attributes = 4.39; p< DEMO
Coefficient of association
between the attributes = –0.45; p< .05
Technical education/Training
Some
Nil
Total
Chi-square on the hypothesis of
independent attributes DEMO 11.21; p< .05
Coefficient of association
between the attributes = 0.66; p< .05
Related work experience
Some
Nil
Total
Chi-square on the DEMO of
independent attributes = 4.63; p< .05
Coefficient of association
between the attributes = 0.46; p< .05
Number of
Entrepreneurs Non-entrepreneurs Total
DEMO
25
44
24 43
12 37
36 80
30
14
44
24
20
44
11 41
25 39
36 80
11 35
25 45
DEMO 80
Attitudinal Factors: As regards the relationship between entrepreneurship
and innovativeness, the findings for Kerala as a whole were similar to
those for DEMO
If we consider the belief in the locus of control and entrepreneurship,
the findings were again similar.
Conclusion
This study examined some of DEMO socio-economic and attitudinal factors
that are generally believed to spur people to launch entrepreneurial ven-
tures and continue as entrepreneurs. The study was based DEMO primary
data collected from those who launched entrepreneurial ventures in the
field of manufacturing industry irrespective of whether these were still
Downloaded from joe.sagepub.com DEMO UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 2, 2010
60 / K.R.G. Nair and Anu Pandey
running or were closed and DEMO from persons who never attempted such
endeavours in the Indian state of Kerala. The analyses of these primary
data in the light of earlier DEMO in this regard have thrown up some inter-
esting findings.
The results do not indicate that business acumen ran in families. As re-
gards DEMO, the evidence indicates that the religious community to
which one belonged DEMO not impact on one’s venturing into entrepreneurial
pursuits or succeeding in them. When we consider the economic status
of the family, there seems to be some evidence that the more economically
better-off a family, the greater the chances of its embarking on entrepre-
neurial ventures and succeeding in DEMO As for age, the evidence broadly
suggests that maturity in terms DEMO age favoured success in entrepreneurial
ventures. Both technical education/training and work experience in a simi-
lar or related field favourably affect entrepreneurship. The DEMO
view that entrepreneurs are innovative in their attitudes is substantiated.
As regards entrepreneurs having greater faith in the internal locus of con-
trol compared DEMO the rest of the population is borne out by the data obtained.
Notes
1. The authors wish to express their gratitude to the Indian DEMO for Social Science
Research for financial support which enabled collection and analyses of the primary
data used here. Thanks are also due to R.A. DEMO and Bhanu Murthy, Department
of Commerce, University of Delhi; M.L. DEMO, Faculty of Management, Indira
Gandhi National Open University and Vasantha Patri, Department of Psychology,
Lady Sri Ram College for Women, University DEMO Delhi for detailed discussions on
earlier drafts of this paper. Promod Malik of the Centre for Policy Research is specially
thanked for able secretarial DEMO
2. For a detailed discussion, see Nair (2001).
3. Trissur is one of the fourteen districts or administrative regions of Kerala. For DEMO
details, see Nair (2002).
4. For a detailed discussion, DEMO Pandey (2002).
5. Data collected in connection with a research DEMO entitled ‘Industrialisation in
Kerala’, funded by the Indian Council of Social DEMO Research.
6. There was no entrepreneur who had established more than one unit. So surveying
forty-six units meant surveying forty-six different entrepreneurs.
7. For DEMO regarding the questionnaire, see Nair (2002).
8. The sample however covers only four of the fourteen districts of Kerala and even in
DEMO case of the districts covered; the sample size for the district DEMO not vary with its
population.
9. Fifty-eight per cent of Kerala’s population constitutes of Hindus.
Downloaded from joe.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July DEMO, 2010
Characteristics of Entrepreneurs / 61
References
Alexander, A.P. (1964). Greek DEMO Athens: Centre for Planning and Economic
Growth.
Carroll, J.J. (1965)DEMO The Filipino Manufacturing Entrepreneur: Agent and Product of
Change. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Dollinger, M.J. (1995). Entrepreneurship Strategies and Resources. Burr DEMO: Irwin/
Austen Press.
Hisrich, R.D. & Peters, M.P. (1995). Entrepreneurship—Starting, Developing and
Managing a New Enterprise. Boston: Irwin.
Kunkel, J.A. (1970). Society and Economic Growth—A Behavioural Perspective of Social
Change. New York: Oxford University Press.
Nair, K.R.G. (2001). Whither Kerala? Indian Social Science Review, 2: 359–72.
———. (2002). Industrialisation DEMO Kerala, Mimeographed Report submitted to the
Indian Council of Social Science DEMO, New Delhi.
Nath, V. (2000). Entrepreneurship by Regions and DEMO: A Survey, Economic and Political
Weekly, 35: 4217–21.
Pandey, DEMO (2002). Entrepreneurship Development in Kerala, Unpublished M.Phil
Dissertation, Department DEMO Business Economics, University of Delhi.
Ronstadt, R.C. (1983). Initial DEMO Goals, Age and the Decision to Start an Entrepreneurial
Career, Mimeographed paper at the Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the US
DEMO of Management, August.
Rotter, J. (1966). Generalised Expectancies for DEMO versus External Control of
Reinforcement, Psychological Monographs, General and Applied  (Number 80).
Sayigh, Y.A. (1962). Entrepreneurs of Lebanon. M.A.: Harvard University Press.
Schumpeter, J.A. (1967). The Theory of Economic DEMO New York: Oxford
University Press.
Sharma, R.A. (1980). Entrepreneurial DEMO in Indian Industry. New Delhi: Sterling.
Young, F.W. (1971). DEMO Micro-Sociological Interpretation of Entrepreneurship. In P. Kilby
(ed.) Entrepreneurship and Economic Development (pp. 139–49). New York: The
Free Press.
Weber, M. (1930). The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. New Delhi: T. Parsons.
Downloaded from joe.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on July 2, 2010{1g42fwefx}