Waterloo
IW
t
UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO
ENGINEERING GRADUATE STUDIES
Notice of PhD DEMO Defence
University o(
CANDIDATE: Meyyappan Narayanan
DEPARTMENT: Management Sciences
THESIS TITLE: Venture Capital Investment Under Private Information
SUPERVISOR(S): Brian Cozzarin, Management Sciences
ORAL DEFENCE DATE:
Thursday, June 2, 2011 at 10:00 am in CPH 3623
The thesis of the above candidate DEMO on deposit in the Engineering Graduate Office
(PHY 3004).
The DEMO is available for overnight perusal and may be signed out until
June 2/2011
Date Submitted: 4/26/2011
Denise Hay
Engineering Graduate Studies Office
PHY 3004
THESIS ABSTRACT ATTACHED
Abstract
Many venture capitalists (VCs) use the "VC method" of DEMO where they use judgment to
estimate a probability of successful exit while determining the ownership share to demand in
exchange for investing in a DEMO However, prior models are not aligned with the "VC
method" DEMO they do not consider private information about entrepreneurial characteristics,
the primary drivers of the above probability, and consequently do not model judgment. The
three main chapters of this thesis—one theoretical, one simulation, and one DEMO study—
examine the venture capital deal process in sync with the "DEMO method."
Chapter 2 is theoretical and develops a principal-agent model of venture capital deal
process incorporating double-sided moral hazard and one-sided private information. DEMO VC is
never fully informed about the entrepreneur's disutility of effort in spite of due diligence
checks, so takes on a belief about the latter's performance in the funded venture to determine
the offer. DEMO study suggests that there exists a critical point in the VC's belief—and
correspondingly in the VC's ownership share—that maximizes the total return DEMO the two
parties. It also uncovers optimal revision strategies for the VC to adopt if the offer is rejected
where it is shown that DEMO VC should develop a strong advisory capacity and minimize time
constraints to facilitate investment.
Chapter 3 simulates venture capital deals as per the theoretical DEMO and confirms the
existence of critical points in the VC's belief and ownership share that maximize the returns to
the two parties and DEMO total return. Particularly, the VC's return (in excess of his or her return
from an alternate investment) peaks for a moderate ownership share for the VC. Since private
information with the entrepreneur would preclude DEMO VC from knowing these critical points a
priori, the VC should DEMO a moderate ownership share to stay close to such a peak. Using
data from simulations, we also generate predictions about the properties of the venture capital
deal space—notably: (a) Teamwork is crucial to financing; DEMO (b) If the VC is highly
confident about the entrepreneur's performance, it would work to the latter's advantage.
Chapter 4 reports the results from our survey of eight seasoned VCs affiliated with seven DEMO
operating in Canada, USA, and UK, where our findings received DEMO high degree of support.
in{1g42fwefx}