Journal of Small Business Management 2011 49(1), pp. 55–70
Entrepreneurship DEMO: Known Worlds
and New Frontiers
jsbm_314 55..70
by Heidi M. Neck DEMO Patricia G. Greene
We explore three “worlds” that entrepreneurship educators generally teach in and
introduce a new frontier where we discuss teaching entrepreneurship as DEMO method.
The method is a way of thinking and acting, built DEMO a set of assumptions using a
portfolio of techniques to create. It goes beyond understanding, knowing, and talking
and requires using, applying, DEMO acting. At the core of the method is the ability for
students to practice entrepreneurship and we introduce a portfolio of practice-based
pedagogies. These DEMO starting businesses as coursework, serious games and
simulations, design-based thinking, DEMO reﬂective practice.
Introduction
Entrepreneurship is complex, chaotic,
and lacks any DEMO of linearity. As edu-
cators, we have the responsibility to
develop DEMO discovery, reasoning, and
implementation skills of our students so
they may excel in highly uncertain envi-
ronments. These skills enhance the like-
lihood DEMO our students will identify and
capture the right opportunity at the right
time for the right reason. However, this
is a signiﬁcant responsibility and chal-
lenge. The current approaches to entre-
preneurship education are based on DEMO
world of yesterday—a world where pre-
cedent was the foundation for future
action, where history often did predict
the future. Yet, entrepreneurship is
DEMO creating new opportunities and
executing in uncertain and even cur-
rently unknowable environments. Entre-
preneurship and entrepreneurship
education have more relevance today
than ever DEMO
For many years, it was popular to ask,
“Can entrepreneurship DEMO taught?” As
educators, we always said, “yes, of
course” DEMO went on to list the myriad of
reasons rehearsed in advance of such
questions. Our answers might include, “it
is a skill set,” or “we have been doing it
for years,” or “it depends DEMO you mean
by entrepreneurship.” In reality and
Heidi M. Neck is an associate professor and the Jeffry A. Timmons professor of entrepre-
neurial studies DEMO Babson College.
Patricia G. Greene is President’s Distinguished Professor in Entrepreneurship at Babson
College
Address correspondence to: Heidi M. Neck, Babson College, Babson College, 231 Forest
Street, Babson Park, MA 02457-0310. E-mail: hneck@babson.edu.
DEMO AND GREENE 55
upon reﬂection in looking at the future
of entrepreneurship education, we may
be willing to admit that we were wrong
and willing to consider DEMO expla-
nations. Might it be that entrepreneur-
ship, using current popular DEMO,
cannot really be taught and that real-
world experience actually does super-
sede an expensive college education?
Just look at Bill Gates, Steve Jobs,
Richard Branson, Mary Kay Ash, and
Debbie Fields DEMO are all incredibly suc-
cessful entrepreneurs without a college
degree. Should their success signal any-
thing to entrepreneurship educators? Not
really. For every Bill Gates, there are a
million entrepreneurs who experience
“in the real world” dramatic, life-altering
failure that we do not read about in the
popular press.
We know what you are thinking. First,
we say entrepreneurship DEMO be
taught. Then we suggest that experience
supersedes education. Finally, we DEMO
ignore Bill, Steve, Richard, Mary Kay,
and Debbie—the kings DEMO queens of
learning entrepreneurship outside the
ivory tower of the academy. Confused?
Our confusion is intentional to illustrate
where we are as educators DEMO the
dynamic, cross-disciplinary ﬁeld of entre-
preneurship. The academic ﬁeld and
DEMO ﬁeld of entrepreneurship have
consistently been at odds throughout the
years, DEMO such conﬂict has led to a rich
and diverse pool of collaborative
educators—academics, entrepreneurs,
consultants, investors, full-time, part-
time, academically qualiﬁed, and profes-
sionally qualiﬁed—with a common
understanding that entrepreneurship
education is important. Across the ﬁeld,
there are differences in how we
approach teaching DEMO
Given the multidisciplinary ﬁeld of
entrepreneurship, the content covered in
most DEMO courses is far-
reaching. An entrepreneurship educator
is often expected to know everything
about every ﬁeld. It is not uncommon to
teach aspects of DEMO, ﬁnance, law,
human resources, leadership, marketing,
accounting, DEMO, and ethics in any
given class. The next class might offer
DEMO from sociology, anthropol-
ogy, and business history. This is at a
time when those in the discipline of
entrepreneurship also strive for
increased DEMO as an academic
ﬁeld, pushing for the research rigor that
some DEMO drives intellectual maturity
(Brush et al. 2003). As a ﬁeld, entrepre-
neurship essentially covers prestart-up
and beyond, from intellectual property to
initial public offering. Though the ﬁeld
of entrepreneurship has progressed
beyond evaluating and DEMO the
entrepreneur as the lone maverick with
superhero powers, the entrepreneur DEMO
nonetheless a central ﬁgure in the emerg-
ing stages of business creation. As such,
entrepreneurship educators also teach
foundation principles, often considered
“the soft stuff,” of living with uncertainty,
opportunity identiﬁcation, entrepreneur-
ial mindset, creating, decision-making,
developing empathy, business design,
culture, DEMO balance, social respon-
sibility, and leveraging failure. The mar-
riage of all of these content areas is value
creation and capture entrepreneurship as
DEMO engine to create economic, social, and
personal value. For many students of
entrepreneurship, whereas their peers
are pursuing careers, they are pursuing DEMO
life path. It looks different, it feels differ-
ent; it is different—especially in today’s
global environment.
The purpose of this paper is to
DEMO a framework for teaching in a
new world. We advance the concept of
teaching entrepreneurship as a method,
which is in contrast to DEMO current
ways—the known worlds—in which we
are currently teaching entrepreneurship.
We are not proposing a particular peda-
gogy. If anything, we would ﬁrmly fall in
Forest and Peterson’s (2006) andragogy
camp anyway. On the contrary, we are
proposing an entirely different approach
56
JOURNAL OF SMALL BUSINESS DEMO
to teaching entrepreneurship. We are
proposing an overarching framework for
teaching entrepreneurship DEMO will
require many different approaches to
teaching and learning—some of which
have not yet been discovered or created.
We are proposing that teaching entrepre-
DEMO requires teaching a method.
The method is teachable, learnable, but it
is not predictable. The method is people-
dependent but not dependent on DEMO type
of person. The entrepreneurship method
goes beyond understanding, knowing,
DEMO talking and demands using, apply-
ing, and acting. Most importantly the
method requires practice. Entrepreneur-
ship requires practice. Learning a
method, we believe, is often more impor-
tant than learning speciﬁc content. In an
ever-changing world, we need to teach
methods that stand the test of dramatic
changes in content and context.
We introduce this method in light of
DEMO current approaches to teaching
entrepreneurship.
The Known Worlds of
Entrepreneurship
Education
We present three different approaches
used to teach entrepreneurship. Some
educators rely on DEMO approach, whereas
others incorporate two or even all
approaches. Though it DEMO tempting to
think our worlds represent the evolution
of the ﬁeld, DEMO do not think of them
strictly in chronological order and recog-
nize that each of these approaches is
being used in classrooms today.
The DEMO World
We have already acknowledged the
importance of the entrepreneur in this
ﬁeld of study. A large amount of litera-
ture has developed around DEMO “traits”
approach, much of it starting with the
economic development work DEMO David
McClelland (1965). Even today, research-
ers around the world continue to search
for the monolithic personality of the
entrepreneur. Brockhaus and DEMO
(1986) reviewed the early trait literature
and concluded that there are four major
personality traits of individuals: need for
achievement, internal locus DEMO control,
high risk-taking propensity, and toler-
ance for ambiguity. Ten DEMO later,
Miner (1996) proposed four psychologi-
cal personality patterns of entrepreneurs:
personal advisors, empathetic super
salespeople, real managers, and expert
idea generators. Also, most recently,
Shane posited the role of the entrepre-
neurial gene, taking the nature versus
nurture discussion to new extremes
(Mount 2010). Any discussion of the
numerous challenges in this trait line of
research can range from problems with
deﬁning (who is an entrepreneur and
who are we picking to represent “suc-
cessful” entrepreneurs), DEMO
and explaining (these are traits of suc-
cessful people in many DEMO of work) to
prediction (do we all not wish we could
pick the winners)?
In this world, the entrepreneur reigns
supreme DEMO almost superhero charac-
teristics. We can consider this approach
from three perspectives. First, though it
is easy to consider this an early world of
entrepreneurship, this is not a time-
bound discussion. Bill Gartner (1988)DEMO
gave us a notable moment of punctuated
equilibrium that prompted many in the
ﬁeld to move beyond traits, but it is hard
to let go. We are also sure that you still
hear, as we do, the “you cannot teach
entrepreneurship” mantra at many of the
more practitioner-oriented programs you
give or attend. Despite our introduction
to this essay, we do beg to differ. After
all, this same question has been asked
about both leaders and teachers (Quinn
and Anding 2005).
A second consideration of entrepre-
neurial content in this world is the fact
that DEMO of the characteristics studied
were identiﬁed in research projects in
which the samples were entirely white
NECK AND GREENE 57
males. Methodologically, it is hard to
support any sort of generalization from
that, and none of our worlds of entrepre-
neurship are exclusively males.
Third, this world, especially in the
early days, uses a quite narrow deﬁnition
of success—one that is entirely economi-
cally based. It is DEMO in the smallest
deﬁnition of entrepreneurship, the cre-
ation of a DEMO business, even if it is one
that is intended to grow. DEMO Giacalone
(2004) reminded us, “Teaching students
to use the single-minded DEMO
value system distorts the reality of daily
life, were we routinely DEMO nonma-
terialistic goals” (p. 416). The ﬁnding
that entrepreneurs are DEMO by
more than money is long-standing and
quite robust across studies, DEMO yet, we
rarely tie the motivation to the entrepre-
neurs’ own DEMO of success.
The entrepreneur is the champion in
this world. On the delivery side, as teach-
ers, we use a variety of entrepreneurial
DEMO, self-examinations, the “do
you have the right stuff” approach. We
probe for those characteristics the early
research suggested were important, such
as locus of control or need for achieve-
ment. Many of these are interesting DEMO
valid measures but not necessarily
precise for identifying entrepreneurs.
Then there are some of the “others.” Two
questions we recently found in an online
DEMO included the responses (and these
would be the ones desirable for DEMO
preneurs): “I like to be ‘wild’ and unin-
hibited and go fast. I like to act on
impulse.” Though these may be extreme
DEMO, the tone is not an unusual part
of the discussion. One DEMO professor
describes his explicit goal as making his
students’ “spines sweat.” On a recent trip
to Malaysia, one of the authors of this
essay saw a grade sheet posted on a
bulletin board with the results DEMO an
entrepreneurial assessment. How would
the teenage recipient of a 60 on his or
her assessment think about entrepre-
neurship in the future. Are DEMO really
ready to screen people out of entrepre-
neurship though they are still coming
into their own?
The entrepreneur world is heavily
inﬂuenced DEMO a lecture teaching method-
ology, basically a stand-and-deliver
approach. However, we combine this
with the use of many guest speakers,
selected with DEMO precise list of criteria
reﬂecting again in this world’s particular
deﬁnition of “entrepreneur” and
“success.” This means that most of our
guest speakers tend DEMO be white males
who have started and usually grown
their businesses. To be fair, over the
years, the examples of role models have
DEMO somewhat more diverse along
some dimensions, but it is a continuing
DEMO
The pedagogical implications of the
entrepreneur world are a description of
the entrepreneur, neatly ﬁtting into an
“observe, describe, and measure”
approach, DEMO categorizations
and some correlations but not able to go
beyond (Christensen DEMO Carlile 2009).
In some sense, our students taught in
this DEMO see entrepreneurship as a box
in which they either ﬁt or do not. Their
concern is that they do not have the right
stuff/DEMO to be an entrepre-
neur. As teachers, our choices of entre-
DEMO illustrations set up role
models and our students often do not see
a reﬂection of themselves. The ironic
part is that with all this DEMO,
picking the winners does not get any
easier.
The Process World
Low and MacMillan (1988) called for
more causal, process-oriented research.
Amit, Glosten, and Muller (1993)
reviewed core entrepreneurship research
challenges and concluded that given the
interdisciplinary nature of entrepreneur-
ship, analytical and empirical tools
should be borrowed from other disci-
plines to develop theory around DEMO
process of entrepreneurship. The call
58
JOURNAL OF SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
was echoed in Venkataraman’s (1997)
seminal paper on the distinctive domain
of entrepreneurship. The inﬂuence of
strategy scholars working in the ﬁeld
coupled DEMO calls for more rigorous and
methodically sound studies led scholars
to operationalize entrepreneurship as a
process with greater emphasis on the
organizational level of DEMO The
process view extends the reach of entre-
preneurship from ﬁrm creation to ﬁrm
exit; thus, there is increased attention
given to capital DEMO, resource alloca-
tion, performance, and growth. The
process research results DEMO their way
into the classroom, and textbooks today
take a more DEMO approach.
The process is presented and taught in a
linear fashion as one of identifying an
opportunity, developing the concept,
understanding resource requirements,
acquiring resources, implementation,
and exit (Morris 1998).
We DEMO to the process world as one
of planning and prediction. The analyti-
cal approach of teaching opportunity
evaluation, feasibility analysis, business
planning, and ﬁnancial forecasting is
the cornerstone for most entrepreneur-
ship curricula today. Perhaps DEMO
process world is so popular to teach in
because we can. When most agreed that
entrepreneurs did not have speciﬁc
traits, we were motivated to ﬁnd pro-
cesses to teach. Business plan writing
and the case DEMO in this world are
the preferred pedagogies. In a ﬁeld
where we argue that there are no right
answers, the process world, from DEMO
education perspective, is the closest we
can get.
Though the business DEMO process
is an attractive and powerful learning
process, a disproportionate amount DEMO
time is spent honing secondary research
skills than actually taking smart action in
the real world. Any educator that has
used the business plan DEMO a major course
project (authors included) understands
the inner thoughts of students:
Student 1: The longer the plan the
better. A long plan indicates more
work and a better grade.
Student 2: It’s the midpoint of the
semester and I’m convinced my
opportunity is not viable DEMO I
have to complete the plan because
it represents 30% of my grade. I
don’t have time to start over.
Student 3: Once I’m ﬁnished with
this plan on my new bar I’m going
to mail DEMO to every venture capital-
ist in the area.
The argument for business plan
writing can succinctly be summed up in
one sentence: the business plan is
required for investment. Gumpert
(2002), in his entertaining book, Burn
Your Business Plan, questioned why we
even write business plans. DEMO points to a
growing industry of consultants, soft-
ware designers, and educators that
“market” business plan writing and have
created the perception that DEMO is a
required document for every entrepre-
neur. Though the true premise of his
book is about developing relationships
with a spectrum of investors, his point is
duly noted. Even venture capitalists do
not want the DEMO plan novels; they
want action and proof of concept ﬁrst. As
DEMO, we must ask ourselves if we
are forcing students to write DEMO business
plan too soon.
To complement the planning portion
of core entrepreneurship courses, the
case method is used so students can
learn about the various decision options
faced by entrepreneurs. The case study is
admittedly a DEMO tool that allows
the center of learning to be with the
students; however, the majority of
faculty are never adequately trained in
the DEMO method. Teaching using the case
method takes an extraordinary amount
of time—both in prep as well as in
mastery. Christensen (1991) stated that
DEMO case discussion teacher has to master
questioning, listening, and response;
NECK AND GREENE 59
these skills are inextricably linked, fail to
effectively work in isolation, DEMO require
teaching ﬂexibility and, we would argue,
skills of an DEMO artist. The
downside of teaching a case without
adequate training is that student learning
is compromised. A classroom discussion,
as engaging as it DEMO be, is not the same
as a case study discussion and DEMO not
necessarily lead to the accomplishment
of learning objectives.
The process world in our view is one
of prediction. It focuses on a linear
DEMO that if followed correctly, will
increase the likelihood of venture
success. DEMO steps in the process are
generally introduced in introductory
entrepreneurship courses, DEMO electives
are offered to delve deeper into particu-
lar steps. For example, classes on oppor-
tunity, entrepreneurial marketing,
entrepreneurial ﬁnance, and managing
growth are commonplace and main-
stream in the most developed entrepre-
neurship DEMO The problem is that
entrepreneurship is neither linear nor
predictable, but DEMO is easy to teach as if it
were.
The Cognition World
Again, let us state that our approach
here is not evolutionary or linear, but
there is an undeniable time element in
that the cognitive approach emerged
more recently than our other two worlds.
In fact, the cognitive approach has even
been described as emerging as a
response to the DEMO of past ‘entrepre-
neurial personality’ based research to
clearly distinguish the unique contribu-
tions to the entrepreneurial process of
entrepreneurs as people” (Mitchell et al.
2002, p. 93). This description is interest-
ing in that it recognizes not only the
earlier research focus on the person but
DEMO the role of the entrepreneurial
process.
The cognitive approach in entrepre-
neurship is really only about 15 years old
and with a few exceptions, has only
60
started to make its way into the classroom
in DEMO last ﬁve years. In this world, we are
again focusing on DEMO entrepreneur or the
entrepreneurial team but in a quite differ-
ent way. This newer focus on the person
is in a more dynamic way DEMO recognizes
the potential for learning how to think
entrepreneurially. If we start from Neiss-
er’s 1967 deﬁnition of cognition as the
processes that allow DEMO inputs to be
transformed, reduced, elaborated, stored,
retrieved, and used, we can then advance,
at least for our purposes, DEMO the entrepre-
neurial cognition approach. Now we look
at the “knowledge structures that people
use to make assessments, judgments, or
decisions involving opportunity DEMO
tion, venture creation, and growth”
(Mitchell et al. 2002, p. 97). As educators,
we can work with knowledge structures.
The DEMO questions in cognitive entrepre-
neurship focused on topics such as how
do entrepreneurs think and is that a
potential competitive advantage? (Mitch-
ell DEMO al. 2002). This approach brings
us back to the question of who is the
entrepreneur or when is someone an
entrepreneur?
The DEMO helpful question is “how do
people think entrepreneurially?” This is a
much more useful construct to guide our
educational and research activities in DEMO
ﬁeld, recognizing the great diversity in
the ways people can be DEMO
We were recently asked quite seriously
about the role of “gut” in teaching entre-
preneurship, and it is a very fair ques-
tion. The mental models underlying the
cognitive approach (Krueger 2007)
provide us with the ways and means to
address such questions, leading toward
the potential of providing both skills and
increased conﬁdence to our students. In
this DEMO, our focus expands to include
both doing and thinking.
So, what and how do we teach in this
world? We pay attention to different
things, including the decision to become
an entrepreneur and how to understand
that decision. We investigate the entre-
JOURNAL OF SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
preneur and most certainly now include
the team. We spend more time DEMO dis-
covery, speciﬁcally on the identiﬁcation
and exploitation of opportunities, and
we explore what we believe to be the
central question of this DEMO: how do
people think entrepreneurially.
Part of our emphasis to guide DEMO
gogy is therefore on the think...do. In
order to do this, DEMO use cases and simu-
lations, but we use them in a DEMO
way. When we focus on the entrepreneur
as the protagonist, we DEMO exploring not
only the venture process but the
decision-making process. Others are
using the writing of narratives and
scripts using the Mitchell et al. (2000)
approach of arrangement, willingness,
and ability to further the students’ under-
standing of how they process informa-
tion about entrepreneurship. We DEMO
have seen a number of great approaches,
exercises, and classes DEMO the search for
opportunities, including Jim Fiet’s sys-
tematic search (Fiet and Patel 2006;
Nixon et al. 2006) and DeTienne and
Chandler’s 2004 opportunity identiﬁca-
tion exercise. Overall, in this world, we
are DEMO on entrepreneurial deci-
sions and we do it by discussing the role
of expert scripts, heuristics, and schema,
leading to the construction DEMO entrepre-
neurial mental models.
In summary, the entrepreneur world
has clearly DEMO us that there is no
one type of entrepreneur. This means
one of the challenges of the cognitive
world is to avoid the trap DEMO the entre-
preneur world and therefore be able to
recognize the richness of a diversity of
cognitive approaches, again linked to a
diversity of entrepreneurial motivations
and desired outcomes or deﬁnitions of
success. At the same DEMO, with an over-
reliance on teaching entrepreneurship as
a process, the process world appears
linear and predictable. Innovation is
often absent because we DEMO and
applaud the use of existing business
models often arguing that using proven
models reduces the risk of failure. The
vast majority of our DEMO plans are
not based on a truly innovative product
or service. Even more absent is the inno-
vation in business models. This leaves us
DEMO the position of largely replicating
existing forms of businesses and there-
fore, even existing kinds of economies.
The cognition world is growing in popu-
larity because it recognizes the impor-
tance of the mind and the DEMO
approach to learning how to think
entrepreneurially.
New Frontiers:
Entrepreneurship as a
Method
Why do we support entrepreneurship
as a method? Because a process implies
that you will get to a speciﬁc destination.
Entrepreneurship is DEMO thought of as a
process—a process of identifying an
opportunity, understanding DEMO
requirements, acquiring resources, plan-
ning, and implementing. However, the
word “process” assumes known inputs
and known outputs as in a manufactur-
ing DEMO For example, building a car
on an assembly line is a DEMO
process. You know all the parts; you
know how they ﬁt DEMO; and you
know the type of car you will have at DEMO
end. A process is quite predictable.
Entrepreneurship is not predictable. On
the other hand, a method represents a
body of skills or techniques; DEMO,
teaching entrepreneurship as a method
simply implies that we are helping stu-
dents understand, develop, and practice
the skills and techniques need DEMO pro-
ductive entrepreneurship.
Figure 1 contrasts teaching entrepre-
neurship as a process and a method.
Teaching entrepreneurship as a method
requires going beyond understanding,DEMO
knowing, and talking; it requires using,
applying, and acting. DEMO
requires practice. Learning a method
may be more important than learning
NECK AND GREENE 61
Entrepreneurship as a Process
Known inputs and outputs
Figure 1
Process versus DEMO
Entrepreneurship as a Method
A body of skills or techniques
Steps
Predictive
Linear
Toolkit
Creative
Iterative
Precision Experimentation
Tested
Practiced
content. In an ever-changing DEMO, we
need to teach methods that stand the
test of dramatic DEMO in content and
context. Rather than viewing practical or
pedagogical knowledge as derivative of
scientiﬁc knowledge, it is more appro-
priate to view practice and teaching as
distinct modes of knowing in their own
respects (Van de Ven and Johnson
2006). Knowledge of teaching and prac-
tice DEMO their place alongside of science
as distinct and complementary elements
of professional knowledge (Kondrat
1992 in Van de Ven and Johnson 2006).
When each of these different kinds of
knowledge are together focused on the
DEMO complex problems, they have
the potential to produce a deeper
understanding DEMO any one type of
knowledge applied alone (Van de Ven
and DEMO 2006). Perhaps, this is ulti-
mately the nature of entrepreneurship
DEMO
Approaching entrepreneurship as a
method means teaching a way of
thinking and acting built on a set of
assumptions using a portfolio of tech-
DEMO to encourage creating. The
method forces students to go beyond
understanding, DEMO, and talking. It
requires using, applying, and acting. The
method DEMO practice. Therefore, our
underlying assumptions of the method
include the following:DEMO
(1) Applies to novice and experts: the
assumption is that DEMO method
applies across student populations
and works regardless of experience
level. What is important is that each
student understands how he or she
views DEMO entrepreneurial world
and his or her place in it. It repre-
sents the foundation of the method.
(2) The method is inclusive, meaning
that the deﬁnition of entrepreneur-
ship is expanded to include any
organization DEMO multiple levels of
analysis. Therefore, success is idio-
syncratic and multidimensional.
(3) The method requires continuous
practice. The focus here is on
doing, then learning, rather than
learn then do. As a result a DEMO
tive practice component is incred-
ibly important to learning.
(4) The method is for an unpredictable
environment.
The Method approach ﬁrmly recog-
nizes DEMO entrepreneurship is teachable.
Similar to the approach to leadership dis-
cussed in Quinn and Anding, “We can be
in a normal, reactive state DEMO an extraor-
62
JOURNAL OF SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
dinary, creative state. Anyone can move
from where they are now to a more
reactive or more creative state” (1999, p.
489). DEMO question is how to do this. For
us, it means experimenting DEMO a peda-
gogical portfolio that emphasizes the
dimensions of the method. We suggest a
portfolio here that includes starting busi-
nesses as part of DEMO, serious
games and simulations, design-based
learning, and reﬂective practice.
Starting DEMO
Starting businesses as part of course-
work has become more mainstream
over the past few years. Babson College,
for example, started its Foundations of
Management and Entrepreneurship
(FME) course in 1996 where ﬁrst year,DEMO
undergraduate students are required to
start a business during their ﬁrst year at
the college. The focus of FME is on
opportunity recognition, resource parsi-
mony, team development, holistic think-
ing, and value creation through harvest.
The vehicle of learning is a limited dura-
tion business start-up DEMO in entre-
preneurial thinking and a basic
understanding of all functions of busi-
ness. Because FME is a required course,
all ﬁrst-year undergraduates DEMO
the entire cycle of entrepreneurship.
The course is a blend of theory and
practice, which forms the basis for the
entire Babson undergraduate core cur-
riculum. The overall purpose of the
course is to allow students DEMO practice
business and entrepreneurship so the
content comes alive. The objectives of
the course include:
(1) Students practice entrepreneurship
and generate economic DEMO social
value.
(2) Students understand the nature of
business as an integrated enterprise
and knowledge of all key business
areas is essential in DEMO a
well-rounded business aptitude in
preparation for the real world.
(3) Students use information technol-
ogy (IT) for decision-making and
productivity and DEMO that IT is
essential in supporting all areas of a
business.
(DEMO) Students experience social respon-
sibility and philanthropy through
the donation of DEMO time (six hours
minimum) and business proﬁts to
charitable organizations.
Many business schools today have
incorporated the real-world practice of
business creation into DEMO entrepre-
neurship curriculum. For example, the
2010 United States Association for DEMO
Business and Entrepreneurship winner
for model entrepreneurship course was
awarded to Monmouth University for its
capstone experience where students
work in teams to start DEMO
However, as we talk about a pedagogy of
practice within the DEMO
method, we are advocating for real-
world venture creation courses to DEMO
place at the beginning and not at the end
of entrepreneurship programs. We
suggest this because at the undergradu-
ate level, students have little business
experience and to truly develop empathy
for the entrepreneur, one must experi-
ence new venture creation before he or
she can study business DEMO or
other disciplinary areas. Furthermore, a
level of conﬁdence is generated DEMO the
“doing” experience and students begin to
experience success and failure as well as
practice methods for navigating
unknown territories. Students experi-
ence the DEMO and downs of entrepreneur-
ship and learn about the sweat equity
associated with a start-up. They gain
knowledge of the importance of leader-
ship DEMO struggle with ﬁnding and devel-
oping their own style. They practice
entrepreneurship and through experi-
ence, learn about the power of human
agency, DEMO effectively managing and uti-
lizing human resources is more art than
science. Students feel defeat after making
NECK AND GREENE 63
poor decisions and experience elation
over small wins. In hindsight, they
underestimate the role of trust between
managers and employees and learn del-
egation DEMO not a choice. In the end, they
ﬁnally learn that the DEMO opportunity in
the world is of little value without a
strong team that can execute. Such
strength is derived from open and con-
stant DEMO, shared but chal-
lenging goals, and the ability to adapt in
uncertain environments.
Serious Games and Simulations
To play or not to play? That is indeed
the question. The inﬂuence of computer
games and gaming DEMO the rising genera-
tions is under investigation with consid-
eration of the applications in both the
academic and professional worlds. There
is a large DEMO of deﬁnitions of serious
games, with most sharing two common
grounding DEMO (Greene, Forth-
coming). First, there is an element of
DEMO usually deﬁned as having rules
and a sense of “gameplay.” Second, DEMO
is the expectation of fun. Gaming aligns
learning, play, and participations while
exposing students to real challenges in a
virtual world. Today’s games DEMO
50–100 hours to master, which equals
the amount of time a DEMO spends on
a semester-long course (Pink 2006).
There is indeed DEMO rising use of games
in spaces where simulations were preva-
lent but with that added expectation of
the gameplay and fun elements. We both
DEMO a Serious Game Summit as part
of the annual Game Developers Confer-
ence and heard the presentations on how
Hilton Garden Inn is using DEMO to train
its staff on customer service. We learned
how Intel uses games for network train-
ing, and for one of the most far-reaching
examples, how the U.S. Army and the
Canadian Army each use computer
games and alternative reality games for
recruiting and training purposes.
Babson, similar to a few other
schools, has been investigating and
64
experimenting with the use of serious
games in our entrepreneurship curricu-
lum for some DEMO To date, our focus
has been on three main areas. First, we
developed and tested a social media
alternative reality game for teaching
DEMO media to faculty members. The
intent was to help faculty understand
what is available, how it can be helpful
to entrepreneurs, and how DEMO can be
useful in teaching entrepreneurship. The
framework of the game was an elaborate
treasure hunt that required the faculty/
students to not DEMO visit social media
sites but to use each one of them in a
way that would beneﬁt an entrepreneur
(or entrepreneurship student). The ulti-
mate treasure was a hidden chest con-
taining what was labeled DEMO
Babson’s Secret Entrepreneurship Cur-
riculum” and was in reality a list of
resource materials for teaching serious
games.
Another one of our game experiments
DEMO the use of an off-the-shelf computer
game. The Sims, and the DEMO
packet, Open for Business. The purpose
of the game was to DEMO the business
creation process in order to map the cre-
ation of organizational culture, particu-
larly through the way the student/
entrepreneur/player used his or her time
and his or her money in relation DEMO the
business, the employees, and the com-
munity. The course is based on a combi-
nation of institutional- and resource-
based theories to DEMO guidance for
students in creating culture as a resource.
The greatest challenge was to get stu-
dents to stop playing the game.
Finally, we developed a video game to
support learning about how entrepre-
neurs think DEMO conditions of risk,
uncertainty, and unknowability. The
game is based DEMO the theory of effectua-
tion (Sarasvathy 2008) and is designed to
replace a case study for an in-class dis-
cussion on entrepreneurial thinking.
DEMO, the use of serious games is part
of the method approach; it allows stu-
JOURNAL OF SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
dents a different environment to prac-
tice entrepreneurship. It is a playful
DEMO for serious results.
Design-Based Learning
The basic argument is that entrepre-
neurs think, and perhaps act, similar to
designers. In our quest to DEMO, under-
stand, and even measure the entrepre-
neurial mindset, the DEMO of design is a
good starting point for our inquiry.
Entrepreneurship is an applied disci-
pline, yet we are teaching and research-
ing as if it was part of the natural
sciences (Simon 1996). Furthermore, the
impact of entrepreneurship research is
limited and little has been performed to
assess the effectiveness of entrepreneur-
ship education. Herb Simon argued that
DEMO disciplines are better served by
design-based curricula. Design is a
process of divergence and convergence
requiring skills in observation, synthesis,
searching and generating alternatives,
critical thinking, feedback, visual repre-
sentation, creativity, problem-solving,DEMO
and value creation. Teaching entrepre-
neurship through a design lens can help
students identify and act on unique
venture opportunities using a toolkit of
DEMO, ﬁeldwork, and understand-
ing value creation across multiple stake-
holder groups.
At the core of entrepreneurship is the
identiﬁcation and exploitation of oppor-
DEMO (Shane and Venkataraman 2000),
yet the majority of entrepreneurship
courses assume that the opportunity has
been identiﬁed. In the process world, we
talked about case studies and business
plan writing. The majority of entrepre-
DEMO case studies focus on opportu-
nity evaluation, but little attention is
DEMO to how the opportunity was iden-
tiﬁed beyond a surface-level discussion
related to the life history of the entrepre-
neur. In a traditional business DEMO
course, very little time is given to prac-
ticing tools of DEMO and idea genera-
tion. Overall, very little is done to train DEMO
student to think more entrepreneurially
and creatively participate in opportunity
discovery. We argue that such a discov-
ery process should be grounded in fun-
DEMO design principles so students
are equipped with tools to not only ﬁnd
opportunities but to also make opportu-
nities (Sarasvathy 2008).
Reﬂective Practice
The idea of encouraging reﬂection is
certainly not new, and if anything, is
regaining its currency as a critical com-
ponent of the overall learning experi-
ence. From Socrates, through Thoreau to
the present day, DEMO emphasis on taking
time to think often resonates and yet
seems difﬁcult to inject into an action-
based curriculum in an overarching and
meaningful DEMO For many of our stu-
dents, simply sitting still and thinking
DEMO not come naturally or easily, and
yet, the power of the potential
outcome—“being aware of our actions so
we can evaluate them” (Brockbank and
McGill 2007, p. 85) seems clear.
Reﬂection is an important DEMO by
which knowledge is developed from
experience. When reﬂecting, one consid-
DEMO an experience that has happened and
tries to understand or explain it, which
often leads to insight and deep
learning—or ideas to test on new expe-
riences. Reﬂection is particularly impor-
tant for perplexing experiences, working
under conditions of high uncertainty,
and problem-solving. As a result, it
should not be a surprise that reﬂection is
an integral component of DEMO
ship education and also a way of prac-
ticing entrepreneurship.
Donald Schön (1983, 1987) coined the
term reﬂective practice while studying
applied university programs such as
medicine, law, and architectural design.
He argued that DEMO knowledge acquired
through coursework, what he called
propositional knowledge, was limited in
its impact because it did not take into
consideration the reality DEMO practice. Yet,
NECK AND GREENE 65
he discovered that professionals graduat-
ing from applied programs were still
effective DEMO how they were taught.
Schön learned that professionals
enhanced their practice through engage-
ment and developed “practice experi-
ence” (Brockbank and McGill 2007).
Schön distinguished “reﬂection-on-
practice” (do–learn–think as a process)
from “reﬂection-in-practice” (DEMO
think as a behavior). Both are important
and represent a continuous cycle of
learning.
Schön found the teachers and stu-
dents engaged in DEMO on
emergent practice that was to
underpin their learning and there-
fore enhance their practice.
Putting it more simply, students
learned by listening, DEMO,
doing and by being coached in
their doing. Not only did they
apply what they had heard and
learned from lectures, books, DEMO
demonstrations but when they did
an action that was part of their
future profession, for example
using a scalpel, they also learned
by DEMO themselves and with
their [teachers], how the action
went. They reﬂected DEMO their prac-
tice. In addition, they would “take
with them” that DEMO on their
previous actions as a piece of
“knowledge” or learning when
they went into the action the next
time. Thus in the next DEMO they
would be bringing all their previ-
ously acquired understanding and
practice and be able to reﬂect in
the action as they did it, particu-
larly if a new circumstance came
up. (Brockbank and McGill 2007,
p. 87)
Given the nature of entrepreneurship
as a continuous DEMO of action, learning,
testing, and experimenting, developing
students as DEMO entrepreneurs
66
requires reﬂection-on-practice and
reﬂection-in-practice as part of a peda-
gogy portfolio.
A primary objective of reﬂection is
deep learning. Marton (1975) DEMO
learning as surface or deep. Surface
learning is associated with a more
passive approach that is premised on a
model of education that is DEMO on
learning, absorbing, and regurgitating.
Deep learning is associated with a more
active approach characterized by a desire
to grasp and synthesize information DEMO
valuable and long-term meaning.
Conclusions
There is agreement, at least in DEMO
but not in practice, that entrepreneurship
courses should be taught differently DEMO
the traditional management courses
(Vesper and McMullen 1988). Kent
(1990) even stated that “entrepreneur-
ship education must be entrepreneurial”
(p. 284), whereas early writings by
Plaschka and Welsch (1990) pointed to
emerging structures in entrepreneurship
education:
As the criticisms of business
education show, current analytical-
functional quantitative, tools-
oriented, theoretical, left-side of
the brain, overspecialized, com-
partmentalized, approaches are
not adequate to begin solving ill-
deﬁned, unstructured, ambiguous,
complex multidisciplinary, holis-
tic, real world DEMO (p. 61)
Table 1 summarizes the known
worlds (entrepreneur, DEMO, cogni-
tion) that we teach in today as well as the
new frontier presented here—
entrepreneurship as a method.
Our purpose was to DEMO that
we teach in several different worlds.
Many teach in more than one world, but
the environment for entrepreneurship is
changing whereas education for entre-
preneurship is not. We are living in a
JOURNAL OF SMALL DEMO MANAGEMENT
Table 1
Known Worlds and New Frontiers
Entrepreneur World Process World Cognition DEMO Method World
World of... Heroes, myths, and
personality proﬁling
Focus Traits; nature versus
nurture
Planning and
prediction
New venture creation Decision-making to
engage in
entrepreneurial
activity
Level of Analysis Entrepreneur Firm Entrepreneur and team Entrepreneur, team,
and ﬁrm
Cases, business plans,
business modeling
Hockey stick
projections, capital
markets, growth,
resource allocation,
performance
Expert scripts,DEMO
heuristics and
decision-makings,
schema, mental
models, knowledge
structures
Practice,
self-knowledge, ﬁt,
action, do–learn,
cocreation, create
opportunities, expect
DEMO embrace failure
Description Prediction Decision Action
Primary Pedagogy Business basics,
lectures, exams,
assessment
Language Locus of control,
risk-taking
propensity, tolerance
DEMO ambiguity, n-ach
Pedagogical
Implications
Thinking and doing Value creation
Portfolio of DEMO
to practice
entrepreneurship
Cases, simulations,
scripting
Serious games,
observation, practice,
reﬂection,
cocurricular, design
NECK AND GREENE 67
world characterized by increasingly
greater levels of uncertainty and even
unknowability. We DEMO advocating for an
entrepreneurship method approach for
three reasons: First, entrepreneurship
education is incredibly important, but
current, mainstream approaches are
dated. Second, real-world experience
contributes signiﬁcantly to learning, but
sometimes, the cost of DEMO in the real
world is too high. Finally, and because of
DEMO 1 and 2, entrepreneurship within
a formal education structure requires
a DEMO approach based on action and
practice.
As you can see from our example peda-
gogy portfolio, the method is teachable,
learnable, but DEMO is not predictable. Start-
ing businesses help students “feel” what it
is like to assume the role of an entrepre-
neur. Serious games and DEMO
allow students to play in virtual worlds
that mirror reality. Designed-based learn-
ing encourages student to observe the
world through a different lens and DEMO
opportunities. Finally, reﬂective practice
gives permission to our students to take
DEMO, think, and absorb the learning of
their practice-based curriculum.
Together, DEMO portfolio of feeling,
playing, observing, creating, and thinking
is DEMO entrepreneurship method and a
prescription for practice.
The method is people-dependent but
not dependent on a type of person. The
entrepreneurship method goes beyond
DEMO, knowing, and talking
and demands using, applying, and
acting. Most importantly, the method
requires practice. Entrepreneurship
requires practice. Learning a method, DEMO
our opinion, is often more important
than learning speciﬁc content. In DEMO
ever-changing world, we need to teach
methods that stand the test DEMO dramatic
changes in content and context. At
the end of the day, perhaps we do not
teach entrepreneurship the discipline.
Perhaps we teach a method to navigate
the discipline.
References
Amit, R., L. Glosten, and E. Muller
(1993). “Challenges to Theory Devel-
opment in Entrepreneurship
Research,” Journal of Management
Studies 30(5), 815–834.
Anding, J. (DEMO). “An Interview with
Robert E. Quinn. Entering the Funda-
mental State of Leadership: Reﬂec-
tions on the Path to Transformational
Teaching,” Academy of Management
Learning & Education 4(4), 487–495.
Brockbank, A., DEMO I. McGill (2007).
Facilitating Reﬂective Learning in
Higher Education, 2nd ed. New York:
Open University Press.
Brockhaus, R., and P. DEMO (1986).
“The Psychology of the Entrepreneur,”
in The Art & Science of Entrepreneur-
ship. Eds. D. Sexton and R. Smilor.
Cambridge, DEMO: Ballinger, 25–48.
Brush, C. G., I. M. Duhaime, W. DEMO
Gartner, A. Steward, J. A. Katz, M. A.
Hitt, S. A. Alvarez, G. D. Meyer, and
S. Venkataraman (2003). “Doctoral
Education in the Field of Entrepre-
neurship,” Journal of Management
29(DEMO), 309–331.
Christensen, C. M., and P. R. Carlile
(2009)DEMO “Course Research: Using the
Case Method to Build and Teach Man-
DEMO Theory,” Academy of Man-
agement Learning & Education 8(2),DEMO
240–251.
Christensen, C. R. (1991). “The Discus-
sion Teacher in Action: Questioning,
Listening, and Response,” in Educa-
tion for DEMO: The Artistry of Dis-
cussion Leadership. Eds. C. Roland
Christensen, D. A. Garvin, and A.
Sweet. Boston, MA: Harvard Business
School Press, 153–174.
DeTienne, D., and G. Chandler (2004)
“Opportunity Identiﬁcation DEMO Its
Role in the Entrepreneurial Class-
room: A Pedagogical Approach and
DEMO Test,” Academy of Manage-
ment Learning and Education 3(3),DEMO
242–257.
68
JOURNAL OF SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
Fiet, J. O., and P. C. Patel (2006). “Entre-
preneurial Discovery as Constrained,
Systematic Search,” Small Business
Economics 30, 215–229.
Forest, S., and T. Peterson (2006). “It’s
Called Andragogy,” Academy of Man-
agement Learning & Education 5(1),
113–122.
Gartner, W. B. (1988). “Who Is an Entre-
preneur? Is the Wrong Question,”
American Journal of Small Business
12(4), 11–32.
DEMO, R. A. (2004). “A Transcendent
Business Education for the 21st
Century.” Academy of Management
Learning & Education 3(4), 487–
495.
DEMO, P. G. (forthcoming). “The Emer-
gence of the Serious Game Industry,”
ISBE Annual Conference, Liverpool,
Oct 2009.
Gumpert, D. DEMO (2002). Burn Your Busi-
ness Plan! Needham, MA: Lauson DEMO
lishing.
Kent, C. A. (1990). Introduction: Educat-
ing the DEMO Entrepreneurship
Education: Current Developments,
Future Directions. New York:
Quorum DEMO
Kondrat, M. E. (1992). “Reclaiming the
Practical: Formal and DEMO
Rationality in Social Work Practice,”
Social Service Review 166, 237–255.
DEMO, N. R. (2007). “What Lies
Beneath? The Experiential Essence DEMO
Entrepreneurial Thinking,” Entrepre-
neurship Theory and Practice 31(1),
DEMO
Low, M. B., and I. C. MacMillan (1988).
“Entrepreneurship: Past Research and
Future Challenges,” Journal of Man-
agement 14(2), 139–161.
Marton, F. (1975). “What Does It Take to
Learn?” in How Students Learn. Eds.
N. Entwistle and D. Hounsell. Lan-
DEMO: Institute for Research and
Development in Post Compulsory
Education, 125–138.
McClelland, D. (1965). “Need Achieve-
ment and Entrepreneurship: A Longi-
tudinal Study,” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 1, 389–392.
Miner, DEMO B. (1996). The 4 Routes to Entre-
preneurial Success. San DEMO, CA:
Berrett-Koehler.
Mitchell, R. K., L. Busenitz, T. Lant, P.
McDougall, E. A. Morse, and B. Smith
(2002). DEMO a Theory of Entrepre-
neurial Cognition: Rethinking the
People Side of DEMO
Research,” Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice 27, 93–104.
Mitchell, R. K., J. B. Smith, K. W. Sea-
wright, and E. A. Morse (2000). “Cross-
Cultural Cognitions and the Venture
Creation Decision,” Academy of Man-
agement Journal 53(5), 974–993.
Morris, M. H. (DEMO). Entrepreneurial
Intensity: Sustainable Advantages for
Individual, Organizations, and Soci-
DEMO Westport, CT: Quorum.
Mount, I. (2010). “Nature vs. Nurture:
Are Great Entrepreneurs Born...Or
Made?” Fortune Small Business,
December DEMO/January 10, 25–26.
Neisser, U. (1967). Cognitive Psychology.
Englewood DEMO, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Nixon, R. D., K. Bishop, Van G. DEMO
Clouse, and B. Kemelgor (2006).
“Prior Knowledge and Entrepreneur-
ial Discovery: A Classroom Meth-
odology for Idea Generation,”
International Journal of Entrepre-
neurship Education 4, 19–36.
Pink, D. (2006). A Whole New Mind. New
York: Riverhead Books.
Plaschka, G. R., and H. P. Welsch (1990).
“Emerging Structures in Entrepreneur-
ship Education: Curricular DEMO
and Strategies,” Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice 14(3), 55–71.
Sarasvathy, S. D. (2008). Effectuation:
Elements of Entrepreneurial Expertise.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Schon, D. (1983). The Reﬂective Practi-
tioner. New DEMO: Basic Books.
——— (1987). Educating the Reﬂective
Practitioner. London: DEMO
Shane, S., and S. Venkataraman (2000).
“The Promise of DEMO as
NECK AND GREENE 69
a Field of Research,” Academy of
Management Review 25(1), DEMO
Simon, H. A. (1996). The Sciences of the
Artiﬁcial. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Van de Ven, A. H., and P. DEMO Johnson
(2006). “Knowledge for Theory and
Practice,” Academy of DEMO
Review 31(4), 802–821.
Venkataraman, S. (1997). “The Distinc-
tive Domain of Entrepreneurship
Research,” in Advances in Entrepre-
neurship, Firm Emergence and
Growth. Eds. G. T. Lumpkin and J.
Katz. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 119–
138.
Vesper, K. H., and W. E. DEMO
(1988). “Entrepreneurship: Today
Courses, Tomorrow Degrees?” Entre-
preneurship DEMO and Practice
13(1), 7–13.
70
JOURNAL OF SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT{1g42fwefx}