The Review of Economic Studies Ltd.
Staged Financing: An Agency Perspective
Author(s): Darwin V. Neher
Source: The Review of Economic Studies, DEMO 66, No. 2 (Apr., 1999), pp. 255-274
Published by: The Review of Economic Studies Ltd.
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2566991
Accessed: 27/04/2009 14:11
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's DEMO and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may DEMO obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=resl.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that DEMO on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. DEMO work with the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
The Review of Economic Studies Ltd. is collaborating with DEMO to digitize, preserve and extend access to
The Review of Economic DEMO
http://www.jstor.org
Review of Economic Studies (1999) 66, 255-274
? 1999 The Review of Economic Studies Limited
0034-6527/99/00130255$02.00
An
Staged
Agency
Financing:
DEMO
DARWIN V. NEHER
Cornerstone Research
First version
received
January 1995;
final version
accepted December 1997 (Eds.)
This paper investigates the structure of outside investment in a profitable entrepreneurial
venture. Though efficient, financing the venture up front may be infeasible because the entrepre-
neur cannot commit to DEMO renegotiate down the outside investor's claim once she's sunk her
investment. Staging the investment over time helps to mitigate this commitment problem. DEMO
early rounds of investment create collateral that support the later rounds. We characterize the
optimal staged investment path and show how it is affected DEMO various features of the venture.
The predictions of the model are consistent with observations on staged financing in venture
capital.
1. INTRODUCTION
The fact DEMO entrepreneurs face liquidity constraints is well documented (Evans and Jov-
anovic (1989), Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian and Rosen (1994a, 1994b)). This DEMO investigates
one source of such constraints, and how they may be DEMO by the structure of invest-
ment into entrepreneurial ventures. Our focus is on the use of staged financing to over-
come a commitment problem DEMO arises in entrepreneurial finance due to the critical role
that the entrepreneur himself plays in determining the success of the venture.
To illustrate, consider an entrepreneurial venture that is efficiently financed if K dol-
lars are DEMO up front to purchase physical assets which are then used by the entre-
preneur for one period. After this period the venture returns sK DEMO certainty, where s is
large enough to ensure that the initial DEMO was profitable. When the entrepreneur
is cash constrained, it would seem DEMO an outside investor's participation can be ensured
via a claim of at least K dollars against the venture's return. However, this simple solution
may not be feasible for the reasons explored by Hart and DEMO (1994) in their analysis
of debt contracts: the claim offered DEMO investor may not be credible as the entrepreneur
cannot commit not to renegotiate the investor's claim after the investor has sunk her K
DEMO investment, but before the entrepreneur has completed his work. If the DEMO
of the renegotiation leaves the investor with a claim of less than K, then she would ex
ante not be willing to finance the venture.
Now imagine that the venture could be financed by investing half DEMO the needed
amount (K/2) up front, and the other DEMO after one period. If the entrepreneur works with
the physical assets purchased with both rounds of investment, then the venture returns sK
after two periods. The initial investment by the investor is now smaller, hence the inves-
tor's ensuing claim is less susceptible to being renegotiated down DEMO the venture's first
period. The venture can also build up collateral, through the entrepreneur's work with
the first round of investment, DEMO can be used to protect the investor's claim from being
renegotiated down in the second period. Staging the financing thus helps to mitigate DEMO
255
256 REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
commitment and renegotiation problem, and may therefore facilitate the funding of ven-
tures that could not be funded under "up-front" financing.
The main result of this paper is the derivation of the optimal staged investment path
in the face of this commitment, or hold-up, problem. We also examine how the venture's
profitability, the DEMO of the venture's physical assets, and the entrepreneur's wealth
DEMO the form of the optimal investment path, and the question of DEMO a given
venture can be financed at all. The predictions of our model are found to be broadly
consistent with recent empirical studies on DEMO financing of ventures in the venture capital
market (Sahlman (1990), Gompers (1992, 1995), Lerner (1992)). Of most importance DEMO
the almost universal use of staged financing by venture capitalists. As noted by Sahlman
(1990): "The most important mechanism for controlling the DEMO [by the venture capi-
talist] is staging the infusion of capital".
The commitment problem that motives the use of staging comes from our DEMO
on the important role of the entrepreneur: in a given venture DEMO entrepreneur has unique
human capital that is critical to achieving the venture's full potential. However, the
entrepreneur cannot be contractually bound to work. In the words of Hart and Moore
(1994), his human capital is "inalienable". The entrepreneur always retains the right to
repudiate the contract with the investor and exit the venture.1 As in Hart and DEMO's
(1994) work on debt contracts, we suppose that upon DEMO of the investor's claim
by the entrepreneur the physical assets of the venture revert to the investor. If these assets
have little value DEMO the entrepreneur in place (investment is largely sunk), then the
DEMO retains bargaining power in the subsequent negotiations over claims to the
venture's return (earned if the entrepreneur returns to work). The resolution of the bar-
gaining may leave the investor with a much diminished DEMO, hence it is in this sense that
the entrepreneur can "hold-up" the investor after the investor has made her investment.2
Staging the financing reduces the possibility of hold-up through our view of how the
venture DEMO Over the life of the venture what begins as part of the human capital of
the entrepreneur (and hence inalienable), gradually becomes embodied in the physical
capital of the venture (and hence alienable). The value of the venture's physical assets
without the entrepreneur in place (the venture's collateral value) therefore grows over
time. When investment into the venture is staged, this collateral can support the later
rounds of outside investment. The venture's early rounds of investment are also safe DEMO
hold-up if they are small enough so that the claims held by the outside investor cannot
be bid down further.
Our model is one DEMO perfect certainty. Other works on the staging of investment in
venture capital have taken a "real option" view of staging that revolves around DEMO generic
problem of investing under uncertainty (Gompers (1992), Hellman (DEMO), Sahlman (1988,
1990)).3 In these models the value of staging investment is the option value of waiting to
invest, rather than the outcome of the agency problem that exists between the entrepreneur
DEMO the venture capitalist. The real option model of staging and the model presented
here share some interesting similarities (and predictions), but fundamentally they address
1. Note that venture capital contracts between the venture capitalist and DEMO often contain
elements that try to bind the entrepreneur to the venture. These include noncompete clauses and vesting sched-
ules that penalize entrepreneurs if DEMO leave the venture early (Sahlman (1990)). These contractual elements DEMO
only affect the outside option of the entrepreneur. They cannot affect the fundamental issue addressed here,
which is the value that the entrepreneur DEMO within the venture.
2. For further discussion of these issues, and DEMO literature on the noncontractibility of human capital,
see Neher (1996)DEMO
3. The role of staging has also been investigated in a more general real option framework (not directly
based on venture capital) by DEMO and Weitzman (1981).
NEHER
STAGED FINANCING
257
different although parallel concerns in venture capital finance. DEMO parallels (and diver-
gences) between these models are discussed in some detail in Section 6.
Our model is also one of symmetric information. DEMO staging of investment has been
discussed as solving an agency problem revolving around asymmetric information in
Gompers (1992, 1995). In Gompers (1992) the venture capitalist chooses to stage the
financing in an entrepreneurial project to ensure that she can stop the entrepreneur from
pouring money into DEMO project that is doomed to fail. The venture capitalist cannot observe
whether the project has "become" a failure without bearing a monitoring cost, hence the
choice of stages balances this monitoring cost with the benefit DEMO being able to observe
and discontinue funding of a failed venture. This perspective is also discussed in more
general terms to motivate the empirical DEMO of Gompers (1995). These papers and
ours share an agency DEMO on staged investment; however, Gompers' focus is on
the role DEMO staging as a form of monitoring, whereas we focus on staging DEMO a reaction to
the growth in a venture's ability to take on outside finance due to a diminishing hold-up
problem.
Asymmetric information is DEMO at the core of the model explored in Admati and
Pfleiderer (DEMO). They too investigate the financing of an entrepreneurial venture in
stages, but they are interested in analysing the role of the venture capitalist as a financial
intermediary who can resolve informational asymmetries between the entrepreneur DEMO
the capital markets. Staging is not an endogenous feature of their model. Neither is it an
endogenous feature of the financial contracting models of DEMO (1996), and Bolton and
Scharfstein (1990). These papers address contracting issues that surround staged financing,
but do not address the DEMO of staging itself.
Finally, the model presented here is related in DEMO to Admati and Perry (1991).
They too study the role DEMO staged investment in overcoming a commitment problem. In
their model, two DEMO players alternate in making sunk contributions to a joint project
that gives each of them a private benefit when the total contributions exceed a DEMO
level. An inability to commit to make future contributions, on the DEMO of both players,
creates a free rider problem because each player would like to free-ride on the other
player's contribution. Similar to DEMO effects of the entrepreneur's commitment problem in
our model, the DEMO problem constrains the level of contributions that each player is
willing to make and some socially desirable projects must go unfunded. There is no DEMO
lateral in their model. However, Admati and Perry derive a result DEMO of ours by
showing that when the players' disutilities from contributions DEMO are convex, some
projects may be financed in equilibrium by the DEMO alternating making small (relative
to first best) contributions (a form DEMO staged investment).
The paper is organized as follows. The model is set out in Section 2. In Section 3 we
outline and solve DEMO bargaining game that follows a repudiation by the entrepreneur. The
analysis of the bargaining game is quite rich, and of some independent interest. In Section
4 we analyse the determination of the optimal investment path. Here DEMO address the
question of whether a given venture can be financed at all, and if so what the form of the
optimal investment path is. In Section 5 we briefly explore some comparative statics and
some DEMO extensions to the model. In Section 6 we discuss the model's predictions in
light of recent empirical work on the venture capital industry, the relationship between our
model's predictions and those of a real DEMO model of staged financing, and conclude.
2. THE MODEL
We study DEMO problem facing an entrepreneur who needs to raise capital to finance a new
project, or venture. We assume that the entrepreneur has no wealth (this assumption is
258 REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
discussed in Section 5 below) and therefore must turn to an outside investor or venture
capitalist. We assume a DEMO supply of deep-pocketed venture capitalists, hence the
entrepreneur simply needs to DEMO an investment contract that allows any one investor to
break even. The venture that we consider bears a return after investments of both physical
DEMO human capital. Physical capital investment comes in the form of an investment path,
II, I2, . . ., IT. Both the size of each investment (Ii), and the number of rounds of invest-
ment (T) are determined endogenously. We assume that each round of DEMO corre-
sponds to a single period of the venture. Investment is assumed to come at the beginning
of the period, and each period is of fixed and equal length with a common per period
discount factor, ,B. We put no restrictions on the allowable path other than an upper
bound on its scale. The total amount of physical capital investment DEMO the venture
cannot exceed K, so that i=T I i- K. DEMO further assume that once the investment path has
been chosen and investment has begun, the nature of the path remains fixed. We do not
allow the dimensions of the path to be changed midway through the DEMO
Human capital investment comes uniquely from the entrepreneur. He makes this
investment simply by working with the physical capital that is provided in each DEMO
There is assumed to be no effort cost on the part of the entrepreneur (see note 5 below).
If all physical capital investment is made, and the entrepreneur works with the capital
for all T periods, the venture returns R = s yT I Ii after the T-th period. We call the return
to the maximum scale of the DEMO RM, where sK = RM. The venture is assumed to
generate DEMO returns other than those provided at completion. Because our focus is the
endogenous determination of the path of investment into the venture, we assume this
simple structure of returns out of the venture. However, the venture may be terminated
early, in which case it provides a return based on the outside value of the assets in place
at termination. This DEMO value is the value of the venture without the entrepreneur's
human capital. We call this early termination "liquidation", and if liquidation occurs in
period i the venture immediately returns Li. This liquidation value of DEMO venture's assets
could be their resale, or scrap value, or simply the value that the assets have under the
control of someone DEMO than the entrepreneur. We also assume that the entrepreneur
has no opportunities for income outside that provided by the return from the venture.
The DEMO of how the venture's liquidation value evolves over the life of the
venture captures our concept of how the human capital of the DEMO gradually
becomes embodied in the venture's physical capital. We assume that any physical capital
investment is sunk before it has had its full DEMO with the entrepreneur (this is weakened
in Section 5 below). DEMO the investment has had its period with the entrepreneur it gains
transferable or liquidation value at the venture's return rate s. Thus the DEMO value
of the venture in period i + 1 is s(Il ? * * * + Ii) = Li+ 1. Note that the investment Ii1+ is not
included in Li+, . This round of investment has zero outside value until the entrepreneur
completes round i + 1. DEMO, we are implicitly assuming that growth in the ven-
ture's DEMO value comes solely from new investment. This assumption is weakened
in Section 5. The timing of the model is illustrated in Figure 1.
In DEMO period i the venture could be liquidated for Li, or continued, where continu-
ation means that the entrepreneur stays with the venture, and there is further capital
investment (Ii+ 1, Ii+2,...). Continuation DEMO requires that the current physical assets
remain in place. The choice to liquidate is a permanent end to the venture. The venture
cannot be DEMO and then started over (this is perhaps most consistent with the DEMO
4. As our model takes place with perfect information and no uncertainty this assumption is quite unrestric-
tive. It simply allows us to simplify DEMO renegotiation process described below.
NEHER STAGED FINANCING 259
Period I Period 2 Period T
it 2 DEMO R
LI Lr
L2
t=1 t=2 t=T t=T+l
that liquidation represents the venture continuing, but under the stewardship
other than the entrepreneur).
A critical feature of the model's structure is that there is an DEMO cost to financing
the venture via multiple rounds of investment (staged DEMO) vs. a single round (up-
front financing). Though the venture's return is simply dictated by SxU It, no matter the
structure of investment, staged financing leads to a costly delay in realizing this return.5
For example if A = K is invested and the entrepreneur DEMO for a penod, then the venture
returns sK= Rm after this DEMO period (to focus our analysis on potentially profitable
ventures we will DEMO the condition that s > 1/fl). The net return to this single invest-
ment "path" is greater than the net return DEMO any multiple investment path where
xT L - K and the venture returns Rm after the T-th period (this conclusion follows from
the equal lengh of the venture's periods of any path).6 Note that DEMO conclusion also
holds true if the return from the multiple investment path is generated by early liquidation
rather than completion.
Though up-front financing is DEMO on efficiency grounds, the entrepreneur
(henceforth known as E) may DEMO be able to credibly offer the venture capitalist (hence-
forth known DEMO V) a large enough claim against the return generated by a DEMO period
venture to cover her investment. This is due to our assumption that E is unable to commit
not to repudiate the investment contract DEMO V by removing his valuable human capital
from the venture. As in Hart and Moore (1994) we assume that E always retains this DEMO
to repudiate, and therefore can do so in any period of DEMO venture. Following Hart and
Moore we further assume that the worst penalty that can be assessed E is that control
over the physical assets DEMO the venture are transferred to V. No other penalty can be
exacted (V cannot have access to E's personal belongings, nor have DEMO jailed). This also
implies that any money that E may have borrowed beyond that invested in the venture is
similarly untouchable.
In light DEMO this structure we consider the following type of investment contract
between E and V. V agrees to provide all rounds of investment in the DEMO path
hII,, IT in return for a claim againist the venture's return at time T? I (call this claim
P). DEMO agrees to work on the venture for all T periods and receives the residual claim
5. Note that introducing an efrort cost for the DEMO also creates another "cost" to staged financing
(the entrepreneur would DEMO to work more periods). This cost bome by the entrepreneur could potentially
interact with his incentives to engage in hold-up, and hence affect the determination of the equilibrium invest-
ment path. This is an interesting DEMO for future research.
6. Note that the assumption that periods are of fixed and equal length, rather than perhaps depending on
the level of the period's investment, is not crucial to drawing this conclusion. it simply makes net present value
calculations more tractable without qualitatively affecting the DEMO Similarly note that other ways to consider
the efects of the staging process will lead to the same qualitative conclusions as our model if DEMO efficiency cost
to staging the investment is maintaine. For exampe, this DEMO be the case in a model where the costs of staging
came not specifcally fron delay, but from a reduced return to later investments relative to early investments.
FIGURE 1
of someone
260 REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
against the venture's final return (R - P0). If E repudiates the contract in any period of
DEMO venture (for example i), control over the physical assets is DEMO to V. E and V can
then negotiate a new contract, DEMO V can simply liquidate the assets for Li. If a new contract
is agreed to, we assume that E is given back control over the venture, and that the venture
starts up at the same place it left off when E repudiated. V continues to provide invest-
ment, in return for her new claim on the venture's return (call this Pi). Note that we do
not explicitly model V's DEMO against any early liquidation proceeds. We assume that any
early liquidation must have followed a repudiation by E, hence V has control over the
venture's physical assets and an implicit claim for their total value.
DEMO above formulation implicitly assumes that V cannot initiate renegotiation by, for
DEMO, refusing to input an agreed-upon round of investment. This assumption may
DEMO restrictive because allowing V to initiate renegotiation could possibly help to
counteract the effects of E's right to repudiate and renegotiate, hence could possibly help
to get the venture financed more efficiently. However, as Propositions 2 and 3 will illus-
trate, the optimal investment path has the feature that V's initial claim on the venture's
return (P0) equals her post-renegotiation claim (Pi) for renegotiation in every period.
Therefore along an optimal investment path there is no scope for V to DEMO her claim
through initiating renegotiation. For ease of exposition we thus restrict to E the right to
initiate renegotiation.7
We can consider contracts with DEMO given structure without loss of generality because
they give V the maximum possible protection against E's inability to commit not to
repudiate and DEMO E therefore faces the problem of designing an investment path
that maximizes the venture's net present value and allows the venture to be DEMO
financed under a break even contract of the above form. Feasibility is governed by the
commitment, or hold-up, problem, which in turn is characterized by the outcome of the
renegotiation process that follows a repudiation DEMO the entrepreneur in any period of the
chosen investment path.
3. RENEGOTIATION
Following E's repudiation of the investment contract, V gains control over the venture's
physical assets. We characterize the division of bargaining power DEMO the subsequent
renegotiation by assuming that bargaining power is connected to the control of capital.
Both E and V consequently have some bargaining power DEMO V has control over the physi-
cal capital, while E retains DEMO over his human capital. We therefore structure their
bargaining over the surplus available from continuing the venture along the lines of the
strategic bargaining DEMO studied by Binmore, Shaked and Sutton (1989), and Osborne
and Rubinstein (1990). The players make alternating offers, and V can DEMO pursue her
outside option (liquidation of the physical assets) in response to an offer by E. We assume
that E makes the first DEMO, and that the alternating offers take place in small periods of
DEMO A, therefore with an associated common discount factor 3= /3'. The outcome of
bargaining will be either the liquidation of the venture'DEMO assets, or the resumption of the
venture under a new contract.
DEMO Note that this discussion assumes that renegotiation forced by V is done under the same terms as
renegotiation forced by E. In fact it DEMO likely that V's bargaining power would actually be less in the former
situation because E would still control the venture, whereas in the latter situation control over the venture's
physical assets have been passed DEMO to V. Thus, the need to consider the possibility of V-induced DEMO
is even weaker. Furthermore, if E can draw upon the competitive DEMO of investors to step in and make a
round of investment that V has threatened not to make, then V has no bargaining power in the renegotiations.
In this case V has no incentive to attempt DEMO force renegotiation.
NEHER
STAGED FINANCING
261
We denote the present value to V of DEMO outcome of renegotiation in period i by ufv
If the venture resumes following the bargaining then this outcome is implemented via a
new contract DEMO V's claim against R designated by Pi. Because our model is determin-
istic we can, without loss of generality, restrict our attention DEMO contracts which are repudi-
ation-proof (this is proven as part of DEMO proof of Proposition 1 below). Therefore Pi will
precisely reflect the value to V of the renegotiation's outcome and
Pi= (U+ Gi )/fpT+ 1 -i, where Gi designates the present discounted value of the invest-
ments yet to be made, hence G1i = T1 + Il,JIj, (Go = ST= , l J- Ij, GT =O). If the out-
come of the bargaining is immediate liquidation then DEMO - L, and we designate Pi = 00.
The surplus being DEMO over is 3T+ 1 iR - Gi, which we designate Si. DEMO will restrict
our attention to investment paths where continuing is efficient in each period, hence Si> Li
(other paths should lead to a mutual agreement to abandon).
The intertemporal nature of the venture, and the possibility of renegotiation in any
period, makes the analysis of renegotiation in a given period quite rich (and of some
independent interest). The equilibrium outcome depends on the interaction between the
value of liquidation, the surplus value of continuation, and the constraint imposed by the
possibility of repudiation and renegotiation in any period between the current period and
DEMO venture's end. This is best understood by first analysing the bargaining in period T,
and then working backwards period by period. In DEMO T the value of continuing the
venture until the end is ST= PiR, and V has the "outside option" to liquidate the assets
for LT. The equilibrium and outcome of this alternating offers bargaining game DEMO well
known. When A->0 (hence 3-- 1) E and V agree to "split the surplus", unless V's outside
option is greater, in which case V receives the value of her outside option and E receives
the residual. Agreement is immediate and the venture continues DEMO the end (T+ 1) with
UT = max (LT, ST/2) and PT UTV/I
The bargaining game in period T- 1 is similar to the above, except for the need to
consider the effects of possible repudiation and renegotiation in period T on the bar-
DEMO in period T - 1. When bargaining over the surplus ST- I V needs to consider the
possibility that a large claim on R DEMO be bid down through a repudiation by E in period
T. In fact there can be no credible claim on R larger than PT. DEMO turn this constrains the
share of ST- 1 that can be credibly offered to V. It could be the case that this constraint
is DEMO severe that V prefers immediate liquidation for LT-, even though it DEMO efficient to
continue the venture until completion. Incorporating this constraint into the alternating
offers bargaining framework is not difficult. A complete analysis found in DEMO appendix.
When A-0 (hence 3-- 1) the result of the bargaining can be characterized quite easily.
Agreement is immediate and
UT_ I = DEMO {LT-1,min
(p2
PT--PIT,
ST-1/2)}
(1)
When LT-1 > /32PT - PIT the venture is immediately liquidated. Otherwise the venture con-
tinues with PT- UI 1//32?=IT/Il. Note that by construction PT- I<PT, hence the con-
tract will not be repudiated and renegotiated in period T.
The outcome of the bargaining game DEMO period i, where 1 -<i T- 2, is analysed simi-
larly, except that the possibility of repudiation and renegotiation in all periods between i
and T needs to be considered. This can be quite DEMO done by defining the variable Qi
min {P i+1,... ,PT, R} for i, 1 i?j T. The variable Qi represents the largest claim on R
that can be credibly offered to V in DEMO bargaining game in period i. Any larger claim
would be bid down in a subsequent period. The general counterpart to equation (1) is
DEMO in the following proposition.
T
262 REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
Proposition 1. As 3-- 1 the following DEMO characterizes a subgame perfect equilib-
rium of the period i alternating offers bargaining game outlined above where E makes
the first offer.
max {Li, min (pT+ I -'Qi - Gi, Si/2)}.
is DEMO
U1v= (2)
If Li> >pT+l -'Qi - Gi DEMO the venture liquidated (and Pi= cx ), otherwise the
venture continues and the outcome can be implemented via the repudiation-proof contract Pi
(U1v+ Gi)/fpT+ -i
The proof of Proposition 1 is contained in the Appendix.
4. THE OPTIMAL INVESTMENT PATH
The threat of future repudiation, and the renegotiation outcome characterized in Prop-
osition 1, governs the credibility of any investment contract initially offered to V. By
staging the investment the DEMO can create interim collateral which can help to
mitigate the repudiation threat. An example illustrates.
Example 4.1. Define a venture by K= 1, ,DEMO 09, and s =2. Consider the possibility
of financing the venture DEMO full scale in one period. V would have to be given a claim P0 =
1 11 against RM = 2 to provide the DEMO investment. To see whether this claim is credible we
need to consider the outcome of E repudiating sometime in the first period. There is DEMO
constraint due to the possibility of future repudiation, and LI = DEMO, and GI = 0, hence by
Proposition 1 Uv= ,BR/DEMO = $0 90, and PI = 1. The ex ante claim DEMO 1 11 is therefore not
credible and the venture cannot be financed in one period. Consider now the possibility
of financing the venture via DEMO investment path (II = $0.6, I2= $0 4). To provide these
investments V must be offered a claim P0 = 1 185 DEMO RM= 2, which comes at T + 1 =
3. To DEMO whether this claim is credible we need to consider the outcome of E
repudiating in both the first and second periods. The analysis of DEMO in the
second period is as above except that L2 =$1 20. By Proposition 1 U2V =L2 =$1 20, hence
P2= 1 33. E will therefore choose not to repudiate in the second period as the DEMO
tiation leads to an increase in V's claim. Renegotiation following repudiation in the first
period needs to incorporate Ql =P2= 1 33, and GI =0 36. Again by Proposition 1
Uv= $0 63, hence P1 = 1 22. E will therefore choose not to repudiate in the DEMO period.
As E will not repudiate in either period V's claim of P 1 185 is credible, and the venture
can be financed via the staged investment path.
To determine the optimal investment path we DEMO establish conditions under which
any given investment path can be feasibly financed. Consider the investment path
{I1, .. , IT} which returns R. Feasibility implies that E must be able to offer V a credible
claim DEMO R (PO) that covers her investments. As argued above our deterministic model
allows us to restrict our attention to repudiation-proof contracts, hence feasibility can be
captured by two conditions:
Po? min{P1,. . , PT}, (3)
p TPo > jET3B'11I (4)
Note that by construction Pi:5R, hence P0 ?R (hence (4) also implies that the net return
to the venture is positive). DEMO can restrict attention to equality in (4) as E only needs to
ensure that V breaks even on her investments.
NEHER
STAGED FINANCING
263
It is useful to characterize (3) as DEMO system of T "feasibility" inequalities, or con-
straints: Po0 P1, 1?i-<T. Each inequality represents the repudiation-proof constraint for
the given period of the venture. By using equality in (4) to establish DEMO, and the definition
of Pi established in Proposition 1, we can rewrite (3) as
,x B I.
<5
Ui,v
1- DEMO
-<T.
(5)
The system of inequalities in (5) DEMO recasts the feasibility constraints in terms of invest-
ments and the payoff to repudiation. The post-repudiation payoff to V in each period
must be DEMO enough to cover her investments to date (suitably discounted). The DEMO
proposition, which is proven in the appendix, establishes two features of an optimal invest-
ment path.
Proposition 2.
ing two conditions:
Optimality
DEMO
that a
feasible investment
path satisfies the
follow-
(a) UiV=
Li, 2?-i-<?T,
(b) Yj
=
1
p = DEMO, I
2 <i -<T.
Condition (a) of Proposition 2 states that along an optimal investment path all
rounds of investment, save the first, are fully backed by the liquidation value of the ven-
ture's assets (the venture's collateral). A similar result cannot hold for the first period as
the venture has not yet built DEMO any collateral (L1 = 0). The intuition for condition (a)
comes from the consideration of a feasible investment path that does DEMO satisfy (a) for
some i, 2-<i-<T. Feasibility implies DEMO 1'_ J-3I.? U!v, but Uiv is based either on the
surplus value of continuing the venture, or on a future period's repudiation. Neither of
these are affected if we consider adding I+ 1 DEMO I;, hence constructing a new investment
path one period shorter. The new path remains feasible and delivers the return one period
sooner. Therefore DEMO new path is preferred by E.
Condition (b) of Proposition 2 states that there cannot be any "slack" in the 2
through DEMO feasibility constraints of an optimal investment path. When there is slack in
any constraint, for example 1 'I)< I. U/', investment can be moved from an earlier
round to round i and the DEMO of the path can be maintained. Pushing investment to
the future means a lower present value for the investment path, which is again preferred
by E.
We can use Proposition 2 to generate candidates for the DEMO investment path.
Conditions (a) and (b) of Proposition 2 imply that
Ii=LiL-'j_1'-PiIj,
2:5
i-<T.
(6)
Along an optimal investment path each round of investment beyond the first is DEMO
equal to the debt capacity of the venture, or equal to DEMO venture's total collateral value
minus the claims arising from previous investments. Condition (6) generates a unique
candidate for an optimal investment path DEMO any given initial investment, II, and path
duration, T. It DEMO to determine the choice of II, the choice of T, and to determine
the overall feasibility of the candidate path constructed using I, T, and condition (6).
By construction the path generated by (6) satisfies the 2 through T feasibility con-
straints of condition (DEMO). The feasibility of the overall path is therefore determined by the
264 REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
first feasibility constraint, I 5 U(v. This constraint can be simplified to
II?5 SI
/2, (7)
by appealing to the definition of Ulv, and by noting that LI = 0 and by construction
p TQl - GI = I. DEMO important observation to be made here is that the satisfaction (or DEMO)
of condition (7) is divorced from the "scale" of the venture. To see this consider the T
period investment path dictated DEMO condition (6) and I, = 1. Call this path (1, I2,.., IT),
which defines SI. Now consider the T period investment path dictated by condition (6)
and I, = DEMO Using condition (6) it is straightforward to establish that the new investment
path (k, Il, . .. ., IT) is simply k times the old, or I' = kIi for all i. DEMO S' = kS1 (as S1
is a linear combination of the investments). The satisfaction (or not) of condition (7) is
DEMO same for both paths. This is a direct result of the constant returns to scale nature of
our venture.
The invariance of feasibility with DEMO to scale changes implies that we need only
consider investment paths that are at full scale, or
EJ1I=K. (8)
Scaling up a DEMO investment path also scales up the venture's surplus, hence full DEMO
is preferred by E. The condition that the venture operates at full scale allows us to
uniquely define II: for any given T and I, condition (6) uniquely defines the investment
path which can then be rescaled until condition (8) is satisfied. The following proposition,
DEMO is proven in the appendix, summarizes the discussion of this section DEMO defines the
optimal investment path.
Proposition 3. For a venture defined by s, ,B, and K consider the candidate investment
paths given by (6) and (8) for all T> 0. If (7) is satisfiedfor any T the venture can be feasibly
financed. If the DEMO can be feasibly financed then the optimal investment path is the
feasible candidate path for which T is a minimum.
Proposition 3 is proven DEMO analysing how the structure of the candidate investment
paths changes as T decreases. This is then compared to the increase in the present value DEMO
the venture's return that arises due to the decreased completion time. The basic intuition is
that the venture's surplus is larger the DEMO the venture is completed. Fast completion
(when feasible) is therefore preferred by E. Note that Proposition 3 implies that when
sf3 2 the DEMO financing of the venture will be in one round, or up-front (condition (7)
holds as S1 /2 = (sIi )/2 -I,1). In this case the venture's return is high DEMO that staging
is not needed to protect V's claim.8 We illustrate the results of Proposition 3 (for sf3 < 2)
in Example 4.2 and Example 4.3.
Example 4.2. Consider a venture with the following DEMO: s = 1 5, 095,
K= 100. Take I, DEMO and use (6) above to construct unscaled candidate investment paths.
The investment levels for periods 1 through 8 are shown in Figure 2.
DEMO This also implies that if staging creates no collateral, then the DEMO way the venture can be financed is
if it is profitable for V to do it up-front. A related result is found in Lemma DEMO of Admati and Perry (1991). In
their model (with no collateral) when the players have investment cost functions that are linear (DEMO V's is) the
commitment problem cannot be overcome by staging DEMO investment. The project can only go forward if one
player finds it profitable to complete the project in one round by himself.
2-5-
2-
NEHER
STAGED FINANCING
Investment Path
265
0 1 2 3 DEMO 5 6 7 8
Periods
2
FIGURE
Figure 2 shows us candidate paths for T = 1 through T = 8. We then use DEMO same
investment levels to construct an S1 /2, for each T, to address the question of feasibility
(via condition (7)). DEMO path of these SI /2 is shown in Figure 3.
The DEMO value of T for which I, = 1 ?S1 /2 DEMO 6, therefore the minimum number of
periods in which the venture DEMO be feasibly financed is 6. By Proposition 3 the optimal
investment path is therefore found by scaling up the path (1, . . DEMO , I6) dictated by (6) until
6= 6 I 14
DEMO, I5= 196398, I6= 250968).
investent
Ii = 100. The optimal investment path is (II == 196432, '2
877,I= 87877, DEMO 116308, 60,1
Example 4.3. Consider another venture with the following DEMO: s = 1-45,
/3 095, K = 100. As DEMO we take I, = 1 and use (6) to construct DEMO candidate
investment paths. Then as above we calculate the associated S1 /DEMO path to address the
question of feasibility (via condition (7))DEMO This path is shown in Figure 4. We can see that
this path never crosses the I, = 1 boundary, hence there is DEMO way to feasibly finance this
venture.
Example 4.2 shows how staging helps to mitigate the hold-up problem that stops the
defined venture from proceeding DEMO up-front finance. Example 4.3 shows that even
S,/2 Path
1-6
DEMO
1 2
I
08
0 6
0-4
0-2
0
-
0
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
DEMO
-
-
-
-
-
-
I
2
3
4
3
5
FIGURE
. . . .
. . . . . . . DEMO . .
. . . . . . .
7
Periods
................................... .......... .
8
6
=
266 REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
S1/2 Path
0-9 - - - DEMO - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - DEMO - -
0.8
0.7
0-6
05-
04
0.3
0.2
0.1
0 - I l I
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Periods
DEMO
FIGURE
under staged financing some profitable ventures are not feasibly financed. Note that the
defined venture in Example 4.3 would be profitable if financed DEMO as sf > 1.
The optimal investment path found in Example 4.2 has the interesting property that
the second round of investment is smaller DEMO the first, with the subsequent investments
monotonically increasing (this is illustrated, but not to correct scale, in Figure 2). The
relationship DEMO the first and second rounds of investment arises from the first invest-
ment's special role. The first investment creates collateral (L2) that DEMO used to back V's
claims in the venture's second round. These are the claims that arise from V's first and
second DEMO Therefore the second investment is equal to the debt capacity that is
left over after the first investment has been backed by the second DEMO collateral (I2 =
L2 - II /,). If the collateral does not grow fast enough (s < (,B + 1)/DEMO) the second round of
investment will be less than the first DEMO This differs from the venture's subsequent
rounds where the growth in collateral that comes from each round of investment backs
only the following DEMO's investment (plus the time value adjustment of the old claims)DEMO
As the collateral grows at rate s > 1 the investment path is increasing round to round. In
fact it can be shown, by using conditions (6), (7), and Proposition 3, that along an optimal
investment path the investments grow until the final round, IT. An optimal path has this
characteristic because without it there would be DEMO shorter feasible investment path, which
violates optimality via the results of DEMO 3.
5. COMPARATIVE STATICS AND EXTENSIONS
In this section we investigate how changes in the model's underlying parameters and basic
assumptions affect the DEMO of the venture and the structure of the optimal invest-
ment path. We first analyse some comparative statics with respect to s and ,B. Second we
change the assumption that the investments into the venture are DEMO (until they gain
value through the work of the entrepreneur). DEMO we let the assets in place earn some
return (or grow DEMO value) after their initial period with the entrepreneur. Fourth we allow
DEMO entrepreneur to have positive wealth.
The effect of changing s or ,DEMO on any given venture's feasibility and optimal investment
path is easily understood by noting the change's effect on condition (7).
Proposition 4. For any given venture consider the investment path constructed using
(6) for a given I, and T. As s or ,B increase the path continues to satisfy the 2 through T
feasibility conditions of (5), and S1 /2 increases.
NEHER STAGED FINANCING 267
The proof of Proposition 4 is straightforward. When DEMO increases the liquidation values
along the path (Li, 2<i- T) all rise, hence the 2 through T feasibility conditions of (5)
continue to hold. Furthermore the increase in s increases the return DEMO the venture (R),
hence S1 /2 also rises. When ,B rises the given investment path becomes "cheaper" in a
discounted DEMO sense. The 2 through T feasibility conditions of (5) continue to hold as
in each period the investments to date (now discounted at a smaller rate) continue to be
covered by the post-repudiation payoff to V. The lower discounted value of the investment
path also means that DEMO /2 rises.
An increase in S1 /2 implies that condition (DEMO) is more easily satisfied, hence it is more
likely that the venture can be feasibly financed. If the venture is already financeable then
DEMO is more likely that the venture can be feasibly financed in fewer periods (which is pre-
ferred). This result is not surprising in light of the roles of s and /B. Together they dictate
the net present profitability of the venture, and when this profitability rises (DEMO either s
or /3 increasing) the venture becomes easier to finance. An important corollary to Prop-
osition 4 is
Corollary 4. As ,B 1 all profitable ventures become financeable.
The proof of Corollary 4 is DEMO by considering conditions (6) and (7) as f--> 1.
DEMO an investment path constructed using (6), a given II, and T, it is easily shown that as
P3 -- 1 condition (DEMO) becomes I_<sT- 1(s - _)I . For T DEMO large this condition will
hold, hence the venture is financeable for DEMO s > 1.
The cost of staged financing comes from the delay it imposes on the venture's return.
When /-->1 there is no discounting of the future, hence there is no cost of delay, hence
there is no cost to staged financing. Staged financing can therefore entirely overcome the
commitment problem, though potentially in an infinite number of rounds. When s-> 1 the
collateral that provides the basis for staging the investment builds very slowly and hence
the venture requires many stages DEMO be completed.
Now consider the following simple change to the model. Let the assets purchased
with Ii have immediate outside value caIi, while maintaining the assumption that they have
outside value sIi after a period with DEMO entrepreneur. A way of interpreting a (where
0`5 a< 1) DEMO as a measure of the intangibility of the assets. When a is 0 (as in the original
model) the assets purchased are completely DEMO until the addition of E's human
capital (which requires a DEMO to implement). When a > 0 the assets are not completely
intangible and the venture's collateral in period i increases from s ,JIl Ij to
s ?I 11+ aI. The construction of the optimal investment path for this extended model
closely follows the construction of the DEMO investment paths in the basic model. In
fact Proposition 3 holds when we substitute the following condition for condition (6)
i Ia (DEMO,= 13pi I) 2<i<T. (6a)
As above, DEMO can understand the effect of changing a on any given venture's feasibility
and optimal investment path by noting the effect on condition (7). It is straightforward
to establish the following extension to Proposition 4 (the proof is omitted).
Proposition 4A. For any given venture consider DEMO investment path constructed using
(6a) for a given Il and T. As a increases the path continues to satisfy the 2 through T
DEMO conditions of (5), and S1 /2 increases.
268 REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
Proposition 4A establishes that the new source DEMO collateral diminishes the effect of
the commitment problem. In fact if the assets are perfectly tangible (ao= 1) repudiation
by E becomes meaningless DEMO V's claims are entirely protected by the assets purchased.
Another simple change to the basic model is to let the venture's physical DEMO that
have had their period with E continue to grow in outside value at rate y. This implies that
the assets that are worth DEMO in round i are worth y Li in round i + 1, hence
Li+, = yLj+sI1. (9)
Note that this also implies that the final value of the venture will be
S E,J-1 )/ VI 10
The parameter y can be thought of as representing DEMO the venture grows in value in
ways that are not directly tied to the human capital of the entrepreneur. As above, the
construction of the optimal investment path for this extended model closely follows the
analysis DEMO Section 4. Proposition 3 continues to hold when condition (6) is modified by
(9) and condition (7) is modified so that DEMO incorporates (10). It is again straightfoward
to establish the following DEMO to Proposition 4 (the proof is omitted).
Proposition 4B. For DEMO given venture consider the investment path constructed using
(6) (under (9)) for a given I, and T. As y increases the path continues to satisfy the 2 through
Tfeasibility conditions of (5), and S1 /2 (under (10)) increases.
The new growth in value diminishes the effect of the commitment problem along the
lines of DEMO decrease in the discount rate (an increase in I3). It DEMO the cost of staging
smaller because the assets are gaining value while the staged path delays the realization
of the venture's return. Therefore, an increase in ymakes the venture more likely to be
feasibly financed, and if already financeable then financeable in fewer periods. In fact
when DEMO assets in place grow in value at the rate 1/,B DEMO is no cost of staging, and as
in Corollary 4 all DEMO ventures can be financed (though again in a potentially large
number DEMO rounds).
Finally consider allowing E to have wealth greater than zero. The immediate impact
is that E's wealth ensures that all profitable DEMO will go forward. E simply has to
provide the first round of investment himself, and then the collateral that is built up will
back outside investment for future rounds. However, full efficiency may not be achieved.
Ventures may still be financed in stages (E's wealth may not be enough to fully overcome
the effects of the commitment problem), DEMO ventures may not go forward at full scale.
This second observation comes from noting that our above results on the invariance of
the venture'DEMO feasibility with respect to scale do not necessarily apply. An investment path
that includes a contribution from E cannot be scaled up without limit DEMO E has a fixed
amount of wealth. The scale (the total DEMO of investment) of a venture financed at
partial scale is therefore DEMO on the level of E's wealth.9
Allowing E to have some wealth can also change the character of the optimal invest-
ment path DEMO by an outside investor (the investments into the venture can now
DEMO contributions from both E and V). It can be shown that it is optimal for E to
invest all his wealth at t DEMO 1. This implies that the collateral in the second round of the
9. Note a similar finding in a different context in Hart and DEMO (1994) and Moore (1992). The important
role of entrepreneurial DEMO in predicting the scale of their activities is empirically documented in Evans and
Jovanovic (1989) and Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian and Rosen (1994a, 1994b).
NEHER STAGED FINANCING 269
venture comes from both E's investment, and V's initial investment. This collateral still
must support both of V'DEMO first and second rounds of investment, but the collateral increase
due DEMO E's investment can lead to V's second round being larger than his first. The optimal
investment path from outside investors may now DEMO monotonically increasing throughout,
rather than only after the first period (DEMO was discussed above).
6. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
A useful place to consider the predictions of our model is in the venture capital market
DEMO investment is often staged. What drives the staging of investment in our model is
the gradual embodiment of the entrepreneur's human capital in DEMO physical capital of
the venture. This evolution increases the venture's collateral, hence allows more outside
financing. Each new stage of financing should therefore coincide with a significant devel-
opment in the venture, such as a new patent, the final creation of a product, a clearer
view DEMO the marketability of a product, etc. These are all ways in DEMO the entrepreneur's
human capital becomes embodied in the physical assets of the venture. The coincidence
of the choice of stages of investment by DEMO capitalists and stages in the development
of ventures is well documented. As Sahlman (1990) says: "Each successive stage [of
financing] is generally DEMO to a significant development in the company" (see also Perez
(DEMO) and Lorenz (1989)). Lerner (1992) also reports this DEMO in his study on the disk
drive and biotechnology industries.
The end of the entrepreneurial process in our model consequently corresponds to the
time DEMO all of the entrepreneur's relevant human capital is embodied in the venture's
physical capital. This seems to have empirical support in the DEMO of Perez (1986) and
Sahlman (1990). They note that DEMO are often replaced towards the end of the
venture capital process when the venture has become less an entrepreneurial venture, and
more a standard firm. At this point the management of the venture requires the skills DEMO
a standard manager, rather than those of an entrepreneur.10
Another important DEMO of the hold-up problem that motivates the use of staged
financing in our model is the initial intangibility of the physical capital that is DEMO in
the venture. In fact Proposition 4A predicts that a reduction in the intangibility of a
venture's physical capital investments both increases the DEMO that the venture is able
to get financed, and decreases the DEMO number of investment stages. Both Gompers
(1992, 1995) and Lerner (1992) find evidence that is consistent with these predictions.
Gompers finds that when assets are less tangible, more rounds of financing are required,
and Lerner finds that in firms with more tangible achievements there should DEMO larger
infusions per round. Other empirical findings by Lerner, Gompers and DEMO (1992)
on the nature of investment paths in venture capital DEMO also consistent with our model's
predictions. All three authors find that the outside funds disbursed to a venture increase
with each round, and that outside finance comes after opportunities for inside finance
(entrepreneurial wealth and other sources) are exhausted.
It is interesting to consider what related conclusions a "real option" model of staged
financing might deliver. A real DEMO model of investment into an entrepreneurial venture
is a model of investment under uncertainty, where the uncertainty creates an option value
to waiting to invest. Staged financing may arise as optimal due to the tradeoff between
DEMO venture's current need for capital, and the value of the DEMO to withhold capital until
10. This process is studied in a learning model by Chang, Siegel, and Thakor (1990) and in a DEMO of
control rights by Hellman (1993).
270
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
the resolution of some uncertainty regarding the DEMO of the venture. Empirically
then, each stage of financing should coincide DEMO a development in the venture that
reflects a resolution of some uncertainty. If uncertainty is resolved at points of significant
development in the venture (as above) then the real option model delivers a similar predic-
tion to our model regarding the coincidence of stages of investment and stages DEMO develop-
ment. The two models also may share similarities in their predictions of how the tangibility
of the capital investments affects the staged investment DEMO In both models the benefit
of staged financing comes from the interplay between sunk investment (investment in
intangible physical assets) and the progression DEMO the venture. In our model staging arises
because up-front sunk investment is subject to hold-up. In a real option model staging
arises because waiting DEMO make a sunk investment has an option value. In both cases a
reduction in the intangibility of the physical capital investments affects the need DEMO stage
investment.
It is unclear whether a real option model would share our model's other empirically
supported predictions regarding the nature of staged DEMO in venture capital.
Further analysis of a real option model requires a precise specification of the process by
which uncertainty is resolved. However it DEMO important to note that although they share
some relevant predictions, our DEMO and a real option model address fundamentally
different issues. A real option model is simply a model of investment under uncertainty
and thus does DEMO explicitly address the agency problem that surrounds the likely diver-
gence in the objectives of the entrepreneur and the objectives of the venture capitalist.
DEMO the model in this paper is deterministic. We have abstracted away from uncer-
tainty to focus on the role of the entrepreneur, and his unique human capital, in the
financing of an entrepreneurial venture. Both agency and uncertainty are significant
aspects of entrepreneurial finance, and incorporating them into a common framework is
an important avenue for future research. One question DEMO arises when both uncertainty
and agency are present in a model of staged financing is: how is control over refinancing
decisions contractually allocated across different realizations of the uncertainty? This is
investigated in Neher (1996), where convertible preferred stock (a commonly used finan-
cial instrument in DEMO capital) is shown to allocate this control efficiently.
Though we have DEMO on the relationship between our model and venture capital
investment, the DEMO reached here may shed light on general issues involving the
ability of investment structure to overcome hold-up, or commitment, problems. These
may arise DEMO other realms of entrepreneurial finance including the financing of entrepren-
eurial type projects within firms.
APPENDIX
Here we provide a thorough analysis of the DEMO offers bargaining game that follows a repudiation of the
existing contract by E in period i of the venture. We first present Lemma I DEMO concerns the general problem
of bargaining over a fixed amount of surplus (Si) when one of the players has an outside option (V can liquidate
for Li) and faces a constraint on the amount of the surplus that can be credibly offered to her. Label the
constraint DEMO
Lemma 1. Consider the alternating offers bargaining
following 2 cases characterize the equilibrium:
game described above. E makes the
first offer. The
Case DEMO
When
L,
? C V never liquidates
the assets. There
are 4 subcases.
(1 a) IfLj3Si/1 l3 where C>- S/DEMO ? 3 then the game has a unique subgame peifect equilibrium correspond-
ing to E always offerinig the division of surplus (Si/l + ?, 3Si/1 + 3), (E's share, V's share) and E accepting aniy
?
NEHER STAGED FINANCING 271
division? (y, y2) where yi ? DEMO/1 + 3. V always offers the division of surplus (3Si/DEMO ? 3, Si/1 + 3) and V accepts
any division (xi, x,) wher-e x2-3Si/ 1 + 6. The result is imimediate agreemi-ient on E's proposal.
(1 .b) If Li<3C < 3S1/1 + 3 then the game has a unique subgame pe/fect equiilibriunm corresponding to E always
offering the division of surplus (Si - 3C, 3C) and E accepting aniy division lvwhere yi?-3(DEMO - 3C). V always offers the
division of surplus (Si DEMO C, C) and V accepts any division where X2 S C. The result is immediate agreemen7t on E's
proposal.
(1 .c) DEMO Li > 3Si/1 + 3 and C>- Si - 3(Si - Li) then the game has a uanique subgame peifect equilibriulm corr-e-
sponding to E alvays offer ing the division of surplus (Si - Li, Li) and E accepting any} division wvher-e Y ?- 3(S. - Li).
V always ojfers the division of surplus (3(S1 - Li), Si - 3(Si - Li)) DEMO V accepts any division where x - Li. Tle
result is immediate agreenment on E's proposal.
(1.d) If Si - 3(Si DEMO Li) > C> Li> 3Si /1 + 3 then the game has a unique subgame peifect equilibriulm corre-
sponding to E always DEMO the clivision of surplus (Si - Li, Li) anid E DEMO any division iwhere y, >? 3(Si - Li).
V always ojffrs the division of surplus (Si - C, C) and V accepts any division wher-e x2 - Li. Th7e r esult is DEMO
agreement on E's proposal.
Ccase 2. If Li > C then the game has a unique sutbgame peifect equilibriumn corresponding to V ahvays DEMO
liquidation. The result is i:mmediate liquidation by V.
Proof of Lemma 1. As we are using a standard bargaining framework, and the bargaining is over a
known quantity, the proof of the unique subgame perfect equilibrium follows closely the presentation of Osborne
and Rubinstein (1990). The point of departure is the constraint imposed by C. We proceed by DEMO the
subgame perfection of the outlined strategies. The proof of uniqueness follows that presented by Osborne and
Rubinstein (1990) and is omitted.
(1.a) Given the strategies outlined and as Li j-SS/l + 3 V cannot ever improve her position by liquidating
the venture's assets. Also DEMO C>Si/l + 3 there is no relevant constraint on the divisions of surplus offered. The
standard result therefore applies and the outlined DEMO form a subgame perfect equilibrium of the bargaining
game.
(1.b) Given the strategies outlined and as Li <3CV cannot ever improve her position by liquidating the
venture's assets. To determine that the strategies offered DEMO a subgame perfect equilibrium consider a subgame
starting in period t* of the bargaining game that begins with a move by E. Is E'DEMO proposed strategy an optimal
response to that played by V? Any DEMO played by E will either yield division (xl, x2) in DEMO t, where
xI -Si - 3C and t- t*, or division (Si - C, C) in period t, where t-' t* + 1. Clearly offering (Si - 3C, 3C) immedi-
ately is optimal as Si - 3C?'t- t1XI where t- t*, x1 ?Si - 3C, and Si - 3C> 3't' (Si DEMO C) where t- t* + 1.
Now, given the strategy proposed by E, is V playing an optimal response? If V accepts (Si - 3C, 3C) in t*
that yields V 3 C. DEMO else would generate 3C in period t, t > t*, or Y2 in period t, where Y2 - C and t - t* + 1.
Note that E would accept the division (3(Si - 3C), Si - 3(S, - 3C)) where Si - 3(Si - 3C) > C as C< Si/I ?, +
but by assumption the constraint C is the maximum share that DEMO can credibly collect. Clearly then the best of
these options is to accept (Si -6C, 3C), or reject and propose (Si - C, C). V's strategy is therefore a best
response. The other possible subgames are similar.
(1.c) As C?- Si - DEMO(Si - Li) there is no relevant constraint on the divisions DEMO surplus offered. The standard
result of bargaining with an outside option therefore applies and the outlined strategies form a subgame perfect
equilibrium of the DEMO game. Consider for example V's liquidation decision. Consider, as above, a
subgame starting in period t* with E proposing a division of DEMO (xi, xJ). Note that if x2 < Li, then DEMO should
liquidate immediately. Not liquidating would yield at most Si - 3(Si - Li) in period t* + 1, or Li in DEMO t* + 2
(as Es proposal is stationary we need not DEMO times past t* + 2; they are clearly worse for V)DEMO Liquidating
immediately is best as Li > 3(Si - 3(Si - Li)) > 322Li (note the assumption on the size of Li). E must therefore offer
an (xi,,x2) such that x >Li, the best choice being (Si- Li, Li). DEMO the subgame perfection of the outlined
strategies follows the arguments of case (1.b) above.
(1.d) This is like case 1.c, but V's proposed division of surplus violates the feasibility constraint
C(C < DEMO - 3(Si - Li)). The proposed strategies clearly form DEMO subgame perfect equilibrium as the strategies of
both E and V reflect their best possible payoffs given the constraints due to C and Li. DEMO the discussion
of the C constraint in case (i.b) above, DEMO the discussion of the Li constraint in case (I.c) above.
2. As Li > C there is no feasibly division of surplus that DEMO VLi. V's optimal response to any proposed
division of surplus is therefore immediate liquidation. I I
It is straightforward to establish that as DEMO 1, V's payoff from the equilibrium outlined in Lemma 1
DEMO max {Li, min (C, Si/2)}.
272 REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
Proof of Proposition 1. We first use DEMO induction argument to establish that V cannot be credibly offered
a claim on Si greater than BT+ -Qi -Gi. Conversely a claim smaller or DEMO to pT+ l-Qi - Gi is credible. We
then use Lemma 1 to establish equationi (2). It follows by construction that if the venture is continued then Pi
is repudiation-proof.
Assume that Proposition 1 holds DEMO all periods j, i <j - T. Consider the bargaining in period i over the
surplus Si. Label as wi a proposed claim DEMO V on Si. A claim on Si is implemented via a claim on R, call it pi
(this claim is in $T+ 1 DEMO must incorporate the investments yet to be made). When Coi > PT? liQi - Gi this
implies that pi> Qi. There are DEMO cases to consider. If Qi = R then clearly Pi, and DEMO oi, is not credible. If
Qi < R then for some DEMO < pi. As the outcome of repudiation and renegotiation in period j is continuation of the
venture with a smaller claim on R for DEMO, E will clearly repudiate to bid down V's claim from DEMO The claim pi,
and hence wi, is not credible. When DEMO T+' -G, this implies that pi < Qi. Now if E repudiates in any
period j, i <j- T the venture is DEMO immediately liquidated, or continued under a repudiation-proof contract,
Pj, where Pj>pi. In either case repudiating is not in the interests of DEMO The claim pi, and hence ci, is credible.
This establishes pT+ I -iQi - Gi in the role of C in Lemma 1. DEMO 1 therefore establishes (2) as characterizing
the subgame perfect equilibrium of the bargaining game in period i. By construction if the venture is DEMO
then UiV-<I3T+ -Qi- Gi, and hence Pi- Qi, and by the above argument Pi is repudiation-proof.
To complete the proof we simply DEMO to establish the equilibrium in period T. Here QT= R, so DEMO
QT represents C in Lemma 1 and immediate liquidation is never chosen (QT> LT). Lemma 1 establishes the
subgame perfect equilibrium, which as 3-* 1 can be chracterized by UTV= max {Li, min (DEMO, Si/2)} = max {Li, Si/
2). This can be implemented via the repudiation-proof contract PT= UT//p. |
Proof of Proposition 2. To prove parts (a) and (b) we DEMO consider a feasible investment path that does
not satisfy one (or DEMO) condition(s) and show how the path could be changed profitably while maintaining
feasibility. First consider a feasible investment path (II, , DEMO), where Uiv"?Li* for some i (2 -<i -<T). Now
consider a new investment path (II, IT, ), where I, = It, 2= I . I I + Ii,
=I,*+I,--IT- I=-IT-
This new path is preferred by E DEMO the original path as it completes the project one period earlier:
. sl,= Ii ,J=I pi i-I fl-1j*> T3 T I DEMO *
We can use the T above) that are satisfied for (It*, II_. IT) to
establish the T- 1 feasibility constraints of DEMO new investment path, (II, I2, .JT- 1). All the conditions for
the constraints i through T - 1 are satisfied, as these correspond with the conditions for the constraints i + 1
through DEMO old path. For example Uiv= Lu,i2 and l lpiJ-ij<+I =1 ji--Ij*, hence , l=j-/Ij< Uiv. For
the i - 1-th DEMO we also know that U/il = Ui7 because by assumption Uri# Li, and by construction
Li* >Li_., hence both u/i1, DEMO Ur are based on the surplus available, or the constraint imposed DEMO future
repudiation, and these are the same for both paths. Again DEMO p,i+ ljI <y1 flP-iJ* and the i - 1 -th DEMO
is satisfied. What remains is the 1 through i - 2 constraints. We will show that the i - 2-th constraint holds, the
rest follow. To establish that Z7- /1-1i7I? Ui' 2 we first note that ji-2 /31i+21 - 2 /31- i+j2j It is straight-
forward DEMO establish that UiV 2?> U2 by using (2): Li-2= DEMO, 2, Si-2> S? 2, and as we have established DEMO
ujv uJV
P* l constraint in the definition of Q* 2) DEMO 13T-i+3Q,*-_ -G,*-2 < pT-i+2Qi -2-Gi2 in cases where
p T-i+ Qi*-2 - G *_2 defines ur2. The new investment path is therefore DEMO as all T - 1 feasibility constraints
hold.
Now consider a feasible investment path (I*, I*,. I), where X> I-1Jy < Ur for some i (2 i T).
Using part (a) of Proposition 2 we have that Ur = Li, hence as Li = s ,7Il IP' our i-th feasibility constraint
becomes:
pI DEMO T
I= 1//3(/3Tsl, , i-IJ*)
feasibility constraints (derived in (5)
I*< p ,,Il Pp SP I2* DEMO -+P
SP,P Ii*_
Now consider a new investment path created by moving e investment from I l to I* (note that if I,* 0 the
original path is trivially not optimal as this i DEMO 1 -th round of investment could be removed, thus finishing the
DEMO one period earlier). For E small enough the i-th feasibility constraint still holds and this new path
(II, I2,...,IT) is preferred by E as the discounted value of the investments is lower. DEMO other feasibility con-
straints also continue to hold. For the constraints k, where i+ 1 <k?T, Ukv= Lk= Lk*= Ukv and
Ek= I pj -Iif < Ek= I P -Ti. When i > 2 DEMO i - 1-th constraint holds as Ui1l Li- I - L_l = ur,il and I-i I < * 1,
and the k DEMO where 2 -k-' i -2 are unchanged. We can also show DEMO the first feasibility constraint
(II - U/v) also holds. First note that Li = 0 <IIA TI, - GI because all DEMO k are satisfied, where 2 <k ? T
hence -3T Pk jT=I PJj. Each renegotiated contract covers the entire investment path. This, along with
1,
i- I j T- 1, this implies that Pj- P *+I,
hence Qi-2?
Q,-2
(the inequality comes from the added
NEHER STAGED FINANCING 273
S1 > St* and I' 5- Uvr, DEMO that I1`? UY. The case when i =1 can be similarly DEMO The new investment
path is therefore feasible as all T feasibility constraints hold.
Proof of Proposition 3. We prove Proposition 3 by showing that DEMO given venture that is feasibly financed
using a T period investment path (that satisfies (6) and (8)) yields E a higher DEMO than if the venture were
financed using a greater than T period path (also satisfying (6) and (8)). Define an investment path
(I,**.,IT, IT+ , using a given I, and (6). To prove our proposition we will establish that,
PR K ,T K
p T
fi- Iy > PT+I T Ii ji
I1.= _ST+ 1 P-I
3Ii ( 1
for all T. Note that (11) incorporates the appropriate scaling so that (8) is satisfied. Condition (11) can be
rewritten as,
IT+ I > IT+ 2 (12)
LT+ 1 LT+ 2
by using (6), sK= R, and the definition of Li. We establish (12) by induction for T> 1. In fact we establish the
stronger condition, IT+ 1/DEMO > IT+ 2/LT+2 Assume that ITILT> IT+ 1/LT+1. This DEMO (12) through the
manipulation of (12) by using IT+ = LT+1 - (1/1)LT, LT+2 = LT+1 ?SIT+1, and DEMO LT+1 - sIT. The final step
in our proof for T> DEMO is to establish (12) for T= 2 (I2/L2 > DEMO/L3). This is easily done by using that I2= (s DEMO 1/
P3)Ii, L2 =sI , and 13 = (S2 + S - 2s/f3)Ii, L3 = (S2 + s DEMO s/f3)II. These same equations directly establish condition
(11) for T= 1. II
Acknowledgements. This paper is a revised version of Chapters DEMO and 2 of my Princeton Ph.D. disser-
tation. I would like to thank my advisors, Doug Bernheim, Tim Besley, and especially John Moore for invaluable
guidance. I am also grateful to Bharat Anand, Shubham Chaudhuri, Sharon Gifford, Oliver Hart, Anna Harvey,
Kai-Uwe Kuhn, three DEMO referees, and the editors Patrick Bolton and Ian Jewitt for helpful DEMO,
and to the Social Science Research Council of Canada for financial support. The usual disclaimer applies.
REFERENCES
ADMATI, A. and PERRY, M. (1991), "Joint Projects without Commitment", Review of Economic Studies, DEMO,
259-276.
ADMATI, A. and PFLEIDERER, P. (1994), "Robust Financial Contracting, and the Role of Venture Capital-
ists", Journal of Finance, 49, 371-402.
BINMORE, K., SHAKED, A. and SUTTON, DEMO (1989), "An Outside Option Experiment", Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 104, 753-769.
BOLTON, P. and SCHARFSTEIN, D. (1990), "DEMO Theory of Predation Based on Agency Problems in Financial
Contracting", American Economic Review, 80, 94-106.
BUSINESS WEEK "Rewriting the Rules of Venture Capital", July 19, 1993 (New York: McGraw-Hill).
CHAN, DEMO, SIEGEL, D. and THAKOR, A. V. (1990), "Learning, Corporate Control and Performance Require-
ments in Venture Capital Contracts", International DEMO Review, 31, 365-381.
COOPER, I. A. and CARLETON, W. T. (1979), "Dynamics of Borrower-Lender Interaction: Partitioning
Final Payoff in Venture Capital Finance", Journal of Finance, 34, 517-531.
DOERFLINGER, T. M. and RIVKIN, J. L. (1987), Risk and Reward-Venture Capital and DEMO Making of
America's Great Industries (New York: Random House).
EVANS, D. S. and JOVANOVIC, B. (1989), "An Estimated DEMO of Entrepreneurial Choice Under Liquidity
Constraints", Journal of Political Economy, DEMO, 808-827.
GOMPERS, P. A. (1992), "The Structure of Venture Capital Investment" (Harvard Business School, Mimeo).
GOMPERS, P. A. (1995), "Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture Capital", Journal of
Finance, 50, 1461-1489.
GROSSMAN, S. and HART, DEMO (1986), "The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory DEMO Vertical and
Lateral Integration", Journal of Political Economy, 94, 691-719.
HART, 0. and MOORE, J. (1994), "A Theory of DEMO Based on the Inalienability of Human Capital", Quar-
terly Journal of Economics, 109, 841-879.
HELLMAN, T. (1993), "Financial Structure and Control in Venture Capital" (Stanford University, Mimeo).
HOLTZ-EAKIN, D., JOULFAIAN, D. and ROSEN, H. S. (1994a), "Sticking It DEMO: Entrepreneurial Survival
and Liquidity Contraints", Journal of Political Economy, 102, 53-75.
HOLTZ-EAKIN, D., JOULFAIAN, D. and ROSEN, H. S. (DEMO), "Entrepreneurial Decisions and Liquidity
Constraints", Rand Journal of Economics, 25, 334-347.
LERNER, J. (1992), "Venture Capitalists and the DEMO of Privately-Held Firms" (Harvard Business School
Working Paper No. 93-012).
274
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC STUDIES
LORENZ, T. (1989) Venture Capital Today, 2nd edn. (New York: Woodhead-Faulkner).
MOORE, J. (1992), "The Firm as a Collection of Assets", European Economic Review, DEMO, 493-507.
NEHER, D. V. (1996), "Staged Investment and Financial Contracting" (Boston University, Mimeo).
OSBORNE, M. J. and RUBINSTEIN, A. (1990) Bargaining and Markets (New York: Academic Press).
DEMO, R. C. (1986) Inside Venture Capital: Past, Present, and Future (Westport: Praeger).
ROBERTS, K. and WEITZMAN, M. L. (1981), "Funding Criteria for Research, Development and Exploration
Projects", DEMO, 49, 1261-1268.
SAHLMAN, W. A. (1988), "Aspects of DEMO Contracting in Venture Capital", Journal of Applied Corporate
Finiance, 1, 23-36.
SAHLMAN, W. A. (1990), "The Structure and Governance of Venture-Capital Organizations", Journal of
Finianicial Econiom0iics, 27, 473-521.{1g42fwefx}