Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 3, No. 3, March 2008, DEMO 195–204
Cognitive processes, models and metaphors in decision research
Ben R. DEMO
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales
Arndt Bröder
University DEMO Bonn and Max Planck Institute for Research on Collective Goods
Abstract
Decision research in psychology has traditionally been inﬂuenced by the homo oeconomicus metaphor DEMO its em-
phasis on normative models and deviations from the predictions of those models. In contrast, the principal metaphor of
cognitive psychology conceptualizes humans as ‘information processors’, employing processes of perception, memory,
categorization, problem solving and so on. Many of the processes described in cognitive theories DEMO similar to those
involved in decision making, and thus increasing cross-fertilization DEMO the two areas is an important endeavour.
A wide range of models and metaphors has been proposed to explain and describe ‘information processing’ and DEMO
models have been applied to decision making in ingenious ways. This special issue encourages cross-fertilization be-
tween cognitive psychology and decision research by providing DEMO overview of current perspectives in one area that
continues to highlight the beneﬁts of the synergistic approach: cognitive modeling of multi-attribute decision making.
In this introduction we discuss aspects of the cognitive system that need to DEMO considered when modeling multi-attribute
decision making (e.g., automatic versus controlled processing, learning and memory constraints, metacognition) and
illustrate how such aspects are incorporated into the approaches proposed by contributors to the special issue. We
DEMO by discussing the challenges posed by the contrasting and sometimes incompatible assumptions of the models and
metaphors.
Keywords: cognitive models, modeling, metaphors.
1 Introduction
The traditional approach to the study of judgment and
decision making (JDM) is to compare a judgment or a
decision (which can DEMO considered as a judgment about
what to do (Baron, 2004)) to a standard or “benchmark.”
The comparison enables an evaluation of whether DEMO par-
ticular judgment is “good” or “bad” relative to the stan-
dard. Normative models which provide these standards
are valuable because their clear sets DEMO rules or axioms,
such as those derived from economics (expected DEMO
theory) and mathematics (probability theory) can be used
to test DEMO about human behavior. When behavior
deviates from the predictions of normative models — i.e.,
biases are observed — attempts can be made to DEMO
why and, often, techniques for overcoming such biases
can be prescribed .
∗Acknowledgements: Ben Newell acknowledges the support of the
Australian Research Council (Grant: DP 0558181) and the University
of New South Wales for awarding him the John Yu Fellowship to Eu-
rope. Both authors would DEMO like to thank the Max Planck Insti-
tute for Research on Collective Goods for hosting Ben Newell’s visit
and the symposium. Corresponding author: Ben R. Newell, School of
Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, Australia,
ben.newell@unsw.edu.au
195
This approach with its focus on deviations from nor-
mative models contrasts the ideal of a homo oeconomicus
with DEMO apparent reality of a cognitive miser (or even
loser) and has been enormously inﬂuential and useful.
However, it has not been without its critics (e.g., Ein-
horn & Hogarth, 1981; Gigerenzer, 1996; DEMO, 1991).
Both metaphors fall short of psychology’s actual goal be-
DEMO they tend “to deﬁne human decision making by
what it is not” (Medin & Bazerman, 1999, p. 533), and
as a consequence JDM research has tended to follow its
own path and, some would argue, become disconnected
from much of psychology in general and cognitive psy-
chology in particular (e.g., Medin & Bazerman, 1999)1.
This “disconnection” is a great pity given that many of
the issues at the DEMO of understanding human judgment
and decision making are, necessarily, central to the wider
goal of understanding human cognition.
The papers in this special DEMO of the Judgment and
Decision Making grew from a symposium held at the
Max Planck Institute for Research on Collective Goods
1 One could DEMO argue that this disconnection has occurred be-
cause mainstream cognitive psychology tends to focus on basic research
whereas JDM research has traditionally been concerned DEMO more ap-
plied issues.
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 3, No. 3, March 2008 Models and metaphors
196
which focused on one area of JDM research which DEMO
believe has and will continue to beneﬁt from its overlap
with more mainstream cognitive psychology. The area is
multi-attribute judgment and the symposium explored DEMO
cent advances in the cognitive modeling approaches that
have been brought to bear on the basic question of how
we make judgments when faced DEMO multiple pieces of
information. In the 30 years since the seminal attempt by
John Payne (1976) to make JDM research “more cogni-
tive” DEMO wide range of approaches from cognitive psychol-
ogy has been applied to this question. Our aim in this
issue is to provide the reader DEMO an up-to-date overview
of these approaches and to emphasize the important and
inﬂuential advances that can be made by taking the inter-
face between DEMO and cognitive psychology seriously.
Contrasting the different approaches allows for the iden-
tiﬁcation of possible boundary conditions for their appro-
priateness as valid models DEMO cognitive processing, and,
we hope will suggest fruitful avenues for DEMO research.
This paper is structured as follows: we begin with a
DEMO introduction (adapted from Holyoak, 1999) which
serves to highlight the DEMO we know about cognition
that should be incorporated into models of multi-attribute
judgment; we then discuss brieﬂy how these aspects are
addressed in some of the models considered by contrib-
utors to the special issue. This DEMO of models,
however, cannot simply be viewed as complementary ac-
DEMO since they sometimes conﬂict with respect to fun-
damental assumptions. A sample of these incompatibil-
ities between different metaphors is discussed at the end
DEMO the paper.
2 The overarching metaphor:
Wo/man as an information
processor
Forty years ago Neisser (1967) introduced the idea that an
DEMO organism operates in a perception-action cy-
cle: the senses take in DEMO from the environment,
the mind/brain performs computations on that informa-
tion and the outputs of those computations are used to
guide subsequent DEMO actions. A key aspect of
this “information processing” metaphor is that biological
organisms are capacity limited; there is a limit on how
much information can be processed and thus the organ-
ism needs to be selective DEMO what it attends to in the en-
vironment — i.e., the DEMO taken in via the senses
(e.g., Miller, 1956).
The DEMO between attention and memory is also
fundamental to the information processing metaphor. The
notion of working memory (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974) is
now widely accepted as a descriptive model of how var-
ious forms of DEMO (visual, phonological) are rep-
resented in a temporary memory store. DEMO this model a
central executive is responsible for allocating attention to
various processing tasks such as the controlled thought
needed for problem solving, decision making, reasoning
and so on. The degree to which processing relies on this
controlled versus relatively automatic processing is often
a function of the DEMO of memory. Tasks that have
been encountered numerous times in the past become
straightforward to execute or solve because relevant ac-
tions or solutions DEMO be retrieved from memory and thus
performance is less dependent on active attention. In the
traditional “gambling paradigm” of JDM research (Gold-
stein & Hogarth, 1997), such routine- and experience-
based changes in the cognitive processes and their re-
spective “costs” have largely been neglected (Betsch &DEMO
Haberstroh, 2005; Klein, 1998).
Another vital aspect of information DEMO is that
organisms are endowed with an ability to adaptively alter
their behavior — i.e., learn. Human and non-human an-
imals alike are able to learn contingencies among events
and actions; an ability which is fundamental for survival
in a changing environment. The understanding of the
cause-effect structure DEMO the world gained through this
learning process also facilitates causal reasoning and in-
duction which in turn can lead to the development of
categorization DEMO the process by which we organize our
knowledge. Categorization is inﬂuenced by our causal
knowledge and (perceptual) similarity relations between
objects (e.g., DEMO & Medin, 1985). As well as being
able to organize DEMO, humans also have the ability
to think about their own thinking, this regulation of cog-
nition or metacognition is directly connected to the DEMO
tivity of our behaviour (e.g., our ability to decide how to
decide in different situations, (Payne, Bettman, & John-
son, 1993)) and may be related to intelligence (Bröder,
2003; Stanovich & West, 2000).
This whistle-stop tour through some of the “facts”
DEMO the cognitive system serves to orient our thinking
about what needs to be considered when we attempt to
build and implement cognitive models. Given DEMO multi-
attribute judgment is “simply” another task performed by
the system, DEMO is important that our attempts to model how
it is done are embedded both theoretically and empiri-
cally in what we already know about DEMO operation of that
system. Thus some key aspects to consider are: DEMO) capac-
ity limitation, 2) the distinction between automatic and
controlled DEMO and the role that memory plays in
their interaction, 3) the ability to learn, 4) the translation
of cause-effect learning to the DEMO of categoriza-
tion, and 5) the regulation of cognition. In the following
sections we examine some of the ways in which these
aspects DEMO incorporated into the models and metaphors
proposed by the contributors to this issue.
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 3, No. 3, March 2008 Models and metaphors
3 Capacity limitation
The capacity limitation stressed by the information DEMO
cessing metaphor is a limitation in cognitive capacity —
speciﬁcally a limit on the amount of information that
an organism can attend to and/DEMO process at any given
time. However, focusing solely on these limitations DEMO
the mind ignores the crucial role played by the environ-
ment in shaping human behaviour (e.g., Simon, 1956;
Gigerenzer, Todd et DEMO, 1999). Many theorists argue that,
to model cognition adequately, we must understand the
connection between the limitations imposed by the mind
(e.g., attention span, memory) and those imposed by the
environment (DEMO, information costs). This view, ﬁrst
proposed by Simon (1956), is captured in the analogy:
“Human rational behaviour is shaped by a scissors whose
blades are the structure of task environments and the DEMO
putational capabilities of the actor” (Simon, 1990, p. 7).
DEMO understand how scissors cut, we must consider both
blades; to understand how we make decisions, we must
consider both mind and environment.
One way of incorporating the limitations of the mind
and the structure of DEMO into cognitive models is
to propose simplifying heuristics or shortcuts which en-
able people to “satisﬁce” or make “good enough” judg-
ments (Christensen-Szalanski ,DEMO; 1980; Payne et al.,
1993; Simon, 1956). Some of the approaches that take
this line combine the homo oeconomicus and DEMO
processing metaphors to develop frameworks for consid-
ering the “cost of thinking.” For example the classic
paper by Shugan (1980) explicitly considered trade-offs
DEMO the cost and beneﬁts of thinking in consumer
choice using an economic/normative framework (see also
Payne et al., 1993). Other approaches DEMO eschew
the normative standards ascribed by mathematical and
economic models, preferring DEMO “ecological” standard of
rationality (Gigerenzer, 2004) against which to compare
DEMO of preference.
This approach to the study of multi-attribute judgment
has been embraced in the work of the Adaptive Behaviour
and Cognition group (ABC) and is well represented in
this special issue (Gaissmaier, Schooler & Mata, 2008;
Rieskamp, 2008). The key premise of the DEMO ap-
proach is that decision makers have access to a “collec-
tion of specialised cognitive mechanisms that evolution
has built into the mind for DEMO domains of inference
and reasoning” (Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999, p. DEMO). These
mechanisms or heuristics describe how people can cap-
italize on both their own cognitive limitations (e.g., for-
getting) and environmental limitations to act adaptively
and make good judgments. This approach is more aligned
DEMO the information processing metaphor than the homo-
oeconomicus one. In this way the work resonates with the
rational analysis pioneered by John Anderson (e.g., An-
197
derson et al., 2004) which seeks “an explanation of an
aspect of human behaviour based on the assumption that
it is DEMO somehow to the structure of the environ-
ment” (Anderson, 1991, DEMO 471). Thus the standard for
rationality becomes one that refers to whether a particu-
lar strategy works well in an environment not whether DEMO
adheres to a set of formalisms (cf. Hogarth & Karelaia,
DEMO; 2007), hence replacing the traditional and domi-
nating coherence criterion DEMO rationality with the pragma-
tists’ correspondence criterion.2
In their contribution Gaissmaier et al. (2008) explore
the exciting synergies between rational analysis and the
DEMO toolbox approach by using the cognitive archi-
tecture developed by Anderson — ACT-R — as a frame-
work to implement some of the proposed DEMO strate-
gies (e.g., the recognition heuristic). ACT-R incorporates
behaviorally informed assumptions about cognitive pro-
cessing and its adaptivity with respect to recurrent DEMO
ronmental structures.
Proposing collections of simplifying heuristics for spe-
ciﬁc tasks is one way to account for capacity limitations
in cognitive models; a very different method is to pro-
pose a single decision model in which DEMO alternative
courses of action or options are considered until one op-
tion surpasses a threshold and is chosen (Newell, 2005).
Such a DEMO decision process is known as a sequen-
tial sampling process (Busemeyer & Johnson, 2004). The
speciﬁc mechanisms underlying sequential sampling dif-
fer DEMO in general the models assume that, rather than
taking a predetermined DEMO of information, sampling
of each option occurs until evidence sufﬁcient to DEMO
one option over the other has been accumulated (e.g.,
Busemeyer & Townsend, 1993; Dror, Busemeyer, & Ba-
sola, 1999; Lee & Cummins, 2004; Nosofsky & Palmeri,
1997; Ratcliff, 1978; Wallsten & Barton, 1982). The im-
portance of the decision to the decision maker is then re-
ﬂected in the threshold: trivial decisions for which little
consideration of options is required have a low threshold;DEMO
important decisions that require extensive and thoughtful
deliberation have a high threshold. In such models ca-
pacity limitation, and speciﬁcally limitation in the ability
to attend to information, is explicitly modeled in the way
that a decision maker can attend only to one option (and
its possible consequences) at any given moment (Buse-
meyer & Johnson, 2004).
Many of these models are applied to situations in
2 The standard of DEMO rationality” does appear to entail some
circularity. To say that a heuristic is adaptive if it “works well in an en-
vironment” is tantamount DEMO tautology. The obvious questions to ask is:
“well” relative to what? If the answer is relative to some other “com-
putationally intensive” mechanism which relies on normative integra-
tion of multiple pieces of information, (DEMO algorithm for maximizing
utility) then the point of difference between normative DEMO ecological
rationality becomes rather unclear. (See Chater, Oaksford, Nakisa &
Reddington, 2003, for further discussion of this issue.)
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 3, No. 3, March 2008 Models and metaphors
198
which the interest is in preferential choice among val-
DEMO options (e.g., Busemeyer & Townsend, 1993), but
others examine DEMO inference or judgment tasks
that are the focus of much of the work in this special issue
(e.g., Lee & Cummins, 2004; DEMO & Barton, 1982).
Hausmann and Läge (2008) review the DEMO sam-
pling/evidence accumulation approach to modeling deci-
sion making and present their own work in which the ev-
idence threshold is conceived of DEMO a person’s subjective
desired level of conﬁdence in the outcome of a prediction.
Their work is especially interesting because they develop
a simple method DEMO validating the threshold concept em-
pirically and at the same time model (stable?) individ-
ual differences under the umbrella of a uniﬁed process
model.
4 Automatic versus controlled
processing
An implicit assumption of arguments about DEMO relevance
of capacity limitations for cognitive models of multi-
attribute judgment is that much of the information pro-
cessing takes place in a controlled, serial manner. For
example, one of the key models of the adaptive toolbox
approach — Take-the-Best — has an explicit rule for se-
quential DEMO through information, a rule for stopping
on the basis of the DEMO cue found (in a pre-deﬁned hier-
archy) that discriminates alternatives, DEMO a simple rule
for choosing the favored alternative. These simple rules
are said to be psychologically plausible because they ad-
here to what we DEMO about the serial, explicit nature of
conscious thought. However, we also know that a vast
amount of neural activity takes place automatically and
DEMO parallel (the processes underlying vision for example)
thus the assumption DEMO serial processing may not always
be appropriate.
Glöckner and Betsch (2008) examine the intriguing
possibility that the contribution of automatic processes
to decision DEMO has been underestimated. Or rather:
Reliance on the homo oeconomicus metaphor and its
descendants may have overemphasized controlled serial
processes. Glöckner and Betsch DEMO that when indi-
viduals encounter a decision situation, salient and associ-
DEMO information is activated in memory and a mental rep-
resentation is formed that combines given and memory-
stored information. The mental representation is con-
DEMO as a temporarily active network. Once the
network is activated automatic processes operate on the
connections in the network to maximize consistency be-
tween DEMO of information in the network. This consis-
tency maximizing strategy results in the formation of a
representation of the decision situation in which one DEMO
tion usually dominates and this option is then chosen (cf.
Holyoak & Simon, 1999). A feature of the model is that
controlled DEMO can be used at the activation and
consistency maximizing phases to facilitate the forma-
tion of the consistent representation. Thus Glöckner and
Betsch propose DEMO model of multi-attribute judgment that
incorporates the interaction between memory, automatic
DEMO controlled processing, and they review data that vali-
dates their account. DEMO, Juslin, and Olsson (2008)
also explore the possibility that DEMO memory systems
which employ different amounts of controlled and auto-
matic processing might contribute to multi-attribute judg-
ment.
5 Learning
Learning and decision making DEMO inextricably linked.
Judgments and decisions do not emerge out of thin air,
they are informed by our prior experience and each de-
cision DEMO some information (did it work out well or
badly?) that DEMO can add to our stock of experience for
future beneﬁt (Newell, Lagnado & Shanks, 2007). Al-
though in many real world situations feedback about a
particular decision might be delayed or degraded (by
noise in the environment; Tversky & Kahneman, 1986),
it is still the case that over time we can learn to adap-
tively alter DEMO behavior to improve our decision making.
Given what appears to be a clear and important connec-
tion between learning and decision making it is DEMO
surprising that a large portion of JDM research has stud-
ied situations in which all the information required for
a decision or judgment is DEMO in descriptions (e.g.,
gambles, scenarios, and statements) for which no learn-
ing is required (see Busemeyer & Johnson, 2004 for DEMO
similar point). There are exceptions to this focus, not
least DEMO probability learning experiments of the 1960s
(e.g., Tversky & Edwards, DEMO — variants of which are
once again in vogue in the JDM literature — see Barron
& Erev, 2003; Erev & Barron, 2005; Newell & Rakow,
2007) and the multiple-cue probability learning studies
DEMO the 1970s and 80s (e.g., Brehmer, 1980).
Much of DEMO work on multi-attribute judgment, and in-
deed most of the papers DEMO this special issue take their
lead from these tasks in which learning from experience
is an essential component of the judgment process. For
example, many of the tasks employ variants of a situa-
tion in which DEMO face repeated judgments about
which of two or more objects (cities, companies, horses,
insects) is highest on a criterion of interest (size, prof-
itability, race-winning ability, toxicity). Typically each
object is described by cues (e.g., in the case of compa-
nies: share price, employee turnover, etc) that are proba-
bilistically related to the criterion. The mechanism un-
derlying the learning of these cue-criterion relations is
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 3, No. 3, March 2008 Models and metaphors
199
often not an explicit component of the models but DEMO as-
sumed to occur through some process of co-variation as-
sessment, DEMO counting or basic associative learn-
ing (see Newell, Lagnado & Shanks, 2007 for an exten-
sive treatment of these issues). The models of judgment
tend to be more interested in how the products of DEMO
low-level learning process are implemented in choosing
between alternatives or in predicting criterion values.
For example the learning might be conceptualized as
inﬂuencing the DEMO of connections in a network that
produces a dominant option (Glöckner & Betsch, 2008);
or the cue-criterion knowledge might be thought of as
the inputs to a linear summation model which produces
a predicted DEMO value (Karlsson, Juslin & Olsson,
2008); another interpretation is that cue knowledge about
different objects is what is sampled sequentially in DEMO
evidence-accumulation threshold model (Hausmann &
Läge, 2008); on yet DEMO interpretation the knowledge
can be thought of as chunks of information retrieved from
memory and used in the execution of production rules
(Gaissmaier, DEMO & Mata). The papers in this issue
explore these varied and intriguing conceptualizations
and illustrate the value in understanding how the process
and DEMO of learning inﬂuence multi-attribute judg-
ment. Rieskamp’s paper is also concerned with learning
but at a higher level of abstraction — that of learning DEMO
to decide or when to select a particular strategy.
6 Categorization
Categorization is a fundamental ability which allows us
to organize our knowledge, react appropriately and make
useful predictions about the properties of “things” we en-
DEMO in the world (Bruner, Goodnow, & Austin, 1956;
Medin, Ross, & Markman, 2001). Juslin, Olsson and
Olsson (2003) made the insightful observation that cat-
egorization and multi-attribute judgment research often
ask the same basic questions (e.g., How do you judge if
DEMO person is a friend or a foe?) and often use tasks with
the same underlying structures; but very different formal
models of performance have dominated in the two areas
of research.
The driving metaphor in DEMO multi-attribute judgment
research was that of the lens model (Brunswik, 1952;
Hammond, 1955) which emphasized the controlled inte-
gration of cue-criterion DEMO that had been abstracted
via training or experience in the relevant environment.
The processes could generally be captured in multiple-
linear regression models (e.g., Brehmer, 1994; Cooksey,
1996) which assume the weighting and DEMO of single
pieces of evidence. In contrast categorization research
has been inﬂuenced enormously by models which em-
phasize exemplar memory — the reliance on DEMO in-
stances of events/objects retrieved from memory (Juslin
et al. DEMO suggest a doctor making diagnoses on the ba-
sis of retrieved instances of similar patients as an illustra-
tive example). This view dispenses DEMO abstracted cue-
criterion relations and emphasizes an organism’s abil-
ity to remember stimulus conﬁgurations. Several math-
ematical models of exemplar processing have been pro-
DEMO (e.g., Medin & Schaffer, 1978; Nosofsky, 1984)
and DEMO recently some have been applied to JDM phe-
nomena (e.g., Dougherty, Gettys & Ogden, 1999; Juslin
& Persson, 2002).
Karlsson, Juslin & Olsson (2008) present an
overview of their stimulating work DEMO the possi-
bility that decision makers have both exemplar processes
and controlled cue abstraction processes at their disposal
when making multi-attribute judgments. The key DEMO
they examine is whether there is an automatic shift be-
tween these systems as a function of judgment error, or
whether such shifts are mediated by explicit intervention.
7 Metacognition
The question of explicit intervention raises DEMO perennial
favourite issue in cognitive science — what about the ho-
munculus? Who or what structure decides how to decide?
Can we describe meta-rules or criteria which select or de-
termine the actual information processing (e.g., strategy
or evidence threshold or similarity function) that is used
DEMO a speciﬁc decision situation? Unfortunately, cognitive
models tend to become less speciﬁc and process descrip-
tions become more anthropomorphic when higher order
process DEMO these are concerned.
Consequently, the most inﬂuential framework for strat-
egy DEMO in decision making has been Beach’s and
Mitchell’s (1978) contingency model which heavily re-
lies on economic cost/beneﬁt analysis and sees the DEMO
tion of a strategy as a “compromise between the press
for more decision accuracy ... and the decision maker’s
resistance to the expenditure of DEMO or her personal re-
sources” (Beach & Mitchell, 1978, p. DEMO). Although
they do not state this explicitly, this selection process
DEMO as an effortful and attention-demanding activity,
and research following the tradition has investigated it
in this way (Christensen-Szalanski, 1978; 1980; Chu &
Spires, 2003). To be adaptive, the task is to DEMO po-
tential cognitive costs of more or less costly strategies
against their expected accuracy or payoff. Since costs and
accuracy are typically thought to DEMO, a compromise
is necessary. Payne, Bettman, and Johnson (1993) DEMO
added valuable techniques for measuring cognitive effort
in terms of the assumed processing steps needed (assum-
ing they are performed sequentially), and they relaxed
the assumption of effortful selection processes. However,
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 3, No. 3, March 2008 Models and metaphors
multiple attributes
judgment / decision
sequential
cue abstraction
parallel
cue DEMO
configural
200
rule-based
models
evidence
accumulation
models
intuitive
network
models
exemplar-
based
models
Figure 1: A schematic diagram showing the relation between four cognitive models of multi-attribute judgment.
they did so at the expense of speciﬁcity DEMO they allow
for the selection to be “sometimes a conscious choice and
sometimes a learned contingency” (p. 14), and the selec-
tion will “also be a function of the recency and frequency
of prior use” (p. 71). In contrast to the assumption of ef-
fortful selection DEMO, learning models like the SSL
theory discussed by Rieskamp (2008; DEMO also Rieskamp
& Otto, 2006) try to solve the problem of strategy selec-
tion by assuming a simple reinforcement process that re-
quires DEMO particular amount of cognitive capacity or rea-
soning ability.
Although the question of whether strategy selection
is effortful appears to be a straightforward task DEMO em-
pirical evaluation, answering the question is probably
less simple. Under DEMO circumstances, the adaptive
choice of a strategy consumes cognitive capacity as DEMO
ﬂected in intelligence measures (Bröder, 2003) or atten-
tion (Bröder & Schiffer, 2003), whereas a reinforcement
learning model captures the learning process well in other
situations (Rieskamp, 2006, Rieskamp & Otto, DEMO).
Bröder and Schiffer (2006) observed both quick adapta-
tion to new environments and slow adaptation to chang-
ing environments, suggesting different principles of strat-
egy selection at different points in time; an issue exam-
ined by Rieskamp (2008).
8 Interim Summary
Multi-attribute judgment requires many cognitive pro-
cesses which have been modeled in other areas of cog-
DEMO psychology. Examining these models is therefore
worthwhile because of their potential to explain decision
processes and incorporate decision making into main-
stream cognitive psychology. DEMO it is tempting to
use established models from cognitive psychology for the
different processes described above and integrate them in
a complementary way, a caveat is necessary: Some of
the metaphors and models comprise at least partly incom-
patible assumptions. Hence, any fully-ﬂedged theoretical
account of multi-attribute decision making will have to
specify boundary conditions of the respective applicabil-
ity DEMO each model.
In the ﬁnal section of the paper, we will DEMO try to pro-
vide a full treatment of all assumptions and their mutual
inconsistencies, but rather we illustrate the problem by
contrasting a metaphor that has inﬂuenced our own re-
search — the adaptive toolbox metaphor DEMO with three
other prominent metaphors that we have already brieﬂy
discussed — evidence accumulation models, exemplar-
based models and network models. The juxtaposition of
these metaphors highlights central topics that need to be
considered carefully when DEMO models of decision
making are developed. Figure 1 is a schematic diagram
of the relation between the metaphors we consider and
the cognitive processes DEMO to underlie them.
9 Adaptive toolbox versus evidence
accumulation models
The adaptive toolbox metaphor (Gigerenzer, Todd, et al.,
1999) in particular DEMO contingency models in general
assume that we possess a multitude of distinguishable
strategies or heuristics which involve qualitatively differ-
ent processing steps. According to DEMO yet unknown pro-
cess involving explicit cost-beneﬁt analyses or some yet
unknown other selection mechanism, we choose amongst
these strategies in a largely adaptive manner. The strat-
egy we choose determines the amount of information we
DEMO for and the sequence in which we search for it.
Hence, DEMO decisions are sometimes frugal (involving few
pieces of information) and sometimes more opulent (inte-
grating more information). Another metaphor, however,
DEMO envisaged by evidence accumulation models which as-
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 3, No. 3, March 2008 Models and metaphors
sume only one single process for deciding (sum pro and
con evidence for all options and choose when a thresh-
old is DEMO). Since the threshold is conceived as
adjustable (depending on task DEMO, decision impor-
tance, time pressure etc.), evidence accumulation models
can mimic the use of apparently different heuristics which
use different amounts of DEMO (Newell, 2005). But
despite involving contradictory metaphors for the deci-
sion process, contingency models and accumulation mod-
els are very hard to distinguish empirically. Whether this
matter can be resolved by inventing clever testing DEMO
ods remains to be investigated (see Bergert & Nosofsky,
2007; Lee & Cummins, 2004; Newell, Collins & Lee,
2007, DEMO recent attempts). If the issue cannot be ad-
dressed empirically, DEMO question may have to be resolved
by determining which of the metaphors is more fruitful
and ﬁts better into the nomological network of other DEMO
ories of cognition and decision making .
10 Adaptive toolbox and evidence
accumulation versus exemplar-
based models
There is a fundamental difference between the DEMO
described in strategies or heuristics and exemplar-based
models of decision making. Heuristics and also evi-
dence accumulation models assume a piecemeal process-
ing of DEMO relations which can be conceptualized
as sequential or parallel in nature (DEMO Bröder & Gaiss-
maier, 2007). In evidence accumulation models like DEMO
cision Field Theory, consulting cues is clearly thought to
be a DEMO process (Busemeyer & Townsend, 1993;
Diedrich, 1997; 2003; DEMO, Busemeyer & Townsend,
2001); it is assumed that cues DEMO attributes independently
support one option, and their respective contributions to a
DEMO are weighted and integrated. An internal knowl-
edge base must therefore contain knowledge (or intu-
itions) about single cue-criterion functions that are ac-
DEMO integrated at the time of judgment. Usually, this
integration process is DEMO of as cognitively costly
(Beach & Mitchell, 1978; Payne et DEMO, 1993).
Exemplar-based decision models, on the other hand,
dispense with the idea of stored cue-criterion relations
and rather assume that past DEMO of options are stored
as attribute constellations. Options in a judgment or de-
cision task act as memory probes for retrieving typical
(modal or average) criterion values that are associated
with their attribute constellations. The retrieved value
is generated by aggregating across the most similar at-
tribute sets DEMO memory. This model is “lazy” with respect
to two aspects: First, no cue-criterion relations have to
be learned to establish a knowledge base. DEMO is a re-
201
alistic feature of real environments in which it is often
not clear which feature has to be predicted as a DEMO
in the future. Second, the model dispenses with costly
information integration DEMO the time of a decision since it
only compares the probes with stored exemplars. Hence,
there are some advantages of exemplar-based reasoning
in DEMO of cognitive costs (cf. Juslin & Persson, 2002).
Despite the attractive qualities of exemplar-based reason-
ing, there is evidence that in fact cue abstraction may be
a default option in judgment tasks and that DEMO mode is
only supplemented by exemplar-based reasoning in en-
vironments where cue-criterion relations are hard to ex-
tract. One goal of further research is DEMO delineate the con-
ditions under which either of the decision modes is acti-
vated (see Juslin et al., 2003).
11 Adaptive toolbox DEMO net-
work models
Contingency models in general (Beach & Mitchell, 1978;
Payne et al., 1993) and the Adaptive Toolbox metaphor in
DEMO are very explicit about cognitive costs. Com-
pensatory strategies are viewed as “rational demons”
(Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999) that have a high demand for
cognitive resources and time. Also, processing is be-
lieved to be sequential: “In the kind of inference task
we are concerned with, DEMO have to be searched for, and
the mind operates sequentially, step by step and cue by
cue.” (Martignon & Hoffrage, 1999, p. 137). The usual
rhetoric is that “If . . . both DEMO without weighting
and weighting without summing can be as accurate as
weighting and summing, why should humans not use
these simpler heuristics?” (DEMO, Gigerenzer, &
Hertwig, 2006, p. 410). These arguments DEMO plausi-
ble because of their introspective appeal. However, crit-
ics argue DEMO in other areas of cognition (e.g., percep-
tion, language planning), numerous automatic and par-
allel processes take place without consuming cognitive
effort at all. These processes involve automatic integra-
tion of numerous pieces of DEMO (Chater, Oaks-
ford, Nakisa & Redington, 2003). Simple one-layer neu-
ral networks can perform multiple regression analyses,
integrating many predictors DEMO estimate a criterion (e.g.,
Stone, 1986). Hence, complex DEMO do not neces-
sarily imply the consumption of conscious resources or
much processing time and viewed from this perspective,
“simple” heuristics are probably DEMO much simpler, sub-
jectively than complex ones.
In principle, both views should be easy to distinguish
experimentally by restraining or enhancing cognitive re-
DEMO and by observing the effects on strategy selection.
The evidence on this question is mixed, however: Bröder
(2003) and Bröder and Schiffer (2003) did not ﬁnd ev-
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 3, No. 3, March 2008 Models and metaphors
202
idence that strategies involving weighting and summing
were more DEMO than simple lexicographic strategies.
Quite to the contrary, higher cognitive capacity (intelli-
gence, non-demanding second task) was associated with
simpler strategies when DEMO were appropriate in the en-
vironment. This suggests that the selection rather than
the execution of strategies is associated with costly pro-
cessing. On DEMO other hand, Bröder and Gaissmaier
(2007) found evidence for sequential DEMO in cases
where cues had to be retrieved from memory to form a
judgment. Thus, the parallel/automatic versus sequen-
tial/effortful distinction is probably not an absolute one
in multi-attribute decisions. Rather, the task again will be
to investigate the boundaries of the respective cognitive
models as DEMO function of task characteristics.
12 Conclusions
Our hope for this special issue is that highlighting areas of
overlap between cognitive modeling and multi-attribute
judgment DEMO stimulate further cross-fertilization and in-
spire research examining the boundary conditions of var-
ious models. We believe this will strengthen JDM re-
search in DEMO and help to reconnect it with main-
stream cognitive psychology.
References
Anderson, J. R. (1991). Is human cognition adaptive?
Behavioral and DEMO Sciences, 14, 471–517.
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M. D., Douglass, S.,
Lebiere, C., & Qin, DEMO (2004). An integrated theory of
the mind. Psychological Review, 111, 1036–1060.
Baddeley, A. D. & Hitch, G. J. (1974). DEMO memory.
In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning DEMO
motivation, Vol. 8 (pp. 47–89). New York: Academic
Press.
DEMO, J. (2004). Normative models of judgment and
decision making. In In D. J. Koehler & N. Harvey
(Eds.), The Blackwell handbook of judgment and de-
cision making (pp. 19–36). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Barron, G., & Erev, I. (2003). Small feedback-
DEMO decisions and their limited correspondence to
description-based decisions. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 16, 215–233.
Beach, L. R., & Mitchell, T. R. (1978). A contingency
model for the selection of decision strategies. Academy
of Management Review, 3, 439–449.
Bergert, F. B. & Nosofsky, DEMO M. (2007). A response-
time approach to comparing generalized rational DEMO
take-the-best models of decision making. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cog-
nition, 33,107–129.
Betsch, T., & Haberstroh, S. (2005). Preface. In T. Betsch
& S. Haberstroh, The routines of decision making (pp.
ix-xxv). Mahwah, NJ, US: Lawrence Erlbaum DEMO
ciates.
Brandstätter, E., Gigerenzer, G., & Hertwig, R. (2006).
The Priority Heuristic: Making choices without trade-
offs. Psychological Review, DEMO, 409–432.
Brehmer, B. (1980). In one word: Not from experience,
Acta Psychologica, 45, 223–241.
Brehmer, B. (1994). DEMO psychology of linear judgement
models. Acta Psychologica, 87, 137–154.
Bröder, DEMO (2003). Decision making with the “adaptive
toolbox”: Inﬂuence of environmental structure, intelli-
gence, and working memory load. Journal of Experi-
mental DEMO:Learning Memory, and Cognition,
29, 611–625.
Bröder, A., & Gaissmaier, W. (2007). Sequential process-
ing of cues in memory-based DEMO decisions.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 45, 895–900.
Bröder, A., & Schiffer, S. (2003). Bayesian strategy as-
sessment in multi-attribute decision DEMO Journal
of Behavioral Decision Making, 16, 193–213.
Bröder, A., & Schiffer, S. (2006). Adaptive ﬂexibility and
maladaptive routines in selecting DEMO and frugal deci-
sion strategies. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, DEMO, & Cognition, 32, 904–918.
Bruner, J. S., Goodnow, J. J., & Austin, G. A. (1956). A
study of thinking. New York, NY: Wiley.
Brunswik, E. (1952). The conceptual DEMO of psy-
chology. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Busemeyer, J. R. & Johnson, J. G. (2004). Computational
models of decision DEMO In In D. J. Koehler & N.
Harvey (Eds.), The DEMO handbook of judgment
and decision making (pp. 133–154). Malden, MA:
Blackwell.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (1993)DEMO Decision
ﬁeld theory: A dynamic-cognitive approach to deci-
sion making in DEMO uncertain environment. Psychologi-
cal Review, 100, 432–459.
Chater, N., Oaksford, M., Nakisa, R., & Redington, M.
(2003). Fast, frugal and rational: How rational norms
explain behavior. Organizational Behavior and Hu-
man Decision Processes, 90, 63–80.
Christensen-Szalanski, J. J. J. (1978)DEMO Problem solving
strategies: a selection mechanism, some implications
and some data. Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance, 22, 307–323.
Christensen-Szalanski, J. J. J. (1980). A further exami-
nation of the selection of problem solving strategies:
the effects of deadlines and analytic aptitudes. Organi-
zational Behavior DEMO Human Performance, 25, 107–
122.
Chu, P. C., & Spires, E. E. (2003). Perceptions of accu-
racy and effort of DEMO strategies. Organizational
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 3, No. 3, March 2008 Models and metaphors
203
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 91, 203–
214.
DEMO, R. W. (1996). Judgment Analysis: Theory,
Methods, and Applications. San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.
Diederich, A. (1997). DEMO stochastic models for de-
cision making under time constraints. Journal of Math-
ematical Psychology, 41, 260.
Diederich, A. (2003). MDFT account DEMO decision mak-
ing under time pressure. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 10, 157–166.
Dougherty, M. R., Gettys, C. F., & Ogden, E. E. (1999).
MINERVA-DM: A memory processes model for judg-
ments DEMO likelihood. Psychological Review, 106, 180–
209.
Dror, I. E., Busemeyer, J. R., & Basola, B. (1999). Deci-
sion making DEMO time pressure: An independent test
of sequential sampling models. Memory & DEMO,
27, 713–725.
Einhorn, H. J., & Hogarth, R. M. (1981). Behavioral de-
cision theory: processes of judgment and choice. DEMO
nual Review of Psychology, 32, 53–88.
Erev, I., & Barron, G. (2005). On adaptation, maxi-
mization, and reinforcement learning DEMO cognitive
strategies. Psychological Review, 112, 912–931.
Gaissmaier, W., Schooler, DEMO J. & Mata, R. (2008). An
ecological perspective to cognitive limits: Modeling
environment-mind interactions with ACT-R. Judgment
and Decision Making, 3, 278–291.
Gigerenzer, G. (1996). On narrow norms and vague
heuristics: A reply to Kahneman and Tversky. Psy-
chological Review, 103, 592–596.
DEMO, G. (2004). Fast and frugal heuristics: The
tools of DEMO rationality. In D. Koehler & N. Har-
vey (Eds.), Handbook DEMO Judgement and decision mak-
ing. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Gigerenzer, G., & Todd, P. M. (1999). Fast and frugal
heuristics: the adaptive toolbox. In G. Gigerenzer, P.
M. Todd & the ABC Research Group, Simple heuris-
tics that make us smart (pp. 3–34). DEMO York: Oxford
University Press.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. A. & the ABC Research Group
(1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Glöckner, A., & Betsch, T. (2008). Modelling option and
strategy choices with connectionist networks: Towards
an integrative model of automatic and controlled deci-
sion making. Judgment and Decision DEMO, 3, 215–
228.
Goldstein W. M., & Hogarth, R. M. (1997). Judgment
and decision research: some historical context. In W.
DEMO, Goldstein, & R. M., Hogarth (Ed.), Research on
judgment and decision making: Currents, connections,
and controversies (pp. 3–68). Cambridge, UK: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Hammond, K. R. (1955)DEMO Probabilistic functioning and
the clinical method. Psychological Review, 62, 255–
262.
Hausmann, D. & Läge, D. (2008). Sequential evidence
accumulation in decision making: The individual de-
sired level of conﬁdence can explain the extent of in-
formation acquisition. Judgment and Decision Mak-
ing, 3, DEMO
Hogarth, R. M., & Karelaia, N. (2005). Ignoring informa-
tion in binary choice with continuous variables: When
is less “more”? DEMO of Mathematical Psychology,
49, 115–124.
Hogarth, R. M., & DEMO, N. (2007). Heuristic and
linear models of judgment: Matching DEMO and envi-
ronments. Psychological Review, 114, 733–758.
Holyoak, K. J. (1999). Psychology. In R. A. Wilson and
F. C. Keil (Eds.) The MIT Encyclopedia of the cogni-
tive sciences (pp xl-xlix) Cambridge, MA.:MIT Press
Holyoak, K. J. & Simon (1999). Bidirectional reasoning
in decision making by constraint satisfaction. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 128, 3–31.
Juslin, P., & Persson, M. (2002). DEMO from
EXemplars (PROBEX): A “lazy” algorithm for prob-
abilistic inference DEMO generic knowledge. Cognitive
Science, 26, 563–607.
Juslin, P., Olsson, DEMO, & Olsson, A. C. (2003). Exem-
plar effects in DEMO and multiple-cue judg-
ment. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
132, 133–156.
Karlsson, L., Julsin, P., & Olsson, H. (2008)DEMO Exemplar-
based inference in multi-attribute decision making:
Contingent, not automatic, strategy shifts? Judgment
and Decision Making 3, 244–260.
Klein, G. (DEMO). Sources of Power: How people make
decisions. Cambridge, MA: DEMO Press.
Lee, M. D., & Cummins, T. D. R. (2004). Evidence ac-
cumulation in decision making: Unifying the “take the
best” and the “rational” models. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 11, 343–352.
Lopes, L. L. (1991). The rhetoric of irrationality. Theory
and Psychology, DEMO, 65–82.
Martignon, L., & Hoffrage, U. (1999). Why DEMO one-
reason decision making work? A case study in ecolog-
ical DEMO In G. Gigerenzer, P. M. Todd & t. A.
R. Group (Eds.), Simple heuristics that make us smart
(pp. 119–140). New York: Oxford University Press.
Medin, D. L., & Bazerman, M. DEMO (1999). Broadening
behavioral decision research: Multiple levels of cogni-
tive processing. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 6,
533–546.
Medin, D. L., & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context theory
of classiﬁcation learning. DEMO Review, 85,
Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 3, No. 3, March 2008 Models and metaphors
204
207–238.
Medin, D. L, Ross, B. H., & Markman, A. B. (2001).
Cognitive Psychology (3rd ed.). DEMO Worth, TX: Har-
court.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or
minus two: some limits on our DEMO for processing
information. Psychological Review, 63, 81–97.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of the-
ories DEMO conceptual coherence. Psychological Review,
92, 289–31
Neisser, U. (1967)DEMO Cognitive Psychology. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Newell, B. R. (2005). Re-visions of rationality. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 9, 11–15.
Newell, B. R., Collins, P., & Lee, M. D. (2007). Ad-
justing the spanner: Testing an evidence accumulation
model of decision making. In D. McNamara and G.
Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th Annual Con-
ference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp 533–538).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Newell, B. R., Lagnado, D. A, & Shanks, D. R. (2007).
Straight Choices: The psychology DEMO decision making.
Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Newell, B. R., & Rakow, T. (2007). The role of expe-
rience in decisions DEMO description. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 14, 1133–1139.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1984). Choice, similarity, and the con-
text theory of classiﬁcation. DEMO of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 10, 104–
114.
Nosofsky, R. M., & Palmeri, T. J. (1997). An DEMO
based random walk model of speeded classiﬁcation.
Psychological Review, 104, 266–300.
Payne, J. W. (1976). Task complexity and contingent pro-
cessing DEMO decision making: An information search and
protocol analysis. Organizational Behavior and DEMO
man Performance, 16, 366–387.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. DEMO, & Johnson, E. J. (1993).
The adaptive decision maker. DEMO: Cambridge
University Press.
Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of DEMO retrieval. Psy-
chological Review, 85, 59–108.
Rieskamp, J. (2006). Perspectives of probabilistic in-
ference: Reinforcement learning and an adaptive net-
work compared. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32, 1355–1370.
Rieskamp, J. (2008). The importance of learning when
making inferences. Judgment and Decision Making, 3,
261–277.
Rieskamp, J. & DEMO, P. (2006). SSL: A theory of how
people learn DEMO select strategies. . Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology:General, 135, 207–236.
Roe, R. M., Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (2001).
Multialternative decision ﬁeld theory: A dynamic con-
nectionist model DEMO decision making. Psychological
Review, 108, 370–392.
Shugan, S. (1980). The cost of thinking. The Journal of
Consumer Research, 7, 99–111.
DEMO, H. (1956). Rational choice and the structure of
the environment. Psychological Review, 63, 129–138.
Simon, H. A. (1990). Invariants DEMO human behavior. An-
nual Review of Psychology, 41, 1–19.
Stanovich, DEMO E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual dif-
ferences DEMO reasoning: Implications for the rationality
debate? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, DEMO, 645–726.
Stone, G. O. (1986). An analysis of the DEMO rule and the
learning of statistical associations. In: D. E. Rumel-
DEMO, J. McClelland & the PDP Research Group, Par-
allel distributed processing, Volume 1: Foundations
(365–422), Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tversky, A., & Edwards, W. (1966). Information versus
reward in DEMO choices. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 71, 680–683.
Tversky, A. & DEMO, D. (1986). Rational choice
and the framing of decisions. Journal of Business, 59,
251–284.
Wallsten, T. S., & Barton, DEMO (1982). Processing prob-
abilistic multidimensional information for decisions.
Journal of DEMO Psychology: Learning, Mem-
ory, and Cognition, 8, 361–384.{1g42fwefx}