Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 108–117
Contents lists DEMO at ScienceDirect
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/DEMO/obhdp
Opportunity recognition and the tendency to be an entrepreneur: A DEMO
genetics perspective
Nicos Nicolaou a,*, Scott Shane b, Lynn Cherkas c, Tim D. Spector c
a Department of Public and Business Administration, University of Cyprus, 1678 Nicosia, Cyprus
b Weatherhead School of Management, Case Western Reserve University, 11119 Bellﬂower Rd., Cleveland, OH 44106, United States
c Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology Unit, King’s College London, St Thomas’ Hospital Campus, London, SE1 7EH, United Kingdom
article DEMO
Article history:
Received 16 June 2008
Accepted 22 August 2009
Available online 25 September 2009
Accepted by John Schaubroeck
Keywords:
Entrepreneurship
Opportunity DEMO
Behavioral genetics
Introduction
Whether it is to found an Internet search engine, an airline or a
new restaurant, an important part of being DEMO entrepreneur is
identifying an opportunity for a new business, making opportunity
DEMO an important part of the entrepreneurship process. In
the last decade, DEMO have given increased attention to unravel-
ling the antecedents of opportunity recognition (e.g. Baron & Ens-
ley, 2006; Casson & Wadeson, 2007; Gaglio & Katz, 2001; Shane,
2000). One of the DEMO in this stream of research is that some
people are better at noticing new business opportunities than
other people, and that this superior ability makes them more likely
than other people to start businesses (Baron & Ensley, 2006).
While researchers have identiﬁed some of the factors that ac-
count for the variation across people in opportunity recognition
(Baron, DEMO), to date researchers have not explored the question
of whether some people are born with a greater genetic predispo-
sition to identify entrepreneurial DEMO, and, if they are,
whether the same genetic factors also account for the greater ten-
dency of some people to start businesses. DEMO, previous re-
search suggests that the genetic effects on the tendency DEMO be an
entrepreneur could be gender-speciﬁc, impacting women far more
than DEMO (Zhang et al., in press). In this paper, we DEMO the ﬁrst
empirical investigation of the genetic component of opportunity
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: nicos.nicolaou@ucy.ac.cy (N. Nicolaou), sas46@cwru.edu (S.
Shane).
0749-5978/$ - see front matter  2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights DEMO
doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2009.08.005
abstract
We applied quantitative genetics techniques to a sample of 851 pairs of monozygotic and 855 pairs of
dizygotic female twins DEMO examine the inﬂuence of genetic factors on the variation across people in
opportunity recognition. We also examined the extent to which the same genetic DEMO contribute to
both opportunity recognition and the tendency to be an entrepreneur. We found substantial heritability
for opportunity recognition (0.45), with no inﬂuence of the shared environment. Moreover, we found that
53% of the phenotypic correlation between opportunity recognition and the tendency to be an entrepre-
neur DEMO a common genetic aetiology.
 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
recognition, and examine whether the covariance between oppor-
tunity recognition and the tendency of women to be entrepreneurs
is partly accounted for by genetic factors.
DEMO the genetic aetiology of opportunity recognition
and the tendency to be an entrepreneur among women is impor-
tant for three reasons. First, an accurate understanding of entrepre-
neurship depends on the correctly ascribing the sources of
DEMO between people in opportunity recognition. If the identi-
ﬁcation of new business opportunities is a necessary part of new
business creation, then researchers must account for differences
across people in their ability to recognize opportunities in DEMO
to explain new business formation. To date, researchers have ex-
plained DEMO a small part of this variance (Butler, 2004; Shane,
DEMO). Understanding the role that genetics plays in opportunity
recognition can help scholars build a more comprehensive and
integrative understanding of this phenomenon.
This DEMO true even if the genetic component to opportunity recog-
nition, the DEMO to be an entrepreneur, and other aspects of
entrepreneurship are of DEMO same magnitude as the genetic effects
on psychological factors. No aspect of entrepreneurship is perfectly
correlated with any psychological attribute, nor is there any theory
that holds that people with certain personality traits must be entre-
DEMO Moreover, entrepreneurship is a different phenomenon
from psychological characteristics. Therefore, the same genetic fac-
tors may inﬂuence psychological characteristics and the tendency
to DEMO an entrepreneur and opportunity recognition or they may
not. Just as researchers cannot assume that leadership, job satisfac-
tion, job preferences, and so on, have a genetic component because
N. Nicolaou et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 108–117
109
research shows that psychological characteristics have a genetic
component, they cannot assume that entrepreneurship has a ge-
netic component from evidence of a genetic effect on these
other phenomena. In all cases, researchers must develop and test
theory of the genetic effects on the particular DEMO of
interest.
Second, understanding the common genetic aetiology between
opportunity recognition DEMO the tendency to become an entrepre-
neur is important to suggest what, if any, interventions can be
undertaken to encourage people to create DEMO businesses. If the
entire correlation between opportunity recognition and the ten-
dency to be an entrepreneur is accounted for by genetic factors,
this DEMO suggest that we cannot inﬂuence the level of entrepre-
neurial exploitation that occurs in an economy by engaging in
interventions that stimulate people to, or teach people to, recog-
nize opportunities. On the other hand, DEMO there are no shared genet-
ic inﬂuences between opportunity recognition and the tendency to
be an entrepreneur, then we could signiﬁcantly affect new busi-
ness creation by stimulating opportunity recognition.
Third, the factors inﬂuencing the tendency of women to become
entrepreneurs may be different from those affecting their DEMO
counterparts. Research shows that the genetic effect on the ten-
dency to be an entrepreneur may be stronger for women than for
men (Zhang et al., in press). The differences between men and wo-
men in the strength of genetic effects on the tendency to be an
DEMO suggests the importance of developing and testing
gender-speciﬁc explanations for how genetics impacts different as-
pects of entrepreneurship.
Theory development
We propose that genetic DEMO inﬂuence the variation across
people in opportunity recognition. We also propose that the same
genetic factors that inﬂuence opportunity recognition also inﬂu-
ence the DEMO to be an entrepreneur. A common genetic aeti-
ology for opportunity recognition and the tendency to be an
entrepreneur would depend on three factors: First, that opportu-
nity recognition is heritable; second, that the tendency to be an
entrepreneur is heritable; and third, that a common DEMO mech-
anism accounts for the heritability of both opportunity recognition
and the tendency to be an entrepreneur. Below we offer the argu-
ments for DEMO these three conditions should be true.
The heritability of opportunity recognition
Opportunity recognition, or the identiﬁcation of a chance to com-
bine resources in a way that might generate a proﬁt, is an important
aspect of entrepreneurship (Gaglio & Katz, 2001; Shane, 2003; Shane
& Venkataraman, 2000). Because people need to identify opportuni-
ties to be entrepreneurs, skill at opportunity identiﬁcation increases
the probability that a person will become an entrepreneur (Baron &
Ensley, 2006; Casson & Wadeson, 2007; Gaglio & Katz, 2001; Shane,
2000). However, all DEMO are not equally skilled at identifying
entrepreneurial opportunities (Ardichvili, Cardozo, & Ray, 2003;
Baron & Ensley, 2006). In fact, DEMO have identiﬁed several dif-
ferences between people that are correlated with opportunity recog-
nition, including prior information (Shane, 2000), psychological
‘‘alertness” (DEMO & Katz, 2001), pattern recognition skills (Baron
& Ensley, DEMO), and social network structure (Baron & Ozgen,
2007; Singh, Hills, Hybels, & Lumpkin, 1999).
While we know that DEMO number of factors are correlated with
being ‘‘good” at opportunity recognition (DEMO that individual level
variation in opportunity recognition is associated with being an
entrepreneur), the origin of these interpersonal differences has
not been completely DEMO These differences might be learned,
or they might be the result of a person’s genetic endowment.
Although both learning and genetics are likely DEMO for
individual level variation in opportunity recognition, this paper fo-
cuses DEMO examining Ardichvili et al.’s conjecture (2003: 110) that
‘‘[t]hese individual DEMO may come from variations in indi-
viduals’ genetic makeup...”
The ﬁeld of entrepreneurship does not yet have a fully articu-
lated theory for how DEMO inﬂuences differences across people
in opportunity recognition, but it does have DEMO plausible expla-
nations. Below we examine four plausible mechanisms for these
genetic effects.1
First, genetics may affect people’s ability to identify opportuni-
ties by inﬂuencing their ability to creatively fashion business
opportunities from bits of information. DEMO (2000) explains that
opportunities do not come in pre-packaged form. Rather, people
need to combine information in novel ways to identify business
opportunities. For instance, entrepreneurs might need to think of
new ways to combine resources so that their value exceeds the
cost of the resources themselves, or they might need to come up
with novel solutions to customer DEMO (Ardichvili et al.,
2003; Vesalainen & Pihkala, 1999). DEMO the speciﬁc informa-
tion which entrepreneurs must use creatively, creativity is DEMO
important part of opportunity recognition. In fact, in a survey of
DEMO, Hills, Lumpkin, and Singh (1997) found that 90% be-
DEMO that creativity is ‘‘very important” for opportunity
recognition.
The importance of creativity to opportunity recognition sug-
gests one way that genes inﬂuence opportunity recognition. DEMO
ies show that 55% of the difference between people in creativity is
genetic (Bouchard, McGue, Hur, & Horn, 1998), with two genes –
DRD2 and TPH1 – having been found to account for DEMO of the dif-
ference between people in creativity (Reuter, Roth, DEMO, & Hen-
nig, 2006). Thus, genes might facilitate opportunity DEMO
by making some people more creative than others.
Second, genetics may DEMO people’s ability to identify
entrepreneurial opportunity by affecting their openness to experi-
ence. Openness to experience enhances opportunity recognition
because new experiences provide novel DEMO, and facilitate
mental processes, that are helpful to identifying opportunities
(DEMO & Seibert, 2006).
Genetics affects openness to experience, accounting for be-
tween 45% and 61% of people’s differences in this personality trait
(Bouchard & Loehlin, 2001; Loehlin, 1992). Moreover, researchers
have DEMO that individuals with certain variants of the DRD4 gene
are more open to experience than those with different versions of
the genes (Comings et al., 1999). Thus, genes might facilitate
opportunity recognition by making DEMO people more open to
experience than others.
Third, genetics may affect DEMO ability to recognize entrepre-
neurial opportunities by facilitating the formation of strong social
networks. Social ties facilitate opportunity recognition because
other people often provide DEMO with information helpful
to the process (Ardichvili et al., 2003). Moreover, the necessary
information to identify opportunities is often distributed across a
number of sources, making broad social ties useful to accessing
all of the needed bits of information (Johansson, 2000).
Research shows that DEMO social ties enhance opportunity rec-
ognition. Koller found that 46% of ﬁrm founders had their business
idea suggested to them by someone with whom DEMO had a social
tie. Hills et al. (1997) found that entrepreneurs who have broader so-
cial networks recognize more opportunities than those with
DEMO We focus on these four mechanisms because they could also account for a
common genetic aetiology between opportunity recognition and the tendency to be
DEMO entrepreneur. Genetic factors could inﬂuence opportunity recognition through
other mechanisms as well.
110
narrower social networks. Baron and Ozgen (2007) found that entre-
DEMO with more ties to mentors, other industry participants and
members of DEMO associations, the better they were at recognizing
opportunities. And Singh et DEMO (1999) showed that entrepreneurs
with more diverse social ties were more likely to identify entrepre-
neurial opportunities than those with less diverse ties.
DEMO strength of a person’s social network is, in part, genetic.
Researchers have found that a person’s choice of friends, number
of friends and conﬁdants, frequency of interaction with friends,
amount of social support from friends, social network denseness,
network centrality, social relationship intensity, sociability, social
avoidance, and social skills, are all affected by genetics (DEMO
et al., 1998; Carey, 2003; Fowler, Dawes, & Christakis, 2009; Iervo-
lino et al., 2002; Jang, Livesley, Vernon, & Jackson, 1996; Loehlin &
Gough, 1990; Manke, McGuire, Reiss, Hetherington, & Plomin,
1995; Plomin, 1994; Schnittker, DEMO). Thus, genes might facilitate
opportunity recognition by giving some people DEMO social net-
works than others.
Fourth, genetics may inﬂuence opportunity recognition DEMO
affecting preferences for autonomy and job security. People with
a higher predisposition for autonomy and a lower predisposition
for job security are more interested DEMO working for themselves,
and thus are more likely to search for entrepreneurial opportuni-
ties than other people (Shane, 2003).
The preference DEMO both autonomy and job security are partially
genetic. Studies show that genes account for about a third of the
difference between people in both DEMO (Arvey, Bouchard,
Segal, & Abraham, 1989). Thus, DEMO might facilitate opportunity
recognition by making some people more interested in autonomy
and less interested in job security than others.
These arguments lead to DEMO following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1. Genetic factors inﬂuence part of the variation across
people in opportunity recognition.
The heritability of entrepreneurship
Whether entrepreneurship is DEMO as self-employment,
starting companies, owning one’s own business, or being involved
in the ﬁrm start-up process, recent research shows that the ten-
dency to be an entrepreneur is partially genetic, with heritabilities
from 37% to 48%, depending on the measure. Moreover, these her-
itabilities are DEMO even after taking into consideration the ef-
fects of age, income, education, marital status, race, and
immigrant status (Nicolaou, Shane, DEMO, Hunkin, & Spector,
2008).
The genetic effect on the tendency to be an entrepreneur may
also be much stronger for women DEMO for men. Prior research
shows substantially higher heritabilities of entrepreneurship for
women than for men (Zhang et al., in press). Researchers have
DEMO that genetic effects may be more powerful for women
because there is a lower prevalence of entrepreneurship for wo-
men than for men (Brush, 1992). As a result, the situational factors
that motivate men DEMO start businesses may not have as large an ef-
fect on women. For instance, men might be more likely to start a
company in response to the experience of working in a small busi-
ness, while this experience might not trigger entrepreneurial ten-
dencies in women. The end DEMO is little genetic effect on the
tendency of men to become entrepreneurs, but a strong genetic ef-
fect on women (Shane, forthcoming).
Common genetic factors inﬂuencing opportunity recognition and the
tendency to be an DEMO
The same genetic factors that inﬂuence the tendency to be an
entrepreneur might also inﬂuence opportunity recognition. Much
N. Nicolaou et al. / Organizational DEMO and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 108–117
research shows that similar factors are associated with both phe-
nomena (Baron, 2007). Moreover, all of the above-mentioned
mechanisms, through which genetics affects opportunity recogni-
tion, also affect the tendency to be an entrepreneur.
First, creativity affects DEMO tendency to be an entrepreneur. Cre-
ativity is necessary not just to identify business opportunities, but
also to ﬁgure out how to obtain resources to pursue them. More-
over, over time, the conditions facing businesses DEMO and entre-
preneurs need to come up with creative responses to those
changes (Shane, 2003).
Empirical research conﬁrms this proposition, showing that
entrepreneurs are more creative than non-entrepreneurs. Hull,
Bosley, and Udell (DEMO) found that business owners scored higher
on a measure of creativity DEMO non-owners, while Caird (1991)
and Cromie and O’Donaghue (1992) found that ﬁrm owners were
more creative than the general population.
Second, openness to experience affects the tendency to be an
entrepreneur. Openness to DEMO provides people with a vari-
ety of information that helps them to develop new products and
organizations. Moreover, it provides them with an understanding
of a wide range of customers and customer attitudes that is useful
DEMO running a business (Shane, 2003). Empirically, a recent meta-
DEMO conﬁrms that entrepreneurs are more open to experience
than managers (Zhao & Seibert, 2006).
Third, social network strength affects the tendency to be an
entrepreneur (Hills et al., 1997; Singh et al., DEMO, Baron and Oz-
gen, 2007; Aldrich & Kim, 2007). Entrepreneurs use their social
networks to obtain ﬁnancial and human resources (Aldrich,
1999) because social relationships facilitate resource acquisition
under conditions of uncertainty and information asymmetry
(Shane, 2003). Moreover, social networks provide entrepreneurs
with useful information about many aspects of running their busi-
nesses, from government regulation to interactions with suppliers
(Cromie & Birley, 1993).
DEMO research shows that entrepreneurs tend to have
stronger social networks than other people. For instance, Aldrich,
Rosen, and Woodward (1987) found DEMO people who have more
contact with other members of their social networks are more
likely to start businesses. Denison, Swaminathan, and Rothbard
(1994) found that the size of a person’s social network had a
positive effect on their probability of starting a business. Shane
and Cable (2002) and Shane and Stuart (2002) found that the pres-
ence of social ties between entrepreneurs and investors increased
the odds that the entrepreneurs DEMO raise money from the
investors.
Fourth, the desire for autonomy and DEMO preference for job secu-
rity affect the tendency to be an entrepreneur. People high in need
for autonomy have a disproportionate tendency to start DEMO
because they want to set their own rules and hours, pick DEMO own
goals and plans, and make their own decisions (Rauch & Frese,
2007a, 2007b).
Empirical studies show that entrepreneurs are higher in the de-
sire for autonomy and lower in preference for job DEMO than
other people (Caird, 1991; Cromie & O’Donaghue, 1992; DEMO
& Aboud, 1973). In fact, one study showed that agreement with the
statement: ‘‘being my own boss is vital in choosing a job” increases
the odds that a person will be self-employed ten years DEMO, while
agreement with the statement: ‘‘job security is most vital in choos-
ing a job” reduces the odds that a person will be DEMO a
decade hence (Burke, FitzRoy, & Nolan, 2000). Moreover, Vesalai-
nen and Pihkala (1999) found that the desire for independence in-
creases the odds that a person will engage in the business DEMO
process. And Reynolds and White (1997) found that people en-
gaged in the start-up process scored higher on measures of auton-
omy and DEMO than a control group representing the
overall population.
N. Nicolaou et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 108–117
In short, we argue that the same genetically-inﬂuenced factors
DEMO the probability that people will both recognize opportuni-
ties and be entrepreneurs. Therefore, we hypothesize:
Hypothesis 2. The same genetic factors account for part of the
covariation between opportunity recognition and the tendency to
be DEMO entrepreneur.
Methodology
We use behavioral genetics techniques to examine the degree to
which opportunity recognition has a genetic component, and
whether the same genetic component accounts for variation across
people in both opportunity recognition and the DEMO to be an
entrepreneur. Behavioral genetics involves the comparison of
monozygotic (DEMO) and dizygotic (DZ) twins to disentangle the por-
tion of DEMO variance in opportunity recognition that comes from ge-
netic and environmental factors as well as the portion of the
covariance between opportunity recognition and DEMO tendency to
be an entrepreneur that is accounted for by genetic factors. MZ
twins are formed when a single sperm fertilizes a single egg; the
egg subsequently splits into two, resulting into two individuals
who are genetically identical (Kendler & Prescott, 2006). DZ twins
are formed DEMO two different eggs are fertilized by two different
sperm, and hence DEMO, on average, 50% of their segregating genes,
just like all other full siblings.
Because MZ twins share their entire genetic composition and
DEMO twins share, on average, 50% of their segregating genes, studies
DEMO twins can provide estimates in the heritability (or degree to
which DEMO source of variation in a population is genetic) of a phe-
DEMO of interest (in this case, opportunity recognition). Assuming
that MZ and DZ co-twins do not differ in the similarity of their
environments, differences in the correlations between pairs of
MZ and DZ co-twins is DEMO function of genetic factors.
We use bivariate genetics techniques to identify whether the
same genetic factors inﬂuence both opportunity recognition and
the tendency to DEMO an entrepreneur. By comparing MZ and DZ
twin correlations across both opportunity recognition and the
tendency to be an entrepreneur, (e.g., we compare one twin’s
opportunity recognition score with its co-twin’s tendency to be
an DEMO score) we can determine the extent to which
the correlation between DEMO recognition and the ten-
dency to be an entrepreneur is a function of genetic factors. If
the cross-trait-cross-twin correlations are greater for MZ twins
DEMO for DZ twins, then genetic factors contribute to the pheno-
typic DEMO between these two variables, but if the cross-
trait-cross-twin correlations are DEMO for MZ and DZ twins, or
are greater for DZ twins DEMO for MZ twins, then genetic factors
do not contribute to the DEMO correlation between these
two variables.
The validity of twin studies rests on the assumption that the
shared environment of DZ twins is similar to DEMO of the MZ twins,
so called the equal environments assumption (DEMO). For this
assumption to be violated environmental factors must treat MZ
twins in a different way than DZ twins and this difference in DEMO
ment must inﬂuence the phenotype under study. Different meth-
ods have been used to evaluate the EEA, all of which conﬁrm the
robustness of the assumption (Kendler & Prescott, 2006). First,
studies have DEMO the phenotypic similarity in twin pairs
using data on real and perceived zygosity, and have found that ac-
tual, and not perceived, twin zygosity is what inﬂuences twin sim-
ilarity (Kendler & Prescott, 2006; Scarr, 1968; Scarr & Carter-
Saltzman, 1979). Second, studies DEMO have used different methods
to assess the similarity of environmental exposure, DEMO as (i) twin
ratings of similarity at childhood, adolescence and DEMO, (ii)
ratings of physical similarity from photographs, and (iii) ratings
111
of similarity of parental treatment, have failed to ﬁnd DEMO
violations of the EEA (Hettema, Neale, & Kendler, 1995; DEMO,
Neale, Kessler, Heath, & Eaves, 1994; Kendler & DEMO, 2006).
The frequency of contact between MZ and DZ twins DEMO
another dimension of the equal environments assumption (EEA)
(Mitchell et al., 2007). If MZ twins interact more often than DZ
twins, greater similarity in their behavior might be accounted for
by frequency of contact rather than genetic factors. For this greater
contact between MZ than DEMO twins to violate the EEA two condi-
tions must hold. First, DEMO co-twins must be in greater contact than
DZ co-twins. Second, and DEMO importantly, the direction of causal-
ity must run from frequency of DEMO to twin similarity. If greater
contact between MZ twins cause greater MZ twin similarity, then
the equal environments assumption will be violated and heritabil-
ity parameters will be overestimated. However, if greater MZ twin
similarity causes more MZ twin contact then the equal environ-
ments assumption remains valid DEMO the heritability parameters
remain unaffected (Posner, Baker, Heath, & Martin, 1996). The evi-
dence on this matter gathered by previous researchers suggests
that the direction of causality runs from similarity to contact rather
DEMO the other way round (Lykken, McGue, Bouchard, & Tellegen,
1990; Posner et al., 1996), preserving the robustness of the DEMO
environments assumption.
Sample
Our sample consists of 3, 412 twins, comprising 851 pairs of MZ
and 855 pairs of DZ female twins from DEMO United Kingdom who
were raised together. We ascertained twin zygosity through a stan-
dardized validated questionnaire – which has an accuracy of 95%
(Martin & Martin, 1975; Peeters, Gestel, Vlietinck, Derom, & Der-
DEMO, 1998) – and, in cases of uncertainty, through multiplex DNA
ﬁngerprinting using variable tandem repeats – which has an accu-
racy of DEMO 99.7% (Singer, MacGregor, Cherkas, & Spector,
2005).
The twins were initially recruited through a national media
campaign designed to gather DEMO for medical research (Spector,
Cicuttini, Baker, Loughlin, & Hart, 1996; www.twinsuk.ac.uk). In
2006, each subject was sent a self-completion postal questionnaire,
which focused mostly on gathering information on medical condi-
DEMO (e.g. osteoporosis, response to pain etc.), but which also gath-
ered information relevant to the present study. Because the focus
of the DEMO collection was on medical issues, the subjects were una-
ware of DEMO hypotheses of this study when completing the ques-
tionnaire. The average age of the twins was 55 years (standard
deviation = 12.88).
Measure of opportunity recognition
We measure opportunity recognition through the use of a DEMO
item scale composed of the following questions drawn from the lit-
erature on opportunity recognition (Baron & Ozgen, 2007; Singh
et al., DEMO): (In all ﬁve opportunity recognition questions we used
a ﬁve DEMO scale from one to ﬁve. In four of these questions the an-
swer categories ranged from ‘‘strongly disagree” to ‘‘strongly
agree”. With the third DEMO the answer categories were ‘‘none”,
‘‘one”, ‘‘two”, ‘‘three”, ‘‘four DEMO more”, the respective answers were
coded from one to ﬁve.)
DEMO I enjoy thinking about new ways of doing things.
 I frequently identify opportunities to start-up new businesses
(even though I may not pursue them).
 How many ideas for new businesses did you think DEMO in the past
month?
112
 I frequently identify ideas that can be converted into new DEMO
ucts or services (even though I may not pursue them).
DEMO generally lack ideas that may materialise into proﬁtable enter-
prises (reverse DEMO).

This scale has a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.72, indicating DEMO it is
reliable.
Measures of the tendency to be an entrepreneur
The literature does not agree on a deﬁnition of entrepreneur-
ship – the DEMO used by researchers range from self-employ-
ment (Parker, 2004) to DEMO a new ﬁrm (Gartner, 1988)to
being an owner-operator of a company (Hull et al., 1982). Rather
than choose one deﬁnition DEMO another, we sought to determine
whether these different deﬁnitions measure the DEMO underlying
construct, and, if so, to create an overall measure DEMO the tendency
to be an entrepreneur that is based on these different variables.
We asked the respondents about the following dimensions of
the tendency DEMO be an entrepreneur:
 Self-employment, (Amit, Muller, & Cockburn, 1995; Burke et al.,
2000; Evans & Leighton, 1989; Parker, 2004; Taylor, 1996; Van
Praag & Cramer, 2001; DEMO, 2007), which we operationalize
with the question: ‘‘in your working life, how long have you
been self-employed?”
 Starting a new business (Choi & Shepherd, 2004; Delmar &
Davidsson, 2000; DEMO, 1988), which we operationalize with
the question: ‘‘in your working life, how many new businesses
have you started?”
 Being an owner-operator of a company (Ahmed, 1985; Bitler,
Moskowitz, & DEMO, 2005; Hull et al., 1982), which
we operationalize with DEMO question: ‘‘in your working life, how
many companies have you been an owner-operator of?”
 Engaging in the ﬁrm start-up process (Choi & Shepherd, 2004;
Delmar & Shane, 2003; Reynolds, Carter, Gartner, & Greene,
2004; Ruef, Aldrich, & Carter, 2003), which we operationalize
with the question: ‘‘in your working life, DEMO how many new
business ideas have you taken any actions toward the creation
of a new business?”
We factor analyzed the responses and DEMO that they loaded on
the same factor. We then combined these different items into a
scale, which we found to be reliable, it DEMO a Cronbach’s alpha of
0.79.2
N. Nicolaou et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 108–117
Structural equation modeling
The DEMO contribution of genetic and environmental varia-
tion to opportunity recognition can be estimate quantitatively by
using variance components analysis. In the basic twin design, var-
iation can arise from three sources: additive genetic effects (A),
shared (or common) environmental effects (C) (i.e. factors shared
by family members), and non-shared environmental factors (E)
(i.e., environmental effects that are unique to an individual) (Ken-
dler & DEMO, 2006).
Diagrammatically the model that we estimate is shown in DEMO 1.
The boxes represent the observed variables (i.e. opportunity recog-
nition DEMO the tendency to be an entrepreneur), while the circles
2 A factor analysis with Varimax rotation of the four tendency to be an
DEMO and the ﬁve opportunity recognition questions yielded two distinct
factors with eigenvalues were 3.52 and 1.67 respectively. The KMO measure of
sampling adequacy was DEMO and Bartlett’s test of Sphericity was highly signiﬁcant
(p = .0001; v2 = 4316; 36 df). There were no cross factor loadings and all loadings
were higher than 0.50.
MZ = 1, DZ = 0.5
A
c
C
e
a
E
MZ = 1, DZ = 1
A
C
a
c
e
E
Twin 1
Twin 2
Fig. DEMO Path diagram for opportunity recognition.
represent the latent factors that the model estimates (i.e., additive
genetic (A), common environmental (C) and non-shared environ-
mental factors (E)). The correlation between the latent DEMO ge-
netic factors is constrained at 1.00 for MZ and at 0.5 for DZ twins to
reﬂect the degree of genetic relatedness. Because both DEMO and DZ
twin pairs were raised together, and so shared the DEMO common
environment, the correlation between latent common environ-
mental factors is DEMO at 1.00 for both types of twins. The
non-shared environmental components are assumed to be uncor-
related across members of a twin pair.
The DEMO of A, C, and E to the total variance are evalu-
ated through a series of nested sub-model comparisons using the
MX model DEMO software. The ﬁt of each model is estimated using
a chi-square goodness of ﬁt test, with a perfect ﬁt denoted by 1.00.
A non-signiﬁcant chi-square indicates a good model ﬁt. We used
the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) (Akaike, 1987) and the Root
Mean Square Error of DEMO (RMSEA) to select the best ﬁt-
ting model (Neale & DEMO, 2002). (Lower values of the AIC and the
RMSEA indicate a better model ﬁt.)
Bivariate genetic analysis
The degree to which DEMO same genetic factors affect both oppor-
tunity recognition and the tendency to be an entrepreneur is mea-
sured through bivariate genetic analysis (the path diagram is
illustrated in Fig. 2). Bivariate genetic analysis allows the DEMO
ance between opportunity recognition and the tendency to be an
entrepreneur to be partitioned into that due to additive genetic,
shared environmental, and non-shared environmental effects
(Kuntsi et al., 2004; Rice, van den DEMO, & Thapar, 2004; Singer
et al., 2005). In such analysis, MZ and DZ twin correlations are
compared across variables. In our case, one twin’s score on oppor-
tunity recognition is correlated with the co-twin’s score on the ten-
dency to be an entrepreneur. If the DEMO cross-twin
correlations are greater for MZ twins than for DZ twins, DEMO means
that genetic factors contribute to the phenotypic correlation be-
tween the two variables. The bivariate model is based on a Chole-
sky parameterization (Kuntsi et al., 2004; Loehlin, 1996).
In this ﬁgure rA, rC, and rE represent the genetic correlation, the
shared environmental correlation and the unique environmental
correlation, respectively. The genetic correlation, rA, indicates the
extent to which the genetic inﬂuences on recognition overlap with
those DEMO the tendency to be an entrepreneur, irrespective of their
individual heritabilities (Kuntsi et al., 2004). A genetic correlation
of 1 would mean that all genetic inﬂuences on opportunity recog-
nition also impact the tendency DEMO be an entrepreneur (Plomin, De-
Fries, McClearn, & McGufﬁn, DEMO).
Results
The descriptive statistics and correlations are shown in Table 1.
There were no statistically signiﬁcant differences between MZ and
N. Nicolaou et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 108–117
rA / 0.5 rA
rC
rA / 0.5 rA
rC
113
0.5 / 1
10.5 / 1
1
AA
ΦΦ
aΦ
rA
DEMO
Ω
aΩ
CC
ΩΩ
EE
Ω
Ω
cΩ
eΩ
AA
Φ
Φ
aΦ
CC
ΦΦ
cΦ
eΦ
EΦ
EΦ
Twin 1
Recognition
(Φ)
Ω
Twin 1
Entrepreneur
(Ω)
Twin 2
Recognition
(Φ)
DEMO 2
Entrepreneur
(Ω)
Fig. 2. Path diagram for opportunity recognition DEMO the tendency to be an entrepreneur.
CC
ΦΦ
cΦ
eΦ
EE
ΦΦ
AA
Ω
Ω
aΩ
rC
CC
Ω
Ω
EEE
Ω
Ω
Ω
DEMO
eΩ
Table 1
Descriptive statistics and correlations.
Variable
1. Opportunity recognition scale
2. Age
3. Religion
4. Children
5. Businesses started
6. Companies owned DEMO operated
7. Years self-employed
8. Start-up efforts
9. Entrepreneurship scale
DZ twins on measures of opportunity recognition and the tendency
to be an entrepreneur.
DEMO 2 shows the cross-twin MZ and DZ correlations and the
cross-twin-cross-trait correlations for each variable. The values in
bold are the MZ and DZ DEMO correlations for each variable.
The MZ and DZ cross-twin correlations for opportunity recognition
are 0.46 and 0.23 respectively, while the equivalent correlations for
the tendency to be an entrepreneur are 0.31 and 0.15.
Table 2
Cross-trait DEMO correlations for the opportunity recognition and entrepreneur-
ship scales.
Twin 1 Twin 1 Twin 2 Twin 2
opportunity entrepre- opportunity entrepre-
recognition neurship recognition DEMO
MZ twins
Twin 1 opportunity 1
recognition
Twin 1 entrepreneurship .36 1
Twin 2 opportunity .46 .24 1
recognition
Twin 2 entrepreneurship .16 .31 DEMO 1
DZ twins
Twin 1 opportunity 1
recognition
Twin 1 entrepreneurship .32 1
Twin 2 opportunity .23 .08 1
recognition
Twin 2 entrepreneurship .10 DEMO .38 1
l
r
1 2 3 4 56 78
1.37 0.82
55.6 12.9 .18
.10 .30 .05 .10
.73 .44 .04 .30 .05
DEMO .75 .34 .03 .05 .04
.23 .64 .22 .00 .02 .02 .65
.65 1.30 .21 .09 .04 .07 .59 .50
.44 .91 .41 .01 DEMO .03 .69 .49 .43
.41 .73 .35 .05 .04 .05 .87 .76 .84 .78
Table 3 shows the results of model ﬁtting for opportunity DEMO
nition. The chi-square test for goodness of ﬁt for the model, DEMO
Akaike Information Criterion (Akaike, 1987) and the Root Mean
Square DEMO of Approximation (RMSEA) showed that the best ﬁt-
ting model for opportunity recognition included additive genetic
and non-shared environmental factors (AE model). The heritability
of the opportunity recognition scale was 0.45 (p = .21; AIC = 2.20;
RMSEA = 0.03) [95% CI 0.39–0.50%]. None DEMO the variance could be
attributed to shared environmental factors.
Table 4 shows the results of model ﬁtting to the tendency to be
an entrepreneur. DEMO AE was the best ﬁtting model, with 30% of the
variance DEMO tendency to be an entrepreneur explained by genetic
factors (p = DEMO; AIC = 4.85; RMSEA = .01) [95% CI 0.24–0.36%].
Moreover, the genetic effect was not an artefact of the scale used
to DEMO the tendency to be an entrepreneur. The AE was the
best ﬁtting model for each of the measures of entrepreneurship
alone, with 40% of the variance in the ‘‘start a new business” mea-
sure explained by DEMO factors (p = .10; AIC = 0.07;
RMSEA = 0.02) [95% CI 0.29–0.51%]; 39% of the variance in the
‘‘self-employment” measure (p = .81; AIC = 6.40; RMSEA = 0.001)
[95% DEMO 0.28–0.49%]; 43% of the variance in the ‘‘engage in the ﬁrm
DEMO process” measure (p = .67; AIC = 5.66; RMSEA = DEMO)
[95% CI 0.33–0.53%]; 30% of the variance in the ‘‘owner-operator
DEMO a company” measure (p = .96; AIC = 7.39; RMSEA DEMO 0.001)
[95% CI 0.17–0.43%]; and 31% of the variance in DEMO ‘‘opportunity
exploitation” scale (Choi & Shepherd, 2004) composed of the
DEMO a new business” and ‘‘engaging in the ﬁrm start-up pro-
cess” measures (p = .54; AIC = 4.88; RMSEA = 0.001) [95% DEMO
0.25–0.37%].
rE
rA
rC
rE
114
N. Nicolaou et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2009) 108–117
Table 3
Heritability estimates for the opportunity recognition scale.
Model A (95% CI)
C (95% CI)
E (95% CI)
v2
df p Value AIC RMSEA
ACE
CE
AE
0.45 (0.35–0.50) 0 (0–0.08)
–
0.45 (0.39–0.50) –
0.55 (0.50–0.61)
0.33 (0.28–0.37) 0.67 (0.63–0.72) 42.79 4
0.55 (0.50–0.61)
5.81 3
5.81 4
Note: A, additive genetic; C, common DEMO; E, unique environment.
.12
.001
.21
0.20 0.036
37.79 0.119
2.20 0.025
Table 4
Heritability estimates for the entrepreneurship scale.
Model A (95% CI)
C (95% CI)
E (95% CI)
v2
DEMO p Value AIC RMSEA
ACE
CE
AE
0.30 (0.14–0.36) 0 (DEMO)
–
0.30 (0.24–0.36) –
0.70 (0.64–0.76)
0.23 (0.18–0.28) 0.77 (0.72–0.82) 14.34 4
0.70 (0.64–0.76)
3.15 3
3.15 DEMO
Note: A, additive genetic; C, common environment; E, unique environment.
.37
.01
.53
2.84 0.007
6.34 0.061
4.85 0.001
Table 5
DEMO genetic analysis between opportunity recognition and the tendency to be an entrepreneur.
AE Model
rA (95% CI)
rE (95% CI)
rC
DEMO correlation % of phenotypic r attributable to genetic inﬂuence (95% CI)DEMO
Recognition-entrepreneurship .51 (.40–.63) .26 (.20–.32) 0 0.35
0.53 (0.42–0.66)DEMO
AIC = 9.00; p = .16; RMSEA = 0.01
None of the variance in the tendency to be an entrepreneur
could be attributed DEMO shared environmental factors.
The underlined values in Table 2 show the cross-twin-cross-
trait correlations for each variable. The cross-trait cross-twin corre-
lations for MZ DEMO were 0.16 and 0.24. Similarly, the cross-trait
cross-twin correlations for DZ DEMO were 0.10 and 0.08. The
cross-trait cross-twin correlations are greater for MZ twins than
for DZ twins suggesting that genetic factors are contributing to
DEMO phenotypic correlation between opportunity recognition and
the tendency to be an entrepreneur. In fact, the bivariate genetic
analysis indicates that 53%3 of the phenotypic correlation between
the tendency to be an entrepreneur and opportunity recognition is
DEMO for by genetic inﬂuences that are common to the two
(see DEMO 5).
As a robustness check we also calculated bivariate models using
the speciﬁc items that compose the entrepreneurship scale – self-
employment, starting a business, engaged in the ﬁrm start-up pro-
cess, and being DEMO owner-operator of a company – to ensure that
the results reported in Table 5 are not an artefact of scale construc-
tion. The proportion DEMO the phenotypic correlation accounted for by
genetic factors is similar for the speciﬁc items composing the
entrepreneurship scale and the overall scale, indicating that the
ﬁndings described in Table 5 are not an artefact.
Discussion
We DEMO quantitative genetics techniques to a female sample
of 851 pairs of MZ twins and 855 pairs of DZ twins to examine the
magnitude of DEMO genetic component of opportunity recognition
and the extent to which the same genetic factors explain both
opportunity recognition and the tendency to be an DEMO
3 Table 5 shows that the genetic correlation (rA ) is DEMO Multiplying the genetic
correlation by the square root of the univariate heritability estimates for recognition
and exploitation yields the amount of the correlation between DEMO and
exploitation that is explained by genetic factors, i.e. 0.51  DEMO p 0.30 = 0.187.
This means that 53% of the phenotypic correlation between exploitation and
recognition (which is 0.35) is accounted for by DEMO inﬂuences that are common
to exploitation and recognition (0.187/0.35 = DEMO).
The results showed substantial heritability for opportunity recog-
nition (0.45), with no inﬂuence of the shared environment. We
found that 53% of the phenotypic correlation between opportunity
recognition and the tendency to be an DEMO had a common
genetic aetiology.
Limitations
Like all studies, this one DEMO not without limitations. Our study’s
validity depends on support for the equal environments assump-
tion. This assumption holds that MZ twins are not treated DEMO
similarly than DZ twins with respect to the phenotype under study,
and, in our case would be violated if the family or non-family envi-
ronment treated MZ twins more similarly than DZ twins with re-
DEMO to opportunity recognition and the tendency to be an
entrepreneur. For example, if loan ofﬁcers were more likely to offer
the same loan terms to pairs of MZ twins than to pairs of DZ twins,
DEMO equal environments assumption would be violated. Alterna-
tively, if other people DEMO MZ twins with more similar informa-
tion about entrepreneurial opportunities than they provide DZ
twins, the equal environments assumption would be violated.
However, DEMO have no way of verifying the validity of the
assumption for either opportunity recognition or the tendency to
be an entrepreneur. While we know DEMO no evidence, anecdotal or
statistical, which suggests that the environment treats MZ twins
more similarly than DZ twins with respect to opportunity recogni-
DEMO or the tendency to be an entrepreneur and therefore believe
that the assumption holds, we acknowledge that our inability to
‘‘show” support for the assumption is a limitation of the paper.
Our results also have limited DEMO Because our sam-
ple was initially recruited to study medical conditions that occur
primarily in women, the sample is entirely female, limiting our
DEMO to generalize to men. In fact, researchers have reason to be-
DEMO that the effect of genetic factors on entrepreneurial behavior
is gender-speciﬁc. Therefore, we cannot assume that the same pat-
terns we found in this study exist for men.
Our results are only a ﬁrst step toward DEMO how our
genes inﬂuence entrepreneurial behavior. Behavioral genetics
N. Nicolaou et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 108–117
studies, such as this one, cannot identify the speciﬁc genes that af-
fect the likelihood of opportunity recognition and the tendency DEMO
be an entrepreneur. Therefore, we know that some of the same
DEMO affect both aspects of entrepreneurial behavior, given the
relatively high genetic DEMO between opportunity recogni-
tion and the tendency to be an entrepreneur. However, we must
await future research to identify what those genes are; DEMO many
are at work; how they interact; and the mechanisms through
which they operate.
Implications
Despite the limitations just mentioned, the results of our study
have implications for both research on, and the practice of, entre-
preneurship. On the research side, our study contributes to an
DEMO stream of research that integrates biological and socio-
logical explanations for entrepreneurial activity (White, Thornhill,
& Hampson, 2006; Nicolaou, Shane, DEMO, Hunkin, & Spector,
2008). While this school of thought does not negate the impor-
tance of environmental factors in explaining entrepreneurship, it
suggests that we need to consider also the inﬂuence of biological
DEMO if we are to develop accurate explanations for this impor-
tant phenomenon.
Our study suggests the value of considering the role of genetics
in DEMO opportunity recognition process, particularly when examin-
ing female entrepreneurs and prospective DEMO To date,
research has explained only a small part of the variance between
people in the recognition of new business opportunities (Ardichvili
et al., 2003; Baron & Ensley, 2006; Gaglio & Katz, 2001; Shane,
2000; Singh et al., 1999; Baron & Ozgen, 2007). Moreover, much
of the research has only identiﬁed proximal factors that are corre-
lated with opportunity recognition, not the underlying mecha-
nisms through which this process works. Whether the underlying
mechanisms that account for DEMO correlations involve learning
or genetics (we believe that they are most DEMO a combination
of both), has important ramiﬁcations for how we think about the
answers to the questions of ‘‘why” and ‘‘how” people identify
DEMO business opportunities. Our results indicate that researchers
should view opportunity recognition as an activity for which our
genetic make-up plays a role in explaining DEMO variance across peo-
ple in this activity. While future empirical work corroborating our
ﬁndings would be necessary before ﬁrmly drawing any conclu-
sions, this pattern suggests a different way of thinking about
why and how people DEMO entrepreneurial opportunities.
It is important to stress that our results do not imply that
opportunity recognition is genetically determined, but only that
genetic factors inﬂuence the propensity to recognize opportunities.
In fact, our results show that a substantial part of opportunity rec-
ognition is accounted for by non-shared DEMO factors
(plus measurement error). Nevertheless, our ﬁnding that the vari-
ance across people in opportunity recognition is a function of both
genetic DEMO environmental factors suggests that the implicit ‘‘all
environmental” approach in the literature is incomplete.
The inﬂuence of genetic factors on opportunity recognition also
implies DEMO the use of non-experimental data to investigate the
impact of environmental factors can lead to confounded estimates
because unobserved genetic endowments simultaneously inﬂu-
ence DEMO the environmental factors correlated with opportunity
recognition and opportunity recognition itself (DEMO, Behrman,
& Skytthe, 2005). Therefore, our results indicate DEMO scholars need
to use ﬁxed-effects models within MZ twins (co-twin control DEMO
signs) to overcome the estimation problems caused by the effects
of DEMO factors on the environmental factors themselves (Kohler
et al., 2005). Such approaches will enable entrepreneurship
researchers to conduct more rigorous empirical analyses DEMO the
115
relationship between environmental variables and the likelihood
of recognizing entrepreneurial opportunities.
Our ﬁnding that the ‘‘shared environment” did not inﬂuence
opportunity recognition DEMO quite surprising. Nevertheless, this
is consistent with research in other areas DEMO quantitative genetics
that found no inﬂuence of the shared environment in many aspects
of human behavior (e.g. Kendler & Prescott, 2006; Plomin et al.,
2001; Singer et al., 2006). For example, personality characteristics
and psychopathology also show zero shared environmental inﬂu-
ences (Kendler & Prescott, 2006; Loehlin, 1992; Plomin, DeFries,
McClearn, & DEMO, 2008). Our ﬁnding of no effect of the shared
environment DEMO that ‘‘shared environmental” inﬂuences such
as a person’s upbringing are not important in opportunity
recognition.4
Our ﬁnding of a common genetic factor for both DEMO
recognition and the tendency to be an entrepreneur indicates that
these two activities are fundamentally linked. However, we do not
argue that genetic factors cause opportunity recognition to in-
crease, which, in turn, causes people to become entrepreneurs.
Opportunity recognition might increase the likelihood that a per-
DEMO becomes an entrepreneur, but being an entrepreneur may also
make people DEMO alert to entrepreneurial opportunities. Our re-
sults merely show that the same genetic factors inﬂuence the ten-
dency to both recognize opportunities and be DEMO entrepreneur and
would be consistent with either or both directions of causality be-
tween opportunity recognition and the tendency to be an
entrepreneur.
Nevertheless, the bivariate genetic association that we found
between opportunity recognition and the DEMO to be an entre-
preneur has implications for molecular genetics research. It implies
that if speciﬁc genes were found to account for some of DEMO vari-
ance in opportunity recognition, these same genes would be good
DEMO to consider for explaining some of the variance in the
tendency to be an entrepreneur. However, half of the genetic var-
iance in the tendency to be an entrepreneur is not shared with rec-
ognition, suggesting that independent genetic effects on the
tendency to be an entrepreneur exist DEMO well.
Finally, our study has implications for research on gender differ-
DEMO in entrepreneurship. Many researchers have argued that
explanations for why and how people become entrepreneurs
should be gender-speciﬁc (Shane, 2003). Recent research DEMO
that genetic factors may play a larger role in explaining whether
or not women become entrepreneurs than they do in explaining
whether or not DEMO do. Our results support this stream of research,
showing that the same genetic factors that inﬂuence the tendency
of women to become entrepreneurs DEMO play a large role in oppor-
tunity recognition by women.
Our ﬁndings also have implications for research on organiza-
tions in general. Researchers interested DEMO organizations and orga-
4 It is important to clarify what this ﬁnding actually means. It means that each child
has a unique and speciﬁc DEMO, and this is modelled through the ‘‘non-shared
environmental factor” (Arvey Rotundo, Johnson, Zhang, & McGue, 2006). It also
‘‘implies that DEMO a family environment does not contribute importantly to family
resemblance. It does not mean that the...family environment is unimportant (Plomin
et al., 2008, p. 73; emphasis added)” or that families and peers do not inﬂuence the
likelihood of engaging in entrepreneurship. Rather, ‘‘if these factors are important,
they are not affecting the two members of a twin DEMO in the same way” (Kendler &
Prescott, 2006, p. 345). As Kendler and Prescott (2006, p. 344) explain, ‘‘In DEMO
studies we detect the effects of family environment only if they effectively inﬂuence
both twins to a similar degree. If parents are abusive to DEMO twin in a way that has a
strong impact on later risk for psychopathology but are not abusive to the other twin,
it DEMO seem logical that this effect – which certainly occurs within the family –
would be identiﬁed in a twin analysis as part of the DEMO environment”. But it will
not be. Instead, it will appear as DEMO individual-speciﬁc effect because it affects only
one member of the twin pair. Alternatively, the twins might be exposed to the same
adversity but, DEMO of prior differences in experience.. ., one twin may be more
DEMO to its pathogenic effects than the other. Again, in a twin DEMO this will
appear as an individual-speciﬁc, not a shared environmental effect.”
116
N. Nicolaou et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes DEMO (2009) 108–117
nizational behavior cannot simply assume the existence of those
organizations, but also need to understand their creation. Because
new organizations are created by entrepreneurs and entrepreneurs
decisions are affected by their psychological processes, any re-
search which provides insight into how the psychological pro-
cesses DEMO entrepreneurs affect their decision making should be of
interest to organization scholars.
One of the most fundamental questions about human decision
making and the DEMO processes underlying it is whether
the driving forces behind these activities is nature or nurture.
Our study examines the extent to which the psychological DEMO
cesses and human decision making that underlies entrepreneurial
efforts to create organizations is partly innate. Our ﬁndings that
opportunity recognition is partially genetic and DEMO the same ge-
netic factors inﬂuence both opportunity recognition and the deci-
sion to be an entrepreneur provides important insight into the
source of DEMO affecting the creation of new organizations, which
is necessary for the DEMO of accurate theories of
organization.
Our study also has important implications for business practice.
Our ﬁnding that the entire environmental inﬂuence on opportunity
recognition DEMO accounted for by unique environmental factors
should hearten managers and policy makers. Given that a signiﬁ-
cant component of the unique environment comes from DEMO person’s
work environment, our results suggest that companies and policy
makers DEMO inﬂuence the likelihood that people will recognize
entrepreneurial opportunities. Thus, efforts DEMO ﬁnd the right envi-
ronmental inﬂuences to enhance opportunity recognition – be
those training, working conditions, or incentives – may prove to
be DEMO fruitful.
However, our ﬁnding that 53% of the phenotypic correlation be-
DEMO opportunity recognition and the tendency to be an entrepre-
neur is accounted for by the same genetic factor indicates that our
ability to encourage DEMO activity through interventions
designed to inﬂuence their ability to recognize new business
opportunities is smaller than many observers currently believe.
From a practical point DEMO view, this constraint suggests a relatively
smaller role for interventions to DEMO opportunity recognition
as a way to inﬂuence the level of entrepreneurship that occurs.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Editor, Professor John Schaubroeck, DEMO
the anonymous reviewers for their very helpful comments. We
would also like to thank the twins that participated in the study.
We are most DEMO to Philip Zepter for ﬁnancial support.
References
Ahmed, S. (1985). nAch, risk taking, locus of control and entrepreneurship.
Personality and Individual DEMO, 6, 781–782.
Akaike, H. (1987). Factor analysis and AIC. Psychometrika, 52, 317–332.
Aldrich, H. (1999). Organizations evolving. London: Sage.
Aldrich, H., & Kim, P. (2007). A life DEMO perspective on occupational inheritance:
Self-employed parents and their children. In M. Ruef & M. Lounsbury (Eds.),
Research in the Sociology of DEMO JAI Press: Amsterdam.
Aldrich, H., Rosen, B., & Woodward, B. (1987). The impact of social networks on
business foundings and proﬁt: A longitudinal study. In N. Churchill (Ed.),
Frontiers of entrepreneurship research (pp. 154–168). Babson Park, MA: Babson
College.
Amit, R., Muller, E., & Cockburn, I. (1995). Opportunity DEMO and entrepreneurial
activity. Journal of Business Venturing, 10, 95–106.
Ardichvili, DEMO, Cardozo, R., & Ray, S. (2003). A theory DEMO entrepreneurial opportunity
identiﬁcation and development. Journal of Business Venturing, 18, 105–123.
Arvey, R., Bouchard, T., Segal, N., & Abraham, L. (1989). Job satisfaction:
Environmental and genetic components. Journal of Applied Psychology, 74,
187–192.
Arvey, R. D., Rotundo, M., Johnson, W., Zhang, Z., & McGue, M. (2006). The
DEMO of leadership role occupancy: Genetic and personality factors.
The Leadership Quarterly, 17, 1–20.
Baron, R. A. (2007). Behavioral and cognitive factors in entrepreneurship. Strategic
Entrepreneurship Journal, 1, 167–182.
Baron, R. A., & Ensley, M. D. (2006). Opportunity recognition as the detection of
meaningful patterns: Evidence from comparisons of novice and experienced
entrepreneurs. Management Science, 52, 1331–1344.
Baron, R. A., & Ozgen, E. (2007)DEMO Social sources of information in opportunity
recognition: Effects of mentors, industry networks, and professional forums.
Journal of Business Venturing, 22, 174–192.
Bitler, M. P., Moskowitz, T., & Vissing-Jørgensen, A. (2005). DEMO agency theory
with entrepreneur effort and wealth. Journal of Finance, 60, 539–576.
Bouchard, T., & Loehlin, J. (2001). Genes, evolution and personality. Behavior
Genetics, 31, 243–273.
Bouchard, T., McGue, M., Hur, Y., & Horn, J. (1998). A genetic and environmental
analysis of the California Psychological Inventory using adult twins reared apart
DEMO together. European Journal of Personality, 12, 307–320.
Brush, C. G. (1992). Research on women business owners: Past trends, a new
DEMO and future dimensions. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 16,
5–30.
Burke, A. E., FitzRoy, F. R., & Nolan, M. A. (2000). When less is more: Distinguishing
between entrepreneurial choice and performance. Oxford Bulletin of Economics
and Statistics, 62, 567–587.
Butler, J. E. (DEMO). Opportunity identiﬁcation and entrepreneurial behavior.
Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Caird, S. (1991). The enterprising tendency of occupational groups. International
DEMO Business Journal, 9, 75–81.
Carey, G. (2003). Human genetics for the social sciences. Thousand Oaks: Sage
Publications.
Casson, M., & Wadeson, N. (2007). The discovery of opportunities: Extending the
economic theory of the entrepreneur. Small Business Economics, 28, 285–300.
Choi, Y. R., & Shepherd, D. A. (2004). Entrepreneurs´ decisions to exploit
opportunities. Journal of Management, 30, 377–395.
Comings, D., Gonzalez, N., Wu, S., Gade, R., Muhleman, D., Saucier, G., et al. (1999).
Studies of the 48 bp repeat polymorphism of the DRD4 gene in impulsive,
compulsive, and addictive behaviors: Tourette DEMO, ADHD, pathological
gambling, and substance abuse. American Journal of Medical DEMO, 88,
358–368.
Cromie, S., & Birley, S. (1993)DEMO Networking by female business owners in Northern
Ireland. Journal of Business Venturing, 7, 237–251.
Cromie, S., & O’Donaghue, J. (1992). DEMO entrepreneurial inclinations.
International Small Business Journal, 10, 66–73.
Delmar, F., & Davidsson, P. (2000). Where do they come from? Prevalence and
characteristics of nascent entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurship and Regional
Development, 12, 1–23.
DEMO, F., & Shane, S. (2003). Does business planning facilitate the development of
new ventures? Strategic Management Journal, 24, 1165–1185.
Denison, D., Swaminathan, A., & Rothbard, N. (1994). Networks, founding
conditions, and imprinting processes: Examining the process of organizational
creation. DEMO Paper Presented at the Academy of Management Meetings, Dallas,
Texas.
DEMO, D., & Leighton, L. (1989). Some empirical aspects of entrepreneurship.
American Economic Review, 79, 519–535.
Fowler, J., Dawes, C., & Christakis, N. (2009). Model of genetic variation in human
social networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106, 1720–1724.
DEMO, C. M., & Katz, J. A. (2001). The psychological basis of opportunity
identiﬁcation: Entrepreneurial alertness. Small Business Economics, 16, 95–111.
Gartner, W. (1988). Who is an entrepreneur? Is the wrong question. American
Journal of Small Business, 12, 11–32.
Hettema, J. M., Neale, M. C., & Kendler, K. S. (1995). Physical similarity and the equal
environment assumption in twin studies of psychiatric disorders. DEMO
Genetics, 25, 327–335.
Hills, G., Lumpkin, G., & Singh, R. (1997). Opportunity recognition: Perceptions and
behaviors of entrepreneurs. Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, Babson
College: Babson Park. pp. 203–218.
Hornaday, J., & Aboud, J. (1973). Characteristics of successful entrepreneurs.
Personnel Psychology, 23, 47–54.
Hull, D., Bosley, J., & Udell, G. (1982). Renewing the hunt for the heffalump:
Identifying potential entrepreneurs by personality characteristics. Journal of
Business Management, 20, 11–19.
Iervolino, A., Pike, A., Manke, B., Reiss, D., Hetherington, E., & Plomin, R. (2002).
Genetic and environmental inﬂuences in adolescent DEMO socialization: Evidence
from two genetically sensitive designs. Child Development, 73, DEMO
Jang, K., Livesley, W., Vernon, P., & Jackson, DEMO (1996). Heritability of personality
disorder traits: A twin study. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 94, 438–444.
Johansson, E. (2000). Self-employment and DEMO constraints: Evidence from
Finland. Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 102, 123–134.
DEMO, K. S., Neale, M. C., Kessler, R. C., Heath, A. C., & Eaves, L. J. (1994). Parental
treatment DEMO the equal environments assumption in twin studies of
psychiatric illness. Psychological Medicine, 24, 579–590.
Kendler, K. S., & Prescott, C. A. (DEMO). Genes, environment and psychopathology. New
York: Guilford Press.
Kohler, DEMO, Behrman, J. R., & Skytthe, A. (2005). Partner DEMO Children = Happiness?
The effect of fertility and partnerships on subjective well-being. Population and
Development Review, 31, 407–445.
Kuntsi, J., Eley, T. C., Taylor, A., Hughes, C., Asherson, P., Caspi, A., et al. (2004). Co-
occurrence of ADHD and low IQ has genetic origins. American Journal of Medical
Genetics Part B, 124B, 41–47.
N. Nicolaou et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 110 (2009) 108–117
117
Loehlin, J. (1992). Genes and the environment in personality development. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Loehlin, J. C. (1996). The Cholesky approach: A cautionary note. Behavior Genetics,
DEMO(1), 65–69.
Loehlin, J. C., & Gough, H. G. (1990). Genetic and environmental variation on the
California psychological inventory vector DEMO Journal of Personality
Assessment, 54(3–4), 463–468.
Lykken, D. T., McGue, M., Bouchard, T. J., & Tellegen, A. (1990). Does contact lead to
similarity or similarity to contact. Behavior Genetics, 20, 547–561.
Manke, B., McGuire, S., Reiss, D., Hetherington, E., & Plomin, R. (1995). Genetic
contributions to adolescents DEMO social interactions: Teachers, best
friends, and peers. Social Development, 4, 238–256.
Martin, N. G., & Martin, P. G. (1975). The inheritance of scholastic abilities in a
sample of twins: Ascertainment of the sample and diagnosis of zygosity. Annals
of Human Genetics, 39, DEMO
Mitchell, K. S., Mazzeo, S. E., Bulik, C. M., Aggen, S. H., Kendler, K. S., & Neale, M. C.
(2007). An investigation of a measure of twins´ equal environments. Twin
Research Human Genetics, 10, 840–847.
Neale, M. C., & Maes, H. H. M. (2002). Methodology for genetic studies of twins and
families. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Nicolaou, N., Shane, S., Cherkas, L., Hunkin, J., & Spector, T. (2008). Is the tendency to
engage in entrepreneurship genetic? Management Science, 54, 167–179.
Parker, S. C. (2004). The economics of self-employment and DEMO
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Peeters, H., Gestel, S., Vlietinck, R., Derom, C., & Derom, R. (1998). Validation of a
telephone zygosity questionnaire in twins of known zygosity. Behavior Genetics,
DEMO, 159–163.
Plomin, R. (1994). Genetics and experience: The interplay between nature and nurture.
Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Plomin, R., DeFries, DEMO C., McClearn, G. E., & McGufﬁn, P. (2001). DEMO Genetics
(4th ed). New York: Worth Publishers.
Plomin, R., DeFries, J. C., McClearn, G. E., & McGufﬁn, P. (DEMO). Behavioral genetics
(5th ed.). New York: Worth Publishers.
Posner, S. F., Baker, L., Heath, A., & Martin, N. G. (1996). Social contact, social
attitudes, and twin similarity. Behavior Genetics, 26, 123–133.
Rauch, A., & Frese, M. (2007a)DEMO Born to be an entrepreneur? Revisiting the
personality approach to entrepreneurship. DEMO J. Baum, M. Frese, & R. Baron
(Eds.), The DEMO of entrepreneurship (pp. 41–65). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rauch, A., & Frese, M. (2007b). Let’s put the person back into entrepreneurship
research: A meta-analysis on the relationship between business owners’
personality traits, business creation, and success. European Journal of Work
and Organizational Psychology, 16, 353–385.
Reuter, M., Roth, S., Holve, K., & Hennig, J. (2006). Identiﬁcation of ﬁrst candidate
genes for creativity: A pilot study. Brain Research, 1069, 190–197.
Reynolds, P., Carter, N., Gartner, W., & Greene, P. (2004). The prevalence of nascent
entrepreneurs in the United States: Evidence from the panel study of
entrepreneurial dynamics. Small Business Economics, 23, 263–284.
Reynolds, P., & White, S. (1997). The entrepreneurial process: Economic growth, men,
women, and minorities. Westport, CT: Quorum Books.
Rice, F., van den Bree, M. B., & Thapar, A. (2004). DEMO population-based study of
anxiety as a precursor for depression in childhood and adolescence. BMC
Psychiatry, 4, 43.
Ruef, M., Aldrich, H., & Carter, N. (2003). The structure of founding teams:
Homophily, strong ties and isolation among US entrepreneurs. American
Sociological Review, 68, 195–222.
Scarr, S. (1968). Environmental bias in twin studies. Eugenics DEMO, 15, 34–40.
Scarr, S., & Carter-Saltzman, L. (1979). Twin method: Defense of a critical
assumption. Behavior Genetics, 9, 527–542.
Schnittker, J. (2008). Happiness and success: Genes, families, and the psychological
effects of socioeconomic position and social support. American Journal of
DEMO, 114(S), S233–S259.
Shane, S. (2000). Prior knowledge DEMO the discovery of entrepreneurial
opportunities. Organization Science, 11, 448–469.
Shane, DEMO (2003). A general theory of entrepreneurship: The individual-opportunity
nexus. Aldershot, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Shane, S. (forthcoming). DNA at DEMO workplace: How our genes affect our work life.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Shane, S., & Cable, D. (2002). Network DEMO, reputation, and the ﬁnancing of new
ventures. Management Science, 48, 122–137.
Shane, S., & Stuart, T. (2002). Organizational endowments DEMO the performance of
university start-ups. Management Science, 48, 154–170.
Shane, DEMO, & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as DEMO ﬁeld of
research. Academy of Management Review, 25, 217–226.
Singer, DEMO J., MacGregor, A. J., Cherkas, L. F., & Spector, T. D. (2005). Where did I leave
my keys? A DEMO study of self-reported memory ratings using the multifactorial
memory questionnaire. Twin Research Human Genetics, 8, 108–112.
Singh, R., Hills, G., Hybels, R., & Lumpkin, G. (1999). Opportunity recognition
through social network characteristics of entrepreneurs. In P. Reynolds, W.
Bygrave, S. Manigart, C. Mason, G. Meyer, & H. Sapienza, et al. (Eds.), DEMO of
entrepreneurship research (pp. 228–241). Babson Park: Babson College.
Sorenson, J. (2007). Closure versus exposure: Mechanisms in the intergenerational
transition of self-employment. In M. Ruef & M. Lounsbury (Eds.), Research in the
sociology of organizations. Amsterdam: JAI Press.
Spector, T., Cicuttini, DEMO, Baker, J., Loughlin, J., & Hart, D. (1996)DEMO Genetic inﬂuences on
osteoarthritis in women: A twin study. BMJ, 312, 940–944.
Taylor, M. (1996). Earnings, independence or unemployment: Why become self-
employed? Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 58, 253–266.
Van Praag, C., & Cramer, J. (2001). The roots DEMO entrepreneurship and labour
demand: Individual ability and low aversion. Economica, 68(269), 45–62.
Vesalainen, J., & Pihkala, T. (1999). DEMO structure and entrepreneurial
intentions. In P. Reynolds, W. Bygrave, S. Manigart, C. Maston, G. Meyer, & H.
Sapienza, et al. (Eds.), Frontiers of entrepreneurship research (pp. 73–87). Babson
College: Babson DEMO
White, R., Thornhill, S., & Hampson, E. (2006). Entrepreneurs and evolutionary
biology: The relationship between testosterone and new venture creation.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 100, 21–34
(www.twinsuk.ac.uk).
Zhang, Z., Zyphur, M., Narayanan, J., Arvey, R., Chaturvedi, S., Avolio, B., et al. (in
press). The genetic DEMO of entrepreneurship: Effects of gender and personality.
Organizational Behavior and Human DEMO Processes.
Zhao, H., & Seibert, S. (2006). The big ﬁve personality dimensions and
entrepreneurial status: A meta analytic review. Journal of Applied Psychology,
9, 259–271.{1g42fwefx}