Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 1
DEMO
22
Can genetic factors influence the likelihood of engaging in
entrepreneurial activity?
Nicos Nicolaou a,⁎, Scott Shane b,1
a Department of Public and Business Administration, University of Cyprus, 1678 Nicosia, Cyprus
b Weatherhead School of Management, Case Western Reserve University, 11119 Bellflower Rd., Cleveland, OH 44106, United States
Received 1 August 2006; received in revised form 1 December 2006; accepted 1 November 2007
Abstract
This article offers an argument for how genetic factors may influence the tendency of DEMO to engage in entrepreneurial
activity, and describes four mechanisms through which DEMO factors could operate. It also explores ways that researchers can use
quantitative and molecular genetics to examine entrepreneurship, and discusses the potential implications of a genetic perspective
for management research on entrepreneurship.
© 2008 Elsevier Inc. DEMO rights reserved.
Keywords: Behavioral genetics; Entrepreneurship
1. Executive summary
Entrepreneurship scholars have identified a variety of factors that affect the tendency of people DEMO engage in
entrepreneurial activity (Shane, 2003). However, one of DEMO most interesting factors – genetics – has not been
examined. In this paper, we provide an argument for how genetic factors might influence the likelihood that some
individuals pursue entrepreneurial activity. Drawing from the behavioral genetics DEMO, we propose that genetic
factors may influence the tendency of people DEMO engage in entrepreneurial activity in four complementary ways. First,
genes may affect chemical mechanisms in the brain to increase the likelihood that people DEMO engage in entrepreneurial
activity. Second, genes might predispose people to develop DEMO attributes, such as extraversion and internal locus
of control, that affect the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurial activity. Third, genes may make some people
more sensitive than others to environmental stimuli that increase DEMO likelihood of engaging in entrepreneurial activity.
Fourth, genes may influence exposure DEMO environments that are more favorable to entrepreneurship.
We also discuss different ways through which the contribution of genetic factors to the tendency of people DEMO engage
in entrepreneurial activity may be assessed. The first approach, known DEMO quantitative genetics, estimates genetic and
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +357 22 892464.
E-mail addresses: nicos.nicolaou@ucy.ac.cy (N. Nicolaou), sas46@cwru.edu (S. Shane).
1 Tel.: +1 216 368 5538.
0883-9026/$ - see front matter © 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2007.11.003
2
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (DEMO) 1–22
Fig. 1. Mechanisms through which genetic factors influence entrepreneurship.
environmental DEMO to phenotypic variance in a population from patterns of genetic relationships among
individuals, and usually involves the use of twin and adoption studies (DEMO et al., 2001a,b). The second approach,
known as DEMO genetics, identifies specific genes that contribute to variation between individuals in DEMO social
outcome (Ebstein et al., 1996).
Finally, we discuss DEMO research on genetic factors could inform entrepreneurship research. Examples of potential
contributions include: informing research on the objectivity or subjectivity of entrepreneurial opportunities, DEMO
the mechanism through which parental self-employment influences children's propensity to become self-employed
(Aldrich and Kim, 2007), and evaluating the validity of DEMO individual differences literature in entrepreneurship (Baron,
2004; White, Thornhill DEMO Hampson, 2006).
2. Introduction
For forty years researchers have examined DEMO becomes an entrepreneur (Gartner, 1988; Bird, 1989; Shane and
DEMO, 2000; Aldrich and Martinez, 2001; Baron, 2004). While DEMO effort has identified a variety of factors that
influence which members of society engage in entrepreneurial activity and which do not (see Shane, DEMO, chapters 4
and 5 for a review), one of the DEMO interesting explanations for the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurial
activity – genetic factors – has not been examined. This article seeks to DEMO this void by introducing an argument for the
role of genetic factors into the discussion of who becomes an entrepreneur. Specifically, the article provides a process
theoretic explanation for how genes may influence the tendency of DEMO to engage in entrepreneurial activity.
We define a gene as a piece of DNA that is passed from parents to their biological children during DEMO and
which influences an observed characteristic of an individual, referred to DEMO a phenotype. Thus, the “genetic factors” that
we discuss in this DEMO are those factors that influence the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurial activity,
which are encoded in DNA and transmitted biologically, as opposed to those factors that influence the tendency of
people to engage DEMO entrepreneurially activity, which are not encoded in DNA and are not DEMO biologically.
We propose that genetic factors may influence the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurial activity in four
complementary ways (see Fig. 1). First, genes may affect chemical mechanisms in the brain to increase the likelihood
that people will engage in entrepreneurial activity. Second, genes may influence individual differences,2 such as
extraversion and internal locus of control, that predispose people to engage in entrepreneurial activity. Third, genes
may make some people more sensitive than others to environmental stimuli that increase the DEMO of engaging in
entrepreneurial activity. Fourth, genes may affect the tendency DEMO people to select into environments that are more
favorable to entrepreneurship.
2 We use the term “individual differences” to refer to enduring psychological attributes DEMO people in a way consistent with past research on
entrepreneurship. This mechanism differs from the first mechanism even though the first mechanism clearly involves DEMO between
individuals because the second mechanism operates through enduring psychological attributes of people and the first does not.
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 1–22
3
We also discuss how researchers can use quantitative and molecular DEMO, two approaches important to
understanding the effect of genetics on human DEMO, to explain people's tendency to engage in entrepreneurial
activity.3 In DEMO, the paper discusses how researchers can separate genetic from environmental influences, given
the potential for gene–environment interactions and gene–environment correlations.
Finding evidence of DEMO influences in entrepreneurship will not be easy. It will require hard-to-collect samples
and inter-disciplinary collaborations. Moreover, it will require the field of to grapple with its lack of consensus on the
definition of “entrepreneurship” and with DEMO in the effects of genetic factors over time. Any findings that are seen
in empirical work might not survive the test of replication. And DEMO investigation of genetic influences in
entrepreneurship may provide only minor insights into the phenomenon. Our aim, therefore, is not to be prescriptive.
Rather, we hope that by pointing out why researchers might want to look DEMO the effect of genetic factors and how they
might go about doing that, we might start off a new conversation in the field.
We begin that conversation by suggesting why it might be important to examine DEMO process through which genetic
factors influence who engages in entrepreneurial activity. First, examining the role of genetic factors might lead to the
development of new theories, raise questions about old ones, and open up paths DEMO inquiry heretofore not considered.
For example, in recent years management researchers DEMO tended to emphasize the role of situational factors rather
than individual differences in explaining people's propensity to engage in entrepreneurial activity (Thornton and Flynn,
2003; Aldrich and Wiedenmayer, 1993; Gartner, 1988). DEMO this focus has provided important insights into our
understanding of who engages in entrepreneurial activity, some scholars (e.g., Stewart and Roth, 2001; Baron, 2002;
Shane and Khurana, 2003; White, Thornhill and DEMO, 2006) have argued that researchers have overemphasized
environmental factors at the expense of individual differences. Research on genetic factors might help to test DEMO
there is an imbalance in attention given to situational factors, for DEMO, by examining how genetic factors might
affect the probability of developing DEMO differences that increase the tendency to engage in entrepreneurial
activity, as DEMO as to select into environments conducive to entrepreneurship.
An understanding of the role of genetic factors might also provide richer, more precise explanations for the tendency
of people to engage in entrepreneurial activity. For example, genetic research could determine whether the influence of
parental self-employment on children's DEMO to become self-employed (Fairlie, 1999; Burke et al., 2000; DEMO
and Kim, 2007; Sorenson, 2007) is solely the result of information about how to run a business that is provided during
childhood (the prevailing explanation in the literature) or whether it is also the result of genetic factors (an explanation
not currently offered in the literature).
Second, an understanding of the role of genetic factors in entrepreneurship may help researchers to conduct better
empirical entrepreneurship research. For example, an understanding of how genetic factors influence the tendency of
people to engage DEMO entrepreneurial activity would provide researchers with a mechanism to select the appropriate
comparison group to test the effect of environmental conditions on that tendency. DEMO would permit more precise tests
of the effect of environmental factors, DEMO, possibly, reveal patterns that have not been shown empirically, but DEMO
been posited theoretically. Similarly, an understanding of the role of genetic DEMO might indicate that evidence of an
association between individual characteristics and the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurial activity are
artifacts of omitted DEMO bias because both individual characteristics and entrepreneurial activity are endogenously
affected by genetic factors.
The paper proceeds as follows. The next section outlines the DEMO of our theory, making clear what we do and
do not DEMO The second section offers our process theory for how genetic factors might influence the tendency of
people to engage in entrepreneurial activity and develops DEMO testable propositions about those mechanisms. The
third section offers suggestions for how researchers might examine the influence of genes on the tendency of people DEMO
3 We believe that a discussion of methodological approaches to examining how genetic factors influence the tendency of people to engage in
entrepreneurship is DEMO to our effort to introduce genetics into the entrepreneurship literature. We are proposing that genetic factors play some
role in entrepreneurship. Illustrating how one DEMO methodologically investigate the influence of genetics factors on entrepreneurship helps us to
accomplish this goal because an understanding of the role of genetic factors DEMO an understanding of what molecular and quantitative genetics
studies can help to explain. Moreover, from a practical point of view, we believe that DEMO both the process theory and information on how to
test it makes the paper more useful to scholars in the field. To the best DEMO our knowledge, ours is the first paper that attempts to bridge DEMO
disciplinary boundary between behavioral genetics and entrepreneurship. As a result most entrepreneurship/management scholars would be
unfamiliar with genetics. Therefore, we believe that by briefly illustrating how scholars can conduct this research makes our ideas easier DEMO
comprehend.
4
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (DEMO) 1–22
engage entrepreneurial activity. The fourth section discusses implications for entrepreneurship DEMO The fifth
section concludes.
3. The boundaries of our theory
We begin by highlighting the boundaries of our investigation. First, we are proposing that it is very unlikely that
entrepreneurship is determined solely by environmental factors. DEMO is, we are suggesting that genetic factors might
also influence the DEMO of people to engage in entrepreneurship.
It is important to make clear at the outset that we are only proposing that genes might matter. DEMO are not proposing
that genes determine who engages in entrepreneurial activity. Genetic factors do not cause people to engage in social
activities, like entrepreneurship.4 Genes only affect the probability that people will engage in those activities (Plomin
et al., 1990). As Plomin et al. (1990: 376) explained, “Genetic effects on behavior are not deterministic in the sense DEMO a
puppeteer pulling our strings. Genetic influences imply probabilistic propensities rather than hard-wired patterns of
behavior”. Thus, our suggestion that genetic factors influence the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurship
should not be confounded with DEMO determinism (Turkheimer, 1998). As Alford et al. (2005: 163) explain, “it is
not biological determinism to posit the existence of DEMO collections of genes that increase the probability that
certain people will display heightened or deadened response patterns to given environmental cues” (Alford et al., 2005:
163).
Second, we are not suggesting that there DEMO a specific gene for entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship is a complex
phenotype, and DEMO is very unlikely that there is a strong association between having a certain allele of 5 a particular gene
and the tendency to engage DEMO entrepreneurship. Moreover, the relationship between specific genes and the tendency to
DEMO in entrepreneurship is likely to be quite complex, given the length DEMO the causal chain from genes to
entrepreneurial activity. When it is very difficult to “trace in a clear and unambiguous fashion a complete set DEMO causal
links from DNA base-pair variation to a complex biobehavioral phenomenon” (DEMO, 2005a:8), then the relationship
between genes and the phenotype (entrepreneurship) is very likely to violate the criterion of causal proximity (DEMO,
2005b) that is necessary for the simple ‘X is a DEMO for Y’ statement.
Third, we suggest that the effect of genetic DEMO on the tendency to engage in entrepreneurship could be both
pleiotropic and polygenic. Pleiotropic effects mean that a gene that influences one social behavior DEMO influences
another (Plomin et al., 2001a,b). The pleiotropic effects of genes are important to explaining the role of genetic factors
in DEMO tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurship because a gene that increases the propensity of people to
engage in entrepreneurship might also increase the DEMO of people to engage in other activities, such as
management.
Polygenic DEMO mean that two or more genes are needed to increase the likelihood that a particular social outcome
will occur. Unlike specific medical disorders, like Huntington's disease, in which a single gene is responsible for the
disorder, there are no known one-to-one relationships between specific genes and human behaviors. Therefore, a
number of genes may be needed in order to increase the likelihood that a person will engage in entrepreneurship. These
genetic DEMO might be additive or they might be epistatic6 (either way, the independent main effects of any one
gene on entrepreneurship are probably negligible)DEMO
Fourth, we note that our proposed explanation for the role of DEMO factors is complementary to environmentally-
driven explanations. It does not reject the possibility that other factors, such as the exogenously determined external
environment, DEMO influence the tendency of people to engage in this activity. Moreover, DEMO proposed explanation is
explicitly interactionist — it advocates transactions between genetic and environmental influences. We suggest that
genetic factors may, and probably do, DEMO with environmental factors to account for the tendency of people to
engage in entrepreneurship, and we specifically identify gene– environment interactions as a mechanism through which
genetic factors may influence this tendency.
4 In genetics, the probability that a person exhibits a phenotype given that the person has DEMO genotype for that phenotype is known as penetrance.
Thus, complete penetrance DEMO to the situation where the probability of developing a phenotype is 1, meaning that if the person has the genotype
he/she will definitely develop the disorder or trait (e.g. Huntington's disease). The tendency to engage in entrepreneurial activity is a case of
incomplete penetrance where DEMO probability is significantly below 1.0.
5 An allele is any one of a number of possible DNA codings of the same gene.
6 Epistasis DEMO to the interaction between genes (Wolf et al., 2000; Grigorenko, 2003).
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 1–22
5
Due to the relative infancy of the fields of behavioral DEMO and entrepreneurship, and the breadth of both areas,
we restrict DEMO discussion of the possible effect of genetic factors to the single issue of who engages in entrepreneurship,
and leave the discussion of how DEMO factors might influence other aspects of the entrepreneurial process and the
performance of entrepreneurs to future research.7 The complexity of explaining the effect of DEMO factors on all
aspects of the entrepreneurial process simultaneously with almost no empirical evidence on this question makes any
more specific investigation so speculative DEMO to be unscholarly.8
We propose that the mechanisms through which genetic factors influence the tendency of people to engage in
entrepreneurship are the same DEMO of the operationalization of entrepreneurship (i.e. whether it is recognizing
and DEMO opportunities; self-employment; firm formation, etc…). Therefore, we do not offer any arguments that
are conditional on entrepreneurial activity taking one of DEMO particular forms.
A lack of convergent validity between empirical tests examining the effect of genetic factors on the different
operationalizations of entrepreneurship would not DEMO our theoretical arguments, but, instead, would reflect the
problems that DEMO with current operationalizations of the construct employed by the field of entrepreneurship.
Researchers could fail to find results for certain operationalizations of entrepreneurship (e.g., self-employment; firm
formation; being an owner–operator) because the variance in DEMO ways in which entrepreneurship has been defined is
too large for these activities to correlate highly. As a result, some operationalizations of entrepreneurship might turn out
to be better measures of the construct than others. However, this is true of any theory to explain who becomes an
entrepreneur, not just a test of genetic factors.9
Fifth, we focus our attention on the four different mechanisms through which genetic factors operate, rather than on
a lower level of analysis, such as identifying the specific individual differences through which genetic factors might
operate, for three reasons. One, DEMO scholars' intuition of the role of genetic factors immediately focuses on DEMO
mechanism of genetic covariance with individual differences. Hence, we are afraid DEMO focusing on specific
propositions for how genetic factors operate through different individual differences – even if it were the most plausible
of the four DEMO that we propose – would close off inquiry in the other mechanisms and would encourage future
scholars to focus exclusively on this mechanism.
Two, at this point in time, we have virtually no direct evidence for genetic covariance between entrepreneurship and
specific individual differences. Thus, any evidence of genetic covariance with specific individual differences that exists
today rests on the DEMO evidence of an association between genetic factors and a specific individual difference in one
study, and an association between that individual difference and the tendency to engage in entrepreneurship in another.
Because geneticists have found evidence DEMO the heritability of a wide variety of individual differences, the formulation
DEMO propositions for specific individual differences would reduce to identification of those individual differences that
entrepreneurship researchers agree are robustly associated with the tendency to DEMO in entrepreneurship. Given the
7 This paper represents the first attempt to discuss the possible influence of genetic factors on entrepreneurship. We do not DEMO that it is
possible discuss the range of ways that genetic factors influence all aspects of entrepreneurship in a single paper. We recognize that DEMO scholars
might view other aspects of entrepreneurship to be more worthy of attention than the issue on which we have chosen to focus this DEMO We offer
two reasons for our selection. First, genes are attributes DEMO people. Therefore, it is logical to think that they have a DEMO order effect on aspects of the
entrepreneurial process that are the direct result of human agency (like the decision to engage in entrepreneurial activity) rather than on the aspects
of the process that are not the direct result of human agency (like the amount of venture capital in an economy or the presence of high growth
industries). Second, performance at entrepreneurial activity is conditional on engaging in entrepreneurial activity. Therefore, it seems logicalto
investigate genetic factors that might influence the decision to engage DEMO entrepreneurial activity before one investigates whether genetic factors
influence success at that activity.
8 While our focus abstracts away from the complexity of potential DEMO effects on different aspects of the entrepreneurial process, it is
important DEMO note that this simplifying assumption is not specific to genetic factors. Any factor can have a positive effect on one aspect of the
entrepreneurial DEMO and a negative effect on another. For example, overconfidence has been DEMO to be positively associated with the tendency
of people evaluate entrepreneurial opportunities favorably (Busenitz and Barney, 1997) and negatively associated with the likelihood that people
will obtain financial resources for their ventures (MacMillan and Subba Narasimha 1987). Therefore, just as other researchers have made the
simplifying assumption that the factors that they sought to predict influence the tendency DEMO people to engage in entrepreneurial activity in ways that
do not vary across the different aspects the entrepreneurial process (e.g., the identification of DEMO, the evaluation of business ideas,
resource acquisition, the exploitation process, and so on), we assume that the mechanisms through which genetic factors influence the tendency of
people to engage in entrepreneurship are the DEMO, even though, in practice, they might differ across different parts DEMO the process.
9 For instance, research shows that certain social network DEMO are associated with being an owner–operator but are not associated with
transition into self-employment (Aldrich and Kim, 2007; Stuart and Sorenson, in DEMO). The inconsistent results do not falsify the social network
theory of who becomes an entrepreneur because being an owner–operator might be the correct DEMO of the construct of
entrepreneurship while self-employment might not be.
6
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (DEMO) 1–22
disagreement within the field of entrepreneurship over which individual differences DEMO a robust association with the
tendency to engage in entrepreneurship10 (because DEMO conflicting empirical results, the use of convenience samples, and
different definitions of the experimental and control groups)11 , this effort would likely DEMO of a discussion of those
individual differences that the authors, editors DEMO reviewers of the paper agree are important, and which at least DEMO
future readers would not.
Because our proposed theory is not conditional on the inclusion of specific individual difference and environmental
variables, we are selective in our discussion of specific genes, environmental conditions, and individual differences.
DEMO that are discussed should be seen as examples of the mechanisms we propose rather than as a comprehensive
discussion of how genetic factors influence DEMO tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurial activity.
4. The influence of genetic factors on entrepreneurial activity
In this section, we provide a process theory for how genetic factors might influence the tendency of people to DEMO
in entrepreneurial activity and develop specific propositions for four mechanisms through which genetic factors might
influence this tendency: ‘direct’ effects, genetic covariance between DEMO differences and entrepreneurial activity,
gene–environment interactions, and gene–environment correlations (see Fig. 1).
4.1. The physiological effects of genes
Genes might affect DEMO mechanisms in the brain to increase the likelihood that people will engage in
entrepreneurial activity. Although we currently know very little about the mechanisms DEMO which genes directly
affect social outcomes, researchers have proposed the physiology DEMO brain function as the most likely mechanism. For
example, researchers have DEMO that the GABRG3 gene affects an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the human central
nervous system, which governs the tolerance to and dependence on alcohol (DEMO et al., 2004). By analogy, we reason
that genes might affect the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurial activity by influencing DEMO level of positive
or negative physiological reactions to that activity.12
We illustrate how the process might work by focusing on examples of genes that DEMO been shown to affect related
human activities. For instance, a polymorphism DEMO the 5-HT2c gene, which is involved in the production of oxytocin,DEMO
influences the physiological response that people have to overcoming obstacles, with DEMO having the gene experiencing a
greater positive physical response to such activity (Bagdy et al., 1992). Because researchers have shown that
entrepreneurial DEMO involves significant persistence in overcoming obstacles to many things, including obtaining
DEMO, hiring employees, and securing equipment and facilities (Baron and Markman, 2003; Baum and Locke, 2004;
Baum et al., 2001; DEMO and Baron, 2003), it is possible that the 5-HT2c polymorphism DEMO the likelihood that
people engage in entrepreneurial activity by increasing the positive physiological response that those people have to it.13
10 The evidence in DEMO of the effects of individual differences that received widespread attention in the literature in the 1960's and 1970s (e.g.,
McClelland, 1961; Hornaday and Aboud, 1971) was heavily criticized in the 1980s and DEMO, when a number of papers reported contradictory
empirical evidence (e.g. Brockhaus, 1980; Sexton and Bowman, 1983; Brockhaus and Horwitz, 1986; DEMO et al., 1991; Cooper and Gimeno-
Gascón, 1992), leading DEMO scholars to discount individual differences research in entrepreneurship (Gartner, 1989; DEMO and MacMillan, 1988).
However, recently some rigorous meta-analytic studies have reinvigorated interest in the personality characteristics of entrepreneurs by presenting
significant associations DEMO challenging the earlier narrative reviews (Collins et al., 2004; Rauch DEMO Frese, 2000; Stewart and Roth, 2004; Baum
et al., DEMO). Moreover, researchers have also reframed their view of individual differences DEMO incorporate dimensions other than personality traits,
which has yielded stronger empirical findings (Baron, 2002).
11 For instance, the entrepreneurship literature does not agree on a definition of entrepreneurship. These definitions range from self-employment
(Evans and Leighton, 1989), to owning a business, to firm DEMO (Gartner, 1989), to engaging in the firm start-up process (DEMO et al.,
2004). The literature also disagrees on whether managers, employees, or the general population is the appropriate control group to DEMO
entrepreneurs against.
12 We are not suggesting that there is a single gene that captures a significant part of the variance in entrepreneurship, just as researchers do not
argue that a single gene captures a significant DEMO of the variance in alcoholism. We are merely pointing out that genes might affect the variance in
entrepreneurship through chemical mechanisms in the brain, just as genes affect the variance in alcoholism through chemical mechanisms in DEMO
brain.
13 The effect of this gene may be pleiotropic. The same 5-HT2c polymorphism would increase the likelihood that a person engages in, say,
managerial activity and mountain climbing because the physiological response to the DEMO of oxytocin would be experienced when any
obstacles are overcome.
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 1–22 7
Similarly, a polymorphism in the DRD4 gene, which has DEMO associated with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(LaHoste et al., 1996; DEMO, 2003), affects the release of dopamine in the brain (Van Tol et al., 1991, 1992). The release of
dopamine influences, among other things, the physiological sensations that people feel from engaging in the same activity
for long periods of time, as well as from action-oriented behavior. The evidence of greater action orientation and preference
for engaging DEMO multiple activities for short periods of time shown by entrepreneurs (Baron, 2002) might reflect their
greater tendency to possess this polymorphism in the DRD4 gene and its effect on the release of dopamine from taking
DEMO as well as engaging in the same activity for a long period of time. These arguments lead to the first proposition:
Proposition 1. DEMO factors influence the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurial activity through
physiological effects that result from brain chemistry.
4.2. Genetic covariance between individual DEMO and entrepreneurial activity
Genetic factors also (or alternatively) might predispose people to develop individual attributes that affect the
tendency of people to engage DEMO entrepreneurial activity. These individual attributes include, but are not limited to,DEMO
personality traits, and also include such attributes as cognitive processes and DEMO (Baron, 2002). As we mentioned
earlier, we do not DEMO direct empirical evidence that genetic factors increase the tendency of people to engage in
entrepreneurship through their effects on individual differences, and we are not proposing that specific individual
differences are more likely to be the DEMO variables than others. Rather, we are merely showing the plausibility of
DEMO mechanism of genetic covariance with individual differences.
To date, researchers have DEMO an association between genetic factors and a number of individual differences for
which other researchers have identified an association between the individual difference and DEMO propensity to engage in
entrepreneurial activity. For example, a number of DEMO have shown the heritability of internal locus of control —a
belief that outcomes can be controlled by one's own behavior (Rotter, 1966)DEMO For example, Pedersen et al. (1989)
showed that additive genetic sources of individual variability in locus of control accounted for 31 to DEMO of the variance,
while heritability estimates based on monozygotic14 twins reared apart yielded almost identical figures (32–36%), and a
study by Miller and Rose (1982) showed heritability estimates of internal locus of control DEMO 0.55.
A recent review by Rauch and Frese (2000) summarized evidence that internal locus of control is positively
associated with a person's DEMO to engage in entrepreneurial activity (see also studies by Durand, 1975; Caird,
1991; Ahmed, 1985; Cromie and O' Donaghue, DEMO; Ward, 1993). Moreover, Schiller and Crewson (1997) analyzed
DEMO from the National Longitudinal Survey of White Men (1966– 1981) and found some evidence that individuals with
more internal locus of control, as measured in their youth, exhibited a higher likelihood of transitioning to self-
employment later in life, indicating that internal locus of control is the cause, not the effect, of entrepreneurial activity.
A second individual difference DEMO has been associated with both genetic factors and the propensity of people to
engage in entrepreneurial activity is extraversion. A number of studies have DEMO that extraversion – a personality
trait that incorporates several attributes, including DEMO, gregariousness, talkativeness and exhibitionism (Barrick
and Mount, 1991) – DEMO heritable (Bouchard and Loehlin, 2001). For example, a meta-analysis DEMO 36 studies of
monozygotic (MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) twins reared together found that the heritability for extraversion was 0.58
(Eaves et al., 1989), while other studies have found broad heritabilities of 0.53 (DEMO et al., 1996), 0.49 (Waller, 1999),
and 0.56 (Riemann et al., 1997). Moreover, molecular genetic studies of extraversion support the results of twin
studies. Benjamin et al. (1996) found DEMO the long alleles of the DRD4 exon III repeat gene were positively associated
with extraversion. (Given that personality traits cannot alter gene sequence, DEMO evidence of an association
between genes and a personality trait can be interpreted as evidence of a genetic cause of the individual difference).
DEMO empirical studies provide evidence that extroversion is positively associated with the likelihood that people
will engage in entrepreneurial activity.15 For instance, Roberts (1991) examined 72 technologists within the MIT
14 Monozygotic, or identical, twins DEMO when a single egg is fertilized by a single sperm, and DEMO are genetically identical. Dizygotic, or fraternal,
twins, arise when two eggs are fertilized by two separate sperm, and so share, on DEMO, 50% of their segregating genes.
15 Extraversion increases the likelihood that DEMO will engage in entrepreneurial activity, just as it increases the likelihood DEMO people will engage
in all activities (sales, acting, etc) in which persuading others is important. The entrepreneurial process depends heavily on convincing DEMO –
potential investors, employees and customers – of the value of DEMO yet unproven idea (Baron and Markman, 2003). Sociability and expressiveness
enhance the ability to do this (Bhide, 2000).
8 N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (DEMO) 1–22
Enterprise Forum and the 128 Venture Group and found that DEMO with stronger entrepreneurial tendencies were more
extroverted than the others. Burke et al. (2000) used data from the National Child Development Study, which surveyed
a cohort of individuals born in one particular week in March DEMO and found that individuals with a more extroverted
orientation (higher anxiety DEMO scores) measured at the age 11 were more likely to become DEMO later
in life.
A third individual difference for which there is evidence of genetic influence and association with the tendency of
people to engage DEMO entrepreneurial activity is need for achievement, a motivation that leads people DEMO undertake
activities and tasks that involve personal responsibility for outcomes, demand DEMO effort and skill, involve
moderate risk and provide clear feedback (McClelland, 1965).16 Several studies show evidence of the heritability of
achievement motivation. Tellegen et al. (1988) found a heritability estimate of 0.39; while McGue et al. (1993), who
administered the same questionnaire twice, DEMO years apart to a sample of twins, found an achievement score DEMO
of 0.40 between MZ twins when twin scores were measured at the same time. When they compared one twin's score at
the time DEMO first testing with the score achieved by his/her pair ten years later, and found a correlation of 0.24 for
achievement. In other words, Harry's achievement score at the time of first testing was statistically predictive of
Michael's score ten years later.
Empirical research also has DEMO an association between need for achievement and the tendency of people to
engage in entrepreneurial activity. Meta-analyses by Collins et al. (2004) and DEMO and Roth (2004) have
demonstrated a positive relationship between achievement motivation and the tendency to engage in entrepreneurial
activity. (See also studies by McClelland, 1965, Hornaday and Bunker, 1970, Hornaday and Aboud, 1971, Begley and
Boyd, 1986, Ahmed, 1985, Miner et al., DEMO, and Cromie and O' Donaghue, 1992).
A fourth individual DEMO that is associated with both genetic factors and the propensity to engage in
entrepreneurship is that of social potency/social skills. For instance, some researchers have shown that social skills are
associated with the tendency to DEMO in entrepreneurial activity (Abell, 1996; Baron and Markman, 2003; DEMO
and Cable, 2002; Burt, 2005), while other researchers have DEMO evidence of the heritability of social skills. For
example, Carey (2003) reported kinship correlations for social potency of 0.56 and 0.27 respectively for MZ and DZ
twins reared apart and 0.65 and 0.08 for MZ DEMO DZ twins raised together. These arguments lead to the second
proposition:
Proposition 2. Genetic factors influence the tendency of people to engage in DEMO activity by accounting for
part of the covariance between individual differences and the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurial activity.
4.3. Gene–environment interactions
DEMO in the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurship also might be explained by gene–environment
interactions. Gene–environment interaction means that a gene creates sensitivity DEMO a certain environmental stimulus
(Rowe, 2003). When exposed to that stimulus, a person with the relevant gene displays a greater reaction than a person
without that gene (Plomin, DeFries and Loehlin, 1977; DEMO et al., 2005). Behavioral genetics research has provided
evidence of DEMO effect of gene–environment interactions on social outcomes. For example, Caspi et DEMO (2002) found
that a functional polymorphism in the MAOA gene moderated the impact of childhood maltreatment on the
development of anti-social behavior. That DEMO, children with a particular polymorphism in the MAOA gene are more
DEMO than children without this polymorphism to develop anti-social behavior if they are maltreated.
Researchers have not yet identified any gene–environment interactions that affect the DEMO of people to engage
in entrepreneurial activity. However, we can illustrate DEMO this mechanism might operate by extrapolating from gene–
environment interactions that affect related social outcomes. For example, the dopamine D4 receptor gene, which
DEMO dopamine in the brain, has been shown to increase the salience DEMO information (Berridge and Robinson, 1998;
Volkow, 2004). Because DEMO identification of new business ideas is affected by both information about entrepreneurial
opportunities and the salience of that information to the person receiving it (Gaglio and Katz, 2001; Shane 2000),
people with a variant of the DRD4 gene may be more sensitive than others to the DEMO of information about
16 People who have a high need for achievement are argued to be more likely than others to become entrepreneurs because DEMO activity
involves solving ill-defined problems, goal setting and planning, and the drive to bring ideas to fruition.
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 1–22 9
potential business opportunities.17 That is, the DRD4 gene may interact with information about opportunities to
increase the likelihood that a person will DEMO a new business idea, and so increase the probability that the DEMO
will engage in entrepreneurial activity.
Another example might be a polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene, which has been associated with anxious behavior,
negative emotionality, and hostility in response to unfamiliar situations (Lesch et al., 1996). Recently, this
polymorphism was also found to moderate the influence of stressful events on depression (Caspi et al., 2003). Because
DEMO pursuit of some types of business opportunities is more stressful than others – for instance, quitting a tenured
academic job to start a biotechnology firm to exploit research results involves making decisions that risk the loss DEMO
more wealth, time, and prestige under greater pressure and uncertainty than starting a part-time consulting business to
exploit that research while maintaining a DEMO professor – people with the long form of the 5-HTT gene might be
more sensitive than those without the gene to accept the stress DEMO engaging in entrepreneurial activity when confronted
with an opportunity to start a business that is of the more stressful variety.
A third example is DEMO Taq A1 allele of the DRD2 gene which has been shown to be more prevalent among excessive
gamblers than the general population because the DEMO affects the reward pathways in the brain and reduce the
physiological sensations that come from engaging in risky activity (Comings et al., 1996)DEMO Because the acquisition of
capital is difficult due to the uncertainties and information asymmetries involved (Shane, 2003), entrepreneurs often
need finance their DEMO out of their own savings (Bates, 1995; Blanchflower and Oswald, 1998; Aldrich, 1999). It is
possible that the possession of DEMO Taq A1 allele DRD2 gene might interact with the need to self-finance a business
opportunity to affect the likelihood of person engaging in entrepreneurial DEMO Those people who have this allele are
more likely to engage in entrepreneurial activity when confronted with opportunity to start a business through self-
DEMO Although all of the findings referenced above would need to be replicated before researchers could conclude
that the statements that they are shown to DEMO are true, they nevertheless suggest our third proposition.
Proposition 3. Genetic DEMO influence the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurial activity through
interactions with environmental factors.
4.4. Gene–environment correlations
Genes influence exposure to environments, a phenomenon called gene–environment correlation (Plomin et al.,
1977; Kendler and DEMO, 1986). Because genes lead people to select, modify and construct their environments (Scarr,
1992), environmental factors are non-randomly distributed among people of different genetic make-up (Neale and
Maes, 2002)18 . DEMO, genes also might influence the tendency of people to engage in DEMO activity through
selection of people into different environments.
Although we do not have evidence yet of gene–environment correlations in the tendency of people to DEMO in
entrepreneurial activity, we can propose some logical possibilities. For example, some people might be more likely to
work in occupations or industries DEMO which the odds of starting a business are higher because genetic factors affect their
educational and occupational preferences. We know that the propensity of DEMO to engage in entrepreneurial activity
17 Research has shown that prior information about markets and prior information about how to serve markets increases the DEMO of
identifying new business ideas (Shane, 2003). For instance, DEMO (2000) found that prior knowledge about a market increases the likelihood of
identifying an entrepreneurial opportunity in that market. This has been backed DEMO some less direct evidence from Long (1982) and Boyd (1990)DEMO
using immigrant data. Research also has shown that entrepreneurs often start companies to make similar products to those made by their former
employers (e.g. Aldrich and Wiedenmayer, 1993; Klepper and Sleeper, 2001), often serve the same customers as their previous employers (e.g.
Cooper and Dunkelberg, DEMO), while the approaches that they employ are similar to those used by their former employers (e.g. Klepper, 2001).
Furthermore, Cooper et al. (1991) found that the respondent's previous job was the DEMO common source of the start-up's new business idea.
18 There are three types of genotype-environment correlation: passive, active and evocative (Plomin et al., 1977, Rutter and Silberg, 2002).
Passive genotype–environment correlation occurs when biological parents provide their children not only with genes conducive to DEMO
development of a particular trait but also with an environment that is favorable to the development of that trait. For example, intelligent parents
might provide their children with both genes and the intellectually stimulating environment that DEMO beneficial to the development of cognitive skills
(Plomin et al., 1977). The evocative type “ occurs when individuals evoke reactions from other DEMO on their basis of their genetic propensities”
(Plomin et al., 2001a,b: 309). For example, physically attractive children may encounter more DEMO reactions than less attractive children (Rowe,
2003) while “aggressive children provoke hostility among peers” (Gottfredson, 1999: 64). Active genotype–environment correlation occurs when
individuals actively seek environments related to their genetic propensities (Plomin et al., 1977). That is, the active type occurs when DEMO
select, modify or construct their experiences based on their genetic propensities (Plomin et al., 2002).
10 N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (DEMO) 1–22
varies across industries (Taylor, 1996). More than 80% DEMO all firms are founded in the same industry in which the
founders were previously employed (Young and Francis, 1991) and more than 60% of firm founders serve the same or
similar customers as their prior DEMO (Cooper and Dunkelberg, 1987).
Moreover, the skills demanded of DEMO vary greatly across industries. People with strong mathematical skills
will be more likely to be found employed in some industries (e.g., aerospace), DEMO people with strong verbal skills
will be more likely to be found employed in others (e.g., retail) (Eckhardt and Shane, 2005). Therefore, the likelihood
that a person will engage in entrepreneurial activity could be affected by the industry in which a person is employed,
DEMO in turn could be affected by the skill set demanded by that industry.
Genetic factors influence the skills that people have. Researchers have shown DEMO both verbal and mathematical
skills are heritable. For example, Nichols (1978) found that the average twin correlations for verbal comprehension
were 0.78 for MZ and 0.59 for DZ twins across 27 studies and 0.70 and DEMO for MZ and DZ twins respectively for
mathematical skills across 15 studies. Similarly, two other studies, by McGue and Bouchard (1989) and DEMO Pedersen
et al. (1992) reported heritability estimates of 0.57 and 0.58 respectively for verbal ability, while the heritability
estimates for the measure of arithmetic and number comparisons were 0.53 and 0.58.
Thus, genetic factors might affect the skills that people have, which lead them to select into employment in different
industries. Because different industries present different opportunities for engaging DEMO entrepreneurial activity, gene–
environment correlations in skills influence the tendency of DEMO to engage in entrepreneurial activity.
Another example of how gene– environment correlations might influence the tendency of people to engage in
entrepreneurial activity lies DEMO education. People are more likely to engage in entrepreneurial activity if they are more
highly educated.19 A large number of studies have provided consistent DEMO of the positive association between
education and entrepreneurial activity (see Borjas, 1986; Macpherson, 1988; Borjas and Bronars, 1989; Boyd, 1990;DEMO
Fernandez and Kim, 1998; Delmar and Davidsson, 2000; Davidsson and Honig, 2003; Rees and Shah, 1986; and
Ritsila and Tervo, 2002).
There is also empirical evidence that genetic factors influence the DEMO of years of education that people get
(Taubman, 1976; Lichtenstein DEMO al., 1992) and that genetic differences explain a significant amount of the variation in
educational attainment (Behrman and Taubman, 1989). Because DEMO with greater education are more likely than
others to engage in entrepreneurial activity, gene–environment correlations could influence the tendency of people to
engage in entrepreneurial activity. These arguments lead to the fourth proposition:
Proposition 4. DEMO factors influence the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurial activity through selection
of people into different environments.
5. How research on the genetic DEMO of behavior can be used to understand entrepreneurship
This section explores different ways that the potential contribution of genetic factors to the tendency to DEMO in
entrepreneurial activity may be assessed. The first approach, known as DEMO genetics, estimates genetic and
environmental contributions to phenotypic variance in a DEMO from patterns of genetic relationships among
individuals, and usually involves the DEMO of twin and adoption studies (Plomin et al., 2001a,b). The second approach,
known as molecular genetics, identifies specific genes that contribute to variation between individuals in some social
outcome. These two approaches DEMO research are complementary because “twins make it possible to use quantitative
genetic analyses that can chart the course for molecular genetic analyses” (Plomin et al., 2003: 536).20
19 Education provides information and skills that DEMO the expected returns to entrepreneurial activity. Many of the skills necessary to start a
business – those related to assembling resources, hiring people, DEMO markets, selling, leading others, planning, organizing, making decisions,
DEMO, problem solving and communicating – are learned in school (Shane, DEMO). Education also provides the background knowledge
necessary to notice new business opportunities (Shane 2000), as well as the analytic skills to evaluate them (Clouse, 1990). Finally, education
provides social networks and legitimacy that are useful for many aspects of entrepreneurial activity, such as hiring employees and raising money
(Thornton and Flynn, 2003).
20 For DEMO phenotypes finding the actual genes involved has proved very difficult, even DEMO there has been consistent evidence of heritability.
Given how difficult this has proved for a phenotype as straightforward as height, it is likely to prove very difficult for a less straightforward
phenotype like engaging in entrepreneurial DEMO
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 1–22 11
5.1. Quantitative genetics
There are certain “experiments of nature” and DEMO “experiments of nurture” that permit us to disentangle genetic
from environmental contribution to human behavior. Specifically, studies of MZ and DZ twins and adoption can be
used to separate these effects and have been used extensively DEMO quantitative genetics research (Plomin et al., 2001a,b;
Bouchard et al., 1990; DeFries et al., 1994).
5.1.1. Adoption studies
Adoption gives rise to ‘genetic’ parents (birth parents who give their children for adoption shortly after birth) and
‘environmental’ parents (the adoptive parents that DEMO no genetic relation to their adopted children) (Plomin et al.,
2001a,b). A correlation between genetic parents and their adopted-away children DEMO some attribute can only be
attributed to genetic factors, while, in the absence of a selected environment, similarity between adoptive parents and
adopted children is environmentally related.
Genetic influence may also be evaluated by comparing DEMO correlation between ‘genetic-plus-environmental’
parents21 and their children on some attribute with the correlation between adoptive parents and their children on the
same attribute (Plomin et al., 2001a,b). In the case of entrepreneurial activity, DEMO can compare the correlation
in the rate of self-employment, for example, between ‘genetic-plus-environmental’ parents and their offspring with the
correlation between adoptive parents DEMO their adopted children. If the correlation is higher between children and their
‘genetic-plus-environmental’ parents than it is between adopted children and their adoptive parents, then researchers
would have evidence that self-employment has a genetic component.22
5.1.2. DEMO studies
An alternative method for separating genetic and environmental influences involves studies that compare identical
twins (MZ) with fraternal (DZ) twins. MZ DEMO share exactly the same genetic make-up, whereas DZ do not. If DEMO
factors are important in explaining behavioral variance, then MZ twins must DEMO more similar than DZ twins. Therefore,
researchers can use studies that compare identical (MZ) and fraternal twins (DZ) to disentangle the DEMO of genes and
environments on the tendency to engage in entrepreneurial activity. For example, researchers can evaluate whether
genetic factors influence the likelihood that people become entrepreneurs by comparing the rates of entrepreneurial
activity among MZ DEMO DZ twins. If the correlation between rates of entrepreneurial activity of dyads of MZ twins is
higher than the correlation between the self-employment rates DEMO dyads of DZ twins, then researchers would have
evidence that the DEMO to engage in entrepreneurial activity has a genetic component.23
5.1.3. Twin and adoption studies
Researchers can use a combination of twin and adoption methods DEMO their research designs. For example, researchers
can examine twins separated at DEMO and raised apart, and twins raised together. By comparing the correlations
DEMO four different types of twins, MZ twins raised together, MZ twins raised apart, DZ twins raised together, and
DZ twins raised apart, researchers can uncover the heritability of the tendency of people to engage DEMO entrepreneurial
activity. Because the differences between MZ and DZ twin correlations provide information about the effect of similar
genetic make-up on the tendency to DEMO in entrepreneurial activity, and the differences between being raised
together and DEMO raised apart provide information about the effect of the environment on the tendency to engage in
entrepreneurial activity, the combination of twin and adoption studies would allow researchers to compare the relative
importance of environmental and DEMO factors on dependent variables like self-employment.
21 ‘Genetic-plus-environmental’ parents share both genes and environment with their children.
22 Because adoption is a non-random event, researchers need to exercise caution with studies of entrepreneurship based on adoption. DEMO adoptive
parents are more committed to their children than other parents, DEMO might expose their children to more environmental influences that positively
affect entrepreneurial activity (for example, education), thereby leading researchers to overstate the DEMO affects on self-employment from
adoption studies.
23 Researchers need to exercise caution with studies of entrepreneurship based on twin studies. If studies are done DEMO environments where
entrepreneurship is very common, like the United States, the rates of entrepreneurial activity of MZ and DZ twins are more likely DEMO look different
than in environments, like Japan, where entrepreneurship is relatively rare. Therefore, researchers need to focus on the difference between the MZ
and DZ twin correlations, and not in the correlations themselves.
12
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (DEMO) 1–22
5.2. Molecular genetics
The second method that can be used DEMO assess the contribution of genetic factors to entrepreneurship is molecular
genetics. In contrast to quantitative genetics, molecular genetics tries to identify specific genes that are responsible for
individual differences in behavior. It does so by analyzing DEMO (Watson and Berry, 2003).
There are two major methods that are used in molecular genetics research: linkage and association. Linkage
analysis “typically uses phenotypic data on families to infer the presence and extent of DEMO segregation
between a trait and one or more genetic markers, to DEMO the location of a trait-influencing genetic variant” (Sham,
2003: 41). To put it differently, linkage analysis identifies the co-transmission within families between an attribute
and various genetic markers (Plomin and Walker, 2003) (linkage studies usually use many genetic markers with
no specific hypotheses involved). Thus, researchers could investigate the co-transmission of DNA markers and
the tendency to engage in entrepreneurial activity within families to generate evidence of DEMO genetic basis for
entrepreneurship.
Association, on the other hand, is a correlation between a particular DNA marker and an attribute in a
population (Plomin et al., 2001a,b; Plomin and Spinath, 2004). To measure association, researchers compare an
‘affected’ sample that exhibits a particular characteristic to a control sample to determine whether there is an
increased prevalence DEMO a specific hypothesized DNA marker in the affected group (DiLalla, 2004). To generate
evidence of the genetic basis for the tendency of DEMO to engage in entrepreneurial activity through association
analysis, researchers could compare DEMO DNA markers of people who engage in entrepreneurial activity
and people who do not. For example, researchers could identify an allele associated with entrepreneurial activity if
people who engage in that activity also have that particular DEMO significantly more often than the general
population.24
5.3. Detecting gene–environment interactions
Investigating gene– environment interactions in the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurial DEMO would
involve identifying both candidate genes and plausible environmental factors. For example, researchers might examine
whether the interaction of the Taq A1 allele of the DRD2 gene (which has been (inconsistently) associated with
sensations of pleasure in response to excessive gambling) and the opportunity to start a business that requires self-
financing increase the likelihood of engaging in entrepreneurial DEMO
When examining gene–environment interactions, researchers should take three key considerations into DEMO
First, researchers should select genes whose polymorphic variants are relatively common DEMO the population. Second, they
should choose genes for which a biologically DEMO argument can be made for moderating the influence of the
environmental measure. Third, an association between a gene and the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurial
activity is not a necessary condition for selecting a DEMO as a candidate for gene–environment interactions (Moffitt et al.,
2005, 2006) because a gene's association with the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurial activity may be
conditional on the environment, making direct statistical associations between the gene and the tendency to engage in
entrepreneurial DEMO difficult to uncover.
Researchers could test for evidence of gene–environment interactions in the tendency of people to engage in
entrepreneurial activity though moderated regressions DEMO focus on the interaction between a genetic polymorphism
and an environmental variable (with a measure of entrepreneurial activity as the dependent variable). This would entail
a four part process. The first part would involve the DEMO of a candidate gene for which DNA samples would be
collected and sent to a lab for genotyping. The second part would involve operationalizing DEMO select gene for statistical
analysis based on the number of different variants that exist for that particular gene. The third part would involve
selecting DEMO gathering data on an environmental variable that has been linked to the tendency of people to engage in
entrepreneurial activity and for which a DEMO plausible relationship with the selected gene can be made. The
fourth part of the process would entail examining whether the interaction between the genetic DEMO the environmental
variables was statistically significant in the regression analysis.
24 Association studies are more likely than linkage studies to be useful in entrepreneurship DEMO because they are more powerful in detecting
alleles of small effect size and because association samples are more easily identified.
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 1–22 13
5.4. Detecting gene–environment correlations
There are two ways in which DEMO can investigate the existence of gene–environment correlations in
entrepreneurship: through correlations DEMO attributes of biological parents and adoptive families' environments, and
through multivariate genetic analysis of the relationship between an environmental measure and a correlated DEMO
5.4.1. Correlations between attributes of biological parents and adoptive families' environments
DEMO though biological parents' attributes are not the best indicator of their DEMO children's genotypes, a finding that
biological parents' attributes are correlated with the environment in which the adoptive child lives suggests that the
DEMO reflects genetically influenced characteristics of their adopted-away children (Plomin et al., 2001a,b). In the
case of the tendency of people to DEMO in entrepreneurial activity, researchers could find evidence of gene–environment
correlations by DEMO the entrepreneurial activities of adopted children (which were separated at birth) with the
characteristics of their biological parents. This would entail a two-part DEMO The first part would involve examining the
correlation between biological parents' DEMO activities and the adoptive parents' support of entrepreneurial activity.
The second DEMO would involve examining whether this correlation (i.e. between the biological parents' entrepreneurial
activity and the adoptive parents' support of entrepreneurial activity) was DEMO after including the adoptee's behavior as a
mediating construct in the model. A reduced correlation would provide evidence of gene–environment correlation because
the DEMO between biological parents' entrepreneurial activities and the adoptive parents' behavior would be explained
by the behavior of the adoptees (Baron and Kenney, DEMO). (See Ge et al., 1996 and Riggins-Caspers et al., DEMO for
applications of this methodology in different contexts, for example in DEMO context of anti-social behavior).
5.4.2. Multivariate genetic analysis
In order to show a genetic effect on an environmental measure, it is not sufficient to show that the environmental
measure is correlated with an individual attribute DEMO such correlations may occur for environmental reasons. To
detect such influences requires multivariate genetic analysis of the relationship between an environmental measure and
a DEMO measure (e.g., a psychological attribute). This technique examines the genetic and environmental
contributions to the covariance between these two measures rather than DEMO the variance of each measure considered on
its own (Plomin and DEMO, 1979, Plomin, 1994). The essence of this method is DEMO identify the extent to which genetic
effects on an environmental measure overlap with the genetic effects on a correlated measure.
Fig. 2 illustrates the DEMO case. Latent variable G represents genetic influences on the environmental measure
that overlap with the other measure, while latent variable E represents common environmental effects. The path from G
to the environmental measure indicates genetic effects DEMO the environmental measure that are shared with the genetic
effects on the correlated measure (Plomin, 1994). The indicator g represents unique genetic DEMO on the
environmental measure that are independent of the genetic effects on the correlated measure.
Fig. 2. Multivariate genetic analysis.
14
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (DEMO) 1–22
In the case of the tendency of people to engage DEMO activity, multivariate genetic analysis can be used to
identify whether the DEMO variance of the tendency to engage in entrepreneurial activity is accounted for by other
behavioral factors (such as having internal locus of control) DEMO environmental measures (such as living in a place like
Silicon Valley DEMO many venture capitalists operate).
5.5. Difficulties in conducting behavioral genetics research in entrepreneurship
It is important to note that providing evidence of the DEMO of genetic factors on the tendency of people to engage in
entrepreneurship will not be easy. First, rigorous genetics research, whether on entrepreneurship DEMO anything else,
requires samples that are representative of the populations from which they are drawn.
Second, evidence of heritability of entrepreneurship is a necessary but not sufficient condition to explain the role of
genetic factors DEMO entrepreneurship. Finding genetic influences on a phenotype does not help identify the specific genes
involved, nor does it explain how genes affect the phenotype. Finding these influences merely helps researchers
suggest plausible candidate genes to investigate DEMO studies of gene–environment interactions.
Third, the observed effects of genetic influences DEMO not be fixed over time or place. As Plomin et al. (DEMO,b: 88)
emphasizes, “ heritability refers to the contribution of genetic differences to observed differences among individuals for a
particular trait in DEMO particular population at a particular time” . Although the genetic composition that affects the
probability that a person will engage in entrepreneurship does not DEMO over his or her life, and the distribution of
genes across DEMO human population varies little over time (Strachan and Read, 2003), the effect of these genetic factors,
and hence the observed phenotypes, can vary widely. In particular, if the primary mechanism through which genes affect
the probability that will engage in entrepreneurship occurs through gene–environment interactions, then variation in the
effects of the environmental stimuli that interact with DEMO person's genetic composition can easily lead to very different
distributions in the amount of entrepreneurial activity across time or locations for two populations DEMO the identical
distribution of genetic factors. As Baumol (1990) so clearly points out, people with a tendency to engage in
entrepreneurship for whatever reason may be more likely to engage in activities like starting businesses DEMO places in
which environmental stimuli encourage such activity than in places where environmental stimuli discourage it. Thus, in
any given population, the magnitude DEMO the environmental effect can be larger or smaller than the magnitude of the
genetic effect.
Moreover, while genes themselves are stable within people over their life course, the effects of genetic factors may
increase or decrease over time. Genetic effects might increase because genetic effects snowball during development,DEMO
leading to greater and greater phenotypic effects. Genes might be expressed under some conditions and at some times
in development and not at others. DEMO effects also might increase or decrease because increased exposure to
environmental factors over time may allow the effect of environmental factors to increase or DEMO cumulate (Plomin
et al., 2001a,b). For instance, in DEMO case of entrepreneurship, the effect of genetic composition on the probability DEMO a
person engages in entrepreneurship might increase as a person ages because genetics influences the environmental
conditions into which a person selects, generating a corridor of choices that increase the probability of becoming an
entrepreneur. Conversely, the effect of genetic composition on the probability of becoming an entrepreneur DEMO
decrease as a person ages because increased exposure to the environment might lead environmental factors, such as
education or work experience, to account DEMO more of the variance in behavior.
Fourth, a substantive understanding of DEMO role of genetics in entrepreneurship requires the accumulation of
consistent results in multiple studies of samples representative of known populations; evidence of the mechanisms
through which genetic factors influence the tendency to engage in entrepreneurship; and molecular genetics studies
which identify the set of genes that operate through DEMO mechanisms. It also demands replication of any associations
found between candidate genes and entrepreneurship, a non-trivial achievement given the substantial number of studies
that show a relationship between candidate genes and social outcomes similar to entrepreneurship DEMO have not
survived the test of replication ( Kluger et al., DEMO; Kendler, 2005a; Munafo et al., 2003).
6. Potential implications for entrepreneurship research
Research on genetic factors has potential implications for many DEMO of entrepreneurship research. Space
limitations preclude a discussion of all research issues that genetic research could possibly inform. Therefore, we
merely provide several examples of potential research implications.
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 1–22
15
First, research on genetic factors might help to reinvigorate a longstanding, but not universally agreed upon, aspect
of entrepreneurship research: the role of individual differences in the tendency of people to engage in DEMO
activity. Although much of the entrepreneurship literature considers entrepreneurship to be affected by both individuals
and environments (Shane and Venkataraman, 2000), it DEMO not agree on the relative importance of the two contributors
(Gartner DEMO Carter, 2003). Moreover, in recent years, the field has DEMO to focus less and less on the role of
individuals and more and more on the role of environmental conditions in explaining the tendency DEMO people to engage
in entrepreneurial activity (Thornton and Flynn, 2003).
Because researchers have not explained all of the variance in the tendency DEMO people to engage in entrepreneurial
activity, and because many scholars believe DEMO environmental factors alone cannot explain all of this variance (Shane
and DEMO, 2000; Baron, 2004; White et al., 2006), research DEMO genetic factors would be a welcome
contribution to the entrepreneurship field if it would help to explain why individual differences, such as internal locus
of control, or extraversion, are associated with entrepreneurial activity. Moreover, this research might provide an
explanation for why certain individual differences other than DEMO traits increase the tendency of people to
engage in entrepreneurial activity.
Second, multivariate genetic analysis of the covariance between psychological traits (e.g. locus DEMO control,
extraversion) and entrepreneurship will inform scholars of the degree DEMO which this covariance is explained by genetic
or environmental factors.25 Moreover, DEMO information will enable researchers to identify whether the tendency to
engage in entrepreneurial activity is affected by the same genes that affect various individual DEMO or whether it is
affected by different genes.
Research into the effect of genetic factors on the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurship DEMO has the
potential to indicate whether the association between individual differences and the tendency to engage in
entrepreneurial activity is an artifact of omitted DEMO bias. For example, if the covariance between a personality trait
and DEMO tendency to engage in entrepreneurial activity was totally explained by genetic factors, an environmental
stimulus to increase the predisposition to have this personality trait would not increase the propensity to engage in
entrepreneurial activity. If research DEMO genetic factors and entrepreneurship revealed that the association between
psychological traits and the propensity of people to engage in entrepreneurial activity was such an DEMO, then much of
the extant theorizing about why and how individual DEMO explain entrepreneurial activity might need to change.
Third, research into genetic DEMO that influence the tendency of people to engage in entrepreneurial activity might
improve the methodology of entrepreneurship research in several ways. For instance, it could help researchers to
identify the appropriate comparison group for entrepreneurs. While DEMO scholars compare entrepreneurs to managers
( Brockhaus, 1980; Busenitz and Barney, 1997), other scholars compare entrepreneurs to the general population
(Gartner DEMO Carter, 2003), and the field has no consensus on what DEMO appropriate control group is for entrepreneurs.
Evidence of the pleiotropic effects of genes would help researchers to identify the right comparison group to use DEMO their
empirical research. For any study of the effect of environmental factors on the propensity of people to engage in
entrepreneurial activity (e.g., DEMO to capital), the correct comparison group for entrepreneurs would be those people
who engage in the other activity affected by the gene. For DEMO, if the gene that increases the propensity to engage in
entrepreneurial DEMO also increases the propensity to engage in management activity, then managers DEMO the
appropriate comparison group to test the effect of access to capital on the tendency to engage in entrepreneurial activity.
In addition, co-twin control designs (what entrepreneurship researchers would call fixed effects models within
monozygotic (DEMO) twins) could be used to estimate the impact of environmental factors on the tendency of people to
engage in entrepreneurial activity. Within-MZ models DEMO control for a wide range of factors (e.g. personality and
capabilities DEMO to genetic predispositions, the neighborhood in which the twins grew up, cohort effects, family
environment and background) which would otherwise confound our DEMO Such models can be used to overcome
the estimation problems caused in non-experimental data by unobserved endowments that simultaneously affect both
the independent and DEMO variables (Kohler et al., 2005). Such research using twin data might enable
entrepreneurship scholars to construct more rigorous theoretical models about the DEMO of, for example, such as
education and training, on the DEMO of engaging in entrepreneurial activity.
25 It is important to note that finding a genetic predisposition for a trait X, and finding an association between trait X and entrepreneurial activity
does not necessarily imply a genetic DEMO on entrepreneurial activity. It is only through analysis of the genetic covariance between the trait and
entrepreneurial activity that such a relationship can be DEMO
16
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (DEMO) 1–22
Fourth, genetics might inform research issues that are largely unanswered by other approaches. For instance, what is
the mechanism through which parental self-employment influences children's propensity to become self-employed?
There is strong DEMO across a wide range of studies that the likelihood of engaging in entrepreneurial behavior
increases with parental self-employment (Shapero and Sokol, 1982; de Wit and van Winden, 1989; Butler and Herring,
1991; Taylor, 1996; Burke et al., 2000; Uusitalo, 2001; Aldrich and DEMO, 2007; Sorenson, 2007). For example, Fairlie
(1999) examined a sample of 6417 employed men from the Panel Study of Income DEMO and found that having a
self-employed father increased the probability of self-employment. Similarly, de Wit and van Winden (1989) found
that Dutch men who had self-employed fathers in 1952 were more likely to be self-employed DEMO years later.
There are two possible explanations for why the children of self-employed parents are more likely than other people
to become self-employed, but no existing empirical research has been able to disentangle these explanations. One
DEMO explanation is that the children of the self-employed learn more about self-employment because of the
information that they gather about how to run a DEMO either actively or passively during their childhood (Krueger,
1993). DEMO possible explanation is that the children of the self-employed are more likely than the general
population to have genotypes that predispose them to engage DEMO self-employment.
Genetics could inform this issue by identifying the degree of passive gene–environment correlation in
entrepreneurial activity. Passive gene– environment correlation refers to the DEMO transmission of genes and
environment within families (Plomin et al., 1977; Carey, 2003) and occurs when biological parents provide their
children not only with the genes conducive to the development of a particular behavior DEMO also with an environment
that is favorable to the development of that behavior. For example, self-employed parents might provide their children
with both genes and the environment that is beneficial to the development of firm formation DEMO
Fifth, research into genetic factors has the potential to inform important DEMO in the scholarly literature about
entrepreneurship. The most easily identifiable example concerns opportunity identification, which has been the subject
of much recent discussion. Recent research has argued that the identification of new business opportunities is important
DEMO affecting who engages in entrepreneurial activity (Venkataraman, 1997; Shane and DEMO, 2000; Shane,
2003). However, the field is divided DEMO two schools of thought about the nature of entrepreneurial opportunities. The
first perspective argues that opportunities are concrete realities waiting to be noticed, or discovered, by entrepreneurs
(Kirzner, 1997; Shane and Venkataraman, 2000; DEMO and Katz, 2001). This perspective endorses an objective view
of DEMO environment where information exists independently of individuals “without a context of how and why
individuals relate and interact to it” (Gartner et al., DEMO:7).
Many researchers find this first perspective unsatisfying, arguing that DEMO are socially constructed,
subjective and the product of an individual's actions (Gartner et al., 2001). This second perspective does not DEMO that
concrete characteristics of an individual's environment exist and matter; DEMO rather it argues that the environment is also
determined by an individual's actions (Gartner et al., 2001). As Sarasvathy (2003: DEMO) argues, “opportunities and
markets have to be invented, fabricated, constructed, made — through the peculiar processes of human action and
interaction that comprise the entrepreneurial method”.
The debate over the objectivity of opportunities could DEMO informed by empirical examination of gene–environment
correlations. Gene–environment correlations would provide support for the argument that opportunities are not
independent of the individual who DEMO them, making exposure to entrepreneurial opportunities non-random and
subject to genotypic DEMO As Scarr (1992) argues, gene–environment correlations view “human experience…..
[as] DEMO construction of reality, not a property of the physical world that DEMO the same experience to everyone who
encounters it” (Scarr, 1992, DEMO 5). If, entrepreneurial opportunities arise out of life's experiences DEMO events (Gartner
et al., 2001) which are, to some degree, genetically influenced, entrepreneurial opportunities are not truly independent
of an individual DEMO are non-randomly distributed across the population.
26 Passive gene–environment correlations may be empirically detected by comparing correlations between a measure of the family environment
DEMO a measure of children's entrepreneurial propensity in adoptive and non-adoptive families. If the correlation between the family environment and
a child's behavioral DEMO is larger in non-adoptive than in adoptive families, this suggests that DEMO gene-environment correlation is present
for that particular measure (see Plomin et DEMO, 1985). In this example, the presence of a gene-environment correlation would indicate that the
mechanism through which having self-employed parents increases the DEMO of engaging in self-employment is both the transmission of
genotypes that influence the propensity to engage in entrepreneurial activity and the effect of information DEMO comes from being reared in an
entrepreneurial environment.
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 1–22
17
Fig. 3 illustrates how one could investigate the genetic contribution DEMO the identification of entrepreneurial
opportunities by measuring genotype–environment correlations. In our example, we suggest two variables that
researchers have found to be associated with the identification of entrepreneurial opportunities — intelligence and
internal locus of control (Shane, 2003). The model decomposes the genetic variance into variance that is common to all
three variables, namely G1, to variance that DEMO common to the second and third variables, namely G2, and to variance
that is unique to entrepreneurial opportunities, namely g. (the path DEMO represents only one twin for simplicity —
the full model would have the three variables for both twins as well as the appropriate covariance DEMO between the
latent variables). Genotype– environment correlation, and hence support DEMO the opportunity enactment perspective, is
shown if the genetic effects on DEMO identification of entrepreneurial opportunities overlap with the genetic effects on the
other measures.
Finally, if the influence of environmental factors on the tendency to engage in entrepreneurship is moderated by
genetic factors, then the field's approach to government entrepreneurship policy and entrepreneurship education might
need to be DEMO to accommodate these interactions. If, for example, the effect of external stimuli on the tendency to
engage in entrepreneurship is contingent on an DEMO's genotypic profile, then government policies would need to
be made DEMO precise, essentially fitting policy stimuli to different genotypes. Similarly, a contingent influence of
external stimuli on the tendency to engage in entrepreneurship would DEMO that approaches to education also need to
be fit to genotypes.
7. Conclusion
In this paper, we presented an argument for why researchers should examine the effect of genetic factors on the
tendency of people to DEMO in entrepreneurial activity. We also proposed an explanation for how genetic factors
might influence this tendency. We are not proposing that individuals are born DEMO a ‘gene for entrepreneurship’, but
rather that there are four complementary DEMO through which genetic factors might affect the tendency of people
to engage in entrepreneurial activity. We offered specific suggestions for how entrepreneurship researchers could DEMO
the methods of quantitative and molecular genetics to examine how genetic factors influence this tendency. We also
explained how researchers could disentangle the effects DEMO genetic and environmental factors in entrepreneurial
activity. Finally, we discussed how DEMO on genetic factors could inform entrepreneurship research.
Clearly, we are only DEMO where to start. At present, we have no direct empirical evidence DEMO genetic factors
affect people's propensity to engage in entrepreneurial activity. Such evidence would be necessary to determine the
value of investigating the role DEMO genetic factors in entrepreneurship, and the validity of the process theory DEMO are
proposing.
Fig. 3. Using genetic analysis in research on entrepreneurship.
18
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (DEMO) 1–22
We also have not mapped genetic factors to all aspects DEMO entrepreneurship, focusing exclusively on the relationship
between genetic factors and the DEMO of people to engage in entrepreneurial activity. As theory develops in this
area, we would expect researchers to explain ways in which genetic factors might influence the entire entrepreneurial
process from the identification of opportunities, through the processes of resource assembly, organizing, and
opportunity exploitation. For example, scholars might use genetic research to provide insights into the sources of
DEMO advantage for entrepreneurs (Alvarez and Busenitz, 2001).
As this journey unfolds, researchers may find that the investigation of the influence of genetic factors leads to a
rethinking of scholarly explanations for entrepreneurship because it DEMO to arguments fundamentally different from
those in the extant literature. Alternatively, DEMO an investigation may provide only minor insights by enhancing and
extending existing explanations for the phenomenon. We hope that this paper will lead other DEMO to join us in our
quest to further uncover the role of genetic factors in entrepreneurship and find out which of these paths such DEMO
investigation takes us down.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Phil Phan and the anonymous reviewers for their guidance and insightful comments. We would
also DEMO to thank Linda Argote, Sue Birley, Yiannis Gabriel, Laura Koumas, Jim Rebitzer and Violina Rindova for
helpful comments on an earlier draft DEMO this paper.
References
Abell, P., 1996. Self-employment and entrepreneurship: a DEMO of entry and exit. In: Clark, Jan (Ed.), Consensus DEMO Controversy. Routledge,
Farmer, NY, pp. 175–205.
Ahmed, S.U., 1985. nAch, risk taking propensity, locus of control and entrepreneurship. Personality and DEMO Differences 6, 781–782.
Aldrich, H., 1999. Organizations Evolving. Sage, London.
Aldrich, H.E., Wiedenmayer, G., 1993. From traits to rates: an ecological perspective on organizational foundings. In: Katz, Jerome, Brockhaus,
Robert (Eds.), Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence, and Growth. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT.
Aldrich, H.E., Martinez, M.A., 2001. Many are DEMO but few are chosen: an evolutionary perspective for the study of DEMO
Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice 25, 41–56 (Summer).
Aldrich, H., Kim, P., 2007. A life course perspective on occupational inheritance: self-employed parents and their children. In M. Ruef, M. Lounsbury
(Eds) Research in the Sociology of Organizations. JAI Press: Amsterdam: Elsevier 33–82.
Alford, J.R., Funk, C.L., Hibbing, J.R., 2005. Are political orientations genetically transmitted? American Political Science Review 99 (2), 1–15.
Alvarez, S.A., Busenitz, L.W., 2001. The entrepreneurship of resource-based theory. Journal of Management 27, 755–775.
Bagdy, G., Kalogeras, K.T., Szemeredi, K., 1992. Effect of the 5-HT1C and 5-HT2 receptor stimulation on excessive grooming, penile erection, and
plasma oxytocin concentrations. European Journal of Pharmacology 229, 9–14.
DEMO, R., 2002. OB and entrepreneurship: the reciprocal benefits of closer DEMO links. In: Staw, B., Kramer, E. (Eds.), Research DEMO
Organizational Behavior. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 225–269.
Baron, R.A., 2004. The cognitive perspective: a valuable tool for answering entrepreneurship's DEMO “why” questions. Journal of Business Venturing
19 (2), 221–239.
Baron, R.M., Kenney, D.A., 1986. The moderator–mediator variable distinction in social psychological research: conceptual, strategic and statistical
considerations. Journal of Personality and Social DEMO 51 (6), 1173–1182.
Baron, R., Markman, G., 2003. DEMO social capital: the role of entrepreneurs' social competence in their financial success. Journal of Business
Venturing 18 (1), 41–60.
Barrick, M.R., Mount, M.K., 1991. The big five personality dimensions and job performance: a meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology 44, 1–26.
Bates, T., 1995. Self employment entry across industry groups. Journal of Business Venturing 12, 109–124.
Baum, DEMO, Locke, E.A., 2004. The relationship of entrepreneurial traits, skill, DEMO motivation to new venture growth. Journal of Applied Psychology
89 (4), 587–598.
Baum, J.R., Locke, E.A., Smith, K.G., 2001. A multi-dimensional model of venture growth. Academy of Management Journal 44 (2), 292–303.
Baum, J.R., Frese, M., Baron, R.A., 2007. The DEMO of Entrepreneurship. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Baumol, W., 1990. Entrepreneurship: productive, unproductive and destructive. Journal of Political Economy 98 (5), 893–921.
Begley, T., Boyd, D., 1986. Psychological characteristics associated with entrepreneurial performance. DEMO of Entrepreneurship Research.
Babson College, Babson Park, MA.
Behrman, J.R., Taubman, P., 1989. Is schooling ‘mostly in the genes’? Journal of Political Economy 97, 1425–1446.
Benjamin, J., Li, L., Patterson, DEMO, Greenburg, B.D., Murphy, D.L., Hamer, D.H., 1996. Population DEMO familial association between the D4 dopamine
receptor gene and measures of novelty seeking. Nature Genetics 12, 81–84.
Berridge, K.C., Robinson, T.E., 1998. What is the role of dopamine in reward: hedonic impact, reward DEMO, or incentive salience? Brain Research
Reviews 28 (3), 309–369.
DEMO, A., 2000. The Origin and Evolution of New Businesses. Oxford, DEMO York.
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 1–22
19
Bird, B., 1989. Entrepreneurial Behavior. Scott, Foresman and Company, Glenview, IL.
Blanchflower, D., Oswald, A., 1998. What makes DEMO entrepreneur? Journal of Labor Economics 16, 26–60.
Borjas, G., 1986. The self-employment experience of immigrants. Journal of Human Resources 21, 485–506.
Borjas, G.J., Bronars, S.G., 1989. Consumer discrimination and self-employment. Journal of DEMO Economy 97, 581–605.
Bouchard Jr., T.J., Loehlin, J.C., 2001. DEMO, evolution and personality. Behavior Genetics 31 (3), 243–273.
Bouchard Jr., T.J., Lykken, D.T., McGue, M., Segal, N.L., Tellegen, A., 1990. Sources of human psychological differences: the Minnesota study of
DEMO reared apart. Science 250, 223–228.
Brockhaus, R.H., 1980. Risk taking DEMO of entrepreneurs. Academy of Management Journal 23, 509–520.
Brockhaus, R.H., DEMO, P., 1986. The psychology of the entrepreneur. In: Sexton, D.L., Smilor, R.W. (Eds.), The Art and Science of
Entrepreneurship. Ballinger Publishing Company, Cambridge, MA.
Boyd, R.L., 1990. Black and Asian DEMO in large metropolitan areas: a comparative analysis. Social Problems 37, 258–272.
Burke, A.E., FitzRoy, F.R., Nolan, M.A., 2000. When less DEMO more: distinguishing between entrepreneurial choice and performance. Oxford Bulletin
of Economics DEMO Statistics 62, 567–587.
Burt, R.S., 2005. Brokerage and Closure: An Introduction to Social Capital. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Busenitz, L., Barney, J., 1997. Differences between entrepreneurs and managers in large organizations: biases and heuristics in strategic decision
making. Journal of Business Venturing 16, 165–180.
Butler, J.S., Herring, C., 1991. Ethnicity and entrepreneurship in America: toward an explanation of racial and ethnic group variations in self-
employment. DEMO Perspectives 34, 79–94.
Caird, S., 1991. The enterprising tendency of DEMO groups. International Small Business Journal 9, 75–81.
Carey, G., 2003. DEMO Genetics for the Social Sciences. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks.
Caspi, A., McClay, J., Moffitt, T.E., Mill, J., Martin, J., Craig, I.W., Taylor, A., Poulton, R., 2002. Role of DEMO in the cycle of violence in
maltreated children. Science 297, 851–854.
DEMO, A., Sugden, K., Moffitt, T.E., Taylor, A., Craig, I.W., Harrington, H.L., McClay, J., Mill, J., Martin, J., Braithwaite, A., Poulton, R., 2003.
Influence of life stress on depression: moderation by a polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene. Science 301, 386–389.
Chell, E., Haworth, J., Brearley, S., 1991. The Entrepreneurial Personality. Routledge, London.
Clouse, V., 1990. A controlled experiment relating entrepreneurial education to students' start-up decisions. Journal of Small Business Management
28, 45–53.
Collins, C.J., Hanges, P., Locke, E.A., 2004. The relationship of need for achievement to entrepreneurship: a meta-analysis. Human Performance 17,
95–117.
Comings, D., Rosenthal, R.J., Lesieur, H.R., Rugle, L.J., Muhleman, D., Chiu, C., Dietz, G., Gade, DEMO, 1996. A study of the dopamine receptor gene
in pathological gambling. DEMO 6 (3), 223–234.
Cooper, A., Dunkelberg, W., 1987. DEMO research: old questions, new answers and methodological issues. American Journal of Small
Business 11 (3), 11–23.
Cooper, A.C., Folta, T., Woo, C., 1991. Information acquisition and performance by start-up firms. In: Churchill, N.S., et al. (Ed.), Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research. Center for Entrepreneurial Studies, Wellesley, MA, pp. 276–290.
Cooper, A.C., Gimeno-Gascón, F.J., 1992. Entrepreneurs, processes of founding, and new-firm performance. In: Sexton, D.L., Kasarda, J.D. (Eds.),
The State of the Art of Entrepreneurship. PWS-Kent Publishing Company, Boston, MA, pp. 301–340.
Cromie, S., O' Donaghue, J., 1992. Assessing entrepreneurial inclinations. International Small Business Journal 10 (2), 66–73.
Davidsson, P., Honig, B., 2003. The role of social and human capital among nascent entrepreneurs. Journal DEMO Business Venturing 18 (3), 301–331.
de Wit, G., van DEMO, F.A.A.M., 1989. An empirical analysis of self employment in the Netherlands. Small Business Economics 1, 263–272.
DeFries, J.C., Plomin, R., Fulker, D.W., 1994. Nature and Nurture during Middle Childhood. Blackwell, Cambridge, DEMO
Delmar, F., Davidsson, P., 2000. Where do they come from? Prevalence and characteristics of nascent entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurship and Regional
Development 12, DEMO
Dick, D.M., Edenberg, H.J., Xuei, X., Goate, A., Kuperman, S., Schuckit, M., Crowe, R., Smith, T.L., DEMO, B., Begleiter, H., Foroud, T., 2004.
Association of GABRG3 with alcohol dependence. Alcoholism, Clinical and Experimental Research 28 (1), DEMO
DiLalla, L.F., 2004. Behavioral genetics: background, current research, and DEMO for the future. In: DiLalla, L.F. (Ed.), Behavior Genetics DEMO:
Perspectives in Development, Personality, and Psychopathology. APA, Washington, DC.
Durand, D.E., 1975. Effects of achievement motivation and skill training on DEMO entrepreneurial behavior of black businessmen. Organizational
Behavior and Human Performance 14, DEMO
Eaves, L.J., Eysenck, H.J., Martin, N.G., 1989. Genes, DEMO and Personality: An Empirical Approach. Academic Press, New York.
Ebstein, DEMO, Novick, O., Umansky, R., Priel, B., Osher, Y., Blaine, D., 1996. Dopamine D4 receptor (D4DR) exon III polymorphism associated with
the human personality trait novelty-seeking. Nature Genetics 12, 78–80.
Eckhardt, J., Shane, S., 2005. Industry changes in the importance of DEMO and complementary assets and the relative growth of new and
established firms. Working Paper, University of Wisconsin.
Evans, D., Leighton, L., 1989. Some empirical aspects of entrepreneurship. American Economic Review 79, 519–535.
Fairlie, DEMO, 1999. The absence of African–American owned businesses: an analysis of the dynamics of self-employment. Journal of Labor Economics
17 (1), 80–108.
Fernandez, M., Kim, K., 1998. Self-employment rates of Asian Immigrant Groups: an analysis of intra-group and inter-group differences.
International Migration Review 32, 654–681.
Gaglio, C.M., Katz, J.A., 2001. The psychological basis of opportunity DEMO: entrepreneurial alertness. Small Business Economics 16 (2),
95–111.
Gartner, W., 1988. Who is an entrepreneur? Is the wrong question. American DEMO of Small Business 12 (4), 11–32.
20
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (DEMO) 1–22
Gartner, W.B., 1989. Some suggestions for research on entrepreneurial DEMO and characteristics. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice Fall 14 (1),
27–38.
Gartner, W., Carter, N., 2003. Entrepreneurial behavior and firm organizing DEMO In: Acs, Z., Audretsch, D. (Eds.), Handbook of
DEMO Research. Kluwer, Boston, pp. 195–222.
Gartner, W.B., Carter, N.M., Hills, G.E. 2001. The language of opportunity. Working Paper.
Ge, X., Conger, R.D., Cadoret, R.J., et al., 1996. Developmental interface between nature and nurture: a mutual influence model of child antisocial
behavior and parenting. Developmental Psychology 32, 574–589.
Gottfredson, L.S., 1999. The nature and nurture of vocational interests. In: Savickas, M.L., Spokane, A.R. (Eds.), Vocational Interests: Their
Meaning, Measurement, and Use in Counseling. Davies-Black, Palo Alto, CA.
Grigorenko, 2003. Epistasis and the genetics of complex traits. In: Plomin, R., DeFries, J.C., Craig, I.W., McGuffin, P. (Eds.), Behavioral Geneticsin
the Postgenomic Era. American Psychological Association, Washington, DC.
Hornaday, J., Aboud, J., 1971. Characteristics of successful entrepreneurs. Personnel Psychology 24, 141–153.
Hornaday, J., Bunker, C., 1970. The nature of the entrepreneur. Personnel Psychology 23, 47–54.
Jang, K.L., Livesley, W.J., Vernon, P.A., 1996. Heritability of the big five DEMO dimensions and their facets: a twin study. Journal of Personality
64, 577–591.
Kendler, K.S., 2005a. “A gene for…”: the nature of gene action in psychiatric disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry 162, 1243–1252.
Kendler, DEMO, 2005b. Psychiatric genetics: a methodological critique. American Journal of Psychiatry 162, 3–11.
Kendler, K.S., Eaves, L.J., 1986. Models for the joint effects of genotype and environment on liability to psychiatric illness. American Journal DEMO
Psychiatry 143, 279–289.
Kirzner, I., 1997. Entrepreneurial discovery and the DEMO market process. an Austrian approach. Journal of Economic Literature 35, 60–85.
DEMO, S., 2001. Employee startups in high tech industries. Industrial and Corporate Change 10, 639–674.
Klepper, S., Sleeper, S., 2001. Entry by Spinoffs. Mimeo. Carnegie Mellon University.
Kluger, A.N., Siegfried, Z., Ebstein, R.P., 2002. A meta-analysis of the association between DRD4 polymorphism and novelty seeking. Molecular
Psychiatry 7, 712–717.
Kohler, H.-P., Behrman, J.R., Skytthe, A., 2005. Partner+Children=Happiness? The effect of fertility and partnerships on subjective well-being.
Population and Development Review 31 (3), 407–445.
Krueger, N., 1993. Growing Up Entrepreneurial. Academy of Management Proceedings, Atlanta.
LaHoste, G.J., et al., 1996. Dopamine D4 receptor gene polymorphism is associated with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Molecular
Psychiatry 1, 121–124.
Lesch, K.P., Bengel, DEMO, Heils, A., Sabol, S.Z., Greenberg, B.D., Petri, S., et al., 1996. Association of anxiety-related traits with a polymorphism in DEMO
serotonin transporter gene regulatory region. Science 274, 1527–1531.
Lichtenstein, P., DEMO, N.L., McClearn, G.E., 1992. Genetic and environmental predictors of socioeconomic status. Behavior Genetics 22,
731–732.
Long, J.E., 1982. The income DEMO and self-employment. National Tax Journal 35 (1), 31–42.
Low, M.B., MacMillan, I., 1988. Entrepreneurship: past research and future challenges. Journal DEMO Management 14 (2), 139–161.
MacMillan, I., Subba Narasimha, P., 1987. Characteristics distinguishing funded from unfunded business plans evaluated by venture capitalists.
Strategic Management Journal 8 (6), 579–585.
Macpherson, D., 1988. Self-employment and married women. Economic Letters 28, 281–284.
Markman, G., Baron, DEMO, 2003. Person-entrepreneurship fit: why some people are more successful as entrepreneurs than others. Human Resource
Management Review 13, 281–302.
McClelland, D., 1961. The Achieving Society. Van Nostrand, Princeton, NJ.
McClelland, D.C., 1965. DEMO achievement and entrepreneurship: a longitudinal study. Journal of Personality and Social DEMO 1, 389–392.
McGue, M., Bouchard, T.J., 1989. Genetic and DEMO determinants of information processing and special mental abilities: a twin analysis. DEMO:
Sternberg, R.J. (Ed.), Advances in the Psychology of Human Intelligence, vol. 5. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp. 7–45.
McGue, M., DEMO, S., Lykken, D.T., 1993. Personality stability and change in early adulthood: a behavioral genetic analysis. Developmental
Psychology 29, 96–109.
Miller, J.Z., Rose, R.J., 1982. Familial resemblance in locus of control: a DEMO study of the internal-external scale. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 42, 535–540.
Miner, J.B., Smith, N.R., Bracker, J.S., 1989. Role of entrepreneurial task motivation in the growth of technologically innovative firms. Journal DEMO
Applied Psychology 74, 554–560.
Moffitt, T.E., Caspi, A., Rutter, M., 2005. Strategy for investigating interactions between measured genes and measured environments. Archives of
General Psychiatry 62, 473–481.
Moffitt, T., Caspi, A., Rutter, M., 2006. Measured gene–environment interactions in psychopathology: concepts, research DEMO, and implications
for research, intervention, and public understanding of genetics. DEMO on Psychological Science 1, 5–27.
Munafo, M.R., Clark, T.G., DEMO, L.R., Payne, E., Walton, R., Flint, J., 2003. Genetic polymorphisms and personality in healthy adults: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Molecular Psychiatry 8, 471–484.
Neale, M.C., Maes, H.H.M., 2002. Methodology for Genetic Studies of Twins and Families. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, DEMO
Nichols, R.C., 1978. Twin studies of ability, personality and interests. DEMO 29, 158–173.
Pedersen, N.L., Gatz, M., Plomin, R., DEMO, J.R., McClearn, G.E., 1989. Individual differences in locus of control during the second half of the
life span for identical and fraternal DEMO reared apart and reared together. Journal of Gerontology 44, 100–105.
Pedersen, N.L., Plomin, R., Nesselroade, J.R., McClearn, G.E., 1992. Quantitative genetic analysis of cognitive abilities during the second half of the
lifespan. DEMO Science 3, 346–353.
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (2009) 1–22
21
Plomin, R., 1994. Genetics and Experience: The Interplay between Nature and Nurture. Sage, Newbury Park, CA.
Plomin, R., DeFries, J.C., 1979. Multivariate behavioral genetic analysis of twin data on scholastic abilities. Behavior genetics 9, 505–517.
Plomin, R., Loehlin, J.C., DeFries, DEMO, 1985. Genetic and environmental components of “environmental" influences. Developmental Psychology
21, 391–402.
Plomin, R., DeFries, J.C., McClearn, G.E., 1990. Behavioral Genetics: A Primer, second ed. W.H. Freeman, New York.
Plomin, DEMO, Walker, S.O., 2003. Genetics and educational psychology. British Journal of DEMO Psychology 73, 3–14.
Plomin, R., Spinath, F.M., 2004. Intelligence: genetics, genes, and genomics. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 86, 112–129.
Plomin, R., DeFries, J.C., Loehlin, J.C., 1977. Genotype–environment DEMO and correlation in the analysis of human behavior. Psychological
Bulletin 84, DEMO
Plomin, R., DeFries, J.C., McClearn, G.E., McGuffin, P., 2001a. Behavioral Genetics, 4th ed. Worth Publishers, New York.
Plomin, R., Hill, L., Craig, I., McGuffin, P., Purcell, S., Sham, P., 2001b. A genome-wide scan of 1842 DNA markers for DEMO associations with
general cognitive ability: a five-stage design using DNA pooling. DEMO Genetics 31, 497–509.
Plomin, R., Price, T.S., Eley, T.C., Dale, P.S., Stevenson, J., 2002. Associations between behaviour problems and verbal and nonverbal cognitive
abilities and disabilities in early childhood. Journal of DEMO Psychology and Psychiatry 43 (5), 619–633.
Plomin, R., DeFries, J.C., Craig, I.W., McGuffin, P., 2003. Behavioral genomics. In: DEMO, R., DeFries, J.C., Craig, I.W., McGuffin, P. (Eds.),
Behavioral Genetics in the Postgenomic Era. American Psychological Association, Washington, DC.
Rauch, A., Frese, M., 2000. Psychological approaches to entrepreneurial DEMO: a general model and an overview of findings. In: Cooper, DEMO,
Robertson, L.T. (Eds.), International Review of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, vol. 15. Chichester, U.K, Wiley, pp. 101–142.
Rees, H., Shah, A., 1986. An empirical analysis of self-employment in the UK. Journal of Applied Econometrics 1, 95–108.
Reynolds, P., Carter, N., Gartner, W., Greene, P., 2004. The prevalence of nascent entrepreneurs DEMO the United States: evidence from the panel study of
entrepreneurial dynamics. DEMO Business Economics 23, 263–284.
Riemann, R., Angleitner, A., Strelau, J., 1997. Genetic and environmental influences on personality: a study of DEMO reared together using the self-
and peer report NEO-FFI scales. Journal of Personality 65, 449–475.
Riggins-Caspers, K.M., Cadoret, R.J., Knutson, J.F., Langden, B., 2003. Biology–environment interaction and biology–environment correlation:
contributions of DEMO discipline and parental psychopathology to problem adolescent behaviors. Behavior Genetics 33 (DEMO), 205–220.
Ritsila, J., Tervo, H., 2002. Effects of unemployment on new firm formation: micro-level panel data evidence from Finland. Small Business
Economics 19, 31–40.
Roberts, E.B., 1991. Entrepreneurs in High Technology: DEMO from MIT and Beyond. Oxford University Press, New York.
Rotter, J.B., 1966. Generalised expectancies for internal versus external control of reinforcement. Psychological Monographs 80 (Whole No. 609).
Rowe, D., 2003. Assessing genotype × environment interactions and correlations in a Postgenomic World. In: Plomin, R., DeFries, J.C., Craig, I.W.,
McGuffin, P. (Eds.), Behavioral Genetics in the Postgenomic Era. American Psychological Association, Washington, DC.
Rutter, M., Silberg, J., 2002. Gene–environment interplay in relation to emotional and behavioral disturbance. Annual Review Psychology 53,
463–490.
Sarasvathy, S., 2003. DEMO corridors to economic primitives: entrepreneurial opportunities as demand-side artefacts. In: Butler, J. (Ed.),
Opportunity Identification and Entrepreneurial Behavior. Information Age Publishing, Greenwich, CT, pp. 291–312.
Scarr, S., 1992. Developmental theories for 1990s: development and individual differences. Child Development 63, 1–19.
Schiller, B.R., Crewson, P.E., 1997. Entrepreneurial origins: a longitudinal inquiry. Economic Inquiry DEMO, 523–531.
Sexton, D.L., Bowman, N.B., 1983. Comparative entrepreneurship characteristics DEMO students: preliminary results. In: Hornaday, J., Timmons, J.,
DEMO, K. (Eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research. Babson College, Wellesley, MA, pp. 213–232.
Sham, P., 2003. Recent developments in quantitative trait loci analysis. In: Plomin, R., DeFries, J.C., Craig, I.W., McGuffin, P. (Eds.), Behavioral
Genetics in the Postgenomic Era. APA DEMO, Washington, DC.
Shane, S., 2000. Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities. Organization Science 11, 448–469.
Shane, S., 2003. A General Theory of Entrepreneurship: The Individual-Opportunity Nexus. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham.
DEMO, S., Venkataraman, S., 2000. The promise of entrepreneurship as a field of research. Academy of Management Review 25, 217–226.
Shane, S., Cable, D., 2002. Network ties, reputation, and the financing of DEMO ventures. Management Science 48 (3), 364–381.
Shane, S., Khurana, R., 2003. Career experience and firm founding. Industrial and Corporate Change 12 (3), 519–543.
Shapero, A., Sokol, L., 1982. The social dimensions of entrepreneurship. In: Kent, C.A., Sexton, D.L., Vesper, DEMO (Eds.), Encyclopedia of
Entrepreneurship. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, pp. 72–90.
Sorenson, J., 2007. Closure versus exposure: mechanisms in the intergenerational transition of self-employment. In: Ruef, M., Lounsbury, M. (Eds.),
Research in the Sociology of Organizations. JAI Press, Amsterdam, pp. 83–124.
Stewart Jr., W.H., Roth, P.L., 2001. Risk propensity differences DEMO entrepreneurs and managers: a meta-analytic review. Journal of Applied
Psychology 86, 145–153.
Stewart, W.H. Jr., Roth, P.L. 2004. Achievement motivation, dependability DEMO entrepreneurial status: hunting the Heffalump with meta-analysis.
Working Paper, Arthur M. Spiro Center for Entrepreneurial Leadership, Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina.
Stuart, T., Sorenson, Ο., in press. Strategic networks and entrepreneurial ventures. DEMO Entrepreneurship Journal.
Taubman, P., 1976. The determinants of earnings: genetics, family, and other environments; a study of white male twins. American DEMO Review
66, 858–870.
Taylor, M.P., 1996. Earnings, independence or unemployment: why become self-employed? Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 58 (2), 253–266.
Tellegen, A., Lykken, D.T., Bouchard Jr., T.J., DEMO, K., Segal, N., Rich, S., 1988. Personality similarity in twins reared apart and together. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 54, 1031–1039.
Thapar, A., 2003. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: new genetic findings, new directions. In: Plomin, R., DeFries, J.C., Craig, I.W., McGuffin,
P. (Eds.), Behavioral Genetics in the Postgenomic Era. DEMO Psychological Association, Washington, DC.
22
N. Nicolaou, S. Shane / Journal of Business Venturing 24 (DEMO) 1–22
Thornton, P., Flynn, K., 2003. Entrepreneurship, networks and geographies. In: Acs, Z., Audretsch, D. (Eds.), Handbook of Entrepreneurship
Research. Kluwer, Boston, pp. 401–436.
Strachan, T., Read, A., 2003. Molecular Genetics, third ed. Garland Publishing Inc.
Turkheimer, E., DEMO Heritability and biological explanation. Psychological Review 105, 782–791.
Uusitalo, R., DEMO ‘Homo Entreprenaurus?’ . Applied Economics, 33, pp. 1631–1638.
Van Tol, H.H.M., Bunzow, J.R., Guan, H.-C., Sunahara, R.K., Seeman, P., Niznik, H.B., Civelli, O., 1991. Cloning of a human dopamine D4 receptor
gene with high affinity for the antipsychotic clozapine. Nature DEMO, 610–614.
Van Tol, H., Wu, C., Guan, H., DEMO, K., Bunzow, J., Civelli, O., Kennedy, J., Seeman, P., Niznik, H., Jovanovic, V., 1992. Multiple dopamine D4
DEMO variants in the human population. Nature 358 (6382), 149–152.
Venkataraman, S., 1997. The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research. In: Katz, J.A. (Ed.), Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence
and Growth, vol. 3. JAI Press Inc, Greenwich, Connecticut.
Volkow, N.D., 2004. Mediation of DEMO in health and addiction. 157th Annual Meeting of the American Psychiatric Association.
Waller, N.G., 1999. Evaluating the structure of personality. In: Cloninger, DEMO (Ed.), Personality and Psychopathology. American Psychiatric
Association, Washington, DC.
DEMO, E.A., 1993. Motivation of expansion plans of entrepreneurs and small business managers. Journal of Small Business Management 31, 32–38.
Watson, J.D., Berry, A., 2003. DNA The Secret of Life. William Heinemann, London.
White, R.E., Thornhill, S., Hampson, E., 2006. Entrepreneurs and evolutionary DEMO: the relationship between testosterone and new venture
creation. Organizational Behavior and DEMO Decision Processes 100 (1), 21–34.
Wolf, J.B., Brodie III, E.D., Wade, M.J., 2000. Epistasis and the Evolutionary Process. Oxford University Press, New York.
Young, R., Francis, J., 1991. Entrepreneurship and innovation in small manufacturing firms. Social Science Quarterly 72 (1), 149–162.{1g42fwefx}