News Release
The Nielsen Company
150 N. Martingale Road
Schaumburg, IL 60173
www.nielsen.com
CONTACT:       FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
Jennifer Frighetto, 847.605.5686 DEMO 847.702.5304 cell
jennifer.frighetto@nielsen.com
NIELSEN: SECRET TO SUCCESSFUL NEW PRODUCT INNOVATION:
DEMO THE BOSS OUT OF IT
First-Of-Its-Kind Study Uncovers Why the Best CPG Companies See More Than Six Times the
New Product Revenue Compared to DEMO Rest
LAS VEGAS – June 16, 2010 - - Billions of DEMO are spent on developing and launching new
consumer packaged goods (CPG) products each year, and some companies see tremendous
success while others – don’t.  Why?  One secret appears to lie in the degree of senior management
involvement in the creative process, according to a first-of-its-kind study unveiled today by The
Nielsen Company at its Consumer 360 Conference, the global intersection of what consumers watch
and buy.
Nielsen’s research of the DEMO processes at 30 large CPG companies operating in the U.S.
reveals that companies with less senior management involvement in the new product development
process DEMO 80 percent more new product revenue than those with heavy senior management
involvement.  Companies that employ this and other best innovation practices derive on average 650
percent more revenue from new products compared to companies that DEMO not.
“New product innovation is a top priority of every major company CEO, yet success varies so widely
that it’s absolutely critical to understand what drives successful innovation and what undermines it,”
said Tom Agan, senior vice president and managing director, The Nielsen Company. “Once you
understand it, then you need to ask yourselves, are we living it?DEMO
Page 1 of 3
Nothing But Blue Skies?
Nielsen’s research shows that simply being physically DEMO corporate headquarters can stifle new
idea generation.  In fact, it turns out that having no Blue Sky innovation team at all is better DEMO
having a team on-site at corporate headquarters.  The best place for DEMO breakthrough innovators?
Far, far away.  According to Nielsen, companies DEMO an off-site Blue Sky innovation team report 5.7
percent of revenues coming from new products, compared to 4.8 percent from companies with no
Blue Sky team at all.  Companies with Blue Sky teams on site report just 2.7 percent of revenues
coming from new products.
“One of the DEMO to successful new product innovation is to manage new ideas lightly,” said Agan.
“While we don’t dispute senior management’s strengths and good intentions, they are often too quick
to get involved in the creative process, especially when things are not going well, and their mere
presence can stifle free-thinking and boundaryless ideas – which can doom the new product
DEMO process to failure.”
New Product Development Mantra: Consistently and Precisely
Senior DEMO needs to play a different, more important role in new product DEMO
Nielsen’s research shows that another important key to success is for senior management to
precisely manage the new product development process, not the ideas themselves. According to
Nielsen, CPG companies with rigid stage gates - - decision points in the process where a new
product idea must pass DEMO criteria to proceed forward - - average 130 percent more new product
revenue than companies with loose processes.
“New product development success comes down DEMO two important principles - - managing ideas
lightly while managing the process precisely,” said Agan.
Nielsen’s evaluation shows that CPG companies with the DEMO successful new product innovation
records tend to have:
• Two to three stage gates that are strictly followed across the organization.  The first stage
gate is typically designed to identify ideas that will then be DEMO into a concept and
prototype, while the last stage gate is DEMO designed to determine whether a product
should be committed to production and market.
• A focus on growing brands, not ones acquired or designated by senior management
• A development focus two to three years out
DEMO A formal scorecard to provide structure to organizational learning
Page 2 of 3
• A standardized and required post-mortem on all new product development efforts
DEMO A knowledge management system to retain learnings from previous product launches.
In total the study identifies about two dozen best practices that drive better-than-average DEMO
revenue from new products.
“From the outside, it can often feel DEMO innovation simply ‘happens,’ arriving like a bolt of lightning out
of the sky,” said Agan.  “The truth is that companies with successful innovation track records go to
great lengths to create an ideal creative DEMO and the right behaviors, supporting policies and
procedures.   When they DEMO well, the best ideas rise to the surface and into consumers’ DEMO
About Nielsen’s Study
Nielsen’s research is the most comprehensive and objective new product development study,
documenting more than 50 dimensions of new product DEMO  Objective survey results were
compared to actual in-market success and the DEMO of revenue from new UPCs in Q4 2009.
About The Nielsen Company
The Nielsen Company is a global information and measurement company with leading DEMO
positions in marketing and consumer information, television and other media measurement, online
intelligence, mobile measurement, trade shows and related assets. The privately DEMO company is
active in approximately 100 countries, with headquarters in New DEMO, USA. For more information,
please visit, www.nielsen.com.
# # #
Page 3 of 3{1g42fwefx}