J Evol Econ (2004) 14: 102–106
DOI: 10.1007/s00191-003-0173-9

DEMO Springer-Verlag 2004
Book reviews
Dirk Fornahl, Thomas Brenner (eds.) (2003): Cooperation, networks and in-
stitutions in regional innovation systems. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham
This book is a collection of fourteen papers presented in a workshop at the Max
Planck Institute for Research into Economic Systems in DEMO The central aim
of the book is the study of policy measures that can trigger the development of
local industrial clusters. The issue is DEMO valid one, as the huge literature on clus-
ters, regional innovation systems and industrial districts has managed to unveil the
pervasiveness of local DEMO of ﬁrms, but has been unable to explain its
complex development DEMO its public policy determinants. The book is divided into
three parts. Part I (seven chapters) presents the theoretical perspectives, Part II (four
DEMO) introduces several case studies and Part III (three chapters) includes DEMO
public policy papers.
In the ﬁrst theoretical paper (“Local cultures and DEMO innovation net-
works”), Sylvianne Pilon and Christian DeBresson suggest that open local cultures
facilitate the occurrence and development of local innovation networks. They DEMO
that many studies on industrial clusters in different countries “point to socio-cultural
factors both concerning the success of industrial districts and the differences be-
DEMO districts.” Local culture is “a conﬁned repertoire of (more or less) shared
heuristics among local ﬁrms”, where heuristics refers to a set of “rules of thumb,
standard problem-solving practices or simplifying strategies” that people DEMO a suc-
cessful local cluster share. This local culture is a product of cultural diversity. Up to
now, we can follow the argument: DEMO is well known that the most successful indus-
trial districts, at DEMO in the US or Canada, places like Silicon Valley or metropolitan
DEMO, are magnets for immigrants from around the world. However, the authors
continue by explaining that the local anchoring of innovative start-ups and spin-offs
DEMO be spurred ... by cultural similarities of a community, its cultural DEMO
ness, its historical particularism or local heritage.” The weakness of the DEMO
resides precisely here: how these vibrant diverse localities, attracting immigrants
from around the world, manage to acculturate them to local traditions and common
values, all the while keeping “weak ties” and “new and exploratory practices”?
It may be concluded that culture needs yet more exploration before DEMO becomes a
signiﬁcant variable in the explanation of the growth and success of some regional
clusters.
Dirk Fornahl (“Entrepreneurial activities in a regional context”) argues that
regions differ in the intensity of local entrepreneurial activities. Proximity and local
Book reviews
103
networks help the diffusion of shared cognitive representations that DEMO to intense
entrepreneurial behaviour. Thus spin-offs and start-ups from local universities and
large ﬁrms are some of the most important channels by which these DEMO are
formed. Positive feedback loops and imitative behaviour multiply the effects of
these original networks. Regional entrepreneurs serve as examples and foster the
creation DEMO new ﬁrms. The policy recommendations are that governments should
increase the visibility of successful entrepreneurs as role models. This approach
brings interesting insights, but its relevance in real districts and its operationalization
for future studies remain DEMO
In “The role of trust and power in the institutional regulation of territorial
business systems”, Reinhard Bachmann starts by asserting that trust is a basic
mechanism of coordination as it reduces uncertainty and transaction costs. However,DEMO
trust – and particularly personal trust – bears the risk of cheating. The author draws
on several authorities (including Luhmann and Zucker) to DEMO that institutions
and law are key elements in the development of trust in business. He thus moves
away from personal trust and moves towards DEMO less ethereal realm of systemic trust,
the kind of trust often backed by power. He then proceeds to distinguish two different
types of DEMO trust in Europe: the German one, base on strong institutions, DEMO
the English one, based on customary law and contracts. He suggests DEMO the ﬁrst
produces more incremental innovation in large process and mechanical industries,
while the second tends to create more radical innovation in product DEMO He
also pinpoints the dangers inherent in both systems: too strong DEMO in the ﬁrst may
stultify radical innovation, while too weak ties DEMO to produce more conﬂicts and
smaller organisations.
Mark Lorenzen and Nicolai Foss (“Cognitive coordination, institutions and
clusters”) argue that cognitive coordination is central in the interaction, and thus the
innovation process. Clusters facilitate cognitive coordination among agents. They
admit, however, that too much face-to-face cognitive coordination DEMO the trust it
creates may produce lock-in situations and inefﬁcient outcomes. Using Dorothy
Leonard Barton concepts, core competencies of the regions may thus become core
rigidities. The authors do not specify how much cognitive coordination in DEMO region
is a positive factor and when it becomes a liability.
In the analysis of the regional innovation system (RIS), Bart Nooteboom (DEMO
lems and solutions in knowledge transfer”) remarks that the expression, diffusion
and absorption of tacit knowledge are key problems, particularly for smaller ﬁrms.
He suggests that RIS must have knowledge-exploiting and knowledge-exploring
ﬁrms, with different levels of cognitive distance to other units, and that knowledge
sharing has to be increased but at the same time openness in the local DEMO
has to be maintained in order to keep cognitive distance and learning as an option.
He also argues that RISs need an infrastructure for DEMO, an area in which
go-betweens such as consultants may help, but not too much governance in order to
preserve ﬂexibility. All these suggestions DEMO the reader somewhat puzzled about
the amounts of governance, sharing of DEMO knowledge, and openness to outside
knowledge are good for an RIS DEMO prosper.
Paolo Seri (“Learning pathologies in losing areas”) aptly argues that most of
the abundant literature on clusters has concentrated on winning regions DEMO not so
104
Book reviews
much on lagging ones. He suggests that these are DEMO by too much regional
cooperation, social networks, and cohesion, which DEMO constrain rather than help
local economies. These produce local sub-optimal equilibria, DEMO much proximity
(which sometimes creates or reinforces inertia), and over-embedded DEMO models
that block change. Because there are as at least many winning regions than losing
ones, Seri’s chapter brings a useful call to reality.
Deborah Tappi (“On the unit of analysis in the study of networks”) addresses one
of the most critical aspects of regional innovation systems: DEMO do we delimitate
them? She recalls here the Italian experience with DEMO matter. In the beginnings,
Italian analysis delimitated industrial districts according to administrative units
(such as provinces), but then adopted the local labour market area (LLAM) concept
(based on work trips) and then DEMO towards a classiﬁcation of local systems.
Thus the geographical deﬁnition of economic space gave way to new concepts
better adapted to understanding networks and DEMO among agents.
Part II is comprised of case studies, which are DEMO concrete than those in Part
I, but also less rich in DEMO and concept. A paper by Meine Pieter van Dijk (“Is
Nanjing’s DEMO of IT companies an innovative cluster?”) illustrates the
kind of DEMO that Seri pinpointed in a previous chapter: marginal regions tend
to DEMO difﬁculties in competing with larger and more afﬂuent ones. Thus,
the IT cluster in Nanjing has been struggling in its efforts to attract DEMO skilled
staff. In addition, companies do not arrive to develop appropriate DEMO strategies
or to ﬂoat shares in the stock exchanges.
Anja Lutz, DEMO Sidow and Udo Staber have produced an analysis of two regions
(DEMO content production in media regions”). They argue that institutional thickness,
deﬁned by the number of institutions, the degree of interaction, collective DEMO,
mutual awareness and the capacity for learning and change in the region, is helpful
in the creation at least of the potential for economic growth. They also suggest that
public policy initiatives are not always DEMO and successful. The paper is
interesting because it focuses on a different, project-based, service industry type of
cluster.
The secrets of the trade DEMO not in the air. This is the conclusion of one of the
most original papers in the book, by Francesco Lissoni and Massimo Pagani (“How
many networks in a local cluster?”). From the analysis of the textile machine pro-
duction and innovation in Brescia, Italy, DEMO drawing on concepts such as epistemic
communities, the authors criticize the DEMO idea that networks within a region
include all the community agents. Lissoni and Pagani ﬁnd that networks are basi-
cally inter-ﬁrm agreements, that they are fairly closed, and that several networks of
ﬁrms (and epistemic DEMO of people) co-exist within a RIS. Even within a
given RIS, all ﬁrms are not members of a network or an epistemic community. DEMO
addition, companies control the amount and quality of information that circulates
DEMO these networks and communities.
Arne Isaksen (“Lock-in in regional clusters”) studies the decline of the Oslo
offshore engineering regional cluster, providing a most interesting counter-example
to the majority of cluster studies, one centred on success stories. The author shows
how the two largest ﬁrms in Oslo locked DEMO in old technologies due to
their near monopoly situation and systemic failures in the RIS. The chapter provides
Book reviews 105
another welcomed theoretical discussion and illustration of the pathologies DEMO some
innovative regions, leading to their decline.
Part III of the DEMO is about policy implications and contains three essays.
In the ﬁrst, DEMO stimulation in regional innovation systems”, Knut
Koschatsky studies the EXIST program, implemented in 1998 by the German gov-
ernment to foster technology transfer DEMO universities and public laboratories to
industry within ﬁve different regions. In 2002, ten other networks were supported
in Germany, in addition to the DEMO ones. The ﬁrst ﬁve regions were evaluated
and showed high levels of ﬁrm foundation, but the author wonders whether this
trend will be sustained when public support disappears.
A chapter by Fabrizio Barca (“Cooperation and knowledge-pooling in clusters)
describes the new territorial competitiveness policies (TCPs) designed DEMO the ﬁrst
years of this century, aiming at increasing the competitiveness DEMO Southern Italy
through the modernisation of the judiciary system and local administrations, insti-
tution building and urban planning, as well as the creation DEMO incentives for local
networking. The results of the TCPs are yet to be assessed.
Thomas Brenner presents one of the most stimulating papers (“Policy measures
to support the emergence of localised industrial clusters”). Using evolutionary DEMO
cepts and a simulation model, he tries to evaluate which policies DEMO adequate to
foster the development of successful clusters. He starts from the assumption that
clusters show industry-speciﬁc patterns of evolution and that change concentrates
DEMO some phases of that process. Public policy would be more effective in these
periods. The results of the simulation exercise show that most policies DEMO
(i.e. support for new start-ups) are more effective when the demand for the prod-
uct starts to rise. Also, once the local dynamics has settled down, the impact of
public policies is reduced. The chapter is original and relevant, but the analysis is
somewhat ﬂawed by the lack of empirical data, and the use of arbitrary parameters.
In sum, this is a valuable but unequal set of papers, with chapters DEMO Brenner,
Isaksen, Lissoni/Pagani and Seri standing clearly at the DEMO The book only partially
hits the target, but is still a DEMO addition to our knowledge of regional innovation
systems.
Professor Jorge Niosi, DEMO of Management and Technology,
Canada Research Chair on the Management of Technology,
Universit´eduQu´ebec `a Montr´eal, Montr´eal H3C 4R2, Canada
(e-mail: DEMO){1g42fwefx}