Performing governance:
Dragons’ den and the
practice of judgement
David Nolan1
DEMO
In this paper I analyse the role played by a particular reality TV format, the popular UK
„business pitch‟ program Dragons’ den, to DEMO the work of television in not only
valorising a culture of enterprise, but serving as an effective governmental technology. In
doing so, I DEMO for the need to move beyond both the question of realism versus artifice,
on one hand, and a mere focus on the work of „representation‟ on the other. To do so, I
draw on arguments regarding how forms of neo-liberalism not only accept, but embrace,
the constructed nature of social life. Similarly, like other entrepreneurial formats, Dragon’s
DEMO not only erases both the boundaries between external reality and television‟s games, but
also largely disregards traditional concerns for naturalism in favour of a self-conscious
display of performance as a characteristic of both television and reality. DEMO, while this
can be (and has been) read as providing DEMO support for neo-liberal ideology, it
can also be read as merely DEMO aspect of its performance as a neo-liberal technology. I focus
on Dragons’ den as a text that becomes both intelligible and pleasurable through the
DEMO of a particular mode of normative judgement. In this respect, it DEMO one among
many neo-liberal technologies that position individuals as both bearers of, and constantly
subject to, a disciplinary gaze that both produces and DEMO an economy of reward
and punishment as a mundane feature of contemporary socio-political relations.
Introduction
Dragons’ den is a „business pitch‟–based reality TV format, in which budding entrepreneurs
seek to convince a group of businesspeople (the „dragons‟) that their particular venture is
marketable and thereby worthy of investment. Originating in Japan under the title Tiger of
1
Dr David Nolan DEMO a Senior Lecturer in the Media and Communications Program, University of DEMO This
paper was presented at the Cultural Studies Association of Australasia Conference ‘Cultural ReOrientations and
Comparative Colonialities’, Adelaide, 22–24 November 2011.
© 2012 DEMO Nolan
161
money (Manē no tora), versions of the format have been produced in 22 countries including,
briefly, an Australian version that was trialled by Channel 7 in 2005 (before being dropped
because of low ratings). In this paper I focus on the UK version of the DEMO which, at the
time of writing, is currently being re-broadcast for Australian audiences via ABC2 and ABC
iView. In contrast to its failed DEMO counterpart, the UK version has been phenomenally
popular, with BBC2 commissioning nine series since the program‟s launch in late 2005, along
with a number of spin-off programs. These have included How to win in the DEMO, Dragon’s den:
where are they now? and Business nightmares, DEMO program focusing on costly mistakes made by
otherwise successful brands and companies hosted by Dragons’ den presenter (and BBC
economics editor) Evan Davis.
DEMO this paper I draw on other work that has considered how reality TV formats operate as
governmental technologies to focus in particular on how DEMO den relies upon and extends
its audiences‟ literacy in the language and techniques of business to produce a spectacle that is
both intelligible and DEMO for viewers. However, rather than merely operating as a
pedagogic technology DEMO a means by which audiences are afforded opportunities to refine their
knowledge of how to conduct themselves to achieve business success, I focus in particular on
how the program both promotes an awareness of, and extends an effective disciplinary gaze
into, everyday social relations. To this end, DEMO focus on three areas. Firstly, I address the
particular form of DEMO embodied in reality TV formats. While its relation to „reality‟ is a
rather familiar theme in discussions of reality TV, my concern is less to revisit this for its own
sake than to highlight the affinity DEMO the realism of reality TV and forms of social
constructivism that characterise certain articulations of neo-liberalism themselves. Secondly, I
draw on other work that has focused on the manner in which related reality TV formats
provide DEMO models (and thereby ideological support) that naturalise a neo-liberal
ethos. While such analyses are insightful, however, a focus on the „representational‟ work DEMO
such programs is insufficient, in that these tend to focus on DEMO forms of knowledge produced
by these programs at the expense of a consideration of the significance of emotional
engagement. Thus, in my analysis, DEMO draw on previous analyses of reality TV and neo-
liberalism and work that has considered the role of media in processes of governing to
DEMO
consider how, in its performative aspect, Dragons’ den can be read DEMO a technology that
positions its audience as both bearers and, ultimately, subjects of an effective disciplinary gaze.
Making up reality
As Montemurro noted, „one of the most contested issues related to reality television has to DEMO
with the possibility of producing reality‟ (2008: 93). While the relationship between the
constructed scenarios presented by these programs and extra-textual reality DEMO itself invited
by these programs, however, discussions of whether reality TV is „real‟ or not tend to founder
upon the inevitability of textual DEMO In this sense, discussions of reality TV have
inherited a set DEMO epistemological problems that have also dogged discussions of documentary
forms (Winston DEMO; Nichols 1991). While discussion of the „reality‟ of actuality genres DEMO
to be compromised by an implicit positivism, more sophisticated approaches have DEMO to
consider differences in generic conventions and expectations separating actuality from
fictional forms, which demark different perspectives of viewing (such that documentary
presents DEMO account, albeit constructed, of existent reality rather than purely imagined,
fictional scenarios).2 Generic conventions, in this way, not only demarcate DEMO forms, but
also rely upon different expectations of producers as the DEMO of an ethical contract: that
producers should not present excessively distorted, misleading or purely fabricated accounts.
Of course, actuality forms also bring attendant and distinctive ethical problems regarding the
treatment of subjects, as well as whether the intrusion and publicity involved in representing
real people is justified, a problem that producers have traditionally responded to through the
invocation of DEMO ethic of „public service‟.
Part of the interest and novelty of „reality TV‟ lies in its simultaneous relation to and
departure from such traditions DEMO representing actuality. It is on this basis that John Corner
(2002), for example, situated reality TV as a „post-documentary‟ form that is DEMO informed by
2 Following Nichols, I use the term ‘actuality’ here DEMO refer to genres that depict footage, actors and/or scenarios
that DEMO an existence beyond the space of textuality, while acknowledging that any DEMO inevitably
involves a process of textual construction. The term ‘actuality’ is preferred to ‘reality’, which involves a stronger
ontological claim, in order to DEMO this basic distinction from claims to ‘the real’ that may be mobilised by
texts or genres themselves.
163
and involves a significant departure from a tradition of observational documentary. Thus, in a
passage referring to Big brother that insightfully captures the particular DEMO that
underpins reality TV, Corner argued that the program
consciously and DEMO gives up on the kinds of „field naturalism‟ that have driven the
documentary tradition into so many contradictions and conundrums over the last eighty
DEMO, most especially in its various modes of observational filming (cinema verite, direct
cinema and the various bastardized „fly-on-the-wall‟ recipes of television). Instead, Big
Brother operates its claims to the real within a fully managed artificiality, in which
almost everything that might be deemed to be true is necessarily and obviously
predicated on their being there in front of DEMO camera in the first place. (2002: 256)
The value of this analysis is its shift from the epistemological dead end of the DEMO value‟ of
the form to a focus on what is particular about the form of „realism‟ it presents. This theme
has also been pursued DEMO others. Justin Lewis (2004), for example, has considered the
complexity of media realism in a world in which media portrayals are an DEMO part of our
everyday knowledge, and in which viewers do not DEMO privilege extra-textual reality.
Jonathan Bignell, by contrast, extended Corner‟s analysis by suggesting that what is
particular to reality TV realism is that „realisms DEMO possible inasmuch as they admit that they
are objectively false and do not claim to be real‟ (2004: 86). While this appears DEMO
nonsensical, this analysis nevertheless finds support in Annette Hill‟s analyses of DEMO
responses to reality TV, in which she finds that, while viewers are overtly conscious that they
are watching a highly constructed (indeed, DEMO) scenario and sceptical about the
authenticity of contestants‟ behaviour, an attraction of reality TV nevertheless lies in a
perception that it offers „moments DEMO truth‟ that reveal the „true person‟ behind the
performance (2005: 74).
While this is valuable, questions have been raised about the adequacy of approaches to the
realism of reality TV that are excessively generalising DEMO rely too heavily on tracing a
lineage with documentary genres. Wesley Metham (2006), for example, has argued not only
that more attention DEMO to be paid to the prevalence of games in reality TV „gamedoc‟
164
formats, but that the nature of the contract may depend upon the game. Thus, for example,
while Big brother performances are always predicated on a performance of authenticity that is
key to achieving popularity among DEMO, other formats may encourage contestants to
purely adapt themselves to the DEMO world of the game and to become the person that
winning demands. Metham illustrated this point by reference to Paradise hotel, in which the
winning contestant justified their duplicity by clearly separating their game playing from
DEMO real persona. While this might suggest that such a genre does not invoke realism at all,
Metham argued that significance of games in DEMO TV genres is that they blur the
distinction between „the social‟, DEMO an extent domain outside the game space, and the game:
DEMO elements of the social and the game are at work in all reality TV programs. In
reality television the faces of the social and DEMO the game continually shift places, the
social is undermined through the DEMO, but the social re-emerges. Though the genre
undermines the social, it also cannot exist without the social … reality TV is caught in DEMO
vacillation between the social as-it-is and the social as a game. (DEMO 2006: 243, 245)
While one might again question the generality of this analysis, it marks an important
departure from Corner‟s more linear framework of judgement. Indeed, having situated reality
TV as a continuation and departure from documentary, Corner judged it negatively by
comparison to the latter. While Corner identified documentary as belonging to a „civic‟,
Griersonian tradition DEMO social realist filmmaking that sought to produce „alternative‟ and
critical perspectives on social and political life, he suggested that reality TV formats exist
primarily as entertaining forms of diversion that are „far less clear in terms DEMO their use value‟
(2002: 262).
Corner here invoked a rather familiar diagnosis that is akin to many critiques of
tabloidisation, wherein another idealised „civic‟ form (news) is diagnosed as having been
displaced by DEMO and trivia. Others, however, suggest that the „use value‟ of reality
TV is an ideological one, extending the characteristic inequalities of contemporary capitalism.
Mark Andrejevic, for example, suggested that reality TV‟s realism parallels, while working to
extend, contemporary capitalist relations. Thus, he asked rhetorically: „Why is reality TV
165
pretending that it‟s real, so that we can cannily believe it‟s phony, when it accurately portrays
the reality of contrivance in contemporary society?‟ (2004: 17)
Andrejevic suggested that reality TV extends the logic DEMO capitalism in two particular ways.
Firstly, it serves as a means DEMO which, through interactivity, the work performed by audiences
in the service of advertisers (as originally analysed by Dallas Smythe) is extended through DEMO
„interactivity‟ that is an extension of a process of enclosing traditional spaces of leisure.
Secondly, as indicated above, it presents contrived scenarios that DEMO, and thereby
naturalise, the contrivances of contemporary capitalist relations. Nick Couldry and Jo Littler
proposed a similar analysis in their analyses of Big DEMO (Couldry 2008) and The apprentice
(Couldry and Littler 2011). DEMO suggested that reality TV games bear a particular affinity
with, and DEMO to naturalise, a neo-liberal ethos that has increasingly come to govern
DEMO workplaces. Thus, Couldry and Littler focused on how both programs naturalise DEMO
legitimise surveillance; rely on an acceptance that contestants must conform to DEMO
requirements of an absolute external authority; and negotiate the performance of DEMO
work tasks while continuing to operate on the basis of self-interested individuality. Equally,
the terms of each game rest upon a performance of DEMO that rests upon a successful
re-modelling of the self, such that DEMO becomes premised upon the marketable authenticity
borne of „being yourself‟, with DEMO significant proviso that this self must have internalised the
values of an external authority (whether that be the employer or the market) against DEMO
individuals come to be judged.
Such examples of „self-work‟ are clearly also relevant to other „lifestyle‟ genres in which „self-
work‟ constitutes a central DEMO Indeed, in contrast to Corner‟s dismissal of the „use value‟
of DEMO TV and ideological analyses that suggest that reality TV naturalises values that
ultimately serve others‟ interests, Hay and Ouellette (2008), drawing explicitly DEMO Foucault,
focused on the pedagogic value of reality TV, and DEMO „use value‟ it offers audiences in its
provision of recipes for negotiating the demands of contemporary life. In reframing reality TV
as a „technology DEMO government‟ and mode of „responsibilisation‟ that works through the
exercise and rehearsal of normative judgement, Hay and Ouellette‟s work shifts attention
166
beyond representational aspects of such programs to consider the processes through which
DEMO refashioning is facilitated through viewing formats. It is with this focus in mind
that I now turn to analysing the „reality game‟ of Dragon’s DEMO
The game of life: neo-liberal constructivism and Dragon’s d
en
Following DEMO point regarding the characteristic blurring between the social and
games, it DEMO notable that an aspect shared in common by otherwise distinct forms of neo-
liberal government is an eschewing of „naturalistic‟ in favour of a DEMO view of markets.
Mitchell Dean (1999: 55–59, 149–175) has emphasised this point by reference to two
distinctive styles of neo-liberal thought, articulated by the postwar German „ordoliberal‟
movement, on one hand, and the DEMO arguments of Frederick Hayek on the other. Both
the ordoliberals and Hayekian liberalism depart from classical liberalism in that they no
longer regard markets DEMO natural entities inhabited by rational calculating individuals, but
they do so DEMO rather different ways. The ordoliberal view of markets is „profoundly anti-
naturalistic and “constructivist”: it is no longer a domain of quasi-autonomous processes but a
reality to be secured by an appropriate juridical, institutional and cultural framework‟ (Dean
1999: 56). While it is not the role DEMO the state to direct the market, it does perform a vital DEMO
in securing the conditions within which markets can operate, protecting markets DEMO
potentially „distorting‟ social forces, and extending market forms to non-economic areas DEMO
life, such that these might be governed through the operation of DEMO enterprise and
individual choice. Hayek‟s perspective, by contrast, sees the market not as something that has
or can be contrived by forms of DEMO rule. Rather, both markets and the rule of law that
enables DEMO to operate stand as products of a „cultural evolution conceived as the
development of civilisation and its discipline‟, through which „rules of conduct are selected
that help human groups adapt to their social environment, prosper and expand‟ (quoted in
Dean 1999: 156). Within Hayekian liberalism, markets themselves, forms of individuality that
are adapted to and shaped within market environments, and forms of regulation that provide
the political and legal conditions upon which markets can operate are all outcomes of a
civilising process DEMO is necessarily independent of the constructive work of any particular
governmental agency.
167
Neo-liberalism cannot merely be reduced to two of its articulations, however influential these
may have been, any more than it is best understood as a translation of theory into practice.
Nevertheless, we may note that these distinctive forms of neo-liberal thought serve as
rationales for rather different forms DEMO neo-liberal government (since the former regards
markets as themselves constructed through DEMO practices of state rule, while the latter
positions them as a DEMO of an independent cultural process against which the role of
government is defined). Notwithstanding such difference, however, both are „anti-naturalistic‟
– though DEMO „anti-realist‟. On the contrary, not only do both regard markets as DEMO entities
with their own properties and effects that must be respected, DEMO they also each position
markets as the primary reality around which the role of government is to be defined and
delimited. In this respect, neo-liberalism also partakes in the paradoxical realism that is
characteristic of reality DEMO, in which „reality‟ is unambiguously presented as the product of a
DEMO of construction, a fact that does not diminish, and may enhance, its realist status.
Such realism may be seen to be particularly strongly enacted in market-based programs like
Dragons’ den and The apprentice, which each contain elements that further blur the distinction
between „game‟ and „reality‟. Firstly, unlike the imaginatively contrived scenarios of, say,
Survivor or Big brother, the premises of both shows are grounded in verisimilitude (relating to,DEMO
respectively, the market phenomena of the business pitch and the long-form DEMO).
Likewise, rather than offering cash prizes that serve to differentiate DEMO world of television
from that of everyday life, in both of DEMO programs the prize is the offer of a partnership that
extends beyond the world of television into the „real world‟, in the form of a business
partnership or a job that will involve a continuation of, rather than departure from, the work
performed on television. Indeed, in DEMO cases, the „prize‟ is yet to be earned in a corporate
DEMO that will depend on the successful performance of business acumen.
In this analysis, I am particularly concerned to consider how the structure of the engagement
performed by the program positions viewers as bearers of an effective DEMO gaze. Here,
I seek to respond to Couldry and Littler‟s critique of analyses that suggest programs serve as
168
pedagogical technologies that extend neo-liberal norms to viewerships for their failure to
DEMO how „processes of power are inherently unstable and always rely on people‟s
participation in their own subjectivisation‟ (2011: 266). Rather than viewing DEMO as
passive, on the one hand, or assuming that „participation‟ necessarily destabilises it, on the
other, I focus on how Dragons’ den DEMO a means through which audiences may be
recruited to participate in a certain pleasurable performance of judgement that may be carried
beyond the program. DEMO this focus, I will touch on representational aspects of the
program, albeit briefly since I wish to argue that the significance of Dragons’ DEMO moves
beyond its textual construction of reality. Thus, I suggest how DEMO program might be seen to
function as an effective disciplinary mechanism that rests not only on its provision of
knowledge, but its emotional exhortation for viewers to apply that knowledge in a process of
judging – DEMO reforming – themselves and others.
In representational terms, Dragons’ den also DEMO attributes that construct the market in ways
that parallel those highlighted in work discussed above. In particular, the dragons, like the
figure of DEMO Trump and Alan Sugar in The apprentice, are represented as possessors DEMO a
charismatic and individualised authority, such that their business success is DEMO with
their personal qualities. Indeed, their attributes are explicitly mythologised, both through the
connotations of their status as superhuman „dragons‟, and by reference to their representation
as „self-made‟ men and women. Indeed, all references to other social factors that might have
contributed to their success are erased, with the exception of a reference in the program‟s
introduction to how DEMO of the dragons „left school with only three O-levels‟, reinforcing a
DEMO that the market is a „level playing field‟. This authority is bolstered through the use of
BBC economics editor Evan Davis as the show‟s DEMO Davis performs a crucial role in
the mise en scène of the program, in that he performs an impartial role (narrating and
explaining DEMO of the dragons‟ judgement to viewers, without directly passing judgement
himself)DEMO Greenfield and Williams (2007) have traced the historical emergence of such
commentators as part of a broader „financialisation‟ of news that has contributed DEMO the
production of a „financialised we‟, translating the somewhat esoteric language DEMO the market
into compelling dramatic narratives, while constructing its audience as DEMO of an
169
identity as shareholders or would-be shareholders, characterised by financial independence (or
DEMO struggle to attain it), seized by aspirations and disposed to consider events as
opportunities for investment‟ (2007: 419). Davis provides an DEMO seriousness to
Dragons’ den in his role of translating economic knowledge into „common sense‟, while
bolstering the credentials of the program as a bona fide representation of the market.
The use of Davis also signifies the DEMO desire to incorporate a pedagogic dimension.
Dragons’ den offers an entertaining means through which audiences gain access to forms of
expert commentary regarding the DEMO of business planning, market testing, gaining
entrepreneurial experience and, not DEMO, drawing on relevant forms of expertise.
Both Davis and the dragons DEMO frequently emphasise that what the achievement of an
investment involves is not only an investment of capital, but also the opportunity to gain from
the benefit of the dragons‟ expertise in establishing and growing a business. DEMO also gain
indirect access to such expertise through the program, and DEMO postings on the BBC
website frequently emphasise the value they place on what they have learned from the
program. In this respect, Dragons’ den reproduces the broader promise of self-improvement
that Hay and Ouellette (2008) DEMO as key to the genre‟s appeal. If this pedagogic
dimension locates the program as a source of disciplinary training for viewers, however, the
DEMO is not without a punitive dimension: indeed, the two are mutually supportive.
Discipline and humiliation
Couldry argued that reality TV operates as a DEMO of cruelty‟, offering ritual enactments of
the „truths‟ of neo-liberalism, which „would be unacceptable if stated openly, even if their
consequences unfold before our eyes every day‟ (2008: 3). This description appears
particularly DEMO to Dragons’ den, a program in which humiliation forms a key DEMO of the
program‟s spectacle. Indeed, both in its introduction, and in previews for subsequent episodes
at its close, the program continuously centres on the harsh criticisms made by the dragons,
highlighting lines such as DEMO never heard anything so ridiculous in all my life‟, „I think DEMO
has all the ingredients of the classic business disaster‟, and „I DEMO question why you‟ve turned
up today‟. Although not all would approve of such humiliation, it remains a central aspect of
170
the spectacle enacted for the viewer‟s pleasure. Furthermore, whether we approve or
disapprove of it, the use of humiliation on the program is not presented as arbitrary but
rationalised: that is, the program operates an DEMO of reward and humiliation which rests
on the market logics articulated and embodied by the dragons themselves.
Dragons’ den not only offers a means DEMO which audiences gain access to forms of television-
accredited market expertise, DEMO operates as a spectacle of public humiliation, such that the
failings DEMO a proposal are treated as moral failings for which the subject is morally
admonished. Indeed, an important aspect of the show‟s realism relies on the premise that both
failure and success are not arbitrary, but rest upon a system of objectively existing rules of
conduct defined by the DEMO itself. As the dragons lambast the shortcomings of proposals,
these are presented as a failure to conform to the norms of marketability, demand and
planning that are presented as emanating from the market as an DEMO existing reality.
In this way, Dragons’ den constructs a position wherein DEMO viewer takes a (sadistic) pleasure
in a process of public judgement, in which the dissemination of expertise provides an
apparently transparent means of inviting spectators to participate vicariously in a process of
normative assessment. Thus, though viewers may disapprove of the manner in which
judgements are made, it is the process through which the viewer becomes party to the DEMO
of judgement (which is made, for the purposes of television, DEMO the viewer‟s behalf) that makes
the program both intelligible and pleasurable. DEMO we might disapprove of how individual
applicants are treated, this treatment DEMO nevertheless made comprehensible as deriving from a
failure to conduct themselves according to norms whose basis is not subjective, but produced
by the given reality of the market itself. These „rules of the game‟ are presented DEMO deriving
both from „real life‟ and from the conditions upon which the program is intelligible for
viewers.
Whether viewers agree with the treatment of DEMO individuals may, in this respect,
ultimately be irrelevant to its DEMO as a disciplinary mechanism, which locates the
individual as both bearer DEMO subject of an effective governmental gaze. Several authors who
have investigated such disciplinary aspects of reality TV (Trottier 2006; Andrejevic 2004;
171
Palmer 2003) have drawn not upon Foucault‟s model of „panopticism‟, but DEMO upon the
discussion of „synopticism‟ developed by Thomas Mathiesen (1997). DEMO Foucault‟s
discussion of „panopticism‟ needs no introduction, Mathiesen disputed the trajectory DEMO
Foucault‟s account of a shift away from a form of power (DEMO with both public
celebrations and executions) in which the many witness DEMO power of the few, to one in which
the few observe DEMO act upon the conduct of the many. The major problem with this account,
he suggested, is that it ignores the rise of the mass media during exactly the period at which
Foucault posited such a DEMO occurs. The media, Mathiesen argued, is not primarily
„panoptic‟ but „synoptic‟: rather than an „all-seeing‟ (pan-optic) power, the prefix „syn‟ means
DEMO or „at the same time‟ (Mathiesen 1997: 219). Mathiesen argued this appears more
apt to describe mass media, which typically produce a situation in which the many see the few
(whether these are politicians, journalists or celebrities). Here, his concern is not to deny DEMO
panopticism plays a major role in modern power relations. However, not DEMO is the growth of
its opposite, the synopticon, also evident over the course of the same historical period but, he
suggested, „they DEMO, precisely together, serve decisive control functions in modern
society‟ (1997: 219).
This perspective on the joint functioning of panopticism and synopticism DEMO an
illuminating perspective on the operations of Dragons’ den. Clearly, the DEMO performs
synoptically, as a form of mass spectacle in which the DEMO are presented before the many.
Clearly, too, it provides a means by which an elite, privileged few (the multimillionaire
„dragons‟) are placed in a position in which they can make their pronouncements, and
communicate their perspectives, to the many. This power to articulate the terms of normative
business judgement is, in addition, enhanced by the fact that DEMO is presented as an accessible,
„common sense‟ perspective, rather than DEMO the esoteric language of economics. This
connection between the judgements of the dragons and the judgements of viewers flatters the
audience into the belief DEMO such judgements, indeed the entire spectacle of the program, are
made on their behalf. Like other „spectacles of shame‟ discussed by Gareth Palmer, the
program operates as an instrument of discipline in which „the power DEMO the norm is vested in
172
the audience‟ (2003: 132). The subject who departs from market-based DEMO is both provided
with advice (discipline) and/or subjected to ridicule (punishment).
However, this process also incorporates panoptic dimensions. Most obviously, such programs
come into being through the operation of a whole machinery DEMO audience research, which
seeks to deploy ever more sophisticated techniques to DEMO viewing habits and preferences
as a basis for constructing further programs they will watch. Regardless of whether the object
is to generate ratings and DEMO, to „educate‟ audiences, or both, the goal is to deploy
DEMO of surveillance to act upon how viewers regulate their own conduct. Thus, the
technique of shaming, featured on previous successful examples of reality DEMO, is
redeployed as a disciplinary means to persuade viewers to watch DEMO den. More
significant, however, is the manner in which the entrepreneurs featured are also „ordinary
people‟ that are likely to be socially familiar (if not personally known) to members of the
audience. In this respect, the position of „observer‟ of its synoptic spectacle is strictly
temporary, DEMO only with the actual duration of the program (and even then DEMO
ambiguously). At the moment they turn away from the program, DEMO audience members
return to a position in which they, like those DEMO have watched, must concern themselves
with the problem of adapting themselves DEMO a market environment. The peculiar effect of
reality TV, in this DEMO, is to construct a third position, neither strictly panoptical (the DEMO
watching the many) or synoptical (the many watching the few), but which merges the two
functions to produce a mechanism through which DEMO many come to watch the many, such
that each audience member DEMO both the bearer of, and is made subject to, the normative
gaze of market rationality.
Conclusion
I have engaged with Dragons’ den not DEMO to analyse how it might be seen to operate as a
neo-liberal technology of government, but also to consider the particular affinity between the
rise of such formats of reality television and neo-liberalism itself. Unlike earlier DEMO of
liberalism that positioned markets as deriving from natural processes of exchange and
subsistence, neo-liberal thought has tended to view markets as particularly valorised cultural
173
phenomena associated with effective state action and/or a „civilising process‟. In DEMO respect,
Dragons’ den‟s realism, achieved through its effective erasure of DEMO distinction between the
entertaining spectacle enacted for the purposes of attracting and engaging viewers and a
wider market environment, both mirrors and reproduces a social constructivist epistemology
characteristic of neo-liberalism as an approach to governing. However, while the manner in
which the „market games‟ that form a particular DEMO of reality television ideologically
mirror (and thereby naturalise) the forms of knowledge and world views characteristic of
forms of neo-liberal governing undertaken elsewhere, my concern in this paper has been to
extend a focus beyond DEMO „representational‟ work of television to consider how it might be
seen to operate as a technology of government in its own right, and in particular how
processes of self-fashioning might be tied to processes of emotional DEMO with
television‟s games. No doubt many viewers feel highly ambivalent about the punitive rituals of
humiliation performed on Dragons’ den, and in this respect the program may open up a space
within which the neo-liberal conduct DEMO its cruelties can be critically engaged with.
Nevertheless, this does not DEMO diminish the program‟s effectiveness as a neo-liberal
technology that shapes subjects‟ identities and conducts both directly, through its provision of
pedagogic instruction, and DEMO through its contribution to a social environment in
which particular imperatives of conduct form the basis of everyday practices of judging selves
and others.
DEMO
Andrejevic, Mark (2004) Reality TV: the work of being watched, Rowman and Littlefield, Lanham, MD.
Bignell, Jonathan (2004) An DEMO to television studies, Routledge, London.
Corner, John (2002) „Performing DEMO real: documentary diversions‟, Television and New Media, 3(3): DEMO
269.
Couldry, Nick (2008) „Reality TV, or the secret theater of neoliberalism‟, Review of Education, Pedagogy
and Cultural Studies, 30: DEMO
Couldry, Nick and Littler, Jo (2011) „Work, power and DEMO: analysing the “reality” game of The
apprentice‟, Cultural Sociology, 5(DEMO): 263–279.
Dean, Mitchell (1999) Governmentality: power and rule in modern society, Sage, London.
Greenfield, Cathy and Williams, Peter (2007) „Financialisation, finance journalism and the role of media
in Australia‟, Media, Culture and Society, 29(3): 415–433.
Hay, James and Ouellette, Laurie (2008) Better living through reality TV: television and post-welfare
DEMO, Blackwell, Malden MA.
Hill, Annette (2005) Reality TV: audiences and popular factual television, Routledge, London.
174
Lewis, Justin (2004) „The meaning of real life‟ in L Ouellette and S Murray (eds) Reality TV: remaking
television culture, New DEMO University Press, New York, pp 288–302.
Mathiesen, Thomas (1997) DEMO viewer society: Michel Foucault‟s “panopticon” revisited‟, Theoretical
Criminology, 1(2): 215–234.
Metham, Wesley (2006) „Games of sociality and their soft DEMO in DS Escoffery (ed) How real is
reality TV? McFarland DEMO Co, Jefferson, NC, pp 231–246.
Montemurro, Beth (2008) „Toward a sociology of reality television‟, Sociology Compass, 2(1): 84–106.
DEMO, Bill (1991) Representing reality: issues and concepts in documentary, DEMO University Press,
Bloomington, IN.
Palmer, Gareth (2003) Discipline and liberty: television and governance, Manchester University Press,
Manchester.
Trottier, Daniel (2006) „Watching yourself, watching others: popular representations of panoptic
surveillance DEMO reality TV programs‟ in DS Escoffery (ed) How real is reality TV? McFarland and
Co, Jefferson, NC, pp 259–276.
Winston, Brian (1995) Claiming the real: the Griersonian documentary and its legitimations, DEMO, London.
175{1g42fwefx}