Organization Studies
http://oss.sagepub.com
Trust, Opportunism and Governance: A Process DEMO Control Model
Bart Nooteboom
Organization Studies 1996; 17; 985
DOI: DEMO/017084069601700605
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://oss.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/17/6/985
Published by:
DEMO://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
European Group for Organizational Studies
Additional services and information for Organization Studies can be found at:
Email DEMO: http://oss.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://oss.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations (this article cites 9 articles hosted on the
SAGE Journals Online and HighWire DEMO platforms):
http://oss.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/17/6/985#BIBL
DEMO from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, DEMO
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
Trust, Opportunism and Governance: A
Process and Control Model
Bart Nooteboom
DEMO Nooteboom
School of
Management and
Organization,
University of
Groningen, The
DEMO
985-
Abstract
In this paper a process and control model is developed for the analysis and
design of inter-firm relations, in which both opportunism and trust play a role.
Its aim is to develop a tool DEMO the analysis, diagnosis and design of inter-firm
partnerships. It takes into DEMO the value of the partner, relative to alternat-
ives, and the risk of the relation. Risk depends on the incentives that the partner
DEMO have towards opportunism, his opportunities for opportunism and his ’pro-
pensity’ DEMO opportunism. The latter is related to trust. A partner’s incent-
ives towards opportunism depend on the uniqueness of the value that he offers,
DEMO one’s own switching costs and on the partner’s dependence on the relation.
The underlying theory employs both transaction cost economics and social
exchange theory. DEMO the basis of the model, values and risks can be balanced
DEMO different ways: there are adversarial strategies that jeopardize value, and
cooperative strategies that build value. The model can be used to explore viable
DEMO of strategies of governance, depending on different conditions. As
an illustration, it is used for an analysis of ways to initiate a relation.
DEMO: transaction cost economics, governance, trust, inter-firm
alliances, inter-firm partnerships.
,t ,- ¡ &dquo;. ¡
.
.
,
_
: :
Introduction
The purpose of the present paper is to set up a process and control
model for the analysis of the process of DEMO of inter-firm rela-
tions, and the design of their control ( DEMO ), in which allowance
is made for both opportunism and trust. DEMO aligns with the conclusion
by Smith Ring and Van de Ven (DEMO: 113) that:
’As the uncertainty, complexity, and duration of economic transactions within
and between firms increase, it becomes increasingly important for scholars
and managers to understand developmental processes of how equity, trust,
conflict-resolution and procedures and internal governance structures emerge,
evolve, and dissolve over time.’
As Joag (1995: 406) noted concerning vertical relations between sup-
pliers and users:
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV DEMO WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights DEMO Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
.
986
’Even though marketing aims at understanding, explaining, predicting and
influencing DEMO in human society (Bagozzi 1975; Dwyer et al. 1987),
DEMO research has been concentrated only on steps leading to choice ... that
end in the selection of suppliers (Webster and Wind 1972), thus leaving all
processes beyond unmentioned.’
Taking such views into account, we focus on the process of develop-
ment and governance after an exchange relation DEMO been started. Trans-
action costs comprise costs of search and evaluation, DEMO of setting
up governance prior to transactions and costs of control and redesign
of the relation. Here, we focus on the third kind.
The question arises of how the present study fits in the growing literat-
DEMO on institutions, and in particular how it relates to transaction cost
DEMO (TCE). TCE, as developed by Williamson (1975, 1985), has
been called ’new institutionalist’ economics, but shortcomings have
been identified from a ’neo-institutionalist’ perspective, which harks
back to the older American institutionalists like Veblen, Commons and
Mitchell (see, e.g. Johanson and Mattson 1987; DEMO 1993; Foss
1993; Hodgson 1993; Nooteboom 1992, 1993b; Pitelis DEMO, 1994).
We position the present paper in terms of the DEMO between these
schools of thought.
The ‘new-institutionalism’ of TCE maintains important parts of the core
of neo-classical economics, while ’neo-institutionalist’ economics
includes perspectives from sociology. Some of the characteristic differ-
ences between the two schools are DEMO in Table 1. Emboldened
material in the table indicates the perspective of the present paper, and
shows that it goes beyond traditional perspectives of mainstream eco-
nomics, into the neo-institutionalist branch.
We aim to develop a model for studying the process of developing
institutional arrangements between firms, which takes into account the
possibility of trust next to the possibility of DEMO, allowing for
the possibility that the relations between the firms may DEMO locked into
Table 1
New and Neo-
institutionalist
Economics
Cf. Nooteboom (DEMO), Groenewegen and Vromen (1995).
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com DEMO UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. DEMO rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
.
.
,
.
987
efficient or inefficient paths. It should yield a tool to explore balances
and imbalances of dependence between parties, mixes of trust and
opportunism, and of formal and informal forms of governance. It should
also serve to identify instruments for governance, and to select them
in relation to events that might trigger action. The ultimate objective,DEMO
beyond the present paper, is to employ the model as a DEMO for simula-
tion studies of the evolution of relations, and for DEMO of game
theory in the analysis of governance. For the use of game theory in an
attempt to reconstruct different generic forms of supplier-user DEMO
(’Western, Japanese and a third way’), see Nooteboom (1994)DEMO
In contrast with TCE, we accept the relevance of sociological categories
DEMO as trust, power, social cohesion and social exchange, but we DEMO
acknowledge possible inclinations towards opportunism, and we pre-
serve notions concerning DEMO from TCE.
In game-theoretic terms, this paper does not take the DEMO of
cooperative games, in the usual sense employed in the literature, that
agreements are assumed to be binding from the start. The challenge DEMO
to show ho~s~ agreements can be made binding; how cooperation can
DEMO achieved in spite of opportunities and possible inclinations towards
opportunism. So, DEMO are oriented towards cooperation as something to
be explained rather than assumed (cf. Hargreaves et al. 1995:
38).
The basic analysis, DEMO the present paper, is applicable to relations in
general, including both horizontal relations between competitors and
vertical relations of subcontracting, or even entirely different relations,
such as marriages, but subcontracting forms the main intended area of
application. q .
Trust and Opportunism
,
Transactions are to be seen as being embedded in relations that develop
in time, while these relations in turn are socially embedded in their
environment (Granovetter 1985). It is a peculiar thing in TCE that, on
the one hand, passage of time is crucial, but on the other, relevant
parameters are seen as timeless. According to TCE, a crucial condition
for dependence is that time is required, with repeated transactions, to
recoup DEMO investments, and allowance is made for the
emergence of unpredictable contingencies DEMO preclude closed con-
tracts. On the other hand, TCE implicitly assumes DEMO continuation of
e.r ante inability to judge propensities towards opportunism, unchanged
DEMO and demand conditions (in which no novel and perhaps more
attractive DEMO or suppliers appear on the scene), productive com-
petencies and abilities to monitor partner’s actions. But surely, ongoing
interaction will modify those parameters? It is reasonable to say that
prior to transaction one is uncertain about the partner’s potential oppor-
tunism, and hence should take opportunism into account. Once one
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO DEMO April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not DEMO commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
988
takes time into account, in ongoing transactions, it is unreasonable DEMO
ignore the formation of perceptions about propensities towards oppor-
tunism, and DEMO possibility of building trust.
In spite of Williamson’s acknowledgement of ’atmosphere’ as a rele-
vant factor in transactions, he neglects issues of trust and power. The
view of the present paper is that these issues are DEMO, and that a
dynamic treatment of ongoing relations allows for the DEMO of trust.
To study this, we need contributions from sociology and DEMO
on trust and social exchange (Homans 1961; Blau 1964; Luhmann DEMO,
1988; Granovetter 1982, 1985; Gambetta 1988a).
The view DEMO transactions are embedded in relations that develop in
time has been advocated for a number of years in marketing and pur-
chasing by the DEMO Marketing and Purchasing Group (IMP;
Hakansson 1982, 1987; Hagg DEMO Johanson 1983; Easton 1989) and
others (Jarillo 1988; Semlinger 1991; Lamming 1993). Exchange leads
to mutual adaptation, which entails investment DEMO a relation. As a result
of this, bonding between the actors DEMO, trust is generated and a
lasting relation emerges (Johanson and Mattson 1987, Easton 1989). A
comparable attempt towards a process approach was recently published
by Smith Ring and Van de Ven (1994).
However, if the IMP view can be taken to imply a rejection of the TCE
view as a whole, it runs the risk of throwing away the baby with the
bathwater. Doubtless, in present conditions of turbulence, finns require
interactions in networks. Trust forms an important dimension in such
relations, and, as pointed out by Hirschmann ( 1984), trust DEMO increase
with its usage. However, there are risks as well: trust is not unbounded,
it cannot be taken for granted and it DEMO break down. As Dasgupta
(1988: 54) put it: ’If the incentives are right a trustworthy
(untrustworthy) person may be relied upon DEMO be untrustworthy
(trustworthy)’. ’Golden opportunities’ of defection are tempting, even
to the trustworthy.
TCE has contributed greatly by specifying rigorously what the DEMO
and extent of risk in transactions is: to the extent that DEMO are inclined
towards opportunism, and if bounded rationality makes it impossible
DEMO foresee it and to foreclose its undesirable consequences, then one
runs DEMO risk of loss of investment to the extent that investments are
relation specific, or of ’hold-up’ situations as a consequence of that
risk. Next, TCE has supplied indications of how to construct schemes
for ‘governing’ transactions in such a way that risks are reduced: in
bilateral private ordering, the use of different guarantees to compensate
for one-sided, transaction-specific investments (symmetrical specific
investments, cross-ownership of specific assets, hostages, guaranteed
price, DEMO or period of purchase), and countermeasures to guard
against invalid use and expropriation of such guarantees. In infrequent
transactions: trilateral governance, with DEMO third party acting as an
arbitrator. These concepts are of theoretical and practical use, and it is
unwise to ignore them.
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
989
Transaction on the basis of trust, with its implicit, pre-existing DEMO
unspecified conditions for cooperation, economizes on the specification
and monitoring of DEMO and material incentives for cooperation.
This makes it not only cheaper (DEMO to the taste of many, also more
agreeable), but also DEMO for greater flexibility. With detailed formal
contracts it is more difficult (DEMO and costly) to modify terms for
changed conditions. Apart from its DEMO worth, trust pays, but it also
carries a risk of betrayal. One cannot simply buy into trust. If it is not
already in DEMO prior to transaction, trust has to be built up. It is DEMO
much the result of cooperation as a condition for it. All one can do is
to select conditions that are conducive to the emergence DEMO trust, such as
placing not too much focus on mistrustful means DEMO governance.
It is a long-standing argument in economics that optimal behaviour
prevails among firms, not because agents are calculatively competent,
but because the pressures of selection in markets extinguish sub-optimal
behaviour, either because it loses its resources for survival to agents
with more optimal conduct, or because it turns around to emulate more
optimal conduct. It is, in fact, questionable whether this mechanism is
indeed always so rigorous as to allow only the ’single exit’ (Latsis
1980) of optimal behaviour. There may DEMO slack due to lack of competi-
tion, due to mono- or DEMO and lack of contestability of markets,
or due to product differentiation. But that is not an issue we will discuss
here.
The argument DEMO appears in transaction cost economics (TCE).
Williamson ( 1975, 1985) argued that among alternative governance
structures (market, ’hierarchy’, forms ’between DEMO and hierarchy’) >
one will survive which is optimal, i.e. DEMO the sum of production,
transaction and organization costs, in a DEMO technological and institu-
tional environment. The argument was carried further by Hill (1990).
He argued that since trust economizes on the cost of governance, the
selection pressures of markets will lead to the prevalence of trust, so
that ’in the long run’ we can forget about opportunism.
However, the argument is flawed in the same way as, more DEMO, argu-
ments for group selection are flawed: it neglects the tension between
collective and individual interest. While it is clearly in the interest DEMO
a group as a whole for everyone to be trustworthy and trusting, since
that would greatly reduce transaction costs for all, individuals may DEMO
tempted to defect and be opportunistic while pretending to be trust-
worthy. The extent of this temptation increases as more people are trust-
worthy, and it further depends on the efficiency and reliability by which
such DEMO can be detected and communicated, and the ensuing risk
of a DEMO of reputation that is detrimental to future partnerships.
Nooteboom (1995) developed a model to analyse the issue. It is con-
cluded that even DEMO loss of reputation becomes infinitely costly, there
still arises some non-zero DEMO value of the percentage of oppor-
tunistic agents. If we allow only for self-interest, opportunism will not
disappear, and Williamson remains correct on DEMO, if not on other
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV DEMO WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights DEMO Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
990
points: there is always a chance that a transaction partner may be oppor-
tunistic. Nevertheless, it helps considerably if, next to self-interest, there
are other sources of cooperation in the institutional environment in
which DEMO are embedded. Norms and values of conduct may mitigate
inclinations towards opportunism; they may cause people to forego
opportunities for opportunism, at least DEMO reasonable bounds (short
of ’golden opportunities’ that are too tempting to DEMO). Here, Hill’s
(1990) argument carries conviction: societies with such institutional
mitigation of opportunism have a competitive advantage over societies
that do DEMO, and they may thereby have a better chance of surviving in
DEMO markets.
We conclude that both trust and opportunism are likely to arise in trans-
action relations. Neither should be ignored, and we should find a way
of systematically exploring their joint occurrence. Therefore, in spite
of the differences between economics and sociology, we should seek
to integrate them.
.
&dquo;
..,
,
Dimensions of Trust
’
-
DEMO
.
The concept of trust is subtle, diffuse and elusive. One DEMO some sym-
pathy for the economist’s inclination to evade the issue, DEMO we cannot
afford to do that. Here, I try to employ DEMO concept with all the subtleties
found for it in the literature (DEMO 1988a).
Since our focus is on relations between organizations, the DEMO
arises as to what the relation is between the conduct of individuals and
the conduct of firms: the ’micro-micro’ problem. As argued by Smith
Ring and Van de Ven ( 1994), these two sets of DEMO are related by
roles to which individuals are assigned in organizations. Conduct qua
persona’ is restricted and guided by organizational roles and alignment
between DEMO two can be a problem. If cooperation is founded on trust
based on personal bonding, problems may arise concerning the exigen-
cies of organizational role. Personal loyalty may deviate from organiza-
tional interest, and may even lead to corruption or embezzlement. Too
strong personal ties may need to DEMO prevented by turnover of personnel
across roles. Conversely, personnel change may DEMO to a breakdown
of relations based on personal trust. Such considerations should be part
of governance.
Trust may concern a partner’s abilitv to perform DEMO to agree-
ments (competence trust), or his intemiolls to do DEMO (goodwill trust).
Here, we focus on the latter type of trust. Of course, risks due to failures
of competence are important in subcontracting relations, but they do
not form the focus here. The focus is on the relations between goodwill
trust and cooperation. Whenever we use DEMO term ’trust’, this denotes
goodwill trust.
According to Williams ( 1988), cooperation requires willingness to
accept dependence, which requires assurance that other, non-dependent
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April DEMO, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial DEMO or unauthorized distribution.
991
(or less dependent) parties will not defect in the cooperation. DEMO
to Dasgupta (1988), trust is associated with expectations regarding the
DEMO choice of actions that have a bearing on one’s own choice of
action. Such expectations may have a strong or a weak basis, ranging
from assurance from objective facts and logical reason, through belief
which is less firmly based on experience and argument, to unsubstanti-
ated faith. Gambetta (1988b: 217) summarized different views on trust
as the subjective probability that one assigns to action by another agent
(or group of agents) which affects one’s own action. Luhmann (1988)
emphasized that in DEMO there is an element of choice. If there is no
choice, DEMO one simply has to surrender to the powers that be, the DEMO
that no harm will occur is a matter of confidence, not DEMO Trust entails
an action that one has a choice to conduct, DEMO that one may later regret.
One may or may not trust a potential business partner, and accept or
refuse him as a partner. If it goes wrong, one attributes blame also to
oneself for engaging in the relation. One has confidence or not in the
law, or the political system, or God, without a choice as to whether or
DEMO to participate in them. If one is treated unjustly, the blame DEMO on
the system; not one’s own choice.
Williams ( 1988) distinguished between macro and micro, and between
egotistic and non-egotistic sources of cooperation. Micro sources
depend on the specific relation at hand, while macro sources apply
more generally. This yields four sources of cooperation, as indicated
in Table 2.
Williams argued that none of these sources suffices by itself, and that
in cooperation some mix will always be operative, while no universally
best mix, regardless of specific conditions, can be specified. As DEMO out
by Gambetta ( 1988b), the Mafia employs all four sources, in ways that
mutually reinforce each other. Cooperation is forced by violent means,
is materially rewarded, is enhanced by bonds of friendship and pseudo
family relationships (Mafia ’families’, brotherhood, godfathers, etc.)
and DEMO ethic of non-betrayal (~/~~’~’).
If trust is associated with DEMO subjective probability that a partner will
not misuse one’s dependence, without DEMO qualifications, then any-
thing that contributes to such subjective probability would DEMO to
trust. However, trust is generally not associated with motives of DEMO
interest ; at least not self-interest in a restricted material, economic DEMO
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
Table 2
Sources of
Cooperation
992
We trust someone if he is likely to cooperate, even if he is not coerced
to do so and has no direct material DEMO in doing so. Thus, trust is
associated with the non-egotistic sources DEMO cooperation; with loyalty
to a partner due to ethics or bonds DEMO friendship or kinship rather than
coercion or material self-interest. The Mafia needs to employ coercion
and the lure of material interest because trust will DEMO suffice as a basis
for cooperation. Conversely, material self-interest and coercion DEMO
seldom sufficient as a basis for cooperation; one needs trust to DEMO extent
that one cannot fully control the partner’s conduct by threat and reward
(cf. Deutsch 1962, quoted in Zand 1972).
One can DEMO that the narrower concept of trust, when based on ties
of DEMO or kinship, is not really beyond self-interest, because they
constitute social coercion rather than choice. In friendship or, more
weakly, in relations DEMO empathy or familiarity, trust in the sense of
non-obligational and non-material DEMO of cooperation appears to be
most ’thick’. But even there, one DEMO argue that it is based on self-
interest, in the form DEMO the ’emotional utility’ derived from it. One could
argue, therefore, as economists do, that in the last analysis, motivation
on the basis DEMO norms, bonding, social exchange, kinship, friendship or
whatever, is DEMO egotistic. In fact, anything that anyone does can be
interpreted as DEMO preference’. One objection to this view is that it
has made itself unfalsifiable, but there are two other objections.
The first objection is taken from social exchange theory (Blau 1964).
In addition to an economic dimension (extrinsic utility), exchange often
has a social dimension (intrinsic DEMO). Economists tend to think of
value in exchange as something that exists independently from the
transaction. As formulated by Murakami and Rohlen (1992: 70); ’The
value of the relationship itself is typically ignored and the impersonality
of the transaction is assumed’. In intrinsic utility, the exchange process
itself matters, in addition to the economic surplus and its division that
the exchange yields. People may prefer to transact on the basis DEMO trust
and its concomitants of ethics, kinship, friendship or empathy. Social
exchange relies more on unspecified, implicit obligations, which depend
on shared DEMO of meaning, belief and ethics. The idea that exchange
includes non-contractual DEMO, of course, goes back (at least) to
Durkheim (1893)DEMO The economist will answer that there are apparently
two dimensions of utility (extrinsic and intrinsic), and if one prefers to
transact with party X in spite of higher extrinsic returns from a transac-
tion with DEMO Y, apparently intrinsic utility dominates extrinsic utility,
but self-interest as DEMO driver of conduct remains in the seat. Be that as
it may, the point is that economists tend to neglect intrinsic utility and
its implication that it does matter who the transaction partner is. What
matters DEMO that personality and social embeddedness enter as dimensions
of transactions.
,
DEMO second, more general, objection is that there is often tension
between private material interest (monetary gain) and interest in ethical
norms, social cohesion, kinship, friendship and the like. There is a real
Downloaded DEMO http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
DEMO 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
issue of sacrificing one for the sake of the other. This goes DEMO
material interest in the form of maintaining reputation as a basis for
future material benefit. One should include in one’s investigation how
these conflicts DEMO resolved, and how one dimension may mitigate the
effect of the DEMO How opportunism may be mitigated by trust, and
how loyalty may DEMO broken by some ’golden opportunity’ to
defect.
Trustworthiness varies between agents. It is to some extent personal,
in bonds of kinship and friendship, but also to some extent impersonal,
when a person observes a DEMO ethic or set of behavioural routines.
When the agent is a firm, its trustworthiness is associated with ethics
and behavioural routines, which are DEMO of an organization’s culture.
Again, firm and individual are connected by DEMO roles, and
again, the alignment between a person qua persona and his organiza-
tional role may not be perfect. That depends, among other things, on
the care in role allocation and discipline in role observance that the
firm exercises. Variability of trustworthiness, and hence of its opposite
propensity towards opportunism, underlines the need to extend TCE
with considerations of trust. If not, everyone is equally opportunistic;
then, in the DEMO of a partner and in governing a relation with him,
one should try to establish his particular propensity towards opportun-
ism (cf. Noorderhaven 1995).
Social exchange, by its nature, is restricted to insiders: people with
whom one shares the basis for trust. Trust requires familiarity DEMO
mutual understanding, and hence depends on time and context.
Definition of DEMO ..
On the basis of the above, we adopt the following DEMO:
X is willing to engage in cooperation with Y (i.e. DEMO upon cooperation or
continue it), even if it makes X dependent, if X has a more or less well-
grounded belief, in DEMO form of a subjective probability, that Y will cooperate
in the DEMO of not mis-using such dependence. This belief may be based on
(DEMO) available opportunities for misuse on the part of Y, Y’s incentives
towards misuse and Y’s propensity to employ the opportunities. Propensity to
use DEMO for defection is related to trust, which has its basis in DEMO,
kinship, friendship or empathy.
My definition of (goodwill) trust DEMO now be as follows:
X trusts Y to the extent that X chooses to cooperate with Y on the basis of a
subjective DEMO that Y will choose not to employ opportunities for defec-
tion that ,Y considers damaging, even if it is in the interest of DEMO to do so. The
trustworthiness of Y depends on Y’s true propensity to employ those
opportunities. ( 1 )
~
Note that ( 1 ) indicates that:
- X and Y have a choice: to engage upon cooperation, at the risk of
dependence (X), and DEMO forego opportunities to misuse such depend-
ence ( Y). This distinguishes trust from confidence.
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO DEMO April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not DEMO commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
994
-
. ,,
.
-
there are two mutually dependent DEMO of choice: a choice of whether
to enter upon a relation DEMO cooperation and to continue with it, and
a choice of whether DEMO not to misuse dependence of one’s partner in
the relation (called DEMO )
- the second type of choice (defection) is based DEMO a combination of
opportunities for defection, interest in defection and propensity DEMO
to employ opportunities for defection
- trust relates to the last factor: the partner’s choice not to defect in
spite of both a motive and an opportunity to do so
trust is related to a propensity, not a certainty: it may not be resistant
to golden opportunities.
Defection is closely related to the concept of opportunism, as employed
in TCE: ’interest seeking with guile’, and to make the connection with
TCE DEMO will equate the two. Thus, we will speak of ’opportunities for
DEMO, and the ’propensity’ to employ them. We may define
power as DEMO to act against someone’s interest in a way that
he cannot control. Then power is close to opportunities for opportunism.
Trust is then associated DEMO the voluntary submission to power, on the
belief that it will DEMO be exercised.
In the case of an organization, the subjective probability DEMO with
trust depends on an assessment of: the ethical stance and DEMO that
fonn part of the culture of the tirm, the ’tightness’ DEMO which indi-
viduals are tied to it in their organizational roles, DEMO characteristics
of the individual one is dealing with (his personal ethics, bonding) and
the net effect on his propensity towards opportunism.
Now, DEMO reputation a basis for trust, or is it part of interest’? It can be
either or both. In economics, the rationale for reputation is that it is
built upon investments in the form of opportunities DEMO opportunism
foregone. To behave opportunistically is to surrender the investment,
if opportunism is both detected and communicated at large, and this
yields a rational basis for people to rely on reputation, at least to some
extent (reputation may be surrendered when a ’golden opportunity’ pre-
sents itself). A complication is that reputation may be based on the
rational DEMO of its benefit, as indicated, but may also be based
on genuine trustworthiness in the sense of a non-egotistic propensity
to forego opportunities DEMO opportunism (on the basis of ethics, kinship,
friendship, empathy)DEMO While both may be sensitive to temptation, trust-
worthiness is more DEMO than calculation. It is less sensitive to the
condition of detectability and communicability of a breach, and is less
likely to unravel when the end of a relation is in sight. The difference
may not be DEMO to establish: that may require some minimum degree
of experience and DEMO with a partner, or joint membership of a
social community with DEMO strong nonns and values of
cooperation.
In our study there are two fundamental questions:
A. On the basis of what motives will agents DEMO upon and maintain
a relation?
.’ , . ~’ ~
.
:
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
995
.
.
.
B. How will agents act and react within DEMO relation? They may be
jockeying for advantage, short of breaking up the relation. This
question can be broken down into two questions:
DEMO 1. How do agents behave in a relation, i.e. in a DEMO with given
parameters of the relation’? For example: when will they act
opportunistically?
B2. How do they behave in trying to change DEMO relation, i.e. change
the parameters of the relation? For example: DEMO can they bal-
.
.
ance risk and value?
The answer to question A
because it yields value, which may have many (DEMO and
dimensions. In this paper we focus on question B. We
1 in the next section, and question B2 in the one after that.
B
seems simple: people engage upon a relation
intrinsic) >
consider question
Model of Conduct
--
~
~
’
~
.
Relations of DEMO are incurred from an expectation of value.
Thus, the value to DEMO of a partner Y (VYX) is a key variable. Here, DEMO is
specified as value relative to the next best alternative, which DEMO
negative when a more attractive partner presents himself. This allows
for the event of a more attractive alternative partner emerging on the
scene, and the analysis of its consequences for the relation.
This concept of the DEMO of a partner in relative terms (excess value
with respect to DEMO next best alternative) is not present, at least not
explicitly, DEMO TCE. TCE, as developed by Williamson, assumes that for
contracting out, there is a specialized supplier who offers value in ternls
of an ability to produce more efficiently, because he produces in larger
volumes for more than one user. The search for a focal user, and the
evaluation of such a partner’s worth, is not part of the analysis (in
contrast with Coase, who does pay attention to transaction costs DEMO the
form of search). One could perhaps argue that, implicitly, such an evalu-
ation is nevertheless present in Williamsonian TCE, in the possibility
of new contingencies (’external uncertainty’), that may arise which a
partner might exploit opportunistically. However that may be, we need
to make it explicit, for two reasons. First, to deal with the risk DEMO a
relation will become destabilized due to the emergence of a novel, more
attractive alternative for one of the partners. Second, to allow DEMO invest-
ments for the increase of value, on either or both DEMO of the relation.
Both are part of the project of making TCE dynamic, by looking at
the evolution of relations in the light of changing conditions, learning,
etc.
Value may include many dimensions, such DEMO: efficiency, develop-
mental capability, flexibility, adherence to specifications, network DEMO
tion, value as a source of learning, international presence, continuity.
DEMO has been suggested by a reviewer that there is redundancy here: DEMO
value of the partner- to you and vocir switching costs can be collapsed
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April DEMO, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial DEMO or unauthorized distribution.
996
into a single variable from the beginning. However, analytically, it DEMO
useful to maintain the distinction. First of all, switching costs are DEMO
to specific investments that cause value. Second, they primarily contrih-
ute DEMO one’s own vallie to the partner, rather than his value for DEMO
Value also includes competence trust: an assessment of the partner’s
capability DEMO perform and to achieve goals of quality, service, delivery
time, DEMO transfer, payment, etc.
Value is assessed not only in the present, but also on the basis of poten-
tial for the future. This is taken to imply some assessment of the proba-
bility that the DEMO will proceed in the future. As is well known from
repeated games (Axelrod 1984), this is crucial: a rational decision to
defect DEMO is then based on a trade-off between advantage
now and possible loss of value from an ongoing relation in the future.
In particular, opportunism affects perceived probabilities of an ongoing
relation. Renunciation of opportunities for opportunism DEMO enhance
trust. This may contribute directly to value by increasing intrinsic value,
and indirectly by increasing perceived probabilities of an ongoing
relation.
The DEMO side of the coin is risk, due to dependence, and as a result
of that: the size of damage that
that he will do it:
.
the partner may do, and the probability
LOX
= SLX x PRLX
.
( ? ) >
where: LOX DEMO possible loss for X; SLX = size of the loss for DEMO; PLX =
probability of loss for X.
The damage may consist DEMO several things:
Loss of extrinsic value, in the economic surplus DEMO the exchange
-
-
(due to neglect or accident). This DEMO include disasters, with a cost
that exceeds (one’s share in) DEMO value of the surplus.
Redistribution of the economic surplus (due to DEMO).
Damage due to a break of the relation (which may DEMO non-intentional,
e.g. when the partner goes bankrupt).
Loss due to spill-over of proprietary information.
-
Loss of intrinsic value.
-
-
Spill-over DEMO sensitive information to competitors, via the partner, is a
risk to the extent that knowledge is transferred, but while the relation
lasts, DEMO partner has an interest in preventing it. The risk is particularly
high if the relation is broken opportunistically; on purpose rather than
by accident. In fact, sensitive information may be treated as a
‘hostage’.
The loss for X due to a break of the relation equals switching costs
(SWX) plus the relative value of the partner Y ( ~’YX )DEMO The cost of break-
age determines dependence on cooperation in the sense of the ’cap-
tiveness’ of X (CAPX): damage due to the redistribution of surplus
cannot systematically exceed the damage due to a break DEMO the relation,
because if it did, X would be likely DEMO break the relation. Disasters,
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
997
however, could exceed that limit. Like the accidental damage of break-
age, they are associated with competence trust rather than goodwill
trust.
Switching costs (SWX) include the costs associated with specific invest-
ments that DEMO typical of TCE: e.g. specific investments that one has
oneself incurred; guarantees given to cover the risk of specific invest-
ments by the DEMO; the value to X of hostages supplied, etc.
If we look only at goodwill trust and ignore disasters, risk depends
wholly on the possibility of opportunism. In formula:
SLX < CAPX = SWX + DEMO ~ ’
*
(3) >
-
-
The probability of DEMO to (PLX) then equals
opportunism by Y, and depends on:DEMO
incentives towards opportunism by Y (IOY)
opportunities for opportunism by DEMO (OOY)
- propensity towards opportunism by Y (inverse
the probability of
.
of trustworthiness
-
POY).
(4)
Here, we DEMO the sources of cooperation from Table 2.
Each of the above form a necessary condition for opportunistic acts,
which is expressed by the DEMO multiplicative specification:
PLX = IOY x OOY x POY
(5)DEMO
where: IOY, OOY and POY are normalized to take values between 0
and 1 0 for a closed contract and =1 for the DEMO of any
formal constraints on action; POY is the probability that DEMO will utilize
opportunities for opportunism.
There is similarity here to the notion in TCE that there are transaction
costs only if there are specific DEMO and there is bounded rationality
and there is opportunism. As we shall argue, specific assets yield
switching costs and hence captivity and hence an incentive to opportun-
ism ; bounded rationality precludes closed contracts with perfect DEMO
itoring and thereby opens opportunities for opportunism; the possibility
of opportunistic DEMO is here reconstructed as ’propensity towards
opportunism’.
Incentives towards opportunism (lOY) belong to the dimension of inter-
est as a source of cooperation (Table 2), and are associated with what
in TCE is called DEMO ordering’ or ’relational contracting’. It depends
on the captiveness of X (DEMO), and hence on the value of Y to X
on switching costs. The first depends on the degree to which Y has
adapted DEMO the specific demands of X, which is likely to yield specific
DEMO (but not necessarily
specific products with non-specific assets, see Nooteboom 1993c), and
the latter on how the risks of specific investments are DEMO, for
example, by cross-ownership or guarantees, exchange of hostages, etc.
The incentive for Y also depends on pressures from competition or
-
DEMO =
-
and
flexible production technology allows for
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
998
owners/shareholders on Y to utilize opportunities for short-term profit
or DEMO
An earlier prototype of the model was discussed with representatives from
several industries. One was the automobile industry, at a time of declining
sales ( 1993), which yielded great competitive pressure, and consequently
high pressure on suppliers. Here, our ideas concerning the role of trust
met with scepsis bordering on ridicule: trust was something they could
not afford to build on. Other representatives were from the firm that has
a monopoly DEMO the exploration and production of natural gas. They balked
at our discussion of potential opportunism: they had easy, amicable, gener-
ous relations with their suppliers. Unlike the automobile industry, they
could easily afford to.
Y’s incentives towards opportunism also depend on the extent to which
Y perceives DEMO to be dependent on X: if Y is more dependent on
DEMO than vice versa, it is in Y’s interest to be careful DEMO opportunism.
Y should also take into account the effect that opportunistic action may
have on the intrinsic value of the relation and on perceived DEMO
of an ongoing relation, and hence future value and particularly if DEMO
takes into account the possible retaliation by X, which may yield DEMO
downward spiral of mutual retaliation. Y should take into account the
risk of breakdown of the relation, yielding complete loss of the relative
value of his partner, switching costs, loss of hostages, spill-over to
competitors.
Note that this part of our model (IOY) incorporates what is DEMO in
game-theoretic studies of the outcomes of interaction, except that here DEMO
set up a framework for reproducing the process of strategic interaction.
The literature (Axelrod 1984) demonstrates that there is an infinite
number of DEMO in the repeated prisoner dilemma game. Rather than
taking any of these for granted, we want to reproduce the emergence of
sequences of choices and their effects on further choices.
Opportunities for opportunism (OOY) belong DEMO the source of coercion
(Table 2), by contractual, legally enforceable restrictions on Y’s con-
duct, or what in TCE is called ’legal ordering’. As recognized in TCE,
they also depend on the occurrence DEMO unforeseen contingencies
(’external uncertainty’), which arise to the extent that DEMO environment
is volatile (shifts in technologies or markets, for example). They also
depend on X’s ability to monitor Y’s actions (’asymmetric
information’), and on Y’s competence to utilize the opportunities. In
connection with DEMO, they are also related to firm size: due to a greater
spread of activities over more products and wider markets, larger firms
have more diversified partnerships and thereby are better able to spread
risk and DEMO activities (Nooteboom 1993a).
Propensity towards opportunism belongs to the category DEMO trust: norms/
values, ethics, customs and bonds of kinship DEMO friendship. Trust tends
to grow as the relation proceeds successfully, because DEMO of empathy
may get stronger, or because habituation occurs. The setting DEMO of a
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
999
common cognitive base (getting to know who is who in each other’s
organizations, mutual understanding, development of procedures and
routines) can be seen as mutual specific investments.
The results so far are illustrated in DEMO 1. Note that through the basic
variables in Figure 1, opportunism DEMO be triggered or lessened by
external events (not created by the DEMO), such as (the list is not
exhaustive):
emergence of a new potential partner for X, lessening the relative value of Y
(1’YX), and possibly reducing switching costs for X (SLt’X), DEMO reducing
the captiveness of X
some unexpected situation presents a novel opportunity for Y to exercise
opportunism (OOY)
the information X has for monitoring changes, perhaps due to a change of
technology (OOY)
DEMO change of law or regulation affects opportunities for opportunism
( OOY)
appearance of a novel competitor puts pressure on Y to utilize opportunities
DEMO opportunism (lOY)
Y is taken over by a more or DEMO less aggressive finn or the contacts of X at Y
are replaced (POY).
-
-
-
-
-
-
Note also that the arrows from IOY, OOY and POY intersect, rather
than going directly DEMO the outcome of opportunistic conduct. This is
designed to reflect the possibility of interaction effects. A large value
of X’s captivity (CAPX) determines DEMO gain that Y may take from
opportunism [’golden opportunity’, see (31], and this may affect his
incentive to grasp the opportunity (IOY)DEMO The incentive interacts with
propensity towards opportunism (POY), in that DEMO may exceed the
boundaries of Y’s trustworthiness. If X seeks to restrict Y’s opportunities
by detailed legal contracts and close monitoring <OOY I ), this may
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
Figure 1
Determinants of
Risk of
Opportunism DEMO
X
1000
antagonize trust and Y’s propensity to opportunism may increase
(POY I ). Restrictions on Y’s conduct signal to Y that X has no trust, which
may suggest to Y that X himself is not trustworthy, so that Y is more
inclined to take countenneasures of limiting X’s actions. Thus, we may
arrive at a cycle of mutual limitation and breakdown of trust.
This scheme has been tested in empirical research (Berger et al. 1995;
Nooteboom et al. 1995), and has been DEMO for preliminary attempts to
diagnose buyer-supplier relations in practice. The empirical research
was aimed at testing the model on the basis of surveys. Psychometric
DEMO were used for measuring variables, and these were fed into
econometric DEMO to test hypotheses derived from Figure 1. The
first study (Berger DEMO al. 1995) involved a survey of 80 suppliers to a
producer DEMO state-of-the-art photocopying machines. The second
(Nooteboom et al. 1995) involved 10 customer relations each for 10
suppliers of sub-assemblies to end-producers of electrical/DEMO
apparatus. Examples of the exploratory use of the model in practice will
be discussed in the text. Below is an illustration.
Analysis of the DEMO between a supplier of hard/software (Y) to a con-
sortium of firnis that develop worldwide telecom services (X) showed that
the DEMO was extremely dependent on the supplier: it was their single
supplier (in our model: causing high ~~YX), and switching costs (5’WX)DEMO
were extremely high, thus yielding high captivity (CAPX). On the other
hand, the supplier had multiple customers, suggesting a modest relative
DEMO of the buyer (VXY), faced limited switching costs (SWn, DEMO
yielding low captivity (CAPY). This suggested a danger of one-sided
DEMO of the buyer, in terms of the size of possible loss (SLX). The
buyer recognized this, and was contemplating a switch to dual sup-
pliership, in spite of the enormous duplication of costs involved. On the
basis of the model, we found that, nevertheless, dependence was balanced
in that the buyer supplied such a unique opportunity for DEMO supplier to
penetrate fast-growing world markets in telecom that the supplier would
have absolutely no interest in exploiting the one-sided dependence of the
buyer (low incentive IOY) and, furthermore, was large enough not to run
the risk of default. As a result, the extent and size of possible loss to the
buyer (SLX) was compensated by a low DEMO (PLX). The buyer
decided not to go for dual sourcing, for the time being.
Model of Governance
’
So far, we have considered the implications of given parameter values
in the relation. Now we DEMO to the possibilities of control by modifying
the parameters. Figure 1 applies to both sides of a relation, as illustrated
in Figure 2. For governance (control), we must add a control loop,
whereby partners can redesign the relationship to lessen dependence.
This yields actions which constitute DEMO that are internal to the rela-
tion, and may call forth DEMO by the other side, and so on, perhaps
until some equilibrium arises, possibly in the nature of a Nash equili-
brium. In Figure 2, single lines indicate effects of parameters; double
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 DEMO Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
1001
lines in the control loop indicate governance by change of param-
DEMO Note that we include the (negative) effect of one’s own per-
ceived dependence on one’s incentives towards opportunism. Trust-
related variables, such as ethics, habituation and bonding determine the
propensity towards opportunism. We again take an illustration from
practice.
In a relation between a supplier of specialty DEMO (Y) to a producer
of semi-conductors (X), there appeared DEMO be extreme captiveness of the
buyer (single supply, yielding high 6’YX, and high investments dedicated
to receiving the specific products and services from the supplier, yielding
high SWX). The supplier, on the other DEMO, had many alternative cus-
tomers (ostensibly yielding modest BlXY)and limited switching costs
(SYVY), due to limited specific investments. On further inspection, VXY
turned out to be higher, since the buyer was yielding DEMO supplier access
and prestige in a vital growth market. This might yield balance of depend-
ence, but it seemed to be wearing off: DEMO supplier seemed to have learned
most of what there was to learn, and was already cashing in on the pres-
tige. Meanwhile, the DEMO of the buyer was only increasing, with
an ostensible increase of DEMO size and probability of loss (SLX, PLX). On
the other hand, the relation was characterized by extreme openness. In
our analysis we conducted interviews at both sides, with a proposal for
holding answers to certain potentially sensitive questions secret from the
other side, but this offer was rejected by both sides. We were encouraged
Downloaded from http://DEMO at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE DEMO All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
Figure 2
Interaction
between X and Y
1002
to present our analysis, including opportunities for opportunism, etc., with-
out holding anything back, in a meeting with representatives from both
sides. Both sides acknowledged that our analysis was valid, and they
would certainly use that kind of thinking in other relations, but in this
particular relation there was no need, because ’both sides fully trusted
each other’. The relation had developed over a protracted period of time,
with DEMO mutual benefit, and strong bonding and social exchange had
developed. Thus, there seemed to be a very low propensity towards oppor-
tunism on DEMO sides (low POY and POX), which also appeared to reduce
DEMO probability of loss for the buyer. Yet, we felt more confident DEMO
we heard that the next stage in the development of the relation involved
a much higher level of specific investments (notably high location
specificity) on the part of the supplier (yielding higher SWI7.
Figure 2 DEMO that if one is concerned about risk, there are two basic
DEMO for redesign of the relation:
.
Modify the causative parameters of risk for- X in Figure 2:
k’YX I value of the DEMO Lessen dependence by decreasing the value of the
partner, by developing DEMO (remember that value is relative to the next
best alternative).
DEMO = one’s switching costs. This can be changed by reducing the specificity
of investments, or of the underlying technology; demanding more guarantees;
DEMO their ownership; changing guarantees given to the partner;
adding or DEMO hostages, etc.
OOY = the partner’s opportunities for opportunism. This can DEMO changed by
changing contractual terms or one’s capacity for monitoring, or DEMO trying to
stabilize the environment that generates unforeseen contingencies.
IOY = the partner’s incentives towards opportunism. This can be reduced above
all by increasing DEMO perceived dependence. We return to this later.
POY = the partner’s propensity towards opportunism. This is the most difficult
to change directly: it is dependent on the growth of trust in time, which one
can try to affect by building friendship or empathy, and trying to develop
further joint ethics, procedures or routines.
One can also modify the parameters in the scheme that structures risk
for one’s partner Y, in the mirror image of Figure 2. There, SLY indic-
ates the size of the loss for Y due to opportunism by X, and PLY its
probability.
,
~
Modify the causative parameters affecting partner- Y’s risk:
VXY = one’s value to the partner. This can be increased, by investing in one’s
capabilities, or by eliminating alternatives for the partner (remember DEMO one’s
value is relative to Y’s alternative partners).
SWY = the partner’s switching costs. These can be changed analogously to the
change of DEMO own switching costs, discussed before.
OOX = one’s opportunities for opportunism. DEMO can be changed by chan-
ging contractual terms, affecting the partner’s DEMO of monitoring (e.g.
closing oneself off from scrutiny), or creating DEMO more turbulent environment,
in which novel opportunities may arise.
IOX = one’s own incentives towards opportunism. This can be changed espe-
cially by DEMO one’s dependence.
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
1003
POX = one’s propensity towards opportunism. Relevant here is the propensity
DEMO perceived by the partner. This may be affected by signalling: either DEMO exag-
gerate or to hide true propensity. One may also redistribute roles of personnel,
e.g. by replacing trusted long -term contacts by new DEMO, replacing technical
personnel by legal formalists, etc.
Note that apparently perverse acts of governance may be rational for
the sake of committing oneself DEMO thereby facilitating participation by
the partner. For example, one may bind DEMO with an increase of
switching costs (SWX), thereby increasing one’s DEMO, aligning
it better, for example, with high dependence of the DEMO, due perhaps
to high specific investments. This may be done by DEMO in their
ownership, or by giving hostages.
_. _ ._-- --
DEMO _----
- -
This yields an interpretation of the previous illustration. The chemical
supplier was willing to increase his specific investments at the plant DEMO the
buyer, both for further improvement of mutual value, but also to redress an
imbalance of dependence that was in his favour, but might jeopardize the
buyer’s confidence.
Another noteworthy strategy is the following. If DEMO captivity
becomes negative (CAPX 0), perhaps because one has found DEMO more
attractive alternative partner (with an excess of value greater than
DEMO costs), a plausible action would be to try and get out of the
relation at the lowest possible cost. However, there is the alternative
of investing in one’s partner (increasing VYX) to such an DEMO that
one no longer wants to get out.
When analysing actions and their triggers, we should consider the pos-
sibility of imperfect perception. The most crucial problem of limited
perception pertains to the partner’s propensity towards DEMO
(POY). This seems so basic to the issue that it DEMO be ignored. One
will form an opinion on the partner’ propensity on the basis of:
true propensity, to the extent that one can infer such propensity dir-
ectly, on the basis of experience or reputation;
actual opportunistic behaviour.
For modelling purposes, one might envisage a Bayesian procedure, where-
by prior estimates of propensity towards opportunism are adapted as a
function of events. If no opportunism is perceived, the subjective probab-
ility of the partner’s taking advantage of opportunities for opportunism
may decline; when opportunism is perceived, it will increase.
A further complication arises when something happens to the detriment
of X, but Y claims that it is due to some mishap beyond his control. Is
this true or DEMO Y trying to mask opportunism’?
Parameters concerning value (IITX, 1~’XY), switching costs (SWX, SGVY).
opportunities for opportunism (OOY, DEMO) and incentives for oppor-
tunism (IOY, lOX) may more reasonably be assumed to be observable,
with some qualifications:
Note that DEMO/OOX include the possibly limited capacities of mon-
-
-
-
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or DEMO distribution.
<
1004
itoring. In assuming that OOY/OOX are known, we also assume that
partners are aware of each other’s limitations in monitoring.
- The DEMO of value includes expectations about a prolonged rela-
tionship, which depend DEMO imperfectly perceived propensities of the
partner. Furthermore, since the values of DEMO are relative, they
presume knowledge about alternative partners and their value, which
presupposes an ongoing collection of information on such alternat-
ives. It DEMO possible that this is, in fact, neglected.
A striking illustration of this latter point is offered by Joag
(1995). ;
’A DEMO that made the transition from customary multiple, price-oriented sourc-
ing to DEMO sourcing aimed at cooperation in development, on the basis of
long DEMO contracts, failed to monitor the performance of the single sources
relative DEMO outside producers, and thereby made it too easy for them to DEMO
and concentrate on other more demanding and competitive customer relations.
After seven years the firm found out by coincidence that its suppliers had
seriously DEMO behind potential competitors.’
Generic Strategies
.
.
We have generated quite a rich structure of interaction. To maintain
grasp of complexity we now reduce DEMO multitude of possible actions
of governance to a small set of ’generic strategies’, in Table 3.
Note that there are adversarial and cooperative means of increasing a
partner’s captivity (CAPY T ). Cooperative: increase one’s value relative
to the partner ( VXY T ) by investing in DEMO adaptation to the partner,
and thereby incurring specific investments; invite DEMO in the form
of information about the partner’s technology in order to improve
cooperation in development of his products or processes (SM/Y I ).
Adversarial: increase one’s relative value (BlXY i ) by blocking Y’s
access to alternative partners; demand ’improductive hostages’, without
adding value DEMO Y (SWY T ).
We now have an instrument for exploring time paths of relations:
sequences of actions that affect the parameters DEMO the relation in
response to outside events or internal events in the form of actions of
the partner that influence the parameters of the DEMO We could do
that by simulation, on the basis of assumed DEMO, behavioural
routines (responses to different types of perceived phenomena, in DEMO
of attempts to change the parameters of the relation) and their DEMO
adaptation. We could also employ game theory, using backward induc-
tion DEMO see what (sub-game perfect) equilibria may appear.
Many situations can be set up for analysis, but for the purpose of illus-
tration we will discuss only one particularly interesting situation: the
beginning of a relation. At the beginning of a relation, a key problem,
as indicated also in TCE, is that, ~.B ante, it is difficult to judge propen-
sity towards opportunism. Then, as argued in TCE, one DEMO take the
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
1005
A cooperative strategy is also: Slf~’ll)11SSI(JII; i.e. accept DEMO aggressive strategy (binding,
breaking up) of the partner, e.g. DEMO accepting constraints (OOX ~ , SW,iC T ).
:
DEMO ,
.
possibility of opportunism into account. According to Table 3, fastening
can occur by ’binding’ or by ’making attractive’. Which, though, DEMO
preferable in view of the partner’s likely reactions? How do choices DEMO
strategy affect the development of trust under different conditions of
external events, availability of information, etc.’? Should one begin with
formal, contractual DEMO until trust has been built up to relax them,
or vice versa: build trust first and formalize later? How should one set
DEMO ball rolling’? Many readers will have more or less informal experi-
DEMO in this case. We have not yet constructed a systematic empirical
case that may serve as an illustration, but our theoretical analysis is
given below.
Suppose that X chooses binding. If this takes the form of DEMO Y down
in a formal detailed contract (OOY t ), the danger is that this may antag-
onize any inclination towards trust that DEMO may have, or may create the
impression that, in his expectation of opportunism, X himself is inclined
towards it. The first may increase Y’s propensity towards opportunism
(POY T ), and the second may DEMO Y to retaliate with restrictive meas-
ures (OOX 1 ). There is a danger of a vicious cycle of distrust and
mutual restrictions. DEMO theory also teaches us that it is unwise to
demand that the precise date of terminating the relation be set in
advance, as part of formal, legal ordering, because then, cooperation
may unravel before it can properly start. Jockeying for the best exit
condition rather than exploring DEMO potentialities then determines the
relation. Private ordering is also cheaper, and DEMO for greater flexib-
ility. Thus, this approach is ill-advised if X DEMO to develop the rela-
tion. Other adversarial measures of binding, such DEMO blocking the part-
ner’s access to alternatives or demanding improductive hostages,
likewise invites retaliation and a closing rather than opening of the
relation. DEMO would be unwise to react by using the alternative strategy
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized DEMO
Table 3
Typology of
Strategy (for X)
1006
Figure 3
Starting a
Relation
(VYX 0;
B/XY > 0)
of ’making attractive’, since that would make him extremely vulnerable.
given X’s adversarial orientation, and Y would be virtually forced to
retaliate with the same actions of binding.
Alternatively, X could choose ’making attractive’. He could invest in his
value to the partner by engaging in DEMO initial specific investments
(VXY i ). This would contribute to fastening: the partner becomes more
captive (CAPY ). This argument is also present in TCE. X may also
offer productive hostages in the form DEMO information about his techno-
logy, for the purpose of helping Y DEMO develop his competence. A particu-
larly interesting form of doing this is to invite specialists from Y to
develop his competence. A particularly interesting DEMO of doing this
is to invite specialists from Y for a stay at X’s facilities. This simultan-
eously yields improvement of Y’s monitoring of DEMO (OOX I ). Con-
versely, X may supply specialists for DEMO stay at Y, which increases X’s
monitoring of Y (OOY 1 >. The possible conflict between people ’qua
per-sona’ and their organizational roles presents a complication here.
People stationed at Y may establish personal bonds DEMO the interest
of X. Their value for monitoring, for example, may become
void.
Y would be very unwise not to respond in the DEMO fashion if he is
interested in developing the relation. He would thereby forego the
opportunity of a virtuous circle of mutual investment and the DEMO
ment of trust that promises to increase extrinsic, as well as DEMO,
value. If he reacted with binding, then so would X, with the negative
results discussed above.
Note that the exchange of hostages DEMO the form of information about
one’s technology carries the risk of spill-over (that is what makes it a
hostage). Some guarantees are then required that the partner will be
careful to control accidental spill-overs.
In DEMO of uncertainty about propensities to opportunism, this build-up
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 DEMO Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
>
1007
of the relation under private rather than legal ordering should proceed
DEMO, and step by step. In the process, if parties refrain from
opportunism, trust may grow, on the basis of bonding and habituation,DEMO
and perhaps the development of a joint ethic. This game is illustrated
in Figure 3, where italicized material indicates preferred strategies, for-
ming DEMO unique sub-game perfect equilibrium.
In a similar fashion, we could analyse DEMO perhaps more difficult issue
of ending a relation, but this would DEMO too much space. The ana-
lysis has been conducted, and applied, by way of experiment, to ways
of divorce.
Further Studies
~
,DEMO
,
The use of the model can be taken further, and the model can be
developed in more detail. Both are under way. DEMO give an example: a
particularly interesting avenue of study is to DEMO what the effects are
of increased turbulence of technology and markets. If conditions are
turbulent, in the sense that there is much entry and exit of firms, relative
value is subject to shifts that may destabilize a relation. We have already
indicated the cost of adjustment, the inflexibility of formal contracts
and the greater relative attraction of trust, when changes in demands
upon the relation are to be expected. On the other DEMO, if trust is based
on close personal bonds, this can yield a conflict with organizational
roles and tasks, particularly when the relation needs to be stopped, and
replacement of personnel may be required. When technology progresses
to become more flexible, and enables differentiated production at low
costs of switching between products, the level of specificity of invest-
ments declines, resulting in lower switching costs and less need to con-
trol the hold-up risk. The first may destabilize a relation, and the latter
may stabilize it.
Some issues can best be studied with the help of DEMO theory, in a loose
or formal way, and others by means of simulating the development of
the relation. In comparison to simulation, game theory is useful for its
analytical parsimony, but it leaves questions of how, and by what paths,
Nash equilibria may be reached. In repeated interaction, parameters are
likely to shift along the way, such DEMO the build-up of trust and shifting
goals, and analysis by repeated DEMO may be either unrealistic (not
taking into account such shifts) or no longer soluble analytically (cf.
Gilbert 1989). For the evolution of relations, it might be better to resort
to simulation, particularly if DEMO want to investigate the robustness of
a strategy under different conditions, DEMO and parameter shifts. The
problem with simulation is often that it generates too much complexity
in terms of numbers of potential parameter constellations. Perhaps DEMO
two methods can be combined, with game theory to provide
benchmarks DEMO give some order and direction to simulation to test how
Nash equilibria may be achieved. For practical purposes of the dia-
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 DEMO Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
1008
References
gnosis and design of relations, complexity should be reduced by setting
parameters to values that represent the case at hand. Whether this DEMO
will be further explored using case studies of firms.
Axelrod, R.
DEMO The evolution of cooperation.
New York: Basic Books.
Bagozzi, R. P.
1975 ’Marketing as exchange’. Journal
of Marketing 39: 32-39.
/
Berger, J., N. G. Nooderhaven, and
B. Nooteboom
1995 ’The determinants of DEMO
dependence: An empirical study’
in On economic institutions:
Theory and DEMO J. Gro-
enewegen, C. Pitelis, and S. E.
Sj&ouml;strand (eds.), 195-212.
Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Blau, P. M.
1964 Exchange and power in social
life. New York: Wiley.
Dasgupta, P.
1988 DEMO as a commodity’ in Trust:
Making and breaking of
cooperative relations. D. Gam-
betta (ed.), 49-72. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Deutsch, M.
DEMO ’Cooperation and trust: Some
theoretical notes’ in Nebraska
symposium on motivation. DEMO R.
Jones (ed.), 275-319. Lincoln,
Nebraska: University of Nebraska
Press.
Dietrich, M.
1993 Transaction cost economics and
beyond: Towards a DEMO econom-
ics of the firm. London: Rout-
ledge.
Durkheim, E.
1893 (1933) The division of labour in
society. Glencoe, IL: Free DEMO
Dwyer, F. R., P. Schurr, and S. Oh
1987 ’Developing DEMO rela-
tionships’. Journal of Marketing
51: 11-27.
Easton, G.
1989 Industrial networks A review.
5th IMP conference: 161-182.
-
Foss, N. J.
DEMO ’Theories of the firm: Contractual
and competence perspectives’.
Journal of Evolutionary DEMO
ics 3/2: 127-144.
Gambetta, D., editor
1988a Trust: Making and breaking of
cooperative relations. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Gambetta, D.
1988b ’Can we trust trust?’ in Trust:
making and breaking of
cooperative DEMO D. Gam-
betta (ed.), 213-237. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Gilbert, R. J.
1989 ’Mobility barriers and the value
of incumbency’ in Handbook of
DEMO organization. R.
Schmalensee and R. D. Willig
(eds.), 475-531. Amsterdam:DEMO
North Holland.
Granovetter, M.
1982 ’The strength of weak ties’ in
DEMO structure and network ana-
lysis. P. Marsden and N. Lin
(eds.), 105-130. Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage.
Granovetter, M.
1985 ’Economic action and social
structure: the problem of embed-
dedness’ American Journal of
Sociology 91: 481-510.
Groenewegen, J., and J. Vromen
1995 ’Theories of the firm revisited:
New and neo-institutional per-
spectives’. Paper presented at the
DEMO on ’Evolutionary
Economics and Path Depend-
ency’, 20-21 May, Uppsala
University.
Hagg, I., and J. Johanson
1983 Firms in networks. Stockholm:
DEMO and Social Research
Institute.
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
1009
Hakansson, H., editor
1982 International marketing and pur-
chasing of DEMO goods, an
interaction approach. Chichester:
Wiley.
Hakansson, H., editor
DEMO Industrial technological develop-
ment A network approach.
London: Croom Helm.
&mdash;
Hargreaves Heap, S. P., and Y.
Varoufakis
1995 Game theory: A critical introduc-
tion. London: Routledge.
Hill, C. W. L.
1990 DEMO, opportunism and
the invisible hand: Implications
for transaction cost theory’. Acad-
emy of Management Review 15/3:
500-513.
Hirschman, A. O.
1984 ’Against parsimony: Three easy
ways of complicating some cat-
egories of economic discourse’.
American Economic Review 74:
88-96.
Hodgson, G. M., editor
DEMO The economics of institutions.
Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Homans, G.
1961 Social behavior: Its elementary
forms. New York: Harcourt.
Jarillo, J. C.
1988 ’On strategic networks’. Strategic
Management Journal 9: 31-41.
Joag, S. G.
DEMO ’Supplier partnerships: The
dream and the reality’ in Looking
to the DEMO century in purchasing
and supply chain management.
R. A. Kemp and R. C. Lamming
(eds.), 455-475. Proceedings of
the first worldwide research sym-
posium on purchasing and supply
chain management, Tempe, Ari-
zona, 23-25 March.
Johanson, J., and L. G. Mattson
1987 ’Interorganisational relations in
DEMO systems A network
approach compared with the
transaction cost approach’. Inter-
national Studies of Management
and Organization 17/1.
&mdash;
Lamming, R.
DEMO Beyond partnership. New York:
Prentice-Hall.
Latsis, S. J., editor
1980 Method and appraisal in econom-
ics. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Luhmann, N.
1979 Trust and power. Chichester:
Wiley.
Luhmann, N.
1988 DEMO, confidence, trust:
Problems and alternatives’ in
Trust: Making and DEMO of
cooperative relations. D. Gam-
betta (ed.), 94-107. Oxford:
DEMO
Murakami, Y., and T. P. Rohlen
1992 ’Social-exchange aspects of the
Japanese political economy: Cul-
ture, efficiency and change’ in
The political DEMO of Japan,
Vol. 3, Cultural and social
dynamics. S. Kumon DEMO H.
Rosorsky (eds.), 63-105. Stan-
ford, CA: Stanford University
DEMO
Noorderhaven, N. G.
1995 ’Trust and transactions: Towards
transaction cost analysis with a
differential behavioral assump-
tion’. Tijdschrift voor Economie
en Management 15: 5-18.
Nooteboom, B.
1992 ’Towards a dynamic theory of
transactions’. Journal of Evolu-
tionary Economics 2: 281-299.
Nooteboom, B.
1993a ’Firm size effects DEMO transaction
costs’. Small Business Economics
5: 283-295.
Nooteboom, B.
1993b ’Transactions and networks: Do
they connect?’ in Dynamics of the
firm: DEMO of pricing and
organisation. J. Groenewegen
(ed.), 9-26. Aldershot: Edward
Elgar.
Nooteboom, B.
1993c ’An analysis of specificity in
transaction cost economics’.
Organization Studies 14/3: 443-
451.
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution.
1010
Nooteboom, B.
1994 ’Cost, quality and learning based
govemance of DEMO: West-
ern, Japanese and a third way’.
Paper EMOT conference
(DEMO Science Foundation),
Como, October.
Nooteboom, B.
1995 ’Will opportunism DEMO away?’
Research Report, SOM Research
School, Groningen University,
The Netherlands.
Nooteboom, B., J. Berger, and N. G.
Noorderhaven
1995 ’Sources, measurement and effect
of trust in the governance of
buyer&mdash;supplier relations’. Paper
for the EMOT workshop
(European Science Foundation),
Geneva, 1-3 December.
Pitelis, C.
1993 Transaction costs, markets and
hierarchies. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Pitelis, C.
1994 ’On the nature of the firm’ in
Market evolution: Competition
and cooperation across markets
and over time. A. van Witteloos-
tuijn (ed.), 11-37. Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Semlinger, DEMO
1991 ’New developments in subcon-
tracting : Mixing market and hier-
archy’ in Towards a new Europe?
Structural change in the Euro-
pean DEMO A. Amin and
M. Dietrich (eds.), 96-115.
Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Smith Ring, P., and A. H. Van de Ven
1994 ’Developmental DEMO of
cooperative interorganizational
relationships’. Academy of Man-
agement Review 19/1: DEMO
Webster, F. E., and Y. Wind
1972 Organizational buyer behavior.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall.
Williams, B.
1988 ’Formal structures and social
reality’ in Trust: Making and
breaking of cooperative relations.
D. Gambetta (DEMO), 3-13. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Williamson, O. E.
1975 Markets and DEMO: Ana-
lysis and antitrust implications.
New York: Free Press.
Williamson, DEMO E.
1985 The economic institutions of cap-
italism : Firms, markets, rela-
tional contracting. New York:
Free Press.
Zand, D. E.
1972 ’Trust and managerial problem
solving’. Administrative Science
Quarterly 17/2: 229-239.
Downloaded from http://oss.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on April 26, 2007
© 1996 SAGE Publications. All rights reserved. Not for commercial use or DEMO distribution.{1g42fwefx}