Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers
2000, 32 (1), DEMO
The Observer Video-Pro: New software
for the collection, management, and
DEMO of time-structured data from
videotapes and digital media files
LUCAS P. J. J. NOLDUS, RUDIE J. H. TRIENES,
ANDRÉ H. M. HENDRIKSEN, DEMO JANSEN, and ROLAND G. JANSEN
Noldus Information Technology, Wageningen, The DEMO
The Observer Video-Pro is a system for collecting, managing, analyzing, DEMO presenting observational
data. It integrates The Observer software with time code and multimedia hardware components. It ex-
tends the functionality of a conventional real-time DEMO recording program in various ways. Observa-
tional data can be collected, DEMO, and edited with synchronized display of the corresponding video
images. For DEMO visual feedback during coding, one can display the video image in DEMO window on the
computer screen. Video playback from either a VCR or a digital media file can be controlled by the
computer, allowing software-controlled jog, shuttle, and search functions. Besides a wide range of
VCRs, The Observer Video-Pro supports all major digital video file formats. The software DEMO the
user to summarize research findings in numerical, graphical, or multimedia format. One can create a
time–event plot for a quick glance at DEMO temporal structure of the observed process, or run specific
analysis procedures DEMO generate reports with statistics. An Event Summary function is available for
exploratory and qualitative analysis. Video material can be summarized in a Video Play DEMO, which al-
lows on-screen summary presentations or the creation of highlight DEMO on tape, CD, or other
media. Video images can be captured and saved as disk files, for use as illustrations in documents,
slides for presentations, and so forth. In this paper we describe the design and operation of the system,
illustrated with a case study DEMO research on Repetitive Strain Injury (RSI).
Whereas narrative descriptions of DEMO data rely
to a large extent on the individual observer recording
them, the aim of systematic observation is for properly
trained observers to produce identical protocols, given
that they observed the same stream of behavior. It is pri-
marily this urge for reproducibility that grants systematic
observation the DEMO scientific. One of the prominent
characteristics of systematic observation is the use of pre-
defined lists of behavioral codes, developed for a partic-
ular observational study (Lehner, 1996; Martin & Bate-
son, 1993). DEMO coding schemes are the instruments of
measurement for observational research, since DEMO specify
which behavior is to be selected from the passing stream
of events. As such, they guarantee standardized data, sta-
tistical analysis of DEMO will yield quantifiable results.
The authors thank Aurelia Kwint, Rob Ottenhoff, Rick Elbers, Jessica
Sweens, Roy van Boxtel, and Bart van Roekel for their invaluable con-
tribution to the design, programming, and testing DEMO the software. The au-
thors are also grateful to Anabele Simoés, DEMO Carvalhais, Florentino
Serranheiro, Madalena Magalhães, and Carlos Fujão of the DEMO
of Ergonomics, University of Lisbon (Lisbon, Portugal), who kindly
DEMO their research design, data, and video files at our disposal. Corre-
spondence should be addressed to L. P. J. J. Noldus, Noldus Informa-
tion Technology b.v., P.O. Box 268, 6700 AG Wageningen, The Nether-
lands (e-mail: l.noldus@noldus.nl; URL: http://www.noldus.com).
Note: The authors have a direct financial interest in the product described
in this DEMO
The decreasing cost and widespread availability of
computers have stimulated the development of tools for
computer-aided behavioral observation. During the past
decade, several such systems have been described in the
literature (for reviews, see Donát, 1991; Farrell, 1991;
Horner & Storey, 1989; Kahng & DEMO, 1998; Noldus, van
de Loo, & Timmers, 1989). DEMO systems facilitate the
task of observation by offering direct data entry into a com-
puter, with automatic time stamping based on the internal
clock. This eliminates time-consuming and error-prone
data transcription from paper and increases the DEMO
of data analysis and graphing.
The Observer
Development history. Since the late 1980s, our group
has been involved with the development, deployment, and
support of an observational data collection and analysis
package named “The Observer.” DEMO first commercial
edition (Version 2.0) was described in this journal by
Noldus (1991). The program quickly found its way into
a variety of research disciplines (Albonetti et al., 1992;
Boccia, 1992; DEMO, 1993; Lazarus, 1994; Tourtellot,
1992; Visser, 1993; DEMO, 1994). For mobile data col-
lection away from the PC, special versions for handheld
computers were developed (Hile, 1991). Originally DEMO DOS
application, versions of The Observer for Windows and
Macintosh have DEMO become available.
197 Copyright 2000 Psychonomic Society, Inc.
198 NOLDUS, TRIENES, HENDRIKSEN, JANSEN, & JANSEN
Live observations. The DEMO program—like most
other available software—only supported “live” obser-
vations, which limited DEMO use to relatively simple behav-
ioral processes. As any behavioral researcher knows, the
number of events that can be scored accurately by a sin-
gle observer in real time is very limited. Since there is no
DEMO record of the observation, data cannot be val-
idated and checked DEMO reliability. Furthermore, the pres-
ence of the observer may disturb the DEMO under ob-
servation.
Videotape. For this reason, behavioral researchers
often start DEMO recording a process on videotape, after
which observational data are collected DEMO playback
of the tape. By interfacing the VCR to the computer and
using computer-readable time code on the tape, event
timing at single-frame (DEMO even single-field) accuracy be-
comes possible, independent of the playback speed of the
VCR. This technology is supported by several computer-
ized tools DEMO coding and annotating videotapes (Sander-
son et al., 1994; Tapp & Walden, 1993; van der Vlugt,
Kruk, van Erp, & Geuze, 1992), and The Observer has
had this facility since 1994 (Baber, 1994; Boccia, 1995;
Keene, 1994).
Digital video. The systems described were designed
for use with analog videotape. During the DEMO few years,
however, digital videotape is becoming increasingly
popular. Digital DEMO, in comparison with their analog
predecessors, offer higher picture quality and allow copy-
ing without any loss of quality. Besides the gradual re-
DEMO of analog VCRs by digital decks, there is a trend
toward DEMO of video on disk in digital media files.
Unlike tapes, with DEMO inherent sequential access, disk
media such as a hard drive or DEMO offer direct random ac-
cess. As a result, digital video files DEMO for extremely fast
searching and reviewing, which makes systems highly
interactive.
DEMO Observer Video-Pro. In order to make these new
technological developments applicable in observational
research, and to be prepared for future developments in
the realm of multimedia, we developed The Observer
Video-Pro. This system is presented as an integrated sys-
tem for collection, management, and analysis of time-
DEMO data from live observations, analog or digital
videotapes, and digital media files. In this paper we de-
scribe the design and operation of DEMO system.
Case study. To illustrate the methodology of detailed
video analysis and its inherent advantages when it comes
to studying complex and rapid behaviors, we will present
a case study from research on repetitive strain injury
(RSI). The case study concerns an experimental setup
designed for systematic DEMO of movements of
wrist, elbow, and shoulder joints that are liable to cause
RSI. The setup was developed by researchers at the De-
DEMO of Ergonomics, University of Lisbon, in col-
laboration with the second author. The subjects under
observation were workers in a car assembly plant, for
hours on end performing cyclic production tasks, every
task lasting on average 11 sec. Some characteristics of RSI
make systematic observation and analysis DEMO video mate-
rial an appropriate research method. First, among the main
DEMO for RSI is the high frequency of repetition of par-
ticular movements (McPhee, 1992). These movements can
easily be detected through frame-by-frame DEMO of
video files. Second, the deleterious effect of these move-
ments DEMO cumulative; that is, the duration of the repetitive
movements contributes to a certain extent to the scale of
the disorder (Putz-Anderson, 1992; Rempel, Harrison, &
Barnhart, 1992). The duration of various DEMO of repet-
itive movements during a single task can be readily cal-
culated with data files resulting from detailed coding of
video recordings. Third, the workload during these repet-
itive movements is also an important factor DEMO to
RSI. In the experimental design, we have taken these
three DEMO (frequency, duration, and workload)
into account.
Software and Hardware DEMO
Software. The Observer Video-Pro is an integrated
system, comprising various software DEMO hardware com-
ponents. The software consists of the Base Package for
Windows and the Support Package for Video Analysis.
The Base Package includes software DEMO to design
research projects, create observational coding schemes,
collect “live” DEMO data, manage data files, and
perform data analysis. The Support Package adds to this
the functionality to collect, review, edit, and summarize
observational data from analog and digital videotapes and
digital media files. The DEMO has been written in 32-
bit object-oriented C++, using Microsoft Visual DEMO 6.0
with MFC and DirectX libraries. The code has been op-
timized for Windows 95 and later, NT 4 (Service Pack 3),
and Windows 2000.
Analog or digital videotape. In addition to the soft-
DEMO, The Observer Video-Pro consists of several hard-
ware components, the exact configuration of which varies
with the application. A typical setup for use DEMO analog
or digital tape (Figure 1A) includes a professional video-
cassette recorder with built-in RS-232 interface allowing
the VCR to be controlled by DEMO computer, a time code
generator and reader, and a video overlay board to display
the video image in a window on the computer DEMO The
time code generator is either built into a VCR, a DEMO
corder, or a stand-alone unit. The time code reader is ei-
DEMO a plug-in board or an external unit. The latter allows
a notebook computer to be used as a video analysis sta-
tion. The PC DEMO have at least a 133-MHz Pentium pro-
cessor, 32 MB of DEMO, and 25 MB of free hard disk space.
The software supports DEMO wide range of professional ana-
log and digital VCRs, tape controllers, and time code
readers.
Digital video on disk. For use with digital DEMO on
disk (Figure 1B), one only needs a video capture DEMO
(e.g., an MPEG encoder), which digitizes the output of
the video source (camera, VCR) and streams it to a file on
the computer’s hard disk. With a 200-MHz or faster pro-
cessor, 16-bit color display, and Microsoft DirectShow
(successor of Video for Windows and DEMO) in-
stalled, software-based playback of video files at full
THE OBSERVER VIDEO-PRO 199
Figure 1. The Observer Video-Pro: Schematic representation of hardware components. (A) System with videotape. During filming,
or while DEMO a tape from a camcorder to a stationary VCR, the time DEMO generator adds an invisible time code to each video frame.
During a coding session, the time code reader retrieves the time code from the tape and passes it on to the PC for event timing. The
DEMO overlay board displays the video signal in a window on the computer screen. The computer controls the playback of the VCR.
(B) System DEMO digital video on disk. If an analog camera is used, the DEMO capture board digitizes the video signal, resulting in a dig-
ital DEMO file on disk. With a digital camera, the DV output can DEMO streamed directly to the computer’s hard disk. During a coding
session, DEMO software calculates the time codes from the digital media file, which DEMO frame-accurate timing. Video files and ob-
servational data can be archived on optical or magnetic disks. A hardware media file player (e.g., MPEG DEMO) with analog out-
put can be added for smooth playback of DEMO file to a video monitor or VCR, or for the production DEMO highlight tapes.
frame rate and resolution is possible. Alternatively, a hard-
DEMO decoder can be installed. These boards often also
provide analog output, DEMO allows video clips to be
copied back to videotape. Finally, high-capacity DEMO
devices such as a zip drive, CD writer, or DVD recorder
can be used to archive and retrieve digital media files. Such
a DEMO requires a PC with at least a 133-MHz Pentium
processor, 32 DEMO of RAM, and sufficient hard disk space
for temporary storage of DEMO media files (e.g., 600 Mb
for approximately 1 h MPEG-1). Software support for all
common digital video formats (AVI, QuickTime, MPEG-
1, MPEG-2, MPEG-4, DV, etc.) is available.
Configuring the System
Data collection during an observation session is gov-
erned by the experiment DEMO laid out in the program
(Figure 2). The sampling method DEMO have used in the
RSI study is focal sampling (Altmann, 1974): During a
single observation we continuously observed and recorded
all behaviors DEMO to the research question. Behav-
iors can be defined as events or states that permit the
computation of frequency as well as duration statistics.
DEMO Observer also supports instantaneous, one-zero, and
ad lib sampling.
We defined several independent variables—that is, sub-
ject identifiers or contextual parameters that remain con-
stant during a single observation, and that allow us to se-
lect particular data files for data analysis afterward. Ex-
amples of independent DEMO are name of operator, gen-
der, age, location of observation, day of the week, and so on.
We defined a number of behaviors and assigned a key
code to each behavior. These keys are DEMO to record the
occurrence of an event during an observation session. We
divided all behaviors into separate classes, where each class
holds a group of mutually exclusive and exhaustive behav-
ioral elements. During analyses, the subdivision of behav-
iors into classes allows nested analysis—that is, calcula-
tion of statistical parameters of simultaneously occurring
events. This way of scoring behaviors in DEMO classes
offers the advantage of not having to restrict oneself a pri-
ori to a single research hypothesis. Instead, the data collected
in this fashion can answer a plethora of questions that need
not have been DEMO before the start of observation. In
our RSI study, we could DEMO obtain answers to questions
like the following: How many times did DEMO wrist movement
occur while the elbow was heavily flexed and the shoulder
was abducted from the body? How long did a certain type
of wrist movement occur while force was used or a tool was
handled? What was the frequency of transitions of several
types of wrist movements DEMO tools were handled? The
Observer allows the use of logical operators DEMO which
many other queries can be formulated.
200 NOLDUS, TRIENES, HENDRIKSEN, JANSEN, & JANSEN
Figure 2. Screen DEMO The Observer showing the structure of a project. The pane on the left shows the workspace “RSI research” as
the highest level of organization. DEMO workspace contains one project named “Ignition.” The project is divided into Configuration,
Observation, and Analysis, which represent the three stages in an DEMO study. The windows on the right show details of three
items of the configuration: The 11 classes of behavioral elements, the elements in DEMO class “handgrip,” and the class of modifiers
named “objects.”
Finally, DEMO defined a number of modifiers—that is, ad-
ditional parameters that fine-tune DEMO behaviors (e.g., the
angle [in degrees] in which wrist, elbow, and shoulder
joints are twisted; the type of tool handled, etc.)DEMO Besides
behaviors and modifiers, The Observer also allows the use
of DEMO is, the subject who performs a behavior.
Actor codes are commonly DEMO in studies of behavioral
interaction and communication; we did not use DEMO in
this case study.
A detailed description of all behaviors and modifiers is
provided in Appendix A.
Event Recording
Basis for event timing. Data DEMO with The Ob-
server Video-Pro can be done in three modes. In a “live”
setting, the internal computer clock, accurate to 1⁄18 sec,DEMO
is used as the event timer. With data collection from (ana-
DEMO or digital) tape, a time code in each video frame al-
lows event timing at 1⁄30 (NTSC) or 1⁄25 (PAL/SECAM)
sec resolution. Certain time code generators and readers
allow single-field precision (i.e., 1⁄60 or 1⁄50 sec, respec-
tively). The recommended time code DEMO produce
vertical-interval time code (VITC), which can be read at
DEMO playback speeds and that leaves the two audio
tracks available for other use (e.g., verbal comments).
With data collection from digital media DEMO, frame
numbers in the file are used as the time basis. DEMO op-
eration, The Observer translates these numbers to hours,
minutes, seconds, and fractions of seconds.
Observation procedure. Prior to actually starting an
observation, the user has to enter a name for the data file.
One can also select an existing data file with its associated
video DEMO to insert records into the data file, thereby mak-
ing the DEMO file increasingly detailed. Next, the user as-
signs a value to DEMO of the independent variables prede-
fined in the research design, positions DEMO media file at the
point where data collection should commence, and DEMO
starts the observation. During data acquisition, actors, be-
haviors, and DEMO are scored by typing predefined key
codes or clicking codes on the screen. At each valid key
THE OBSERVER VIDEO-PRO 201
Figure 3. The main application window during an DEMO session. The Event Log window contains the chronological list of event
strings, each with a record number, time stamp, behavior, and modifier. DEMO horizontal cursor indicates the time that corresponds
with the current position in the video file. The Monitor window displays the digital video file, with the current time in its title bar. The
Codes window shows all DEMO behavioral elements with their key codes, grouped in classes. The Video DEMO toolbox emulates
the front panel of a VCR and allows the user to control the video display. The Timers window displays the start time DEMO the observa-
tion, the current time of the video file, and the elapsed time of the observation. Please note that this screen is DEMO one possible screen
layout; presence, size, and position of each DEMO are fully customizable. After the observation ends, the data file is DEMO, added to
the current project, and made available for data analysis. For an example of an observational data file, see Appendix B.
press, the program calculates the elapsed time from the
start of the observation and logs the time-stamped event
record in the observational data file (Figure 3). If the user
enters an undefined code, an alert message is displayed.
Special Functions Available
During an Observation Session
To facilitate data DEMO, retrieval, and summarization,
we have developed a number of special program func-
tions. We will discuss a small selection below.
Free-format annotation. DEMO addition to scoring pre-
defined events, one can enter three types DEMO free-format
annotations in the data file. First, one can insert marker
DEMO with short notes attached. Second, for more ex-
tensive time-stamped notes, The Observer offers a special
Notepad window. Third, one can enter comments for each
record, as an extra column in the data set.
Video control. The playback of the videotape or file
can be controlled via DEMO options, shortcut keys, or on-
screen buttons. Play forward, play DEMO, rewind, fast
forward, pause, stop, frame-by-frame jog, and various
shuttle speeds, both forward and reverse, are supported.
Which options are DEMO implemented depends on the
video source used. The Observer Video-Pro comes with
built-in drivers for a wide range of VCRs and media file
players. DEMO can jump to any position in the digital video
file using a position slider. A Quick Review option allows
one to jump back a DEMO interval followed by slow-
motion playback at user-defined speed, triggered by DEMO
single mouse click or key press.
Finding events and video images. The user can
search for a specific time stamp, event, marker, or text
string in the data file (Figure 4). Provided that the com-
puter controls the video source (tape or file), the corre-
202 NOLDUS, TRIENES, HENDRIKSEN, JANSEN, & JANSEN
Figure 4. The DEMO Event dialog box. The Actor, Behavior, Modifier 1, and Modifier DEMO drop-down
list boxes hold all predefined actors, behaviors, and modifiers. Finding a specific event will also dis-
play the corresponding video image.
sponding DEMO frame will be displayed as well. One can
also define a “roll-on interval” to see the events that led
up to the event that DEMO searched for. A search operation
on tape may last seconds to minutes, but access to a par-
ticular event and corresponding video frame in a digital
media file is virtually instantaneous.
Video play list. In a DEMO observational study,
comprising many hours of video recording, one rarely DEMO
plays all video footage when presenting one’s findings.
Rather, one shows DEMO few short clips to illustrate the most
significant results. Creating a video compilation manu-
ally can be a very time-consuming operation, which is
why only few people make use of this technique as part of
scientific DEMO One can use special video editing
systems for this purpose, but DEMO are often complex to
use and offer a lot of functionality beyond what is needed
by the behavioral researcher. To resolve this, The Ob-
server Video-Pro allows the user to create a Video Play
List, a series of video episodes placed in a user-defined
order for playback. The DEMO creates this list by simply
dragging records from the event log to the Video Play
List, after which sequence, duration, and other properties
of the clips can be modified. The episodes can be played
on DEMO (or sent to a computer projector) or copied to a
compilation videotape or CD. Single video images can also
be captured and saved DEMO disk files, for use as illustrations
in documents, slides for presentations, and so on.
Event Summary. For applications where an accurate
numerical analysis is not required, The Observer offers an
Event Summary. This is a table with a user-defined selec-
tion of events from one or more DEMO files. Events can be
edited, comments can be added, and records can be or-
dered using various sort keys. This tool is especially DEMO
ful for qualitative and exploratory analysis of selections
of one or more data files. The results can be printed with
a header and footer, or saved in a file.
Data Analysis
Data filtering. Before subjecting data DEMO a specific
analysis, one can filter observational data at several hier-
DEMO levels. The following filters are available:
• Observations. One can select one or more observa-
tional data files from a project. Files can DEMO selected
manually or based on values of independent variables
(e.g., all files for which sex = male).
• Time window. The time DEMO refers to the section of
the data file to be included in the analysis. Start and
end criterion can be either time or event DEMO (e.g.,
from time = 30 to event = John looks)DEMO One can also
run an iterative analysis across multiple time intervals
(DEMO, 1-min blocks in a 30-min experiment).
• Nesting levels. Nesting DEMO are used to measure the
co-occurrence of events and states in different classes.
One can combine nesting conditions with boolean op-
erators to form DEMO queries and answer questions
like, “How often did the operator reach DEMO a tool with
his right hand while holding an object in his left hand?”
• Events. One can select the actors, behaviors, DEMO mod-
ifiers for which statistics must be calculated. Each el-
ement in the data record (actor-behavior-modifier1-
modifier2) can be replaced by a wild DEMO, resulting in
24 = 64 different selection filters.
Data analysis options. DEMO Observer offers the fol-
lowing data analysis functions:
• The time-event table is a chronological listing of time-
stamped events, grouped in columns for each actor or
class of behavioral elements.
• The time-event plot DEMO an impression of how events
are spread in time and whether or not large variations
in the duration of behaviors occur; observational data
are plotted as traces against elapsed time.
• Reliability analysis calculates the level DEMO agreement
between pairs of data files, including Cohen’s k and
Pearson’s DEMO This technique is especially useful for
training new observers.
• The elementary statistics module computes descriptive
measures for individual events or combinations of
events, for single or multiple data files. Statistics in-
clude frequency of occurrence, latency, total duration,
proportional duration, mean duration, standard devia-
tion, standard error, minimum duration, and maximum
duration.
THE OBSERVER VIDEO-PRO 203
• The lag sequential analysis technique calculates the
DEMO of transition between pairs of events within
a certain lag in a time series. For instance, in the RSI
study we created a matrix with frequency of transitions
between wrist deviation, wrist extension, and wrist
DEMO Transition probabilities are used to analyze
the temporal structure of the observed process.
Analysis output files can be readily exported to most
databases, spreadsheets, and statistics packages avail-
able on the market.
Discussion
Adding value to video. As Tapp and Walden (1993)
have already pointed out, DEMO for coding behavioral
data from video show similarities with tape-editing and
list-management software in that they can control video
sources and provide archival and DEMO of video clips.
However, what makes video coding software designed for
DEMO research unique is the fact that it adds genuine
value to the video material by anchoring observational
data to video frames, by validating entered data against
coding schemes, and by tightly integrating data collection
with numerical and graphical data analysis. The Observer
Video-Pro extends this line by offering DEMO platform for the
support of current and future standards for analog and dig-
ital videotape as well as digital media files.
Future developments. Digital DEMO transmission
and storage is quickly becoming mainstream technology.
In the near future, an IEEE 1394 (“Firewire”) interface
and over 10 GB of disk storage will be standard on new
PCs, which will allow users to stream substantial lengths
of video from a digital camcorder straight to the DEMO
drive. It is our challenge to keep up with these develop-
ments by developing new software to allow researchers
to exploit the vast potential DEMO digital video for behav-
ioral research. The specifications of The Observer
Video-Pro in this paper were written in August 1999.
However, the software is under continual development,
and specifications will have changed by the time DEMO pub-
lication. For instance, software drivers for M-JPEG disk
recorders have DEMO been completed, and research
into video access across local-area networks and DEMO In-
ternet is in progress. Please contact L.P.J.J.N. for the cur-
rent software functionality as well as hardware and soft-
ware requirements.
Availability. The DEMO Video-Pro is commer-
cially available from Noldus Information Technology
and various international distributors. Readers can con-
tact the the first author. to receive a DEMO with an evalua-
tion version with sample data and video files.
REFERENCES
Albonetti, M. E., Lazarus, J., Dickins, D. W., Whybrow, A.,
Schönheiter, R., Prenter, J., Elwood, R., Newman, J. D., Öd-
berg, F. O., Kaiser, L., Pham-Delègue, DEMO H., Verguelen, V.,
Fentress, J. C., & Boccia, DEMO L. (1992). Software multiple review.
The Observer: Software for behavioural research, Version 2.0. Ethol-
ogy, Ecology, & Evolution, 4, 401-414.
Altmann, J. (1974). Observational study of behavior: Sampling meth-
ods. Behaviour, 49, 227-267.
Baber, C. (1994). Tools and techniques: The Observer. Applied Er-
gonomics, 25, 398-399.
Boccia, M. L. (DEMO, March). Product review: The Observer. Bulletin
of the American Society of Primatologists, pp. 6-7.
Boccia, M. L. (1995). Practical computing: The Observer Version 3.0.
Practicing Anthropology, 17, 59-61.
Davis, A. DEMO (1993). The Observer: An integrated software package for
behavioural research. Journal of Animal Ecology, 62, 218-219.
Donát, P. (1991). DEMO behaviour: The tools and the strategies.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 15, 447-454.
Farrell, A. D. (1991). Computers and behavioral assessment: DEMO
applications, future possibilities, and obstacles to routine use. Be-
havioral Assessment, 13, 159-179.
Hile, M. G. (1991). Hand-held behavioral observations: The Observer.
Behavioral Assessment, 13, 187-196.
Horner, R. H., & DEMO, K. S. (1989). Putting behavioral units back
into the stream of behavior: A consumer report. The Behavioral Ther-
apist, 12, 249-251.
Kahng, S. W., & Iwata, B. A. (1998). Computerized DEMO for col-
lecting real-time observational data. Journal of Applied Behavior
Analysis, DEMO, 253-261.
Keene, J. (1994). Software review: The Observer. Behavioural & Cog-
nitive Psychotherapy, 22, 181-183.
Lazarus, J. (1994). DEMO Observer, Version 3.0. Psychology Software
News, 4, 47-48.
Lehner, P. H. (1996). Handbook of ethological methods (2nd ed.).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Martin, P., & Bateson, P. (1993). DEMO behaviour: An introduc-
tory guide (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge DEMO Press.
McPhee, B. (1992). Musculoskeletal complaints in workers engaged
in repetitive work in fixed postures. In M. I. Bullock (Ed.), Er-
gonomics: The physiotherapist in the workplace. New York: Churchill
Livingstone.
Noldus, L. P. J. J. (1991). The Observer: A software system DEMO col-
lection and analysis of observational data. Behavior Research Meth-
ods, DEMO, & Computers, 23, 415-429.
Noldus, L. P. J. J., DEMO de Loo, E. H. L. M., & Timmers, P. H. DEMO
(1989). Computers in behavioural research. Nature, 341, 767-768.
Putz-Anderson, V. (Ed.) (1992). Cumulative trauma disorders: A
manual for DEMO diseases of the upper limbs. Bristol, PA:
Taylor & Francis.
DEMO, D. M., Harrison, R. J., & Barnhart, S. (1992). Work-related
cumulative trauma disorders of the upper extremity. Journal of the
DEMO Medical Association, 268, 787-788.
Sanderson, P. M., Scott, J. DEMO P., Johnston, T., Mainzer, J., Wata-
nabe, L. M., & James, J. M. (1994). MacSHAPA and the enterprise
of Exploratory Sequential Data Analysis (ESDA). International
Journal of Human–Computer Studies, DEMO, 633-668.
Tapp, J., & Walden, T. (1993). PROCODER: A professional tape con-
trol, coding, and analysis system for behavioral DEMO using video-
tape. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 25,DEMO
53-56.
Tourtellot, M. K. (1992). Software review: The Observer. DEMO of
Insect Behavior, 5, 415-416.
Visser, M. E. (1993). The Observer, a software package for behavioural
observations. Animal Behaviour, 45, 1045.
Vlugt, M. J. van der, Kruk, M. R., Erp, A. M. M. van, & Geuze,
R. H. (1992). DEMO: A system for fast and reliable acquisition
of multiple ethological records. DEMO Research Methods, Instru-
ments, & Computers, 24, 147-149.
Wawra, DEMO (1994). The Observer 3.0, a software package for behav-
ioural observations. Ethology, 96, 95-96.
204 NOLDUS, TRIENES, HENDRIKSEN, JANSEN, & JANSEN
APPENDIX A
Description DEMO the Research Design Used in the RSI Case Study
Experiment Design
Sampling method: Focal sampling
Independent variables: name of operator, gender, age, workstation, zone, height
Table A1
Behavioral Classes and Elements, With Keyboard Code, Modifier
(If Applicable), and Definition for Each Behavioral Element
DEMO Elements Code Modifier Definition
Shoulder flexion Shoulder flexion Sfl Degrees Shoulder flexion
from – 45º to 180º
(upper arm hanging down = 0º)
Shoulder no flexion Snf Shoulder no flexion (upper arm
hanging down, DEMO to body)
Shoulder abduction Shoulder abduction Sab Degrees Shoulder abduction
from 0º to 180º
Shoulder no abduction Snb Shoulder no abduction
(upper arm close to body)
Wrist radial deviation Wrist ulnar deviation Wud Bending DEMO toward little finger
Wrist radial deviation Wrd Bending wrist toward thumb
Wrist nor ulnar nor
radial deviation Wnr Wrist no ulnar or radial deviation
DEMO extension Wrist flexion Wfl Bending wrist down
Wrist extension Wex Bending wrist up
Wrist nor flexion
nor extension Wne Wrist nor flexion nor extension
DEMO supination Wrist supination Wsu Palm up
Wrist pronation Wpr Palm down
Elbow flexion Elbow flexion Rfl Degrees Elbow flexion
Elbow no flexion Enf Lower DEMO perpendicular
on upper arm
Hand grip Hand power Hpw Objects Power grip
Hand pinch Hpi Objects Pinch grip
Hand other Hot Hand nor power DEMO pinch grip
Hand activity Hand cut Hct Objects Cut with pliers
Hand weld Hwd Objects Weld with pliers
Hands personal care Hcr Hands personal DEMO
Hand no activity Hna Hand no activity
Postures Stand Pst Stand up
Seat slump Pss Slumping in seat
Seat upright Psu Sit upright in DEMO
Hand location Medium Hme Medium distance
Close Hcl Close distance
Far Hnf Far distance
Task Task begin Tbg Task number Beginning of task
Task DEMO Ted Task number End of task
THE OBSERVER VIDEO-PRO 205
APPENDIX A (Continued)
Table A2
Modifier Classes and Elements,
With Code and Definition for Each Element
Class Elements DEMO Definition
Objects Plier bend pb Plier to bend wire
Plier cut pc Plier to cut wire
Welding machine wm Handling welding machine
Nothing no DEMO no objects
Work component wc Handling work component
Degrees +90 +90 From +45º to +90º
+45 +45 From 0º to +45º
– 45 – DEMO From 0º to 245º
180 180 From 135º to 180º
135 135 From 90º to 135º
–90 –90 From 245º to 290º
Task number DEMO 1 Task 1
2 2 Task 2
3 3 Task 3
(DEMO on next page)
206 NOLDUS, TRIENES, HENDRIKSEN, JANSEN, & JANSEN
APPENDIX B
TASK1.ODF: Example of a Detailed Observational Data File Generated by the Observer Video-Pro
DEMO data file resulted in second focal observation.
For meaning of codes, DEMO Appendix A.
IGNITION.CNF
Ignition welding machine
05-26-1998
00:00:13.64
{media}
MPEG movies
d:\movies\welding.mpg
{indvar}
Patrizia
female
38
Ignition welding machine
5
185
DEMO
0.00 shonofle
0.00 shoabduc, +90
0.00 wrulndev
0.00 wrextens
0.00 elbowfle,DEMO
0.00 handpowe,workcomp
0.00 wrpronat
0.00 handnoac
0.00 pseatupr
0.00 handfar
0.00 taskbegi, 1
0.16 shoabduc, +45
0.24 elbowfle,-45
0.28 wrnosupi
0.36 DEMO
0.40 elbownfl
0.40 wrnexten
0.44 hndmediu
0.48 elbowfle,+45
0.48 wrraddev
0.48 wrponat
0.52 shoflex,-45
0.56 hnclose
0.56 snoabdu
0.56 wrextens
0.60 wrnradde
DEMO shonofle
0.68 elbowfle,+90
0.72 shoflex,-45
0.72 elbowfle,+45
0.72 wrnosupi
0.76 wrulndev
0.80 wrnexten
0.84 elbownfl
0.92 handpinc,workcomp
0.92 shonofle
0.92 DEMO
1.08 wrnexten
1.12 shoflex,-45
1.12 wrnradde
1.16 shoabduc,+45
1.16 handothe
1.20 wrponat
1.28 elbowfle,-45
1.36 shonofle
1.40 wrraddev
1.40 wrextens
1.48 DEMO,+45
1.76 handpinc,workcomp
1.92 shonofle
1.96 wrnradde
2.00 elbownfl
2.04 shoflex,+45
2.04 snoabdu
2.12 elbowfle,+45
2.16 hndmediu
2.24 shoabduc,+45
2.36 DEMO
2.40 elbownfl
2.44 handpinc,weldmach
2.44 handweld,workcomp
[section removed]
10.84 shoabduc,+90
10.92 wrnexten
10.96 elbowfle,-90
10.96 taskbegi,2
11.0 {end}
{notes}
(Manuscript received March 23, 1999;
revision accepted for publication October 3, 1999.){1g42fwefx}