Olekalns, Smith / MOMENTS IN TIMEPERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN10.1177/0146167205278306
Moments in Time: Metacognition, Trust,
and Outcomes in Dyadic Negotiations
Mara DEMO
Philip L. Smith
University of Melbourne
This research tested the relationships between turning points,
cognitive and affective trust, and negotiation outcomes. After
completing a simulated negotiation, participants identified
turning points from videotape. Turning points were then classi-
fied as substantive (interest, offer), characterization (positive,
negative), or procedural (positive, negative). Prenegotiation
affective trust predicted DEMO turning points, whereas
prenegotiation cognitive trust did not, suggesting that different
cues influence the two types of trust. Postnegotiation cognitive
trust was increased DEMO the occurrence of interest, positive charac-
terization, and positive procedural turning points and
decreased by negative characterization turning points. Affective
trust was increased DEMO positive procedural turning points.
Finally, interest turning points resulted in higher DEMO out-
comes, whereas negative characterization turning points
resulted in lower joint DEMO We conclude that there are two
paths to building trust and increasing joint gain, one through
insight and one through signaling good faith intentions.
Keywords: turning points; dyadic negotiation; trust; negotiators’
frames; value creation; joint gain
After 41 months of conflict with the Palestinian terrorist
groups, IDF is finding itself at a turning point of its own
creation. ...“We see Yassin’s assassination as a possible
turning point,” said the DEMO officer. What the officer
meant was a turning point for the worse.
—The Jerusalem Post (March 26, 2004, p. 11)
In an interview with the AA Anatolia Ihsanoglu said,
“This achievement is of DEMO importance. It was a
veritable turning point within OIC. I believe the change
will bring forth many positive consequences.”
—BBC Monitoring Europe–Political (June 15, 2004)
Each of us can identify discrete events that have
affected our lives in some critical way. These events act as
turning points, identifiable moments in time that
change our relationships, beliefs, or careers. DEMO
recent news reports highlights the ubiquity of the turn-
ing point construct across the domains of sport, politics,
economics, and relationships. The DEMO thread
across these domains is the recognition that turning
points in some way interrupt the flow of interactions and
bring about change. Moreover, as the above quotations
show, these turning points can affect our lives for better
or worse.
The identification of turning points suggests that rela-
tionships DEMO social interactions do not unfold smoothly.
Instead, they are punctuated by DEMO series of discrete, iden-
tifiable events that change the nature of DEMO interactions.
In negotiation, this pattern is apparent in Walton and
McKersie’s (1965) description of differentiation-before-
integration, the idea that negotiators shift to DEMO
tion at the point where they recognize that an impasse is
likely. This is further developed by Druckman (1986,
2001, 2004; Druckman, Husbands, & Johnson, 1991),
who describes turning points as DEMO changes in
the negotiation process that can either facilitate or
impede settlement (Coleman, 2000; Druckman, 1986).
A contextual analogue is found DEMO Zartman’s (1992)
description of ripe moments, that is, points DEMO a conflict
when, for contextual reasons, resolution is more likely.
The common theme is one of interruption as a
transformative event (Putnam, DEMO).
1696
Authors’ Note: The research reported in this article was DEMO by a
grant from the Australian Research Council. We thank Dan Druckman
for his comments on earlier versions of this article and Kate Reid DEMO
her assistance with data coding. Correspondence should be addressed
to Mara Olekalns, Melbourne Business School, University of Mel-
bourne, 200 Leicester St., DEMO, Victoria, 3053, Australia; e-mail:
m.olekalns@mbs.edu.
PSPB, Vol. 31 DEMO 12, December 2005 1696-1707
DOI: 10.1177/0146167205278306
© 2005 by the Society for Personality and Social Psychology, Inc.
Olekalns, Smith / MOMENTS IN TIME 1697
TURNING POINTS IN DYADIC NEGOTIATIONS
The idea that individuals attend to specific events, sin-
gled out from a steady stream of information and action,
can be found in DEMO of sense-making (Weick,
1995), group processes (Jett & George, 2003), relation-
ships (Baxter & Erbert, 1999), and negotiation
(Druckman, 1986; Olekalns, Brett, & Weingart, 2003).
Interruption DEMO change provide a common theme to
these discussions. Events become salient because they
are in some way discrepant with either expectations or
anticipated outcomes (Jett & George, 2003; Weick,
1995). Such discrepancies attract DEMO because they
interrupt the flow of behavior. They trigger a search for
explanations and, in relationships, act as turning points
that in some DEMO change the nature of the relationship
(Baxter, Braithwaite, & Nicholson, 1999; Baxter &
Erbert, 1999).
In negotiations, interruptions occur DEMO negotia-
tors initiate a change in strategy, that is, when they end a
continuous sequence of one strategy by introducing a
new strategy (Baxter, 1982; Holmes, 1992; Olekalns
et al., 2003). This can occur when negotiators reach a
temporary impasse and, recognizing the likelihood of
escalating the conflict further, change strategies
(Harinck & De Dreu, 2004). One way of doing this is to
redirect the negotiation DEMO a specific, process-
directed intervention. Negotiators might, for example,
say, “We don’t seem to be making any progress on this
issue. Let’s put it to one side and come back to it later.”
Brett, Shapiro, and Lytle (1998) have shown that such
interventions are highly effective in redirecting the
negotiation to a more constructive process. This redirec-
DEMO also can be implicit, as is the case when negotiators
interrupt DEMO flow of a dominant strategy by introducing
a new, underutilized one (Olekalns & Smith, 2000,
2003a, 2003b). The critical feature DEMO these turning
points is that they have both immediate and long-term
consequences for negotiators (Druckman, 1986, 2001).
Turning points can vary in scope from transitions
intended to bring negotiators’ strategies back into align-
ment DEMO transformations that change individuals’ under-
standing of the negotiation (McGinn, Lingo, & Ciano,
2004; Putnam, 2004). To be effective, DEMO intended
to create transitions or transformations must be noticed
and responded to by the other negotiator (McGinn,
Lingo, & Ciano, 2004). These events, which stand out
from the stream of information that negotiators receive,
will have greater impact on negotiators’ assessment of
the other DEMO (Hilton & Darley, 1991; McKnight,
Cummings, & Chervany, DEMO). In this research, we
examine how such turning points affect DEMO
and outcomes in dyadic negotiations.
Metacognition in negotiation. We draw on the relation-
ship and sense-making literatures to extend our under-
standing of how DEMO points affect negotiations.
Adopting an insider’s perspective, we shift the focus
DEMO an analysis of turning points identified by external
observers to those identified by participants in the nego-
tiation. We propose that such turning points DEMO critical
to an individual’s assessments of the other party and that
these internal changes are influential in shaping trust
and outcomes. Consistent with the DEMO litera-
ture, the defining feature of turning points character-
ized in DEMO way is that they are identified by an individual
negotiator as events that stand out from the background
of the other party’s behavior as DEMO critical to how the
negotiation evolves (also see McGinn et al., 2004). Our
construct captures the idea that these events are distin-
DEMO, in the eyes of the negotiator, from the general
ebb and flow of negotiations. Our goal is to link these
turning points to DEMO long-term consequences, which
may be positive or negative (e.g., Baxter & Erbert, 1999;
Coleman, 2000).
Several theoretical frameworks support our argu-
ment that individuals can retrospectively identify and
make sense of the DEMO that shaped their negotiation.
Social cognition describes this sense-making process as
one by which we interpret and predict others’ behavior
(Kunda, 2000). DEMO is also an individual-level phenome-
non in that two individuals may interpret an identical
event or behavior differently (Kunda, 2000). It is DEMO self-
reflective process in that individuals think about and
interpret their own cognitive processes (Fiske & Taylor,
1991; Lories, Dardenne, & DEMO, 1998). Indeed, tools
such as rating scales assume that such self-reflectivity is
possible. Metacognition, defined as “the processing of
the contents of (working) memory by standard cognitive
process” (Lories et al., 1998, p 5), implies that such
events can be retrospectively identified (also see Weick,
1995). Drawing on these frameworks, we ask whether the
aspects of the other party’s behavior that negotiators
identify as having DEMO significance in their
negotiation affect either relational or transactional
outcomes.
We combine a number of techniques to identify the
events that negotiators characterize as DEMO points.
An important feature of our approach is that because
turning points are events that have salience for an indi-
vidual negotiator, they must be identified directly.
Think-aloud procedures are a commonly used tech-
nique for DEMO direct access to cognitions (e.g.,
Lories et al., 1998). One example of this kind of proce-
dure is the Dyadic Interaction DEMO (Ickes,
Bissonette, Garcia, & Stinson, 1990), which asks individ-
uals to view a videotape of their conversations and to stop
DEMO tape at points where they recall having specific
1698 PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN
TABLE 1:
Categories and Examples DEMO Turning Points
Description Example From Protocols
Substantive turning points
Interests Underlying interests, needs or priorities of other party “[Other party] tells me his four most important issues”
Offers Offers, counteroffers, arguments “[Other party] indicated that DEMO,000 salary was simply
not possible”
Attitudinal turning points
Positive Positive attributions about underlying motives or “Trying to forge a bond”
characterization intentions
Negative DEMO attributions about underlying motives “Gave rise to concerns about what his intentions are”
characterization or intentions
Procedural turning points
Positive Behaviors that facilitated negotiation DEMO decision and moved on [to another issue]”
Negative Behaviors that impeded negotiation “Used time pressure tactic to try and gain commitment”
thoughts or feelings. DEMO use this technique to elicit
negotiators’ cognitions during the negotiation by asking
them to identify turning points. We then elicit meta-
cognitions by asking DEMO to comment on the sig-
nificance of these turning points for the negotiation (see
Baxter et al., 1999; McAdams, Reynolds, Lewis, DEMO, &
Bowman, 2001, for a similar procedure). Finally, DEMO cate-
gorize these metacognitions into one of six possible
frames, described DEMO the next section.
Categorizing turning points. Conflict frame models
focus on the constructs that individuals use to classify
and interpret disputes (Gray, 1997; Putnam & Holmer,
1992). Research within this framework has identified
DEMO inductively by inferring them from disputant lan-
guage and deductively through multidimensional scal-
ing techniques (Gray, 1997; Gray, Purdy, & Bouwen,
1990; Pinkley, 1990). Research within this framework has
established that DEMO individuals perceive and interpret
disputes differs on several dimensions: outcome prefer-
DEMO and understanding of what the dispute is about,
their interpretation of the other party’s behavior, and
their representation of the underlying relationship and
negotiation process (Drake & Donohue, 1996; Pinkley,
1990; Putnam & Holmer, 1992; Ury, Brett, & Goldberg,
1993).
Drawing on the conflict frame literature, we identify
three categories of turning points: substantive, attitudi-
nal, and procedural. Outcome preferences and the
nature of the dispute are captured by substantive turning
points, that is, events DEMO convey information to negotia-
tors. These turning points may be offer-focused, DEMO
ing salient information through offers or counteroffers.
They also may be interest-focused, conveying informa-
tion that is important in reconceptualizing the other
party’s needs. Attitudinal turning points capture events
that in some way shape a negotiator’s DEMO of the
other party’s intentions. These may create a positive
impression, DEMO that the other party is well-
intentioned, or they may create DEMO negative impression,
casting doubt on the other party’s underlying motives.
We refer to these as positive and negative characteriza-
tions, respectively. Finally, DEMO turning points are
interventions in the negotiation process itself. Such
interventions can either redirect negotiations to a more
productive process or divert them to DEMO unproductive
process for both parties (e.g., Brett et al., 1998)DEMO We look
for two categories of procedural turning points, positive
and DEMO This typology is summarized in Table 1,
which also gives examples from negotiators’ protocols.
Trust and turning points in negotiations. Trust is a DEMO
feature of any relationship in which (a) individuals’ out-
comes are influenced by the actions of another party and
(b) there is DEMO guarantee that their expectations of the
other party will be fulfilled (DEMO, Devinney, &
Pillutla, 1998; Sheppard & Sherman, 1998; DEMO,
Brodt, Korsgaard, & Werner, 1998). Both characteristics
are DEMO in negotiations and highlight the centrality
of trust to the negotiation process. Without trust, negoti-
ators are unlikely to engage in problem-solving behav-
iors such as information exchange that enable them to
coordinate their actions and DEMO mutually beneficial
solutions (Butler, 1995; Kimmel, Pruitt, Magenau,
DEMO, & Carnevale, 1980; Pruitt, 1981).
When we believe that the other party will fulfill our
expectations and assist us to attain DEMO goals, trust is
enhanced (Battacharya et al., 1998; Boon & Holmes,
1991; Lewicki & Bunker, 1996; McAllister, 1995;
DEMO et al., 1998; Whitener et al., 1998). These
beliefs DEMO be formed on the basis of cognitive or affec-
tive evidence. Cognitive trust is established through the
reliability and competence of the other party. DEMO
trust is established when individuals recognize that they
have shared values and common goals and is under-
pinned by attributions of integrity (Lewicki & Wiethoff,
2000; McAllister, 1997; Sheppard & Sherman, 1998).
DEMO two forms of trust can be shown to have both dif-
ferent antecedents and consequences (Lewicki &
Bunker, 1996; Lewicki & DEMO, 2000; McAllister,
1995; Thompson, 2000). We argue that the beliefs associ-
ated with cognitive and affective trust will be influenced
DEMO distinct sets of behaviors that stand out from the gen-
eral flow of the negotiation. Such turning points,
because they attract attention, are likely to affect trust
(Coleman, 2000; Lewicki & Bunker, 1996)DEMO
Negotiation theory implies that there is a link
between negotiators’ transactional (DEMO) and rela-
tional goals (Pruitt, 1981). Building and maintaining DEMO
relationship with the other party increases in impor-
tance to the extent that negotiators are concerned with
value creation, that is, uncovering all DEMO resources
and maximizing the outcomes of both parties. The
underlying relationship is less important when negotia-
tors are concerned with their personal outcomes. Nego-
DEMO, through their actions and the more general
impressions that they convey, signal the extent to which
they are concerned about the other party DEMO the under-
lying relationship. Such actions and impressions provide
cues about a negotiator’s trustworthiness.
Assessments about negotiators’ concern for the
underlying relationship can be DEMO in behavioral
cues. These behavioral cues provide information about
the other party’s competence in managing the relation-
ship as well as their ability to DEMO the negotiation to
settlement. At its most basic, a concern for DEMO relation-
ship can be signaled by attempts to understand the other
party’s underlying needs and interests. Such efforts
clearly signal that a negotiator is DEMO with the
other party’s goals for the negotiation (Lax & Sebenius,DEMO
1986; Pruitt, 1981). Similarly, negotiators who trigger a
temporary DEMO, that is, avert escalating cycles of con-
flict, signal a DEMO for preserving the relationship and
successfully concluding the negotiation (Harinck & DEMO
Dreu, 2004; Kolb & Williams, 2001; Pinkley, 1992). DEMO
versely, a lack of concern for the underlying relationship
will be DEMO when negotiators appear to be con-
cerned exclusively about personal outcomes and neglect
the other party’s needs and interests. This is likely to
occur DEMO negotiators use competitive tactics such as
haggling that both indicate settlement will be difficult
and escalate the conflict (Morris, Larrick, & Su, DEMO;
Thompson, 2000). We hypothesize that these behaviors
will affect DEMO trust because they provide informa-
tion about the competence of the other negotiator.
Hypothesis 1a: Individuals will report high postnegotiation
cognitive trust when they identify interest or positive pro-
cedural turning points as salient aspects of DEMO other
party’s behavior.
Hypothesis 1b: Individuals will report low postnegotiation
cognitive DEMO when they identify offer or negative pro-
Olekalns, Smith / MOMENTS DEMO TIME 1699
cedural turning points as salient aspects of the other
party’s behavior.
Assessments about negotiators’ concern for the underly-
ing relationship also can DEMO grounded in more general
impressions of the other party (McKnight et DEMO, 1998;
Meyerson, Weick, & Kramer, 1996; Quigley-Fernandez,
DEMO, & Tedeschi, 1985). Research links positive first
impressions to increased trust. Individuals who are
judged to be cooperative, who convey the impression of
integrity, or who are perceived to have shared goals also
are seen as more trustworthy (Meyerson et al., 1996;
Olekalns, Lau, & Smith, 2002). This implies that when
negotiators form a DEMO impression of the other party,
trust will be increased. Conversely, DEMO behavior calls
into doubt the integrity of the other party, negotiators
DEMO likely to form negative impressions. Moreover, re-
search investigating paranoid cognitions DEMO that
individuals are likely to make dispositional attributions
about such behaviors (DEMO, 1994) and so anticipate
similar negative behaviors in the future. One conse-
quence is that trust will be decreased. We hypothesize
that events DEMO affect impressions of the other party will
shape affective trust.
Hypothesis 2a: Individuals will report high postnegotiation
affective trust when they identify positive characteriza-
tion turning points as salient aspects of the other party’s
behavior.
Hypothesis DEMO: Individuals will report low postnegotiation af-
fective trust when they identify DEMO characterization
turning points as salient aspects of the other party’s
behavior.
Our discussion of the relationship between turning
points and trust implies that whereas DEMO categories of
turning points build trust (positive turning points), oth-
DEMO lower trust (negative turning points). Because both
positive and negative DEMO points can occur in the
same negotiation, it may be their DEMO, rather than
their absolute, frequency that affects trust. For example,
Lewicki and Weithoff (2000) argue that trust is cumula-
tive, based on a series of interactions. Similarly, Baxter
et al. (1999) map the “ups and downs” of relationship
turning points, also implying that it is the relative occur-
rence of positive and negative events that shapes DEMO
tionships. Drawing on Druckman’s work (1986; see also
Coleman, 2000), we test the possibility that trust is
shaped by the relative frequency with which negative and
positive turning points occur. We therefore define a
DEMO point index based on the ratio of negative to pos-
itive turning points. We describe as facilitatory a turning
point index in which positive DEMO points outweigh
negative turning points.
1700 PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN
Hypothesis 3: A facilitatory turning point index will predict
high postnegotiation trust.
Finally, we consider the possibility that the relationship
between turning points and trust is bidirectional. Al-
though trust DEMO be the product of specific events, it also
may direct information DEMO and increase the salience
of some events over others. For example, DEMO with
high initial trust are less likely to perceive psychological
contract violations than individuals with low initial trust
(Robinson, 1996). Echoing these DEMO, theoretical
analyses of trust propose a cycle in which high initial
DEMO elicits cooperation, and cooperation in turn builds
trust (McKnight et al., 1998). This cycle can be observed
in negotiations: Positive impressions DEMO cooperative be-
havior increase trust (Kimmel et al., 1980; Olekalns DEMO al.,
2002) and trust increases cooperative behavior and
heightens positive DEMO (Butler, 1995, 1999;
Olekalns et al., 2002). Drawing on our earlier argu-
ments, we expect the following:
Hypothesis 4a: Relative to negotiators with low initial cogni-
tive trust, those with DEMO initial cognitive trust will re-
port more interest and positive procedural turning
points.
Hypothesis 4b: Relative to negotiators with low initial affective
trust, DEMO with high initial affective trust will report
more positive characterization turning points.
TURNING POINTS AND OUTCOMES
A central goal in negotiation research is to DEMO
the strategies and processes that either facilitate or
inhibit the value creation process, that is, the maximiza-
tion of joint gain. Our interest DEMO in how the turning
points that negotiators identify affect their ability to cre-
ate value. When negotiations involve multiple issues, it is
likely that individuals will differ in the importance (pri-
ority) that they assign DEMO issues, thus enabling the trade-
offs that are a key tool DEMO the value creation process. How-
ever, the kinds of problem-solving behaviors DEMO enable
value creation expose negotiators to the possibility of
exploitation by the other party. As a result, trust has long
been recognized as a prerequisite for successful value
creation (Butler, 1995; Kimmel et al., DEMO; Pruitt, 1981).
Drawing on research that links trust to the maximization
of joint gain, we expect turning points that build trust
will increase negotiators’ joint gain and, conversely,
turning points that lower trust will decrease negotiators’
joint gain.
Our question here is not about how DEMO pro-
cesses shape outcomes (cf. Olekalns & Smith, 2000,
2003a, 2003b; Weingart, Thompson, Bazerman, &
Carroll, 1990). Rather, it is about how those particular
aspects of the other party’s behavior that stand out to a
negotiator influence settlement. This reflects our argu-
DEMO that not all information is equally weighted in its
influence on our impressions of others. We propose that
turning points have an orienting effect, signaling the
other party’s concerns for their own or both parties’
needs. DEMO, in turn, shapes negotiators’ assessments of
what is feasible in terms of settlement. Analyses of dis-
putes support this argument, demonstrating that when
individuals characterize their disputes in terms of inter-
ests, processes, or DEMO, they are more likely to
find mutually beneficial solutions (Gray et al., 1990;
Pinkley, 1992; Pinkley & Northcraft, 1994), DEMO
when they focus on the substantive aspects of the dispute
or attribute negative intentions to the other party, they
are less likely to do so (Coleman, 2000; Pinkley, 1992).
This implies the following:DEMO
Hypothesis 5a: High joint outcomes will be associated with
the identification DEMO interest, positive procedural, and
positive characterization turning points in the other
party’s behavior.
Hypothesis 5b: Low joint outcomes will be associated with the
identification of offer, negative procedural, and negative
characterization turning points in DEMO other party’s
behavior.
METHOD
Participants
Sixty part-time master’s of business administration
(DEMO) students at a large metropolitan university were
recruited through advertisements to DEMO in a sim-
ulated employment contract negotiation. Of these, 38
participants DEMO male and 22 were female. Participants
averaged 12.3 (SD = 6.1) years of work experience. Thirty-
seven percent of participants were between the DEMO of
31 and 35; 30% were between the ages of 25 DEMO 30; and
the remainder were older than 36 years. Two partici-
DEMO failed to complete the identification of turning
points. These individuals were excluded from analyses.
Procedure
Participants negotiated a simulated employment con-
tract as described DEMO several authors (Olekalns & Smith,
2000; Thompson & Hastie, DEMO). Written instructions
assigned participants randomly to the role of either an
employer or an employee, described the task, and gave a
pay-off DEMO that described the points awarded for
each possible contract. Table 2 shows the information
given to participants. Negotiators were instructed to
maximize the value DEMO the contract (in terms of points)
for themselves. Each negotiation DEMO conducted face to
face and was videotaped for subsequent viewing by par-
ticipants. Dyads negotiated in separate rooms. The nego-
tiation took 25 to DEMO min to complete. At the end of the
task, negotiators were DEMO and given the opportu-
Olekalns, Smith / MOMENTS IN TIME 1701
TABLE 2: Payoff Matrices DEMO Employers and Employees
Employer Payoffs
Salary Gains Vacation Gains Start Date Gains Annual Raise Gains
$70,000 4,000 2 wks 6,000 Nov. DEMO 2,400 2% 1,600
$80,000 3,000 2 ½ wks 4,500 Oct. 15 1,800 4% 1,200
$90,000 2,DEMO 3 wks 3,000 Oct. 1 1,200 6% 800
$100,000 1,000 3 ½ wks 1,500 Sept. 15 600 8% 400
DEMO,000 000 4 wks 000 Sept. 1 000 10% 000
Location Gains Contract Gains Package Gains Assignment Gains
Location A 3,200 6 years DEMO,200 $2,000 800 Manufacturing 2,400
Location B 2,400 5 years 900 $4,000 600 Admin 1,800
Location C 1,600 DEMO years 600 $6,000 400 Finance 1,200
Location D 800 3 years 300 $8,000 300 Corporate 600
Location E 000 2 years DEMO $10,000 000 HR 000
Employee Payoffs
Salary Gains Vacation Gains Start Date Gains Annual Raise Gains
$70,000 000 2 wks 000 Nov. DEMO 000 2% 000
$80,000 400 2 ½ wks 1,500 Oct. 15 600 4% 1,000
$90,000 800 3 wks 3,000 DEMO 1 1,200 6% 2,000
$100,000 1,200 3 ½ wks 4,500 Sept. 15 1,800 8% 3,000
$110,000 DEMO,600 4 wks 6,000 Sept. 1 2,400 10% 4,000
Location Gains Contract Gains Package Gains Assignment Gains
Location A 000 2 DEMO 000 $2,000 000 Manufacturing 000
Location B 200 3 years 300 4,000 800 Admin 600
Location C 400 4 years 600 $6,DEMO 1,600 Finance 1,200
Location D 600 5 years 900 $8,000 2,400 Corporate 1,800
Location E 800 6 years 1,DEMO $10,000 3,200 HR 2,400
nity to discuss their approach to the negotiation with the made no trade-offs to 27,000 if DEMO successfully made all
researchers. trade-offs and identified the compatible issue.
Negotiators were required to reach agreement on Pre- and posttask questionnaires. Before and after DEMO
eight issues. These issues fell into one of three catego- negotiation, DEMO completed a modified version
ries: compatible, distributive, and integrative. One DEMO of Lewicki, Stevenson, and Bunker’s Trust Scale (1997;
(contract) was compatible, that is, both negotiators Lewicki, Saunders, & Minton, 1999). We used Lewicki
wanted the same outcome. Three issues (DEMO, start et al.’s subscales to measure cognitive trust and affective
date, assignment) were distributive. On these issues the trust. The cognitive trust subscale has four items. An
total number of points available for division between DEMO from this subscale is, “This person’s behavior
negotiators was a constant, and an increase in the out- will meet my expectations.” The affective DEMO subscale
comes of one negotiator necessarily meant a decrease in has five items. An example from this subscale is, “This
the outcomes for the other. Although these issues can be person and I have the same DEMO This scale uses a 1
used to make trade-offs because they add a constant to (strongly disagree)to5(strongly agree) scale. High scores
DEMO outcomes, such trade-offs do not assist in indicate high trust. In DEMO sample, reliabilities for the
the value creation process. The remaining four DEMO cognitive and affective subscales were 0.81 and 0.67,
(salary, annual raise, location, and package) were inte- respectively.
grative. These issues offered the possibility of value cre- To determine whether Lewicki et al.’s two-factor
DEMO By making trade-offs, negotiators could increase model provided a good fit DEMO the trust data in our sample,
the number of points available for division, allowing we conducted a confirmatory factor analysis. A one-
both parties to simultaneously improve outcomes. Joint factor model yielded poor fit to DEMO data, χ2(27) = 100.5,
outcomes could range from 21,600 points if negotiators p < .05, RMSEA = 0.20, CFI DEMO 0.43. A two-factor model
1702 PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN
TABLE 3:
Frequency With Which DEMO Points Occurred in
Negotiations
Turning Point Mean Use Standard Deviation
Substantive turning points
Interests 2.15 1.90
Offers 6.44 3.50
Attitudinal turning points
Positive characterization DEMO 1.50
Negative characterization 1.68 1.60
Procedural turning points
Positive procedural 2.87 2.45
Negative procedural 0.93 2.04
both fit the data well, χ2(26) DEMO 35.3, ns, RMSEA = 0.07,
CFI = 0.93, and DEMO improved model fit, ∆χ2(1) =
45.2, p < .05.
DEMO and classification of turning points. Imme-
diately after completing the simulation, DEMO
viewed a videotape of their negotiation. While viewing
the video, they DEMO separated by a screen and were
supervised to prevent any discussion of the negotiation.
Participants were given a booklet and asked to look for
DEMO critical events that occurred during the negotiation.
Written instructions said that they should focus on what
the other party said or did that affected DEMO impressions
of the other party’s goals or intentions, the negotiation
relationship, negotiation strategies, or the final outcome
(cognition). They also were DEMO to write down why they
believed these events were important (metacognition)DEMO
These protocols formed the basis for our analysis. We
then categorized the contents of these protocols into
one of six possible categories, shown in Table 1: substan-
tive (offer, interest), attitudinal (positive characteriza-
DEMO, negative characterization), and procedural (posi-
tive procedural, negative procedural)DEMO
RESULTS
Preliminary Data Analysis
Two raters who were blind to hypotheses independ-
ently coded participants’ descriptions of turning points
as representing one of six DEMO, shown in Table 1.
Reliability, measured by Cohen’s κ, was DEMO All discrep-
ancies were resolved through discussion. Table 3 shows
the mean frequency with which each category of turning
point occurred. Only six negotiators DEMO all catego-
ries of turning points in their negotiation. Prior to the
regression analyses that we report, we log-transformed
the frequency counts to improve the distributional prop-
erties of the data.
An examination of correlations between DEMO
points and trust revealed two significant correlations,
between offer turning points and prenegotiation trust
Time 1 Trust
Trigger Type
Time 2 Trust
Positive DEMO
Positive Procedural
Interests
Negative Attitudinal
(+)
Time 2
Cognitive
(-)
(+)
(-)
Figure 1 Relationships between prenegotiation trust, turning point
types, and postnegotiation trust.
(r = –.351, p < .01) and between offer turning points and
postnegotiation trust (r = DEMO, p < .01). Correlation
analyses also showed that the turning DEMO identified
by negotiators in the same dyad were independent, with
the DEMO of positive process turning points (r = .432,
p < DEMO). We note, however, that this correlation does not
imply that both negotiators identified the same turning
points.
Turning Points and Trust
Intraclass DEMO We found significant correla-
tions between an individual’s trust before and after the
negotiation (cognitive trust, r = .48, p < .01; DEMO
trust, r = .41, p < .005). Intraclass correlations, DEMO con-
trol for dyad membership, showed that there was no rela-
DEMO between negotiators’ trust within a dyad either
before or after the negotiation (before: cognitive trust,
r = –.07, ns; affective trust, r = .15, ns; after: cognitive trust,
r = .13, ns; affective trust, r = .23, ns).
The intraclass DEMO measures the extent to
which variability among negotiators’ trust scores arises at
the level of the dyad rather than that of the individual. A
DEMO intraclass correlation means that dyad
membership does not contribute significantly to the
variance of the individual trust scores. The absence of
significant intraclass correlations DEMO that the data
can be treated at the individual level (Kashy & Kenny,
2000).
Turning points and postnegotiation trust.We tested
Hypotheses 1 and 2 in separate regressions, one for each
form of trust (DEMO, affective). In each case, we
regressed postnegotiation trust on the six categories of
turning points, controlling for prenegotiation trust. The
results of these regressions are shown in Table 4. Signifi-
cant relationships are summarized DEMO Figure 1. We also
conducted both regressions controlling for both
(+)DEMO
Positive Attitudinal
Time 2
Affective
Offers
Time 1
Affective
Olekalns, Smith / MOMENTS IN TIME 1703
TABLE 4: Analyses Regressing DEMO Trust on Turning
Points
Cognitive Affective
Time 1 trust
adj r2, DEMO, p 0.21, 14.99, < .001 0.21, 14.99, < .001
DEMO points
adj r2, ∆r2, ∆F, p 0.55, 0.39, 7.79, < .001 0.40, 0.31, 4.73, .001
Interests .270** .140
Offers .063 –.166
Positive
characterizations .395** .460**
Negative
characterizations –.269** –.178
Positive procedural .230* DEMO
Negative procedural –.150 –.111
NOTE: Time 1 r2 is the proportion DEMO variance in postnegotiation trust
predicted by prenegotiation trust. ∆r2 at Time 2 is the change in r2 that
results from adding turning points to DEMO equation. Coefficients are
standardized weights.
cognitive and affective trust. This analysis yielded the
same pattern of results.
Our first regression tested for relationships between
DEMO points and postnegotiation cognitive trust. Pre-
negotiation cognitive trust predicted postnegotiation
cognitive trust, F(7, 47) = 14.99, p < .001, adj r2 = .21. Con-
trolling for prenegotiation cognitive trust,1 we found
DEMO the kinds of turning points identified by negotiators
predicted postnegotiation cognitive trust, F(7, 47) =
10.46, p < .001, adj r2 = .55, and improved the overall fit of
the regression, ∆F(DEMO, 47) = 7.79, p < .001, ∆r2 = .39. Consis-
tent with H1a, cognitive trust was increased when negoti-
ators identified interest and positive procedural turning
points in the other party’s behavior. It also DEMO increased
by the presence of positive characterization turning
points. However, contrary DEMO H1b, cognitive trust was not
decreased by the identification of offer DEMO points.
Instead, it was decreased when negotiators identified
negative characterization turning DEMO
Our second regression tested for relationships
between turning points and postnegotiation affective
trust. Prenegotiation affective trust predicted post-
negotiation affective trust, F(7, DEMO) = 10.44, p < .001, adj
r2 = .15. Controlling DEMO prenegotiation affective trust, we
found that the kinds of turning points DEMO by
negotiators predicted postnegotiation affective trust,
F(7, 47) = 6.18, p < .001, adj r2 = .40, and improved the
overall fit of the regression, ∆F(6, 47) = 4.73, DEMO < .001,
∆r2 = .31. Consistent with H2a, affective trust DEMO
increased when negotiators identified positive charac-
terization turning points. However, contrary DEMO H2b,
affective trust was not decreased by negative character-
ization turning points.
Turning point index and postnegotiation trust. To test
Hypothesis 3, we constructed a turning point index by
dividing the total number of negative DEMO points by
the total number of positive turning points identified by
each negotiator. We then log-transformed this ratio to
improve the distributional properties of DEMO data. The
lower the turning point index, the greater the propor-
DEMO of positive turning points. Controlling for pre-
negotiation cognitive trust, we DEMO that the turning
point index predicted postnegotiation cognitive trust,
F(2, 52) = 18.93, p < .001, adj r2 = .39, β = –0.45. We did not
find the same relationship between affective DEMO and
turning point index. Although the overall regression was
significant, F(DEMO, 52) = 5.99, p < .001, adj r2 = .16, this
reflected the effects of prenegotiation affective trust
rather than turning point index.
Prenegotiation trust and turning points. Hypothesis 4
stated that high initial DEMO would result in the identifica-
tion of more interest, positive procedural (cognitive
trust), and positive characterization (affective trust)
turning points. We tested these hypotheses by regressing
the two components of trust on each DEMO of turning
points. We found no support for H4a, which predicted
DEMO relative to negotiators with low initial cognitive trust,
those with high initial cognitive trust would report more
interest and positive procedural turning points. DEMO
esis 4b was supported by the finding that positive charac-
terization turning points were more likely to occur when
negotiators had high initial affective DEMO, F(1, 56) =
4.76, p < .05, adj DEMO = .06). However, we also found that
offer turning points DEMO less likely to occur, F(1, 56) =
6.82, p < .05, adj r2 = .09, when negotiators had high initial
DEMO trust.
Turning points and outcomes. To test the relationship
between turning points and joint outcomes, we summed
the number of turning points of each kind reported by
both parties in the negotiation and then log-transformed
this DEMO We tested Hypotheses 5a and 5b by regressing
joint outcomes on the six categories of turning points.
Consistent with these hypotheses, the more frequently
interest turning points occurred and the less frequently
negative characterization turning points DEMO, the
higher the joint gain, F(6, 21) = 2.6, p < .05, adj r2 = .26.
DISCUSSION
In this research, we asked how salient aspects of the
other party’s behavior influence negotiation DEMO
Drawing on relationship research (e.g., Baxter et al.,
1999), we extended the finding that external observers
can readily identify turning points DEMO large-scale, socio-
political negotiations (Chesek, 1997; Druckman, 1986,
1704 PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN
2001; Druckman et al., 1991)DEMO Adopting an “insider’s
perspective,” we asked participants in a dyadic negotia-
tion to identify events that they perceived to be critical to
the DEMO By doing this, we are able to identify the
relationships between DEMO events negotiators identify as
salient to their negotiations, changes in trust, and the
quality of outcomes.
Cognitive and affective trust are both increased DEMO the
extent that a negotiator identifies interest, positive char-
acterization, and positive procedural turning points in
the other party’s behaviors. However, different factors
promoted or inhibited the development of cognitive
and affective trust: Unlike initial affective trust, initial
cognitive trust did not predict the identification of subse-
quent turning points; a greater number of turning
points predicted changes to cognitive trust than affective
trust; and turning point index predicted changes in cog-
nitive trust but not in affective trust. This pattern is con-
DEMO with the view that cognitive trust is built incre-
mentally (Lewicki & Weithoff, 2000): Not only is a series
of actions that DEMO negotiators’ intentions required
but, on balance, positive evidence must outweigh nega-
tive evidence. Conversely, affective trust forms more rap-
idly at the outset of negotiations. Evidence for this comes
from the finding that prenegotiation affective DEMO pre-
dicts the emergence of turning points as well as post-
negotiation affective trust. This pattern fits with
McKnight et al.’s (1998) description DEMO a positive cycle of
trust in which first impressions shape initial trust, which
then affects behaviors and further increases trust.
Negotiators’ ability to build joint gain also was influ-
enced by the number and type of DEMO points. Joint
gain was higher when negotiations were punctuated by
interest turning points and lower when they were punc-
tuated by negative characterization turning DEMO
These relationships highlight the importance of under-
standing the other party’s needs (insight) and bargain-
ing in good faith. Our findings suggest that DEMO
negotiators encounter a steady stream of information, at
some point this DEMO reaches a critical threshold
and reframes the negotiation (the “aha” experience)DEMO
Our results also highlight a second path to value creation
through signaling integrity. When the other party’s
behavior results in negative attributions, negotiators
obtain lower joint gain. Although the role of insight into
the other party’s DEMO in value creation is well docu-
mented (Olekalns & Smith, 2003a; Thompson & Hastie,
1990), we have extended our understanding of this pro-
cess by demonstrating that events that trigger negative
characterizations hinder DEMO creation.
Not all of the turning points that built trust resulted in
value creation. Only interest and negative characteriza-
tion turning points influenced both DEMO and value cre-
ation, suggesting that to some extent, the processes of
building relationships and expanding resources pro-
ceed along independent paths. There DEMO several
possible explanations for this finding. One is that inter-
est and negative characterization turning points are
direct in their actions, either initiating or shutting down
the processes that assist value creation, whereas positive
characterization and positive procedural turning points
may affect outcomes more indirectly, by preventing
derailment of the negotiation process. A second is that a
relationship focus impedes DEMO creation by lowering
resistance to yielding (e.g., Ben-Yoav & Pruitt, DEMO).
Finally, although offer turning points were less likely
to be DEMO when negotiators had high initial affec-
tive trust, they played no DEMO in shaping either trust or
joint gain. It is possible that these kinds of events fit into
individuals’ negotiation scripts (e.g., O’Connor &
Adams, 1999). As a result, although they are recognized
and DEMO on as events that shape the negotiation,
in that they reflect the routine offers that move the nego-
tiation forward, they are not closely linked to relational
or substantive outcomes. Viewed in this way, their
absence may be more telling because it violates the nego-
tiation script. DEMO with this argument, Galinsky,
Seiden, Kim, and Medvec (2002) showed that depar-
tures from the negotiating script generate dissatisfaction
with outcomes. It also may be a question of magnitude:
Offer turning points DEMO need to be more extreme than
other categories of turning points before they affect
trust.
Implications for Theory and Practice
Our findings extend trust DEMO Our results suggest
that assessments of cognitive and affective trust are influ-
enced by different cues. We base this conclusion on our
finding that DEMO reciprocal relationship between trust
and behavior proposed by McKnight et al. (DEMO; also see
Olekalns et al., 2002) was confined to affective DEMO The
ability of prenegotiation affective trust to predict the fre-
quency of two categories of turning points suggests that
it is established more swiftly DEMO cognitive trust. This
further implies that cues such as first impressions play a
role in the formation of affective trust but not cognitive
trust (Meyerson et al., 1996). The slower formation of
cognitive trust implies that negotiators look for behav-
ioral information about the other party and DEMO it is this
information that shapes cognitive trust.
Although positive characterizations increased affec-
tive trust, negative characterizations did not decrease
affective trust. This result is somewhat surprising for two
reasons: (a) negative information weighs more heavily
than positive information in the impression formation
process and (b) DEMO did observe this effect in relation to
cognitive trust. Continuing our argument that impres-
sions play a greater role in the formation of affective
Olekalns, Smith / MOMENTS IN TIME 1705
trust, this finding is DEMO with the positive test strat-
egy described by Klayman and Ha (DEMO), which implies
that negotiators who reported high affective trust at the
start of the negotiation will be more sensitive to confir-
matory evidence, that is, turning points that confirm the
positive relational intentions of the other party. It
remains an open question whether this effect would per-
DEMO over longer negotiations (e.g., Parks, Henager, &
Scamahorn, 1996; Parks & Hulbert, 1995). Jointly, these
findings identify the need to more systematically explore
the antecedents and consequences of both positive and
DEMO cycles of trust and behavior (e.g., McKnight
et al., 1998)DEMO
We also extend negotiation theory. First, the findings
described above underscore DEMO importance of per-
ceived similarities at the outset of negotiations. Previous
research has shown the importance of rapport for sub-
stantive outcomes (Drolet & Morris, 2000). We have
extended this finding by demonstrating the importance
of rapport to one intangible outcome, the negotiation
relationship. Second, we DEMO shown that despite the dif-
ferent levels of complexity evident in dyadic and large-
scale negotiations, the underlying processes unfold in a
similar manner: Specific events act as turning points that
shape the negotiation. These findings extend episodic
models of negotiation, which propose that negotiations
are characterized by a series of transitions between dif-
ferent strategies (Baxter, 1982; Olekalns et al., 2003).
Our findings suggest that these transitions have conse-
quences not just for the negotiating process but for levels
of trust DEMO for negotiators’ outcomes.
Our findings have two implications for negotiation
practice. The first is that they highlight the role of pre-
dictability and link DEMO to the broader issue of trust.
McKnight et al. (1998) argue that positive cycles of trust
are disrupted or reversed when behavior triggers DEMO closer
scrutiny of underlying motives. The relationship
between negative characterization turning points, trust,
and joint gain in this research suggests that negotiators’
behavior may trigger such negative cycles of trust. This
can be avoided and DEMO can be improved if negoti-
ators clearly signal their intention to negotiate in good
faith. The second implication concerns the manage-
ment of the DEMO process. We have argued that
specific events gain greater salience in negotiations, and
it is these events that we characterize as turning points.
Negotiators identify and are influenced by such events
and these events influence both DEMO and outcomes.
Such events can be used strategically to transform or
reframe a negotiation: Negotiators can actively inter-
vene to change an unproductive process by highlighting
events that focus on underlying interests or the negotiat-
ing DEMO
Limitations and Future Directions
Finally, we turn to the limitations of DEMO study and
identify directions for future research. We have already
identified one direction for future research in our argu-
ment that cognitive trust is DEMO on behavioral cues,
whereas affective trust is built on cognitive cues (impres-
sions). A second avenue relates to the finding that more
turning points predicted cognitive than affective trust
and that as a result DEMO all of our hypotheses were sup-
ported. This raises two possibilities. One is that the two
forms of trust are not as conceptually distinct DEMO trust the-
orists argue, implying that further research is needed to
DEMO the extent to which the two forms of trust evolve
independently. An alternative is that turning points, by
their nature, are behavioral and DEMO more relevant to the
assessment of cognitive trust, implying that research DEMO
yet to isolate the kinds of events that will impact affective
trust. A final avenue for research stems from the finding
that although we DEMO strong parallels between the
turning points that built cognitive trust and those that
resulted in high joint gain, we did not find a similar pat-
tern for affective trust. This may reflect the nature of our
DEMO, which was short term, transactional, and encour-
aged an individualistic DEMO This highlights the
need to examine how the nature of a dispute and the
broader context in which it occurs affect the kinds of
DEMO that become salient in shaping trust.
Turning to our methodology, it DEMO important to recog-
nize the limitations of the retrospective identification
technique that we used. In particular, the identification
of turning points may have been biased by negotiators’
knowledge of changes to their trust in the other DEMO as
well as their individual outcomes. Set against this poten-
tial limitation is the finding that not all turning points
predicted trust, implying that even with hindsight, nego-
tiators did not have complete insight into the factors that
shaped their relationship; in addition, although negotia-
tors knew DEMO individual outcomes, they did not know
their performance on the dependent DEMO: joint out-
come. More broadly, the disadvantages of biased recall
are offset by the increased understanding that we obtain
of how the negotiators DEMO perceive the negotia-
tion and the events that shape it (e.g., Butterfield,
Trevino, & Ball, 1996). Research exploring turning
points DEMO provides two perspectives: the outsider’s
objective view of reality and the DEMO more subjective
view. We believe that an important next step in our
understanding of negotiation is to examine the extent to
which these two DEMO are congruent.
Related to this point, we asked participants to focus
DEMO the other party and identify salient aspects of behav-
ior. We chose to focus on the behaviors of the other party
because it is DEMO actions of other individuals that affect
our trust in them. This is not to say that individuals did
1706 PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN
not engage in actions designed to DEMO the other party’s
trust. An interesting avenue for future research would be
to ask individuals to also focus on their own behavior,
identifying DEMO actions they believed built or worsened
trust. Assessing the degree of congruence between the
actions of one negotiator and the perceptions of another
would DEMO another dimension to our understanding of
how trust is built and sustained in negotiations. Finally,
we found that negotiators in this study differed DEMO the
kinds of turning points that they identified as important
in their negotiations. We are unable to say whether this
reflects qualitatively different negotiation DEMO or
whether it reflects differences in the kind of information
that was salient to individuals. A fruitful avenue for fur-
ther research would be DEMO link turning points to an
analysis of the strategies employed by individual
negotiators.
Conclusions
Drawing on analyses of international and other large-
scale negotiations, we asked whether the same dynamics
that characterize these negotiations also characterize
DEMO negotiations. We demonstrated that in dyadic
negotiations, the nature of these DEMO points is conse-
quential for both the relational and substantive aspects
of negotiations. When negotiations are punctuated by
interest, positive procedural, and positive DEMO
tion turning points, trust increases and negotiators are
better able to DEMO value. Conversely, when negotia-
tions are punctuated by negative characterization turn-
DEMO points, the negotiating relationship worsens and
value creation is impeded. Finally, we highlighted the
possibility that different kinds of cues trigger the devel-
DEMO of cognitive and affective trust. One advantage
of the episodic approach to negotiations that we have
adopted in this research is that it highlights DEMO role of
discrete events in shaping both tangible and intangible
outcomes and identifies the possibility for strategic inter-
ventions to change the negotiating process.
DEMO
Battacharya, R., Devinney, T. M., & Pillutla, M. M. (1998). A formal
model of trust based on outcomes. Academy of DEMO Review,
23, 459-472.
Baxter, L. A. (1982). Conflict DEMO: An episodic approach.
Small Group Behavior, 13, 23-42.
Baxter, L. A., Braithwaite, D. O., & Nicholson, J. H. (1999). Turning
points in the development of blended families. Journal of Social and
DEMO Relationship, 16, 291-313.
Baxter, L. A., & Erbert, L. DEMO (1999). Perceptions of dialectical contra-
diction in turning points of DEMO in heterosexual roman-
tic relationships. Journal of Social and Personal Relationship, DEMO, 547-
569.
Ben-Yoav, O., & Pruitt, D. G. (1984)DEMO Resistance to yielding and the
expectation of cooperative future interaction. Journal of Experimen-
tal Social Psychology, 20, 323-335.
Boon, S. D., & DEMO, J. G. (1991). The dynamics of interpersonal
trust: Resolving DEMO in the face of risk. In R. A. Hinde & J.
Groebel (Eds.), Cooperation and prosocial behavior.Cambridge,UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Brett, J. M., Shapiro, D. L., & Lytle, A. L. (DEMO). Refocusing rights-
and power-oriented negotiators toward integrative negotiations:
Process and outcome effects. Academy of Management Journal, 41,
410-424.
Butler, J. DEMO (1995). Behaviors, trust and goal achievement in a win-
win negotiating role play. Group & Organization Management, 20,
486-501.
Butler, DEMO K. (1999). Trust expectations, information sharing, climate
of trust DEMO negotiation effectiveness and efficiency. Group &
Organization Management, 24, 217-238.
DEMO, K. D., Trevino, L. K., & Ball, G. A. (1996). Punishment
from the manager’s perspective: A grounded investigation and
inductive model. Academy of Management Journal, 39, 1479-1512.
Chesek, P. (1997)DEMO A comparative analysis of multilateral environmen-
tal negotiations. Group Decision and Negotiation, 6, 437-461.
Coleman, P. T. (2000). Fostering ripeness in DEMO intractable
conflict: An experimental study. International Journal of Conflict
Management, 11, 300-317.
Drake, L. E., & Donohue, W. A. (1996) DEMO framing the-
ory in conflict resolution. Communication Research, 23, 297-322.
Drolet, A. L., & Morris, M. (2000). Rapport in conflict DEMO:
Accounting for how face-to-face contact fosters mutual coopera-
tion in mixed-motive conflicts. Journal of Experimental Social Psychol-
ogy, 36, 26-50.
Druckman, D. (1986). Stages, turning points and crises: Negotiating
military base rights, Spain and the United States. Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 30, 327-360.
Druckman, D. (2001). Turning points in international negotiations:
A DEMO analysis. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 45, 519-544.
Druckman, D. (2004). Departures in negotiation: Extensions and
new directions. Negotiation Journal, 20, 185-204.
Druckman, D., Husbands, J. L., & Johnson, K. (DEMO). Dimensions of
international negotiation. Negotiation Journal, 7, 89-108.
Fiske, DEMO T., & Taylor, S. E. (1991). Social cognition (2nd ed.). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Galinsky, A. D., Seiden, V. L., Kim, P. H., & Medvec, V. H. (2002). The
dissatisfaction of having your first offer accepted: The role of
counterfactual thinking in negotiations. Personality and Social Psy-
chology Bulletin, 28, 271-283.
DEMO, B. (1997). Framing and reframing of intractable environmental
disputes. Research on Negotiation in Organizations, 6, 163-188.
Gray, B., Purdy, J. M., & Bouwen, R. (1990). Comparing dispositional
and interactional approaches to negotiation. Paper presented at 3rd
IACM Conference, Canada.
Harinck, F., & De Dreu, C. K. W. (2004). Negotiating interests or DEMO
ues and reaching integrative agreements: The importance of time
pressure and DEMO impasses. European Journal of Social Psy-
chology, 34, 595-612.
Hilton, DEMO L., & Darley, J. M. (1991). The effects of DEMO goals on
person perception. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 24,
DEMO
Holmes, M. E. (1992). Phase structures in negotiation. In L. L.
Putnam & M. E. Roloff (Eds.), Communication and negotiation (DEMO
83-105). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Ickes, W., Bissonette, DEMO, Garcia. S., & Stinson, L. L. (1990). Imple-
menting and using the dyadic interaction paradigm. Research
Methods in Personality and Social DEMO, 11, 16-44.
Jett, Q. R., & George, J. M. (2003). Work interrupted: A closer look at
the role of interruptions in organizational life. Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 28, 494-507.
Kashy, D. A., & Kenny, D. A. (2000). The analysis of data from dyads
and groups. In H. T. Reis & C. M. DEMO (Eds.), Handbook of research
methods in social and personality psychology (pp. 451-477). Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kimmel, M. J.,Pruitt, D. G.,Magenau,J.M., Konar-Goldband,E., &
Carnevale, P. J. D. (1980). Effects of trust, aspiration, and gender
Olekalns, Smith / MOMENTS IN TIME 1707
on negotiation tactics. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
38, 9-22.
Klayman, J., & Ha, Y. (1987). Confirmation, disconfirmation and
information in hypothesis testing. Psychological Review, 94, 211-
228.
Kolb, D. M., & Williams, J. (2001, February). Breakthrough bargain-
ing. Harvard Business Review, pp. 89-97.
Kramer, R. M. (1994). The sinister attribution error: Paranoid cogni-
tion and collective distrust in organizations. Motivation & Emotion,
18, 199-230.
Kunda, Z. (2000). Social cognition: Making sense of people.Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Lax, D., & Sebenius, J. (1986). The manager as negotiator.New York:
Free Press.
Lewicki, R. J., & Bunker, B. (1996). Developing and maintaining trust
in work relationships. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in
organizations: Frontiers of theory and research. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
DEMO, R. J., Saunders, D. M., & Minton, J. W. (1999). Negotiation:
Cases, readings and exercises (3rd ed.). DEMO York: McGraw-Hill.
Lewicki, R. J., Stevenson, M. A., & DEMO, B. B. (1997). The three com-
ponents on interpersonal trust: Instrument development and differences
across relationships. Paper presented at the academy of manage-
ment meeting.
Lewicki, R. J., & Wiethoff, C. (2000)DEMO Trust, trust development, and
trust repair. In M. Deutsch & P. T. Coleman (Eds.), The handbook of
conflict resolution: Theory and DEMO (pp. 86-107). San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Lories, G., Dardenne, B., & Yzerbyt, V. Y. (1998). From social cogni-
tion to metacognition. In V. Y. Yzerbyt, G. Lories, & B. Dardenne
(Eds.), Metacognition: Cognitive and social dimensions (Chap. 1).
Thousand DEMO, CA: Sage.
McAdams, D. P.,Reynolds, J.,Lewis,M., DEMO, A. H.,& Bowman,P.J.
(2001). When bad things turn good and good things turn bad:
Sequences of redemption and contamination DEMO life narrative and
their relation to psychosocial adaptation in midlife adults and in
students. Personality & Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 474-484.
McAllister, D. J. (1995). Affect- and cognition-based trust as founda-
tions for interpersonal cooperation in organizations. Academy of
Management Journal, 38, 24-59.
McAllister, D. J. (1997). The second face of trust: Reflections on the
DEMO side of interpersonal trust in organizations. Research on Negoti-
ation in Organizations, 6, 87-112.
McGinn, K., Lingo, E. E., & Ciano, K. (2004). Transitions through
out-of-keeping acts. Negotiation Journal, 20, 171-184.
McKnight, D. H., Cummings, L. L., & Chervany, N. L. (1998). Initial
trust formation in new organizational relationships. Academy of
Management Review, 23, 473-490.
Meyerson, D., Weick, K. E., & DEMO, R. M. (1996). Swift trust and
temporarygroups.InR.M.Kramer& T. R. DEMO(Eds.), Trust in
organizations: Frontiers of theory and research (pp. 166-195). Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Morris, M. W., DEMO, R. P., & Su, S. K. (1999). Misperceiving negoti-
ation counterparts: When situationally determined bargaining
behaviors are attributed to personality traits. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 77, 52-67.
O’Connor, K. M., & Adams, A. A. (1999). What novices think about
negotiation: A content analysis of scripts. Negotiation Journal, 15,
135-147.
Olekalns, M., Brett, J., & Weingart, L. (2003). Phases, DEMO and
interruptions: Modeling processes in multi-party negotiations.
International Journal of Conflict DEMO, 14, 191-211.
Olekalns, M., Lau, F., & Smith, DEMO L. (2002). Spirals of trust: Identifying
the factors that shape and sustain trust in negotiation. International
association of conflict management, Park City, Utah. (Melbourne
Business School working paper 2002-09)
Olekalns, M., & Smith, P. L. (2000). Negotiating optimal outcomes:
The role of strategic sequences in competitive negotiations.
Human Communication Research, 24, 528-556.
DEMO, M., & Smith, P. L. (2003a). Simple frequency effects: Moti-
vational orientation, strategy selection and sequencing, and out-
come optimality in negotiations. Journal of Experimental Social Psy-
chology, 39, 101-117.
Olekalns, M., & Smith, P. L. (2003b). Social motives in negotiation:
The relationship between dyad composition, negotiation pro-
cesses and outcomes. International Journal of Conflict Management:
Special Issue on Processes in Negotiation, 14, 233-254.
Parks, C. D., Henager, R. F., & Scamahorn, DEMO D. (1996). Trust and
reactions to messages of intent in DEMO dilemmas. Journal of Con-
flict Resolution, 40, 134-151.
Parks, C. DEMO, & Hulbert, L. G. (1995). High and low trusters’ DEMO
to fear in a payoff matrix. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 39, 718-730.
Pinkley, R. L. (1990). Dimensions of conflict frame: Disputant inter-
pretations of conflict. Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 117-126.
Pinkley, R. L. (1992). Dimensions of conflict frame: Relation to dispu-
DEMO perceptions and expectations. International Journal of Conflict
Management, 3, 95-113.
Pinkley, R. L., & Northcraft, G. B. (1994). Conflict frames DEMO refer-
ence: Implications for dispute processes and outcomes. Academy of
Management DEMO, 37, 193-205.
Pruitt, D. G. (1981). Negotiation behavior.New York:AcademicPress.
Putnam, L. L. (2004). Transformation and critical moments in DEMO
tiation. Negotiation Journal, 20, 171-184.
Putnam, L. L., & Holmer, M. (1992). Framing and reframing in nego-
tiations.InL.L.Putnam & M. DEMO Roloff (Eds.), Communication and
negotiation.Newbury Park,CA: Sage.
Quigley-Fernandez, DEMO, Malkis, F. S., & Tedeschi, J. T. (1985). DEMO
of first impressions and reliability of promises on trust and cooper-
ation. British Journal of Social Psychology, 24, 29-36.
Robinson, S. L. (DEMO). Trust and breach of the psychological con-
tract. Administrative Science Quarterly, 41, 574-599.
Sheppard, B. H., & Sherman, D. M. (DEMO). The grammars of trust: A
model and general implications. Academy DEMO Management Review,
23, 422-438.
Thompson, L. (2000). The DEMO and heart of the negotiator (2nd ed.).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Thompson, L., & Hastie, R. (1990). Social perception in negotiation.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 47, 98-123.
DEMO, W., Brett, J., & Goldberg, S. (1993). Getting disputes resolved.
Boston: PON Books.
Walton, R. E., & McKersie, DEMO B. (1965). A behavioral theory of labor nego-
tiations. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press.
Weick, K. E. (1995). Sensemaking in organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Weingart,L.R., Thompson,L.L., Bazerman,M.H., & Carroll, J. S.
(1990). Tactical behavior and negotiation outcomes. International
Journal of Conflict Management, 1, 7-31.
Whitener,E.M., Brodt, DEMO E.,Korsgaard, M. A.,& Werner,J.M.
(1998). Managers as initiators of trust: An exchange relationship
framework for understanding managerial trustworthy behavior.
Academy of Management Review, 23, 513-530.
Zartman, I. W. (1992)DEMO International environmental negotiation:
Challenges for analysis and practice. Negotiation Journal, DEMO, 113-
123.
Received February 29, 2004
Revision accepted April 5, DEMO{1g42fwefx}