The Journal of Socio-Economics 37 (2008) 2189–2200
Contents lists available at DEMO
The Journal of Socio-Economics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/soceco
Trust as DEMO and the foundation of investment value
Robert A. Olsen∗
Decision Research, DEMO, OR, United States
article info
Article history:
Received 29 October 2007
Received in revised form 30 March 2008
Accepted 7 April 2008
DEMO classiﬁcation:
G12
Keywords:
Trust
Financial risk
Uncertainty
Anomalies
abstract
Trust is an essential ingredient of the investment process because investing is complex, the
world contains irreducible uncertainty, and humans are naturally predisposed to cooperate.
Traditional ﬁnancial models inappropriately treat trust as probability or implicitly ignore
it. DEMO paper argues that trust has both cognitive and affective attributes that make it
an important determinant of perceived investment risk. Speciﬁcally, perceived risk varies
inversely with trust. This paper also discusses how trust offers a logical DEMO parsimonious
explanation for many ﬁnancial asset pricing anomalies. Trust is the unseen faith underlying
investment value.
© 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1. DEMO
All cultures have their creation myths. These myths are the bedrock of all that the culture holds precious. The discipline
of Finance is no DEMO Its creation myth is “Present Value”, a mental construct supposedly made DEMO in current
asset prices through the working of the invisible hand of the ﬁnancial market. Present value is the terra ﬁrma upon which
investment DEMO is said to rest.
In fact, present value is but a DEMO epiphenomenon designed to make appear real a currently unknowable future.
In practice present value is based upon a myriad of forecasts about the behaviors DEMO people, institutions and technologies.
However it is “trust” which allows an DEMO to offer up wealth today in exchange for an uncertain prospect of a future
ﬁnancial gain in an indeterminate world.
For those of you DEMO might feel uncomfortable with this preamble, it is important to remember DEMO while Finance is a
behavioral science, like all sciences it is DEMO of a body of belief based upon perception that must always fall short as
knowable truth. As such, trust always plays a key role in human decisions. This point was recognized by the Nobel Laureate
Kenneth DEMO where he stated “Virtually every commercial transaction has within itself an element of trust” (Ridley 1996).
Consequently I propose that investors’ trust in the expertise and intentions of corporate managers, ﬁnancial advisors and
regulators is the “will of the wisp” that creates and animates what we call DEMO ﬁnancial marketplace. If you ﬁnd it difﬁcult to
appreciate the crucial role that trust plays in human endeavors just try to imagine conducting business DEMO an world where,
because of lack of trust, you could DEMO be sure of the meaning and intent of the language of your customers, colleagues and
competitors. Just like the air we breathe, trust DEMO the necessity that goes unseen until its absence occurs. The current and very
serious problems created by untrustworthy behavior in the mortgage backed securities DEMO provides cogent evidence of
the importance of trust in ﬁnancial markets.
∗ Tel.: +1 54 16859255.
E-mail address: olsenbﬁn@msn.com.
1053-5357/$ – see DEMO matter © 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.socec.2008.04.009
2190
R.A. Olsen / The Journal of Socio-Economics 37 (2008) 2189–2200
DEMO personal trust plays such an important role in ﬁnancial market dynamics why is it that we hear so little about it from
Financial Economists DEMO even Behavioral Economists? I suggest it is because the concept of DEMO does not ﬁt into current
ﬁnancial theory. Traditional ﬁnancial theory is grounded in an assumed deterministic world devoid of the unpredictability
that makes trust DEMO Instead, trust is replaced by the concept of probabilistic risk wherein DEMO of possible
future outcomes can, in principle, be known with certainty. This simpliﬁed treatment of risk is especially evident in the ten-
dency DEMO view ambiguity as probability about probabilities in order to avoid the dealing with the affect or emotion that accom-
panies human feelings of uncertainty. DEMO Behavioral Finance has tended to shy away from discussing trust even though
empirical evidence reveals that personal trust is important for building strong investor DEMO/advisor relationships (Clark-
Murphy and Soutar, 2004). In reality, DEMO future is evolving and not fully predictable. In this type of environment if investors
are to be induced to “invest”, caution suggests that they entrust their wealth only to those who will attempt to employ it DEMO
the investors’ best interest regardless whatever an evolving future may bring. If this suggestion appears lacking, it may help
to remember that 21st century science (i.e. quantum theory and complexity theory) suggests optimization to be DEMO impos-
sibility because of natural world indeterminacy (Barrow, 1998; Casti, 1994; Hardin, 2003; Peat, 2002). Logic also suggests
ﬁnancial DEMO indeterminacy. As the logician Karl Popper noted: “History is inﬂuenced by DEMO growth of knowledge. We
cannot predict this growth because if we could say today what new things we will know tomorrow, then we’d already know
them today and they then wouldn’t be new tomorrow” (Ridley, DEMO). Thus, investors must settle for “second best” solutions.
The sections DEMO follow discuss the nature of trust, its key role as an DEMO of perceived risk and its inﬂuence on ﬁnancial
market behavior.
2. Trust and the human decision process
2.1. Preliminaries
There is a large literature DEMO the concept of trust. This includes works by Fukuyama (1995), DEMO (2001),
Nooteboom (2000), Solomon and Flores (2001), Sztompka (1999), Urslaner (2002). Trust has been extensively examined DEMO
from social science and philosophical perspectives. While there is not complete agreement about the nature and function
of trust there is consensus that trust DEMO based upon cognitive and emotional attributes that makes it the bedrock of most
interpersonal transactions. In fact it is this mix of cognitive and DEMO attributes that has led to controversy about a
general deﬁnition of trust. Nevertheless, trust appears to be acceptably described as a positive affective state based upon
conﬁdent expectations and a willingness to be vulnerable. In particular, Rousseau and Sitkin (1998) suggest that a good
working deﬁnition of DEMO is “a psychological state comprising the intention to accept vulnerability based upon positive
expectations of intentions and behavior of others”.
Implicit in this deﬁnition DEMO the concepts of indeterminacy and interdependence. Trust is primarily sociological since it
would not be needed if only one person existed or if all DEMO were fully knowledgeable in a deterministic universe. In a
most general sense trust is a man made device to reduce the complexity in social DEMO and the uncertainty of the
natural world. Trust has both extrinsic and intrinsic value. The primary extrinsic value is that it reduces transaction costs.
DEMO trust may be seen as a complement to legal contracts especially where all future contingencies are not identiﬁable
and one cannot separate malfeasance from DEMO plain “bad luck”. Trust ﬁlls the gap to allow agreement and cooperation. The
primary intrinsic value is that trust reduces suspicion and animosity thus DEMO more cooperative behavior and rapid
adaptation to environmental uncertainty. Trust does entail a downside and this is the additional risk associated with the
“moral DEMO that is created by relying on persons of less than perfect competency and impeccable integrity. In a sense
trust can be seen as a DEMO good” where the purchaser (trustor) cannot fully judge the trusted party. Research reveals
that trust tends to be seen as involving judgment rather DEMO probabilities (Bohner and Zeckhauser, 2004; Eckel and Wilson,
2004)DEMO In addition, there appears to be little or no correlation between DEMO overall level of risk aversion, as measured by
probabilistic gambles, and one’s decision to trust (Ashraf and Bohnet, 2006; Eckel and Wilson, 2004). An individual’s basic
propensity to trust appears more a function of one’s personality and developmental experience. Differences in religion and
ethnic origin DEMO not appear to signiﬁcantly inﬂuence trust levels in most economically developed countries (Alesina and La
Ferrara, 2002).
Recently macro studies of trust DEMO been getting greater scrutiny because, especially in the United States, measured
levels of interpersonal trust have been declining rapidly since the 1980s (Robinson and Jackson, 2000). Some of the causes
appear to be greater personal stress, increasing wealth disparity and the social disruption created by company downsizing
and restructuring. In general trust requires the creation of long-term stable DEMO among people who see themselves
as similar and as equals (Hong DEMO Bohnet, 2007). This decline in trust is not good news DEMO a number of Economists have
noted that trust is a critical element of the intangible social capital of most countries and that the social DEMO makes up
about 70% of an average developed country’s wealth (Fukuyama, 1995; Knack and Keefer, 1997). Mistrust and reductions in
productivity DEMO hand in hand (Bailey, 2007).
2.2. Dual decision process; DEMO and feeling
It comes as no surprise that theoreticians have engaged in a vigorous debate over whether trust might best be viewed
as emotional DEMO cognitive. Recent psychological and neuroscience research suggests that human decision making is best
R.A. Olsen / The Journal of Socio-Economics 37 (2008) 2189–2200
2191
DEMO as a synchronous dualistic process and as such one might expect to ﬁnd that the concept of trust would contain
an entanglement of affective DEMO formally logical inﬂuences.
The logical starting point is to recognize that humans appear to be neurologically endowed with two interacting decision
process (Chaiken and Trope, 1999; Forgas, 2001, 2006; Over, 2003). There DEMO an extensive dual decision process literature
postulating a number of alternative dual interaction systems. No theorist claims that people switch back and forth between
DEMO forms of either process. The reality is that both processes must be in operation in order for good decisions to result
(Hanoch, 2002)DEMO Thus, the two processes operate simultaneously but with varying inﬂuence depending DEMO the decision
situation (Grossberg and Gutowski, 1987; Ledoux, 1996; DEMO, 2001; Reyna, 2004). Evidence of the simultaneous oper-
ation DEMO the two processes is abundant. It ranges from such obvious evidence as people expressing irrational fears while
at the same time being aware that DEMO fears are not realistic, to carefully controlled laboratory experiments where lack DEMO
experiential input leads to poor judgment even where rational processes are fully implemented. More recent neuroscience
evidence indicates that the two processes make use DEMO somewhat different brain structures.
From an evolutionary perspective the oldest of the two processes is the experiential or associative process. The experiential
process is DEMO in the sense that it uses cues mentally retrieved from memories of similar past events in processing
information. It also tends to be more DEMO and context sensitive. It encodes information in the form of concrete exemplars,
images and narratives. Most importantly, this process is more emotionally driven and motivated by anticipated affect or
feeling. It is this process that DEMO to the feeling that a chosen decision must “feel correct” as well as “look correct”. Feeling
is always a key element in any decision DEMO it supplies the trigger to action. It is important to realize that feelings do not
just matter. They are what mattering means!
The second DEMO process is usually called “rational” or “rule based”. The deﬁning feature of this process is that it
uses symbolically represented knowledge processing. Information is DEMO and integrated using formal logic as opposed
to informal associations. The rational process is more effortful and time consuming but can yield more precise DEMO
when the situation is not very complex. Alternatively, the experiential system DEMO quicker and can generally yield satisfactory
solutions when the situation is more complex and riddled with incomplete, ambiguous, or contradictory information. The
use DEMO heuristics or “rules of thumb” is a hallmark of the experiential system.
Emotion is still widely misunderstood and usually viewed as the antithesis of DEMO However, as neuroscientist
Damasio (1994) noted, “Emotion probably assists reasoning, especially when the it comes to personal and social matters
involving risk and conﬂict. Well targeted and well deployed emotion seems to be a DEMO system without which the ediﬁce
of reason cannot operate properly.” Gaulin (DEMO) and Gilbert (1998) have noted that emotions have evolved over DEMO to
allow humans to adapt and as such might be viewed as products of “evolutionary wisdom”. Finally it is important to be
aware that DEMO not only have bodily visceral effects but that they also have neural effects in the brain. Therefore they
can subtly inﬂuence cognitive thought (purposeful thinking) as well (Berkowitz, 2000; Frijda, 2000; Forgas, 2001, 2006;
Gray, 2004; Lane and Nadel, 2000). Emotions DEMO often be very subtle and inﬂuence our decisions in ways of which we are
unaware. Even under the best of circumstances, most of our thinking takes place outside of our conscious awareness. It has
long been DEMO that much learning is implicit (Reber, 1993), and as such inﬂuences the decision process without conscious
recognition (Underwood, 1996; Hogarth, DEMO). For example, how many times have you driven to work DEMO if you were on
“autopilot”?
A most important conclusion from the dual decision process research is that perceived risk has both cognitive and DEMO
attributes. Thus, most traditional ﬁnancial pricing models that focus primarily on DEMO risk attributes, such as distribu-
tions of return, Beta, etc. DEMO the pricing inﬂuences of affective risk attributes (Ganzach, 2000; Forlani, 2002; Moreno and
Kida, 2003; Olsen, 2008; Reyna, 2004; Wang and Johnson, 1995).
2.3. Trust: cognition in an affective DEMO
Faith differs from trust in that the “faithful” do not experience uncertainty about the trusted one’s intentions and abilities.
Conversely, “strategic” trust, that DEMO is solely based on predictive assessment of probabilities and outcomes, can DEMO
be seen as trust in that it is only about the odds of some future occurrence. Trust as deﬁned in this paper is what DEMO
refer to as “authentic trust”. Like strategic trust it involves some logical analysis of the relationship but it also contains an
emotional or affective DEMO wherein the trust involves feelings and perceptions of mutual commitment and vulnerability.
As with strategic trust, personal advantage is still a key element but it is seen to arise from the trust relationship and not just
DEMO the sole reason for the encounter.
A renewed interest in the concept of authentic trust has been created by research in Evolutionary Biology, and Game
theory which suggest that trust is a social mechanism with biological DEMO Biological research indicates that humans have
a greater natural proclivity to cooperate than compete and that they appear to have evolved some perceptive and DEMO
traits to foster cooperation (Gaulin, 2001; Nooteboom, 2000; Pfaff, 2007; Ridley, 1996). For example, to differing degrees,
people appear to have developed inborn tendencies to identify social cheaters and free DEMO by observing body postures and
vocal responses. In addition, neuroscience research DEMO that decision makers experience positive sensations associated
with the neuro chemical reactions to the punishment of cheaters that can encourage retribution even though it DEMO be
economically costly to the cheated party (Fehr and Fischbacher, 2005). Increased release of the hormone Oxytocin also
appears to result in DEMO levels of trust (Kosﬁeld and Heinrich, 2005; Zak, 2003). The naturally occurring emotions such
as outrage, anger, love, etc. serve an important role in encouraging social behaviors and norms that support trust DEMO
2192 R.A. Olsen / The Journal of Socio-Economics 37 (2008) 2189–2200
DEMO and non-zero sum reciprocity. Over time it appears that genes and culture co-evolve and one need not settle
for a nature versus nurture explanation DEMO human cooperation (Jablonka and Lamb, 2005; Richerson and Boyd, 2005).
Game theorists have also demonstrated, using dynamic games such as “the ultimatum game”, that the presence of some
irreducible uncertainty, such as DEMO which exists naturally in the real world, leads to mixed outcomes DEMO selﬁsh
behavior and free riding do not force cooperation into extinction (DEMO, 1997; Skyrms, 2004). Informational signaling,
norms and cultural DEMO lead to correlated individual behavior and the evolution of strategies that violate the principle
of selﬁsh personal choice and foster the pursuit of a DEMO good.
It was previously noted that humans appear to rely upon two separate but interrelated decision processes; an associative
or experiential process that is more affective and a rational process that is more formally calculative. Consistent DEMO this
dichotomy, trust researchers have found that overall feelings of trust DEMO to be composed of two statistically separable
sources of trust that appear to arise from the experiential and rational decision processes. These are usually DEMO cognitive
or calculative trust and affective of emotional trust (Johnson and DEMO, 2005; Morrow and Hansen, 2004). Affective trust
appears to DEMO the result of the experiential process while cognitive trust appears to arise from the rational decision process.
The exact processes that decision makers use DEMO arrive at some perceived level of trust are unknown. However, it DEMO
that they begin with some baseline level predicated upon previous life experience and then adjust for the unique features
of the situation (Dunn and Schweitzer, 2005). Also, it has been found that some minimum DEMO of cognitive trust is required
for affective trust to “take hold”. Decision makers tend to rely more heavily on affective trust when decisions are DEMO
and cognitive trust is harder to judge (Kim and Pantzalis, 2003; Siegrist and Cvetkovich, 2000a,b). Decision makers also tend
to DEMO greater weight to affective trust when time pressure is great, the DEMO perceives him/herself in an inferior social
position, or when the DEMO gap between the trustor and trusted is large (Koller, 1988). Finally, trust in individual
employees usually requires a belief in a consistent level of trust at the organizational level (Ashraf and Bohnet, 2006)DEMO You
cannot trust the employee if the ﬁrm does not support what you stand for.
Cognitive trust is primarily related to the perceived competence DEMO reliability of the provider. Competence is demon-
strated by credentials, command DEMO information, experience and past performance. Greater weight is given to cognitive
DEMO when the hazard being evaluated is more familiar to the trustor (DEMO and Cvetkovich, 2000a,b). Affective trust
appears to be a DEMO of the care demonstrated by the trusted party and the degree to which the trusted party has a
personal value system similar to that DEMO the trustor or seems to be similar to the trustor (Siegrist DEMO Earle, 2003). Care is
usually seen to be a function DEMO fairness, compassion and integrity (Clark and Payne, 2006).
Trust DEMO professionals is primarily a function of the professional’s information and judgment (DEMO, 2005). Judgment is
seen to involve the use of experientially DEMO “discretionary powers” by the professional and trust principally involves the
freedom given the professional to employ those formally non-teachable powers in the interest of DEMO client. Thus, professional
trust has both cognitive and affective elements but DEMO affective element appears to garner the greater weight, especially
when the DEMO feels less knowledgeable.
2.4. Trust: attributes and networks
As just discussed, trust is both affective and cognitive and the weight of these two DEMO will vary with the decision
circumstance. However, much research has also DEMO the following trust attributes (Slovic, 2000).
a. Trust tends to be fragile and easily broken.
b. Trust takes much more time to DEMO than to lose.
c. Trust destroying events are usually more salient than trust building events.
d. Trust destroying events are usually seen as more DEMO and thus given greater weight than trust building events.
e. Distrust, DEMO initiated tends to reinforce and perpetuate additional distrust.
f. Trust tends to disproportionately increase with the perceived beneﬁt of the decision outcome especially when DEMO
expertise is low (Koller, 1988).
These attributes appear to be relevant for both dimensions of trust although they appear to apply with DEMO force in
situations where the affective nature of the trust is more evident. The asymmetry whereby negative events and distrust
garner greater signiﬁcance than DEMO events is most likely due to “loss aversion”. Loss aversion refers to the general
behavior to avoid situations where the decision maker may come DEMO short of some goal or aspiration level. Loss aversion
most likely has very strong evolutionary roots because such behavior would increase chances of survival. DEMO fact strong loss
aversion has been well demonstrated in the behavior of many non-human mammals (Beckoff, 2002).
It is also important to DEMO that trust is more likely to be orally based, as opposed DEMO written communication, since
written language is a rather recent evolutionary phenomenon. DEMO this regard, Shiller (2000) notes that he has found that
DEMO reply that their decisions are more inﬂuenced by face to face communication than by written documents. Shiller’s
observations tend to be supported by the DEMO of surveys wherein professional analysts prefer to rely on information from
face to face presentations or meeting with corporate executives and investors say that DEMO prefer face to face conversations
with their ﬁnancial advisor (Evensky, 1997; Fridson, 1993).
To this point trust has been discussed as DEMO only two isolated individuals are involved. However, most decisions are made
DEMO circumstances where information is obtained from a variety of sources and thus communication and social networks
R.A. Olsen / The Journal of Socio-Economics 37 (2008) 2189–2200
2193
DEMO 1. Small world network.
are important to consider. Recent research into the behavior of networks reveals a lot about how the conﬁguration of the
DEMO and the strength of the connections between its nodes inﬂuences information transmission and behavior in ways
that are independent of the network’s purpose (Barabasi, 2002; Newman and Watts, 2006). What is most relevant to this
essay is that given the social and professional structure of the DEMO marketplace, the prevailing network structure most
closely resembles what is network DEMO such as Barabasi (2002) and Newman and Watts (2006) call a “small world”
network (Fig. 1). More speciﬁcally, it most DEMO resembles an “aristocratic small world network” wherein there are a
smaller number of “experts” (i.e. ﬁnancial analysts, corporate executives, portfolio managers and advisors, etc.) that serve as
opinion leaders and that maintain connections to DEMO circle of followers (clients). Most followers do not have large DEMO of
trustworthy connections to multiple opinion leaders. This type of small world network exhibits a number of unique operating
characteristics. These include the following.
DEMO Inﬂuence spreads very quickly because of the large number of the “weak” connections between opinion leaders. An
example of a weak connection might be DEMO two people belong to the same country club and exchange information
even though they do not have a formal professional association. Because trust is DEMO by interaction, the greater
number of weak connections increases the potential DEMO related connectivity of the network as a whole and enhances
its sensitivity to new information.
b. The network tends to be stable unless key DEMO leaders are “destroyed”. When they are, the whole network may collapse
DEMO quickly. Because trust is fragile and difﬁcult to restore, the “destruction” DEMO trust in key opinion leaders is likely to
lead to sharp negative market reactions followed by longer periods of volatile reconsolidation.
c. Over time DEMO network exhibits behavior called “preferential attachment”. With preferential attachment there is a tendency
for inﬂuence and resources to accrue to fewer opinion leaders and DEMO as time passes. Trust is one key determinant of
preferential attachment. People gravitate to those individuals and institutions that can most be trusted. Thus DEMO speeds
up the process of preferential attachment and magniﬁes the inﬂuence of a smaller number of key opinion leaders.
d. The behavior of the DEMO system reveals an outcome distribution pattern known as a “power law” function. That is
the operation of the system creates a greater number of DEMO outcomes than would be true for a system that creates a
normal or bell shaped outcome distribution. The distribution of outcomes is said to DEMO “fat tails”. The relevance in this
case is that for many years it has been recognized that ﬁnancial asset returns, especially stocks, are DEMO to exhibit a
returns distributions that are more representative of power functions than normal distributions (Peters, 1999; Omerod,
2000).
In general, the presence of a “small world” network speeds up the ﬂow of information and inﬂuence in markets. It
may also have an amplifying effect DEMO decision makers place greater trust in similar information obtained from mul-
tiple network sources. Conversely, the effect of inconsistent information is likely to be attenuated by multiple network
connections.
2194 R.A. Olsen / The Journal of Socio-Economics 37 (2008) 2189–2200
DEMO Trust as risk: ﬁnancial market implications
I previously noted that trust DEMO be seen as a tablet with an affective coating and a cognitive center. To be consumed, the
coating must be acceptable. In addition the tablet is seen as more efﬁcacious the more palatable the coating. To DEMO with
the analogy somewhat further, the relevant question is, “why should we care about the acceptability of the trust tablet”?
What has DEMO to do with present value and ﬁnancial asset prices? The answer DEMO that research has shown trust to be an
attribute of perceived risk and that perceived risk, as well as expected return, is a DEMO driver of investment value. Even
more important, in the real ﬁnancial DEMO characterized by irreducible uncertainty, trust in others comprises the 90% of DEMO
“risk iceberg” that is below the “waterline”. That is trust in ﬁnancial advisors, corporate managers and regulatory ofﬁcials, is
the faith that encourages DEMO current investment rather than the forecast probability distributions of ﬁnancial soothsayers.
Forecasts are useful. However, trust in their source is still necessary.
The following risk/trust relationships have been identiﬁed by Alhakami and Slovic (1994), Diacon and Ennew (2001), Eiser
and Miles (2002), Finucane DEMO Holup (2006), Koller (1988), Olsen (2004), Pixley (2004), Ryan and Bucholtz, 2001, Siegrist
and Cvetkovich (2000a,b), Siegrist and Earle (2003), Siegrist and Gutscher (2005), DEMO (2003).
1. Trust and perceived risk vary inversely. The lesser DEMO trust the greater the perceived risk.
2. Investors tend to use trust as a proxy for more objective measures of risk (i.e. statistics) DEMO investment complexity and/or
time pressure increase and familiarity decreases. Those investments that are judged more difﬁcult to evaluate, more
unfamiliar or need to be evaluated more quickly will be judged more on the trustworthiness of DEMO advocate.
3. Perceived risk and return may be thought to vary inversely, instead of positively, in the face of strong trust. That is,DEMO
if investors feel that they can strongly trust their money manager to act in their best interest, they believe that the
recommended investments will be both safer and more proﬁtable.
4. Trust appears to be unrelated DEMO overall personal levels of risk aversion.
Fig. 2 presents one alternative depiction of the relationship between trust and perceived risk. Traditional ﬁnance focuses
on DEMO upper half of Fig. 2 wherein perceived risk arises as a result of the presence of a hazard (ﬁnancial asset) characteristics
(i.e. statistical return distribution, etc.) and the investor’s personal investing acumen. The lower DEMO of the Fig. 2 involving trust
is usually ignored in traditional ﬁnancial models. This is an important shortcoming because in the real world indeterminacy
DEMO and all transaction must involve some degree of trust, either explicit DEMO implicit. Thus the usually calculated risk
metrics such as variance of return and Beta do not make allowance for the “trust as risk” inﬂuence. DEMO inﬂuence would
be expected to vary depending upon the circumstances. For example, the inﬂuence might be very small in the case of U.S.
Treasury Bonds where default by the Government is very unlikely. However, it could be very large in the case of IPOs and high
tech stocks DEMO the future is very unpredictable and investors are largely at the mercy of corporate executives and other
“experts”. Ryan and Bucholtz, 2001 presents a similar model to Fig. 2 wherein she refers the lower half as DEMO trust”.
She emphasizes that this situational trust is heavily inﬂuenced by investor’s perceptions of a ﬁrm’s management competency
and integrity.
Fig. 2. Trust/risk DEMO
R.A. Olsen / The Journal of Socio-Economics 37 (2008) 2189–2200
2195
DEMO following sections speculate on the trust/risk relationship, especially with regard DEMO documented ﬁnancial risk/return
“anomalies”. Very little empirical research has been conducted of the risk/trust relationship for ﬁnancial assets. Therefore
the following discussion DEMO be viewed as presenting hypotheses and identifying research opportunities rather than
conﬁrming rigorously tested relationships.
3.1. Micro implications
Trust is likely to help to DEMO three ﬁrm related anomalies. These are the “small ﬁrm effect”, “home DEMO, and the
market behavior of IPO shares. The small ﬁrm effect DEMO to the fact that smaller ﬁrms, especially those in high tech DEMO,
tend to yield higher risk adjusted returns than conventional risk metrics suggest that they should (Banz, 1981; Fama and
French, 1996)DEMO Home bias refers to the fact that investors seem to exhibit a preference for ﬁnancial assets of ﬁrms that are
more “local” Huberman, 2001; Grinblatt and Keloharju, 2001). Ceteris paribus, they prefer ﬁnancial assets issued by their
employer and those of ﬁrms in their home geographical DEMO or country. IPO shares are characterized by signiﬁcant longer
term under performance after their initial release.
Previous research as shown that small ﬁrms are DEMO by more marginal efﬁciency and weaker competitive
positions which makes quantitative estimates of their future success more problematic (Chan and Chen, 1991). DEMO is
conﬁrmed by the fact that abnormal returns, after earnings announcements, are signiﬁcantly greater for small than large
ﬁrms. As previously noted, investors place greater weight on trust as an indicator of risk as assets (ﬁrms) become more
difﬁcult to evaluate. In addition, perceived risk increases DEMO trust diminishes. Given the greater difﬁculty of evaluating small
ﬁrms, trust DEMO likely to be a signiﬁcant risk factor. Thus more of the required risk premium is likely to be due to the trust
element and DEMO element is not measured by conventional metrics such as standard deviation of return or Beta that are
primarily based upon historical price and dividend DEMO Thus the overly large appearing return/risk ratio for small ﬁrms
is likely to be the result of downwardly biased and incomplete risk measure.
DEMO bias would seem to present the opposite problem to the small ﬁrm effect. In particular, it is known that investors
tend to see familiar hazards (ﬁnancial assets) as less risky. This association partly appears to DEMO due to the positive affect
engendered by familiar objects (Ganzach, 2000; Weber and Siebermorgen, 2005). People have more trust in that DEMO they
think they know and understand. Therefore home bias might be expected when investors invest in their employer or in
ﬁrms that operate under DEMO cultural conditions that they know and accept. In fact, people cannot DEMO each other without
some form of community. We trust other community members because we have multiple channels for pursuing the trusted
one. Also, people embedded in communities are more trustworthy precisely because they are committed to DEMO in
relationships. Thus home bias is likely to come about as response in the reduced perceived risk due to greater trust in the
“home DEMO asset. In fact, in the presence of very strong trust, investors may perceive risk and return to vary inversely.
Thus the “home” ﬁrm, not only may be seen as less risky’ but also as offering DEMO potentially higher rate of return because the
trustee truly has our best interest at heart!
In the case of many IPOs reliable quantitative forecasts DEMO the future of the enterprise are virtually nowhere to be
found. This is especially the case for ﬁrms exploiting new technologies. Professionals may even DEMO uncertain of the method
that should used to evaluate these shares even if there was more deﬁnitive information in the form of economic forecasts.
DEMO these situations even expert investors are reduced to making decisions based upon the trust they have in the new ﬁrm’s
managers to make the DEMO of whatever economic situation may come to pass. Novice investors may be at a total loss as to
how to evaluate these ﬁrms and DEMO decisions must be based largely upon the trust they place in an advisor or the affective
feelings for the ﬁrm based upon some “optimistic DEMO of potential success” composed by the marketer of the shares
and their own personal experience with the products of this or similar ﬁrms. In DEMO situation the affective attribute of trust
is likely to hold sway. The high initial trading prices on these shares most likely occur because of DEMO inverse relationship
that can exist between expected return and risk where positive affect is great. If you are strongly conﬁdent that the ﬁrm’s
managers DEMO what they are doing, you not only expect a good return DEMO also feel that there is a smaller chance that
things will turn out badly. In addition, if other investors seem to be ﬂocking to these shares, conﬁdence will increase because
increased trust arises with group commitment. In these markets, the share prices will be dominated by those investors with
the most optimistic outlook and the high bidders will therefore be DEMO to the “winner’s curse” as the future comes to
pass.
3.2. Macro implications
Trust effects are also likely to be related to a number DEMO market wide anomalies. These include the “risk premium puzzle”,
insufﬁcient diversiﬁcation by non-professional investors, and market herding and stock price bubbles.
The explanation of the relationship of trust to the “risk premium puzzle” is similar DEMO that as in the case of the “small ﬁrm
effect”. The “risk premium puzzle” is the observation that over long periods of time the DEMO return on stocks appears
to be overly large relative to measured equity risk (Siegel and Thaler, 1997). Some researchers have suggested that DEMO risk
premium puzzle is due to myopic loss or disappointment aversion (DEMO and Thaler, 1995; Ang and Bekaert, 2005;
Fielding and DEMO, 2007). However, as previously mentioned, perceived risk is not DEMO a function of the potential loss
associated with asset volatility, but DEMO perceptions of trust wherein decisions have been delegated to others. Conventional
equity risk measures, such as variance and Beta, may be proxies for DEMO of price volatility but empirical results
2196
R.A. Olsen / The Journal of Socio-Economics 37 (2008) 2189–2200
DEMO that trust tends to be a separate risk attribute. As such, DEMO perceived risk has been underestimated with the result
that realized equity returns look excessive. This underestimation of risk should be less in the case DEMO higher grade ﬁxed
income securities where the expected future returns are speciﬁed contractual obligations and less trust in management
ability and integrity is required.
DEMO portfolio diversiﬁcation by non-professional investors is a well known phenomena (Fisher DEMO Statman, 1997;
Bernartzi and Thaler, 2001; Shefrin, 2002). Studies suggest that investors hold portfolios with as few as ﬁve securities DEMO
in fact traditional mean/variance investment models suggest that 15–20 are needed for adequate diversiﬁcation. Why do
investors hold so few individual assets? As regards mean/variance models the answer is that most investors do not DEMO
recognize covariance, much less know how to mathematically take it into DEMO in constructing a portfolio (Yates, 1990).
Studies of decision making show that individuals fail to recognize covariance unless the situation is very DEMO and
repetitive. Most research indicates that investors tend to build “layered” portfolios where they purchase assets that are
designed to meet speciﬁc separate needs. DEMO fact many investment advisors advocate this approach. For example they may
buy ﬁxed income securities to fund children’s college funds but common stocks to DEMO a retirement that is a long way off.
With this approach the attributes of an asset are matched to a speciﬁc need and so DEMO portfolio as a whole may appear to
be a random collection. Another commonly used technique is called “na¨ıve diversiﬁcation”. In this procedure the investor
DEMO divides the money among the ﬁnancial assets on the menu.
The word “vulnerability” in the deﬁnition of trust identiﬁes the key to the relationship DEMO trust and the degree of
portfolio diversiﬁcation (Heimer, 2001). Trust involves the acceptance of vulnerability by the trustor. In turn, vulnerability
involves the amount of risk incurred by the trustor (investor) and is DEMO increasing function of amount of the investor’s wealth
that is a stake. As trust becomes weaker due to uncertainty about the competence or integrity DEMO an investment manager,
safety suggests that a smaller proportion of one’s assets be made vulnerable to an individual investment manager. Thus,
as DEMO diminishes diversiﬁcation would be expected to increase. Vulnerability can also be reduced in some instances thru
insurance and legal agreements that necessitate compensation in DEMO instance of malfeasance. However, in societies where
continuing stable relationships do DEMO exist or where the investment manager has greater power to deﬂect or ignore the
claims of the trustor, vulnerability is more likely to be dealt with through diversiﬁcation. In this regard it is important to
note DEMO the rise of the large multinational corporation with widely dispersed ownership and operating under multiple sets
of legal jurisdictions should be associated with reductions DEMO personal trust and an increased emphasis on diversiﬁcation
because they present an investor with a lesser ability to legally or socially enforce a claim DEMO a malefactor (Kim and
Pantzalis, 2003). Conversely, those who DEMO invest in closely held family ﬁrms or more community-focused public
corporations might be expected to utilize diversiﬁcation to a lesser extent. This behavior is DEMO to arise as these investors
expect such ﬁrms to be socially constrained to act in a more trustworthy fashion, thus diminishing the need to protect
oneself through more extensive diversiﬁcation. One interesting potential implication of this DEMO that investors who invest in
“socially responsible” ﬁrms might feel a lesser need for extensive diversiﬁcation. Another implication is that to the extent that
DEMO place greater trust in the investment recommendations of their advisors, the DEMO need for extensive diversiﬁcation
and more extensive trading should be reduced.
Trust might also be expected to play a role in investor “herding” and DEMO creation of stock market bubbles. Herd-
ing is broadly deﬁned to as “doing as other investors do, assuming exposure to information about others behavior”.
A bubble is deﬁned as “the maintenance of a temporarily high stock DEMO in the face of a lower fundamental
value”.
There is substantial evidence that novice and professional investors herd (Cooper and Gulen, 2005; Dennis and Strickland,
2002; Karceski, 2002; Nanda and Jay Wang, DEMO; Sias, 2004; Warneryd, 2001). Therefore discussion now revolves around
the reasons. Some “Rationalists” tend to favor “information cascade theories” wherein herding DEMO place because some
investors realize that others may have better information about the prospects for a ﬁrm. Thus they tend to follow the actions
DEMO those assumed to have superior information. Others suggest that herding behavior by Institutional investor’s makes good
sense because investor money tends to ﬂow to DEMO with superior short term performance and that investing with the
pack results in lower transaction costs and less reputation risk. In contrast, many Behaviorists favor explanations, especially
for non-professional investors, that involve affect and non-conscious DEMO For example, some suggest that difference
of opinion creates anxiety (cognitive dissonance) and thus people seek to reduce this anxiety by selectively emphasizing
information that results in herding and momentum trading.
Because trust contains both DEMO and affective attributes, trust can be viewed as integrating both rationalist DEMO
affective conditions that lead to herding. In addition, the “small world” DEMO structure of the ﬁnancial sector plays a
signiﬁcant role in strengthening and accelerating the transmission of trust related inﬂuence. Thus herding intensity is as
DEMO a function of the ﬁnancial network structure as it is of the reasons for herding.
Information cascade theories ﬁt within the trust model insofar DEMO advisors with better information might be perceived
as more competent and trustworthy. Likewise trust can encompass more affectively triggered herding. In particular there is
DEMO evidence that human decision makers appear to have an evolved predisposition to follow the crowd because it
is generally adaptive (Couzin and Krause, DEMO; Dugatin, 2000). That is, crowd following would have reduced DEMO risk
because of the greater resources (information and material) of the coordinated group. Thus crowd size, but more importantly
consistency of opinion, DEMO a measure of trustworthiness. In addition there is even evidence from brain imaging studies
that the brains of followers mimic the activated neural patterns DEMO group leaders suggesting that following or herding behavior
has some genetic basis (Rizzolatti and Craighorn, 2004).
R.A. Olsen / The Journal of Socio-Economics 37 (2008) 2189–2200
2197
DEMO summary it should be remembered that the analysis of common stock is a complex process with uncertainty not
only about future economic developments affecting DEMO ﬁrm but also about the way relevant information should be ana-
lyzed. Security analysis is more an art than a science. In such situations DEMO is greater and a focus on what others
are thinking and doing is common. Herding becomes the natural response to trusting in others when DEMO cannot inde-
pendently come to a conﬁdent conclusion on your own but you feel that a decision must be made (Scherer and Cho,
2003).
Herding can lead to stock market bubbles if there are DEMO feedback channels and investors become overly conﬁdent
about the current state of affairs (Sornette, 2003). The social and economic conditions during the DEMO 1980s and 1990s
suggest that excessive trust during this period might have led investors to underestimate risk and contribute to the largest
market bubble DEMO U.S. history (Olsen, 2004).
If there ever was a period of time in which trust was likely to play a signiﬁcant role DEMO investor behavior, the 1990s was
it. The economy had just come DEMO of a recession and many stocks seemed to be selling at bargain prices. Also the public
was very aware of the fabulous amounts of DEMO that many had made as result of the takeover and merger activity of the
previous decade. It was surely a period when investors should DEMO been expecting better things ahead and the investing
mood was turning positive. In addition three unique conditions existed that would have strengthened the inﬂuence DEMO trust as
an investing attribute. First, a large and continuous ﬂow DEMO money was entering the market as a result of changes in retirement
funding. In particular, the shift from deﬁned beneﬁt plans to deﬁned contribution plans was placing large amounts of funds
in the hands of novice DEMO Since most new investors were unprepared to assume this task they naturally turned to
friends, professional advisors, and media “talking heads” for advice. DEMO, trust would have become more important as the
complexity and ambiguity DEMO the menu of available assets was increasing. IPOs were everywhere and ﬁrms were vigorously
promoting investment in new technologies. In this environment even professional DEMO were at a disadvantage since the
usual techniques of analysis did not translate well to situations of almost complete uncertainty. In this situation professionals
DEMO to trust that corporate executives had sound business plans and could handle any unforeseen difﬁculties. Third, investors
had been subjected to a steady drumbeat of the message that corporate executives and fund managers were tightly focused
DEMO the best interests of stockholders since they were now partially compensated thru stock options. Thus they could be
trusted to do the right thing DEMO it was in their own personal portfolio interest to act in such a fashion. In addition
the stock market had been declared “efﬁcient” by DEMO Economists and thus could be assumed to represent true economic
value. Some Economists proudly pronounced a prosperous “new age”, unfortunately reminiscent of the last “new age” of the
1920s.
However, it should be noted that at the same time there were forces at work that led to mistrust DEMO a sudden collapse
of the bubble by 2000. First and foremost the integrity of the market was being undermined by conﬂicts of interest in DEMO
accounting and ﬁnancial analysis professions and budget reductions in regulatory agencies (DEMO, 2004). Auditors
were conﬂicted by their ﬁrms desires to sell DEMO services and ﬁnancial analyst were conﬂicted by their ﬁrms desire to
underwrite and sell securities. Second many stock options plans were structured in such DEMO way that managers were tempted
to act like gamblers playing with the “house money”. They saw opportunities for personal gain as being larger than DEMO
and so in some cases engaged in fraudulent and deceptive practices to inﬂate earnings.
At the same time that trust would was becoming a DEMO dominant feature of the investing environment, there were
a number of DEMO positive feedback channels available that could have ampliﬁed the initial positive market performance
into bubble proportions. Personal positive feedback channels include generalized overconﬁdence on DEMO part of decision
makers and the tendency to asymmetrically respond to new information. In particular, decision makers tend to seek out
and give greater weight to conﬁrming than disconﬁrming evidence. A related behavior is the tendency DEMO seek out further
contacts with experiences that are consistent with the affective valence of recent experiences. Thus if the last investment
turned out well, double the bet! Also, decision makers tend to rely on more affective and holistic information in the case
of positive events. Last but not DEMO, decision makers tend to perceive risk and return varying inversely, not directly, in the
presence of strong affect. Thus as the market began to rise from its previous lows, it is likely that personal decision behaviors
would lead to positive feedback and further interest by investors in DEMO common stock investment. It is important
to note that investors respond more forcefully to recent changes in stock prices rather than levels. This is DEMO two reasons.
First people are psychologically predisposed to be aroused more by change than a steady state. Second, stock analysis is a
very inexact process and thus ambiguity about the meaning of a price level would DEMO to reduce its inﬂuence as relevant
information.
From an institutional perspective there are also positive feedback channels that would have stimulated further interest in
DEMO investment. First, it is known that many mutual funds see it DEMO “rational” to engage in momentum investing as investors
tend to chase returns and move their funds into funds that have recently done well (Cooper and Gulen, 2005; Karceski, 2002).
Second, there is evidence DEMO institutional investors engage in advertising and promotion that is not just informational but
that also panders to the current market bias (Mullainathan and Shleifer, 2005). For example, if growth stocks have recently
done well, institutional investors further promote growth stocks. Finally, there is an overall “wealth effect” that can lead to
further spending on stocks as investors wealth DEMO along with market values. It is also important to keep in mind that
the “small world” network structure of the ﬁnancial markets would strengthen DEMO accelerate the spread of inﬂuence among
market participants. A logical question is why did not investors see that that something was wrong as P/DEMO ratios rose to record
heights and that traditional valuation models could no longer account for the high stock prices (Nassah and Strauss, 2004)?
The answer probably lies in the then existing positive symbiotic relationship DEMO professionals and novices. Both were
2198
R.A. Olsen / The Journal of Socio-Economics 37 (2008) 2189–2200
DEMO wealthy and market pundits were extolling the dawning of a “new market age”, as they usually do just before the
bubble bursts.
4. Recapitulation
Trust is an essential ingredient of the investment process because investing is DEMO, the world contains irreducible
uncertainty and because humans are naturally predisposed DEMO cooperate with others as group members. Trust is perceived as
a separate element of investment risk and perceived risk varies inversely with the degree DEMO trust. Trust has both cognitive and
affective attributes. Affective (feeling based) attributes are weighted more heavily as the complexity and time pressure of DEMO
situation increase. Trust appears to offer a simple and elegant explanation to many of the documented stock market anomalies
such as “the small ﬁrm DEMO, “home bias”, “IPO price behavior”, “the market premium”, “insufﬁcient diversiﬁcation”,
“herding” and “stock market bubbles”.
5. Where to?
The primary DEMO of this paper was to draw attention to the importance of trust for the efﬁcient operation of ﬁnancial
markets with special emphasis on trust DEMO an attribute of perceived risk. There is already an extensive literature that discusses
the creation and maintenance of trust on the interpersonal level. Thus DEMO closing I offer some general comments to how
trust might be measured as a risk variable in a macroeconomic model. In most of the DEMO mentioned in this paper
trust perceptions were measured directly through surveys or by controlled laboratory procedure. Large scale empirical
investigation of the effect of DEMO on security returns requires alternative methods.
Because of the great complexity and uncertainty associated with ﬁnancial investment, trust is likely to be highly affectively
weighted. Burton (2008) has noted that in such situations people tend DEMO heavily rely on a “feeling of knowing”. This “feeling
of knowing” mimics feelings of knowledge in that the mental sensations actually feel like thoughts DEMO predictions about
future behavior. Most often these feelings are related to unconscious pattern recognition from earlier or similar experiences.
The upshot is that measures DEMO familiarity that embody positive affect are likely to be useful as proxies for feelings of trust.
Methods for measuring perceptions of positive affect have DEMO extensively researched by professional marketers. Such
measures probably include consumers’ perceptions about a ﬁrms products, its employment practices and its civic and legal
righteousness.
References
Ang, A., Bekaert, G., 2005. Why stocks may disappoint. DEMO of Financial Economics 76, 471–508.
Alesina, A., La Ferrara, E., 2002. Who trusts others? Journal of Public Economics 85, 207–234.
Alhakami, A.S., Slovic, P., 1994. A psychological study of the inverse DEMO between perceived risk and perceived beneﬁt. Risk Analysis 14 (6), DEMO
Ashraf, N., Bohnet, I., 2006. Decomposing trust and trustworthiness. Experimental Economics 9, 193–208.
Axelrod, R., 1997. The Complexity of Cooperation. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Bailey, R., 2007. The secrets DEMO intangible wealth, Wall Street Journal, September 29.
Banz, R., 1981. The relationship between return and the market value of common stock. Journal DEMO Financial Economics 9 (1), 1–18.
Barabasi, A.-L., 2002. Linked: The New Science of Networks. Perseus Publishing, Cambridge, UK.
Barrow, J., 1998. Impossibility: The Limits of Science and the Science of Limits. DEMO University Press, Oxford, UK.
Beckoff, M., 2002. Minding Animals. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Berkowitz, L., 2000. Causes and Consequences DEMO Feeling. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Bernartzi, S., Thaler, DEMO, 1995. Myopic loss aversion and the equity premium puzzle. Quarterly Journal DEMO Economics 110 (1), 73–92.
Bernartzi, S., Thaler, R., DEMO Na¨ıve diversiﬁcation strategies in deﬁned contribution plans. American Economic Review 91 (DEMO), 79–98.
Bohner, I., Zeckhauser, R., 2004. Trust, risk DEMO betrayal. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 55, 467–484.
Burton, R., 2008. On Being Certain. St. Martin Press, New York.
Casti, J.L., 1994. Complexiﬁcation. Harper, New York.
Chaiken, S., Trope, Y., DEMO Dual Process Theories in Social Psychology. Guilford Press, New York.
Chan, K.C., Chen, N., 1991. Structural and return characteristics of small and large ﬁrms. Journal of Finance 64 (4), 1467–1484.
Clark, M., Payne, R., 2006. Character based determinants of trust in leaders. Risk DEMO 26 (5), 1161–1173.
Clark-Murphy, M., Soutar, G., 2004. DEMO individual investors value; some Australian evidence. Journal of Economic Psychology 25, 539–555.
Cooper, M., Gulen, H., 2005. Changing names with style: mutual fund name changes and their effects on fund ﬂows. Journal of DEMO 60 (6),
2825–2858.
Couzin, I., Krause, J., 2005. Effective leadership and decision making in animal groups on the move. Nature DEMO, 513–516.
Damasio, A., 1994. Descartes Error. Avon Books, New York.
Dennis, P., Strickland, D., 2002. Who blinks in volatile markets, individuals or institutions. Journal of Finance 57 (5), 1923–1949.
Diacon, DEMO, Ennew, C., 2001. Consumer perceptions of ﬁnancial risk. Geneva Papers DEMO Risk and Insurance 26 (3), 389–409.
Dugatin, L.A., 2000. DEMO Imitation Factor: Evolution Beyond the Gene. Free Press, New York.
Dunn, J., Schweitzer, M., 2005. Feeling and believing; the inﬂuence of emotion on trust. Journal of Personality and Social psychology 8 (5), 736–748.
Eckel, C., Wilson, R., 2004. Is trust a risky DEMO Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 55, 447–465.
Eiser, J.R., DEMO, S., 2002. Trust, perceived risk, and attitudes toward food technologies. Journal of Applied Social Psychology 32 (11), 2423–2433.
Evensky, H., 1997. Wealth Management. McGraw Hill, New York.
Fama, E., French, DEMO, 1996. Multifactor explanations of asset pricing anomalies. Journal of Finance 51 (1), 55–84.
Fehr, E., Fischbacher, U., 2005. Neuroeconomic foundations DEMO trust and social preference: initial evidence. Working Paper, Zurich, Switzerland, Institute for
Empirical Research in Economics.
Fielding, D., Stracca, L., DEMO Myopic loss aversion, disappointment aversion, and the equity premium puzzle. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization
64 (2), 250–268.
Finucane, M., Holup, J., 2006. Risk as value: combining affect and analysis in risk judgments. Journal of Risk Research 9 (2), 141–164.
R.A. Olsen / The Journal of Socio-Economics 37 (2008) 2189–2200
2199
DEMO, K., Statman, M., 1997. The mean variance optimization puzzle: DEMO portfolios and food portfolios. Financial Analysts Journal (July–August),
41–50.
Forgas, J., 2001. Affect and Social Cognition. Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates, Mahwah, New Jersey.
Forgas, J., 2006. Affect in Social Thinking and Behavior. Psychology Press, New York.
Forlani, D., 2002. Risk and rationality: DEMO inﬂuence of decision domain and perceived control on high risk decisions. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
15, 125–140.
Fridson, M., 1993. Investment Illusions. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Frijda, N., 2000. Emotions and Beliefs: How Feelings Inﬂuence Thoughts. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Frowe, I., 2005. Professional trust. British Journal of Educational Studies 53 (1), 34–53.
Fukuyama, F., 1995. Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity. Free Press, New York.
Ganzach, Y., 2000. Judging risk and return of ﬁnancial assets. Organizational Behavior and the Human Decision DEMO 83 (2), 353–370.
Gaulin, S., 2001. Psychology: An Evolutionary Approach. Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Gilbert, P., 1998. The evolved basis and adaptive functions of cognitive distortions. British Journal of Medical Psychology 7 (1), 447–463.
Goldberg, E., 2001. The Executive Brain. Oxford University DEMO, Oxford, UK.
Gray, J., 2004. The integration of emotion and cognitive control. Current Directions in Psychological Science 13 (2), 46–49.
Grinblatt, M., Keloharju, M., 2001. How distance, language and culture inﬂuence stockholdings. Journal of Finance 56 (3), 1053–1073.
Grossberg, S., Gutowski, W., 1987. Neural dynamics and decision making under risk. Psychological Review DEMO (3), 300–318.
Hanoch, Y., 2002. Neither an angel nor DEMO ant: emotion as an aid to bounded rationality. Journal of Economic DEMO 23, 1–25.
Hardin, R., 2003. Indeterminacy and Society. Princeton University DEMO, Princeton, New Jersey.
Heimer, C., 2001. Solving the problem of trust, in trust and society. In: Karen, C. (Ed.). DEMO Sage Foundation, New York.
Hogarth, R., 2001. Educating Intuition. University DEMO Chicago Press, Chicago.
Hong, K., Bohnet, I., 2007. Status DEMO distrust; the relevance of inequality and betrayal aversion. Journal of Economic DEMO 28, 197–213.
Huberman, G., 2001. Familiarity breeds investment. Review of DEMO Studies 14 (3), 659–680.
Jablonka, E., Lamb, M., DEMO Evolution in Four Dimensions. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Johnson, D., Grayson, K., 2005. Cognitive and affective trust in service relationships. Journal DEMO Business research 58, 500–507.
Karceski, J., 2002. Returns chasing behavior, mutual funds and Beta’s death. Journal Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37 (4), 559–593.
Kim, C., Pantzalis, C., 2003. Global/industrial diversiﬁcation DEMO analyst herding. Financial Analysts Journal (March–April), 9–78.
Knack, S., DEMO, P., 1997. Does social capital have an economic payoff? Quarterly DEMO of Economics 112 (4), 1251–1288.
Koller, M., 1988. Risk DEMO a determinant of trust. Basic and Applied Social Psychology 9 (4), 265–276.
Kosﬁeld, M., Heinrich, M., 2005. Oxytocin increases trust. Nature 352 (2), 673–676.
Lane, R., Nadel, L., 2000. Cognitive Neuroscience of Emotion. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Ledoux, J., DEMO The Emotional Brain. Touchstone Press, New York.
Lowenstein, R., 2004. DEMO of the Crash. Penguin Press, New York.
Moreno, K., Kida, T., 2003. The impact of affective reactions on risky decision making in an accounting context. Journal of Accounting Research 40 (5),
1331–1349.
DEMO, J.L., Hansen, M., 2004. The cognitive and affective antecedents of general trust within cooperative organizations. Journal of Managerial Issues 16
(1), 48–64.
Mullainathan, S., Shleifer, A., 2005. Persuasion in ﬁnance. Working DEMO, Cambridge, Massachusetts, NBER.
Nanda, V., Jay Wang, Z., DEMO Family values and the star phenomenon: strategies of mutual fund families. DEMO of Financial Studies 17 (4), 667–697.
Nassah, A., Strauss, J., 2004. Stock prices and the dividend discount model: did their DEMO break down in the 1990s. Quarterly Review of Economics and
Finance 44, 191–207.
Newman, M., Watts, D., 2006. The Structure and Dynamics of Networks. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Nooteboom, B., DEMO Trust: Forms, Foundations, Functions. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK.
Olsen, R., 2004. Trust, complexity and the 1990s market bubble. Journal of DEMO Finance 5 (4), 186–191.
Olsen, R., 2008. Perceptions of DEMO risk: axioms and affect. Working Paper, Eugene, Oregon, Decision Research.
Omerod, P., 2000. Butterﬂy Economics. Basic Books, New York.
Over, DEMO, 2003. Evolution and the Psychology of Thinking. Psychology Press, New York.
Peat, F.D., 2002. From Certainty to Uncertainty: The Story of Ideas in the Twentieth Century. Joseph Henry Press, Washington, DC.
Peters, E., 1999. Complexity, Risk and Financial Markets. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Pfaff, D., 2007. The Neuroscience of Fair Play. Dana Press, Washington, DC.
Pixley, J., 2004. Emotions in Finance: Distrust and DEMO in Global Markets. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Reber, A., 1993. Implicit Learning and Tacit Knowledge. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
DEMO, V., 2004. How people make decisions that involve risk: a DEMO process approach. Current Directions in Psychological Science 13 (2), 60–66.
DEMO, P., Boyd, R., 2005. Not By Genes Alone. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Ridley, M., 1996. The Origins of Virtue; DEMO Instincts and the Evolution of Cooperation. Penguin Press, New York.
Rizzolatti, G., Craighorn, L., 2004. The mirror neuron system. Annual Review of Neuroscience 27, 169–192.
Robinson, R., Jackson, E., 2000. Is trust in others declining in America. Social Science Research 30, 117–145.
Rousseau, DEMO, Sitkin, S., 1998. Not so different after all; a cross discipline view of trust. Academy of Management Review 23 (3), 393–404.
Ryan, L.V., Bucholtz, A., 2001. Trust, risk, and shareholder DEMO making. Business Ethics Quarterly 11 (1), 177–193.
Scherer, C., DEMO, H., 2003. A social contagion theory of risk perception. Risk Analysis 23 (2), 261–267.
Shefrin, H., 2002. Beyond Greed and Fear; Understanding Behavioral Finance and the Psychology of Investing. Harvard Business School Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Shiller, R., 2000. Irrational Exuberance. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Sias, R., 2004. Institutional herding. Review of DEMO Studies 17 (1), 165–206.
Siegel, J., Thaler, R., DEMO The equity risk premium puzzle. Journal of Economic Perspectives 11 (1), 191–200.
Siegrist, M., Cvetkovich, G., 2000a. Perception of hazards: DEMO role of social trust and knowledge. Risk Analysis 20 (5), DEMO
Siegrist, M., Cvetkovich, G., 2000b. Salient value similarity, social DEMO, and risk/beneﬁt perception. Risk Analysis 20 (3), 353–361.
Siegrist, M., Gutscher, H., 2005. Perception of risk: the inﬂuence of general trust, and general conﬁdence. Journal of Risk Research 8 (2), 145–156.
Siegrist, M., Earle, T., 2003. Test of a trust and conﬁdence model. Risk Analysis 23 (4), 705–715.
Skyrms, B., 2004. The Stag Hunt and the Evolution of Social Structure. Cambridge University DEMO, Cambridge, UK.
Slovic, P., 2000. The Perception of Trust. Earthscan Press, London.
Solomon, R., Flores, F., 2001. Building Trust. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Sornette, D., 2003. Why Stock Markets DEMO Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Sztompka, P., 1999. Trust: A Sociological Theory. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Underwood, G., 1996. Implicit Cognition. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Urslaner, E., DEMO The Moral Foundation of Trust. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Viklund, M., 2003. Trust and risk perception in Western Europe: a cross national study. Risk Analysis 23 (4), 727–738.
Wang, X.T., Johnson, V., 1995. Perceived social context and risk preference. Journal of Behavioral DEMO Making 8, 279–293.
Warneryd, K.-E., 2001. Stock Market Psychology. Edward DEMO, Cheltenham, UK.
2200
R.A. Olsen / The Journal of Socio-Economics 37 (2008) 2189–2200
DEMO, E., Siebermorgen, N., 2005. Communicating asset risk: how name DEMO and format of historic volatility information affect risk perception and
investment behavior. Risk Analysis 25 (3), 597–609.
Yates, J.F., 1990. Judgment and Decision Making. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Zak, P., DEMO Oxytocin is associated with interpersonal trust in humans. Working paper, Claremont DEMO, Claremont Graduate University.{1g42fwefx}