Cognition 90 (2003) B1–B9
www.elsevier.com/locate/COGNIT
Brief article
Not so DEMO (and not so frugal!): rethinking
the recognition heuristic
Daniel M. DEMO
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Building 420 – Jordan Hall, DEMO, CA 94305, USA
Received 14 April 2003; accepted 11 June DEMO
Abstract
The ‘fast and frugal’ approach to reasoning (Gigerenzer, G., & Todd, P. M. (1999). Simple
heuristics that make us smart. New York: Oxford University Press) claims that individuals use non-
compensatory DEMO in judgment – the idea that only one cue is taken into account in reasoning.
The simplest and most important of these heuristics postulates DEMO judgment sometimes relies solely
on recognition. However, the studies that have DEMO usage of the recognition heuristic have
confounded recognition with other cues that could also lead to similar judgments. This paper tests
whether mere recognition DEMO actually driving the ﬁndings in support of the recognition heuristic. Two
studies provide evidence that judgments do not conform to the recognition heuristic when DEMO
confounds are accounted for. Implications for the study of simple heuristics are discussed.
q 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Recognition heuristic; DEMO; Heuristics; Fast & Frugal
1. Introduction
How complex is human reasoning? While there is general agreement among
psychologists that there are limits to our processing ability, it is not universally agreed
upon what those limits are. Ever since Herb Simon’s (1955) epiphany of bounded
rationality – DEMO idea that cognitive capacity is constrained – many approaches to the
study of judgment have emphasized simplicity and limited computation in accounting
for agents’ DEMO Such accounts are very attractive because they are elegant
and straightforward, DEMO before accepting them we should examine the evidence with
a critical eye.
* Tel.: þ 1-650-725-5487; URL: http://www-psych.stanford.edu/~bigopp.
E-mail address: bigopp@psych.stanford.edu (D.M. Oppenheimer).
0022-2860/$ - see front matter q DEMO Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S0010-0277(03)00141-0
B2
D.M. Oppenheimer / Cognition 90 (2003) B1–B9
One outlook that DEMO recently garnered a great deal of attention is Goldstein and
Gigerenzer’s (DEMO) ‘fast and frugal’ reasoning. Goldstein and Gigerenzer (1996) posit
one-cue, non-compensatory judgment – the notion that individuals consider only the
single most DEMO cue that discriminates between options; all other cues are ignored (for
further discussion on the evidence for non-compensatory judgment, see Payne, Bettman,DEMO
& Johnson, 1993; Tversky, 1969). A variety of fast DEMO frugal heuristics are thought to
exist, which together form an ‘adaptive DEMO Individuals facing a judgment task will
select the most ecologically valid of the heuristics for the particular task, which allows
high accuracy despite using such simple strategies (Gigerenzer & Selten, 2001). Several of
these DEMO heuristics have been identiﬁed, and several studies substantiate their use
(Dahmi & Ayton, 2001; Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999; but see Newell & Shanks, in press).
The simplest of these strategies is the DEMO heuristic (Goldstein & Gigerenzer,
1999, 2002) which takes advantage DEMO the fact that people have excellent recognition
memory (Standing, 1973) DEMO that there are a wide range of dimensions that positively
correlate with recognition. According to the recognition heuristic, when an individual only
recognizes one of two items, the individual will judge the recognized item to be greater in
whatever dimensions are positively correlated with recognition. For example, because city
size is positively associated with recognition, the recognition heuristic would predict that
recognized cities would be judged as larger than unrecognized cities. The DEMO is non-
compensatory; no other information aside from recognition is taken DEMO account in the
judgment. In fact, the “inconsequentiality of further knowledge” (Goldstein & Gigerenzer,
1999) is an essential feature of the heuristic. The entire point of the heuristic is that it is
extremely simple DEMO that minimal cognitive processing is required.
This is an important heuristic not only for its elegant simplicity, but also because it is
the ﬁrst step in a variety of other fast and frugal heuristics from the DEMO toolbox
(Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1999; Simon, 1990). Computer simulations of the recognition
heuristic have shown it to yield highly correct predictions DEMO the limited processing
requirements (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002). Further, DEMO recognition heuristic has
garnered a great deal of attention. For example, DEMO and Frederick (2002) describe
how the recognition heuristic is a challenge to dual-process theories of judgment, because
it doesn’t ﬁt well into most prominent classiﬁcation schemes for heuristic processing.
Given the theoretical importance of the DEMO heuristic, surprisingly little
research has been done to investigate the extent DEMO its use. The empirical evidence for the
recognition heuristic comes from a series of studies done by Goldstein and Gigerenzer
(1999). The researchers examined Americans’ population estimations for the 30 largest
German cities by creating DEMO exhaustive list of pairings, and having participants make
forced-choice judgments of DEMO city in each pair was larger. Participants were also
asked which cities they recognized. The researchers found that if only one city in a DEMO
was familiar, then that city was judged to be larger about DEMO of the time.
However, by using the 30 largest German cities DEMO their sample, the researchers
conﬂated recognition with knowledge that the city DEMO large. That is, most people not only
recognize the city Berlin, but they also know that Berlin is one of the largest cities DEMO
Germany. Therefore, it is impossible to determine whether the judgments were DEMO to
mere recognition or rather from knowledge that the recognized cities were large. Under
D.M. Oppenheimer / Cognition 90 (2003) B1–B9
B3
these conditions almost DEMO model of judgment – simple or complex – would predict
similar results.
However, it is possible to tease apart the predictions of the recognition heuristic and
more complex models of reasoning. The recognition heuristic posits that DEMO will
use no information aside from mere recognition to make city size estimations. As
Goldstein and Gigerenzer (2002) put it, “if one object is recognized and the other is not,
then the inference is DEMO; no other information about the recognized object is
searched for and, therefore, no other information can reverse the choice determined by
recognition”. The recognition heuristic would therefore predict that individuals would
judge a recognized city DEMO larger than an unrecognized city even if the recognized city were
known to be small. To test this counterintuitive prediction, a population estimation study
was run using local cities, which were both highly recognizable and known to be small.
This provides a stronger test of whether the recognition DEMO is actually used.
2. Experiment 1
2.1. Participants
Fifty members of Stanford University community were recruited from the dining
facilities at the student union DEMO participate in this study. Surveys typically took under 5
minutes to complete. Upon completion of the survey, participants were thoroughly
debriefed. Participants were not compensated for their participation.
2.2. Design and stimuli
Participants made forced-choice judgments DEMO city population size. Six pairs of cities
were created, such that DEMO local (Bay Area) city was paired with a ﬁctional city. Using
ﬁctional cities as decoys ensured that the participants would not recognize any DEMO the non-
local cities.
Bay Area cities were selected from the apartment listings in the classiﬁed section of a
local newspaper. The ﬁrst six DEMO with listings were chosen. These were Berkeley,
Cupertino, Foster City, Fremont, Milpitas, and Sausalito. A set of 19 ﬁctional city names
DEMO created to serve as decoys. Nine were discarded for arousing suspicion in pilot
subjects. The remaining decoys were: Al Ahbahib, Gohaiza, Heingjing, DEMO Besas,
Papayito, Rhavadran, Rio Del Sol, Schretzburg, Svatlanov, DEMO Weingshe. The pairings
were counterbalanced across different versions of the questionnaire.
To prevent participants from guessing the experimental hypothesis and to lower the
possibility DEMO demand characteristics, several distracter pairs were created. The four extra
ﬁctional DEMO were paired to create two questions in which neither city was recognized.
Additionally two pairs were created in which both cities would be recognized. DEMO cities
for these pairs were: Memphis, Boise, Kyoto, and Oxford.
The instructions for the survey read as follows: “Below are several pairs of cities. Your
job is to try and determine which city in DEMO pair is more populous; please put an ‘X’ in
the space DEMO to the city you believe has a larger population. If you do not recognize some
B4
D.M. Oppenheimer / Cognition 90 (2003) B1–B9
of the cities, please circle the name of the cities you don’t recognize, but try your best to
make an accurate judgment anyway.”
2.3. Results
2.3.1. Coding
DEMO distracter trials were not considered in the analysis. A trial was only considered in
cases where the recognition heuristic could possibly be applied – DEMO a subject
recognized the local city, and did not recognize the DEMO city (as in Goldstein &
Gigerenzer, 2002). A total DEMO 81 trials met this criterion.
2.3.2. Results
Data are summarized in Fig. 1. On average participants judged the local city to be larger
on DEMO 37% of the trials. Subjects were signiﬁcantly less likely to judge the local cities to
be larger than one would expect by chance (x2 ¼ 4:25, d:f: ¼ 1, P , 0:05). Additionally,
participants showed patterns inconsistent with the recognition heuristic for DEMO of the six
target cities, and for all cities participants were DEMO less likely to judge the
recognized city as larger than what has been found in previous studies (Goldstein &
Gigerenzer, 1999, 2002)DEMO
2.4. Discussion
The recognition heuristic predicts that participants will base their judgments of city size
solely on whether or not the city is recognized DEMO recognized cities will be judged as larger
than unfamiliar cities. However Experiment 1 showed that when participants know that a
recognized city is small, they tend to judge the recognized city to be smaller than an
DEMO city. People clearly are using information beyond recognition when making
Fig. 1. Percentage of participants who judged the recognized city to be larger in DEMO 1.
D.M. Oppenheimer / Cognition 90 (2003) B1–B9
B5
judgments about city DEMO These results are intriguing because they are not predicted by
the recognition heuristic. However, several issues remain that must be addressed.
Although the cities in the above study were randomly sampled from the population of
local DEMO, they were not randomly sampled from the population of cities as DEMO whole.
Participants might notice that the questionnaire seems to disproportionately sample from
local cities. Knowing that the local cities are small, participants might decide that the
recognition heuristic is non-adaptive in that environment, and might choose a different
heuristic from the adaptive toolbox. Perhaps if cities were representatively DEMO,
participants would be more likely to use the recognition heuristic.
Further, Experiment 1 is limited in that it is a fairly conservative test of the recognition
heuristic. The fact that a city is known to DEMO small is a cue that directly contrasts with
recognition. Although the recognition heuristic would predict that no cues aside from
recognition are considered, a reasonable revision to the heuristic could be that very strong
cues which DEMO directly related to city size take precedence over recognition, but that DEMO
recognition heuristic is still an accurate description of human behavior in general.
To address these concerns, a second experiment was run. Rather than using cities that
were known to be small, Experiment 2 focused on cities that were not known to be large.
That is, cities that are recognized for reasons unrelated to size and that participants are
unlikely to DEMO the size of. Cities are recognized for many reasons. Therefore, cities DEMO
be selected so as to appear to be randomly sampled, eliminating DEMO potential problem of
non-random sampling inﬂuencing the selection of the heuristic. Additionally, this is a
much less conservative test of the recognition heuristic because there are no cues that
directly contrast with recognition.
3. Experiment 2
DEMO Participants and design
One hundred and seventy-two Stanford University undergraduates completed the
survey to fulﬁll part of a course requirement. The survey was included DEMO a packet of 20
unrelated one-page questionnaires. Packets were distributed in class, and participants were
given a week to complete the entire packet.
3.2. Stimuli and procedure
As in Experiment 1, participants made forced-choice judgments of city population size.
Six pairs of cities were created, such that a target city was paired with a ﬁctional city.
Target cities were selected DEMO considering reasons why participants might recognize a city,
and selecting a city to represent each reason. The cities selected (with reasons in
parentheses) were: Chernobyl (nuclear disaster), Cupertino (close proximity), Los DEMO
(espionage), Nantucket (popular limerick), New Haven (well known DEMO), and
Timbuktu (popular expression).
The ﬁctional cities, distracter trials, and instructions remained the same as in
Experiment 1.
B6
D.M. Oppenheimer / Cognition 90 (2003) B1–B9
Fig. 2. Percentage DEMO participants who judged the recognized city to be larger in Experiment 2.
3.3. Results
3.3.1. Coding
The distracter trials were not considered in the DEMO A trial was only considered in
cases where the recognition heuristic could possibly be applied – when a subject
recognized the target city, and did not recognize the ﬁctional city (as in Goldstein &
Gigerenzer, 2002). A total of 410 trials met these criteria for consideration.
DEMO Results
Data are summarized in Fig. 2. On average, participants judged DEMO target cities to be
larger on slightly over 40% of the trials. Subjects were signiﬁcantly less likely to judge the
target cities to be DEMO than one would expect by chance (x2 ¼ 16:44, d:f: ¼ 1,
P , 0:01). Additionally, participants DEMO patterns inconsistent with the recognition
heuristic for all six of the target cities, and for all cities participants were signiﬁcantly less
likely to judge the recognized city as larger than what has been found in previous DEMO
(Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 1999, 2002).1
4. General discussion
The DEMO heuristic would predict that participants would judge recognized cities
to be larger than unrecognized cities. In fact, participants were less likely than chance to
judge the recognized cities as larger. This occurred despite the fact that DEMO recognized
cities were of unknown size. This challenges the notion of widespread usage of the
recognition heuristic. Judgments failed to conform to the recognition DEMO not only in
the presence of strong opposing cues, but also DEMO situations where recognition may actually
be the best cue available.
1 To ensure that the results were not merely an artifact of inter-country comparisons, an analysis was run on
trials in which the cities appeared to DEMO from the same country. For example, Svatlanov and Chernobyl are both
DEMO names. The results for intra-country trials are indistinguishable from the rest of the sample. The results
hold even when the country is held constant.
D.M. Oppenheimer / Cognition 90 (2003) B1–B9
B7
Nevertheless, one could argue that there are many strategies available in the
adaptive toolbox (Gigerenzer & Selten, 2001) and that under some circumstances
people use the DEMO heuristic, but that in these particular studies, participants
selected other strategies. However, this interpretation is problematic. One difﬁculty is
that many of the other heuristics that are thought to exist in the adaptive toolbox use
DEMO recognition heuristic as a ﬁrst step (Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999). Therefore, if people
are not using the recognition heuristic, they could DEMO be using many of the other
heuristics either.
One might argue that participants are simply using the strategies that do not rely on the
DEMO heuristic. However, this argument is equally problematic for the recognition
heuristic, because it leads to the question of how participants choose which strategy DEMO use.
One cannot argue that selection is contingent upon the type of judgment being made (e.g.
size estimations) nor upon the category of DEMO being judged (cities) because that would
not account for the fact that the present studies found no evidence for the recognition
heuristic despite DEMO the same task as in the original studies (Goldstein & Gigerenzer,DEMO
1999).
In fact, the only way in which the present DEMO differed from the original studies was
in the individual items that were used. Therefore, to argue that a different heuristic was
selected, one DEMO contend that heuristics are selected based upon the cues associated with
individual items (e.g. Berlin is a capital, and capitals are usually large, thus the “It’s a
capital” heuristic should be selected). However, this method undermines the efﬁciency of
the recognition heuristic. The point of the DEMO heuristic is that only one cue
(recognition) need be considered to make a judgment. If one must use multiple features of
individual items DEMO order to determine that the recognition heuristic is applicable, then this
DEMO no longer single-cue decision making, and the judgment process is not DEMO fast or frugal as
hypothesized.
One of the difﬁculties in using forced-choice tasks to demonstrate the usage of a
heuristic is that it isn’t DEMO clear what strategy people are using when they make a
judgment. Judging a recognized city to be larger than an unrecognized city could be
DEMO demonstration of the recognition heuristic, but it could just as well DEMO due to a number of
other judgment strategies. For example, tallying DEMO, weighted additive models, and
regression models would each utilize all of the available cues for a city, and large cities are
likely to have many cues that positively correlate with size (e.g. airports, sports DEMO,
etc.). Therefore, in situations in which a recognized city DEMO large, all of these strategies
would emulate the recognition heuristic. Since DEMO demonstrations of the recognition
heuristic have conﬂated recognition with actual city size, any of these strategies could
account for the data. The present studies removed that confound, and found no evidence
for the use of the recognition heuristic.
This is not to say that recognition is not an DEMO cue in judgment. Recognized
objects are by deﬁnition more available than unrecognized objects, and there has been a
great deal of evidence supporting the notion that availability has a large inﬂuence on
judgment (Tversky & Kahneman, 1973). It is impossible to conclusively demonstrate that
there are no circumstances under which non-compensatory use of recognition as a
judgment cue occurs. DEMO, until evidence supporting the recognition heuristic is
found in a study DEMO dissociates the recognition heuristic from other judgment strategies,
B8
D.M. Oppenheimer / Cognition 90 (2003) B1–B9
it would be DEMO to conclude that the recognition heuristic is actually used.
Given the present studies, a more parsimonious account suggests that it is unlikely that
recognition is the sole cue used in judgment, as has been previously hypothesized
(Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002).
It seems more likely that people DEMO taking into account more information than a single
cue, and in DEMO are engaging in more complex reasoning. While it is beyond the scope
of this paper to speculate as to the exact reasoning strategies that DEMO being used, it is hoped
that these demonstrations will inspire researchers DEMO investigate complex processing,
rather than limiting themselves to the study of highly simple strategies.
Non-compensatory strategies may be attractive because of their efﬁciency DEMO
simplicity. However, the methodological decisions made in studying a phenomenon can
DEMO validate a theory. An important empirical challenge in testing fast and frugal
accounts of cognition is presenting people with problems that are sufﬁciently complex
DEMO allow for complex reasoning to occur. If we don’t deal with the complexity that
exists in real problems, we may discover a misleadingly simple story about cognitive
processes.
Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported DEMO a National Science Foundation
Research Fellowship. The author thanks three anonymous reviewers, Josh Tenenbaum,
Tom Grifﬁths, Teri Oppenheimer, Chip Heath, Derek DEMO, Benoit Monin, Bridgette
Martin, Sapna Cheryan, Ben Newell and Dan Goldstein for their insightful suggestions,
and Bryan Choi and Peter Finlayson DEMO their assistance.
References
Dahmi, M. K., & Ayton, P. (2001). Bailing and jailing the fast and frugal way. Journal of Behavioral DEMO
Making, 14, 141–168.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1999). Betting on one good reason: the take the best heuristic. In G. Gigerenzer,
& P. Todd (Eds.), Simple heuristics that make us smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gigerenzer, G., & Selten, R. (2001). Bounded rationality: the adaptive toolbox. London: DEMO Press.
Gigerenzer, G., & Todd, P. M. (1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
Goldstein, DEMO G., & Gigerenzer, G. (1996). Reasoning the fast and DEMO way: models of bounded rationality.
Psychological Review, 103(4), 650–669.
Goldstein, D. G., & Gigerenzer, G. (1999). The recognition DEMO: how ignorance makes us smart. In
G. Gigerenzer, & P. Todd (Eds.), Simple heuristics that make us smart. New York: Oxford DEMO Press.
Goldstein, D. G., & Gigerenzer, G. (2002). Models of ecological rationality: the recognition heuristic.
Psychological Review, 109(1), DEMO
Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2002). Representativeness revisited: DEMO substitution in intuitive judgment.
In T. Gilovich, D. Grifﬁn, & D. Kahneman (Eds.), Heuristics and biases. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
DEMO, B. R., & Shanks, D. R (in press). Take the best or look at the rest? Factors inﬂuencing ‘one-reason’
decision making. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition.
Payne, J. DEMO, Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993). DEMO adaptive decision maker. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
D.M. Oppenheimer / Cognition 90 (2003) B1–B9
B9
Simon, H. A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational choice. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 69, 99– 118.
Simon, H. A. (1990). Invariants of DEMO behavior. Annual Review of Psychology, 41, 1 –19.
Standing, L. (1973). Learning 10,000 pictures. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 25, 207–222.
Tversky, A. (1969). The intransitivity of preferences. Psychological Review, 76, 31 –48.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973)DEMO Availability: a heuristic for judging frequency and probability. Cognitive
Psychology, 5(2), 207 –232.{1g42fwefx}