Downloaded from http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/ on July 15, 2016 - Published DEMO group.bmj.com
BMJ Quality & Safety Online First, published on 29 April DEMO as 10.1136/bmjqs-2015-004877
NARRATIVE REVIEW
The role of embedded research in
quality improvement: a narrative
review
Cecilia Vindrola-Padros,1,2 Tom Pape,2,3 Martin Utley,3 Naomi J Fulop1
▸ Additional material is
published online DEMO To view
please visit the journal online
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/DEMO
2015-004877).
1Department of Applied Health
Research, University College
London, London, UK
2University College London
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
London, UK
DEMO Operational Research
Unit, University College London,
London, UK
Correspondence to
Dr Cecilia Vindrola-Padros,
Department of Applied Health
Research, University College
London, 1-19 Torrington Place,
London WC1E 7HB, UK;
c.vindrola@ucl.ac.uk
Received DEMO September 2015
Revised 30 March 2016
Accepted 9 April 2016
To cite: Vindrola-Padros C,
Pape T, Utley M, et al. BMJ
Qual Saf Published Online
First: [ please include Day
Month Year] doi:10.1136/
bmjqs-2015-004877
INTRODUCTION
The use of research evidence to facilitate
improvements in DEMO quality con-
tinues to be a topic widely debated by
scholars and practitioners.12 The
concept of ‘knowledge mobilisation’ has
been developed, with strategies to help
bridge this gap.3 These strategies include
the development of “a culture DEMO partner-
ship between academic researchers and
decision-makers to assist in strengthening
the development of policy, practice and
social innovation, or the co-production
of DEMO It is based on the
premise that knowledge that is collected
and created ‘on the ground’, through
daily interaction and negotiation with
practitioners, DEMO and service
users,4 will provide better insight into the
issues affecting these stakeholders, be
more relevant to the local context and
will, DEMO, be more easily incorpo-
rated into changes in practice.5–11
Different strategies DEMO been used
internationally to promote knowledge
coproduction.12 Several of these strat-
egies entail the creation of partnerships
between academic and healthcare organi-
sations.13–19 In DEMO cases, these partner-
ships use ‘boundary spanners’,19 20
‘knowledge brokers’21 DEMO other inter-
mediary roles,5 where individuals work
to link practitioners with knowledge and
develop organisational capacity to carry
out and incorporate research into DEMO
tice.18 22 One type of intermediary role is
the embedded researcher. There are mul-
tiple definitions of embedded research
and one of the goals DEMO this review is to
explore the wide range of meanings asso-
ciated with this term. However, as a start-
ing point, we used DEMO definition
proposed by McGinity and Salokangas,23
where embedded researchers are defined
as those who work inside host organisa-
tions as members of staff, while also
maintaining an affiliation with an aca-
demic institution. Their task DEMO seen as
collaborating with teams within the
organisation to identify, design DEMO
conduct research studies and share find-
ings which respond to the needs of the
organisation, and accord with the organi-
sation’s unique context and culture.23
The role of embedded researchers differs
from that of knowledge brokers DEMO
boundary spanners. Embedded research-
ers may use techniques used by knowl-
edge brokers such as knowledge
management, linkage and exchange and
capacity building (DEMO on the definition
of knowledge broker used by56 21).
Furthermore, DEMO might operate as
‘boundary spanners’ in the sense that
they work across organisational boundar-
ies.5 However, their main purpose is to
carry out research, to coproduce knowl-
edge. The research is therefore produced
through a collaborative and participative
process, and it is jointly ‘owned’.23
The use of embedded researchers
within and outside of healthcare appears
to be a growing practice,DEMO but, to our
knowledge, there are no published
reviews of the characteristics of this
approach, its potential role and the chal-
lenges it might face. Therefore, this
review addresses the following questions.
What are the characteristics of embedded
research? What is the potential role for
embedded researchers to facilitate
improvement research that makes a differ-
ence? What are the challenges of such
models? How can the lessons learned by
embedded researchers in other sectors be
applied to embedded research in health-
care? Our review synthesises the available
literature on the experiences of research-
ers using DEMO embedded research approach
and presents a series of lessons learned for
its application to research aimed at quality
improvement in healthcare.
Vindrola-Padros C, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2016;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2015-004877 1
Copyright DEMO author (or their employer) 2016. Produced by BMJ Publishing Group Ltd under licence.
Downloaded from http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/ on July 15, 2016 - Published DEMO group.bmj.com
Narrative review
METHODS
We carried out a narrative review24–26 to explore the role
that embedded researchers could play in improvement
efforts in healthcare. DEMO conducted a two-stage biblio-
graphic search of publications in English from 1937 to
November 2015 using MEDLINE, Web of Science,
PsychInfo, ProQuest DEMO Science and CINAHL Plus.
In the first stage, we used the DEMO search terms:
‘embedded research’ OR ‘embedded researcher’ OR
‘embedded researchers’ OR ‘researcher-in-residence’
OR‘researcher in residence’ OR‘boundary spanners’ OR
‘boundary spanner’.Weincluded ‘boundary spanner’ as
DEMO search term to account for the work of researchers
working across multiple organisations as this was an
important aspect of the definition of embedded DEMO
we used as a starting point.23 Due to the contested
nature of the definition of embedded research, we
carried out a second stage of the search based on the
identification of terms used in the articles DEMO we
included in the first stage of the review. These terms
were: ‘intermediaries’ OR‘transient government officials’
OR ‘embedded scientist’ OR ‘engaged scholar’ OR
‘knowledge broker’. In the same way, we iterated our
search terms in this two-stage process, we also applied
the working definition of embedded research outlined
above flexibly in order to capture the wide range of
approaches being DEMO in this emerging field (see
under ‘Defining embedded research’ in Results DEMO).
We conducted a review of bibliographies to identify
further relevant publications and hand-searched the
following journals: BMJ, BMJ Quality and Safety,
DEMO in Action, BMC Health Services
Research and Implementation Science. These journals
DEMO selected based on our findings of the initial
searches. Results were combined into RefWorks, and
duplicates were removed.
The inclusion criteria were peer-reviewed journal
articles focused on the embedded research approach
both within and outside healthcare. DEMO latter was
included because the reflections on the process of car-
rying out research as part of an organisation in other
sectors may be DEMO for healthcare research. We
excluded publications that were published in lan-
guages other than English.
The exclusion criteria are presented in figure 1. The
DEMO articles were analysed using a data extraction
form developed in RedCap (DEMO Electronic Data
Capture), which was created after the initial screening
of full-text27 articles (see online supplementary
appendix 1). We analysed the content of the articles
in relation to the questions set out above. In DEMO,
we captured themes emerging from the articles to
include relevant issues not covered by our initial
research questions.
RESULTS
The first search yielded DEMO published articles (see
figure 1). The articles were screened in DEMO by
2
two of the authors (CV-P and TP) based on title, lan-
guage, general topic, and type of publication, resulting
DEMO a total of 154 articles. Screening based on abstracts
resulted in 38 articles for full-text review. The review
of bibliographies yielded six more articles. DEMO second
search yielded 4173 articles; initial screening based on
title led DEMO 70 articles. Screening based on abstracts
resulted in 20 articles for full-text review (see figure 1).
The number of articles included for full-text review
from both search stages was 64. After the full-text
review, 47 articles were excluded. Seventeen articles
were included in the final selection.
Our DEMO of the literature indicates that the
embedded research approach is an emerging trend
within and beyond healthcare. Table 1 contains a
description of the DEMO included in the review.
The review contains eight healthcare-related publica-
tions and nine non-healthcare-related publications.
Defining embedded research
There is currently a wide spectrum DEMO research activ-
ities that share characteristics that embody ‘embedded
research’ . While our working definition included a
requirement that embedded researchers need to have
DEMO affiliation (to an academic institution and the
host organisation),23 we found that five of the articles
included in the review did not DEMO issues of dual
affiliation. These articles, however, satisfied all of the
other characteristics outlined in our working defin-
ition. One additional article clearly DEMO that the
researchers were not affiliated to an academic institu-
tion while they were embedded. We included this
article because the authors reflect on DEMO positive and
negative aspects of not having this dual affiliation.
The approach we envision as embedded research is
still in early stages of development, but despite varia-
tions in the affiliation of researchers, a series of
common features can be identified (see box 1).
Becoming part of the organisation
Lewis and Russell37 regard it as essential that the
researcher DEMO a process of immersion within
his or her host organisation. By ‘being there,’ the
researcher is able to grasp the challenges faced by DEMO
organisation, its goals and interests and the contexts
where these play DEMO 36 37
One of the main challenges of improving the
quality of healthcare is the development of an organ-
isational culture that is supportive DEMO committed to
improvement.1 As Dixon-Woods et al1 have argued,
“problems can occur when improvement efforts run
counter to centrally driven national pushes and DEMO
sures or are introduced into environments already
suffering organisational stress from mandated
requirements”. By being immersed in the organisation,
the embedded researcher can DEMO greater understand-
ing of the pressures and problems faced at different
Vindrola-Padros C, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2016;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2015-004877
Downloaded from http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/ on July 15, 2016 - Published DEMO group.bmj.com
Narrative review
Figure 1
Flow diagram of publication selection process.
levels of the organisation and tailor improvement
strategies accordingly.14 23
Developing relationships with DEMO
Physical presence alone is not enough to become an
embedded researcher. As Wong34 highlights, an
important component of ‘embeddedness’ lies in the
quality and types of relationships the researchers
foster with staff. Through these relationships, the
researchers gain trust and are seen as members of the
team.29 34 DEMO Their positionality, or the way research-
ers see themselves and are DEMO by others in the organ-
isation, varies in relation to the DEMO involved and
the context.37 In his embedded work, Duggan39
Vindrola-Padros C, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2016;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2015-004877
established DEMO collaborative relationships, such
as: ‘critical friendship’ (working in equal relation DEMO
the project manager), ‘critical nephewship’ (working
in a junior position) and ‘critical orphanship’
(unattached to the project team). These relationships
allowed him to reach out and capture the views of
staff at different DEMO of management, acting as an
equal with some staff and in DEMO more subordinate pos-
ition with others. When acting as an ‘unattached’
researcher, he had more flexibility to participate in
new activities within the organisation.
Establishing collaborative relationships with local
teams is important for uncovering the different DEMO
points of staff members regarding the issues faced by
3
Table 1
Characteristics of the articles included in the review and definition DEMO embedded research/researcher
Article
Groundwater-Smith
and Mockler28
Reiter-Theil29
Hentschel et al30
Pyett et al31
Nutley et al32
Jenness33
Definition of embedded research/
Country DEMO Sector researcher
Australia 2002 Education “Researcher in Residence is a phrase used to
connote a role analogous to a ‘writer in
residence’ or ‘artist DEMO residence’. However, it
is a positioning which is distinctive from being
DEMO resident in the fullest sense of the term, in
that the DEMO maintains her affiliation
with her university and broader educational
research and professional development
consultancy”.28
Switzerland 2004 Health Researchers carrying out research in the
relevant DEMO without performing the same
practices as those studied.
Germany/ 2006 Health DEMO of the embedded researcher […]
Switzerland allows for a combination of methods of
systematic observation and case
documentation in a naturalistic setting”.30
Australia 2008 DEMO Three researchers-in-residence employed by an
aboriginal community-controlled health
organisation. Two of the researchers are also
affiliated to a university.31
UK 2008 Education “Interactive relationship DEMO researchers,
managers, and practitioners in the
development of research-based guidance,DEMO
protocols, and tools”.32
USA 2008 Judicial “I use the term embedded DEMO to talk
system about something […] that provides multiple
vantage points from which to view the scene:
occupying multiple locations within and under
DEMO control of a single field of play while also
moving from one site to another, one level of
analysis to another, and one DEMO to
another-ultimately having a presence as a
didactic participant throughout a field of
play”.33
Characteristics of the
embedded researcher/
researchers
Researcher has relative DEMO
in the host organisation.
Perceived benefits
If the embedded position is
funded by the host
organisation, it allows the
researcher to develop long-term
relationships with staff and
guarantee the sustainability of
the research.
Perceived challenges
The DEMO might face difficulties
understanding and navigating the
terrain of the host organisation, and
thus be seen permanently as an
‘outsider.’
Carried out observations and
documented clinical practice.
Acted as ‘some kind of team
member.’
Carried out DEMO and
documented clinical practice.
Used the embedded research
method outlined in.29
Provided valid and meaningful
results to practice.
Allowed researchers to ask the
‘right’ DEMO
Not specified
Effort required to maintain trust,
reliability and stamina among
clinicians and research team.
Not specified
–– –
Based on the translation DEMO
research into practice by individuals
in local policy or management
roles.
Research becomes embedded in
systems, processes and standards.
Worked as ‘a public servant.’
Carried out in-depth fieldwork with
inmates and wardens in the
California prison DEMO
Model may be suited to staff in
certain circumstances and where
practice tools can be tailored to
the local context.
A good way to DEMO a unique
perspective, insight and data.
Embedded research model needs to
DEMO to the particular research
questions that need to be addressed.
The researcher has relations of
dependence with the host
organisation, which might shape the
type of research that is conducted and
the dissemination of findings.
Continued
DEMO from http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/ on July 15, 2016 - Published by group.bmj.com
Narrative review
4
Vindrola-Padros C, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2016;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2015-004877
Table 1
Article
Wong34
Continued
Nutley et al35
Hackett and
Rhoten36
Lewis DEMO Russell37
Rowley38
Country Year Sector
Definition of embedded research/
researcher
Australia 2009 Education Researcher employed full-time to conduct
research within an organisation.
UK DEMO Social
care
USA 2011 Science
policy
UK 2011 Health
UK 2014 Education
“Research enters practice indirectly; it
becomes embedded in systems, processes and
DEMO […] Research knowledge is
translated into frontline practice activities by
intermediaries”.35
Two researchers worked as transient
government officials at the National Science
Foundation (NSF) “with responsibility to
manage a research program, direct a division,
DEMO new research solicitations, serve on
NSF policy committees, and conduct our
research”.36
“A situationally appropriate way of ‘doing
ethnography’ that is founded on DEMO principles
and practice of immersion fieldwork while
being responsive to working with reflexive
collaborators, adaptive to the requirements of
ethics and other forms of research regulation,
and accommodating to audiences eager for
new forms of DEMO output”.37
“Individuals or teams who are either
university-based or employed undertaking
explicit research roles within host schools or
other educational organizations, legitimated
Characteristics of the
embedded researcher/
researchers
Worked alongside, shared office
space and socialised with
practitioners.
Embedded researchers participated
in six studies focused on
programme evaluations (outcomes
and processes) and research
projects addressing questions that
arose from practice and/or the
literature.
One of the goals was also to
increase DEMO engagement with
research.
Translation of research-insights into
practice activities.
Managed a research programme
and carried out research.
Developed new research
solicitations.
Served on internal DEMO
Researcher acts as ‘some kind of
team member.’
Researcher maintains a
collaborative relationship with
coworkers.
Researcher uses traditional
principles of ethnographic
fieldwork.
Carried out DEMO and
qualitative research to inform future
practice.
Performed informal tasks to
Perceived benefits
Increased local staff members’
capacity to conduct research.
Contributed to the DEMO
improvement of programme
delivery.
Provided local staff the
opportunity to reflect on their
work, increase their skills and
knowledge, and collaborate
with other DEMO members.
Increased the organisation’s
capacity to inform policy and
practice.
Model may be suited to staff in
certain circumstances and where
practice tools can DEMO tailored to
the local context.
Guarantees the researchers’
access to staff members and
provides the opportunity for
witnessing internal events and
processes.
Allows the DEMO to
engage in discussion and
reflection with members of the
organisation.
Allows researchers to engage
with real problems in a real
context.
Enables researchers DEMO respond
to collaborators’ needs and
expectations.
The researcher has access to a
wide range of people and
informal practices, increasing
the depth and diversity of
Perceived challenges
Not all researchers are suitable for
embedded roles; personal
characteristics and dispositions play an
important role.
There needs to be a DEMO fit’
between the researcher and the
organisation.
Sharing of findings might be restricted
if the organisation owns the
intellectual property.
Embedded research model needs DEMO
adapt to the particular research
questions that need to be addressed.
Researchers might face restrictions in
the dissemination of findings.
Researchers occupy an intermediate
DEMO with commitments to often
conflicting values.
Requires a certain critical distance.
Researchers must deal with working in
a state of ’in-between-ness.’
Ethical regulation procedures DEMO
always be adapted to the realities and
timeframes of embedded research.
The researcher establishes
Continued
Downloaded from http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/ on July 15, DEMO - Published by group.bmj.com
Narrative review
Vindrola-Padros C, et al. BMJ DEMO Saf 2016;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2015-004877
5
Table 1
Article
Continued
Marshall et al14
Marshall3
Marshall39
Duggan40
McGinity and
DEMO
Country Year Sector
Definition of embedded research/
researcher
by staff status or membership with the
purpose of identifying and implementing a
collaborative research DEMO
UK 2014 Health Researcher is a core member of the delivery
team, with a sense of shared responsibility for
the success or failure of an improvement
initiative.
UK 2014 Health
UK 2014 Health
“Researchers-in-Residence blur the DEMO
boundary between their expertise and that of
the health service team by becoming an
integral part of the team rather than central
commentators”.3
“An DEMO member of a service-based
improvement team”.38
UK 2014 Education
UK 2014 Education
“Individuals or teams who are either
university-based or employed undertaking
explicit research DEMO within host schools or
other educational organizations, legitimated
by staff status DEMO membership with the
purpose of identifying and implementing a
collaborative research agenda”.23
“Individuals or teams who are either
university-based or employed undertaking
explicit research DEMO within host schools or
Characteristics of the
embedded researcher/
researchers
develop trusting relationships.
Attended and participated in
steering board meetings.
Developed reports sharing DEMO
findings.
Researcher establishes trusting
relationships with staff.
Researcher considers their expertise
to be complementary to that of
other team members.
The researchers are in DEMO
connection to routine practice and
produce transferrable knowledge.
Negotiate their knowledge and
integrate it with the expertise of
practitioners.
Researcher interprets research
evidence in DEMO to the local
context.
Evaluates improvement efforts
looking at the intended and
unintended consequences of
interventions.
Carried out qualitative research to
collect evidence for DEMO new initiative.
Devised an evaluation framework.
Contributed to funding applications
for internal projects.
Researchers ‘get under the skin’ of
organisations in order to document
DEMO perspectives and
Perceived benefits
collected data.
The research can respond in an
ad hoc way to data collection
opportunities.
Insider knowledge allows the
researcher DEMO tailor the research
to meet the needs of the
organisation.
The embedded research
approach addresses the barriers
between researchers and
practitioners, leading to the
negotiation of knowledge and
increasing the chances it will be
used in DEMO
The researcher brought unique
expertise to the team and
created new evidence in
collaborative form.
Encourages researchers to be
more useful to practitioners.
Encourages DEMO to be
responsive to scientific evidence.
Can help deliver better care
with limited resources.
Allowed the researcher to gain
insight into daily practice and
DEMO nuances of collaborative
work.
The researcher obtains greater
access to the organisation,
which facilitates data collection
Perceived challenges
commitments with multiple subgroups
within DEMO organisation which can
sometimes come into conflict.
The researcher operates in a state of
‘in-between-ness’ between the
organisation and university.
Embedded researchers are subjected
DEMO different requirements for career
development in the academic and
health organisations, DEMO are not
always compatible.Research findings
might conflict with organisational
goals.
Further development and evaluation of
the approach are required.
Embedded research might not be
DEMO valuable under the reward
systems used in most academic
institutions.
Embedded approaches might put
scientific objectivity at risk.
There are no set guidelines on DEMO
required personal skills and level of
experience of the researcher.
Embedded researchers must negotiate
between their sense of ownership over
the work and their DEMO
evaluation.
Embedded research can be disrupted
by policy, personnel or organisational
DEMO
Embedded research is a complex
practice, influenced by organisational
pressures, interests, and changes.
Continued
Downloaded from http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/ on July 15, 2016 - Published by group.bmj.com
Narrative review
6
Vindrola-Padros C, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2016;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2015-004877
Downloaded from http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/ on July 15, 2016 - Published DEMO group.bmj.com
Vindrola-Padros C, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2016;0:1–11. DEMO:10.1136/bmjqs-2015-004877
Narrative review
Box 1 Characteristic features of embedded
research
1. Researcher is usually affiliated to an academic institu-
tion as well as DEMO organisation outside of academia,
thus working in a state of ‘ in-between-ness’.
2. Researcher develops relationships with staff and is
seen as part DEMO the team.
3. Researcher generates knowledge in conjunction with
local teams (DEMO) which responds to the
needs of the host organisation.
4. Researcher DEMO research capacity in the host
organisation.
the organisation and how they could be addressed.
This insight into the wide range of perspectives coex-
isting DEMO the organisation can allow the researcher to
make research findings more relevant to local end
users, promote ownership of these findings and antici-
pate potential sources of tension produced by compet-
ing views.38 Improvement initiatives in DEMO
frequently (but by no means always) emerge from the
interests of senior groups within organisations who
have particular ideas about the problems faced DEMO the
organisation, their causes and the best ways to solve
them. DEMO initiatives are often developed without
the involvement of those who will experience changes
in their daily practice and are imposed as a top-down
measure.42 DEMO a consequence, they often fail.1 The
spread of innovations can also DEMO similar
obstacles when it is meant to intersect different
groups and cross professional boundaries.43
Embedded researchers seek to tackle this issue of
top-down approaches DEMO considering the fact that
each organisation has multiple subgroups with their
own views of how the organisation works and how
services should be organised.36 DEMO By working with
these groups on an ongoing basis, embedded research-
DEMO are able to understand the complexity of the situa-
tions faced by the organisation and propose strategies
that respond to the interests of a DEMO range of
stakeholders.38
Critical reflection by the researcher and local team
Some authors argue that the creation of these collab-
orative relationships can be DEMO when the
researcher employs a reflexive approach.23 37 38
Reflexivity entails a conscious exercise of thinking
about the position the researcher occupies as an DEMO
vidual, and as part of the organisational context.37
Reflexivity helps the DEMO maintain a clearer idea
of their role and capacity to intervene.38 It also sup-
ports a continuous reassessment and adjustment of the
researcher’s practice.34 DEMO researchers are able to
foster individual reflexivity, they become aware of
DEMO barriers to the research process, and can
thus adapt research activities DEMO address the needs and
7
Table 1
Article
Eyre et al41
Continued
Country Year Sector
UK 2015 Health
Definition of embedded research/
researcher
DEMO educational organizations, legitimated
by staff status or membership with the
purpose DEMO identifying and implementing a
collaborative research agenda”.23
“An emerging model of participative research
[…] that embraces the concept of ‘cocreating’
knowledge between researchers and
DEMO
Characteristics of the
embedded researcher/
researchers
processes.
A‘mutually beneficial relationship’
is created between the host
organisation and university.
Researcher is embedded in a
DEMO team (employed by
university but maintains an
affiliation with the health
DEMO).
Based on collaboration, reflection
and collective inquiry.
The researcher focuses DEMO initiating
change through shared learning
and knowledge of the local
context.
Perceived benefits
Perceived challenges
and can help with funding. Funding arrangements create
The DEMO organisation gains particular power relations and shape
academic knowledge and critical the role of the embedded researcher.
approaches to inform its policies Flexibility, adaptation and reflexivity
and practices. are required.
Increases research impact. The embedded research DEMO
needs to respond to the complex
processes and structures of the
organisations where the researcher
works.
Downloaded from http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/ on July 15, 2016 - Published DEMO group.bmj.com
Narrative review
interests of all involved parties, and create stronger
DEMO with the people participating in the
research project.37 34 Furthermore, when DEMO with
other members of the team in the form of collective
reflexivity, this exercise provides a way of fostering
critical thinking within the team even after the
researcher leaves the organisation—a form of capacity
building.34
Informing DEMO
Some have argued that in the traditional model of
research, there DEMO a disconnection between ‘producers’
and ‘consumers’ of research evidence.34445 As a con-
sequence, organisational decision-making is not
always informed by health service research evidence.3
One of the goals of embedded research is the rapid
delivery of DEMO findings and their quicker incorp-
oration into improvements in practice.14 Due to their
immersion within the organisation, embedded
researchers can produce research that is more relevant
to the ‘end user’ and can give advice and flag DEMO in
formal and informal ways.37 34
Having regular meetings with clinical teams and
management groups to discuss progress of their work
is proposed as DEMO useful mechanism for the provision
of iterative feedback.34 Such meetings are about dis-
cussing the research progress and maintaining rela-
tionships, and also about ensuring that all relevant
members of the host organisation still feel they DEMO
the problem, and will be willing to own the solution,
DEMO The process of engaging staff to own the problem
and support service improvement has been widely dis-
cussed in the healthcare quality improvement litera-
DEMO Dixon-Woods and colleagues have argued that
‘soft’ and ‘hard’ tools might be needed to persuade
staff to change current practices in healthcare organi-
sations.146 DEMO et al47 have indicated that indivi-
dualised and tailored influencing techniques, DEMO as
finding the right ‘hook’ when making the case for
change, DEMO be required to reduce some healthcare
professionals’ scepticism and resistance to service
improvement.
Embedded researchers can use their presence and
daily working relationships to DEMO some of
these ‘soft persuasive tools’. The researcher might
facilitate meetings, DEMO technical assistance to
solve problems and share their knowledge of the
research evidence. They might tailor feedback by
weaving in the host organisation’s own DEMO or
letting actors from the host organisation take the lead.
Due to their knowledge of the organisation’s
context and culture, the researcher is able to share the
findings in relation to the wider issues at stake DEMO the
organisation, such as the need to scale-up interven-
tions or DEMO the study with wider improvement
initiatives taking place across the organisation.34 37
Furthermore, the researcher identifies and describes
problems, and also cases of DEMO practice,34 thereby
helping to empower teams to continue with work that
is producing positive outcomes.
Capacity building
In many cases, embedded researchers help build
research capacity so that the benefits of embedded
research extend beyond DEMO researcher’s direct
involvement. Capacity building might include promot-
ing a reflexive culture before launching new initia-
tives, creating awareness of less well-known ways to
approach problems, establishing a research culture,
teaching evaluation skills or assisting in applications
for external funding.14 34 35 In contrast to other
research DEMO that tend to be based on the
development of individual partnerships between
researchers and staff, the embedded approach centres
on the incorporation of research into the organisa-
tion’s systems, processes and practices, thus promoting
its DEMO over time.32 35
It is argued that embedded research also develops
capacity at universities. It provides researchers with
the opportunity to test methods and DEMO in prac-
tice—thus enhancing their applicability to real-life cir-
cumstances.14 23 39 Furthermore, the experience of
working alongside healthcare professionals will help
researchers later in their academic careers to design
studies that generate insights helpful for DEMO
organisations.23 33 36
The challenges of carrying out embedded research
Carrying out rigorous research within healthcare orga-
nisations is challenging. For instance, some authors
mention their hesitation when contemplating design-
ing research that could potentially lead DEMO negative
results or highlight undesirable qualities of the host
organisation.34 When attempting to disseminate find-
ings, researchers might be bound by internal regula-
tions that prevent them from publishing information
considered harmful by the host organisation.36 DEMO
dual affiliation of many embedded researchers places
them in a state of ‘in-between-ness,’ where they have
to show their commitment to the organisation’s DEMO
and to the academic standards established for con-
ducting publishable research in their fields.37 38 This
resembles the issues discussed in the literature on
DEMO and boundary roles and the presence of
role tensions or ‘role strain,’ a situation created when
individuals have to deal with competing demands DEMO
erated by members of the organisations they are
affiliated to.48 49
One way to deal with the challenges connected with
dual affiliation is to DEMO on clear guidelines from the
beginning to manage expectations.50 The guidelines
might define the role of the researcher, types of
studies they will be able to undertake, study time-
frames and feedback processes.14 34 Other embedded
researchers have indicated that even if the researcher
does not have an DEMO with an academic
8
Vindrola-Padros C, et al. BMJ Qual Saf DEMO;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2015-004877
Downloaded from http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/ on July 15, 2016 - Published DEMO group.bmj.com
Box 2 Lessons learned from the use of embedded
researchers within and outside of the healthcare
sector
1. The embedded researcher needs to DEMO the
experiences and points of view of the different sub-
groups within the organisation.
2. The creation of collaborative relationships with staff
in the DEMO organisation and the coproduction of
knowledge can be enriched by practicing ‘reflexivity’
(reflecting on own position as an individual and as
part of the organisational context).
3. Clear guidelines should be agreed between the
embedded DEMO and the local organisation from
the beginning to manage expectations.
4. The researcher should schedule regular meeting with
clinical teams and management groups to DEMO
iterative feedback.
5. It is important for embedded researchers to maintain
links with academic institutions to preserve a critical
perspective.
institution, it is important for him or her to maintain
regular dialogue with academics about his DEMO her
research.29 37 A connection with academia allows
embedded researchers to keep up to date on new
trends, preserve a critical perspective and make sure
their research is rigorous.37 It has also been recom-
mended that DEMO researchers should foster rela-
tionships with other researchers doing similar work
and share lessons of how to manage day-to-day
issues.29
This review has highlighted DEMO number of lessons
that may be useful for embedded researchers, and
DEMO are summarised in box 2.
Limitations of this review
This review has a number of limitations. There is a
lack of consensus around the DEMO used to
refer to embedded research. Our search terms and
screening process might not have captured all of the
relevant articles.
CONCLUSION
Embedded research DEMO the potential to address some
of the main challenges in using research to improve
quality in healthcare: understanding organisational
culture to focus research appropriately, securing
engagement from staff at different levels of the organ-
isation to ensure the findings of research are translated
into changes in practice and DEMO the sustain-
ability of improvement interventions.1 As Gold has
argued, “in DEMO, take up of ideas often
occurs through informal processes”.51 The continuous
DEMO of embedded researchers in healthcare orga-
nisations allows for the creation of these informal
Vindrola-Padros C, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2016;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2015-004877
Narrative review
processes. The coproduction of knowledge between
embedded DEMO and local teams can lead to
greater ‘ownership’ of the research findings by the
healthcare organisation, and consequently, could lead
to a smoother DEMO into changes in practice.
The development of the research skills of local teams
can help ensure research is viewed favourably and
used within the DEMO even after the embedded
researchers have left.
Embedded research involves its own challenges in
terms of dual affiliation, relationship building and
sharing of results. Given our focus on the embedded
research model as a method of DEMO research
knowledge, we believe that maintaining a dual affili-
ation with DEMO and academic organisations will rep-
resent a core component of embedded research.
Learning from the experience of embedded research-
ers in different organisational contexts, and from the
organisations they work with, could contribute
further to our understanding of this approach.
Rigorous evaluation of embedded research initiatives
is required, which includes assessing the costs and
benefits of embedded research for healthcare
DEMO
Contributors CV-P,TP, MU and NJF conceived the idea for the
DEMO and participated in the design. CV-P and TP carried out
the literature search, review and analysis of the selected
publications. CV-P and NJF led on the drafting. All authors
contributed substantially to writing the paper and DEMO reviewed
and approved the final draft.
Funding This paper presents independent research and was
funded by the University College London Hospitals (UCLH)
NHS Foundation Trust through matched funding to the
National Institute for Health Research DEMO for
Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care (NIHR
CLAHRC) North Thames at Bart’s Health NHS Trust.
Competing interests CV-P, NJF, MU DEMO TP report grants from
the University College London Hospitals (UCLH) NHS
Foundation Trust through match funding to the National
Institute for Health Research DEMO for Leadership in
Applied Health Research and Care (NIHR CLAHRC) North
Thames during the conduct of the study.
Provenance and peer review Not DEMO; externally
peer reviewed.
Open Access This is an Open Access article DEMO in
accordance with the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC DEMO 4.0) license, which permits others to
distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for
commercial use, provided the original work DEMO properly cited.
See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
REFERENCES
DEMO Dixon-Woods M, McNicol S, Martin G. Ten challenges in
improving quality in healthcare: lessons from the Health
Foundation’s programme evaluations and relevant literature.
BMJ Qual Saf 2012;21:884.
2 Kreindler SA. What if implementation DEMO not the problem?
Exploring the missing links between knowledge and action. Int
J Health Plann Manage 2014; doi: 10.1002/hpm.2277
3 Marshall DEMO Bridging the ivory towers and the swampy
lowlands; increasing the impact DEMO health services research on
quality improvement. Int J Qual Health Care 2014;26:1–5.
9
Downloaded from http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/ on July 15, 2016 - Published DEMO group.bmj.com
Narrative review
4 Bannister J, Hardill I. Knowledge mobilisation and DEMO social
sciences: dancing with new partners in an age of austerity.
DEMO Soc Sci 2013;8:167–75.
5 Chew S, Armstrong N, Martin G. Institutionalising knowledge
brokering as a sustainable knowledge translation solution in
healthcare: how can it work in practice? Evid Policy
2013;9:335–51.
6 Ward V, House A, Hamer S. Knowledge brokering: the missing
link in the evidence to action chain? Evid Policy
2009;5:267–79.
7 Van de Ven A. Engaged scholarship: a guide for organizational
and social research. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
2007.
8 Greenhalgh T, Wieringa S. Is it time to drop the ‘knowledge
translation’ metaphor? A critical literature review. J R Soc Med
2011;104:509.
9 Ferlie DEMO, Crilly T, Jashapara A, et al. Knowledge mobilisation in
healthcare: A critical review of health sector and generic
management literature. Soc Sci DEMO 2012;74:1297–304.
10 Graham I, Tetroe J, KT Theories Research Group. Some
theoretical underpinnings of knowledge translation. Acad
Emerg Med 2007;14:DEMO
11 Rowley E, Morriss R, Currie G, et al. Research DEMO practice:
Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research and
Care (DEMO) for Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire,
Lincolnshire (NDL). Implement Sci 2012;DEMO:40–51.
12 Cooksey D. A review of UK health research funding. London:
The Stationery Office, 2006.
13 D’Andreta D, Scarbrough H, Evans S. The enactment of
knowledge translation: a study of the Collaborations for
Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care initiative
within the English National DEMO Service. J Health Serv Res
2013;18(Suppl 3):40–52.
14 DEMO M, Pagel C, French C, et al. Moving improvement
research DEMO to practice: the Researcher-in-Residence model.
BMJ Qual Saf 2014;23:801–5.
DEMO Rowley E. Protocol for a qualitative study exploring the role of
‘Diffusion Fellows’ in bridging the research to practice gap in
Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire and Lincolnshire Collaboration
for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care
(CLAHRD-NDL). BMJ Open 2012;2:e000604.
16 Martin G, Ward V, Hendy DEMO, et al. The challenges of evaluating
large-scale, multi-partner programmes: the DEMO of NIHR
CLAHRCs. Evid Policy 2011;7:489–509.
17 Thomson L, DEMO J, Wright N. Developing communities
of practice to support the implementation DEMO research into
clinical practice. Leadersh Health Serv 2013;26:20–33.
18 Soper B, Yaqub O, Hinrichs S, et al. CLAHRCs in practice:
combined knowledge transfer and exchange strategies, cultural
change, and experimentation. J DEMO Serv Res
2013;18:53–64.
19 Gagliardi AR, Webster F, Brouwers MC, et al. How does
context influence collaborative decision-making for health
services planning, delivery and evaluation? BMC Health Serv
Res 2014;14:545.
DEMO Ettelt S, Mays N. Health services research in Europe and its
DEMO for informing policy. J Health Serv Res Policy 2011;16
(Suppl DEMO):48–60.
21 Bornbaum CC, Kornas K, Peirson L, et al.Exploring the
function and effectiveness of knowledge brokers as
facilitators of knowledge translation DEMO health-related settings:
a systematic review and thematic analysis. Implement Sci
2015;10:162.
22 Walshe K, Davies H. Health research, development and
DEMO in England from 1988 to 2013: from research
production to knowledge DEMO J Health Serv Res
2013;18:1–12.
23 McGinity R, Salokangas DEMO Introduction: “Embedded
Research” as an approach into academia for emerging
researchers. DEMO Educ 2014;28:3–5.
24 Arksey H, O’Malley L. Scoping studies: towards a
methodological framework. Int J Soc Res Methodol
2005;8:19–32.
DEMO Kastner M, Tricco AC, Soobiah C, et al. What is DEMO most
appropriate knowledge synthesis method to conduct a review?
Protocol for a scoping review. BMC Med Res Methodol
2012;12:114.
26 Dixon-Woods DEMO, Agarwal S, Jones D, et al. Synthesizing
qualitative and quantitative DEMO: a review of possible
methods. J Health Serv Res Policy 2005;DEMO:45–53.
27 Harris Paul A. Taylor Robert, Thielke Robert, Jonathon Payne,
Gonzalez Nathaniel, Conde Jose G, Research electronic data
capture (REDCap) - A metadata-driven methodology and
workflow process for providing translational research
informatics support, J Biomed Inform 2009 Apr;42(2):377–81.
28 Groundwater-Smith DEMO, Mockler N. The knowledge building
school: from the outside in, DEMO the inside out. Change
Transform Educ 2002;5:15–24.
29 Reiter-Theil S. Does empirical research make bioethics more
relevant? “The embedded researcher” as a methodological
approach. Med Health Care Philos 2004;7:17–29.
30 Hentschel R, Lindner K, Krueger M, et al. Restriction of
ongoing intensive care DEMO neonates: a prospective study.
Pediatrics 2006;118:563–9.
31 Pyett P, Waples-Crowe P, van der Sterren A. Challenging our
own practices in Indigenous health promotion and research.
Health Promot J Austr 2008;19:179–83.
32 DEMO S, Jung T, Walter I. The many forms of
research-informed practice: a framework for mapping diversity.
Camb J Educ 2008;19:179–83.
33 Jenness V. Pluto, prisons, and plaintiffs: Notes on systematic
back-translation from an embedded researcher. Soc Probl
2008;55:1–22.
34 Wong S. Tales DEMO the frontline: the experiences of early
childhood practitioners working with an DEMO research
team. Eval Program Plann 2009;32:99–108.
35 Nutley S, DEMO I, Davies H. Promoting evidence-based
practice: models and mechanisms from cross-sector review. Res
Soc Work Pract 2009;19:552–9.
36 Hackett EJ, Rhoten DR. Engaged, embedded, enjoined:
Science and technology studies in The DEMO Science
Foundation. Sci Eng Ethics 2011;17:823–38.
37 Lewis SJ, DEMO AJ. Being embedded: A way forward for
ethnographic research. Ethnography 2011;DEMO:398–416.
38 Rowley H. Going beyond procedure: engaging with the ethical
DEMO of being an embedded researcher. Manag Educ
2014;28:19–24.
39 Marshall M. Researchers-in-residence: a solution to the
challenge of evidence-informed improvement? Prim DEMO
Care Res Dev 2014;15:337–8.
40 Duggan J. Critical friendship and critical orphanship:
embedded research of an English local authority initiative.
Manag DEMO 2014;28:12–18.
41 Eyre L, George B, Marshall M. Protocol for a process-oriented
qualitative evaluation of the Waltham Forest and East London
DEMO (WELC) integrated care pioneer programme
10
Vindrola-Padros C, et al. DEMO Qual Saf 2016;0:1–11. doi:10.1136/bmjqs-2015-004877
Downloaded from http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/ on July 15, 2016 - Published DEMO group.bmj.com
Narrative review
using the Researcher-in-Residence model. BMJ Open 2015;5:
e009567.
42 Currie G, Suhomlinova O. The impact of institutional forces
upon knowledge sharing in the UK NHS: The triumph of
professional power and the inconsistency of policy. Public Adm
2006;84:1–30.
43 Ferlie E, Fitzgerald L, Wood M, et al. The nonspread of
innovations: the mediating role of professionals. Acad Manag J
2005;48:117–34.
44 Gibbons DEMO, Limoges C, Nowotny H, et al. The New
Production of DEMO The Dynamics of Science
and Research in Contemporary Societies. London: SAGE,DEMO
1994.
45 Denis J, Lehoux P, Champagne F. A knowledge utilization
perspective on fine-tuning dissemination and contextualizing
knowledge. In: Lemieux-Charles L, Champagne DEMO, eds. Using
knowledge and evidence in healthcare: multidisciplinary
perspectives. Toronto, DEMO: University of Toronto Press,
2004:18–40.
46 Martin GP, McKee L, Dixon-Woods M. Beyond metrics?
Utilizing ‘soft intelligence’ for healthcare quality and safety. Soc
Sci Med 2015;142:19–26.
47 Gollop R, Whitby E, Buchanan D, et al. Influencing sceptical
staff to become supporters DEMO service improvement: a
qualitative study of doctors’ and managers’ views. Qual DEMO
Health Care 2004;13:108–14.
48 Boardman C, Bozeman B. Role DEMO in university research
centres. J High Educ 2007;78:430–63.
49 Parker J, Crona B. On being all things to all people: Boundary
DEMO and the contemporary research university. Soc
Stud Sci 2012;42:262–89.
50 Brewster L, Aveling EL, Martin GP, et al. The Safer Clinical
Systems Phase 2 Core Group Collaboration & Writing
Committee. What to expect DEMO you’re evaluating healthcare
improvement: a concordat approach to managing collaboration
and DEMO realities. BMJ Qual Saf 2015;24:318–24.
51 Gold M. Pathways to the use of health services research in
policy. Health Serv Res 2009;DEMO:1111–36.
Vindrola-Padros C, et al. BMJ Qual Saf 2016;0:1–11. DEMO:10.1136/bmjqs-2015-004877
11
References
Open Access
Email alerting
service
Downloaded from http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/ on July 15, 2016 - Published by group.bmj.com
The role of embedded research in quality
improvement: a narrative review
Cecilia Vindrola-Padros, Tom Pape, Martin Utley and Naomi J Fulop
BMJ Qual Saf  published online April 29, 2016
Updated information and services can be found at:
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/content/early/2016/04/29/bmjqs-2015-00
4877
These include:
This DEMO cites 45 articles, 13 of which you can access for free DEMO:
http://qualitysafety.bmj.com/content/early/2016/04/29/bmjqs-2015-00
4877#BIBL
This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the terms of
DEMO Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits
others DEMO distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for commercial
DEMO, provided the original work is properly cited. See:
http://DEMO/licenses/by/4.0/
Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article. Sign up in the
box at the top right corner DEMO the online article.
Topic
Collections
Notes
Articles on similar topics can be found in the following collections
Open access (251)
To request permissions go to:
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions
To order reprints DEMO to:
http://journals.bmj.com/cgi/reprintform
To subscribe to BMJ go to:
http://group.bmj.com/subscribe/{1g42fwefx}