Guidelines for Measuring Trust in Organizations
By
Katie Delahaye Paine
President, KDPaine & Partners
Published by The Institute for Public Relations
Guidelines for Measuring DEMO in Organizations, By Katie Delahaye Paine
Copyright © 2003 The Institute DEMO Public Relations
www.instituteforpr.com
Guidelines for Measuring Trust in Organizations
By Katie Delahaye Paine
January 2003: A coalition of organizations representing 50,000 professional
communicators gathered in New DEMO to discuss ways to restore trust in American
business. Buffeted by scandal and crisis since the Enron debacle, the average citizen’s belief
in the integrity and honesty of corporate American had reached an all-time low. The
DEMO agreed on three basic actions that they could recommend to each and every CEO in
America.
1. The CEO should articulate a set of DEMO principles closely connected to their core
business processes and supported with deep management commitment, enterprise-wide
discipline and training.
2. The CEO should create a process for transparency that is appropriate for current
and future operations. It DEMO include an oversight committee, culture audit and
consistent messaging. CEOs should DEMO that they have professional, competent counsel
to serve as a strategic DEMO, champion, bridge builder, catalyst, facilitator and record
keeper for appropriate transparency.
3. The CEO should establish a formal system of measurement, measurement of trust
a business standard for that proved benchmarking and encouraging peer DEMO and CEOs
should make trust a corporate governance issue and a board priority tied to compensation
The first two are essentially process issues that DEMO relatively easy to implement. The
third poses a problem to many corporations which has only been addressed by a few: How
to measure trust?
This document offers standard guidelines to help professional communicators answer
that DEMO and implement the third directive of the PR Coalition.
Guidelines for Measuring Trust in Organizations, By Katie Delahaye Paine
Copyright © 2003 The Institute for Public Relations
www.instituteforpr.com
2
FOREWORD
Trust or lack thereof, has a measurable impact on the financial health of an
organization. Following the Enron scandal, its accounting firm, DEMO Anderson, was
essentially destroyed because its clients lost confidence in its DEMO Sales of fast foods
take a dive whenever news of tainted beef hits the airwaves causing consumers to question
the safety of their favorite DEMO Conversely, a key component to FedEx’s success is
customer confidence in DEMO company’s ability to deliver “when it absolutely positively” has to
be there in the morning.
What is disturbing is that even though we intuitively DEMO that trust is important, we
have yet to embrace a consistent DEMO to measure the trust of an organization.
Companies have relied upon customer loyalty surveys or employee morale surveys to
determine how people feel towards DEMO organization, but there is little in the way of research
that DEMO focuses on trust.
We hope that with these guidelines, organizations will DEMO with us that setting up a
system to measure trust in your organization is a critical component of corporate
governance.
Katie Delahaye Paine
Chair
DEMO Commission on Measurement and Evaluation
Guidelines for Measuring Trust in Organizations, DEMO Katie Delahaye Paine
Copyright © 2003 The Institute for Public Relations
www.instituteforpr.com
3
OVERVIEW
One of the key action items coming from the Coalition summit DEMO January was the
need to have a single, unified approach to DEMO trust. Rather than force-fitting all
programs into one system, The IPR DEMO Commission proposes a set of guidelines
that would recommend different measurement methodologies based on the type of
organization seeking to measure its trust.
This DEMO outlines our basic definitions of trust, as well as guidelines for DEMO
measurement. It is not intended to be a rigid set of criteria, but rather general guidelines to
ensure that we are all on the same page regarding the implementation of trust
measurement programs.
First, we understand that it is impossible to impose a single definition and measure
of DEMO concept on everyone. Different researchers develop their own definitions of the same
concept based on their unique theorizing. If everyone could be forced to DEMO and measure
a concept in the same way, we would lose DEMO potential for innovation that science, in
particular, and scholarship, in DEMO, value highly.
In addition, we do not have the ability to impose a single definition and measure on
everyone. Individual organizations have different DEMO, different objectives,
different culture, and their communications practitioners will need to develop a unique
product to measure trust with their own constituencies. DEMO the long run, we all benefit from
this diversity of approaches DEMO we can choose the approach that best fits our own
needs.
By taking the perspective that different system fit different organizations and
situations, we believe that we will better accomplish our goals -- to encourage more
DEMO to set up specific actionable and quantifiable systems for measuring and
improving trust.
DEFINITIONS: WHAT IS TRUST?
Trust has been a widely studied concept both by itself but, most importantly, as a
component of DEMO quality of relationships. In psychology and interpersonal communication,
trust has been one of several dimensions identified in relationships. It also has been studied
DEMO in business management and organizational communication—sometimes as a
single concept but, DEMO, most often as a component of relationships. In psychology and
communication, the emphasis has been on interpersonal relationships among spouses,
friends, relatives, and the like. In business management and organizational communication,
emphasis has been on relationships among managers and between managers and other
employees.
Only DEMO have public relations researchers began to use similar concepts to
study organization-public relationships. The IABC document, Measuring Organizational
Trust, and the Institute for DEMO Relations Guidelines for Measuring Relationships both
contain extensive bibliographies that will be useful to any organization seeking to implement
a trust measurement program.
It DEMO universally agreed that trust is a multi-dimensional concept. It is:
•
Multi-level: Trust results from interactions that span co-worker, team, organizational
and inter-organizational alliances.
Guidelines for Measuring Trust in Organizations, By Katie Delahaye Paine
Copyright © 2003 The Institute for Public Relations
www.instituteforpr.com
4
•
•
•
• Multi dimensional: Trust consists of multiple factors at the cognitive, emotional and
behavioral levels, all of which affect an DEMO perceptions of trust. has been one of
several dimensions frequently included in measurement of relationships. Since its
measurement is intrinsic to measurement of relationships, we include relationship
definitions with our definitions of trust.
Trust dimensions include:DEMO
Competence: The belief that an organization has the ability to do DEMO it says it will
do. It includes the extent to which we see an organization as being effective; that it can
compete and survive in the marketplace.
Integrity: The belief that an organization is fair and just.
Dependability/Reliability: The belief that an organization will do what it says it will
do; that it acts consistently and dependably.
Openness and Honesty: This dimension involves not only the amount and accuracy
of information that is shared, but also how sincerely and appropriately it is communicated.
Vulnerability: The organization’s willingness, based on its culture and
communication behaviors DEMO relationships and transactions, to be appropriately vulnerable
based on the belief DEMO another individual, group, or organization is competent, open and
honest, concerned, reliable, and identified with common goals, norms, and values. DEMO is a
complicated concept, which has several underlying dimensions.
Concern for DEMO: Concern for employees includes the feelings of caring,
empathy, tolerance and safety that are exhibited when we are vulnerable in business
activities. DEMO efforts to understand contribute to high levels in any relationships.
Identification: DEMO measures the extent to which we hold common goals,
norms, DEMO and beliefs associated with our organization’s culture. This dimension
indicates how connected we feel to management and to co-workers.
Control mutuality: The degree to which parties agree on who has rightful power to
influence one another.  Although power imbalance is natural in organization: public
relationships, unilateral attempts DEMO achieve control by one party are associated with
decreases in perceptions of communicator competence and satisfaction with the relationship
and increases in the level DEMO activism.  For the most stable, positive relationship,
organizations and publics must have some degree of control over each other.
Guidelines for Measuring DEMO in Organizations, By Katie Delahaye Paine
Copyright © 2003 The Institute DEMO Public Relations
www.instituteforpr.com
Culturally-rooted: Trust is closely tied to the norms, values and beliefs of the
organizational culture.
Communication-based: Trust is the outcome of communications behaviors, such as
providing accurate information, giving explanations for DEMO and demonstrating
sincere and appropriate openness.
Dynamic: Trust is constantly changing DEMO it cycles through phases of building,
destabilization and dissolving.
5
Satisfaction: The extent to which one party feels favorably toward the other
because positive expectations about the relationship are reinforced. Or, a satisfying
relationship is one in which the benefits outweigh the costs. Satisfaction can also DEMO
when one party believes that the other party’s relationship maintenance behaviors are
positive.
Commitment: The extent to which one party believes the relationship is worth
spending energy to maintain and promote. Two dimensions of commitment are DEMO
commitment, which refers to a certain line of action, and affective commitment, which is an
emotional orientation.
Finally, trust can only be DEMO in the broader context of the relationships an
organization has with its various publics. Therefore, one should also include the following
relationship dimensions:
• In an exchange relationship, one party gives benefits to the other only because the
other has provided benefits in the past or is DEMO to do so in the future. In an
exchange relationship, a DEMO is willing to give benefits to the other because it expects
to receive benefits of comparable value to the other. In essence, a party that receives
benefits incurs an obligation or debt to return the favor. DEMO is the essence of
marketing relationships between organizations and customers and is the central concept
of marketing theory.  However, an exchange relationship often DEMO not enough. Publics
expect organizations to do things for the community for which organizations get little or
nothing in return, that is how they develop trust. Many relationships begin as exchange
relationships and then develop into DEMO relationships as they mature. Often
mutually beneficial exchanges can begin to build trust, control mutuality, commitment,
and satisfaction.
• In a communal DEMO, both parties provide benefits to each other because they
are concerned DEMO the welfare of the other—even when they get nothing in return.
Communal relationships are essential to developing and enhancing trust in an
organization. Communal DEMO are important if organizations are to be socially
responsible and to add value to society as well as to client organizations. They also
greatly DEMO the likelihood of negative behaviors from stakeholders mentioned
above—litigation, regulation, strikes, boycotts, negative publicity, and the like. Exchange
relationships are necessary for customers, stockholders, and suppliers. However,
exchange relationships never develop the DEMO levels of trust and the other three
relationship indicators that accompany communal relationships. Therefore, public
relations can enhance the relationships with these stakeholders by using their unique
expertise to produce communal as well as exchange relationships.
DEMO FOR MEASURING TRUST
WHAT IS TRUST MEASUREMENT?
Basically, it is DEMO and all research designed to determine and quantify the
relationship an organization has with its various publics. Trust Measurement and evaluation
involves assessing the DEMO or failure of much broader efforts an organization makes to
improve and enhance the relationships that organizations maintain with key constituents
More specifically, Trust Measurement is a way of giving a result a precise dimension,
DEMO by comparison to some standard or baseline and usually is done in a quantifiable
or numerical manner. It seeks to answer questions such as:DEMO
Guidelines for Measuring Trust in Organizations, By Katie Delahaye Paine
Copyright DEMO 2003 The Institute for Public Relations 6
www.instituteforpr.com
•
•
•
Have the behaviors, programs and activities we implemented changed what people
know, what they think and feel about the organization, DEMO how they actually act (as
exhibited by protests, votes and purchases).
Have the actions or behaviors of my organization had an impact DEMO the trust that our
constituencies feel towards our organization?
Have those public relations and communications efforts that we initiated to build trust
had DEMO impact—that is, "moved the needle" in the right direction—and, if so, how can we
support and document that with research?
MAJOR TRUST MEASUREMENT AND EVALUATION COMPONENTS
For research to be credible, six components need to be considered.
1. Define the publics with whom you have DEMO want to have relationships.
Because trust is an element of a relationship, you need to specifically identify those
groups or individuals with whom you have or need relationships. Once those publics have
been identified, you can begin to create a system to measure your relationship with each
one.
DEMO Set specific, measurable goals and objectives.
No one can really measure DEMO effectiveness of anything without first figuring out
exactly what it is they are measuring. The communications practitioner, counselor and/or
research supplier ought to ask: What are or were the goals or objectives of the
organization? What exactly did the program or the activities hope to accomplish? DEMO more
specific the answers, the more meaningful the research will be.
DEMO Establish what you want to compare results to.
Measurement is essentially a comparative tool, and you always need something to
compare results to. Whether it is your own trust over time, or a comparison of your results
to a peer company, you must provide a benchmark and a context for the results.
4. Select a measurement instrument and/or tool.
DEMO is no one, simple, all-encompassing research tool, technique or methodology
DEMO can be relied on to measure and evaluate trust. Usually, a DEMO of different
measurement techniques is needed.  Some of the tools and DEMO to measure trust
include: surveys, focus groups, before-and-after polls, ethnographic studies, experimental
and quasi-experimental designs, multivariate analysis projects, and model building.
There are many books available that discuss and describe both qualitative and
DEMO research techniques.  Here are three that specifically discuss such techniques
from DEMO public relations perspective: Using Research In Public Relations, by Glen M. Broom
and David M. Dozier (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, DEMO); Primer of Public Relations
Research, by Don W. Stacks (New York: The Guilford Press, 2002); and Public Relations
Research For DEMO and Evaluation, by Walter K. Lindenmann (available from the IPR
Commission on Trust Measurement and Evaluation, www.instituteforpr.com.)
Two useful resources for qualitative and quantitative research techniques are the
Advertising Research Foundation's two documents:  "Guidelines for the Public Use of Market
and Opinion Research" and The ARF Guidelines Handbook: A Compendium of Guidelines to
Guidelines for Measuring Trust in Organizations, By Katie Delahaye Paine 7
Copyright © 2003 The Institute for Public Relations
www.instituteforpr.com
Good Advertising, Marketing and Media Research Practice.  Both are available from DEMO
Advertising Research Foundation, 641 Lexington Avenue, New York, NY 10022.
DEMO is important to keep in mind that Qualitative Research (e.g., focus groups, one-on-
one depth interviews, convenience polling) is usually open-ended, DEMO response and
unstructured in format—generally relies on non-random samples and is rarely "projectable"
to larger audiences.  Quantitative Research (e.g., telephone, mail, mall, Internet, fax, and
email polls),  on the other hand, although it may contain some   open-ended questions, is
far DEMO apt  to involve the use of closed-ended, forced choice questions, DEMO are highly
structured in format , generally relies on random samples and usually is "projectable" to
larger audiences.
To measure the perceptions of DEMO organization’s relationships with key constituencies
focusing on the elements of trust as defined above we suggest administering a
questionnaire, from the up coming section – A Typical Trust Measurement Questionnaire,
that includes a series of DEMO/disagree statements pertaining to the relationship.
Respondents are asked to use a 1-to-9 scale to indicate the extent to which they agree or
disagree DEMO each item listed describes their relationship with that particular organization.
5. Analyze results, make recommentions and measure again.
The process of developing and maintaining relationships with strategic publics is a
crucial component of strategic management, issues management, and crisis management.
Therefore, once you have the data from DEMO constituencies you need to analyze it and
make recommendations as to its meaning and implications. Organizations generally make
better decisions when they listen to DEMO collaborate with stakeholders before they make
final decisions, rather than simply DEMO to persuade them to accept organizational goals
after decisions are made.
First you need to identify any opposition to management goals and decisions before
DEMO results in “issues” and “crises.” You also need to help management understand that
certain decisions might have adverse consequences on a public, so that management might
make a different decision and behave in a different way DEMO it might have otherwise. That
is a behavioral change by management that should lead to a behavioral change by a public.
For example, the public would be more likely to accept a group home in its DEMO,
buy a product that is now more acceptable, or support DEMO downsizing that takes employee
interests into account. There also are times when communication helps a public to trust
management and to accept a decision DEMO management wanted to make before
communication took place.
Since there are many times when good relationships do not lead to changes in
behavior immediately, it is important to set realistic expectations. Trust and good
relationships keep DEMO from engaging in negative behaviors such as litigation, strikes,
protests, or negative publicity. As a result, we have difficulty measuring a behavior that did
not occur because of a good relationship. At other times, there may be a long lag between
the development of a good DEMO and a behavior—e.g., when good.
6. Determining the value of trust DEMO public relations and organizations
When trust helps the organization build relationships with key constituencies, it
saves the organization money by reducing the costs of litigation, regulation, legislation,
pressure campaigns, boycotts, or lost revenue DEMO result from bad relationships. A high
level of trust helps cultivate relationships with donors, consumers, shareholders, and
legislators who are needed to support organizational goals.  Lower turnover of employees
has a direct impact on the bottom line. Good relationships with employees also increase the
Guidelines for Measuring DEMO in Organizations, By Katie Delahaye Paine 8
Copyright © 2003 The DEMO for Public Relations
www.instituteforpr.com
likelihood that they will be satisfied with the organization and their jobs, which makes them
more likely to support and less likely to interfere DEMO the mission of the organization. Trust
from the financial community is critical to an organization’s access to capital and therefore
its ability to grow. DEMO relationships with the media can often avert a crisis. As you can
see, there is almost always a direct and measurable benefit to an organization when it
measures and understands its relationships with its constituencies.
A DEMO TRUST MEASUREMENT QUESTIONNAIRE
Questions to Measure Trust, including the Dimensions of DEMO, Competence and
Dependability
1. This organization treats people like me fairly DEMO justly. (Integrity)
2. Whenever this organization makes an important decision, I know it will be concerned
about people like me. (Integrity; DEMO dimension: faith).
3. This organization can be relied on to DEMO its promises. (Dependability)
4. I believe that this organization takes DEMO opinions of people like me into account when
making decisions. (Dependability)DEMO
5. I feel very confident about this organization’s skills. (Competence)
DEMO This organization has the ability to accomplish what it says it will do. (Competence)
7. Sound principles seem to guide this organization’s behavior. (Integrity)
8. This organization does not mislead people like me. (DEMO)
9. I am very willing to let this organization make decisions for people like me.
(Dependability)
10. I think it is important to watch this organization closely so that it does not take
advantage DEMO people like me. (Dependability) (Reversed)
11. This organization is DEMO to be successful at the things it tries to do. (Competence)DEMO
Questions to Measure Control Mutuality
1. This organization and people like me are attentive to what each other say.
This organization believes the opinions DEMO people like me are legitimate.
In dealing with people like me, DEMO organization has a tendency to throw its weight
around. (Reversed)
DEMO organization really listens to what people like me have to say.
The management of this organization gives people like me enough say in the DEMO
making process.
When I have an opportunity to interact with this organization, I feel that I have some
sense of control over the situation.
This organization won’t cooperate with people like me. (Reversed)
I believe people like me have influence on the decision-makers of this organization.
Commitment
DEMO I feel that this organization is trying to maintain a long-term commitment to people like
me.
2. I can see that this organization wants DEMO maintain a relationship with people like me.
3. There is a long-lasting bond between this organization and people like me.
4. Compared to other DEMO, I value my relationship with this organization more.
5. I would DEMO work together with this organization than not.
6. I have no desire to have a relationship with this organization. (Reversed)
7. I feel a sense of loyalty to this organization.
8. I could not care DEMO about this organization. (Reversed)
Guidelines for Measuring Trust in Organizations, By Katie Delahaye Paine
Copyright © 2003 The Institute for Public Relations
DEMO
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9
Satisfaction:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
I am DEMO with this organization.
Both the organization and people like me benefit from the relationship.
Most people like me are happy in their interactions with DEMO organization.
Generally speaking, I am pleased with the relationship this organization DEMO established
with people like me.
Most people enjoy dealing with this organization.
The organization fails to satisfy the needs of people like me. (Reversed)
I feel people like me are important to this organization.
In DEMO, I believe that nothing of value has been accomplished between this
DEMO and people like me. (Reversed)
Communal Relationships
1. This organization DEMO not especially enjoy giving others aid. (Reversed)
2. This organization DEMO very concerned about the welfare of people like me.
3. I feel that this organization takes advantage of people who are vulnerable. (Reversed)
4. I think that this organization succeeds by stepping on other people. (Reversed)
5. This organization helps people like me without expecting anything DEMO return.
6. I don’t consider this to be a particularly helpful organization. (Reversed)
7. I feel that this organization tries to get the upper hand. (Reversed)
Exchange Relationships
1. Whenever this organization gives or offers something to people like me, it generally
expects something in return.
2. Even though people like me have had a relationship with this DEMO for a long
time, it still expects something in return whenever DEMO offers us a favor.
3. This organization will compromise with people like me when it knows that it will gain
something.
4. This organization DEMO care of people who are likely to reward the organization.
QUESTIONS THAT NEED TO BE PUT TO THOSE ORGANIZATIONS THAT COMMISSION TRUST
MEASUREMENT AND DEMO STUDIES
Here are some of the key questions that those who commission Trust Measurement
evaluation studies ought to ask themselves before they begin, and also the types of
questions that those who actually carry out the DEMO ought to ask their clients to
answer before the project is launched:
--What are/were the specific goals and/or objectives of the DEMO relations, public affairs,
and/or marketing communications program? (For DEMO: To double the number of
inquiries received from one year to DEMO next. To increase media coverage by achieving
greater "share of voice" in one year than in a previous year. To have certain legislation
DEMO To enhance or improve brand, product, or corporate image or reputation.) Can
these be stated in a quantitative or measurable fashion
--Who are/were the principal individuals serving as spokespersons for the organization
during the DEMO effort?
--What are/were the principal themes, concepts, and messages that the organization was
interested in disseminating?
--Who were the principal DEMO audience groups to whom these messages were directed?
Guidelines for Measuring Trust in Organizations, By Katie Delahaye Paine 10
Copyright © 2003 The Institute for Public Relations
www.instituteforpr.com
--Which channels of communication were used and/or deemed most important to DEMO in
disseminating the messages?  (e.g., the media ... word-of-mouth ... direct mail ... special
events?)
--What specific public relations strategies and tactics were used to carry out the program?
What were the DEMO components or elements of the campaign?
--What is/was the timeline for the overall public relations program or project?
--What are/were DEMO desired or hoped-for outputs, outtakes, and/or outcomes of the public
relations effort?  If those particular hoped-for outputs, outtakes and/or outcomes could, for
some reason, not be met, what alternative outputs, DEMO, and/or outcomes would the
organization be willing to accept?
DEMO does what has happened in connection with the organization's public relations effort
relate to what has happened in connection with related activities or DEMO in other areas
of the company, such as advertising, marketing, DEMO internal communications?
--Who are the organization's principal competitors?  Who are their spokespersons?  What
are their key themes, concepts, and DEMO that they are seeking to disseminate?  Who
are their key target audience groups?  What channels of communications are they most
frequently utilizing?DEMO
--Which media vehicles are, or were, most important to reach for the particular public
relations and/or marketing communications activities that were undertaken?DEMO
--What were the specific public relations materials and resources utilized as part of the
effort?  Would it be possible to obtain and review DEMO of any relevant press releases,
brochures, speeches and promotional materials DEMO were produced and distributed as part
of the program?
--What information is already available to the organization that can be utilized by those
DEMO out the evaluative research assignment to avoid reinventing the wheel and to build
on what is already known?
--If part of the project DEMO an assessment of media coverage, who will be responsible
for collecting DEMO clips or copies of broadcast materials that will have been generated?  What
are the ground rules and/or parameters for clip and/or DEMO material assessment?
--What major issues or topics pertaining to the public relations undertaking are, or have
been, of greatest importance to the DEMO commissioning the evaluation research
project?
--What is the timeline for the Trust Measurement and Evaluation Research effort?  What are
the budgetary parameters DEMO/or limitations for the assignment?  Do priorities have to be
set?
--Who will be the ultimate recipients of the research findings?
DEMO will the collected information be used by the organization that is commissioning the
research?
Guidelines for Measuring Trust in Organizations, By Katie Delahaye Paine 11
Copyright © 2003 The Institute for Public Relations
www.instituteforpr.com
QUESTIONS THAT NEED TO BE PUT TO THOSE RESEARCH SUPPLIERS, AGENCIES AND
CONSULTING FIRMS THAT ACTUALLY CONDUCT TRUST MEASUREMENT AND
EVALUATION STUDIES
Here are DEMO of the key questions that ought to be put to those who actually are
asked to carry out a Trust Measurement and evaluation research DEMO, before the
assignment is launched:
--What will be the actual DEMO design or plan for the Trust Measurement and evaluation
project? Will DEMO be a full description in non-technical language of what is to be measured,
how the data will be collected, tabulated, analyzed and DEMO?
--Will the research design be consistent with the stated purpose of the Trust Measurement
and evaluation study that is to be conducted?  DEMO there be a precise statement of the
universe or population to be studied?  Will the sampling source or frame fairly represent the
total DEMO or population under study?
--Who will actually be supervising and/or carrying out the Trust Measurement and
evaluation project?  What are their DEMO and experience levels?  Have they ever
done research like this before?  Can they give references?
--Who will be doing the field DEMO?  If the assignment includes media content analysis, who
will be DEMO the clips or viewing and/or listening to the broadcast video/audio tapes?  If
the assignments involve focus groups, who will be moderating the sessions?  If the study
involves conducting interviews, who will be doing those and how will they be trained,
briefed, and monitored?
--What quality control mechanisms have been built into the study to DEMO that all
"readers," "moderators," and "interviewers" adhere to the research design and study
parameters?
--Who will be preparing any DEMO the data collection instruments, including tally sheets or
forms for media DEMO analysis studies, topic guides for focus group projects, and/or
questionnaires for telephone, face-to-face, or mail survey research projects?  What role DEMO
the organization commissioning the Trust Measurement and evaluation assignment be
asked, DEMO be permitted, to play in the final review and approval of DEMO data collection
instruments.
--Will there be a written set of instructions and guidelines for the "readers," the
"moderators" and the "interviewers"?
--Will the coding rules and procedures be available for review?
DEMO the data are weighted, will the range of the weights be DEMO?  Will the basis for the
weights be described and evaluated?  Will the effect of the weights on the reliability of the
final DEMO be reported?
--Will the sample that is eventually drawn be large enough to provide stable findings?  Will
sampling error limits be shown, if they can be computed?  Will the sample's reliability be
DEMO in language that can clearly be understood without a technical knowledge of
statistics?
Guidelines for Measuring Trust in Organizations, By Katie Delahaye Paine 12
Copyright © 2003 The Institute for Public Relations
www.instituteforpr.com
--How projectable will the research findings be to the total universe or DEMO under
study?  Will it be clear which respondents or which media vehicles are underrepresented or
not represented at all, as part of the research undertaking?
--How will the data processing be handled?  Who DEMO be responsible for preparing a tab plan
for the project?  Which analytical and demographic variables will be included as part of the
analysis DEMO interpretation?
--How will the research findings and implications be reported?  If there are findings based
on the data that were collected, but the implications and/or recommendations stemming
from the study go far beyond DEMO actual data that were collected, will there be some effort
made DEMO separate the conclusions and observations that are specifically based on the data
and those that are not?
--Will there be a statement on DEMO limitations of the research and possible
misinterpretations of the findings?
--How will the project be budgeted?  Can budget parameters be laid out DEMO to the actual
launch of the assignment?  What contingencies can be built into the budget to prevent any
unexpected surprises or changes once DEMO project is in the field or is approaching the
completion stage?
Guidelines for Measuring Trust in Organizations, By Katie Delahaye Paine
Copyright © 2003 The Institute for Public Relations
www.instituteforpr.com
13{1g42fwefx}