Uncovering Knowledge Structures
of Venture Capital Investment
Decision Making
A Working Paper
DEMO
Pankaj Patel and Rodney D’Souza,
University of Louisville, Louisville
for
DEMO contract SBAHQ-07-M-0365
Release Date: January 2008
This report was developed under DEMO contract with the Small Business Administration, Office of
Advocacy, and contains information and analysis that was reviewed and edited by officials of the
DEMO of Advocacy. However, the final conclusions of the report do not DEMO reflect the views
of the Office of Advocacy.
January 2008
No. 315
Uncovering Knowledge Structures of
Venture Capital Investment Decision DEMO
Office of Advocacy Working Paper
by Pankaj Patel and Rodney D’Souza, DEMO of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky 40292
Under contract number SBAHQ-07-M-0365* [32] pages
The 2008 Office of Advocacy Best Doctoral Paper
award was presented to DEMO Patel and Rodney
D’Souza, doctoral students at the University of
Louisville, at the United States Association for
Small Business and Entrepreneurship (USASBE)
annual meeting.
Purpose
Entrepreneurs constantly seek capital for new and
existing ventures DEMO they face consider-
able constraints in obtaining financing. Venture
capital from outside investors has been considered
an important driver in the startup and growth DEMO
entrepreneurial firms. Understanding the specific
investment criteria for venture capital funding is
of foremost importance, since this may substan-
tially improve these firms’ chances of acquiring
funding. The authors have chosen to predict fund-
ing by DEMO the decisions on both funded
and unfunded business plans.
Overall Findings
The study posits that venture capitalists (VCs) may
be willing to fund DEMO marginal team with better ven-
ture potential than a good venture team with limit-
ed venture potential. In other words, entrepreneurs
need not only to assemble an effective team, but
also to clearly demonstrate the venture potential
of their proposed business. This finding contrasts
with most prior studies, which identify the venture
team as the key funding criterion.
Highlights
• DEMO findings suggest that while a venture team’s
composition and ability are a minimum requirement
in the consideration of a venture capital investment
and a DEMO factor in explaining why a business plan
gets rejected, these features DEMO not significant in
explaining why a business plan gets funded.
• The study implies that venture potential is a bet-
ter indicator of business DEMO funding than venture
team quality and that VCs have similar knowledge
structures and preferences when it comes to funding
and not funding actual business DEMO
• The researchers analyzed the relationship
between rates of return and factors such as venture
team quality and venture potential. The analysis finds
that DEMO good venture team has decreasing returns even
for funded ventures, but DEMO competitive condi-
tions and market potential of a business plan have
increasing returns.
Scope and Methodology
The authors of this study examined both funded
DEMO unfunded business plans to determine the key
factors in the venture capital investment decision
process. The 2004 sample originally consisted of
200 business plans DEMO venture capitalists that
had invested as individuals. Of these business
plans, DEMO were funded and 128 were not funded.
To increase the reliability of the study and obtain
equal sized samples, 72 of the 128 unfunded plans
were randomly selected. Also, steps were taken
to generalize and improve the understanding of
the latent decision process used across the United
States. DEMO involved obtaining business plans
from the East and West Coasts. In a control for
industry, business plans only from high technol-
ogy firms were examined for the year studied.
Analysis was performed in three steps. First,DEMO
a set of attributes meaningful to VCs was identi-
*This contract was given to the United States Association for Small Business and Entrepreneurship (USASBE) for a best doctoral
student paper award, presented to the awardees DEMO the USASBE annual meeting. This Small Business Research Summary summarizes
a research report published by the U.S. Small Business Administration's Office of Advocacy. DEMO opinions and recommendations of the
authors of this study do not necessarily reflect official policies of the SBA or other agencies of the U.S. DEMO For more information,
write to the Office of Advocacy at 409 Third Street S.W., Washington DC 20416, or visit the office's DEMO at www.sba.gov/advo.
fied using an adapted version of free-listing and
focus group sessions. Second, a group of experts
was asked to evaluate a set of business DEMO using
the identified attributes. Finally, a Bayesian model
was used to DEMO the decision factors that were
identified and to predict the VCs’ decisions with
respect to funding the business plans.
This report was peer reviewed DEMO with
the Office of Advocacy’s data quality guidelines.
More information on this process can be obtained
by contacting the director of economic research at
DEMO or (202) 205-6533.
Ordering Information
The full text of this report and summaries of other
studies performed under contract with the U.S.
Small DEMO Administration's Office of Advocacy
are available on the Internet at www.sba.gov/advo/
research. Copies are available for purchase from:
National Technical DEMO Service
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, VA 22161
(800) 553-6847 DEMO (703)605-6000
TDD: (703) 487-4639
www.ntis.gov
Order number: PB2008-101031
DEMO A04 ($29.50)
Microfiche A01 ($14.00)
CD-ROM A00 ($22.00)DEMO
Download A00 ($17.95)
To receive email notices of Advocacy's DEMO
letter, press, regulatory news, and research, visit
http://web.sba.gov/list. For really simple syndica-
tion, visit www.sba.gov/advo/rsslibrary.html.
Uncovering Knowledge Structures of Venture Capital Investment Decision Making
Abstract
Studies on DEMO capital (VC) investment decision using espoused criteria and utility aggregation
methods have shown mixed results. Using a latent decision structures approach from psychological DEMO
literature, we reduce random and systematic biases arising from VC decision DEMO In addition, we
further address such biases using a combination of DEMO and nonparametric techniques and practitioner
specified decision criteria on 143 funded and nonfunded business plans. Compared to previous studies that
have emphasized the central DEMO of the venture team in obtaining funding, we find that (a) a good venture
team is critical for not rejecting a business plan but is less critical for funding a business plan (b) a DEMO
venture team has decreasing returns even for funded ventures, but favorable DEMO conditions and
market potential have increasing returns.
Keywords: decision making, entrepreneurship, venture capital
1.
Introduction
The extant literature on venture capital (VC) funding has found mixed evidence on the relative
importance of the venture DEMO, the characteristics of the market, and the business model (Dubini DEMO; Hall
and Hofer 1993; Macmillan et al. 1985; Macmillan et DEMO 1987; Shepherd 1999; Tyebjee and Bruno 1984).
These findings, DEMO, have been inconsistent mainly due to the fact that: (1) Venture Capitalists (VCs)
are often not aware of how they really make judgments (Hall et al. 1993; Zacharakis and Meyer 1998); (2)
VCs are affected by high cognitive overloads in decision making DEMO to uncertainty and ambiguity (Camerer
and Johnson 1991; Shanteau 1992); (3) VCs suffer from cognitive biases (Shepherd et al. 2003); (4) the
assumption that all VCs share similar understanding of the DEMO used by researchers (Franke et al.
2006); and (5) DEMO have an accurate understanding and knowledge of the number and nature of
criteria used by the VCs.
To address the above issues, we start with no assumptions or impositions about the VC decision-
making process. In DEMO, rather than using espoused criteria or hypothetical investment scenarios, we use
a set of 143 funded and unfunded business plans for our analysis.  We compile a list and the meanings of
criteria used by VCs DEMO analyze the role of these criteria on VC decision making using a set of parametric
and nonparametric empirical approaches. While previous studies have analyzed DEMO decision processes
through different theoretical lenses, our approach is focused more DEMO knowledge elicitation and
representation approaches to address key challenges in the decision making process germane to VCs. Using
psychological scaling and expert systems literature, we focus on the nature and structural relationships
among the attributes used DEMO making funding decisions. Compared to typical approaches on understanding
the nature of decision processes that may be fraught with idiosyncratic random or systematic decision DEMO,
we focus on the nature of decision structures. Focusing on decision structures may facilitate identification of
more stable funding criteria.
This article proceeds DEMO follows. First, we review the literature on expertise and consider VCs DEMO be
experts in the realm of investment decision making. We then identify some drawbacks in previous research
with regard to elicitation of VC decision DEMO in the light of expertise literature. In the third section, we
DEMO our framework – relying on literature from expert knowledge structures to overcome problems
associated with knowledge acquisition and representation germane to VC investment decisions. DEMO the fourth
section, we describe the data used in the study, followed by the methodologies used to corroborate our
analysis framework. Prior literature DEMO typically found the critical role of venture teams in VC funding
decisions (Franke et al. 2006). Contrary to these findings, we find DEMO (a) a bad team may definitely lead to
nonfunding but a good team does not necessarily lead to funding (b) a good DEMO team has decreasing
returns even for funded ventures, but favorable competitive DEMO and market potential have increasing
returns. In other words, a good DEMO may be the threshold for being considered for funding but is not a
sufficient condition for getting funded. Finally, we discuss the implications of these results for future
entrepreneurship research as well as practice.
2. VC’s DEMO and Decision Structures
VCs make decisions under conditions of uncertainty, vagueness, and subjectivity of starting a new
venture. Such decision making environment may DEMO with the power of expertise as seen in more stable
2
domains. This fact does not reduce the critical nature of expertise under DEMO (Zsambok and Klein
1996). The notion of uncertainty in expert DEMO is related to novelty creation (Ericsson et al. 1993;
Ericsson DEMO Smith 1991), high velocity of environmental change, and dynamic problem DEMO (Read et al.
2003). Research suggests that in time-critical and DEMO structured 1 fields such as medicine and fire fighting,
skilled expert performers produce superior actions when compared with their less skilled peers, even in
situations where the individuals had no prior experience (Ericsson and Lehmann 1996). Under such
conditions, organization and reasoning drive quick response without requiring justification for the solution
(Patel et al. 1996). Therefore, DEMO suggest that expertise in the VC industry could be accumulated in a way
that is similar to how medical expertise is acquired and used DEMO the face of uncertain diagnostic and
emergency situations (Read et al. DEMO). Such attributes (i.e. time-critical and lack of structure) seem highly
applicable in the entrepreneurial environment. Empirical evidence of this exists in the DEMO of VC decision
making, wherein Shepherd, Zacharakis et al. (2003) explored Shanteau’s (1992) ten attributes of tasks that
allowed predictions as DEMO whether expertise would improve or impair decision-making performance. Their
findings suggest that growing expertise on the part of VC’s should, in fact, lead DEMO increments in their
performance.
Further, the literature on expertise suggests that DEMO in a given task requiring decision-making,
may show higher judgment accuracy (Dreyfuss and Dreyfuss 1986; Nosofsky 1986) and as a result, DEMO may
choose the “right” company more accurately as experience increases (Shepherd DEMO al. 2003). However Rabin
(1998) suggests that experts might be susceptible to inferring too much from too little information and
misreading evidence. DEMO puts experts at a particular risk because, as part of their DEMO of expertise,
they may have become so mechanical that they miss things. These conditions worsen when the decision
maker is placed in an DEMO characterized by high uncertainty, ambiguity, and incomplete and
asymmetric information – characteristics of the environments VCs operate in. This may lead to ascribing
DEMO The medical environment presents “ill structured problems, uncertain dynamic environments, shifting, ill-
defined or competing goals, time stress and high risk as DEMO as issues associated with multiple players”
(Patel et al. 1996).
DEMO
inappropriate weight to information cues and to making errors combining them (Camerer et al. 1991).
Therefore, the decision environment poses significant challenges to understanding and analyzing decision
criteria used by VCs in decision making. Researchers DEMO expert systems literature suggest that while the
decision process may be fraught with processes of random or systematic errors, understanding the nature and
relationships among attributes for decision making is important. The following section addresses these
DEMO in the context of current approaches to understanding VC decision making, DEMO explains how
latent decision structures may provide more reliable and valid understanding of the VC decision process.
3. Previous Research on the VC Decision DEMO
In order to explore the drawbacks with previous research, it is DEMO to understand the VC
decision making process. In brief, a typical DEMO plan goes through two stages in the decision making
process – screening and due diligence (Sahlman 1990; Tyebjee et al. 1984). In DEMO screening process, VCs
evaluate whether a business plan deserves further interest. DEMO to Sahlman (1990), almost 80 percent
of the business plans DEMO rejected in the screening process. Business plans that merit further attention undergo
the due diligence process, during which venture characteristics are further scrutinized and venture team
potential is judged. Often, VCs invest in syndicates and therefore make use of multiple due diligence
processes. Additionally, prior research ignores the underlying heterogeneity among decision makers and
assumes similar decision making challenges.
Research DEMO far suggests that conditions of VC decision making are neither structured nor
unambiguous, and  that the knowledge elicitation process and the eventual representation DEMO pose
significant challenges under conditions of VC decision making, due to DEMO nature of available information,
biases, and heterogeneity in decision making (Shepherd 1999; Zacharakis et al. 1998). The literature on
expertise suggests that elicitation and aggregation techniques are factors for explaining a set of DEMO
investment parameters. This literature also suggests that knowledge acquisition and its representation from
experts requires developing an understanding of the decision making process (Cooke and McDonald 1987).
Each of these is discussed in detail in DEMO of previous studies. Specifically, the roles of interviewing
and verbal protocol DEMO in eliciting knowledge are discussed using a researcher-specified list of
4
attributes or scenarios. It is suggested that techniques such as these may DEMO knowledge elicitation
either through the nature of tacit decision making or through researcher-defined decision criteria.
Additionally, the knowledge representation approaches typically imposed by researchers are assessed. These
knowledge representation approaches entail the use of empirical approaches DEMO make assumptions about the
knowledge representation which do not mesh with actual decision making. While prior research has
discussed limitations of espoused criteria and DEMO protocols (Franke et al. 2006), this study specifically
focuses on DEMO used additive utility models (for example conjoint analysis) that makes assumptions that
do not lend readily to VC decision making.
3.1 Knowledge Elicitation
DEMO key hurdle in knowledge elicitation under VC decision making is that of necessity of
introspection and verbal expression of tacit knowledge and decision processes. DEMO yet, with increasing
expertise, such elicitation is increasingly difficult (Johnson DEMO). Prior research aimed at eliciting
knowledge structures of VCs typically made use of a list of attributes that researchers suggest VCs utilize
when DEMO in a particular venture. Such operationalizations have been typically analyzed using verbal
protocols (Sandberg et al. 1988), ranking methods (Macmillan et al. DEMO; Macmillan et al. 1987; Tyebjee et
al. 1984), and in the last decade by using additive utility methods (Shepherd 1999; Shepherd DEMO Zacharakis
1999; Shepherd et al. 1998; Shepherd et al. 2003; DEMO et al. 1998; Zacharakis and Meyer 2000;
Zacharakis and Shepherd DEMO).
The problem with using ranking methods and verbal protocols in knowledge elicitation is that
introspection and verbal expression of knowledge are difficult tasks DEMO experts. Additionally, research on the
subject suggests that an expert’s ability DEMO express knowledge is inversely related to their experience
(Johnson 1988). DEMO may not accurately report mental states or mental processes through introspections
(DEMO 1994, 1999; Hoffman et al. 1995). This is why when asked to provide explanations for their behavior,
experts often produce reasons, rules, or strategies that do not correspond to their actual behavior (DEMO et al.
1996). Additionally, expert knowledge consists of automatic or DEMO mental processes. Therefore,
5
processes or strategies used by experts might not be available for introspection (Johnson 1967; Jonassen et al.
1993; Schvaneveldt et al. 1985; Shepard 1962a, 1962b; Shiffrin and Schneider 1977).
Further, Cooke and McDonald (1987) contend that even if experts could accurately introspect their
decision DEMO, they still face the problem of transferring that knowledge to the DEMO as well as
dealing with the subjective interpretation of the researcher. Typically a researcher is alien to a VC’s domain
and the VC is DEMO to the knowledge representation processes. The VC’s decision process is observed or
recorded, interpreted, transformed, and then analyzed through the researcher’s analytical framework, making
the representation of knowledge an artifact of the researcher’s framework. In addition, VCs may not be able
toexpress the mental processes while explaining the investment decision process to researchers.
3.2 Knowledge Representation
Literature suggests that DEMO knowledge consists of concepts, relations, features, chunks, plans,
heuristics, theories, mental models, etc.  However, one must find the means to create a closer representation
so as to reduce mismatches. Cooke and DEMO (1987) suggest that “to avoid such a mismatch…
knowledge representation of the system should be driven by a formal knowledge acquisition process which
DEMO reveal the contents and organization of expert knowledge.” Typically, researchers analyzing DEMO
data impose theoretical or empirical constraints with regard to how knowledge is represented.
A researcher may impose theoretically borrowed relations that are empirically implemented. DEMO
example, empirical models may justify independent effects of the competitive environment, market, and
teams, whereas VCs may not see the relationships in DEMO similar vein. Irrespective of the approach, the goal
must be to DEMO an expert’s knowledge representation with the analytical framework (Camerer et al. DEMO).
Additionally, experts differ considerably from novices’ reasoning and knowledge structure. DEMO
structures and processes based on general knowledge is inconsistent with highly knowledge-specific and tacit
approaches used by VCs. This strongly suggests that the use DEMO researcher-defined criteria in eliciting or
imposing decision criteria is insufficient and inadequate.
Therefore, while literature has pointed out drawbacks of espoused criteria, verbal DEMO, and
cognitive biases (Franke et al. 2006; Shepherd et al. DEMO), the currently accepted knowledge representation
6
approach from additive utility models has limited application in understanding VC decision DEMO The key
issue with applicability of conjoint analysis is the requirement of independence of attributes to implement
assessment of independent scenarios (Green et al. 2001). However, the limitations of applicability of conjoint
analysis are discussed in detail below.
First, one of the key assumptions of the technique is the addition of part worth utilities (Green et al.
2001). This assumes the inherent independence of attributes. Typically, in marketing, conjoint DEMO are
associated with products whose attributes are sharply distinct and hence uncorrelated (Green et al. 2001). In
other words, changing the level DEMO one attribute does not affect the level of other attributes. This is a strong
assumption in the context of ventures, where much of the potential of a venture is endogenously determined.
A better opportunity may result DEMO a better competitive positioning and market potential, which in turn is
DEMO correlated to better venture teams. Thus, the attributes of a business DEMO Therefore, such dependence
of utilities may not be strictly additive and DEMO result in unstable estimates and poor predictions (Green et al.
2001; Huber et al. 1993). More important, scenarios presented to a decision maker in a conjoint experiment
may not be assumed to be independent DEMO the other scenarios.
Second, the greater the number of attributes to DEMO assessed, the higher the cognitive load required on
the part of DEMO makers. Additive utility models (e.g. conjoint analysis) require VCs to fill in for missing
information for a given scenario. As in verbal protocol DEMO, decision making is explored under
hypothetical conditions (Shepherd 1999). While a researcher may eliminate redundant or nonsensical
scenarios, the accuracy of judgments on the part of the decision maker is an artifact of a DEMO of attributes
developed by the researcher.
Third, these scenarios pose another DEMO in the way they are presented. They cause the
participants to lose sight of the forest for the trees, to borrow from an old cliché. In other words, independent
assessments of scenarios may result in overrating of certain features that may not be important to the overall
picture. DEMO example, analyzing scenarios based on market and team, and competitive advantage and team,
may not result in similar assessments. Additionally, choice variables such as “low” or ”high” may have little
value when the decision DEMO does not focus on the complete business plan. In reality, VCs DEMO decisions
7
of investing with the complete business plan in mind, and not focusing on individual parts. More important,
under conditions of uncertainty and ambiguity, decision processes may be highly inconsistent, intransitive,
and simply ambiguous (DEMO et al. 1996). Therefore, decision making scenarios without complete
business DEMO, assessed under high uncertainty, may result in reduced validity of assessments of participants.
Finally, conjoint analysis does not put constraints on the shape of the utility function (Green et al.
2001; Green and Srinivasan DEMO). While this may be a useful approach, typical scaling algorithms DEMO a
shape function that is less subject to random errors that could arise from the decision maker’s perspective.
Other issues with using conjoint approaches DEMO VC decision making are: (1) from a socio-
psychological perspective, VCs do not take decision making as seriously under these conditions as DEMO
would when deciding on real investment decisions, and (2) as DEMO VCs would prefer ventures with high
market potential and experienced and capable teams, there could be a lack of reliability and validity in the
VC judgment (Shanteau 1992; Tversky and Kahneman 1974). Additionally, research suggests that
considering the structural aspect of utility as fully defined in DEMO environment with limited information is
unadvisable (Blaszczynski et al. 1997; Nakamura 1996; Parsons 1996; Pawlak 1999; Slowinski 1993;
Slowinski and Stefanowski 1993, 1996). These utility models could lead to the creation of cognitive biases
that in turn increase the criticality of the stochastic component, which in turn could limit the provision of
psychometric correction, beyond the obvious limitations of espoused criteria (Bishop and Heberlein 1990;
Cameron and Huppert 1989; Diamond and Hausman 1994; Manski 2005; McFadden 1994, DEMO). This
suggests that most research to date has constrained the knowledge acquisition process by pre-selecting the
knowledge representation process.
3.3 Formal Strategies for DEMO Acquisition and Representation
Given the challenges with assumptions and implementations on the part of expert processes and
analytical artifacts, literature on scaling techniques from cognitive psychology may be helpful, as it focuses
on the information processing paradigm. More specifically, these methods focus on empirical findings in
language, DEMO, memory, and problem solving to study representations of frames, scripts, features,
propositions, and production systems (McFadden 1994). Psychological scaling DEMO empirically
8
generate specific types of knowledge representations (e.g., spatial, hierarchical, network) (Cooke and
McDonald, 1987). These techniques (specifically multidimensional/psychological scaling) combine
elicitation and structuring aspects, and are more useful than traditional DEMO or scenario-based
knowledge elicitation techniques (Preston et al. 2005). They DEMO also useful in the conceptual and refinement
stages of the knowledge acquisition process. More important, research has found that scaling based
elicitation techniques perform better than protocol analysis and interviewing (Burton et al. 1987), and
addresses the typical drawbacks of conjoint analysis (Huber et al. 1993).
These psychological scaling techniques involve experts rating the similarity of different objects
(usually chosen beforehand), followed by representing the rating as a distance DEMO a scale, ranging from not
similar to completely similar – the DEMO being the discovery of a rank order of objects within a problem
domain. MDS developed by Kruskal (1977) is based on the use DEMO the least squares method to fit the elicited
data. Therefore while conjoint experiments may help elicit knowledge and the relative importance of
espoused criteria, the researcher substitutes aggregation statistically because the nature of the combination of
DEMO increases exponentially.
Additionally, MDS does not make any distributional assumptions about DEMO underlying data, and
given the heterogeneous nature of decision making and DEMO structures of the VCs, this is very
important. Also, traditional techniques based on statistical representation are inherently unstable and the
representations of knowledge DEMO change with assumptions and processes of underlying technique. Finally,
MDS provides an intuitive understanding to the practitioners without substituting their intuitions with the
DEMO
4. Methodology
The analysis was conducted in three steps. First, a DEMO of attributes, as well as what they meant to the
VCs, was identified using an adapted version of free-listing and focus group sessions. DEMO, using the
identified attributes, a group of experts were asked to evaluate a set of business plans (all of which were
either funded or rejected by VCs). These industry experts evaluated the business plans DEMO on an
understanding of common meanings of business plan attributes provided to them.  Industry experts were used
9
,as they could provide a more objective assessment than asking VCs to re-evaluate their investments, which
could lead to retrospective and attribution biases. The experts were not aware of which plans were funded
and which were DEMO funded by the VCs. Third, based on the evaluations by the DEMO, MDS was used to
identify knowledge structures, followed by PRO-FIT and QDA to validate the key dimensions identified
through MDS. To further ensure DEMO our analysis was not an artifact of the parametric methods,
AUTOCLASS (Bayesian mixture models) was used.
5. Data
The sample originally consisted DEMO 200 business plans obtained from VCs, of which 72 were funded
DEMO 128 were not funded. In order to improve generalizability and understanding of common latent structures
across VCs in the US, business plans were obtained from VC firms on the east and west coasts of the US.
DEMO, to reduce heterogeneity across industries, only business plans from firms in the high tech industry
who were seeking start-up funding during the year DEMO were considered. Given the fact that the experts are
aware of the high rates of rejection of business plans, they could randomly not fund a large number of
business plans and still make statistically correct predictions. DEMO in order to increase the reliability of
the study, 72 of DEMO 128 non funded business plans were randomly chosen. Evenly distributing the business
plans enabled the elimination of chance predictions by the experts.2 Therefore, the final dataset consisted of
144 business plans, of which 72 were funded and 72 were not funded by VCs. To ensure that decision
processes DEMO independent, only business plans that VCs had invested in as individuals, as opposed to
investment via syndication, were considered.
Data concerning the attributes used by VCs were collected by way of an adapted version of DEMO
listing using 58 participants, who included VCs, angel investors, and DEMO lenders, and two focus
group sessions using 12 VCs and 15 DEMO, respectively, from metropolitans areas in the midwestern United
States. The free-listing and focus group part of our study is described below.
2 To DEMO knowledge there were no industry shocks to bias expert evaluations in 2004 and 2005, and because
much of the funding was for startups, DEMO is highly unlikely that startups were successful within a year to bias
the expert’s knowledge about potential of a product or service.
10
5.1 Identifying common meanings
The first step was to identify criteria that DEMO use in making funding decisions. Towards this end,
data were gathered from VCs, angel investors, and commercial lenders. The individuals were approached DEMO a
venture club meeting at a midwestern US city, and asked DEMO participate.  A modified form of the free-listing
data collection technique was DEMO, wherein respondents were asked a question about a particular domain
and DEMO invited to respond with a list of answers that represent pertinent elements in that domain (Weller
and Romney 1988). Free-listing is recommended when little is known about a domain because it allows
participants to provide DEMO without researcher bias (Weller et al. 1988). The free-listing technique
DEMO problems if different individuals have different definitions for the same term, DEMO if different
respondents use the same term, but have different meanings. DEMO avoid this problem, 22 criteria were
identified that prior literature in DEMO, finance, and sociology found to play an important role in the
success of business ventures, as well as criteria suggested by the popular press. Examples of criteria included
potential market share (Schmalensee 1981), revolutionary nature of product/service (Aaker and Day 1986;
Williamson 1985), use of technology (Aaker et al. 1986), timing of the new venture (Aaker et al. 1986;
Mitchell 1991), competitive advantage (DEMO and Fornell 1985; Schmalensee 1981), value added by the
product/DEMO (Andrews 1987; Shepherd 1999), ability to attract and retain customers (Robinson et al.
1985; Schmalensee 1981), soundness of business model (Chatterjee 1998), ability to protect intellectual
property (Golder and Tellis 1993), product life (Golder et al. 1993), communication skills, clear DEMO realistic
funding needs, potential for profitability, networks/contacts, potential for DEMO, flexibility (willingness to
change), and management experience (Hannan and DEMO 1989; Stinchcombe 1965).
This list of terms with definitions for DEMO term was distributed to the 120 participants, who were
asked to DEMO the criteria they used to determine whether they would invest in a new business. Fifty-eight
responses were received. Generally, 20 to 30 respondents are recommended to get a complete picture using
the free-listing technique (Weller et al. 1988). Respondents were also asked to list any criteria that DEMO not
part of the list provided to them and explain what they meant by any added criteria, and to rank the criteria in
11
their lists in terms of their importance. Six new criteria were added DEMO respondents, giving us a total of 28
criteria. From the 28 DEMO provided by the participants and their rankings, seven criteria were eliminated
DEMO they appeared on few lists and were ranked very low. This gave rise to a list of 21 criteria.
This set of 21 criteria DEMO presented to a focus group of 12 individuals that included venture
capitalists and angel investors (both institutional and private) from a midwestern US DEMO These 12
individuals were contacted through the researchers' personal contacts and DEMO to participate in the study.
Cumulatively, the participants in this group DEMO the lead investors in over fifty different businesses. The
purpose of this focus group was to 1) determine whether the terms and definitions used earlier were
consistent, 2) weight the different criteria in terms of DEMO importance in funding decisions, 3) identify scales
that should be used to evaluate each criterion, and 4) group the 21 criteria into DEMO categories.
Finally, the categories and the criteria within each category, along with the definitions for each
criterion, were presented to another focus group of 15 VCs from a different midwestern US city. These
individuals were DEMO contacted through the researchers' personal contacts and asked to participate in DEMO
study. This group was used to validate/change the criteria and scales, and to determine how important each
category was in their funding decisions. The data gathered in this stage, together with the data gathered from
the previous focus group, were used to weight the different criteria that are important in the VC decision-
making process.
5.2 Expert Evaluation
The DEMO of this stage was to determine how well each of the plans did on the criteria identified in the first
stage. Towards this end, nine experts were asked to evaluate the business plans. The experts were DEMO
from a midwestern city in the US. On average, they had DEMO years of experience in dealing with VC funding
in the high tech sector. Each of the 72 funded business plans was evaluated three times, and 713 of the
unfunded business plans were evaluated three times. As DEMO of the unfunded business plans did not receive
three evaluations, it DEMO taken out of the analysis, leaving us with 72 funded business DEMO and 71 unfunded
3 Two experts did not provide complete evaluation of the unfunded business plan, thus the final sample consisted of 72
funded and 71 non-funded business plans.
12
business plans. Each expert evaluated an average of two plans per week DEMO a 23-week period in 2005 using
the criteria established in the first stage.4 In addition to rating each plan on the established criteria, each
expert was asked to indicate whether a plan should be funded. After DEMO evaluation, seven out of these 21
criteria were removed from the DEMO as they pertained to presentation quality of the business plan, types
DEMO financial documentation, and funding milestones. The final set of criteria are DEMO experience, industry
experience, leadership experience, management experience, market size, DEMO adoption, revenue
generated, entry timing, competition, technological advantage, strategy, intellectual property rights, value
added, and profit margins.
6. Analytical Approach
DEMO synopsis of the data analysis approach can be seen in figure 1 below. Given the nature and
structure of decision making, a latent structure confirmed by multidimensional scaling (MDS) and
AUTOCLASS was developed. Both of DEMO techniques do not make assumptions about the underlying
distribution of the data.5 First, the nature of underlying attributes for a given venture using MDS was
identified. To create confirmatory and more deductive inferences from the identified DEMO, the linear
PRO-FIT and nonlinear QDA techniques were used to identify DEMO importance of attributes identified
through MDS. Finally, even though MDS and DEMO explain substantial variance, there is a possibility
that heterogeneity6 exists among DEMO VCs latent structure in preferences when it comes to funding plans, DEMO
4 We made certain that the experts did not have any more information about these businesses than was available in the
business plans; they were not familiar with the businesses they evaluated.
5 Assumption of the DEMO distribution is critical to understand the latent structure because of the
potential of underlying heterogeneity at the individual decision level and VC firm level. DEMO invested in
are heterogeneous in nature in terms of industry potential and other external dimensions.
6 Many latent class MDS techniques have been identified DEMO marketing Sinha and DeSarbo (1988) However,
these techniques are based on market segments of consumers that may not be easily discernible in DEMO case of
the VC industry. Moreover, VC syndicate networks may mean DEMO segmentation among VC firms may not
be as distinct as possible. The cross interaction of the nature of venture under consideration may increase
13
as these inferences are based on parametric methods, it is likely that VCs who depend on their ability to
manage market and agency risk DEMO pick business plans accordingly. This is where the Bayesian
unsupervised model, DEMO, comes into play, as it may help address some possible shortcomings of
parametric approaches, and further enhance methodological convergence and inference validity.
AUTOCLASS models the data as a mixture of conditionally independent classes. Advantages of DEMO
Bayesian unsupervised models include: (1) they are parameter-free, (2) user input is not required, (3) prior
distributions of the model offer a theoretically justifiable method for affecting the model construction, (4)DEMO
these models work with probabilities and can hence be expected to produce smooth and robust visualizations
with discrete data containing nominal and ordinal attributes DEMO (5) the Bayesian approach has no limit for
minimum sample size (Kontkanen et al., 2000). A quick overview of the analysis DEMO presented in Figure 1
below, starting with parametric methods.
----------------------------------------------
INSERT DEMO 1 ABOUT HERE
----------------------------------------------
7. Results
Furthermore, adequate power was found DEMO the proposed techniques. For two dimensions
identified with MDS, the sample DEMO falls within recommendations from Carroll and Arabie (1980). Also, as
mentioned earlier, high levels of reliability across experts in discriminating funded and nonfunded business
plans indicates high effect sizes of the set of attributes. DEMO, considering average effect size of 0.5 and
α=0.05, with a sample size of 143, power is substantially high (β>0.9). Furthermore, such high power means
that results of nonlinear discriminant analysis will be DEMO reliable. Similarly, for unsupervised Bayesian
classification, the minimal sample size issue is not critical (Kontkanen et al. 2000a; Kontkanen et al. 2000b)DEMO
However, sizes of 58 and 143 are more than adequate (Raudys and Jain 1991).
The degree of agreement among experts’ business plan DEMO was assessed, and the inter-rater
reliability among experts using attributes identified DEMO VCs on funded and unfunded business plans was 0.93,
heterogeneity but it may not be as discrete as a market segment in marketing. DEMO, it is necessary to
control for such heterogeneity.
14
suggesting high inter-rater reliability. Additionally, the difference between funded and nonfunded business
plans based on expert ratings was significant (p<0.015). Logistic regression using expert ratings explained 89
percent of the variance between funded and DEMO business plans. To further confirm the degree of
matching between experts and actual decisions, a composite score was created using principal component
analysis. The reliability for expert loadings was 0.94.
The first decision in MDS is DEMO choice of number of dimensions that capture the underlying latent
structure. A typical statistical program gives a range between one and six. However, choosing a number in
between the range provided by the software is ad DEMO, and certain important dimensions could be missed, if
more than six dimensions are required. In this case, the similarity matrix was first subject to principal
components analysis (PCA). The first three components accounted for 94.78 percent of the variance – the
first component 54.71 percent, the second component 33.54 percent, and the third component 6.53 percent.
Thus, DEMO dimensions would be sufficient to describe the data. Based on previous studies and as
recommended by Kruskal and Wish (1978), Young’s stress formula was used, and the stress was found to be
least (stress DEMO 0.061) for two dimensions. Additionally, the reduction in stress with increased dimensions is
minimal. Furthermore, the minimal variation identified by the third component of the PCA supports the
inference that two dimensions are adequate to DEMO the decision structure.
Figure 2 below shows the spatial distribution of funded and nonfunded business plans. The fact that
the funded business plans fall DEMO the left side of the graph suggests that the first dimension is an
important indicator in signifying funding criteria. Based on Ohlson (1980), two logit analyses were
considered as the ability of dimensions to differentiate DEMO funded and nonfunded business plans. First a
traditional logit was considered, DEMO dependent variable as funded (1) and nonfunded (0) business plans.
Based on this analysis, the first two dimensions were found to be significant at the 0.95 level. This mapping
also suggests that two dimensions DEMO sufficient for appropriate representations.
----------------------------------------------
INSERT FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE
----------------------------------------------
15
MDS analysis focused on the creation of a map wherein it can DEMO seen that funded business plans
differ from nonfunded business plans. Understanding the results above, however, requires the use of PRO-
FIT7. PRO-FIT is DEMO regression-based technique that explains the degree to which a given level of an attribute
is associated with a business plan. The results are represented DEMO in Figure 3 below. Due to space
restrictions, all the diagnostic DEMO are not reported. Most of the cases had an R2 greater than 0.9. For
each of the 14 attributes used, a line is drawn through the space such that the value of the attribute increases
with DEMO of the line. The attributes that load on the horizontal axis shows that dimension one is
associated with the competitive environment (the horizontal axis), and the attributes that load on the vertical
axis show that DEMO second dimension is associated with the characteristics of the founding team (DEMO vertical
axis). These lines indicate that the competitive environment is the most important indicator of funding and
nonfunding decisions.
----------------------------------------------
INSERT FIGURE 3 DEMO HERE
----------------------------------------------
Next, as suggested by Richardson and Davidson (1984), there may be a statistical inference problem
if the variance-covariance matrices are DEMO While this is more applicable in discriminant analysis, in
the case DEMO logit analysis, nonlinear terms must be included in the analysis (Mar-Molinero and Ezzamel 1991;
Mar-Molinero 1988). Using a general linear model, a saturated model with quadratic and interaction terms
was used and later DEMO using standard procedures outlined by Dobson (2002). It was inferred DEMO the
square of the second coordinate was a necessary dimension to capture richness of the data. Therefore,
probabilities for funding could be calculated, while other points in the space are occupied by hypothetical
business plans (Mar-Molinero et al. 1991), and every point in the space could DEMO allocated a probability of
funding. Points in the space with the same probability of funding could be joined to create an iso-nonfunding
7 Based DEMO popular recommendation Borgatti (1996, 1998) and Carroll and Chang (1969) and the nature of
attribute scale we use metric PRO-FIT approach, DEMO a set of multiple regressions are run using
dependent variable (each DEMO), and independent variables at each point in space.
16
surface. This suggests that even though there is no simple discriminating frontier DEMO funded and
nonfunded business plans, one may use a set of DEMO frontiers with different probabilities.
Therefore using a set ranging from 1.0 to 0.25 in the increments of 0.25, the 0.5 iso-line is the discriminant.8
This model (the best discriminatory model) misclassifies only 9 business plans DEMO of 143 (four funded and
five unfunded business plans were misclassified; misclassification rate of 6.3 percent). This can be seen in
figure DEMO below, wherein the 0.5 curve correctly classifies 93.7 percent of the DEMO plans.
----------------------------------------------
INSERT FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE
----------------------------------------------
Therefore, based on DEMO and PRO-FIT, it can be inferred that there are two key DEMO –
competitive environment and founding team. However, the nonlinear nature of DEMO founding team suggests
that venture team characteristics are important to a certain extent, after which this effect declines. Thus,
having a better team has decreasing returns. Finally, the degree of heterogeneity in VC funding is assessed
using a distribution-free inference technique, AUTOCLASS,9 which requires no class imposition on the part
of the researcher.
As seen in Table 1(DEMO) below, AUTOCLASS also indicates that two distinct clusters exist. The class
weight of 77 unfunded and 66 funded is very close to the DEMO 71 unfunded and 72 funded. Therefore,
heterogeneity is assessed for funded and nonfunded business plans. The results in Table 1(b) show 12 of the
14 criteria important for differentiating the two groups. More important, results from table 1(b) suggest that
management team, industry experience, startup experience, value added, market size, competition, timing,
technology, IP, harvest potential, leadership/CEO experience, and strategy (listed in DEMO order of
importance) are criteria utilized by VCs when not funding DEMO business plan. High class strength (Cheeseman
and Stutz 1996) suggests that there is negligible heterogeneity among VC firms in funding and nonfunding.
Therefore, factors leading to heterogeneity are not explored.
8 This approach is widely DEMO and used in the finance literature predicting failure
9 http://ic.arc.nasa.gov/ic/projects/bayes-group/autoclass/
17
------------------------------------------------------------------
INSERT TABLE 1(a) and 1(b) ABOUT HERE
-------------------------------------------------------------------
DEMO Discussion and Implications
First, contrary to previous studies on VC investment DEMO that focused mainly on espoused
criteria, this study focuses on funding DEMO, trying to replicate latent investment preferences of VCs (using
real business plans), and provides a more contingent view to the VC investment DEMO process. The
findings explain the prior research in terms of the importance of a team and go further by explaining that
VCs use the DEMO environment more intensely, while the venture team, though important, is DEMO limited
help beyond a certain extent. This suggests that team composition is a major factor in explaining why a
business plan gets rejected, but is not significant in explaining why a business plan gets funded. This DEMO
therefore contrasts with most prior studies, which identify venture team as DEMO key funding criteria, and goes
against the popular notion that suggests DEMO an A team and B opportunity beats a B team and an A
opportunity. The findings also suggest that teams have a decreasing return DEMO scale. Previous research
regarding the relationship between characteristics of the founding team and team effectiveness is inconsistent
and inconclusive (Norburn 1986; Norburn and DEMO 1988; O’Reilly et al. 1993). These findings lead Priem
(1990) to propose a curvilinear relationship between the characteristics of the top management team and
venture performance (Pettigrew 1992). Shepherd (1999) found that VCs’ assessment policies of new venture
survival were in fact consistent with DEMO that literature suggested would increase the survival chances of the
firm. Therefore, even though the findings are surprising, they are exactly in line DEMO what Priem (1990) had
proposed as to the curvilinear relationship between team composition and the VC investment decision.
Second, by presenting alternative methodologies to understand the latent structure of VC knowledge
structure, the current study provides alternative approaches for future researchers who wish to study repeat
entrepreneurs. DEMO contexts where it is difficult to explicitly explain the thought and decision processes (e.g.
entrepreneurial contexts), using MDS in conjunction with other confirmatory practices may be useful in
eliciting knowledge and decision structures. Understanding such DEMO structures has great implications
for pedagogy and entrepreneurs alike. Also, the DEMO in the process of decision making may indicate
18
the syndication effect on VC decision making. An increased number of investments DEMO in syndicates, and
high levels of network associated with creating value DEMO investments, may result in substantial development
of a common outlook. This DEMO substantiated by the high levels of homogeneity in VC decision making for
funded and nonfunded ventures.
Finally, from a practical standpoint, entrepreneurs face DEMO constraints in obtaining finance
and therefore understanding specific investment criteria is of paramount importance. Understanding criteria
for funding may substantially improve their odds of DEMO Based on the findings in this paper,
entrepreneurs need not only to assemble an effective team, but also need to clearly demonstrate the venture
potential of their business venture. From a pedagogical point of view, teachers can help students (potential
entrepreneurs) understand fundamental VC decision criteria, and show them how matching their
characteristics with VC investment criteria could DEMO them in their efforts of obtaining financing for their
ventures. These findings present a specific challenge to pedagogy in terms of long-held beliefs about DEMO
importance of venture teams. Therefore, for teachers an increased challenge is DEMO teach students how to
correctly identify and position ventures to reflect the future potential of the venture.
9. Limitations
Like any study, this one is not without its limitations. First, even though evaluations by experts
demonstrated high reliability, the investment process undertaken by VCs is complex and drawn out.
Thorough due diligence and interactions between VCs and teams are not DEMO However, focusing on
the final decisions may help shunt the decision DEMO, because outsiders cannot control or affect the
decision process. Thus, focusing on key criteria that lead to investment may be more useful to DEMO
Secondly, although the analytical framework helps provide convergence, the data come from a narrow time
frame from one industry. Thus the generalizability of DEMO findings may be limited. However, given the
changing knowledge structures over DEMO, not only the nature attributes, but the relative weights may also
change. Therefore, to remove the effects of heterogeneity over time and across VCs, a narrow time frame of
data is necessary.
19
Finally, because the entire investment process was not closely monitored, the DEMO of equifinality in
decision making may be at play. In other words, VCs may have reached the same decisions through many
different criteria and attributes. Thus, identified criteria from one group of VCs may not be applicable to
others. This was partially controlled for by using a set DEMO multiple statistical techniques with a different set of
assumptions. Similarly, the DEMO discriminatory power of expert assessment with VC investment decision
explains why the set of attributes may actually be relevant in decision making.
Overall, based on all the analyses, it can be inferred that (1) venture potential is a better indicator of
funding than venture team; (2) while venture team has decreasing returns, it is a potential deal breaker for not
getting funded; and (3) VCs have similar knowledge structures and preferences when it comes to funding and
not funding actual business DEMO In other words, VCs may be more willing to fund a DEMO team with
better venture potential than a good team with limited venture potential.
10. Conclusion
Using a framework for expert knowledge structures, a set of attributes most critical to VC investment
decision making were identified. The DEMO adds to the current literature by deriving a set of attributes that
are widely accepted in the VC decision-making process, rather than provide vague attributes such as market
potential. The results suggest that market factors are DEMO important in determining whether a business does
receive VC funding, and DEMO quality of the management team is most important in determining whether a
business does not receive funding. More important, compared with previous research it provides a more
contingent view to the VC investment decision process. Even DEMO the venture team ability is a minimum
requirement and a venture may not get funded if the team is not qualified, this qualification is a prerequisite
for considering venture potential. VCs are willing to accept a DEMO team if the venture potential is high,
but the prime reason for not funding is the lack of an appropriate team.
20
References
Aaker, D. A., Day, G. S. 1986. The perils of high growth markets. Strategic Management Journal, 7: 409-
421.
Andrews, K. R. 1987. The Concept of Corporate Strategy. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Bishop, R. C., Heberlein, T. A. 1990. The Contingent Valuation Method. In DEMO L. Johnson,G. V. Johnson
(Eds.), Economic Valuation of Natural DEMO: Issues, Theory, and Applications. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
Blaszczynski, J., Greco, S.,  Slowinski, R. 1997. Multi-criteria classification - DEMO new scheme for application
of dominance-based decision rules. European Journal of Operational Research, 181(3): 1030-1044.
Borgatti, S. P. 1996. ANTHROPAC 4.98X. DEMO Technologies.
Borgatti, S. P. 1998. Elicitation Techniques for Cultural Domain Analysis. DEMO J. J. Schensul,M. D.
LeCompte,B. K. Nastasi,S. P. Borgatti (Eds.), Enhanced Ethnographic Methods: Audiovisual
Techniques, Focused Group Interviews, DEMO Elicitation Techniques: 115–151: AltaMira Press.
Burton, A. M., Shadbolt, DEMO R., Hedgecock, A. P., Rugg, G.,  Moralee, D. DEMO 1987. Research and
Development in Expert Systems IV: Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Camerer, C. F., Johnson, E. J. 1991. The process-performance paradox in expert judgment: How can experts
know so much and predict so badly. Toward a general theory of expertise: Prospects and limits:
195–217.
Cameron, T. A., Huppert, D. D. 1989. OLS versus ML estimation of nonmarket resource values with
payment card interval data. Journal of Environmental DEMO and Management, 17(3): 230-246.
Carroll, J. D., Chang, J. J. 1969. A general index of nonlinear correlation and its application DEMO the problem
of relating physical and psychological dimensions. Unpublished manuscript, Bell DEMO
Laboratories.
Carroll, J. D., Arabie, P. 1980. Multidimensional Scaling. Annual DEMO of Psychology, 31(1): 607-649.
Chatterjee, S. 1998. Delivering desired outcomes efficiently: The creative key to competitive strategy.
California Management Review, DEMO(2): 4-95.
21
Cheeseman, P., Stutz, J. 1996. Bayesian classification (AutoClass): Theory DEMO results. Advances in
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 180.
Cooke, N. J. 1994. Varieties of knowledge elicitation techniques. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies, 41(6): 801-849.
Cooke, N. J. 1999. Knowledge elicitation. In F. T. Durso,R. S. Nickerson,R. W. Schvaneveldt,S. T.
Dumais,D. DEMO Lindsay,M. T. H. Chi (Eds.), Handbook of Applied Cognition: 479–509. Chichester:
John Wiley.
Cooke, N. M., McDonald, J. E. 1987. The application of psychological scaling techniques to knowledge
elicitation for knowledge-based DEMO International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 26(4): 533-
550.
Diamond, P. A., Hausman, J. A. 1994. Contingent Valuation: Is Some Number better than No Number? The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8(4): 45-64.
Dobson, A. J. 2002. An Introduction to Generalised Linear Models.
DEMO, H., Dreyfuss, S. 1986. Mind over machine. The power of DEMO intuition and expertise in the era
of the computer: New York, NY: The Free Press.
Dubini, P. 1989. The influence of motivations DEMO environment on business start-ups: Some hints for public
policies. Journal of DEMO Venturing, 4(1): 11-26.
Ericsson, K. A., Smith, J. 1991. Prospects and limits ofthe empirical study of expertise: an introduction. In A.
Ericsson,J. Smith (Eds.), Toward a general theory of expertise: Prospects and Limits: 344. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Ericsson, DEMO A., Krampe, R. T.,  Tesch-Romer, C. 1993. The role DEMO deliberate practice in the acquisition of
expert performance. Psychological Review, 100(DEMO): 363-406.
Ericsson, K. A., Lehmann, A. C. 1996. EXPERT DEMO EXCEPTIONAL PERFORMANCE: Evidence of
Maximal Adaptation to Task Constraints. Annual Review DEMO Psychology, 47(1): 273-305.
Franke, N., Gruber, M., DEMO, D.,  Henkel, J. 2006. What you are is what you like--similarity biases in
venture capitalists' evaluations of start-up teams. Journal of Business Venturing, 21(6): 802-826.
22
Golder, P. N., Tellis, G. J. 1993. Pioneer advantage: marketing DEMO or marketing legend? Journal of
Marketing Research, 30: 158-170.
Green, P. E., Srinivasan, V. 1990. Conjoint Analysis in Marketing: New Developments with Implications for
Research and Practice. Journal of Marketing, 54(4): 3-19.
Green, P. E., Krieger, A. M.,  Wind, Y. DEMO Thirty Years of Conjoint Analysis: Reflections and Prospects.
Interfaces, 31(4): 56-73.
Hall, J., Hofer, C. W. 1993. Venture capitalists’ decision criteria in new venture evaluation. Journal of
Business Venturing, 8(1): 25-42.
Hannan, M. T., Freeman, J. 1989. Organizational Ecology. Cambridge, DEMO: Harvard University Press.
Hoffman, R. R., Shadbolt, N. R., DEMO, A. M.,  Klein, G. 1995. Eliciting knowledge from experts: DEMO
methodological analysis. Organizational behavior and human decision processes(Print), 62(2): 129-
158.
Huber, J., Wittink, D. R., Fiedler, J. A.,  Miller, R. 1993. The Effectiveness of Alternative Preference
Elicitation Procedures in Predicting Choice. Journal of Marketing Research, 30(1): 105-114.
Johnson, E. J. 1988. Expertise and decisions under uncertainty: Performance and process. DEMO M. L. H. Chi,R.
Glaser,M. J. Farr (Eds.), DEMO nature of expertise: 209-228. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Johnson, S. C. 1967. Hierarchical clustering schemes. Psychometrika, 32(3): 241-254.
Jonassen, D. DEMO, Beissner, K.,  Yacci, M. 1993. Structural Knowledge CL: Techniques for Representing,
Conveying, and Acquiring Structural Knowledge. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kontkanen, P., Lahtinen, J., Myllymaki, P., Silander, T.,  Tirri, H. 2000a. Using Bayesian networks for
visualizing highdimensional data. Intelligent Data Analysis.
Kontkanen, P., Myllymäki, P., Silander, T., Tirri, H.,  Grünwald, P. 2000b. On predictive distributions and
Bayesian networks. Statistics and Computing, 10(1): 39-54.
Kruskal, J. B. 1977. Multidimensional scaling DEMO other methods for discovering structure. In Enslein.,D. A.
Ralston,Wilf. (DEMO), Statistical Methods for Digital Computers, Vol. 3: 296-339. New York: Wiley
Kruskal, J. B., Wish, M. 1978. Multidimensional Scaling. London: Sage.
23
Macmillan, I. C., Siegel, R.,  Narasimha, P. N. S. DEMO Criteria used by venture capitalists to evaluate new
venture proposals. Journal of Business Venturing, 1(1): 119-128.
Macmillan, I. C., Zemann, DEMO,  Subbanarasimha, P. N. 1987. Criteria distinguishing successful from
unsuccessful ventures DEMO the venture screening process. Journal of Business Venturing, 2(2): DEMO
137.
Manski, C. F. 2005. Social Choice with Partial Knowledge of DEMO Response: Princeton University
Press.
Mar-Molinero, C., Ezzamel, M. 1991. Multidimensional scaling applied to company failure. Omega, 19:
259–274.
Mar-Molinero, C. DEMO 1988. Schools in Southampton: A Quantitative Approach to School Location, Closure
and Staffing. The Journal of the Operational Research Society, 39(4): 339-350.
McFadden, D. 1994. Contingent Valuation and Social Choice. American Journal of Agricultural Economics,
76(4): 689-708.
McFadden, D. 1999. Rationality for Economists? Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 19(1): 73-105.
Mitchell, W. 1991. Dual clocks: entry order influences on incumbent and newcomer market share and
survival when specialized assets retain their value. Strategic Management Journal, 12: 85-100.
Nakamura, A. 1996. Rough logic based on incomplete information DEMO its application. International Journal
of Approximate Reasoning, 15(4): 367-378.
DEMO, D. 1986. GOGOs, YOYOs and DODOs: Company Directors and Industry DEMO Strategic
Management Journal, 7(2): 101-117.
Norburn, D., Birley, S. 1988. The Top Management Team and Corporate Performance. Strategic
Management Journal, 9(3): 225-237.
Nosofsky, R. M. 1986. Attention, similarity, and the identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General., 115(1): DEMO
24
O’Reilly, C., Snyder, R.,  Boothe, J. 1993. Effects of DEMO team demography on organizational change.
In G. Huber,W. Glick (Eds.), Organizational change and redesign: 147-175. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Ohlson, J. A. 1980. Financial Ratios and the Probabilistic Prediction of Bankruptcy. Journal of Accounting
Research, 18(1): 109-131.
Parsons, S. 1996. Current DEMO to handling imperfect information in data and knowledge bases. IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 8(3): 353-372.
Patel, V. L., Kaufman, D. R.,  Magder, S. 1996. The acquisition of medical DEMO in complex dynamic
decision-making environments. In A. Ericsson (Ed.), The DEMO to excellence: The acquisition of
expert performance in the arts and DEMO, sports and games.: 127-165. NJ: Erlbaum.: Hillsdale.
Pawlak, Z. DEMO Rough classification. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 51(2): 369-383.
DEMO, A. M. 1992. On Studying Managerial Elites. Strategic Management Journal, 13: 163-182.
Preston, S., Chapman, C., Pinfold, M.,  Smith, G. 2005. Knowledge acquisition for knowledge-based
engineering systems. International Journal of Information DEMO and Management, 4(1): 1-11.
Priem, R. L. 1990. Top Management Team Group Factors, Consensus, and Firm Performance. Strategic
Management Journal, 11(6): 469-478.
Rabin, M. 1998. Psychology and Economics. Journal of Economic Literature, 36(1): 11-46.
Raudys, S. J., Jain, DEMO K. 1991. Small sample size effects in statistical pattern recognition: recommendations
DEMO practitioners. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 13(3): 252-264.
Read, S., Wiltbank, R.,  Sarasvathy, S. D. 2003. What Do Entrepreneurs Really Learn From Experience? The
Difference Between Expert and Novice Entrepreneurs. BKERC Proceedings.
Richardson, F. M., Davidson, L. F. 1984. On linear discrimination with accounting ratios. Journal of
Business Finance and Accounting, 11(4): 511-525.
Robinson, W. T., Fornell, C. 1985. The sources of market pioneer advantages in consumer goods industries.
Journal of Marketing DEMO, 222: 305-317.
25
Rowe, A. L., Cooke, N. J., Hall, E. P.,  Halgren, T. L. 1996. Toward an on-line knowledge assessment
methodology: Building DEMO the relationship between knowing and doing. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 2(1): 31-47.
Sahlman, W. 1990. The Structure and Governance of Venture-Capital Organizations. Journal of Financial
Economics, 27(2): 473–521.
Sandberg, DEMO R., Schweiger, D. M.,  Hofer, C. W. 1988. The DEMO of Verbal Protocols in Determining
Venture Capitalists’ Decision Processes. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 13(1): 8-20.
Schmalensee, R. 1981. Economies of scale DEMO barriers to entry. Journal of Political Economy, 89: 1228-
1238.
Schvaneveldt, R. W., Durso, F. T., Goldsmith, T. E., Breen, T. J., Cooke, N. M., Tucker, R. G.,  De DEMO, J.
C. 1985. Measuring the structure of expertise. International Journal of DEMO Studies, 23(6):
699-728.
Shanteau, J. 1992. Competence in DEMO: The role of task characteristics. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 53(2): 252-266.
Shepard, R. N. 1962a. The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance
function. I. Psychometrika, 27(2): 125-140.
Shepard, R. N. 1962b. The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance
function. II. Psychometrika, 27(3): 219-246.
Shepherd, D. A. 1999. Venture Capitalists' Assessment of New Venture Survival. Management DEMO,
45(5): 621.
Shepherd, D. A., Zacharakis, A. DEMO Conjoint analysis: a new methodological approach for researching the
decision policies DEMO venture capitalists. Venture Capital - An international journal of entrepreneurial
finance, DEMO(3): 197–217.
Shepherd, D. A., Zacharakis, A.,  Baron, R. A. 2003. VCs’Decision Processes: Evidence Suggesting More
Experience may not Always be Better. Journal of Business Venturing, 18(3): 381-401.
26
Shiffrin, R. M., Schneider, W. 1977. Controlled and automatic human information processing: 11. Perceptual
learning, automatic attending, and a general theory. Psychological Review, 84(2): 127-190.
Sinha, I., DeSarbo, W. S. DEMO An Integrated Approach toward the Spatial Modeling of Perceived Customer
Value. Journal of Marketing Research, 35(2): 236-249.
Slowinski, R. 1993. Rough DEMO Learning of Preferential Attitude in Multi-Criteria Decision Making.
Proceedings of the 7th International Symposium on Methodologies for Intelligent Systems: 642-651.
Slowinski, R., Stefanowski, J. 1996. Rough-set reasoning about uncertain data. Fundamenta Informaticae,
27(2-3): 229-243.
Stinchcombe, A. L. 1965. Social structures and organizations. In J. G. March (Ed.), Handbook of
Organizations: 142-193. Chicago, IL.: DEMO McNally.
Tversky, A., Kahneman, D. 1974. Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Science, 185: 1124-
1131.
Tyebjee, T. T., Bruno, A. V. 1984. A Model of Venture Capitalist Investment Activity. Management Science,DEMO
30(9): 1051-1066.
Weller, S. C., Romney, A. K. DEMO Systematic Data Collection. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
Williamson, O. DEMO 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism: Firms, Markets, Relational Contracting.
DEMO York: Free Press.
Zacharakis, A. L., Meyer, G. D. 1998. A lack of insight: do venture capitalists really understand their own
decision process? Journal of Business Venturing, 13(1): 57-76.
Zacharakis, A. L., Meyer, G. D. 2000. The potential of actuarial decision models: Can they improve the
venture capital investment decision? Journal of Business Venturing, 15(4): 323-346.
Zacharakis, A. L., Shepherd, D. A. DEMO The nature of information and overconfidence on venture
capitalists' decision making. DEMO of Business Venturing, 16(4): 311-332.
Zsambok, C. E., DEMO, G. 1996. Naturalistic decision making. NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
27
Figure 1: Analytical Techniques
Parametric
Techniques
Used to understand
the nature of
knowledge
structures
Inferential
techniques make
distributional
assumptions
Nonparametric
Technique
Used to understand
DEMO nature of
knowledge
structures, business
plans, and decision
making
Inferential
techniques lacks
distributional
assumptions
28
Multidimensional Scaling
(MDS) (figure 2)
Identifying Key Dimensions
using objects
AUTOCLASS
Identifying key classes
using variables
PRO-FIT (figure 3)
Independently verifying
dimensions using
variables instead of
objects
Quadratic Discriminant
DEMO (figure 4)
Empirical verification of
the discriminatory
potential of the DEMO axes
identified using MDS
Class Identification
(Table 1a)
Dimensions of DEMO and
unfunded Table
Key dimensions that
discriminate classes
(Table 1b)
Figure 2: MDS Analysis
6
4
2
0
-4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
-2
29
-4
-6
DEMO o n -fu n ded
F u n ded
Figure 3: PRO-FIT Analysis
30
Figure 4: Quadratic Discriminant Analysis
31
Table 1(a) Class Strength10
Table 1: AUTOCLASS Results
Class # DEMO of class strength Relative Class Strength Class Wt. Normalized Class weight
0 -42.1   1.00 77 0.54
1 -50.3 0.67 66 0.46
(real distribution is: 72 funded + 71 not funded)
Table 1(b): Within class attribute measures
Attribute I-jk 11  Attribute I-jk
Group 0 (DEMO business plans)   Group 1 (funded business plans)
Management Experience 2.31 Value Added 3.01
Industry Experience 2.16 Market Size 2.97
Startup Experience DEMO Competition 2.71
Value Added 2.08 Entry Timing 2.57
Market Size 2.05 Technology 2.40
Competition 2.01Technological advantage 2.36
Entry Timing 1.98 Strategy 2.25
Technological advantage DEMO Startup Experience 1.88
Intellectual Property Rights 1.47 Industry Experience 1.76
Harvest Potential  1.21 Leadership Experience 1.69
Leadership Experience 1.07 Management Experience 1.67
Strategy 1.04Harvest Potential 1.32
Class entropy with respect to global entropy  8.47 9.23
10 The class divergence, or cross entropy with respect to the single class Classification, is a measure of how
strongly the class probability  distribution  function differs from that of the database as a whole.  It is zero for
identical distributions, going infinite when two discrete distributions place probability 1 on differing values
of the same attribute.
11 I-jk  denotes the term influence value for attribute k in class j.  This is the cross entropy or Kullback-
Leibler distance between the class and full database DEMO distributions
32{1g42fwefx}