Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 2–10
www.elsevier.com/locate/cogbrainres
Review
Neurobiology DEMO decision-making: Quo vadis?
Martin P. PaulusT
Laboratory of Biological Dynamics DEMO Theoretical Medicine, USA
Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-9116, USA
Veterans Affairs DEMO Diego Healthcare System, CA 92161, USA
Accepted 5 January 2005
Available online 5 March 2005
Abstract
Decision-making is an important aspect of daily DEMO Moreover, dysfunctions of decision-making play a critical role in a number DEMO
neuropsychiatric disorders. Several important research groups have contributed a diverse set of approaches to study decision-making and its
underlying neurobiology. Insights from these studies DEMO provide important directions for future research in this area.
D 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Theme: Decision-making
Topic: Cognition
Keywords: Decision-making; DEMO; Neuropsychiatric disorder
Contents
1. Introduction ................................ ........................... 2
2. Dimensions of DEMO ..................... ........................... 3
3. Emotion and decision-making ...................... ........................... 5
4. Physiological responses and decision-making .............. ........................... 5
5. Neural substrates underlying decision-making .............. DEMO 6
6. Individual differences and clinical populations .............. ........................... 7
7. Conclusions ................................ ........................... 8
References ................................... ........................... 8
1. Introduction
Decision-making fundamentally refers DEMO the process of
making choices or reaching conclusions. One can conceptu-
alize decision-making in a wide variety of situations, which
range from the selection of a simple act, such as initiating a
T Fax: +1 DEMO 642 1429.
E-mail address: mpaulus@ucsd.edu.
0926-6410/$ - see front matter DEMO 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2005.01.001
finger movement, DEMO the selection of a complex action, such
as which bonds to DEMO in the stock market. In this special
issue, a number of DEMO groups provide intriguing insights
into the blossoming field of the neurobiology of decision-
making, but also highlight some of the important unsolved
problems. The goal of this overview is to identify common
ground among these researchers, embed the current findings
into a more general framework addressing important aspects
DEMO decision-making research, and identify issues that will
need to be addressed DEMO future research.
M.P. Paulus / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 2–10
3
Conceptually, decision-making can be divided both
temporally and functionally into partially distinct processes:DEMO
(1) the assessment and formation of preferences among
possible options; (2) the selection and execution of an action;
and (3) the experience or evaluation of an outcome. During
the first stage, individuals attribute value to the available
options and select one of them. During DEMO second stage,
individuals initiate, perform, and complete an action accord-
ing to the preferences established during the first stage. To
successfully complete DEMO stage, a range of action-related
processes occurs, such as the sequencing of actions, the
inhibition of competing actions, and the appropriate timing DEMO
actions. During stage three, individuals generate and process
a signal, which is related to the difference between expected
and experienced outcomes. This signal DEMO a means of
linking actions to outcomes, and is key to DEMO the values
during the first stage of the next decision-making. Finally,
decision-making is an iterative process, such that the current
stage of decision-making is influenced by the history of
preceding stages and directly influences the DEMO
stages of processing.
2. Dimensions of decision-making
There are at least five critical dimensions that can
have profound effects on how individuals make decisions.
DEMO, decision-making is often associated with uncer-
tainty, either explicitly described as the probability of an
outcome associated with an action, or implicit as past
experienced associations of an action with an outcome.
Trepel et al. DEMO argue that one must carefully consider
the complex transformation of probabilities into decision
weights, which influence the degree to which one option
is preferred over another. Similarly, Shiv et al. [61] show
that these probabilities are not necessarily perceived in a
linear fashion. Second, each option in a decision-making
situation has a certain value, which is derived from the
possible reward or punishment associated with the outcome
of that option. Ursu shows DEMO this value may fundamentally
be processed relative to the alternative option. Thus, the
reference point, which defines the most preferred option in a
DEMO situation, may not be constant as suggest by
traditional utility theories DEMO may vary according to the
available alternatives [40]. Third, decision-making takes
DEMO over time; in other words, past actions and outcomes
affect the future assessment of options available. Yarkoni et
al. [69] show that individuals DEMO process options over
several different time scales. In many daily decision-making
situations, individuals do not know explicitly how likely it is
that a given option will have a desirable or undesirable
outcome, but instead have acquired positive or negative
values associated with options because of prior experiences
with DEMO selected choice. Fourth, many decision-making
situations take place between individuals or DEMO groups
of individuals. Thus, options are evaluated not only according
to DEMO positive and negative values of the decision-maker, but
also in regards DEMO the effects of the decision on other
individuals or groups. These possible consequences may
have profound effects on the value attributed to an option.
DEMO and Mellers [25] show that one must carefully
consider the trade-offs between self-interest, the individual
component, and fairness, the group-specific component of
decision-making. Fifth, although traditional choice psychol-
ogy has sought to discover generic decision-making rules and
laws, there is extensive behavioral evidence that decision-
making is highly dependent on context—to the extent that
some investigators have questioned whether DEMO is such a
thing as a generic decision-making situation. Several groups
[26,61,68] show that contextual characteristics of the task or
the task DEMO have profound influence on behavior or
neural substrate activation.
Attribute level refers to the specific quantitative or
qualitative degree of an option dimension such DEMO the price
of an apartment or the degree of nightlife in a vacation resort
[27]. The attribute levels of the dimensions for each option DEMO
a decision-making situation do not contribute linearly to the
degree of preference of one option over another. This
seemingly obvious statement can have profound DEMO
ces for the interpretation of the experimental results. For
example, as DEMO elaborates, subjects show a quicker
selection of an option when there DEMO a stronger association in
long-term memory, which increases the level of DEMO
This theme is also briefly mentioned in Trepel’s article, which
attempts DEMO identify the basic components of a decision-
making situation (acts [options], states, and consequences).
Nevertheless, the characteristics of options or acts DEMO based
on complex processes that tend to conglomerate attributes not
necessarily in a cognitively rational manner (as hypothesized
in system I, see below) but also in an associative affective
way (as conceptualized in what is referred to as system II).
The review by Trepel et al. DEMO emphasizes an important
issue that has not been widely addressed in the literature on
the neurobiology of decision-making. Specifically, inves-
tigators typically manipulate reward or punishment proba-
bility or magnitude without explicitly taking into account
the DEMO established behavioral biases in these situations.
For example, a 50% chance DEMO winning $1 is not the same as
a 25% chance of winning $2 even though the expected value
of both options is the same. DEMO has long been recognized that
human beings transform both probability and reward or
punishment magnitude in characteristic ways to evaluate
different options. It would DEMO useful to take into account
these transformations when conducting future neuroimaging
studies with these types of paradigms. Moreover, these
investigators also emphasize that framing effects are likely
to have strong influences on the processing characteristics of
DEMO tasks, which will make it more difficult to
establish a neural DEMO that could be called a bgeneric
decision-makingQ system.
Over 200 years ago, Bernoulli [5] recognized that people’s
evaluation of potential outcomes is based on a subjective
4
M.P. Paulus / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 2–10
value DEMO differs from the simple mathematical product of
probability and outcome magnitude. He proposed that the
psychological function underlying the evaluation of the
magnitude of DEMO outcome is concave, that is, that the
difference between $200 and $400 is evaluated as larger
than the difference between $1200 and $1400. DEMO concavity
of the value function in the gain domain is paralleled by a
convexity in the loss domain (i.e., losing $400 versus $200 DEMO
more aversive than $1400 versus $1200). In addition to
subjective effects on the magnitude of the value function,
individuals also show subjective DEMO of the probability
of an outcome. It has long been recognized that a change from
impossibility, for example, bthe earth is not going DEMO get hit by
an asteroidQ, to possibility, for example, bthe DEMO may get hit
by an asteroidQ , or from possibility to certainty has a bigger
impact than a change from a somewhat probable to DEMO more
probable outcome [15]. In practical terms, people tend to
value DEMO reduction of a probability proportionally much less
than the complete elimination of a probability, for example,
individuals typically do not buy car insurance for half price
that would only cover them on odd days [63].
DEMO effects in decision-making situations: it
is widely assumed that because of DEMO limited processing
resources of the brain, complex sets of stimuli are DEMO
atically simplified or beditedQ, which helps to establish rules.
Editing includes DEMO of combination, that is, proba-
bilities of equal outcomes are added; simplification, that is,
non-essential differences are neglected; cancellation, that DEMO,
elements common to both gambles are cancelled; and
segregation, that is, complex gambles are separated into
risky and riskless components. In addition to these editing
processes, other context-specific decision-making effects
have been reported. Specifically, one of the most basic
finding in decision-making processes is the bconcreteness
principleQ [62]. If an individual is asked to decide on the
relative DEMO (on a scale from blike very muchQ to bdon’t
like at DEMO ) between different ski vacation packages that are
characterized by the bquality of the snowQ and the price of the
hotel, individuals tend to overweigh the quality of the snow
attribute. In contrast, if subjects are asked to estimate the
maximum price they would be willing to pay DEMO the different
ski vacation packages, they tend to overweigh the price DEMO the
hotel attribute. Tversky [67] argued long ago that people
compare available options on each attribute individually
rather than evaluating the option as a DEMO, which leads to
the emphasis on some attributes and the neglect DEMO others. In
particular, when two options have attributes that are very
DEMO, such as two cars with equally powerful engines, then
these attributes are ignored when one arrives at a final
decision.
Background contrast refers DEMO the observation that
previous experience profoundly influences which dimen-
sion to emphasize when determining the degree of
preference of a particular option. For example, people
are more likely to select a cheaper tire, that is, DEMO
according to price rather than quality, when they were
previously asked DEMO select between two tires which differed
little in price but a lot in their associated warranty [60].In
contrast, individuals who had previously been exposed to
small differences in warranty and a large price difference
were more DEMO to select the tire with the longer warranty.
Ursu and Carter [68] show in their study that background
contrast may be a special case DEMO a counterfactual thinking,
that is, the evaluation of the selected DEMO within the
context of the alternatives.
The degree of preference for an option and the resulting
selection of an action in a decision-making situation
DEMO strongly on the specific constellation of attributes.
For example, in situations DEMO competing attributes of
available options are btoo close to callQ, for DEMO, two
apartments that cost $290 versus $350 a month and are
DEMO with a 25-min versus a 5-min commute,
individuals do not necessarily select the option that would
maximize the outcome (select the $290 apartment) but,
instead, often choose to search for alternatives with more
DEMO attributes (e.g., asked to see other options with
varying commuting times). Moreover, the introduction of a
competing alternative increases the delay to make a
decision, for example, people are less likely to buy DEMO t-
shirt, even if it is on sale, when at the same time another t-
shirt is on sale, relative to the situation when only one t-
shirt is on sale [59]. Finally, adding an option with an
extreme value on one attribute can have two effects DEMO
decision-making. It can increase the preference for an
option with a medium value of the same attribute
(compromise) or it can reduce the DEMO of an
option, which has a less attractive attribute (polarization).
For example, introducing a high-quality/high-priced cam-
era as a third option for two mid-quality/mid-priced
cameras increases the preference for the cameras with
DEMO median price. However, introducing a low-quality/low-
priced item tends to DEMO the preference for a high-
quality/high-priced item.
Lastly, in reference DEMO Kahneman’s distinction between
decision utility and experienced utility, Trepel et al. DEMO
emphasize that what one expects to observe and its
corresponding emotional impact may differ significantly
from what one eventually when an outcome is presented
DEMO and the subsequent emotional impact of that
outcome. This distinction is consistent with the notion that
decision-making occurs in different and possibly separable
stages (assessment, action selection, and outcome process-
ing). Moreover, this observation also calls into question
whether decision-making in situations with hypothetical
outcomes is DEMO to decision-making when the individ-
ual experiences subsequently the effects of the selected
option. For example, one could ask a subject to choose
between two gambles with or without presenting an actual
outcome. Whereas the former DEMO be formulated to
explicitly address effects of explicit reward or punishment
probability or magnitude on the assessment of preferences
for an option, the latter may be required to examine the
M.P. Paulus / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 2–10
5
integration DEMO preceding stages of decision-making on
subsequent decision-making situations. This calls for more
systematic research into comparing the role of neural
substrates when decisions are DEMO without presenting an
outcome versus when individuals are asked to select from
a range of available options within the context of
experiencing explicit reward DEMO punishment associated
with these options.
A sophisticated experimental approach to determine the
influence of control mechanisms versus inhibitory processes
is suggested by Yarkoni et DEMO [69]. In their formulation, self-
control is defined as the ability DEMO use internal representations
of long-term future outcomes to bias and constrain their
decision-making behavior. These investigators also empha-
size the fact that in many DEMO situations, values,
goals, and probabilities are bmoving targetsQ, that DEMO, are not
constant over time but are in fact sensitively influenced DEMO
the prior choices that the person has made. This approach
mirrors that of dynamic decision-making theories. Specifi-
cally, Busemeyer and Townsend [7,51] propose decision
field theory to capture the deliberation process that occurs
with conflicting DEMO The theory predicts the feeling of
pleasure we may have about an important decision when the
action is far away, and the later dread we feel when the action
is imminent, for example, accepting to DEMO an important talk
at a scientific conference. Decision field theory also predicts
preference reversals as a function of time pressure, violations
of stochastic dominance, and the inverse relationship
between decision time and choice proportions. Yarkoni et
al. [69] show that neural substrates important for temporal
processing are engaged DEMO sustained neural activity when
processing rewards that change over many trials versus those
that change over few. These authors also highlight that
decision-making takes DEMO over several temporal domains
and that one needs to establish a paradigm to examine these
different phenomena simultaneously.
system, which is thought to be evolutionarily older, fast,
mostly automatic, and hence not very accessible DEMO conscious
awareness and control, uses primarily similarity and asso-
ciative processing DEMO The other system is based on
algorithms and rules, for example, the probability calculus,
Bayesian updating, formal logic, is slower, effortful, and
requires awareness and conscious control. For example,
uncertain and threatening cues associated with action options
can trigger affective responses (e.g., fear, dread, anxiety) and
have profound influences on the decision-making process.
Therefore, several investigators have proposed that decision-
making in the presence of risk DEMO be conceptualized as a
general feeling state [34] rather than defined by the proper-
ties of the decision-making situation. Some investigators
have even argued DEMO people predominantly use an affect
heuristic when making a decision [20,45], that is, individuals
base their decision on an baffect poolQ, which contains all the
positive and negative tags consciously or unconsciously
associated with DEMO action options. Several empirical findings
have been cited to support this view.
The role of emotions is highlighted in the article by Shiv
et DEMO [61]. These investigators utilized a simple investment
task to examine the role of losses versus gains in
individuals with substance use disorder. These subjects
DEMO more likely to invest than healthy comparison subjects
even when faced the possibility of a loss. Moreover, it
appeared that these subjects respond differently to feed-
back. Whereas normal participants were more likely to
withdraw from DEMO a risky option particularly after a
loss, substance use individuals showed DEMO levels of risky
responses after a prior loss or gain. These investigators
emphasize the multifactorial nature of these differences,
which could be attributable DEMO attenuated loss outcome
processing, decreased ability to view future negative
consequences, and inability to inhibit attractiveness of
immediate reward.
3. Emotion and decision-making
DEMO James linked decision-making, the process of
deliberating until an action takes DEMO, to emotion [28].
Emotions have significant effects on decision-making
processes both DEMO the assessment and outcome stage
of decision-making. For example, positive affect DEMO the
assessment stage can result in greater variety seeking [29],
overestimation of the likelihood of favorable and under-
estimation of the likelihood of DEMO events [43],
increased deliberation times [33],and more complex
decision-making strategies [38]. In comparison, negative
affect during this stage can narrow the search for response
alternatives [18], speed response selection, and reduce the
use DEMO different sources of information [36].
Some investigators have suggested that two fundamen-
tally different systems underlie decision-making [17], which
work in parallel but may arrive at conflicting decisions. One
4. Physiological responses and decision-making
Emotions have DEMO defined as evolved adaptive process
to improve survival, characterized by and DEMO as
distinctive and automated physiological responses [28], with
the function to DEMO or appraise events in our environment
along immediate, non-reflective dimensions of DEMO,
control, certainty, responsibility, effort [64] and to create a
DEMO of readiness to act [22]. Thus, measuring physiological
responsivity during decision-making DEMO may be a
useful approach to examine the effects of emotions on
decision-making. A major contribution is that of Damasio
[13], who proposed the somatic marker theory. This theory
posits that every stimulus is associated with DEMO affective
weight that is coded automatically and generates changes in
the autonomic nervous system (i.e., heart rate, blood pressure,
skin conductance). These autonomic changes constitute the
somatic markers, which inform brain systems of the affective
6
M.P. Paulus / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 2–10
weight, particularly emotional intensity, of stimuli. A key
component of their theory is the interaction between body and
brain in computing advantageous versus disadvantageous
action DEMO In particular, somatic markers may represent
primary (body generated) or DEMO (brain generated)
signals that associated value and meaning to options DEMO a
decision-making situation. Along similar lines of reasoning,
some investigators have proposed a brisk-as-feelingsQ
hypothesis, which highlights the role of affect experienced
at the moment of decision making [34], consistent with the
emerging view that the anterior cingulate and the anterior
insula may be critical for the DEMO of afferent
interoceptive information about impending external stimuli
and internal emotional states [10,11]. According to these and
other related models, brain-generated body-feeling states
may be critical determinants for the evaluation of different
options during decision-making DEMO and result in
establishing a value system based on these body-feeling
states. The study by Cohen et al. [9] points toward the critical
role DEMO the anterior cingulate cortex in a network of structures
that are important for processing interoceptive stimuli.
At this stage, it is not clear whether the observed changes
in body state are primary or secondary. Specifically, is an
acceleration or deceleration of the heart, a primary event
aimed to alert brain areas to the significance of an impending
stimulus or action DEMO situation or does the brain initiate
body state changes to prepare the individual for these events?
Ultimately, these questions can only be resolved by sophis-
ticated psychophysiological neuroimaging experiments.
Moreover, selective pharmacological manipulation of periph-
eral body states, for example, administration of beta-blockers
that do not DEMO the blood–brain barrier, may begin to
address the causal connections between DEMO body and the
brain in a decision-making situation.
Intriguingly, Crone et DEMO [12] show in a set of experiments
that heart rate changes can be linked specifically to outcome
variability, a measure of risk in a decision-making situation.
Specifically, it appears that heart-rate changes are related to
the ability to make a decision, which is contextually
dependent, that is, varies according to what could have
happened. Therefore, peripheral body states may provide a
means of alerting to events that are important for adjusting
DEMO performance.
5. Neural substrates underlying decision-making
The neural processes and computations that may underlie
the adjustment of the value system over time has been DEMO
intense investigation and several theoretical models [16,23,
57,65] have been proposed to explain how response
selection takes place in a decision-making DEMO
These neural systems theoretical models have in
common a connection between specific brain systems and
processes underlying the adjustment of the value system.
For DEMO, in the Log-likelihood model [57] a Bayesian-
like process [48] is DEMO to modify probabilities of
hypotheses according to perceived stimuli [23], which DEMO
thought to occur in the parietal cortex [47,58].In
comparison, the DEMO Error, or Temporal Difference
model [56,65] focuses on monoaminergic neurons DEMO
general, which appear to broadcast prediction errors, that
is, the DEMO between the expected and observed
reward, as global teaching signals to DEMO areas of the
brain [55], and dopamine neurons in particular, which
generate a short-latency, phasic reward signal [54]. The
temporal difference model originally provided a neurally
based conceptualization of stimulus–reward processing.
This model has also DEMO used to account for changes in
the stimulus–reward relationships in decision-making sit-
uations [16]. Moreover, BOLD fMRI activation changes
were found to be consistent with predictions by the
temporal difference model in ventral striatum and orbito-
DEMO cortex during acquisition of appetitive conditioned
stimuli [44] and in the striatum during the expectancy
violation of positive and negative stimuli [39].
Using neuroimaging DEMO or brain lesion patients and
decision-making paradigms, several investigators have
shown DEMO structures important for the processing of
reward [32], punishment [3], positive and negative moods
[46], as well as self-relevant processing [53] are also active
in decision-making situations. Therefore, it is important to
consider at what stage and to what extend emotions play a
role during decision-making. If DEMO divides decision-
making into the three stages outlined in the introduction,
that is, assessing the situation and the weight of each
available option, selecting and completing an action
according to optimal option, and experience DEMO conse-
quences of the outcome, one can argue that emotions can
DEMO different roles during different stages of decision-
making. For example, anticipation DEMO expectation of
outcomes associated with each available option may play
a critical role during the first stage of decision-making,
which is consistent with DEMO findings by Ursu and Carter
[68]. It appears that individuals continuously form pre-
dictions about the future, which are updated with new
information (DEMO, for recent example, Ref. [50]). If one
assumes that emotions are the consciously perceived
feelings [14], indicating change in impending reward or
punishment, one should not be surprised to find significant
emotional responses during the assessment stage of
decision-making. Similarly, during the action phase of the
decision-making process, particularly when temporally
extended, one could conceivably find that DEMO degree of
effort associated with action selection can generate feelings
that are highly relevant for the completion of the selected
choice. Lastly, it is obvious that outcomes can provoke
strong emotions. It will be particularly interesting DEMO
examine whether the outcomes experienced following a
decision-making situation show similar characteristics as
the experience of expected rewards or punishments. In
particular, it will be important to determine whether
M.P. Paulus / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 2–10
7
populations DEMO psychiatric disorders as studied by Shiv,
Fishbein and Goudriaan show stage-specific emotional
impairments.
One may propose that neural substrates, which are
observed to be active during decision-making, could play
three different roles. First, these DEMO substrates could
serve to employ generic cognitive and affective compo-
nents during the decision-making process. For example,
Braver asserts the point that many DEMO the activation
patterns observed during a temporally-extended decision-
making task involve neural substrates that have commonly
been identified with cognitive functions comprising cog-
nitive DEMO executive control, error monitoring, and working
memory. Second, one may DEMO that certain neural
substrates are specifically involved in decision-making
relevant processes. For example, Trepel argues that
valuation, an important component in establishing expected
DEMO of a given option, could be linked to posterior
parietal cortex DEMO and not simply reflect different
degrees of attentional processing. Similarly, Cohen DEMO
differential activation during high-risk vs. low-risk deci-
sions in right orbitofrontal, DEMO, temporal and
parietal cortex, as well as anterior cingulate and ventral
striatum. Moreover, this author argues that the ACC
specifically processes decision to choose a highly uncertain
large reward. In this context, it is interesting to mention
that prospect theory specifically argues that the non-
linearity of DEMO probability weighing is directly related to
a risk-averse/prone decision-making pattern. Future inves-
tigation will need to show whether there is a relationship
between DEMO ACC and the degree of nonlinearity within the
context of prospect theory. Third, one may argue that
processes that are associated with but not necessarily
central to the decision-making operation activate neural
substrates. For example, Yarkoni shows that task-related
activation patterns were related to state-dependent changes
in task DEMO but argued that some of these neural
substrates may simply be due to perceptual processing and
specific task characteristic. Similarly, Trepel highlights the
importance of considering framing effects, which may be
due to contextually biased brain representations of the
options available to the decision-maker.
Can we link choice DEMO to brain activation patterns?
This is a difficult but important question to address
because it may enable us to make predictions within a
DEMO of an existing theory rather than gathering
isolated behavioral and neuroimaging findings without
identifying the mechanics that connects them. In their
contribution, Trepel et al. [66] review key findings from
traditional choice psychology and suggest that DEMO may be
able to associate activation patterns in distinct neural
substrate to peculiar decision-making phenomena. For
example, is the anterior cingulate activation related to the
S-shaped probability weighing function, the nonlinear
value function, or the DEMO pattern of risk-seeking
and risk-aversion?
6. Individual differences and clinical populations
Traditional choice psychology has sought to identify
generic decision-making patterns, that is, behaviors that
deviate from a normative explanation in a systematic manner
and can be observed in almost all individuals [30,35].In
comparison, less attention has been paid to individual
differences, that is, whether personality or DEMO
characteristics are associated with different choice behaviors.
In several of the current studies, investigators show signifi-
cant individual differences in choice behaviors. For example,
Haselhuhn and Mellers show that although the majority of
individuals cooperated DEMO strategic reasons, that is, the
weighing between expected pleasure and the likelihood of
rejection, others appear to be driven by a tradeoff between
greed and fairness or by more pleasure from fair payoffs than
from DEMO payoffs. These findings suggest that decision-
making patterns are highly influenced by the manner in which
the individual process the conditions in which a DEMO has
to be made. These differences may be due to the degree to
which individuals project their own emotions onto others. In
this context, error monitoring may also be different for
individuals with different personality characteristics. DEMO
example, Crone makes the point that highly anxious
individuals may have DEMO hypersensitive performance monitor-
ing system.
The recent emergence studying the neurobiology of
decision-making has also been closely associated with the
search for decision-making dysfunctions DEMO populations with
neurological or psychiatric disorders [6,8,37,41,42,49].In
this sense, decision-making research provides an ideal
translational opportunity to test emerging hypotheses in the
field of systems neuroscience or psychology in the clinical
DEMO However, at this stage, there is no clear framework
from which to develop bdysfunctionsQ of decision-making.
For example, we do not know whether specific decision-
making related processes, for example, probability, value
processing, DEMO dysfunctional in these populations or whether
the altered decision-making patterns are a consequence of
generic cognitive process dysfunctions. Initial studies by
Bechara et al. DEMO that ventromedial prefrontal lesion
patients were able to generate somatic markes but were not
able to utilize these markers in guiding them to make DEMO
optimal decision [2].
Along similar lines of reasoning Bechara showed that
some, but not all, substance using individuals show
decision-making dysfunctions that are DEMO to those
observed in ventromedial prefrontal cortex lesion patients
[1,4]. Extending this line of research, Fishbein et al. [21]
show altered risky decision-making behavior in substance
using individuals. These authors show that drug using
subjects DEMO more risky choices and were less likely to
shift strategies in response to learned contingencies.
Moreover, this behavior was associated with less activation
in the ventral anterior cingulate cortex. An immediate goal
for clarifying the decision-making DEMO in sub-
8
M.P. Paulus / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 2–10
stance DEMO individuals is whether they are more attracted
by the rewarding consequences, DEMO whether they are less
deterred by the potential negative consequences, or
DEMO it is a combination of both. Elucidating this
mechanism has direct consequences for treatment. For
example, it is the former, one may have DEMO focus on
providing competing stimuli that have similarly rewarding
outcomes but are associated with less negative consequen-
ces. Alternatively, if it is the latter, one may need to focus
on stressing the negative consequences in educational
interventions and measure its direct emotional impact on
individuals at risk.
The DEMO of substance using subjects also highlights the
importance of further clarifying decision-making specific
versus generic cognitive dysfunctions contributing to
decision-making abnormalities. For example, these individ-
uals perform poorly on tasks that are constructed to
measure inhibition DEMO as go/nogo or stop tasks
[19,31,52]. Thus, failed DEMO of competing actions,
however, may also have a profound influence DEMO appro-
priate decision-making.
Finally, the study by Fishbein et al. highlights DEMO
importance of investigating various conceptualization of
risk. This study uses a modified Rogers’ task to which
individuals select a low-probability high reward versus a
DEMO low reward option. Nevertheless, this
task measures only certain aspects of DEMO but neglects
others. Slovic has shown that risk perception are not only
driven by the outcome and the probability of the event
but are DEMO powerfully modulated by the perceived dread
[63], for example, the risk of a nuclear disaster is
perceived as more risky than that of DEMO airplane accident
because of the aversive dread stimuli with nuclear
disaster. This is consistent with the system I and system
II type processing [17], which is briefly alluded to in the
review by Trepel et al. DEMO It will be important to
conceptualize risk processing and its dysfunction in
neuropsychiatric populations within the framework of
these types of processes (deliberate, DEMO, explicit, and
cognitive versus associative, fast, implicit, and affective)DEMO
Moreover, it is unclear how these different systems are
represented in DEMO brain and whether selective dysfunc-
tions in system II explain the risk-taking patterns
observed in drug-using individuals.
Apart from inhibitory dysfunction, self-regulatory abnor-
malities have also been proposed as a source of decision-
making abnormalities in DEMO with disorders of addiction.
Goudriaan et al. [24] interpret their findings to reveal that
pathological gamblers do not regulate their behavior
appropriately, that is, change as a result of negative
consequences. These authors argued that the difference
between pathological gamblers and healthy comparison
subjects may be due to DEMO lack of behavioral flexibility or
the urge to regain previous losses. Therefore, an bappropriateQ
strategy may be employed with an binappropriate goalQ. One
may argue whether drug-using individual do not show
bdysfunctionalQ decision-making but instead show DEMO
decision-making within a dysfunctional framework of
assumptions and goals.
7. Conclusions
The papers in this issue show that decision-making is
complex, involves both cognitive and affective functions, and
plays an important role in individuals with neuropsychiatric
disorders. Moreover, some investigators raise the concern
that the subjective effects of reward and punishment
probability and magnitude are complex. Thus, experimental
parameters may need to take into account individually
derived weight and value functions. The DEMO seems to be
ripe for a close collaboration between psychologists, social
DEMO, systems and cognitive neuroscientists, as well as
clinical psychologists or neuroscientists and clinicians. The
development of a taxonomy of decision-making situations,
that DEMO, the hierarchical classification of different types of
decision-making situations and their DEMO behavioral
phenomena, may also help to constrain what is a very DEMO
construct, which involves a number of different component
processes that are DEMO to rely on different brain systems.
Identifying or delineating such taxonomy may also help to
better determine what is dysfunctional in subjects who have
DEMO with decision-making.
References
[1] A. Bechara, H. Damasio, Decision-making and addiction (part I):
impaired activation of somatic states in substance dependent
DEMO when pondering decisions with negative future conse-
quences, Neuropsychologia 40 (10) (2002) 1675–1689.
[2] A. Bechara, H. Damasio, D. Tranel, DEMO Damasio, Deciding
advantageously before knowing the advantageous strategy [see
comments], Science 275 (1997) 1293–1295.
[3] A.Bechara,H.Damasio,A.R. Damasio,G.P. Lee,Different
DEMO of the human amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal
cortex to decision-making, J. DEMO 19 (13) (1999) 5473–5481.
[4] A. Bechara, S. Dolan, A. Hindes, Decision-making and addiction
(part II): myopia for the DEMO or hypersensitivity to reward?
Neuropsychologia 40 (10) (2002) 1690–1705.
[5] D. Bernoulli, Exposition of a new theory on the measurement of risk,
Econometrica 2 (1954) 223–236.
[6] G. Brebion, M.J. Smith, X. Amador, D. Malaspina, J.M. Gorman,
Word recognition, discrimination DEMO, and decision bias in
schizophrenia: association with positive symptomatology and depres-
sive symptomatology, J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 186 (10) (1998) 604–609.
[7] J.R. Busemeyer, J.T. Townsend, Decision field theory: a dynamic-
cognitive approach to decision making in an uncertain environment,
Psychol. Rev. 100 (3) (1993) 432–459.
[8] L. Clark, T. Robbins, Decision-making deficits in drug addiction,
Trends Cogn. Sci. 6 (9) (2002) DEMO
[9] M.X. Cohen, A. Heller, C. Ranganath, Functional connectivity with
DEMO cingulate and orbitofrontal cortices during decision-making,
Cogn. Brain Res. 23 (DEMO) (2005) 61–70.
[10] A.D. Craig, How do you feel? DEMO: the sense of the
physiological condition of the body, Nat. Rev., Neurosci. 3 (8) (2002)
655–666.
M.P. Paulus / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 2–10
9
[11] DEMO Craig, A new view of pain as a homeostatic emotion, Trends
Neurosci. 26 (6) (2003) 303–307.
[12] E.A. Crone, S.A. Bunge, P. de Klerk, M.W. van der Molen, Cardiac
concomitants of performance monitoring: context dependence and
individual differences, Cogn. Brain Res. 23 (1) (2005) 93-106.
[13] A.R. Damasio, The somatic marker hypothesis and DEMO possible
functions of the prefrontal cortex, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, B
Biol. Sci. 351 (1996) 1413–1420.
[14] A.R. Damasio, T.J. Grabowski, A. Bechara, H. Damasio, L.L. Ponto,
J. Parvizi, R.D. DEMO, Subcortical and cortical brain activity during
the feeling of self-generated emotions, Nat. Neurosci. 3 (10) (2000)
1049–1056.
[15] W. Edwards, DEMO prediction of decisions among bets, J. Exp. Psychol.
50 (1955) DEMO
[16] D.M. Egelman, C. Person, P.R. Montague, A computational role DEMO
dopamine delivery in human decision-making, J. Cogn. Neurosci. 10
(5) (1998) 623–630.
[17] S. Epstein, Integration of the cognitive and the DEMO
unconscious, Am. Psychol. 49 (8) (1994) 709–724.
[18] K. DEMO, Heuristics and biases in theory formation: on the cognitive
processes of those concerned with cognitive processes, Theory
Psychol. 1 (4) (1991) 407–430.
[19] M.T. Fillmore, C.R. Rush, Impaired inhibitory control of behavior DEMO
chronic cocaine users, Drug Alcohol Depend. 66 (3) (2002) DEMO
[20] M.L. Finucane, A. Alhakami, P. Slovic, S.M. Johnson, The affect
heuristic in judgments of risks and benefits, J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 13
(1) (2000) 1–17.
[21] D.H. Fishbein, B.A. Eldreth, DEMO Hyde, J.A. Matochik, E.D. London,
Risky decision-making and the anterior cingulate cortex in abstinent
drug abusers and nonusers, Cogn. Brain Res. 23 (1) (2005) 119–136.
[22] N.H. Frijda, The laws of emotion, Am. Psychol. 43 (5) (1988)
349–358.
[23] J.I. Gold, M.N. Shadlen, Banburismus and the brain: decoding the
relationship between sensory DEMO, decisions, and reward, Neuron
36 (2) (2002) 299–308.
DEMO A.E. Goudriaan, J. Oosterlaan, E. de Beurs, W. van den DEMO, Decision
making in pathological gambling: a comparison between pathological
gamblers, DEMO dependents, patients with tourette syndrome and
normal controls, Cogn. Brain Res. 23 (1) (2005) 137–151.
[25] M.P. Haselhuhn, B.A. Mellers, DEMO and cooperation in economic
games, Cogn. Brain Res. 23 (1) (2005) 24–33.
[26] R. Huckfeldt, J.J. Mondak, M. Craw, J. DEMO, Making
sense of candidates: partisanship, ideology, and issues as guides to
judgement, Cogn. Brain Res. 23 (1) (2005) 11–23.
[27] J. Huber, D. Ariely, G. Fischer, Expressing preferences in a principal-
agent task: a comparison of choice, rating, and matching, Org. DEMO
Human Decis. Process. 87 (1) (2002) 66–90.
[28] W. James, The principles of psychology, 1988.
[29] B.E. Kahn, A.M. Isen, DEMO influence of positive affect on variety
seeking among safe, enjoyable products, J. Consum. Res. 20 (2)
(1993) 257–270.
[30] D. Kahneman, A perspective on judgment and choice: mapping
bounded rationality, Am. Psychol. 58 (9) (2003) 697–720.
[31] J.N. Kaufman, T.J. Ross, DEMO Stein, H. Garavan, Cingulate
hypoactivity in cocaine users during a GO-NOGO task as revealed
by event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging, J. Neurosci.
23 (21) (2003) 7839–7843.
[32] B. Knutson, G.W. Fong, C.M. DEMO, J.L. Varner, D. Hommer,
Dissociation of reward anticipation and outcome with event-related
fMRI, NeuroReport 12 (17) (2001) 3683–3687.
[33] S. Lewinsohn, H. Mano, Multi-attribute choice and affect: the
influence of naturally occurring and manipulated moods on choice
processes, J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 6 (1) (1993) 33–51.
[34] G.F. Loewenstein, E.U. Weber, C.K. DEMO, N. Welch, Risk as feelings,
Psychol. Bull. 127 (2) (2001) 267–286.
[35] R.D. Luce, Utility of gains and losses: DEMO theoretical, and
experimental approaches, 2000.
[36] M.F. Luce, J.R. Bettman, J.W. Payne, Choice processing in emotion-
ally difficult decisions, J. Exp. DEMO: Learn., Mem., Cogn. 23 (2)
(1997) 384–405.
[37] N. Lyon, B. Mejsholm, M. Lyon, Stereotyped responding by schizo-
phrenic outpatients: cross-cultural confirmation of perseverative switch-
ing on a two-choice task, DEMO Psychiatr. Res. 20 (2) (1986) 137–150.
[38] H. Mano, DEMO, framing effects, and affect, Org. Behav. Human
Decis. Process. 57 (1) (1994) 38–58.
[39] S.M. McClure, G.S. Berns, P.R. Montague, Temporal prediction errors
in a passive learning task activate human striatum, DEMO 38 (2)
(2003) 339–346.
[40] B.A. Mellers, A.P. McGraw, Anticipated emotions as guides to choice,
Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 10 (6) (2001) 210–214.
[41] K. Mogg, A. Mathews, M. DEMO, J. May, Biased cognitive
operations in anxiety: artefact, processing priorities or attentional
search? Behav. Res. Ther. 29 (5) (1991) 459–467.
[42] J. Monterosso, R. Ehrman, K.L. Napier, C.P. O’Brien, A.R. DEMO,
Three decision-making tasks in cocaine-dependent patients: do they
measure the DEMO construct? Addiction 96 (12) (2001) 1825–1837.
[43] T.E. Nygren, A.M. Isen, P.J. Taylor, J. Dulin, The influence of positive
affect on the decision rule in risk situations: focus on outcome (and
DEMO avoidance of loss) rather than probability, Org. Behav.
Human Decis. Process. 66 (1) (1996) 59–72.
[44] J.P. O’Doherty, P. Dayan, DEMO Friston, H. Critchley, R.J. Dolan,
Temporal difference models and reward-related learning in the human
brain, Neuron 38 (2) (2003) 329–337.
[45] E. Peters, P. Slovic, The springs of action: affective and analytical
information processing in choice, Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 26 (12)DEMO
(2000) 1465–1475.
[46] M.L. Phillips, W.C. Drevets, S.L. Rauch, DEMO Lane, Neurobiology of
emotion perception I: the neural basis of normal emotion perception,
Biol. Psychiatry 54 (5) (2003) 504–514.
[47] DEMO Platt, P.W. Glimcher, Neural correlates of decision variables in
parietal cortex, Nature 400 (6741) (1999) 233–238.
[48] A. Pouget, P. DEMO, R.S. Zemel, Inference and computation with
population codes, Annu. Rev. DEMO 26 (2003) 381–410.
[49] S. Rahman, J. Sahakia, N. Cardinal, R. Rogers, T. Robbins, Decision
making and neuropsychiatry, Trends. Cogn. DEMO 5 (6) (2001) 271–277.
[50] A.D. Redish, Addiction as DEMO computational process gone awry,
Science 306 (5703) (2004) 1944–1947.
[51] R.M. Roe, J.R. Busemeyer, J.T. Townsend, Multialternative decision
field theory: a dynamic connections model of decision making,
Psychol. Rev. 108 (DEMO) (2001) 370–392.
[52] R. Salo, T.E. Nordahl, K. Possin, M. Leamon, D.R. Gibson, G.P.
Galloway, N.M. Flynn, A. Henik, A. Pfefferbaum, E.V. Sullivan,
Preliminary evidence of reduced cognitive inhibition in methamphet-
amine-dependent individuals, Psychiatry Res. 111 (1) (2002) 65–74.
[53] T.W. Schmitz, T.N. Kawahara-Baccus, S.C. Johnson, Metacognitive
evaluation, self-relevance, and the right prefrontal cortex, NeuroImage
22 (2) (2004) 941–947.
[54] W. Schultz, Getting formal with dopamine and reward, Neuron 36 (2)
(2002) 241–263.
[55] W. Schultz, A. Dickinson, Neuronal coding DEMO prediction errors,
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 23 (2000) 473–500.
[56] W. Schultz, P. Dayan, P.R. Montague, A neural substrate of prediction
and reward, Science 275 (5306) (1997) 1593–1599.
[57] M.N. Shadlen, DEMO Newsome, Motion perception: seeing and
deciding, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. DEMO S. A. 93 (2) (1996) 628–633.
[58] M.N. Shadlen, DEMO Newsome, Neural basis of a perceptual decision
in the parietal cortex (area LIP) of the rhesus monkey, J. Neuro-
physiol. 86 (4) (2001) 1916–1936.
[59] E. Shafir, A. Tversky, Thinking through uncertainty: nonconsequential
reasoning and choice, Cogn. Psychol. 24 (4) (1992) DEMO
[60] E. Shafir, I. Simonson, A. Tversky, Reason-based choice, Cognition
49 (1–2) (1993) 11–36.
[61] B. Shiv, G.F. Loewenstein, DEMO Bechara, The dark side of emotions in
decision-making: when individuals with decreased emotional reac-
10
M.P. Paulus / Cognitive Brain Research 23 (2005) 2–10
tions DEMO more advantageous decisions, Cogn. Brain Res. 23 (1)
(2005) 85–92.
[62] P. Slovic, Information processing, situation specificity, and the
generality of risk-taking behavior, J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 22 (1)
(1972) 128–134.
[63] P.E. Slovic (Ed.), Perception of Risk, 2000, DEMO 473.
[64] C.A. Smith, P.C. Ellsworth, Patterns of cognitive appraisal in emotion,
J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 48 (4) (1985) 813–838.
DEMO R.E. Suri, W. Schultz, A neural network model with dopamine-like
reinforcement signal that learns a spatial delayed response task,
Neuroscience 91 (3) (1999) 871–890.
[66] C. Trepel, C.R. Fox, R.A. Poldrack, DEMO theory on the brain?
Toward a cognitive neuroscience of decision under risk, Cogn. Brain
Res. 23 (1) (2005) 34–50.
[67] A. Tversky, Utility theory and additivity analysis of risky choices,
J. Exp. Psychol. 75 (1) (1967) 27–36.
[68] S. Ursu, C.S. Carter, Outcome representations, counterfactual compar-
isons and the human orbitofrontal cortex: implications for neuroimaging
studies of decision making, Cogn. Brain Res. 23 (1) (2005) 51–60.
[69] T. Yarkoni, J. Gray, E.R. Chrastil, D.M. Barch, L. Green, T.S. Braver,
Transient and sustained neural activity DEMO temporally extended
decision making, Cogn. Brain Res. (in press).
[70] R.B. Zajonc, Emotion and facial efference: a theory reclaimed,
Science DEMO (4695) (1985) 15–21.{1g42fwefx}