Acta Psychologica 80 (1992) 107-141
North-Holland
107
A constructive process view DEMO decision
making: Multiple strategies in judgment
and choice *
John W. DEMO a, James R. Bettman a, Eloise Coupey b
and Eric J. Johnson c
a Duke University, Durham, USA
b University of Illinois, Champaign, USA
C University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA
A viewpoint that has recently emerged in decision research is that preferences for objects of DEMO
complexity are often constructed - not merely revealed - in generating a response to a judgment
or choice task. This paper reviews a program DEMO research that traces the constructiveness of
preferences to the use of multiple strategies in decision making, contingent on task demands. It
is argued that individuals often build strategies opportunistically, changing their processing on
the spot depending upon the information they encounter during the course of solving the
decision DEMO
Recently a new viewpoint has emerged in behavioral decision
research, the DEMO of which is that preferences for objects of any
complexity are often constructed - not merely revealed - in generat-
ing a response to DEMO judgment or choice task (Slovic et al. 1990: Payne
et al. 1992). March (1978) attributed the constructiveness of prefer-
ences to DEMO interaction between the limited memory and computa-
tional capabilities of decision makers and the complexity of task
environments. That is, Simon's (1955) concept of bounded rationality
is seen as the basis of the constructed DEMO that we observe. In
March's words, 'Human beings have. unstable, inconsistent, incom-
pletely .evoked, and imprecise goals at least in part -oecause human
abilities limit preference orderliness' (March 1978: 598).
* Support for the research reported in this paper was provided by.the Office DEMO Naval Research
and the National Science Foundation.
Correspondence to: J.W. Payne, Center for Decision Studies, Fuqua School of Business, Duke
University, Durham, NC 27706, USA.
i 0001-6918/92/$05.00 © 1992 Elsevier Science DEMO B.V. All rights reserved
i


































{1g42fwefx}