ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE 16, 366--387 (1976)
Task Complexity DEMO Contingent Processing in
Decision Making: An Information Search and
Protocol Analysis
DEMO W. PAYNE
Carnegie-Mellon University
Two process tracing techniques, explicit information search DEMO verbal pro-
tocols, were used to examine the information processing strategies DEMO
use in reaching a decision. Subjects indicated preferences among apartments.
The number of alternatives available and number of dimensions of information
available was varied DEMO sets of apartments. When faced with a two alterna-
tive situation, DEMO subjects employed search strategies consistent with a com-
pensatory decision process. In contrast, when faced with a more complex
(multialternative) decision task, DEMO subjects employed decision strategies de-
signed to eliminate some of the available alternatives as quickly as possible and
on the basis of a limited DEMO of information search and evaluation. The
results demonstrate that the information processing leading to choice will vary
as a function of task complexity. An DEMO of research in decision be-
havior with the methodology and theory of more established areas of cognitive
psychology, such as human problem solving, DEMO advocated.
The problem of preferential choice is an old one in psychology. Many
years of research effort have been devoted to developing various
mathematical DEMO which could describe decision behavior. Unfortu-
nately, these attempts to develop DEMO general model of decision making have
proved frustrating. All of the models proposed have received some empir-
ical support, but none seems completely satisfactory as an explanatory
model. The present paper suggests an alternative approach to DEMO
ing decision behavior. The approach derives from research on human
problem solving (cf. Newell & Simon, 1972) which has made it clear that
in performing complex tasks individuals utilize different heuristics that
will keep the DEMO processing demands of the situation within the
bounds of their limited capacity. Preferential choice among multidimen-
sional alternatives would seem sufficiently complex to require DEMO same
general type of heuristic processing. Research on problem solving has
This research was supported by Research Grant No. MH-07722 from the National Insti-
DEMO of Mental Health. I wish to thank Myron L. Braunstein, David DEMO, Herbert A.
Simon, and Paul Slovic for their valuable comments. I am indebted to Eileen Heisman and
Linda Nicholson for their assistance in DEMO conduct of the experiments.
Requests for reprints should be sent to John W. Payne, who is now at the Graduate School
of Business, DEMO of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637.
Copyright O 1976 by Academic Press, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
366
CONTINGENT PROCESSING IN DECISION MAKING 367
also shown individual behavior to be DEMO adaptive to the demands of
the task. This suggests that the heuristics used by decision makers may be
systematically related to certain characteristics of DEMO decision situation.
The research reported in the present paper represents an initial attempt to
identify those task characteristics which push an individual towards vari-
DEMO decision strategies.
Models of Decision Making
In this section of the paper we will briefly examine four of the most
important decision models which DEMO been proposed in terms of their
underlying process assumptions. That is, DEMO do each of the models
imply about the information processing which would precede a final
choice. Newell (1968) points to this emphasis on DEMO a particular decision
came about as one important characteristic of the representation of
human behavior as an information processing system.
Perhaps the earliest rule DEMO decision making to be proposed is the addi-
tive or linear model of choice. With an additive model, the process of
choosing among multidimensional alternatives is assumed to proceed as
follows: Each alternative in a choice set is evaluated separately. A value,
either objective or subjective, is arrived at for each component, or dimen-
sion, of an alternative. DEMO components are then combined in an additive
fashion resulting in an overall value for that alternative. Comparisons are
then made among the overall values DEMO the alternatives and the one with
the greatest value is chosen. An important aspect of the additive model is
that it is compensatory. That DEMO, the additive model implies that a decision
maker will trade-off between DEMO high value on one dimension of an alterna-
tive and a low value on another dimension.
While the results of most studies of the DEMO model have been generally
supportive (Slovic & Lichtenstein, 1971), a concern with the cognitive
aspects of decision theory has led some researchers DEMO propose models of
choice which they argue would reduce the information processing de-
mands being made on the individual. An early example of this DEMO of
model was Simon's (1957) principle of Satisficing. Simon argued for a
model of "rational" choice where a decision maker would DEMO the
space of alternatives only until he found an alternative that exceeded
some minimum aspiration level. A similar nonlinear, noncompensatory
decision rule has been suggested by a number of researchers (Coombs,
1964; Dawes, 1964; Einhorn, 1970). The model proposed is called the
conjunctive model. DEMO model implies that whether a multidimensional
alternative x = (xz, xz ..... x,) surpasses some stimulus or standard y =
(Y~, DEMO ..... Yn) will depend on x~ being greater than y~ for DEMO i. In other
words, an alternative must have a certain minimum DEMO on all the relev-
ant dimensions in order to be chosen.
368
JOHN w. PnYNE
Exactly how the set of information processes implied DEMO the conjunc-
tive and satisficing models would deal with a decision situation involving
choice among a limited and well defined set of alternatives is DEMO com-
pletely clear. One possible procedure would be to use a satisficing criter-
ion to eliminate alternatives. By varying the aspiration level, a decision
maker could make repeated evaluations of the alternatives in a choice set
DEMO only a single alternative remained. That alternative would then be
the preferred alternative.
Tversky (1969) proposed the additive difference model which, unlike
the additive and conjunctive models, assumes that decision m~kers use an
intradimensional evaluation strategy. In that type of processing strategy
the alternatives are compared directly DEMO each dimension, a difference is
determined, and the results are summed together to reach a decision.
Since the additive difference model is based DEMO a direct comparison be-
tween two alternatives, there is a question DEMO how such a decision strategy
would work in a multialternative choice situation. One solution for a
decision maker would be to compare a given DEMO to only the best of
the preceding alternatives. If the given alternative is preferred, it can
become the new standard against which each of the remaining alternatives
will be compared.
The final theory of choice to DEMO discussed was presented by Tversky
(1972), and is called the DEMO (EBA) model. The model
describes choice as a covert elimination process. In choosing among
multidimensional alternatives the individual is assumed to proceed in DEMO
following manner. A dimension or aspect is selected. Then all the alterna-
tives that do not possess that dimension or aspect are eliminated. The
DEMO is repeated until all but one of the alternatives is eliminated.
The probability of selecting an aspect or dimension is assumed to be
proportional DEMO its weight or relative importance. Notice that the EBA
model, like DEMO additive difference model, implies an intradimensional
evaluation strategy.
Process Tracing and DEMO Models
Part of the difficulty in developing a complete explanatory model of
decision behavior arises from the empirical procedures which have typi-
cally been DEMO Most research on decision behavior has focused on
data which reflect only the end product of the decision process, e.g.,
choice proportions, DEMO, or ratings. In contrast, the present study
will use two methods of experimentation which should provide valuable
insights into the information processing strategies DEMO led a subject to
exhibit a particular choice.
The first experimental procedure will involve presenting subjects with
decision tasks where they will have to DEMO for information about the
CONTINGENT
PROCESSING
IN DECISION
MAKING
369
alternatives available. Examination of a subject'DEMO pattern of information
search should provide a method for discriminating between alternative
models of decision making in terms of the information processing be-
havior DEMO to underlie the various models. Each of the four models of
decision making discussed earlier, additive, additive difference, conjunc-
tive, and elimination-by-aspects, imply, at least in their most common
forms, different information search DEMO
Two characteristics of the search patterns will be of primary interest.
The first characteristic deals with the percentage of available information
searched on each DEMO in a choice set. In particular, we will be
interested in DEMO a decision maker searches a constant or variable
amount of information across the alternatives. The second characteristic
concerns whether the decision maker uses an DEMO or an in-
tradimensional search strategy. Each model may be seen in terms of a
particular combination of these two search characteristics.
An additive DEMO strategy would imply an interdimensional and con-
stant pattern of search. A decision maker following a strict additive differ-
ence model would have to DEMO a constant amount of information per
alternative, but would search in DEMO intradimensional fashion. Both the
conjunctive and EBA models, on the other DEMO, imply the possibility of a
decision maker using a variable search DEMO That is, these two models
imply a limited search strategy which DEMO involve a minimum of one
dimension up to all the relevant dimensions of an alternative. The prefer-
red alternative would be evaluated on the DEMO number of dimen-
sions. The conjunctive and EBA models differ, however, in whether they
imply an interdimensional (conjunctive) or intradimensional (EBA) DEMO
strategy.
The second research procedure will involve asking subjects to "think
DEMO" while actually making their decisions. This procedure should pro-
vide data DEMO will supplement the information search findings. While
answers to the question "DEMO are you doing right now?" may be mis-
leading, they DEMO likely to be considerably less misleading than later de-
scriptions of how the task was performed. When combined with objective
evidence of what the DEMO maker is doing, e.g., search data, informa-
tion may be DEMO from verbal reports elicited during the decision
making performance which would otherwise be lacking. Verbal protocols
have proved valuable in other areas of cognitive DEMO (Newell &
Simon, 1972) and decision making (Clarkson, 1962; Braunstein & Cole-
man, 1967; Payne, 1974; Soelberg, 1965; Svenson, 1974).
Contingent Decision Making and Task Complexity
The four models of decision behavior reviewed in this paper have often
been discussed as DEMO general models of choice. In contrast, the
370
JOHN W. PAYNE
present paper, consistent with research on human problem solving (cf.
Newell & Simon, 1972), views the models as DEMO That is, a
given decision maker might employ both compensatory and DEMO
satory choice processes contingent upon the demands of the decision
task. The present study will investigate the choice strategies used by
individuals as a DEMO of the two task determinants: number of alterna-
tives available and DEMO of dimensions of information available per
alternative.
It is surprising that relatively few studies have investigated the effects
of these task determinants on choice DEMO The general theoretical
approach seems to have been to postulate a general model of choice which
would be applicable to a choice situation regardless DEMO the number of
alternatives (Corbin & Marley, 1974; Luce, 1959; Restle, 1961; Tversky,
1972). Empirical studies of multialternative choice have been almost en-
tirely lacking. Most research on human decision behavior DEMO concen-
trated on the problem of how people choose the better of two alternatives.
Two recent exceptions are studies by Russo and Rosen (1975) and Wright
(1975). Russo and Rosen investigated choice among six DEMO Their
principal finding was that multialternative choice process consists primar-
ily of binary comparisons. However, as Russo and Rosen point out, the
generality DEMO their finding would seem to be limited to choice sets of
intermediate size, at best.
There have been a few more studies aimed at investigating the effect of
amount of information available on judgment behavior (Hayes, 1964;
Hendrick, Mills, & Kiesler, 1968; Einhorn, 1971; Jacoby, Speller, &
Kohn, 1974). In general, the results from these studies seem to indicate
that the effects of increasing the DEMO of information are to increase the
variability of the responses and to decrease the quality of the choices
while also increasing the confidence of DEMO decision maker in his judgments
(Slovic & Lichtenstein, 1971).
In summary, the present study will use two process tracing techniques:
(DEMO) explicit information search and (2) verbal protocols, to make explicit
the effects of two variations in the complexity of a decision task, (a)
number of alternatives and (b) number of dimensions, DEMO the information
processing strategies subjects use in reaching a preferential choice.
EXPERIMENT 1
Method
Subjects. There were six subjects who were paid at a DEMO hourly rate
for their participation in the experiment. The subjects were all of college
age. They were naive with respect to the task and DEMO
Stimuli. The stimuli were "information boards" (Wilkins, 1967) repre-
DEMO different one-bedroom furnished apartments. An information
CONTINGENT PROCESSING IN DECISION MAKING
371
board consisted of a number of DEMO attached to 20 in. × 63A in.
sheet of cardboard. The envelopes contained 4 in. × 6 in. cards labeled
with the name of DEMO dimension of information, e.g., "noise level." To
obtain the value of that dimension for a particular alternative, the subject
had to pull the card out of the envelope, turn it around and place it back
into the envelope. The information about the value of the dimension DEMO
on the back of the card, e.g., "Noise level low." Once a card was turned
over, the value of the dimension on the particular alternative was clearly
displayed for the remainder of the choice DEMO
A decision situation for a subject involved a number of alternatives,
either 2, 6, or 12, and a number of dimensions of information available per
alternative, either 4, 8, or 12. Each subject received three of the nine
possible combinations of number of alternatives with DEMO of dimen-
sions per alternative. The three combinations received by a subject con-
tained some combination of the three levels of the number of DEMO
variable and the three levels of the amount of information variable. The
order of presentation of the decision situations was counterbalanced
across subjects.
There DEMO three levels of value on each dimension. Some of the di-
mension values were expressed as quantitative values, e.g., rent--S110,
$140, or $170, and some were expressed more qualitatively, e.g., noise
level--low, DEMO, or high. The values of an alternative on the various
dimensions DEMO chosen such that no alternative would completely domi-
nate another on all the available dimensions. The dimensional values were
selected so that each alternative DEMO have/~ priori both good and poor
qualities.
Each increase in the number of dimensions of information available per
alternative contained the previous available DEMO as a subset. That
is, an increase from four to eight DEMO per alternative involved just
adding four additional dimensions to the original four. The reason for this
procedure was to ensure that even the most DEMO information condition
would involve at least some dimensions which would seem necessary to
making a realistic choice, e.g., rent. This did not mean, however, that the
added dimensions were necessarily of small importance. The values of the
dimensions were varied across decision situations. The names of the DEMO
mensions and the values for the two-alternative, 12 dimension choice
situations DEMO given in Table 1. The alternatives were labeled A, B,... , L.
Procedure. Each subject was run individually in a 1-hr session. The
subjects were told that they would be presented with a number of DEMO
tives to choose among and a certain amount of information about each
alternative. They were told that each alternative represented a furnished
one bedroom DEMO and that they should choose the apartment they
would prefer for themselves on the basis of the information provided
372
JOHN W. PAYNE
TABLE 1
DIMENSIONS AND VALUES FOR THE Two-ALTERNATIVE, 12-DIMENSION CHOICE SITUATION
Alternatives
P
A
B
Alternatives
Low
High
II
Small
DEMO
III
Fair
Good
VIII
IX
Dimensions
n
IV
20 rain
30 rain
V
$I 10
$170
X
VI
Fair
Good
VII
Average
Below average
DEMO
XII
A
B
Poor
Good
Good
Fair
Below average
Average
Garage
Off street
Poor
Good
During the experiment the names of the dimensions were DEMO on 4 × 6 cards.
b The number below in parentheses represents the lowest amount of information condition
which included that dimension. I: Noise Level (4), II: Size, Living & Dining Rms. (4),
III: Cleanliness (8), IV: Distance from Campus (8), V: Rent (4), VI: Brightness of Rms. (12),DEMO
VII: Closet Space (12), VIII: Landlord Attitude (12), IX: Transportation Facilities (12),
X: Furniture Quality (8),)(I: Parking (8), XII: Kitchen Facilities (4).
about each apartment. A sample information board was shown to the
subject, The subject was not instructed on how much of the available
information he DEMO she had to use in making the decision. If any subject
specifically asked about information use they were told they were free to
look DEMO as little or as much information as they wanted to or felt was
necessary to make a decision. No time constraints were placed on DEMO
subject. They were instructed to work at their own pace and that they
should have plenty of time to finish.
The following "think aloud" instructions were given to the subjects:
"Whenever you start to DEMO at a piece of information, say what you're
going to DEMO at. When making an observation about an apartment on the
basis of a piece of information, describe each conclusion and the specific
observations which you are using to support your judgment. Finally,
please state aloud DEMO line of reasoning you are using to go from the
observations to your decision."
The subject was asked if he or she had DEMO questions and then was
presented with the first set of choice alternatives. The subject was al-
lowed to rest briefly after making his or DEMO choice and then a new set of
alternatives was presented. The procedure was then repeated for a third
time.
During the experiment a record DEMO kept by the experimenter of the
order in which information was examined by each subject in each decision
situation. For example, if the first 4 x 6 card a subject turned over was the
rent of DEMO A, that piece of information was assigned a value of 1;DEMO
the second card examined was then given the value 2, and DEMO on. The
CONTINGENT
PROCESSING
IN DECISION
MAKING
373
search results are based on this DEMO record of the pattern of informa-
tion search exhibited by each subject in each decision situation. The
verbal protocols provide information about repeated observations DEMO the
same piece of information.
Results
A complete transcript of the verbal reports given by each subject was
made. Consistent with the procedure suggested DEMO Newell and Simon
(1972), the protocols were broken up into DEMO phrases. The phrases were
labeled, for example, A1, A2 ..... DEMO Each phrase was a naive as-
sessment of what constituted a single task assertion or reference by the
subject. Newell and Simon (1972) DEMO argued that breaking verbal pro-
tocols up into small phrases "goes DEMO long way towards isolating a series of
unambiguous 'measurements' of what information the subject had at par-
ticular times (p. 166)."
During the analysis of the results, excerpts from the protocols of the six
subjects will be presented. Unfortunately, space limitations make it impos-
sible to reproduce the complete protocol for each subject in this report.
The DEMO protocols for the six subjects may be obtained from the
author.
The search data for each subject is primarily organized in terms of the
DEMO of available information searched and pattern of search, inter-
dimensional or DEMO Table 2 presents the mean percentage of
available information searched for each subject and treatment combina-
tion (number of alternatives and number of dimensions per alternative).
The standard deviation of the percentage of information search DEMO also
given. This statistic measures the variability in the amount of informa-
tion searched per alternative in a particular choice situation. Notice that
the DEMO of information searched declined both as the number of
alternatives available in a decision situation increased and as the number
of dimensions per alternative DEMO
The interesting question concerns how the subjects went about the pro-
cess of reducing the mean percentage of information searched. An answer
to this DEMO is provided, in part, by examining the amount of variation
in information searched across the alternatives for each subject in each
treatment combination. DEMO the subjects were asked to choose between
just two alternatives, they DEMO searched the same amount of informa-
tion on each alternative. For Subjects 1, 2, 3, and 4, this included all
available information. DEMO 5 and 6 did not search all the information
before making a choice. However, like the first four subjects, they also
searched the DEMO amount of information on both alternatives. Such a
search pattern is consistent with a compensatory decision rule such as an
additive process or additive DEMO process.
374
JOHN W. PAYNE
TABLE 2
MEAN PERCENTAGE OF AVAILABLE INFORMATION SEARCHED DEMO EACH SUBJECT AND
TREATMENT COMBINATION
Number of alternatives
a
2
Subjects
4
8
12
6
Number of dimensions a
4 8 12
4
12
DEMO
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
1.0
(o) b
1.0
(o)
1.0
(o)
.750
(0)
1.0
(0)DEMO
.083
(0)
.792
(.246)
.563
(.220)
.500
(.403)
.500
(.224)
.542
(.240)
.611
(.146)
.563
(.285)
.667
(.343)
.708
(.123)
,260
(.164)
.368
(.290)
.472
(.407)
a Mean: 2--alternative, .806; 6---alternative, .582; 12--alternative, .506; 4----dimension,
.754; 8----dimension, .630; 12---dimension, .510.
b Numbers in parentheses indicate the standard deviation of the percentage of information
searched.
In contrast, consider the multialternative choice situations (6 or 12
alternatives). In these decision situations, all DEMO subjects utilized a search
procedure which resulted in a greater number of dimensions of informa-
tion examined for some alternatives than for others in DEMO same set of
choice alternatives. Such a search pattern is compatible with the
hypothesis that the subjects were using a noncompensatory decision rule
such DEMO an elimination-by-aspects process or a conjunctive choice pro-
cess. For 11 of the 12 multialternative decision situations (2 for each
subject), the amount of available information searched was as great or
greater for the alternative DEMO than for any other alternative in the
choice set. In the remaining situation, the preferred alternative had the
next to the maximum amount of information searched.
These results suggest that subjects may have been reducing the DEMO
of information they had to search in the multialternative choice situations
by eliminating some alternatives on the basis of only a few dimensions.
An DEMO of the verbal protocols supports this view. For example,
consider this excerpt from the protocol of Subject 1:
A162: Apartment E.
CONTINGENT
PROCESSING
IN DECISION
MAKING
375
A163: The rent for apartment E is $140.
A164: Which is a good note.
A165: The noise DEMO for this apartment is high.
A166: That would almost deter me DEMO there.
A167: Ah, I don't like a lot of noise.
A168: And, if it's high, it must be pretty bad.
A169: Which means, you couldn't sleep.
A170: I would just put that one aside right there. I wouldn't look any
further DEMO that.
A171: Even though, the rent is good.
This subject appears to be using a conjunctive rule to eliminate alterna-
tives on the DEMO of partial information about that alternative. The con-
junctive rule is implied by the interdimensional pattern of search exhibited
by this subject. Another explicit DEMO of the elimination of alternatives
after a limited search and evaluation is provided by this excerpt from the
protocol of Subject 4:
D289: Since we have a whole bunch here,
D290: I'm going to go across the top and
D291: see which noise levels are high.
D292: If there are any high ones,
D293: I'DEMO reject them immediately.
D297: Go to D.
D298: It has a high noise level.
D299: So, we'll automatically eliminate D.
D305: So, we have four here
D306: that are O.K. in noise DEMO
There are two important things to recognize in the excerpt from Subject 4.
First, this subject seems to be using an intradimensional search strategy
as part of the process of eliminating alternatives. Such a search strategy DEMO
consistent with an elimination-by-aspects process. Second, statement
D289 is evidence that DEMO 4 was developing a decision strategy deter-
mined, at least in DEMO, by the fact that the decision situation involved a
"whole bunch" of alternatives.
Additional support for the hypothesis that decision makers will vary
their information processing rules as a function of task complexity may be
DEMO in the following brief excerpt from the protocol of Subject 3. This
excerpt deals with a decision problem involving six alternatives and eight
dimensions DEMO information.
376
JOHN W. PAYNE
C98: Well, with these many apartments to DEMO from;
C99: I'm not going to work through all DEMO the characteristics.
C100: Start eliminating them as soon as possible.
Table DEMO presents the information search pattern exhibited by each sub-
ject in the different decision situations. The patterns of search have been
classified into one DEMO four categories depending on whether the search
pattern was variable or constant in amount of information search per
alternative, and whether the pattern of search was primarily across the
dimensions and within a particular alternative or DEMO a particular di-
mensions and across alternatives.
The pattern of search was determined, in part, by examining the alter-
native and dimension associated DEMO the nth + 1 piece of information
searched by a subject as a function of the alternative and dimension
associated with the nth piece DEMO information searched. If the nth + 1 piece
of information searched was within the same alternative but involved a
different dimension, then that constituted an instance of an interdimen-
sional pattern of search. On the other DEMO, if the nth + 1 piece of infor-
mation searched was DEMO the same dimension, but a different alterna-
tive, then that constituted an instance of an intradimensional pattern of
search. If the nth + DEMO piece of information searched was neither within the
same alternative or the same dimension as the nth piece of information,
then that was DEMO to be a shift in the pattern of information search.
In no case were there more instances of shifts in information search than
instances DEMO either interdimensional or intradimensional patterns of
search. The number of instances of interdimensional, intradimensional,
and shifts of information search for each subject and decision situation is
given in Table 3. A measure of interdimensional v DEMO
search is given by the number of interdimensional singlestep transitions
minus the number of intradimensional singlestep transitions divided by
the sum of the two DEMO A pattern consisting of only interdimensional
transitions and shift transitions, would DEMO a value of + 1.00. A pattern
consisting of only intradimensional transitions and shifts, would have a
value of - 1.00. The mean value for the seven search patterns classified as
interdimensional (see Table 3) DEMO .808. The mean value for the seven
search patterns classified as intradimensional was -.832. The mean for
the four search patterns classified as mixed DEMO -.097.
It has already been mentioned that all the subjects used a decision
process which involved a constant amount of search per alternative when
DEMO were faced with a two-alternative choice situation. It has also been
mentioned that such a search strategy is consistent with a compensatory
decision process. DEMO type of compensatory strategy employed, however,
clearly varied between subjects (see Table 3). Two subjects used inter-
dimensional search strategies in DEMO two-alternative choice situations
12
4
8
12
TABLE 3
CLASSIFICATION OF SEARCH PATTERNS
Subject 1 (54-I-12)
& Subject 5 (10-7-7)
Subject 4 (52-8-7)
DEMO
Subject 2 (1-11--6)
Subject 3 (4-19-3)
& Subject 4 (10-9-4)"
Subject 6 (14--15-14y
Subject 3 (7-13~5)"
& Subject 6 (11-14--6)'
Subject 2 (3-43~5)
Subject 4 (DEMO)
Subject 2 (1-8-6)
Subject 3 (0-12-11)
& Subject 5 (0-1-0) b
Intradimensional
Variable
a The numbers in parentheses are DEMO number of instances of interdimensional, intradimensional, and shifts of information search, respectively,
for each subject and decision situation.
b This subject only examined one piece of information per alternative, i.e., rent, in choosing among the two alternatives.
c A mixed search strategy which initially involved DEMO search and which ended with interdimensional search.
Task characteristics
Number of
alternatives
Number of
dimensions
2
4
8
12
6
4
8
12
Constant
DEMO 1 (6-0-1)
a
Subject 6 (8-1-2)
Interdimensional
Variable
Subject 5 (4 4 3)
Subject 1 (31-1-6)
O
Z
DEMO
Z ,.q
(3
f~
Z
©
©
"-4
378
JOr~N w. PAYNE
which suggests that they were using an additive DEMO process. A clear
example of the type of tradeoff analysis implied by an additive model may
be seen in the following excerpt from the DEMO protocol of Subject 1:
A24: O.K., the decision now is between the two rent prices
A25: in accordance with the other qualities.
A26: Now for apartment A has the advantage,
A27: because DEMO noise level is low
A28: and the kitchen facilities are good
DEMO: even though the rent is $30 higher than B.
For this DEMO, the good values on the dimensions of noise level and
kitchen DEMO were seen to compensate for the higher rent price.
The other four subjects used an intradimensional search strategy. Such
a search strategy, along with the constant amount of search per alterna-
tive, suggests that these subjects employed an additive difference decision
process when faced with a two-alternative choice DEMO The following
excerpt from the protocol of Subject 4 is an example of a subject using a
compensatory decision process and an intradimensional search DEMO
to choose among two alternatives:
D238: O.K., we have an A and a B.
D239: First look at the rent for both of them.
D240: The rent for A is $170 and
D241: DEMO rent for B is $140.
D242:$170 is a little steep,
D243: but it might have a low noise level.
D244: So DEMO'll check A's noise level.
D245: A's noise level DEMO low.
D246: We'll go to B's noise level.
D247: It's high.
D248: Gee, I can't really very well DEMO with a lot of noise.
D249: So I'll ask myself DEMO question, is it worth spending that extra
$30 a month for,DEMO
D250: to be able to study in my apartment.
Subjects in DEMO experiment were clearly aware of compensatory deci-
sion processes and would clearly use such processes under certain task
conditions.
It is also clear from DEMO search data and from the verbal protocols that
important individual differences do exist in the information processing
which underlie decisions.
The final protocol excerpts DEMO we will discuss are from Subject 2
and provide very clear data about that subject's decision processes in a
12-alternative choice situation. The DEMO excerpt comes from an inter-
mediate stage in the decision process. The excerpt shows the subject
using both an intradimensional search pattern and an DEMO rule:
CONTINGENT PROCESSING IN DECISION MAKING
379
Bl19: I'm going to look at landlord attitude.
B120: In H it's fair.
B121: In DEMO it's poor.
B122: B it's fair, and
B123: DEMO it's good.
B124: In L the attitude is poor.
B125: In K it's poor.
B126: In J it's good, DEMO
B127: In I it's poor.
B128: So, one of DEMO, is poor.
B129: So, that's important to me.
B130: So... that I'm living there,
B131: Which is the landlord also.
B132: So, I'm not going to live any place DEMO it's poor.
After statement B132, the subject never again examined DEMO, D, I,
K, and L.
The subject continues to DEMO and evaluate alternatives until she is
able to reduce the choice problem to a decision between just two alterna-
tives. This subject was clearly DEMO a strict elimination-by-aspects pro-
cess to eliminate alternatives. A detailed analysis of the singlestep transi-
tion data showed that the subject was not only DEMO a variable and
intradimensional search pattern but that all (remaining) alternatives were
completely searched on one dimension before some subset of those alter-
DEMO were searched on the next dimension.1 This occurred on all eight
dimensions which were examined by the subject in the process of reduc-
ing DEMO choice set from 12 to 2 alternatives. Subject 3 in a six-alternative
and eight dimension decision situation also appeared to use a pure
elimination-by-aspects DEMO
The next excerpt is important in showing the subject shifting from an
elimination-by-aspects procedure to what appears to be an additive differ-
ence strategy.
DEMO: So, eliminate those two (A & B)
B173: And decide between these two (J & H)
B174: O.K., the kitchen facilities in H are good.
B175: In J they're fair.
B176: And that's about the same to me.
13186: Landlord DEMO in J is better than in H.
B187: And, that's important.
I wish to thank a reviewer for suggesting this additional analysis DEMO the search data.
380
JOHN W. PAYNE
B 190: Quietness of the rooms.
B191: DEMO H it's good.
B192: In J it's fair.
B193: And that's about the same.
B194: The rents are just about the same.
B195: In both of them the cleanliness is poor.
B196: In J the rooms are larger.
B197 So, I guess, J will be better.
Notice that in directly comparing the final two choice DEMO the
subject compares the two alternatives on previously examined dimen-
sions, DEMO example, landlord attitude (B186), and also seeks information
about a new dimension and makes a comparison (B190-B193).
EXPERIMENT 2
The purpose of this experiment was to further examine the generality of
the hypothesis DEMO the information processing leading to choice is contin-
gent on task complexity. This experiment used stimuli and procedures
similar to those used in Experiment DEMO However, it differed from Experi-
ment 1 in the following respects. DEMO, a slightly greater variety of deci-
sion situations were examined. Second, twice as many subjects were
employed. Third, a complete within-subjects design was used.
Method
Subjects. There were 12 subjects who were paid at a DEMO hourly rate
for their participation in the experiment. The subjects were college stu-
dents who had agreed to be part of a paid subject DEMO
Stimuli. The stimuli were again information boards representing differ-
ent one-bedroom apartments. The dimensions and values were basically
the same as Experiment 1. The DEMO change concerned rent, which had
values of $120, $140, and DEMO A decision situation involved either 2, 4, 8,
or 12 alternatives, and either 4, 8, or 12 dimensions of information per
alternative. Each subject received all of the 12 possible combinations of
number DEMO alternatives with number of dimensions per alternative.
Procedure. The subjects were run individually in three separate 1-hr
sessions. The three sessions occurred within a DEMO week interval. During
each session, a subject received 4 of the DEMO decision situations. The four
situations received by a subject in each session involved a 2, 4, 8, and 12
alternative decision problem with some combination of the three levels of
number of dimensions available per DEMO The order of presentation
of decision situations was counterbalanced across sessions and subjects.
The subjects were instructed to choose the apartment they would prefer
CONTINGENT PROCESSING IN DECISION MAKING
381
for themselves on the basis of DEMO information provided about each apart-
ment. Again, if any subject specifically DEMO about information use they
were told that they were free to look at as little or as much information as
they wanted to or DEMO was necessary to make a decision. The same "think
aloud" instructions were given to the subjects.
The subject was asked if there were DEMO questions and then was pre-
sented with the first set of choice alternatives. The subject was allowed to
rest briefly after making his or DEMO choice and then a new set of alterna-
tives was presented. The procedure was then repeated for a third and
fourth time. The subject DEMO then allowed to leave and reminded to come
back for the second and third sessions.
The order and amount of information sought was recorded DEMO the exper-
imenter.
Results
Because of space limitations, the analysis of DEMO results for this experi-
ment will emphasize the search data. The protocols for the subjects may
be obtained from the author. The search data DEMO each subject was again
primarily organized in terms of amount of available information searched
and pattern of search. Table 4 presents the mean percentage DEMO informa-
tion searched across subjects for each treatment combination (number of
DEMO and number of dimensions per alternative). Note that as the
alternatives increased, the subjects, on the average, sought a smaller
percentage of the total available information, although the total amount
sought increased. Likewise, DEMO the number of dimensions of information
available increased, the total percentage DEMO available information sought
decreased. Similar results were obtained in Experiment 1.
The answer to the question of how subjects went about the process of
DEMO the percentage of available information sought was again pro-
vided, in DEMO, by examining the amount of variation in information search
TABLE 4
DEMO OF AVAILABLE INFORMATION SEARCHED FOR DIFFERENT NUMBERS OF
ALTERNATIVES AND DIMENSIONS PER ALTERNATIVE
Number of
alternatives
Number of dimensions per alternative
4
8
12
DEMO
2
4
8
12
Mean
.845
.792
.667
.625
.732
.709
.565
.479
.449
.551
.553
.413
.319
.365
.413
.702
.590
.488
.480
382
JOHN W. PAYNE
across the alternatives for each subject in each DEMO combination.
The absolute value of the difference between the percentage of informa-
tion searched per alternative and the mean percentage of information
searched for DEMO treatment for each individual was calculated. A three-
way analysis of variance (number of alternatives available, amount of
information available per alternative, and subjects) was conducted. This
test of differences among variances was proposed by Levene (cited in
Keppel, 1973). The main effect of number DEMO alternatives, F(3, 33) =
12.36, was significant (p < .01). The amount of variation in percentage of
available information searched per alternative increased as the number of
alternatives available increased. The main DEMO of amount of information
per alternative, F(2, 22) = DEMO, and the interaction, F(6, 66) = 1. I0, DEMO
not significant.
Table 5 presents a classification of the 144 search patterns exhibited by
the subjects (12 subjects x 12 treatment combinations) into DEMO of four
categories depending on whether the search pattern was variable or con-
stant in amount of information searched per alternative, and whether the
pattern of search was primarily interdimensional or intradimensional. The
number of instances DEMO interdimensional, intradimensional, and shifts in
information search was determined for each subject and decision situation
based on the singlestep transition data. Like the DEMO obtained from
Experiment 1, in no case were there more instances DEMO shifts in informa-
tion search than instances of either interdimensional or intradimensional
search. The classification of a pattern as interdimensional or intradimen-
sional was DEMO by calculating the number of interdimensional
singlestep transitions minus the number of intradimensional singlestep
transitions divided by the sum of the two numbers. If DEMO value of that
measure was positive, the search pattern was classified DEMO interdimen-
sional. If the value was negative, the search pattern was DEMO as
intradimensional. The means of this measure of interdimensional vs in-
tradimensional search for the search patterns classified into one of the
four categories DEMO given in Table 5 as a function of number of alternatives
available. The results section of Experiment 1 provides additional infor-
mation on how DEMO singlestep transition scores were determined.
The results given in Table 5 support the conclusion that as the number
of available alternatives increases, subjects shift from decision strategies
involving a constant amount of search per alternative, e.g., compensatory
procedures, to decision strategies which involve eliminating some alterna-
tives DEMO the basis of only a few dimensions, e.g., conjunctive or
elimination-by-aspects procedures. Additional support for the use of a
strict elimination-by-aspects process by DEMO was obtained by cal-
culating the number of search patterns that showed not only a variable
and intradimensional pattern but also a pattern where DEMO (remaining) al-
CONTINGENT
PROCESSING
IN DECISION
MAKING
383
TABLE 5
CLASSIFICATION OF SEARCH PATTERNS DEMO A FUNCTION OF
NUMBER OF ALTERNATIVES AVAILABLE
Search pattern
Number of
alternatives
2
4
8
12
Interdimensional
Constant
Variable
12 (.71)
6 (DEMO)
3 (.79)
2 (.69)
3 (.61)
DEMO (.47)
15 (.57)
12 (.73)
Intradimensional
Constant
DEMO
18 (-.79)
2 (-.72)
~b
0
3 (-.75)DEMO
17 (-.62)
18 (-.64)
22 (-.60)
ternatives DEMO be completely searched on a dimension before some
subset of those alternatives would be searched on another dimension.
Thirty-three of the 108 multialternative search DEMO were consistent
with a strict elimination-by-aspects decision process. For 99 of the 108
multialternative choice situations (9 for each subject), the amount of
available information searched was as great or greater for the alternative
chosen DEMO for any other alternative in the choice set. In the remaining
nine situations, the preferred alternative had the next to the maximum
amount of information searched.
Since the data for each subject in this experiment were DEMO in
three separate experimental sessions, the question arises whether there
were DEMO obvious differences in decision procedures within subjects as a
function of experimental session. An examination of the search pattern
indicated little or no systematic DEMO in the types of search strategies
observed in the first and third experimental sessions. For example, in the
case of the 12 alternative choice problems, seven of the 12 subjects
showed the same type of search patterns for the 12 alternative choice
problems presented in the first experimental DEMO as for the 12 alterna-
tive problems presented in the third and final experimental sessions. Two
subjects changed from constant to variable search and DEMO subjects
changed from interdimensional to intradimensional search. On the other
hand, DEMO the case of the eight alternative choice problems, seven of the DEMO
subjects again showed no changes (not necessarily the same subjects as DEMO
the 12 alternative case), two subjects changed from intradimensional to
interdimensional search, one subject changed from variable to constant
search, and two DEMO changed from interdimensional to intradimen-
sional search.
Finally, the maximum number DEMO dimensions searched in any decision
situation was determined for each subject. The average maximum across
the 12 subjects was 10.2 dimensions searched. This result DEMO evidence
384 JOHN W. PAYNE
against any argument that many dimensions were completely DEMO
for the subjects.
DISCUSSION
An analysis of decision maker's information search patterns and verbal
protocols has demonstrated that the information processing leading to DEMO
preferential choice will vary as a function of task complexity. The most
important determinant of complexity examined was clearly the number of
alternatives available. DEMO faced with a two-alternative choice problem,
subjects employed decison strategies which involved searching the same
amount of information on each alternative. Such a DEMO of search is
consistent with the types of information processing which were shown to
underlie the usual forms of two compensatory decision models. Examina-
DEMO of verbal protocols provided additional support for the use of either
additive or additive difference types of decision processes by the subjects
when faced DEMO a two alternative choice task.
In contrast, when faced with a DEMO complex decision task, either 6 or
12 alternatives, subjects employed decision strategies which resulted in a
variable amount of information search across alternatives. DEMO variable
pattern of search had been shown to be consistent with either a conjunc-
tive or elimination-by-aspects decision process. Both the conjunctive and
elimination-by-aspects DEMO were proposed as ways in which people
seek to reduce the amount of information processing involved in complex
decision making. The protocols obtained showed DEMO subjects tended to
adopt decision strategies which would eliminate some of the available
alternatives as quickly as possible and on the basis of a DEMO amount of
information search and evaluation.
The hypothesis that increases in the complexity of a decision situation
will result in decision makers resorting to DEMO heuristics in an effort to
reduce cognitive strain was thus shown to be valid in this experiment. The
use of an elimination-by-aspects choice process DEMO a decision maker rep-
resents an example of such heuristic. More generally, the results reported
in this study are consistent with a growing body of research (e.g., Mertz &
Doherty, 1974; Lichtenstein & Slovic, 1973; Slovic & MacPhiUamy, 1974;
Payne, 1973, 1975) DEMO argues for a contingent information processing
approach to understanding decision behavior.
In that regard, the four decision processes discussed in this paper might
be conceptualized as different subroutines in a general choice program.
The control conditions DEMO which one of these sets of processes might
be called would then seem to depend, at least in part, on the characteris-
tics DEMO the decision problem. In that respect, the less cognitively demand-
ing DEMO procedures, conjunctive and elimination-by-aspects, might
be called early in the decision process as a way of simplifying the decision
CONTINGENT PROCESSING IN DECISION MAKING
385
task by quickly eliminating alternatives until DEMO a few alternatives re-
mained as choice possibilities. The subject might then employ one of the
more cognitively demanding choice procedures, e.g., additive DEMO
model, to make the final evaluations and choice. The protocol of DEMO 2
in Experiment 1 gives clear evidence of such a combination decision
processes. Other subjects also give indications of similar decision
strategies. Einhorn (1971) suggested a similar explanation of decision mak-
ing in complex situations.
Individual Differences
Important individual differences in information processing in decision
making were shown DEMO exist. Some of the subjects tended to search for
information in an interdimensional fashion. Other subjects tended to
search in an intradimensional fashion.
One DEMO explanation for the differences in information search may
be in how the decision maker represents the knowledge he acquires about
the alternatives in the DEMO task. For example, a decision maker might
store information about the DEMO alternatives in the following form:
Apartment A (rent, $140). This object (property, value) representation
would suggest that an individual might find it easier to search and evaluate
(store) information within an DEMO and across dimensions. On the
other hand, a decision maker might DEMO to code information in terms of
rent (apartment A, $140). This property (object, value) representation
would suggest that an intradimensional form of processing might be easier
for an individual. This type of knowledge DEMO has been widely
used in building theories of human cognitive processes (DEMO & Newell,
1974). This explanation for the observed differences between subjects in
information search patterns is only speculative. However, it is clear from
other experiments in cognitive psychology that the way in which informa-
DEMO is organized and filed has important consequences for our thinking
(Posner, 1973). Research is needed to determine the heuristics used by
individuals DEMO setting up a format or structure for storing information
about a decision problem.
Information Processing and Decision Making
The emphasis in this paper has DEMO on examining decision behavior in
terms of the information processing which led to a particular decision.
This emphasis on understanding what a decision maker DEMO actually doing
can be contrasted to an emphasis on the description of his observable
behavior. Description of decision behavior has been the primary focus DEMO
the years of research devoted to developing various mathematical judg-
ment models. However, as Graesser and Anderson (1974) have recently
pointed out: "To establish an algebraic model is only a first step in the
DEMO of the judgment process. The model is only a surface form, DEMO
386
Jor~N w. PAYNE
more than one underlying mechanism of integration can DEMO the same
data pattern. On this problem, little is known, and about all that seems
certain is that subjects do not consciously use DEMO paper-and-pencil type of
mental arithmetic" (p. 697). Slovic and Lichtenstein (1971) have also
questioned the psychological validity of certain traditional mathematical
DEMO models and have argued the need to develop new models and
different methods of experimentation.
The present study has demonstrated the efficacy of two DEMO tracing
techniques in identifying the information processing behavior which un-
derlies preferential choice in a complex situation. The procedure of pre-
senting subjects with DEMO decision task where they would have to search for
information, along DEMO the collection of verbal protocols from subjects
while actually performing the decision task, has proved valuable in il-
luminating the effects of two task variables on a decision maker's proces-
sing strategies.
The next step DEMO the analysis of decision behavior within an information
processing framework would be the development of a computer program
that attempts to simulate the behavior DEMO in this empirical study.
Efforts in that direction are currently being undertaken.
REFERENCES
Braunstein, M. L., & Coleman, O. F. An information-processing model of the aircraft acci-
dent investigator. Human Factors, 1967, 9, 61-70.
Clarkson, G. Portfolio selection: A simulation of trust investment. Englewood Cliffs, N. J.:
Prentice-Hall, 1962.
Coombs, C. H. A theory of DEMO New York: Wiley, 1964.
Corbin, R., & Marley, A. DEMO J. Random utility models with equality: An apparent, but not
actual, generalization of random utility models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
1974, DEMO, 274-293.
Dawes, R. M. Social selection based on multidimensional criteria. Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology, 1964, 68, 104-109.
Einhorn, H. DEMO The use of nonlinear, noncompensatory models in decision making.
Psychological Bulletin, 1970, 73, 211-230.
Einhorn, H. J. Use of nonlinear, noncompensatory DEMO as a function of task and amount
of information. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 1971, 6, 1-27.
Graesser, C. C,, & DEMO, N. H. Cognitive algebra of the equation: Gift size = gener-
osity x income. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1974, 103, 692--699.
Hayes, J. R. Human data processing limits in decision making. In E. Bennett (Ed.), Infor-
mation system science and engineering. Proceedings of the First Congress on the
Information Systems Sciences, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964.
Hendrick, C., Mills, J., & Kiesler, C. A. Decision time as a function of the number and
complexity of equally attractive alternatives. Journal DEMO Personality and Social
Psychology, 1968, 8, 313-318.
Jacoby, J., DEMO, D. E., & Kohn, C. A. Brand choice behavior as DEMO function of informa-
tion load. Journal of Marketing Research, 1974, 11, 63-69.
Keppel, G. Design and analysis: A researcher's handbook. Englewood Cliffs, N, J.: Pren-
rice-Hall, 1973.
CONTINGENT PROCESSING IN DECISION MAKING
387
Lichtenstein, S., & Slovic, P. Response-induced reversals of preference in gambling: An
extended replication in Las Vegas. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1973, 101,
16-20.
Luce, R. D. Individual choice behavior: A theoretical analysis. New York: Wiley, 1959.
Mertz, W. H., & Doherty, M. E. The influence of task characteristics on strategies of cue
combination. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 1974, DEMO, 196-216.
Newell, A. Judgment and its representation: An introduction. In DEMO Kleinmuntz (Ed.),
Formal representation of human judgment. New York: DEMO, 1968.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. Human problem solving. Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Pren-
tice-Hall, 1972.
Payne, J. W. DEMO approaches to decision making under risk: Moments versus risk
dimensions. Psychological DEMO, 1973, 80, 439-453.
Payne, J. W. A process tracing study of risky decision making: Examples of protocols and
comments. Complex Information Processing Working Paper No. 274, Carnegie-Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, Pa., September 1974.
DEMO, J. W. Relation of perceived risk to preferences among gambles. Journal DEMO Experi-
mental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 1975, 104, 86-94.
Posner, M. I. Cognition: An introduction. Glenview, Ill.: Scott, Foresman, •973.
Restle, F. Psychology of judgment and choice. New York: Wiley, 1961.
Russo, J. E., & Rosen, L. D. An eye DEMO analysis ofmultialternative choice. Memory &
Cognition, 1975, 3, 267-276.
Simon, H. A. Models of man. New York: Wiley, 1957.
Simon, DEMO A., & Newell, A. Thinking processes. In D. H. Krantz, DEMO C. Atkinson, R. D.
Luce, & P. Suppes (Eds.), DEMO developments in mathematical psychology,
(Vol. 1). San Francisco: Freeman, 1974.
Slovic, P., & Lichtenstein, S. Comparison of Bayesian and DEMO approaches to the
study of information processing in judgment. Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance, 1971, 6, 649-744.
Slovic, P., & MacPhillamy, DEMO Dimensional commensurability and cue utilization in com-
parative judgment. Organizational Behavioral and Human Performance, 1974, 11,
174-194.
Soelberg, P. A study of decision making: Job choice. Doctoral dissertation, Carnegie Insti-
tute of Technology, 1965.
Svenson, O. Coded think aloud protocols obtained when making a choice to purchase one of
seven hypothetically offered houses: Some examples. Progress Report on Project of
Cognitive Processes and Decision Making, University of Stockholm, DEMO
Tverskey, A. Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice. Psychological Review, 1972, 79,
281 - 299.
Tversky, A. Intransitivity of preferences. Psychological Review, 1969, 76, 31-48.
Wilkins, L. Social deviance. Englewood DEMO, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1967.
Wright, P. Consumer choice strategies: DEMO vs. optimizing. Journal of Marketing
Research, 1975, 12, 60-67.
RECEIVED:DEMO
June 2, 1975{1g42fwefx}