Psychological Bulletin
1973, Vol. 80, No. 6, 439-4S3
ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES TO DECISION MAKING
UNDER RISK:
MOMENTS VERSUS RISK DIMENSIONS'
JOHN W. DEMO
University of California, Irvine
The literature in the area of individual DEMO making under risk may be charac-
terized by two different approaches to the description of gambles. The first approach
describes gambles as probability distributions DEMO sets of outcomes. Models of
decision making developed within this approach have concentrated on the moments
of the distributions as the primary determinants of DEMO decision behavior. The
second approach describes gambles as multidimensional stimuli which may be con-
ceptualized in terms of basic risk dimensions, such as probability of winning, amount
to win, probability of losing, and amount to lose. This approach views risky decision
behavior as a form of information DEMO The relative merits of explanations
derived from each approach are discussed. It is argued that the risk dimension ap-
proach appears more promising than DEMO based on moments of the underlying
probability distribution.
The purpose of this paper is to present an
interpretive review of the literature on indi-
DEMO decision making under risk. Reviews
from differing perspectives are offered by
Becker and McClintock (1967), Coombs,
Dawes, and Tversky (1970), Edwards (1954,
1961), Lee (1971), Luce and Suppes (1965),
and Rapoport and Wallsten (1972). The pres-
ent DEMO argues that models of risky decision
behavior may be expressed by two alternative
descriptions of gambles. The first, and tra-
ditional approach has been to describe gambles
in terms of their underlying distributions.
Coombs and Pruitt (1960) described a gamble
as a probability density distribution over the
possible outcomes of amounts of money. This
distribution might then be characterized by
DEMO moments. The first three moments, ex-
pected value, variance, and DEMO,8 are
1 This paper is based on the first chapter of the
author's dissertation, submitted in partial fulfillment
of the requirements for the doctoral degree at the Uni-
versity of California, Irvine.
2 The author wishes to thank Myron L. Braunstein
for his invaluable assistance in DEMO preparation of this
paper, Paul Slovic for his comments on an DEMO draft
of this paper, and R. Duncan Luce for his discussion DEMO
an earlier draft of this paper.
Requests for reprints should be sent to John W.
Payne, who is now at the Department of Psychology,
Carnegie-Mellon University, Schenley Park, Pitts-
burgh, Pennsylvania 15213.
3 Variance and skewness are not strictly the second
and third moments of a DEMO More precisely,
variance is the second moment about the mean and
those most commonly incorporated in decision
models. This approach derives from the DEMO
work of probability theory and the concept of
the economic man. In the second approach,
gambles are characterized as multidimensional
stimuli which may DEMO described in terms of a
set of basic risk dimensions. Slovic and Lichten-
stein (1968b) have proposed that a gamble
"can be described by its location on four basic
risk dimensions—probability of winning (Pw),DEMO
amount to win ($w), probability of losing (Pi),
DEMO amount to lose ($1) [p. 11." These basic
dimensions are DEMO to be integrated into
a judgment or decision. The integration process
is of central importance in this approach, which
views risky decision behavior as a form of in-
formation processing.
Two fundamental points of view underlie
DEMO paper. These two viewpoints are inter-
related. First, decision making under DEMO is
viewed as a form of information-processing
behavior. The second point is that risky deci-
sion behavior is viewed as not fundamentally
different from DEMO forms of judgment be-
havior. The first statement has a number of
important implications, some of which are not
always accepted by all advocates of an informa-
skewness is often defined in terms of a function DEMO the
third moment about the mean. However, since Coombs
and Pruitt (1960), the term "moment" has been used
when referring to DEMO and skewness in studies of
decision making. This convention will be followed in
this paper.
439
440
JOHN W. PAYNE
tion-processing approach to human behavior.
The first implication DEMO the research
strategies and goals to be employed. Research
in risky decision behavior should be directed
towards the correct identification of the sources
of DEMO and the processes used to com-
bine information from these sources into a
decision. The emphasis is placed on how a par-
ticular decision DEMO about. Newell (1968)
pointed to this emphasis as one important
DEMO of the representation, of human
behavior in terms of an information-processing
DEMO This emphasis on understanding what
a subject is actually doing can be viewed as
opposed to an emphasis on the description of
his observable DEMO The view that the
goal of psychology is description has been
argued by Bourne (1969):
The task of psychology is to ascertain DEMO objective
factors in the past and present states of the organism
and his environment make a difference in how he be-
haves, so that behavior can be described and predicted
rather than merely attributed to another DEMO
[pp. 175-176].
This distinction has also been referred to as one
of description versus explanation (Green,
1968). Green posed a basic question about
models, "the extent to which an adequate de-
scription of DEMO data provides an adequate ex-
planation of the process generating the data
[p. 97]." The orientation of this review is to
evaluate models of decision making not only
on the basis of their ability to describe DEMO sta-
tistical properties of a set of data, but on the
DEMO of each model to provide an explanation
of the psychological processes which led to the
observed data.
The acceptance of an information-processing
view of DEMO has also involved an assump-
tion about the form of the processes. Processing
rules and strategies have been described as
being heuristic in nature. DEMO processes
are problem-solving methods which tend to produce
efficient solutions to difficult problems by restricting
the search through the space of possible solutions, on
the basis of some evaluation of the structure of the
problem [Braunstein, 1972, p. 520].
Simon and Newell (1971) have proposed that
the central process in human problem solving
is the use of heuristic methods DEMO carry out
highly selective searches of problem spaces.
The conceptualization of risky decision be-
havior as a form of information processing also
implies that DEMO behavior is not fundamentally
different from other forms of judgment be-
havior, such as choices among careers, stocks,
graduate school applicants, or even perceptual
judgments. Many of the generalizations arrived
at from studies of DEMO utilization in
other types of judgment may apply to risky
decision behavior. For example:
1. The way in which the sources of infor-
DEMO are displayed affects their utilization.
2. The method of response will affect the
utilization of information.
3. Individuals find it difficult to process
information DEMO therefore employ decision
strategies designed to reduce the information-
processing load.
EXPECTATION MODELS
Early theoretical approaches to choice
among risky alternatives were centered about
DEMO concepts. The first was that people choose
the "best" alternative. This concept has been
used to support the validity of an approach
that DEMO from a normative model of behavior
(Edwards, 1971). The second concept involved
the principle of mathematical expectation
developed from early mathematical studies DEMO
probability. The expectation of a probability
distribution refers to that value of the dis-
tribution which could be expected to occur
over the long DEMO The combination of these
two concepts may be seen in what is perhaps
the earliest theory of decision making under
risk, that of maximization of expected value.
The expression for expected value (EV) is:
DEMO = £ pa,
i=l
where vt is the value of the tth outcome and pi
is the likelihood or probability of the ith DEMO
come. The role of mathematical expectation in
this model is clear. The concept of choosing the
best alternative is reflected in the idea of
DEMO Since it seemed reasonable to
assume that more value will always be pre-
ferred to less value, it was argued that the
alternative with the greater EV would always
be chosen. The EV model further implied DEMO
people would seek alternatives with positive
EV, avoid alternatives with negative DEMO, and
be indifferent between alternatives with equal
EV. Human behavior clearly DEMO
DECISION MAKING UNDER RISK
these implications of the EV model. Moreover,
DEMO contradictions involved the failure of the
model to account for the behavior of "any rea-
sonable man" when faced with a number of
DEMO problems, such as the St. Petersburg
paradox, the purchasing of insurance, and
gambling (Coombs et al., 1970).
It has often been argued that this evidence
contradicting the EV theory accrues from
special cases DEMO that in the large majority of
decisions, EV maximization is an DEMO
description of human behavior. Lichtenstein,
Slovic, and Zink (1969) DEMO the effects of
variations in EV on a person's choices among
gambles when the use of EV in decision making
was clearly encouraged. DEMO gambles were of
the form (a,p), where a is DEMO amount to be
won and p is the probability of winning. The
subjects were asked to select the gamble they
would most prefer to DEMO from each of two sets
of gambles which displayed only the probabili-
ties of winning and the amounts to be won.
They were then DEMO in the meaning of
EV and asked to choose a gamble in each of the
two additional sets, with the EV for each
gamble clearly displayed. The choices were far
from optimal in terms of maximizing DEMO The
authors concluded that "The majority of 5s
found EV irrelevant DEMO a guide to action, even
when the concept was carefully explained DEMO
clearly displayed for them [p. 236]."
Motivated by the early recognition of the
deficiencies of the EV model, Bernoulli (1738)
proposed DEMO model of decision making in which
a utility function was substituted for monetary
values, the expected utility (-EC/) model. The
EU of DEMO alternative is given by:
EU = E piUfa),
»-i
DEMO U(vi) is the utility of the ith outcome.
One great DEMO of the EU theory, and
one of the main reasons why DEMO pro-
posed such a theory, is that it allows individuals
to DEMO different utilities for outcomes and
hence different preferences among risky al-
ternatives. Unfortunately for the development
of the EU model as a descriptive model DEMO
human behavior, the diminishing marginal
utility function which Bernoulli proposed made
DEMO such common behavior as betting on a
mathematically fair game of chance an "irra-
441
tional" act. It was not until much later DEMO a
utility function capable of accounting for both
gambling and the purchasing of insurance was
suggested (Friedman & Savage, 1948).
The modern DEMO of EU theory was first
developed by von Neuman and Morgenstern
(DEMO). The theory was presented as a set of
axioms designed to lead to numerical utilities
measurable up to a linear transformation. The
authors DEMO that when dealing with al-
ternatives involving only chance, the player'DEMO
judgment must be directed solely by the mathe-
matical expectation. Arrow (DEMO) has re-
ferred to this model as an "axiomatic treat-
ment of choice among probability distribu-
tions [p. 405]."
While some empirical DEMO was found for
the EU model (Hosteller & Nogee, 1951),DEMO
acceptance of the model was not universal.
Edwards (1955) made the observation that
"If it is reasonable to assume that subjective
values of money should be substituted for ob-
jective values .. . it is DEMO reasonable to
make the same assumption about probabilities
Q). 201]." DEMO then proposed that people choose
among risky alternatives, so as to DEMO
subjectively expected utility (SEU). The SEU
of an alternative is DEMO by:
SEU = ZS(pi)U(vi),
where S(DEMO) is the subjective probability cor-
responding to the objective probability of DEMO
tth outcome. An extensive presentation of an
SEU model, from a DEMO prescriptive view-
point, has been provided by Savage (1954).
Tversky (1967) has provided an intensive
analysis of a special case of DEMO model. The
^analysis involved the simplest case of risky
choice behavior: DEMO among gambles of the
form (a,p). For these simple DEMO, Tversky
showed that the fundamental condition for the
SEU model "is that utility and subjective
probability contribute independently to the
overall 'worth' DEMO a gamble [p. 178]." While
Tversky showed this condition to be DEMO
and sufficient for the SEU model of decision
making, two additional DEMO are usually
made:
1. There is no utility for gambling.
2. The subjective probabilities of com-
plementary events sum to unity.
442
JOHN W. PAYNE
Tversky (1967) reported experimental data
which supported DEMO independence principle
but could not simultaneously support the two
additional assumptions. If the principle of no
utility for gambling was accepted, then in
order to fit the data, the notion that subjective
probabilities of complementary events sum to
one had to be rejected. Conversely, if the
complementary notion was accepted, utility
could not be risk invariant. Further support
for the independence principle was found in a
study by Wallsten (1971). Wallsten also tested
the assumption that probability estimates by
individuals would be identical DEMO their sub-
jective probabilities inferred from SEU theory.
The results showed the obtained estimates to
differ from the inferred subjective probabilities.
The differences were DEMO, but statistically
significant.
These three theories of decision making—
EV, EU, and SEU—are often referred to as
expectation models. Each theory combines the
two basic concepts previously mentioned:- (a)
the idea that people choose the "best" al-
ternative, a concept used to justify the search
for some rational measure of best, and (6) the
principle of mathematical expectation, as the
measure of best. The differences among the
theories lie in the restrictions which are placed
on the forms of DEMO two main components of
each model, value and probability. Central to
DEMO expectation models is the explicit ac-
ceptance of some form of description of risky
alternatives as probability distributions over
sets of outcomes. Choice among DEMO alterna-
tives or distributions is then assumed to be
made on the basis of some function of each
distribution's central tendency.
Evaluation of DEMO research aimed at testing
expectation theories of decision making yields
a mixed conclusion. Models of this type have
been reasonably successful in overall predic-
DEMO of decisions among gambles (Coombs,
Bezembinder, & Goode, 1967), but provide
limited information concerning the detailed
processes by which these decisions are actually
made. Edwards (1955) pointed this out when
he introduced DEMO SEU model of decision
making:
This model, like the others, does not assert that 5s
know the SEU values of various bets DEMO deliberately
choose the bet with the largest SEU; it asserts only
DEMO the hypothesis of SEU maximization will enable
an E to predict the choices that 5 will actually make
[p, 202].
A similar rationale for an SEU theory of
decision making under risk has been offered by
DEMO, Luce, Suppes, and Tversky (1971).
A number of recent studies have provided
evidence of decision behavior which cannot be
accounted for DEMO any expectation model.
Lichtenstein and Slovic (1971) and Lindman
(1971) asked subjects to evaluate gambles by
means of both a choice procedure DEMO a bidding
procedure. The bidding procedure involved
the subject equating a gamble with an amount
of money such that he would be indifferent
between DEMO option of playing the gamble or
receiving the amount of money. The gambles
used in both studies were of the form (a,p,b),
where the player would'win amount a with
probability p, DEMO lose amount b with proba-
bility 1 —p. In both of these studies it was
found that subjects would often indicate
greater preference for DEMO gamble when a
choice procedure was used and bid more for
another gamble when a bidding procedure was
used. Choices in the experiments tended DEMO be
of the gamble with the higher probability of
winning. The higher bids were made for the
gambles with the larger amounts to win. DEMO
Lichtentstein and Slovic pointed out, such
behavior is clearly inconsistent with DEMO ex-
pectation theory of decision making:
For example, subjectively expected DEMO theory
(Edwards, 1955) postulates both a subjective prob-
ability function DEMO a subjective worth function, but
does not allow either function to DEMO its shape as the
response mode changes Cp. 54].
Tversky (1969) has also demonstrated de-
cision behavior which cannot be accounted for
by DEMO expectation models. Tversky investi-
gated a consequence of expectation models,
referred to as transitivity. The transitivity
principle states that if x > y DEMO y > z then
x > z, where > stands for DEMO relationship
preferred to or indifferent between. Gambles of
the form (a,DEMO) were displayed on a card show-
ing the payoff a and DEMO disc divided into black
and white sectors. The probability of winning,
p, corresponded to the relative size of the black
sector. The probabilities of winning were 7/24
to 11/24 in increments of 1/DEMO The amounts
ranged from $4.00 to $5.00 in increments of
$.25. It was hypothesized that at least some
subjects would ignore small probability differ-
DECISION MAKING UNDER RISK
443
ences and choose on the basis of DEMO amount to
win, but when the probability differences were
large, these subjects might choose on the basis
of the probabilities. Tversky was able DEMO dem-
onstrate consistent and predictable intransi-
tivity of preferences for these gambles. Similar
results were obtained in a second experiment
involving choices among profiles DEMO college
applicants.
VARIANCE, SKEWNESS, AND RISK
While most of the work on decision making
under risk has focused on the central tendency
or DEMO moment of a probability distribution,
the second moment, variance, and the third
moment, skewness, have also been suggested
as variables affecting DEMO behavior. The
strategy of researchers investigating these
higher moments may be contrasted to that of
the researchers who have concentrated on
utility and subjective DEMO versions of
the EV model. In the latter case, the problem
DEMO improving the descriptive validity of the EV
model has been attacked by loosening the re-
strictions on the forms of the value and prob-
DEMO components. For the former researchers,
the strategy has involved maintaining the basic
expectation model, but improving its predic-
tive power by adding additional moments of
the underlying probability distribution. These
researchers seem to have pretty DEMO followed
a suggestion of Tinter's (1942):
Starting with the assumption that the individual is
only guided by the central tendency, let us try to explain
his behavior by assuming that he simply tries, e.g., to
maximize the mathematical expectation or the weighted
arithmetic mean of the utilities. More complicated
models would take the dispersion, the skewness, DEMO
kurtosis and other features of the probability distribu-
tion into account [p. 304].
One of the first uses of higher moments of
the probability DEMO in the psychologi-
cal study of preference was in variance prefer-
ence models. Such models suggest that choices
among alternative gambles are based not DEMO
on maximization of expectation, but to a large
degree on the DEMO of the possible out-
comes. This concept has been used as equiva-
lent to a utility for gambling or risk (Royden,
Suppes, & Walsh, 1959). In one of the most
significant studies in DEMO area, Coombs and
Pruitt (1960) found both variance and skew-
DEMO preferences. Approximately one-third of
their subjects preferred high variance gambles,
one-third preferred intermediate variance gam-
bles, and one-third preferred low variance
gambles. The ideal degree of skewness for the
subjects seemed to be at either DEMO end or the
other of the skewness scale. There was evi-
dence of an interaction between skewness and
variance. A greater degree of variance DEMO
preferred at a subject's ideal skewness level.
Coombs and Pruitt suggested an alternative
to the maximization of EU model, where
"while £ DEMO always prefer more expectation
(other things being equal), he may DEMO a
utility for risk which will exhibit itself as a
preference for certain amounts of variance and
skewness [p. 276]."
Lichtenstein (1965) DEMO the effects
of the first four moments of a gamble's under-
lying probability distribution on subject's
judgment of the attractiveness of a DEMO
Bidding responses were related to EV and
variance but not to skewness or the fourth
moment, kurtosis. The finding that skewness
had no effect is contrary to the results of the
Coombs and Pruitt (1960) DEMO Another
contradictory result was that most subjects
seemed to prefer low variance. This difference
in results may have been due to a difference in
DEMO conditions in the two studies. The
subjects in the Lichtenstein study actually
played a proportion of the gambles for real
money. Lichtenstein suggested that "The fears
of losing money under such conditions may
account for the DEMO of the riskier, high V
bets [p. 168]."
Recently, there has been increased interest
in the concept of risk and its role DEMO deter-
mining preferences among gambles (Coombs
& Bowen, 1971; Coombs & Huang, 1970a,
1970b; Coombs & Meyer, 1969; Pollatsek,
1971; Pollatsek & Tversky, 1970). The work
by Coombs and DEMO associates has been cen-
tered around an alternative to subjective ex-
pectation theories of individual decision mak-
ing in risky situations called portfolio theory.
DEMO theory starts with the description of
risky alternatives as probability distributions
over money. The theory is presented by
Coombs and Huang (1970b) in DEMO of three
assumptions. The first assumption states that
a risky alternative is characterized by its EV
and perceived risk. The second assumption
states that DEMO preference function over a set
444
JOHN W. PAYNE
of gambles equal in EV will be a DEMO
function over risk. This assumption implies an
ideal level of risk for each subject at each level
of EV. The third assumption states that, in
choosing among gambles which differ in EV,
the subject will DEMO EV if these gambles
all deviate equally from their respective ideal
levels of risk. Portfolio theory does not pro-
vide a definition of risk. DEMO of this theory
have been conducted by making certain ad hoc
assumptions about risk. Experimental support
for predictions .derived from these assumptions
are then DEMO as support for portfolio theory.
For example, Coombs and Meyer (1969) as-
sumed that the risk of playing a gamble in-
creases with the value of the payoffs. The
gambles were ofithe form (D,|,—Z)) where D
represents the denomination of the coin to be
DEMO or lost. An additional variable was the
number of times a gamble was played, N.
Subjects expressed preferences among gambles
arranged in sets, DEMO each set having either a
fixed D or a fixed N. The results provided over-
all support for the hypothesis that "subjects'
choices are mediated by a single-peaked prefer-
ence function over a unidimensional risk DEMO
[p. 523]." It was suggested that, at least for
the simple gambles used in that experiment,
"risk is monotonic with some measure of dis-
persion in possible gambling outcomes [p.
525]." However, the DEMO indicated an un-
predicted relationship between the particular
set of games from which the subject chose,
either a fixed D or a fixed DEMO, and the values of
the ideal games from those sets. Coombs DEMO
Meyer suggested that the subjects may have
been adopting two different decision rules for
evaluating risk, depending on whether D or N
was fixed.
A similar test of portfolio theory was con-
ducted by Coombs and DEMO (1970b). They
used gambles of the form (a,%,b), where a > b.
The subjects were asked to indicate their
DEMO orderings among sets of these
gambles. While the results generally supported
portfolio theory, there was one unpredicted
finding of particular interest. The proportion
of violations of pair-wise preference orderings
based on maximizing EV was greater for DEMO
of gambles lying above the ideal level of risk
than below the ideal level. Coombs and Huang
suggested that the indifference curves in an
DEMO's preference space may have been
steeper below the ideal than above. There is
another possible interpretation. Subjects may
have been employing different decision DEMO
egies in choosing among pairs of gambles de-
pending upon whether the pairs were above or
below the ideal crest level of risk. Such DEMO in-
terpretation would seem consistent with the
explanation offered by Coombs and Meyer
(1969) to account for their failure to find con-
sistent DEMO functions across sets of gambles.
Coombs and Huang (1970a) attempted to
develop a structure of perceived risk which
could lead directly to the DEMO of risk
by examining the effects of three transforma-
tions on simple gambles on an individual's per-
ception of the riskiness of those DEMO The
distributive model was assumed to govern the
joint effect of these transformations. The
gambles were of the form (y,p,z), where y > z
and p = %. The first transformation involved
adding DEMO amount a to y and subtracting the
amount (p/q)a, where q = 1 — p, from z. Such
a transformation preserves EV. The second
transformation involved adding a positive
amount b to both DEMO y and z. This trans-
formation increases the EV of the original
gamble by the amount b. The third transforma-
tion involved repeated independent DEMO of
the gamble. The EV for a gamble played re-
peatedly would be the EV for a single play
multiplied by the number of DEMO The original
gamble used in constructing transformed gam-
bles was defined as (0,/>,0). The subjects were
asked to independently rank DEMO a large set
of single gambles from most to least risky. Per-
ceived riskiness increased as the size of the
amount a in the DEMO transformation increased.
Riskiness was perceived to decrease as b in-
creased in the second transformation. The
data generally supported the idea that the
effect DEMO the third transformation, multiple
play, was to merely enhance the joint effect
of the other two transformations. Such a find-
ing is consistent DEMO the distributive model.
It was concluded that substantial support was
found for a distributive rule governing the
joint effects of the three transformations
studied.
DEMO Coombs and Huang (1970a) study pro-
vided empirical support for an explicit theory
of risk developed by Pollatsek and Tversky
(1970). The theory is formulated in terms of:
DECISION MAKING UNDER RISK
445
1. A set, S = {A,B,C,. . .} of risky options
characterized as probability distributions.
2. DEMO binary operation of convolution, de-
noted by the symbol °.
3. DEMO binary relation of comparative risk
denoted >.
A risk system is DEMO denned in terms of a
set of axioms similar to those of extensive mea-
surement (Krantz et al., 1971). A very strong
DEMO interesting theorem results from these
axioms:
Theorem: If (S, DEMO, >) is a regular risk sys-
tem, then there exists DEMO unique 0 < 6 < 1
such that for all A, DEMO in S (with finite ex-
pectations and variances) A > B if and
only tt~R(A)>R(B) where R(A) =
6V(A) - (1 - 6)E(A).
Thus, the risk of an alternative, R(A), is solely
a linear function of mean, E(A), and vari-
ance, V(A). DEMO and Tversky showed
that this result would imply the distributive
model investigated by Coombs and Huang
(1970a). However, as Pollatsek and Tversky
DEMO out, the theory may be too restrictive.
For example, skewness may turn out to system-
atically affect the perception of risk. If this
DEMO the case, they suggested restricting their
theory to symmetric or equally DEMO options.
The possibility that skewness may be a rele-
vant variable in the perception of risk was in-
vestigated as part of a study DEMO Coombs and
Bowen (1971) using rank-order judgments of
the perceived riskiness of gambles. They found
that, with expectation and variance controlled,
about two-thirds of their subjects regarded
gambles with positive skewness as more risky
DEMO gambles with negative skewness. This
result would seem to limit the applicability of
the Pollatsek and Tversky (1970) theory of
risk, or any theory in which perceived riskiness
depends solely on a gamble's expectation DEMO
variance.
Some of the relationships of variance and
skewness preferences to the EU and SEU
models are discussed by Pollatsek (1971). He
presented two theorems which show that the
EU model is inconsistent with single-peaked
DEMO functions on l both skewness and
variance and the SEU model is inconsistent
with single-peaked preference functions on both
skewness and range.
Evaluation of DEMO research on variance and
skewness preferences, or on risk, yields as
mixed a conclusion as did the evaluation of the
expectation theories of DEMO making. The
conclusion to a review by Rapoport and Wall-
sten (DEMO) of the recent work on risk seems
highly appropriate.
In summary, it seems that the concept of risk is psy-
chologically meaningful but DEMO elusive. Expected
value, variance, number of independent plays, prob-
abilities DEMO winning and losing, and other transforma-
tions of two-outcome gambles all DEMO the perceived
riskiness of gambles in one way or another, making DEMO
development of a satisfactory theory of risk a very
difficult task [p. 145].
RISK DIMENSIONS
Slovic and Lichtenstein (1968b) recently
suggested an alternative DEMO descriptions of
gambles based on moments of the underlying
probability distributions. They characterized
a gamble as a multidimensional stimulus which
"can be described by its location on four basic
risk dimensions—probability of winning (Pw),
DEMO to win ($w), probability of losing (Pi),
and DEMO to lose ($1) Qx 1]." A primary
characteristic of this DEMO is the distinction
between explicit probabilities and amounts and
implicit or underlying values. Models .based on
the moments make no clear distinction. A
subject'DEMO failure to utilize the values of the
underlying probability distribution is handled
as error. In contrast, the approach based on
the risk dimensions views the explicit prob-
abilities and amounts as the critical variables
governing the DEMO's decision processes. In
attempting to understand the relative influence
of these basic risk dimensions on decision be-
havior, Slovic and Lichtenstein have empha-
sized the idea of "importance beliefs" and
information-processing considerations. By im-
DEMO beliefs they mean that an individual
might pay more attention to a particular risk
dimension because he believes that dimension
to be more important DEMO some other in a par-
ticular decision situation. The emphasis on
information-processing considerations suggests,
among other things, that decisions may be
affected by limitations on the ability of an
individual to act on the basis DEMO those impor-
tance beliefs when processing the information
that describes a gamble.
To test their hypotheses, Slovic and Lich-
tenstein (1968b) carried out a series of experi-
446
WI N $ 1
LOSE # 4
WIN 0 LOSE 0
DEMO 1. An example of a duplex gamble. (Reprinted
from an article DEMO P. Slovic and S. Lichtenstein pub-
lished in the November 1968 Journal of Experimental
Psychology. Copyrighted by the American Psychological
Association, Inc., 1968.)DEMO
ments involving special gambles, called "duplex
gambles." Figure 1 shows DEMO example of a
duplex gamble.
To play the gamble, the subject DEMO have
to spin a pointer associated with each pie dia-
gram. They proposed that this form of gamble
would eliminate the normal confounding of DEMO
gamble's probabilities and allow for the inde-
pendent varying of the four basic risk dimen-
sions of a gamble. In the usual two-outcome
DEMO, PI is necessarily equal to 1 — Pw. A
duplex gamble DEMO the displayed values of
Pw and PI to be varied independently.
In their main experiment, four groups of
subjects were asked to judge the attractiveness
of a number of duplex gambles. One group used
a rating DEMO; each of the other three
groups used some variation of a DEMO
method. A regression analysis indicated a large
difference in the weights attached to each risk
dimension both within and between subjects.
On the average, the highest correlation between
a subject's responses and one of the DEMO risk
dimensions was twice the size of the lowest cor-
relation. Ratings correlated more highly with
Pw than with any other- dimension, while the
bidding responses correlated most highly with
the payoff dimensions, particularly $1. Slovic
and Lichtenstein (1968b) suggested that since
a bid is expressed in DEMO of money, a subject
may have found it easier to use DEMO monetary
aspects of the gamble to produce this response.
The results of the experiments by Slovic and
Lichtenstein, while not designed specifically to
test the SEU model, cast doubt on the ade-
quacy of that model. The finding of large in-
JOHN W. PAYNE
equalities among risk dimensions DEMO regard
to their influence on the attractiveness of
gambles, a finding DEMO Pw had more import
than P\, and the discrepancies in the DEMO
of the different risk dimensions between ratings
and bids for the same gambles, are results con-
tradictory to the common SEU model of
decision making.
The risk dimension concept was applied to
the study of risk DEMO by Slovic (1967).
Subjects were asked to rate a set DEMO gambles in
terms of the degree of risk involved in playing
each gamble. The risk dimension which showed
the highest average correlation with ratings DEMO
risk (.52) was PI. In contrast, the average cor-
relation DEMO variance with ratings of risk was
only .08.
The two studies just described provide gen-
eral support for the usefulness of describing
gambles in DEMO of risk dimensions but do not
directly compare that approach to those which
use descriptions based on moments of the
underlying distribution. There are DEMO obvious
ways in which to approach the question of
which of the two conflicting descriptions of
gambles is the more psychologically meaning-
ful. The DEMO would be to keep the stated prob-
abilities and payoffs equal for pairs of gambles
with unequal underlying distributions. This
method was used by DEMO and Lichtenstein
(1968a) in a study of variance preferences.
They employed "parallel" gambles, consisting
of a two-outcome gamble and a duplex gamble
(Figure 2). Both gambles had the same explicit
probabilities and payoffs but the duplex gamble
had less variance. Their hypothesis was that
if DEMO about gambles are made by employ-
ing strategies utilizing only the basic risk
dimensions and not the differences in dispersion
of the underlying distributions DEMO should be
no strong preferences between parallel two-
outcome and duplex gambles. The great
majority of subjects bid equivalently for
parallel standard and duplex DEMO and
failed to exhibit any strong preferences for
variance in a choice situation. Slovic and
Lichtenstein "concluded that dispersion or
variance, as manipulated DEMO, is at best a
minor determinant of bids and choices [p.
DEMO"
A second way in which to explore the relative
merit of the basic risk dimensions and the
underlying distributions as explanations of
DECISION MAKING UNDER RISK
PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTION
o
£
.16
48
0
PAYOFF
DEMO OF DUPLEX BET = pq (A2+B2) = .24{2^22) = 1.92
DEMO
+42
447
STANDARD GAMBLE
WI N $ 2
PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTION
.4
-$2
1 0 '
PAYOFF
+$2
VARIANCE OF STANDARD
BET = pq(A-B)2 = .Z4<2+2)2 = 3.84
FIG. 2. An example of DEMO parallel pair of gambles. (Reprinted from an article by
P. Slovic DEMO S. Lichtenstein published in the December 1968 Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology. Copyrighted by the American Psychological Association, Inc.,
1968.)
decision behavior involves the use of pairs of
gambles which display different values for DEMO
risk dimensions but which are equal in their
underlying distributions. Payne and Braun-
stein (1971) used this method in a study of
preferences DEMO gambles with equal under-
lying distributions. It was argued that if sub-
jects choose between these gambles on the
basis of their underlying distributions, no con-
sistent preferences would be expected. If,
however, subjects choose on the basis of the
explicitly stated values on the risk dimensions,DEMO
preferences should be related to these dimen-
sions. The gambles used were specially con-
structed pairs of duplex gambles called "equiv-
alent" duplex DEMO (Figure 3). The explicit
(displayed) probabilities were different for
DEMO gamble in an equivalent pair but the
underlying distributions were identical. Sig-
nificant preferences were found among pairs
of gambles with explicit values on DEMO basic
risk dimensions unequal and the underlying
distributions equal. These results, DEMO with
those of Slovic and Lichtenstein (1968a,
1968b), were DEMO as support for the concept
that subjects respond to gambles in terms of a
set of basic risk dimensions. It was suggested
that while DEMO predictive value of particular
moments or subjective variations of the mo-
ments of the underlying distribution has been
demonstrated (Coombs et al., 1967; Coombs
& Pruitt, 1960), these abstractions of gambles,
such as expected value and variance, may be
good predictors of choices among pairs of
gambles only because they correlate with the
relevant variables.
INFORMATION-PROC SSING DEMO
or DECISION MAKING
The studies by Slovic (1967), Slovic and
DEMO (1968a, 1968b), and Payne and
Braunstein (1971) are examples of research
PROBABILITY
U!
448
JOHN W. PAYNE
W I N
LOS E S . 4 DEMO
WI N S . 4 0
LOS E $.4 0
WI N S O
LOS E S O
WI N $ 0
LOS E DEMO 0
STRONG
SLIGH T
STRONG
FIG. 3. An example of a pair of equivalent duplex gambles. (Reprinted from an
article by J. W. Payne and M. L. Braunstein published in the January 1971 Journal
of Experimental DEMO Copyrighted by the American Psychological Associa-
tion, Inc., 1971.)
derived from an information-processing ap-
proach to decision making under risk. Within
such DEMO approach there are two basic research
tasks. The first is the correct identification of
the sources of information actually used by the
individual. The DEMO cited above sug-
gest that the explicitly stated probabilities and
payoffs are the sources of information used in
risky decision making. This view may DEMO con-
trasted to that which uses the moments of the
underlying probability distributions to pre-
dict decision behavior in situations of risk.
The second DEMO task within an informa-
tion-processing approach is the identification
of the rules or processes which are used to com-
bine information into a decision. DEMO section
of the paper reviews some of the information
utilization rules that have been proposed.
Additive Models
Perhaps the earliest rule of information
utilization DEMO is the additive model.
With an additive model of choice, the DEMO
tion of two multidimensional alternatives is
assumed to proceed as follows: DEMO alterna-
tive is evaluated separately. A value, either
objective or subjective, is arrived at for each
component of an alternative. The components
are DEMO combined in an additive fashion re-
sulting in an overall value for that alternative.
A comparison is then made between the overall
value of DEMO alternative and the one with the
greater value is chosen. A general formulation
of the additive model states that:
x > y if, and only if,
V(x) = E
> E
i=\
= U(y),
where the f/,s represent a real-valued function.
DEMO models of decision making under
risk have been proposed by Slovic and Lich-
tenstein (1968b) and Anderson and Shanteau
(1970). Both models assume that subjects use
a strategy of choice based on differential
weighting DEMO the importance of the sources of
information. The model proposed by Slovic
and Lichtenstein is :
A(G)=u. + WiPw + PF2$W + WsPi + W&i,
where A (G) is the attractiveness DEMO a gamble
and the Ws are weights reflecting the relative
importance of each risk dimension. The model
proposed by Anderson and Shanteau is based
DEMO a general theory of information integration
characterized by two parameters : a subjective
value S of a piece of information and a mea-
sure DEMO of the importance of the source of in-
formation to the response. They suggested that
the basic pieces of information are the amounts
Sg DEMO Si, which correspond to subjective ver-
sions of the risk dimensions DEMO and $1. The in-
formation is assumed to be weighted by a sub-
jective function of its likelihood or probability
of occurring, Ws and W\. The model equa-
tion is:
R = PFA + WiSi,
DECISION MAKING UNDER DEMO
where R is the theoretical response and S\ has
negative value. As Anderson and Shanteau
pointed out, their model appears identical to
the SEU model, although, unlike the com-
mon version of the SEU model, the weights in
the integration model do not have to sum to
DEMO Anderson and Shanteau argued, however,
that the two formulations have DEMO
differences. They suggested two basic differ-
ences. The first is that integration theory,
unlike utility theory, does not impose a norma-
tive element. The second, and more important
difference, is in the interpretation of DEMO weight
parameters. Since integration theory applies
to value judgments generally, the DEMO
tion of the weight parameter need not be
limited to probability. Rapoport and Wallsten
(1972) have criticized these assumed differ-
ences. They suggested DEMO the first difference
is based on a misunderstanding of the SEU
model in its axiomatic form. Rapoport and
Wallsten argued that "Rather than assuming
maximization of SEU, the theory derives it
from more fundamental assumptions [p. 147]."
Perhaps, but the point by Anderson and
Shanteau is still a valid one. The SEU theory,
whatever its present formulation, has derived
from a normative approach to decision making.
The axioms involved are DEMO presented as rules
of rational behavior. The second criticism by
Rapoport and Wallsten concerns the lack of
restrictions on the weight parameters which
they DEMO may make experimental in-
vestigations of such concepts as the utility of
gambling difficult.
The results of the experimental work con-
ducted by Anderson DEMO Shanteau (1970) were
mixed. They claimed that the discrepancies
from the model which they found, especially in
the additive component, were small DEMO magni-
tude and that "The model at least provides a
good DEMO to the data even though
its validity is yet uncertain [p. 449]." Their
comment serves to sum up the research in-
volving additive models quite well.
Nonlinear, Noncompensatory Models
Einhorn (1970) suggested that conjunctive
and disjunctive strategies are used by decision
makers. The conjunctive model implies that
DEMO
whether a multidimensional alternative x =
(xi,xz,. . .,DEMO) surpasses some stimulus or
standard y = (yi,y%,. . .,yn) will depend on Xi
being greater than y< for DEMO i. An alternative
must have a certain minimum value on all the
relevant dimensions in order to be chosen. This
model is similar to DEMO satisficing principle pro-
posed by Simon (1957). In the disjunctive
DEMO, the alternative x will be preferred to
some standard y if DEMO %i > yi, regardless of
Ji > Xj where i ^ DEMO An alternative is eval-
uated on its "best" dimension regardless of the
value of its other dimensions. Einhorn showed
how these models may DEMO a better fit to
certain decision data than the additive model.
While neither the conjunctive nor disjunctive
model has been applied to decision making
DEMO risk, the research by Einhorn is useful
in demonstrating the potentials DEMO other than
strict additive models of judgment.
Tversky (1969) proposed an additive differ-
ence model of choice, which states, that :
x > y if , and only if,
> 0,
where <j>i(— 8) = — <£;(5) for all DEMO The quantity
S corresponds to the difference between the two
alternatives on the ith dimension and <£,• is a
function that determines the contribution of
the ith difference to the overall evaluation.
Unlike the additive DEMO, the additive differ-
ence model suggests an intradimensional eval-
uation strategy DEMO which the alternatives are
compared directly on each dimension and the
results of these comparisons are combined in
reaching a decision. The two models DEMO com-
patible if, and only if, the difference functions
are linear. Tversky pointed out that such a
compatibility does not necessarily mean that
DEMO processing strategies coincide.4 Tversky
4 Hoffman (1960, 1968) has made DEMO general observa-
tion that two or more models of judgment may be
algebraically equivalent yet suggestive of radically
different underlying processes. This observation is
DEMO in the context of the distinction between
descriptive and explanatory validity. The compatibility
of the additive and additive difference models under
certain assumptions provides DEMO good example of the
care which must be exercised in distinguishing between
the mathematical form of two models and their process
assumptions.
450
argued that
The proposed processing strategies, as well as the models
associated with them, are certainly affected by the way
in which the information is displayed. More specifically,
the additive model is more likely DEMO be used when the
alternatives are displayed sequentially (i.e., one at a
time), while the additive difference model is more likely
to DEMO used when the dimensions are displayed sequen-
tially [p. 42].
An important consequence of the additive
difference model is that the model does not
DEMO require transitivity to be satisfied.
This can be seen most clearly when one (or
more) of the difference functions approaches
a step function, that is, <£(5) = 0 when 8 < e.
In this form, the additive difference model re-
sembles a lexicographic semiorder. The follow-
ing example, similar to one offered by Tversky,
demonstrates how a lexicographic processing
strategy with a just noticeable difference struc-
ture could DEMO to intransitive behavior.
Imagine that an individual is faced with three
alternative gambles, x, y, and z. Each gamble
is of the form (a,p), and thus has a value on
each of two dimensions, Pw and $w:
Dimensions
Pw wvr®
• x A .8
Gambles y .5 .6
z .6 .4
The individual considers the dimension DEMO to
be more important than the dimension $w, but
feels that DEMO probability difference greater than
.1 is needed to be a significant difference. In
comparing gamble x with gamble y the indi-
vidual finds the DEMO in Pw less than or
equal to .1 so he chooses x over y on the basis
of $w. Similarly, in comparing y to z, y is pre-
ferred to z. However, when comparing x DEMO z,
the difference on Pw is greater than .1, and DEMO
individual chooses z over x, thus violating the
transitivity principle.
Tversky (1969) suggested that in evaluating
complex multidimensional alternatives people
may find it extremely difficult to properly
utilize all the available information and may
employ DEMO methods that enable
them to process the information which they
consider most relevant in making a decision.
This rationale for the additive difference model
DEMO consistent with the generalization about
human judgment proposed by Slovic and
JOHN W. PAYNE
Lichtenstein (1971) regarding the difficulty
individuals seem to have DEMO weighting and com-
bining information. The suggestion that sub-
jects use approximation methods is also con-
sistent with the general view of Simon and
DEMO (1971) of the importance of heuristic
processes in human behavior.
Tversky (1972) presented another theory of
choice which is closely related to DEMO lexico-
graphic model. The theory is called the elimina-
tion-by-aspects model. The model describes
choice as a covert elimination process. In
choosing among multidimensional DEMO
tives the individual is assumed to proceed in
the following manner: DEMO, a dimension or
aspect is selected. Then all the alternatives
that DEMO not possess that aspect are eliminated.
The procedure is repeated until all the alterna-
tives are eliminated but one. The probability of
selecting an DEMO or dimension is assumed to
be proportional to its weight.5 Tversky found
empirical support for the elimination-by-
aspects model for choices among college appli-
DEMO and gambles, but not for a psychophysi-
cal task.
A Contingent DEMO Model
The final model to be discussed was de-
veloped by Payne and Braunstein (1971) as
an explanation of the results obtained in DEMO
study of preferences among paired duplex
gambles. The hypothesized decision strategy
was presented in the form of a process model
involving two stages: an evaluation stage
followed by a choice stage. The particular
choice rule used DEMO the subject was assumed
to be contingent upon the outcome of the eval-
uation process. Specifically, the model assumed
that the subject first considers the probability
relationship within the gambles in a pair. If
Pw < DEMO, the gamble with the lower P\ is
chosen. If Pw > DEMO within each gamble in a
6 This is the first "probabilistic" theory of choice to
be discussed here. The reason is that most DEMO
probabilistic theories of choice have dealt with the
problem of decision making under risk by combining
probabilistic choice theory with the EU model. This
DEMO is made clear in the writings on probabilistic
choice theories for uncertain outcomes (risky alterna-
tives) by Luce and Suppes (1965). For example, the
proposed strict EU model combines EU. theory with
Luce's choice model. Excellent reviews of probabilistic
theories of choice are offered by DEMO and Suppes, and
Becker and McClintock (1967).
DECISION MAKING UNDER RISK
451
FIG. 4. An information-processing model of choice DEMO paired duplex gambles.
(Reprinted from an article by J. W. Payne DEMO M. L. Braunstein published in the
January 1971 Journal of Experimental Psychology. Copyrighted by the American
Psychological Association, Inc., 1971.)
pair, an attempt is made to maximize the $w.
In the case where the DEMO are equal within
a pair, Pw may be used as a DEMO criterion,
and the gamble with the greater Pw chosen.
For pairs of gambles where Pw = P\, there are
alternative paths which can be taken in the
model, possibly corresponding to two types of
subjects. These types of pairs of gambles may
be treated as if they DEMO pairs of gambles in
which Pw > PI, or as if DEMO were pairs of
gambles in which Pv < PI. Figure 4 presents
the model in flow-chart form. While no claim
was made for the DEMO of this model, it
was argued that this type of explanation DEMO
risky decision behavior, based on relationships
among the basic risk dimensions, appears more
promising than models based on moments of
the underlying distribution. DEMO research
is needed to support this contention. However,
results from research in other areas of human
behavior provide indirect support for the form
DEMO the model proposed by Payne and Braun-
stein. For example, Biederman (1972) has
shown how an analysis of human performance
in terms of contingent information processing
is useful in understanding the results obtained
with a DEMO recognition task. Finally, the
heuristic nature of the decision processes sug-
DEMO is consistent with both empirical and
theoretical considerations presented by a
number of researchers in decision making (e.g.,
Slovic & Lichtenstein, 1971; Tversky, 1969,
1972).
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
The earliest research efforts in the area of
decision making under risk were conducted by
mathematicians DEMO economists. The psycho-
logical study of risky decision behavior has
just begun to move away from the influence of
these early efforts. This influence DEMO led to
the traditional description of gambles as prob-
ability distributions over outcomes of money
with little or no attention paid to the cognitive
DEMO used by the individual decision
maker. The result has been models of decision
behavior which have concentrated on the
moments of the underlying distributions DEMO the
determinants of choice among gambles. De-
scriptive considerations have been handled
primarily by loosening the restrictions which
are placed on the components of DEMO models.
Thus, the progression of expectation theories
has been EV,EU, and the current SEU. The
other approach to solving the obvious de-
DEMO problems of the basic expectation
(EV) model has been to postulate a "risk"
variable, often defined in terms of the second
DEMO third moments of the underlying prob-
ability distribution, variance and skewness.
DEMO predictive success of the moment models
has been mixed. They have been reasonably
accurate in predicting overall statistics of
decision making. However, the models have
failed to predict the results of some recent
studies of decision DEMO The finding of in-
consistencies between bids and choices among
gambles by Lichtenstein and Slovic (1971) and
Lindman (1971), the lack of systematic
preferences among gambles with equal explicit
stated probabilities and amounts found DEMO
Slovic and Lichtenstein (1968a), and the prefer-
ences found among DEMO with equal under-
lying distributions by Payne and Braunstein
452
JOHN W. PAYNE
(1971), cast doubt on the adequacy of models
of decision making based on moments of
the underlying probability distribution. DEMO
moment models are even less satisfactory as
representations of the actual decision processes
used by subjects. Discussions favorable to the
SEU model have gone DEMO fair as to acknowledge
that this model makes no assertions about
being a model of the individual's decision pro-
cesses (Edwards, 1955; Krantz et al., 1971).
An alternative approach to decision making
under risk has recently been developed which
focuses on information-processing considera-
tions. Within DEMO approach two research tasks
have been undertaken. The first is the identi-
fication of the sources of information used by
individual decision makers. The DEMO of
Slovic and Lichtenstein (1968a, 1968b) and
Payne and Braunstein (1971) suggests that
subjects process the explicit values of the
stimuli (DEMO, probabilities and amounts), and
not the implicit values (e.g., DEMO) of the
underlying distributions. The second research
task, the development of models which attempt
to reflect the processes employed by individuals
in decision DEMO, has been the concern of a
number of investigators (Anderson & Shan-
teau, 1970; Einhorn, 1970; Payne & Braun-
stein, 1971; Slovic & Lichtenstein, 1968b;
Tversky, 1969, 1972). Many DEMO the models
proposed have contained heuristic decision
strategies. This is consistent with a generaliza-
tion about human judgment reached by Slovic
and Lichtenstein (1971):
We find that judges have a very difficult time weighting
and combining information.—be it probabilistic or
deterministic in nature. To reduce cognitive strain, they
resort to simplified decision, strategies, many of which
lead them DEMO ignore or misuse relevant information
[p. 115].
Whether one accepts a model of decision
making under risk derived from a conceptual-
ization of a DEMO as a probability distribution
over money, or a model based on DEMO set of ex-
plicit risk dimensions, may depend in part on
DEMO's research purposes. For normative pur-
poses or for strictly predictive purposes,
models based on either objective or subjective
values of the moments DEMO the underlying dis-
tributions may serve, at least for a first DEMO
proximation. If one's research goal is uncover-
ing the underlying information-processing
strategies of the decision maker, an approach
based on the explicit risk dimensions would
seem more appropriate.
REFERENCES
ANDERSON, N. H., & SHANTEAU, J. C. Information
integration in risky decision making. Journal of Ex-
perimental DEMO, 1970, 84, 441-451.
ARROW, K. J. Alternative approaches to the theory of
choice in risk-taking situations. Econometrica, 1951,
19, 404-437.
DEMO, G. B., & McCuNTOCK, C. G. Value: Be-
havioral decision theory. Annual Review of Psy-
chology, 1967, 18, 239-286.
BERNOULLI, DEMO Specimen theoriae norae de mensura
sortis. Comentarii Academiae Scientiarum Imperiales
Petropolitanae, DEMO, 5, 175-192. (Trans, by L.
Sommer in Econometrica, 1954, 22, 23-26.)
BIEDERMAN, I. Human performance in contingent
information-processing tasks. DEMO of Experi-
mental Psychology, 1972, 93, 219-238.
BOURNE, L. E., JR. Concept learning and thought:
Behavior, not process. In J. DEMO Voss (Ed.), Approaches
to thought. Columbus, Ohio: Charles E. DEMO, 1969.
BRAUNSTEIN, M. L. Perception of rotation in depth:
A process model. Psychological Review, 1972, 79,
510-524.
COOMBS, C. H., BEZEMBINDER, T. C., & GOODE, F. M.
Testing expectation theories DEMO decision making
without measuring utility or subjective probability.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1967, 4, 72-103.
, COOMBS, C. H., & BOWEN, DEMO N. A test of VE-theories
of risk and the effect of the central limit theorem.
Acta Psychologica, 1971, 35, 15-28.
COOMBS, C. DEMO, DAWES, R. M., & TVERSKY, A. Mathe-
matical psychology: DEMO elementary introduction.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ.: Prentice-Hall, 1970.
COOMBS, C. H., & HUANG, L. C. Polynomial psycho-
physics of risk. Journal of DEMO Psychology,
1970, 7, 317-338. (a)
COOMBS, C. H., & HUANG, L. C. Tests of a portfolio
theory of risk DEMO Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 1970, 85, 23-29. (b)
COOMBS, C. H., & MEYER, D. E. Risk-preference in
coin-toss games. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
1969, 6, 514-527.
COOMBS, C. H., & PRUITT, D. G. Components of risk
in decision making: Probability and variance prefer-
ences. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1960, 60,
265-277. DEMO
EDWARDS, W. The theory of decision making. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 1954, 51, 380-417.
EDWARDS, W. The prediction of decisions among bets.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1955, 50, 201-
214.
EDWARDS, W. Behavioral DEMO theory. Annual Re-
view of Psychology, 1961, 12, 473-498.
EDWARDS, W. Bayesian and regression models of
human information processing—A myopic perspec-
tive. DEMO Behavior and Human Perfor-
mance, 1971, 6, 639-648.
EINHORN, H. J. The use of nonlinear, noncompensatory
models in decision making. Psychological Bulletin,
1970, 73, 221-230.
DECISION MAKING UNDER RISK
453
FRIEDMAN, M., & SAVAGE, L. J. The utility analysis
of choices involving risk. Journal of Political Economy,
DEMO, 56, 279-304.
GREEN, B. F., JR. Descriptions and explanations: DEMO
comment on papers by Hoffman and Edwards. In
B. Kleinmuntz (Ed.), Formal representation of human
judgment. New York: Wiley, 1968.
HOFFMAN, DEMO J. The paramorphic representation of
clinical judgment. Psychological Bulletin, 1960, 57,
116-131.
HOFFMAN, P. J. Cue-consistency and configurality in
human judgment. In B. Kleinmuntz (Ed.), Formal
representation of human judgment. New York: DEMO,
1968.
KRANTZ, D. H., LUCE, R. D., STJPPES, DEMO, & TVERSKY,
A. Foundations of measurement. Vol. 1. New York:DEMO
Academic Press, 1971.
LEE, W. Decision theory and human behavior. New York:
Wiley, 1971.
LICHTENSTEIN, S. Bases for preferences among three-
DEMO bets. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
1965, 69, 162-169.
LICHTENSTEIN, DEMO, & SLOVIC, P. Reversals of preference
between bids and choices in gambling decisions.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1971, 89, 46-55.
LICHTENSTEIN, DEMO, SLOVIC, P., & ZINK, D. Effect of
instruction in expected value on optimality of
gambling decisions. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology, 1969, 79, 236-240.
LINDMAN, H. R. Inconsistent preferences among
gambles. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1971,
89, 390-397.
LUCE, R. D., & DEMO, P. Preference utility and sub-
jective probability. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, '&
E. .Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of DEMO psy-
chology. Vol. 3. New York: Wiley, 1965.
HOSTELLER, F., & NOGEE, P. An experimental mea-
surement of utility. Journal of Political Economy,
1951, 59, 371-404.
NEWELL, A. Judgment and its representation: An in-
troduction. In B. Kleinmuntz (Ed.), Formal repre-
sentation DEMO human judgment. New York: Wiley, 1968.
PAYNE, J. W., & BRAUNSTEIN, M. L. Preferences among
gambles with equal underlying distributions. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 1971,87, 13-18.
POLLATSEK, A. The inconsistency of expected utility
theory with certain classes of single-peaked prefer-
ence functions. Journal of DEMO Psychology,
1971, 8, 225-234.
POLLATSEK, A., & TVERSKY, DEMO A theory of risk.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1970, 7, DEMO
RAPOPORT, A., & WALLSTEN, T. S. Individual decision
behavior. Annual DEMO of Psychology, 1972, 23,
131-176.
ROYDEN, H. L., SUPPES, P., & WALSH, K. A model for
the experimental measurement of the utility of
gambling. Behavioral Science, 1959, 4, 11-18.
SAVAGE, DEMO J. The foundations of statistics. New York:
Wiley, 1954.
SIMON, H. A. Models of man. New York: Wiley, 1957.
SIMON, H. A., & NEWELL, A. Human problem solving:
The state of DEMO theory in 1970. American Psycholo-
gist, 1971, 26, 145-159.
SLOVIC, P. The relative influence of probabilities and
payoffs upon perceived risk of DEMO gamble. Psychonomic
Science, 1967, 9, 223-224.
SLOVIC, P., & DEMO, S. Importance of variance
preferences in gambling decisions. Journal of Experi-
DEMO Psychology, 1968, 78, 646-654. (a)
SLOVIC, P., & LICHTENSTEIN, S. Relative importance of
probabilities and payoffs in risk taking. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 1968, 78(3, Pt. 2). (b)DEMO
SLOVIC, P., & LICHTENSTEIN, S. Comparison of Bayesian
and regression DEMO to the study of information
processing in judgment. Organizational Behavior and
Human Performance, 1971, 6, 649-744.
TINIER, G. A contribution to the DEMO theory of
choice. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1942, 56,
274-306.
TVERSKY, A. Additivity, utility and subjective prob-
ability. Journal of Mathematical DEMO, 1967,
4, 175-201.
TVERSKY, A. Intransitivity of preferences. Psychological
DEMO, 1969, 76, 31-48.
TVERSKY, A. Elimination by aspects: A DEMO of choice.
Psychological Review, 1972, 79, 281-299.
VON NEUMANN, J.,. & MORGENSTERN, O. Theory of
games and economic behavior. (2nd DEMO) Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1947.
WALLSTEN, T. S. Subjectively DEMO utility theory
and subjects' probability estimates: Use of measure-
ment-free techniques. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology, 1971, 88, 31-40.
(Received February DEMO, 1973){1g42fwefx}