ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR AND HUMAN DECISION PROCESSES
Vol. 66, No. 2, May, pp. 131 – 152, 1996
ARTICLE NO. 0044
When Time Is Money: Decision Behavior under
Opportunity-Cost Time Pressure
JOHN W. PAYNE AND JAMES R. BETTMAN
Fuqua School of Business, Duke University
AND
MARY FRANCES LUCE
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
Decison-making dilemmas can arise because errors
may result either from deciding too soon or from de-
laying decisions too long. DEMO can result in lost op-
portunities or reductions in payoffs from the most ac-
curate decision. This paper investigates decision pro-
cesses in environments DEMO there is time stress due
to the opportunity cost of delaying decisions. First,
using computer simulation, the relative accuracy of
alternative decision strategies is examined in environ-
ments that differ in terms of the levels DEMO opportunity
cost of delay. The lexicographic choice rule is shown
to be a very attractive decision process in situations
where there is opportunity-cost time DEMO Two ex-
periments test the adaptivity of actual decision behav-
ior to the presence or absence of opportunity-cost time
pressure along with variations in DEMO (accuracy em-
phasized vs. effort savings emphasized), dispersion in
probabilities DEMO weights across the outcomes of the
choice options, and the degree DEMO correlation among
the outcomes. Subjects were generally adaptive to op-
portunity-cost time pressure. However, failures in
adaptivity were identiﬁed when choice environment
properties with conﬂicting implications for adapta-
tion were present simultaneously. In particular, under
opportunity-cost time pressure, subjects received a
lower expected payoff when the goal was to emphasize
choice accuracy than when the goal was to emphasize
savings DEMO effort. The question of when adaptivity in
decision making might fail is discussed. q 1996 Academic
Press, Inc.
INTRODUCTION
‘‘High-velocity’’ environments are characterized by
rapid changes in technology, demand, competitors, or
This research was supported by a grant from the Decision, Risk,
and Management Science Program of the National Science Founda-
tion. Address reprint requests to John W. DEMO at the Fuqua School
of Business, Duke University, Box 90120, DEMO, NC 27708-0120.
regulatory rules (Eisenhardt, 1989) and often involve
stress due to the need to make choices under time pres-
sure. However, such time stress is often due not so
much to strict deadlines DEMO it is to the potential oppor-
tunity cost of delaying decisions. As Eisenhardt (1993,
p. 121) notes, ‘‘the decision-making dilemma in such
environments comes from the fact that it is easy to
make mistakes DEMO deciding too soon and equally inef-
fective to delay choices or to imitate others.’’ In particu-
lar, delay in deciding can result ‘‘in failure as. . .win-
dows of opportunity close’’ (Eisenhardt, 1993, p. 121).
In some cases, the longer the delay in making the deci-
sion, the lower the expected return (value) from even
the most accurate of decisions. For example, if a com-
pany delays a new product introduction to get test mar-
ket results, competitors may observe the test, develop
their own versions of the product, and introduce these
DEMO before the ﬁrst company ﬁnishes test market-
ing (Ono, 1995). More generally, the company’s pros-
pects may continuously degrade with delay; DEMO longer
the delay, the more effective competitors’ responses
may be.
We DEMO decision making under situations
where there is opportunity-cost time pressure. We are
interested in how people adapt their decision-making
strategies (Payne, Bettman, & Johnson, 1993) when
faced with opportunity-cost environments and in the
possible DEMO or even failures in adaptivity that may
arise in such environments. In particular, we focus on
how people decide when there are conﬂicts between the
processing implications of opportunity costs and the
implications of other variables DEMO as goals and the
degree of conﬂict (intercorrelation) between outcomes.
Next, we review prior research on decision making
under time pressure. Then we summarize an accuracy –
effort framework for adaptive decision behavior and
report DEMO simulation study of decision strategies based
on that framework. Using the simulation results and
131
0749-5978/96 $18.00
Copyright q 1996 by Academic Press, Inc.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 DEMO:17:26 obha AP: OBHDP
132
PAYNE, BETTMAN, AND LUCE
prior research, we develop a set of hypotheses regard- strategies, see Payne et al., 1993, or Svenson, 1979).
ing adaptivity (and possible failures in adaptivity) to The strategy a decision maker uses is highly contingent
opportunity-cost time pressure and DEMO two experi- upon a host of task and context factors, such DEMO the
ments that test these hypotheses. Finally, we discuss number of DEMO available, information format,
the implications of the results for adaptive DEMO response mode, and the correlations among attributes
making. (Einhorn & Hogarth, 1981; Hammond, 1990; Payne et
al., 1993).1
TIME PRESSURE AND DECISIONS Given a set of available strategies and facing various
task DEMO, how do people decide how to decide? One
Research suggests three major ways in which people framework for explaining contingent decision behavior
respond DEMO decision problems under time pressure. focuses on the accuracy and cognitive effort character-
First, people accelerate their processing (i.e., spend less izing the available strategies (Payne et al., 1993; for
time processing each item of information; see Ben related ideas, see Beach & Mitchell, 1978, and Bocken-
Zur & Breznitz, 1981). Second, processing tends to be holt, Albert, Aschenbrenner, & Schmalhofer, 1991).
more selective DEMO time stress, focusing on the more Cognitive effort has been measured DEMO the number of
important and/or negative information about alterna- elementary information processing operations (e.g., ac-
tives (Ben Zur & Breznitz, 1981; Wallsten, 1993). quiring an item of information, comparing two pieces
DEMO, decision strategies may shift as a function of of information, or multiplying one value by another)
increased time pressure (Payne, Bettman, & Johnson, needed to make a decision using a speciﬁed decision
1988; Svenson, Edland, & Slovic, 1990). rule (Bettman, Johnson, & Payne, 1990). Accuracy has
There may be a hierarchy of responses to time pres- been measured in a variety of ways, including a com-
sure. Under moderate time pressure, Payne et al. parison of the expected payoff when using a choice heu-
(1988) report that DEMO subjects accelerated processing ristic with the expected payoff from using a more nor-
and processed somewhat selectively. Under more se- mative rule like weighted DEMO value or expected
vere time pressure, people accelerated their processing, value maximization.
were even more selective, and changed strategies from The basic hypothesis of the effort/accuracy frame-
a more depth-ﬁrst (alternative-based) to a DEMO work is that the strategy used to decide represents an
breadth-ﬁrst (DEMO) pattern of processing as adaptive balancing of the goals of being DEMO accurate as
time pressure increased. As discussed in the next sec- possible while conserving limited cognitive resources.
tion, this shift in processing pattern is consistent with Although people are often adaptive decision makers,
an accuracy/DEMO framework for strategy selection failures in adaptivity exist. For example, Kleinmuntz
(Payne et al., 1993). and Schkade (1993) note that the choice of a strategy
The studies cited above all used deadlines to DEMO for decision making will be based on subjective ex ante
time stress (e.g., a time limit of 15 s per choice in Payne DEMO of relative effort and accuracy and these esti-
et al., 1988)DEMO With very few exceptions (e.g., Kerstholt, mates will not always DEMO veridical. Adaptivity may also
1994), the terms ‘‘time pressure’’ and ‘‘time constraint’’ fail in situations characterized by multiple task or con-
are used DEMO (Svenson & Maule, 1993). text variables with differing implications for adaptive
Deadlines can make the use of some normative strate- processing.
gies DEMO due to limits on how much information A number of studies have validated the effort and
can be processed in a given time, thus limiting the accuracy model of strategy selection. Creyer, Bettman,
range of feasible approaches for adapting to time pres- and Payne (1990), for example, found that subjects ac-
sure (Keinan, 1987). Because of our interest in studying quired more information, took more time, were DEMO
adaptivity, we focus on situations with opportunity- selective in the processing DEMO information, were more
cost time pressure, where there is time stress but a alternative-based, and were more accurate when the
broad range of strategies is still possible. goal was to maximize accuracy rather than to DEMO
THE ADAPTIVE DECISION MAKER: AN EFFORT/
ACCURACY FRAMEWORK
People often DEMO a variety of information processing
strategies for dealing with judgment and choice tasks,
ranging from careful and reasoned examination of al-
ternatives to DEMO and fast rules of thumb (heuristics)
(for an overview of the properties of various decision
1 Task effects describe factors associated with DEMO general structure
of the decision problem, including time pressure. Context effects DEMO
to factors associated with the particular values of the options in the
speciﬁc decision set under consideration, such as the similarity
among options. In general, task factors are more likely to be noticed
a priori or early in the decision. Context factors, on the other hand,
are often noticeable only after some information has already been
processed.
/ a703$$2617 DEMO 10:17:26 obha AP: OBHDP
DECISIONS UNDER OPPORTUNITY-COST TIME PRESSURE
133
effort (see also Stone & Schkade, 1994). Thus, there
was a shift in strategies in the DEMO that one would
predict using the effort/accuracy framework.
Stronger tests of the effort/accuracy framework have
been conducted by using computer simulations of DEMO
effort and accuracy characterizing typical decision
strategies to generate hypotheses about processing pat-
terns and then carrying out experimental studies of FIG. 1. Sample DEMO problem.
actual decision behavior to test these hypotheses. Of
particular relevance to the present studies, the simula-
tion model of Payne et al. (DEMO) showed that certain
heuristics like the lexicographic rule and elimination-
by-aspects DEMO actually more accurate than more nor-
mative procedures like additive utility under severe
time deadlines (because there is not enough time to
fully complete the more complex adding rule). The pre-
ferred strategies under time DEMO generally in-
volved processing at least some information about all
the alternatives as soon as possible (breadth-ﬁrst or
attribute-based strategies). The simulation model also
showed that heuristics involving attribute-based pro-
cessing were relatively more accurate DEMO the disper-
sion in probabilities was high rather than low.2 In ex-
periments with human subjects, people adapted their
decision processes in ways consistent with the simula-
tion results (Payne et al., 1988), shifting DEMO strat-
egies in the direction of more selective and more attri-
bute-based processing under severe time pressure.
Interestingly, Eisenhardt (1989) found that manage-
ment teams that simultaneously processed two or more
alternatives in a breadth-ﬁrst DEMO made quicker
and better decisions in ‘‘high-velocity’’ environments
than those teams that processed alternatives using
more sequential, depth-ﬁrst (alternative-based) consid-
eration of one alternative at a time (see also Judge &
Miller, 1991). These results suggest that adaptivity in
environments characterized by opportunity-cost time
pressure DEMO be also involve a shift toward more selec-
tive and more attribute-based processing as time pres-
sure is increased.
In addition to adaptivity to DEMO task factors like
time constraints and goals, people also have been
DEMO to be adaptive to more subtle context factors
like the dispersion in weights characterizing a decision
problem (Payne et al., 1988) and whether the correla-
tion between outcomes is positive or negative (Bett-
man, DEMO, Luce, & Payne, 1993). For example,
Bettman et DEMO (1993) showed that people respond to
interrattribute correlation by shifting their processing
3 Our risky-choice context with multiple outcomes is structurally
2 To DEMO dispersion of probabilities, a four-outcome alterna- similar to riskless multiattribute choice DEMO (Keeney & Raiffa,
tive (gamble) with a low degree DEMO dispersion might have probabilities 1976). Given that a good deal of research on choice processing has
of .26, .29, .18, and .27. Alternatively, a gamble with a high degree used riskless stimuli, much DEMO the terminology describing processing
of dispersion might have probabilities of .56, DEMO, .14, and .24. uses the term attribute instead of outcome. We use this standard
strategies: when the correlations between outcomes
were negative, DEMO greater conﬂict, people in-
creased their processing and that processing was DEMO
alternative-based. Importantly, those subjects who
adapted more to different correlation levels DEMO
better in the sense of selecting options with higher
values.
We wish to examine how a decision maker might
change his or her strategy DEMO processing information
when faced with an opportunity-cost decision environ-
ment. Although the above research provides some guid-
ance about expected strategy changes, we use computer
simulation to investigate the effects of opportunity-cost
time pressure in more DEMO In particular, we examine
the relative accuracy of various decision strategies DEMO
how opportunity-cost time pressure may interact with
different context variables that have been previously
shown to impact the accuracy of decision strategies
(i.e., DEMO in weights and interattribute correla-
tion). The simulation represents an evaluation of differ-
ent strategies in various task environments by an ide-
alized DEMO decision maker. We then use the results
of the simulation and previous research to generate
hypotheses for our experiments.
A SIMULATION INVESTIGATION OF
OPPORTUNITY-COST DEMO PRESSURE
The Decision Task
The decision task in the simulation was a risky
choice. Each decision problem had four alternative
gambles with four outcomes (see Fig. 1 for an example).
Outcome values ranged from $.01 DEMO $9.99. The proba-
bility that a given outcome occurs (e.g., Outcome 1) is
the same for all alternative gambles. However, each
gamble DEMO have a different payoff for that outcome.
Such choice problems allow us to easily relate conse-
quences to choice among gambles in our experimental
DEMO (i.e., people can play selected gambles for real
money).3
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 10:17:26 obha AP: OBHDP
134
PAYNE, BETTMAN, AND LUCE
The Decision Strategies
In solving choice DEMO of the kind just described,
the decision maker must search among the probabili-
ties for each outcome and the values (payoffs) associ-
DEMO with the outcomes for each alternative. Different
decision strategies can be thought of as different rules
for conducting that search. In the simulation, we exam-
ined six choice rules (equal weight additive value
(EQW), DEMO (LEX), elimination-by-aspects
(EBA), satisﬁcing (SAT), weighted additive DEMO
(WADD), and random choice (RAND); see Payne et al.,
1993, for deﬁnitions). The ﬁrst four choice rules repre-
sent heuristics in that potential information is ignored
(effort is saved) at DEMO cost of a potential loss in choice
quality (accuracy is lower)DEMO These four heuristics vary
substantially in how much information is used and in
how the information is used. For instance, the LEX
and EBA rules are associated with the use of relatively
limited amounts of information DEMO processing of infor-
mation within attributes (attribute-based), whereas
the EQW DEMO SAT rules are associated with processing
across attributes (alternative-based). Also, rules like
LEX, EBA, and SAT tend to be associated with DEMO
selective processing (i.e., different amounts of informa-
tion are processed across alternatives or attributes). In
general, greater variability or selectivity in search is
associated with the use of noncompensatory decision
strategies where a good DEMO on one attribute cannot
compensate for a bad value on another attribute (see
Payne, 1976). The weighted additive rule and the sim-
DEMO random choice rule represent the complete use of
information and the complete lack of information
search, respectively. The WADD rule also is associated
with consistent processing (the same amount of infor-
mation is examined for each alternative and attribute),
consideration of tradeoffs, and alternative-based pro-
cessing DEMO information. Such rules are often viewed as
normative models of how decisions should be made
(Keeney & Raiffa, 1976; Frisch & Clemen, DEMO).
The Task Variable of Opportunity-Cost Time Pressure
One could manipulate opportunity-cost time pres-
sure for a decision problem by reducing the payoff re-
DEMO as a direct function of the amount of time or
effort spent in making the decision. However, that
makes comparison across problems with different num-
terminology below. For example, the standard term attribute-based
processing describes processing where information on one attribute
is examined for several alternatives before another DEMO is con-
sidered. In our risky-choice context, that term will refer DEMO examining
values for one outcome across several alternatives before considering
another outcome.
bers of alternatives and attributes difﬁcult. Conse-
quently, we manipulated opportunity-cost time pres-
sure by using the number of elementary information
processing operations (EIPs) needed to complete the
weighted additive rule in the particular decision envi-
ronment being studied as a standard of comparison.
To illustrate our approach, refer to the decision prob-
lem given in Fig. 1. To implement DEMO weighted adding
strategy, a decision maker would ﬁrst read the proba-
DEMO for Outcome 1, then the value for Gamble A on
Outcome DEMO, and then multiply these two values. Then
he or she would DEMO the probability for Outcome 2,
the value for Gamble A on Outcome 2, multiply these
two values, and add that product to DEMO product for
Outcome 1. This process would continue for all four
outcomes, followed by the same process for Gamble B.
Then the weighted values for Gamble A and Gamble
B would be compared. After similar processing DEMO
Gambles C and D, the decision maker would choose
the gamble DEMO the highest weighted value. Therefore,
using the method for calculating EIPs described in
Payne et al. (1993), there would be 32 read EIPs (acqui-
sitions of information), 16 product EIPs (weighting op-
DEMO), 12 addition EIPs (compensatory combina-
tions of information), and DEMO comparison EIPs (de-
termining which of two values is larger) needed to solve
the problem in Fig. 1 using the WADD rule, for a total
of 63 EIPs. If a person used WADD or expected DEMO
maximization to choose among the alternatives, option
D would be selected, with an expected value (weighted
sum) of $5.44.
Now consider implementing DEMO lexicographic rule on
the same problem. The decision maker would ﬁrst read
the probability for Outcome 1, then the probability for
Outcome 2, DEMO then compare the two, retaining the
larger. Similarly, the remaining probabilities would be
read and compared to ascertain the most probable out-
come. DEMO the values on that outcome for each gamble
would be read and compared to ﬁnd the largest value
on the most probable outcome. The DEMO with that
largest value would be selected. To solve the problem
in Fig. 1 using the LEX rule would require a total of
only DEMO EIPs (8 reads, 6 comparisons, and 3 elimination
operations). DEMO lexicographic choice rule would select
option B, with a lower expected DEMO of $5.24.
Dividing the number of EIPs needed to solve the
problem using the LEX rule by the number of EIPs
needed to solve DEMO same problem using the WADD
rule indicates that the LEX rule should be about 27%
(17/63) as effortful as the WADD rule. DEMO assume
that the decision environment involves an opportunity-
cost, i.e., there will be value loss due to delay. Further,
assume that the DEMO loss to delay means that any
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 10:17:26 obha AP: OBHDP
DECISIONS UNDER OPPORTUNITY-COST TIME PRESSURE
135
outcome received after the time (effort) needed to use a in the simulation. The ﬁrst context factor varied was
complete WADD strategy would lose 25% of its original the dispersion DEMO probabilities (low vs. high). Probabili-
value (i.e., be worth DEMO of its original value). For in- ties of .26, .29, .18, and .27 exemplify low dispersion
stance, if the WADD rule DEMO used in such an environ- for a four-outcome problem, with probabilities DEMO .56,
ment to select option D and Outcome 1 occurred, DEMO .06, .14, and .24 an example of high dispersion. Disper-
the payoff would only be .75 times $7.84, or $5.88. The sion in probabilities is a context factor that is relatively
expected payoff in that DEMO, given the selection of op- easy to notice.
tion D, would be .75 times the expected value of option The second context variable DEMO the correlation
D, or $4.08 (.75 times $5.44). More severe opportunity- among the outcome values. This variable was set at
cost environments DEMO be associated with higher negative (high conﬂict among outcomes, or an average
losses due to delay and hence receiving lower percent- correlation between DEMO of 0.33),4 zero, and posi-
ages of the original values after the decision was made. tive (low conﬂict, or an average DEMO between
To continue our example, if taking 63 EIPs to solve DEMO of .6). The correlation among outcomes is
a decision in such an opportunity-cost environment more difﬁcult to notice than the dispersion in probabili-
DEMO an expected value loss of 25% (you keep 75%), ties DEMO it requires comparing values for several
what would happen if you were to use a LEX rule to alternatives on several attributes. A major DEMO
make the decision more quickly? First, use of the LEX examined in our experimental work is how the pres-
rule would lead to DEMO different choice, i.e., option B, and ence of salient goals DEMO opportunity-cost time pres-
that option has a lower expected value, $5.24. DEMO, sure may interact with more subtle context factors to
one would DEMO that the value loss would not be as determine how, and DEMO well, people adapt their deci-
great as with the WADD rule DEMO the decision was sion behavior.
made more rapidly. We assume that the amount lost
due to delay is proportional to the number of EIPs DEMO Procedure
by the LEX rule relative to WADD. That is, instead DEMO The six decision rules were individually applied to
a loss of 25%, the loss would be 27% of 25% (i.e., (17/ 1000 decision problems in each of the 24 conditions
63) times 25%), or roughly 6.7%. Then the expected deﬁned by a 4 (levels of time pressure —0, 25, 50, or
payoff for the LEX rule would be the EV of Gamble B 75% discount) by 2 (DEMO of dispersion —low or high)
times the proportion of the value retained, or $5.24 by 3 (correlation structure —negative, zero, or DEMO)
times (1 0 .067), or $4.89. More generally, the formula factorial. Payoffs for each problem were randomly gen-
is Expected PAYOFF DEMO (1 0 ((EIPsRule /EIPsWADD)* erated from a distribution bounded by 0 (e.g., $0.00)
Value Loss))*Expected ValueRule Choice . and 1000 (e.g., $10.00) using correlation structures
Thus, there is DEMO value loss due to using the LEX speciﬁed by using the appropriate correlation values
rule to decide in the opportunity-cost time pressure between cells (i.e., 0.33, 0, or .6) in the columns of the
DEMO, but it is less than the value loss from Microsoft Excel DEMO for Windows spreadsheet represent-
using the WADD rule. This is true even though the ing each decision problem. The dispersion levels for
LEX rule DEMO not select the ‘‘best’’ choice in terms of probabilities were generated by using one of two meth-
expected value. Nevertheless, in this case a quicker ods designed to produce low levels of dispersion or high
decision DEMO a generally less accurate heuristic (LEX) levels of dispersion, as DEMO for the condition in
yields a higher expected payoff ($4.89) than a slower the simulation (see Johnson & Payne, 1985, p. 402 for
decision using the rule which is most accurate when details). DEMO decision rules and simulation were pro-
there is no time pressure (DEMO, $4.08). grammed using Excel and Decisioneering’s Crystal
In the simulation, opportunity-cost time pressure or Ball, software for running Monte Carlo simulations us-
value loss (discount) due to delay was varied across ing spreadsheets.5
DEMO levels: no discount, 25% discount, 50% discount,
and 75% DEMO These levels represent the loss in 4 It can be shown that for problems with n outcomes, the maximum
value if the decision maker uses as many EIPs as the average negative intercorrelation among all pairs DEMO outcomes is [01/
WADD rule. The various levels of discount or value loss (n 50 1)] (Green & Krieger, 1986).
represent the degree to which an environment pun- Note that the simulation DEMO some simplifying assumptions.
ishes delays in decision making, with higher values DEMO example, WADD weights values by probabilities, whereas other
leading to larger losses. models (e.g., subjective expected utility, prospect theory) use subjec-
DEMO values and/or decision weights. In addition, we weight each EIP
DEMO in our effort measure. Although different EIPs do require
different amounts of time (Bettman et al., 1990), earlier simulation
work has shown DEMO the simpler equal weight assumption leads to
nearly identical conclusions (Payne DEMO al., 1988).
Context Variables
In addition to the task variable DEMO opportunity-cost
time pressure, two context variables were manipulated
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 DEMO:17:26 obha AP: OBHDP
136 PAYNE, BETTMAN, AND LUCE
TABLE 1
Simulation Results for Accuracy DEMO Heuristics as a Function of Opportunity-Cost Time Pressure,
Correlation between Outcomes, and Dispersion in Probabilities
Negative correlation Zero correlation Positive correlation
Discount rate Discount rate Discount rate
Strategy 0% 25% 50% 75% 0% 25% 50% DEMO 0% 25% 50% 75%
Low dispersion
WADD 607a 455 299 150 671a 504 336 168 749a 562 376 187
EQW 556 483 404 336 DEMO 565 480 396 742 645 552 456
EBA 553 468 383 297 614 514 416 318 683 564 450 334
LEX 557 542a 501a DEMO 628 590a 550a 514a 723 680a 635a 593a
SAT 509 476 434 410 592 560 525 485 670 640 615 590
RAND 506 504 DEMO 492a 502 501 493 491 494 499 500 508
High dispersion
WADD 678a 509 338 170 707a 531 358 178 759a 569 383 192
DEMO 559 486 410 339 648 564 483 394 737 641 549 458
EBA 577 490 397 309 623 523 431 330 679 561 450 DEMO
LEX 666 626a 580a 543a 684 643a 609a 562a 745 700a 660a 620a
SAT 512 479 440 411 574 543 521 491 668 638 DEMO 590
RAND 497 496 500 508 497 496 500 499 494 492 495 503
Note. The 0% discount rate corresponds to no time pressure; a 75% discount rate is the most severe time pressure. WADD, weighted
additive strategy; EQW, equal weight strategy; EBA, elimination-by-aspects strategy; LEX, lexicographic strategy; SAT, satisﬁcing strategy;
RAND, random strategy. Results DEMO the expected payoff for each strategy based upon 1000 trials.
a The most accurate strategy for each environment.
Results decision goes up (i.e., DEMO discount is larger), the ex-
Table 1 shows the average payoff values for each of pected payoff from the WADD rule decreases faster
DEMO six rules in the 24 simulation conditions. Figure 2 than the payoffs for any of the other choice rules. In
shows the results graphically DEMO the 0 correlation, low fact, in all the environments WADD provides a payoff
and high dispersion conditions. lower than random choice under the DEMO levels of
First, note that given how the choice options were DEMO pressure.
generated, all the environments are equally friendly in Each of DEMO choice heuristics has lower payoffs as
terms of the average payoff due to random choice. Also, time stress is increased; however, the lexicographic
by our deﬁnition of payoff, the WADD rule provides rule seems to provide above random payoffs across a
the greatest payoff under no time DEMO in all the range of time pressure conditions and across a variety
environments. The no time pressure results from this of different contexts. Thus, shifting to a more attribute-
simulation mimic those reported in Payne et DEMO (1988) based decision rule is adaptive for increasing opportu-
and Bettman et al. (1993). Heuristics often provide pay- nity-cost decision environments, DEMO it was for more
offs close to those provided by the WADD rule; however, time-constrained environments (Payne et al., 1988).
which DEMO works best varies according to context
variables such as the dispersion in probabilities. For WHEN MAY ADAPTIVITY FAIL?
example, the EQW simpliﬁcation generally does rela-
tively better in low dispersion environments and the These simulation DEMO characterize how the accu-
LEX heuristic does relatively better in the high disper- racy of various decision strategies changes under differ-
sion environments. Also, all the heuristics do relatively ent levels of opportunity-cost time pressure, dispersion
better in environments characterized by positive rather in probabilities, and correlation between outcomes. Our
than negative correlation structures. premise of adaptivity in decision making DEMO that
Of greatest interest, however, are the results for dif- the behavior of actual decision makers would corre-
fering levels of opportunity-cost time DEMO As is spond, at least directionally, with the behavior of the
clear from Table 1 and Fig. 2, as the cost of delaying a idealized decision makers studied in the simulations.
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 10:DEMO:26 obha AP: OBHDP
DECISIONS UNDER OPPORTUNITY-COST TIME PRESSURE
137
FIG. 2. Simulation results for accuracy DEMO heuristics under zero correlation. Note. The 0% discount rate corresponds to no time pressure;
a 75% discount rate is the most severe time DEMO WADD, weighted additive strategy; EQW, equal weight strategy; EBA, DEMO
by-aspects strategy; LEX, lexicographic strategy; SAT, satisﬁcing strategy; RAND, random strategy. Results are the expected payoff for
each strategy based upon DEMO trials.
Although there is a substantial amount of research (1993) point out that some task characteristics will be
support for such adaptivity in DEMO behavior, easier to detect than others and therefore may have
adaptivity DEMO not always perfect (Payne et al., 1993). a ‘‘disproportionate’’ inﬂuence on strategy selection. A
Under what conditions might adaptivity to task and DEMO general issue is when an information format
context demands be limited? DEMO possibilities are makes the underlying structure of a decision problem
discussed in Payne et al. (1993), including issues of nontransparent (Hammond, 1990; Tversky & Kahne-
knowledge about properties of choice tasks, knowledge man, 1988).
about strategies and their efﬁcacy in various environ- Adaptation to DEMO task or context factor also may
ments, and factors inﬂuencing the DEMO to execute interfere with adaptation to another task or context
strategies. For instance, Kleinmuntz and Schkade factor. Even before information search begins, a DEMO
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 10:17:26 obha AP: OBHDP
138
PAYNE, BETTMAN, AND LUCE
EMPIRICAL HYPOTHESES
The simulation results provide DEMO with more details
about the effects of opportunity-cost time pressure.
Now we use these results, prior research, and the ideas
above to generate DEMO main effects and inter-
actions for opportunity-cost time pressure, goals, and
dispersion.
First we consider opportunity-cost time pressure.
Based upon the simulation results DEMO the earlier time
pressure studies, we hypothesize
H1a. Decision makers faced DEMO opportunity-cost time pres-
sure will shift decision strategies in the direction of rules like
lexicographic choice. This shift will be reﬂected in decreasing
amounts DEMO information processing, increased selectivity in pro-
cessing, and increased use of attribute-based processing.
If decision makers adapt to increased opportunity-
cost time pressure DEMO outlined in H1a, processing char-
acteristic of the lexicographic rule will DEMO to higher
payoffs under time pressure. However, under no time
pressure, such processing will not lead to higher pay-
offs, because the WADD rule yields higher performance
(and is characterized by more processing, less DEMO
processing, and more alternative-based processing).
Hence, we state
H1b. Choices consistent with lexicographic types of processing
will result in higher levels of DEMO under opportunity cost time
sion maker may undertake an a priori strategy change
on the basis of an obvious task or context variable.
Once DEMO a strategy change is set in motion, subjects
may be reluctant DEMO shift strategies a second time in Next, we hypothesize that goals DEMO processing as
response to another less obvious variable. Of course, if
DEMO implications for processing and performance are decision maker and as shown in previous research (e.g.,
the same for multiple task and context variables, there
is no dilemma for the decision maker. However, when
the DEMO of adapting to one variable, e.g., goal,
dispersion, or DEMO structure, are inconsistent
with what is required to adapt to another DEMO variable,
such as opportunity-cost time pressure, problems can
arise.
The DEMO of our experiments is to examine how indi-
viduals change their processing when there are multi-
ple task and context factors with conﬂicting implica-
DEMO for how one should decide. For instance, the goal
of being DEMO accurate as possible implies more processing
and the use of more normative strategies like WADD.
The simulation results for opportunity-cost time pres-
sure, however, suggest that strategies like WADD may
not function well in such time-stressed environments.
Hence, we might expect that individuals would have
difﬁculties in adapting to an opportunity-cost time
pressure environment with accuracy goals.
as noted above, we believe that when environments
vary in multiple ways with conﬂicting implications DEMO
processing, people may at times successfully adapt and
may at other DEMO exhibit failures in adaptivity. This
hypothesis also reﬂects our belief that decision goals
are more salient or have clearer implications for the
individual than DEMO time pressure; many
people may not understand the full implications of DEMO
ciding in an opportunity-cost environment. In sum, we
do not expect DEMO of time pressure and goal on
processing; we believe that people DEMO respond to the
goal manipulation in similar ways, regardless of time
DEMO However, we do expect an interaction of goal
and opportunity-cost time DEMO on performance:
H2b. There will be an interaction of goals and opportunity-cost
time pressure on performance: a goal emphasizing accuracy will
lead to higher performance levels than a goal emphasizing effort
under no time pressure, but an accuracy goal will lead to lower
performance under opportunity-cost time DEMO
We will test H1a and H2a and H2b in both Experiments
One and Two below. H1b will only be tested in Experi-
ment One.
DEMO, we investigate the impacts of goal and time
pressure on decision DEMO across variations in con-
text variables previously shown to impact processing
(DEMO, dispersion in probabilities and correlations be-
tween outcomes). We do DEMO for several reasons. First,
responses to the context variables indicate the overall
pressure, on average, and lower levels of payoff under no DEMO
pressure. Choices consistent with weighted added types of pro-
cessing will show the opposite pattern.
predicted by the effort/accuracy model of the adaptive
DEMO et al., 1990):
H2a. A goal emphasizing accuracy will lead to more processing,
less selectivity, and more alternative-based processing than a
goal emphasizing effort.
However, we expect that the results for performance
will be more complicated. In particular, we expect an
interaction of goals and opportunity-cost time pressure
on performance. As in previous research, we expect a
goal emphasizing accuracy to lead to higher perfor-
mance when there is DEMO time pressure. However, we
expect that accuracy goals may lead to DEMO perfor-
mance under opportunity-cost time pressure. People
trying to optimize on accuracy rather than effort may
use strategies that actually lead to lower performance
DEMO when the time discount is taken into account.
The accuracy goal may interfere with adaptation to
time stress by causing people to shift to DEMO more exten-
sive depth-ﬁrst strategy rather than a breadth-ﬁrst
strategy. This hypothesis is a major focus of our study;
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 10:DEMO:26 obha AP: OBHDP
DECISIONS UNDER OPPORTUNITY-COST TIME PRESSURE
139
adaptivity of subjects in these experiments; we hope to Again, because of these expected processing effects
replicate previous ﬁndings for the main effects of these
factors. Second, and more importantly, we include the should be particularly poor when this condition is com-
context variables in our designs to begin to look at how
people DEMO with problems where there are multiple ciﬁcally, we hypothesize
task and DEMO variables to which one could adapt.
There may be times when successfully adapting to one
variable may interfere with adaptation to another vari-
able.
DEMO our ﬁrst experiment, we investigate the main ef-
fects of dispersion DEMO probabilities and the interactions
between dispersion and goals and between dispersion
and time pressure. In the second experiment, we con-
sider main effects of correlation structure and interac-
tions between correlation and goals and between corre-
DEMO and time pressure. Dispersion in probabilities is
likely to be easier to detect than differences in correla-
tion structures; however, both dispersion and DEMO
tion structure are likely to be more difﬁcult to detect
than variations in goals. As noted above, although op-
portunity-cost time pressure may be easy to detect, its
implications for processing, particularly in combination
with DEMO factors, may not be as easy for individuals
to determine. Thus, in each case we predict that those
changes in the context variables DEMO lead to greater
processing, less selectivity in processing, and more al-
ternative-based processing will interfere with adaptiv-
ity to opportunity-cost time pressure. The DEMO
hypotheses for the two context variables are given be-
low: Hypothesis DEMO will be tested in Experiment One
and Hypothesis 4 will be tested in Experiment Two.
For dispersion in probabilities, consistent with the
results or Payne et al. (1988), we hypothesize that
H3a. Low levels of dispersion in probabilities will lead to greater
processing, less selective processing, DEMO more alternative-based
processing than high levels of dispersion.
Because we expect factors leading to more extensive,
consistent, and alternative-based processing to inter-
fere with adaptivity to opportunity cost-time pressure,
we also hypothesize
H3b. Dispersion DEMO time pressure will interact for expected
payoff. Performance will be relatively poorer under low disper-
sion when low dispersion is combined with opportunity-cost time
DEMO
As noted above for H2b, we do not expect an interaction
DEMO time pressure and dispersion on the processing vari-
ables.
Next, we DEMO that the main effects of correlation
on processing will replicate those reported in Bettman
et al. (1993):
H4a. More negative correlation structures DEMO lead to greater
processing, less selectivity in processing, and more alternative-
based processing than more positive correlation structures.
of negative correlation between outcomes, performance
bined with opportunity-cost time pressure. More spe-
H4b. Correlation structure and DEMO time pressure
will interact for performance: performance should be relatively
poorer DEMO negative correlation when opportunity-cost time
pressure is present.
Finally, the speciﬁc DEMO of Experiment Two will
allow us to test a more detailed hypothesis regarding
adaptivity:
H4c. Those subjects who adapt their processing more to DEMO
tion will perform better in the no time pressure condition, but
DEMO adaptivity of processing to correlation levels will lead to
poorer performance under opportunity-cost time pressure.
OVERVIEW OF EXPERIMENTS ONE AND TWO
The focus of DEMO experiments is how opportunity-cost
time pressure, along with variations in goals DEMO con-
text factors, inﬂuences the details of decision pro-
cessing. Thus, we utilize a computerized system for
collecting process-tracing data as well as DEMO data.
Computer Software for Data Collection
Subjects’ information acquisitions, response times,DEMO
and choices were monitored using the Mouselab soft-
ware system (Payne DEMO al., 1993). For both experiments,
choice stimuli were presented DEMO Mouselab as a matrix
of available information, with four columns containing
DEMO four outcomes. The ﬁrst row of boxes in the matrix
contained the probabilities for each of the four out-
comes; the four remaining rows of boxes contained pay-
off information for each of four alternative gambles.
DEMO probability values and dollar values were all hid-
den behind closed boxes that subjects were permitted
to open one at a time by moving DEMO mouse-controlled
cursor into a box. In conditions involving time pressure,
a clock appeared in the upper lefthand corner of the
computer screen and DEMO down as the subject de-
cided. As detailed below, the time DEMO the clock was set
so that subjects would generally not run out of time,
and the payoff was based on the proportion of DEMO
remaining on the clock. Subjects terminated decision
processing by clicking a mouse button while in
a‘‘choice’’ box corresponding to one of the four available
DEMO The Mouselab program recorded the order in
which boxes were opened, DEMO time spent in each box,
and the chosen option, allowing DEMO the construction of
several dependent variables.
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 10:17:26 obha AP: OBHDP
140
Dependent Variables
Accuracy and choice measures. The primary mea-
sure of DEMO accuracy, PAYOFF, was simply the ex-
pected payoff for each subject’s chosen option. For no
time pressure trials, this was simply the expected value
of the chosen alternative. For time pressure trials, this
expected value was multiplied by the proportion of time
left on the clock after DEMO processing was com-
pleted: PAYOFF Å Chosen Gamble EV*(1 0 (Time
Taken/Total Time on the Clock)). Finally, to control DEMO
differences in the stimulus sets, PAYOFF was divided
by the maximum DEMO value for any option of the
decision set to yield a measure called RELPAY. Thus,
RELPAY Å (PAYOFF/Maximum Possible EV in the
Decision Set). Both PAYOFF and RELPAY thus reﬂect
discounts due to DEMO pressure. The results for the
PAYOFF and RELPAY measures were essentially the
same, and we focus on the results for PAYOFF. How-
ever, DEMO include the results for RELPAY in the tables
to aid interpretation.
Two additional measures characterizing subjects’
chosen alternatives were calculated and used to exam-
DEMO H1b. These binary measures reﬂect whether the
alternative chosen is the alternative that would be indi-
cated by the expected value maximization rule (EV-
MAX) or the lexicographic rule (LEXMAX). Note that
for a DEMO decision, the alternative with the high-
est expected value may also DEMO the alternative with the
best value on the most important attribute, DEMO both
the expected value maximization and the lexicographic
rules may indicate that the same gamble is best.
Processing variables. The information acquisition
data recorded DEMO Mouselab were used to create seven
variables reﬂecting aspects of subjects’ decision pro-
cessing. First, the variable TIME reﬂects total pro-
cessing and is simply the total time spent for a choice
trial. The variable ACQ (acquisitions) also reﬂects the
total amount of processing, and is calculated DEMO sum-
ming the total number of times information (e.g., prob-
ability or dollar payoff) boxes were opened for a particu-
lar trial. Finally, a third measure of the amount of
processing is the average time spent per acquisition of
an item of information, denoted TPERACQ.
The next three variables reﬂect selectivity in decision
processing. Two measures are the variances DEMO the pro-
portions of time spent on each attribute (VARATT) and
on each alternative (VARALT). Lower values for these
two variables indicate that decision processing was
more evenly spread over all four attributes or DEMO
tives, respectively. The third selectivity measure,
PTMI, is the proportion of the total time spent on boxes
involving the values of the DEMO probable outcome for
PAYNE, BETTMAN, AND LUCE
a particular decision problem. Higher values of PTMI
should characterize more lexicographic-like processing.
The seventh processing DEMO reﬂects the se-
quence in which dollar value information is acquired.
Given the acquisition of a particular piece of value in-
formation, the two cases of most interest for the next
acquisition are acquiring information on DEMO same al-
ternative but a different outcome (an alternative-based
transition) and obtaining information on the same out-
come but a different alternative (an attribute-based
transition).6 A simple measure of the relative degree of
alternative-based DEMO attribute-based processing is
calculated by subtracting the total number of attribute-
based transitions for a trial from the total number of
alternative-based transitions for DEMO trial and dividing
this difference by the sum of the attribute-based plus
the alternative-based transitions (Payne, 1976). This
measure of the relative DEMO of alternative-based ver-
sus attribute-based decision processing of value infor-
mation is denoted PATTERN and ranges from a value
of 01.0 (indicating totally attribute-based processing)
to a value of 1.0 (indicating totally alternative-based
processing).
These processing measures can be related to the deci-
sion strategies. The DEMO rule, which examines all
information, should have high values for TIME, ACQ,
and TPERACQ; low values for VARATT and VARALT;
DEMO values for PTMI; and high values for PATTERN.
The EQW strategy DEMO have relatively high values
for TIME, ACQ, and TPERACQ; low DEMO for VAR-
ATT and VARALT; low values for PTMI; and high val-
ues for PATTERN. The EBA and LEX rules, since they
do not process all available information, involve sim-
pler processing operations, and DEMO on the most prob-
able outcome, should have lower values for DEMO,
ACQ, and TPERACQ; higher values for VARATT and
PTMI; DEMO lower values for PATTERN (more attribute-
based). For VARALT, the LEX rule should have lower
values and EBA should have higher values. DEMO,
the SAT rule should have lower values for TIME, ACQ,DEMO
and TPERACQ; higher values for VARALT; relatively
lower values for VARATT and PTMI; and high values
for PATTERN.
EXPERIMENT ONE
Method
Subjects. Seventy-two undergraduate students par-
ticipated in this experiment to fulﬁll a course require-
DEMO Subjects were also entered into one of two $50.00
6 Recall that we retain the term attribute-based processing here
to remain consistent with the DEMO on decision processing.
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 10:17:26 obha AP: DEMO
DECISIONS UNDER OPPORTUNITY-COST TIME PRESSURE 141
lotteries, although they were unaware of this addi- noticeable to subjects. Within each block, stimuli were
tional compensation when they volunteered for the individually randomized for each subject, and which of
study. Subjects were run individually, and experimen- the two blocks was presented ﬁrst was counterbalanced
tal sessions took roughly 45 min to complete. DEMO sub- across subjects.
ject was randomly assigned to a condition involving
either no or severe time pressure; 36 subjects were as-
signed to each of the no and severe time pressure condi-
tions.7 Thus, opportunity-cost time pressure was ma-
nipulated between subjects.
Stimuli and manipulation of dispersion. Stimuli
DEMO 32 sets of four risky options, each involving dif-
fering dollar DEMO for four possible outcomes. Every
option in a set was deﬁned in terms of the same four
outcome probabilities, and probability values were con-
strained to sum to 1.0. Possible payoffs ranged from
$0.01 to $9.99.
DEMO considered 8 decision sets with low disper-
sion in outcome probabilities, DEMO 8 decision sets with
high dispersion in outcome probabilities. These stimuli
are a subset of those in Payne et al. (1988). The correla-
tions between dollar values for each of the four attri-
butes were DEMO on average, and no dominated alterna-
tives were included in the DEMO Subjects considered
each of the 16 decision sets twice, once under DEMO accu-
racy goal and once under an effort goal, described fur-
DEMO below. Thus, both dispersion and goal were manip-
ulated within subjects.
DEMO All instructions and stimuli were pre-
sented via the Mouselab program. Subjects read that
the purpose of the experiment was to understand how
people DEMO decisions and that there were no right or
wrong answers. After becoming familiar with Mouselab,
subjects received experimental task instructions and
completed four DEMO decisions, one for each of the
possible goal by dispersion conditions. DEMO the ﬁrst two
practice decisions, all of the boxes on the DEMO
screen remained open during decision processing to
allow subjects to learn about the structure of the deci-
sions. Subjects received feedback on their payoffs DEMO
each of their four practice decisions.
The 32 experimental stimuli were separated into two
blocks, with the two members of each effort/accuracy
goal pair always presented in differing blocks. The rows
and columns of the DEMO were permuted between the
two goal conditions so that this repetition would be less
Time pressure manipulation. Subjects were as-
signed to either a DEMO time pressure or a severe opportu-
nity-cost time pressure group. In the severe opportu-
nity-cost time pressure condition, a clock appeared in
the upper lefthand corner of the computer screen and
counted down as subjects made DEMO decisions. Sub-
jects in the time pressure group were informed that
their payoff or winnings for each trial would be equal
to the amount DEMO money their chosen alternative paid
for the outcome occurring multiplied by the proportion
of time left on the clock when a ﬁnal decision was DEMO
cated. Thus, subjects completing a decision in 25% of
the available DEMO would receive 75% of the chosen
gamble’s payoff, while subjects completing DEMO decision
using 75% of the available time would receive only 25%
of the chosen gamble’s payoff. The clock was pro-
grammed to count down DEMO 30 s; subjects were not
told how much time was on DEMO clock.8 Based on on the
prior results of Payne et al. (DEMO) and Bettman et al.
(1993), 30 s exceeded the time needed to perform the
task.
Since we intended to have an opportunity-cost DEMO
ulation of time pressure and not a deadline manipula-
tion, there DEMO be a problem if many subjects ran out
of time. However, DEMO 7 of the 1152 decisions made by
the subjects in the time-pressured condition took more
than 30 s. Thus, subjects almost always made a decision
before the value of the expected payoff was $0.9
Four practice DEMO involving feedback were
given to facilitate understanding of the time pressure
environments. Immediately after each practice prob-
lem, a screen with feedback appeared. In the time pres-
sure group, the feedback screens reported the subject’s
chosen gamble, the outcome occurring (outcomes were
randomly generated according to their DEMO probabili-
ties), the monetary payoff associated with the relevant
gamble/outcome pair, the proportion of clock time used,
and the adjusted payoff (equal to the appropriate payoff
multiplied by the proportion of time left on the clock).
For the no time pressure group, feedback screens re-
8 Subjects in the two studies reported below used an average DEMO
7 An additional 20 subjects were initially assigned to a moderate roughly 12 s of the 30 s available. Thus, on average their winnings
level of opportunity-cost time pressure. Preliminary results indicated were discounted by 40%.
DEMO means for the moderate time pressure condition tended to sim- 9 As a comparison, the subjects under the most severe time con-
ply fall between those for the no time pressure and severe time straint in DEMO et al. (1988), 15 s, ran out of time about 74% of the
pressure conditions, so the moderate time pressure group was time. Of course, in their time constraint task, choice of a DEMO
dropped from the experimental design midway through data collec- option led to the same payoff regardless of how much time was taken
tion. to DEMO that option.
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 10:17:26 obha AP: OBHDP
142
PAYNE, BETTMAN, AND LUCE
ported the subject’s chosen alternative, the outcome scale where higher numbers indicated a greater feeling
occurring, and the associated monetary payoff. of being hurried or time-pressured. The effect of oppor-
DEMO time pressure on HURRIED was signiﬁcant
(Means: none Å 3.99, DEMO Å 5.51, F(1,70) Å 26.3, p
õnity-cost time DEMO was successful in generating.0001), indicating that the manipulation of opportu-
Goal manipulation. Before each decision trial, sub-
jects viewed a computer screen instructing them as to
whether their task for the particular trial involved a
DEMO focus on maximizing accuracy or on minimiz-
ing effort. Subjects were instructed that minimizing
effort involved making a choice in as little time as DEMO
ble. In order to explain the goal of maximizing accu-
racy, DEMO were used. One example illustrated the
importance of probability values (i.e., that a .75 chance
at $10.00 was better than a .50 chance DEMO $10.00), and
a second illustrated the importance of dollar values
(DEMO, that a .75 chance at $20.00 was better than a .75
DEMO at $10.00). Subjects were instructed that they
should attend to both payoffs and probabilities ‘‘in com-
bination’’ in order to effectively maximize decision DEMO
curacy, although subjects were not explicitly instructed
regarding normatively accurate decision DEMO or opera-
tions like the WADD rule. Subjects were explicitly told
that ‘‘maximizing accuracy involves winning the most
money possible,’’ and the feedback DEMO presented
during the practice trials reported the subject’s mone-
tary payoff for the preceding decision, adjusted for time
pressure if the subject was in the time pressure condi-
tion.
Finally, subjects were told that both minimizing ef-
fort and maximizing accuracy were important for every
trial, but that trials would differ in the degree to which
a relative focus on DEMO or on effort was required.
Speciﬁcally, subjects were told that a DEMO reﬂecting
effort minimization and a score reﬂecting accuracy
maximization would be computed for each trial. On
effort minimization trials, subjects were informed that
effort would count three times as heavily as accuracy
in computing a total DEMO for that trial. Similarly, on
accuracy maximization trials, accuracy was to be
weighted three times as heavily as effort. In order to
reinforce DEMO goal manipulation and to ensure that sub-
jects did not forget their goal task, a reminder line
appeared at the bottom of each choice screen. For each
accuracy trial, this line read ‘‘TOTAL SCORE Å (DEMO)
(ACCURACY)was used for each effort trial. Subjects were told DEMO/ (1) (EFFORT).’’ Analogous wording
they would be entered in a $50.00 lottery if their total
scores exceeded an unspeciﬁed cutoff value. DEMO,
all subjects were entered into the lottery. Similar goal
manipulations had been successfully used in Creyer et
al. (1990).
Manipulation check. At the end of the experiment,
subjects were asked how hurried they DEMO felt during
the experiment (HURRIED), rated on a seven-point
feelings DEMO being hurried.
Results
Multivariate analysis. Because we expected the de-
pendent variables to be intercorrelated, we initially
performed a multivariate analysis of variance with de-
pendent variables PAYOFF, ACQ, TIME, TPERACQ,
VARATT, VARALT, PTMI, and PATTERN.10 EVMAX
and LEXMAX were not included because they are bi-
nary variables. The main effects for time pressure
(F(8,63) Å 98.1, p õ .0001), goal (F(8,63) DEMO 9.9, p õ
.0001), and dispersion (all highly signiﬁcant. Likewise, there was a signiﬁcantF(8,63) Å 10.5, p õ .0001) were
interaction of time pressure by goal (F(8,63) Å 4.1, p
õ .0001). The interaction of time pressure by disper-
and the dispersion by goal interaction was not signiﬁ-sion was marginally signiﬁcant (F(8,63) Å 1.9, p õ .08),
cant (DEMO(8,2004) Å 1.15, ns). The three way interaction
between time pressure, goal, and dispersion was also
not signiﬁcant (F(8,2004) Å 0.45, ns). The means for
the dependent variables DEMO each time pressure, goal,
and dispersion condition are reported in DEMO 2. Next,
the univariate tests for the various process and out-
come measures are presented.
Main effects of time pressure. As stated in DEMO, we
expected higher opportunity-cost time pressure to be
associated with decreased DEMO of processing (lower
values for ACQ, TIME, and TPERACQ), DEMO selective
processing (higher values for VARATT, VARALT, and
PTMI), DEMO more attribute-based processing (a lower
value for PATTERN).
Opportunity-cost time DEMO had the expected
main effects on ACQ (Means: none Å 24.6, severe Å
15.4, F(1,70) Å 20.4, p õ DEMO), TIME (Means: none
10 We expected several of the process and outcome measures to
be correlated. Generally speaking, as our reasoning regarding the
hypotheses implies, measures of amount of processing will be nega-
tively correlated with measures of selectivity and positively corre-
lated with the degree DEMO alternative-based processing. Selectivity will
generally be negatively correlated with the degree of alternative-
based processing. These expectations were borne out by correlations
(all signiﬁcant at p õ .0001) between ACQ and VARATT (r Å0.61),
TIME and VARATT (r Å0.50), ACQ and VARALT (r Å0.24), TIME
and VARALT (r Å0.18), ACQ and PATTERN (r Å .49), TIME and
PATTERN (r Å .37), and VARATT and PATTERN (r Å0.80). The
correlation between VARALT and PATTERN was not signiﬁcant (r
Å0.02).
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 10:17:26 obha AP: OBHDP
DECISIONS UNDER OPPORTUNITY-COST TIME PRESSURE 143
TABLE 2
Process and Performance Measures DEMO a Function of Opportunity-Cost Time Pressure, Goal, and Dispersion: Experiment DEMO
No time pressure Severe time pressure
Accuracy Effort Accuracy Effort
Dependent Low High Low High Low High Low High
measure dispersion dispersion dispersion dispersion DEMO dispersion dispersion dispersion
ACQ 28.8 25.3 23.7 20.4 17.7 16.3 15.1 12.4
TIME 26.0 23.4 20.9 18.5 14.1 13.4 12.0 10.6
TPERACQ .55 .53 DEMO .49 .43 .44 .41 .41
VARATT .040 .063 .062 .084 .058 .083 .073 .110
VARALT .015 .017 .020 .020 .020 .022 .023 .028
PTMI DEMO .33 .34 .36 .33 .36 .36 .40
PATTERN .02 0.14 0.13 0.34 0.10 0.26 0.16 0.41
RELPAY .92 .91 .90 .91 .48 .50 .54 DEMO
PAYOFF 5.61 5.82 5.46 5.86 2.92 3.22 3.28 3.78
EVMAX .33 .39 .27 .38 .34 .27 .27 .28
LEXMAX .39 .36 .42 .41 .43 DEMO .46 .57
Note. ACQ, number of acquisitions; TIME, time taken; TPERACQ, time per acquisition; VARATT, variance in the proportion of time
spent on each attribute; VARALT, variance in the proportion of time DEMO on each alternative; PTMI, proportion of time spent on the most
important attribute; PATTERN, index reﬂecting relative amount of attribute-based (0) DEMO alternative-based (/) processing; RELPAY,
expected amount won divided by DEMO maximum amount which could be won; PAYOFF, expected amount won; DEMO, proportion of highest
expected value choices; LEXMAX, proportion of choices DEMO on the most probable outcome.
processed it faster.
Time pressure had the expected directional effects
on variables reﬂecting selectivity, but the results were
not signiﬁcant for VARATT (Means: none Å 0.062, se-
vere Å 0.081, F(1,70) Å 2.60, p õ .12) or PTMI (Means:
none Å 0.34, severe Å 0.36, F(1,70) Å 2.29, p õ .14).
For VARALT, time pressure had DEMO marginally signiﬁ-
cant main effect (Means: none Å 0.018, severe DEMO 0.023,
Fport for increased selectivity under increasing time(1,70) DEMO 3.03, p õ .09). Thus, there is only weak sup-
pressure.
Finally, time pressure had the expected directional
effect on PATTERN, DEMO this effect was not signiﬁcant
(Means: none Å00.14, severe Å00.230, F(1,70) Å
0.67). To summarize, opportunity-cost time pressure
DEMO the same directional effects on processing as the
more traditional constraint form of time pressure: in-
creased time pressure lead to less processing, DEMO or
accelerated processing, somewhat more selectivity, and
a directional change to more attribute-based pro-
cessing. The results were weaker than those in the
DEMO Payne et al. study, perhaps due to the fact that
the DEMO study used a between subjects manipula-
tion of time pressure, whereas DEMO et al. used a
Å 22.2, severe Å 12.5, F(1,70) Å 25.0, p õ 0001), and within subjects manipulation. DEMO will consider this is-
TPERACQ (Means: none Å 0.52, severe DEMO 0.42, F(1,70) sue again below.
mation under opportunity-cost time pressure but alsoÅ 15.9, p õ .0003). People not only processed less infor- pressure on performance, as stated in H1b and H2b.Now we consider the effects of opportunity-cost time
We consider H2b below in the DEMO on time pressure
by goal interactions. H1b states that choices consistent
with lexicographic processing will result in higher pay-
offs under opportunity-cost time pressure DEMO lower
payoffs under no time pressure. Choices consistent
with maximizing expected value should exhibit the op-
posite pattern.
We use LEXMAX and EVMAX to DEMO this hy-
pothesis. LEXMAX is the proportion of choices select-
ing the option that would be chosen by the lexico-
graphic rule (i.e., DEMO on the most probable outcome),
while EVMAX is the proportion DEMO choices selecting the
option that would be chosen by the WADD rule (i.e.,
the option with the highest expected value). Given the
stimuli in Experiment One, LEXMAX and EVMAX are
negatively correlated (r DEMO, p õ .0001).11 The pat-
terns of correlations between the DEMO measures
and LEXMAX and EVMAX are as expected: LEXMAX
is negatively DEMO with ACQ (r Å0.28), TIME (r
11 In the second experiment, EVMAX and LEXMAX were positively
correlated due to the different interattribute correlation structures
used in that experiment. This positive correlation compromises our
ability DEMO test H1b in Experiment Two.
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 10:17:26 obha AP: OBHDP
144
PAYNE, BETTMAN, AND LUCE
the correlations between LEXMAX and PAYOFF DEMO
between EVMAX and PAYOFF for the two time pres-
sure conditions. If H1b is true, we expect that LEXMAX
will be positively correlated with PAYOFF under time
pressure and will be negatively correlated under no
time DEMO, with the opposite pattern expected for
EVMAX. The correlation between LEXMAX DEMO PAY-
OFF is .23 (p õ .0001) under time pressure, DEMO ex-
pected, and is nonsigniﬁcant (time pressure. The correlation between EVMAX andr Å .04, ns) under no
PAYOFF is negative but nonsigniﬁcant DEMO time
pressure (r Å0.02, ns) and is positive when there DEMO
no time pressure (support H1b. r Å .36, p õ .0001). These results
Further evidence that performance is related to
shifts in DEMO under time pressure is provided by
correlations between processing measures and PAY-
OFF. In the time pressure condition, VARATT (r Å
.51), DEMO (r Å .23), PTMI (r Å .13), and PATTERN
Thus, more attribute-based and selective processing(r Å0.36) are all correlated DEMO PAYOFF at p õ .0001.
(such as in LEX) leads to higher PAYOFF under time
pressure. In contrast, the correlations between pro-
cessing variables and PAYOFF were all slightly posi-
tive and nonsigniﬁcant under no DEMO pressure.
Main effects of goal. According to H2a, a goal em-
DEMO accuracy should lead to more processing, less
selectivity, and more alternative-based processing
(Creyer et al., 1990). The results generally were consis-
DEMO with the above expectations.
Subjects processed more extensively under an accu-
racy goal, making more acquisitions (ACQ: Means: ac-
curacy Å 22.6, effort Å 17.7, F(1,70) Å 48.6, p õ .0001),
taking more time (TIME: Means: accuracy Å 19.2, ef-
fortmore time per acquisition (TPERACQ: Means: accu-Å 15.5, F(1,DEMO) Å 38.6, p õ .0001), and spending
racy Å 0.49, effort Å 0.45, F(1,70) Å 15.3, p õ DEMO).
Subjects also were less selective under an accuracy
goal, over DEMO attributes (VARATT: Means: accuracy
Å 0.061, effort Å 0.082, DEMO(1,70) Å 30.6, p õ .0001) and
alternatives (VARALT: Means: accuracy Å 0.018, effort
Åracy goal, subjects also concentrated DEMO extensively0.023, F(1,70) Å 4.35, p õ .05). DEMO given an accu-
on the most probable attribute (PTMI: Means: DEMO
Å 0.33, effort Å 0.37, F(1,70) Å 19.2, p õ .0001).
Finally, subjects processed information in a more al-
ternative-based manner under an accuracy goal (PAT- propriate reactions to time pressure.
Å0.22), and PATTERN (r Å0.39) and positively with TERN: Means: accuracy Å00.12, effort Å00.26,
VARATT (r Å .44); EVMAX is positively correlated with F(1,70) Å 22.9, p õ DEMO). A shift in goal leads not
ACQ (r Å .18), TIME (r Å .12), and PATTERN (r Å .29) DEMO to different amounts of processing, therefore, but
and negatively with VARATT (r Å0.32)(all signiﬁcant also to shifts in strategy. In sum, the main effects for
atThe data most directly relevant to testing H1b DEMO õ .0001). goal strongly support H2a.
Time pressure by goal interactions. We did not ex-
amine main effects for opportunity-cost time pressure
or DEMO on PAYOFF, because our primary hypothesis
regarding performance, H2b, was DEMO opportunity-cost
time pressure and goal would interact to determine
PAYOFF. Accuracy goals were expected to have dif-
fering implications for adaptive performance than op-
DEMO time pressure does. In particular, we ar-
gued that a goal DEMO accuracy would lead to
higher payoffs than a goal emphasizing effort in the
absence of time pressure, but that a goal emphasizing
accuracy would actually lead to lower payoffs than a
goal emphasizing effort under opportunity-cost DEMO
pressure.
The expected interaction of time pressure by goal on
PAYOFF was signiﬁcant (F(1,70) Å 29.43, p õ .0001)
and of the anticipated form. Under no time pressure,
accuracy goals led DEMO higher payoffs ($5.72) than effort
goals ($5.66), at a DEMO of 5 more s of processing time
(see Table 2). DEMO, under opportunity-cost time
pressure, the expected payoff received for the accuracy
goal ($3.07) was $.46 less than the expected payoff re-
ceived DEMO the effort goal ($3.53); subjects processed
about two and a DEMO seconds longer in the accuracy
condition (see Table 2). These DEMO provide strong
support for H2b.
This detrimental effect of the accuracy goal in the
time pressure conditions was not due to subjects choos-
ing DEMO with relatively lower undiscounted ex-
pected values. The interaction between time pressure
and goal was not signiﬁcant for the EVMAX measure
(x2 (1, n Å 2296) Å .04, ns)(since EVMAX is a 0 – 1
variable, a logit analysis was used). The interaction
between time pressure and goal was also not signiﬁcant
for the LEXMAX measure (x2 (1, n Å 2296) Å .14, ns).
We DEMO not expect opportunity-cost time pressure and
goal to interact for our processing measures, and this
was generally the case. The interaction was not sig-
niﬁcant for ACQ (F(1,70) Å 2.23), TPERACQ (F(1,70)
Å 1.38), VARATT (F(1,70) Å DEMO), VARALT (F(1,70) Å
.16), PTMI (F(DEMO,70) Å .01), or PATTERN (F(1,70) Å
DEMO); there was a signiﬁcant interaction for TIME
(F(1,70) Å 4.38, p õ .05). Thus, subjects generally pro-
cess DEMO similar ways in response to different goals re-
gardless of the level of time pressure, supporting our
notion that responding to goals may interfere with ap-
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 10:17:26 obha AP: OBHDP
DECISIONS UNDER OPPORTUNITY-COST TIME PRESSURE
145
Effects involving dispersion. In H3a we DEMO that accuracy and effort (the ‘‘total score’’ described above
lower dispersion DEMO probabilities would lead to greater in the procedure), not accuracy alone. Hence, subjects’
amounts of processing, less selective processing, and lower payoffs under accuracy goals and time pressure
more alternative-based processing. Lower dispersion is DEMO reﬂect their attempts to balance accuracy and ef-
associated with higher values of ACQ (Means: low Å fort, and these attempts cannot be measured by payoff
21.4, high Å 18.6, F(1,70) Å 27.8, p õ .001) and TIME scores alone. However, subjects under an accuracy goal
(Means: low.001), but there is no main DEMO on TPERACQ (Means:Å 18.2, high Å 16.5, F(1,DEMO) Å 15.7, p õ both received lower payoffs and took more time under
opportunity-cost time pressure than subjects under ef-
low Å .47, high Å .47, F(1,70) Å 1.33). Lower dispersion DEMO goals. The time pressure performance of subjects
is also associated with lower values of VARATT under an accuracy goal was thus dominated by subjects
DEMO an effort goal on both components of ‘‘total score,’’
payoffs and time. Thus, we believe that our results
provide clear evidence of failures in adaptivity.
Finally, lower dispersion in probabilities generally
led to greater processing, less selective processing, and
more alternative-based processing, supporting H3a.
Contrary to H3b, however, there was no interaction of
dispersion and time pressure DEMO payoff.
In sum, Experiment One yields several very interest-
ing results DEMO adaptivity to time pressure, par-
ticularly those for H1b and H2b. DEMO results for goal
and dispersion on processing variables were generally
as expected, but those for time pressure were some-
what weak. The manipulations for goal and dispersion
were within subjects, whereas opportunity-cost time
pressure was varied between subjects. In general, a
The effects of opportunity-cost time pressure on deci- between subjects design provides subjects with in-
sion processing were in DEMO directions hypothesized in creased experience with whatever opportunity-cost
H1a (less processing, more selectivity, more attribute- time pressure decisions they are facing. However, DEMO
based), but the results did not all reach signiﬁcance. within subjects manipulation of time pressure provides
H1b was supported, however; choices consistent DEMO an even stronger test of adaptivity, since subjects must
lexicographic processing DEMO in higher payoffs un- switch strategies from one trial to the next to be adap-
der time pressure but did not under no time DEMO, tive. A within-subjects design also controls for individ-
with the reverse DEMO true for choices consistent with ual differences in preferred processing patterns.
maximizing expected value. These results are im- We ran a version of Experiment DEMO with 42 subjects
portant, because they show that subjects who adapt DEMO where opportunity-cost time pressure, goal, and disper-
ways suggested by previous work and the simulation sion were all manipulated within subjects. In this DEMO
attain higher payoffs under time pressure. periment, the effects of time DEMO on processing
Goals emphasizing accuracy have the effects pre- were strongly signiﬁcant in the expected directions for
dicted in H2a, leading to more processing, less selectiv- all variables except VARALT. In addition, the im-
ity, and more alternative-based processing. Perhaps portant time pressure by goal interaction on DEMO
our most important result, however, is ﬁnding support was also signiﬁcant (p õ .002) and in the direction
for an interaction of DEMO and opportunity-cost time expected in H2b ($6.04 for accuracy, no time pressure;
pressure on payoffs, as hypothesized in H2b. A goal $5.98 for effort, no time pressure; $3.25 for accuracy,
emphasizing accuracy DEMO to higher performance time pressure; $3.56 for effort, time pressure). Ob-
than a goal emphasizing effort under no time pressure, taining this interaction both between and within sub-
but under opportunity-cost time pressure accuracy DEMO provides strong support for our notions about fail-
goals lead to lower performance than effort goals. This ures in adaptivity. Finally, the main effects of goal and
result shows that adaptivity can be compromised in dispersion DEMO as expected in H2a and H3a, but the
situations with multiple DEMO with conﬂicting impli- expected time pressure by dispersion interaction on
cations for adaptive processing. PAYOFF is again not signiﬁcant.
An alternative explanation of these DEMO is that Thus, the within subjects version of Experiment One
subjects DEMO asked to optimize some combination of bolsters conﬁdence in our results. We decided to also
(Means: low Å .058, high Å .085, DEMO(1,70) Å 40.3, p õ
.0001) and PTMI (Means: low Å .33, high Å .37, F(1,70)
Å 9.4, p õ .01), but there is no signiﬁcant effect on
VARALT (Means: low2.4). Finally, low dispersion led to higher values forÅ .019, high Å .022, F(1,70) Å
PATTERN (DEMO: low Å0.09, high Å0.29, F(1,70)
Å H3b DEMO that there would be an interaction be-29.9, p õ .0001). DEMO, H3a is generally supported.
tween dispersion and time pressure on PAYOFF, be-
cause the processing which is characteristic of low dis-
persion conﬂicts DEMO the processing which is adaptive
for time pressure. Unfortunately, the time DEMO by
dispersion interaction for PAYOFF was not signiﬁcant
(F(1,70) Å 1.05), and H3b is not supported.
Discussion
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 DEMO:17:26 obha AP: OBHDP
146
PAYNE, BETTMAN, AND LUCE
use a within subjects design for DEMO Two and to decisions (probability values ranged from .18 to .30)DEMO
examine another context variable, correlation between Also, decision sets contained either negative or positive
outcomes. It is important to replicate both the effects DEMO between outcomes for Experiment Two,
of opportunity-cost time pressure on processing and the rather than the zero correlation that was characteristic
important time DEMO by goal interaction on payoffs. of the stimuli for Experiment One.
It is also critical to generalize such results over differ- Thirty-two decision problems DEMO constructed from
ent context variables, such as correlation, that have 8 core stimuli, 4 with positive correlation between out-
been shown to affect processing and performance, espe- comes, and 4 with negative correlation. These DEMO stimuli
cially the time pressure by correlation interaction on were a subset of the stimuli used for Experiment One
payoffs proposed in H4b. in DEMO et al., 1993. For negatively correlated trials,
correlations between the DEMO for pairs of outcomes
EXPERIMENT TWO ranged from 0.78 to 0, DEMO an average value of 0.31.
For positively correlated trials, correlations ranged
DEMO .16 to .86, with an average value of .60. Each of
DEMO 8 decision sets was considered 4 times, once under
each of DEMO time pressure (none/severe) and goal (accu-
racy/effort) conditions. The rows and columns of the
dollar values comprising the decision sets DEMO per-
muted between differing conditions, in order to mask
this repetition.
DEMO The procedure was very similar to that
in Experiment One and again used the Mouselab sys-
tem. Practice trials including feedback were provided
to DEMO subjects to facilitate learning about the structure
of the decisions and the time pressure manipulation.
The 32 experimental stimuli were separated into two
blocks, with each member of an effort/accuracy goal
stimulus pair always presented DEMO differing blocks.
Which of the two blocks was presented ﬁrst was coun-
terbalanced across subjects, and stimuli were individu-
ally randomized for each subject within each block.
Time pressure and goal manipulations. The goal
manipulation was DEMO to that used in Experiment
One. The time pressure manipulation was imple-
mented by adapting the opportunity-cost time pressure
manipulation from Experiment One to DEMO within-sub-
jects environment. Thus, half of subjects’ decisions in-
volved no DEMO pressure, and the other half involved
opportunity-cost time pressure. For the DEMO pressure
trials, a clock appeared on the computer screen and
Method DEMO down for 30 s (trials with no time pressure
were immediately DEMO, because there was no
clock on the screen). In order DEMO ensure that subjects
understood the time pressure environments, they ini-
tially DEMO and received feedback concerning four
practice problems, two with time pressure DEMO two
without. Subjects took 30 s or longer only 11 times of
1216 time pressure trials.
We manipulated opportunity-cost time pressure
(none or severe), goal (effort or accuracy), and correla-
tion between outcomes (DEMO or negative) in a com-
plete within subjects design. Correlation can DEMO a
major impact on the relative accuracy of choice heuris-
tics, DEMO people are adaptive to changes in correlation
structures (Bettman et al., 1993). Hence, we hypothe-
size that people will adjust their processing in response
to correlation, as proposed in H4a. More importantly,
we expect that adapting to negative correlation by pro-
cessing more, being less selective, and processing more
by alternative will lead to decreased adaptivity to op-
portunity-cost time pressure. In particular, we expect
performance to be relatively poorer under negative cor-
relation when time pressure is present (H4b) DEMO that
increased adaptivity to correlation will lead to higher
performance under no time pressure but lower perfor-
mance under time pressure (H4c). The latter prediction
can be tested in Experiment Two because of special
features DEMO the stimuli, explained in detail below.
Finally, Experiment Two seeks to replicate the ef-
fects of time pressure and goal on processing (H1a and
H2a) and the crucial interaction of opportunity-cost
time pressure and goal on decision performance (H2b).
We again expect an accuracy goal to lead to poorer
performance under time pressure but better perfor-
mance without DEMO pressure.
Subjects. Seventy-six undergraduate students par-
ticipated in this experiment in order to fulﬁll a course
requirement. Subjects were entered into a $50.00 lot-
DEMO in addition to receiving course credit, although
they were unaware of DEMO lottery when they volun-
teered for the study. Subjects were run individually,
and sessions took roughly 45 min to complete.
Stimuli and manipulation DEMO interattribute correla- Manipulation checks. Subjects were asked to make
tion. Stimuli were identical in structure to those used eight decisions at the end of DEMO experimental task, one
for Experiment One. However, for Experiment Two, DEMO each of the time pressure by goal by correlation
the dispersion in attribute probabilities was low for all cells (the order was randomized for each individual
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 10:17:26 obha AP: OBHDP
DECISIONS UNDER OPPORTUNITY-COST TIME PRESSURE
147
subject). After each of these DEMO, subjects were across alternatives (VARALT: Means: none Å 0.021,
asked to assess (on seven-point scales) how hurriedthey had felt during DEMO previous decision (HURRIED), cused more on dollar values pertaining to DEMO mostsevere Å 0.021, F(1,2276) Å 0.1, ns). DEMO also fo-
how stressful they had found the previous decision to
probable outcome under time pressure (PTMI: Means:
be (STRESSFUL), and the degree to which they noticed none Å 0.46, severe Å 0.49, F(1,2276) Å 9.0, p õ .003).
positive or negative interattribute correlation in the Finally, subjects tended to process more by attribute
relevant decision problem (CORREL: ‘‘Please indicate under time pressure, as indicated by the main effect of
the degree to which you feel DEMO a gamble with a high time pressure on PATTERN (Means: none Å 0.10, se-
(low) value on one outcome would tend to have low vere Å 0.03, F(1,2261) Å 14.9, p õ .0001).
(high) values on the other three outcomes.’’ Higher DEMO
sponses to this question indicate an assessment of rela-
tively more negative interattribute correlation). Sub-
jects under opportunity cost time pressure felt more
DEMO (Means: none Å 4.06, severe Å 4.71, F(1,600)
Å 28.0, p õ .0001) and more stressed (Means: DEMO Å
3.11, severetion, subjects correctly associated higher values ofÅ 3.40, DEMO(1,600) Å 5.4, p õ .02). In addi-
CORREL with stimuli with negative interattribute cor-
relation (Means: negative Å 4.19, positive Å 3.93,
F(1,600) Å 6.1, p õ DEMO).
Results
Multivariate analysis. A m ultiva riat e a na lysis of
va rian ce in cludin g P AYOF F, ACQ, DEMO , TPE R-
ACQ, VARATT, VARALT, PTMI, a nd PATTERN in-
dica t ed sign iﬁcan t m ain effects for t DEMO e pressur e
(F(8,2254) Å 548.6, p õ DEMO), goa l (F(8,2254) Å
44.8, p õ DEMO), a nd corr elat ion (F(8,2254) Å 211.3,
p õ .0001). Sim ilar ly, t he two-wa y int er action s be-
tween t im e pressur e a DEMO goal (F(8,2254) Å 6.7, p õ
.0001), DEMO im e pressur e a nd corr elat ion (F(8,DEMO) Å
4.5, p õp .0001), a nd goal an d cor rela tion (F(8,2254)
Åth ree way in tera ct ion bet ween time pr essu re, goa l,7.8, DEMO .0001) were all signiﬁca n t . F in a lly, t h e
an d cor rela tion wa s n ot DEMO iﬁca n t (F(8,2254) Å 1.26,
ns). Th e m ea ns for t he dependen t m ea DEMO res by t im e
pr essu re, goa l, an d cor rela tion ar e present ed in Ta -
ble DEMO The un ivar ia te test s for th e var ious pr ocess
an d out come measur es ar e given below.
DEMO of goal. H2a was again supported. Subjects
expended more effort under an accuracy goal, as evi-
denced by signiﬁcantly higher means for ACQ (DEMO:
accuracy Å 22.4, effort Å 17.2, F(1,2341) DEMO 167.2, p õ
.0001), TIME (Means: accuracy Å 15.6, effort Å 12.1,
F(1,2341,) Å 168.6, p õ .0001), and TPERACQ (Means:
accuracy.0001). Å 0.40, effort DEMO 0.38, F(1,2282) Å 94.5, p õ
When given DEMO accuracy goal, subjects shifted pro-
cessing strategies: they were less selective over both
attributes (VARATT: Means: accuracy Å 0.039, effort
Å DEMO, F(1,2276) Å 207.4, p õ .0001) and alternatives
(VARALT: Means: accuracy Å 0.018, effort Å 0.024,
of DEMO processing information related to the most prob-F(1,2276) Å 31.6, p õ .0001); spent a lower proportion
able outcome (PTMI: DEMO: accuracy Å 0.44, effort Å
0.52,alternative-based processing (PATTERN: Means: accu-F(1,2276) Å 104.1, p õ .0001); and shifted to more
racyunder an accuracy goal.Å 0.13, effort Å 0.01, F(DEMO,2261) Å 52.2, p õ .0001)
Time pressu re by goal in teractions. Ou r critica l
hypoth esis rega rdin g DEMO a ccur acy (H2b) wa s
th at accu ra cy goals wer e expected t o be a ssocia ted
with high DEMO perfor ma nce in t he absence of t im e pres-
su re, but with lower per form an ce un der t im e pres-
su re.
Th e expected t im e pressur DEMO by goa l int er action
wa s fou nd for P AYOF F (F(1,2341) Å 41.1, p õ .0001).
Su bjects actu ally received lower payoffs with an ac-
cu ra DEMO goal in time-pressur ed en vironm en ts (a ccu-
Main DEMO of time pressure. Overall, the effects ra cy Å $3.42, effort Å $3.86), a nd th is resu lt wa s
of DEMO time pressure on processing were r ever sed u n der n o t im e pr essu r e (a ccu r a cySubjects under time pressure processed less exten- ceived u n der t DEMO e a ccu r a cy goa l in t h e t im e-pr essu r edsigniﬁcant and in the directions hypothesized by DEMO effort Å $6.05). N ot e t ha t t he expect ed pa yoff re-Å $6.16,
sively. Time pressure was associated DEMO lower values
condit ion was $.44 less th an th e expected payoff r e-
for ACQ (Means: none Å 22.2, severe Å 17.4, F(1,2341) ceived u n der t h e DEMO t goa l, a n d ch oices in t h DEMO a ccu -
Å 143.1, p õ .0001), TIME (Means: none Å 15.5, severe ra cy, t im e-pr essu red con dition took two a nd a h alf
Å 12.1, F(1,2341) Å 159.4, p õ .0001), and TPERACQ secon DEMO lon ger t h a n t h e ch oices in t h e effor t , t im e-
(Means: none DEMO 0.40, severe Å 0.38, F(1,2282) Å 53.3, pr essu red con dition . Once a ga in , t he DEMO pr essu re
p õ .0001). by goa l in t er a ct ion for E VMAX wa s n ot sign DEMO n t (x2
Under time pressure, subjects were more selective (DEMO, n Å 2424) Å .00, ns), in dica ting DEMO at th ese r esults
across attributes (VARATT: Means: none DEMO 0.046, se- wer e n ot du e t o su DEMO s ch oosin g ga m bles wit h r ela -
vere Å 0.054, F(1,2276) Å 26.8, p õ .0001), but not tively lower u ndiscoun ted expected values m or DEMO fre-
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 10:17:26 obha AP: OBHDP
148 PAYNE, BETTMAN, AND LUCE
TABLE 3
Process and Performance Measures DEMO a Function of Opportunity-Cost Time Pressure,
Goal, and Correlation: Experiment 2
No time pressure Severe time pressure
Accuracy Effort Accuracy Effort
Dependent DEMO Positive Negative Positive Negative Positive Negative Positive
measure correlation correlation correlation correlation correlation correlation correlation correlation
ACQ 29.2 21.5 21.4 16.5 21.2 17.5 16.8 DEMO
TIME 20.1 15.3 14.9 11.7 14.5 12.3 11.6 10.1
TPERACQ .41 .42 .39 .37 .38 .40 .38 .36
VARATT .032 .036 .058 .059 .043 DEMO .067 .063
VARALT .016 .019 .019 .031 .018 .020 .021 .027
PTMI .40 .44 .50 .51 .44 .46 .52 .52
PATTERN .18 .15 .03 DEMO .08 .10 0.01 0.04
RELPAY .97 .95 .96 .92 .50 .55 .59 .61
PAYOFF 5.16 7.16 5.16 6.94 2.68 4.16 3.15 4.58
EVMAX .41 DEMO .40 .73 .47 .76 .40 .72
LEXMAX .55 .76 .62 .75 .57 .74 .56 .72
Note. ACQ, number of acquisitions; TIME, time taken; TPERACQ, time per acquisition; VARATT, variance in the proportion of DEMO
spent on each attribute; VARALT, variance in the proportion of time spent on each alternative; PTMI, proportion of time spent on the DEMO
important attribute; PATTERN, index reﬂecting relative amount of attribute-based (0) and alternative-based (/) processing; RELPAY,
expected amount won divided by the maximum amount which could be won; PAYOFF, expected amount won; EVMAX, proportion of highest
expected value choices; LEXMAX, proportion of choices highest on the most probable outcome.
qu en t ly u n DEMO t im e pr essu r e. Th u s, ou DEMO im por t a n t probable outcome (PTMI: Means: DEMO Å 0.47, posi-
in tera ct ion predict ion docum en DEMO limits to adap- tive Å 0.48, F(1,2276) Å 6.3, p õ .02). However, there
t ivit y is r DEMO t ed in a ll t h r ee of ou r st u dies. was no effect on VARATT (Means: negative Å DEMO,
by goal interactions for processing variables, namely Finally, in contrast to the results reported in Bett-As expected, there were few signiﬁcant time pressure positive Å .051, F(1,2276) Å 1.3).
for DEMO (F(1,2341) Å 11.2, p õ .001) and TIME man et al. (1993), subjects did not shift to more alterna-
(respond similarly to different goals regardless of theF(1,2341) Å DEMO, p õ .001). Thus, once again, subjects tive-based processing DEMO faced with negative corre-lations between outcomes (PATTERN: Means: negative
level DEMO time pressure. Å 0.07, positive Å 0.06, F(1,2261) DEMO .67, ns). Thus, H4a
is generally supported, with the DEMO of the results
Effects involving correlation. As stated in H4a, we DEMO VARATT and PATTERN.
expect that negative correlation between outcomes will
be associated with more processing, less selectivity, Time pressure by correlation interactions. One DEMO
and more alternative-based processing, reﬂecting that jor reason for including correlation DEMO the experimental
strategies like WADD are needed to achieve higher ac- design was that we hypothesized a two-way interaction
curacy levels with negative correlation. DEMO opportunity-cost time pressure and correla-
Subjects expended more effort when the correlations tion on PAYOFF. In particular, as stated in H4b, we
were DEMO, with signiﬁcantly higher means for ACQ expect that performance will be DEMO more poor
(Means: negative Å 22.2, positive Å 17.4, F(1,2341) Å under negative correlation when opportunity-cost time
141.8, p DEMO .0001), TIME (Means: negative Å 15.3, positive pressure is DEMO As expected, this interaction was
Å 12.4, F(1,2341) DEMO 118.0, p õ .0001), and a marginally signiﬁcant (F(1,2341) Å 25.5, p õ .0001). Under no time
signiﬁcant DEMO for TPERACQ (Means: negative Å 0.392, pressure, payoffs were $7.05 for positive and $5.16 for
positiveWith negative correlations between outcomes, sub-Å 0.388, F(1,2282) Å 2.8, p õ .10). negative correlation; under opportunity-cost time pres-sure, the payoffs were $4.37 for positive and DEMO for
jects were less selective over alternatives (VARALT: negative correlation. As hypothesized, performance for
Means: negative Å 0.018, positive Å 0.024, DEMO(1,2276) negative correlation is relatively poorer under time
tion of DEMO processing information related to the mostÅ 26.0, p õ .0001) and spent a relatively lower propor- pressure: the payoff for negative correlation is 73% ofthat of positive correlation ($5.16/$7.05) under no time
/ DEMO 04-18-96 10:17:26 obha AP: OBHDP
DECISIONS UNDER OPPORTUNITY-COST TIME PRESSURE
149
pressure, but only 67% of that for positive correlation opportunity-cost time pressure (and thus lead to a posi-
($2.92/$4.37) with opportunity-cost time pressure. tive correlation between the index DEMO performance),
Thus, H4b is supported. because of the loss in value expected if a decision maker
Adaptivity to correlation, performance, and DEMO pres- responds to negative correlation gamble sets by in-
sure. Bettman et al. (1993) examined the degree to creasing his or her acquisition DEMO information and time
which an individual’s adaptivity to correlation was re- to make the decision, lowering selectivity, and increas-
lated to performance by DEMO at the responses to ing processing by alternative.
eight pairs of gamble sets in which the two sets in a As noted under Method DEMO Experiment Two, the
pair had the same probabilities, although correlation stimuli used in the current experiment were a subset
levels differed across the DEMO gamble sets.12 In particu- (4 sets of 8) of the stimuli used in Bettman et al. (1993).
lar, the differences between DEMO positive correlation Using the same method for relating processing differ-
gamble set and the paired negative correlation gamble ences (positive-negative) and performance described
DEMO were computed for ﬁve processing variables (ACQ, above, we found DEMO the correlation between the com-
TIME, VARATT, VARALT, and PATTERN)DEMO These dif- posite measure of processing differences and average
ferences indicated the extent to which each subject PAYOFF was in the right direction for DEMO no time
adapted to the level of correlation. For each pair of pressure trials but was not quite signiﬁcant (r Å0.07, p
gamble DEMO, Bettman et al. also calculated a measure õadaptivity leads to better DEMO). Thus, there.12; recall that the negative sign implies that greater
of performance, i.e., accuracy of choices. They then was an indication DEMO those subjects who adapted
tested the extent to which the degree of adaptivity in more to different correlation levels performed better
processing was related DEMO performance by pooling the when there was no opportunity-cost time pressure. In
data for the eight gamble set pairs per subject over all contrast, the correlation between the composite mea-
subjects and correlating a composite index DEMO from sure of processing differences and average performance
the processing difference scores with the average per- was signiﬁcant and in the opposite direction when DEMO
formance scores. The index was formed by standardiz- als involving opportunity-cost time pressure were ex-
ing the differences for each processing variable and amined (r Å .16, p õ .001). That is, those subjects DEMO
reversing the signs for VARATT and VARALT (because adapted less to DEMO correlation levels performed
more adaptivity in response to negative correlation better on decision problems that also involved opportu-
would normally be associated with higher DEMO for nity-cost time pressure. These results support H4c.
ACQ, TIME, and PATTERN, but lower values of VAR-
ATT and VARALT). Those subjects who adapted more
to different correlation levels were better performers: Discussion
the correlation between the composite score of pro-
cessing differences and performance in DEMO et al.
(1993) was signiﬁcant and in the expected direction (DEMO
Å0.15, p õ .01; the sign of the correlation is negative
Experiment Two replicated a major result of Experi-
ment One, a time pressure by goal interaction for pay-
offs. Once again, an accuracy goal increased payoffs in
the absence of time pressure but decreased payoffs un-
DEMO opportunity cost time pressure. In addition, and
importantly, we found similar evidence for limits to
adaptivity involving correlation and time pressure.
Both a DEMO time pressure by correlation interac-
tion and a more detailed analysis of adaptivity and
performance showed that adapting to correlation in
ways that are DEMO without time pressure can be
harmful to performance when opportunity-cost time
pressure is present. These ﬁndings provide strong sup-
port for our contention that DEMO may suffer when
decisions must be made in environments with multiple
aspects which conﬂict in their implications for adaptive
processing.
because more negative differences DEMO positive
and negative correlation should correspond to higher
average performance levels (DEMO, greater negative dif-
ferences for ACQ for positive-negative correlation con-
ditions DEMO be expected to correspond to higher aver-
age performance)).
As DEMO in H4c, in Experiment Two of the present
paper we expect DEMO similar correlation pattern between
processing differences and performance for the trials
with no time pressure (i.e., a negative correlation, indi-
cating that performance increases with greater adap-
tivity). However, based on the simulation results pre-
sented earlier, we expect that greater adaptivity to lev-
els of correlation will hurt performance under
GENERAL DISCUSSION
12 In the current paper, we only had such matched sets in Experi-
ment Two. Therefore, the adaptivity analysis reported below could
not be carried out for Experiment One.
DEMO generally adapted well to individual proper-
ties of the choice task in our experiments. When faced
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 10:17:26 obha AP: OBHDP
150
PAYNE, BETTMAN, AND LUCE
with opportunity-cost time pressure, subjects generally strategies. The inability to execute a strategy might be
adapted by processing DEMO information, being more se- due to memory and computational difﬁculties caused
DEMO in their processing, and processing more by at- by the complexity DEMO the task and/or by various environ-
tribute, replicating previous ﬁndings (Payne et al., mental stressors (see Siegler, 1989, for a DEMO discus-
1988). Subjects also adapted to changes in goals by sion).
exhibiting more effort, less selectivity, and more alter- The present DEMO may be interpreted in terms of
native-based processing under an accuracy goal. Fi- several of these potential sources of failure in adaptiv-
nally, the main effects of the context variables, disper- ity. It is likely that subjects’ a priori estimates of the
sion in probabilities and correlation between DEMO, impact of opportunity-cost time pressure on expected
were also consistent with DEMO from the perspec- payoffs were vague, and although subjects carried out
DEMO of a decision maker concerned with both accuracy several practice trials and did adapt their processing
and effort. Taken together, the present results clearly to opportunity-cost time pressure, their knowledge of
add to the evidence that people are intelligent, if not the impact of opportunity-cost time pressure on payoffs
optimal, processors of information when they only have may have been inadequate. Subjects may have focused
to take one property of the choice DEMO into account. on responding to goals or correlation and inadequately
However, DEMO present results also suggest condi- compensated for time pressure. Generally, individuals
DEMO involving interactions between variables where may have problems in adaptation when the implica-
people may fail to adapt. In particular, in both of tions of adapting to individual aspects of the choice
the present experiments we DEMO that the goal of environment conﬂict (e.g., adapting to an accuracy goal
maximizing accuracy can interfere with the need to or to negative DEMO conﬂicts with what is re-
adapt to opportunity-cost time pressure. We showed quired for adapting to time pressure).
that an accuracy goal leads DEMO better performance A second, related explanation for the failure in
when DEMO is no time pressure, but an effort goal adaptivity is that DEMO responsiveness to the goals
is associated with higher payoffs under opportunity- of accuracy and effort was ‘‘disproportionate’’ (Klein-
cost time pressure. We also found in Experiment Two muntz & Schkade, 1993). The instructions to empha-
that those subjects who responded more to the corre- size accuracy or DEMO were given before each decision
lations between outcome values did better in the no problem, which may have increased the subjective
time pressure condition, while those subjects who re- weight given to the goal manipulation.
sponded less to the correlations did better under op- A third possibility is DEMO the time stress generated
portunity-cost time pressure. Thus, our ﬁnding that DEMO the need to pay attention to the clock in the opportu-
people may have trouble adapting to multiple, con- nity-cost conditions may have interferred with the abil-
ﬂicting properties of the decision situation was repli- ities DEMO the subjects to execute their chosen strategies
cated both across different experiments and across (see Eysenck, 1984, for the related idea that anxiety
different combinations of task and context factors. reduces short-term storage capacity and DEMO
Note that any discussion of failures or successes in control). However, our main effect results show that
adaptivity depends on acceptance of some standard for our subjects shifted their processing patterns in pre-
what is DEMO by better versus poorer performance on dicted directions as a function of goals, correlational
the task. In addition, this standard must be shared DEMO structures, and opportunity-cost time pressure, sug-
both the subjects and the researchers. For a general gesting that a simple explanation based upon a DEMO
discussion of alternative views of achievement on judg- degradation of performance is not adequate.
ment tasks, see Hammond (1990). Finally, as noted above, subjects may have tried to
optimize on a criterion considering effort as well as
Failures of Adaptivity payoffs. However, the fact that subjects under time
pressure and accuracy goals received lower payoffs and
Two major DEMO of factors associated with potential also took more time does not seem consistent with this
failures in adaptivity exist. First, being adaptive re- possibility. Whatever the exact reason for the failure
quires various types of knowledge. DEMO in knowl- in adaptivity exhibited by our subjects, it is clear DEMO
edge can include difﬁculties in assessing the task and both accuracy goals and negative correlation interacted
context factors characterizing the decision environ- with opportunity-cost DEMO pressure to lower subjects’
ment, lack of knowledge of appropriate strategies, not payoffs.
being able to veridically assess the effort and/or the
DEMO of a strategy in a particular situation, and Motivated Decisions
not DEMO one’s desired accuracy – effort tradeoffs. In a recent article, Pelham DEMO Neter (1995, p. 581)
Second, being adaptive requires the DEMO to execute ask ‘‘What are the judgmental consequences of being a
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 10:17:26 obha AP: OBHDP
DECISIONS UNDER OPPORTUNITY-COST TIME PRESSURE
151
highly motivated decision maker?’’ In DEMO series of experi-
ments, they ﬁnd that higher levels of motivation DEMO
tate judgmental accuracy when the judgments to be
made are relatively easy but debilitate judgmental ac-
curacy when the tasks are relatively difﬁcult. To DEMO
extent that dealing with decisions under opportunity-
cost time pressure is more difﬁcult, our results are sim-
ilar to those of Pelham and Neter. Using a choice task,
as opposed to the judgment tasks studied DEMO Pelham
and Neter, we ﬁnd that an accuracy goal led to DEMO
creased performance in environments that did not in-
volve opportunity-cost time pressure and lowered per-
formance in environments that did involve opportu-
nity-cost time DEMO Thus, decision makers who are
more motivated to be accurate can DEMO make
decisions in ways that are not adaptive for the tasks
or environments they face.
Implications for Practice
The present results, along with prior results of ours
and others, have implications for making decisions in
high-velocity environments. Dumaine (1989) argues
that companies often mistakenly try to compete DEMO
speed simply by doing what they already do, only
faster. However, our results imply that strategy
changes are needed under opportunity-cost time pres-
DEMO In particular, when deciding in high-velocity envi-
ronments, the decision maker should focus on breadth
of evaluation rather than on depth of evaluation. DEMO
is, the decision maker should ﬁrst identify or generate
multiple options DEMO evaluate; then he or she should
focus on breadth of evaluation (i.e., considering all the
multiple options on important attributes). Evaluation
processes which focus on single alternatives, although
they can generate greater insights into the relative
beneﬁts and costs of each option, are likely to succeed
only when the environment is not highly time-pres-
sured (see Ward, DEMO, Cristiano, & Sobek, 1995, for
the related point that Toyota is able to ‘‘make better
cars faster’’ by thinking about sets of DEMO alterna-
tives, rather than pursuing one alternative at a time
in DEMO interative fashion). More research that directly
examines how alternative prescriptions for decision
making fare in high- and low-velocity environments is
needed.
REFERENCES
Beach, L. R., & Mitchell, T. R. (1978). A contingency model for the
selection of decision strategies. Academy of Management Review,
3, 439 – 449.
Ben Zur, H., & Breznitz, S. J. (DEMO). The effects of time pressure
on risky choice behavior. Acta Psychologica, 47, 89 – 104.
Bettman, J. R., Johnson, E. J., Luce, M. F., & Payne, J. W. (1993).
Correlation, conﬂict, and choice. Journal of Experimetnal Psychol-
ogy: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, 931 – 951.
Bettman, J. R., Johnson, E. J., & Payne, J. W. (1990). A componential
analysis of cognitive effort in choice. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 45, 111 – 139.
Bockenholt, U., Albert, D., Aschenbrenner, M., & Schmalhofer, F.
(1991). The effects of attractiveness, dominance, DEMO attribute dif-
ferences on information acquisition in multi-attribute binary
choice. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
49, 258 – 281.
Creyer, E. DEMO, Bettman, J. R., & Payne, J. W. (1990). DEMO impact of
accuracy and effort feedback and goals on adaptive decision behav-
ior. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 3, 1 – 16.
Dumaine, B. (1989). How managers can succeed through speed. For-
tune, DEMO 13, 54 – 59.
Einhorn, H. J., & Hogarth, R. M. (1981). Behavioral decision theory:
Processes of judgment and choice. Annual Review of Psychology,
32, 53 – 88.
Eisenhardt, K. DEMO (1989). Making fast strategic decisions in high
velocity environments. Academy DEMO Management Journal, 32, 543 –
575.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1993). High reliability organizations meet high
velocity environments: Common dilemmas in nuclear power
plants. In K. H. Roberts (Ed.), New challenges to understanding
organizations (pp. 117 – 135). New York: Macmillan Co.
Eysenck, M. W. (1984). A handbook of cognitive psychology. London:
Erlbaum.
Frisch, D., & Clemen, R. T. (1994). Beyond expected DEMO: Rethink-
ing behavioral decision research. Psychological Bulletin, 116, 46 –
DEMO
Green, P. E., & Krieger, A. M. (1986). The minimal rank correlation,
subject to order restrictions, with application to the weighted lin-
ear choice model. Journal of Classiﬁcation, 3, 67 – DEMO
Hammond, K. R. (1990). Functionalism and illusionism: Can integra-
DEMO be usefully achieved? In R. M. Hogarth (Ed.), Insights in deci-
sion making: A tribute to Hillel J. Einhorn (pp. 227 DEMO 261). Chicago:
Univ. of Chicago Press.
Johnson, E. J., & Payne, J. W. (1985). Effort and accuracy in choice.
DEMO Science, 31, 395 – 414.
Judge, W. Q., & Miller, A. (1991). Antecedents and outcomes of deci-
sion speed in DEMO environmental contexts. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 34, 449 – 463.
Keeney, R. L., & Raiffa, H. (1976). Decisions with DEMO objectives:
Preferences and value tradeoffs. New York: Wiley.
Keinan, G. (1987). Decision making under stress: Scanning of alter-
natives under DEMO and uncontrollable threats. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 639 – 644.
Kerstholt, J. H. (1994). The effect of time DEMO on decision mak-
ing in a dynamic task environment. Acta Psychologica, DEMO, 89 –
104.
Kleinmuntz, D. N., & Schkade, D. A. (1993). Information displays
and decision processes. Psychological Science, 4, 221 – 227.
Ono, Y. (1995). Tampon war: Claims of comfort vie with appeals to
conscience. Wall Street Journal, January 12, B1 DEMO B8.
Payne, J. W. (1976). Task complexity and contingent processing in
decision making: An information search and protocol analysis. Or-
ganization Behavior and Human Performance, 16, 366 – 387.
Payne, J. W., DEMO, J. R., & Johnson, E. L. (1988). Adaptive
strategy selection in decision making. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 534 – 552.
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 10:17:26 DEMO AP: OBHDP
152
PAYNE, BETTMAN, AND LUCE
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. L. (1993). The adaptive
decision maker. Cambridge, England: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Pelham, B. W., & Neter, E. (1995). The effect of motivation on judg-
ment depends on the difﬁculty of the judgment. Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 68, 581 – 594.
Siegler, R. S. (1989). Mechanisms of cognitive development. Annual
Review of Psychology, 40, 353 – 380.
Stone, D. N., & Schkade, D. A. (1994). Effects of attribute scales on
process and performance in multiattribute choice. Organizational
Behavior and Human DEMO Processes, 59, 261 – 287.
Svenson, O. (1979). Process descriptions of decision making. Organi-
zational Behavior and Human Performance, 23, DEMO – 112.
Svenson, O., Edland, A., & Slovic, P. (1990). Choices between incom-
Received June 14, 1995
pletely described alternatives under time stress. Acta Psycholog-
ica, 75, 153 – 169.
Svenson, O., & Maule, A. J. (Eds.) (1993). Time pressure and stress
in human judgment and decision making. New York: Plenum.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1988). Rational choice and the DEMO
of decisions. In D. E. Bell, H. Raiffa, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Decision
making: Descriptive, normative, and prescriptive interactions (pp.
167 – 192). Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Wallsten, T. S. (1993). Time pressure and payoff effects on multidi-
mensional probabilistic inference. DEMO O. Svenson & A. J . Maule
(Eds.), Time pressure DEMO stress in human judgment and decision
making (pp. 167 – 179)DEMO New York: Plenum.
Ward, A., Liker, J. K., Cristiano, J. J., & Sobek, D. K. (1995). The
second Toyota paradox: How delaying decisions can make better
cars faster. Sloan Management Review, 36, 43 – 61.
/ a703$$2617 04-18-96 10:17:26 obha DEMO: OBHDP{1g42fwefx}