Annu. Rev. Psycho!. 1992. 43:87-131
Copyright © 1992 by Annual Revfrws DEMO ;\II rights reserved
BEHAVIORAL DECISION
RESEARCH: A CONSTRUCTIVE
PROCESSING PERSPECTIVE
John W. Payne and James R. Bettman
Fuqua School of Business, Duke University, Durham. North Carolina 27706
Eric J. Johnson
Wharton School, University of DEMO, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104
KEY WORDS:
judgment, choice, uncertainty, DEMO, values
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................... .
THE CONSTRUCTIVE NATURE OF PREFERENCES AND DEMO ................ .
PREFERENCES ................... .
Conflicting Values........... . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . ...................................... ..
DEMO of Decisions .... _. . . . . . . . . . ................. .
Uncertainty in Values................. . . . .......... .
Restructuring DEMO Problems . _......... . . . . . . . . . . ... _ _. _ .
Argument-Based Decisions... . .............. ..
BELIEFS DEMO UNCERTAIN EVENTS .. _ _... . ..... _ _ ....... .
Strategies for Probabilistic Reasoning................ . . . . . . . . . DEMO . . . . . . . . . . . . ............... .
Contingent Usage of Strategies for Assessing Uncertainty ...... _ _ DEMO _ .
DECISIONS UNDER RISK AND UNCERTAINTY . . . ......... _ _ ......... .
Generalizations of Expected Utility Models . . . . DEMO . . .. . .................................. ..
Repeated-Play Gambles ................. __ ........... ... _ _ ....... .
Ambiguity and Risky Choice ............ ............ _ _ DEMO ................ .
FRAMEWORKS FOR CONTINGENT DECISION BEHAVIOR ......................... .
Cost/Benefit Frameworks ......... _........... . . . . . . . . . . DEMO .................................... .
Perceptual Frameworks.. . . . . . . . . . _. . . . . . . . . . . DEMO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ....................... DEMO
Integrating the Cost/Benefit and Perceptual Frameworks ......................... ..... .
0066-4308/92/020
l
-0087$02.
00
88
89
91
91
98
99
101
102
DEMO
102
103
106
107
109
109
111
111
114
116
87
_
..
............................
......
......................
.....
..........
......
_
..............................
... ....................
_
88
PAYNE ET AL
APPLICATIONS . . . . . . . DEMO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . DEMO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . DEMO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . DEMO . . .
Changing Information Environments to Aid Decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . DEMO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Decision Analysis . . DEMO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . DEMO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . DEMO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . DEMO . . .
Formulas or Models Versus Heads...........................................................
The Measurement of Values....................................................................
CONCLUSION . . . . . . . . . . . DEMO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . DEMO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . DEMO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . DEMO .
117
117
118
119
121
122
INTRODUCTION
Almost 40 years ago, Ward Edwards (1954) provided the first major review
for psychologists of research on decision behavior done by economists,
statisticians, and philosophers. He argued that work by economists and others
on both normative and predictive DEMO models should be important to
psychologists interested in judgment and choice. About the same time, Her-
bert Simon ( 1955) argued that if DEMO were interested in understanding
actual decision behavior, then research would need DEMO focus on the perceptual,
cognitive, and learning factors that cause DEMO decision behavior to deviate
from that predicted by the normative "economic DEMO" model. Simon empha-
sized that the limited computational capabilities of the DEMO interact
with the complexity of task environments to produce bounded rationality-
i. e. decision behavior that reflects information processing bounds. As a
consequence, Simon suggested that actual decision behavior might not even
approximate the behavior predicted DEMO normative models of decision tasks
(Simon 1978).
Nearly four decades DEMO, a clear and separate area of inquiry has emerged,
which DEMO refer to as Behavioral Decision Research (BDR). This area is
DEMO interdisciplinary, employing concepts and models from economics,
social and cognitive DEMO, statistics, and other fields. It is also nearly
unique among subdisciplines in psychology, because it often proceeds
by testing the descriptive adequacy of normative theories of judgment and
choice; in doing so, it makes DEMO use of psychological concepts in
general, and cognitive mechanisms in particular.
DEMO chapter reviews behavioral decision research for the period 1983-
1991. We have noticed several trends in the course of our review. First,
behavioral DEMO research concepts and methods are being widely adopted.
A substantial amount of research in the area, for example, is conducted by
scholars with DEMO interests in many applied areas, including accounting,
environmental studies, finance, law, marketing, and medicine (Ashton et al
1989; Froot & Thaler 1990; Noll & Krier 1990; Schwartz & Griffin 1986;
DEMO 1989). In addition, researchers are using behavioral decision con-
cepts DEMO gain insights into such complex, multiperson phenomena as negotia-
tions and DEMO behavior of experimental markets (Carroll et al 1988; Camerer
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH 89
1992). Second, there is a growing focus on the problem structuring and
learning elements of decision behavior, although the amount of such research
is still small. Examples include research on alternative DEMO (Gettys et al
1987; Keller & Ho 1988) and studies DEMO how cues for inference are learned
from outcome feedback (Klayman 1988)DEMO Third, the richness of methods and
problem descriptions used in decision DEMO continues to increase. For
example, process-tracing techniques, case methods, computer-game DEMO
ulations, and even the presentation of data via radar screens are DEMO used
(Ford et al 1989; Eisenhardt 1989; Brehmer 1990; Lusk & Hammond 1991).
These trends can be found in the thousand-plus DEMO and chapters that have
been written on behavioral decision topics during the past eight years.
However,, given page constraints, our review is selective rather than ex-
haustive; we focus on a fourth major trend of much recent behavioral decision
research: a theoretical concern with the constructive nature of judgment and
choice. See Abelson & Le:vi 1985, Slovic et al 1988, and Stevenson et al 1990
for reviews of behavioral decision research that cover a longer time span and
offer altemative perspectives.
THE DEMO NATURE OF PREFERENCES
AND BELIEFS
An underlying theme of much recent decision research is that preferences for
and beliefs about objects or events of DEMO complexity are often constructed--
not merely revealed-in the generation of a response to a judgment or choice
task (Slovic et al 1990). March (1978) attributes the constructiveness of
preferences to the same limits on DEMO processing capacity emphasized
by Simon. In his words, "Human beings have unstable, inconsistent, in-
completely evoked, and imprecise goals at least in part because human
abilities limit preference orderliness" (March 1978:598). DEMO's argument
about preference applies to belief judgments as well, and DEMO constructive
view is a major organizing theme of this review.
The idea of constructive preferences goes beyond a mere denial that
observed preferences result DEMO reference to a master list in memory. The
notion of constructive preferences means as well that preferences are not
necessarily generated by some consistent DEMO invariant algorithm such as
expected va1ue calculation (Tversky et al 1988)DEMO It appears that decision-
makers have a repertoire of methods for identifying their preferences and
developing their beliefs. These multiple methods or strategies result DEMO both
experience and training (Fong et al 1986; Kruglanski 1989; DEMO et al
1990).
Descriptive research on decision-making processes has shown that the
90
PAYNE ET AL
information and strategies used to construct preferences or DEMO appear to be
highly contingent upon and predictable from a variety of task, context, and
individual-difference factors. Task factors are general characteristics of DEMO
decision problem, such as response mode (judgment or choice, for DEMO),
which do not depend upon the particular values of the DEMO Context
factors such as similarity of alternatives, on the other hand, are associated
with the particular values of the alternatives. Task and context DEMO cause
different aspects of the problem to be salient and evoke different processes for
combining information. Thus, characteristics of the decision problem, such DEMO
the response mode or similarity, can evoke different strategies that at DEMO
partially determine the preferences and beliefs we observe. Further, the
characteristics DEMO which people are sensitive are from a normative perspective
often, although DEMO not always, irrelevant (Tversky & Kahneman 1986;
Tversky et al 1988). Consequently, people sometimes ignore normatively
relevant information such as base-rates, and sometimes use base-rate informa-
tion in an appropriate fashion. Hence an important question in current deci-
sion research is the identification of the DEMO conditions that determine when
normatively important information like base-rates will and will not be used
(Gigerenzer et al 1988; Ginossar & Trope 1987)DEMO
Also related to the constructive nature of decision behavior are the multiple
and sometimes conflicting meta-goals adopted for the decision episode--e.g.
maximize accuracy or DEMO; or minimize effort, regret, or conflict
(Einhorn & Hogarth 1981; Tetlock 1985). Finally, how a solution to a
decision problem DEMO constructed will also, of course, be a function of in-
dividual-difference factors such as processing capacities (Bettman et al 1990)
and prior knowledge or expertise (Shanteau 1988). Another important ongo-
ing issue is the extent to which individual differences in values and beliefs are
related DEMO task and context changes (MacCrimmon & Wehrung 1990;
Schoemaker 1990)DEMO
Thus many current issues in behavioral decision research can be related to
the notion of the constructive nature of human preferences and beliefs and DEMO
contingent use of multiple approaches for solving decision problems. We use
this theme in organizing our review. We first consider two central elements of
DEMO and beliefs about uncertain events-focusing on the
use of multiple strategies in such judgments and the factors that influence
which strategies are used. Then DEMO consider decision-making under risk and
uncertainty, again focusing on contingent strategy DEMO This prevalence of
evidence for contingent strategy use leads us to consider possible frameworks
explaining such contingencies. Finally, we consider how the research and
concepts reviewed can be applied to improve assessments of preferences,
beliefs, and decisions.
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH
91
PREFERENCES
Common sense suggests that good decisions are DEMO decisions and that
small changes in how a question is asked or how options are presented should
not change what we prefer. In more DEMO terms, we would expect our
choices and judgments to possess procedural DEMO: Normatively equiv-
alent procedures for assessing preferences should result in the DEMO prefer-
ence order (Tversky et al 1988). Similarly. we would DEMO descriptive
invariance to hold: Different representations of the same choice problem
DEMO yield the same preference (Tversky & Kahneman 1986). As discussed
DEMO, a great deal of research demonstrates that both procedural and descrip-
DEMO invariance often fail to hold. In fact, Shafer (1986) has DEMO the failure
of decisions to be invariant across procedures and descriptions "DEMO most
fundamental result of three decades of empirical investigation" (p. 464) in
behavioral decision-making.
Why does invariance fail? A constructive view of DEMO suggests
at least three~ sources of such failures. First, decisions often DEMO conflict-
ing values, where we must decide how much we value DEMO attribute relative to
another. In trying to deal with such conflicts, DEMO often adopt different
strategies in different situations, potentially leading to variance DEMO prefer-
ences. Second, decisions are often complex, containing many attributes or
alternatives. Since these problems are simplified by decision-makers in differ-
ent ways, failures of invariance might be related to task complexity. Finally,
although DEMO may know what we get when we choose an option, we DEMO not
know how we feel about it. A prestigious Ivy League school may offer a
competitive and high-pressure graduate program, but we might be uncertain
about how we would like that environment. Hence, invariance may fail
because of uncertainty in values, even when we know what we will receive.
Below, we consider the underlying theme of the constructive nature of
judgment and choice. We review investigations of how individuals respond to
decisions DEMO difficult by conflicting values, decision complexity, and
uncertainty in values. ln addition, we consider how individuals may restruc-
ture problems or construct arguments in assessing their preferences.
Conflicting Values
Conflict among values arises because decisions DEMO involve a choice
among options where no option best meets all of our objectives. Conflict has
long been recognized as a major source of DEMO difficulty (Shepard 1964).
The presence of conflict and the fact DEMO a rule for resolving the conflict
cannot readily be drawn from memory are also reasons why decision-making,
even in the simplest laboratory tasks, is often characterized by tentativeness
92
PAYNE ET AL
and the use of relatively weak methods (heuristics). The use of such heuristics
is often associated with novice-like problem DEMO rather than the kind of
recognize-and-calculate processes associated with expertise (Chi DEMO al 1988;
Langley et al 1987).
In cases where there is clearly a dominating option-Le. option A is at least
as good DEMO option B on all valued attributes and strictly better on one or more
attributes-there is no conflict, and the choice of the dominating option is
easy. In fact, the idea that the dominant option should be chosen in such a
case is the most widely accepted principle of DEMO decision-making. When
the relation of dominance is highly transparent, people indeed DEMO the
dominating option; however, the principle of dominance can be violated if the
relation of dominance is masked by the way a decision DEMO presented (Tversky
& Kahneman 1986) or by erroneous beliefs such as the fixed-pie assumption
in negotiations (Bazerman 1990).
How do people make decisions among multiattribute alternatives when no
alternative dominates, and hence conflict exists? People use a variety of
evaluation strategies, some of which can DEMO thought of as conflict confronting
and others as conflict avoiding (Hogarth DEMO). The most common assump-
tion is that such decisions are made by considering the extent to which one is
willing to trade off DEMO of one valued attribute (e.g. economy) against less of
another valued attribute (e.g. safety). That is, conflict among values is
confronted DEMO resolved. A decision model often used to represent the trad-
ing-off process is the weighted additive value model, in which a measure of
the relative importance (weight) of the attribute is multiplied by the attribute
DEMO for the particular alternative and the products are summed over all
attributes. The alternative with the highest overall evaluation is chosen.
Exactly how people DEMO of "weights" in such decisions is the subject of
investigation. There is some evidence that weights are sometimes interpreted
in a local sense: The relative weights reflect the ranges of attribute values
across the alternatives DEMO the choice set-i.e. the greater the range, the greater
the importance DEMO the attribute (Goldstein 1990). At other times, subjects
interpret the weight given to an attribute more globally--e.g. safety might
always be viewed DEMO much more important than costs, without much con-
sideration of local DEMO of values (Beattie & Baron 1992).
To the extent that DEMO make decisions consistent with an additive model,
the key research problems are to measure the weights and values a person
assigns to the DEMO describing the decision alternatives. Unfortunately,
the tradeoffs people exhibit among conflicting attributes are highly contingent
on a host of task and context factors. DEMO also use strategies other than
weighted adding in many situations, depending DEMO task and context factors.
Many of the heuristics used are noncompensatory, DEMO that a good value
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH 93
on one attribute cannot compensate for a bad DEMO on another. Hence,
tradeoffs may not be made explicitly in many cases.
PROCEDURAL v ARIANCE One of the most important task variables demon-
DEMO procedural variance in preference assessments is the method by which
the decision-maker is asked to respond. Different response modes can lead to
differential weighting DEMO attributes and different preference assessments. Re-
search on choice vs matching tasks and on preference reversals documents
such response mode effects.
Choice vs Matching DEMO excellent illustration of the contingent weighing of
attributes as a function of response mode is provided by the so-called "promi-
nence effect" investigated DEMO Tversky et al ( 1988). They show that the
predominant attribute (e.g. lives saved in comparison to the cost of a safety
program) is given even more weight when preferences are assessed using a
choice mode than when preferences are assessed using a matching task.
Let us DEMO the difference between a matching task and a choice task.
Imagine that you are asked to consider two programs for dealing with traffic
accidents DEMO The programs are both described to you both in terms of yearly
dollar costs and in terms of the number of casualties per year DEMO will result
in: Program A is expected to lead to 570 DEMO and cost $12 million, while
Program B is expected to lead DEMO 500 casualties and cost $X. In a matching
task you are asked to provide an estimate X for the cost for program B-
presumably DEMO amount greater than $12 million-that will make Program B
equal in overall value to Program A.
In a choice task, on the other hand, values for the cost and casualties of
both programs are given (DEMO you know all the values in the example above,
and you know that Program B will cost $55 million). You are asked DEMO choose
the program you prefer. Most people choose B over A in this situation,
implying that saving 70 lives is more important than DEMO $43 million. In a
matching task, on the other hand, people estimate X at less than $55 million,
implying that a cost DEMO of less than $43 million is equivalent to the
difference in casualties of 70. Hence, the tradeoffs when performing matching
tasks differ from those when performing choice tasks.
Tversky et al ( 1988) suggest that different heuristics or computational
schemes are likely to be used in the two DEMO of tasks. Of the two, choice is
thought to involve more DEMO reasoning, such as that involved in the
lexicographic choice strategy (i.e. select the option that is ordinally superior
on the most important attribute)DEMO Lexicographic reasoning is viewed as both
cognitively easier than explicit tradeoffs and easier to justify to oneself and
others. A lexicographic strategy for choice DEMO avoids rather than confronts
94 PAYNE ET AL
conflict. Matching, on the other hand, requires DEMO more quantitative assess-
ment. In order to perform the matching task, DEMO must consider the size of the
intervals for both attributes and the relative weights of the attributes.
More generally, Tversky et al suggest a principle of strategy compatibility
between the nature of the required response, ordinal or cardinal, and the types
of reasoning employed by a decision-maker. Choice, for example, requires an
ordinal response and is hypothesized to evoke DEMO (processes) based on
the ordering of the attribute values.
Pref ere nee reversals As discussed by Fischer & Hawkins ( 1989), an DEMO
related to, but distinct from, the concept of strategy compatibility is that of
"scale compatibility," which states that the weight of a stimulus attribute is
enhanced by its compatibility with the response scale. The DEMO of scale
compatibility has been in the literature for some time and has played a major
role in elucidating the classic preference reversal phenomenon (Lichtenstein
& Slovic 1971). In the standard preference-reversal paradigm, two bets of
comparable expected values are evaluated. One of the bets offers a DEMO
probability of winning a small amount of money while the other bet offers a
low probability of winning a much larger amount of money. DEMO asked to
choose between the two bets, most people prefer the DEMO with the higher
probability of winning. When asked to bid on (DEMO a cash equivalent to)
each bet separately, most people assign DEMO higher value to the low-probability,
high-payoff bet. Tversky et al ( 1990) show that overpricing of the low-
probability, high-payoff bet, as suggested by the scale compatibility of payoff
amount with the bid response DEMO, is a major cause of preference reversals
(see also Bostic et al 1990). Schkade & Johnson (1989), using a computer-
based method for monitoring information-acquisition behavior, also found
support for the notion that scale compatibility is a factor underlying prefer-
ence reversals.
Scale compatibility clearly DEMO a role in preference reversals; however,
other mechanisms may also DEMO to preference reversals. For example,
Goldstein & Einhorn ( 1987) DEMO that the evaluation process is the same for
all response modes. They locate the principal source of procedural variance in
the expression of the DEMO internal evaluation on different response
scales.
Hershey & Schoemaker ( 1985) DEMO that preference reversals also may
be understood in terms of how individuals reframe decisions with certain
response modes. Suppose that a person is given DEMO sure-thing option and a
gamble offering the possibility of either a specified greater-amount outcome
or a specified lesser-amount outcome, and that the person is asked to set
(match) a probability p of obtaining the greater DEMO in order to make the
sure-thing option and the gamble equal in value. Hershey & Schoemaker
BEHA VlORAL DECISION RESEARCH 95
suggest that the person uses the amount DEMO the sure thing as a reference point,
with the two outcomes of the gamble then coded as a gain and as a loss. DEMO
other response modes the framing of the problem is assumed to be different
(see Bell 1985 for the suggestion that the expected value (DEMO) of a gamble
serves as a natural reference point in a DEMO mode). Casey (1991) empha-
sizes the related idea of an aspiration level in his explanation of a new form of
preference reversal. DEMO, Johnson & Schkade (1989), using process-
tracing methods, show DEMO the more an individual uses a reframing and an
anchoring and adjustment strategy, the greater the extent to which value
assessments differ across response modes. We have more to say about
framing effects and anchoring and DEMO below.
As suggested by the strategy-compatibility hypothesis discussed above,
preference reversals may also be due to changes in evaluation processes as a
function DEMO response mode (e.g. Johnson et al 1988; Mellers et al 1992;
Schkade & Johnson 1989). People may use different strategies to DEMO
each type of response, thus leading to reversals. In a series DEMO experiments
pitting strategy compatibility and scale compatibility against one another,
Fischer & Hawkins ( 1989) found strategy compatibility effects to be stronger
as explanations of procedural variance.
To summarize, various preference-reversal explanations locate the cause of
the phenomenon at either the framing, strategy selection, weighting of DEMO
formation, or expression of preferences stage of decisions. However, as
suggested by several authors (e.g. Goldstein & Einhorn 1987), the prefer-
ence-reversal phenomenon may be so robust because there are multiple
underlying causes, each of which may be operative in some situations but not
others. In DEMO event, it is now clear that the answer to how much DEMO like a
decision option can depend greatly on how you ask the question.
DESCRIPTIVE v ARIANCE Research conducted in the past eight years con-
DEMO that the manner in which problems are presented affects preferences,
even when the descriptions or presentations are normatively equivalent
(Tversky & Kahneman 1986). Two major streams of research that demon-
strate descriptive variance are DEMO of framing effects and effects of
information presentation,
Framing effects Framing involves the determination of the effective acts,
contingencies, and outcomes of a decision. Framing is influenced by how the
decision problem is presented DEMO by the norms, habits, and expectations of
the decision-maker (Tversky & Kahneman 1986). Tversky & Kahneman
( 198 l) illustrated the DEMO of presentation on framing by showing that
simple wording changes---e.g. from describing outcomes in terms of lives
saved to describing them in terms of DEMO lost----<;an lead to different pref-
96
PAYNE ET AL
erences. Numerous other researchers have demonstrated such wording DEMO
(Fagley & Miller 1987; Huber et al 1987; Kramer 1989; Levin & Gaeth 1988;
Puto 1987). These studies most often DEMO between (a) framing that
leads one to code outcomes as gains and (b) frames that result in outcomes'
being coded as DEMO It is clear that people treat negative consequences and
positive consequences differently. Tversky & Kahneman ( 1992) have empha-
sized the importance of this difference in the concept of loss aversion, which
states that the impact of a difference on a dimension is greater when that
difference is DEMO as a loss than when it is seen as a gain. We believe that this
concept will prove important in understanding decision behavior.
More DEMO, however, a complete theory of framing has proven dif-
ficult to formalize, although progress has been made in identifying impor-
tant elements of framing. For instance, Thaler (1985; Thaler & Johnson 1990)
has suggested that framing may be an active process rather than simply a
DEMO response to the decision problem as given. He examined the hypoth-
esis that people prefer outcomes framed to make the options appear the most
DEMO or the least unpleasant. Using the prospect theory value function
(Kahneman & Tversky 1979) as a starting point, Thaler ( 1985) argued
DEMO people generally prefer to have gains kept separate (segregated) and
to have all negative outcomes integrated (packaged together) into one
total.
Thaler & Johnson ( 1990) term this view hedonic editing and asked whether
DEMO actively edit options to a more pleasant frame. Their study examined
how prior gains and losses (e.g. sunk costs) influence subsequent choices
(Arkes & Blumer 1985; Laughhunn & Payne 1984; Staw 1981). Their DEMO
suggest a more complex picture of hedonic editing; for example, people
apparently prefer to have financial losses separated temporally. They also
report a "break-even" effect, in which the impact of a prior loss on DEMO
is influenced by whether the choice of a new gamble will or will not offer the
possibility of getting back to some original reference DEMO or break-even
point.
Linville & Fischer ( 1991) also provide evidence DEMO the original hedonic-
framing hypothesis does not account for peoples' preferences DEMO temporally
separating or combining good and bad news. They find that people prefer to
segregate bad news but to combine a positive and negative DEMO on the same
day. They suggest that frames are driven by the need to conserve the limited,
but renewable, physiological, cognitive, and social resources available to
people for dealing with emotional events. Like Thaler, they see framing as at
times a proactive process.
The concept of DEMO reference point, target level, or aspiration level that
contributes to framing effects, and perhaps to procedural variance, is a
venerable one in DEMO of decision-making (Siegel 1957; Simon 1955).
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH 97
Simon, for example, suggested that individuals can DEMO choice problems
by coding an outcome as being one of two types: satisfactory if the outcome is
above the aspiration level or unsatisfactory if it is below. Substantial evidence
indicates that choice depends on the reference DEMO used in the coding of
outcomes (Fischer et al 1986; Payne et al 1984; Tversky & Kahneman 1990).
A particularly important form of reference-level effect is the status quo bias
(Samuelson & Zeckhauser 1988; Kahneman et al 1990), in which the reten-
tion of the status quo option is favored over other options. Recently, Hogarth
& Einhorn ( 1991) have emphasized the role of a reference point in the
encoding of evidence for the purpose of updating beliefs.
Framing effects are DEMO examples of descriptive variance. Hence,
understanding how frames are selected would be very important. Fischhoff
(1983) found it hard to predict when DEMO frames would be used. However,
Puto ( 1987) was able DEMO relate the selection of reference points to expectations
and objectives in an industrial buying context. Given the crucial nature of
framing effects in decision DEMO, much more research on this topic is
needed.
Information presentation effects DEMO in modes of information pres-
entation also affect decision behavior. For example, Stone & Schkade ( 1991)
found that representing attribute values with words led to less compensatory
processing than representing the values numerically. Wallsten DEMO his col-
leagues (Budescu et al 1988; Erev & Cohen 1990; Wallsten 1990) have
carried out an important related series of experiments DEMO differences
between numerical and verbal representations of probability information. In
general, DEMO prefer to receive information about probabilities of events in
numerical form but prefer to express the probabilities of events to others in
words (e.g. doubtful, likely).
The format or structure of information presentation also can influence how
information is processed. Jarvenpaa (1989, 1990), extending an DEMO result
by Bettman & Kakkar (1977), found that how information DEMO processed
tended to be consistent with how graphic displays were organized-i.e. by
alternative or by attribute. MacGregor & Slovic (1986) also show that DEMO
will use a less important cue in predictive judgments simply because it is more
salient in the display. While the finding that information acquisition DEMO
in a fashion consistent with display format is not surprising (see DEMO 1972,
for an early statement of this idea), it does have important implications both
for aiding decision behavior using relatively simple changes DEMO information
presentation and for the design of graphics for computer-based decision
support systems.
Another series of experiments has dealt with a third aspect of DEMO
presentation, the completeness of information displays (Dube-Rioux & Russo
98
PAYNE ET AL
1988; Hirt & Castellan 1988; Weber et DEMO 1988). Those studies show that the
apparent completeness of a display can blind a decision-maker to the possibil-
ity that important information is DEMO from a problem description (a result
earlier obtained by Fischhoff et DEMO 1978). Individuals may respond differently
to the problem if they do not realize that information is missing.
Finally, Fischer et al ( 1987) found that when a more fundamental attribute
(e.g, health effects) DEMO represented by a proxy attribute (e.g. levels of pollut-
ants in DEMO air) there was a strong bias toward overweighting the proxy
attribute (relative to an expectation model of the value of the proxy). DEMO
et al suggest that this bias is due to the inference processes people use to
construct values when they do not have well-articulated preferences DEMO
tradeoffs among attributes.
Complexity of Decisions
Studies showing procedural and descriptive variance in how individuals deal with
conflicting values provide clear examples of constructive DEMO behavior;
however, other striking examples exist of multiple strategy use DEMO contingent
judgment and choice. Many of these examples concern how people adapt their
decision processes to deal with decision complexity. The primary hypothesis
underlying DEMO of this research is that the more complex the decision problem,
the more people will use simplifying decision heuristics. This hypothesis has been
DEMO by a number of studies conducted during the past eight years. Decision
complexity has been manipulated using the number of alternatives, number of
attributes, and time pressure, among other factors.
Perhaps the most well-established task-complexity DEMO is the impact of
changes in the number of alternatives available. When faced with two alterna-
tives, people use compensatory decision strategies like the weighted additive
model; these involve trading off a better value on one attribute against a
poorer value on another. However, when faced with multi-alternative deci-
sion tasks, people prefer noncompensatory choice strategies (Biggs et al DEMO;
Billings & Marcus 1983; Johnson et al 1989; Klayman 1985; Onken et al
1985; Sundstrom 1987).
Varying the amount of DEMO information is another way to manipulate
decision complexity. A number of studies, though not all, indicate that
decision quality can decrease with increases DEMO the number of attributes after a
certain level of complexity has been reached (Keller & Staelin 1987; Shields
1983; Sundstrom 1987). These studies of "information overload" effects have
been criticized on a variety DEMO methodological grounds (e.g. Meyer & Johnson
1989). Nonetheless, it is clear that people use selective attention to deal with
increased task complexity. DEMO crucial question is how people focus on the
most important information and avoid getting distracted by irrelevant in-
formation. Grether & Wilde (Grether & Wilde 1983; Grether et al 1986) argue
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH
99
that in "real" tasks people are able DEMO ignore the less-relevant information, and
hence overload is not a serious DEMO On the other hand, Gaeth & Shanteau
(1984) found that DEMO were adversely influenced by irrelevant factors,
although that influence could be reduced with training. Research on the
strategies people use for selectively attending DEMO information would be valu-
able.
People also respond in several ways when faced with decision problems
varying in time pressure. These coping mechanisms include DEMO acceleration
of processing, selectivity in processing, and shifts in decision strategies. As
time constraints are made more severe, the amount of time spent processing
an item of information decreases substantially (Ben Zur & Breznitz 1981).
Under time stress, processing is focused on the more important and/or more
negative information about alternatives (Ben Zur & Breznitz 1981; DEMO &
Edland 1987; Wallsten & Barton 1982; Payne et al DEMO). There is also
evidence that decision strategies may shift as a function of increased time
pressure (Zakay 1985; Payne et al 1988)DEMO Finally, there may be a hierarchy of
responses to time pressure. DEMO et al ( 1988) found that under moderate time
pressure subjects DEMO processing and to a lesser extent became more
selective in their processing. Under more severe time pressure, people
accelerated processing, focused on a DEMO of information, and changed
processing strategies.
Research on decision complexity, therefore, also documents the con-
structive nature of judgment and choice, since DEMO respond to complex
decisions using different strategies depending upon the nature of the task.
Uncertainty in Values
Rational choice involves two kinds of guesses: "guesses about future con-
sequences of current actions and guesses about future preferences for those
consequences" (March 1978:40). Decisions are difficult DEMO either kind
of uncertainty (need to guess) is present. Below, DEMO review research on how
people assess the probabilities of uncertain events that link future con-
sequences to actions. In the current section we examine DEMO considering
the second kind of uncertainty. How well do people assess uncertainties about
their own future preferences, and how do people make choices when their
values are ambiguous?
Kahneman & Snell ( 1990), for DEMO, have explored how people predict
future experiences of enjoyment or discomfort (i.e. future utility values).
They conclude that people have difficulty evaluating DEMO utilities of future
consequences... People also have trouble estimating the utilities of con-
sequences that wiH result after a series of repetitive experiences with DEMO same
outcome.
Choice among alternatives whose outcomes occur at different points in time
100
PAYNE ET AL
is related to prediction of utilities for consequences DEMO time. The standard
approach to such choice problems is to assume a discount function that
permits an individual to make value comparisons between immediate DEMO
delayed consumption. Stevenson (1986) and Benzion et al (1989) provide
experimental studies of discounting.
Loewenstein ( 1988) extends the discounting analysis by including the
concept of a reference point used by individuals in the DEMO of im-
mediate and delayed consumption options. For example, Loewenstein argues
DEMO delay in consumption of a good assumed to have already been purchased
will be framed as a loss, and a high level of compensation for that loss will be
demanded. A speed-up in delivery of a DEMO item, on the other hand,
will not be valued as DEMO: the "speed-up cost" will be lower than the delay
premium DEMO Loewenstein shows that different methods of eliciting
intertemporal preferences yield different estimates of subjects' relative prefer-
ences for immediate and delayed consumption in ways consistent with the
concept of a reference-point effect and inconsistent with standard DEMO
models. While the focus of Loewenstein's paper is on framing and in-
tertemporal preferences, his studies also provide an example of the more
general phenomenon of procedural variance in the elicitation of preferences.
Norm Theory DEMO deals with uncertainty in preferences and the context-
dependent aspects of judgment. Kahneman & Miller ( 1986) suggest that the
particular subjective value given to an attribute score--e.g. travel time to an
apartment from campus-will be DEMO ad hoc on the basis of the recall
or generation in memory of a comparison class of objects or decision episodes
that seem relevant DEMO the task at hand. The value assigned to an attribute score
of a particular stimulus will reflect the distribution of scores for that attribute
DEMO the set of exemplars of that object evoked in memory. Kahneman &DEMO
Miller also suggest that the attributes that control judgments may often not be
the most central attributes, given that the generated set of exemplars may not
be seen as varying much on the most central attributes.
DEMO obvious hypothesis is that the more uncertainty (ambiguity) in one's
preferences, the more one's expressed preferences will be subject to pro-
cedural and descriptive effects. For example, preferences for events further
and further in the future may be more susceptible to framing effects. As
another DEMO, Alba & Hutchinson ( 1987) contend that consumers less
familiar or less expert in a product class are more likely than familiar buyers
DEMO select information based on non-task related cues, such as display form (see
also Hoch & Ha 1986; Levin & Gaeth 1988). Conversely~ people who have
more experience in making decisions within a particular domain DEMO be less
susceptible to effects such as the prominence effect of choice vs matching. A
key research issue is whether the major determinant of DEMO to
procedural and display variables is the number of facts, the DEMO
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH
l 0 l
possessed about a domain, or the number of tradeoff decisions made within a
domain.
Restructuring Decision Problems
Researchers DEMO assume that a decision-maker takes the decision prob-
lem as initially presented and seeks to find the preferred alternative given that
structure-what Slovic ( DEMO) refers to as the concreteness principle. How-
ever, a decision-maker might restructure the problem. Restructuring might
involve transformations of information (e.g. rounding off, standardizing, or
performing calculations), rearranging information (e.g. the order of brands or
attributes), or simplifying by eliminating information. The restructuring
might DEMO to reduce either the amount of perceived conflict in the decision
or the degree of complexity.
The restructuring phenomenon expresses our theme that preferences DEMO
often constructed. Montgomery (1983), for example, has proposed that peo-
ple actively restructure decision problems until one alternative is seen to be
DEMO, which provides a (relatively) conflict-free way to make the deci-
DEMO The restructuring may involve such operations as collapsing two or more
attributes into a more comprehensive one, emphasizing an attribute, or adding
ne\.v DEMO to the problem representation that will bolster one alternative.
Coupey ( 1990) suggests that various restructuring activities might also ease
the total cognitive effort of solving a given decision problem. She allowed
some of her subjects DEMO take notes while solving decision problems and then
coded the restructuring operations evident in the notes. Individuals who
received information sequentially, or information that was poorly structured,
used notes to generate alternative x attribute matrixes. DEMO who
restructured were more likely ultimately to utilize alternative-based strategies.
Hence, DEMO interpretation of these data is that individuals put effort into
restructuring so that later they can use a more accurate heuristic with a
reasonable DEMO of effort.
Other researchers have also stressed restructuring in their accounts of
deci.sion behavior (M. Johnson 1984, 1989; Ranyard 1989). Michael John-
son's work deserves special note for its innovative look at the DEMO of
preferences among more noncomparable alternatives. Most decision research
has examined choices among options easily defined on a common set of
attributes--e.g. alternative brands DEMO television. In contrast, Johnson explored
how people choose among items from DEMO product classes ( e.g. a new
television vs a vacation) that DEMO different attributes. He identified several
processes used by people to deal with such noncomparable choice options,
including the generation of more abstract attributes, a form of restructuring.
Bettman & Sujan (1987) argue that the DEMO individuals construct for such
choices are a function of how the problem is framed.
102
PAYNE ET AL
Argument-Based Decisions
A final concept related to the DEMO of constructive preferences is that
choice is based on arguments that are generated in support of one option over
another (Shafer 1986; Slovic DEMO; Tversky 1988). Simonson (1989), for
example, has shown DEMO choice phenomena that are difficult to explain with
more traditional models can be explained in terms of a search for reasons
(arguments) to DEMO one option over another. Specifically, he showed that
the size of DEMO asymmetric dominance (attraction) effect, in which the addition
of an DEMO dominated alternative to a choice set (i.e. dominated by
one alternative DEMO not another) increases the probability of choosing the
dominating alternative (Huber et al 1982; Ratneshwar et al 1987), was
increased by the need to justify one's decisions to others. Further, he showed
that the choice of the dominating alternative was felt by subjects to be DEMO
likely to be criticized and to provide a better argument.
To summarize, there is ample evidence that preferences are often con-
structed in response to a judgment or choice task. Next we consider evidence
that people DEMO multiple strategies to construct assessments of uncertainty.
Following that discussion, we DEMO choice involving both uncertainty and
values in more detail.
BELIEFS ABOUT UNCERTAIN EVENTS
The question of how people judge the probabilities or likelihoods of DEMO
events has been a major focus in behavioral decision research for a number of
years, and interest continued during the period under review. Efforts to
compare intuitive probability judgments to the rules of statistics continue to DEMO
a major focus, as detailed below. The fact that such intuitive DEMO often
deviate from the laws of probability is now widely accepted, DEMO some
investigators question both the meaning and the relevance of errors in intuitive
judgments (von Winterfeldt & Edwards 1986).
Much of the recent work on how people assess the probability of an event
has adopted DEMO of the same concepts used to explain preferential choice.
That is, DEMO are seen as having available several ways of assessing beliefs
about uncertain events, and individuals use different modes of probabilistic
reasoning in a highly contingent fashion. In addition, probability judgment
can be thought of as the construction of arguments (Shafer & Tversky 1985).
In the following sections, we consider different strategies for probabilistic
reasoning and then consider evidence for the contingent use of such strategies.
Strategies for Probabilistic Reasoning
Specific heuristics DEMO in probabilistic thinking (e.g. availability, repre-
sentativeness, and anchoring and DEMO) continue to be investigated. The
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH 103
availability heuristic refers to the assessment of the DEMO of an event
based on the ease with which instances of that event come to mind. The
representativeness heuristic involves an assessment of the DEMO of an
event by judging the degree to which that event corresponds to an appropriate
mental model such as a sample and a population, an instance and a category,
or an act and an actor. DEMO and adjustment is a general judgment
process in which an initially generated or given response serves as an anchor
and other information is used DEMO adjust that response. It is generally assumed
that the adjustment is insufficient.
The availability heuristic has been investigated in relation to judgments of
political DEMO (Levi & Pryor 1987), perceptions of the risk of consumer
DEMO (Folkes 1988), the generation of hypotheses by accountants (Libby
1985), and judgments about others (Shedler & Manis 1986). More generally,
the relationship between memory access and judgment has been examined by
DEMO & Srull (1985) and Hastie & Park (1986).
A DEMO study of the representativeness heuristic is offered by Bar-Hillel
(1984). DEMO an innovative study, Camerer (1987) has shown that representa-
tiveness DEMO prices in experimental markets, although the effect is smaller
for subjects DEMO greater experience in that market.
Finally, the anchoring and adjustment heuristic DEMO been investigated in a
variety of domains, including accounting (Butler 1986), marketing (Davis et
al 1986), the assessment of real estate values (Northcraft & Neale 1987), and
as a general process by which belief-updating tasks are performed (Hogarth &
Einhorn l991 ).
Contingent Usage of Strategies for Assessing Uncertainty
One characteristic of the use of DEMO is the neglect of potentially relevant
problem information. As discussed more fully below, the adaptive use of
heuristics, even though neglecting some information, can save substantial
cognitive effort and still produce good solutions to decision DEMO
However, in many situations people do make systematic errors in forming
DEMO judgments. As illustrated below, the question is no longer whether
biases DEMO, but under what conditions relevant information will or will not be
DEMO to construct a response to a probability judgment task. We examine this
issue for usage of base-rate information, the conjunction fallacy, and the
DEMO of expertise on uncertainty judgments.
THE USE/MISUSE OF BASE-RATE INFORMATION Almost 20 years ago,
Kahneman & Tversky (l 973) reported a DEMO of studies that involved
presenting subjects with a brief personality description of a person and a list of
different categories to which the person DEMO belong. The task for the subject
104 PAYNE ET AL
was to indicate the category to which the DEMO was most likely to belong.
The striking finding was that subjects all but ignored the relative sizes of the
different categories-i.e. the base rates; instead, judgments were based
almost exclusively on the extent to which the given description matched the
various category stereotypes (representativeness). Since then, DEMO research-
ers have investigated when and how base-rate information is utilized in
decision-making (see Bar-Hillel 1990 for an overview of base-rate studies).
Base-rate information is often, but by no means always ignored. For example,
Medin & Edelson ( 1988) report that in one series of studies "participants use
base-rate information appropriately, ignore base-rate information, or use
base-rate information inappropriately (predict that the rare disease is more
likely to be present)" (p. 68).
Evidence that base-rate information is sometimes neglected and sometimes
used appropriately in assessing the probability of an event has DEMO to the view
that probabilistic reasoning involves contingent processing. Two recent ex-
amples of contingent-processing approaches to base-rate use are provided by
Gigerenzer et DEMO (1988) and Ginossar & Trope (1987). Both studies show DEMO
the use of base-rate information is highly sensitive to a variety of task and
context variables. For example, Gigerenzer et al found that a change of
problem context from guessing the profession of a person to DEMO the
outcome of a soccer game influenced the use of base-rate information, with
the use of base-rates greater in the soccer problem. They argued that "the
content of the problem strongly influenced both subjects' performance DEMO
their reported strategies" (p. 523, emphasis added).
Ginossar & DEMO ( 1987) propose that people have a variety of rules for
DEMO probabilistic judgments, including both statistical and nonstatistical
inference principles. Which rule DEMO used to solve a particular judgment task is
contingent upon the recency and frequency of prior activation of the rules, the
relation of the rules to task goals, and their applicability to the givens of the
problem. More generally, Ginossar & Trope view strategies for thinking
under uncertainty as sequences of production rules whose application depends
on the same general DEMO factors that determine production rule applica-
tion in other task domains (DEMO 1982). They conclude that instead of
asking whether people are inherently good or bad statisticians, attention
should be directed to understanding the cognitive factors that determine when
different inferential rules, statistical or nonstatistical, will DEMO applied. The
Ginossar & Trope viewpoint is one we share completely and is consistent with
much of the research on preferences reported above.
THE DEMO FALLACY The idea that the same person will use a
variety of approaches to solving probabilistic reasoning tasks also arises in
discussions of the DEMO fallacy. Tversky & Kahneman ( 1983) distin-
guish intuitive (holistic) DEMO about the probabilities of events from more
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH 105
extensional (decomposed) reasoning, where events are analyzed into ex-
haustive lists of possibilities or compound probabilities are evaluated by
DEMO elementary ones. A fundamental law of probability derived from
extensional logic is the conjunction rule: The probability of a conjunction of
events, P(DEMO & B ), cannot exceed the probability of any one of DEMO constituents,
P(A) and P(B). Intuitive reasoning, on the other hand, is seen by Tversky &
Kahneman as being DEMO on "natural assessments" such as representativeness
and availability, which "are often neither deliberate nor conscious" (p. 295).
Consistent with the DEMO that probabilistic reasoning is often intuitive,
Tversky & Kahneman demonstrate numerous instances where people state
that the probability of A & B is DEMO than the probability of B, violating the
conjunction rule. Additional evidence DEMO violations of the conjunction rule can
be found in several studies (DEMO & Greenfield 1986; Thuring & Junger-
mann 1990; Wells 1985; DEMO & Carlson 1986). Einhorn & Hogarth (1986b)
relate causal DEMO to the conjunction fallacy and suggest that there is a
link between the need for multiple causes of an event and the conjunction
fallacy.
DEMO & Kahneman argue that violations of the conjunction rule are both
systematic and sizable; however, they also note that "probability judgments
are not aJways dominated by nonextensional heuristics ... [and] judgments of
probability vary in DEMO degree to which they follow a decompositional or
holistic approach" (p. 310). Thus, understanding when the decision-maker
will use one approach or another in solving problems under uncertainty is of
the same crucial importance DEMO understanding the use of different strategies in
the assessment of preferences. A related argument is offered by Beach et al
(1986), who propose that a person has a repertoire of strategies for making
forecasts that DEMO both strategies utilizing aleatory reasoning (ex-
tensional) and explicit reasoning (DEMO characteristics). They suggest that
the selection of a forecasting strategy will depend on a variety of task factors.
Beach et al also make DEMO useful distinction between task factors that determine
which strategy will be used and environmental factors that determine the vigor
with which a strategy wi11 DEMO applied. They suggest that a variable like the
ext1insic benefit of making an accurate forecast will be more likely to
determine how rigorously a DEMO is applied than to determine which
strategy is applied.
EXPERTISE AND UNCERTAINTY JUDGMENTS The studies of base-rate use'
violations of the conjunction rule, and, more generally, intuitive vs statistical
reasoning in the solving of DEMO problems illustrate constructive deci-
sion behavior. In discussing such contingent judgments and choices, we have
emphasized elements of the task as determinants of behavior; however, it is
clear that the processes used to construct a DEMO to a decision problem may
differ as a function of individual differences as well.
106
PAYNE ET AL
One question of current interest is the extent DEMO which the strategies for
assessing uncertainties found in studies of novices doing laboratory tasks
generalize to the judgments of experts dealing with tasks relevant DEMO their
areas of expertise. It is clear that experience does not necessarily improve
judgment. Garb (1989), for example, provides a review of DEMO effects of
training and experience on the validity of clinical judgment in mental health
fields. He concludes that "the results on validity generally fail to support the
value of experience in mental health fields. However, the results do provide
limited support for the value of training" (p. DEMO). Garb also argues that
experienced judges do seem better at knowing which of their judgments are
likely to be correct; that is, DEMO judgments are better calibrated.
Other research demonstrates that expertise is not a panacea for making
assessments of uncertain events. Experts, too, use heuristics DEMO as represen-
tativeness and show such biases as the misuse of base-rate information. Cox
& Summers (1987), for example, found that experienced DEMO buyers used
the same heuristics when making sales forecasts (i.e. representativeness) and
displayed biases similar to those found with novice subjects. The extent DEMO
which the heuristics and potential biases that have been observed in studies
using college students will also be observed in "real-world" settings using
DEMO continues to be a subject of much debate (see, for example Bunn &
Wright 1991; Shanteau 1988).
Why might expertise not DEMO to better assessments in some cases? The
prediction of future events DEMO depends on learning from and understanding
past events. One factor that may cause people to learn less from experience
than they should is the DEMO bias (Fischhoff 1975) or the "I knew it all
along" phenomenon. An excellent review of the research on hindsight is
offered by DEMO & Hastie (1990). They conclude that the hindsight
phenomenon extends DEMO the judgments of experts in nonlaboratory settings.
For other reasons why expertise may not lead to better assessments, see
Camerer & Johnson (1991)DEMO
Next we examine in more detail an area of research that draws upon and
combines findings from studies both of preferences and of judgments DEMO
uncertain events, namely how people make decisions under risk and un-
DEMO
DECISIONS UNDER RISK AND UNCERTAINTY
The study of how people make decisions that involve tradeoffs between the
desirability of consequences and the likelihood of DEMO choice
among gambles--continues to be one of the most active areas of decision
research. Not only do responses to gambles provide insight into basic DEMO
logical processes of judgment and choice, but understanding decision-making
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH
I 07
under uncertainty and risk has direct relevance DEMO improving decisions in
business and public policy. Increasingly, as might be DEMO, decisions
under risk are seen as being sensitive to the same DEMO of context and task
variables described above for preferences among multi-attribute alternatives
and for the assessment of uncertainties. In the following sections, we consider
research on generalizations of expected-utility models (how values depend
upon the specific set of available options and interactions between payoffs and
probabilities), on DEMO to repeated-play gambles, and on ambiguity and
risky choice.
Generalizations of DEMO Models
Expected-utility (EU) theory (von Neuman & Morgenstern 1947) has long
been the standard model for decisions under risk, although the descriptive
validity of the expected-utility model has also long been questioned. An
economist, Mark Machina, recently summarized risky-decision research by
noting that "choice under DEMO is a field in flux" (Machina 1987: 121).
We DEMO; evidence of violations of the standard EU model has accumulated
to DEMO point that numerous theorists have offered alternatives to the standard
EU model. The goal has been to model risky decisions in ways that will DEMO
the tradeoffs between probabilities and values to reflect contextual factors.
One approach has been to develop generalizations of the expected-utility
model. Decision weights that DEMO not be additive over outcomes, for ex-
ample, are used in place of linear probabilities. Another type of generalization
allows the value of DEMO outcome of a gamble to differ depending on the specific
gamble of which it is a part (Becker & Sarin 1987). A related idea is that the
value placed on the outcome of one gamble DEMO on the outcome that
would have been received if a second gamble had been chosen and the same
random (Went had occurred-i.e. the notion of regret (Bell 1982; Loomes &
Sugden 1987). Regret is a good example of a contextual factor that may effect
decisions.
Many DEMO the proposed generalizations of EU also reflect a weakening of the
view that the disentanglement of belief and value is essential to rational
decision-making (Shafer 1986). For example. one can weight the probabilities
(decision weights) of outcomes by the rank order of the attractiveness of the
outcomes. The lowest-ranked, least-attractive outcomes, for instance, might
be given relatively greater weight (Quiggin 1982; Segal 1989). One could also
allow decision DEMO to differ for gain outcomes and loss outcomes
(Einhorn & Hogarth DEMO 986a). Weber et al (1992) extend the idea of sign-
dependent decision weights to judgments of the riskiness of gambles as well
DEMO to attractiveness judgments.
Another generalization of the expected-utility model allows the decision
weights assigned to the outcomes to vary as a function of both DEMO rank and
108
PAYNE ET AL
the sign of the payoffs. Luce (1990; DEMO & Fishburn 1991) and Tversky &
Kahneman ( 1990) propose DEMO with this property. In the Luce model, a
framing or "plausible accounting" assumption is that gambles that have a
mixture of gains and losses are decomposed into two subgambles, one
consisting of gain outcomes and null consequences and another consisting of
loss outcomes and null consequences. Within DEMO gain and loss subgambles,
respectively, the decision weights are rank DEMO The decision weights
for the gain and loss consequences are allowed to differ.
Recently, Tversky & Kahneman ( 1990) have offered a generalization DEMO
prospect theory that also allows for different decision weights for gains and
losses. The decision weights are also rank dependent based upon the marginal
DEMO of the events ordered by payoffs. The new theory, called
Cumulative DEMO Theory, is extended to cover both probabilistic and
uncertain (ambiguous probability) gambles. Cumulative Prospect Theory re-
tains the major features of the original versions of prospect theory. In particu-
lar, the prediction of reflection of risk attitudes for gains and losses is
preserved; risk aversion and risk seeking are predicted, respectively, for gains
and losses of moderate or DEMO probability-e.g. p > .5. However, for small
probabilities-e.g. p < .1-the DEMO is for risk seeking for gains and
risk aversion for losses. These risk attitude predictions are derived from the
principles of (a) diminishing DEMO for both value functions (from a
reference point) and weighting functions (from certainty and impossible
events) and (b) loss aversion.
The DEMO power of rank- and sign-dependent models is impressive;
however, Tversky & Kahneman note that formal models of the valuation of
risky options are at best approximate and incomplete, arguing that "choice is a
constructive DEMO contingent process. When faced with a complex decision
problem, people employ DEMO variety of heuristic procedures in order to simplify
the representation and the evaluation of prospects. The heuristics of choice do
not readily lend themselves DEMO formal analysis, because their application is
contingent on the method of DEMO, the formulation of the problem and
the context of choice" (DEMO 36). While we agree with their assessment that
judgment and choice are often constructive and characterized by contingent
usage of heuristics, we believe that the contingent use of heuristics is more
susceptible to formal analyses DEMO implied above (e.g. see Payne et al 1988).
To what DEMO do generalizations of EU much beyond those already
proposed represent the best direction for theory development in the attempt to
understand risky decision behavior (Camerer 1989)? One suggestion, offered
by Shafir et al ( 1989), is to combine the absolute approach of expectation
models, in which the attractiveness of a gamble is assumed to be independent
of other DEMO, with a comparative approach, in which the attractiveness
of a gamble depends on the alternatives to which it is compared. Another
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH
109
suggestion, offered by Lopes (1987; Schneider & Lopes 1986), is to move
away from expectation models of decisions DEMO models that more directly
reflect the multiple and conflicting goals that people may have in solving risky
decision problems. Some suggested goals are maximizing DEMO, maximiz-
ing potential gain, and maximizing the probability of coming out ahead . The
Lopes concept of multiple goals is similar in spirit DEMO the early idea of
characterizing gambles by risk dimensions rather than moments (Slovic &
Lichtenstein 1968; also see Aschenbrenner 1984 for a test of dimensional vs
moment-based explanations of risky decisions).
Repeated-Play Gambles
Whether DEMO respond differently to gambles involving a single play versus
repeated-play gambles may be related to the notion that multiple goals can
underlie risky choice. DEMO may pay attention to different goals depending
on how often a gamble will be played (Lopes 1981) or whether the decision
involves a DEMO individual or a group of comparable individuals (Redelmeir
& Tversky 1990)DEMO Recent work provides substantial empirical support for the
need to distinguish between risky-choice behavior for unique and repeated
gambles (Keren & Wagenaar 1987; DEMO et al 1990). Wedell & Bockenholt
(1990), for example, show that the frequency of preference reversals is less
under repeated-play conditions. DEMO offer an interpretation of the effects of
multiple plays that emphasizes the concept of an aspiration level in both
choice and pricing. An interesting DEMO exists between the repeated
play of gambles and the question of when people will reason statistically. As
suggested by Kahneman & Lovallo ( 1992), framing an apparently unique
risky decision as part of a much larger set of risky choices may lead to
behavior more in line with DEMO considered tradeoff of beliefs and values.
Ambiguity and Risky Choice
In most discussions of decision-making under risk, it is assumed that the
probabilities representing the decision-maker's uncertainties about events are
well specified. However, there is often ambiguity concerning the probabilities
of events. That is, a decision-maker might tell you that his or her best guess is
that the probability DEMO an event is .4, but he or she may also tell DEMO that the
estimate is shaky. While the standard theory of subjective expected utility
prescribes that an "expected probability" adequately represents the in-
dividual'DEMO uncertainty about an event, it is clear that people respond dif-
DEMO to decisions under uncertainty as a function of the uncertainty about
uncertainties, even when the expectations of the probabilities are the same.
Thus, DEMO presence or absence of ambiguity about the probabilities may
represent an important context variable affecting risky decisions. As illus-
110
PAYNE ET AL
trated by the classic Ellsberg paradox (Ellsberg 1961) and subsequent ex-
perimental results, individual choices often exhibit an aversion DEMO ambiguity,
at least when the probabilities of the events are moderate (e.g .. 5) or larger.
Frisch & Baron ( 1988) suggest a number of reasons why it may be reasonable
for an individual DEMO show ambiguity aversion. Ambiguity seeking, however,
can occur for lower-probability DEMO (Curley & Yates 1989), a result
suggested by Ellsberg.
A DEMO of researchers have investigated ambiguity and risky decisions
during the period under review (Curley & Yates 1985, 1989; Curley et al
1986; DEMO & Hogarth 1985; Frisch & Baron 1988; Gardenfors & Sahlin
1983; Hogarth & Einhorn 1990; Hogarth & Kunreuther 1985; Kahn & Sarin
1988). This interest reflects both a theoretical concern with the limits DEMO the
standard expected-utility model and a recognition that ambiguity is a preva-
lent feature of real-world decision problems. Ritov & Baron (1990), for
example, suggest that ambiguity lowers the willingness to vaccinate a child
against potentially deadly diseases.
Einhorn & Hogarth ( 1985) offer a model of how people adjust probabilities
under ambiguity to reflect what might be imagined. DEMO is likened to
a mental simulation process. The adjustment is from an anchor that corre-
sponds to an initial estimate of the probability of DEMO event. The size of the
adjustment depends on the amount of ambiguity as well as on the value of the
initial probability. Hogarth & DEMO ( 1985, 1989) use the ambiguity
model as a basis for understanding when, and at what prices, insurance
coverage for different uncertainties DEMO be offered. Hogarth & Einhorn
( 1990) also propose a model DEMO how people assess decision weights in
evaluating risky options which is based upon their model for ambiguous
probabilities. The adjustment of decision weights in DEMO Hogarth & Einhorn
model is affected by the size as well as the sign of the payoffs, as is the case
for several of the generalizations of expected utility noted above.
Curley et al (1986) DEMO evidence that concern about the evaluation of
one's decisions by others is at least a partial explanation for ambiguity
avoidance. In the standard DEMO task, where there is one urn containing 50
red balls and DEMO black balls and another urn containing 100 red and black balls
in unknown proportions, the preference for a bet based on the known 50:50
urn is enhanced by the anticipation that the contents of the DEMO urn will
be shown to others.
Heath & Tversky ( 1991) DEMO extended the study of ambiguity to domains
where the judged probabilities are based on knowledge rather than chance.
They argue that the willingness to DEMO on an uncertain event depends on one's
feelings of knowledge or competence in a given context, as well as on the
estimated likelihood of that event and the precision of that estimate. In
support of DEMO idea, they report that subjects who felt knowledgeable about a
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH 111
domain (e.g. politics) were more likely to DEMO a bet based on a judged
probability event than on a matched lottery (chance) bet. The chance bet was
preferred over a matched DEMO bet in content domains in which one felt
less competent. Heath & Tversky conclude that the effect of knowledge or
competence far outweighs the DEMO of ambiguity or vagueness in
understanding how beliefs and preferences interact in determining risky de-
cisions. In other words, factors beyond simple beliefs about the likelihoods of
events and values (e.g. feelings of competence) may DEMO risk-taking
behavior.
The research outlined above suggests a variety of methods individuals may
use to construct probability assessments or make decisions when confronting
ambiguity. DEMO individuals use these methods in a contingent fashion has not
been investigated; however, given the prevalence of contingent-strategy usage
in the areas reviewed DEMO far, examining how individuals respond con-
tingently to ambiguity would be DEMO fertile area for future research.
FRAMEWORKS FOR CONTINGENT-DECISlON
BEHAVIOR
We have now reviewed research on preferences, judgments of beliefs about
uncertain events, and DEMO decision-making. In all cases, we have seen
substantial evidence for contingent DEMO of multiple strategies for dealing with
such decision tasks. Awareness of the highly contingent nature of decision
behavior has led several researchers to propose DEMO within which
constructive decision behavior could be understood. Some of these frame-
works emphasize the cognitive costs and benefits of the various strategies
people DEMO use in constructing preferences and beliefs. In that regard, such
frameworks DEMO direct extensions of the bounded-rationality concept. Other
frameworks emphasize more perceptual processes of problem representation,
fonnulation, or framing that determine which strategies, DEMO, and beliefs
will be used to solve a particular problem.
Cost/DEMO Frameworks
Tht~ most frequently used approach to explaining contingent decision behavior
assumes that people have available or can generate a repertoire of strategies or
DEMO for solving decision problems. The available strategies or abilities
may have been acquired through formal training (Larrick et al 1990) or natural
experience (Kruglanski 1989), and their availability in any given situation
will be DEMO function of the frequency and recency of prior use (Ginossar & DEMO
1987). lt is also assumed that the strategies have differing expected advan-
tages (benefits) and disadvantages (costs). The selection of a strategy then
112
PAYNE ET AL
involves the consideration of the anticipated benefits and DEMO of each
strategy given the specific task environment.
Beach & Mitchell and their colleagues offer one version of a cost/benefit
framework (Beach & Mitchell 1978; Beach et al 1986; Waller & Mitchell
1984). DEMO & Mitchell identify three broad categories of strategies: 1.
"aided-analytic", 2. "unaided-analytic", and 3. "nonanalytic." Task factors
assumed to influence strategy selection include complexity, ambiguity of
goals (values), significance of DEMO, and accountability. Recently, Beach
& Mitchell have argued that their original model is too limited and have
proposed a new model called "Image Theory" that stresses the intuitive and
automatic aspects of decision-making (Beach DEMO; Mitchell & Beach 1990).
The emphasis in Image Theory is DEMO noncompensatory tests of the acceptabil-
ity or compatibility of a single alternative (candidate option) with the de-
cision-maker's values or goals (images). They stress that individuals make
judgments about the compatibility of an DEMO with one's image; this is seen
as a rapid, smooth process that can be called "intuitive" decision-making. The
more analytical processes DEMO in the original Beach & Mitchell model
are assumed to be evoked only if there is more than one acceptable alterna-
tive.
A comparison DEMO analytical and intuitive decision-making is also
stressed by Hammond and his associates (Hammond et al 1987). They argue
that the cognitive processes (DEMO of thought) available to a decision-maker
can be seen as falling DEMO a continuum from intuition (characterized by rapid
data processing, low cognitive control, and low awareness of processing) to
analysis (characterized by slow data processing, high cognitive control, and
high awareness of processing). DEMO et al claim that properties of the
decision task, such as DEMO information is presented pictorially or pre-
sented via bar graphs or numbers, lead to one mode of cognition versus
another. An important feature of their framework is the distinction they make
between the frequency and the DEMO of judgmental errors assumed to result
from intuitive and analytical modes of thought. Analysis is viewed as leading
to fewer but larger errors than DEMO Hammond et al (1987) provide a good
example of a computational error (execution of analysis) in decision-making
involving an engineer who wrote DEMO a weight of .8 for a cue instead of the
.08 that he intended, thus reducing his judgmental accuracy to little better
than chance.
The Beach & Mitchell and the Hammond frameworks deal with contingent
decision DEMO at a fairly general level of analytic vs nonanalytic and
analytic vs intuitive modes of thought. Explaining contingent strategy selec-
tion at a more DEMO information processing level has been the focus of a
series of studies by Payne et al (summarized in Payne et al 1990a). They
investigate the costs and benefits of solving complex preferential choice
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH
113
problems using specific decision strategies such as satisficing (Simon 1955),
lexicographic choice (Tversky 1969), elimination-by-aspects (Tversky 1972),
equal weighting (Einhorn & Hogarth 197 5), and more DEMO strategies
like additive utility. While Payne et al acknowledge the importance of factors
like decision accuracy, avoidance of conflict, and accountability in strategy
DEMO, they focus on the role played in strategy choice by the DEMO
effort (mental resources) required to execute a strategy in a specific task
environment (Simon 1955; Russo & Dosher 1983). Payne et DEMO note that
different decision strategies require different amounts of computational effort
and that a measure of such cognitive effort in decision-making can be
obtained DEMO decomposing strategies like elimination-by-aspects and weighted
adding into sets of elementary information processes (EIPs) (see 0. Huber
1989 for similar ideas). Examples of ElPs are reading an alternative's value
on an attribute into DEMO memory,. comparing two alternatives on an
attribute, and adding the DEMO of two attributes in working memory. Bett-
man et al ( 1990) show that a weighted EIP model provides good predictions of
the response times and subjective effort reports associated with the use of
various decision DEMO in different task environments.
By combining measures of strategy effort with measures of decision
accuracy, Johnson & Payne (1985), Payne et al (1988), and Payne et al
( 1990b) use simulation to show that adaptive choice of decision heuristics can
often provide reasonable effort/accuracy DEMO Their studies of the
adaptiveness of actual decision behavior to changes in decision tasks, con-
texts, and goals show that people often adapt DEMO behavior in ways that seem
reasonable given a concern for both decision effort and decision accuracy
(Payne et al 1988; Creyer et al DEMO). However, Klayman & Ha (1987) argue
that people may DEMO always be as adaptive to task demands as they should be.
In the case of hypothesis testing, for instance, Klayman & Ha argue DEMO
people generally rely on a "positive test strategy" that often works very well,
but can lead to systematic errors or inefficiencies. Overgeneralizing DEMO
applicability of reasonable heuristics is perhaps a typical failure of adaptivity
(DEMO 1988). Klayman & Ha (1987), like Tversky & Kahneman (1986),
suggest that the use of more optimal strategies may require that the rela-
tionships between task variables and strategy performance be highly DEMO
ent.
Most current attempts to explain contingent or constructive decision be-
havior focus on goals and strategies that the decision-maker brings to the task,DEMO
which are assumed to interac:t with task structure and context in determining
strategy use. However, people, can decide how to decide not DEMO at the
beginning of a decision episode but also as they learn more about a problem in
the course of solving it. That is, people can be opportunistic (data driven) as
well as top-down (goal driven) (Hayes--Roth and Hayes-Roth 1979). One
114
PAYNE ET AL
argument for a more opportunistic view of strategy DEMO is that people may
store procedures for decision-making in terms of simple processing operations
such as comparison processes rather than in the form of DEMO complete
strategies like elimination-by-aspects (Bettman & Park 1980; Biehal & Chak-
ravarti 1986). It has been suggested that opportunistic or constructive pro-
DEMO will be more likely to be used as decision problems become more
complex or stressful (Klein & Yadav 1989). Evidence that people scan
alternatives in a more nonsystematic fashion under stress, and therefore may
be more data driven, is provided by Keinan (1987). Information display
DEMO may also impact the degree of bottom-up vs top-down processing
(Jarvenpaa DEMO).
Perceptual Frameworks
As reviewed above, some of the most dramatic DEMO of the lack of
invariance in human decision behavior have come from studies of framing
effects (Tversky & Kahneman 1986). Tversky & Kahneman acknowledge
that contingent processing in decision-making can sometimes be explained in
terms DEMO mental effort; however, they prefer to trace contingent decision
behavior to more basic perceptual principles governing the formulation or
representation of decision problems. DEMO of such principles include the
diminishing sensitivity of values and decision weights and the coding of
outcomes from a reference point discussed earlier. Tversky & Kahneman
stress that "in the persistence of their appeal, framing effects resemble visual
illusion more than computational errors" (Tversky & Kahneman 1986:DEMO).
Another approach to the issue of multiple decision strategy use which
blends cost/benefit and perceptual approaches has been offered by Montgom-
ery DEMO his associates (Lindberg et al 1989; Montgomery 1983; Montgomery
& DEMO 1983). As noted earlier, Montgomery sees decision-making as
series of DEMO and restructuring activities. The various compensatory
and noncompensatory decision rules like elimination-by-aspects are seen as
operators used in the restructuring of the decision problem. DEMO, like Tver-
sky & Kahneman, Montgomery emphasizes problem formulation or represen-
tation activities in his account of the constructive nature of decision behavior.
DEMO also emphasizes the justifiability of the decision process as a
goal of the decision-maker.
A key distinction between the perceptual perspective and that offered DEMO the
cost/benefit approach concerns the role of incentives in determining decision
behavior. If the only factors influencing decision behavior were a concern
with DEMO and a concern for decision effort, then one would expect that
DEMO of rational decision principles could be eliminated by proper in-
centives. For example, many economists continue to argue that the lack of
incentives may cause individuals to perform suboptimally (e.g. Harrison
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH
115
1989). Further, as was found by Creyer et al (1990), the processes used in
decision-making should become more consistent with normative models as
incentives are increased. However, errors in preferential choice and probabi-
listic reasoning persist even in the presence of monetary DEMO (Grether &
Plott 1979; Tversky & Kahneman 1983). Even DEMO casual view of decision-
making in the real world suggests that reasoning errors sometimes occur in
important decisions. Consequently, much recent research has examined the
effects of incentives on decision behavior, leading to a view that incentives
can both help and hinder decision performance (Ashton 1992; Berg & Dick-
haut 1990; Hogarth et al 1991).
As noted by DEMO & Kahneman (1986), incentives do not work by
magic Generally, what incentives do is prolong deliberation or attention to a
problem; people generally \vork harder on more important problems. More
effort is generalJy believed DEMO lead to better performance. However, as
reported in Paese & Sniezek ( 1991), increased effort may lead to increased
confidence in judgment without accompanying increases in accuracy. Devot-
ing more effort to using a flawed DEMO strategy can lead to poorer
performance (Arkes et al 1986).
DEMO incentives to change decision strategies and increase performance,
several conditions seem necessary. First, one must believe that one's current
decision strategy is insufficient in terms of desired accuracy (i.e. if you don't
think it's broken, you won't fix it). Failure to adapt may result from over-
confidence in assessing the likelihood that a current DEMO will lead to a
successful outcome. ln many decision environments feedback is often not
sufficient to sway such assessments (Einhorn 1980). A related factor that may
cause people to overestimatf: the quality of their current judgments is the
hindsight bias. A failure to adapt can also result DEMO difficulty in properly
assessing the task environment and the relationship between the environment
and the strategy. For example, the degree of intercorrelation among cues or
attributes affects the accuracy of heuristics, yet correlations are difficult to
estimate (Alloy & Tabachnik 1984).
Second, for incentives to lead DEMO a strategy shift, a better strategy must be
available. If one DEMO't know what else to do, a belief that one is DEMO with a
flawed strategy may lead to a panic response under high incentives (Janis
1989). There is evidence that better strategies are sometimes unavailable. For
example, several effective memory strategies for encoding and retrieval are
not possessed by young children (John & Cole 1986). Deficits in strategy
knowledge for solving certain classes of problems have recently been ex-
DEMO by Kaplan & Simon 1990). Brehmer (1990) makes the related point
that knowledge of suboptimality in the process of solving a complex DEMO
dynamic dedsion problem is not a primary perceptual datum. Instead, "it is an
inference based on a normative model of the task, and, if the decision-maker
..
116
PAYNE ET AL
does not have a well-developed model of the DEMO, the possibility of doing
better will not be detected" (Brehmer DEMO:267). Thus, it is certainly possible
that better decision strategies DEMO some situation are not known by most
decision-makers. On a more positive note, however, recent work by Nisbett
& Fong and their colleagues DEMO shown that the teaching of statistical and
decision principles increases the likelihood of using statistical and decision
theoretic reasoning processes (Fong et al 1986; Larrick et al 1990).
Third, one must believe that one DEMO capable of executing the new, hopefully
more optimal strategy. For complex DEMO there may be a constraint on
which strategies are believed to be feasible. In the words of Simon (1981),
"what a person cannot do he will not do, no matter how much he wants to do
it" (p. 36). More generally, incentive effects can be seen as one more question
concerning the conflicting goals (i.e. accuracy, effort minimization, conflict
avoidance, and justifiability) that a decision-maker might DEMO in constructing
a solution to a decision problem.
Integrating the Cost/Benefit and Perceptual Frameworks
The perceptual framework clearly complements the cosUbenefit framework,
DEMO it is difficult to see how simple wording changes alone (e.g. DEMO seen
in "lives saved" versus "lives lost" in Tversky & Kahneman 1981) change
either cognitive effort or the desire for accuracy. On the other hand, it is not
clear how the perceptual framework would handle contingent behavior due to
the number of alternatives, for example, DEMO that phenomenon fits nicely into
a cosUbenefit framework. There are opportunities to integrate cosUbenefit and
perceptual frameworks. For example, Tversky & Kahneman (1990) suggest
that the framing process is governed by such rules of mental DEMO (effort
saving) as the general tendency to accept the problem as given and the
segregation of the decision problem at hand from its DEMO context. In
addition, during the course of constructing a heuristic, decision-makers may
cycle between noticing aspects or characteristics of the choice set (e.g.
extreme values across alternatives) and deciding how to exploit those aspects.
Perceptual frameworks may be most relevant for the noticing process, where-
as cosUbenefit notions may be more relevant for determining what to do to
take DEMO of what has been noticed. A third opportunity for integrating
the two frameworks would be to consider that individuals' assessments of
costs and benefits for any heuristic may be greatly influenced by perceptual
concerns such as DEMO information is presented or how the problem is framed.
The concepts of multiple strategies and constructive decision-making also
provide a point of integration between DEMO research and other areas of
psychology. For example, Weber et al (1991) suggest that research on
memory processes can shed light on the possible decay, distortion, or confu-
sion of intermediate computations in the DEMO (implementation) of a
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH
117
decision strategy. They also suggest that the idea DEMO parallel processing in
memory may require a rethinking of our measures of decision effort. Another
area of integration is between the concept of decision DEMO and mood or
affect (Isen 1987; Mano 1992). Mano, DEMO instance, shows that people employ
simpler strategies when under distress.
APPLICATIONS
DEMO decision research is often motivated by the desire to improve the
decision-making process. Several approaches to improving decisions are
identifiable in the literature. Some DEMO changes in the task environment
facing the decision-maker. For example, the DEMO that decision behavior is
often descriptively variant (i.e. information presentation matters) suggests
that decisions might be improved through rather straightforward, inexpensive
changes to the information environments in which individuals make judg-
ments and choices.
Other DEMO, such as decision analysis, stress changes in the capacity
of the decision-maker for dealing with decision tasks. The concept of in-
formation-processing limits DEMO decision behavior, for instance, suggests that
tasks might be restructured (DEMO) to make required judgments and
choices easier for the decision-maker and DEMO more accurate. Decision
analysts also often try to improve directly the capacity of a decision-maker to
cope with complex decisions through the provision of DEMO aids such as
computer-based decision support systems and through training in statistical
and decision·-theoretic reasoning. Of course, combinations of improvements
in information provision, DEMO of tasks, decision aids, and training
are possible.
The approaches to aiding decision mentioned above can be thought of as
methods for improving DEMO match between task and person. An alternative
approach is to replace the computations or processing done in the head with an
automated decision procedure (a formula or model). Finally, when societal
decisions (e.g. whether DEMO improve some aspect of the environment at some
cost to the public) affect, or depend upon, the preferences of others, providing
decision-makers DEMO better information on the values and beliefs of other
people should also improve the decision process (see Lichtenstein et al 1990,
for a discussion of some of the dilemmas facing a societal decision-maker).
Changing DEMO Environments to Aid Decisions.
The great adaptability of human decision behavior makes it possible to
improve decisions by improving the information environments in which
DEMO are made. For example, the processing of current information can
be DEMO cognitively easier-.. -without making more information available.
118
PAYNE ET AL
That is, the processability of currently available information can be improved
(Russo 1977).
In a now classic study, DEMO ( 1977) showed that providing a rank-ordered
list of unit-price information DEMO the point of purchase resulted in shifts in
purchasing patterns and increased cost savings for consumers. In a recent
extension of that study, Russo et al ( 1986) found that using an organized
display to provide nutritional information on proteins, minerals, and vitamins
had little impact on DEMO behavior; but when the nutritional information
concerned negative attributes such as DEMO, sugar, and calories, the orga-
nized information display had an DEMO Russo et al offer a cost/benefit
explanation of this difference in results: Most consumers were not concerned
about deficiencies in vitamins, but DEMO were concerned about getting too
much sodium, sugar, and calories. The importance of improved formats is
also borne out in studies of hazard-warning DEMO on household products
(Viscusi et al 1986) and the provision of information on radon in homes
(Smith et al 1988).
The processability of information depends on the congruence between (a)
the format and organization of information and (b) the type of processing
(judgment) DEMO be done (Bettman et al 1986). There are two basic DEMO
to congruence. The first, a reactive approach, is to attempt to determine how
decision-makers are currently processing information and to make that pro-
DEMO easier. Typical displays of information in Consumer Reports illustrate
this approach. Consumers would generally like to compare information on
several attributes across several alternatives. DEMO providing matrix displays of
such information and by using comparative rating scales, Consumer Reports
makes any comparison process easier. A second and more proactive approach
is to determine the types of processing one wishes to encourage DEMO then
design formats that facilitate such processing. The Russo unit-price study is
an example of this approach if one wanted to encourage comparisons based
DEMO unit price, since the rank-ordered list contained only that information for
DEMO various brands. This latter approach may be particularly relevant for
public policy decision-makers, although obvious issues arise concerning the
degree to which processing should be guided.
Decision Analysis
Decision analysis is a set of methods and DEMO designed to help people
structure and simplify the task of making complex, confusing, and stressful
decisions. Decision analysis depends heavily on human assessments DEMO beliefs
and/or preferences as inputs. Increasingly, decision analysis as a DEMO of
research and practice is sensitive to the contingent nature of decision be-
havior. Behavioral research is causing decision theorists to revise both models
DEMO procedures (Watson & Buede 1987; von Winterfeldt & Edwards 1986).
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH
119
Bell (1985), for example, suggests that DEMO factors such as the
possibility of disappointment or regret might well be included in formal
decision analyses. Instead of the alternative-focused thinking that is DEMO in
most decision problems, Keeney ( 1988) suggests that people would be better
served by a more value-focused approach, in which one asks whether one
could do better in achieving one's values than is DEMO by the most readily
apparent alternatives. Keller & Ho (1988) offer suggestions for how new
alternatives might be constructed.
As noted above, a key feature of decision analysis is the incorporation of
human beliefs and DEMO into the analysis. The essential idea is to
provide a structure by means of which a complex decision problem may be
decomposed into a DEMO of cognitively simpler judgments. Research con-
tinues on how decomposition of judgments might improve decisions (Henrion
et al 1992; MacGregor et al 1988; Ravinder et al 1988); however, the
constructive nature of even the simplest tradeoff and belief judgments raises
questions regarding the validity of the DEMO inputs into decision analy-
ses. Consequently, a variety of new methods DEMO been proposed for eliciting
the beliefs and values necessary to operationalize decision models. These new
methods are designed to avoid some of the context DEMO influencing pro-
bability and preference assessments. For instance, the most common DEMO
cedures for assessing von Neumann-Morgenstern utility functions involve the
matching of a sure-thing option with a gamble. This procedure is subject to
the so-called DEMO effect, in which outcomes that occur with certainty are
given more DEMO McCord & de Neufville ( 1986) have suggested a utility-
assessment DEMO designed to reduce this effect that involves the comparison
of one gamble against a second gamble. Another approach commonly sug-
gested for dealing with DEMO judgments is sensitivity analysis, in which
utility is measured in several DEMO and any discrepancies are explicitly
reconciled by the decision-maker (von Winterfeldt & Edwards 1986). One of
the major advantages of the new computer-based packages for decision
analysis is the ease with which such sensitivity analysis DEMO be conducted.
Finally, Slovk et al ( 1988) discuss how a deeper understanding of task and
context effects could help us deliberately to DEMO our own preferences
more effectively, a proactive approach to contingent decision DEMO
Formulas or Models Versus Heads
The focus of our review so far has been on understanding how a decision-
maker combines or processes information DEMO Alternatively, a decision-
maker could use a mathematical, statistical, or DEMO procedure to
combine the information when asked to make a judgment or choice. The
process of combining information in the head is often called DEMO judg-
120
PAYNE ET AL
ment. The use of a formula or model DEMO combine information may involve the
automation of a human judge's decision rules, or it may reflect empirically
established relations between data and the outcomes of interest-i.e. an
actuarial approach (Dawes et al 1989). Numerous studies have shown that
judgments are generally better if made using a DEMO (Dawes et al 1989;
Kleinmuntz 1990), and organizations do DEMO fof!J1ulas instead of clinical
judgment for some decision problems. The use of statistical judgment in place
of clinical is more the exception than the DEMO, however. Consequently, recent
research has emphasized two questions. First, what DEMO influence the use
of an automated decision procedure? Second, how can models and humans
complement rather than compete with one another as decision DEMO?
Dawes et al ( 1989) suggest several reasons why we DEMO use our heads
instead of formulas: lack of familiarity with the DEMO showing the benefits
of formulas, a belief that the evidence does DEMO apply to case-by-case de-
cisions, and an inflated belief in the DEMO of clinical judgment. Klein-
muntz ( 1990) offers several other reasons DEMO formulas are not often used,
including the error possibilities in the execution of a formula (Hammond et al
1987). Arkes et al (1986) show empirically that a simple decision formula was
used less DEMO solving a probabilistic judgment task when incentives for per-
formance existed, DEMO outcome feedback was available, and when people
felt themselves to have DEMO domain expertise. Under the conditions of
incentives, feedback, and felt expertise, people frequently shift strategies,
apparently in the hope that they will be able to beat the odds inherent in the
probabilistic nature of DEMO judgment task.
Einhorn (1986) suggests that people generally find it difficult to accept
some level of explicit error associated with the use of DEMO decision rule, even
though the use of the statistical rule would DEMO to fewer overall errors in
prediction. Einhorn ( 1986) also suggests DEMO the degree to which one decides
to use a statistical formula depends on whether one believes the phenomenon
being predicted is inherently random (a formula is more likely) or systematic
in nature; and as Einhorn DEMO, people tend to believe even random events are
systematic (see also Gilovich et al 1985; Lopes & Oden 1987). Similarly,
Kahneman & Tversky (1982) hypothesize that the laws of probability are
more DEMO to be accepted (and used) when uncertainty is attributed to the
external world and a distributional mode of reasoning is adopted. Given the
DEMO nature of probabilistic reasoning, one might be able to frame
problems DEMO being more external and distributional and thus increase the
acceptability of formal statistical and decision models.
An old idea that has received much recent DEMO is to combine the use of
formulas and judgment in the head. One approach is to use experts to measure
the inputs to a DEMO but to combine the subjective inputs mechanically (e.g.
Libby & Libby DEMO). At a more aggregated level, a judgment from a model
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH
121
and an intuitive judgment might be integrated in DEMO ways. The model
might be used as one input to be combined with other information known to
the decision-maker (Peterson & Pitz 1986). The model could also be used as a
baseline judgment, which should only be modified by the judge in special
cases. Finally, the judgment by formula and the judgment in the head might
be aggregated using DEMO formula--e. g. 50% human judgment and 50%
model (Blattberg & Hoch DEMO).
The Measurement of Values
The measurement of human values (preferences) has practical significance in
a number of different domains. Marketing, for example, has long been
concerned with understanding and predicting the preferences of consumers in
the hope that such understanding will lead to better managerial decisions
(Green & Srinivasan 1990). Sophisticated methods of measuring preferences
are also DEMO used to guide decisions in a variety of nontraditional areas, such
DEMO medicine, law, and public policy (Keeney et al 1990). DEMO example, the
method of contingent valuation (CVM) is being used DEMO assess the value of
environmental goods (Cummings et al 1986; Fischhoff & Furby 1988; Mitch-
ell & Carson 1989) both to guide DEMO decisions about protection of the
environment and to establish liability in the case of damages to the environ-
ment. A contingent valuation (CV) DEMO typically involves the assessment of
tradeoffs by a large sample of respondents. Essentially, CV studies assess
preferences by asking a respondent to match an option defined by an environ-
mental good (level of air quality) DEMO a clearly specified level (1) and a wealth
level ( l) against a second option defined by an environmental good at a
specified second (more preferred) level (2) and an alternative (less preferred)
wealth level (2). In the typical willingness-to-pay (WTP) task, the respondent
is asked to specify an amount by which he/she would be willing to reduce
his/her current wealth leve}-.. j .e. DEMO down from level 1 to level 2-in order
to gain an environmental improvement--a move up from level 1 to level 2. A
subject of DEMO practical import is the extent to which the assessed value of a
public good (e.g. clean air) is contingent on a host of DEMO variables
(such as the order in which questions are asked~ whether DEMO matches by
considering a potential gain or a potential loss in the level of a public good; or
whether the i;:vent to DEMO assessed--environmental damage-may occur or has
already occurred) (Kahneman & Knetsch 1992; Schulze & McClelland 1990).
The constructive nature of human preferences, DEMO in domains
where people do not commonly make tradeoff decisions, raises DEMO question
of the extent to which any technique such as CV creates values as much as it
reveals them. Fischhoff & Furby ( 1988) offer one response to the labile
(constructive) nature of values that DEMO a careful provision of infor-
mation to the respondent. Gregory & McDaniels ( 1987) suggest another
122
PAYNE ET AL
approach that involves the explicit construction of values DEMO multi-attribute
decision analysis. On the other hand, in the spirit of DEMO theory, one
should also ask whether there is an alternative to DEMO measurement, however
flawed, of individual values as input to policy decisions. Using an un-
structured intuitive approach to judge the value of some DEMO good
may be even more biased. Ignoring the value of an environmental good
because it is difficult to measure is a questionable response. We DEMO that
increased understanding of the details of procedural and descriptive variance
can lead to the development of better value assessment tools.
CONCLUSION
Behavioral decision DEMO has made much progress between 1983 and
1991. We now better understand and appreciate the constructive nature of
decision behavior. Behavioral decision research is DEMO being used in-
creasingly to inform a variety of applied areas of study, including health,
business, and public policy.
The highly contingent DEMO of decision behavior both poses problems
(costs) and creates opportunities (DEMO) for decision researchers. At the
theoretical level, the fact that decision processes are not invariant across task
environments complicates the search for a DEMO set of underlying principles
(models) that can describe behavior. In addition, as noted by Hogarth &
Einhorn (1991), the importance and pervasiveness of task and context effects
may create a view of decision DEMO as a fragmented and chaotic fiekL
Nonetheless, as researchers ask questions DEMO the conditions under which
different types of information and different decision processes are likely to be
used, generalizations about decision behavior seem to be emerging. Well
established, for example, are the effects of task complexity DEMO decision
strategy use, the importance of the gain-vs-loss distinction in both DEMO and
riskless preference, and the prevalence of the anchoring and adjustment
DEMO in judgment. In addition, phenomena like loss aversion suggest that
general DEMO of value can be discovered. Thus, the constructivist view
does not DEMO that there is no reflection of underlying beliefs and values in
generating a decision.
Also on the theoretical level, the need to predict and explain the con-
structive aspects of decision behavior should contribute to a DEMO integra-
tion of decision research with other areas of psychology. For example, Norm
Theory, which emphasizes context as a factor in making decisions (Kahne-
man & Miller 1986), clearly depends on cognitive psychology and DEMO un-
derstanding of how memory is structured and operates. Similarly, Ginossar &
Trope ( 1987) stress that the strategies used for assessing beliefs will depend
on the same cognitive factors that influence use of procedural DEMO in
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH
123
other task domains. Finally, the importance of accountability, justifiability,
and argument-based reasoning in decision-making helps reinforce the long-
standing connections between decision research and social/organizational
psychology.
The constructive and contingent DEMO of decision behavior has important
implications at the level of application as well. We have summarized some of
those implications for the design of DEMO environments, the practice of
decision analysis, the design of combined judgment/formula decision sys-
tems, and the! measurement of values. Behavioral decision research continues
to reflect a rich interplay between basic and applied disciplines and DEMO
descriptive and prescriptive concerns.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Support for this review was provided by the Office of Naval Research and the
National Science Foundation. In addition, the support of our respective
institutions and the Graduate School of Management, University of Califor-
nia, Irvine is gratefully acknowledged. We also wish to thank Jonathan
Baron, Colin Camerer, Gregory Fischer, Robin Hogarth, and DEMO Tversky
for their comments on an earlier draft of the manuscript.
Literature Cited
Abelson, R. P., Levi, A. 1985. Decision mak-
ing and decision theory. In The Handbook
of Social Psychology, Vol. l, ed. DEMO Lind-
zey, E. Aronson. New York: Random
House
Alba, J. DEMO, Hutchinson, J. W. 1987. Di-
mensions of consumer expertise. J Con-
sum. Res. 13:411-54
Alloy, L. B., Tabachnik, N. 1984. Assess-
ment of covariation by humans and animals:
the joint influence of DEMO expectations and
current situational information. Psycho/.
Rt~V. 91: 112-49
Anderson, J. R. 1982. Acquisition of cogni-
tive skill. Psvchol. Rev. 89:369-406
DEMO, H. R., Blumer, C. 1985. The psychol-
ogy of sunk DEMO Organ. Behav. Hum.
Decis. Process. 35:124-40
Arkes, H. R., Dawes, R. M., Christensen. C.
1986. Factors influencing the use of a DEMO
sion rule in a probabilistic task. Organ. Be-
hav. Hum. Decis. Process. 37:93-1 IO
Aschenbrenner, K. M. 1984. Moment versus
dimension-oriented theories of risky choice:
a (fairly) ge:neral test involving single-
peaked DEMO J. Exp. Psycho/..
Learn. Mem. Cogn. 10:513--35
Ashton, R. DEMO 1992. Pressure and perfor-
mance in accounting decision settings: para-
doxical DEMO of incentives, feedback, and
justification. J. Acct. Res. In press
Ashton, R. H., Kleinmuntz, D. N., Sullivan,
J. B., Tomassini, L. A. 1989. Audit deci-
sion making. In Research Opportunities in
Auditing: The Second Decade, ed. A. R.
Abdel-Khalik, I. Solomon, pp. DEMO
Sarasota, FL: Am. Account. Assoc., Audit-
ing Sect.
Bar-Hillel, M. 1984. Representativeness and
fallacies of probability judgment. Acta Psy-
cho/. 55:DEMO
Bar-Hillel, M. 1990. Back to base-rates. See
Hogarth 1990, pp. 200-16
Baron, J. 1988. Thinking and Deciding. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge Univ. Press
DEMO, M. H. 1990. Judgment in Man-
agerial Decision Making. New York: John
Wiley. 2nd ed.
Beach, L. R. 1990. Image Theory: Decision
DEMO in Personal and Organizational
Contexts. New York: John Wiley
Beach, L. R., Barnes, V. E., Christensen-
Szalanski, J. J. J. 1986. DEMO heuristics
and biases: a contingency model of judg-
mental forecasting. J. DEMO 5: 14 3-
57
Beach, L. R., Mitchell, T. R. 1978. A contin-
gency model for the selection of decision
strategies. Acad. DEMO Rev. 3:439-49
Beach, L. R., Mitchell, T. R. 1987. DEMO
theory: principles, plans, and goals in deci-
sion making. Acta DEMO 66:201-20
124
PAYNE ET AL
Beattie, J., Baron, J. 1992. Investigating the
effect of stimulus range on attribute weight.
J. Exp. Psycho/.: Hum. Percept. Perform.
In press
Becker, J. L., Sarin, R. K. 1987. Lottery
dependent utility. Manage. Sci. 33:1367-82
Bell, D. E. 1982. Regret in decision making
under uncertainty. Oper. Res. 30:961-81
Bell, D. E. 1985. Disappointment in decision
making under uncertainty. Oper. Res. 33:1-
27
DEMO, U., Rapoport, A., Yagil, J. 1989.
Discount rates inferred DEMO decisions: an
experimental study. Manage. Sci. 35:270-
84
Ben Zur, H., Breznitz, S. J. 1981. The effects
of time pressure on DEMO choice behavior.
Acta Psycho/. 47:89-104
Bettman, J. R., Johnson, E. J., Payne, J. W.
1990. A componential analysis of cognitive
effort in choice. Organ. Behav. Hum. De-
cis. Process. 45:111-39
Bettman, J. R. , Kakkar, P. 1977. Effects of
information presentation format on con-
sumer information acquisition strategies. J.
Consum. Res. 3:233-40
Bettman, J. R., Park, C. W. 1980. Effects of
prior knowledge, experience, DEMO phase of
the choice process on consumer decision
processes: a protocol DEMO J. Consum.
Res. 7:234-48
Bettman, J. R., Payne, J. DEMO, Staelin, R.
1986. Cognitive considerations in designing
effective labels for presenting risk informa-
tion. J. Mark. Pub. Pol. 5:1-28
Bettman, J. R., Sujan, M. 1987. Effects of
framing on evaluation of comparable and
DEMO alternatives by expert and
novice consumers. J. Consum. Res. 14:
141-54
Biehal, G. J., Chakravarti, D. 1986. Consum-
ers' use of DEMO and external information
in choice: macro and micro processing per-
spectives. DEMO Consum. Res. 12:382-405
Biggs, S. F., Bedard, J. C., Gaber, B. G.,
Linsmeier, T. J. 1985. The effects of DEMO
size and similarity on the decision behavior
of bank loan officers. Manage. Sci. 31:970-
87
Billings, R. S., Marcus, S. A. 1983. Measures
of compensatory and noncompensatory
models of decision behavior: process tracing
versus policy capturing. Organ. Behav.
Hum. Perform. 31:331-52
Blattberg, R. C., DEMO, S. J. 1990. Database
models and managerial intuition: 50% mod-
el and 50% manager. Manage. Sci. 36:887-
99
Bostic, R., Herrnstein, R. J., Luce, R. D.
1990. The effect on the preference-reversal
DEMO of using choice indifferences.
J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 13:193-212
Brehmer, DEMO 1990. Strategies in real-time
dynamic decision making. See Hogarth
1990, pp. DEMO
Budescu, D. V., Weinberg, S., Wallsten, T.
S. 1988. DEMO based on numerically
and verbally expressed uncertainties. J.
Exp. Psycho/.: DEMO Percept. Perform.
14:281-94
Bunn, D., Wright, G. 1991. Interaction DEMO
judgmental and statistical forecasting
methods: issues & analysis. Manage. Sci.
37:DEMO
Butler, S. A. 1986. Anchoring in the judg-
mental evaluation of DEMO samples.
Account. Rev. 61:101-11
Camerer, C. F. 1987. Do biases DEMO probability
judgment matter in markets? Experimental
evidence. Am. Econ. Rev. 77:DEMO
Camerer, C. F. 1989. An experimental test of
several generalized utility DEMO J. Risk
Uncertain. 2:61-104
Camerer, C. 1992. The rationality of DEMO
and volume in experimental markets.
Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. In
press
Camerer, C., Johnson, E. J. 1991. The pro-
cess-performance paradox in expert judg-
ment: How can experts know so much and
predict so badly? In Toward a General
Theory of Expertise: Prospects and Limits,DEMO
ed. A. Ericsson, J. Smith, pp. 195-207.
Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. DEMO
Carroll, J. S., Bazerman, M. H., Maury, R.
1988. DEMO cognition: a descriptive
approach to negotiators understanding their
opponents. Organ. Behav. DEMO Decis.
Process. 41:352-70
Casey, J. T. 1991. Reversal of the DEMO
reversal phenomenon. Organ. Behav. Hum.
Decis. Process. 48:224-51
Chi, M. DEMO H., Glaser, R., Farr, M. J., eds.
1988. The DEMO of Expertise. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Coupey, E. 1990. Decision Restructuring in
consumer Choice. PhD thesis. Fuqua
School of Business, Duke Univ.
Cox, A. D., Summers, J. D. 1987. Heuristics
and biases in the intuitive projection of retail
sales. J. Mark. Res. 24:290-97
Crandall, C. S., Greenfield, B. 1986. Un-
derstanding the conjunction fallacy: a con-
junction of effects? Soc. Cognit. 4:408-19
Creyer, E. H., Bettman, J. R., Payne, J. W.
1990. The impact of accuracy and effort
feedback and goals on adaptive decision be-
havior. J. Behav. DEMO Making 3:1-16
Cummings, R. G., Brookshire, D. S.,
DEMO, W. D. 1986. Valuing Environmen-
tal Goods: An assessement of the Con-
tingent Valuation Method. Totawa, NJ:
Rowman & Allanheld
Curley, DEMO P., Yates, J. F. 1985. The center
and range of the probability interval as
factors affecting ambiguity preferences.
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH
125
Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process.
36:273-87
Curley, S. P., Yates, J. F. 1989. An empirical
evaluation of decriptive DEMO of ambigu-
ity reactions in choice situations. J. Math.
Psycho!. 33:397-427
Curley, S. P., Yates, J. F., Abrams. R. A.
1986. DEMO sources of ambiguity
avoidance. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis
Process. 38:230-56
Davis, H L., Hoch, S. J., Ragsdale, E. K.
1986. An anchoring and adjustment model
of spousal predictions. J. Consum. Res.
13:25-37
DEMO, R. M., Faust, D., Meehl, P. E. 1989.
Clinical DEMO actuarial judgment. Science
243: 1668-74
Dube-Rioux, L., Russo, J. E. 1988. An
availability bias in professional judgment.
J. Behav. o~~cis. Making 1:DEMO
Edwards, W. 11954. The theory of decision
making. Psycho/. Bull. DEMO:380-417
Einhorn, H. J. 1980. Leaming from experi-
ence and suboptimal DEMO in decision mak-
ing. In Cognitive Processes in Choice and
Decision Behavior, ed. T. S. Wallsten. pp.
1--20. Hillsdale. NJ: Erlbaum
Einhorn, H. J. 1986. Accepting error to make
less error. J. Personal. Assess. 50:DEMO
Einhorn, H. J., Hogarth, R. M. 1975. Unit
weighting schemes DEMO decision making.
Organ. Behav .. Hum. Perform. 13:171-92
Einhorn, H. DEMO, Hogarth, R. M. 1981. Be-
havioral decision theory: processes of DEMO
ment and choice. Annu. Rev. Psycho!.
32:53-88 .
Einhorn, H DEMO .J., Hogarth, R. M. 1985.
Ambiguity and uncertainty in probabilistic
inference. Psycho/. Rev. 93:433-61
Einhorn, H.J., Hogarth, R. M. l986a. Deci-
sion making under ambiguity .. J. Bus .. 59:
5225-50
DEMO, H.J., Hogarth, R. M. 1986a. Judg-
ing probable cause. Psycho[. DEMO 99:3-19
Eisenhardt, K. M. 1989. Making fast strategic
decisions in DEMO velocity environments.
Acad. Manage. J. 32:543-76
Ellsberg, D. 1961. Risk, ambiguity, and the
Savage axioms. Q. J. Econ. 75:643-69
Erev, DEMO, Cohen, B. L. 1990. Verbal versus
numerical probabilities: efficiency, biases,
and the preference paradox. Organ. Behav.
Hum. Decis. Process. 45:1--18
DEMO, N. S., Miller, P. M. 1987. The effects
of decision DEMO on choice of risky vs.
certain options. Organ. Behav. Hum. De-
cis. Process. 39:264-77
Fischer, G, W., Damodaran, W., Laskey, DEMO
B., Lincoln, ID. 1987. Preferences for proxy
attributes. Manage. Sci. 33:198-214
Fischer, G. W., Hawkins, S. A. 1989. The
prominence bias in multiattribute decision
making: Scale compatibility., strategy com-
..
patibility and DEMO wntingent strategies hy-
pothesis. Working paper, Carnegie Mellon
Univ.
Fischer, G. W., Kamlet, M. S., Fienberg, S.
E., Schkade, D. DEMO Risk preferences for
gains and losses in multiple objective deci-
sion making. Manage. Sci. 32:1065-86
Fischhoff, B. 1975. Hindsight * foresight: the
DEMO of outcome knowledge on judgment
under uncertainty. J. Exp. Psycho/.: DEMO
Percept. Perform. 1:288-99
Fischhoff, B. 1983. Predicting frames. J. Exp.
DEMO: Learn. Mem. Cogn. 9:103-16
Fischhoff, B. Furby, L. 1988. DEMO val-
ues: a conceptual framework for interpreting
transactions with special reference DEMO con-
tingent valuations of visibility. J. Risk Un-
certain. 1: 147-84
DEMO, B., Slovic P., Lichtenstein, S.
1978. Fault trees: sensitivity DEMO estimated
failure probabilities to problem representa-
tion. J. Exp. Psycho!.: Hum. DEMO Per-
form. 1:330-44
Folkes, V. S. 1988. The availability heuristic
DEMO perceived risk. J. Consum. Res. 15:13-
23
Fong. G. T., DEMO, D. H., Nisbett, R. E.
1986. The effects of statistical DEMO on
thinking about everyday problems. Cogn.
Psrchol. 18:253-92
Ford: J. DEMO, Schmitt, N., Schechtman, S. L.,
Hults, B. M., Doherty, M. L. 1989. Pro-
cess tracing methods: contributions, prob-
lems, and neglected research questions.
Orxan. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process.
43:75--117
Froot. K. A., Thaler, R. H. 1990. Anoma-
lies---foreign exchange. J. Econ. DEMO
4:179-92
Frisch, D., Baron, J. 1988. Ambiguity and
rationality, J. Behav. Decis. Making 1:149-
57
Gaeth, G. J., Shanteau, J. 1984. Reducing the
influence of irrelevant information on ex-
perienced decision DEMO Organ. Behav.
Hum. Perform. 33:263-82
Garb, H. N. 1989. Clinicialjudgment, clinical
training and professional experience. Psy-
cho!. Bull. 105:387-96
Gardenfors, P., Sahlin, N. 1983. Decision
making with unreliable probabilities. Brit.
./ . . Math. Stat. Psycho/. 36:240-51
Gettys, C. F., Pliske, R. M., Manning, C.,
Casey, J. T. 1987. An evaluation of human
act generation performance. Organ. Behav.
Hum. Decis. Process. 39:23-51
DEMO, G., Hell, W., Blank, H. 1988.
Presentation and content: the use of base
rates as a continuous variable . ./. DEMO Psy-
cho/ ... Hum. Percept. Perform. 14:513-
25
Giiovich, T., Vallone, R., Tversky, A. 1985.
The hot hand in basketball: on the mis-
126
PAYNE ET AL
perception of random sequences. Cogn.
Psycho/. 17:DEMO
Ginossar, Z., Trope, Y. 1987. Problem solv-
ing in judgment DEMO uncertainty. J. Pers.
Soc. Psycho/. 17:464-74
Goldstein, W. M. DEMO Judgments ofrelative
importance in decision making: global vs.
local interpretations of DEMO weight.
Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 47:
313-36
Goldstein, W. DEMO, Einhorn, H. J. 1987. Ex-
pression theory and the preference reversal
phenomena. Psycho/. Rev. 94:236-54
Green, P. E., Srinivasan, V. 1990. Conjoint
analysis in marketing research: new de-
velopments and directions. J. Market. 54:3-
19
Gregory, R., McDaniels, T. 1987. Valuing
environmental losses: What promise does
the right measure hold? Policy Sci. 20:DEMO
26
Grether, D. M., Plott, C. 1979. Economic
theory of DEMO and the preference reversal
phenomenon. Am. Econ. Rev. 69:623-38
Grether, DEMO M., Schwartz, A., Wilde, L. L.
1986. The irrelevance of information over-
load: an analysis of search and disclosure.
S. Calif. Law Rev. 59:277-303
Grether, D. M., Wilde, L. L. 1983. Consumer
choice and information: new experimental
evidence. Inform. Econ. Policy 1:115-44
Hammond, K. R., Hamm, R. M., Grassia, J.,
Pearson, DEMO 1987. Direct comparison of the
efficacy of intuitive and analytical cognition
in expert judgment. IEEE Trans. System.
Man. Cyber. 17:753-70
Harrison, G. 1989. Theory and misbehavior of
first price auctions. Am. Econ. Rev. 79:
DEMO
Hastie, R., Park, B. 1986. The relationship
between memory and DEMO depends on
whether the judgment task is memory-based
or on-line. Psycho/. Rev. 93:258-68
Hawkins, S. A., Hastie, R. 1990. Hindsight:
biased judgments of past events after the
outcomes are known. Psycho[. Bull. DEMO:
311-27
Hayes-Roth, B., Hayes-Roth, F. 1979. A
cognitive model DEMO planning. Cogn. Sci.
3:275-310
Heath, C., Tversky, A. 1991. DEMO and
belief: ambiguity and competence in choice
under uncertainty. J. Risk DEMO 4:5-
28
Henrion, M., Fischer, G. W., Mullin, DEMO
1992. Divide and conquer? Effects of de-
composition on the accuracy DEMO calibration
of subjective probability distributions.
Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. In
press
Hershey, J. C., Schoemaker, P. J. H. 1985.
Probability versus certainty equivalence
methods in utility measurement: Are they
equivalent? Manage. Sci. 31:DEMO
Hirt, E. R., Castellan, N. J. 1988. Probability
and category DEMO in the fault tree
paradigm. J. Exp. Psycho/.: Hum. Percept.
DEMO 14:122-31
Hoch, S. J., Ha, Y. 1986. Consumerleaming:
DEMO and the ambiguity of product
experience. J. Consum. Res. 13:221-33
Hogarth, R. M. 1987. Judgement and Choice.
New York: John Wiley. 2nd DEMO
Hogarth, R. M., ed. 1990. Insights in Deci-
sionMaking: A DEMO toHillelJ. Einhorn.
Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press
Hogarth, R. M., Einhorn, H.J. 1990. Venture
theory: a model of decision weights. Man-
age. Sci. 36:780-803
Hogarth, R. M., Einhorn, H. J. 1991. Order
effects in belief updating: the belief-
adjustment model. Cogn. Psychol. 23
Hogarth, DEMO M., Gibbs, B. J., McKenzie, C.
R. M., Marquis, M. A. 1991. Leaming
from feedback: exactingness and incentives.
J. Exp. Psycho/.: Learn. Mem. Cognit.
17:734-52
Hogarth, R. M., Kunreuther, DEMO 1985.
Ambiguity and insurance decisions. Am.
Econ. Rev. 75:386-90
Hogarth, DEMO M., Kunreuther, H. 1989. Risk,
ambiguity, and insurance. J. DEMO Un-
certain. 2:5-35
Huber, J., Payne, J. W., Puto, C. P. 1982.
Adding asymmetrically dominated alterna-
tives: violations of regularity DEMO the sim-
ilarity hypothesis. J. Consum. Res. 9:90-98
Huber, 0. DEMO Information-processing oper-
ators in decision making. In Process and
Structure in Human Decision Making, ed.
H. Montgomery, 0. Svenson, pp. 3-22.
Chichester: DEMO
Huber, V. L., Neale, M. A., Northcraft, G.
B. DEMO Decision bias and personnel selec-
tion strategies. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis.
Process. 40:136-47
Isen, A. 1987. Positive affect, cognitive pro-
cesses, and social behavior. Adv. Exp. Soc.
Psycho/. 20:203-53
Janis, I. L. 1989. Crucial Decisions. New
York: Free Press
Jarvenpaa, S. L. 1989. DEMO effect of task de-
mands and graphical format on information
processing strategies. Manage. Sci. 35:285-
303
Jarvenpaa, S. L. 1990. Graphic displays in
decision making-the visual salience effect.
J. Behav. Decis. Making 3:247-62
Joag, S. G., Mowen, J. C., Gentry, J. W.
1990. Risk DEMO in a simulated in-
dustrial purchasing task: the effects of single
DEMO multi-play decisions. J. Behav. De-
cis. Making 3:91-108
John, D. DEMO, Cole, C. A. 1986. Age differ-
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH
127
ences in :information processing: un-
derstanding deficits DEMO young and elderly
consumers. J. Consum. Res. 13:297-315
Johnson, E. DEMO, Meyer, R. M., Ghose, S.
1989. When choice models fail: com-
pensatory representations in negatively
correlated environments. J. Mark. Res.
26:255-70
Johnson, E. J., Payne, J. W. 1985. Effort and
accuracy in choice. Manage. Sci. 31:394-
414
Johnson, E. J., Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R.
1988. Information displays and preference
reversals. Organ. DEMO Hum. Dec. Pro·
cess 42:1-21
Johnson, E. J., Schkade, DEMO A. 1989. Bias in
utility assessments: further evidence and ex-
planations. DEMO Sci. 35:406-24
Johnson, M. D. 1984. Consumer choice strat-
egies DEMO comparing noncomparable altema ..
tives. J. Consum. Res. 11:741-53
Johnson, DEMO D. 1989. The differential pro-
cessing of product category and noncompar-
able choice alternatives. J. Consum. Re.~
16:300-9
Kahn, B. E., Sarin, R. K. 1988. Modeling
ambiguity in decisions under uncertainty. J.
Consum. Res. DEMO:265-72
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. 1992. Valuing
public goods: the purchase of moral satis-
faction. J. Econ. Environ. Manage. Jn press
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., Thaler, R.H.
1990. Experimental tests of DEMO endowment
effect and the Coase theorem. J. Polit
Econ. 98: 1325-48
DEMO, D., Lovallo, D. 1992. Timid de-
cisions and bold forecasts: a cognitive per·
spective on risk taking. In Fundamental
Issues in Strategy, ed.. R. Rumelt, D.
Schendel, D .. Teece. Cambridge, MA: DEMO
vard Univ. Press
Kahneman, D., Miller, D. T. 1986. Norm
DEMO: comparing reality to its alternatives.
Psycho/. Rev. 93:136-53
Kahneman, D., Snell, J. 1990. Predicting util-
ity. See Hogarth 1990, pp. 295--310
Kahneman, D., Tversky, A. 1973. On the
psychology of prediction. P sychol. Rev.
80:237-51
Kahnernan, D., Tversky, A. 1979. Prospect
theory: an analysis of decision making un-
der risk. Econometrica 47:263-91
Kahneman, D. Tversky, A 1982. Variants of
uncertainty. In Judgment Under DEMO
c11rtaintv: Heuristics and Biases, ed. D.
Kahnenian, P. Slovic, A. Tversky, pp.
509-20. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press
Kaplan, C. A., Simon, H. A. 1990. In search
of insight. Cogn. Psycho!. 22:DEMO
Keeney, R. L. 11988. Structuring for
problems of public interest. Re.1
DEMO:396-405
Keeney, R. L., Von Winterfeldt, D., Eppel,
T. 1990. Eliciting public values for complex
policy decisions. Manage. Sci. 36:1011-30
DEMO, G. 1987. Decision making under
stress: scanning of alternatives under con-
trollable and uncontrollable threats. J. Pers.
Soc. Psycho/. 52:639-44
Keller, K. L., Staelin, R. 1987. Effects of
quality and quantity of DEMO on deci-
sion effectiveness. J. Consum. Res. 14:
200-13
Keller, DEMO R., Ho, J. L. 1988. Decision prob-
lem structuring: generating DEMO IEEE
Trans. System. Man. Cyber. 18:715-28
Keren, G., Wagenaar, DEMO A. 1987. Violation
of utility theory in unique and repeated gam-
bles. J. Exp. Psycho!.: Learn. Mem. Cogn.
13:387-91
Klayman, J. 1985. DEMO's decision strat-
egies and their adaptation to task character-
istics. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process.
35:179-201
Klayman, J. 1988. Cue discovery in probabi-
listic environments: uncertainty and ex-
perimentation. J. Exp. Psycho!.: Learn.
DEMO Cogn. 14:317-30
Klayman, J., Ha, Y. 1987. Confirmation, dis-
confirmation, and information in hypothesis
testing. Psycho/. Rev. 94:211-28
Klein, N. M., Yadav, M. S. 1989. Context
effects on effort and accuracy in choice: an
enquiry into adaptive decision making. J.
Consum. Res. 15:411-21
Kleinrnuntz, B. 1990. Why we still use our
heads instead of formulas: toward an in-
tegrative approach .. Psycho/. Bull. 107:296-
310
Kramer, R. M. 1989. Windows of vulnerabil-
ity or cognitive illusions? Cognitive pro-
cesses and the nuclear arms race. J. Exp.
Soc. Psycho/. 25:79-100
Kruglanski, A. W. 1989. The psychology of
being "right": the problem of accuracy in
social perception and cognition. Psycho/.
Bull. 106:395-409
Langley, P., Simon, H. A., Bradshaw, G. L.,
Zytkow, J. M. 1987. Scientific Discovery:
Computational Explorations of the Creative
Process. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Larrick, R. P., Morgan, J. N., Nisbett, R. E.
1990. Teaching the use DEMO cost-t-.:mefit rea-
in everyday life. Psycho!. Sci.
1
Laughhunn, D. DEMO, Payne, J. W. 1984. The
impact of sunk outcomes on risky choice
behavior. INFOR (Can. J. Oper. Res. In-
form. Process.) 22: 151-81
Levi, A. S., Pryor, J. B. 1987. Use of the
availability heuristic in probability estimates
of future events: the effects of imagining
outcomes versus imagining reasons. Organ.
Behm> Hum. Decis .. Process. 40:219-34
128
PAYNE ET AL
Levin, I. P., Gaeth, G. J. 1988. How consum-
ers are affected by the framing of attribute
information before DEMO after consuming the
product. J. Consum. Res. 15:374-78
Libby, R. DEMO Availability and the genera-
tion of hypotheses in analytical review. J.
Account. Res. 23:648-67
Libby, R., Libby, P. A. 1989. Expert
measurement and mechanical combination
in control reliance decisions. Account. Rev.
64:729-47
Lichtenstein, M., Srull, T. K. 1985. Con-
ceptual and methodological issues in DEMO
ining the relationship between consumer
memory and judgment. In Psychological
Processes and Advertising Effects: Theory,
Research, and Application, ed. L. F.
Alwitt, A. A. Mitchell, pp. 113-128. Hills-
dale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
DEMO, S., Gregory, R., Slovic, P.,
Wagenaar, W. A. 1990. When lives are in
your hands: Dilemmas of the societal deci-
sion maker. See Hogarth 1990, pp. 91-106
Lichtenstein, S., Slovic, DEMO 1971. Reversals of
preference between bids and choices in gam-
bling decisions. J. Exp. Psycho/. 89:46-55
Lindberg, E., Garling, T., DEMO, H.
1989. Differential predictability of prefer-
ences and choices. J. Behav. DEMO Making
2:205-19
Linville, P. W., Fischer, G. W. 1991. DEMO
ences for separating or combining events. J.
Pers. Soc. Psycho/. 59:5-21
Loewenstein, G. F. 1988. Frames of mind in
intertemporal choice. Manage. Sci. 34:20(}-
14
Loomes, G., Sugden, R. 1987. Some im-
plications of a more general form of regret.
J. Econ. Theory DEMO:27(}-87
Lopes, L. L. 1981. Decision making in the
short DEMO J. Exp. Psycho/.: Hum. Learn.
Mem. 7:377-85
Lopes, L. L. 1987. Between hope and fear: the
psychology of risk. Adv. Exper. Soc. Psy-
cho/. 20:255-95
Lopes, L. L., Oden, G. C. 1987. Distinguish-
ing between random and nonrandom events.
J. Exp. Psycho/DEMO: Learn. Mem. Cogn.
13:392-400
Luce, R. D. 1990. Rational versus plausible
accounting equivalences in preference judg-
ments. Psycho/. Sci. 1:225-34
DEMO, R. D., Fishburn, P. C. 1991. Rank-and
sign-dependent linear utility DEMO for
finite first-order gambles. J. Risk Un-
certain. 1:29-59
Lusk, DEMO M., Hammond, K. R. 1991. Judg-
ment in a dynamic task: microburst forecast-
ing. J. Behav. Decis. Making 4:55-73
MacCrimmon, K. DEMO, Wehrung, D. A. 1990.
Characteristics of risk taking executives.
Manage. Sci. 36:422-35
MacGregor, D., Lichtenstein, S., Slovic, P.
1988. Structuring knowledge retrieval: an
analysis of decomposed quantitative judg-
ments. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Proc-
ess. 42:303-23
MacGregor, D., Slovic, P. 1986. Graphical
representation of judgmental information.
Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2:179-200
Machina, M. J. 1987. Decision-making in the
presence of risk. Science 236:537-43
Mano, H. 1992. Judgments under distress:
assessing the role of unpleasantness and
arousal in DEMO formation. Organ. Be-
hav. Hum. Decis. Process. In press
March, J. DEMO 1978. Bounded rationality,
ambiguity, and the engineering of choice.
Bell DEMO Econ. 9:587-608
McCord, M. R., DeNeufville, R. 1986. "Lot-
tery equivalents": reduction of the certainty
effect problem in utiltity assessment. DEMO
age. Sci. 32:56-60
Medin, D. L., Edelson, S. M. DEMO Problem
structure and the use of base-rate informa-
tion from experience. J. Exp. Psycho/.:
Gen. 117:68-85
Mellers, B. A., Ordonez, L. D., Birnbaum,
M. H. 1992. A change of process theory for
contextual effects and preference reversals
in risky decision making. Organ. Behav.
DEMO Decis. Process. In press
Meyer, R. J., Johnson, E. J. DEMO Informa-
tion overload and the nonrobustness of
linear models: a comment DEMO Keller and
Staelin. J. Consum. Res. 15:498-503
Mitchell, R. C., Carson, R. T. 1989. Using
Surveys to Value Public Goods: The DEMO
tingent Valuation Method. Washington,
DC: Resources for the Future
Mitchell, T. R., Beach L. R. 1990. " ... Do I
love thee? Let me count..." Toward an un-
derstanding of intuitive and automatic DEMO
sion making. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis.
Process. 47:1-20
Montgomery, H. DEMO Decision rules and
the search for a dominance structure: to-
wards DEMO process model of decision making.
In Analyzing and Aiding Decision Pro-
cesses, ed. P. C. Humphreys, 0. Svenson,
A. Vari, pp. 343-69. Amsterdam : North
Holland
Montgomery, H., Svenson, 0. 1983. A think-
aloud study of dominance structuring in de-
cision processes. In Aspiration Levels DEMO
Bargaining and Economic Decision Mak-
ing, ed. R. Tietz, pp. 366-83. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag
Noll, R. G., Krier, J. E. 1990. Some
plications of cognitive psychology for
regulation. J. Legal Stud. 19:747-79
Northcraft, G. B., Neale, M. A. 1987.
perts, amateurs, and real DEMO: an
choring-and-adjustment perspective
im-
risk
Ex-
an-
on
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH
129
property pricing decisions. Organ. Behav
Hum. De-:is. DEMO 39:84-97
Onken, J., Hastie, R., Revelle, W. 1985. DEMO
dividual differences in the use of simplifica-
tion strategies in a complex decision-
making task. J. Exp. Psychol.: Hum. Per-
cept. Perform. 11:14-27
Paese, P. W., Sniezek, J. A. 1991. Influences
on the appropriateness of confidence in
judgment: practice, effort, infonnation, and
decision-making. Organ. DEMO Hum. De-
cis. Process. 48:100-30
Payne, J. W., Bettman, DEMO R., Johnson, E. J.
1988. Adaptive strategy selection in deci-
sion making. J. Exp. Psycho/.: Learn.
Mem. Cogn. 14:534-52
Payne, DEMO W., Bettman, J. R., Johnson, E. J.
1990a. The adaptive decision maker: effort
and accuracy in choice. See Hogarth 1990,
pp. 129-53
Payne, J. W., Johnson, E. J., Bettman, J. R.,
Coupey, E. 1990b. Understanding con-
tingent choice: a computer simulation
DEMO IEEE Trans. System. Man. Cy ..
ber. 20:296--309
Payne, J. DEMO, Laughhunn, D. J., Crum •. R.
1984. Multiattribute risky choice DEMO:
the editing of complex prospects. Manage.
Sci. 30:1350-61
Peterson, DEMO K., Pitz, G. F. 1986. Explicit cue
weighting in a prediction task. Organ. Be-
hav. Hum. Decis. Process. 36:289--304
Puto, C. P. 1987. The framing of buying de-
cisions. J. Consum. Res. 14:301--15
DEMO, J. 1982. A theory of anticipated util-
ity. J. Econ. Behav. DEMO 3:323--43
Ranyard, R. 1989. Structuring and evaluating
simple monetary risks. DEMO Huber 1989, pp.
195-207
Ratneshwar, S., Shocker, A. D., DEMO, D.
W. 1987. Toward understanding the attrac-
tion effect: the implications of product stim-
ulus meaningfulness and familiarity. J.
Consum. Res. 13:520-33
DEMO, H. V., Klcinmuntz, D. N., Dyer, J.
S. 1988. DEMO reliability of subjective proba-
bilities obtained through decomposition.
Manage. Sci. 34:186-99
Redelmeir, D. A., Tversky, A. 1990. Discrep-
ancy between medical decisions for in-
dividual patients and for groups. New Engl.
J. Med. 322:DEMO
Ritov, I. , Baron, J. l 990. Reluctance to vac-
cinate: omission bias and ambiguity. J. Be-
hav. Decis. Making 3:263-78
Russo, J. E. 1977. The value of unit price
information. J. Mark. Res. 14: 193--201
Russo, J. E., Dosher, B. A. 1983. Strategies
DEMO multiattJibute binary choice. J. Exp.
Psycho/.: LE~arn. Mem. Cogn. 9:DEMO
Russo, J. E., Staelin, R., Nolan, C.. A., Rus-
sell, G. J.., Metcalf, B. L. 1986. Nutrition
..
information in the supermarket. J. Consum.
Res. 13:48-70
Samuelson, W., Zeckhauser, R. 1988. Status
quo bias in decision making. J. Risk Un-
certain. 1 :7-59
Schkade, D. A., Johnson, E. J. 1989. Cogni-
tive processes in preference reversals.
Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 44:
203-31
Schneider, S. L. , Lopes, L. L. 1986. Reflec-
tion in preferences under risk: Who and
when may suggest why. J. Exp. Psycho/.:
Hum. Percept. Perform. 12:535-48
Schoemaker, P. J. H. 1990. Are risk attitudes
related across domains and response modes?
Manage. Sci. 36: 1451-63
Schulze, W., McClelland, G. 1990. The
robustness of values from contingent valua-
tion surveys. Paper presented at Meet. Soc.
Judgment and Decision Making, New
Orleans
Schwartz, S., Griffin, T. 1986. Medical
Thinking: The DEMO of Medical Judg-
ment and Decision Making. New York:
Springer-Verlag
Segal, U. 1989. Axiomatic representation of
expected utility with rank-dependent proba-
bilities. Ann. Oper. Res. 19:359-73
Shafer, G. 1986. Savage revisted. Stat. Sci.
1:463-85
Shafer, G., Tversky, A. 1985. Languages and
designs for probability judgment. Cogn.
Sci. 9:309-39
Shafir, E. B., Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E.
1989. An advantage model of choice. J.
Behav. DEMO Making 2:1-23
Shanteau, J. 1988. Psychological characteris-
tics and strategies DEMO expert decision mak-
ers. Acta Psycho/. 68:203-15
Shedler, J., Manis, M. 1986. Can the
availability heuristic explain vividness
effects? J. DEMO Soc. Psycho/. 51:26-36
Shepard, R. N. 1964. On subjectively DEMO
timum selections among multi-attribute
alternatives. In Human Judgments and Op-
timality, DEMO M. W. Shelby, G. L. Bryan,
pp, 257-81. New York: Wiley
Shields, M. D. 1983. Effects of infonnation
supply and demand DEMO judgment accuracy:
evidence from corporate managers.
Account. Rev. 58:284-303
Siegel, S. 1957. Level of aspiration and
decision making. Psycho/. Rev. 64:253-
62
Simon, H. A. 1955. A behavioral model of
rational choice. Q. J. Econ. 69:99-118
Simon, H. A. 1978. Rationality as process and
as product of thought. Am. Econ. Rev.
68:1--16
Simon, H. A. 1981. The Sciences of the Artifi-
cial. Cambridge, MA: MIT DEMO 2nd ed.
Simonson, I. 1989. Choice based on reasons:
130
PAYNE ET AL
the case of attraction and compromise
effects. J. DEMO Res. 16:158-74
Slovic, P. 1972. From Shakespeare to Simon:
DEMO and some evidence about
man's ability to process information. Ore-
gon Res. Inst. Bull. 12
Slovic, P. 1975. Choice between equally val-
ued alternatives. J. Exp. Psycho[.: Hum.
Percept. Perform. 1:28~87
Slovic, P., Griffin, D., Tversky, A. 1990.
Compatibility effects in judgment and
choice. See Hogarth 1990, pp. 5-27
Slovic, P., Lichtenstein, S. 1968. DEMO relative
importance of probabilities and payoffs in
risk taking. J. Exp. Psycho[. Monogr.
Suppl. 78: Part 2
Slovic, P., Lichtenstein, S., Fischhoff, B.
1988. Decision making. In Stevens' Hand-
book of Experimental Psychology. DEMO 2:
Learning and Cognition, ed. R. D. Atkin-
son, R. J. Hermstein, G. Lindzey, R. D.
Luce, pp. 673-738. New York: Wiley
Smith, V. K., Desvousges, W. H., Fisher, A.,DEMO
Johnson, F. R. 1988. Leaming about
radon's risk. J. Risk DEMO 1:233-58
Staw, B. M. 1981. The escalation of commit-
ment DEMO a course of action. Acad. Manage.
Rev. 6:577-87
Stevenson, M. DEMO 1986. A discounting model
for decisions with delayed positive or nega-
tive outcomes. J. Exp. Psychol.: Gen.
115:131-54
Stevenson, M. K., Busemeyer, J. R., Naylor,
J. C. 1990. Judgment and decision-making
theory. DEMO Handbook of Industrial and
Organizational Psychology, ed. M. D.
Dunnette, L. M. Hough, 1 :283-374. Palo
Alto: Consulting Psychologists Press. 2nd
ed.
Stone, D. N., Schkade, D. A. 1991. Numeric
and linguistic information representation in
multiattribute choice. Organ. Behav. Hum.
Decis. Process. 49:42-59
Sundstrom, G. A. 1987. Information search
and decision making: the effects of informa-
tion displays. Acta Psycho[. 65:165-79
Svenson, 0., Edland, A. 1987. Changes of
preferences under time pressure: choices
and judgments. Scand. J. Psycho/. 28:322-
30
Tetlock, P. E. 1985. Accountability: the ne-
DEMO social context of judgment and
choice. Res. Organ. Behav. 7:297-332
Thaler, R. H. 1985. Mental accounting and
consumer choice. Mark. Sci. 4:199-214
Thaler, R.H., Johnson, E. J. 1990. Gambling
with the house money and trying to break
even: the effects of prior outcomes on risky
choice. Manage. Sci. 36:643-60
Thuring, M., Jungermann, H. 1990. The con-
junction fallacy: Causality vs. event proba-
bility. J. Behav. Decis. Making 3:61-74
Tversky, A. 1969. Intransitivity of prefer-
ences. Psycho/. Rev. 76:31-48
Tversky, A. 1972. Elimination by aspects: a
theory of DEMO Psycho/. Rev. 79:281-99
Tversky, A. 1988. Context effects and DEMO
ment-based choice. Paper presented at the
Assoc. Consum. Res. Conf., Maui, Hawaii
Tversky, A., Kahneman, D. 1981. The fram-
ing of decisions and the psychology of
choice. Science 211:453-58
Tversky, A., Kahneman, D. 1983. Ex-
tensional versus intuitive reasoning: the
conjunction fallacy in probability judgment.
Psycho/. Rev. 90:293-315
Tversky, A., Kahneman, D. 1986. Rational
choice and the framing of decisions. J. Bus.
59:S251-78
Tversky, A., Kahneman, D. 1990. Cumula-
tive prospect theory: an analysis of decision
under uncertainty. Working paper, Stanford
Univ.
Tversky, A., Kahneman, DEMO 1992. Loss aver-
sion in riskless choice: a reference de-
pendent DEMO Q. J. Econ. In press
Tversky, A., Sattath, S., Slovic, P. 1988.
Contingent weighting in judgment and
choice. Psycho/. Rev. 95:371-84
Tversky, A., Slovic, P., Kahneman, D. 1990.
The determinants of preference reversal.
Am. Econ. Rev. 80:204--17
Viscosi, W. K., DEMO, W. A., Huber, J.
1986. Informational regulation of consumer
health DEMO: an empirical evaluation of
hazard warnings. Rand J. Econ. 17:351-65
DEMO Neumann, J., Morgenstern, 0. 1947.
Theory of Games and Economic DEMO
Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press. 2nd
ed.
Von Winterfeldt, D., Edwards, W. 1986. De-
cision Analysis and Behavioral Research.
Cambridge: Cambridge DEMO Press
Waller, W. S., Mitchell, T. R. 1984. The
effects DEMO context on the selection of deci-
sion strategies for the cost variance in-
vestigation problem. Organ. Behav. Hum.
Perform. 33:397-413
Wallsten, T. S. 1990. The costs and benefits
of vague information. See Hogarth 1990,
DEMO 28-43
Wallsten, T. S., Barton, C. 1982. Processing
probabilistic multidimensional DEMO
for decisions. J. Exp. Psychol.: Learn.
Mem. Cogn. 8:361-84
Watson, S. R., Buede, D. M. 1987. Decision
Synthesis: The Principles and Practice of
Decision Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge
Univ. Press
Weber, E. U., Anderson, C. J., Birnbaum, M.
H. 1992. A theory of perceived risk and
attractiveness. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis.
Process. In press
Weber, E. U., Goldstein, W. M., Busemeyer,
BEHAVIORAL DECISION RESEARCH
131
J. R. 1991. Beyond strategies: implications
of memory representations and memory
processes for models of judgment and deci-
sion making DEMO Relating Theory and Data:
Essays on Human Memory in Honor of Ben-
nett B. Murdock, ed. W. E. Hockley, S.
Lewandowsky. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum
Weber, M., Eisenfuhr, F., von Winterfeldt,
D. 1988. The effects of splitting attributes
on weights in multiattribute utility DEMO
ment. Manage. Sci. 34:431-45
Wedell, D. H., Bockenholt, U. DEMO Mod-
eration of preference reversals in the long
run. J. Exp. Psycho/.: Hum. Percept. Per-
form. 16:429-38
Wells, G. L. 1985. DEMO conjunction error and
the representativeness heuristic. Soc. Cogn.
3:266-79
Yates, DEMO F., Carlson, B. W. 1986. Conjunc-
tion errors: evidence for DEMO judgment
procedures, including 'signed summation'.
Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 37:
230-53
Zakay, D. l 985. Post-decisional confidence
and conflict experienced in a choice pro-
cess. Acta Psycho/. 58:75-80
..
Copyright of Annual Review of Psychology is the property of Annual Reviews DEMO and
its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv
without the copyright holder's express written DEMO However, users may print,
download, or email articles for individual use.{1g42fwefx}