Translation of Gambles and Aspiration Level Effects in Risky Choice Behavior
Author(DEMO): John W. Payne, Dan J. Laughhunn, Roy Crum
Source: DEMO Science, Vol. 26, No. 10 (Oct., 1980), pp. 1039-1060
Published by: INFORMS
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2631314 .
DEMO: 12/09/2011 23:46
Your use of the JSTOR archive DEMO your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at DEMO
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and DEMO upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
DEMO scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
INFORMS is DEMO with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Management Science.
DEMO://www.jstor.org
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
Vol. 26, No. 10, October 1980
Printed in U.S.A.
DEMO OF GAMBLES AND ASPIRATION LEVEL
EFFECTS IN RISKY CHOICE BEHAVIOR*
JOHN W. PAYNE, t DAN J. LAUGHHUNNt AND ROY CRUM$
Two recent models of risky decision making developed by Fishburn [6] and by Kahneman
and Tversky DEMO have emphasized the importance of a target return or a reference point in
determining preferences and choices among gambles. Target returns and reference points
DEMO variations on the concept of an aspiration level, an old idea DEMO theories of decision
making. Additional evidence on the need to incorporate such a concept in the analysis of risky
choice behavior is presented in DEMO paper. In three experiments, the relationship of pairs of
gambles to DEMO assumed reference point was varied by adding or subtracting a constant amount
from all outcomes. The results demonstrate that such translations of outcomes can DEMO in
the reversal of choice within pairs of gambles. The effect of such translations on choice
depended on whether the size of the translation DEMO sufficient to insure that one gamble in a
pair had outcome values either all above or all below the reference point, while the other
gamble had outcome values both above and below the reference point. A DEMO of the effects
of a reference point on risky choice behavior is presented and the results are also discussed in
terms of the Fishburn DEMO Kahneman-Tversky models, as well as other theories of risky
decision making.
(DECISION MAKING; ASPIRATION LEVEL; UTILITY PREFERENCE)
1. Introduction
The general DEMO of an aspiration level is an old idea in theories of decision
making [25], [26]. Simon [26], for example, suggested that one way individuals simplify
choice problems is to code an outcome as being one DEMO two types: satisfactory if the
outcome is above the aspiration level DEMO unsatisfactory if it is below.' The significance
of the aspiration level DEMO has been reemphasized recently in two models of risky
decision making developed by Fishburn [6] and Kahneman and Tversky [11]. In the
Fishburn model, the risk of a gamble is associated with outcomes below a target
DEMO, while in the Kahneman-Tversky model outcomes are coded into gains and
DEMO depending upon whether they are above or below a reference point. The
concepts of target return and reference point used in these two models DEMO special cases
of an aspiration level, appropriately defined for alternatives with DEMO conse-
quences. For purposes of discussion in this paper, all three DEMO return,
reference point, and aspiration level-are used interchangeably since all DEMO refer to
the pre- determined benchmark return used by a decision maker to translate monetary
outcomes into gains and losses.
The purpose of the DEMO paper is to provide additional empirical evidence on the
need to incorporate a target return, reference point, or aspiration level concept in the
DEMO Accepted by Arie Y. Lewin; received November 19, 1979. This paper has been with the authors 4
months for 2 revisions.
tDuke University.
DEMO of Florida.
'Reviews of much of the early work on the DEMO level concept and its role in decision making are
provided in Stedry [28] and McWhinney [18].
1039
0025-1909/80/2610/1039
$01.25
Copyright K)DEMO
1980, The Institute of Management Sciences
1040
JOHN W. PAYNE, DAN J. LAUGHHUNN AND ROY CRUM
analysis of risky choice behavior. The paper is organized as follows. First, the Fishburn
and Kahneman-Tversky models are briefly discussed, along with results from previous
surveys of managerial practice which have identified the importance of an aspiration
level DEMO the decision-making process of business executives. Next, the design of the
DEMO study of aspiration level effects is discussed and related to the Fishburn and
Kahneman-Tversky models. Results from three different experiments, one of which
involved high-level managers as subjects, are then presented and the relationship of
these results to several other models of decision-making under conditions of risk are
DEMO A set of propositions that serve to summarize the empirical results, DEMO
with ideas contained in the literature, are then presented in order DEMO highlight the
impact of an aspiration level on risky choice behavior. The paper concludes with a
brief discussion of the implications of the empirical DEMO for model building in
management science.
2. The Fishburn
and Kahneman-Tversky
Models
The Fishburn model, denoted the a - t model, uses the DEMO of a target level of
return to define the risk of an alternative. Formally, the risk of an alternative, denoted
A, is measured as the following probability weighted function of returns below a
target:
DEMO(A) =
(t - X)a dF(X),
where DEMO(x) is the probability of receiving a return not exceeding x, t is the target
return, and a is a nonnegative parameter used to measure the relative importance of
the size of the deviations below DEMO and the probability of failing to reach the target.
Both a and t are parameters that are unique to a decision maker. Fishburn argues DEMO
if the main concern of a decision maker is failure to achieve the target, without
particular regard to the size of the deviation, DEMO a value of a in the range 0 < a < 1
is appropriate. For this range of a values, Fishburn demonstrates that the underlying
utility function for the decision maker is convex for losses (consistent with risk
seeking). On the other hand, Fishburn argues that a value of a in the range a > 1
implies that the DEMO maker regards small deviations below target as being
relatively harmless when compared to large deviations. In this case, Fishburn shows
that the decision maker has a utility function which is concave for losses (consistent
with risk aversion).
In the a - t model, the risk of an alternative is combined with its mean return to
determine preference. Given any DEMO alternatives A and B, having mean returns A(A)
and DEMO(B) respectively, A is preferred to B if and only if: A(A) > A(B) and R(A)
< R (B) with at least one strict inequality holding.: The general form of the a - t
model is a familiar one since it DEMO the characteristics of a mean-risk dominance
model. The important point for the present paper is the central role that the target
level of return DEMO in defining risk for the Fishburn model.
The Kahneman-Tversky model, called DEMO theory, is proposed as an alterna-
tive to expected utility theory DEMO its traditional form. Prospect theory views risky
decision making as a two-phase process. The first phase involves editing the given
decision problem into a DEMO representation in order to make the evaluation of
gambles and choice easier for the decision maker. The second phase involves assigning
ASPIRATION LEVELS IN RISKY CHOICE 1041
an overall value to each edited DEMO and the subsequent choice of the gamble with
the greatest value. An important feature of prospect theory is the critical role that is
attributed DEMO an aspiration level in the analysis of risky decisions. A key operation in
the editing phase is the coding by the decision maker of DEMO of the outcomes of a
gamble as being either a gain or a loss, with a gain or loss defined by the relationship
of the outcome to a reference point or level of aspiration.2 According to DEMO
and Tversky, a decision maker then responds to a gamble, in part, by assigning
subjective values to the associated gains and losses. The value function, which is the
Kahneman-Tversky version of a utility function, DEMO assumed to be concave for gains,
convex for losses, and DEMO for losses than for equivalent gains.3 Kahneman and
Tversky point out that a consequence of their theory is that a change in the reference
DEMO may change the preference ordering among a set of gambles.
Kahneman and Tversky support their assumption that the value function is concave
for gains DEMO convex for losses, and hence support the need for a reference DEMO, by
showing that the preference ordering between gambles involving negative amounts DEMO
money is often the mirror image (reverse) of the preference ordering between gambles
involving positive amounts of money. For example, [11, p. DEMO, the gamble which
provides a chance to win $3000 with probability DEMO or to win nothing with probability
0.1, denoted ($3000, 0.9), is usually chosen over the gamble ($6000, 0.45), a result which
implies a concave value function. On the other hand, when these two gambles are
reversed, the gamble (- $ 6000,0.45) is usually chosen over the gamble (- $3000, 0.9),
a result which implies a convex value function. Kahneman and Tversky refer to this
DEMO of choices as the reflection effect.4
Additional evidence supporting a reference point or target level concept can be
found in surveys of management practice. DEMO example, Mao [16] asked executives in
eight medium and large companies DEMO the capital budgeting practices of their firms.
One question concerned what the executives understood by the term "investment risk."
A sample response one executive provided was [16, p. 343]:
"Risk is the prospect DEMO not meeting the target rate of return. That is the risk, DEMO't it? If you
are one hundred percent sure of making DEMO target return, then it is a zero risk proposition."
A DEMO recent, and more complete, survey of capital budgeting practices by Petty and
Scott [22] also shows that the idea of a target return DEMO widely used by managers. They
sent a questionnaire to the chief financial officer of each firm listed in the May 1977
director of Fortune DEMO firms and had a response rate of 35.3 percent. Respondents
were asked to define a "risky investment." The most common response was the
DEMO of not achieving a target rate of return. Conrath [2], Libby DEMO Fishburn
[15] and Crum, Laughhunn and Payne [5] cite additional evidence DEMO the use of a
target or aspiration level concept in business decision making.
2This view of outcomes as being gains or losses is an DEMO to the view of assessing outcomes in terms
of final asset position, as is the case in most expected utility analyses.
3Empirical support for the assumption that the value function is steeper for losses than for DEMO
gains can be found in Fishburn and Kochenberger [7].
4Hershey and Schoemaker [9] have raised some questions about the the strength of the evidence DEMO
by Kahneman and Tversky on the reflection effect. They note that the data presented by Kahneman and
Tversky does not make clear how much DEMO reflectivity occurred, i.e., within subjects. They also
present some data of their own tha-t is mixed with respect to the reflection effect. Additional DEMO seems
warranted.
1042
JOHN W. PAYNE, DAN J. LAUGHHUNN AND ROY CRUM
3.
Design of the Study
An experimental investigation of aspiration level effects on risky DEMO behavior
can proceed in several ways. One procedure would be to try to change the aspiration
level held by an individual through explicit instructions. DEMO example, a decision
maker might be told that he or she DEMO be presented with a set of risky options to
select from and that the target level of return on a project for his or DEMO company is
18%. Another procedure would be to accept that there are individual differences in
terms of aspiration levels, try to measure those differences independently, and then to
determine if a correlation exists between the individual difference measures and
different individual patterns of choice over a set of DEMO alternatives. This has been a
popular approach of researchers working in the area of achievement motivation and
selection of performance tasks, e.g., Atkinson DEMO Raynor [1].
This study used a third procedure, based on a DEMO of -outcomes, that is
suggested by Kahneman and Tversky [11, p. 287]. In this procedure the relationship
between a set of risky alternatives DEMO an aspiration level was manipulated through
simple additive transformations of the alternatives. Consider the two three-outcome
gambles shown in Figure 1. Gamble GI, denoted (a, p; b, q; c, l-p-q), yields an
DEMO of value a with probability p, outcome b with probability q, and outcome c
with probability l-p-q. The outcomes are ordered such that DEMO > b > c. Gamble GII,
denoted (x, r; DEMO, s; z, 1-r-s), is similar in interpretation. Note that DEMO > x, b = y, and
c < z. If we let b = y = $0 then the two gambles represent "regular" prospects as
defined by Kahneman and Tversky [11]. In addition, if DEMO assume that for most
decision makers a natural reference point is 0 (or t3) in Figure 1, then GI and GII each
have one outcome above the level of aspiration and one below. The assumption DEMO
the point of no gain and no loss, i.e., the status quo, serves as the aspiration level is
often made [7], [11]. DEMO is recognized, however, that the reference point may be above
the status quo return or below it [7]. The probabilities associated with the DEMO of
GI and GII are assumed to be different, but are DEMO so that the expected value of
GI equals the expected value of GII. The condition of equal expected values was not
necessary for the DEMO, but was used to facilitate a subsequent comparison of
experimental results DEMO several theories of decision making.
The relationships between GI and GII and the assumed target t3 = 0 can be
changed by the addition DEMO subtraction of a constant k from all outcomes of GI and
GII. Consider first a positive translation (addition of k) where k > DEMO but k < Icl.
Under this translation of both gambles, GI DEMO still have one outcome below t3,
G I
'I
G
DEMO
Gambles
GIl
t1
aI
oI
l
I
t2
I
x
y
z
I
II
t3
Outcome
t4
Values
t5
FIGURE 1. Basic Structure
of DEMO and GII Translations.
ASPIRATION LEVELS IN RISKY CHOICE
1043
while GII would have all outcomes DEMO t3. Another way of viewing the effect of this
translation is that the level of aspiration is now at t2 in Figure 1.
Fishburn'DEMO model predicts that the translated gamble GII would be chosen over the
translated gamble GI since both gambles continue to have equal expected values,DEMO
whereas GII becomes riskless and GI remains risky for all values of a.
The predicted choice between the translated version of GI and GII DEMO on the
Kahneman-Tversky model is not unambiguous for all decision makers since the
overall value of each gamble depends upon the specific characteristics of DEMO value
function both above and below t3, as well as the DEMO values of the translated
outcomes and their probabilities. But the Kahneman-Tversky model does suggest the
choice of GII over GI after the translation. Choice DEMO GII over GI by a decision maker
tends to occur because of the relative steepness of the value function for losses as
compared to DEMO gains. A large negative value assigned to the outcome for GI
that remains below t3 after the translation can cause the overall value of DEMO to decline
below GII.5 Another characteristic of the Kahneman-Tversky model that favors a
choice of GII over GI after the positive translation is the DEMO that GII now provides a
return above t3 with certainty. In this case, GII can be decomposed into a certain
return and an incremental gamble. The Kahneman-Tversky model allows for the
overweighting of the certain return DEMO of GII, thereby also favoring a choice
of GII over GI.
DEMO consider the effect of a negative translation of the outcomes for GI and GII by
an amount - k where k is positive and DEMO > x but k < a. After this translation of both
gambles, GI would still have one outcome above the target t3, while DEMO would now
have all outcomes below the target. Another way of viewing the effect of this negative
translation is that the target level has DEMO raised to t4 in Figure 1.
The predicted choice of GI or GII based on Fishburn's model is not as definite
under such DEMO negative translation, since preferences depend upon the decision maker's
risk DEMO as measured by a and the characteristics of the translated gambles. To the
extent, however, that a decision maker is concerned primarily with DEMO failure to
achieve the target level of return, consistent with a < 1 and risk seeking for losses, then
the choice of GI DEMO GII is more likely. Estimates of a obtained from business
managers by Crum, et al. [5], using a procedure based on the Fishburn DEMO, support
the assumption that a large majority of individuals have a DEMO less that 1. Such
individuals would exhibit a strong tendency to choose GI after the negative transla-
tion.
The Kahneman-Tversky model also does not DEMO a definite prediction for the
choice of either GI or GII, DEMO the negative translation, that would hold for all
decision makers. The DEMO value of GI and GII to any decision maker, and hence
DEMO gamble chosen, depends upon the specific characteristics of the value function, as
well as the properties of the translated gambles. But given the DEMO properties of the
value function specified in their model, it is DEMO that a decision maker would choose
GI. Choice of GI, which DEMO to have an outcome above t3 after the negative
translation, is DEMO because GII now has all outcomes below the target, the region
DEMO a high degree of relative steepness occurs and where negative values are
assigned by the value function. A further aspect of the translated gambles DEMO the
5This statement presumes that the value function, denoted v(x), is indexed so that v(t3) = 0. In this case,DEMO
v(x) < 0 for x < t3 where x denotes DEMO
1044
JOHN W. PAYNE, DAN J. LAUGHHUNN AND ROY CRUM
choice of GI is the fact that GII is now guaranteed to yield a DEMO less than the target
and can therefore be decomposed into a certain loss and an incremental gamble
involving additional losses. The tendency of a DEMO maker to overweight certainty
would, in this instance, lead to an overweighting of the certain loss that also has a large
negative value DEMO the decision maker. This would further reduce the overall value of
GII relative to GI and favor the choice of GI.
For both the DEMO and Kahneman-Tversky models, the implication is that a
simple translation of DEMO by positive and negative amounts can result in a
reversal of choice between GI and GII. The predominant pattern of choices is
predicted to DEMO a choice of GI under a negative translation (-k) and for a reversal of
choice to GII under a positive translation (k).
It should be noted that the translations to be used in this DEMO have been the
subject of previous theoretical discussions of decision making under risk [10], [13], [14],
[23]. In particular, Pfanzagl [23] has stated the principle that the relationship between a
gamble and its certainty DEMO is invariant under the transformation that adds a
constant to all gamble outcomes and to the certainty equivalent. Pfanzagl argues that
this consistency principle DEMO been tacitly assumed in many early treatments of
expected utility theory. More recently, Holloway [10] suggests that the consistency
principle is reasonable over ranges of outcomes and provides a simplification in the
analysis of portfolios of DEMO It has also been argued that the interpretation of
utility functions derived from empirical data is problematic if the consistency principle
does not hold DEMO
Analysis of the Fishburn and Kahneman-Tversky models presented earlier, how-
ever, suggests that the consistency principle will be violated to the extent that DEMO
in choices occur whenever a translation involves crossing a level of aspiration. The
following experiments examine the hypothesis that the choice from a pair DEMO gambles
will reverse as a function of such a translation of outcomes.
4.
Experimental
Results
Experiment 1
Method. The subjects were 30 undergraduate or DEMO students at Duke Univer-
sity. The subjects were either paid at a fixed hourly rate for their participation in the
experiment or were given DEMO toward a course requirement. The subjects were naive
with respect to the task and stimuli.
The stimuli were pairs of three-outcome gambles (see Table 1). Two initial sets of
four "regular" gambles were constructed. DEMO values of the probabilities associated
with the gain and loss amounts were selected to range from 0.2 to 0.5 since this range
is likely DEMO be well-behaved and well understood by subjects [11], [12]. The values DEMO
the gain and loss amounts were selected to be in the range $8 to $86. Each gamble in
the initial sets was constructed to DEMO an expected value of $0.
Four additional sets of gambles were then constructed by positive and negative
translations of all outcomes for the initial DEMO The first set of four gambles was
translated by an an amount of $30 and by an amount of - $30. The second set DEMO
gambles was translated by an amount of $26 and by an amount of - $26. Pairs (A, B),
(A, Y), (X, B) and (X, Y) are those in which DEMO would expect to observe a shift in
choice as a function of the translations.
Each subject was run individually. The subjects were told that DEMO would be
presented with pairs of gambles to choose from and that they should indicate which
ASPIRATION LEVELS IN RISKY CHOICE
TABLE 1
Gambles for Experiment
Set 2
DEMO
A = (44, 0.5, 0, 0.1; -55, 0.4)
B = (10, 0.3; 0, 0.5; - 15, 0.2)DEMO
X = (55, 0.4; 0, 0.1; -44, 0.5)
Y = (15, 0.2; 0, 0.5; - 10, 0.3)DEMO
Set 3
Gamble
A' = (74, 0.5; 30, 0.1; -25, 0.4)
B' = (40, 0.3; 30, 0.5; 15, 0.2)
X' = (85, 0.4; 30, 0.1; 14, 0.5)
Y'= (45, 0.2; 30, 0.5; DEMO, 0.3)
Set I
1
Gamble
A = (36, 0.5; 0, 0.2; -60, 0.3)
B = (8, 0.4; DEMO, 0.4; - 16, 0.2)
X = (60, 0.3; 0, 0.2; -36, 0.5)
Y = (16, 0.2; DEMO, 0.4; -8, 0.4)
Set 4
Gamble
A' = (DEMO, 0.5; 26, 0.2; -34, 0.3)
B' = (DEMO, 0.4; 26, 0.4; 10, 0.2)
X' = (DEMO, 0.3; 26, 0.2; - 10, 0.5)
Y' = (42, 0.2; 26, 0.4; 18, 0.4)
Set 5
DEMO
A" = (14, 0.5; -30, 0.1; -85, 0.4)DEMO
B" = (-20, 0.3; -30, 0.5; -45, 0.2)DEMO
X"= (25, 0.4; -30, 0.1; -74, 0.5)
Y" =(-15,0.2; -30,0.5; -40,0.3)
Set 6
Gamble
A" = (10, 0.4; -26, 0.2; -86, 0.3)
B" = (-18, 0.4; -26, 0.4; -42, 0.2)
X" = (34, 0.3; -26, 0.2; -62, 0.5)
Y" =(-10,0.2; -26,0.4; -34,0.4)
1045
gamble in a pair they would prefer to play if they had DEMO play one. They were also told
to consider each pair of gambles independently. No time constraints were placed on
subjects. Ten of the subjects DEMO asked to give verbal protocols.
Each subject was presented with 36 pairs of gambles. The 36 pairs consisted of each
gamble in a given DEMO of four gambles paired with every other gamble in that set. In
addition, there were four practice pairs presented at the beginning of each session. The
stimuli were presented to each subject on the screen of DEMO computer terminal (Perkin-
Elmer, 1200), connected on-line to an HP-2000 computer. The presentation of pairs
was in a different random order for DEMO subject. Right-left positions of the gambles
within a pair were counterbalanced across subjects and pairs.
Results. The gamble in each of the initial pairs DEMO gamble sets 1 and 2 (see Table 1)
that had DEMO largest probability of winning was defined as GI. The other gamble was
denoted GII. Table 2 presents the proportion of subjects choosing the first DEMO in
each of the 36 pairs of gambles.
Gambles
$30
0.17
0.17
0.23
0.30
0.30
0.50
TABLE 2
Choice
Proportions
for Experiment
1
Sets DEMO,
3, 5
- $30
0.67
0.67
0.60
0.67
0.20
0.67
DEMO
0.37
0.37
0.40
0.33
0.43
0.63
$26
0.17
0.23
0.30
0.27
0.57
0.80
Sets 2,4, 6,
$0
0.43
0.33
0.40
0.57
0.57
0.47
Pair
A, B
A, Y
X, B
X, Y
DEMO, X
B, Y
'Proportion of the 30 subjects choosing the DEMO gamble in each pair.
- $26
0.67
0.67
0.57
0.83
0.50
0.63
1046
JOHN W. PAYNE, DAN J. LAUGHHUNN AND ROY CRUM
It is clear from the proportions in Table 2 that positive and negative translations DEMO
the set of gambles led to reversals in choices. Aggregating across gamble sets 1 and 2,
the mean proportion of choices of GI DEMO the pairs of gambles (A, B), (A, Y), (X, B),
and (X, Y) under a positive DEMO was 0.23. These pairs all involve GI with two
outcomes above and one below the target and GII with all outcomes above the target.
DEMO choices were strongly in the direction of GII. On the other hand, when aggregated
across both sets, the mean proportion of choices of DEMO for the same pairs of gambles
under a negative translation was 0.67. A more direct test of the hypothesis that choice
within a pair DEMO gambles shifted as a function of the translations is provided by
counting the number of times the same gamble in a pair (either GI & GI or GII &
GII) was chosen under a positive DEMO negative translation and the number of times a
shift in choice occurred, i.e., from GI to GII or from GII to GI. Table DEMO presents the
results of such a count across the 30 subjects and the eight critical pairs of gambles.
The most common pattern of choice DEMO the predicted reversal: from GII for a
positive translation to GI DEMO a negative translation. A test of the equality of two
correlated proportions, applied to the two cells that involved shifts in choice, showed DEMO
significant difference (X2(l) = 78.0, p < 0.01).
DEMO analysis of the patterns of choice for each individual subject confirms this
reversal. Twenty-five of the 30 subjects chose GII a majority of the DEMO under the
positive translation of pairs (A, B), (A, Y), (X, B) and (X, Y). Nineteen of the 30
subjects chose GI a majority of the time under a DEMO translation. Together, the
group and individual analyses confirm shifts in choice, as a function of the transla-
tions, in the direction predicted by the Fishburn and Kahneman-Tversky models.
However, note in Table 2 that there was little indication of a choice reversal under a
translation of outcomes DEMO gamble pairs (A X) and (B, Y). These pairs of gambles are
ones for which the translations used were not sufficient DEMO result in one gamble in a
pair being moved totally above or totally below the assumed reference point of $0.
Two other interesting patterns DEMO choice can also be observed in Table 2. First,
under the assumption that gamble B is less risky than gamble A and that DEMO Y is
less risky than gamble X, in the regular forms DEMO the gambles (for both sets 1 and 2),
then a negative translation of gambles yielded greater risk seeking behavior. Such
behavior is DEMO by data presented in Williams [29] and predicted by Kahneman
and Tversky [11]. A positive translation, on the other hand, leads to greater DEMO
aversion. This is inconsistent with suggestions contained in Holloway [10] that the only
likely effects of adding a constant to all outcomes are either DEMO change in attitude
Pattern
TABLE 3
of Choices for Translated Pairs of
Gambles in Experiment 1
Negative Translation
GI GII
Positive
Translation
GI
GII
DEMO
120
16
64
1Entries indicate the number of choices of GI
and GII for the indicated combinations of positive
and negative translations.
,
ASPIRATION LEVELS IN RISKY CHOICE
1047
toward risk or decreasing risk aversion. DEMO rationale, according to Holloway, is that
"... . as the DEMO payoff increases, an individual becomes less risk averse [10, p.
394]." Second, note that the aggregated choice proportions under the negative transla-
DEMO were generally less extreme than under the positive translations. This is consistent
with the less clear preference prediction of the Fishburn model in this DEMO
Finally, a third of the subjects in this experiment were asked DEMO give verbal
protocols. An examination of the patterns of choices for those 10 subjects as opposed
to the other 20 subjects indicated that both DEMO of subjects responded similarly. In
particular, the mean choice proportions of DEMO for the negative and positive translations
were 0.30 and 0.68, and DEMO and 0.67, for the protocol and nonprotocol subjects
respectively.
Verbal Protocols. DEMO protocols can be used in a variety of ways in decision
research [21]. The present paper used protocols simply to confirm and extend the
DEMO of the choice data. Complete protocols for each of the ten subjects when
faced with the positive and negative translations of gamble pair A, B (sets 3 and 5 from
Table 1, respectively) are provided in the Appendix.6 The protocols are broken up into
short phrases corresponding DEMO a naive assessment of a single task assertion or
reference by the subject.
The protocols clearly support the view that the subjects were sensitive DEMO whether a
pair of gambles included one gamble with outcomes all above the target or one gamble
with outcomes all below the target. In DEMO, note that for most of the subjects an
early observation concerned DEMO a gamble in a pair offered an opportunity for
only a gain or only a loss. As examples, consider the following excerpts from these
protocols:
B1: In this case, gamble one has one negative DEMO
B2: and gamble two has none; or
D1: Here I DEMO I've got a 50% chance of winning choice two.
D2: DEMO chance of winning choice one.
Finally, it should also be noted DEMO even though subjects placed great importance on
the probability of receiving a gain or a loss, they were sensitive to the amounts to be
won or lost and did make tradeoff judgments. See, for example, DEMO protocols for the
first two subjects. Overall, the protocols appear consistent DEMO the choice data and the
interpretations of that data presented earlier.
Experiment
2
In the previous experiment, pairs of gambles were constructed so that the gamble in
a pair with the greater probability of winning (GI) generally had the greater variance.
The second experiment used similar pairs of gambles and also pairs of gambles where
the gamble in a pair DEMO the greater probability of winning (GI) had the smaller
variance. In addition, the format used to present the gambles was changed. For
experiment 1, the gambles were presented in a matrix form on the screen of a
computer terminal. Experiment 2 presented the options using a pie-diagram DEMO in
the manner described by Payne [19].
Method. The subjects were 42 paid undergraduates at Duke University. The
subjects were recruited to participate in DEMO studies: one involved questions about
6Complete protocols for the ten subjects DEMO be obtained from the first author.
1048
JOHN W. PAYNE, DAN J. LAUGHHUNN AND ROY CRUM
consumer behavior and the other involved a small number of risky choice questions.
Both DEMO took place in a group setting including up to eight subjects.
Six pairs of gambles were constructed (see Table 4). Problem 1 and its positive and
negative translations (problems 3 and 5) are similar DEMO the pairs in experiment 1.
Problem 2 and its translations (problems DEMO and 6) have a slightly different pattern of
relationships between the DEMO in a pair, i.e., GI has a lower variance than GII.
These six pairs of gambles were presented to the subjects in a DEMO that contained
a number of other choice problems. Each pair of gambles was on a separate page in
the booklet. The order of the DEMO of gambles was randomized within a booklet and
across subjects. The position of a gamble on a page was counterbalanced across
subjects. Each subject DEMO instructed to indicate, on a response scale located under-
neath each DEMO of gambles, the choice of gamble and strength of preference for DEMO
chosen gamble. The response scale ran from A to H, divided DEMO a point halfway
between D and E. The extremes of the scale (A and H) were marked "strong" and
scale positions adjacent DEMO the center dividing line were marked "slight."
TABLE 4
Problem DEMO
Gambles
and Choice
Data from Experiment
2
Problem 2
GI = (DEMO, 0.6; 0, 0.1; -60, 0.3)
321
GII = (8, 0.5: 0, 0.3; -20, 0.2)
10
GI = (12, 0.5; 0, 0.2; -20, 0.3)
27
GII DEMO (30, 0.4; 0, 0.4; -60,
15
0.2)
DEMO 3
GI' = (55, 0.6; 25, 0.1; -35, DEMO)
6
GII' = (33, 0.5, 25, 0.3; 5, 0.2)
36
Problem 4
GI' = (37, 0.5; 25, 0.2; 5, 0.3)
38
GII' = (55, 0.4; 25, 0.4; -35, 0.2)
4
Problem 5
GI" = (5, 0.6; -25, 0.1; -85, 0.3)
36
GII" DEMO (- 17, 0.5; -25, 0.3; -45, 0.2)
6
Problem 6
GI" = (-13, 0.5; -25, 0.2; -45, 0.3)
5
GII" = (5, 0.4; -25, 0.4; DEMO, 0.2)
37
Number of subjects choosing the gamble listed above.
DEMO The numbers of subjects choosing each gamble in each pair are given in
Table 4. The proportions of subjects choosing the gamble with all DEMO exceeding
the target for the positive translation in problems 3 and 4 were 0.86 and 0.90,
respectively. In contrast, under the negative translations in problems 5 and 6, the
proportions of subjects choosing the same gamble were only 0.14 and 0.12. That is, the
gamble that now involved all outcomes less than the target was chosen infrequently.
On an DEMO level, 30 of the 42 subjects shifted choices between pairs 3 DEMO 5, and
33 of the 42 subjects shifted choices between pairs DEMO and 6. All shifts in choice that
occurred were in the predicted directions. These results are consistent with the results
obtained in experiment 1. DEMO also, that the predicted and observed effects of the
translation on DEMO proportions is the same in pairs 4 and 6 even though the variance
ASPIRATION LEVELS IN RISKY CHOICE
1049
relationship within the pairs (variance GI < variance GII) is reversed from pairs 3 and
5 (variance DEMO > variance GII).
In order to study the strength of preference exhibited between gambles in a pair, as
contrasted to the direction of choice, the subjects actual responses (A through H) were
transformed into the numerical values -7 to +7 in increments of 2, with negative
values assigned to GI. The mean of the responses, taken without regard to sign, for the
untranslated, positively translated, and negatively translated pairs were 3.69, 6.38, and
3.69, respectively. Clearly, stronger preferences were DEMO for gamble pairs in
which one gamble had all outcomes exceeding the target and the other gamble had an
outcome below the target. These DEMO precisely the pairs in which the Fishburn model
predicts a dominance relationship.
Experiment
3
A criticism that is often expressed regarding decision research is DEMO use of college
students as subjects. Consequently, a third experiment was DEMO to examine the
generality of choice reversals under a translation of outcomes by using business
managers as subjects. In addition, the amounts of money involved in the risky options
were increased by multiplying all outcomes by DEMO,000 units. This adjustment in the
size of the outcomes was designed to make the risky options more meaningful within
the business environment of DEMO managers.
Method. The subjects were 84 managers in several European firms from a broad
cross-section of industry. The firms included a large bank, a chemical company, a
major food chain, an airline, a consulting firm, a mining company, and several
manufacturing firms. The managers occupied a DEMO of top level positions within
these firms, with approximately half being DEMO very senior positions (vice president or
above).
The stimuli consisted DEMO 12 of the pairs of gambles used in experiment 1. The 12
pairs were the ones from Table 1 generated by a complete pairing DEMO the gambles listed
in set 3 (six pairs) and a complete pairing of the gambles listed in set 5 (six pairs). The
subjects, however, were told to consider the amounts as being measured DEMO $100,000
units.
The choice problems were presented to the subjects in a booklet, with each choice
problem on a separate page. The order of the choice problems was randomized and
the position of the alternatives DEMO a page was counterbalanced. Each subject was asked
to indicate choices as a manager. The instructions indicated that a return of zero
would be DEMO to evaluate the quality of their decisions. Subjects responded to each
choice problem separately and were not permitted to return to a previous problem
DEMO a response was provided. Each subject was run individually in his or her own
office. They were given ample time to respond.
Results. Table DEMO presents the number of times the same gamble in a pair (DEMO GI
& GI or GII & GII) was chosen under a DEMO and negative translation, and the
number of times a shift in DEMO occurred, i.e., from GI to GII or GII to GI, DEMO the
84 subjects for the four pairs of gambles that would be predicted to show reversals.
Similar to the results obtained in the previous DEMO, the most common
pattern of choice involved the reversal from GII DEMO GI when gambles were translated
by negative amounts. A test of the equality of the correlated proportions associated
with shifts in choice again indicated DEMO significant difference (X2(l) = 73.33, p < 0.01).
1050
JOHN W. PAYNE, DAN J. LAUGHHUNN AND ROY CRUM
Pattern
TABLE 5
of Choices for Translated Pairs of
Gambles in Experiment 3
Negative DEMO
GI GII
Positive
Translation
GI
GII
901
136
26
84
Entries indicate the number of choices of GI
and GII for the indicated combinations DEMO positive
and negative translations.
Overall, the proportion of choices of GI DEMO the positive translation was 0.35, while
the proportion of choices of DEMO under the negative translation was 0.66.
5. Relation of Results to Other Models
The results of this study, while consistent with the predictions of the Fishburn and
Kahneman-Tversky models, indicate that the consistency principle discussed earlier is
likely to be violated whenever a translation involves crossing an aspiration DEMO
Furthermore, the violation of this principle is strong enough to lead DEMO choice reversals.
In addition, the results are inconsistent with two frequently DEMO formulations of risky
choice behavior, the mean-variance dominance model and utility DEMO with uni-
formly concave (risk averse) utility functions.
Mean- Variance
Dominance
A traditional model of risky choice behavior is one based on mean-variance
DEMO, a model originally introduced by Markowitz [17] and subsequently applied
by DEMO other researchers. Individuals are presumed to choose between risky alterna-
tives by comparing their means and variances, with higher means and lower variances
being preferred. Risk aversion is reflected in the preference for a lower rather DEMO a
higher variance.
Since adding or subtracting a constant from both alternatives in a pair will change
means by the amount of the constant, but not affect variances, individual preferences
based on mean-variance dominance cannot be reversed by the types of translations
used in the present experiments. The DEMO ordering that existed for an individual
for any pair of alternatives prior to a translation would remain intact after the
translation if the mean-variance DEMO model underlies choice behavior. The
extensive switching of choices observed in the experiments is therefore inconsistent
with the predictions of the mean-variance dominance model. DEMO generally, since
additive translations of all outcomes cannot affect the magnitude DEMO any moment
computed about the mean, the observed switching of choices DEMO evidence against
the adequacy of any type of mean-moment dominance model. An attempt to explain
the switching observed in this study by resorting to DEMO about the mean of
higher-order than the variance will therefore also fail.
Utility Theory With Concave Utility Functions
Another commonly used model of individual DEMO behavior is utility theory with a
uniformly concave utility function, i.e., a utility function which exhibits risk aversion
ASPIRATION LEVELS IN RISKY CHOICE
1051
everywhere. Given the pairs of alternatives DEMO in the experiments of this study, the
observed switching of choices DEMO also inconsistent with the existence of uniformly
concave utility functions.
Hadar and Russell [8] introduced the concept of second-order stochastic dominance
(SSD) of DEMO alternative X over another risky alternative Y, with SSD occurring when
DEMO(x)
dx I
rG(y) dy
for all values of DEMO r and with one strict inequality holding for at least one value of
r. In the condition for dominance of X over Y, a is the lowest possible return from
both alternatives and F(x) and G(y) are the cumulative probability distributions for
alternatives X and Y respectively. This definition of SSD implies that X dominates Y if
the DEMO under the cumulative probability distribution for X is less than or equal to the
corresponding area under the cumulative probability distribution for Y all DEMO of
return, and strictly less for at least one value of DEMO
For this paper, the important property of SSD, as Hadar and Russell demonstrated,
is that dominance of X over Y in the DEMO of SSD is equivalent to a preference
ordering of X over Y when an individual has a uniformly concave utility function.
That is, SSD of X over Y is both a necessary and a sufficient condition DEMO a
preference of X over Y for all underlying utility functions that are uniformly concave.
All of the pairs of alternatives used in the DEMO experiments, where choice reversals
were predicted by the Fishburn and Kahneman-Tversky DEMO, could be ordered by
SSD.7 Since positive and negative translations cannot DEMO the relative areas under the
cumulative probability distributions for a given pair of alternatives, SSD was always
retained when both positive and negative translations were employed. Hence, prefer-
ence orderings would also be retained if utility functions were uniformly concave.
Aggregated responses from all experiments for positive and DEMO translations of
gambles are summarized in Table 6. For the three experiments the gambles were
redesignated so that GII was always the alternative in DEMO pair that dominated GI in
the sense of SSD, for both DEMO and negative translations, and hence would be the
Pattern
TABLE 6
DEMO Choices for Translated Pairs of Gambles
in All Three Experiments
Negative Translation
GI GII
Positive
Translation
GI
GII
140'
319
42
159
1Entries DEMO the number of choices of GI
and GII for the indicated combinations of positive
and negative translations.
7Pairs for which choice reversals are not DEMO by the Fishburn and Kahneman-Tversky models, and
for which SSD fails DEMO hold, are (A, X) and (B, Y) in DEMO 1 and the related choice pairings in
experiment 3. These pairs also would, according to Kahneman and Tversky, involve a "cancellation" of DEMO
common elements in the editing phase of the choice process.
1052 JOHN W. PAYNE, DAN J. LAUGHHUNN AND ROY CRUM
preferred alternative for an individual with a strictly concave utility function. Out of
the DEMO total responses, just 159 (approximately 24%) were consistent with uniform
DEMO for both positive and negative translations. For the 478 responses that
selected GII with the positive translations, 319 of them switched to GI, DEMO hence
violated the concavity assumption, when the gambles were translated by DEMO equal
negative amount. In contrast, for the 201 responses that chose DEMO for the negative
translations, only 42 switched to GI and violated DEMO when the gambles were
translated by a positive amount. This differential response to positive and negative
translations, in terms of inconsistency with concavity, DEMO that concavity is more
likely to be violated when alternatives are translated by negative amounts hence
bringing the aspiration level into a more influential DEMO in determining choice.
6. Model of Aspiration Level Effects
As a way of providing a summary of the present results, along with a summary of
the ideas and results contained in the literature, the following set of propositions about
the effects of aspiration levels on risky choice has DEMO developed. Consider Figure 1
which shows the relationship of two hypothetical gambles, GI and GII, to various
levels of aspiration. Start with the DEMO at level t, and consider the proportion of
choices of GI DEMO P(GI), and the proportion of choices of GII denoted P(GII).
PROPOSITION 1. If the target is at t1, then Pt, (GI) < P,,(GII). However, P,,(GI)DEMO
> Pt, (GI) and P,,(GI) will increase as t1 is lowered.
The basic idea is that decision makers will pay DEMO attention to maximization of
gain when the minimum assured gain is increased. This prediction is consistent with
the concept of decreasing relative risk aversion DEMO, [13].
PROPOSITION 2. If the target is at t2, then Pt2 (GI) < P,2(GII). Furthermore, P,2(GI)
will be close to zero.
These predictions are based on the dominance DEMO suggested by the Fish-
burn model.
PROPOSITION 3. If the target is at t3, then either P,3(GI)> P,3(GII) DEMO P,3(GI) <
Pt3( GII).
However, given steeper utility functions for below target outcomes relative to equal
above target outcomes DEMO, [11], it is likely that Pt3(GI) < Pt3(GII)DEMO
PROPOSITION 4. If the target is at t4, then P,4(DEMO) > P,4(GII).
This prediction is based on the DEMO that perceived risk is primarily a function of
probability of loss [19] or failure to achieve a target level of return [6].
PROPOSITION 5. DEMO the target is at t5, then P,,(GI) > P,,(GII). However, P,5(GI)
< P,4(GI) and P1,(GI) will decrease as t5 is increased.
The first part of this proposition is based on the existence of a convex DEMO
function in the loss domain [7], [11]. The second part is DEMO on the idea that a
"ruinous loss" constraint may make minimization of maximum loss important to a
choice between gambles as the lowest DEMO of GI approaches the ruinous outcome
value. As suggested by Crum, DEMO al. [5] and Kahneman and Tversky [11], a ruinous loss
may DEMO to a concave segment in the utility function for losses.
ASPIRATION LEVELS IN RISKY CHOICE
1053
Figure 2 presents a graphic summary DEMO these predictions. The data from the present
study supports the propositions between t2 and t4.
In many ways, this model represents a contingent or lexicographic process of risky
choice. The assumption is that the probability of DEMO to reach an aspiration level
plays an important screening role in determining choice. In particular, a probability of
failure at either 0 or 1 for one alternative and not for another is likely to play the DEMO
role in determining preferences. If the probability of failure for both alternatives is
between 0 and 1, then the probabilities of the various outcomes of the gambles are
likely to be combined or traded off with DEMO values of the outcomes in a fashion
consistent with expectation types of models such as expected utility.
The model also suggests a decision process DEMO to one presented in Payne and
Braunstein [20]. The process suggested was that individuals will often make an initial
judgment about whether they are DEMO with an attractive set of gambles (where the
probability of winning DEMO the probability of losing) or an unattractive set (where
the probability of losing exceeds the probability of winning) before deciding on the
choice rule to be used. Empirical support for the process is presented in DEMO [19],
Payne and Braunstein [20] and Ranyard [24].
Coombs and Avrunin [4] have proposed a general theory of choice behavior that
includes a DEMO idea. These authors view choice as a form of conflict resolution. At
the individual level, the conflict involves tradeoffs among a set of different and
imperfectly correlated goals. Coombs and Avrunin identify three types of conflict
DEMO: approach-avoidance, approach-approach, and avoidance-avoidance. The
first situation involves choice options DEMO each option has both good attributes
(approach) and bad attributes (DEMO). In an approach-approach situation, each
option has only good attributes. DEMO an avoidance-avoidance situation each option has
only bad attributes. Coombs and Avruin [3] suggest that the latter two situations can
be reduced to an DEMO situation and the preference function defined
similarly for all three situations. The model offered in this paper, however suggests that
the preference function used to choose among gambles is likely to be contingent on
whether the DEMO choice situation is an approach-approach situation (t1), an
approach-avoidance situation (t3), or an avoidance-avoidance situation (t5). In partic-
ular, DEMO the other two possible situations with equal expected value gambles, a DEMO
approach-approach and approach-avoidance situation (t2) and an approach-
avoidance and avoidance-avoidance situation (t4) will lead to different preference
functions.
Pt (Gl-l
.5 ___/
_
;1
Target
Levels
FIGURE
2. Summary of Predicted Choice Proportions.
t2
t3
t4
t5
1054
JOHN W. PAYNE, DAN J. LAUGHHUNN AND ROY CRUM
Although the principles involved in the present model are rather simple, it is clear
that the model leads to a more complex predictive problem for decision DEMO
For one thing, the model requires the researcher to identify the DEMO situation as
perceived by the decision maker, especially as it relates DEMO an aspiration level. This is
likely to be more difficult than assuming a common decision rule such as maximiza-
tion of expected utility based DEMO a common risk attitude such as risk aversion.
7.
Conclusions
and Implications
The present study was motivated by two recent theories of risky choice DEMO and [11]
that have placed emphasis on the concept of an aspiration level. The results obtained
provide general support for both theories. The relationship DEMO a pair of gambles
relative to an assumed level of aspiration was varied through a translation of all
outcomes. The results demonstrate that adding DEMO subtracting a constant amount for
all outcomes in a pair of gambles generally results in a reversal of choices within the
pair. Such a DEMO supports the importance of the the concept of a target return or a
reference point, or more generally, a level of aspiration, in the analysis of risky choice
behavior. Furthermore, the pattern of results suggests that a key determinant of the
effect of such translations is whether DEMO size of the translation is sufficient to result in
one gamble having outcome values either all above or all below the target, while the
alternative gamble has outcome values that are both above and below the DEMO
The prevailing view about risk attitude in management science research, for DEMO
normative and positive models, ignores the aspiration level concept and assumes DEMO
decision makers are uniformly risk averse. Results of this paper, in DEMO with
other studies cited earlier, indicate that this prevailing assumption is DEMO from a
descriptive viewpoint.
The consensus emerging from empirical studies is that a more descriptive set of
assumptions about risk attitudes is one where (1) the utility (or value) function is
defined in terms of initial wealth and changes in wealth, rather than terminal wealth,
where (2) changes in wealth are evaluated relative to an aspiration level DEMO target
return, with gains (losses) being defined as a change DEMO wealth above (below) the target
return, where (3) risk DEMO, when ruinous loss is not a concern, is a mixture of
risk seeking for losses and risk aversion for gains, and where (DEMO) ruinous loss
considerations lead to lexicographic choice behavior that screens alternatives DEMO from
further consideration. This characterization, which is discussed in detail by DEMO
and Tversky [11] and Libby and Fishburn [15], has not yet DEMO explored in the
context of management science models.
For positive models, DEMO tend to be judged by the accuracy of their aggregate
predictions rather than accuracy of underlying assumptions, it is unclear whether these
more descriptive assumptions about risk attitude will lead to models with improved
aggregate predictions DEMO maintaining similar levels of parsimony, analytical tracta-
bility, and the requisite second-order conditions. Only future research efforts will be
able to resolve these DEMO issues. A strong case for examining the impact of
increased descriptive accuracy of assumptions in positive models is provided by Simon
[27].
For normative DEMO, which are designed to aid in the decision process, the issue of
descriptive reality of assumptions can be put in clearer focus. Normative DEMO are
more likely to be evaluated by the accuracy of their assumptions, particularly assump-
tions that relate to risk attitudes of the decision maker for whom the model is designed.
ASPIRATION LEVELS IN RISKY CHOICE
1055
Inadequate assumptions in this circumstance may DEMO to rejection of a model by the
decision maker no matter how elegant or how easy it is to deal with analytically, unless
it can be demonstrated that model results are insensitive to the challenged assump-
DEMO In addition, trying to change the risk attitude of a decision DEMO to match the
standard assumption of uniform risk aversion, an approach DEMO suggested by
Keeney and Raiffa [13, p. 200], is questionable. Incorporation of more realistic
assumptions about risk attitudes in normative models offers a DEMO promising prospect
for research, with a potential of improving the track DEMO of implementation of
normative management science models. This is true even though analytical tractability
will undoubtedly be sacrificed for approximate solutions. The need to DEMO in such
research is aptly summarized by Simon [27, p. 498]: 8
.. . decision makers can satisfice either by finding optimum solutions DEMO a simplified world,
or by finding satisfactory solutions for a more realistic world. Neither approach dominates the
other . . ."
Appendix
DEMO
for Positive
and Negative Translations
of Gamble
pair A, B from DEMO 1
GI:
GII:
($74, 0.5; $30, 0.1; DEMO, 0.4)
($40, 0.3; $30, 0.5; $15, 0.2)DEMO
GI:
GII:
($14, 0.5; -$30, 0.1; -$85, 0.4)
(-$20, 0.3; -$30, 0.5; -$45, 0.2)
DEMO
A
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
O.K., ah, good chance of
winning and losing in
number DEMO (GI).
Ah, another guaranteed win
in the first (GII)DEMO
Oh, that $74, I mean it's
good,
but the chances are just
as high that I'll lose
25.
And, it looks like I'll
probably get 30 or 40
in number one.
DEMO, I'm going to go with
number one.
1:
2:DEMO
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
Oh my, another one like this.
Ah, I've got high DEMO,
with the only possible chance
of winning.
Umm, looks like DEMO the first
one (GII) I'm going to lose
20 or 30 bucks.
Second one (GI) I could lose
85.
Could win DEMO
Uh, 14 is just you know-It's
not enough to offset DEMO 85.
Just really, I'm going to
have to go with DEMO one
Choice: GII
Choice: GII
Subject B
1:
2:
3:
In this case, gamble one
(GI) has one negative
outcome
and gamble two has none.
On the 50% chance of a
DEMO along with a 10%
1:
2:
3:
O.K., DEMO this gamble-gamble
one (GI) is two negatives
and gamble two (DEMO) is three
negatives.
Again the first gamble has one
positive outcome
DEMO wish to thank John S. Carroll, and Hillel Einhorn and Robin DEMO for their comments on this
paper. In addition, we wish to DEMO the reviewers for their helpful comments and Charles Bond and Robert
Johnson for their assistance in running experiments 1 and 2. This research was DEMO in part by a grant
from the Engineering Psychology Programs, Office DEMO Naval Research.
1056
JOHN W. PAYNE, DAN J. LAUGHHUNN AND ROY CRUM
Subject B continued
4:
5:
6:
chance of a gain for
DEMO one makes it
enticing to look at the
$74
but the 40% chance of losses
again overcomes the fact
that I'd rather have DEMO
returns.
So therefore I pick gamble
two
and have a chance of lesser
Choice: GII
4:
5:
6:
7:
with the chance of 50%
whereas gamble two you're
admitting you're DEMO to
lose.
In this case I'd feel it.
It would be worth risking
gamble one to try for that
gain even thwough the DEMO
is 85.
Choice: GI rate of return
Subject C
1:
DEMO:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
Subject D
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:DEMO
6:
7:
8:
9.
O.K., in this one DEMO have
a 50% chance of winning
$74. (GI)
40% of DEMO 25.
it all,
but then I can only win
up to $ 50.
Umm, this one I think I
would go to the first
one
cause I'd win more money.
And, although I'd lose
some.
I'd win some.
The difference is for
greater than DEMO amount
won
Choice: GII
O.K., the same situation
as it was.
In here in gamble one (GII)
lose money.
Where the amounts won com-
pared to that in gamble
two (GI) are not DEMO high.
Ah, looking at the 25
dollars lost.
Uh, that would be lost in
gamble two-
probability 40%.
O.K., amount
There's a 50% chance of
winning $74.
and a 10% chance of win-
ing DEMO than that.
1:
2:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
1:
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
O.K., in this one, (GI) uh,
40% chance of losing $85.
But, then I have a 00% chance
of winning 14. 3:Second one
(GII) I win 3:The second one
(GII) I DEMO ...
Oh: I could lose 45, 30, or 20
dollars.
DEMO, I have a greater chance
of losing the $30 in the DEMO
one than losing.
But, I have the same option,
I DEMO lose the $85.
I think I'll pick the second
one
cause I don't want to lose $85.
Choice: GI
Here I see I've got a 50%
chance of winning choice
two (GI).
No chance of winning choice
one (GII).
Although there is a larger
loss risk in choice two.
Still you only got a 40%
DEMO of losing.
You lose the most in 50%
chance of winning.
So, two is the one.
Choice: GI
ASPIRATION LEVELS IN RISKY CHOICE
Subject D continued
10:
11.
12:DEMO
13:
Uh, I'm not ... I'd like
to DEMO some money.
And, since I've got 50%
chance of even,DEMO
and less than even odds,
and less than even odds
losing the 25.
That's going to be my
choice.
Choice: GI
Subject E
1:
2:
Subject F
1:
2:
3:DEMO
4:
5:
6:
7:
Subject G
1:
2:
3:
4:
I pick ... in this choice
DEMO would pick number one
(GII).
because I wouldn't want
DEMO take the 40% chance
of losing.
Choice: GII
O.K., in number one (GI)
I have a 50% chance of
gaining $74
and in number two (GII) I
have a 50% chance of gain-
DEMO $30.
In number one I have a 40%
chance of loss.
And in number two I have
no chance of loss.
Think I'm DEMO to go with
number two
just based on the fact that
the number one has a 40%
chance of $25 loss
and in number DEMO I have -
there's no possibility of
loss whatsoever.
Choice: DEMO
O.K., in outcome one 50%
chance I'd win $30.-
30% DEMO I'd
O.K., I'm automatically
going to win money in DEMO
one (GII)
but in outcome two there's
a 40% DEMO I'd lost $25.
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
1:
2:
3:
4:
DEMO:
6:
7:
8:
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
In this situation I can't
help DEMO lose money.
50% is just ... but in the
first gamble (DEMO) although
I can possibly lose $85.
There is a chance of DEMO,
but also gain money.
My chance is 50%
I pick the first one.
Choice: GI
O.K., let's see, in number
one (GII) - I have a 50%
chance of losing 30
and DEMO number two (GI) I have
a 50% chance of gaining $14.
In number two I have a 40%
chance of losing $85.
And, in number one I have no
chance to gain anything.
And, in number two I have
great - a great possibility
that I will DEMO $85.
However, in number two there's
also a 50% chance DEMO gaining
and there's no chance of gain
in number one.
So, I think I'll go with
number two.
Choice: GI
Problem DEMO outcome one (GI)
40% chance of losing $85.
That sounds DEMO -
don't like that.
Umm that's a 50% chance I
lose money
and a 50% chance I'll gain
money.
1057
1058
JOHN W. PAYNE, DAN J. LAUGHHUNN AND ROY CRUM
Subject G continued
5:
6:
I think I would take the
safe DEMO one
cause 40% is a pretty high
percentage to lose $25.
Choice: GII
6:
7:
8:
Whereas there's a 100% chance
I'll lose money in problem two
(GII).
Most of the percentage lies
where I'd have 50% chance
of losing $30.
DEMO - well I don't like
the looks of losing $85.
I think I'd go with out-
come one
because the least amount DEMO
money I'd have to give in
outcome two is $20.
9:
10:
11:
12:
And that . . . DEMO is still a
13:
lot of money.
I rather take my chances
and try and least gain some
money
so I take outcome DEMO
Choice: GI
14:
Subject H
1:
2:
3:DEMO
4:
5:
6:
7:
Subject I
1:
2:
3:
I am looking at problem
number one.
A DEMO both experiments.
And there is a 50% chance
of winning $30 in experi-
ment two (GI).
However, in problem B in
experiment DEMO (GI) there
is a 50% chance of winning
$74
which offsets the problem
of 40% probability in C
of losing $25.
Yet by DEMO in
experiment two you win
money in any of the
three probabilities.
Therefore I would choose
number two.
Choice: GII
O.K., number one (GII)
has all winning.
uh, let's see, 20%
chance DEMO winning $15.
30% chance of winning the
most.
1:
2:
3:
4:
1:
2:
3:
4:
DEMO, looking again at
gamble two (GI) probability
A.
There is DEMO 50% chance of
money.
Whereas in gamble one (GI)
there'DEMO no chance of winning
money.
I pick two.
Choice: GI
Number DEMO (GII), a 20%
chance of losing $40.
A 50% chance DEMO losing
$30.
A 30% chance of losing
Number two (GI), DEMO 40%
ASPIRATION LEVELS IN RISKY CHOICE
1059
Subject I continued
4:
5:DEMO
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
Subject
J
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
DEMO:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11.
12:
13:
14:
15:
And, a 50% chance of win-
ning $30.
Number two (GI) there's a
40% chance of DEMO $25
which would pretty much
prelude picking it.
And, a 50% DEMO of win-
ning $74
which would be pretty
great.
But, I DEMO still say
that the possible loss
- 40% is possible loss.
I'm not going to pick
that one.
I'm going to pick DEMO
one.
Choice: GII
O.K., I'm looking at
gamble one (DEMO) and
two (GI).
Probability A and amount
A. Comparing the amounts
- the same.
Although, the probability
for gamble one is much
better.
So, it's not bad, $30.
So I move to DEMO and com-
pare them.
But, in gamble one B is
not DEMO good a chance.
It's not worth it.
It's not worth too much.
Whereas, gamble two B
is good chance of los-
ing something.
So, I move to C in gamble
two.
It is very good. 50%
chance of making $74.
Whereas gamble one,
30% chance DEMO making
$40.
So, I think I'd go with
one. Simply DEMO
you can't lose.
There's a pretty good
chance of losing too.
Choice: GII
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
1:
2:DEMO
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
DEMO of losing $85.
10% chance of losing $30.
And, a 50% DEMO of winning.
But, you don't win that much.
And, if you lose there's that
40% chance of losing $85
which is DEMO a bit.
Number one is an automatic
loss probability.
Probably being around 35-
50 dollars.
In number two you do have
a 50% chance DEMO winning
based on that, I'm going to
go with number DEMO
Choice: GI
I'm looking at gamble one
(GI) and DEMO (GII) prob-
ability A.
They are both losers.
Gamble one is an even
bigger loser.
So, I look at B, and they
DEMO both losers too,
same amount.
Probability for gamble one
is much lower.
The probability is higher
in gamble two.
The amounts was still DEMO
little bit lower.
Look at C. Gamble one
there's 1/2 chance of
winning a little bit.
Whereas C in gamble two
you'DEMO going to lose a
Well, gamble two you don't ...
DEMO're going to lose no
matter what in gamble two.
Gamble one is a big chance of
losing a lot.
So, I'd go with gamble two.
Choice: GII
1060
JOHN W. PAYNE, DAN J. LAUGHHUNN AND ROY CRUM
References
1. ATKINSON, J. W. AND RAYNOR, J. O., (Eds.), Motivation DEMO Achievement, V.H. Winston, Washington,
D. C.; 1974.
2. CONRATH, DAVID W., "From Statistical Decision Theory to Practice: Some Problems with the
Transition," Management Sci., Vol. 19 (1973), pp. 873-883.
DEMO COOMBS, C. H. AND ARVUNIN, G. S., "A Theorem on Single-peaked Preference Functionis in One
Dimension," J. Math. Psychology, Vol. 16 (1977), pp. 261-266.
4. AND , "Single-peaked Functions and the DEMO of Preference," Psychological Rev. Vol.
84 (1977), pp. 216-230.
DEMO CRUM, R., LAUGHHUNN, AND PAYNE, J. W., "Risk Preference: Empirical Evidence alnd Its
Implications for Capital Budgeting," in F.G.J. Derkinderen & R. L. Crum (Eds.), Financing Issues in
Corporate Project Selection, Martinus Nyhoff, Boston, Mass. (to appear).
6. FISHBURN, P. C., "Mean-risk Analysis with Risk Associated with Below-target Returns," Amer. DEMO
Rev. Vol. 67 (1977), pp. 116-126.
7. AND KOCHENBERGER, G. .A., "'Two-piece Von Neumann-Morgenstern Utility Functions,"
Decision Sci., Vol. 10 (1979), pp. 503-518.
8. HADAR, Ordering Uncertain Prospects," DEMO Econ. Rev., Vol. 59
(1969), pp. 25-34.
9. HERSHEY, DEMO C. AND SCHOEMAKER, "An Examination of Prospect Theory's Reflection Hypothe-
sis," unpublished manuscript, 1979.
10. HOLLOWAY, C. A., Decision Making under Uncertainty: Models and Choices, Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, N. J., 1979.
11. KAHNEMAN, D. AND TVERSKY, A., "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decisions under Risk,
Econometrica, Vol. 47 (1979), DEMO 262-291.
12. KARMARKAR, U. S., "Subjectively Weighted Utility: A Descriptive Extension of the Expected Utility
Model," Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, Vol. 21 (1978), pp. 61-72.
13. KEENEY, Tradeoffs,
Wiley, New York, 1976.
14. KRANTZ,
Press, New York, 1971.
15. LIBBY, R. AND FISHBURN, "Behavioral Models of Risk Taking in Business Decisions: A Survey and
Evaluation," J. Accounting Res., Vol. 15 (1977), pp. 272-292.
16. MAO, J. C. T., "Survey of Capital Budgeting: Theory and Practice," J. Finance, 1970, 25, DEMO Vol.
25 (1970), pp. 349- 360.
17. MARKOWITZ, H., DEMO Selection, Wiley, New York; 1959.
18. MCWHINNEY, Theory," in G. Fisk (Ed.), The Psychology of
Management Decision, GWK Gleerup DEMO, Lund, Sweden, 1967.
19. PAYNE, W., "Relation of Perceived Risk to Preferences Among Gambles," J. Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception DEMO Performance, Vol. 1 (1975), pp. 86-94.
20. AND BRAUNSTEIN, DEMO L., "Preferences Among Gambles with Equal Underlying Distributions," J.
Experimental Psychology, Vol. 87 (1971) pp. 13-18.
21. AND CARROLL, J. DEMO, "Exploring Pre-decisional Behavior: An Alternative Approach to Decision
Research," DEMO Behavior and Human Performance, Vol. 22 (1978), pp. 17-44.
22. PETTY, J. W. II AND ScoTrr, D. F., "Capital Budgeting DEMO in Large American Firms: A
Retrospective Analysis and Update," in DEMO Derkinderen & R.L. Crum (Eds.), Financing Issues in
Corporate Project DEMO, Martinus Nyhoff, Boston, Mass. (to appear).
23. PFANZAGL, DEMO, "A General Theory of Measurement-Applications to Utility," Naval Res. Logist. Quart.,
Vol. 6 (1959), pp. 283-294.
24. RANYARD, R. DEMO, "Elimination by Aspects as a Decision Rule for Risky Choice," Acta Psychologica, Vol.
40 (1976), pp. 299-310.
25. SIEGEL, "DEMO of Aspiration and Decision Making," Psychological Rev., Vol. 64 (1957), pp. 253-262.
26. SIMON,
27. , "Rational Decision Making in Business Organizations," Amer. Econ. Rev., Vol. 69 (1979), pp.
DEMO
28. STEDRY, A.C., Budget Control and Cost Behavior, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1960.
29. WILLIAMS, C.A., "Attitudes Toward Speculative Risk as an Indication of Attitudes Toward Pure Risks,"
J. Risk and Insurance, Vol. 33 (1966), pp. 577-586.
D.,
J. DEMO
W. R., "Rules for
RUSSELL,
P.J.H.,
R. L. AND
RAIFFA,
H., Decisions with Multiple Objectives:
Preferences
and Value
D. H., LUCE,
R. D., SUPPES,
A.,
P. AND
DEMO,
Foundations
of Measurement,
Academic
P.,
W. H., "Aspiration Levels and Utility
J.
S.,
H. A., "A Behavioral Model DEMO Rational Choice," Quart.
J. Econom., Vol. 69 (1955), pp. 99-118.{1g42fwefx}