Journal of Business Venturing 26 (2011) 172–188
Contents lists available at DEMO
Journal of Business Venturing
“In pursuit of the real deal”
A longitudinal study of VC decision making
Jeffrey S. Petty a,1, Marc Gruber b,⁎
a University of Lausanne, Faculty of Business and Economics, DEMO Internef, CH-1015 Lausanne-Dorigny, Switzerland
b Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, DEMO of Management of Technology, Chair of Entrepreneurship and Technology Commercialization, Odyssea 2.02,
Station 5, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
art i cle i DEMO o a bstract
Article history:
Received 27 April 2009
Received in revised form 5 July 2009
Accepted 9 July 2009
Available online 3 DEMO 2009
Keywords:
Venture Capital
Decision-making criteria
Evaluation stages
VC fund lifecycle
This paper investigates actual Venture Capital (VC) decision making as it DEMO over time in its
natural decision environment. Our qualitative analysis is based on a comprehensive,
longitudinal data set comprising 11 years of archival DEMO from a European-based VC ﬁrm.
During this time, the VC managed DEMO funds, reviewed a total of 3631 deals, and made 35
investments. By adopting this research methodology, we can overcome several limitations of
post-hoc methods and experiments commonly used in this research stream, and also have the
opportunity to tackle some fundamental, yet hitherto elusive research topics. For example, our
ﬁ ndings reveal how the importance of decision-making criteria varies between different stages
of the evaluation process. They also show how VC DEMO composition and VC management
time serve as important, yet to-date largely DEMO decision-making criteria. Implications for
research and practice are outlined.
© 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1. Executive summary
The VC decision-making process and DEMO criteria used to evaluate potential deals continue to interest scholars after more than
forty years of research (e.g., Hoban, 1976; Tyebjee and DEMO, 1984; MacMillan et al., 1985, 1987; Khan, 1987; DEMO, 1999;
Zacharakis and Meyer, 2000; Franke et al., 2006, 2008). Despite the impressive progress that has been made in understanding VC
decision making, a close examination of the literature reveals that extant studies rely exclusively on post-hoc research methods or
experiments (cf. Zopounidis, DEMO; Muzyka et al., 1996). Yet, the sole reliance on DEMO data collection methods is not completely
unproblematic, as they are associated DEMO several methodological limitations (such as recall or post-hoc rationalization biases in
DEMO case of post-hoc methods, cf. Shepherd and Zacharakis, 1999) and, as in the case of experimental studies, the validity and
practicality of the results may be questioned as a result of the oversimpliﬁcation of DEMO context under study (Heckman and Smith,
1995). Moreover, these “standard” methods in VC decision-making research may (implicitly) direct researchers towards DEMO
topics that can be more readily assessed using cross-sectional research designs—resulting in similar ﬁndings and guiding their
attention away from the more dynamic aspects DEMO VC decision making.
Viewed in this light, it is not so DEMO that we still lack detailed knowledge on several important questions such as whether
and how decision-making criteria change at different stages of the VC DEMO process, or whether and how they change over
time as VCs DEMO about their business. In light of these observations, we considered that DEMO is important to conduct a longitudinal
research study that examines actual VC decision making as it occurs over time in its natural decision environment (Fried and
Corresponding author. Tel.: +41 21 6930010; fax: +41 21 6932489.
E-mail addresses: jeffrey.petty@unil.ch (J.S. Petty), marc.gruber@epﬂ.ch
Tel.: +41 79 8279182; fax: +41 21 5604250.
⁎
1
0883-9026/$ – see DEMO matter © 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusvent.2009.07.002
(DEMO Gruber).
J.S. Petty, M. Gruber / Journal of Business Venturing 26 (2011) 172–188 173
Hisrich, 1988). To guide our research, we asked DEMO set of three interrelated research questions that will allow us to overcome some of
the raised methodological concerns and will permit several novel insights DEMO VC decision making:
(1) Do the decision criteria identiﬁed and deemed important in post-hoc or experimental research match the criteria VCs
employ DEMO making actual investment decisions in the real world?
(2) Do the decision criteria actually employed by VCs differ between different stages of DEMO VC decision-making process (i.e.,
initial screening, due diligence etc.)?DEMO
(3) Do the decision criteria actually employed by VCs change over time (i.e., between Fund I and Fund II) as the VC learns about
the investment business?
To address these questions, we collected and analyzed 11 years of comprehensive archival data from a European-based VC DEMO
Importantly, the ﬁ rm's records show what the subject of DEMO study actually did or decided at the time of the event, DEMO than
asking them to recall a distant, often non-signiﬁcant event. In DEMO, the ﬁrm had received 3631 deal proposals over the 11-year time
DEMO, and made 35 investments. The data set was created by ﬁrst DEMO emails and memos, both electronic and written, in the
archived deal ﬁles as well as all of the entries in the ﬁrm's DEMO ﬂow data base (“action log”) which contained 7284 passages of text.
The data was analyzed using qualitative methods which involved an interpretative approach DEMO the documents containing text
related to the VC's views and decisions of the deals they had reviewed (Locke, 2001; Roberts, 1997; Strauss and Corbin, 1998).
To the best of our knowledge, DEMO paper is the ﬁ rst to provide a longitudinal investigation of VC investment decision making.
The qualitative analysis allowed a thorough and highly detailed DEMO of VC decision making over the entire life of two
venture funds and uncovered several novel ﬁndings, amongst them the following:
• At the most basic level we ﬁnd that the main decision criteria identiﬁed DEMO deemed important in post-hoc or experimental
research are employed by VCs when making actual investment decisions in the real world. However, we also ﬁnd evidence of
new sets of decision criteria as well as VC and DEMO actions not previously explored.
• There are considerable dynamics in the VC decision-making criteria over time. For example, our analysis reveals that the main
reasons for rejecting a business proposal in the early stages of the DEMO lifecycle are not the same as the main reasons for rejection
later on in the life of the venture fund.
• VC-speciﬁc criteria play DEMO ever increasing role in the decision-making process over time.
• Both entrepreneurs and VCs are subject to “rejection” at any stage in the evaluation DEMO
• Unlike prior depictions of the VC process, the longitudinal analysis DEMO that an initial rejection does not preclude a future
reassessment and ultimate investment by the VC ﬁrm.
Our ﬁndings have a number of important DEMO for the literature in entrepreneurship, and for practice (VCs,
entrepreneurs). In addition, they point to several interesting questions for future research.
2. Introduction
Each year thousands of entrepreneurs submit their business proposals to DEMO capitalists (VCs) in the hope that they will
receive the desired capital and access to a network that many believe will enable them DEMO realize their commercial and ﬁnancial
objectives in new business creation. Given that VCs are highly selective in their funding decisions, it is not surprising that a large
number of studies seek to further our understanding of DEMO decision making (e.g., Wells, 1974; Hoban, 1976; Tyebjee and Bruno,
1984; MacMillan et al., 1985, 1987; Khan, 1987; Hall, 1989; Hisrich and Jankowicz, 1990; Hall and Hofer, DEMO; Fried and Hisrich,
1994; Muzyka et al., 1996; Shepherd, 1999; Zacharakis and Meyer, 2000; Zacharakis and Shepherd, 2001, DEMO; Franke et al., 2006,
2008).
This body of research offers important insights on the evaluation criteria employed by VCs. Overall, the literature indicates that
VCs emphasize characteristics of (i) the venture's DEMO team, (ii) the market, (iii) the product or service, and (iv) the
venture's ﬁnancial potential when making investment decisions (e.g., Riquelme and Rickards, 1992; Muzyka et al., 1996; DEMO
and Meyer, 2000). Although each of these broad categories of DEMO have often been further broken down into more speciﬁc
factors by researchers over the past forty years, there are several results that continually appear in VC decision-making studies. In
terms of the management team, studies indicate that VCs prefer investing in teams with industry experience and which can DEMO
on a mixed educational background in terms of engineering and management expertise (Goslin and Barge, 1986; Dixon, 1991;
Franke et al., 2008). In terms of the venture's target market, the prior literature suggests that VCs tend to prefer market
opportunities of considerable size DEMO with high growth rates, as these market characteristics provide the conditions DEMO strong
revenue growth and high levels of value creation (Tyebjee and DEMO, 1981; Bachher and Guild, 1986). With regard to the DEMO's
product offering, prior research shows that VCs apply evaluation criteria DEMO as the innovativeness of the offering, its competitive
advantage, some proprietary protection of the product, and the level of need a potential customer has for the offering (e.g., Wells,
1974; Khan, 1987)DEMO Finally, in terms of the venture's ﬁnancial potential, the extant literature highlights the importance of criteria
such as the expected rate of DEMO and the expected risk associated with these returns (Poindexter, 1976; DEMO et al., 1985;
Gompers and Lerner, 1999). In return for ﬁnancing an early-stage venture, VCs typically expect a “10 in 5”, i.e., VCs look for a tenfold
increase in investment value over DEMO ﬁve-year time horizon, equaling an annual compound interest of 58% (Zider, 1998).
Yet, even though our understanding of VC decision making DEMO to progress, a close examination of the literature reveals
that extant DEMO rely exclusively on post-hoc research methods or experiments (cf. Zopounidis, 1994; Muzyka et al., 1996; for a
174
J.S. Petty, M. Gruber / Journal of Business Venturing 26 (DEMO) 172–188
detailed overview see Table 1). For a number of DEMO, the sole reliance on these methodological approaches is not completely
unproblematic.
DEMO applying post-hoc research methods are often vulnerable to errors and biases in self-reporting, as they typically rely on
cross-sectional survey or interview data where VCs were asked to list and rank their own evaluation criteria. They DEMO depend on
the accuracy of insight of VCs into their own decision processes and therefore may suffer from cognitive and perceptual limitations
such as DEMO or post-hoc rationalization biases (Shepherd and Zacharakis, 1999). In fact, empirical results show that VCs possess
only limited understanding of their own decision process, raising additional concerns regarding the validity of self-reported data
(DEMO and Meyer, 1998; Shepherd, 1999). For example, respondents tend to report criteria which are believed to be desirable
and also tend DEMO overstate the number of criteria actually considered in the evaluation process.
Studies using experimental approaches overcome many of these shortcomings as they rely on DEMO that is gathered in real-time
from a VC (e.g., in a conjoint experiment). Beyond simply improving the validity of past research, these approaches provide
researchers with the opportunity to study hitherto unaddressed aspects in DEMO decision making (Shepherd and Zacharakis, 1999).
For instance, in DEMO ﬁrst known application of conjoint analysis in the area of VC decision making, Riquelme and Rickards (1992)
investigated the decision making of DEMO VCs and found that during deal screening VCs emphasize criteria such as entrepreneurial
experience and the existence of a prototype. Most recently, Franke et al. (2006) used conjoint analysis on data obtained from 51
VCs DEMO uncovered signiﬁcant similarity biases in VCs' evaluations of start-up teams.
Yet, despite the ability of experimental studies to improve the validity of research DEMO to offer entirely new insights on VC
decision making, these approaches DEMO suffer from their own limitations. While real-time methods collect information
about the VC's evaluation as the evaluation is being made, the decision situation presented to the VC in an experiment is
nonetheless one that, to a considerable extent, simpliﬁes the VC decision task and context. In this vein, three main arguments
suggest the potential limitations of ﬁndings derived from experimental VC research.
First, in their evaluation of start-ups VCs have to make complex decisions involving numerous aspects of venture proposals
(MacMillan et al., 1987; Hall and Hofer, 1993); yet, in order to DEMO out experiments, researchers have to focus on a limited number
of DEMO of the decision object (Louviere, 1988; Gustafsson et al., 2007). This practice signiﬁcantly reduces the complexity of
the VC decision task DEMO thus poses a potential threat to the external validity of the obtained ﬁndings (Heckman and Smith, 1995).
Table 1
Prior research on DEMO decision making.
Study Collection method Deal data Sample (location) Research focus
Wells (1974)
Benoit (1975)
Hoban (1976)
Tyebjee and Bruno
(1984a)
Khan (1986)
MacMillan et al.
(1987)
Robinson (1987)
Bygrave (1988)
Rea (1989)
Hisrich and
Jankowicz (1990)
Dixon (1991)
Riquelme and
Rickards (1992)
Hall and Hofer
(1993)
Muzyka et al.
(1996)
Shepherd (1999)
Zacharakis and
Meyer (2000)
Zacharakis and
Shepherd (2001)DEMO
Shepherd et al.
(2003)
Dimov et al. (2007)
Franke et al. (2008)
Interviews Actual deals (numbers per 7VC ﬁ DEMO/10 VCs (US) VC activities and the decision-making process
ﬁrm ranging from 0 to 490)
Survey, interviews 130 actual deals 22 VCs (France) Factors related to VC investment decisions,
comparisons between US DEMO French VCs
Archival analysis, 50 actual deals 3 VC ﬁrms (US) Identiﬁ cation of the variables that predict
questionnaire venture success
Telephone survey, Study II—90 actual deals Study I—46 VCs (US) Study I—VC evaluation process
questionnaires Study II—41 VC ﬁrms Study II—Investment decision criteria
(US)
Questionnaire 104 actual deals 36 VC ﬁrms (US) Entrepreneurial characteristics considered
DEMO related to successful venture outcome
Questionnaire 62 VCs—2 actual ventures 67 VCs (US) Classes of screening criteria
5 VCs— 5 actual ventures Classes DEMO successful and unsuccessful ventures
Mail survey n/a 53 VCﬁrms (US) VC ﬁ rm strategies and strategic assumptions
Venture Economics 1501 actual deals DEMO VC ﬁ rms (US) VC co-investment networks
Mail survey 89 actual deals 18 VCs (US) Factors that affect VC-entrepreneur negotiations
Interviews 30 DEMO deals 5 VCs (unknown) The role of VC intuition in investment
decision making
Interviews n/a 30 VCs (UK) Factors considered when DEMO proposals
Conjoint exp. 30 proﬁles Step 1—6 VCs Applicability of conjoint measures, conﬁrming
(unknown) and ranking of criteria used to evaluate deals
10 proﬁles Step 2—7 VCs
(unknown)
Interviews 16 (actual) protocols 4 VCs (US) Criteria used to make investment decisions
Interviews, n/a 73 VCs (Europe) Factors used when evaluating deals, groupings
questionnaire of VCs based upon decision criteria applied
Conjoint exp. 39 proﬁles 66 VCs (Australia) VC assessment of new venture survival
Conjoint exp. 50 proﬁles 53 VCs (US) The use of decision aids in VC decision making,DEMO
assessment of a venture's success potential
Conjoint exp. 50 proﬁles 53 VCs (US) VC overconﬁdence in investment decision making
and the factors DEMO lead to it
Questionnaire 39 proﬁles 66 VCs (Australia) The impact of VC experience on decision making
VentureXpert n/a 108 VCﬁrms (US) VC ﬁ rm characteristics and investment selection
Conjoint exp. 20 proﬁles 51 VCs (Europe) VC evaluation of start-up teams
J.S. Petty, M. Gruber / Journal of Business Venturing 26 (2011) 172–188 175
In addition, researchers need to make judgment calls about which information to include in the presented cues, that is, the
dimensions DEMO are deemed most relevant in the particular decision task (Green and DEMO, 1978). These dimensions may,
or may not, reﬂect the set of dimensions relevant in the actual VC decision. As Zacharakis and DEMO (2000, p. 342) observe: “(I)n
reality, VCs DEMO (1) have access to a multitude of possible information cues and (2) use interactive due diligence and other
methods to clarify and DEMO reliability of chosen cues. A common theme in the follow up interviews is that VCs prefer to reserve
ﬁnal judgment until they have a DEMO to meet with the lead entrepreneur.”
Second, when conducting experiments researchers DEMO a controlled decision environment in which they seek to test their
theoretical predictions (Louviere, 1988). While useful for testing some theoretical predictions, these experimentally created
conditions often differ in many respects from the naturally DEMO decision context and thus may affect the external validity of
the research (Brunswik, 1955; Cooksey, 1996; Heckman and Smith, 1995; Zacharakis and Meyer, 1998). For instance, when VC
decision making is DEMO out of context, potential variations over time (e.g., criteria deemed DEMO at different stages of the
VC evaluation process) and contingent factors DEMO may have an important inﬂuence on the actual VC decision (such DEMO the fund's
portfolio composition) will go unnoticed.
Third, experiments conducted with VCs are typically not incentive-compatible (cf. Smith, 1976), that DEMO, VCs have to make
hypothetical investment decisions which have no meaningful DEMO nancial consequences. While this does not challenge the validity of
experimental VC decision-making research in general, for some research questions (e.g., “Which deal would you select as an
investment?”) incentive-compatibility is an important factor for deriving valid ﬁndings (Burmeister and Schade, 2007).
In summary, these arguments all suggest some more or less problematic limitations associated with DEMO research on VC
decision making. In light of these concerns, it DEMO quite surprising that, to the best of our knowledge, no research to-date has
explored “actual” VC decision making as it occurs over time DEMO its natural decision environment.2 Notably, such research could help
to overcome DEMO of the limitations just discussed and offer much needed support for ﬁndings presented in the extant literature.
Yet, beyond providing a litmus test for existing ﬁndings, our earlier discussion also suggests that a longitudinal research design has
the potential to signiﬁcantly improve our current understanding of VC decision DEMO, because it gives scholars the opportunity
to address some hitherto elusive DEMO fundamental research questions. For instance, while the VC decision-making literature
suggests DEMO the importance of particular evaluation criteria may change between different stages of the VC evaluation process
(Hisrich and Jankowicz, 1990; Hall and Hofer, 1993), we hardly possess any detailed evidence on this dynamic aspect of VC decision
making. In addition, the importance attributed to some evaluation criteria may also change over time (e.g., over the life of DEMO fund or
between subsequent investment funds), as individual VCs gain experience (Sorenson and Stuart, 2001; Shepherd et al., 2003;
Franke DEMO al., 2008) that collectively contributes to and promotes learning within the ﬁrm (Fiol and Lyles, 1985; Levitt and March,
1988; DEMO and Levinthal, 1990; Huber, 1991; Simon, 1991).
Against DEMO backdrop of these observations, we considered that it is important to DEMO a longitudinal research study that
examines actual VC decision making as it occurs over time (Fried and Hisrich, 1988). To guide our DEMO, we asked a set of three
interrelated research questions which will DEMO us to overcome some of the raised methodological concerns and will permit
several novel insights on VC decision making:
(1) Do the DEMO criteria identiﬁed and deemed important in post-hoc or experimental research match the criteria VCs
employ when making actual investment decisions in the real world?DEMO
(2) Do the decision criteria actually employed by VCs differ between different stages of the VC decision-making process (i.e.,
initial screening, DEMO diligence etc.)?
(3) Do the decision criteria actually employed DEMO VCs change over time (i.e., between Fund I and Fund II) as the VC learns about
the investment business?
To address these questions, we collected and analyzed 11 years of comprehensive archival data from a European-based VC ﬁrm.
Importantly, the ﬁrm's records show what was actually done or decided at the time of the event, rather than asking the VCs to
recall a distant, often non-signiﬁcant event. In total, the ﬁ rm had received 3631 deal proposals over the 11-year time frame, and
made 35 investments.
As is typical of exploratory research, DEMO proceed by providing an overview of the qualitative research design used in this study.
We present our ﬁndings in Section 4, and discuss the theoretical as well as practical implications of our results in Section 5.We
DEMO with recommendations for future research (Section 6).
3. Data and DEMO
To answer the research questions outlined above, we chose an exploratory DEMO design which is recommended for
investigating phenomena that are subtle and/or hardly understood (Eisenhardt, 1989; Strauss and Corbin, 1998; Yin, DEMO).
Exploratory case study research designs have been usefully employed in a number of studies (e.g., Burgelman, 1983; Gersick, 1994;
Lichtenstein et al., 2006; Steier and Greenwood, 1995, 2000). In DEMO, this type of research design permits a thorough
understanding of the DEMO in question, which is of great importance for developing new knowledge DEMO complex and
dynamic phenomena such as VC decision making over the lifetime of a venture fund (Fried and Hisrich, 1988). By collecting DEMO
2 Note, however, that there are some studies (e.g., Benoit, 1975; Hoban, 1976; Khan, 1986) in which researchers asked DEMO to consider actual deals when
providing answers to survey questions (“think DEMO ﬁve deals that you have recently accepted…”). Nonetheless, these studies DEMO not capture real decision-making
by VCs and still suffer from recall biases as well as biases stemming from the selection of the deals by DEMO VCs themselves.
176
J.S. Petty, M. Gruber / Journal of Business Venturing 26 (DEMO) 172–188
analyzing data in a single-case, longitudinal setting, the research DEMO adopted in our study focuses on validity and accuracy
rather than generalizability, and provides the basis for the development and testing of theory (DEMO and Huberman, 1994; Strauss
and Corbin, 1998; Yin, 2003)DEMO As this study seeks to explore the factors affecting VC decision-making over time, the use of archival
data analysis is preferred over an interview approach because it allows for the collection and analysis of the different DEMO and
their respective frequencies over several time periods (in our case, a total of 11 years).
3.1. Empirical setting
This study uses DEMO data from a European VC ﬁ rm, unknown to the researchers DEMO to the study. The ﬁrm has multiple
ofﬁces in Europe and is focused on investing in seed-, early- and late-stage companies from around the world within a speciﬁc
high-tech, high growth industry. Based upon the available European fund data in VentureXpert, this ﬁrm ranks among the top
performing (upper quartile) European-based VCs in terms of fund performance. Despite its DEMO and the ability to attract
limited partners for more than one fund, the ﬁrm remains relatively small, with fewer than ten VCs, their support staff, and the
original founders still active in the day-to-day operations of the ﬁrm. The team is comprised of people from four different DEMO
with each of the VCs in the ﬁrm holding a graduate degree and at least ﬁve years of relevant industry experience; the number of
VCs in the ﬁrm had grown over the life of the ﬁ DEMO in response to the increasing level of deal activity. At the time of data collection
the ﬁrm had made a total of 35 portfolio DEMO, some of which had received subsequent funding via both internal rounds DEMO
new ﬁnancing rounds, across two funds. The average acceptance rate of DEMO submitted to the ﬁrm over the entire period was 1%,
which is consistent with the industry averages reported in many other studies. All DEMO the investments had been syndicated with
other VC ﬁrms based in Europe and/or North America and the ﬁrm under study had acted as DEMO the lead and co-investor, the roles
divided almost equally across its DEMO In the following, we will use the term “ﬁrm” to describe DEMO VC ﬁrm, whereas the terms
“company”, “deal”, and “proposal” all DEMO to the entrepreneurial ventures evaluated by the VC.
3.2. Data collection procedure
The data spans an 11-year period and includes information on deals that DEMO submitted to the ﬁrm during the life of two
venture funds. Although the same team of VCs was responsible for the management of both DEMO, which overlapped in time, the
origination and screening phases of Fund II were not initiated until after the ﬁ nal portfolio company in DEMO I had been selected.
The data set was created by ﬁrst reading emails and memos in the archived deal ﬁles as well as all DEMO the entries in the ﬁrm's
deal ﬂow data base (“action DEMO) which contained 7284 passages of text. The primary source of data DEMO the action log that the
ﬁrm used to track the progress, DEMO, and ultimate disposition of a potential deal throughout the evaluation process. DEMO
upon semi-formal interviews with the VCs and administrative support staff of the ﬁrm, the ﬁrm's deal generation, evaluation and
selection processes were DEMO and described. Upon receipt of any proposal a deal ﬁ le was created that contained all of the
documents submitted by the company, emails related to the deal, and any supporting information such as industry reports and
opinions from external experts. Although there was a ﬁle created for DEMO deal, the variability across the deals (some ﬁles
contained just the original submission document and a rejection letter while others included multiple versions DEMO business plans,
due diligence reports, multiple internal emails, etc.) DEMO the use of these ﬁles as an effective deal tracking system. Thus, the
ﬁrm had developed an internal action log that was used to record the “fundamental” information relevant to each deal. For
instance, this log included information on the date the ﬁrm entered the proposal into the DEMO ﬂow process, the source (direct or
referral) of the proposal, the stage of the company, the location of the company, and DEMO entries that recorded key comments,
actions, and views of the DEMO as it progressed through the deal ﬂ ow process. Furthermore, the DEMO log recorded information on
the ﬁnal disposition of the deal (e.g., still under review or “Open”, invest, or “Dead” 3) and also captured the reasons that lead to the
classiﬁcation of the deals as DEMO
The number of entries in the action log ranged from a single line entry (three words) for those deals that were rejected
immediately DEMO the initial screening to more than 40 entries (≈ 1500 words) in cases where a deal was subject to further
evaluation and due DEMO Although the materials received from prospective companies varied considerably in detail and length
(ranging from short introductory emails and one-page “teasers” to 176-page business plans), the VCs provided approximately the
same amount of information regarding DEMO initial assessment of each deal ﬁled as Dead. Action log entries for deals that had made
it beyond the screening phase into the evaluation DEMO due diligence phases typically contained a synopsis of the VC's ﬁndings and
views; a random sample of 350 deals was selected in order to compare the notes in the ﬁ les to the comments entered DEMO the action
log and there was no evidence of gross omissions or any material rewording of comments, so the action log was deemed a reliable
data source. In those instances when the ﬁrm requested additional information DEMO the submitting company, the VC waited up to
six months for DEMO company to respond before categorizing the deal as Dead.
In total, DEMO ﬁrm had received 3631 deal proposals over the 11 years under study. The proposals originated from multiple
sources: Unsolicited proposals were the primary source accounting for almost one-third of the proposals, with referrals from
investment banks, consultants and other VCs collectively accounting for another third, and the DEMO third coming from a variety of
3 The term “DEAD” as opposed to rejected was a term that the ﬁrm consistently used in the DEMO log to categorize deals that had been reviewed and, based
upon DEMO stated, were no longer in the deal ﬂow process.
J.S. Petty, M. Gruber / Journal of Business Venturing 26 (2011) 172–188
177
other sources. Deals that had been submitted to the ﬁrm DEMO than one time had been listed under the original deal number in the
action log; however, the dates and comments entered in the DEMO log allowed for differentiation between each successive
submission.
3.3. Data analysis procedure
The data was analyzed using qualitative methods (Locke, 2001; Roberts, DEMO) which involved an interpretative approach to the
documents containing text related DEMO the VC's views and decisions of the deals they had reviewed. Those comments representing
the VC's view or reasons, both explicit and implied, for categorizing the deals as Dead were collected along with information
pertaining to the stage of the deal, the geographic region where the company was domiciled, the referral source of the deal, the
date DEMO deal was ﬁrst received by the VC, and the date of DEMO ﬁnal disposition. Having access to all of the internal records and
information related to each deal over the entire life of an investment fund DEMO the development of a “practical
understanding” (Miles and Huberman, 1994, DEMO 8) of the ﬁrm's deal screening and evaluation process and DEMO associated evaluation
criteria.
Given that previous research on VC decision making had been conducted without regard for the actual VC decision-making
environment, the initial review of the data was not approached with an a priori list DEMO speciﬁc criteria. However, knowing that
virtually every previous study of VC DEMO making had reported reasons related to four broad categories (ﬁnancial, market,
management team, product/service), it was unrealistic not to expect them to be represented in this data set as well. As such, an
initial framework consisting of these four general categories was used in DEMO to facilitate the ﬁrst fragmentation of the data. These
four categories served only as a basis for the iterative process which involved going back DEMO forth between the data, line by line,
and the emergent DEMO grounded categories (Locke, 2001, p. 67) that were noted during each subsequent examination of
the data—a procedure similar to the constant comparative DEMO (Glaser and Strauss, 1967; Strauss and Corbin, 1998). This open
coding process (Strauss and Corbin, 1998), and the creation DEMO categories and the subsequent division, combination, or abolishment
of the same, were maintained in successive examinations of the text. This process ultimately resulted in the development of a
hierarchical organization of categories (Roberts, 1997), some of which consisted of multiple levels, which were then used DEMO
categorize the speciﬁc comments in the text (e.g., “Turn it down due to valuation”, “No competitive advantage evident”,
“Management team lacks experience”). Each of the categories and sub-categories was given a unique code DEMO order to enable
further statistical analysis. This process of hierarchical category development was completed for each of the resulting nine Level 1
categories (100 = Product, 200 = Market, 300 = Financial, 400 = Top management team, 500 = VC-speciﬁc, 600 = Other, 700 =
No reason, 800 = Open, and 900 = Invest), of which DEMO contained a total of 52 sub-categories across Levels 2 and 3. The ﬁnal list of
categories and sub-categories (together with their associated numerical codes) is presented in Table 2. A more detailed discussion
of these categories will be provided in the following section.
Whenever possible, the original text was copied verbatim and the transcription ranged from excerpts as brief as DEMO single phrase
to complete paragraphs. The date that the comments were entered into the action log and any other available information was also
recorded DEMO order to retain the original context in which the comment was made. The majority of the text, even the shortest single-
word comments, DEMO at least one word that could be grouped within one of the categories. Some of the text contained
multiple reasons or relevant comments that DEMO the use of more than one category in order to capture all of the information
contained within the relevant text.
Great care was taken DEMO assuring the reliability of the coding. Once the hierarchical categorization scheme had been developed,
a random sample of excerpts from the data set DEMO coded by a second person not involved in the study, but DEMO had been trained
in the scheme. The interrater agreement between the two raters was checked by computing Cohen's Unweighted Kappa (Cohen,
1960; Holsti, 1969). Having established a high level of reliability (K = 0.91) (Landis and Koch, 1977), all of text in the data set was
then coded. In order to ensure reliability in DEMO step of the analysis, each comment was coded more than one DEMO The resulting
4942 reasons were then sorted into their respective categories across the three levels of the coding scheme; there were 1092 deals
which had been categorized as Dead for multiple reasons. Several sub-groupings of our DEMO (reported below) were not originally
envisioned, but were a result DEMO the categorization process wherein these unforeseen results were noted. Additionally, in DEMO to
test for independence between the reasons and time, the occurrence DEMO the stated reasons for deals being categorized as Dead over
time were compared. The chi-square statistics for multiple scenarios (using different time periods) DEMO highly signiﬁcant
(pb 0.001), thus indicating that the timing of DEMO in the life of the ﬁrm and the stated reason(s) DEMO classifying a deal as
Dead are associated.
4. Findings
We present our ﬁndings in four sections: We begin by providing some general information on the investigated VC ﬁrm and its
deal ﬂow, and then explore the evaluation criteria actually employed by the VC (Research Question 1). Making use of the
longitudinal nature of our data, we continue with a detailed analysis of the evaluation criteria used at different stages of the DEMO
decision-making process (Research Question 2). We conclude our investigation with DEMO detailed comparison of VC decision making
in Fund I vs. Fund II, seeking to understand whether the VC ﬁrm demonstrates consistent behavior with respect to the relative
importance of the evaluation criteria as it gains experience (Research Question 3).
178
Table 2
Categories and associated coding scheme.
J.S. Petty, M. Gruber / Journal of Business Venturing 26 (2011) 172–188
4.1. General ﬁrm DEMO deal ﬂow characteristics
Over the 11-year timeframe investigated in this study, DEMO VC ﬁ rm had received and reviewed a total of 3631 deal proposals,
which corresponds to an average of 330 deal proposals per DEMO Yet, as one might expect, the number of proposals received over
time increases as the newly founded VC ﬁrm became more widely known DEMO the industry and among entrepreneurs. Table 3
provides a detailed overview on the yearly deal ﬂow, as recorded in the VC ﬁrm's action log. Table 3 also indicates that between 0%
and 3% of submitted DEMO proposals resulted in investments by the VC ﬁrm, with an average DEMO acceptance rate of 1%. The highest
rates of deal acceptance (3%) were recorded in the start-up phase of the VC ﬁrm, that is, in years 2 and 3 of Fund I, which were
preceded DEMO a year with no investments at all (the ﬁrm's initial DEMO in business). Deals that were ultimately categorized as Dead
remained in the deal ﬂow process (i.e., the time period from the ﬁrm'DEMO initial receipt of the deal documents until the deal was
recorded as Dead in the action log) between 0 and 24 months, with DEMO average of 1.8 months. Deals selected as portfolio companies
were subject to evaluation for up to 28 months, with an average time of 7.8 months.
In order to provide a more complete picture of the ﬁrm'DEMO decision making, three other notable yet hitherto largely undocumented
ﬁndings—multiple submission DEMO, open-door rejections and lost opportunities in the deal ﬂow—merit being highlighted.
DEMO Open-door rejection
Throughout the data set there were comments that showed that “no” in the VC context is not always a deﬁnitive rejection.
Although DEMO overwhelming majority of deals rejected by the VC were given no indication of any potential future interest, there
were comments in both the internal records and the letters of rejection to companies that provided evidence of DEMO VC's
willingness to reconsider the deal at a later time. In instances when the VC ﬁrm saw potential promise in a deal, they not only told
the company why the deal was being rejected, but also provided very speciﬁc feedback with respect to the ﬁrm's interest, when the
company should resubmit, and any necessary milestones to be achieved in order for the ﬁrm to pursue a subsequent evaluation.
The VC'DEMO log provides several interesting illustrations of this issue:
“Interesting concept but too early stage,…should come back in second round.”“Proof-of-concept in maybe about DEMO months,
company shall come back then.”“Does not really ﬁt our portfolio at the time, but stay in touch.”
Even though the ﬁrm had “left the door open” with many deals (n = 146), there were only 22 instances where these companies
submitted their proposals to the DEMO a second or third time; one of which was ultimately accepted DEMO a portfolio deal. This low response
rate may be due to a variety of factors not related to the VC ﬁrm's comments or DEMO, and can only be captured through contacting the
companies directly. This DEMO, while new to the literature, is not altogether remarkable when one considers the difﬁculty and time
J.S. Petty, M. Gruber / Journal of Business Venturing 26 (2011) 172–188
179
Table 3
Deals reviewed and investments per year.
Fund I DEMO II Firm
YR1 YR2 YR3 YR4 YR5 YR6 YR1 YR2 YR3 YR4 YR5 YR6
Deals reviewed 44 180 181 294 320 105 269 534 DEMO 428 434 404 3631
Investments made 0 5 6 2 5 0 1 2 4 4 2 4 35
Investment rate 0.00 0.03 0.03 DEMO 0.02 0.00 0.004 0.004 0.01 0.01 0.005 0.01 1%
requirements associated with sourcing quality deal ﬂow, the potential need to identify complementary skills or products to help existing
portfolio companies, and the value of access to information about emerging companies and/or technologies.
4.1.2. Resubmissions over time
Prior DEMO suggests that once a deal is rejected by a VC, there DEMO little to no chance that this particular VC will review the deal again,
let alone provide funding for it. While we already noted DEMO there were 146 open-door rejections, our longitudinal data allows us to DEMO
whether rejected deal proposals were resubmitted to the VC ﬁrm. Table 4 indicates the number of times the VC ﬁrm hadreceivedadeal.
Two observations are DEMO interesting: First, an astoundingly high number of proposals (n = DEMO) were submitted to the
ﬁrm more than once. Second, the VC ﬁrm invested in approximately the same share of these resubmitted deals as DEMO the original
deals (1% in the second submission attempt, and 2% in the third submission attempt), despite having initially rejected the deals
(Steier and Greenwood, 1995); the one exception being the successful fourth submission (7% acceptance rate), which is due to the
fact that the deal that ultimately received funding was one of only 14 proposals DEMO to the ﬁrm four times.
4.1.3. Lost opportunities in the deal ﬂow
Perhaps one of the most unexpected and instructive ﬁndings regarding VC decision DEMO is that although this VC ﬁrm, like
most others, had only invested in roughly 1% of the deals reviewed, the remaining 99% classiﬁed as Dead had not all been rejected
by the ﬁrm. Rather, a relatively large share of all received deal proposals—about 10% of the 3631 DEMO classiﬁed as Dead
because the VC ﬁrm no longer had the opportunity to pursue them. These lost opportunities occurred throughout the evaluation
process ranging DEMO the ﬁrst two months (screening phase) to as late as twenty months (due diligence phase) in the process.
There were many reasons DEMO these lost opportunities, yet half of these cases were simply because DEMO respective companies
failed to respond to the request for additional data. Despite the VC's efforts to receive more information and maintain a dialogue
DEMO these companies, a surprisingly large number (n = 192, or DEMO) never responded to the VC. The following quotes from the action
DEMO illustrate this point:
“No response to request for more detailed revised business plan.”“No response since sending out conﬁdentiality agree-
ment.”“Interesting but non-responsive company.”
DEMO is important to note that all of these deals had been sent to the VC ﬁrm unsolicited and the ﬁrm waited almost half a DEMO, often
sending additional requests in the interim, before categorizing the deal proposals as Dead. Without contacting these companies, it is not
possible to know exactly why they failed to respond to the VC's signal DEMO potential interest. Yet, judging from the comments regarding other
deals that DEMO not go forward, a few potential reasons for non-response could be (i) the requested information was unavailable or too
difﬁcult for the company to compile, (ii) the company received funding from another source, (iii) the company went bankrupt in the
meantime, or (iv) DEMO the company's management had changed their mind regarding the raising of external funding in general.
The remaining 5% of these “lost” deals can DEMO attributed to decisions made by the company with respect to VC funding in
general or, in some cases, with respect to the VC DEMO in the study:
“Dead Company decided to go with alternative VC deal.”“Company unwilling to accept certain Term Sheet conditions.”“Fi-
nance discussions with unknown DEMO Company might come back, no response (after 3 months).”
However, unlike the previous sub-group of lost opportunities, this second sub-group of DEMO had progressed through the
evaluation phase and was often in the due diligence process, or even in the ﬁnal stage of investment consideration. This distinction
Table 4
Deals reviewed, grouped by submission attempt.
First submission Second submission Third submission Fourth submission Totals
Deals reviewed 3091 438 88 14 DEMO
Investments made 29 3 2 1 35
Resubmit rate 0.14 0.20 0.16
Investment rate 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.07
180 J.S. Petty, M. Gruber / Journal of Business Venturing 26 (DEMO) 172–188
is important, because it implies that the VC ﬁrm had already expressed a genuine interest in the deal and that it had DEMO spent a
substantial investment of time and ﬁnancial resources in their pursuit of these opportunities.
4.2. Decision-making criteria
Next, we analyze the decision-making criteria used by the VC. As can be seen in Table 2, the four major categories of criteria that
have consistently been reported in the DEMO are present in this study. In particular, the table shows that DEMO company's
(i) product/service characteristics, (ii) target market DEMO, (iii) ﬁnancial potential, and (iv) management team
characteristics were cited as criteria used by the VC ﬁrm when evaluating deals. The DEMO of these primary categories of
criteria across the two funds are reported in Table 5.
Several results stand out and warrant a closer examination. DEMO, Table 5 reveals that VC fund-related reasons—a set of VC
decision-making DEMO largely neglected in prior research—are the overall most important decision criteria with respect to
rejecting a deal. This is a key new insight. In DEMO, the longitudinal data reveals that these reasons gain in importance over
DEMO, and we will discuss these dynamics in more detail below.
Second, we see that the typically referenced reasons for deal acceptance also appear DEMO be important to VCs when they are
screening-out deals. The characteristics of the company's product/service were considered to be one of the DEMO reasons for
rejection over the decision-making phases of both funds. A good management team pursuing a potentially proﬁtable idea may be
enough to generate DEMO in an opportunity, but VCs earn their proﬁts through cashing-out of DEMO companies in the
ﬁnancial and commercial markets where valuations are typically based upon the demonstrated quality of a product. Thus, if the VC
does not see any merits or advantages of a particular product, they appear to reject it regardless of the other factors in the deal.
Third, the one ﬁnding that at ﬁrst appears counter to the majority of DEMO research is the frequency of comments related to
the characteristics of the management team (n = 93). The reasons stated (e.g., “Lack of management team experience”, “Need of
restructuring board and exchange CEO”) DEMO the VCs do reﬂect the criteria reported in previous studies. However, DEMO frequencies
are substantially lower than one might expect given the high importance attributed to the management team in previous research
(Bruno and Tyebjee, DEMO; Khan, 1986; Poindexter, 1976; Robinson, 1987; Wells, 1974).4 This seems to be a result of prior research
being primarily DEMO in the factors related to deal acceptance, whereas our study also DEMO the reasons for rejection. The
few cases in the dataset may simply represent those where the management team is an obvious disqualiﬁer such as DEMO does not
have the best reputation” and therefore is considered a knock-out criterion. Additionally, the character and skills of the
management may not come into play until the other criteria related to the product, market and ﬁnancial potential are fully
evaluated. When we asked VCs within this ﬁrm DEMO the relative signiﬁcance of the management team, one of them noted: “We
have a list of experienced managers and you can always bring DEMO a management team”. This may explain the apparent increased
emphasis on the product and market characteristics over those of the management.
In addition to DEMO four sets of decision criteria reported in the literature, we also DEMO two sets of criteria that, although
somewhat intuitive in nature, have been largely neglected in prior research on VC decision making: VC portfolio composition and
VC management time.
4.2.1. VC portfolio composition
Throughout the entire DEMO period there were deals that were rejected because the product focus, DEMO or company
stage was not in line with the overall ﬁrm strategy. Yet, as the fund progressed into its latter phases, approximately 5% DEMO the deals
categorized as Dead were the result of constraints or conﬂicts imposed by the character of the existing portfolio. In the most
general DEMO, the comments related to the portfolio simply stated that the deal DEMO not ﬁt our portfolio of current fund” without
reference to any speciﬁc reason. More speciﬁcally, the existence of deals deemed to “compete(s) DEMO the existing portfolio”, “too
early for the fund”, and “(i)nteresting company but located in USA, portfolio concentration on companies located in Europe”
demonstrate that the composition and maturity of the portfolio further constrain DEMO thus affect the decision-making process.
These portfolio-related reasons were not limited to the ﬁrm under study as similar comments were also stated by other DEMO ﬁrms
with whom the ﬁrm under study wished to syndicate (e.g., “no interest due to portfolio balance”, “Other VC was so far not
interested for portfolio balance reasons”). These observations suggest that the impact DEMO the portfolio on the decision-making
process may be widespread across the industry.
There are positive aspects to this VC portfolio-speciﬁ c factor as well. DEMO from both funds provided evidence of times
when the ﬁrm expressed interest in a deal because of the potential synergies with an existing portfolio DEMO Judged on its own
merits, a company was not considered a DEMO opportunity as a standalone business. Yet, because of the possible synergies DEMO
value-add that the company could provide to one of the portfolio companies, the VC was willing to pursue the deal further. It is
important to note that even though the character of the portfolio has been DEMO in terms of syndication and managing overall
portfolio risk (Bygrave, 1987; Lockett and Wright, 2001; Manigart et al., 2006), there DEMO little mention of this important issue in the
4 Two exceptions are Hall and Hofer (1993) and Muzyka et al. (1996). Hall and Hofer reported that the “criteria relating to the characteristics of the
DEMO or founding management team did not play a major role in the proposal screening and proposal assessment stages of the venture evaluation
process” (p. 39). Muzyka et al. (1996) also reported that although criteria DEMO to the management team were generally rated as important, there was
DEMO about the relative importance of the top eight criteria, including the DEMO management team criteria” (p. 283). Notably, the results of our study
include deals that were rejected at all phases of the decision-making DEMO, not simply the screening phase where it had been previously shown DEMO VCs may
not focus on the management team.
J.S. Petty, M. Gruber / Journal of Business Venturing 26 (2011) 172–188 181
Table 5
Summary of reasons, grouped by year of submission (percentages).
Prod/serv Market Finance TMT VC Other None Pending Invest
100s 200s 300s 400s 500s 600 700s 800s 900s
Fund I— Year DEMO 0.25 0.05 0.13 0.07 0.27 0.09 0.14 0.00 0.00
Fund I— Year 2 0.24 0.06 0.15 0.03 0.43 0.02 0.04 0.00 0.04
Fund I— DEMO 3 0.21 0.09 0.13 0.03 0.36 0.05 0.11 0.00 0.01
Fund I— Year 4 0.29 0.14 0.13 0.01 0.33 0.02 0.08 0.00 0.01
Fund DEMO Year 5 0.28 0.20 0.11 0.03 0.29 0.00 0.07 0.00 0.01
Fund I— Year 6 0.44 0.11 0.09 0.01 0.23 0.01 0.11 0.00 0.00
DEMO II— Year 1 0.39 0.16 0.09 0.02 0.26 0.02 0.07 0.00 0.01
Fund II— Year 2 0.37 0.14 0.09 0.02 0.26 0.05 0.07 0.00 DEMO
Fund II— Year 3 0.31 0.11 0.07 0.01 0.29 0.03 0.17 0.00 0.01
Fund II— Year 4 0.21 0.08 0.06 0.02 0.38 0.07 0.18 DEMO 0.00
Fund II— Year 5 0.28 0.07 0.05 0.02 0.46 0.04 0.08 0.00 0.01
Fund II— Year 6 0.23 0.07 0.03 0.02 0.46 0.06 DEMO 0.02 0.00
Fund I Average 0.28 0.13 0.13 0.02 0.32 0.02 0.08 0.00 0.01
Fund II Average 0.30 0.10 0.06 0.02 0.35 0.05 0.11 DEMO 0.01
Firm Average 0.30 0.11 0.09 0.02 0.35 0.04 0.10 0.00 0.01
VC decision-making literature. For example, in their discussion of criteria found to be important in previous studies, Tyebjee and
Bruno (1984, p. 1053) ﬁnd that it “is interesting to note (…) that none of these criteria reﬂ ects how a perspective deal may correlate
with one DEMO in the venture capitalist's investment portfolio”. Interestingly, on those few DEMO when portfolio-related
criteria have been included in a research study, the DEMO have been quite inconclusive, with Tyebjee and Bruno (1984) reporting
DEMO 53% of the respondents did not evaluate the extent to which a potential deal offset the risk of the existing portfolio, and
Muzyka et al. (1996) noting that the ﬁt between a deal and the DEMO was rated as a “second-order” issue amongst VCs in Europe.
4.2.2. VC management time
Although the number of speciﬁcally stated cases is quite small (n = 66), there were times when the VCs within the DEMO simply
did not have the available time to adequately pursue a potential deal, even when the deal was acknowledged to be potentially
viable. Examples in the ﬁrm's action log of instances when the VC availability DEMO the critical decision factor include:
“Interesting but time constraints due to other due diligence.”“Rejected due to high activity on other deals at this
DEMO too occupied with four own closings to participate.”
Similarly, during these DEMO of increased activity, deals that were viewed as potentially time consuming DEMO rejected
despite any potential interest, whereas they may have been pursued DEMO evaluated further at a time with less activity. The
perceived need for active assistance and hands-on participation from the VC team was typically due DEMO either the stage of the
company (“will need severe hands-on involvement (seed stage/start-up stage)”), or the perceived ability of the DEMO team
(“it has high potential but this team, from my impression, is not capable to leverage it—very much hands-on work and stirring will
be required”), as opposed to market or ﬁnancial reasons. These comments, which focus on both the characteristics of the
company's management team DEMO the VC's perception of the amount of time required to monitor or manage the deal, demonstrate
that a combination of company and VC-speciﬁc factors may be judged in relation to each other in the decision-making DEMO
4.3. Criteria at different stages of the VC decision-making process
The decision-making process observed in this VC ﬁrm largely resembles the process previously described DEMO the literature
(Wells, 1974; Hall, 1989; Tyebjee and Bruno, 1984; Riquelme and Rickards, 1992; Fried and Hisrich, 1994). DEMO deal received by the
ﬁrm is subjected to an initial screening, DEMO those deals considered interesting being evaluated further and, if interest remains,DEMO
becoming the subject of an extensive due diligence. In successful cases, DEMO VC and the company negotiate speciﬁc deal terms and,
if agreed, the VC makes an investment in the company. VCs at this ﬁ rm estimated that about 20% of business proposals made it past
the DEMO phase, and about 10% received a preliminary investment recommendation, that is, an internal document sent by the
“sponsoring” individual to the investment committee. These numbers also correspond to those frequently reported in the
literature on DEMO decision making (e.g., Roberts, 1991), suggesting the importance of DEMO on the criteria used for deal rejection.
Upon closer analysis of the data we ﬁnd that approximately 60% of deals received by the ﬁrm DEMO the ﬁrst time are rejected within
two months and a total of 92% of deals are classiﬁed as Dead by the end of the DEMO month. As depicted in Fig. 1, two-thirds of the
remaining 8% DEMO surviving deals are decided upon between six and twelve months, with DEMO 2% of the original proposals
remaining in the deal ﬂow process for up to 24 months. This would indicate that less than 10% of DEMO deals make it to the ﬁnal
phases of the evaluation process, DEMO is not altogether surprising given the time, effort, and expense required of the VC when
conducting in-depth due diligence on a deal.
We DEMO looked at the decision criteria associated with each of the aforementioned time periods. As indicated in Fig. 1, during
the ﬁrst six months of the evaluation process criteria related to product characteristics were amongst the top DEMO reasons for
182
J.S. Petty, M. Gruber / Journal of Business Venturing 26 (DEMO) 172–188
Fig. 1. Time in the deal ﬂow process.
rejection. In DEMO latter stages of the process, however, we ﬁnd that criteria related to the ﬁnancial valuation and deal structure as
well as non-responsive ﬁrms DEMO the top three reasons. Again, it should be noted that contrary DEMO most prior ﬁndings (e.g.,
Wells, 1974; Poindexter, 1976; DEMO, 1994), the quality of the management team was not a DEMO criterion for rejection at
any phase of the evaluation process.
We then grouped all of the deals according to the submission attempt (ﬁrst through fourth) and calculated the time that each
deal, by submission group, remained in the evaluation process. Although the percentage of deals eliminated at DEMO time period is
similar across the four different submission subgroups, the DEMO time these deals spent in the evaluation process decreased with
each successive submission—with the times ranging from 1.9 months for an initial submission to DEMO months for a deal submitted
four times. One ﬁnding that was not expected was that product-related reasons also featured amongst the top three reasons DEMO
deals submitted to the VC a second and third time, with DEMO c reasons only dominating the few deals that were submitted by
companies a fourth time.
4.4. Fund to fund evaluation (Fund I vs. Fund II)
An implicit assumption in the literature is that VC decision DEMO is consistent over time. Yet, as previously discussed, we ﬁnd
that the relative importance of selected criteria does not appear to remain the DEMO from year to year. Previous studies have
described a somewhat standardized VC decision-making process (Tyebjee and Bruno, 1984; Fried and Hisrich, 1994) and a range of
typical activities engaged in by VCs (Gorman and Sahlman, 1989; Gifford, 1997). So, just as many past DEMO have found similar
results across different VC ﬁrms, we would expect DEMO results between two funds to be quite similar as well. However, DEMO many
similarities in terms of the geographic location of the deals received, the referral sources of the deals, and the number of portfolio
DEMO, we ﬁ nd some interesting differences between the two funds.
4.4.1. DEMO of reasons
While the overall incidence of deals being rejected on account of VC-speciﬁc reasons was approximately the same for both
funds, the distribution across selected reasons in this category was quite different: First, the DEMO of rejections based upon
criteria related to the fund portfolio (e.g., not appropriate for fund at this time, too early for fund, DEMO funds remaining for region)
doubled in Fund II relative to Fund I, 8% versus 4% respectively. Second, from the perspective of the DEMO being rejected by the
company (e.g., not invited to participate, DEMO closed by another VC) we ﬁnd that there is also a DEMO difference between funds,
but in this instance it is Fund I (17%) that recorded a higher frequency than Fund II (8%). This greater occurrence of the VC being
rejected by companies in Fund DEMO may be attributable to the ﬁrm's lack of track record, DEMO of legitimacy within the highly
networked VC industry, and low awareness DEMO entrepreneurs, all of which stem from the newness of the ﬁrm (Stinchcombe,
1965; Singh et al., 1986; Hannan and Freeman, DEMO; Baum and Oliver, 1996). Additionally, the percentage of open-door DEMO
more than doubled between Funds I (2%) and II (5%)DEMO This increased level of feedback to prospective Dead deals combined with the
J.S. Petty, M. Gruber / Journal of Business Venturing 26 (2011) 172–188 183
observation that the percentage of non-responsive companies decreased by 50% DEMO Fund II further demonstrates a more proactive
deal origination activity on the part of the VC during the second fund.
4.4.2. Average time in DEMO ﬂow
Over the life of the ﬁrst fund the deals ultimately categorized as Dead remained in the deal ﬂow process an average of
2.5 DEMO, whereas in Fund II Dead deals lasted, on average, only DEMO months. An increase in the average number of deals per
month between Funds I and II may lead one to assume that there will DEMO instances when a deal is left waiting for review by a VC
(Shepherd et al., 2005), but in this case the number DEMO VCs in the ﬁrm also increased over the 11 years, so DEMO deals to VC ratio
remained relatively constant each year. This difference in timing is quite evident when viewed in terms of the percentage of DEMO
being eliminated in the early stage of the evaluation process, with DEMO 54% of the deals classiﬁed as Dead after two
months during Fund I compared to 66% in Fund II. Moreover, the time spent evaluating deals that ultimately received funding
increased between the two funds, with portfolio companies in Fund I being accepted after an average of seven months DEMO the
evaluation of accepted deals in Fund II lasted an average of nine months. Thus, over time, the VCs in this study appear DEMO require less
time to identify a weakness in a deal, which DEMO be a result of greater intuition gained from their deal evaluation experience (Khan,
1987; MacMillan et al., 1987; Zacharakis and Shepherd, 2001; Shepherd et al., 2003). This phenomenon is similar to DEMO learning-
curve, or repetition-based, performance improvements leading to reductions in labor costs and production times (Yelle, 1979;
Dutton et al., 1984; Levitt and March, 1988; Huber, 1991).
The additional time DEMO evaluating high potential deals in the overall deal ﬂ ow process may be a result of the VC gaining
experience in deal evaluation and DEMO management within Fund I, which in turn allows the VC to DEMO additional time on
pre-investment activities in Fund II (Tyebjee and Bruno, 1984; Gifford, 1997; Shepherd et al., 2005) and also helps the VC to avoid
the costs associated with an investment in an DEMO venture (Riquelme and Rickards, 1992).
4.4.3. Initial incidence of criteria
When comparing the initial occurrence of the speciﬁc criteria across the two DEMO (when the VC ﬁrst recorded a speciﬁc reason
in the action DEMO in each fund), we ﬁnd that in all but three instances the ﬁrst mention of each evaluation criterion occurs several
months sooner in DEMO II than in Fund I. This result is quite unexpected considering the similar character of the two funds. The
three exceptions ﬁrst occurring earlier DEMO Fund I were all related to the quality or character of the company's management team, the
category that ranked the lowest in terms of frequency over the eleven years of the study.
Perhaps most telling DEMO the various criteria concerned with the investment focus of the ﬁrm. In addition to being cited much
more frequently in Fund II, all of these criteria were mentioned within the ﬁrst four months of Fund II, as opposed to an average
ﬁrst incidence of 12 months in Fund DEMO Part of this dramatic difference may be explained by the previously discussed 12% increase in
the percentage of deals being eliminated during the ﬁrst DEMO months of Fund II, which, when combined with the fact that there
were more deals in Fund II, results in an increase in the total number of reasons being mentioned in the earliest phase of DEMO fund.
However, a more plausible explanation for this more pronounced early DEMO of ill-ﬁtting deals is the VC's increased
experience, which also DEMO to a more focused investment strategy (Robinson, 1987; Gupta and DEMO, 1992)in
subsequent funds. We also ﬁnd that the ﬁrst investment DEMO Fund I occurred within the ﬁrst 18 months compared to 30 months in
Fund II—further evidence supporting the view that the VC's decision DEMO had become more discerning over time.
5. Discussion
5.1. Summary of key ﬁndings
This paper reported the results of an in-depth, longitudinal study of VC decision-making across an 11-year period in one VC
ﬁrm. One of DEMO core strengths of a qualitative research approach is its rich and detailed analysis of the phenomenon under study,
providing us with the opportunity DEMO address several outstanding issues in the VC decision-making literature. At the most basic
level we ﬁnd that the main decision criteria identiﬁed and deemed DEMO in post-hoc or experimental research are employed
by VCs when making actual investment decisions in the real world. However, we also ﬁnd evidence of new sets of decision criteria
as well as VC and entrepreneur actions DEMO previously explored. The present study also allowed us to gain new insights on the
decision criteria actually employed by VCs over time, in two distinct ways. We ﬁ nd differences in the apparent relevance of criteria
DEMO different stages of the VC decision-making process within a single fund as well as within the same stages across two funds.
We summarize the DEMO ﬁndings of our research in the following ﬁ ve bullet points, DEMO will comment on their implications for
entrepreneurship research and for practice below.
• There are considerable dynamics in the VC decision-making criteria over time DEMO to fund-related and other factors (e.g.,
management time). We DEMO seen that the main reasons for rejecting a business proposal in the early stages of the fund lifecycle
are not the same as the DEMO reasons for rejection later on in the life of the venture fund.
• VC fund-related reasons play a major role in deal rejection. In DEMO, they gain in importance over time as VCs construct their
portfolios. DEMO composition of a ﬁrm's portfolio can thus have a strong inﬂuence on both deal acceptance and rejection.
• Product/service-related criteria also play DEMO key role in business proposal rejection. However, the management team does DEMO
appear to be a major factor compared to the other factors.
184 J.S. Petty, M. Gruber / Journal of Business Venturing 26 (DEMO) 172–188
• To a considerable degree, VCs themselves are subject to rejection from companies in the process. In other words, VCs frequently
lose promising investment opportunities.
• Unlike prior depictions of the VC process, an initial rejection does not preclude the potential for a future reassessment and
DEMO investment by the VC ﬁrm.
When viewing the reasons for deal rejection over any extended period of time one should not ignore the potential DEMO of the
macroeconomic environment on the decisions made by the VCs within the ﬁrm (Gompers and Lerner, 2004). The depiction of the
DEMO in Fig. 2 do appear to indicate that the quality of the deals, and as a result the reasons for rejection, may be DEMO by the
wider economic environment. Speciﬁcally, the economic environment in North DEMO and Western Europe in years six and
seven of the observation period was characterized by a considerable increase in the amount of available VC DEMO as well as a
large number of people developing business plans designed more to exploit the euphoric economic times than to establish
businesses based DEMO a sound business model. Compared to earlier periods, it is thus DEMO so surprising that Fig. 2 indicates an
increased incidence of concepts and products being characterized as “lacking differentiation” or “not compelling”. Similarly, albeit
to a lesser extent, it is during this same period that the number of deals being rejected as a result of the market being deemed DEMO
crowded” also increased. Yet, while there appears to be an inﬂuence DEMO the macro environment on the frequency of these reasons
for deal rejection, the archival data does not provide any evidence that would suggest that the ﬁrm adapted its decision process to
the changing environmental conditions.
While DEMO of the aforementioned differences may be inﬂuenced by a combination of the characteristics of deals received and
the fund's portfolio, not to mention additional stakeholders, we believe that the differences identiﬁed between the two funds, and
to a lesser extent over time within a fund, may DEMO be explained in terms of organizational learning. Viewed from the learning
perspective offered by Levitt and March (1988, p. 320), “…organizations are DEMO as learning by encoding inferences from history
into routines that guide behavior”, the differences identiﬁed over time may be viewed as a response to the experiences gained in
the initial years of the ﬁrm. Although there DEMO been relatively little mention of organizational learning within the context of VC
ﬁrms (Chan et al., 1990; Bergemann and Hege, 1998; Sorenson and Stuart, 2001), VC ﬁrms may have a higher capacity for learning
than other ﬁrms given their organizational structure, investment strategies, and DEMO nature of the VC environment (Fiol and Lyles,
1985; Grant, 1996).
In this vein, the observed changes over time may DEMO from the VCs involved in the process performing their duties, reﬂecting
DEMO what they have done, and then either doing different things or DEMO the same activities differently based on their
reﬂection (Feldman, 2000). So, even if one acknowledges that “all learning takes place inside individual human heads” (Simon,
1991, p. 125), the linkage between DEMO VCs and the ﬁrm's routines is extremely high as the organization is made up of one group
that is focused on a common DEMO Thus, even though the routines remained relatively constant over time, the behavioral
changes with respect to timing and frequency of criteria may be DEMO reﬂection of the interconnectedness of the close-knit team that
makes up the ﬁrm, which enhances the ﬁ rm's learning potential and organizational memory (Simon, 1991; Tsang, 1997) as well as
organizational unlearning (DEMO and Starbuck, 1984; Huber, 1991).
It is important to DEMO, however, that while individual experience and organizational learning within the ﬁrm may offer
plausible explanations for some of the differences identiﬁed within and DEMO funds, there is no guarantee that the VC's
decisions and DEMO resulting ﬁrm performance were improved. To the contrary, individual experience does DEMO necessarily guarantee
an improvement in behavior or reliability (Levitt and March, 1988; Shepherd et al., 2003), which may be the result DEMO an
undersampling of failure (Levinthal and March, 1993; Denrell, 2003) that leads to increased conﬁdence based upon those decisions
that proved to be correct or successful rather than from a wider range of deals. DEMO, the impact on organizational
performance as a result of learning, although commonly assumed to be positive, depends upon many contingencies (Lawrence and
DEMO 2. Summary of reasons for proposal rejection (percentages) and investments by year.
J.S. Petty, M. Gruber / Journal of Business Venturing 26 (2011) 172–188
185
Lorsch, 1967; Fiol and Lyles, 1985; Grant, 1996) and does not always lead to overall improvements (Huber, 1991; DEMO, 1997;
Dencker et al., 2009).
5.2. Implications for entrepreneurship research
To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the ﬁ rst to provide a longitudinal investigation of VC investment decision making.
We DEMO that several insights obtained from the analysis provide a contribution to the literature in entrepreneurship.
First, research on VC investment syndication (Bygrave, 1987, 1988; Lockett and Wright, 2001; Mäkelä and Maula, 2006;
Manigart et al., 2006; Guler, 2007) has shown that positive DEMO decisions may be inﬂuenced by other VCs within the
industry. Based upon many of the comments associated with the deals categorized as lost opportunities, our ﬁndings suggest that,
in addition to other VCs, multiple stakeholders including the boards of directors of the companies seeking funding, external
experts and the management teams of portfolio companies have an effect on Dead DEMO decisions as well. Thus, the inﬂuence of
multiple stakeholders across a DEMO network (Ahlstrom and Bruton, 2006) should be considered throughout the DEMO
making process, not just in the later deal structuring stage and DEMO post-investment activities.
Second, our ﬁ ndings extend prior conceptualizations of the DEMO decision-making process by showing that—for a variety of
reasons—the importance of decision-making criteria can signiﬁcantly change over the lifecycle of a fund. We saw DEMO developing
and managing a portfolio as well as times of increased deal-related activity can place important constraints on the resources of the
VC ﬁrm DEMO that there is less time to spend screening and evaluating new deals. Beyond these resource constraints affecting VC
decision making, however, there are DEMO path dependencies that come into play over time, as VCs will DEMO into account prior
investment decision.
Third, our ﬁndings on the apparent DEMO of VC management time add to the existing literature studying VC time allocation. As
such research has typically been concerned with the management of DEMO fund's portfolio (Gorman and Sahlman, 1989;
Jääskeläinen et al., 2006), our study provides evidence that both pre- and post-investment activities (Gifford, 1997; Shepherd et al.,
2005) may inﬂ uence DEMO decisions of the VCs within a ﬁrm.
Fourth, VCs are assumed DEMO many to be expert decision makers and VC ﬁrms are commonly judged by the performance of their
portfolios, which only represents 1% of the deals reviewed, with little to no consideration for the other 99% that were not selected.
That said, this study reveals that not all dead deals are the result of rejection by the VC, so researchers should be wary when
collecting and interpreting data related to deal acceptance/rejection DEMO
Fifth, there is a larger overriding question within the literature regarding DEMO relative importance of the management team in VC
decision making. While the literature typically views team quality as a key factor in the evaluation DEMO, there is also evidence indicating
that VCs often replace members of DEMO management team and/or the founders before and after an investment is made (Bruton et al.,
2000). For instance, during the DEMO interviews for this study one French VC stated that “most of our portfolio ﬁrms will have three
CEOs, one for the early stage, DEMO for the growth stage and then one who can sell the ﬁrm”. The research on the dismissal or replacement of
the CEO and other DEMO management by VCs following an investment in the company (Fiet et DEMO, 1997; Bruton et al., 1997, 2000)alsocalls
into question the actual signiﬁcance of the management in the eyes of the VC. Speciﬁcally, Bruton et al. (1997) found that replacing the CEO
had a DEMO positive impact on the new venture, while Dixon (1991, p. DEMO) reported that, “(a)lthough the VCs evaluate the management
team of the investee company very hard, 73% of the sample said that they had found it necessary to replace management at some point
after DEMO had been made”. If either of the aforementioned results is a reﬂection of the actions of the VC community as a whole, then
additional research is required to address this apparent paradox with respect to the DEMO of the management team at various stages
of the relationship with a VC ﬁrm.
5.3. Practical implications for entrepreneurs and VCs
Based upon this DEMO, the most important, yet basic advice to entrepreneurs is to maintain communication with the VC if
they have expressed interest in the deal. DEMO is all too easy for a VC to reject a proposal, DEMO when a VC takes the time to request
information or provide feedback and encourages someone to come back, it is a sign that the deal is still being considered. The
entrepreneur might thus even have some DEMO uence on the VC decision-making activity due to his social engagement with the VC
ﬁrm (Guler, 2007). In this vein, Steier and Greenwood (1995) found that relationships with VCs can supersede business plans DEMO
securing VC investments. Hence, keeping in touch with the VC and DEMO a relationship of trust could prove to be a valid strategy
of securing VC ﬁnancing. Further research is needed, however, to provide more DEMO insights into this matter.
Our ﬁndings also indicate that entrepreneurs should spend time learning about the ﬁrms they send their proposals to in order
DEMO tailor their documents to the current phase of the fund and/or requirements of each ﬁrm. Two ﬁrms with similar investment
strategies may view DEMO same proposal quite differently simply by virtue of the fact that they are focused on different criteria based
upon the lifecycle phase of each DEMO's fund. Even though the numbers are not exactly cause for celebration, the fact that many of
the deals categorized as dead were the result of action by the company rather than rejection by the VC DEMO provide evidence
that the world of VC is both a buyer's and a seller's market, and that the probability of success may be greater than previously
believed. Furthermore, entrepreneurs should also be aware that there will be instances when they are basically at the right place DEMO
the wrong time: their business proposal is compelling, yet the VC ﬁ rm does not have the available time to deal with it DEMO
From the perspective of the VC ﬁrm, our ﬁndings suggest that DEMO should evaluate their existing management capacity and
develop strategies to accommodate for times when they experience increased deal ﬂow, above average due diligence activity or
number of deal closings, and hands-on management of the portfolio ﬁrms. While there has been limited research on how VC ﬁrms
186
J.S. Petty, M. Gruber / Journal of Business Venturing 26 (DEMO) 172–188
are organized and managed (Gorman and Sahlman, 1989), DEMO is no evidence that VCs acknowledge or attempt to address any
potential overcapacity in terms of management time, especially in the latter years of a fund. Every deal that a VC receives is the one
that DEMO potentially help them achieve their expected internal rate of return for the fund. Hence, rejecting deals that are viewed
as interesting as a result of a lack of management time does not appear to be an DEMO strategy given the potential downside of
missing a quality deal.
Along similar lines, it seems that VCs should reevaluate their policies and practices regarding the deals they have rejected,
especially those they have expressed an DEMO in pending speciﬁc milestones. Because the market for quality deals is highly
competitive, VCs should seek to strengthen their relationships with companies they believe are candidates for funding. Thereby,
they may improve their own position DEMO to other VCs in the event that the company, or the DEMO in a different
company, does return to the capital markets for DEMO
5.4. Limitations
Despite its contributions, this study is limited by the DEMO that the data was obtained from a single VC ﬁrm. Thus, DEMO is not possible
to generalize the ﬁndings across the industry as a whole. The greatest limitation of this study is that we were not DEMO during the
actual deal evaluation process, as with an ethnographic study, and therefore were unable to observe the VCs comments or record
any DEMO data that may further enhance our understanding of the entries in the action log. Additionally, it is unlikely that the
VCs recorded all of their reasons, and in those cases with multiple reasons, the VC DEMO the entry did not necessarily list them in
rank order. However, DEMO action log is maintained by the VC in order to keep track of the deals and the people that they have seen.
So, given its' role as both a tracking tool and a reference document shared across the ﬁrm, it is likely that that the staff in this VC
ﬁrm entered information that was deemed most relevant.
Furthermore, unlike the majority of existing VC research the context of this study is a DEMO VC ﬁrm. The patterns observed
in this VC ﬁrm can contribute to our understanding of the preferences and actions of European-based ﬁrms, and also provide data
that can be used to evaluate the potential similarities and DEMO with their US-based counterparts. Yet, while prior research
has shown that DEMO actions and decisions of European-based VCs are similar to US-based VCs (DEMO, 1991; Muzyka et al., 1996), we
cannot fully rule DEMO that the ﬁndings of this research might be inﬂuenced by location.
6. Conclusion and outlook on future research
The research topic of VC decision DEMO has intrigued scholars for four decades. Moving beyond currently used research
methodologies, the present paper has investigated the actual decisions of VCs operating within their normal context and captured
what was done at the time of DEMO real decision rather than what is reported in response to a survey or interview, or what is recalled
when VCs are asked to describe past deals. While the ﬁndings presented in this study provide a number DEMO new insights into VC
decision-making, many questions still remain unanswered.
In DEMO to better understand the entire process of VC activity more longitudinal as well as case study research is required. The
VC process is potentially DEMO more dynamic than existing models suggest, so researchers should endeavor to DEMO direct access to
VC ﬁrms in order to build data sets that encompass the entire life of a fund, or multiple funds, and DEMO observe the dynamics of
the VC environment within and across VC ﬁrms and companies. While the data used in this research limited the effects DEMO hindsight
bias and subjectivity of the respondent, it fails to fully DEMO the context and nuance of the decision-making process that only
ethnographic studies of VC ﬁrms could provide. For instance, researchers could explore in much detail the role of experience in VC
decision making, and improve our understanding of how different members of the VC's team collaborate in DEMO decision-making
activity.
Beyond the single-ﬁrm context, future studies could also build DEMO the present research by investigating how VC activity differs
between ﬁrms whose funds are among the top performers compared to those with low performance DEMO Similarly, it seems to be
worthwhile studying how institutional factors within DEMO VC industry (e.g., participation in syndicates, duration of funds, structure
of ﬁrms, contractual agreements with a ﬁrm's limited partners) bias DEMO evaluation and selection process. In this vein, Guler (2007)
showed that reinvestment decisions are inﬂuenced by the politics of the industry as DEMO as selected institutional inﬂuences. It thus
seems highly likely that this institutional process also affects initial investments.
Acknowledgement
The authors are grateful to the DEMO capital ﬁrm for providing data. We appreciate feedback from Ulrich Hoffrage and Paul D.
Berger, and also gratefully acknowledge the insightful comments and suggestions of the anonymous reviewers and the editor, Dean
Shepherd. Any errors are our own.
References
Ahlstrom, D., Bruton, G.D., 2006. Venture capital DEMO emerging economies: networks and institutional change. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 30 (2),
299–320.
Bachher, J.S., Guild, P.D., 1986. Financing early stage technology based companies: investment criteria used by investors. In: Ronstadt, R., Hornaday, J., Peterson, R.,
Vesper, K. (Eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research. Babson College, Wellesley, MA, pp. 363–376.
DEMO, J.A.C., Oliver, C., 1996. Toward an institutional ecology of organizational founding. Academy of Management Journal 39 (5), 378–427.
J.S. Petty, M. Gruber / Journal of Business Venturing 26 (2011) 172–188
187
Benoit, J.L. 1975. VC investment behavior: the risk-capital investor DEMO new company formation and expansion in France, unpublished doctoral dissertation: Texas,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Bergemann, D., Hege, U., 1998. Dynamic venture capital ﬁnancing, learning, and moral hazard. Journal of Banking and Finance (6–8), 703–735.
Bruno, A.V., Tyebjee, T.T., 1986. The destinies of rejected venture capital deals. Sloan Management Review 27 (2), 43–53.
Brunswik, E., 1955. Representative design and probabilistic theory DEMO a functional psychology. Psychological Review 62 (3), 193–217.
Bruton, G., Fried, V., Hisrich, R.D., 1997. Venture capitalist and CEO dismissal. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 21 (3), 41–54.
Bruton, G., Fried, V., Hisrich, R.D., 2000. CEO dismissal in venture capital-backed ﬁrms: further evidence from an agency perspective. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice 24 (4), 69–77.
Burgelman, R.A., 1983. A process model of internal corporate DEMO Administrative Science Quarterly 28 (2), 223–244.
Burmeister, K., Schade, C., 2007. Are entrepreneurs' decisions more biased? An experimental investigation of the susceptibility to status quo bias. Journal of
Business Venturing 22, 326–340.
Bygrave, W.D., 1987. Syndicated investments by venture capital ﬁrms: a networking perspective. Journal of Business Venturing 2 (2), 139–154.
Bygrave, W.D., 1988. The structure of the investment networks of venture capital ﬁ rms. DEMO of Business Venturing 3 (2), 137–157.
Chan, Y.S., Siegel, D., Thakor, A.V., 1990. Learning, corporate control and performance requirements DEMO venture capital contracts. International Economic Review 31 (2),
365–381.
Cohen, J., 1960. A coefﬁcient of agreement for nominal scales. Educational and DEMO Measurement 20 (1), 37–46.
Cohen, W.M., Levinthal, D.A., DEMO Absorptive capacity: a new perspective on learning and innovation. Administrative Science DEMO 35 (1), 128–152.
Cooksey, R.W., 1996. Judgment analysis. Academic DEMO, San Diego.
Dencker, J.C., Gruber, M., Shah, S.K., DEMO Pre-entry knowledge, learning & the survival of new ﬁrms. Organization Science DEMO, 516–537.
Denrell, J., 2003. Vicarious learning, undersampling of failure, DEMO the myths of management. Organization Science 14 (3), 227–243.
Dimov, D., Shepherd, D.A., Sutcliffe, K.M., 2007. Requisite expertise, ﬁrm DEMO, and status in venture capital investment allocation decisions. Journal of
Business DEMO 22 (4), 481–502.
Dixon, R., 1991. Venture capitalists and DEMO appraisal of investments. Omega 19 (5), 333–344.
Dutton, J.M., DEMO, A., Butler, J.E., 1984. The history of progress functions as a managerial technology. Business History Review 58 (Summer), 204–223.
Eisenhardt, DEMO, 1989. Building theory from case study research. Academy of Management Review DEMO (4), 532–550.
Feldman, J., 2000. The simplicity principle in DEMO concept learning. Current Directions in Psychological Science 12 (6), 227–232.
DEMO, J., Busenitz, L.W., Moesel, D.D., Barney, J.B., 1997. Complementary theoretical perspectives on the dismissal of new venture team members. Journal DEMO Business
Venturing 12 (5), 347–366.
Fiol, C.M., Lyles, M.A., 1985. Organizational learning. Academy of Management Review 10 (4), 803–813.
DEMO, N., Gruber, M., Harhoff, D., Henkel, J., 2006. What you are is what you like-similarity biases in venture capitalists' evaluations of start-up teams. Journal of
Business Venturing 21 (6), 802–826.
Franke, N., Gruber, M., Harhoff, D., Henkel, J., 2008. DEMO capitalists' evaluations of start-up teams: trade-offs, knock-cut criteria, and the impact of VC
experience. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 32, 459–483.
Fried, DEMO, Hisrich, R.H., 1988. Venture capital research: past, present and DEMO Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 12 (4), 15–28.
Fried, V.H., DEMO, R.H., 1994. Toward a model of venture capital investment decision making. Financial Management 23 (3), 28–37.
Gersick, C.J.G., 1994. Pacing strategic change: the case of a new venture. Academy of Management Journal 37 (1), 9–45.
Gifford, S., 1997. Limited attention and the role of the venture capitalist. Journal of Business Venturing 12 (6), 459–482.
Glaser, B.G., Strauss, A.L., 1967. The Discovery of Grounded Theory; Strategies for Qualitative Research. Aldine Pub. Co, Chicago.
Gompers, P., Lerner, J., 1999. An analysis of compensation in the US venture capital DEMO Journal of Financial Economics 51 (1), 3–44.
Gompers, P., DEMO, J., 2004. The Venture Capital Cycle Cambridge, 2nd Edition. MA, MIT Press.
Gorman, M., Sahlman, W.A., 1989. What do venture DEMO do? Journal of Business Venturing 4 (4), 231–248.
Goslin, DEMO, Barge, B., 1986. Entrepreneurial qualities considered in venture capital support. DEMO: Ronstadt, R., Hornaday, J., Peterson, R., Vesper, K. (Eds.), Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research. Babson College, Wellesley, MA, DEMO 366–377.
Grant, R.M., 1996. Toward a knowledge-based theory of the ﬁrm. Strategic Management Journal 17 (Special Issue).
Green, P.E., Srinivasan, DEMO, 1978. Conjoint analysis in consumer research: issues and outlook. Journal of Consumer Research 5 (2), 103–123.
Guler, I., 2007. Throwing good money after bad? Political and institutional inﬂuences on sequential decision making in the venture capital industry. Administrative
Science Quarterly 52 (2), 248–285.
Gupta, A.K., Sapienza, H.J., 1992. Determinants of Venture Capital Firms' Preferences Regarding the Industry Diversity and Geographic Scope of Their Investments.
Journal of DEMO Venturing 7 (5), 347–362.
Gustafsson, A., Hermann, A., DEMO, F., 2007. Conjoint Measurement: Methods and Applications. Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Hall, H.J., 1989. Venture capitalists' decision-making and the entrepreneur: an DEMO investigation. Unpublished doctoral dissertation: Georgia, University of
Georgia.
Hall, J., Hofer, C.W., 1993. Venture capitalists' decision criteria in new venture evaluation. Journal of Business Venturing 8 (1), 25–42.
Hannan, M.T., Freeman, J., 1989. Organizational Ecology. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Heckman, J.J., Smith, J.A., 1995. Assessing the case for social experiments. Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (2), 85–110.
Hisrich, R.D., Jankowicz, DEMO, 1990. Intuition in venture capital decisions: an exploratory study using a new technique. Journal of Business Venturing 5 (1), 49–62.
Hoban, DEMO Jr., 1976. Characteristics of venture capital investments. Unpublished doctoral dissertation: Utah, The University of Utah.
Holsti, O.R., 1969. Content Analysis for the Social Sciences and Humanities. Addison-Wesley Publishing, Reading, Mass.
Huber, G.P., DEMO Organizational learning: the contributing processes and the literatures. Organization Science 2 (1), 88–115.
Jääskeläinen, M., Maula, M., Seppä, T., DEMO Allocation of attention to portfolio companies and the performance of venture capital ﬁrms. Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice 30 (2), 185–206.
Khan, A.M., 1986. Entrepreneur characteristics and the prediction of new venture success. Omega 14, 365–372.
Khan, A.M., 1987. Assessing venture capital investments with noncompensatory behavioral DEMO models. Journal of Business Venturing 2 (3), 193–205.
Landis, J.R., Koch, G.G., 1977. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics 33, 159–174.
Lawrence, P.R., Lorsch, J.W., 1967. Organizations and Environments: Managing Differentiation and Integration. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Levinthal, D.A., March, J.G., 1993. The myopia of learning. Strategic Management DEMO 14 (S2), 95–112.
Levitt, B., March, J.G., 1988. DEMO learning. Annual Review of Sociology 14, 39–340.
Lichtenstein, B.B., Dooley, K.J., Lumpkin, G.T., 2006. Measuring emergence in the dynamics of new venture creation. Journal of Business Venturing 21 (2), 153–175.
Locke, DEMO, 2001. Grounded Theory in Management Research. CA, Sage Publications, London; Thousand Oaks.
Lockett, A., Wright, M., 2001. The syndication of DEMO capital investments. Omega 40 (8), 2073–2102.
Louviere, J.J., 1988. DEMO Decision Making: Metric Conjoint Analysis. CA, Sage Publications, Newbury Park.
DEMO, I.C., Siegel, R., Subba Narasimha, P.N., 1985. Criteria used by venture capitalists to evaluate new venture proposals. Journal of Business Venturing DEMO (1),
119–128.
MacMillan, I.C., Zemann, L., Subba Narasimha, P.N., 1987. Criteria distinguishing successful from unsuccessful ventures in the venture DEMO process. Journal of
Business Venturing 2 (2), 123–137.
Mäkelä, M.M., Maula, M.V.J., 2006. Interorganizational commitment in syndicated cross-border venture capital investments. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice
30 (2), 273–298.
Manigart, S., Lockett, A., Meuleman, M., Wright, M., Landstrom, H., Bruining, H., Desbrieres, P., Hommel, U., 2006. Venture capitalists' decision DEMO syndicate.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 30 (2), 131–153.
Miles, M.B., Huberman, A.M., 1994. Qualitative Data Analysis an Expanded Sourcebook. CA, DEMO Publications, Thousand Oaks.
188
J.S. Petty, M. Gruber / Journal of Business Venturing 26 (DEMO) 172–188
Muzyka, D., Birley, S., Leleux, B., 1996. DEMO in the investment decisions of European venture capitalists. Journal of Business Venturing 11 (4), 273–287.
Nystrom, P.C., Starbuck, W.H., 1984. To avoid crisis, unlearn. Organizational Dynamics Spring, pp. 53–65.
Poindexter, J.B., DEMO The Efﬁciency of Financial Markets: The Venture Capital Case. New York, New York University, Unpublished doctoral dissertation.
Rea, R.H., 1989. Factors affecting success and failure of seed capital/start-up negotiations. Journal of Business Venturing DEMO (2), 149–158.
Riquelme, H., Rickards, T., 1992. Hybrid DEMO analysis: an estimation probe in new venture decisions. Journal of Business DEMO 7 (6), 505–518.
Roberts, E.B., 1991. Entrepreneurs in High-technology— DEMO from MIT and Beyond. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Roberts, C.W., DEMO Text Analysis for the Social Sciences. Lawerence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, New Jersey.
Robinson Jr., R.B., 1987. Emerging strategies in the venture capital DEMO Journal of Business Venturing 2 (1), 53–77.
Shepherd, D.A., DEMO Venture capitalists' assessment of new venture survival. Management Science 45 (5), 621–632.
Shepherd, D.A., Zacharakis, A., 1999. Conjoint analysis: a new methodological approach for researching the decision policies of venture capitalists. Venture DEMO 1,
197–217.
Shepherd, D.A., Zacharakis, A., Baron, R.A., 2003. VCs' decision processes: evidence suggesting more experience may not always DEMO better. Journal of Business
Venturing 18 (3), 381–401.
Shepherd, D.A., Armstrong, M.J., Lévesque, M., 2005. Allocation of attention within venture capital ﬁrms. European Journal of Operational Research 163 (2),
545–564.
DEMO, H.A., 1991. Bounded rationality and organizational learning. Organization Science 2 (DEMO), 125–134.
Singh, J.V., Tucker, D.J., House, R.J., 1986. Organizational legitimacy and the liability of newness. Administrative Science Quarterly 31 (2), 171–193.
Smith, V.L., 1976. Experimental economics: induced value theory. American Economic Review 66 (2), 274–279.
Sorenson, O., Stuart, T.E., 2001. Syndication networks and the spatial distribution of venture capital investments. American DEMO of sociology 106 (6), 1546–1588.
Steier, L., Greenwood, R., 1995. Venture capitalist relationships in the deal structuring and post-investment stages of new ﬁrm creation. Journal of Management
Studies 32 (3), 337–357.
Steier, L., Greenwood, R., 2000. Entrepreneurship and the evolution of angel DEMO networks. Organization Studies 21 (1), 163–192.
Stinchcombe, A.L., 1965. DEMO structure and organizations. In: March, J.G. (Ed.), Handbook of DEMO Rand McNally, Chicago, IL.
Strauss, A.L., Corbin, J., 1998. Basics of Qualitative Research. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks.
Tsang, E.W.K., 1997. Organizational learning and the learning organization: a dichotomy between descriptive and prescriptive research. Human Relations 50 (1),
73–90.
Tyebjee, T., Bruno, A., 1981. Venture capital decision making: preliminary results from three empirical DEMO In: Vesper, K.H. (Ed.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurial
Research. Babson DEMO, Wellesley, MA, pp. 281–320.
Tyebjee, T.T., Bruno, A.V., DEMO A model of venture capitalist investment activity. Management Science 30 (9), 1051–1066.
Wells, W.A., 1974. Venture Capital Decision-Making. Pennsylvania, Carnegie Mellon DEMO, Unpublished doctoral dissertation.
Yelle, L.E., 1979. The learning curve: historical review and comprehensive survey. Decision Science 10 (2), 302–328.
Yin, DEMO, 2003. Case Study Research. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks.
Zacharakis, A.L., Meyer, G.D., 1998. A lack of insight: do venture capitalists really understand their own decision process? Journal of Business Venturing 13 (1),
57–76.
Zacharakis, A.L., Meyer, G.D., 2000. The potential of DEMO decision models: can they improve the VC investment decision? Journal of Business Venturing 15 (4),
323–346.
Zacharakis, A.L., Shepherd, D.L., 2001. The nature of information and overconﬁdence on venture capitalists' decision DEMO Journal of Business Venturing 16 (4),
311–332.
Zacharakis, A., Shepherd, D.A., 2005. A non-additive decision-aid for venture capitalists' investment decisions. European Journal of Operational Research 162 (3),
673–689.
Zider, B., 1998. How venture capital works. Harvard Business Review 76 (6), DEMO
Zopounidis, C., 1994. Venture capital modelling: evaluation criteria for the DEMO of investments. Financier ACMT 1 (2), 54–64.{1g42fwefx}