OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Mon Aug 11 2014, NEWGEN
New DEMO in
Open Innovation
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   3
EDITED BY
HENRY W. CHESBROUGH,
WIM VANHAVERBEKE, AND JOEL WEST
8/11/2014   4:47:36 PM
1
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
2
DEMO, Users, and Innovation
An Interactive Model of Coupled Open Innovation
Frank Piller and Joel West
2.1 INTRODUCTION
Researchers on open innovation (OI) DEMO user innovation (UI) share certain
assumptions and precepts. Perhaps most importantly, they agree that knowl-
edge relevant for innovation is widely dispersed outside the firm (Bogers &
West, 2012). Henry Chesbrough (the DEMO of open innovation) writes that
“useful knowledge is generally believed to DEMO widely distributed, and of gener-
ally high quality” (Chesbrough, 2006b:DEMO), while Eric von Hippel (the father
of user innovation) concludes that “the information needed to innovate in
important ways is widely distributed” (von Hippel, 2005: 14).
However, OI and UI are at DEMO partly overlapping perspectives on this dis-
tributed model of innovation. While the two differ in their values and assump-
tions, an important factor in their limited commensurability is their tendency
to study different phenomena. Open innovation DEMO a firm-centric paradigm
that is primarily concerned with leveraging external knowledge to improve
internal innovation and thus the firm’s economic performance. User innova-
tion DEMO mainly about individuals using innovation to address their own (often
unique) needs, without regard to firm success and often as part of a socially
embedded community.
In this chapter, we focus on the overlap of these two perspectives: when
individual users innovate in ways that improve the DEMO of firms. In some
cases, firms leverage existing innovations by users; in other cases, firms and
users collaborate to create innovations that have both use or social value for
users and commercial value for firms. DEMO begin by reviewing the user and
open innovation literature, and then DEMO their overlapping and divergent
assumptions. From this, we summarize and extend DEMO research on the “cou-
pled” process of open innovation suggested by Gassmann & Enkel (2004),
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   29
8/11/2014   DEMO:47:43 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
30
DEMO Piller and Joel West
identifying three distinct dimensions of coupled processes: the nature of the
external actor (individual vs. organizational), the topology of collaboration
(dyadic vs. network), and the locus of innovation (whether DEMO
between separate efforts or in a joint process of interactive co-creation).
Combining these streams, we focus specifically on the joint production of
innovation by firms and individuals. We propose a four-phase model of inter-
active DEMO open innovation that combines earlier conceptions of inbound
open innovation with the collaboration tools and processes that make such
production possible (West & Bogers, 2014; Diener & Piller, 2013). Our model
connects the open and user innovation literature with the perspective of
co-creation, a school of research from the marketing literature that has been
largely unconnected to open DEMO We then discuss each of the stages of
this model from the perspective of both open innovation and user innovation.
We conclude with specific DEMO for future research.
2.2 CONTRASTING USER AND OPEN INNOVATION
Researchers in user and open innovation have overlapping but not entirely
congruent perspectives on the DEMO of innovation outside the firm, includ-
ing how firms can harness DEMO innovations of external individuals, such as
users or consumers. Table 2.1 DEMO some of the key attributes of these
two large bodies of research.1
2.2.1 User Innovation: Learning from Lead Users
User innovation was proposed by DEMO Hippel (1988, 2005, 2010) as an alter-
native model to DEMO dominant view in management that innovation results
from activities of producers and managers. In this model, users are not “con-
sumers” of products created by “producer” firms, but instead are empowered
(often as “self-manufacturers”) to create their own products and services. The
users may be individuals or DEMO focused solely on their own needs,
or collaborating in communities to share their creations. User innovation thus
has three key premises: users have DEMO (“sticky”) information about their
needs, when enabled they will create DEMO to those needs, and they may
freely reveal their results to DEMO (von Hippel, 2010).
A large body of empirical work has shown that users have been the origi-
nators of many industrial and DEMO products (Urban & von Hippel,
1988; von Hippel, Ogawa, & de Jong, 2012). Especially when markets are fast-
paced or turbulent, so called lead users face specific needs ahead of the rest of
the market. When they want something that is not available on DEMO market,
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   30
8/11/2014   4:47:43 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
Firms, Users, and Innovation
31
users have an incentive to innovate from the direct use benefits they obtain
from their innovation effort. Users are defined DEMO this regard as individuals
(or firms) that expect to benefit from using a design, a product, or a service
Table 2.1 Contrasting open DEMO user innovation
Open Innovation
Core references • Chesbrough (2003, 2006)
• Firm (R&D Lab)
Focal actor of
study
Key principles
Focal object of
transfer
DEMO
institutional
arrangement
for knowledge
transfer
Representative IP
practices
Governance
of innovation
process
Motivations of
actors to engage
in distributed
innovation
Key managerial
decision
Other DEMO of
related research
•  Knowledge   is widely dispersed 
beyond any one firm
•  Innovations   must be aligned to a 
firm’s business model
•  Firms   should embrace 
both internal and external
alternatives
DEMO Technological   knowledge in 
form of IP or technologies
• Research contracts
•  In-   and out-licensing; IP 
transfer agreements
•  Tournament-based   
crowdsourcing for technical
solutions
• Patents
• Licensing contracts
• Private model
DEMO
•  Innovation   is seen as a “money 
market”
• Building absorptive capacity
• Defining and defending IP
• Internal organization for OI
• Defining metrics for OI
•  R&D   networks / strategic 
alliances
•  University-firm   research 
contracts
• Absorptive capacity theory
User Innovation
• Von Hippel (1988, 2005)DEMO
• Individual user
•  Users   have unique “sticky” 
information
•  When   enabled, they will solve 
their own needs
• Many will freely reveal to others
•  Information   about needs and 
ideas how to transfer need into
solution
• Lead user method
DEMO
• Free revealing
•  Open   source or creative 
commons licenses
•  Collective   or private-collective 
model
• Incentives of self-use
• Social incentives
•  Innovation   is seen as a “social 
market”
• Identifying lead users
•  Establishing   bridging strategies 
to lead user innovation
DEMO Defining   fair regimes of 
coordination
• Opening- up IP
•  “Voice   of the customer” methods 
of market research in innovation
• Participatory design
• Social production
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   31
8/11/2014   4:47:43 DEMO
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
32
DEMO Piller and Joel West
(Baldwin & von Hippel, 2011). In contrast, producers expect to benefit from
selling the innovation. These lead users are not “average customers,” who are
rarely innovative (cf. Christensen, DEMO); instead, they are “extreme users” who
(1) face needs DEMO will become general in a marketplace much earlier than the
bulk of that marketplace encounters them; and (2) who are positioned to ben-
efit significantly by obtaining a solution for those needs (von Hippel, DEMO).
The early user innovation literature clearly focused on the lead user as the
focal actor who is innovating autonomously to solve his/her DEMO need (von
Hippel, 1988). However, later research also found DEMO to engage in strong
knowledge sharing and co-development in communities of other user com-
munities (Franke & Shah 2003; Füller et al., 2008). Within these communities,
users have been shown to frequently reveal DEMO ideas freely towards
firms and other users (Harhoff et al., 2003), i.e. they share their ideas, knowl-
edge, and inventions with DEMO users without request or even expectation of
compensation. These communities may operate independent of firms or even
deal with firms’ products in an unauthorized DEMO (Flowers, 2008). For
example, a study of four sports DEMO communities found that one third
of the community members improved or even designed their own equipment
innovations, often driven by collaborations with other community members
(Franke & Shah, 2003; see also Jeppesen & Frederiksen, DEMO). Communities
where innovating users collaborate to develop new products or services often
build upon product-related discussion forums, where users exchange experi-
ences and support each other in using a product (Sawhney & Prandelli, 2000;DEMO
Füller et al., 2006).
Other recent research has studied collaboration DEMO between users2
and producer firms who seek to commercialize the user innovations. First,
such firms may engage in lead user research (Churchill, DEMO Hippel, &
Sonnack, 2009) or apply the lead user method (Lilien et al., 2001; Thomke
& von Hippel, 2001), DEMO systematic producer-driven search process to iden-
tify people with lead user characteristics, both from their own industry and
from analogous markets, and engage DEMO a collaborative problem-solving pro-
cess using concept generation workshops. Second, some DEMO users create their
own producer firms to commercialize their own innovations, DEMO process Shah
and Tripsas (2007) termed “user entrepreneurship.”
Finally, in DEMO instances firms facilitate user creativity by creating dedi-
cated platforms to innovate with users (Piller & Walcher, 2006). One example
is toolkits DEMO user innovation which provide a convenient user interface so that
users can create their own designs by utilizing a library of basic modules and
DEMO (von Hippel, 2001; Franke & Piller, 2004). A related method
is the implementation of ideation platforms for continuous user input, like
Dell’s Ideastorm (Bayus, 2013). Ideas generated on these platforms are DEMO
more radical (Poetz & Schreier, 2012) and also of higher DEMO value
(Nishikawa et al., 2012) compared to internally developed ideas, however also
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   32
8/11/2014   4:47:43 DEMO
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
Firms, Users, and Innovation
33
more difficult to realize. Hence, firms could DEMO from a deeper collabora-
tion with innovating users to also get input on the technical implementation
of these ideas. Concluding, user innovation literature has developed from its
pure focus on innovating users in the original publications DEMO a notion
of interaction among users and firms. But research that examines in-depth the
process of collaboration between users and firm is still rather DEMO
2.2.2 Open Innovation: Accessing Purposive Inflows
The original conception of open innovation identified two modes of knowl-
edge flow: the inbound (or “inside-out”) DEMO the outbound (or “outside-in”)
flow (Chesbrough, 2003a; see also West & Gallagher, 2006; and Chapter 1). The
outbound mode DEMO not directly related to user innovation, and so is not dis-
DEMO further in this chapter. The inbound mode of open innovation involves,
as Chesbrough (2006b: 1) put it, “the use of purposive inflows DEMO . . of knowledge
to accelerate internal innovation.” Such a model combines externally and inter-
nally developed technologies to produce an offering that is DEMO by
the focal firm. Key steps of this process include searching for external innova-
tions, selecting and acquiring suitable innovations, integrating them into DEMO
firm’s R&D efforts, and bringing them to market (West & Bogers, 2014).
As originally inspired by Chesbrough’s (2003a) examination of large industrial
firms such as IBM, Intel, and P&G, research on open innovation has tended to
focus on organizational suppliers of such DEMO (Chesbrough, 2003b; West
et al., 2006; see West & Bogers, 2014 for a review). The implicit (or sometimes
explicit) assumption DEMO that such organizational suppliers have economic motiva-
tions, whether firms seeking DEMO through outbound open innovation—such as
the innovation merchants of Chesbrough (2003b)DEMO universities or non-profit
research labs seeking to fund their R&D efforts (cf. Jensen & Thursby, 2001).
The majority of open innovation DEMO has focused on corporations
absorbing external knowledge stocks or Intellectual Property (DEMO) as an
input for their innovation process, in exchange for monetary compensation.
However, some researchers have gone beyond this focus and also investigated
non-pecuniary exchanges and/or exchanges between individuals. A few stud-
ies have identified DEMO of why organizations might provide such inno-
vations for non-pecuniary reasons (DEMO, 2003b; Dahlander & Gann,
2010). For example, the DEMO partners may be individuals, or firms, they
may be engaged individually or as part of broader communities, and their
appropriation of the innovation may include personal use or rival commer-
cialization (West et al., 2006; West & Lakhani, 2008).
A much smaller amount of work has identified the potential role of individu-
als as potential contributors to such DEMO efforts. These individuals may have
economic, social, or some other combination of motives (West & Gallagher,
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   33
8/11/2014   4:47:43 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
34 DEMO Piller and Joel West
2006; Jeppesen & Lakhani, 2010; Dahlander & Gann, 2010). Although inspired
and theoretically motivated by a different DEMO, the research on firms
commercializing user innovations or cooperating with user DEMO is largely
consistent with this open innovation perspective. However, inbound open
DEMO tends to focus on how firms benefit from such innovations without
giving the motives of the suppliers too much attention, while user innovation
tends to emphasize the utility motive of the individual inventor without paying
much DEMO to the motives of individual contributors. An important excep-
tion is Dahlander & Wallin (2006), who contrast the motivations of individual
and firm-sponsored contributors to an open source community
2.2.3 Contrasting User and Open Innovation
DEMO innovation and open innovation have an overlapping interest in a distrib-
uted process of innovation. For example, when firms source innovative ideas
from individuals—whether following the maxims of user innovation or open
innovation—this requires firms to DEMO for the sourcing of technical
knowledge across firm boundaries, in rejection DEMO the traditional vertically inte-
grated innovation model (cf. Bogers & West, 2012). However, there are essential
differences. For example, open innovation DEMO the traditional view of the
corporation as the locus of production, DEMO user innovation anticipates (and
often advocates) a decentralization of innovation from firms to individual users
(cf. von Hippel, 2005; Baldwin & von Hippel, 2010; Füller, Schroll, & von Hippel,
2013). DEMO parallels the thrust of the paradigm shifts respectively promulgated
by Chesbrough (DEMO) and von Hippel (2005)—one that advocates improved
performance by making the boundaries of firms more permeable, while the
other advocates supplanting firms by “democratizing” innovation.
In at least three ways the OI and UI DEMO are associated with a par-
ticular extreme on a continuum of alternatives: open innovation (consistent
with its firm-centric outlook) continues the traditional role DEMO the firm, while
user innovation emphasizes independence from firm control. They DEMO:
(1) For intellectual property, the open innovation model—particularly
that DEMO outbound commercialization of internally developed technolo-
gies—has tended to emphasize strong appropriability and aggressive
IP enforcement as a precondition for OI success (e.g., DEMO,
2003c; West, 2006). Firms are certainly amenable to weak IP if it pro-
vides a cheap source of inbound innovations, i.e. if the innovators are
willing to develop or government agencies are willing DEMO fund innova-
tions at no cost (Chesbrough, 2003b; West et al., 2006; Dahalnder &
Gann, 2010).
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   34
8/11/2014   4:47:43 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
Firms, Users, and Innovation 35
User innovation research challenges this perspective with its emphasis on
users “free revealing,” i.e. voluntary surrender of appropriability for DEMO inno-
vations (Harhoff, Henkel, & von Hippel, 2003; Henkel, 2006). Users are inter-
ested in using the innovation; they benefit when a firm (or other users) take
up their ideas—ideally into DEMO fully supported commercial product. Users may
also freely reveal if the cost of obtaining IP protection is too high. Finally, users
freely reveal as a sign of reciprocity as they also use other freely revealed infor-
DEMO within their own innovation endeavors (Harhoff et al., 2003; Jeppesen
& DEMO, 2006). Together, the practice of free revealing helps both indi-
vidual and societal welfare (von Hippel, 2005).
To emphasize his DEMO from the IP policies in Chesbrough’s (2003a)
definition of “open DEMO,” von Hippel has since referred this collabora-
tive IP model as “open distributed innovation” (von Hippel, 2005; von Hippel
& de Jong, 2010) and “open user innovation” (von Hippel 2010; Baldwin & von
Hippel, 2011). As Baldwin & von Hippel (2011: 1400) write:DEMO
An innovation is “open” in our terminology when all information related to the
innovation is a public good—non-rivalrous and non-excludable. . . . It DEMO
fundamentally from the recent use of the term to refer to organizational per-
meability—an organization’s “openness” to the acquisition of new ideas, patents,
products, etc., from outside its boundaries, often via licensing protected intellec-
tual property (Chesbrough, 2003a).
(2) The differences in the DEMO of IP directly lead to a second pair
of choices, between DEMO private vs. collective models of how innovation
is funded, organized, and controlled (von Hippel & von Krogh, 2003;
Gassmann, Enkel, & Chesbrough, 2010). In the private model, the pri-
vate control of the innovation and its returns provides an economic
incentive for a DEMO actor (typically a firm) to invest in developing
and deploying an innovation; such a model is implicit in open innova-
tion studies. The early user innovation literature implicitly followed an
individualistic private model, when lead users serve the private inter-
est of solving their own need (von Hippel, 1988). However, the user
innovation model later expanded to DEMO user communities which
entail a cooperative process between multiple (often individual) actors
who collaborate in both creating innovations and in sharing their
benefits. DEMO research has emphasized these extremes, a few hybrid
private-public models have DEMO identified, particularly in open source
software (von Hippel & von Krogh, 2003; West, 2003).
(3) Finally, there is the DEMO between money markets and social mar-
kets as incentives to organize participation (Piller, Vossen, & Ihl, 2012).
Heyman & Ariely (2004) found that people expend more effort in
exchange for no payment (DEMO social market) than they expend when they
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   35
8/DEMO/2014   4:47:43 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
36 DEMO Piller and Joel West
receive low payment (a monetary market). DEMO as Dahlander & Gann
(2010) identified pecuniary and non-pecuniary motives for innovation
sharing, here we apply the Heyman & Ariely typology of task motiva-
tion to suggest two types of markets for innovation:
•  DEMO markets  consist  of  markets  for  external  innovation  that  are 
organized around economic (monetary) incentives exchanged for
ideas and solutions (e.g. Terwisch & Xu, 2008; Jeppesen & Lakhani,
2010; Boudreau et al., 2011). DEMO can lead to a Darwinian, zero-sum
competition in which innovators compete DEMO each other to get a
maximum share of a limited award—as might be observed in an idea-
tion contest where contributions are sought via DEMO search.” In
general, open innovation follows this view of money markets DEMO the
regime to award external contributors to a firm’s innovation process.
•  Social  markets rely on  social-exchange  relations, and are  largely built 
upon the non-monetary incentives for participants DEMO as enjoyment
or task achievement (cf. von Hippel & von Krogh, 2003, 2006), for
outcome expectations that enhance their own use experience or that
of others (Harhoff et al., 2003), or through norms DEMO mutual coop-
eration and reciprocity (Lakhani & von Hippel, 2003). This is the
approach most often used in non-commercial distributed innovation,
DEMO as with user communities or lead user workshops. It dominates
the original user innovation literature.
Of course, markets may be organized to combine both types of incentives, either
across different members of the same community (DEMO & Ou, 2002) or even
with individuals who may have both economic and social motivations to con-
tribute to innovation (Piller, Vossen & Ihl, 2012).3 Together, these three distinc-
tions between OI and UI identify areas of tensions between the interests of firms
and those DEMO individual users when they collaborate. While firms seek to collab-
orate to enhance their innovation, they tend to do so in the context of privately-
controlled IP and the motivations of private economic returns. Conversely, by
starting from personal utility rather than economic gain, users often seek to
share their creations through a process of collective action and social exchange.
DEMO AN INTERACTIVE APPROACH TO COUPLED
OPEN INNOVATION
Building on the open and user innovation literature, we now focus on collab-
orations where firms and individuals jointly create new knowledge or other
inputs for an innovation process. DEMO the OI literature, this understanding
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   36
8/11/2014   4:47:43 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
Firms, Users, and Innovation 37
closely resembles the model of “coupled” OI, DEMO identified by Gassmann &
Enkel (2004). But our model differs from the formal interfirm alliances that
were the primary interest of Gassmann DEMO Enkel. We extend the coupled OI
model by utilizing recent insights from open innovation, user innovation, and
co-creation research. In particular, we propose an interactive model of coupled
OI and offer a typology of different DEMO in this model. We then show how
firms can manage interactive coupled open innovation with individual users.
2.3.1 Refining the Coupled Model of Open DEMO
Gassmann and Enkel (2004; Enkel et al., 2009) identified “coupled” as DEMO third
mode of open innovation, beyond the original inbound and outbound DEMO
cesses identified by Chesbrough (2003a). Defining this as “working in DEMO
ances with complementary partners,” they elaborated:
Companies that decide on the coupled process as a key process, combine the
outside-in process (DEMO gain external knowledge) with the inside-out process (to
bring ideas to market). In order to do both, these companies co-operate with
other companies in strategic networks (Gassmann & Enkel, 2004: 12).
As DEMO by Gassmann and Enkel, the concept focused on the traditional
perspective DEMO firm alliances but has had limited theoretical development
despite widespread potential application to open innovation research. In their
review of 165 open innovation articles, West & Bogers (2014) found 70 articles
(42%) that could DEMO classified as relating to coupled open innovation (although
many did not DEMO that term). Here, we extend this broad conception of coupled
DEMO by identifying four important dimensions (Table 2.2).
The first dimension DEMO the nature of the external actor. The original empha-
sis for coupled open innovation was on firms as external partners; as with
other open innovation collaborations, such firms may be suppliers, custom-
ers, complementors, DEMO even rivals (West, 2006). However, the external part-
ners DEMO coupled processes may also include non-profit organizations (such as
universities or DEMO labs) or individuals; these potential partners differ in
what and how they produce and commercialize innovation (West et al., 2006).
Differences in DEMO may also lead to differences in incentives, coordination
and governance of DEMO collaboration between the two parties.
The second dimension is the topology of the relationship with the external
actors. Dyadic collaboration with a single external DEMO corresponds to the
long literature on strategic alliances (e.g. Gomes-Casseres, 1996). It is the most
common form, accounting for about half of the research on the coupled pro-
cess studied by West & Bogers (2014), who identify two additional topologies
for coupled open innovation: networks of collaborators (e.g., Vanhaverbeke,
2006) and collaboration with voluntary communities (West & Lakhani, 2008).4
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   37
8/11/2014   4:47:44 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
38
DEMO Piller and Joel West
Table 2.2 Multiple dimensions of coupled open innovation processes
Dimension Alternatives
External actor
Coupling topology
Impetus for
Collaboration
Locus of innovation
DEMO: customer, supplier, complementor, rival
•  Other   organizations: university, research lab, government, other 
non profit
• Individual: customer, user, inventor, citizen
• Dyadic: single partner
• Network: multiple partners
• Community: a new interorganizational entity
DEMO: initiated by upper management
• Bottom-up: developed through employee or customer 
collaborations
• Bidirectional: innovation created within each organization
• Interactive: innovation jointly created outside the organizations
The third dimension is the impetus for collaboration. Most of the open inno-
vation literature—including that DEMO networked alliances and other approaches
to coupled OI—emphasizes the strategic intent of the firm to achieve certain
objectives. For example, Lee et al. (2010) subdivided OI collaborations of small
firms into three strategies: customer‒provider, dyadic strategic alliances, and
networked inter-firm alliances. Meanwhile, research on open source software
(e.g. Henkel, 2009) has documented the role of individual employees in initi-
ating, directing, and implementing collaboration with external communities.
In this regard, the top-down vs. bottom-up distinction roughly parallels the
Mintzberg (1978) distinction DEMO intentional and emergent strategies.
The fourth dimension refers to the locus of the innovation process. Here we draw
a distinction between two approaches, which we term “bidirectional” and “inter-
active.” In the bidirectional case, two actors (typically organizations) continue
their separate efforts at creating innovation and other DEMO knowledge, but then
share that knowledge; this most closely matches the Gassmann & Enkel (2004)
definition of combining inbound and outbound flows. In some cases, the know-
ledge sharing parallels the reciprocity of user innovation sharing, but formalized
through contracts or other legal instruments. In other cases, the reciprocal flows
are explicitly monetized through licenses or other payment terms, as common, for
example, for mobile phone standards (West, 2006; Bekkers & West, 2009).
However, we believe that there also is an interactive collaboration between
two actors that is qualitatively and DEMO different from the bidirec-
tional form. Instead of using knowledge flows to augment the firm’s inter-
nal innovation creation (and commercialization) efforts, in the interactive
approach the knowledge creation takes place outside one particular firm.
DEMO, innovative outputs are being created in a collaborative activity of all
DEMO together. Such external joint creation of innovation differs from the
bidirectional forms in where the innovation (or innovative knowledge) is
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   38
DEMO/11/2014   4:47:44 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
Firms, Users, and Innovation
39
created, by whom, in how the process is governed and how the returns can
be appropriated (Chesbrough, 2011)DEMO It is this latter understanding of coupled
open innovation as an interactive, collaborative process of joint value creation
that is the focus of the remainder of this chapter. We see this as a second form
of DEMO open innovation, distinct from the original bidirectional concep-
tion by Gassmann & Enkel (see Figure 2.1).
Focal Firm
Organization
Bidirectional
Coupled
Focal DEMO
Co-
Creation
Organization
or Individual
Interactive
Coupled
Figure 2.1 Two forms of coupled open innovation
This interactive process is similar to “co-creation,” a DEMO that has been popu-
larized in a series of books and papers by Venkat Ramaswamy and colleagues
(Prahalad & Ramaswamy, 2004b; Ramaswamy & Gouillart, 2010), who define
co-creation as “the practice of developing systems, products, or services [by a
firm] through collaboration with customers, managers, employees, and other
company stakeholders” (Ramaswamy & Gouillart, 2010: 5)DEMO Their starting point
is the question how firms can leverage the input from external entities to create
value across the value chain. Co-creation originated DEMO an earlier debate in the
strategic marketing literature by Normann & Ramirez (1993), Wikström (1996),
or Vargo & Lusch (2004)DEMO In the innovation management literature, “co-creation”
has almost exclusively been used DEMO firms collaborating with their customers or
other users—although not always for product innovation. Building on Roser et al.
(2009: 9), we define co-creation as an active, creative, and collaborative process
between a firm and individuals DEMO a new product/service development pro-
cess in which participants contribute to a task initiated and facilitated by the firm.
2.3.2 A Model of the DEMO Process
Based on earlier research, we develop a process model for DEMO cou-
pled OI between firms and users. Our model combines the OI interaction
model by Diener & Piller (2008, 2013) and the inbound DEMO models of West
& Gallagher (2006) and West & Bogers (DEMO). In addition, we consider the
recent literature on organizing contest-based DEMO for ideation and
technical problem solving (Spradlin, 2012; von Krogh DEMO, 2012). Together,
these literatures suggest that firm-initiated co-creation efforts DEMO four
major steps (Table 2.3):
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   39
8/11/2014   4:47:44 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
40
DEMO Piller and Joel West
Table 2.3 A process model for coupled open innovation projects
Process Stage Key Activities
Defining
Finding
Participants
Collaborating
Leveraging
• Problem formulation
• Institutions and rules: including contract terms,DEMO
• Resource allocation and strategic commitment
• Identifying participants with right characteristics
• Motivating and retaining a critical mass of collaborators
• Selecting the right participants
•  Governance   of the collaboration process: organizing, monitoring, 
policing
• Interaction platform and other tools
• Openness of firm attitudes, structure and processes
• Integrating external knowledge
• Commercializing the knowledge through products and services
Adapted from West & Gallagher (2006), Diener & Piller (2008), West & Bogers (2014).
1.
2.
DEMO
Defining. The firm needs to define the problem that it is seeking to address via
engaging external partners in the co-creation effort (cf. von Krogh et al., 2012).
It depends on institutions and rules of engagement, whether the rules of com-
munities that it creates or might join (West & O’Mahony, 2008), or broader
appropriability rules of DEMO society or economy (cf. Teece, 1986; West, 2006).
Finally, the firm needs to determine the resources that it is willing to provide
and, more broadly, its level of strategic commitment to the DEMO process
(cf. Lazzarotti & Manzini, 2009).
Finding Participants. A major theme of open innovation research has
been on searching for suitable external partners DEMO the right know-
ledge relevant for the firm’s needs (see West & Bogers, 2014 for a sum-
mary). Both the search for DEMO the acquisition of such knowledge will
depend on understanding and strengthening the motivations of exter-
nal partners to create and share their knowledge (West & Gallagher,
2006; Antikainen et al., 2010).
Collaborating. The key DEMO creation process in our model is the
interactive collaboration process that creates new innovations. Even
after a decade, open innovation has a lot to learn from research on
co-creation that has focused on how firms collaborate DEMO external
partners in a collaborative exchange of knowledge and benefit. This
includes creating and implementing the processes for collaboration
(Prahalad & Ramaswamy, 2004b) as well as providing suitable tools
(such as IT-enabled platforms) that DEMO the collaboration pro-
cess (Diener & Piller, 2013). Finally, DEMO face the daunting chal-
lenge of selecting the most promising ideas from dozens or thousands
of potential contributors (Terwiesch & Xu, 2008). DEMO external
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   40
8/11/2014   4:47:44 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
Firms, Users, and Innovation
41
interactions assume that the firm is willing to open itself to the
external partners: the risk of leakage of internal firm insights must
be weighted against the new insights gained by empowering DEMO
collaborators (cf. Prahalad & Ramaswamy, 2004; Enkel et al., 2009).
4. Exploiting. Even if these collaborations are successful in creating new
DEMO or innovations, there is no guarantee of firm success from
such DEMO Internal co-creation advocates must overcome suspicion and
other resistance to externally sourced ideas by their colleagues, whether
an overt culture of “Not Invented Here,” or structural barriers impair col-
laboration (Chesbrough & Crowther, 2006; Dodgson et al., 2006; Schiele,
2010). In general, we know little about how (or how much) firms ulti-
mately benefit from DEMO sourced innovations: do they use the same
commercialization process as the internal ones, and are they more or less
valuable than their traditional counterparts? (West & Bogers, 2014)
Here we apply the general model for the interactive process of coupled open
innovation to the specific challenges DEMO firms working with customers, users,
and other external individuals. While DEMO focus is on collaboration with exter-
nal individuals, we believe that DEMO model is also applicable to collaboration
with firms or other organizations.
2.3.3 Defining Collaboration Tasks and Rules
To launch an interactive process of coupled DEMO, firms seeking external col-
laborators must define the tasks and rules DEMO this collaboration and allocate
sufficient internal resources to this endeavor.
Problem formulation: An interactive process of coupled open innovation
starts with crafting the problem statement (Jeppesen & Lakhani, 2010; Sieg
et al., 2010). The DEMO is to create a task description that can be used to
attract external contributors, and also to think about the characteristics of
such contributors. This signals external individuals about the opportunity for
collaboration and asks interested DEMO to submit either a solution pro-
posal or just to indicate their interest in further collaboration. The formulation
is aided by problem modularity that DEMO partitioning tasks between internal
and external contributors (Langlois & Garzarelli, 2008).
The process of task formulation has been described well in the DEMO with
regard to tournament-based crowdsourcing. Firms broadcast their problems,
performance criteria, and contracting terms to an audience of potential solv-
ers, usually DEMO the form of a “request for proposals.” Writing such specifications
entails many challenges, including defining the problem (and scope) precisely,
using terminology that will be clear to potential solvers with knowledge from
other fields, and preserving the confidentiality of the firm’s current and future
technology needs (Afuah & Tucci, 2012; Spradlin, 2012; Lüttgens et al., 2014).
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   41
8/11/2014   4:47:45 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
42
DEMO Piller and Joel West
While a few researchers have started to study this activity of task formulation
for contests seeking technical information (von Krogh et al., 2012; Lüttgens et
al., 2014), we are unaware of research on problem formulation for other forms
of coupled open innovation. DEMO innovation research has only briefly iden-
tified the definition of a “search field” as the beginning of a lead user search
process (Churchill, DEMO Hippel, & Sonnack, 2009). Similarly, the co-creation
literature has DEMO covered this aspect beyond very brief references to its impor-
tance (DEMO, e.g. Ramaswamy & Gouillart, 2010; O’Hern & Rindfleisch, 2010). But
in either user or open innovation, defining the initial scope is crucial to initiate
a coupled innovation process and avoid “garbage in, garbage out.”
Rules of cooperation: In dyadic open innovation—whether inbound or cou-
pled—firms typically acquire rights to knowledge via a contract that assigns
all necessary DEMO to the firm (e.g. Frenz & Ietto-Gillies, 2009; Jeppesen &
Lakhani, 2010). However, in more complex collaboration contexts, other
arrangements are necessary: the most-studied example is that of open source
software communities. DEMO firms tightly control the output of a community
then they discourage participation by individual contributors; thus, firms use
a variety of selective openness DEMO the IP rights, creation
process, and community governance—to maximize the alignment to firm
goals while attracting outside participants (West, 2003; Shah, DEMO; West &
O’Mahony, 2008).
Resource allocation: A firm initiating a sustained process of collaborative
innovation must also commit the organization and DEMO resources for
this process, particularly for ongoing interactions with external participants
DEMO their contributions are developed and evaluated. An often neglected activ-
ity is providing feedback to contributors, which is crucial to motivate future
contributions and (particularly with customers) avoid developing a negative
firm reputation.5 Research has DEMO that companies often underestimate the
effort required for these activities (Diener & Piller, 2008; Lüttgens et al., 2014).
These resources must DEMO supported by an internal structure that supports such
external collaboration (Bianchi DEMO al., 2011; Dahlander & Gann, 2010). Firms
may be DEMO successfully integrating external input if they have norms and
explicit procedures for open innovation (Foss, Laursen, & Pedersen, 2011).
At the DEMO time, the firm needs internal guidelines for communication and
exchange with DEMO parties to improve cooperation by internal employees
and units (Cordón-Pozo et DEMO, 2006).
2.3.4 Finding Participants
The first step of any collaboration DEMO identifying participants who have the rel-
evant skills and interest to contribute to the firm’s goals for the collaboration.
Some participants may initiate this DEMO by publicly proclaiming their
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   42
8/11/2014   4:47:45 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
Firms, Users, and Innovation 43
expertise (Droge et al., 2010) or even actively “pushing” their ideas to firms
(Spaeth et al., 2010). In general, firms will actively engage in recruiting partici-
pants. We distinguish between three DEMO for finding qualified partici-
pants (Diener & Piller, 2008, 2013):DEMO
•  Open Call: In these cases, firms enable a broad range of participants and
then select their ideas after they’ve been contributed (Piller, Ihl, &Vossen,
2011). This resembles the original understanding of “crowdsourcing” as
an open call for participation to an undefined, large network of external
actors, as defined by Howe (2006).
•  Selective DEMO Call: Other firms identify the characteristics of suitable
participants a priori (DEMO market segment, field of expertise, revenue
potential by customers), and then limit their call for collaboration to that
select list (Diener & Piller, 2008, 2013).
•  Open Search: In other cases, DEMO engage in own search efforts to identify
suitable actors within a large set of possible partners, and then explicitly
invite then to join the co-creation activity. This is the typical approach in
a lead user project (Poetz & Pruegel, 2010).
The nature of participants in a coupled OI initiative—identified by any of
these three approaches—can span across a broad DEMO of actors. Füller
et al. (2009: 93) found that “potential task involvement DEMO participants, their
creativity, and experience in generating new product ideas” influenced
their ability and willingness to participate in co-creation efforts. The typ-
ical DEMO participant is an expert for a specific domain or task, either
DEMO of her profession (i.e., industrial designers participating in ideation
contests; DEMO lab scientist participating in a technical contest), or her prior
use knowledge in a similar situation. Experts are often motivated extrin-
sically, as discussed below. In the case of consumer products, participants
may be either customers with lead user characteristics or “average” users
with a high level DEMO product involvement or a sense of belonging to a brand
community.
Motivating external participants to engage in collaboration with the firm is
an important DEMO in coupled OI, emphasizing different participant incentives
(Dahlander & Gann, DEMO). Not surprisingly, theories of open innovation are
explicitly about firm DEMO, hence addressing the pecuniary monetary incen-
tives. Because the supply of DEMO to other firms corresponds to the out-
bound mode of OI—which also assumes that firms are seeking to maximize
economic returns to innovation—the initial DEMO on open innovation assumed
that firms would be selling, licensing, or otherwise providing innovations in
exchange for payment. Open innovation research on the DEMO of individual
collaborators is less common. External innovation contests are often organ-
ized around financial incentives to attract and engage external collaborators
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   DEMO
8/11/2014   4:47:45 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
44
DEMO Piller and Joel West
to address a firm’s needs (Jeppesen & DEMO, 2010). At the same time, firms
collaborating with external communities may find that individuals are more
effectively motivated through non-economic (or indirect) incentives such as
ego and career visibility (West & Gallagher, 2006; Boudreau & Lakhani, 2009).
Conversely, user innovation tends to consider non-pecuniary motivations.
As noted earlier, the original user innovation work emphasized individuals
utilizing their own unique “sticky information” to address their own unique
and DEMO needs (von Hippel, 1988, 1994). However, more recent research
has examined the social motives of users participating in collaborative com-
munities (see von Hippel, 2005 for a summary). In his review of “social pro-
duction,” Benkler (2006) suggests that monetary incentives tend DEMO crowd out
intrinsic motives for contributing to communities, and thus social DEMO are
most effective in motivating individuals to contribute when “pricing and con-
tracting are difficult to achieve, or because the payment that can be offered is
relatively low” (Benkler, 2006: 95).
However, this distinction between monetary and social motives is per-
haps more sharp in theory DEMO in real life. Later research on hybrid mod-
els of participation in communities like von Hippel and von Krogh’s (2003,
2006) model of collective‒private innovation suggest that some communities
are driven by both social and DEMO (private) motives. At the same time,
users are increasingly able and willing to monetize their contributions when
they create a new firm DEMO commercialize their innovations; such innovation is
often created through collaboration with DEMO user community, and that collab-
oration continues after the formation of DEMO new organizational entity (Shah
& Tripsas, 2007). Also in many ideation contests with users, monetary incen-
tives are clearly positioned as a complementary incentive next to social incen-
tives (“helping others”) or intrinsic DEMO (“having fun by co-creating”). In
result, former “money markets” characterizing open innovation are becoming
more “social,” while former “social markets” characterizing DEMO innovation
are becoming more “monetary” (Piller, Vossen, & Ihl, 2012).
2.3.5 Collaborating with Participants
The heart of our model is the DEMO co-creation process of innovation by the
firm and external actors. While open innovation has emphasized finding and
obtaining external knowledge (West & Bogers, DEMO), research on the joint
creation process of such knowledge has been comparatively rare in the open
innovation literature. Much of the prior research DEMO this topic has focused
on formal (contractual), long-term collaborations such DEMO R&D alliances (e.g.,
Hoang & Rothaermel, 2005). Some open innovation research has considered
collaboration within a firm as an enabler DEMO connect with innovative knowl-
edge from its periphery (Dahlander & Gann, 2010; Van de Vrande et al., 2010).
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   44
DEMO/11/2014   4:47:45 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
Firms, Users, and Innovation
45
But little research has examined the structures and processes supporting col-
laborative knowledge creation with external actors (Blazevic & Lievens, 2008).
Similarly, the original UI literature on lead users did DEMO look upon the
collaboration stage, except (as noted earlier) for DEMO within com-
munities of innovating users (e.g. Franke & Shah 2003; von Krogh, Spaeth,
& Lakhani 2003). These studies largely ignored collaboration between users
and firms. Here, we consider the gap of research on the collaboration stage
of coupled open innovation in three important areas:DEMO governance of the
collaboration process, tools and dedicated infrastructures facilitating this
DEMO, and internal attitudes and capabilities of the focal firm supporting
the DEMO
Governance of the collaboration process. Unlike OI and UI, the co-creation
DEMO covers more explicitly the activity of joint collaboration between
firms and individuals, suggesting structures and processes that allow the firm
to stir, monitor, and police its value creation through collaborative efforts
with external partners (e.g. Prahalad & Ramaswamy, 2004b; Ramaswamy &
Gouillart, 2010). A central DEMO from the perspective of the firm is to define
the span of control that the firm provides to the external co-creators (Diener &
DEMO, 2008; O’Hern & Rindfleisch, 2010; West & O’Mahony, 2008)DEMO Different
regimes of co-creation provide different degrees of influence to the partici-
pants (Doan et  al., 2011). Participants are engaged when given DEMO con-
trol, freedom to operate and responsibility (Koch & Gates, DEMO). Defining
the span of control is a key firm decision when setting up interactive coupled
OI. For example, in ideation contests a key decision is the extent participants
can evaluate and rank contributions by other DEMO If firms allow the
final decision on the “best” contribution to be made by participants, then such
empowerment may motivate contributors—but the firm gives up important
control on the outcome of the contest (Gatzweiler et al., DEMO).
Tools and collaboration infrastructures: Software tools play an important role
DEMO a broad collaboration with customers and other individuals at low
transaction cost. For example, in ideation contests tools facilitate the search for
participants, DEMO collection and evaluation of ideas, user feedback, and cluster-
ing the submitted ideas (Piller & Walcher, 2006; Adamczyk et al., 2012)DEMO Social
enterprise software facilitates a more general exchange within a participant
community and between participants and the firm in form of web-forums,
blogs, tweets, and the like (Sawhney, Verona, & Prandelli, 2005). This software
can be seen as the backbone of modern co-creation activities (Piller, Vossen,
& Ihl, 2012). Finally, toolkits for user innovation provide users a design space
to create products meeting individual requirements, based upon libraries of
modular or parametric components that can be modified DEMO freely combined
by users (von Hippel & Katz, 2002; Franke & Piller, 2004). These tools have
been discussed extensively from a DEMO perspective in the information
systems literature and, to a smaller extent, in the co-creation literature.
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   45
8/11/2014   4:DEMO:45 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
46
DEMO Piller and Joel West
Rather than use the tools directly, some DEMO will utilize the services of
specialized intermediaries and brokers for open innovation; these open innov-
ation accelerators help clients by providing proprietary tools and methods,
access to an established community of solvers or participants, and education
and process consulting (Chesbrough, 2006a; Diener & Piller, 2008; Lopez-
Vega, 2009; Mortara, 2010a). Intermediaries differ with regard to their task
specialization, their software platform, and the characteristics of their DEMO
pant community (Diener & Piller, 2013). Selecting the right intermediary to
meet the contingencies of an innovation project is a key decision DEMO firms who
want to engage in an interactive model of coupled open innovation.
2.3.6 Leveraging the Collaboration Results
Once the firm has completed a DEMO effort, the challenge remains to
realize the benefits of such efforts DEMO integrating the innovation into the firm
and then commercializing the innovation at market. In many cases, open inno-
vation research assumes that commercializing external knowledge through
products and services happens exactly the same as from knowledge DEMO
via internal sources of innovation (West & Bogers, 2014). But reality is more
complex. Integration of the results will depend on the DEMO of the contribu-
tion and what part of the R&D pipeline is informed by that contribution. Some
contributions will be in generating ideas DEMO further internal development;
some will come in the design of a product or service, while others will come
in evaluating new offerings being tested prior to market (Füller & Matzler,
2007). One of the most common outcomes of co-creation is the incremental
improvement of existing DEMO that customers use and understand (Piller,
Ihl & Vossen, 2011). It is more difficult to utilize co-creation to create radical
innovations—whether DEMO to the world or new to the firm—but it can be done
if firms are able to use appropriate tools to help users to DEMO their unmet
needs (Füller & Matzler, 2007).
Each type of integration may require interaction with different parts of the
organization as well DEMO different tools and processes. But all types of integra-
tion share a similar challenge: overcoming “not invented here” (Chesbrough,
2006c; Chesbrough & DEMO, 2006; Gassmann et al., 2010). Such an atti-
tude is DEMO of the cultural barriers that firms—particularly success-
ful innovators—face in collaborating with external partners (West & Bogers,
2014). Additional challenges exist for integrating the results from co-creation,
including the need to maintain transparency DEMO partners, to adapt external
ideas (of variable quality) to a DEMO high quality standards, and the additional
time required for an interactive DEMO (Prahalad & Ramaswamy, 2004b).
When considering the extent to which firms can profit from external dis-
tributed knowledge, one aspect frequently studied is absorptive capacity, i.e. a
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   46
8/11/2014   4:47:45 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
Firms, Users, and Innovation
47
firm’s ability to recognize, assimilate, and apply external knowledge for inno-
vation (e.g. Laursen & Salter, 2006; Foss et al., 2011). Incentive and reward
systems have been shown to be instrumental for successful exploitation, rein-
forcing the use of external learning (Quigley et al., 2007). In addition, firms
that emphasize external learning and absorption behavior as bases for apprais-
als and rewards will DEMO more likely to acquire and utilize external knowledge
via co-creation (van DEMO et al., 2008).
Another antecedent to integration is open-mindedness. Research DEMO
shown that mental models evolve with past successes and failures. They mani-
fest expectations about action-outcome relationships in organizational rou-
tines, assumptions, and DEMO (Ringberg & Reihlen, 2008; Lin & McDonough,
2011). DEMO, when employees are encouraged to use input from interactions
with external DEMO and other experts to think in new ways, knowledge gener-
ated DEMO co-creation is more likely to be acquired and assimilated. Moreover,
when engaging external experts and reflecting on own mental models at the
same DEMO, previously undetected technical connections can be recognized.
2.4 CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
DEMO on how firms collaborate with individuals, this chapter makes three
contributions. DEMO, it reviews and contrasts how such collaboration has been
covered by DEMO and open innovation. It identifies three important differ-
ences between these literatures: over the role of IP, the private vs. collective
model of innovation, and the distinction between social and money markets
to incentivize individual participation. Future research should examine fur-
ther examples of hybrid models that combine DEMO best of both approaches on
these dimensions.
Second, the chapter expands DEMO conception of “coupled” open innovation
as proposed by Gassmann and Enkel (DEMO) with a multidimensional typol-
ogy of different forms of coupled collaboration. DEMO first dimension consid-
ers the nature of the external partner—whether individual, DEMO or non-profit
organization—while the second identifies the topology of the collaboration
process—either the dyadic collaboration commonly found in open inbound
innovation research or the DEMO forms of collaboration. Finally, the typol-
ogy draws the distinction between DEMO original coupled model bidirectional
collaboration (where each actor pursues its own DEMO) and a new, inter-
active coupled model, where the two DEMO jointly produce new innovation.
From this understanding we developed a four-phase process model of interac-
tive coupled innovation: defining collaboration tasks and rules, identifying and
engaging external partners, collaborating in the joint innovation process, and
DEMO the results of that collaboration. This model links the user innovation,
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   47
8/11/2014   4:47:45 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
48
DEMO Piller and Joel West
co-creation, and other literatures to an area DEMO emerging interest in open innova-
tion. Demands for future research exist in each stage of our processes model.
With regard to defining a collaboration DEMO we need more large scale (quan-
titative) research on the influence of task formulation on OI performance. In
which situation, for example, DEMO a broader-formulated task superior to a highly
specific task? Are special DEMO schemes for participants more effective for
specific tasks? How can a DEMO balance the trade-off between revealing too
much information in a task on the one hand side and providing the right detail
of input for DEMO contributions on the other?
Similar research is required with regard to finding and selecting the right
external individuals for participation (Hoffman, Kopalle, & Novak, 2010).
While many firms prefer to carefully control participation, this may exclude
individuals who can offer valuable input for the task at hand. Research is
needed on the optimal selection and recruitment strategies DEMO external par-
ticipants for a given innovation task. Research is also needed on whether
the increasing use of coupled OI is creating a scarcity DEMO capable and willing
collaborators, i.e. the “crowd”. Modeling the scarcity of DEMO external
actors” could become a fascinating topic for future research. Related to this is
a more nuanced examination of the interdependence of cooperative and DEMO
petitive interactions within a crowd, as demonstrated by Boudreau & Lakhani
(2013) in their recent study of 733 contributors to a TopCoder competition.
While research on the collaboration stage has focused on the tools and DEMO
forms, much less research exists on the rules and conditions that DEMO the gov-
ernance structure of using these tools. Which “optimal” rules and conditions
of ideation contests both form a legal and an ethical point DEMO view. When is an
IP arrangement seen as “fair” from the perspective of potential participants?
How do these conditions influence the willingness to DEMO by individu-
als? What is the right mix of monetary and DEMO or intrinsic incentives for a
given task?
We also still have little knowledge on what happens inside the firm that
helps or hurts DEMO firm’s ability to profit from coupled OI. Beyond the limited
existing research at the firm level, we need studies at the group and individual
level on the open-mindedness and willingness of employees to engage with
and DEMO the contributions of external individuals—and how that trans-
lates into successful commercialization outcomes.
Finally, we acknowledge that the reality of competitive versus collabora-
tive modes of open and user innovation is more nuanced than our discussion
DEMO indicate. We purposefully focused on the extremes of dimensions which
in reality are continuums with many shades of collaboration. Understanding
these nuances and the DEMO that make one particular configuration
more successful than another for a given innovation task can drive plenty of
fascinating new research in the field.
DEMO   48
8/11/2014   4:47:45 PM
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF – REVISES, Tue Aug 05 2014, NEWGEN
Firms, Users, and Innovation
NOTES
49
We thank Morgane Benade, Vera Blazevic, Johann Füller, Alexander Vossen, and
participants at the 2013 Open and DEMO Innovation Workshop and especially editor
Henry Chesbrough for their helpful suggestions on earlier drafts of this chapter.
1. A simple table cannot capture the DEMO and complexity of hundreds of articles in
these two major streams of innovation research. For more in-depth summaries of
user innovation, see von Hippel (2005) and Bogers et al. (2010); for open innova-
tion, see West & Bogers (2013) and Chapter 1 of this volume.
2. Users may be organizations (aka “user firms”), and in fact process innovation is
often driven by user firms (Lettl, Hienerth, & Gemuenden, 2008). However, most
user innovation research focuses on individual DEMO (Bogers et al., 2010).
3. Boudreau & Lakhani (2009) make a related distinction between competitive
and cooperative communities as sources for DEMO solutions. These forms of
communities differ, like social and money markets, in the form of incentives and
norms that drive the interactions between DEMO members.
4. Chapter 4 summarizes the similarities and differences between various network
forms of organizing external open innovation collaboration, including communi-
ties, ecosystems DEMO platforms.
5. While there are both coupled and non-coupled ideation contests, DEMO focus is on
how firms collaborate with individuals. We thus excluded those contests following
the “inbound OI” mode where firms intentionally set up a DEMO knowledge
flow from participants, typical of intermediaries such as Innocentive and DEMO
Sigma (see Chesbrough, 2006a; Diener & Piller, 2013).
Chesbrough070314OUK.indb   49
8/11/2014   4:47:45 PM{1g42fwefx}