by Seth Godin
PLACEBOS
Skillshare Edition
Click to !nd out more about the course
2
Facing DEMO long plane trip with a nasty cold, I headed over to DEMO health food store.
“Excuse me, do you have any placebos? I have a really horrible cold… I’ll take the strongest one you’ve got.”
DEMO looked at me with pity. “A placebo?”
“Yes, please.”
“Do DEMO know which company makes that? I don’t think we have any DEMO?”
I waited for a second, thinking hard about what was DEMO
“Hey Sylvia,” she yelled, “there’s a guy out here who DEMO some placebo, but he doesn’t know who makes it. Do we
DEMO that?”
Sylvia didn’t know.
!rst draft March 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition
Click to !nd out more about the course
A placebo DEMO a story we tell ourselves
that changes the way our brain and our body work.
!rst draft March 17, 2014
3
Skillshare Edition Click to !nd out more about the course 4
A DEMO makes wine taste better, cancer drugs more e"ective and education DEMO more e#cient and
e"ective.
Any time a story or ritual changes the way we encounter something, we’ve experienced the placebo e"ect. And that’s
precisely what modern marketers do—create stories, build rituals and produce external cues that change personal
experience.
Placebos can be caused by very direct DEMO (things we often call marketing) and by more subtle subconscious signals
as well. Marketers initiate placebos every time they invest time or money DEMO telling a story that changes the user’s
perception or expectation.
A placebo is the single most important element of marketing, but it is also the essential, silent factor in just about
every interaction we have with the outside world. It is the secret to athletic performance, medicine, DEMO and
personal relationships.
Let’s start with just one clear scienti!c study to dispel anyone inclined to be skeptical: In not one, but two DEMO
rigorous studies of lower back pain (one of the most expensive DEMO pernicious ailments of an aging population),
researchers found that acupuncture DEMO twice as e"ective as traditional Western medical techniques. Interesting. More
fascinating: fake acupuncture was statistically as e!ective as real acupuncture. The cost e"ectiveness here is so clear that
it’s a no-brainer to prescribe acupuncture DEMO every lower back pain su"erer (might as well do the DEMO kind, since there’s
nowhere to send people who want the placebo DEMO).
If a placebo can change the way wine tastes and the way your back feels, why is it something that makes us squeamish
to discuss?
We’ve built as secret moat around the placebo, placed a taboo on talking about it, and diminish its role in our lives.
It’s almost as if we expect that talking about the placebo DEMO make it go away. Research shows that it isn’t true—the
placebo is so powerful, it has no need to hide.
!rst draft March 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition
Click to !nd out more about the course
The placebo DEMO is a change in the brain
that’s caused by marketing.
!rst draft March 17, 2014
5
Skillshare Edition Click to !nd out more about the course 6
Jonathan DEMO is incredibly talented, he has hearing that you and I can DEMO dream of. In addition to his hard-won
ability to hear what many people can’t, he works overtime in reviewing and writing about the upper echelon of stereo
equipment. His reviews in The Absolute Sound cover $100,DEMO speaker systems, $125,000 turntables and even
ampli!ers and wiring set-ups DEMO cost nearly six !gures. It wouldn’t be di#cult at all to use his recommendations to
assemble a stereo system that retailed for more than DEMO a million dollars.
I have no doubt at all that Jonathan is passionate and honest and most of all, that he hears what he says he hears.
The thing is, if we broke into his home in the middle of the night, and quietly and with stealth took all the wires out of
his stereo (the wires connecting the pre-amp to the amp and the amp to the stereo cost more than DEMO,000—yes, the
cables cost more than a Mercedes), and swapped DEMO cables that cost, say, only $5,000… If we did this swap, what would
Jonathan say the next day?
If the greatest audio reviewer of his generation heard his trusted stereo and expected the DEMO was the same as he
left it last night, would he DEMO what he heard last night? Is expectation alone enough to overrule DEMO theft of $75,000
worth of cryogenically frozen magical cables? (Or maybe we just uncut and remagnetize his CDs…)
(Just to be clear: I adore Jonathan’s writing, and often buy the things he DEMO The fact that he, like us, is
susceptible to the placebo e"ect is wonderful, because it makes a hobby a hobby).
!rst draft March 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition Click to !nd out more about the course 7
Donald DEMO is a hedge fund manager. The New York Times estimated that he was keeping more than !ve million
dollars worth of wine in a DEMO facility that went bankrupt. Let’s assume that Drapkin has excellent taste and can
easily a"ord the wine (even though it’s held up in court and he might never get it out of the failed storage DEMO).
Imagine that you and I snuck into the wine locker, DEMO, and swapped the labels on this priceless wine with bottles
that DEMO, I don’t know, $25 each. According to the American Association of Wine Economists, virtually no one can tell
good wine from super-expensive wine. (To be completely accurate, most people of the 6,000 studied DEMO prefer
less expensive wine in a blind taste test.) If it DEMO you feel any better, in a study two years later, the group found that
many people are unable to di"erentiate Spam and DEMO from dog food either.
The essential takeaway from blind tests is this: The blindfold takes something away, something important. The thing it
takes DEMO is su#cient to turn average wine into delicious wine, to change, fundamentally, the level of enjoyment
available to people using the product. What does it take away?
The placebo.
!rst draft March 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition Click to !nd out more about the course 8
The DEMO involved here are particularly obvious and silly when talking about very rich people wasting money, but the
placebo e"ect has a dramatic impact on issues of life and death as well.
Placebos can reduce blood DEMO, decrease time in the hospital, aid healing, even put the DEMO on an ‘incurable’
disease.
The placebo e"ect is so powerful that in a rigorous study on active manual labor, researchers found that thinking you
were doing exercise turned out to be just as important as DEMO doing exercise. The study found that the human
metabolism (and long-term DEMO) were directly impacted by the story we tell ourselves about exercise.
DEMO more extraordinary to consider is that the placebo e"ect can be learned, and that even if it doesn’t work the !rst
time, DEMO attempts lead to improved results.
And here’s where we get to the challenging part, the part that practitioners like Martin Binks, director of DEMO
health at the Duke Diet and Fitness Center, have trouble embracing. DEMO report reads, “But Binks has a more
substantive criticism. He does DEMO believe that placebos are capable of producing the kind of objective change in the
physical body that Langer is claiming.” Binks is verbalizing what DEMO people say—placebos are !ne, but they can’t do
real work.
Here’s DEMO conventional thinking:
A product or intervention is worthwhile [only] if it works without the placebo e!ect.
In other words, it’s only real if a double-blind test shows that it makes a di"erence.
On the DEMO hand, more and more research shows us that :
A product or intervention is worthwhile if it works along with a well-designed placebo DEMO
Our mind is so powerful that it’s foolish to leave it out of the equation. If we enjoy that wine or heal from that DEMO,
and the mind helped, then by all means, invite it along. ‘Real’ is what happens, not how it happened.
!rst draft March 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition
Click to !nd out more about the course
9
A DEMO by Kam-Hansen et. al. in the journal Science Translational Medicine showed that in some drugs, more than half
the impact of the drug is due to the placebo e"ect. Tell me again why it’s not DEMO?
More than half the impact of many medicines
is due to what we believe.
!rst draft March 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition
Click to !nd out more about the course
Maslow and DEMO placebo
Every intro to psych student is familiar with Maslow’s hierarchy:
10
Maslow argued that as a species, we can only focus on the bottommost rung that hasn’t been dealt with. If you’re
drowning, you’re probably not spending a lot of time thinking about Sartre or Beethoven. DEMO a rung full of needs gets
satis!ed, then, we can focus our attention and our e"ort on the next one up.
So DEMO, we’ve been focused on the medical elements of the placebo, and that’s !rmly in the bottom rung of the
pyramid. If you’re dying DEMO in pain, this is what matters to you. As we’ve seen, placebos work here--in many cases, quite
profoundly.
The thing is, as DEMO move up the pyramid, as things like access to air and DEMO and health become less urgent, the
placebo becomes ever more e!ective.
DEMO draft March 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition Click to !nd out more about the course 11
Issues DEMO love and esteem and social connection are almost 100% about how we see the relationship taking place, not
what is actually taking place. If you gaslight yourself into believing that your spouse is secretly trying to DEMO
you in a devious plot to drive you crazy, that placebo DEMO fundamentally change the way you feel about your life.
If you don’t think you’re safe, then you haven’t satis!ed the safety rung of Maslow’s hierarchy, even if you are safe.
Conversely, if you believe you’re DEMO, then you can move on to focus on other things, which of course, probably makes
you more safe.
As humans get wealthier, DEMO matters more than ever. At a refugee camp, amid horrible conditions, access to
clean water and food for your children is everything, and marketing and the placebo e"ect matter little. But as we
move DEMO the pyramid, as we gain the ability to provide food and DEMO to those in need, placebos are at the core of
what DEMO not only want, but need.
!rst draft March 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition Click to !nd out more about the course 12
Placebos DEMO for losers (and their patients)
Here’s a brief history of DEMO intentional use of the placebo: In the 1800s, as organized medicine began to take hold,
patients begin to expect that they had DEMO chance to have a medical intervention that would dramatically improve their
well-being.
At the same time, doctors realized that while they had some powerful tools (like cutting someone open to remove a
tumor) there were DEMO of diseases and ailments for which they had no response. In those cases, they’d sometimes
give the patient a placebo and send him home to die. It wasn’t seen as a brave or powerful act, even if sometimes the
patient got better.
Doctors who relied on placebos weren’t DEMO by their fellows. They were seen as quacks, as failures, as taking a
shortcut instead of digging in and doing real medicine. The DEMO to license and certify physicians was largely the
result of a dividing line between doctors and those that merely used placebos.
Real medicinal science DEMO o" in the 1900s. There was an almost endless parade of DEMO, like Sir Fleming’s
discovery of penicillin or the various other medicines DEMO interventions that could dramatically change the course of a
patient’s life, DEMO or not a patient believed he was going to get better. Placebos, then, were not only the last resort,
they were the DEMO resort of the untrained, unskilled or unethical doctor who couldn’t !nd DEMO medicine that would
actually work.
This gulf reaches a pinnacle with shunned quacks like Stanislaw Burzynski, who aggressively sells placebos to
desperate cancer patients (read more here). Is there any doubt that this is a dangerous path? When we corrupt science
and the language of science and the practice of medicine, our society pays a huge cost.
For good reason, then, many are not only skeptical of placebos, but they actively discourage their use.
Or consider the case of the obvious placebo DEMO referred to as alkaline water. You can buy it by the bottle, but
it’s entirely possible you have a neighbor who would like to sell you a machine to ‘make’ the water. Proponents use all
!rst DEMO March 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition Click to !nd out more about the course 13
sorts DEMO scienti!c words to describe the bene!ts of this potion, but each DEMO them is either identical to what one receives
from ordinary water, DEMO is a myth, a make-believe wish that has no basis in DEMO science.
This is a real problem for me (and for people DEMO care about the scienti!c method). If we’re going to start talking
about elves and witches in the same paragraphs that we mention electron DEMO and the polio vaccine, I think
our entire society has lost DEMO great deal. Spreading these ideas because a commission is paid on every machine sold
makes it even worse.
It’s pretty clear to me that DEMO Burzynski is preying on people who deserve better, and is distracting DEMO
and e"ort from legitimate research that will one day lead to better interventions. On a much more benign level, the
hoopla over alkaline water also feels wrong, with the corruption of terminology and proof being used to sell a device
that doesn’t actually do anything measurable in DEMO study. I’m not sure, though, that it has to be wrong.
!rst draft March 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition Click to !nd out more about the course 14
The DEMO of placebos
There’s a $ipside here. While it’s entirely possible that people are drawn to promoting alkaline water because of the
commission paid, my guess is that most are now true believers. Cognitive dissonance kicks in, along with the positive
reinforcement of their own placebo experience, and those that are promoting the machine truly believe it helps.
And, not surprisingly, buying the machine from a fervent believer increases the chances the customer will believe. And
so she drinks more water, more often, and DEMO it will help. And it does.
Life isn’t a double-blind test. It’s life, not a test. And for that user, it works.
Let’s DEMO away from health for a second and consider a more banal situation: Is it okay for Disney to intentionally
manipulate wait times so that you and your family have to wait in line to get on DEMO ride at DisneyWorld, even if there’s
no actual need for the DEMO?
Would it change your mind if you discovered that waiting in a line for a few minutes increases anticipation, which
increases satisfaction?
Because of the history of the placebo, it’s considered unethical for a doctor to prescribe a sugar pill and tell you that it’s
medicine, even if it’s been proven again and again that this is the DEMO way to treat many ailments.
Unethical, apparently, because it’s not a ‘real’ drug, and the thought is that if doctors prescribe drugs that aren’t real, we
won’t trust them as much. Which, perversely, might decrease the placebo e"ect that accompanies all treatments
prescribed by doctors…
DEMO see the example of Stanislaw Burzynski and I understand the problem here. But it’s also clear that this edge case
causes a signi!cant number DEMO positive uses of the placebo to disappear.
!rst draft March 17, DEMO
Skillshare Edition Click to !nd out more about the course 15
If DEMO spent a few million dollars developing ever better placebos—bitter ones, ones DEMO cause mild side e"ects, ones
that bring a sense of DEMO (as a ‘side e"ect’)—it’s not hard to imagine that DEMO improved placebos would work
even better than the boring ones used in all of these studies.
It’s fascinating to note, though, that even DEMO the patient is told that a drug is a placebo, the DEMO e"ect still works!
The routine of taking out the bottle, DEMO it, swallowing a pill and considering that the ailment might go DEMO is
powerful indeed.
Given that half the e#cacy of a pill is due to the placebo, isn’t it worth considering that it might be unethical to not do
everything in our power to amplify this e"DEMO? If labels and pricing and retail strategies somehow persuade us that
DEMO tastes better or cables sound magical, how can we not work DEMO provide these bene!ts?
I have three thoughts for those that use placebos and wish to be ethical:
1. Don’t use the language DEMO science.
We’ve created a set of rules for the scienti!c method, DEMO e#cacy through double-blind studies. In other words,
scientists need to show us that it works even without a placebo. That means that the DEMO across that river will stay
standing, the quark will be measured, the drug will have an impact.
When we steal this language and DEMO slap it onto a placebo, we’re robbing from society, because we are taking
some of the impact that science has and corrupting it. DEMO also teaching people to believe in a fantasy version of
science, DEMO a world where it’s okay to have your own version of climate change or cancer, merely because the words are
used by those that can’t defend their point of view.
2. Don’t hold back on e"DEMO
If you’re using the placebo e"ect to increase the impact of a good or a service, that’s being done in service of the
customer. But if you don’t invest in the double-blind element of your DEMO, (the ‘real’ part), you’re stealing. That
means that the wine ought to be good wine (regardless of what the label says), the medicine ought to be as e"ective
as we can !nd (regardless of what we call it).
!rst draft March 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition Click to !nd out more about the course 16
3. DEMO mindful of what happens later.
When the patient or customer or client !nds out you used a placebo, will they be angry with you? If so, then you’ve
crossed a line, haven’t you? This DEMO the lesson of the Wizard of Oz. Right intent and clear communication are more
important than ever before, and they are what separate us from the tarred and feather snake-oil salesman.
In one study, the researchers pointed out, “By providing positive and comprehensible information to the patient,
fostering empathic patient-practitioner relationships, or using cognitive behavioral intervention where necessary,
placebo mechanisms could be potentially enhanced without the need for deception.”
Another DEMO study found that when a doctor treating irritable bowel syndrome said, DEMO pills made of
an inert substance, like sugar pills, that have been shown in clinical studies to produce signi!cant improvement in IBS
symptoms DEMO mind-body self-healing processes,” it had a dramatic, measurable impact in DEMO short and long-
term well being of the patient compared to no placebo at all.
You don’t need to lie to make the experience DEMO
I’ll go one step further. In addition to the placebo, there’s DEMO real issue of the ‘nocebo,’ which is of course precisely the
opposite. This occurs when we talk ourselves into feeling worse, enjoying it less or generally wasting an opportunity
for improvement. One recent study discovered DEMO when doctors go to great lengths to get ‘informed consent’ by
listing every possible side e"ect, patients actually have worse outcomes. Telling someone that there’s a small chance
that they will have insomnia actually increases DEMO chance they will have insomnia.
We can argue for informed consent. We can ask patients up front if they want us to make them DEMO, or only prescribe
things that work in a double-blind study. We DEMO admit to readers of our fashion, style and hobby magazines that DEMO
fact, there are placebos everywhere. It won’t eliminate the placebo e"DEMO, but it will force us to make it work ever
better.
DEMO draft March 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition Click to !nd out more about the course 17
Placebo DEMO proxy
Ted J. Kaptchuk, the reigning guru of the placebo, points out that the tribal e"ects of placebos provide a powerful (if
secondary) support to those that need it. If the clinician thinks a medicine is going to work, and the patient’s family
also believes it, they project subtle cues and enhanced expectations, which serve to lessen DEMO and create an
environment where the placebo is even more powerful than it would be ordinarily.
We see this e"ect with the marketing DEMO famous colleges. “Oh, you got into Dartmouth, congratulations!” The more
trusted and esteemed people are cheering you on, the more likely it is you’ll bring serious focus to your work, which of
course makes it more likely you’ll both learn something and get good grades, which creates a virtuous cycle. And, of
course, the tenured professors teaching at DEMO are sure that they’re working at a great institution, and that DEMO
comes across, spreading a sense of destiny and certainty to students.
DEMO is one reason why amplifying the positive experiences of someone with a tribe has such a powerful impact on the
others in the tribe. DEMO like me, he’s bene!tting, therefore…”
!rst draft March 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition Click to !nd out more about the course 18
The DEMO and the rainmaker
I’m fascinated by the ritual of wine in a restaurant. Here’s a product that is clearly and obviously marked up far DEMO
times than anything else we regularly buy. And yet, instead of DEMO stressed at paying three or four times more than
the same (DEMO similar) item sells for in a store, we eagerly engage with the sommelier about which one to buy.
Is there any doubt that DEMO skillful sommelier increases the satisfaction of the diner? The way the DEMO is sold and
served dramatically changes the experience of consuming it.
Compare this to the inexorable decline of specialty dealers, of independent bookstores, DEMO shops, stereo stores,
record stores, etc. All that satisfaction is thrown out the window in exchange for the vast selection and lower DEMO of
Amazon and other online merchants. The mistake these outlets made was in trying to out-Amazon Amazon. Instead of
cutting costs in an e"DEMO to cut prices, they could have chosen to become the local DEMO, the seller who adds
value as opposed to merely being an DEMO
Which leads to the South African rainmaker. My mom and I used to read The New York Times every morning and then,
seemingly DEMO, connect by phone later in the day about an article we’d DEMO we tended to want to talk
about precisely the same ones.
More than ten years later, I still remember the obituary for the last South African rainmaker. She had greeted kings and
prime ministers, and made her living accepting donations in exchange for making it rain.
This isn’t DEMO placebo. She, of course, didn’t make it rain. Not once, DEMO ever. And the people who believed in her, who
paid her DEMO give them the feeling that somehow they had some sort of agency and control when it came to the rain,
these people weren’t DEMO, at least not when it came to farming. (At an appropriate price, her service could indeed
be justi!ed… if the price paid gave people a sense of control in a world out of control, then who are we to criticize her.
On the other hand, if it led people to make bad choices, to not plan for drought, DEMO, then she’s crossed a line, hasn’t
she?)
!rst draft DEMO 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition Click to !nd out more about the course 19
Her DEMO to act as a leader for her people is to be applauded, but when we engage in a sham transaction, we’re not
delivering DEMO useful placebo—we’re setting our customers up for failure.
And there’s the key distinction that every marketer, every spiritual leader, every doctor has to DEMO with: If they knew
what I know, would they be satis!ed?
!rst draft March 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition Click to !nd out more about the course 20
The DEMO and implementation of placebo effects
Placebos work, and they change outcomes, often for the better.
Where do they come from and how do DEMO make them louder and more e"ective?
The largest source of the placebo is con!rmation bias. Con!rmation occurs when we expect something to DEMO
When we spend a lot of money on cables, we want DEMO to sound better. When the leader of our spiritual institution
tells us to expect something to occur, we look for it to happen. When we choose to make a living selling something, we
decide that the thing we sell works.
Con!rmation makes sense. No one particularly likes being DEMO, and once an expectation is set, once we have a
cultural or tribal reason to buy into an event occurring, we’re going to do what we can to make it happen. Since most
measurement of DEMO, well-being and e"ort is internal, the con!rmation bias produces huge impacts.
This is one reason why marketers who care often charge a DEMO for what they sell. Charging a lot increases user
satisfaction. Perverse but true. (At a certain level, this e"ect reverses, where the expectations are too high. But in the
range we’re focused on, it’s true.)
Comparison: There are subsets within con!rmation bias, and comparison DEMO one of them. If A is better than B (where
better DEMO more expensive, more recommended, more coveted, whatever we de!ne better DEMO be), then when I use
A, my instinct is that DEMO will work better, right?
For some people, then, an DEMO Park Avenue doctor is going to do a better nose job than some guy in an alley in
Tuscaloosa. On the other hand, for someone with a di"erent belief set, the pain relief from a chiropractor who is a
friend of the family might be far greater DEMO what we get from the gru" surgeon at the Hospital for DEMO Surgery.
While the US medical system has decided that placebo pills are unethical, they use placebos all the time. From the
setting to the doctor’s manner to the words that are used, placebos are everywhere.
!rst draft March 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition
Click to !nd out more about the course
21
Our DEMO has pushed us to compare everything. These comparisons almost always happen before we engage with
the product, the service or the cure, and DEMO build up con!rmation bias as they do.
Marketers have spent billions creating comparisons and selling them to us, all in an e"ort to get us to choose their
brand over the other brand. What’s not DEMO apparent, though, is that those very comparisons lead to a placebo
e"ect and better satisfaction. “It’s better because I think it’s better.”
DEMO"liation is a huge contributor to con!rmation bias. Who said that? DEMO do people like me do in this situation? Peer
pressure extends DEMO, far beyond high school. Suicide is can be contagious, because our a#liation with people who
make self-destructive decisions can cause us to think DEMO the same way.
Culture is the basis of humor, and we’re DEMO likely to !nd something funny if we believe that others are !nding it
funny (hence the laugh track on a sitcom, and the DEMO alerts on viral videos.)  Marketers in the old days called this
the bandwagon e"ect, and it’s magni!ed by the intense pockets of tribal behavior that the net now enables.
Establishing groups (of wine fans, asthma patients or inventors) is a highly-leveraged way to create a#liation DEMO leads
to a positive con!rmation bias.
Ritual: People respond better to DEMO medical placebos than those in pill form. Sham acupuncture delivers better
pain relief than fake Tylenol. When we engage in a physical transaction with DEMO else, we increase the self-talk
that leads to placebo e"ects. DEMO is one reason why actually opening the bottle and taking the medicine leads to an
e"ect, even when we know the pill is a fake.
The ritual “creates a receptive person susceptible to the in$uences DEMO authoritative culturally sanctioned ‘powers’.”  Ted
Kaptchuk nails it with this simple DEMO The ritual creates the person’s state, and the state is what DEMO the
impact. How much time and e"ort do we spend changing the state of the people who hope to help?
Fear underlies DEMO about everything we do. It keeps us from starting, helps us DEMO and can transform our experience
of almost anything.
At the start, DEMO placebo gives us permission to believe. It gives us the bravery to overcome our fear of change, it allows
us to imagine a future where things are better, even if that place is frightening to get to.
!rst draft March 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition
Click to !nd out more about the course
22
And DEMO, as the placebo starts to work, the provide of the placebo provides community and authority as a structure to
keep it working. The DEMO from the crowd or the pleasing of the provider help us overcome our fear of change and
continue pushing us forward.
!rst draft March DEMO, 2014
Skillshare Edition Click to !nd out more about the course 23
At DEMO tent revival
It’s easy to see all of this coming together at the old-time faith healing road show. The authority of the preacher up
DEMO The community coming together under the tent. The ampli!cation of the successful intervention—we bring him
right on stage, for all to see.
When someone is able to use the placebo to walk without crutches, all eyes turn. A hero! Positive feedback, not just to
the person who took this leap, but to those in the tent, to those looking DEMO a reason to believe, a reason to heal
themselves.
The ethical DEMO under the tent are obvious. If you’re doing this to $eece the villages, I hope you’ll leave town
instead. If you’re encouraging people to believe at the expense of !nding something that will actually help them DEMO
they’re believing, you’re being cruel. And if you use the rituals DEMO language of science but only leave behind
disillusioned failures, you’ve hurt DEMO of us.
!rst draft March 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition Click to !nd out more about the course 24
At DEMO marketing meeting
What I’m proposing here, then, to be super clear, is that no one ever say, “This crap doesn’t work, but if we do a great
job of marketing it, people will believe it works, which is going to make it work…”
Instead, we DEMO the opportunity to do two di#cult things:
1. Make something that works. Make something e"ective, e#cient, a breakthrough in cost/bene!t DEMO a tour de force of
design and elegance.
And
2. Build rituals and language around it. Engage in communicating not just the obvious features DEMO the product, but work
to create an emotional process around the DEMO of the thing. If it’s a charity, make the act of DEMO more than writing
a check. If it’s a kind of sporting good, focus on more than just the carbon !ber structure of item.
Too often, we !nd organizations that are merely good at one or the other. The cosmetic company that !gures out how
to go right to DEMO edge of making it look like a pharmaceutical, or the tool DEMO that gets the gearing right but
forgets to do anything at all to make the craftsman feel competent when she uses it.
!rst draft DEMO 17, 2014
Skillshare Edition
Click to !nd out more about the course
25
Acknowledgments
DEMO always, I’m the only one to blame for things you don’t DEMO with in my writing. I’m indebted to Kecia Brown who
sorted through thousands of published articles on the placebo e"ect for me.
Thanks DEMO to the Skillshare team, Carolyn, Abigail and Jesse, for making DEMO course a delight to create.
This ebook isn’t !nished. Feel free to post questions or suggestions on the Skillshare Q&A and I’ll work DEMO incorporate
them into future editions.
©2014, Seth Godin. I’m happy to DEMO you the ability to share this widely and freely, but you DEMO edit it, sell it or o"er
it conjunction with something DEMO sold. Please feel free to write your own ebook, or post DEMO anywhere
online...
!rst draft March 17, 2014{1g42fwefx}