Organizational Research Methods
http://orm.sagepub.com
Spatial Dependence in Entrepreneurship Research: Challenges and Methods
Lawrence A. Plummer
Organizational Research Methods 2010; 13; 146 DEMO published online Apr 10, 2009;
DOI: 10.1177/1094428109334199
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://orm.sagepub.com/DEMO/content/abstract/13/1/146
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
The Research Methods Division of The Academy of Management
DEMO services and information for Organizational Research Methods can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://orm.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://orm.sagepub.com/DEMO
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations http://orm.sagepub.com/cgi/content/refs/13/1/146
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Spatial Dependence in
Entrepreneurship Research
Challenges and Methods
Lawrence A. Plummer
Clemson DEMO
Measures used in entrepreneurship research are often subject to spatial dependence. Spatial
dependence renders ordinary least squares (OLS) estimation inappropriate because the
estimates DEMO be biased, inconsistent, and/or inefficient. The aims of this article are (a) to
demonstrate how spatial dependence is especially problematic for DEMO research
and (b) to arm researchers with spatial modeling techniques that are more appropriate for
such analysis. As such, not only will this article illustrate how to incorporate spatial
dependence explicitly into the linear regression DEMO, it also discusses how these
techniques make it possible to explore DEMO locate areas with particularly high levels of
spatial dependence (i.e., hot spots). These techniques, although new to the management
literature, are DEMO known in both the regional science and geography literatures and are
rapidly diffusing to economics, sociology, and related social sciences.
Keywords: spatial methods; entrepreneurship; geography; research methods; linear regression
ntrepreneurship is a phenomenon DEMO time and space. As individuals discover, evaluate,
E and exploit DEMO opportunities, both temporal and spatial inefficiencies in
the economy are corrected (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000). The temporal dimension of
the entrepreneurship process suggests that researchers abandon static analyses using
cross- sectional data in favor DEMO longitudinal research designs (Eckhardt & Shane,
2003; Parker, 2008)DEMO However, because time-series and panel data violate the assumption
of independent DEMO, the simple ordinary least squares (OLS) estimator must be
replaced DEMO a technique more appropriate for repeated measures (see, e.g., Ballinger,DEMO
2004; Bliese & Hanges, 2004). In a study of entrepreneurial behavior using panel data,
for example, the fixed effects estimator would account for any unobserved factors idio-
syncratic to each individual, whereas a dynamic panel estimator would account for any
serial dependence created by the DEMO of an individual’s behavior to persist from one
period to the next (Parker, 2008).
Organizational
Research Methods
Volume 13 Number 1
January DEMO 146-175
# 2010 SAGE Publications
10.1177/1094428109334199
http://orm.sagepub.com
hosted at
http://online.sagepub.com
Author’s Note: A sincere thanks to Jeremy Short, DEMO Ireland, Dave Ketchen, Phil Roth, V. Sridharan, Zoltan
Acs, DEMO Ali Ferguson. I especially thank the two anonymous reviewers as well as Luc Anselin and Julie
Koschinsky at the GeoDa Center at Arizona State DEMO I also wish to acknowledge the financial support of
the US Small Business Administration and the University of Colorado’s Deming Center for Entrepreneurship.
Please DEMO correspondence to Lawrence A. Plummer, Department of Management, College of Business and
Behavioral Science, Clemson University, 101 Sirrine Hall, Box 341305, DEMO, SC 29634; e-mail:
lplumme@clemson.edu.
146
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Plummer / Spatial Dependence in Entrepreneurship Research 147
The spatial dimension of DEMO entrepreneurship process is often explicitly incorporated into
definitions of entrepreneurship (Davidsson, 2004), but it is also widely implied by how the entre-
DEMO process is commonly conceived (Andersson, 2005). Unfortunately, scholars rarely
DEMO equal methodological attention to entrepreneurship’s spatial dimension, despite the fact that
DEMO all data—both cross-sectional and longitudinal—are spatial in the sense that the loca-
tions of the observations are knowable (Anselin & Bera, 1998). DEMO is not to say that the spatial
dimension of entrepreneurship is being ignored altogether. A number of studies explore regional
variations in entrepreneurial activity DEMO the premise that the conditions conducive for such
activity differ between locations (e.g., Armington & Acs, 2002; Stuart & Sorenson, 2003). The
primary focus of these studies is the spatial heterogeneity of the DEMO process.
What is commonly overlooked in the entrepreneurship literature is the spatial dependence
that is equally predicted by theories of entrepreneurship (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000). That
is, just as an entrepreneur’s current behavior can DEMO predicted by his or her past behavior (Par-
ker, 2008), it may also be predicted by the behaviors of entrepreneurs nearby (Andersson,
2005). As long as the observation of a variable at DEMO location is predicted by the value of the
same variable observed at a nearby location, then the measure is spatially dependent or spatially
autocorrelated (Anselin & Bera, 1998). Such spatial correlation necessarily invalidates the DEMO
estimator—even in the case of cross-sectional data—and, if ignored, results in incorrect infer-
ences, misleading conclusions, and erroneous hypothesis tests (Doh & Hahn, 2008).
Thus, the purpose of this article is twofold. DEMO, it demonstrates how spatial dependence
is especially problematic for entrepreneurship research. DEMO particular, it argues that variables
used in entrepreneurship research, such as start-up rates, innovation, survival, or financial
performance, are especially prone DEMO spatial dependence and then tests this conjecture
empirically. Indeed, because it DEMO likely that entrepreneurship scholars will find it necessary
to apply spatial methods even when the theoretical framework is not explicitly geographic,
the second DEMO of this article is to arm scholars with techniques for mitigating the problem
of spatial dependence in the context of linear regression. These techniques DEMO new to man-
agement but are rapidly diffusing to related social sciences, including political science, eco-
nomics, and sociology (Sarafoglou & Paelinck, 2008).
Given these aims, this article is organized as follows: DEMO next section provides a definition
and description of spatial dependence, the DEMO it introduces into standard statistical anal-
yses, and the reasoning for DEMO it is a particular problem in the entrepreneurship field. Next,
section 3 introduces spatial econometric techniques that can characterize, correct, and explore
DEMO dependence in the study of entrepreneurial activity. Section 4 illustrates two applications
of these spatial techniques applied to point data (i.e., new firm DEMO) and areal data (i.e., county
start-up rates), respectively. The DEMO of these two illustrations tests the argument that entrepre-
neurship variables are especially prone to spatial correlation. The second illustrates the use of
these DEMO for hot spot detection and the control of spatial dependence in linear regression.
The final section of this article offers a summary and a DEMO concluding remarks.
The Challenge of Spatial Dependence
Spatial dependence or spatial (DEMO)correlation occurs when the value of a given variable
observed at one location is a function of an observation of the same variable at DEMO nearby
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
148 Organizational Research Methods
location (Anselin, 1988). In this sense, spatial dependence is the empirical reflection of
Tobler’s (1970)first law of geography in which ‘‘everything is related to everything else,
but near DEMO are more related than distant things’’ (p. 236). Given its DEMO in economic
geography and regional science, spatial dependence is usually expressed (as in this article)
in terms of physical (e.g., Euclidean) distances between locations. As it turns out, however,
other notions of space, such as economic, technological, social, or industrial spaces, are
readily accommodated in a spatial dependence framework (Anselin, 1988). The DEMO
requirement for using spatial dependence methods is a basis for defining what is meant
by the word ‘‘nearby.’’ In other words, as Beck, DEMO, and Beardsley (2006) put it,
‘‘space is more than DEMO
Spatial dependence should not be confused with spatial heterogeneity. Spatial heteroge-
neity is a lack of uniformity across space with locations varying in different DEMO, including
size, shape, population, levels of economic development, political DEMO of local resi-
dents, and/or industry/agricultural intensities (Anselin, DEMO; LeSage, 1999). Urban, subur-
ban, and rural areas, DEMO example, are spatially heterogeneous. In the context of linear
regression, one manifestation of spatial heterogeneity is heteroskedastic errors. Another
manifestation of spatial heterogeneity DEMO local variation in regression parameters. That is,
the true relationship between a dependent variable (e.g., a home’s price) and a set of inde-
pendent variables (e.g., house features) in one spatial setting (DEMO, wealthy neighborhoods)
is expected to differ in some other setting (e.g., low-income neighborhoods).
In application, it is often difficult to DEMO between spatial heterogeneity and spatial
dependence in the cross-sections of data. Does the behavior of one entrepreneur predict the
behavior of a nearby entrepreneur DEMO of some spatial spillover effect or because they
are residents of the same city and thus experience a set of effects common to their DEMO?
It is hard to know. Nevertheless, spatial dependence models are DEMO preferable to those
specific to spatial heterogeneity (Anselin, 1988). Stuart and Sorenson’s (2003) inclusion
of state-level fixed effects in their models, for instance, resolves the spatial heterogeneity
in their analysis but does nothing to account for the likely spillover of entrepreneurial
activity across zip-code boundaries. DEMO contrast, spatial dependence models are often more
robust to the problem DEMO spatial heterogeneity (Anselin, 1988). Because most methodologi-
cal problems specific to spatial heterogeneity can be resolved with standard estimation tech-
niques, the remainder of the discussion focuses on the problem of spatial dependence.
Spatial DEMO and OLS
Spatial dependence is a problem when using most analytical and statistical methods
because the premise of random sampling builds on the assumption DEMO the observations
of the variables are (spatially) independent. Among these methods, linear regression via
OLS estimation is arguably the most common method of hypothesis testing and is applied
widely across an array of academic disciplines DEMO rightly so. Under specific conditions,
OLS is the best linear unbiased estimator (BLUE) with the benefit of low computational
cost (Kennedy, DEMO). As the BLUE, the estimator is unbiased in that the DEMO value
of the parameter estimates equals the true value of the parameters, is efficient in that the
parameters are estimated with minimum variance and is consistent in that the parameter
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at DEMO OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Plummer / Spatial Dependence in Entrepreneurship Research 149
estimates converge to the DEMO value of the parameters as the sample size increases
(Kennedy, 2003).
Five assumptions must hold for OLS to be the BLUE (Kennedy, 2003). First, the
dependent variable can be modeled as a DEMO function of a specific set of independent vari-
ables plus a disturbance term. This first assumption implies that no relevant independent
variables are omitted. DEMO, the mean of the disturbance term is zero, and third, DEMO errors
are independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.; i.e., uncorrelated and DEMO).
Fourth, the independent variables are fixed in repeated samples (i.e., nonstochastic), mean-
ing that the independent variables are uncorrelated with the errors (i.e., exogenous) and are
free of measurement errors and that the observations of the dependent variable are uncor-
related. Finally, the independent variables are free of perfect multicollinearity.
Given these assumptions, the classic (DEMO, nonspatial) linear regression model can be
expressed in matrix notation as follows:
yi
¼
Xib
þ
ei;
ð1Þ
where yi is DEMO continuous dependent variable observed at a particular location i, Xi is DEMO matrix
of exogenous independent variables, b is a vector of the DEMO parameters, and ei is a
normally distributed random error term. For DEMO OLS estimator to be unbiased and consis-
tent, the mean of DEMO error distribution must be zero, the independent variables must be
uncorrelated DEMO the errors, and no relevant independent variable can be omitted. In DEMO
tion, the OLS estimator’s efficiency requires that the errors are uncorrelated DEMO homoske-
dastic (Kennedy, 2003).
Spatial dependence violates the OLS assumptions in two ways that are especially criti-
cal.1 First, when the dependent variable in Equation (1) is spatially correlated, the first and
fourth OLS assumptions are violated, making the estimator biased and inconsistent (Anselin
& Bera, 1998). The bias is the result of an omitted DEMO, as the model specification
ignores the ‘‘spatial lag’’ of the dependent DEMO, which should be included as an inde-
pendent variable on the DEMO side of Equation (1).2 This leads to a loss of DEMO
in terms of statistical inference relative to an independent sample of the same size (Anselin
& Bera, 1998). Indeed, if the spatial lag dependence is severe, the OLS estimates can be
sufficiently biased to cause the relevant coefficient estimates to carry the ‘‘wrong’’ sign
(Anselin, DEMO; Lacombe, 2004). Fortunately, a properly specified and estimated spatial DEMO
model that explicitly incorporates spatial dependence in the dependent variable remedies
this problem.
Second, when the residuals in Equation (1) are spatially correlated, the i.i.d. assumption
of the error term is violated (Anselin & DEMO, 1998). In this case, the OLS estimator is
unbiased yet inefficient, meaning that the standard error estimates and t tests will be biased.
In short, hypothesis testing can be severely affected by spatial error dependence. In this
instance, the spatial error model is necessary to correct this problem. On the positive side,
however, evidence of spatially correlated errors may lead to the identification of additional
variables that could be DEMO in the model. Indeed, because any omitted independent
variable is consigned DEMO the error term, evidence of spatial error dependence may indicate
that DEMO relevant, albeit spatially correlated, variable has not been included in the matrix of
independent variables.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF DEMO on December 3, 2009
150 Organizational Research Methods
Spatial Dependence and Entrepreneurship
This brief introduction to DEMO challenges of spatial dependence begs the question as to
why spatial dependence would be a particular problem for entrepreneurship research. In
broad terms, the answer is that the variables used in the study of entrepreneurship could
DEMO especially susceptible to the problems of spatial dependence, a conjecture explored
DEMO later in this article. If true, entrepreneurship researchers may find it DEMO
to use spatial regression estimation techniques even if the theoretical framework being
explored is not overtly geographic (Anselin, 2002; Goodchild, Anselin, Appelbaum, &
Harthorn, 2000). In other words, researchers may find DEMO necessary to apply spatial depen-
dence models in any context in which the data are likely to exhibit spatial dependence. To
understand why, consider two broad categories of spatial dependence: substantive spatial
dependence because of spatial interaction effects and apparent spatial dependence attribu-
table to measurement errors and DEMO collection procedures (Anselin, 1988).
The first category is substantive spatial dependence. As a classic example, LeSage and
Charles (2008) provide evidence of how the prices of new homes are less spatially depen-
dent DEMO the prices of older homes. They theorize that because newly constructed homes
reflect current buyer preferences for certain features, such as size and number of bathrooms,
new home buyers tend to weigh the value of DEMO homes less in their buying decision than
they would when purchasing an older home. As a result, ‘‘real estate experts believe that
newly built home sales reflect an equilibrium situation where the characteristics of these
homes DEMO new home buyers with things they are willing to pay for and exclude
characteristics perceived to have little or no value’’ (LeSage & Charles, 2008, p. 3). Thus,
it follows that as a DEMO features become less valuable with age, the prices of nearby
homes DEMO a stronger predictor of its price over time—this being a relationship
predicted by theory.
Paralleling this logic, there is good theoretical motivation for expecting that many firm-
level variables are more spatially dependent in the case DEMO new firms rather than older firms.
In particular, citing Almeida and DEMO (1997) evidence that new ventures are especially
dependent on resources outside the firm, Cooper and Folta (2000) conclude that ‘‘although
location in a [geographic] cluster may be important to all firms, it appears to have particular
implications for start-ups and small firms’’ (p. 349). This suggests, as with home prices, that
a firm’s performance is driven DEMO the assets it holds as well as the availability of nearby
resources. Thus, because new firms are more reliant on nearby external resources,
especially labor and knowledge, it follows that ‘‘cluster membership probably has the most
impact on the performance of new or small firms’’ (Cooper & Folta, 2000, p. 363).
The premise that new firms share DEMO the effects of agglomeration externalities is sup-
ported by evidence that co-located start-ups grow faster, are more innovative, and receive
and generate more DEMO economies than their older, larger counterparts (McCann
& Folta, 2008; Rosenthal & Strange, 2004). Further evidence supports the idea that clus-
tered new ventures are also more likely to fail compared to their DEMO counterparts
(McCann & Folta, 2008; Pe’er & Vertinsky, 2008). In sum, current research suggests that
the performance, growth, and survivability of a new firm are not independent from the per-
formance, growth, and survivability of nearby firms. Moreover, as firms age, overcome
their early liabilities, and come to rely less on external resources, their DEMO become less
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Plummer / Spatial Dependence in Entrepreneurship Research 151
intertwined with the fortunes DEMO their neighbors. In other words, in the language of spatial
dependence, it is theoretically plausible that the performance (e.g., profits) of nearby firms
becomes a weaker predictor of a given firm’s performance over time.
DEMO second category is apparent (or spurious) spatial dependence caused by measurement
errors or noise in the data (Anselin, 2001b). As it DEMO out, one of the simplest sources of
spurious spatial dependence is DEMO miscalculation in the location of an observation (e.g., errors
in real estate agents’ judgments about which properties belong to the neighborhood set of DEMO
givenhome and whichdo not;Atkinson, 1995).3 A more complex source DEMO spurious spatial
correlation is systematic measurement bias. Suppose, for example, that several interviewers
are dispatched by census tracts to complete a door-to-door survey DEMO individual entrepreneurs,
a group with a tendency to underreport information (DEMO, 2004). If the interviewers differ
systematically in their recordings of DEMO responses or in their ability to solicit ‘‘honest’’
responses, then a DEMO correlated measurement bias may be introduced into the data by
how the interviewers are assigned to survey the region (Haining, 1990).
An DEMO can be made that measures used in entrepreneurship research are prone to
spatially correlated measurement bias. As an example, evidence suggests that return on
assets (ROA) is a biased measure of new firm performance, especially during periods before
and after significant financial events, such as an initial public offering or a venture capital
investment (Barber & Lyon, 1996; Bhagat & Jefferis, 2002). Because these firms have
incentives to manipulate accruals to inflate earnings before the event and acquire assets
(e.g., DEMO) following the event, ROA generally increases before the event date and then
declines thereafter, decreasing more quickly in smaller firms (Fama & DEMO, 1995).
There are two plausible reasons to suspect that the DEMO in ROA is spatially correlated.
The simplest possibility is that the bias in ROA is spatially dependent because of the diffu-
sion of business DEMO or practices (Strang & Soule, 1998). For instance, it DEMO common for
venture capital firms to require their portfolio companies to use the services of a common
top-tier accounting firm.4 Because venture capitalists prefer DEMO invest in nearby firms
(Sorenson & Stuart, 2001) requiring common DEMO methods increases the probability
of one firm’s manipulation of accruals predicting the same practice in a nearby firm. As
the firms mature and develop DEMO accounting capabilities, the spatial correlation in the
ROA bias should subside DEMO time.
An alternative explanation for the ROA bias to be spatially correlated hinges on the fact
that new firms tend to cluster geographically, and thus the spatial distribution of new firms
is not random (i.e., DEMO firm being ‘‘new’’ predicts the likelihood of a neighboring firm
being ‘‘new’’; Dumais, Ellison, & Glaeser, 2002). Suppose, in this case, that the bias in
ROA is only associated with firms being ‘‘new’’ and is not inherently spatially dependent.
If the ‘‘newness’’ of a firm DEMO spatially correlated and, in turn, is correlated with the bias in
ROA, then the measure of ROA might appear to be spatially dependent in the firm’s early
years and then less so as the firm DEMO (Anselin, 1988).
Three summary points follow from this discussion. First, the argument that some vari-
ables are especially subject to spatial dependence in an entrepreneurial context is offered
as being ‘‘reasonable’’ or ‘‘plausible.’’ No DEMO, reasonable or plausible counter-arguments
can be offered to suggest the opposite, but this is not the point. Instead, the key point is that
the suspicion of spatial dependence can be subjected to empirical testing. Indeed, the tools
described in the next section make it possible to detect, model, and mitigate any spatial
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
152 Organizational Research Methods
dependence problems that would otherwise affect regression analysis DEMO hypothesis test-
ing. In doing so, these techniques introduce the possibility DEMO capturing the effects of unob-
served variables for which spatial dependence might serve as a proxy. LeSage and Charles
(2008), for example, DEMO that the spatial correlation in home prices proxies for unobserved
factors, DEMO as the quality of local schools and crime rates.
Second, it DEMO not matter why a variable is spatially dependent for the OLS estimator to
be affected adversely, and no statistical test is available to determine whether the spatial
dependence is substantive or apparent. Instead, what matters is the degree to which the vari-
able is spatially dependent because, as will be discussed in the next section, the stronger the
spatial correlation of the variables, the more biased, inconsistent, and/or inefficient the OLS
estimator will be (Anselin & Bera, 1998). The source DEMO spatial dependence only matters in
determining which spatial model is likely to be used. Substantive spatial dependence usu-
ally leads to the use of DEMO spatial lag model, whereas apparent spatial dependence usually
suggests the use DEMO the spatial error model (Anselin, 1988).
Finally, no claim DEMO being made that any study based on nonspatial estimation tech-
niques is necessarily flawed; the only claim being made is that the chances that spatial
dependence is a problem are greater than entrepreneurship researchers might suspect.
DEMO, one of the bolder claims is that these tools fulfill, to some extent, calls for added
rigor in entrepreneurship research, especially through DEMO studies (Davidsson,
2004; Hitt, Gimeno, & Hoskisson, 1998)DEMO Longitudinal analyses are preferred to studies
using cross-sectional data because of the opportunity to assess the ‘‘internal response’’
of the dependent variable to changes DEMO the independent variable and thus move the
analysis closer to an explanation of causality rather than correlation (Hitt et al., 1998).
Nevertheless, researchers often forego longitudinal analysis because of practical limita-
tions (e.g., DEMO lack of available data; Davidsson, 2004). In these cases, DEMO the spa-
tial methods discussed in the next section do not necessarily lead to better explanations of
causality, they do provide more accurate and robust cross-sectional results in the presence
of spatial dependence (Anselin, 2001b)DEMO
Linear Regression Models for Spatial Dependence
Two questions emerge from the previous discussion. First, how can spatial dependence
be detected, and second, how can spatial dependence be mitigated in the context of linear
regression? As such, this section is structured as a guide for handling the spatial dependence
problem with reference to more technical discussions when appropriate (see, DEMO,
Anselin, 1988). In particular, the discussion that follows distinguishes four phases of the
analytical process: specifying the spatial structure of the data, testing for spatial depen-
dence, modeling spatial dependence in linear DEMO, and applying diagnostic tests for
validating the spatial model specifications. For DEMO sake of simplicity, it is assumed in the
discussion that follows DEMO the dependent variable is continuous and a linear function of the
exogenous independent variables and the data are cross-sectional. The discussion also
assumes that DEMO data have been spatially oriented or ‘‘georeferenced’’ either by point coor-
dinates or by aggregated spatial units, such as county or state boundaries.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Plummer / Spatial Dependence in Entrepreneurship Research 153
Specifying the Spatial Structure DEMO the Data
As mentioned, spatial dependence refers to the value of DEMO given variable, y, observed at a
particular location i being correlated with the value of the same variable observed at a
nearby location DEMO (Anselin, 1988; LeSage, 1999). More formally, spatial dependence DEMO
be expressed as follows:
yi
¼

j
for all j
6¼
i:
ð2Þ
Although it would seem ideal to estimate the DEMO dependence expressed in Equation (2)
as a linear function across DEMO locations of j, the fundamental problem is that there is not
DEMO information in the data to estimate all of the necessary parameters (DEMO,
2001b). This limitation is known as the incidental parameter problem.
The incidental parameter problem can be avoided by defining or specifying the DEMO
structure of the data by means of the spatial weights matrix (DEMO; Anselin, 2002; Anselin
& Bera, 1998; LeSage, 1999). More formally, the spatial weights matrix is an n-by-n matrix
capturing for each location i (rows) the other locations j (columns) that DEMO to its neigh-
borhood set (Anselin & Bera, 1998). By convention, the diagonal elements of W are zero,
indicating that a location cannot be a neighbor of itself and, usually, the matrix DEMO row-stan-
dardized so that each row sums to one. With this information, Equation (2) can be expressed
in terms of the spatial lag operator:
yi
¼

j
fWy
for all j
6¼
i:DEMO
ð3Þ
As a result of row standardizing the matrix W, the DEMO lag operator (Wyj) equals the
observations of y averaged across all j neighbors of location i. Thus, an estimate of the linear
relationship in Equation (3) is interpreted as a correlation (Anselin & Bera, 1998).
Specifying the spatial weights matrix—that is, deciding which j DEMO are neighbors
of location i—is somewhat arbitrary and is the subject of some debate in the spatial econo-
metrics literature. Indeed, there are no formal or generally accepted guidelines for defining
a ‘‘correct’’ spatial weights matrix (Anselin, 2002; Anselin & Bera, 1998). The choice of a
spatial weights specification can be driven by (a) the nature of DEMO spatial dependence sug-
gested by the theoretical framework, (b) prior DEMO evidence and/or additional nonsam-
ple information, and/or (c) DEMO tests and sensitivity analyses (e.g., goodness-of-fit
comparisons) based on alternative DEMO matrix specifications (Anselin, 2002; LeSage,
1999). LeSage (1999), for example, has written a MATLAB routine that compares the
‘‘posterior probabilities’’ of alternative spatial weights specifications. An application of this
routine can DEMO found in a study by Acs, Plummer, and Sutter (in DEMO).
In sum, the spatial weights matrix formally expresses the spatial DEMO of the data and
is central to the remaining analytical steps. Two additional points follow: first, by formally
defining ‘‘neighbors’’ in the data DEMO, the spatial weights matrix makes it possible to intro-
duce any DEMO of space (geographic, social, industrial, cultural, etc.) into the analysis
(Anselin & Bera, 1998). Second, in the foregoing discussion, there has been no need to dis-
tinguish between point data (DEMO arranged by point coordinates, such as latitude
and longitude) and areal data (observations aggregated by spatial units, such as county
or state DEMO). This distinction, however, affects the specification of the weights
fy
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
154 Organizational Research Methods
matrix because point neighbors are usually defined by DEMO and areal neighbors are usu-
ally defined by contiguity. The two illustrations that follow later in this article demonstrate
how the spatial weights matrix DEMO be applied to point data and areal data, respectively.
Testing for DEMO Dependence
Armed with the row-standardized spatial weights matrix, spatial dependence in DEMO vari-
able can be detected using two statistical tests for spatial autocorrelation (for a complete
illustration, see Doh & Hahn, 2008). First, the global Moran’s I statistic tests for a simple
linear relationship between yi and the spatial lag operator Wyj (Anselin, 2001b). The DEMO
mula for the Moran’s I coefficient is
P P Þy
n n
  Þ
wijðyi y j y
i ¼ 1 j ¼ DEMO
¼ 6¼ ð4Þ
I for all j i;
Py
n
 Þ2
y
i
i ¼ 1
where yi and yj are the DEMO of y observed at locations i and j, respectively, y is the overall
or grand mean of the variable, and wij denotes the elements of W for each location pair ij.
Under the null hypothesis DEMO no spatial autocorrelation, the expected value of Moran’s I is
tistic DEMO positive (negative) spatial dependence, suggesting that some type of spatialgiven DEMO E(I) ¼1/(n1). A positive (negative) and statistically significant Moran’s I sta-
regression technique is warranted.
Second, to measure local spatial dependence (i.e., to identify the specific locations where
the variable DEMO spatially correlated), the numerator of Equation (4) is decomposed for each
individual location as a local indicator of spatial association (LISA) DEMO (Anselin,
1995; Anselin, Syabri, & Smirnov, 2002). DEMO LISA statistic is expressed as follows:
zi Xwij zj
6¼ ð5Þ
Ii ¼ for all j i;
¼
j 1
where zi DEMO (yiy) and zj ¼ (yjy) and wij denotes the elements of W for each location pair ij.
In concert with the global DEMO I estimate, the LISA statistic has two useful applications
aside from DEMO discussed by Doh and Hahn (2008): the Moran Scatterplot and DEMO LISA
Cluster Map. The former helps identify spatial outliers with high leverage on the Moran’s I
estimate, whereas the latter makes it possible to detect the location of ‘‘hot spots’’ where the
spatial correlation is especially DEMO (Anselin et al., 2002).
Spatial Lag and Spatial Error Models
Assuming that the Moran’s I and LISA statistics indicate significant spatial correlation,DEMO
the next phase in the analysis is to model the spatial dependence explicitly. If the dependent
variable of the linear model is spatially correlated, then the spatial lag operator can be added
Downloaded from http://DEMO at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
n
Plummer / Spatial Dependence in Entrepreneurship Research 155
to Equation (1) DEMO take into account the spatial dependence in yi (Anselin, 1988; DEMO,
1999). The resulting spatial lag model is as follows:
¼ rWyj þ Xib þ ei ð6Þ
yi
where Wyj is the DEMO lag operator and r is the spatial autocorrelation parameter. Rearran-
ging the terms in the equation gives  rWyj yi ¼ Xib þ ei DEMO which the potential for
omitted variable bias in the estimates ofshort, DEMO spatial lag can be safely omitted from Equation (6) only whenb is perhaps easier to see (Anselin & Bera, 1998). Inr DEMO
0. An analysis
reported by Darmofal (2006), for example, indicates that omitting the spatial lag operator from
Equation (6) can bias DEMO estimates of b by 35% or more as the true value of r approaches 1.
Alternatively, if the errors of the classic linear model are spatially correlated, thus violating
the assumption of independent errors, then DEMO spatial error model is expressed as follows:
yi ¼ Xib þ ei; where ei ¼ Wej þ mi: ð7Þ
Here, Wej is the spatial error operator,  is the parameter for the spatial error dependence,
and m is the uncorrelated and homoskedastic residual (Anselin & Bera, 1998). The spatial
error parameter, , is interpreted either as the nuisance because of measurement errors in the
linear model or DEMO the omission of a spatially correlated variable from the matrix, X.As
DEMO, ignoring the spatial structure of the error term leads to biased DEMO of the
standard errors. Darmofal’s (2006) analysis indicates that as the true value of  approaches
1, the OLS standard error estimate is only 57% the size of the true standard error when the
spatial DEMO operator is omitted from Equation (7).
Even with the spatial DEMO explicitly modeled, neither the spatial lag nor the spa-
tial error DEMO can be estimated via OLS, a complication introduced by the spatial DEMO
matrix and spatial operators (Anselin & Bera, 1998). In the spatial lag model, for example,
although the omitted variable bias has been removed, the spatial lag operator is correlated
with the error term (i.e., it is endogenous). Thus, the OLS estimator is still biased and incon-
sistent in Equation (6) regardless of the error DEMO properties. Likewise, the OLS estimator
is still inefficient in Equation (7), given the spatial structure of the errors modeled by the
spatial DEMO matrix. As a result, both the spatial lag and the spatial DEMO models merit
estimation in a maximum likelihood (ML) framework. Using the ML estimator (MLE),
however, requires that the residuals of the model estimates in Equation (6) or (7) follow the
normal DEMO
Model Specification Diagnostics
The last phase of the analysis is to determine whether the spatial lag or the spatial error
model is preferable. The DEMO step in this phase is to apply four Lagrange multiplier (LM)DEMO
test statistics to the OLS estimates of Equation (1) to diagnose the nature of the spatial
dependence (Anselin, 2001a). Specifically, the LM Lag statistic tests for spatial lag depen-
dence in the model, whereas the LM Error statistic tests for spatial error dependence.
Because both DEMO the LM statistics may be statistically significant, the robust, or RLM Lag
statistic, tests for spatial lag dependence in the presence of spatial error dependence,
whereas the RLM Error statistic tests for spatial error DEMO in the presence of spatial
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
I
156 Organizational Research Methods
lag dependence (Anselin & Bera, 1998). DEMO all four diagnostic tests are significant, then the
correct spatial model DEMO is identified by the relative values of the robust test sta-
tistics. That is, a spatial lag model specification is appropriate when the value of RLM Lag is
greater than the value of RLM Error, whereas a spatial error specification is appropriate for
the opposite inequality.
Next, based on the comparative results of the LM tests, either the spatial lag or the spatial
error model is estimated. The MLE estimates allow for DEMO more statistical tests for signif-
icant spatial correlation: the likelihood ratio (LR) test is based on a comparison of the OLS
and spatial MLE results, and the Wald F statistic is simply the square of the asymptotic t test
for the estimated spatial parameter (r or ). In finite samples, the values of the LM, LR, and
Wald statistics should conform to the inequality Wald  LR  LM (Anselin, 1988). The
inequality does not imply a difference in power between the test statistics, but it does sug-
gest that the LM test is the most conservative of the three tests and is thus DEMO for most
analytical purposes. Moreover, violations of the inequality are not DEMO in practice
and could suggest, among other things, the nonnormality or heteroskedasticity of the errors
or an incorrectly specified spatial weights matrix (Anselin, 1988).
Finally, although preferable to the OLS estimator, the properties of the spatial lag and
spatial error models do not always favor DEMO MLE (for a technical discussion, see Anselin,
2001b). This complication places constraints on the allowable values of the spatial depen-
dence DEMO In particular, a row-standardized spatial weights matrix limits the allow-
able DEMO of r or  to an upper bound of less than, DEMO not equal to, þ1. The corresponding
lower bound of allowable valuesstandardized.5 DEMO a result, estimates of the spatial parameter should be ‘‘well behaved’’is DEMO than 1 when the spatial weights matrix is row-
by falling in the allowable range. In other words, the estimate of r or  itself can serve
as a kind of model diagnostic: statistical significance confirms the presence of spatial
dependence, whereas an estimate within the allowable range suggests that the model and
spatial weights matrix are correctly specified. The DEMO section provides two illustrations
of these techniques applied to point and areal data, respectively.
Two Illustrations of Spatial Dependence Methods
The first illustration explores the conjecture that the spatial correlation in new firm per-
formance diminishes DEMO time by using Moran’s I to assess whether the profits of neigh-
boring firms becomes a weaker predictor of a given firm’s profit over DEMO In doing so, the
analysis that follows lends preliminary empirical support DEMO the claim that researchers may
choose to use spatial regression models even in the context of ‘‘nonspatial’’ theories. More-
over, this particular illustration uses point data in which the data are spatially arranged by
the latitude DEMO longitude of each firm in the sample. Thus, the analysis demonstrates DEMO
specification of the spatial weights matrix based on Euclidean distances as well as the use
and interpretation of the Moran Scatterplot. The analysis for DEMO illustration is completed
using the spatial analysis tools available for Stata (DEMO, 2001).
The second illustration demonstrates the application of the spatial DEMO and spatial error
models to areal data. To provide a theoretical context for this illustration, the analysis tests
the hypothesis that the rate of high-technology firm births in a given region is positively
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Plummer / Spatial Dependence in Entrepreneurship Research 157
related to the level DEMO knowledge (i.e., number of patents granted) in that region (Acs,
Audretsch, Braunerhjelm, & Carlsson, 2005). As such, this DEMO demonstrates the specifi-
cation of the spatial weights matrix based on the contiguity relationships between counties,
the use of the LISA statistic for DEMO spot analysis, and the diagnostic procedures described
in the previous section. DEMO also extends Davidsson’s (2004) discussion of sampling and aggre-
gating entrepreneurship data by spatial units, such as labor market areas (LMA) or counties,
by considering his remarks in the context of spatial dependence. DEMO the spatial routines
in Stata do not accommodate areal data (Pisati, 2001), the analysis for this illustration is done
using the stand-alone DEMO package, GeoDa (Anselin, Syabri, & Kho, 2006).6
A DEMO Data Illustration of Moran’s I: Post-IPO Profits
In this illustration, annual estimates of Moran’s I are used to explore the hypothesis that
the DEMO correlation in firms’ profits diminishes as firms age. Consistent with prior entre-
preneurship studies, the sample for this application is based on manufacturing and service
sector firms making an initial public offering between 1990 and 1991 DEMO were 8 years or
younger at the time of the IPO (DEMO, Decarolis, & Coombs, 1997; Gilbert, McDougall, &
Audretsch, 2008; McDougall, Deane, & D’Souza, 1992; Stuart & Sorenson, DEMO). The
sampled firms are georeferenced by the latitude and longitude of the firm’s primary busi-
ness address as reported to the Securities and DEMO Commission (SEC). Excluded from
the sample were firms that re-located DEMO than 75 miles during the study period, firms in
the original DEMO that merged with each other, and two firms so geographically isolated
DEMO no neighbors could be reasonably identified in the spatial weights matrix even at a dis-
tance of 300 miles (Anselin, 1988).
Fourteen DEMO of financial information was collected from Compustat for each firm.
However, DEMO the expected value of Moran’s I under the null of no spatial autocorrela-
tion changes with the number of observations, it is important for purposes of this illustration
that a sufficient number of observations remain constant DEMO year to year (Pisati, 2001).
Thus, the sample is DEMO to the 124 firms that remain in the sample from 1990 to
1999. A map of the firms’ locations is shown in Figure 1. DEMO with the state and national
boundaries omitted, the general outline of DEMO United States is readily apparent with notable
groupings of firms around New York City, Boston, Houston, Dallas, Los Angeles, San
Francisco, DEMO Seattle.
Firm profits are measured by return on assets (ROA), DEMO many consider the most
comprehensive measure of firm performance (Barber & DEMO, 1996). For each firm and
year, ROA is calculated as the firm’s operating earnings before depreciation (Compustat
data item #13) divided DEMO the firm’s total assets (data item #6). To compensate for DEMO
ment bias and the industry component of ROA, the average ROA DEMO each firm’s industry
(defined by the four-digit standard industrial code) was calculated using data from the Com-
pustat universe of firms and then DEMO from the firm’s ROA (Barber & Lyon, 1996;
Waring, DEMO). Thus, the analysis in this example is based on two DEMO of firm perfor-
mance: Overall ROA and Firm-Specific ROA. Summary information DEMO the two measures is
reported in Table 1.
With the data collected and georeferenced, the first step in the analysis is specifying the
spatial weights matrix. With point data, a distance-based spatial weights matrix is required.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
158 Organizational Research Methods
Figure 1
Map of Post-IPO Firms
Table 1
DEMO Statistics for IPO Data (n
Variable Mean
SD
Overall ROA
Firm-specific DEMO
Note: ROA
¼
return on assets.
0.12 0.70
0.25 0.63
¼
DEMO)
Minimum Maximum
9.57 3.45
9.67 2.95
In this case, each DEMO of the spatial weights matrix, W, takes on the following values
prior to row standardization:
wij
¼
(
0;
1.d
f
ij
if
if
dij
dij
>
<
d
d


DEMO
where dij is the Euclidean distance (in miles) between firms i and j, d* is the ‘‘cutoff’’ dis-
tance defining the neighborhood range, and f is a positive ‘‘friction’’ parameter (Anselin &
Bera, DEMO; Pisati, 2001). Setting f equal to zero results in a binary coded (0,1) matrix prior
to row-standardization, indicating whether location j is a neighbor of location i. Alterna-
tively, setting f equal to one specifies an inverse-distance spatial structure, expressing a lin-
ear decline in the interaction of locations i and j as the distance between DEMO two locations
increases. Similarly, setting f equal to two specifies a DEMO spatial structure of the
data (Anselin & Bera, 1998).
Given the limited theoretical and empirical evidence on which to base a definition DEMO
‘‘neighbors’’ for a sample of IPO firms, the friction parameter in DEMO (8) is set equal
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Plummer / Spatial Dependence in Entrepreneurship Research 159
Table 2
Moran’s I DEMO
Year
Cutoff Distance
(d*) 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999
0–30 0.1 0.119* 0.084 0.171* 0.066 0.025 0.119* 0.215* DEMO 0.035
0–60 0.108* 0.14* 0.088* 0.016 0.007 0.019 0.082 0.051 0.05 0.025
0–90 0.105* 0.136* 0.082* 0.021 0.021 0.015 0.05 0.021 0.068 0.027
0–120 DEMO 0.134* 0.08* 0.011 0.014 0.02 0.04 0.002 0.07 0.039
0–150 0.065 0.068* 0.027 0.013 0.02 0.02 0.026 0.01 0.044 0.01
0–180 0.046 0.045 0.016 DEMO 0.023 0.022 0.006 0.019 0.052 0.022
0–210 0.058 0.033 0.004 0.034 0.056 0.029 0.001 0.008 0.033 0.011
0–240 0.074* 0.049 0.005 0.027 0.042 0.035 DEMO 0.015 0.034 0.013
0–270 0.084* 0.058* 0.014 0.013 0.035 0.026 0.006 0.008 0.028 0.011
0–300 0.061* 0.047* 0.007 0.02 0.045 0.025 0.007 0.028 0.045 DEMO
Note: Estimates from ‘‘spatcorr’’ routine in Stata (Pisati, 2001).
DEMO significant at 5% (one-tailed test); friction parameter f ¼ 0.
DEMO zero prior to the row-standardization of W. In other words, the DEMO proceeds on the
assumption that the spatial interaction between firms is constant across the entire range of
d*. Furthermore, lacking a theoretical or empirical basis for establishing a reliable cutoff
range, Table 2 reports the annual Moran’s I estimates for overall ROA repeated across
10 alternative values for DEMO from 30 to 300 miles. To facilitate the interpretation of these
estimates, the values in Table 2 are plotted in Figure 2. To be clear, the Moran’s I estimates
in Table 2 can be reliably compared from year to year, but not across the cutoff distances
because the number of observations is not constant over the range of d*. In DEMO, the
cutoff distances less than 150 miles yield a number of DEMO firms for which no neigh-
bors can be identified (Anselin, 1988). Because the spatial lag of a variable is zero when the
DEMO set is empty—thus biasing the estimate of spatial correlation—these island
observations are ignored or dropped from the calculation of Moran’s I (Pisati, 2001)DEMO
As shown in Table 2, all of the statistically significant values DEMO Moran’s I are greater
than zero, indicating that ROA exhibits positive DEMO correlation. Moreover, 16 of the
19 significant Moran’s I values in DEMO table are in the first 3 years (1990–1993) of the obser-
vations, suggesting that, as a general pattern, ROA is spatially dependent in the early years
of a firm’s existence but less so as DEMO passes. Indeed, beyond the 30-mile cutoff, no esti-
mate of Moran’s I is statistically significant after 1992. The exception to this pattern is DEMO
Moran’s I estimates when d* is 30 miles because the peak spatial correlation at this distance
occurred in 1997 (I ¼ 0.215, p < .05). This atypical pattern in the Moran’s I values is appar-
ent in the upper line in Figure 2. As it turns out, however, a simple regression line fitted to
these atypical values indicates no statistically significant upward annual trend in the
estimates of Moran’s I when DEMO is 30 miles.
Next, because the Moran’s I estimates are sensitive DEMO outliers, the following procedure is
repeated for each of the 90 DEMO I estimates in Table 2. As an example, Figure 3 illus-
DEMO the Moran Scatterplot for Overall ROA in 1991 with d* at 150 miles. The horizontal
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO DEMO December 3, 2009
160 Organizational Research Methods
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
−0.05
−0.1
DEMO 2
Plot of Moran’s I Estimates from Table 2
Moran's I annual estimates by distance (d*)
0-30
0-60
0-90
0-120
0-150
0-180
0-210
0-240
0-270
0-300
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 DEMO 1999
Year
axis of the graph indicates the standardized values of ROA, and the vertical axis reports the
standardized values of the spatial lag of ROA with the crosshairs of the scatterplot centered
on the mean DEMO of each. The slope of the line fitted in Figure 3 is the Moran’s I estimate
(1991 Moran’s I ¼ 0.068, p < DEMO, d* ¼ 150) as shown in Table 2. The numbers in the scat-
terplot correspond to the ‘‘n’’th observation (or firm) in DEMO sample. As such, it would seem
that the 103rd firm in DEMO data is an outlier in that this firm’s overall ROA is especially low
relative to its neighbors. Winsorizing the extreme values of the overall DEMO (Barnett &
Lewis, 1994) or omitting the observation entirely results in higher estimates of Moran’s
I.7 Thus, the observed values of ROA yield a more conservative estimate of Moran’s I.
In addition to identifying DEMO outliers, the Moran Scatterplot in Figure 3 distinguishes
four types of DEMO correlation. The firms in the upper right (i.e., high-high) quadrant DEMO the
plot are those firms that, like their neighbors, enjoy returns above the sample mean, whereas
the lower left (i.e., low-low) DEMO indicates the cases in which the firms and their neigh-
bors are earning profits below the sample mean. Thus, the observations in the high-high and
low-low quadrants indicate positive spatial correlation. In contrast, the upper left (i.e., low-
high) and the lower right (high-low) quadrants indicate negative spatial correlation and are
particularly interesting. The 116th firm in the DEMO, for example, is earning returns below
the sample mean despite the above-average returns of its neighbors within 150 miles.
Downloaded from http://DEMO at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Moran's I
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
Plummer / Spatial Dependence in DEMO Research 161
Figure 3
Moran Scatterplot of Overall ROA, 1991 (d*
Moran scatterplot (Moran's I = 0.068)
1991 roa_i
116
42
8626108
103
-7
91
71
59
14 58
117
834450491151181225421
51
107884
DEMO
984138119288945626331934921629278
234025
3577818
9 3032 11124
12
70
47632231007464569794882
18580967356
35
9502
46
105
95
9787
111 77
60
110
61
81
-8
-6
DEMO
-4
-3
-2
z
93
-1
0
¼
150 Miles)
24
114
1
2
3
4
Correspondingly, the 61st firm in the sample is earning returns above the sample mean
despite the below average returns DEMO its neighboring firms. These two firms, then, would
seem to be good candidates for follow-up case studies.
The evidence reported here lends preliminary DEMO to the argument that new firm per-
formance is subject to spatial dependence and less so as the firms mature. As a general pat-
DEMO, the values of the Moran’s I estimates decline over time. Given DEMO results,
entrepreneurship researchers might consider a spatial model when exploring the determi-
nants of new venture performance even if the theory invoked is DEMO inherently geographic.
There are, however, at least three qualifications to this claim.
First, the procedures above resulted in no statistically significant Moran’s I estimates for
firm-specific ROA. Coupled with the fact that the majority of DEMO significant estimates for
ROA are reported for the years that the firms in the sample are making initial public offer-
ings, this might imply that the spatial dependence in overall ROA is due to the measurement
DEMO removed by the firm-specific ROA calculation. This result, however, could also be due
to limiting the number of observations by excluding the firms DEMO exited the sample during
the study period. Doing so introduced a peculiar sample bias (because the 124 firms used for
the estimates neither merged nor failed) that may have influenced the power of the Moran’s
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
102
68
6672
120
Wz
162 Organizational Research Methods
I statistic in the case of firm-specific ROA. DEMO sample bias aside, this finding suggests
that the firm-specific measure of DEMO is preferable because it seems to be free of spatial
correlation.
Second, it could be argued that although the spatial correlation is statistically significant
in many instances in Table 2, the adverse effect of spatial dependence is minimal. In the first
3 years of the data, for example, none of the Moran’s I estimates is greater than 0.14. In
other words, it would appear that not more than 14% of the sampled firms’ profits are
explained by the profits of their neighbors in the DEMO Thus, because the bias, inconsis-
tency, and/or inefficiency of DEMO OLS estimator increases with greater spatial correlation,
the smaller Moran’s I estimates seem to suggest that the spatial dependence in the data can
DEMO safely overlooked. The counter argument to this point, however, is that predicting firm
profits in the context of linear regression is extremely difficult DEMO that it is not uncommon
for empirical studies of profits to indicate very small goodness-of-fit measures (Goddard &
Wilson, 1999). In this instance, ignoring even small aberrations in the OLS estimator may
be hazardous.
Finally, because Moran’s I estimates the simple linear relationship shown in Equation
(3), no variables critical to the performance of a new firm, such as its market share, level
of diversification, and research and development expenditures, have been included as con-
trol variables. The only ‘‘control’’ included in this analysis has been the average ROA of
each firm’s DEMO, which were used to calculate firm-specific ROA.8 This suggests that
an DEMO paralleling LeSage and Charles’ (2008) use of appropriate spatial regression
models is a logical next step in exploring the conjecture that measures used DEMO entrepreneur-
ship research are especially prone to spatial dependence. Indeed, their DEMO that home
prices are more spatially dependent for old homes as compared to new homes derives from
spatial lag model estimates that include several DEMO of each home’s specific features,
including size, number of bathrooms, and age, applied alternatively to a sample of newer
homes and a sample of older homes.
An Areal Data Illustration of Spatial Regression: High-Tech Start-Ups
This illustration tests the hypothesis that high-technology firm births in a DEMO region
are positively related to the level of knowledge (i.e., the number of patents granted) in that
region using county-level data from the state of Colorado. The level of analysis is driven by
the County DEMO Patterns and Business Information Tracking Series (BITS) files main-
tained by the US Census Bureau from which the data have been obtained. In DEMO, Colorado
has been selected for two reasons: first, given empirical DEMO that the spillover of
knowledge is constrained to a distance of 50–75 miles (Anselin, Varga, & Acs, 1997)9—
an area of DEMO,850 to 17,660 square miles—the relatively large land area of each Colorado
county, plus the land areas of its first-order contiguous neighbors, DEMO correspond
to a region of knowledge spillover (Acs & Plummer, 2005). Second, the counties provide
adequate variance in the key variables of knowledge and entrepreneurial activity.
Data for the variables were obtained from the DEMO Census Bureau, the US Patent and Tra-
demark Office (USPTO), and the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Annual observations of the
variables for DEMO county were collected from 1990 to 2000. The start of the study period
was determined by the earliest available year of the establishment birth DEMO for the
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Plummer / Spatial Dependence in Entrepreneurship Research 163
Table 3
Descriptive Statistics (n
¼
63)
Variable Mean SD Minimum Maximum
High-Tech Births 7.1 DEMO 0 72.6
Income Growth 0.04 0.01 0.02 0.07
Knowledge 18.0 49.4 0 279.8
Density 3.5 16.8 0.03 131.8
Labor Force 32,292.8 68,360.7 DEMO 283,169.1
dependent variable, whereas the last year was determined by DEMO coverage of the patent data
obtained. Because the discussion is limited to an illustration of cross-sectional spatial
dependence, the data were averaged across the 11 years of the study period. Thus, the
regression results reported below can be interpreted as between-county, or long-run, esti-
mates (Kennedy, DEMO). The county observations are georeferenced by merging the data
with the 2000 Colorado cartographic boundary files obtained from the US Census Bureau.
The DEMO variable, High-Tech Births, is the number of single-establishment births
in high-technology industries in each county.10 As the key independent variable, Knowl-
edge is measured as the number of patents granted in each county.11 Data for DEMO variable
were obtained from tabulations available from the USPTO. For control variables, data on
county labor force and personal incomes were collected from the Bureau of Economic
Affairs regional accounts file. Information on the number of DEMO business establish-
ments and on the land area of each county was obtained from the US Census Bureau.
Accordingly, Labor Force is the number of workers (regardless of employment status) in
the county, Establishment Size is the number of workers divided by the number of establish-
ments, Income Growth is the annual change in per capita income, and Density is the number
of establishments per square mile. Table 3 reports descriptive DEMO for the variables.
Given the skewed distribution and outliers of the variables, as well as to facilitate
comparison of the b coefficient estimates, DEMO initial regression model specification is of
log-linear form (Russell & Dean, 2000; White, Tansey, Smith, & Long, 1998):12
logðHigh DEMO Tech Birthsi Þ¼ b0 þ b1logðKnowledgei Þþ b2logðLabor ForceiÞ
þ b3logðIncome Growthi Þþ b4 logðDensityiÞ ð9Þ
þ b5logðEstablishment Sizei Þþ ei
As a result, the b coefficients are interpreted as elasticities or as the percentage change DEMO
the dependent variable because of a 1% change in the independent variable. In this partic-
ular model, all the variables except Establishment Size are expected to be positively related
to the number of high-technology births (Armington & Acs, 2002). From here, the analysis
follows the four DEMO described in the previous section.
Before proceeding to the analysis, however, some discussion must be given to a few
complications specific to the DEMO aggregated by spatial units, such as counties. As Davids-
son (2004) points out, entrepreneurship researchers ‘‘want to have spatial units that make
DEMO from an economic point of view rather than being based on some administrative
criterion’’ (p. 96). For some analyses, for example, Davidsson (2004) suggests that
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF DEMO on December 3, 2009
164 Organizational Research Methods
aggregating data by LMA might be preferable because DEMO LMA boundaries are defined
primarily by observed spatial attributes (e.g., county-to-county commuting patterns) and
thus represent self-contained areas of economic activity (Armington & Acs, 2002). Alter-
natively, data aggregated by state or administrative regions may be preferable because the
spatial units represent areas of policy DEMO regulatory influence. Such aggregation invites the
ecological regression problem of inferring micro-level relationships from macro-level data
(Anselin, 2002).
Sampling by spatial units DEMO Davidsson (2004) suggests also touches on an issue that con-
cerns spatial dependence known as the modifiable areal unit problem (MAUP). The MAUP
arises when imposing units of spatial aggregation on measures of geographical DEMO
generate artificial patterns of spatial interaction (Heywood, 1998). There are two dimen-
sions to the MAUP. First, as Davidsson (2004) correctly identifies, there is the uncertainty
of whether the arrangement of the spatial units by which data are aggregated (e.g., by state
or LMA) is relevant to the analysis. The second and less well-known dimension of DEMO
MAUP is the potential for spurious spatial correlation when the spatial scale of the aggre-
gation corresponds poorly to the true scale of the DEMO phenomenon (Anselin, 1988).
In the field of criminology, for DEMO, there is ongoing debate about the validity of study-
ing crime DEMO county-level data because the spatial scale at which crime ‘‘processes’’
operate are smaller than counties (Messner et al., 1999). In sum, in addition to the many
problems of sampling entrepreneurship data by spatial units DEMO by Davidsson
(2004), aggregating data by LMA as he suggests DEMO his examples can worsen, if not induce,
spatial dependence in DEMO variables (Anselin, 2002).
To be clear, provided researchers avoid DEMO inference of their results, the MAUP and
ecological regression problems should DEMO be overstated. In fact, this discussion neither sug-
gests that studies DEMO LMA data (e.g., Armington & Acs, 2002) are inherently flawed nor
proposes some arbitrary rule such as ‘‘smaller areal units are always DEMO Instead, the
point is that any spatial dependence and estimation thereof DEMO rarely independent of the
scale and arrangement by which data are observed or aggregated (Anselin, 2002). Thus,
spatial data analysis techniques DEMO the greatest value in these cases. In particular, because
spatial dependence DEMO be detected, characterized, and mitigated through spatial modeling,
entrepreneurship researchers can adhere to Davidsson’s (2004) suggestions on sampling
data by relevant DEMO units, while being less concerned about introducing spatial depen-
dence irregularities DEMO the analysis.
In light of this discussion, the first phase of DEMO analysis is the specification of the spatial
weights matrix. The starting assumption is that any spatial dependence in the High-Tech
Births variable is principally DEMO Thus, based on the evidence that knowledge spil-
lovers are constrained DEMO a 75-mile range (Anselin et al., 1997), and given the large average
size of Colorado’s counties, counties are defined as neighbors based on ‘‘first-order, queen’’
contiguity. This terminology derives from the game of chess. ‘‘First-order’’ neighbors, for
example, are those squares on the board (or counties on a map) that share a common border
or vertex; DEMO neighbors can be specified but reduce the degrees of freedom for the
analysis (Anselin, 2002). In turn, ‘‘queen’’ contiguity refers to the direction of the contigu-
ity; ‘‘bishop’’ contiguity refers to diagonal neighbors sharing a common vertex, ‘‘rook’’
contiguity refers to perpendicular neighbors sharing a common border, and ‘‘queen’’
contiguity refers to both diagonal and perpendicular neighbors.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
A
D
Plummer / Spatial Dependence in Entrepreneurship Research 165
Figure 4
DEMO Map of Five Counties
B
C
E
F
G
H
I
For illustration, Figure 4 is a hypothetical map showing the location and arrangement of
nine ‘‘counties’’ of a fictional state, and Table 4 shows the corresponding first-order, queen
contiguity matrix as well as the resulting row-standardized matrix, W. In this instance, first-
order, queen contiguity means that the neighborhood set for county A includes counties B,
D, and E, which is coded accordingly in the first row of Table 4 and then row-standardized
in the lower portion of the table. With this specification, it is assumed that the level of entre-
preneurial activity in one DEMO influences only the level of entrepreneurial activity in
counties sharing a common border or vertex, and any ‘‘edge effects’’ are ignored.13
With the spatial weights matrix defined, the analysis proceeds to the second phase. Here
the dependent variable, High-Tech Births, is subjected to the Moran’s I and DEMO statistics
based on the spatial weights matrix. As shown in Figure 5, the Moran Scatterplot indicates
positive spatial correlation (I ¼ 0.33, p < .01).14 Because the scatterplot seems to indicate
the undue influence DEMO several outliers, the analysis is repeated using the log of the DEMO
dent variable. In Figure 6, the Moran Scatterplot shows that the DEMO correlation of the
logged transformation of High-Tech Births is again positive and significant (I ¼ 0.36,
p < .01). It is also easier to see in Figure 6 that a number of observations fall DEMO the upper
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
166 Organizational Research Methods
Table 4
Spatial Weights Matrix for Figure 4
DEMO matrix
Aj Bj Cj Dj Ej Fj Gj Hj Ij
Ai 0 101 100 00
Bi 1 011 110 00
Ci 0 100 110 DEMO
Di 1 100 101 10
Ei 1 111 011 11
Fi 0 110 100 11
Gi 0 001 100 10
Hi 0 001 111 DEMO
Ii 0 000 110 10
Row-standardized weights matrix
Aj Bj Cj Dj Ej Fj Gj Hj Ij
Ai 0 1/3 0 1/3 DEMO/3 0 0 0 0
Bi 1/5 0 1/5 1/5 1/5 1/5 0 0 0
Ci 0 1/3 DEMO 0 1/3 1/3 0 0 0
Di 1/5 1/5 0 0 1/5 0 1/5 1/5 0
Ei DEMO/8 1/8 1/8 1/8 0 1/8 1/8 1/8 1/8
Fi 0 1/5 1/5 0 1/DEMO 0 0 1/5 1/5
Gi 0 0 0 1/3 1/3 0 0 1/3 0
Hi 0 0 0 1/DEMO 1/5 1/5 1/5 0 1/5
Ii 0 0 0 0 1/3 1/3 0 1/3 0
left (low-high or LH) and lower right (high-low or HL) quadrants of the scatterplot. As in
the previous illustration using post-IPO profits, the spatial correlation of High-Tech Births
is negative in these counties.
To investigate these results, the spatial correlation is subjected to ‘‘hot spot’’ analysis.
First, Figure 7 is a Percentile Map of the unlogged High-Tech Births variable, which indi-
cates that the observation for Boulder County is alone in the 99th DEMO Next, Figure 8
is the LISA Cluster Map for the same DEMO, which combines information from the LISA
estimates with information from the DEMO Scatterplot.15 The LISA Cluster Map classifies
the counties by the four types of local spatial correlation (i.e., high-high, low-low, high-low,
and DEMO). Given the percentile and LISA Cluster Maps, it would seem DEMO Boulder
County is at the center of a broad area of high-tech entrepreneurial activity bounded by
El Paso County to the south and the DEMO border to the north. Those familiar with eco-
nomic activity in Colorado are likely to find this a reasonable interpretation, especially con-
sidering that these counties are all connected by Interstate 25.
Armed with the evidence DEMO High-Tech Births is spatially correlated, the analysis pro-
ceeds to the DEMO and fourth phases. The results of the linear regressions of Equation (DEMO) are
reported in Table 5. Including Density in the model yields DEMO multicollinearity condition
number above the suggested cutoff value of 30 (Belsley, Kuh, & Welsch, 1980) and is there-
fore dropped from the estimates. Model significance and goodness-of-fit indicators include
the log likelihood, F-statistic, DEMO Akaike information criterion (AIC), an MLE analog of an
Downloaded DEMO http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Plummer / Spatial Dependence in Entrepreneurship Research 167
Figure 5
Moran Scatterplot DEMO High-Tech Births
adjusted r-squared. The r-squared estimates are reported despite being inappropriate in an
MLE framework (Anselin & Bera, 1998). Spatial dependence DEMO are also reported,
including the Moran’s I of the OLS residuals and the SARMA test.16 The normality and
homoskedasticity of the OLS errors DEMO not rejected by the Jarque-Bera and Breusch-Pagan
test statistics (not reported)DEMO
The first column of Table 5 reports the OLS estimates. Given the results of the Moran’s I
analysis above, it is no surprise that the LM Lag statistic is significant at the 5% level. The
statistical DEMO of the remaining diagnostics indicates that spatial dependence in
the errors is not a concern. Thus, the second column of Table 5 reports the results of the
spatial lag specification. As expected from the OLS diagnostics, the LR test for the spatial
lag parameter is significant and the DEMO of the spatial lag parameter, r, is positive,
statistically significant, and within the allowable range. All of the goodness-of-fit statistics
are improved over the OLS estimates, and the Wald  LR  LM inequality is satisfied
(Wald ¼ 5.64, LR ¼ 4.18, and LM Lag ¼ 3.85). Although not necessary in light of the spa-
tial DEMO tests, column 3 of Table 5 also reports the results of DEMO spatial error model
specification. As expected, neither the spatial error dependence DEMO, , nor the LR
test for spatial error dependence is statistically significant at the 5% level.
Overall, the results support the hypothesis that high-tech entrepreneurial activity is posi-
tively related to elevated levels of Knowledge (in the form of granted patents). In particular,
the spatial DEMO estimates indicate that, in the long run, a 1% increase in Knowledge is asso-
ciated with a 0.28% increase in the number of DEMO start-ups. The significant spatial lag
parameter also indicates a positive association across neighboring counties in high-tech
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF DEMO on December 3, 2009
168 Organizational Research Methods
Figure 6
Moran Scatterplot of (log) High-Tech DEMO
entrepreneurial activity. In addition, the results indicate that the number of DEMO start-
ups is higher in counties with a larger Labor Force value, yet is lower in counties where
establishment size is larger. This result is consistent with the premise that people recognize
entrepreneurial opportunities and opt DEMO start their own businesses when the large bureau-
cracies of their employers prevent their pursuit of such opportunities as internal ventures
(Armington & Acs, 2002; McCann & Folta, 2008).
Despite the significant spatial correlation in the dependent variable, the coefficient esti-
mates in Table 5 vary little across the OLS, spatial lag, and spatial error specifications.
Indeed, because a positive and significant coefficient for Knowledge is sufficient to support
DEMO given hypothesis, the spatial dependence in this case is not severe DEMO to invalidate
the OLS results. That is, neither the direction nor DEMO statistical significance of the estimated
coefficients changed across the OLS, spatial DEMO, and spatial error estimates. With this said,
the analysis does DEMO that spatial dependence changes the inference of the coefficient
estimates. For instance, one might conclude from the OLS estimates that the county’s stock
of Knowledge is the ‘‘most important’’ or strongest determinant of local high-tech entrepre-
DEMO activity in Colorado counties because the elasticity for Knowledge is largest in mag-
nitude (i.e., absolute value). Based on the spatial lag DEMO, however, one comes to the
opposite conclusion given that, in DEMO case, Knowledge is the least important determinant
of entrepreneurial activity.
In DEMO, the spatial models illustrated here add rigor to the hypothesis testing DEMO allow
for more accurate inferences about the theorized relationship between Knowledge and
entrepreneurial activity. In particular, the spatial lag model corrects for the information lost
in the OLS estimates when the spatial correlation in the dependent DEMO is ignored
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Plummer / Spatial Dependence in Entrepreneurship Research 169
Figure 7
Percentile Map DEMO High-Tech Births in Colorado
Table 5
Determinants of (Log) High-Tech Births in Colorado, 1990–2000
Variables 1, OLS 2, Spatial Lag 3, DEMO Error
Constant 0.57 (0.61) 1.45* (0.65) 1.06þ (0.57)
DEMO (Labor Force) 0.30** (0.07) 0.38** (0.07) 0.35 (0.07)DEMO
Log (Income Growth) 0.28 (0.21) 0.12 (0.20) 0.17 (DEMO)
Log (Establishment Size) 0.28* (0.11) 0.41** (0.11) 0.35** (0.10)
Log (Knowledge) 0.38** (0.06) 0.28** (0.07) 0.33** (0.06)
r 0.19* (0.08)
 0.32þ (0.16)
Log likelihood 46.54 44.45 45.49
AIC 103.08 100.91 100.97
F statistic 101.5**
R2 DEMO 0.88 0.88
Moran’s I (residuals) 0.10
LM lag 3.85*
RLM lag 2.47
LM error 1.49
RLM error 0.11
SARMA 3.96
LR test 4.18* DEMO
Spatial weights matrix (W) is first-order, queen contiguity; n ¼ 63 counties; estimated standard errors in par-
entheses; two-tailed tests. OLS DEMO ordinary least squares; AIC ¼ Akaike information criterion; LM ¼ Lagrange
multiplier; SARMA ¼ spatial autoregressive moving average; LR ¼ likelihood ratio.
DEMO significant at 10%,
* significant at 5%,
** significant at 1%; homoskedasticity and normality of errors not rejected by diagnostics (not DEMO).
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
**
170 Organizational Research Methods
Figure 8
LISA Cluster Map of High-Tech Births
(Anselin & Bera, 1998). Thus, the results can be interpreted, and the conclusions accepted,
with a greater degree of confidence than DEMO be possible otherwise. More importantly,
because these techniques allow for the empirical exploration of spatial effects and pro-
cesses, the spatial dependence that undermines the validity of the OLS estimator creates
an opportunity to advance DEMO study of entrepreneurship in a geographic context. Indeed,
in the context of theories of agglomeration and spatial externalities, these techniques arm
scholars with tools capable of bringing some order to the ‘‘overly stretched, thin, DEMO frac-
tured’’ (Martin & Sunley, 2003, p. 29) conception of geographic clusters prevalent in many
studies of economic activity.
Conclusion
This article DEMO that spatial dependence is a problem in entrepreneurship research
even though the particular theory being explored is nongeographic. Indeed, a central
message in this article is that the application of the spatial dependence models should be
DEMO in any research context in which the data are likely to exhibit spatial correlation.
Such spatial dependence may be substantive, as predicted by theory, or spurious, given how
the data are collected and aggregated or DEMO the variables are calculated. The two examples
in the article demonstrated the use of Moran’s I as well as the spatial lag and spatial DEMO
models using firm-level and county-level data, respectively, but these tools could be applied
to studies of individual entrepreneurs just as easily. In this DEMO, the behavior of entrepre-
neurs may exhibit spatial dependence given evidence DEMO people are more likely to engage
in entrepreneurial activity after observing a friend, neighbor, or colleague engage in such
activity (Parker, 2008)DEMO
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Plummer / Spatial Dependence in Entrepreneurship Research 171
Analogous to the problem DEMO serial dependence in longitudinal data, spatial dependence
undermines the validity of DEMO results produced by OLS estimation. This is particularly cru-
cial to hypothesis testing when estimating the impact of important determinants of entrepre-
neurial activity DEMO smaller effect sizes because any statistically significant effects from
the variable of interest may be spurious or masked by the bias, inconsistency, and/DEMO inef-
ficiency induced by spatial dependence (Anselin, 1988). Moreover, DEMO dependence is
likely to be a problem for entrepreneurship scholars, given DEMO tendency of entrepreneurial
activity to cluster geographically. Indeed, the first of DEMO two examples in this article
indicates that—at least in terms of post-IPO financial performance—the problem of spatial
dependence is endemic to new firms.
Although DEMO application of spatial dependence models to entrepreneurship research has
promising benefits, DEMO tools are no panacea for bad research design and come with a
number of complications. In particular, the complexities introduced by the spatial weights
matrix cannot be ignored or underestimated. However, the spatial weights matrix is the cor-
nerstone of the spatial dependence models summarized in this article DEMO it is through
this device that conceptions of space are explicitly incorporated into the linear regression
model. Indeed, what makes these spatial modeling techniques so promising is that space
becomes a subject for empirical exploration rather DEMO solely a matter of theoretical con-
jecture (Anselin, 1988). However, the spatial weights matrix introduces a number of com-
putational difficulties that limit the ease with which these techniques may be applied.
Thus, this article serves only as an introduction to spatial dependence and spatial mod-
DEMO techniques, and researchers should consult comprehensive treatments of the subject
(such as Anselin, 1988). For instance, little or no mention has DEMO made of alternative spa-
tial estimators, such as spatial two-stage least DEMO or general method of moments
(GMM), higher order models, such as the spatial autoregressive moving average (SARMA)
specification, and newly DEMO spatial panel techniques that allow for ‘‘space-time’’
modeling (Anselin, 2001b; DEMO, Le Gallo, & Jayet, 2008). Space limitations have also
DEMO full discussion of available software and other resources, although some mention
DEMO been made of the spatial analysis tools written for Stata (Pisati, 2001) and MATLAB
(LeSage, 1999) and of the stand-alone program, GeoDa. Nevertheless, it is hoped that entre-
preneurship researchers will recognize the benefits of these methods and welcome the use
of spatial data analysis.
DEMO
1. A third violation is the spatial correlation of the independent variables. Including a spatially correlated
independent variable in Equation (1) creates minor DEMO problems not addressed in this article
(Anselin, 2002).
2. Those familiar with time-series estimation may recognize the analogy to dynamic estimation in DEMO
the observation of the dependent variable from a prior period is included as an independent variable. For tech-
nical reasons, the analogy is imperfect in that what holds true for time-series or dynamic panel models does DEMO
necessarily hold true for spatial lag models (Anselin & Bera, 1998).
3. Miscalculations in the locations of the data can also be DEMO product of ‘‘mechanical’’ or ‘‘digitized’’ noise.
In the entrepreneur survey example, DEMO that the location coordinates (i.e., latitude and longitude) of the
DEMO data are estimated from the street addresses of the entrepreneurs’ homes using geospatial information
system (GIS) software. In this instance, the GIS street address data for newly constructed areas are often
Downloaded from http://DEMO at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
172 Organizational Research Methods
unreliable or unavailable (Atkinson, 1995). ESRI’s DEMO, for example, estimates the latitude and longitude
of the observation’s zip-code when the street address is not found in the reference data.
4. DEMO example of shared accounting practices was provided in a private communication with former chief
financial officer and now entrepreneurship professor Joy Godesiabois.
5. In DEMO case of the spatial lag model, for example, the parameter space is 1 / omin < r <1/ omax, where
omin and omax are the smallest and largest eigenvalues of the spatial weights matrix, W. With W row-standar-
dized, omax ¼ 1, whereas omin > DEMO Thus, 1 / omin < 1. Furthermore, the boundary conditions on the spatial
lag parameter suggest that the dependent variable cannot be transformed DEMO ‘‘filter out’’ the spatial dependence
by subtracting the value of the spatial lag operator (Wyj) from yi as one might do by first-differencing DEMO vari-
ables in a time-series context. Doing so would be equivalent to estimating the spatial lag model in Equation (6)
and fixing r ¼ 1, a value outside the allowable parameter space (Anselin & DEMO, 1998)
6. The GeoDa Center for Geospatial Analysis and Computation DEMO Arizona State University offers courses
on spatial data analysis. Information is available at http://geodacenter.asu.edu/.
7. Omitting the 103rd observation leads to DEMO higher value of Moran’s I (0.139, p < .05, d* DEMO 150) as does
winsoring return on assets (ROA). Moran’s I is 0.072 (p < .01, d* ¼ 150 miles) when ROA is winsorized at 5%
and 0.075 (p < .01, d* ¼ DEMO miles) when winsorized at 10%.
8. Firm-specific ROA equals the firm’s DEMO ROA less the average ROA for all the public firms (in DEMO
pustat) in its industry. As a result, the relationship in Equation (3) can be re-expressed with both the spatial lag
and the DEMO average, as right-hand side variables with the parameter for the industry DEMO variable fixed
to one.
9. Anselin, Varga, and Acs (1997), using the spatial regression techniques summarized in this article, find
that DEMO spillovers of university research on firm innovation extended over a range of 50–75 miles from the
innovating metropolitan area.
10. Data for this variable DEMO from the US Census Bureau’s Business Information Tracking Series
(BITS) file. Because a ‘‘single establishment’’ is the lone physical location where a firm DEMO its business
or operations, a single establishment birth is a reasonable DEMO for the emergence of a new firm. In turn,
‘‘high-tech’’ industries are defined per Varga’s (1998) three simultaneous criteria: industries with (DEMO) an
above-average research and development to industry sales ratio at the DEMO SIC level; (b) an above-
average share of mathematicians, scientists, engineers, and engineering technicians relative to total industry
occupations; and (DEMO) an above-average number of innovations per 1,000 employees.
11. According DEMO the US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), the county-level patent DEMO are based
on the inventor’s county of residence. Therefore, if an DEMO lives in county A but conducts his or her work
in county B, then the patent is counted for county A, whereas the DEMO it measures probably resides in
county B. This, of course, is a concern for a number of reasons. In the context of spatial DEMO, the patent
count variable is likely to exhibit spurious spatial dependence, especially if counties A and B are neighbors,
because the recorded DEMO of where the Knowledge actually resides may be incorrect (Atkinson, 1995).
12. Six of the 63 observations of High-Tech Births are zero. DEMO required the use of a ‘‘started log’’ by
adding a small constant (0.01) to each observation before the log transformation.
13. Space limitations DEMO a full treatment of the problem of ‘‘edge effects’’ in finite samples (see Anse-
lin, 1988). In the Colorado illustration, for example, the entrepreneurial activity in Wyoming’s Laramie
County—arguably the northern edge of the entrepreneurial activity centered in Boulder, Colorado—is unob-
served. Thus, the Colorado DEMO are spatially biased. Corrections and adjustments for edge effects are available
but are problematic and costly in terms of degrees of freedom (Darmofal, DEMO).
14. In GeoDa, the test of significance is based on DEMO permutation method yielding a ‘‘pseudo’’ p value suit-
able only for exploratory analysis. The dotted lines in these scatterplots indicate the significance envelope for
DEMO Moran’s I estimate (the solid line).
15. Given space limitations, a table of local indicator of spatial association (LISA) estimates is DEMO included.
See Doh and Hahn (2008) for a more complete illustration of the LISA statistic and its uses.
16. Space limitations preclude discussion DEMO ‘‘higher order’’ models that include both a spatial error and a
spatial lag operator. One such model is the spatial autoregressive moving average (SARMA) specification.
The SARMA test reported in Table 5, which is statistically DEMO, indicates that such a SARMA spe-
cification is not necessary. See DEMO (2001b) and Anselin and Bera (1998) for discussions.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Plummer / Spatial Dependence in Entrepreneurship Research 173
References
Acs, Z. J., Audretsch, D. B., Braunerhjelm, P., & Carlsson, B. (2005). The knowledge spillover theory of entre-
preneurship. Unpublished Working Paper.
Acs, Z. J., & Plummer, L. A. (2005). Penetrating the ‘knowledge filter’ in regional economies. Annals of
Regional Science, 39, 439-456.
Acs, Z. J., Plummer, L. A., & Sutter, R. (in press). Penetrating the knowledge filter in ‘rust belt’ economies.
Annals of Regional DEMO
Almeida, P., & Kogut, B. (1997). The exploration of technological diversity and the geographic localization of
innovation. Small Business Economics, 9, 21-31.
Andersson, D. E. (2005). The spatial nature of entrepreneurship. Quarterly Journal of Austrian Economics, 8,
21-34.
Anselin, L. (1988). Spatial econometrics: Methods and models. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.
Anselin, L. (1995). Local indicators of spatial association - LISA. DEMO Analysis, 27, 93-115.
Anselin, L. (2001a). Rao’s score test in spatial econometrics. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 97,
113-139.
Anselin, L. (2001b). Spatial econometrics. In B. Baltagi (Ed.), A companion to theoretical econometrics
(pp. 310-330). Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell.
Anselin, L. (2002). Under the hood: Issues in the specification and interpretation of spatial regression models.
Agricultural Economics, 27, 247-267.
DEMO, L., & Bera, A. K. (1998). Spatial dependence in linear regression models with an introduction to spatial
econometrics. In A. Ullah & D. Giles (Eds.), Handbook of applied economic statistics (pp. 237-246). New
York: Marcel Dekker.
Anselin, L., Le Gallo, J., & Jayet, H. (2008). Spatial panel econometrics. In L. Matyas & P. Sevestre (Eds.),
The econometrics of panel data, fundamentals DEMO recent developments in theory and practice (3rd ed.,
pp. 625-660)DEMO Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Anselin, L., Syabri, I., & Kho, Y. (2006). GeoDa: An introduction to spatial data analysis. Geographical Anal-
ysis, 38, 5-22.
Anselin, L., Syabri, I., & Smirnov, O. (2002). Visualizing multivariate spatial correlation with dynamically
linked windows. Unpublished Working Paper.
Anselin, L., Varga, A., & Acs, Z. J. (1997). Local geographic spillovers between university research and high
technology innovations. Journal of Urban Economics, 42, 422-448.
Armington, C., & Acs, Z. J. (2002). The determinants of regional variation in new firm formation. Regional
Studies, 36, 33-45.
Atkinson, P. M. (DEMO). A method for describing quantitatively the information, redundancy and error DEMO digital
spatial data. In P. Fisher (Ed.), Innovation in GIS DEMO (pp. 85-96). Bristol, PA: Taylor and Francis, Inc.
Ballinger, G. A. (2004). Using generalized estimating equations for longitudinal data DEMO Organizational
Research Methods, 7, 127-150.
Barber, B. M., & Lyon, J. D. (1996). Detecting abnormal operating performance: The empirical power and
specification of test statistics. Journal of Financial Economics, 41, 359-399.
DEMO, V., & Lewis, T. (1994). Outliers in statistical data. Chichester, UK: John Wiley.
Beck, N., Gleditsch, K. S., & Beardsley, K. (2006). Space is more than geography: Using DEMO econometrics in
the study of political economy. International Studies Quarterly, 50, 27-44.
Belsley, D. A., Kuh, E., & Welsch, R. (DEMO). Regression diagnostics. New York: John Wiley.
Bhagat, S., & DEMO, R. (2002). The econometrics of corporate governance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bliese, P. D., & Hanges, P. J. (2004)DEMO Being both too liberal and too conservative: The perils of treating DEMO
data as though they were independent. Organizational Research Methods, 7, 400-417.
Cooper, A. C., & Folta, T. B. (2000). Entrepreneurship DEMO high-technology clusters. In D. L. Sexton &
H. Landstrom (Eds.), Handbook of entrepreneurship (pp. 348-367). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Darmofal, D. (2006). Spatial econometrics and political science. Paper presented at DEMO Southern Political Sci-
ence Association. Retrieved September 5, 2008, from http://polmeth.wustl.edu/retrieve.php?id¼575
Davidsson, P. (2004). Researching entrepreneurship. New DEMO: Springer.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on DEMO 3, 2009
174 Organizational Research Methods
Deeds, D. L., Decarolis, D., & DEMO, J. E. (1997). The impact of firm-specific capabilities on the amount of
capital raised in an initial public offering: Evidence from the biotechnology industry. Journal of Business
Venturing, 12, 31-46.
Doh, J. P., & Hahn, E. D. (2008). Using spatial methods in strategy research. Organizational Research Methods,
11, 659-681.
Dumais, G., Ellison, DEMO, & Glaeser, E. L. (2002). Geographic concentration as a DEMO process. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 84, 193-204.
Eckhardt, J. DEMO, & Shane, S. (2003). Opportunities and entrepreneurship. Journal of DEMO, 29, 333-349.
Fama, E. F., & French, K. (1995). Size and book-to-market factors in earnings and returns. Journal of Finance,DEMO
50, 131-155.
Gilbert, B. A., McDougall, P. P., & DEMO, D. B. (2008). Clusters, knowledge spillovers and new venture
DEMO: An empirical examination. Journal of Business Venturing, 23, 405-422.
Goddard, J. A., & Wilson, J. O. S. (1999). The persistence of profit: A new empirical interpretation. Interna-
tional Journal of Industrial Organization, 17, 663-687.
Goodchild, M. F., Anselin, L., Appelbaum, R. P., & Harthorn, B. H. (2000). Toward spatially integrated social
science. International Regional Science Review, 23, 139.
Haining, R. (1990)DEMO Spatial data analysis in the social and environmental sciences. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Heywood, I. (1998). Introduction to geographical information DEMO New York: Addison Wesley Longman.
Hitt, M. A., Gimeno, J., & Hoskisson, R. E. (1998). Current and future research methods in strategic manage-
ment. Organizational Research Methods, 1, 6-44.
Kennedy, P. (2003). A guide to econometrics. Cambride, MA: MIT Press.
Lacombe, D. J. (2004). Does econometric methodology matter? An analysis of public policy using spatial
econometric techniques. Geographical Analysis, 36, 105-118.
LeSage, J. P. (1999). Spatial econometrics. Retrieved July 31, 2005, from http://www.rri.wvu.edu/
regscweb.htm
LeSage, J. P., & Charles, J. (2008). Using home buyers’ revealed preferences to define the urban–rural fringe.
Journal of Geographical Systems, 10, 1-21.
Martin, R., & Sunley, P. (2003). Deconstructing clusters: Chaotic concept or policy panacea? Journal of
Economic Geography, 3, 5-35.
McCann, B. T., & Folta, T. B. (2008). Location matters: Where we have been and DEMO we might go in agglom-
eration research. Journal of Management, 34, 532-565.
McDougall, P. P., Deane, R. H., & D’Souza, D. E. (1992). Manufacturing strategy and business origin of new
venture firms in the computer and communications equipment industries. Production and Operations
Management, 1, 53-69.
Messner, S. F., Anselin, L., Baller, R. D., Hawkins, D. F., Deane, G., & Tolnay, S. E. (DEMO). The spatial pat-
terning of county homicide rates: An application DEMO exploratory spatial data analysis. Journal of Quantitative
Criminology, 15, 423-450.
Parker, S. C. (2004). The economics of self-employment and entrepreneurship. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Parker, S. C. (2008). Statistical issues in applied entrepreneurship: Data, methods and challenges. In
E. Congregado (Ed.), Measuring entrepreneurship (pp. 9-20). New York: Springer.
Pe’er, A., & Vertinsky, I. (2008). Firm exits as a determinant of new entry: Is there evidence of local creative
destruction? Journal of DEMO Venturing, 23, 280-306.
Pisati, M. (2001). Tools for spatial data analysis. Stata Technical Bulletin, STB-60, 21-37.
Rosenthal, S. S., & Strange, W. C. (2004). Evidence on the nature and sources of agglomeration economies. In
J. V. Henderson & J.-F. Thisse (Eds.), Handbook of urban and regional economics (Vol. 4, pp. 2119-2172).
DEMO York: North Holland.
Russell, C. J., & Dean, M. A. (2000). To log or not to log: Bootstrap as an DEMO to the parametric estima-
tion of moderation effects in the presence of skewed dependent variables. Organizational Research Methods,
3, 166-185.
Sarafoglou, N., & Paelinck, J. (2008). On diffusion of ideas in the DEMO world: The case of spatial econo-
metrics. Annals of Regional Science, 42, 487-500.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009
Plummer / Spatial Dependence in Entrepreneurship Research 175
Shane, S., & DEMO, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as a field of research. Academy of Man-
agement Review, 25, 217-226.
Sorenson, O., & Stuart, T. E. (2001). Syndication networks and the spatial distribution of venture capital invest-
ments. American Journal of Sociology, 106, 1546-1588.
DEMO, D., & Soule, S. A. (1998). Diffusion in organizations and social movements: From hybrid corn to poison
pills. Annual Review of Sociology, 24, 265-290.
Stuart, T., & Sorenson, O. (2003)DEMO The geography of opportunity: Spatial heterogeneity in founding rates and the
DEMO of biotechnology firms. Research Policy, 32, 229-253.
Tobler, W. R. (1970). A computer movie simulating urban growth in the Detroit region. DEMO Geography,
46, 234-240.
Varga, A. (1998). University research DEMO regional innovation: A spatial econometric analysis of academic
technology transfer. Boston: Kluwer.
Waring, G. F. (1996). Industry differences in the persistence DEMO firm-specific returns. American Economic
Review, 86, 1253-1265.
White, M. C., Tansey, R., Smith, M., & Long, R. G. (1998)DEMO Generalized linear models: Loglinear modeling in
managerial research. Organizational Research Methods, 1, 223-247.
Lawrence A. Plummer (PhD, University of Colorado at Boulder) is an assistant professor of strategy and entre-
preneurship at Clemson University and a management research fellow of the Max Planck Institute of Econom-
DEMO Dr. Plummer teaches annually at Florida State University’s Entrepreneurship Bootcamp for Veterans, a
program created by Syracuse University.
Downloaded from http://orm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on December 3, 2009{1g42fwefx}