Strategic Management Journal
Strat. Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (2011)
Published online EarlyView in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com) DOI: 10.1002/smj.968
BEHAVIORAL STRATEGY
THOMAS C. POWELL,1 * DAN LOVALLO,2 and CRAIG R. DEMO
1 Saıd Business School, University of Oxford and St. Hugh’s College, Oxford, U.K.¨
2 International Business, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
DEMO Anderson School of Management, University of California, Los Angeles, Los
DEMO, California, U.S.A.
Behavioral strategy merges cognitive and social psychology with strategic management theory
and practice. Despite much progress, the aims and boundaries of behavioral strategy remain
unclear. In this paper we deﬁne behavioral strategy and DEMO the main unsolved problems. We
propose a unifying conceptual framework for behavioral strategy and conclude by introducing
the papers of the Special Issue on DEMO Psychological Foundations of Strategic Management.
Copyright  2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
INTRODUCTION
Behavioral strategy applies cognitive and social
psychology to strategic management theory and
practice. It aims to strengthen the empirical in-
tegrity and DEMO usefulness of strategy theory
by grounding strategic management in realistic
assumptions about human cognition, emotion, and
social interaction.
Of course, this is not a new idea. Psychol-
ogy inﬂuenced the early development of business
policy DEMO strategy and continues to inﬂuence
strategic management through many streams of
research: behavioral decision research (Kahneman
Keywords: behavioral strategy; psychology; cognition;
judgment; decision making
*Correspondence to: Thomas C. Powell, University of Oxford,
Said Business School, Park End Street, Oxford OX1 1HP U.K.
DEMO: thomas.powell@sbs.ox.ac.uk
and Lovallo, 1993; Schwenk, 1984; Moore, Oesch,
and Zietsma, 2007); the behavioral theory of the
ﬁrm (Cyert DEMO March, 1963; Bromiley, 2005;
Gavetti, Levinthal, and Ocasio, 2007); cognitive
schema, maps, sensemaking, and cognitive rivalry
(Porac DEMO Thomas, 1990; Reger and Huff, 1993;
Lant and Baum, 1995; Weick, 1995); and top-
ics such as escalation (Staw, 1981), aspirations
(Greve, 1998), attribution (Salancik and Meindl,DEMO
1984), attention (Ocasio, 1997), emotions (Nick-
erson and DEMO, 2008), CEO pathology (Kets de
Vries and Miller, 1984), hubris (Bollaert and Petit,
2010), and top management teams (Hambrick and
Mason, 1984). Papers on dominant logic (Praha-
lad DEMO Bettis, 1986) and the myopia of learning
(Levinthal and March, 1993) received the SMJ
Best Paper Prize.
We believe the time has come for new begin-
nings in behavioral strategy, for three reasons.
First, strategic management has not kept pace with
Copyright  2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
1370
T. C. Powell, D. Lovallo, and C. R. Fox
behavioral DEMO in economics and ﬁnance.
This is surprising, since strategy research has DEMO
inhibiting assumptions about decision rationality.
Nonetheless, behavioral economics and behavioral
ﬁnance DEMO led the way in generating new ideas
and research methods and in building intellec-
tual bridges with psychology and neuroscience.
We believe behavioral strategy DEMO do the same
in strategic management.
Second, strategic management theory lacks DEMO
quate psychological grounding. Strategy theory has
converged on a view that the crucial problem in
strategic management is ﬁrm heterogeneity—why
ﬁrms adopt different strategies DEMO structures,
why heterogeneity persists, and why competitors
perform differently. Given DEMO aims, existing
theories are surprisingly parochial, explaining het-
erogeneity as Bainian market power protected by
monopoly barriers, Penrosian resource advantages
protected by factor scarcity, and Schumpeterian
innovation driven by entrepreneurship and tech-
nology. These are the three pillars of strategic
management theory.1
Do these theories really explain DEMO hetero-
geneity? Recent performance shocks of compa-
nies like Lehman Brothers, Bear Stearns, and BP,
and failed mergers such as AOL/Time-Warner and
HP/Compaq, evidently do not stem from monopoly
rents, factor DEMO, or entrepreneurship. The
facts overwhelmingly implicate poor executive
judgment, or larger macro-cultures of poor judg-
ment. Conversely, sound executive judgment, and
contextual DEMO that promote sound judg-
ment, can enhance ﬁrm performance. Until strategy
DEMO builds stronger foundations in psychology,
it will struggle to explain the facts of ﬁrm perfor-
mance. To achieve empirical ﬁdelity, we believe
the ﬁeld needs a robust subﬁeld of behavioral
strategy to serve as the DEMO pillar of strategic
management theory.
Third, recent developments provide new oppor-
DEMO for merging psychology and strategy.
Advances in cognitive neuroscience make it pos-
sible to examine brain activity in strategic deci-
sions, and these technologies have spread quickly
in economics, politics, marketing, and other social
sciences. In experimental psychology, researchers
are increasingly turning to multimethod research
1 This is not to minimize other key inﬂuences, such as institu-
tional theories (Meyer and Rowan, 1977; Oliver, 1997) and the
bargaining view (Lippman and Rumelt, 2003).
Copyright  2011 John Wiley & DEMO, Ltd.
designs, for example combining mathematical
modelling, simulation, behavioral experiments,
ﬁeld interviews, and brain scans to gain multi-
ple perspectives on the same phenomenon. These
developments are nascent, but as strategic manage-
ment matures as a ﬁeld, psychology offers a rich
source of insights in theory and method.
Behavioral strategy has the luxury of building
on past DEMO in cognition, behavioral deci-
sion theory, organizational behavior, and strategy.
DEMO much work remains to be done. Behavioral
strategy is a patchwork of theories and ﬁndings,
and cognitive psychology has not captured the
hearts DEMO minds of strategy researchers. In busi-
ness schools, strategy departments routinely DEMO
economists and sociologists, but seldom psychol-
ogists. Indeed, despite a large volume of output,
experimental psychology has done little to address
the DEMO of strategy theory and practice. Many
strategy researchers regard the core unit of analy-
sis in strategy as the ﬁrm or business unit rather
DEMO the individual, and there is skepticism about
the scaling of psychological DEMO to ﬁrms and
industries. Strategy practitioners are, if anything,
more DEMO than researchers, doubting whether
the ﬁeld can go beyond cognitive biases DEMO pro-
duce useful frameworks that integrate psychology
and strategy practice.
To some degree, the problem comes down to
inadequate paradigm development in behavioral
strategy. The term ‘behavioral strategy’ is not
widely used and means different things DEMO differ-
ent people. Behavioral strategy does not have an
agreed statement of purpose, deﬁnition of bound-
aries, conceptual framework, core research prob-
lems, methodological standards, communities of
scholarship, or supporting institutions (such as DEMO
interest group in the Strategic Management Soci-
ety). Despite more than 30 years of research, the
output as a whole lacks integration and is too
detached from central concerns in the ﬁeld. A
recent review DEMO interdisciplinary inﬂuences on
strategic management included economics, soci-
ology, and marketing, but not psychology (Nag,
Hambrick, and Chen, 2007). DEMO Mintzberg,
Ahlstrand, and Lampel’s (1998: 172) review of
the ‘cognitive school’ of strategy: ‘this school is
characterized more by its potential than by its con-
tributions. The central idea is valid...but strate-
gic DEMO has yet to gain sufﬁciently from
cognitive psychology. Or, perhaps more DEMO
rately, cognitive psychology has yet to address
Strat. Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (2011)
DOI: 10.1002/smj
Special Issue Introduction
1371
adequately the questions of prime interest to strate-
DEMO management.’
On the positive side, there are signs that strat-
egy DEMO recognize these problems. Symposia
in behavioral strategy have become a mainstay in
recent Academy of Management meetings, sup-
ported by the Academy’s Management and
Organizational Cognition Division and with in-
creasing submissions and attendance. Journal edi-
DEMO report an increasing number of submissions
linking strategy and psychology, and DEMO are
being published. The SMJ Special Issue on the
Psychological Foundations of Strategic Manage-
ment received an unprecedented number of sub-
missions, and the range and quality of the papers
were impressive. On the whole, there are reasons
for optimism in behavioral strategy.
The remainder of this paper DEMO, in broad
outline, a vision for the future of behavioral strat-
egy. The next section deﬁnes the ﬁeld, gives a
typology of existing research, and proposes four
core research problems in behavioral strategy. The
subsequent section presents an integrated concep-
tual view of the ﬁeld, and the concluding section
introduces the papers in the Special Issue. We do
not DEMO to have all the answers, but we are
convinced that behavioral DEMO has much to
contribute to strategic management and that schol-
ars can take positive steps to make it happen.
DEFINING BEHAVIORAL STRATEGY
We deﬁne DEMO strategy as follows:
Behavioral strategy merges cognitive and
social psychology with strategic management
theory and practice. Behavioral strategy aims
to bring realistic assumptions DEMO human
cognition, emotions, and social behavior to
the strategic management of organizations
and, thereby, to enrich strategy theory, empir-
ical research, DEMO real-world practice.
This deﬁnition is based on two assumptions.
First, we DEMO that behavioral strategy needs
theoretical grounding in cognitive and social psy-
chology. The deﬁnition allows many research top-
ics and methods, but we intend it to exclude
work that lacks rigorous theoretical grounding
in psychology. At DEMO same time, we intend it
Copyright  2011 John Wiley & DEMO, Ltd.
to encourage a wide range of psychology per-
spectives, and our deﬁnition of ‘cognitive and
social psychology’ is probably broader than most;DEMO
for example, we do not exclude nonexperimental
methods, and we believe that behavioral strategy is
best supported by multiple methods and measures.
Second, we assume that the crucial problem
in behavioral strategy is not a DEMO of good
research, but a lack of conceptual unity. The
ﬁeld DEMO not need more psychology research per
se, but more integration of DEMO psychol-
ogy into strategic management theory. We do not
promote psychology for its own sake, but for
achieving two speciﬁc aims—bringing strategy
theory closer to the empirical facts and integrating
strategy research with strategy practice.
With DEMO caveats in mind, our deﬁnition em-
braces topics in the existing DEMO of behavioral
strategy (such as decision biases and cognitive
schema), DEMO encouraging innovations that go
beyond the status quo (which we will DEMO).
Research methodologies may include experiments,
mathematical modelling, simulations, brain imag-
ing, ﬁeld studies, ethnography, and textual anal-
ysis, always DEMO a preference for multimethod
studies. We believe methodological diversity will
prove essential for improving our understanding of
individual and social behavior in organizations.
Behavioral DEMO encompasses a mind-
boggling diversity of topics and methods. As
shown in previous reviews, conceptual unity has
been hard to achieve and the domain of possi-
ble research is, to say the least, varied (see, for
example, Hodgkinson and Healey, 2008; Hodgkin-
son, 2008; DEMO, 1995; Eisenhardt and Zbaracki,
1992).
On the other hand, the diversity of behavioral
strategy research mirrors, to a large degree, actual
diversity in the empirical domain. This is shown
more clearly in DEMO 1, which categorizes existing
research into three schools of thought, which we
call the Reductionist, Pluralist, and Contextualist
schools (see Tetlock, DEMO, 2000).
Reductionist research relies on positivist, real-
ist, and DEMO philosophies of science and
favors quantitative hypothesis testing using meth-
ods such as mathematical modelling, simulation,
and laboratory decision experiments. The Reduc-
tionist school is inﬂuenced by theoretical work
in behavioral decision research (Edwards, DEMO,
1961; Tversky and Kahneman, 1974; Kahneman
and Tversky, 1979; Nisbett and Ross, 1980) and
Strat. Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (2011)
DOI: 10.1002/smj
1372
T. C. Powell, D. Lovallo, and C. R. Fox
Table DEMO Three schools of behavioral strategy
REDUCTIONIST PLURALIST CONTEXTUALIST
Philosophical foundations
Core processes of interest
Key psychological
concepts
Methodologies
Assumptions about ﬁrms
Contributions to strategic
DEMO
Some contributors past
and present
Positivism, objectivism,
materialism, scientiﬁc
realism,
veriﬁcationism
Individual decision
making, intragroup
decision making
Bounded rationality,
prospect theory,
heuristics and biases,
dynamic inconsistency
Hypothesis testing,
decision DEMO,
simulation,
mathematical and
computational
modelling, neural
methods
Firms’ decisions DEMO
made by top
executives,
entrepreneurs, and top
management teams;
DEMO are subject
to cognitive biases
Cognitive biases in
strategic decisions
(e.g., competitive
blind spots,
competition neglect,
winner’s curse, hubris,
escalation of
commitment);
dynamic inconsistency
Selten, Edwards, Simon,
Von Neumann-
Morgenstern,
Luce-Raiffa,
Tversky-Kahneman,
Schelling, Akerlof,
Smith, Thaler-Shefrin,DEMO
Elster, Bazerman,
Loewenstein, Camerer,
Hogarth, Nisbett-Ross,
Moore, Fox, Lovallo
Nominalism,
pragmatism,
evolutionism
Intergroup bargaining,
problem solving,
politics, conﬂict
resolution,
organizational
learning, resource
allocation
Reference groups, social
cognition, social
identity theory,
self-categorization
Field studies, event
studies, multivariate
statistics, cases, mixed
methods
Firms consist of
subgroups with
conﬂicting DEMO and
perspectives; ﬁrms
resolve strategy
problems via conﬂict
resolution and
intergroup DEMO
Behavioral theory of the
ﬁrm, group
identiﬁcation,
aspirations,
maladaptive DEMO,
organizational
neuroses
March, Cyert, Simon,
Lawrence-Lorsch,
Tajfel, DEMO,
Fiske-Taylor, Bower,
Miller, Kets de Vries,
Hambrick, DEMO,
Denrell, Bromiley,
Rumelt, Winter,
Feigenbaum-Hart-
Schendel
Phenomenology,
existentialism, critical
theory,
postmodernism,
symbolic
interactionism,
contextualism, social
DEMO of reality
Sensemaking, perception,
enactment, action
generation
Cognitive schema,
language, meaning,
signs, ideology, action
rationality, culture
Interpretive histories,DEMO
ethnography, grounded
theorizing,
hermeneutics, textual
analysis, discourse
analysis, semiotics,
cases
Firms and environments
are socially
constructed; ﬁrms are
ideological; DEMO
and actions are
decoupled; actions are
emergent, externally
inﬂuenced
Action rationality,
cognitive schema,
cognitive maps,
cognitive rivalry,
dominant logic,DEMO
sensemaking,
misperception,
enactment,
mindfulness, critical
theory
Weick, Starbuck,
Pettigrew, Brunsson,
March, Staw,
Smircich, Hardy,
Mintzberg, Thomas,
Van Maanan,
Abrahamson, Reger,
Huff, Fiol, DEMO,
Dutton, Mezias, Lant,
Milliken, Hodgkinson,
Thomas, Bettis,
Mitroff
Copyright  2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Strat. Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (2011)
DOI: 10.1002/smj
Special Issue Introduction
1373
Table 1. (Continued )
Linkages to traditional
DEMO of psychology
Historical inﬂuences in
psychology and social
science
Historical inﬂuences in
ontology and
epistemology
REDUCTIONIST PLURALIST CONTEXTUALIST
Structuralism,
behaviorism, cognitive
psychology,
experimental social
psychology,
neuroscience
Wundt, Titchener,
Pavlov, Ebbinghaus,
DEMO, Thorndike,
Tolman, Skinner, F.
Allport, Neisser
Aristotle, Bacon, Comte,
Carnap, Nagel, Vienna
Circle, Popper, Ayer,
early DEMO
Functionalism,
functionalist social
psychology,
gestaltism,
evolutionary
psychology
James, DEMO, Dewey,
Darwin, Mead,
Wertheimer, Koffka,
Kohler, Merton,
Lewin, Asch, Heider,
Festinger
Plato, Berkeley, Hume,
DEMO, Mach, James,
Dewey
Existentialism,
humanism, critical
schools, feminist
psychology,
postmodern
psychology
Merleau-Ponty, Blumer,
Glazer-Strauss,
Giddens,
Berger-Luckmann,
Fromm
Hegel, Kierkegaard,
Brentano, Husserl,
Schutz, Peirce, DEMO,
Horkheimer, Adorno,
later Wittgenstein,
Rorty, Foucault
has made important contributions in strategic deci-
sion making, cognitive biases, risk perception,DEMO
and intertemporal choice. Examples of the Reduc-
tionist inﬂuence in strategy include Duhaime and
Schwenk (1985) on cognitive errors in acquisi-
tion and DEMO, Camerer and Lovallo (1999)
on overconﬁdence and market entry, DEMO and
Shapira (1987) on managerial risk preferences, and
Bromiley (2009) on prospect theory and resource
allocation. Much of the recent progress in behav-
ioral game theory and neuroeconomics derives
from Reductionist assumptions (Camerer, DEMO;
Camerer, Loewenstein, and Prelec, 2005).
Pluralist research is DEMO named because it draws
on multiple theoretical traditions and uses meth-
ods ranging from case studies and simulations to
large sample ﬁeld research. The DEMO school
is grounded in positivist, nominalist, pragmatist,
or evolutionary philosophies of science. Pluralist
research is less concerned with individual decision
making than DEMO the overall decision environ-
ment of the ﬁrm. Combining behavioral decision
theory with political theory (March, 1962; Wil-
davsky, 1972), organization DEMO (March and
Simon, 1958), and social cognition psychology
(Fiske DEMO Taylor, 2008; Bandura, 1977; Fes-
tinger, 1954), Pluralist DEMO studies the con-
sequences of bounded rationality, group conﬂict,
learning, and executive decision making in organi-
zations. Examples of Pluralist inﬂuence in DEMO
include Cohen and Levinthal (1990) on absorptive
Copyright  2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
capacity, Fiol (1991) on organization culture DEMO
identity, Terry and Callan (1998) on ingroup bias
and merger, and Fiegenbaum, Hart, and Schendel
(1996) on strategic reference groups.
DEMO Contextualist school is grounded in phe-
nomenological, constructivist, and critical philoso-
phies of science. Contextualist research is
concerned with management perception, sense-
making, cognitive schema, language, meaning, and
enacted environments. The school is DEMO
in emphasizing the primacy of context—claiming,
for example, that the DEMO between a sea-
soned executive in the boardroom and a subject
playing an ultimatum game in a lab experiment is
ontologically large. As such, Contextualists con-
duct empirical work ‘in context,’ favoring qualita-
tive and DEMO methods such as ethnography
and textual analysis and rejecting positivism and
quantitative hypothesis testing. In the Contextu-
alist view, subjective beliefs, shared ideologies,DEMO
and cognitive frames matter more than explicit
ex ante decisions, which DEMO correspond with
what people or ﬁrms actually do. Examples of the
Contextualist inﬂuence in strategy include Bougon,
Weick, and Binkhorst (1977) on cognition in a jazz
orchestra, Brunsson (1982) on ideology and action
rationality, Starbuck and Milliken (1988a) on the
Challenger disaster, and DEMO, Maule, and
Bown (2004) on cognitive mapping.
The three schools give only a rough picture
of research in behavioral strategy. The schools
DEMO Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (2011)
DOI: 10.1002/smj
1374
T. C. Powell, D. Lovallo, and C. R. Fox
are DEMO as clearly bounded as the table suggests,
and hybrid approaches shade into one another by
degrees. Some researchers operate in more than
one DEMO, which is not surprising—the typology
categorizes outputs rather than people, and many
researchers work from multiple points of view.
Table 1 brings the DEMO heterogeneity of
behavioral strategy into sharp relief. There is lit-
tle agreement, even on issues as fundamental as
the unit of analysis, with DEMO focus-
ing on individual judgments and decision making,
Pluralists on organizationally situated managers
or groups, and Contextualists on cognitive maps,
schema, DEMO management perceptions. All too
often, researchers in different schools study sim-
DEMO problems with minimal concern for cross-
fertilization or knowledge accumulation. In the
end, researchers have produced an impressive vol-
ume of output, much DEMO it very insightful, but
with little or no collective synergy. As DEMO whole,
the enterprise resembles a growth-driven conglom-
erate more than a focused, competence-driven
corporation.
Many scholars believe that behavioral strat-
egy could achieve greater synergies by redeﬁn-
ing its boundaries—for example, by focusing on
one of the three schools of behavioral strategy.
The preferred candidate is often DEMO Reductionist
school, following the examples of economics and
ﬁnance. According to DEMO view, a tightly deﬁned
ﬁeld of behavioral strategy, focused on measure-
ment, experiment, and hypothesis testing, with new
extensions into cognitive neuroscience, offers the
best chance of paradigmatic unity and cumulative
progress.
The Reductionist school will play a major role in
the future of behavioral strategy. DEMO, we do
not advocate restricting behavioral strategy to one
school of DEMO The diversity in Table 1 is not
an aberration but an inherent feature of psychology
and the empirical domain of strategic management.
The Reductionist DEMO cannot cover the problem
space of behavioral strategy, and none of DEMO three
schools has a monopoly on truth. Strategic out-
comes stem from individuals, groups, and organi-
zations interacting in uncertain environments. We
believe DEMO is the only reasonable option and
that leveraging and integrating the three schools of
thought should become the ﬁrst priority of behav-
ioral strategy.
DEMO how can behavioral strategy move toward
intellectual unity? Instead of restricting DEMO toolkit
Copyright  2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
of theories DEMO methods, we believe that behavioral
strategy should apply all of its DEMO to a smaller
number of core research problems. The unsystem-
atic approach of the past has left many opportuni-
ties neglected and gaps to DEMO ﬁlled. Collectively,
the ﬁeld has been ineffective in using psychol-
ogy to build strategy theory or link theory with
practice.
The remainder of DEMO section identiﬁes four
core research problems in behavioral strategy. The
problems span all three schools of behavioral strat-
egy and need contributions from each. DEMO applying
their respective strengths to the core problems and
by ﬁnding imaginative ways to interact and collab-
orate, we believe the Reductionist, Pluralist, and
Contextualist schools can work synergistically to
accumulate theoretical and applied knowledge.
DEMO DOES INDIVIDUAL COGNITION
SCALE TO COLLECTIVE BEHAVIOR?
Cognitive psychology focuses on mental processes
within an individual, whereas strategic manage-
ment has traditionally focused on the ﬁrm, business
unit, or corporation. We believe the perceived DEMO
between individual cognition and collective strat-
egy has done more to impede behavioral strategy
than any other problem.
Decision researchers often assume the strategic
DEMO of ﬁrms reﬂect choices by a CEO or top
management team. This assumption may indeed
hold if the ﬁrm is small, entrepreneurial, autocratic,DEMO
or family owned or if the decision falls outside
annual planning processes (Lovallo and Sibony,
2010). But research in behavioral strategy must
avoid the trap of making simplistic assumptions
about mental scaling—for example, assuming that
a ﬁrm or corporation has the psychology of an indi-
vidual, that one person chooses for the collective,
that the ﬁrm’s actions DEMO to a person’s
decisions, or that many individual choices sum to
DEMO collective choice.
Behavioral strategy has a long way to go in
linking individual psychology with organizational
strategies. One of the distinctive features of strate-
DEMO management is its emphasis on collective
behavior, and behavioral strategy must DEMO
the psychological or social mechanisms by which
mental processes affect organizations. Researchers’
scaling assumptions can and should be made
explicit (Elster, 1982; Ostrom, 1997) and in
Strat. Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (2011)
DOI: 10.1002/smj
Special Issue Introduction
1375
behavioral strategy, the whole question is how
particular forms of behavior arise in and among
organizations. If we do not DEMO the mechanism,
we do not explain the phenomenon.
The problem of aggregation is not unique to
behavioral strategy. Behavioral economists since
at least DEMO (1978) have studied relation-
ships between individual choices and collective
outcomes. Fehr and Tyran (2005) argued that the
mode of aggregation depends DEMO market con-
ditions—in particular, whether ‘strategic substi-
tutability’ or ‘strategic complementarity’ DEMO
aggregate outcomes. Substitutability obtains when
the presence of a few rational decision makers
is enough to produce collective rationality; com-
plementarity obtains when a small number of
irrational decision makers can skew collective out-
comes. For DEMO, Firm A’s decision to increase
output may inﬂuence Firm B not DEMO build a new
plant (substitutability), whereas Firm A’s decision
to DEMO price may cause Firm B to cut price even
more (complementarity)DEMO As Fehr and Tyran (2005:
43) note, ‘there is DEMO general reason to believe that
markets automatically render individual decisions
more rational over time.’
In behavioral ﬁnance, researchers have studied
how noise traders affect market outcomes. In the
model proposed by DeLong et al. (1991), it is pos-
sible for irrational traders to earn higher returns
than DEMO investors and dominate the market
in the long run. Barber, Heath, and Odean (2003)
compared the investment strategies of individuals
and groups (stock clubs). They found that groups,
to a greater extent than individuals, try to justify
their stock choices with defensible reasons. Groups
do this even when their choices contradict sound
investment policy—for example, justifying popu-
lar growth stocks over lesser-known value stocks.
In this context, cognitive scaling stems less from
‘complementarity’ (increasing returns to individ-
ual irrationality) DEMO from the social psychology
of group membership: ‘in situations where people
DEMO exchange reasons to convince others...the
process we document may yield alternatives that
have notable disadvantages but that happen to
come attached to a good DEMO (DeLong et al.,
1991: 1651).
In social psychology and behavioral decision
theory, researchers have dealt in various ways
with the aggregation of mental processes, some
of which offer insights to behavioral strategy.
This includes research on groupthink (Janis, 1972),
Copyright  2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
group polarization (Isenberg, 1986), common
information sampling bias (Stasser and Titus,
1985), social facilitation (Zajonc, 1965), social
loaﬁng (Latane, Williams, and Harkins, 1979),
and transactive memory systems, through which
groups collectively encode, store, and retrieve
knowledge (Wegner, 1987).
The problem of scaling has also DEMO addressed
in management science and organization theory.
From Reductionist assumptions, Marschak (1955)
proposed a mathematical model of team pro-
duction. From Contextualist DEMO, Harris
(1994) examined how organizations, groups, and
cultures are DEMO in the cognitive schema of
individuals. From a Pluralist perspective, Freeman
(1999) surveyed aggregation issues arising from
transaction cost and agency theories. Freeman’s
(1999: 175) conclusions about organizational psy-
chology also apply to behavioral strategy: ‘if
organizational psychology is simply psychology
applied to people who happen to be located in
organizations, then it is hard to see why a sepa-
rate ﬁeld is needed...(A) way out of the box is to
posit a true social psychology of organizations: a
theory of aggregation that explains how individu-
als combine their behaviors to produce collective
DEMO
Freeman (1999) did not propose a ‘way out
of the box,’ but he recommended as a starting
point the organization theories of DEMO, March,
Simon, and colleagues at Carnegie. The behav-
ioral theory of the ﬁrm views organizations as
comprised of differentiated subunits with conﬂict-
DEMO goals, resources, and time horizons (Cyert
and March, 1963). In the Carnegie view, orga-
nizational strategy is largely a political process,
involving coalition building, bargaining, and con-
ﬂict resolution among representatives DEMO differen-
tiated subunits (see also Lawrence and Lorsch,
1967; Bower, 1970; Miles and Snow, 1978). The
CEO must orchestrate an organization-wide polit-
ical process, and subunit managers face what
Blake (1959) called the ‘crisis of statesmanship,’
in which they try to reconcile DEMO priorities
with personal goals and political status with peers
and constituents.
We agree with Freeman that the Carnegie model
offers a solid foundation for DEMO individual
psychology with organizational strategy (see also
Bromiley, 2005; Argote DEMO Greve, 2007). The
model’s emphasis on bargaining and political pro-
DEMO allows researchers to deploy a range of
Strat. Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (2011)
DOI: 10.1002/smj
1376 T. C. Powell, D. Lovallo, and C. R. Fox
ideas DEMO social cognition and group identiﬁcation,
including self-categorization, conformity, obedi-
ence, status, reputation, accountability, trust, social
learning, and reference groups (Fiske and Tay-
lor, 2008; Bandura, 1977; Tajfel, 1978; DEMO,
1975; Festinger, 1954). The psychology of iden-
tiﬁcation, DEMO research on social identity in par-
ticular, offers many avenues for DEMO the gap
between individual cognition and organizational
strategy (Haslam, 2004; DEMO and Mael, 1989;
Hogg and Terry, 2000; Dutton, Dukerich, and Har-
quail, 1994; Huber and Lewis, 2010). For DEMO
ple, Terry and Callan (1998) used social identity
theory to DEMO out-group bias in a hospital
merger; Rumelt (1995) proposed a DEMO linking
psychology and organizational inertia through sub-
unit conﬂict resolution; and DEMO and Reger
(2010) combined identity theory with awareness-
motivation-capability (AMC) theory to explore
competitive interactions (see also Huy, 2011).
The DEMO problem is far from solved, and it is
often improperly framed. DEMO Freeman (1999) sug-
gested, the question is not about scaling DEMO aggre-
gation per se, which assume a kind of adding up
DEMO individual cognition. Rather the question is how
we integrate individual and collective psychology
in organizations to produce a social psychology
of behavioral strategy. The DEMO theory of
the ﬁrm is a good starting point, and Reduction-
DEMO and Contextualist approaches (including social
neuroscience) can add texture and insight to the
Carnegie view. To deal effectively with the prob-
lem, the ﬁeld needs contributions from all three
schools of behavioral strategy.
WHAT ARE DEMO PSYCHOLOGICAL
UNDERPINNINGS OF STRATEGIC
MANAGEMENT THEORY?
In 2008, a proposal DEMO an Academy of Manage-
ment symposium on behavioral strategy began:
‘Strategy is concerned with ﬁnding proﬁt
opportunities. In teaching as well as practice,DEMO
the implicit assumption is that not all oppor-
tunities have been exploited. Rather, there is
money left on the table. We argue that an
appropriate theoretical foundation for strat-
egy should start with the assumption that
DEMO are arbitrage opportunities...The pur-
pose of this symposium is to bring together
Copyright  2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
researchers from strategy, DEMO ﬁnance,
and behavioral decision theory/economics to
examine the issue of market efﬁciency and
strategy. The idea is not to review research
on DEMO and irrationality. Rather, the ambi-
tion is to ﬂesh out a DEMO agenda for
‘behavioral strategy.” (Winter et al., 2008)
The proposal then identiﬁed ﬁve research ques-
tions in behavioral strategy:
When and DEMO are resources and input factors
undervalued?
When and why can arbitrage opportunities exist
in factor and product markets?
What are the limits DEMO arbitrage in factor and
product markets?
What are the implications for strategy?
Is a normative theory of strategy possible?
These questions DEMO not, in our opinion, consti-
tute the whole of behavioral strategy. However,
they raise important issues in strategic manage-
ment research, some of which can be addressed
through a closer alignment of psychology and
DEMO
Denrell, Fang, and Winter (2003) argue that
strategy theories rely too much on theories of
market efﬁciency and equilibrium. If market par-
DEMO acted optimally on information about
resources and market positions, ﬁrms could DEMO
improve performance by following systematic
rules. In strategy theory, there are DEMO rules for
riches;’ if such a rule existed, other ﬁrms DEMO
follow it and compete away its value (Barney,
1986). DEMO, managers do take actions that
improve ﬁrm performance, and not all of these
actions can be ascribed to luck. According to Den-
rell DEMO al. (2003: 978), ‘the discovery of a valuable
strategic opportunity is often a matter of ‘serendip-
ity’ in the strict sense—not just DEMO, but effort and
luck joined by alertness and ﬂexibility. To appre-
DEMO these points it is necessary to break out of
the equilibrium mindset that dominates so much
of economic theory.’
It is possible that ﬁrms DEMO from each other
for precisely the reasons emphasized in strategy
theory, DEMO as resource scarcity, mobility bar-
riers, causal ambiguity, and uncertain DEMO
ity. However, this assumes market participants
are paying attention to markets DEMO acting on
what they know. An alternative hypothesis is that
Strat. Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (2011)
DOI: 10.1002/smj
•
•
DEMO
•
•
ﬁrms generally fail to capture their opportunities,
solve their problems, or imitate imitable resources
(Powell, 2004). This could happen, for example,
if decision makers are subject to self-conﬁrming
beliefs (Ryall, 2003), overoptimism in strategic
forecasting (Lovallo and Kahneman, 2003), com-
petitive blind spots (Zajac and Bazerman, 1991),
self-interested causal attributions (DEMO, Lovallo,
and Caringal, 2006), disordered learning processes
(Denrell, 2008), institutional conformity (Abra-
hamson, 1991), unwillingness to imitate (Jonsson
and Regner, 2009), or perceptual ﬁltering (Star-
buck and DEMO, 1988b). Suboptimal behavior
could also emerge from emotions such as DEMO,
prejudice, anger, hubris, and impulsivity (Elfen-
bein, 2007; Rafaeli and Sutton 1989; Postrel and
Rumelt, 1992), which can DEMO or improve
performance (Staw and Barsade, 1993; Huy, 1999;
Pfeffer and Sutton, 1999; Howard, 1993). Even
large ﬁrms might behave erratically due to poor
executive judgment, as we observe. Under any
such conditions, some market participants would
ﬁnd opportunities to adopt strategies that improve
ﬁrm performance. As Bromiley and Papenhausen
(2003: 432) point out, ‘the entire ‘no rules for
riches’ story...collapses if we have rules that could
improve performance. This would arise when some
ﬁrms either do not DEMO the rules exist or do not
act on them.’
Studies show that actual distributions of ﬁrm
proﬁtability are consistent with generating pro-
cesses that DEMO a great deal of randomness
(Levinthal, 1991; Powell, 2003; DEMO, 2004),
and some forms of competitive behavior derive
from the inherent uncertainty or randomness of
markets (Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2001; Lipp-
man and Rumelt, 1982). For example, corporate
success induces self-serving DEMO, and exec-
utives are likely to attribute success to their own
DEMO, even when success is due to excessive
risk taking or luck (Salancik and Meindl, 1984). If
executive decisions are informed by false or over-
conﬁdent attributions, some market participants
may ﬁnd it possible to exploit market opportunities
(Denrell and Fang, 2010).
We agree with DEMO who argue that strate-
gic management theory needs deep reformulation
along behavioral lines. The assumption that ﬁrm
heterogeneity stems from economic barriers does
not DEMO with what we know about human cog-
nition, emotions, learning, DEMO interactions, and
institutions. Until theories of ﬁrm heterogeneity
Copyright  2011 DEMO Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Special Issue Introduction
fully incorporate psychology, the empirical facts
will continue to frustrate our attempts to explain
them, and researchers will ﬁnd it impossible to
integrate theory with strategy practice.
CAN DEMO STRATEGY
EXPLAIN COMPLEX EXECUTIVE
JUDGMENTS?
Research in behavioral decision theory (DEMO)
shows that individuals lack the cognitive capac-
ity to make fully informed and unbiased decisions
in complex environments (Kahneman, Slovic, and
Tversky, 1982; Payne, Bettman, and Johnson,
1988). To cope DEMO complex judgments and deci-
sions, people use simplifying heuristics that are
DEMO to systematic biases. Decision makers do not
maximize the subjective expected utility of total
wealth, but focus on deviations from cognitive ref-
erence points. BDT has found many applications
in the social sciences, including strategic manage-
ment (Bazerman and Moore, 2008).
BDT has not yet realized DEMO full potential in
strategic management (Hodgkinson and Sparrow,
2002). DEMO does not link seamlessly with strategy
theory and it has not made large impacts on
strategy practice. The decision context of strate-
gic management DEMO organizationally situ-
ated managers, widespread uncertainty, and poorly
deﬁned problems with unknowable social and eco-
nomic consequences. In the circumstances, we
believe strategy research should increase its
emphasis on executive judgment in the actual con-
DEMO of high-stakes, complex problem solving in
organizations.
Management scholars have always DEMO
the complexity of strategic problem solving in
organizations. Peter Drucker (1974) viewed execu-
tive work as a practice, not unlike problem solving
in medicine, architecture, military affairs, and for-
eign policy. He wrote that ‘decision making is not
a mechanical job. It is risk-taking and a DEMO
to judgment. The ‘right answer’ (which usually
cannot be found anyway) is not central. Central
is understanding of the problem. Decision making,
DEMO, is not an intellectual exercise. It mobilizes
the vision, energies and resources of the organiza-
tion for effective action’ (Drucker, 1974: 480).
Herbert Simon (1987) distinguished two kinds
of organizational decisions: logical and judgmen-
tal. Simon cited Chester Barnard, who deﬁned
Strat. Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (2011)
DOI: 10.1002/smj
1377
1378
T. C. Powell, D. Lovallo, and C. R. Fox
‘logical’ DEMO as those involving ‘conscious
thinking which could be expressed in words or
by other symbols,’ whereas judgmental decisions,
which Barnard called ‘non-logical,DEMO were those
‘not capable of being expressed in words or as
reasoning, which are only made known by judg-
ment, decision or action’ (Simon, 1987: 57). Going
further, Barnard (1938: 302) DEMO: ‘the sources
of these non-logical processes lie in physiologi-
cal conditions DEMO factors, or in the physical and
social environment, mostly impressed upon us
unconsciously...They also consist of the mass of
facts, patterns, concepts, techniques, abstractions,
and generally what we call formal knowledge or
beliefs, which are impressed upon our minds more
or less by conscious effort and study.’
Simon (1987) linked judgment to expert intu-
ition, drawing analogies to expert computer sys-
tems and pattern recognition in chess and DEMO
But Simon (1987) recognized that executive judg-
ment in organizations involves more than pro-
grammable or expert intuition. Exactly what it
does involve DEMO unclear then and remains unclear
today. After reviewing two studies on executive
judgment, Simon (1987: 61) concluded that ‘these
two pieces of DEMO are just drops of water in
a large bucket that needs ﬁlling. The description,
in detail, of the use of judgmental and analytical
processes in expert problem solving and decision
making deserves a high priority DEMO the agenda of
management research.’
Complex judgments have indeed received atten-
tion in decision research—for example, Janis and
Mann (1977) developed a descriptive theory of
conﬂict in complex policy decisions, and Klein
(1998) has described intuition and judgment in a
variety of applied contexts (see also Kahneman and
Klein, 2009). Judgment has also been addressed in
strategic management (Priem and Cycyota, 2001;
Hodgkinson, Langan-Fox, and Sadler-Smith, 2008;
Schoemaker, 1990). However, Simon’s statement
generally holds true DEMO Strategy research has
not produced enough empirical research on com-
plex judgments and does not have a uniﬁed view
of complex problem solving in DEMO Per-
haps the ‘decision’ is not the right unit of analysis
in behavioral strategy, or not always the right unit.
One of the key challenges in behavioral strategy
research is to show how decisions ﬁt within DEMO
larger and more complex domain of strategic prob-
lem solving in organizations.
Copyright  2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
CAN WE IMPROVE THE
PSYCHOLOGICAL ARCHITECTURE
OF THE FIRM?
Researchers have proposed a variety of DEMO
for overcoming decision biases (Kahneman et al.,
1982, chapters 28–32; Russo and Schoemaker,
2002). Schwenk and Thomas (1983) proposed a
framework for matching strategy problems with
decision aids such as dialectical DEMO, devil’s
advocacy, scenario analysis, and the Delphi pro-
cedure; Soll and Larrick (2009) found that people
generally do better when they DEMO between two
proposed solutions than when they choose one or
the other; Gawande (2009) claimed that introduc-
ing checklists reduced errors in health care man-
agement and construction; and Donaldson (2010)
proposed ways DEMO managers to minimize sampling
biases and other errors in statistical reasoning.
Despite these methods, individual biases persist
in organizations. As Tetlock (2000: 324) points
out, decision biases are not ‘merely atavistic ves-
tiges of DEMO more primitive social order, soon to
be swept away by the DEMO of com-
petitive market forces.’ In organizations, people
operate in a DEMO of subgroup norms, political ide-
ologies, consensus building, and self-presentation.
DEMO biases are deeply embedded in routines,
automatic behavior, psycho-physical distortions,DEMO
and executives’ knowledge structures. In prac-
tice, emotional, social, and DEMO realities nearly
always trump decision aids in their inﬂuence on
organizational judgments.
This raises two questions:
• What are the intended and unintended
DEMO of individual de-biasing in
organizations?
• Is it possible to design the psychological archi-
tecture of the ﬁrm, including both choice archi-
tecture and decision processes, to yield better
executive judgments?
Thaler and Sunstein (2008) argued that research-
ers should accept that decision makers are DEMO
nary human beings with faulty cognition and poor
self control. Instead of trying to ﬁx the hardwired
errors of individual cognition, organizations should
focus on managing the psychological architecture
of the choice environment—for example, by con-
spicuously displaying the running costs of manu-
facturing equipment or designing work DEMO that
Strat. Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (2011)
DOI: 10.1002/smj
Special Issue Introduction
1379
encourage people to seek alternative points of view
(see also Johnson et al., 2011). The authors argue
that ecological ‘nudges,’ supplemented by rewards
and incentives, offer a workable and human-
friendly alternative to explicit decision aids.
Arkes (1991) distinguished three types DEMO
errors—strategy-based, association-based, and
psycho-physically-based—and Larrick (2004)
argued that remediation DEMO should ﬁt the
type of error. Heath, Larrick, and Klayman (DEMO)
divided organizational repairs into two categories:
motivational repairs, which DEMO the energy
and enthusiasm with which people work; and
cognitive repairs, which prevent mental errors
or improve decision processes. For example, as
motivational repairs, managers could increase the
decision autonomy of project teams or redesign
common areas to enhance ‘psychological capital’
(Luthans, Youssef, and Avolio, DEMO); as cognitive
repairs, managers could address overoptimism in
forecasting by DEMO in training and databases
for case-based decision making.
Denrell and March (DEMO) argued that many
errors in learning and inference derive from dys-
DEMO learning environments and would exist
even if all decision makers were rational. For
example, consider an executive team choosing how
to enter a foreign market. Suppose the ﬁrm has
previous experience in market entry by joint DEMO
ture once (a failure) and by acquisition four times
(two DEMO and two failures). By the structure
of the selection process, DEMO team has asymmetric
information—i.e., more information about acqui-
sitions than joint DEMO Hence, it has learned
the conditions under which acquisitions succeed
and DEMO and is likely to choose a form of acqui-
sition that succeeded in the past. Since the team
has minimal information about joint ventures, and
all of it is bad, it eliminates this option (the DEMO
stove effect’). This is true even if joint venture is
the optimal choice but requires competence build-
ing by repeat experience. This is DEMO cognitive bias
but an anomaly in the adaptive learning process.
Rational selection demands the search for success-
ful options and avoidance of failed options. DEMO
a side consequence, it produces undersampling of
failure (see also Markle, 2011).
Lovallo and Sibony (2010) distinguished be-
tween recurrent strategic decisions, such as re-
source allocations in R&D projects, and DEMO one-
off decisions for which the ﬁrm lacks established
choice processes, DEMO as responding to a new
Copyright  2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
market entrant. To minimize decision biases, the
authors recommend that DEMO link their strategic
decisions with known decision biases and create
choice architectures for dealing with the biases
they actually face. For example, all large phar-
maceutical ﬁrms engage in basic research and
are repeatedly susceptible to DEMO bias and
the politics of internal resource allocation. Most
ﬁrms link R&D investments to the annual plan-
ning cycle, in which each business line makes
a case for resources. However, one leading ﬁrm
addressed escalation bias proactively by forming
a detached ‘divestment team’ that scans internal
projects DEMO for possible retirement. Can
such mechanisms lead to better resource alloca-
tions and, ultimately, to higher returns? Given
the difﬁculties of repairing individual biases, ﬁrm-
level solutions may offer the best way forward.
The psychological design of organizations is
a promising area for strategy research. Experi-
ence DEMO that judgmental errors stem from
a combination of cognitive errors and the con-
text of choice. On the whole, individual cognitive
errors have received more attention than the psy-
chological architecture of the ﬁrm, even though
the latter now appears more conducive to posi-
tive intervention (see Kahneman and Klein, 2009).
We believe that future research should give equal
time to the psychological architectures of collec-
tive choice.
PUTTING IT ALL DEMO
As a nascent ﬁeld of study, behavioral strategy
faces two opposing DEMO: the threat of irrele-
vance by focusing too narrowly on one DEMO
(such as BDT or cognitive schema); and the threat
of DEMO by trying to appease every point
of view in strategy and psychology. In our opin-
ion, behavioral strategy needs to follow a middle
path, recognizing the diversity of the tasks it faces,
while focusing on a small number of core prob-
lems. Behavioral strategy may converge to DEMO
paradigm in a future generation (though we think
this is unlikely); in the meantime, behavioral strat-
egy needs to ﬁnd unity within DEMO
The good news is that the scope of behavioral
strategy is not inﬁnite. The ﬁeld may have multiple
paradigms, but it does not have 40 or 50 of them.
Figure 1 depicts the conceptual model we DEMO in
mind.
Strat. Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (2011)
DOI: 10.1002/smj
1380
T. C. Powell, D. Lovallo, and C. R. Fox
REDUCTIONISM
DEMO problems
Multiple methods
Shared community
PLURALISM CONTEXTUALISM
Figure 1. Behavioral strategy: DEMO integrative view
In Figure 1, the domain of behavioral strategy
is DEMO by its three main schools of thought:
Reductionism, Pluralism, and Contextualism. Each
school tells part of the truth about behavioral strat-
egy; each can reasonably be called a paradigm. The
Reductionist paradigm deals with DEMO psychologi-
cal character of economic decision making, which
is best studied DEMO and experimentally;
its core model is behavioral decision theory. The
Pluralist paradigm deals with the psychological
character of complex political judgments in large
DEMO and is best studied by observations
in the ﬁeld; its core DEMO is the internally differ-
entiated organization. The Contextualist paradigm
deals with the character of management percep-
tions and mental frames and is best studied DEMO
interpretive, symbolic, ethnographic, or hermeneu-
tic methods; its core model is schema theory.
In past research, the three paradigms operated
in relative independence. Economically inclined
researchers conducted experiments on biases,
heuristics, and experiments; organizationally in-
clined researchers studied CEOs, top management
teams, and organization structures; sociologically
inclined researchers studied cognitive frames, per-
ceptions, and schema.
At the same time, some researchers operated
in more than one paradigm—people like Herbert
Simon, James March, Karl Weick, Barry Staw,
Sidney Winter, and Bill Starbuck—and many
researchers still do. We take this as evidence that
the three paradigms are not incompatible and that
research in DEMO strategy can combine a wide
ﬁeld of vision with a capacity for disciplinary
integration.
These are the traits that behavioral strategy
needs to cultivate DEMO a ﬁeld of study. On one
side, we recognize that researchers DEMO to work
Copyright  2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
on DEMO problems within their domains of
specialization. On the other, we do DEMO see a con-
tradiction in seeking within-paradigm and across-
paradigm contributions, DEMO with a greater degree
of openness (Bendersky and McGinn, 2010). We
believe disciplinary unity will ﬂow from three
practices: attending to a small number of core
problems; adopting a policy of methodological
pluralism and multimethod research; and strength-
ening the institutional and social fabric of the
community of scholars and practitioners in behav-
ioral strategy.
Our vision for DEMO strategy can be sum-
marized in the following seven points:
1. Deﬁnition: Behavioral strategy merges cog-
nitive and social psychology with strategic
management theory and practice. Behavioral
strategy aims to bring realistic assumptions
about human DEMO, emotions, and social
behavior to the strategic management of organi-
zations and, thereby, to enrich strategy theory,
empirical research, and real-world practice.
2. We construe cognitive and social psychology
broadly. The domain of DEMO strategy
comprises three paradigms: Reductionist, Plu-
ralist, and Contextualist. The DEMO should em-
brace insights from all three paradigms.
3. Behavioral strategy should strive for greater
disciplinary unity. The ﬁeld should welcome the
diversity of DEMO three-paradigm world rather than
excluding any of them. There are three ways
to build a more uniﬁed discipline of behav-
ioral strategy: problem integration, methodol-
ogy integration, and community integration.
4. Problem integration: Behavioral strategy should
bring all three paradigms to bear on a small
number of DEMO research problems. We propose
four core problems: (1) scaling individual DEMO
nition to collective behavior; (2) deﬁning the
psychological underpinnings of DEMO theory;
(3) understanding complex judgment in orga-
nizations; and (4) improving the psychological
architecture of the ﬁrm.
5. Methodology integration: DEMO strategy
should adopt a principle of methodological
pluralism and intellectual sharing. Researchers
should design multimethod studies, and journal
editors and reviewers should set expectations
accordingly. Researchers should prioritize
knowledge accumulation for the ﬁeld as a
whole.
DEMO Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (2011)
DOI: 10.1002/smj
6. Community integration: Researchers, practi-
tioners and others should focus on DEMO
ening the social and institutional fabric of
behavioral strategy. Researchers should orga-
nize an interest group in the Strategic Manage-
ment Society and specialized DEMO and
conferences. Efforts have been made in this
direction, but much DEMO can be done to build
name recognition, reputation, and intellectual
unity in the ﬁeld. We believe the Strategic Man-
agement Society is the DEMO venue for taking
the lead in this effort.
7. Though its three base paradigms are histori-
cally grounded and relatively stable, behavioral
strategy should strive for growth, dynamism,
and creative leadership in deﬁning new research
problems and methods. Many changes are hap-
pening even now—the shift from DEMO
to complex judgments; from individual biases
to choice architecture; from introspection to
cognitive neuroscience. We believe behavioral
strategy should stay abreast of these DEMO
and take leadership in exploring new research
frontiers at the intersection of strategy and
psychology.
As behavioral strategy expands and develops,
we believe DEMO beneﬁts of methodological plural-
ism will become increasingly apparent. As coed-
itors of the Special Issue, we reviewed papers
covering a wide range of methods: mathematical
models, simulations, brain scans, lab experiments,
ﬁeld DEMO, case studies, LISREL analyses, event
studies, comparative studies, discourse DEMO,
cognitive mapping, and others. However, we were
surprised by how few papers tried to put these
methods together—for example, combining
experiments with event studies, simulations with
discourse analysis, or cognitive maps with brain
DEMO We see mixed-methods research as the
future of behavioral strategy. Indeed, DEMO opportu-
nities are so great—intellectually, socially, institu-
tionally—that it seems inevitable that the ﬁeld will
move in this direction. Opportunities for mixed-
methods DEMO have been cited earlier, and mod-
els can be found in DEMO disciplines—for example,
the Henrich et al. (2004) program of combining
anthropology and game theory to study ultimatum
games, dictator games, and DEMO goods games in
international cultures. We believe methodological
pluralism should become the standard for research
in behavioral strategy.
Copyright  2011 John Wiley & DEMO, Ltd.
Special Issue Introduction
SPECIAL ISSUE: PSYCHOLOGICAL
FOUNDATIONS OF STRATEGIC
MANAGEMENT
The Call for Papers for the Special Issue was
issued in April DEMO, with a submission dead-
line of January 20, 2009. As part of the SMS
Annual Meeting, a preconference meeting was
held in Washington, D.C., in October 2009, in
which papers still under consideration were pre-
sented and discussed.
The Call for Papers invited submissions
on a DEMO range of topics and using varied
methodologies:
‘We invite conceptual or empirical papers
dealing with the psychological origins of
strategy, with particular emphasis on how
psychology can inform theory and empiri-
cal research on strategy DEMO, resource
formation and deployment, strategy imple-
mentation, market efﬁciency, and sustained
competitive advantage. For empirical studies,
we welcome both conventional methods DEMO
new or emerging methodologies, including
natural or controlled experiments, numeri-
cal or agent-based simulation, mathematical
modelling, or neuro-physiological research
such as brain DEMO
We received a very large number of submis-
sions, more than DEMO previous SMJ Special Issue.
The response demonstrated the scope and rele-
vance of behavioral strategy, as well as the ﬁeld’s
immense heterogeneity. There were some excep-
tional papers among the submissions—more than
could be published in DEMO Special Issue. In review-
ing submissions, in addition to the usual DEMO
of contribution, method, and style, we gave pri-
ority to DEMO with strong links to psychology
and papers that presented novel ideas, DEMO than
extensions or restatements of ideas published else-
where. In some cases, we referred papers to the
normal SMJ review process.
We would like to express our sincere gratitude
to all those who submitted papers to DEMO Special
Issue. We were delighted and overwhelmed by
the response, and DEMO appreciate the patience of
authors, especially those whose papers we could
DEMO publish. We also want to thank the many
scholars who gave generously of their time and
energies to review papers for the Special Issue.
DEMO Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (2011)
DOI: 10.1002/smj
1381
1382
T. C. Powell, D. Lovallo, and C. R. Fox
We DEMO to use three reviewers on each paper,
and we recognize that the volume of papers placed
unusual demands on our colleagues in behavioral
DEMO Finally, we are grateful for the sage
advice and support of DEMO Bettis, who served as
our SMJ advising editor. Rich’s availability and
DEMO were much appreciated.
In the end, we accepted the nine papers DEMO
appear in this volume. We believe each of them
makes a distinctive contribution to behavioral strat-
egy. The papers cover diverse topics and meth-
DEMO, but also demonstrate the potential for a more
uniﬁed ﬁeld of DEMO strategy. Some of the
papers use multiple methods, others point the DEMO
to new topics and methods, and each of them
addresses one DEMO more of the core problems in
behavioral strategy.
The paper by Huy (2011) uses social identity
theory to show how individual emotions scale DEMO
groups and organizations and shows the conse-
quences of collective emotions for strategy
implementation. The author’s ﬁeld study in a large
Canadian service ﬁrm DEMO how a psycholog-
ical mechanism such as identiﬁcation can bridge
the gap between individual psychology and orga-
nizational strategy.
Dysfunctional learning regimes can lead DEMO ﬁrm
inefﬁciency even when the ﬁrm and its employ-
ees do not commit cognitive errors. Markle (2011)
uses a simulation method to study this prob-
lem in the context of employees’ responses to
wage changes. DEMO paper shows that the exis-
tence of employees who do not respond to wage
hikes causes ﬁrms to underestimate the output of
high-effort employees DEMO, hence, to set inefﬁ-
cient wages. This model has many applications in
strategic management and represents a new wave
of research linking individual DEMO organizational
learning.
Hu, Blettner, and Bettis (2011) combine ref-
erence point theory with the behavioral theory
of the ﬁrm to produce a DEMO reference point
model of adaptive aspirations. Using simulations,
the authors examine three strategies for adjusting
aspirations—conservative, ambitious, and satisﬁc-
ing—and ﬁnd that DEMO latter yields better out-
comes. This paper shows the beneﬁts of combining
Reductionist and Pluralist approaches to improve
our understanding of long-standing problems in
DEMO management.
Bingham and Eisenhardt (2011) conducted a
ﬁeld study of organizational learning in six
Copyright  2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
entrepreneurial ﬁrms. The question concerned what
organizations learn and how they do it. DEMO authors
argue from the data that what organizations learn
are portfolios of heuristics, and that these heuris-
tics follow a speciﬁc developmental sequence of
events. The authors identify the heuristics and
sequences, and link them to collective learning,
memory and capability development.
Bardolet, Fox, and Lovallo (2011) combine ﬁeld
evidence with experimental methods to examine
the cognitive biases of corporate resource alloca-
tion. The authors ﬁnd that diversiﬁed ﬁrms show
DEMO persistent bias toward allocating capital equally
across business units, no matter DEMO the units
are partitioned—in effect, cross-subsidizing low-
performing units with the DEMO of high perform-
ers. By eliminating noncognitive explanations, the
authors reveal DEMO psychological foundations of a
critical source of corporate inefﬁciency.
Two papers are linked to recent developments
in cognitive neuroscience. Powell (2011) evaluates
the DEMO of behavioral neuroscience for con-
tributing to behavioral strategy. Powell identiﬁes
the potential contributions and limitations of neu-
roscience and shows how research in DEMO
may lead to useful interdisciplinary collaborations
and innovations in theory development, DEMO
validation, measurement, and strategy practice.
Hodgkinson and Healey (2011) employ a model
in social cognitive neuroscience—controlled vs.
automatic processing—to challenge the assump-
DEMO and conclusions of dynamic capability the-
ory. The authors argue that emotion and intuition
play essential roles in building individual and col-
lective capabilities DEMO suggest ways of aligning
strategy theory with models of capability develop-
ment in cognitive neuroscience.
We conclude the Special Issue with a com-
mentary DEMO Daniel Levinthal (2011) entitled ‘A
behavioral approach to strategy—what’s the alter-
native?’ He argues that sharp distinctions between
rational and nonrational strategy DEMO unhelpful. The
world is neither one nor the other, and what DEMO
matters in strategy is whether models help peo-
ple solve the problems they face as scholars and
strategy practitioners. In Levinthal’s (2011) words,DEMO
‘the choice is not between whether we should act
in a God-like manner or like mortals. We are mor-
tals.’ Ultimately, Levinthal argues, DEMO need models
that solve the problems faced by thinking and feel-
ing human beings, and this requires a robust and
dynamic ﬁeld of behavioral strategy.
Strat. Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (2011)
DOI: 10.1002/DEMO
Special Issue Introduction
1383
On that point we agree, and we hope you enjoy
the Special Issue.
REFERENCES
Abrahamson E. 1991. Managerial fads and DEMO: the
diffusion and rejection of innovations. Academy of
Management Review 16: 586–612.
Argote L, Greve HR. 2007. A Behavioral Theory of
the Firm —40 years and counting: introduction and
impact. Organization Science 18(3): 337–349.
Arkes HR. 1991. The costs and beneﬁts of judgment
errors: implications for debiasing. Psychological
Bulletin 110: 486–498.
Ashforth BE, Mael F. 1989. DEMO identity theory and
the organization. Academy of Management Review 14:
20–39.
Bandura A. 1977. Social Learning Theory . Prentice-Hall:
Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Barber BM, Heath C, Odean T. 2003. Good reasons
sell: reason-based choice among group and individual
investors in the stock market. Management Science
DEMO(12): 1636–1652.
Bardolet D, Fox CR, Lovallo DA. 2011. Corporate
capital allocation: a behavioral perspective. Strategic
Management Journal 32(13).
Barnard CI. 1938. The Functions of the Executive.
Harvard University Press: Cambridge, DEMO
Barney JB. 1986. Strategic factor markets: expectations,
luck, and business strategy. Management Science
32(10): 1231–1241.
Bazerman MH, Moore D. 2008. Judgment in Managerial
Decision Making (7th edn). Wiley & Sons: DEMO,
NJ.
Bendersky C, McGinn KL. 2010. Open to negotiation:
DEMO assumptions and knowledge dis-
semination. Organization Science 21(3): 781–797.
Bertrand M, Mullainathan S. 2001. Are CEOs rewarded
for luck? The ones DEMO principals are. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116: 901–932.
Bingham CB, Eisenhardt KM. 2011. Rational heuristics:
the ‘simple rules’ that strategists learn from DEMO
experience. Strategic Management Journal 32(13).
Blake RR. 1959. Psychology and the crisis of statesman-
ship. American Psychologist 14(2): 87–94.
Bollaert DEMO, Petit V. 2010. Beyond the dark side
of executive psychology: current research and
new directions. European Management Journal 28:
362–376.
Bougon M, Weick KE, Binkhorst D. 1977. Cognition
in organizations: an analysis of DEMO Utrecht Jazz
Orchestra. Administrative Science Quarterly 22(4):
606–639.
Bower DEMO 1970. Managing the Resource Allocation
Process . Harvard Business School Press: DEMO, MA.
Bromiley P. 2005. The Behavioral Foundations of Strate-
gic Management DEMO Blackwell Publishing: Malden, MA.
Bromiley P. 2009. A prospect theory model of resource
allocation. Decision Analysis 6(3): 124–138.
Copyright  2011 DEMO Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Bromiley P, Papenhausen C. 2003. Assumptions of
rationality and equilibrium in strategy research.
Strategic Organization 1(4): 413–437.
DEMO N. 1982. The irrationality of action and action
rationality: decisions, ideologies, and organizational
action. Journal of Management Studies 19(1): 29–44.
Camerer CF. 2003. Behavioral Game Theory: Experi-
ments in Strategic Interaction . Princeton University
Press: Princeton, NJ.
Camerer CF, Loewenstein GF, Prelec D. DEMO Neuroe-
conomics: how neuroscience can inform economics.
Journal of Economic Literature DEMO: 9–64.
Camerer CF, Lovallo D. 1999. Overconﬁdence and
excess entry: DEMO experimental approach. American
Economic Review 89(1): 306–318.
Cohen WM, DEMO DA. 1990. Absorptive capacity:
a new perspective on organizational learning.
Administrative Science Quarterly 35: 128–152.
Cyert RM, March JG. 1963. A Behavioral DEMO of the
Firm . Prentice-Hall: Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
DeLong JB, DEMO A, Summers LH, Waldmann RJ.
1991. The survival of noise traders in ﬁnancial
markets. The Journal of Business 64(1): 1–19.
Denrell DEMO 2004. Random walks and sustained competitive
advantage. Management Science 50: 922–934.
DEMO J. 2008. Superstitious behavior as a byprod-
uct of intelligent adaptation. In The Oxford Hand-
book of Organizational Decision Making, Star-
buck WH, DEMO G (eds). Oxford University
Press: Oxford, U.K.: 271–286.
Denrell J, Fang C. 2010. Predicting the next big thing:
success as a signal of poor judgment. Management
Science 56(10): 1653–1667.
Denrell DEMO, Fang C, Winter SG. 2003. The economics of
strategic opportunity. Strategic Management Journal
24(10): 977–990.
Denrell J, March JG. 2001. Adaptation as information
restriction: the hot stove effect. Organization Science
12(5): 523–538.
Donaldson L. 2010. The Meta-Analytic Organization:
Introducing Statistico-Organizational Theory .ME
DEMO: New York.
Drucker PF. 1974. Management: Tasks, Responsibilities,
Practices DEMO Harper & Row: New York.
Duhaime IM, Schwenk CR. 1985. Conjectures on
cognitive simpliﬁcation in acquisition and divestment
decision making. Academy of Management DEMO
10(2): 287–295.
Dutton JE, Dukerich JM, Harquail CV. 1994. Organiza-
tional images and member identiﬁcation. Administra-
tive Science Quarterly 39(2): 239–263.
Edwards W. 1954. The theory of decision-making.
Psychological Bulletin 51(4): 380–417.
Edwards W. 1961. Behavioral decision theory. Annual
Review of Psychology DEMO: 473–498.
Eisenhardt KM, Zbaracki MJ. 1992. Strategic decision
making. Strategic Management Journal Winter
Special Issue 13: 17–37.
Elfenbein HA. 2007. Emotion in organizations: a review
and theoretical integration. Academy of Management
Annals 1(1): 315–386.
Strat. Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (2011)
DOI: 10.1002/DEMO
1384
T. C. Powell, D. Lovallo, and C. R. Fox
Elster DEMO 1982. The case for methodological individual-
ism. Theory and Society 11(4): 453–482.
Fehr E, Tyran JR. 2005. Individual irrationality and
aggregate outcomes. Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives 19(4): 43–66.
Festinger L. 1954. DEMO theory of social comparison
processes. Human Relations 7: 117–140.
Fiegenbaum A, Hart S, Schendel D. 1996. Strategic
reference point theory. Strategic Management Journal
17(3): 219–235.
Fiol M. 1991. Managing culture as a competitive
DEMO: an identity-based view of sustainable
competitive advantage. Journal of Management 17:DEMO
191–211.
Fiske ST, Taylor SE. 2008. Social Cognition: From
Brains to Culture. McGraw-Hill: New York.
Freeman J. 1999. Efﬁciency and rationality in orga-
nizations. Administrative Science Quarterly 44(1):
163–175.
Gavetti G, Levinthal DEMO, Ocasio W. 2007. Neo-
Carnegie: the Carnegie School’s past, present, and
reconstructing for the future. Organization Science 18:
523–536.
Gawande A. DEMO The Checklist Manifesto: How to Get
Things Right . Metropolitan Books: New York.
Greve HR. 1998. Performance, aspirations, and risky
organizational change. DEMO Science Quar-
terly 44: 58–86.
Hambrick DC, Mason PA. 1984. Upper echelons: the
organization as a reﬂection of its top managers.
Academy of Management Review 9(2): 193–206.
Harris SG. 1994. Organizational culture and DEMO
sensemaking: a schema-based perspective. Organiza-
tion Science 5(3): 309–321.
DEMO SA. 2004. Psychology in Organizations: The
Social Identity Approach (2nd edn). Sage: Thousand
Oaks, CA.
Heath C, Larrick RP, Klayman DEMO 1998. Cognitive
repairs: how organizations compensate for the
shortcomings of individual DEMO Research in
Organizational Behavior 20: 1–37.
Henrich J, Boyd R, DEMO S, Camerer C, Fehr E,
Gintis H (eds). DEMO Foundations of Human Sociality:
Economic Experiments and Ethnographic Evidence
from Fifteen Small-Scale Societies . Oxford University
Press: Oxford, U.K.
Hodgkinson GP. 2008. DEMO management. In Intro-
duction to Work and Organizational Psychology: A
European DEMO (2nd edn), Chmiel N (ed).
Blackwell: Oxford, U.K.; 329–350.
Hodgkinson GP, Healey MP. 2008. Cognition in organi-
zations. Annual DEMO of Psychology 59: 387–417.
Hodgkinson GP, Healey MP. 2011. Psychological foun-
dations of dynamic capabilities: reﬂexion and reﬂec-
tion in strategic management. Strategic Management
Journal 32(13).
Hodgkinson GP, Langan-Fox J, Sadler-Smith E. DEMO
Intuition: a fundamental bridging construct in the
behavioral sciences. British Journal DEMO Psychology 99:
1–27.
Hodgkinson GP, Maule AJ, Bown NJ. 2004. Causal
cognitive mapping in the organizational strategy ﬁeld:
Copyright  2011 DEMO Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
a comparison of alternative elicitation procedures.
Organizational DEMO Methods 7: 3–26.
Hodgkinson GP, Sparrow PR. 2002. The Competent
Organization: A Psychological Analysis of the
Strategic Management Process . Open University
Press: Buckingham, U.K.
Hogg MA, Terry DJ. 2000. Social identity and self-
categorization processes in organizational contexts.
Academy of Management Review 25(1): DEMO
Howard N. 1993. The role of emotions in multi-
organizational decision making. Journal of the
Operational Research Society 44(6): 613–623.
Hu S, Blettner D, Bettis RA. 2011. Adaptive aspirations:
performance consequences of risk preferences at
extremes and alternative reference groups. Strategic
Management Journal 32(13)DEMO
Huber GP, Lewis K. 2010. Cross-understanding: implica-
tions for group cognition and performance. Academy
of Management Review 35(1): 6–26.
Huy QN. DEMO Emotional capability, emotional intelli-
gence, and radical change. Academy of Management
Review 24(2): 325–345.
Huy QN. 2011. How middle managers’ group-focus DEMO
tions and social identities inﬂuence strategy implemen-
tation. Strategic Management Journal 32(13).
Isenberg D. 1986. Group polarization: a critical review
and meta-analysis. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 50: 1141–1151.
Janis IL. 1972. Victims of Groupthink . Houghton-Mifﬂin:
Boston, MA.
Janis IL, Mann L. DEMO Decision Making: A Psycholog-
ical Analysis of Conﬂict, Choice, and DEMO .
Free Press: New York.
Johnson EJ, Shu S, Dellaert DEMO, Fox CR, Gold-
stein DG, Haubl G, Larrick RP, DEMO E, Payne JW,¨
Schkade D, Wansink B. 2011. Beyond nudges: tools
of a choice architecture. Unpublished manuscript,
Columbia University.
Jonsson S, Regner P. 2009. Normative barriers to
imitation: social complexity of core DEMO in a
mutual fund industry. Strategic Management Journal
30(5): 517–536.
Kahneman D, Klein G. 2009. Conditions for intuitive
expertise: a failure DEMO disagree. American Psychologist
64(6): 515–526.
Kahneman D, Lovallo D. DEMO Timid choices and bold
forecasts: a cognitive perspective on risk-taking.
Management DEMO 39(1): 17–31.
Kahneman D, Slovic P, Tversky A. 1982. Judgment
Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases . Cambridge
University Press: New DEMO
Kahneman D, Tversky A. 1979. Prospect theory: an
analysis of decisions under risk. Econometrica 47:
313–327.
Kets de Vries MFR, Miller D. 1984. Neurotic style
and organizational pathology. Strategic Management
Journal 5(1): DEMO
Klein G. 1998. Sources of Power: How People Make
Decisions . DEMO Press: Cambridge, MA.
Lant T, Baum J. 1995. Cognitive sources DEMO socially
constructed competitive groups: examples from the
Strat. Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (2011)
DOI: 10.1002/smj
Special Issue Introduction
1385
Manhattan hotel industry. In The Institutional Con-
struction DEMO Organizations , Scott WR, Christensen S
(eds). Sage: Thousand DEMO, CA; 15–38.
Larrick RP. 2004. Debiasing. In Blackwell Handbook
of Judgment and Decision Making , Koehler DJ,
Harvey N (eds). Blackwell: Malden, MA; 316–337.
Latane B, Williams K, Harkins S. 1979. Many hands
make light the work: the causes and consequences
of social loaﬁng. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 37: 822–832.
Lawrence PR, DEMO JW. 1967. Differentiation and
integration in complex organizations. Administrative
Science Quarterly 12: 1–30.
Levinthal DA. 1991. Random walks and organizational
mortality. Administrative Science Quarterly 36:
397–420.
Levinthal DA. 2011. A behavioral approach to strat-
egy—what’s DEMO alternative. Strategic Management
Journal 32(13).
Levinthal DA, March JG. DEMO The myopia of learning.
Strategic Management Journal , Winter Special Issue
14: 95–112.
Lippman SA, Rumelt RP. 1982. Uncertain imitability: an
analysis of interﬁrm differences in efﬁciency under
competition. Bell Journal of Economics 13: 418–438.
Lippman SA, Rumelt RP. 2003. A bargaining perspective
on resource advantage. Strategic Management Journal
24(11): 1069–1086.
Livengood RS, Reger RK. 2010. That’s our turf! Identity
domains and competitive dynamics. Academy of
Management Review 35(DEMO): 48–66.
Lovallo D, Kahneman D. 2003. Delusions of success:
DEMO optimism undermines executives’ decisions.
Harvard Business Review 81: 56–63.
Lovallo D, Sibony O. 2010. The case for behavioral
strategy. McKinsey Quarterly . March: 1–14.
Luthans F, Youssef CM, Avolio BJ. 2007. Psychological
Capital: Developing the Human Competitive Edge.
Oxford University Press: Oxford, U.K.
March JG. DEMO The business ﬁrm as a political
coalition. Journal of Politics 24(4): 662–678.
March JG, Shapira Z. 1987. Managerial perspectives on
risk and risk-taking. Management Science 33(11):
1404–1418.
March JG, Simon HA. DEMO Organizations . Wiley: New
York.
Markle AB. 2011. Dysfunctional learning in DEMO
processes: the case of employee reciprocity. Strategic
Management Journal 32(13)DEMO
Marschak J. 1955. Elements for a theory of teams.
Management Science 1(2): 127–137.
Meyer JW, Rowan B. 1977. Institutional organizations:
formal structure as myth and ceremony. American
Journal of Sociology 83: 340–363.
Miles RE, Snow CC. 1978. Organizational Strategy,
Structure, and Process . DEMO: New York.
Mintzberg H, Ahlstrand B, Lampel J. 1998. Strategy
DEMO: A Guided Tour of the Wilds of Strategic
Management . Free DEMO: New York.
Moore DA, Oesch JM, Zietsma C. 2007. What DEMO
tition? Myopic self-focus in market entry decisions.
Organization Science 18(3): 440–454.
Copyright  2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Nag R, Hambrick DC, Chen MJ. 2007. What is
strategic management, really? Inductive derivation
of a consensus deﬁnition of the ﬁeld. Strategic
Management Journal 28(DEMO): 935–955.
Nickerson J, Zenger T. 2008. Envy, comparison costs,
and the economic theory of the ﬁrm. Strategic
Management Journal 29(13): 1371–1394.
Nisbett RE, Ross L. 1980. Human Inference: Strategies
and Shortcomings of Social Judgment . Prentice-Hall:
Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Ocasio W. 1997. Towards an attention-based view of the
ﬁrm. Strategic Management Journal , Summer DEMO
Issue 18: 187–206.
Oliver C. 1997. Sustainable competitive advantage:
combining DEMO and resource-based views.
Strategic Management Journal 18(9): 697–713.
Ostrom E. 1997. A behavioral approach to the rational
choice theory of collective action. DEMO Political
Science Review 92(1): 1–22.
Payne JW, Bettman JR, Johnson EJ. 1988. Adaptive
strategy selection in decision making. Journal of
Experimental DEMO: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition 14: 534–552.
Pfeffer J, Sutton DEMO 1999. The Knowing-Doing Gap:
How Smart Companies Turn Knowledge into Action .
Harvard Business School Press: Boston, MA.
Porac JF, Thomas H. 1990. Taxonomic mental models
in competitor deﬁnition. Academy of Management
Review 15: 224–240.
Postrel S, Rumelt RP. 1992. Incentives, routines, and
self-command. Industrial and Corporate Change 1(3):
397–425.
Powell TC. 2003. Varieties of competitive parity.
Strategic Management Journal 24(1): 61–86.
Powell TC. 2004. DEMO, execution, and idle rational-
ity. Journal of Management Research 4(2): 77–98.
Powell TC. 2011. Neurostrategy. Strategic Management
Journal 32(13).
DEMO TC, Lovallo D, Caringal C. 2006. Causal ambi-
guity and management perception. Academy of Man-
agement Review 31(1): 175–196.
Prahalad CK, Bettis RA. 1986. The dominant logic:
a new linkage between diversity DEMO performance.
Strategic Management Journal 7(6): 485–501.
Priem RL, Cycyota DEMO 2001. On strategic judgment.
In Handbook of Strategic Management , Hitt MA,
Freeman RE, Harrison JS (eds). Blackwell Publishers:
Oxford, U.K.; 493–519.
Rafaeli A, Sutton RI. 1989. The expression of emotion
DEMO everyday life. Research in Organizational Behavior
11: 1–42.
Reger RK, Huff A. 1993. Strategic groups: a cognitive
perspective. Strategic Management Journal 14(2):
103–123.
Rumelt RP. 1995. Inertia and transformation. In
Resources in an Evolutionary Perspective: Towards
a Synthesis of Evolutionary and Resource-Based
Approaches to Strategy , Montgomery CA (ed).
Kluwer Academic: Norwell, MA; 101–132.
DEMO JE, Schoemaker PJH. 2002. Winning Decisions:
Getting it Right the DEMO Time. Random House: New
York.
Strat. Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (2011)
DOI: 10.1002/smj
1386
T. C. Powell, D. Lovallo, and C. R. Fox
Ryall DEMO 2003. Subjective rationality, self-conﬁrming
equilibrium, and corporate strategy. Management
Science 49: 936–949.
Salancik GA, Meindl JR. 1984. Corporate attributions
as strategic illusions DEMO management control.
Administrative Science Quarterly 29(2): 238–254.
Schelling TC. 1978. Micromotives and Macrobehavior .
W.W. Norton & Company: New York.
Schoemaker PJH. 1990. Strategy, complexity, and eco-
nomic rent. Management Science 36(1): 1178–1192.
Schwenk CR. 1984. Cognitive simpliﬁcation processes
in strategic decision-making. Strategic Management
Journal 5(2): 111–128.
Schwenk CR, Thomas H. 1983. Formulating the mess:
the role of decision aids in problem formulation.
Omega 20: 10–20.
Simon HA. 1987. Making management decisions: the role
of intuitions and emotion. Academy of Management
Executive 1(1): 57–64.
Soll JB, Larrick RP. 2009. Strategies for revising judg-
ment: how (and how well) people use others’ opinions.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Mem-
ory, and Cognition 35: 780–805.
Starbuck WH, Milliken FJ. 1988a. Challenger: ﬁne-
tuning the odds until something breaks. Journal of
Management Studies 25: 319–340.
Starbuck WH, Milliken FJ. 1988b. Executives’ percep-
tual ﬁlters: what they DEMO and how they make
sense. In The Executive Effect: Concepts and DEMO
ods for Studying Top Managers , Hambrick DC (ed).
JAI DEMO: Greenwich, CT; 35–65.
Stasser G, Titus W. 1985. Pooling of unshared informa-
tion in group decision making: biased information
sampling during discussion. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 48(6): 1467–1478.
Staw BM. DEMO The escalation of commitment to a
course of action. Academy of Management Review 6:
577–587.
Staw BM, Barsade SG. 1993. Affect and managerial
performance: a test of the sadder-but-wiser vs.
happier-and-smarter hypotheses. Administrative Sci-
ence Quarterly 38(2): 304–331.
Copyright  2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Tajfel H (ed). 1978. Differentiation Between Social
Groups . Academic Press: London, U.K.
Terry DJ, Callan VJ. 1998. In-group bias in response to
an organizational merger. Group Dynamics: Theory,
Research, and DEMO 2(2): 67–81.
Tetlock PE. 1990. Some thoughts on fourth-generational
models of social cognition. Psychological Inquiry
1(3): 212–214.
Tetlock PE. 2000. DEMO biases and organizational
correctives: do both disease and cure depend on
DEMO politics of the beholder? Administrative Science
Quarterly 45(2): 293–326.
DEMO RH, Sunstein CR. 2008. Nudge: Improving
Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness .Yale
University Press: New Haven, CT.
Turner JC. 1975. DEMO comparison and social identity:
some prospects for intergroup behavior. European
Journal of Social Psychology 5(1): 5–34.
Tversky A, Kahneman D. 1974. Judgment under uncer-
tainty: heuristics and biases. Science 185: 1124–1131.
Walsh DEMO 1995. Managerial and organizational cognition:
notes from a trip down Memory Lane. Organization
Science 6(3): 280–321.
Wegner DM. 1987. Transactive memory: a contemporary
analysis of the group mind. In Theories of Group
Behavior, Mullen B, Goethals GR (eds). Springer-
Verlag: New York; DEMO
Weick KE. 1995. Sensemaking in Organizations . Sage:
Thousand Oaks, DEMO
Wildavsky A. 1972. The self-evaluating organization.
Public Administration Review 32(5): 509–520.
Winter SG, Sterman J, Massey C, Lovallo D, Shapira DEMO,
Denrell D, Fang C. 2008. Behavioral strategy: a
research agenda. Symposium proposal, 2008 Academy
of Management Annual Meeting, Anaheim, CA.
Zajac EJ, Bazerman MH. 1991. Blind spots in strategic
decision-making: the case DEMO competitor analysis.
Academy of Management Review 16: 37–56.
Zajonc RB. 1965. DEMO facilitation. Science 149:
269–274.
Strat. Mgmt. J., 32: 1369–1386 (DEMO)
DOI: 10.1002/smj{1g42fwefx}