Decision Making over Time and under Uncertainty: A Common Approach
Author(s): Drazen Prelec and George Loewenstein
Source: Management Science, Vol. 37, No. 7 (Jul., 1991), pp. 770-786
Published by: INFORMS
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2632534
Accessed: 20/10/2009 12:DEMO
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not DEMO an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, DEMO you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/DEMO?publisherCode=informs.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page DEMO such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
DEMO in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about DEMO, please contact support@jstor.org.
INFORMS is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Management Science.
http://www.jstor.org
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
Vol. 37, No. 7, July 1991
Printed in U.S.A.
DEMO MAKING OVER TIME AND UNDER
UNCERTAINTY: A COMMON APPROACH*
DRAZEN PRELEC DEMO GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts 02163
Department of Social and Decision Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
This DEMO considers a number of parallels between risky and intertemporal choice. We begin
by demonstrating a one-to-one correspondence between the behavioral violations of the respective
DEMO theories for the two domains (i.e., expected utility and discounted utility models). We
argue that such violations (or preference reversals) are DEMO consistent with three propositions
about the weight that an attribute receives in both types of multiattribute choice. Specifically, it
appears that: ( 1 ) if we add a constant to all values of an attribute, DEMO that attribute becomes
less important; (2) if we proportionately increase DEMO values of an attribute, or if we change the
sign of DEMO attribute, from positive to negative, then that attribute becomes more important. The
generality of these propositions, as well as the constraints they would impose on separable rep-
resentations of multiattribute preferences, is discussed.
(TIME DEMO; TIME DISCOUNTING; INTERTEMPORAL CHOICE; DECISION
MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY; CHOICE ANOMALIES)
1. Introduction
The expected utility (EU) and discounted utility (DU) models provide easy access to
the interconnected domains of time and uncertainty. Parallel in structure, both models
view decision makers as selecting between alternatives based on a weighted sum of utilities,
with the weights being DEMO probabilities (for EU) or discount factors based on time
delays (DEMO DU). EU and DU have been applied to such diverse topics as labor supply,
saving behavior, crime, and fertility, and continue to be broadly utilized as both descriptive
and normative models of choice DEMO growing criticism of their assumptions and im-
plications and an onslaught of alternative formulations.
The initial appeal of the two theories was due, no doubt, to their formal simplicity,
and their close similarity to the familiar financial calculations of actuarial value and
present value. Subsequent axiomatic derivations-by DEMO Neumann and Morgenstern
(1953) for EU, and Koopmans (1960) DEMO DU-have clarified the logic behind these
calculations, and have brought to DEMO surface the fundamental assumptions that justify
them. These turn out to be surprisingly few in number, and relatively easy to accept, at
least DEMO presented in a transparent formal context.
In parallel with the axiomatic development, however, researchers have uncovered a
growing number of "anomalous" examples, indicating that people reliably violate the
EU and DU axioms when confronted DEMO certain special configurations of choices. The
EU anomalies, and especially the DEMO paradox, have stimulated the development of
theoretical alternatives to expected utility (e.g., Kahneman and Tversky 1979, Machina
1982). In contrast, until recently (Loewenstein and Prelec forthcoming), the discounted
utility violations have not been documented or subjected to the same intense discussion
and exposure.
In DEMO paper we draw attention to some remarkable parallels between EU and DU
violations, and, more importantly, propose that the existence of such "DEMO" vio-
lations is not coincidental, but rather reflects certain fundamental psychological properties
* Accepted by Gregory W. Fischer; received April 12, 1989. DEMO paper has been with the authors 5
months for 2 revisions.
770
Copyright
0025- 1909/9 1
C) 1991, The Institute of Management DEMO
/3707/0770$0 1.25
DECISION MAKING OVER TIME AND UNDER UNCERTAINTY
771
of multidimensional prospect evaluation. DEMO properties concern the weight that at-
tributes receive in decision making as a function of their magnitude. Our analysis is
restricted to simple prospects DEMO of a single nonzero outcome which is to be
received either with a given probability, or at a specified point in time. In subsequent
papers (Loewenstein and Prelec 1989, 1991) we detail a variety of "sequential choice
anomalies" applicable to temporal prospects with multiple outcomes and DEMO our
theoretical analysis of simple prospects to explain them.
EU and DU are at once excessively restrictive and unnecessarily vague in their spec-
ification DEMO attribute weighting. They are too restrictive regarding the nonmoney attribute
(probability DEMO time), and not sufficiently restrictive toward the money attribute. For
example, DU makes the extreme assumption that people are sensitive to only absolute
time delays-that a given time delay has the same impact on choice DEMO of when
it occurs. The empirical observation that people tend to view a given absolute time delay
as more significant if it occurs earlier DEMO the source of one important DU anomaly. EU's
similarly rigid assumption about probability weighting-namely that only relative prob-
abilities matter-leads to an analogous DEMO anomaly. In their specification of the money
attribute, however, both models are quite vague. Beyond the assumption of decreasing
marginal utility, which is in any case not integral to either model, virtually any pattern
of weighting is permissible.
By treating the money and nonmoney dimensions commensurably-by relaxing DEMO
restrictions on the nonmoney dimension, while simultaneously adding new restrictions
to DEMO money dimension-we show that it is possible to explain the basic patterns of
anomalous choice in both domains. With one notable exception, the weighting of money,
time, and probability each conform to three simple patterns that we label "decreasing
absolute sensitivity," "increasing relative sensitivity" and "loss amplification."
The paper starts with a brief discussion of the central implications of the normative
theories in ?2. ?3 summarizes, and draws connections between the anomalies and par-
adoxes that have been uncovered DEMO far in both domains. The theoretical core of the
paper, in ?4, presents a diagnosis of the sources of these violations, in DEMO form of three
properties of attribute weighting that can explain most of the basic choice patterns in
decision making under uncertainty and intertemporal choice. ?5 develops a multiplicative
choice model that embodies the three properties, and ?6 discusses evidence supporting
and challenging the model.
2. The Normative Models
Encoding or "Framing" Assumptions
The common starting point for any normative DEMO is the establishment of a particular
canonical format for describing the choice objects distinguished by the theory. In expected
utility theory, it is traditional to "integrate" outcomes into final wealth positions so that
the ultimate DEMO of choice are lotteries over aggregate levels of wealth. For example,
a decision maker with wealth w would frame an option defined by
DEMO
(x, p) a(x
Xp1; . .. ; xn, DEMO,,)
as
(w + x, p)
(w +
DEMO Xp1; . . ; w + xn, Pn).
Discounted utility also typically assumes integration. In a standard application, indi-
viduals face choices between temporal prospects, which are (finite) collections of dated
consumption outcomes. A temporal prospect
X a (XX t) a(xI
X ti; ... .; x,i
tn)
indicates that outcome xi will be obtained at time ti. Often the time intervals are presumed
to be DEMO spaced (i.e., they form a "consumption program" over successive periods
ti= it1), in which case one omits the t1 and expresses DEMO prospects as an outcome
772 DRAZEN PRELEC AND GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
sequence (xl,... , x,)DEMO Integration, here, involves aggregating new consumption options
with existing plans. If the decision maker's existing plans call for (cl, . . DEMO , c,), then by
accepting the prospect (xl, . DEMO . , x,), the decision maker reveals a preference for
(cl + xi, . . . , cn + xn) over (cl, . . . , cn).
Both models have also been derived under the assumption that the final objects of
choice are outcomes DEMO without regard for existing consumption or wealth (see,
e.g., Fishburn and Rubinstein 1982, for time, and Fischer, Kamlet, Fienberg and DEMO
1986, for uncertainty). However, without the assumption of asset integration such models
can easily lead to suboptimal decisions if a person is DEMO by repeated choices.
Without asset integration, for example, it is possible that a person who preferred $300
in one year to $200 today, if the decision were divided into two subsidiary choices, would
repeatedly prefer $100 today over $150 in one year. Since a decision maker with DEMO
preferences could be manipulated into violating dominance by a skillful arbitrageur, DEMO
is not clear that such models should be considered "normative" in the strict sense of
the term.
In addition to these book-keeping assumptions, the normative models are each com-
mitted to a specific numerical representation DEMO preferences. For risky prospects, the
representation is additively separable across outcomes DEMO linear in probabilities, so that
prospect (xl, Pi, ... . Xn , Pn) is preferred to (Yi, q1, . . DEMO , yn qn) at base wealth level w,
if and DEMO if it has higher value according to the expected utility formula
E piu(w + xi) ? E qiu(w + yi), (DEMO)
where u(x + w) is the utility level for DEMO wealth level equal to x + w. For temporal
prospects, the DEMO is also additively separable across outcomes, but exponential
in time, so that prospect (xi, . . , xn) is preferred to (DEMO, . . . , yn) at base consumption
level (cl, . .. , cA), iff
z ( 1 + r)'u(ci + xi) 2 E (1 ? r)'u(ci + y). (2)
Both representations make strong claims about how preference should change if the time
or probability scales are transformed in certain DEMO The expected utility representation
implies that only relative probability ratios of nonzero outcomes are significant, so that
the operation of reducing proportionately the probabilities of nonzero outcomes in two
prospects by the same factor should not DEMO preference. For instance, a person who is
indifferent between two lotteries DEMO still be indifferent if there is only a 10% chance
that either lottery will be played.
The discounted utility representation implies, in contrast, DEMO only absolute time
intervals matter. Contemplating the same choice between (x) and (y) from an earlier
vantage point shifts all time intervals DEMO a constant amount (T) , which, according to (2 ),
reduces both sides of the equation by (1 + r)T. This is the stationarity property, as
originally formulated by Koopmans ( 1960) in a discrete-time context.
3. Anomalies
Even though EU and DU have been widely applied in economic research, recently
both models have been challenged by a proliferation of anomalies-common patterns
of behavior inconsistent with the models' predictions. In this section, we review the most
significant EU and DU anomalies and show that there is a virtual one-to-one correspon-
dence between DEMO
The Common Ratio! Common Difference Effects
The independence axiom implies that preferences between risky prospects should not
be affected by multiplying the probabilities of DEMO outcomes by a common factor.
DU Anomalies
Name
Common difference
effect
Immediacy effect
EU Anomalies
773
Gain/DEMO asymmetry
Description
(x, t) (y, t') but (x, t + k)
< (y, t' + k)
DEMO of immediate
consump.
Lower devaluation of losses
Lower devaluation of large
than small gains/losses
Sensitivity to different
descriptions of objectively
equivalent prospects
Name
DEMO ratio
effect
Certainty effect
Reflection effect
"Peanuts effect"
Framing effects
DEMO
pk)
(y; q) but (x;
< (y; qk)
(x; p)
Magnitude effect
Overweighting of
certain outcomes
DEMO seeking toward
losses
Risk taking for small
gains, risk aversion
for DEMO losses.
Sensitivity to different
descriptions of
objectively
equivalent
prospects
Framing effects
DECISION MAKING OVER TIME AND UNDER UNCERTAINTY
TABLE 1
DU and
EUAnomalies
The DEMO ratio effect (Kahneman and Tversky 1979) refers to a violation of this
prediction defined by: (x; p) (y; q) implies (x; ap) -<: (y; aq), for y > x; 0 < a < 1.
A person who is indifferent, DEMO, between a 25% chance of $2500 and a 50% chance of
DEMO would probably prefer a 2.5% chance of winning $2500 to a 5% chance of win-
ning $ 1000.
The corresponding anomaly in intertemporal choice DEMO the common difference effect.
DU implies that a person's preference between two single-outcome temporal prospects
should depend on the absolute time interval between DEMO of the objects. However,
both intuition, and experimental evidence (Thaler 1981, Benzion, Rapoport and Yagil
1989) indicate that the impact of a constant time difference between two outcomes
becomes less significant as both DEMO are made more remote. Formally, (x, t) (y,
DEMO) implies (x, t + e) -< (y, d DEMO e), for y > x, e > 0. A person DEMO is indifferent, say,
between $20 today and $25 in one DEMO will most likely prefer $25 in eleven months
to $20 in ten.
The common-ratio and common-difference anomalies imply that preference is generally
sensitive to DEMO ratios and differences along a dimension. Consider, first, the common-
ratio effect. Sensitivity to differences can explain why shrinking all probabilities propor-
tionately DEMO the significance of the probability dimension, thereby shifting preferences
in favor DEMO the prospect that contains the larger money outcome.' Likewise, increasing
the outcome dates in a pair of temporal prospects by a constant interval, decreases the
ratio between the time delays. Sensitivity to time ratios implies DEMO reduction in the relative
importance of time, again shifting preferences in DEMO of the prospect with the larger
money outcome.
The Immediacyl Certainty
Effects
Several researchers have argued that, in addition to the common ratio and difference
effects, a virtual discontinuity of preference occurs when the dimensions of time and
uncertainty approach their point of maximal significance (i.e., t DEMO 0, and p = 1). The
certainty effect (Kahneman and Tversky 1979) refers to the tendency to value dispro-
portionately outcomes that are certain to occur. If ap = 1, then (x; p) (y; q) implies
' See Rubinstein ( 1987) for an explicit model of the similarity relations.
774 DRAZEN PRELEC AND GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
(x; ap) >- (y; aq), for y > x; a > 1. The immediacy DEMO refers to the enhanced
significance decision makers attach to outcomes that are experienced immediately-i.e.,
(x, t) - (y, d) implies (x, t + e) -< (y, d + e), for t = 0, and y > x, e > 0. DEMO can be
detected in the extremely high discount rates estimated for short time delays in several
empirical studies of discounting (Thaler 1981, Benzion, Rapoport and Yagil 1989), and
can also be observed in intertemporal DEMO making that does not involve monetary
payoffs (Christensen-Szalanski 1984).2 The DEMO and certainty effects are special
cases of violations of stationarity and proportionality, and can therefore be formally
subsumed under the common ratio and common difference effects. Many researchers
feel, however, that these phenomena are qualitatively DEMO, and warrant separate treat-
ment (see, e.g., Cohen and Jaffray 1988, Benzion, Rapoport and Yagil 1989).
Sign Effects
The "reflection effect" in decision making under uncertainty (Kahneman and Tversky
1979) refers to the finding that modal preferences shift from risk aversion to risk DEMO
when positive domain gambles are "reflected" by making all payoffs negative-(x; p)
- (y; q) implies (-x; p) >- (-y; q) for p < q (although see Hershey and Schoe-
maker 1980).
A similar discrepancy in treatment of losses DEMO gains also can be observed in inter-
temporal choice defined by (DEMO, tl) -(y, t2) implies (-x, tl) >- (-y, t2), for y > x > 0
and t2 > tl. The attractiveness of gains is reduced faster than the aversiveness of losses.
Loewenstein (1988b) reports evidence of gain /loss asymmetries on the order of 15-20%
for small and moderate outcomes delayed by one year. DEMO (1981) reports even greater
discrepancies.
A necessary condition for sharp sign effects is that people segregate new choices from
their existing assets and "frame" the outcomes of such choices as losses and gains (Mar-
DEMO 1952, Kahneman and Tversky 1979) which they treat differently. EU, DEMO
usually assumes a utility function denominated in total assets, cannot account DEMO the
reflection effect, because sign shifts for small amounts have a DEMO effect on total
wealth (ruling out wealth effects as an explanation DEMO the behavior) but a major impact
on risk preferences (Kahneman and Tversky 1979). Nor can a model that assumes that
utility is DEMO function of asset levels account for the observation that people at all income
levels gamble and buy insurance (Markowitz 1952; see also Harvey DEMO).
The same logic applies equally well to intertemporal choice. People display the loss/
gain asymmetry at a wide range of consumption levels. DEMO by assuming that new
outcomes are segregated, and encoded as gains DEMO losses, is it possible to explain why
people who consume at DEMO disparate baseline levels display the loss/gain asymmetry.
Magnitude Effects
Although not as well established as other EU anomalies, there is also evidence of a
relationship between outcome magnitude and risk taking that is incompatible with DEMO
(Markowitz 1952). The general pattern is one of (a) DEMO seeking for very small gains
turning progressively to risk aversion as outcome magnitudes increase, and (b) risk aver-
sion for very small losses turning to risk seeking as the absolute magnitude of negative
outcomes increase-i.e., (x; p) - (y; q) implies (ax; p) -< (ay; q), and (-x; p) - (-y;
q) implies (- ax; p) -< (-ay; q) for a > 1, x > y > 0, and p < q.
2 Christensen-Szalanski interviewed expectant women at different times during their DEMO concerning
their preference for using anaesthesia during childbirth. At all times prior to labor the great majority expressed
a preference for not using anaesthesia. DEMO the onset of labor, however, preferences abruptly shifted, with
a DEMO fraction opting for relief. Apparently the cost of desisting from anaesthesia (DEMO pain of labor) and the
benefits (e.g., later satisfaction from DEMO given birth "naturally") were balanced differently when both outcomes
were DEMO the future and when one (the pain) was experienced in the present.
DECISION MAKING OVER TIME AND UNDER UNCERTAINTY
775
Magnitude effects can also DEMO observed in intertemporal choice. Numerous survey
studies (Thaler 1981, Loewenstein 1988b, Benzion, Rapoport and Yagil 1989) have
revealed a common pattern: DEMO negative relationship between the absolute magnitude of
an outcome and the rate at which it loses value when delayed. For example, Thaler's
(DEMO) subjects were indifferent between $15 immediately and $60 in a year ($15/ $60
= 1/4) and between $250 immediately and $350 DEMO a year ($250/$350 = 5/7). For
losses, the comparable figures were ($15/$20 = 3/4) and ($250/$270 = 25/27). This
pattern can be formalized as (x, DEMO) - (y, t2) implies (ax, t1) -< (DEMO, t2), for a > 1, y
> x > 0 and t2 > t, and (-x, tl) - (-y, DEMO) implies (-ax, t1) >- (-ay, t2). Like DEMO
effects, the magnitude effects observed in intertemporal choice are incompatible with DEMO
assumption of integration (see Loewenstein and Prelec forthcoming).
Framing Effects
DEMO effects, even more than conventional sign and magnitude effects, strike at the
heart of the representational assumptions because they demonstrate that changing the
DEMO in which a prospect is represented, holding constant its "objective" DEMO,
can have a significant impact on choice. Framing effects are generally induced by shifting
the implicit point of reference in a choice (Payne, Laughhunn and Crum 1980, Tversky
and Kahneman 1981) . Such reference point shifts can be viewed as linear transformations
of attributes. For example, Kahneman and Tversky were able to obtain preference shifts
by reframing simple DEMO into two stages, one common to both prospects, and one
different. If the common stages tend to be ignored by subjects, as they hypothesized, then
the new frame can be interpreted as a scalar transformation of probabilities. Other illus-
trations of framing express prospects as losses or DEMO by adding or subtracting a constant
amount to the payoffs of two prospects, while compensating for this manipulation with
a lump sum payment.
Framing effects have also been documented in intertemporal choice (Loewenstein
1988a, Loewenstein DEMO Prelec forthcoming). In one study, for example, subjects were
given a choice between two vacation options, one offering 37 vacation days two years in
a row, the other offering 44 days in the first year and 30 in the second. In one experimental
condition, the 30 days common to all options were segregated from each outcome; in
the other they were integrated. Choices in the two conditions differed significantly, with
the option offering greater up-front rewards preferred more in the segregated condition.
DEMO second study found a significant shift of choice when payment options for a TV were
expressed in terms of gains (a rebate) or DEMO (payments).
4. Theoretical Integration
The goal of this section is DEMO distill from the behavioral clues just enumerated a minimal
set of principles that apply to multiattribute choice generally, and that are consistent
with the violations of the normative models in both the time and probability domains.
DEMO of Objects of Choice
The starting point for any model of choice is its assumptions concerning the nature
of choice objects. Although often regarded DEMO unproblematic or self-evident, the so-called
"representational" assumptions are psychologically pivotal. DEMO EU and DU typically
assume that people integrate new alternatives, either DEMO existing wealth (EU), or with
planned consumption (DU). But evidence reviewed in the previous section-sign, ab-
solute magnitude, and framing DEMO that people in fact often segregate new
alternatives from current wealth and from future consumption plans. Even when people
do take wealth or consumption DEMO into account, they probably do so in a much cruder
way DEMO required by asset integration. The assumption of asset integration is undermined
776 DRAZEN PRELEC AND GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
by the fact that typical decision DEMO may have only imprecise knowledge of their
current wealth, and only DEMO or sketchy future consumption plans.
Our starting assumption is that in a multiattribute prospect, the value of each attribute
is encoded or "framed" as a pair of values, the first being the absolute magnitude of the
attribute, and the second being the polarity of the attribute, DEMO is positive if larger
values along the attribute improve the prospect, DEMO negative otherwise. Thus, for example,
a temporal prospect of $1,DEMO due in 6 months would be encoded as: (1,000, DEMO) with
polarities ( +-, -), where the negative polarity for the time attribute indicates that we are
dealing with delays, which diminish the overall prospect value.
The central idea behind our explanations of the DEMO is that certain transfor-
mations of values along an attribute, as DEMO as changes in polarity, lead to systematic
changes in the weight DEMO "psychological salience" that is attached to that attribute.3 In
stating our conditions, we will denote generic two-attribute prospects by (a, b), where
both a and b are formally elements of real intervals A DEMO B. The two special cases of
concern to us, of course, are preferences over simple lotteries (x, p), interpreted as a DEMO
chance of receiving $x, and delayed cash payments (x, t) received at time t. The letters
x, y, will always stand DEMO values along the money attribute, while p, q, and t, s, for
values along the probability and time attributes, respectively. It DEMO understood that 0 < p,
q < 1, and t, s> 0.
We now review the assumptions needed to secure a real-valued representation of pref-
erences (these are adapted from Fishburn and Rubinstein's 1982 axioms for preferences
over single, dated cash flows):
Al. DEMO > is a weak order on (A, B).
A2. CONTINUITY. The sets weakly preferred to a given (a, b) are closed.
A3. MONOTONICITY. If a > b then (a, c) > (DEMO, c).
If c = 0 then (c, a) - (c, b).
A4. ZERO OUTCOME.
Taken together, A 1 -A4 guarantee that preferences can be represented by a continuous
real-valued function u(DEMO, b), which is increasing in a and satisfying u(0, b) = 0 (Fishbum
and Rubinstein 1982, Theorem 1).
We now give a more precise definition of a transformation to increase the DEMO of
an attribute.
DEFINITION 1. Let (a, b) be a DEMO two attribute prospect, andf(a) a transformation
of the first attribute. We say that the transformation f increases the weight of an attribute
DEMO whenever two prospects are indifferent originally, (al, bl) - (DEMO, b2), then the trans-
formation has the effect of making DEMO transformed attribute decisive:
(f(al), b1) -< (f(a2), b2) iff (f(al), b2) -< (f(a2), bl).4
The definition for decreasing the weight on an DEMO is derived by reversing exactly
one of the preferential inequalities.
Our definition of attribute weighting is illustrated in Figure 1. The inside indifference
curve DEMO the two indifferent prospects (al, bI) and (a2, b2); the two indifference
curves lying to the northeast pass through the prospects after the first attribute has been
3 There is a close affinity DEMO our approach and that taken by Tversky, Sattath and Slovic ( DEMO) to
explain the preference reversal phenomenon. Their basic claim is that DEMO weight of a dimension is enhanced
if the response scale is expressed in units of that dimension (i.e., certainty equivalents for gambles will DEMO
relatively more sensitive to dollars than probabilities). Our hypothesis is that numerical transformations of a
dimension also have a predictable impact on its DEMO
4 The definition easily generalizes to prospects with three or more attributes by letting the second attribute,
B, stand for several distinct attributes.
DECISION MAKING OVER TIME AND UNDER UNCERTAINTY
777
b 2
-
/
0 2
f(al)
f a2)
FIGURE I
subjected to DEMO transformationf( *). Since (f(aA) bl ) >- (DEMO ), b2), preference increases
toward the northeast, and the prospect (f(a2) . b2) is preferred to (f(al I), b I). Intuitively,
after applying a transformation tf * that increases the weight on the first attribute, the
prospect that was initially stronger on that attribute becomes decisive.
We now state three assumptions about DEMO effect of linear transformations on attribute
weight. The first two formalize the intuition that preferences, generally, will be invariant
neither with respect to DEMO that preserve ratios nor those that preserve dif-
ferences along an attribute.
)
A5. DECREASING ABSOLUTE SENSITIVITY (DAS). Increasing the absolute magnitulde
DEMO all values of an attribute by a common additive constant decreases the weight of the
attributte. Specifically, if (a,, bl ) -(DEMO , b2) , and Eal > O, then
(a, + PROPORTIONALITY.~~ E5 bi) >- (a2 + E5 b2) (a, DEMO IE5 b2) -< (a2 + IE5 bi).
A6*. /x )(,q,te o n e<1 x p
In (Y,DEMO the temporal IQ case, with attributes A and B standing for DEMO and money ( T and X )
this is inconsistent with DEMO, which preserves
Had we introduced, for example, the Fishburn and DEMO version of stationarity,
iJf
If
the original indifference
judgment.
A5*.
STATIONARITY.
If (x, t) -(y,
s), and e >DEMO
O,
then (x, t + e) -(y,
DEMO
utility formula (I1
the representation of intertemporal preference would conform to DEMO
+ r)'u(x) (Fishburn and Rubinstein 1982, Theorem 2).
In a similar spirit, we state
s + e),
DEMO
A6. INCREASING
PROPORTIONAL
nittude of all values of an attribtute
weight of the attributte. Specifically, if (al,5 bl I )I
SENSITIVITY
by a common muiltiplicative
(a2, b2), and aa I > O, a
(IPS).
Increasing the absolutte
constant incr-eases
> 1, then
DEMO
the
(aa
bI)<
(aa2 , b2)
iJf
(aal,b2)<(aa2,/b)
For risky choice, with attributes A DEMO B standing for probability and money (P and
X) , this is inconsistent with the independence axiom, which states that if a given lottery
is indifferent to a second lottery, then indifference should be preserved if both lotteries
are "mixed" with a common third lottery. In DEMO domain of single-outcome lotteries, the
only possible mixtures are those involving DEMO lottery and the certain zero outcome.
Restricted to this domain, the DEMO axiom may be expressed as
778 DRAZEN PRELEC AND GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
which yields a numerical representation of DEMO form pCu (x), where c is an arbitrary
positive constant. DEMO
Increasing proportional sensitivity is a generalization of the subproportionality con-
dition, DEMO by Kahneman and Tversky ( 1979), to the more general setting of non-
separable preferences (see further discussion below). For unbounded dimensions, like
time and money, IPS will clearly fail at sufficiently large DEMO: Doubling an award of
10 billion dollars clearly matters less than DEMO an award of $500,000; likewise, the
difference between losing one or two million dollars is less important than that between
losing one DEMO two thousand, to most people at least.6
Our final condition states DEMO losses (outcomes below a zero reference point) are
treated just like somewhat larger gains.
A7. Loss AMPLIFICATION. The two operations (i) increasing DEMO absolutte magnitude
of all values along an attribute by a common multiplicative constant, and (ii) changing
the polarity of an attribute, from DEMO to negative, have the same effect on the weight
of that DEMO Likewise, changing the polarity from negative to positive will have the
DEMO effect as shrinking values by a common multiplicative constant.
In conjunction with the IPS condition, loss amplification implies that changing values
from gains to losses of equal absolute magnitude increases the weight of the money
dimension. DEMO yoking together changes in polarity with scale changes, we explicitly avoid
DEMO claim that losses always have greater weight. We are not convinced that this stronger
condition is true for very large amounts, in that the perceives] differences between two
huge losses may in fact be less salient DEMO the difference between two equivalent gains.
Indeed, A7 implies that if DEMO proportional sensitivity were violated at some level
of an attribute, then DEMO the sign of the attribute at that level would not increase
the weighting of that attribute.
5. Restrictions on Separable Models
Previous work on DEMO models of risky and intertemporal choice has often con-
centrated on separable representations, which arise when preferences satisfy the double
cancellation condition (Krantz, Luce, Suppes and Tversky 1971 ):
A8. DOUBLE CANCELLATION. If (DEMO, a) (y, b) and (y, c) (z, a), then (x, c)
(z, b).
For DEMO, Al, A2, A3 and A8 imply that preferences can be DEMO by the
multiplicative formula f(a)g(b) (Fishburn and Rubinstein 1982, Theorem 3). The
prospect theory model of risky choice, DEMO written as 7r(p)v(x), has this form, as DEMO
the intertemporal models of Fishbum and Rubinstein (1982) and Loewenstein and Prelec
(1989). How do our three conditions (A5, A6 and A7) restrict the shape of the component
functions, f and g? Considering decreasing absolute sensitivity first, we see that in the
context of a separable representation, f(al )g(al) = f(a2)g(a2) implies
f(al + E)g(al) <f(a2 + iff + c)g(al).
E)g(a2) f(al + E)g"a2)>f(a2
After eliminating the ratio, g(al )/g(a2), from the three expressions, DAS may be stated
DEMO
S To derive the representation, apply the transformation, p -l In (1 /p), and invoke the Fishburn-Rubinstein
axioms, with In (DEMO /p) being interpreted as time. A proof of this resuWt for the discrete timre model is given in
Harvey ( 1986).
6 DEMO thank Amos Tversky for bringing this problem with IPS to our attention.
7 Loss amplification only applies to the money attribute since the time DEMO probability attributes cannot be
reversed in sign.
DECISION MAKING OVER TIME AND UNDER UNCERTAINTY 779
f(al + c)/f(a2 + c) <f(ai)/f(a2) iff f(DEMO + c) >f(a2)/f(al),
+ E)/DEMO(a2
or more compactly as
f(a2) f(al f ) DEMO(a)
?
(ifEal > ).
Increasing the absolute magnitude DEMO a, and a2 by a common constant moves the ratio,
DEMO(al)/f(a2), closer to one (i.e., it increases DEMO ratio iff(aI) <f(a2), and decreases it
iff(a a) >f(a2)). Equivalently, this means that the slope DEMO the function log lf(a) I becomes
less and less steep DEMO one moves further away from the a = 0 point, in DEMO the positive
or negative direction.
The same argument applied to the increasing proportional sensitivity condition shows
that
(if aa1 > 0 and I aI >
f(a2) f(a2/a) f(a2) 1).
DEMO reduction of the absolute magnitude of a, and a2 by a DEMO proportional constant
moves the ratio, f(al)/f(a2), closer to one. The implication is that the slope of
log If( a) I becomes shallower as log I I decreases, or, equivalently, DEMO log If( a) I is a
convex function of log I 1. This is subproportionality, as Kahneman and Tversky ( 1979)
defined it for the probability weighting function.
Finally, loss amplification, together with DEMO, means that the scaled ratio of two positive
values will be DEMO to one than the scaled ratio of two negative values of the same
absolute magnitude:
f(-Ia,1) f(Ia,1) if DEMO > la21.
f(-1Ia2l) f(I1a2l)
Equivalently, this means that log lf(a) I is a steeper function of log I I for negative than
for positive values of a.
This property is distinct DEMO "loss aversion"-the requirement thatf( a) is steeper in
the DEMO domain, which has been postulated to hold for decision making under DEMO
certainty (Kahneman and Tversky 1979). The behavioral implications of loss DEMO
are that a gain cannot compensate for a loss of equal absolute magnitude (an even gamble
to win or lose some amount should be rejected, for example). Sign-sensitivity, on the
other hand, does not compare gains against losses directly; rather, it compares the prob-
ability-money DEMO across the two domains, of gains and losses; in that sense, it identifies
a second-order gain-loss asymmetry.8
Although only one model of intertemporal choice incorporates a value function that
satisfied the three attribute sensitivity properties (Loewenstein and Prelec forthcoming),
many models have been proposed that include probability weighting or discount functions
that embody some of the properties discussed DEMO
Prelec (1989) has proposed a two-parameter family of discount functions, DEMO spans
the range from the exponential to the power function-i.e., the DEMO between constant
absolute and constant proportional sensitivity. Such a family of functions is generated
by the following axiom:
8 The influence of reference DEMO on the shape of indifference curves has been given a comprehensive
treatment in a recent paper by Tversky and Kahneman ( 1989). By DEMO aversion, they refer to a local distortion
in a person's DEMO preference structure, produced by a reference, or "status quo" point. Constantloss aversion,
a special case, occurs when the distortion can be expressed by a simple proportional rescaling of values below
and above the DEMO point on each dimension. In other words, the loss of x DEMO along a dimension is
assessed as if it were a shift in the negative direction of cax units along that same dimension (with ca being a
constant specific to that dimension, but always greater than one).
a
a
x
780
DRAZEN PRELEC AND GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
A8. SECOND-ORDER STATIONARITY. If (x, DEMO) - (y, s) and (x, t')
for DEMO 0 < e < 1,
- (y, s'), DEMO
(x, 5 t + ( 1
)t') )
- (y, es + ( 1
)s'). )
In other words, if the two intervals, t - s and t' - s', are subjectively equivalent, then
they will also be equivalent to any weighted average. Stationary time preferences are
included here, since the premise in the axiom will only hold when the two intervals are
equal: t - s = t' - s'. Included also are so-called relative timing preferences (Harvey
1986 ), for which the initial premise DEMO hold if the ratios, t/s and t'/s', are equal. The
most general discount function consistent with A8 is the general DEMO (Prelec 1989,
Theorem 5)
f(t)
= 1+
DEMO)-,
which reduces to the exponential function as the a-parameter goes to zero and the power
function as a becomes infinitely large. A DEMO case of this function was proposed by
Mazur ( 1987, with DEMO = A), to account for animal preferences over delayed rewards.
The limiting case where time preferences are invariant under proportional changes in
time DEMO has been studied by Harvey ( 1986), in the context of discrete time. Harvey
referred to this property as relative timing preferences, and proved that the discount
function must be a decreasing power function,
DEMO(t)
= t#5
,8 < O.
Harvey pointed out that DEMO time relative to the present is split into some constant delay
s, and an additional delay t', then the power discount function becomes
f(t) = (s + t'),
t' = t - s,
which is formally equivalent to the hyperbolic form stated DEMO Harvey referred to s
as a time lag, which might correspond, for example, to a period during which no con-
templated policy alternative can have an effect on society.
Many probability weighting functions also satisfy DEMO and IRS. For example, as noted
earlier, the probability weighting function in Kahneman and Tversky's Prospect Theory
satisfies subproportionality. Similarly, Karmarkar's (1978, 1979) probability weighting
function
r(p)
=
PS(+
1
p)s 5
has the requisite s-shape, for s < 1, though it is not subproportional over
range. Rachlin, Raineri and Cross (1989) proposed the form
the full probability
p
r(p) = DEMO + k(1 - p) '
which is subproportional everywhere, DEMO k > 1, but which does not overweigh small
probabilities. Prelec ( 1990) derived a log-hyperbolic form
r(p) = (l
1- DEMO {pj})a/,
from a "compounding" axiom, which states that the pair of indifferences, (x, p) (y,
q) DEMO (x, rp) (y, sq) imply (x, rcp) (y, sCq), for any c > 1. The common ratio
effect, in other words, can be replicated at lower probability levels, by compounding the
reduction of the two probabilities (p and q) at DEMO rates (r and s). The function is
subproportional everywhere, and traces out the s-shape predicted by Kahneman and
Tversky.
DECISION MAKING OVER TIME AND UNDER UNCERTAINTY
781
6. Predictions of the DEMO
Single outcome prospects (temporal and risky) provide four separate attributes on
which to test the predictions of the model. Only the money dimension DEMO be reversed
in sign, however, so that the three conditions identified in the previous section yield a
total of 10 predictions of choice DEMO, which are summarized in Table 2. We consider
first the predictions DEMO temporal prospects, shown in the two right-hand columns of
the table.
DEMO Choice
The common-difference effect-perhaps the fundamental intertemporal choice anom-
aly-illustrates decreasing absolute sensitivity for the time dimension. Adding a constant
to both delays diminishes DEMO importance of time, thus shifting preference in favor of
the prospect DEMO the larger money outcome. The increasing proportional sensitivity
condition has not been systematically tested, but we have little reason to doubt that it
holds: For example, if one is indifferent between a large prize in DEMO years time and a
smaller prize in one year, then one DEMO likely to prefer the larger prize when months, or
days are DEMO for years in the comparison.
Turning to the money attribute, decreasing DEMO sensitivity has again not been
tested, perhaps because it follows from DEMO function concavity, which is widely assumed.
For example, a person who is indifferent between $1000 now and $2000 two years from
now, is likely to prefer $2000 now over $3000 at the later date. Increasing DEMO sen-
sitivity corresponds to the magnitude effect discussed in ?3, and has been tested extensively.
While robust in the range of small to DEMO dollar outcome, as noted above, it is
likely that the effect will reverse at the very high end: A person indifferent between $1000
now and $2000 three years from now, may well prefer ten million now to twenty in three
years (assuming again that he cannot draw on the funds now).
The third condition, loss amplification, is DEMO with the observed lower discounting
of losses than gains discussed in ?DEMO Consider a person who is indifferent between $20 in
one year or $10 now. According to increasing relative sensitivity, the same person would
prefer $200 in one year to $100 now, since magnifying both dollar outcomes by a common
constant increases the weight placed on the money attribute. DEMO, instead, we change the
sign to create a choice between -$20 in one year or -$10 now, loss amplification states
that it should have the same effect as increasing the outcome magnitudes-i.e., to increase
the weight on the dollar attribute relative to the time delay attribute. Thus, following a
sign shift, preference should shift in favor of the earlier smaller loss. It should be noted
that loss amplification does not preclude DEMO operation of other reasons for underdis-
counting losses, such as "wanting to get it over with," dread, etc. (Loewenstein 1987).
DEMO Making Under Uncertainty
Increasing sensitivity on the probability dimension is illustrated by the common-ratio
effect (Kahneman and Tversky 1979). Shrinking (multiplicatively) the nonzero prob-
TABLE 2
Model Predictions
Decision Making Under Uncertainty
Intertemporal
Choice
DEMO Properties
Decreasing Absolute
Sensitivity
Increasing Relative
Sensitivity
Loss Amplification
Probability
Plausible within a
limited range
Common ratio
effect
Money
Follows from risk
aversion
Implausible
DEMO effect
Time
Common difference
effect
Unverified but
plausible
Money
Follows from U fn.
concavity
Magnitude effect
Sign effect
782
DRAZEN PRELEC AND GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
abilities in two risky prospects by DEMO common factor decreases the perceived difference
between the probabilities, which, in accordance with IPS, reduces the weight of the prob-
ability dimension. This causes preference to shift in favor of the lower-probability higher-
money outcome DEMO
The situation with the decreasing absolute sensitivity condition is a bit more ambiguous.
For small probabilities, the condition is likely to hold. For example, a person who is
indifferent between, say, ($ 1000; 0.1 ) and ($2000; 0.05 ), will most certainly prefer ($2000;DEMO
0.5) to ($1000, 0.55). Indeed, risk-aversion or risk neutrality are sufficient to ensure
DAS, in the context of expected utility theory. However, if we make the probabilities
very high, then the condition DEMO no longer self-evident. A person may very well be indif-
ferent between an 80% chance at $2 million and a 90% chance at $1 DEMO, and at the
same time prefer a 99% chance at a DEMO to a 89% chance of two million.
Possibly, the violation of DEMO suggested by this example is due to an intrinsic ambiguity
in how probabilities are framed. With the almost certain windfall in the example, one is
inclined to think in terms of the probabilities of not winning, rather than winning the
prize. In that frame, the relative impact of 11% vs. 1% is greater than the relative impact
of 20% vs. DEMO
Turning to the money attribute, decreasing absolute sensitivity is commensurate with
DEMO aversion and seems perfectly compelling. Adding a constant to the outcomes of risky
alternatives increases the relative weighting of probability, shifting preferences in favor
of the smaller, safer, prospect. A person who is indifferent, say, between $100 for sure
and a 50% chance at $300, will DEMO prefer $200 to a 50% chance at $400, or $500 to
DEMO 50% chance at $700. The opposite preference pattern would go against robust expected
value increases, and would only be justified by extreme risk-proneness at the higher dollar
amounts. In the context of prospect theory, for example, DAS is satisfied provided that
the logarithm of the value function is concave in money (which is a weaker requirement
than the traditionally assumed concavity of the value function itself).
Unfortunately for our model, risky choice typically does not conform to increasing
proportional sensitivity. Magnifying the "stakes" of risky prospects increases the impor-
tance of the probability dimension, DEMO in more risk-averse behavior. What can
account for this one exception? DEMO believe that the discrepancy results from interactions
between attributes, which are DEMO for risky and intertemporal choice.
In decision making under uncertainty probabilistic outcomes are mutually exclusive-
one and only one outcome occurs. When evaluating a DEMO in isolation, all possible
comparisons take place between the outcome that DEMO and those that do not. Fur-
thermore, the effect of such DEMO is generally taken to be contrastive. As a result
of disappointment (DEMO 1985), losing a gamble is more painful the greater the potential
gain. Likewise, the utility of winning is heightened by the elation that results from pon-
dering the negative outcome that could have occurred, although the disappointment
effect is generally assumed to dominate the elation effect (Bell 1985). We believe that
anticipation of disappointment is responsible for the DEMO of increasing proportional
sensitivity for risky choice.
Consider what happens as one magnifies the stakes of a simple prospect consisting,
say, of a 0.5 chance at $100 and a 0.5 chance at $0. Although the DEMO increases in
expected value, its subjective value does not increase commensurately DEMO after allowing
for risk aversion. This is because, due to disappointment, the zero outcome becomes
progressively worse in utility terms as the positive DEMO increases. Disappointment
and elation also have the combined effect of amplifying the utility difference between
the positive and negative outcomes as the positive outcome DEMO improved. Thus, as the
value of the positive outcome increases, the decision maker becomes increasingly preoc-
cupied with the probability of obtaining the DEMO of the two outcomes, increasing the
DECISION MAKING OVER TIME AND UNDER UNCERTAINTY
783
weighting of the probability DEMO The probability dimension becomes relatively
more important because, as the gamble DEMO magnified, its overall value does not increase
commensurately but the decision DEMO's concern with obtaining the more desirable
outcome increases.
Interaction effects in intertemporal choice are different from those in decision making
under uncertainty, and the difference can explain why increasing proportional sensitivity
is generally observed for DEMO prospects but not for risky ones. For simple, one-
outcome prospects, the most important interaction effect is the "endowment" effect
(Elster 1985, Tversky and Griffin 1990). People derive positive utility from "savoring"DEMO
a desirable outcome or from dreading an undesirable one (Loewenstein 1987)DEMO
Magnifying the outcome in a simple intertemporal prospect enhances utility in every
period, due to savoring (and possibly memory) so that overall utility increases even more
than what would be predicted on the basis of DEMO discounted utility. Note that this is
precisely the opposite of what occurs in decision making under uncertainty, where the
dominant interaction effect-disappointment-attenuates the gamble's increase in de-
sirability as the value of the positive outcome DEMO magnified. On the other hand, magnifying
the value of the outcome DEMO a simple intertemporal prospect does not have a strong
impact on the importance of time delay. Although one might be more concerned about
experiencing DEMO highly desirable outcome earlier, possibilities for savoring, and hence
willingness to delay may also increase as the delayed outcome improves. Again, this is
in marked contrast to the case of decision making under uncertainty where DEMO
the magnitude of the positive outcome increases preoccupation with the probability of
obtaining it.
Loss amplification does seem plausible when applied to decision making DEMO un-
certainty, though it has not been tested systematically. For example, a person who is
indifferent between $10 or a 50% chance at DEMO would probably prefer $100 to a 50%
chance at $200, reflecting DEMO increase in the weight placed on probability when outcomes
are magnified. If changing the sign of the money dimension from positive to negative
has DEMO same impact on attribute weighting as does magnifying outcomes, then we DEMO
expect the weight on probability to be increased if we changed the signs of the payoffs
in the original prospects. Loss amplification therefore predicts DEMO the same decision
maker would prefer a 50% chance of losing $20 to a sure loss of $10, a plausible pattern
of choice.
7. Discussion
In this paper we have outlined several significant parallels between intertemporal DEMO
and decision making under uncertainty. Actual patterns of behavior in both domains
are surprisingly similar, as revealed by the parallelism between the DU and EU anomalies
discussed in ?3.9 As a result, with the sole DEMO of the weighing of value in decision
making under uncertainty, behavior DEMO both domains can be expressed in terms of three
I Our argument for a close correspondence between patterns of choice in the domain of DEMO and uncertainty
is bolstered by recent research demonstrating that preference reversals analogous to those observed in decision
making under uncertainty also occur in intertemporal DEMO (Tversky, Slovic and Kahneman 1990). There
are further parallels that we do not explore here. Recently a number of models of preferences DEMO multiple
outcome lotteries have been developed in which a nonlinear transformation is applied to the cumulative probability
dimension. In these rank order models extreme DEMO are weighted disproportionately (e.g., Quiggin 1982,
Yaari 1987). We have found a similar pattern with preferences toward sequences of outcomes; the outcomes
that appear at the beginning and end of the sequence receive DEMO weight than called for by conventional
discounting schemes (Loewenstein and Prelec DEMO, 1991 ).
784 DRAZEN PRELEC AND GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
simple principles laid out in ?4: increasing relative and decreasing absolute sensitivity,
and loss amplification.
The discounted and expected utility models both make extreme assumptions about
the sensitivity of DEMO to transformations of the nonvalue attribute; in both cases
actual behavior DEMO between these extremes. At the same time both theories are relatively
agnostic about how transformations of the value attribute will affect preference-yet it
is DEMO to specify such effects with some precision.
Our analysis reiterates the importance, already evident in research on decision making
under uncertainty, of preferential DEMO The most common practice in attempts
to produce alternative models to EU has been to modify EU to take into account various
violations of DEMO Our analysis suggests however that EU and DU may provide
skewed foundations for such efforts; the pattern of choice described by intermediate
sensitivity appears to provide a superior base on which to add interaction effects.
In DEMO conclusion that preferences are sensitive both to absolute and relative transfor-
mations of attributes, our findings are related to several earlier contributions. Mac-
Crimmon and Messick (1976), Lurie (1987), and Loewenstein, Thompson and Bazerman
(1989) have demonstrated that interpersonal comparisons of material outcomes reflect
DEMO concern both for absolute and relative differences between one's own and other persons'
payoffs. Even more closely related is Harvey's (1988) discussion of two approaches to
discounting in public policy which he terms absolute and relative timing preference.
These are equivalent to what we would DEMO constant absolute and constant relative sen-
sitivity for time.
Our conclusion that patterns of weighting are relatively similar for different attributes
is also reminiscent DEMO earlier work on decision making under uncertainty which has
treated the probability and time dimensions symmetrically-as diverse attributes are
typically handled in generic multiattribute DEMO problems (e.g., Slovic and Lichtenstein
1968, Payne and Braunstein 1971) . Most existing choice models, including EU and DU,
assume that qualitatively different patterns of weighting apply to money and nonmoney
(probability or time) attributes. However, such a discrepancy in treatment is not evident
DEMO actual choice behavior. Rather than employing separate rules for different choice
attributes, people seem to apply certain fundamental and relatively simple rules to eval-
uating different types of attributes.
An interesting question is whether the similarity DEMO intertemporal choice and
decision making under uncertainty applies more broadly to other types of multi-attribute
choice. Time and uncertainty are closely related in a DEMO of ways so it is possible
that the observed parallelism of choice behavior is unique to these two domains. Both
are attributes that pertain DEMO choice objects' delivery-its time or probability of occurring-
rather than to DEMO of the objects themselves. Furthermore, time and uncertainty
are typically correlated DEMO one another in the real world, perhaps also contributing to
their DEMO treatment. Anything that is delayed is almost by definition uncertain.
And since uncertainty takes time to resolve, uncertain outcomes are also typically delayed.
Indeed some researchers have argued that the two attributes really measure the same
DEMO, although there is disagreement regarding which is the more fundamental (Rachlin,
Raineri and Cross 1989, Benzion, Rapoport and Yagil 1989). DEMO of these connections
raise the possibility that the similarity of choice behavior is peculiar to time and uncer-
tainty-that it reflects their intimate connection DEMO than fundamental processes un-
derlying all multiattribute choices. The answer to this question awaits further research.10
'? We thank Jerry Green, Richard Herrnstein, Daniel Kahneman, Mark Machina, Howard Rachlin, Paul
Schoemaker and Amos Tversky for helpful suggestions. Financial assistance from the Russell Sage Foundation
and the DEMO P. Sloan Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
DECISION MAKING OVER TIME AND UNDER UNCERTAINTY
References
785
BELL,
BENZION, A. RAPOPORT
Management Sci., 35 (March 1989), 270-284.
CHRISTENSEN-SZALANSKI, J. J. JAY, "Discount Functions and the Measurement of Patients' Values: DEMO's
Decisions During Childbirth," Medical Decision Making, 4, 1 (DEMO), 47-58.
COHEN, M. AND J.-Y. JAFFRAY, "Certainty Effect Versus DEMO Distortion: An Experimental Analysis of
Decision Making under Risk," J. DEMO Psych. Human Perception and Performance, 14 (1988), 554-
560.
ELSTER, "Weakness of Will and the Free-Rider Problem," Econ. and Philosophy, 1 (1985), 231-265.
FISCHER, W., M. S. KAMLET, S. DEMO FIENBERG AND D. SCHKADE, "Risk Preferences for Gains and Losses
in Multiple Objective Decision Making," Management Sci., 32 (1986), 1065-1086.
DEMO, C. AND A. RUBINSTEIN, "Time Preference," Internat. Economnics Rev., 23 (1982), 677-694.
HARVEY, C. M., "Prescriptive Models of DEMO Effects and Risk Attitudes," Unpublished Working
Paper, Dickinson College, 1988.
"Value Functions for Infinite-Period Planning," Management Sci., 32, 9 (DEMO), 1123-1139.
HERSHEY, J. C. AND P. J. H. SCHOEMAKER, "DEMO Theory's Reflection Hypothesis: A Critical Examination,"
Organizational Behavior and Huiman Petformance, 25 (1980), 395-418.
KAHNEMAN, AND A. TVERSKY, "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk," Econornetrica,
47, 2 (1979), 363-391.
KARMARKAR,
Organizational Behavior and Huiman
"Subjective Weighted
24 (1979), 67-72.
KOOPMANS, "Stationary
KRANTZ, D. H., R. D. LUCE,
Press, New York, 1971.
LOEWENSTEIN, G., "Anticipation and the Valuation of Delayed Consumption," Economic J., 97 (DEMO), 666-
684.
"Frames of Mind in Intertemporal Choice," Management DEMO, 34 (1988a), 200-214.
"The Weighting of Waiting: Response Mode Effects in Intertemporal Choice," working paper, Center
for Decision Research, DEMO
, L. THOMPSON M. BAZERMAN, "Decision Making in Interpersonal Contexts," J. Personalityn and
Social Psych., 57 (1989), 426-441.
AND D. DEMO, "Anomalies in Intertemporal Choice: Evidence and an Interpretation," Qu1art.
DEMO (forthcoming).
AND , "Preferences over Outcome Sequences," working paper, Center for Decision Research,
1989.
AND , "Negative Time Preference," Amer. Economic Rev., Papers and Proc., 81 (1991), 347-
DEMO
LURIE, S., "A Parametric Model of Utility for Two-person Distributions," Psych. Rev., 94 (1987), 42-60.
MACCRIMMON, K. R. AND DEMO M. MESSICK, "A Framework for Social Motives," Behavioral Sci., DEMO (1976),
86-100.
MACHINA, M., " 'Expected Utility' without the Independence Axiom," Econometrica, 50 (1982), 277-323.
"Dynamic Consistency and Non-expected Utility Models of Choice under Uncertainty," UCLA San
Diego DEMO Paper, 1988.
MARKOWITZ, "The Utility of Wealth," J. Political DEMO, 60, 2 (1952), 151-158.
MAZUR, J. E., "An Adjustment Proceduie for Studying Delayed Reinforcement," in M. L. Commons, J. E.
Mazur, J. A. Nevins and FI. Rachlin (Eds.), Qluantitative DEMO oJfBehavior: The Ef/ect of Delay and
of Intervening Events on DEMO Value, Chapter 2, Ballinger, Hillsdale, NJ, 1987.
VON NEUMANN, J. AND 0. MORGENSTERN, Theory of Gamnes and Economnic Behavior, Princeton DEMO
Press, Princeton, NJ, 1953.
PAYNE, J. W. AND M. L. BRAUNSTEIN, "Preferences among Gambles with Equal Underlying Distributions,"
J. Experimental Psych., 87 (1971), 13-18.
,D. J. LAUGHHUNN AND R. CRUM, "Translation of Gambles and Aspiration Level Effects in Risky
Choice Behavior," Management Sci., 26 (1980), 1039-1060.
PRELEC, "Decreasing Impatience: DEMO and Consequences," Russell Sage Foundation Working Paper,
1989.
,"On the Shape of the Decision Weight Function," Harvard Business School Working DEMO, 1990.
QUIGGIN, "A Theory of Anticipated Utility," J. Econ DEMO Behavior and Organization, 3 (1982), 323-343.
D. E. "Disappointment DEMO Decision Making Under Uncertainty," Oper. Res., 33, 1 (1985), 1-27.
AND
J. YAGIL,
"Subjectively Weighted Utility: A Descriptive Extension of the Expected Utility Model,"
Petformance, 21 (1978), 6 1-72.
Utility and the Allais Paradox," Organizational Behlavior and Hutman
Ordinal DEMO and Impatience," Econometrica, 18 (1960), 207-309.
P. SUPPES AND
A. TVERSKY,
Foundations of Measuirement,
"Discount Rates Inferred
from Decisions: An Experimental
Study,"
Performance,
Vol. 1, Academic
U.,
J.,
G.
P.
D.
U.,
T.,
H.,
D.,DEMO
J.,
AND
J.
786
DRAZEN PRELEC AND GEORGE LOEWENSTEIN
RACHLIN, H., A. RAINERI AND DEMO CROSS, "Subjective Probability and Delay," Working Paper, SUNY Stony-
DEMO, 1989.
RUBINSTEIN, A., "Similarity and Decision-Making Under Risk," Theoretical Economics Discussion Paper number
162, London School of Economics, 1987.
P. DEMO S. LICHTENSTEIN, "Relative Importance of Probabilities and Payoffs in Risk Taking," J. Ex-
perimental Psych., 78 (1968), 646-654.
THALER, R., "Some Empirical Evidence on Dynamic Inconsistency," Economics Letters, 8 (DEMO), 201-207.
TVERSKY, AND D. GRIFFIN, "Endowment and Contrast in DEMO of Well-being," in F. Strack, M. Argyle
and N. Schwartz (Eds.), Subjective Well-Being, 1990.
AND D. KAHNEMAN, "The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of Choice," Science, 211 (1981),
453-458.
AND , "Reference Theory of Choice and Exchange," unpublished working paper, 1989.
S. SATTATH AND P. SLOVIC, "Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice," Psych. Rev., 95,
(1988), 371-384.
, DEMO SLOVIC AND D. KAHNEMAN, "The Causes of Preference Reversals," Amer. Economics Rev., 80
(1990), 204-217.
YAARI, M. E., "The Dual Theory of Choice under Risk," Econometrica, 55 (1987), DEMO
SLOVIC,
A.{1g42fwefx}