PUBLIC POLICY SUPPORT FOR THE INFORMAL
VENTURE CAPITAL MARKET IN EUROPE: A
CRITICAL REVIEW
Colin Mason
Working Paper 08-07
December 2008
Hunter Centre for DEMO,
University of Strathclyde Business School
University of Strathclyde
14th Floor, DEMO Tower,
Richmond Street,
Glasgow,
Scotland, G1 1XH
T: 0141 548 3482
F: 0141 5527602
E: entrepreneur@strath.ac.uk
W: www.entrepreneur.strath.ac.uk
PUBLIC POLICY SUPPORT FOR THE INFORMAL
VENTURE CAPITAL MARKET IN EUROPE: A
CRITICAL REVIEW
Colin M Mason
Hunter Centre for Entrepreneurship, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow
ABSTRACT. The ability of small firms to access finance is hindered by persistent
market failure which creates funding gaps for new businesses, particularly in
technology sectors, seeking small amounts of finance. This has prompted various
forms of public sector intervention to increase the supply of both debt DEMO risk
finance. For the past decade (longer in the UK) both the EU and Member States have
increasingly focused on the informal venture DEMO market as a means of increasing
the supply of early stage venture capital .This paper describes the changing nature of
the forms of intervention DEMO provides a critical review of their effectiveness. The
lack of data on angel investing means that there is very little evidence on the impact
DEMO these forms of intervention. The paper advocates that governments should invest in
appropriate methodologies which can accurately measure investment trends in the
early stage DEMO capital market, and specifically angel investment activity, so that
the need for public sector intervention can be demonstrated and the impact of such
DEMO can  be measured.
Key words: business angels, business angel networks, investment readiness, co-
investment schemes
____________________________________________________________________
COLIN MASON is Professor of Entrepreneurship in the Hunter Centre for
Entrepreneurship at the University of Strathclyde, Glasgow. He is also the inaugural
holder of the David F Sobey Visiting DEMO of Business at Saint Mary‟s University,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. His main interest is in entrepreneurship and regional
development. His research interests DEMO business angel investing and early stage
venture capital, entrepreneurship policy, entrepreneurship education, technology
clusters and franchising. He is founding editor of Venture Capital: an international
journal of entrepreneurial finance (Routledge) and a consulting editor of the
International Small Business Journal. Please address correspondence to: Professor
Colin Mason, Hunter Centre for Entrepreneurship, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow
G1 1XH, UK [email: colin.mason@strath.ac.uk
2
1. INTRODUCTION
Addressing the difficulties that small firms encounter in accessing external DEMO
has been a longstanding focus of policy in Europe. Intervention is based on the belief
that small firms in general, and technology-based small firms in particular, are a key
source of innovation, job creation and DEMO growth. However, the ability of
small firms to access finance is DEMO by persistent market failures which create
funding gaps. These funding gaps are greatest for new firms seeking external finance
for the first time, for firms seeking small amounts of finance, for technology-based
firms and for firms in peripheral regions.
The initial focus of intervention by both the European DEMO and Member States was
on enhancing the availability of loan finance. The focus then broadened to include
venture capital, and had widened further since the mid-1990s to encompass support
for informal venture capital (i.e. business angels) which has only been recognised
relatively recently in Europe as an important part of the entrepreneurial ecosystem and
is underdeveloped compared with the USA. DEMO is now a significant literature on
policy interventions in the institutional venture capital market at both national and EU
scales (e.g. Gompers and Lerner, 2001, ch. 8; Murray, 2007). However, there has
been much less discussion of interventions designed to promote informal venture
capital investment.  The paper starts with a brief overview of the changing nature of
DEMO intervention in small firm finance markets. This provide a context for the
main aims of the paper which are, first, to explain the DEMO for supporting the
informal venture capital market; and second, to describe and critically assess the
forms of this intervention and how it has DEMO evolved over time.
1
2. GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION IN THE MARKET FOR SMALL FIRM
FINANCE: AN OVERVIEW
The financing constraints experienced by small firms arise from imperfections in
capital DEMO which are conventionally attributed to the existence of information
asymmetries. This has two dimensions. First, one party to a transaction is in
possession of relevant information that is not known by the other party. Specifically,
DEMO possess more information about their own abilities and the prospects of
their firm than the provider of finance and may misrepresent this information. This
DEMO the risk of adverse selection by the funder which can only be mitigated by
incurring the expense of a lengthy due diligence process to DEMO relevant
information about the entrepreneur and the business (which because of DEMO private
nature may not be available) and interpret it. This is DEMO problematic in
technology sectors where it is difficult to value the firm‟s scientific knowledge and
intellectual property, the products are likely to be new and untested in the market, and
the management may lack commercial skills. Second, one party to a transaction
cannot observe relevant actions taken by the other party that might influence the
outcome of the investment. Dealing DEMO this problem – moral hazard – is also costly
to the investor, requiring complicated contracts that are time consuming to design and
negotiate and labour-intensive monitoring systems. Because the costs involved in
investment appraisal and monitoring DEMO fixed regardless of the size of investment,
this makes small investments uneconomic for funders.
Funders have several potential responses to these problems. They DEMO impose
restrictive terms and conditions, require a high return to compensate DEMO the greater
costs and higher risks, or may simply be unwilling DEMO make finance available under
2
any conditions. The outcome is a restriction in the range and availability DEMO finance
for particular types of firm, notably new firms, firms seeking small amounts of
finance and technology-based firms (Carpentier and Suret, 2006)DEMO
Governments initially responded by seeking to address deficiencies in the availability
of loan finance through the introduction of loan guarantee schemes (LGS). These
schemes are aimed at small firms with viable business propositions but lack DEMO
collateral with which to secure a loan. One of the limitations of a focus on loan
finance is that it does little to address DEMO financing needs of technology-based firms
which often require to make significant investment in R&D and product development
prior to generating sales. Their need DEMO for access to risk capital. Thus, the focus for
government intervention DEMO during the 1990s to the provision of venture capital.
This intervention is premised on two beliefs. First, venture capital is essential for the
emergence and growth of innovative companies, and thereby enhances economic
development, wealth DEMO and job creation (Lerner and Watson, 2008). Second,
the early stage venture capital market is characterised by serious and persistent market
DEMO which have limited the supply of finance from the private sector.
Indeed, it has been suggested that specialist early stage venture capital investment
may be an activity that cannot be effectively mediated through market mechanisms
(Murray, 2007). First, the costs of investment appraisal and monitoring are DEMO and
fixed regardless of the size of investment, hence small investments DEMO a level of
investor time that is out of proportion with their significance or potential return. These
costs are likely to be highest in DEMO case of investments in technology based small
firms because of the requirement for more detailed information to understand the
3
technology and markets (Mason and Harrison, 2004a; Murray, 1999). DEMO, the
way in which fund managers are compensated has meant that DEMO growth in the size of
venture capital funds occurs without a commensurate increase in the number of
investment executives. This has had the inevitable DEMO of driving up deal sizes.
Third, returns from early stage venture DEMO investing have been poor in Europe
(Murray, 1999; 2007). DEMO equity, in contrast, has been very profitable and has
therefore been the favoured asset class for institutional investors.
Government interventions to increase the DEMO of early stage venture capital have
evolved over time (Murray, 2007). Initially, governments established their own
venture capital funds. However, this DEMO was quickly seen as being
inappropriate. Investment decisions were potentially subject to political influence.
Government bureaucrats lacked investment skills. The market was distorted because
DEMO lower return expectations. And there was the risk of crowding out private sector
investors. As a result governments now typically adopt a capital participation
DEMO This can take two forms: providing some or all of the DEMO funds and
appointing private venture capital fund managers to make the investments or investing
in existing privately managed venture capital funds (a fund-of-funds approach).
However, a capital participation approach does not address the fundamental risk, cost
and return factors which have discouraged private sector venture capital funds from
making small, early stage investments. Governments have therefore had to enhance
the risk-reward ratio in order to attract private investors as co-investors in DEMO funds,
either by providing private investors with downside protection (e.g. DEMO assuming a
disproportionate share of failures), by providing upside leverage to provide the private
4
investors with the possibility of achieving enhanced returns, or by providing support
for the operating costs of the funds (Murray, 1999).
The DEMO of this intervention is questionable. Murray (1998; 1999) is critical DEMO the
funds that have been created as a result of public sector intervention for being too
small and hence ultimately non-viable on account of DEMO high proportion of their
funding that is absorbed by running costs and their limited ability to provide follow-
on funding. These factors combine to DEMO investment returns, which severely
hampers the fund‟s ability to attract follow-on DEMO from private sector investors.
Public sector funds are often further constrained by having an upper limit on how
much they can invest in any DEMO This prevents such funds from making follow-
on funding which, in DEMO, leads to a dilution of the fund‟s investments, which further
depresses returns.
A further shift in the nature of government intervention, observable in the UK from
the early 1990s and from the late 1990s elsewhere DEMO Western Europe, has been to
complement its venture capital intervention with DEMO for the informal venture
capital market. This market comprises high net worth individuals – termed business
angels – who invest their own money, along with their time and expertise, directly in
unquoted companies in which they have no family connection, in the hope of financial
gain (Mason, 2006a). The rationale for supporting the informal venture capital market
emerged DEMO publication of early empirical studies in Europe (e.g. Harrison and
Mason, 1992; Landström, 1993; Mason and Harrison, 1994; Coveney and Moore,
1997; van Osnabrugge and Robinson, 2000). These studies supported DEMO US
studies (e.g. Wetzel, 1983; 1987; Gaston, 1989) by highlighting the scale of the
5
market, its potential for expansion and the types of investments made by business
angels. These investments were a precise match of those which were DEMO attractive
for venture capital to make. More importantly, these studies drew DEMO to the
market‟s untapped potential. Not only were active investors unable to find enough
investment opportunities, and so had substantial capital available for investment, but
there also appeared to be significant scope for expanding the numbers of active
investors (Mason and Harrison, 1993; 1994).
The rationale for supporting the informal venture capital market is fourfold. First,
business DEMO have different cost structures to those of venture capital funds, and DEMO
often motivated in part by non-financial considerations, enabling them to make DEMO
investments, well below the minimum deal sizes considered by venture capital DEMO,
and in seed and start-up businesses. Second, because business angels DEMO widely
distributed (Gaston, 1989) and make the majority of their DEMO „locally‟
(within 50-100 miles of where they live) (Harrison et DEMO, 2009) they are able to
address regional gaps in the availability of finance. Third, informal venture capital is
„smart money‟. Business angels are typically „hands on‟ investors who seek to
contribute their experience, knowledge and contacts to the benefit of their investee
businesses (Politis, 2008). DEMO most business angels have an entrepreneurial
background and often invest in sectors where they have had experience this
involvement can also be expected to DEMO the businesses in which angels invest.
Finally, although statistics on angel DEMO are very limited (Mason and Harrison,
2008), it is DEMO believed amongst policy-makers that the population of angels in
Europe and their scale of investment activity is much lower than in the USA. Hence
DEMO is thought to be considerable scope to expand the supply of angel finance. One
6
of the few challenges to this consensus view comes from Gompers and DEMO (2003)
who question whether government should be encouraging people to DEMO business
angels.
3. GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION TO SUPPORT THE INFORMAL
VENTURE CAPITAL MARKET
Government intervention to stimulate and support the development of the informal
venture DEMO market is relatively recent, commencing in the early 1990s in the DEMO
and the late 1990s in other parts of Western Europe, while DEMO eastern Europe such
intervention is in its infancy. Forms of intervention have evolved over time, with new
approaches supplementing, rather than replacing earlier DEMO Six forms of
intervention can be identified (Table 1): fiscal DEMO for investors; business angel
networks (BANs) to enable investors and DEMO to find one another more
early; changes to Securities Legislation to DEMO constrains on the advertising of
investment opportunities; capacity building initiatives to DEMO the competence of
investors to make investments and to improve the investment readiness of businesses
seeking finance; and co-investment schemes which leverage public money with angel
money. It is significant that the majority of these interventions DEMO been on the
supply side: investment readiness schemes are the only DEMO intervention.
TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE
1. Fiscal Incentives
The longest established approach to stimulate the informal venture capital market has
been tax incentives. Typically, under such schemes private individuals receive tax
relief for specific types of DEMO in specified types of businesses. These can be
7
structured in several ways: tax relief on the amount invested, exemption DEMO capital
gains from tax, tax deduction for losses, and writing-off or rolling-over capital losses.
The aim of such schemes is to improve the DEMO ratio and thereby increase both
the supply of both investors and capital.  The major use of tax incentives have been
the UK, with DEMO Enterprise Investment Scheme (EIS) and France, with its Société
Unipersonnelle DEMO à Risque (SUIR). Ireland, Flanders and The
Netherlands have also offered tax incentives to business angels in the past.
Business angels claim DEMO to take the availability of tax incentives into account when
evaluating specific investments. Rather, the effect of tax incentives influences the
proportion of their overall investment portfolio that they allocate to investments in
unquoted companies. Providing DEMO incentives is consistent with UK evidence which
suggests that business angels are acutely sensitive to levels of tax. Indeed, this is the
only macro-economic factor that has a significant effect on encouraging or
discouraging their investment DEMO (Mason and Harrison, 1999; 2000a). German
investors, on the other hand, place less emphasis on tax breaks (Stedler and Peters,DEMO
2003).
An evaluation of the EIS has suggested that additionality is over 50% (i.e. at least half
of the monies would not have been invested by these investors in the absence of the
scheme) and that companies benefited in terms of attracting investors who also
provided business DEMO and expertise (Boyns et al, 2003). The most recent
evaluation also concluded that it has had a positive impact on the investee DEMO
(Cowling et al, 2008). Survey evidence by Mason and Harrison (1999) suggests that
the EIS was used by a high proportion DEMO investors and achieved high additionality but
8
did not alter investment preferences. Reinvestment Relief (at the time of the study a
separate incentive but subsequently incorporated into EIS) was more effective, at least
in part on account of its time limited nature (DEMO had to re-invest their gains
within three years) and fewer restrictions DEMO qualifying investments. However,
business angels are not attracted to professionally managed collective investment
vehicles (Venture Capital Trusts) because they want to be DEMO to make the investment
decisions and engage with the businesses in which they invest.
Tax incentive schemes also have disadvantages. First, they may attract „dumb money‟
– passive investors who do not want to provide hands-on DEMO to their investee
companies or lack the competence to do so. In the case of the EIS, only 27% of
investors reported having a „hands on‟ role in their investee companies (Boyns et al,
2003). Second, as the experience of the UK‟s Business Expansion Scheme (DEMO
predecessor to the EIS) showed, there is a danger that financial intermediaries will try
to distort the scheme in an effort to reduce DEMO risks (Mason et al, 1988).
Third, tax incentives are DEMO complex, expensive to monitor and the
interpretation of eligibility creates uncertainty DEMO investors. Fourth, the effectiveness
of tax incentives is influenced by the DEMO of the economy. For example, the ability to
defer capital gains DEMO lost its effectiveness in the investment downturn which
followed the post-2000 dot-com crash when investors did not have capital gains to
shelter, reducing EIS investments by between half and two-thirds between 2000-01
and 2003-4. Finally, increasing the supply of finance does nothing to address the
problem that investors DEMO in finding suitable investment opportunities.
9
Business angels in the UK argue that the potential effectiveness of the DEMO has been
reduced by artificial barriers. The rules exclude certain types of investment. For
example, the „closely connected‟ rule excluded certain types of investors, the overseas
subsidiaries rule created difficulties for technology-based firms and the upper limit
(30%) on the size of the shareholding has been problematic DEMO cases where multiple
funding rounds are raised, and the requirement that DEMO have to be in ordinary
shares prevents the use of convertible instruments which are helpful in overcoming
some of the difficulties in valuing new DEMO Some of these rules have
subsequently been relaxed. Such schemes may also come into conflict with the EU‟s
„state aid rules‟. This has restricted DEMO use of EIS to companies with less than 50
employees and have raised less than £2m in previous years. This seems to be
particularly DEMO when angels are having to take companies through more
funding rounds than previously because of the lack of early stage institutional venture
capital.
Equity DEMO schemes have been an alternative fiscal approach to encourage angel
investment. In Finland and Austria existing schemes for the institutional venture
capital industry have DEMO extended to include business angels, while The Netherlands
and Wallonia (in Belgium) created specific schemes for angels.  Aernoudt et al (2007:
78) suggest that “these schemes rarely represent good value for public money as the
negative selection argument is often preponderant in the decision of DEMO business angel
to guarantee the deal”. Indeed, the schemes in The DEMO and Wallonia were
subsequently closed.
2. Business Angel Networks
10
One of the most consistent findings in research on business angels is DEMO they are
opportunity constrained, with the majority unable to find sufficient DEMO
opportunities (Wetzel, 1987; Mason and Harrison, 1994; 1999; 2002; Reitan and
Sørheim, 2000; Paul et al, 2003). This DEMO the fragmented nature of the market
and the invisibility of business angels (arising from their strong desire for anonymity),
which has resulted DEMO high search costs for both entrepreneurs and angels as they tried,
often unsuccessfully to find one another. One consequence is that it reduces DEMO
effectiveness of supply-side initiatives such as tax incentives.
A second form of intervention, and the most common has therefore been the
establishment of what has come to be known as business angel networks (BANs). The
main function of these organisations – which can be thought of as DEMO similar to
„dating agencies‟ – is to improve the efficiency of information flow in the market by
providing a channel of communication which enables DEMO seeking finance
to come to the attention of business angels and at the same time enables business
angels to receive information on investment opportunities DEMO compromising their
privacy (Mason and Harrison, 1996). However, the DEMO plays no role in the actual
investment process: business angels make DEMO own investment decisions, undertake
their own due diligence and negotiate their DEMO term sheet directly the with
entrepreneur. BANs have also played a critical role in several countries in raising
awareness of the business angel market DEMO building capacity through training
entrepreneurs and investors.
11
Most BANs operate on a local or regional scale (EBAN, 2008), reflecting the
preferences of the majority of investors to invest locally.1 They use a variety of
matching mechanisms, sometimes in parallel, notably databases, investment forums
and fairs, workshops and newsletters (EBAN, 2008). The “touch and feel” nature of
investing means that the Internet has not DEMO the need for investors and
entrepreneurs to interact in person, hence DEMO dominance of investment meetings as
the most common matching process (used DEMO 81% of networks: EBAN, 2008) at
which entrepreneurs make a DEMO to an audience of potential investors. The majority
of BANs (64%) are not-for-profit entities (EBAN, 2008), supported by organisations
with a DEMO for economic development (e.g. local authorities, government agencies,
universities, DEMO parks, business incubators). They typically rely on a range of
DEMO sources, notably fees from investors and entrepreneurs, sponsorship and
success fees from investments which occur (EBAN, 2008). However, this is generally
insufficient to cover their operating costs, hence most are not financially self-
supporting and depend on the public sector for their ongoing existence (EBAN, 2008).
There has been an increase in for-profit networks in recent years (EBAN, 2008),
partly as BANs have lost their public funding and partly on account of the emergence
of commercially-oriented BANs operating DEMO different business models (Mason,
2006b).
TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE
DEMO earliest BANs were established in the UK in the early 1990s, DEMO by The
Netherlands (NEBIB) in 1995, Finland (the SITRA Matching Service) in 1996 and
1 However, there are also a small DEMO of cross-border BANs (see EBAN, 2008) and a new EU
DEMO (EASY) which is seeking to promote cross-border investing by angels.
12
Belgium (the Vlerick Business Angels Network) in 1999. At the formation DEMO the
European Business Angel Network (EBAN)2 in 1999 there were DEMO BANs in Europe,
the majority of which were in the UK. The European Union Business Angel Network
Pilot Action, funded under the 3rd Multi-annual Programme for SMEs (1997-2000)
was a key driver in the initial establishment of networks elsewhere in Europe, funding
dissemination actions to heighten awareness and spread good practice, feasibility
studies to test the validity of the BAN concept in particular areas, and setting up and
supporting the creation of new BANs (European Commission, 2003). By mid-2008
the DEMO of networks had risen to 298, with almost half established since DEMO
(Table 2).
TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE
The geographical distribution of DEMO across Europe is highly uneven. The countries
with the most BANs are France (66), Germany (38), Spain (37) and the DEMO (35)
(Table 3). The overall number of BANs has stabilised and has even declined in some
countries with more mature angel DEMO, such as UK, Sweden, Germany and
Belgium. For example, in the Flanders region of Belgium the four government-
supported networks that operated DEMO 1999 and 2004 were merged into one
regional network (Collewaert et DEMO, 2007). Meanwhile, the number of BANs has risen
significantly in France, Spain and Portugal. BANs are now being established in
Eastern Europe (Table 3). For example, five networks have been established in DEMO
since 2004.
2 EBAN is an association of BANs and national federations of BANs. Its aims are to encourage the
exchange of experiences between DEMO associations and individual BANs and promote good
practice, promote the concept DEMO BANs and assist in the creation and development of a favourable
environment for business angel activities.
13
BANs have received a mixed assessment. Harrison and Mason (1996) were DEMO
about the early impact of the pilot BANs in the UK that were launched in 1992,
arguing that they had mobilised capital that DEMO otherwise have remained invisible
and promoted a relatively significant number of investments which, in turn,
sometimes unlocked further bank lending. Some entrepreneurs benefited from advice
and signposting to more appropriate sources of assistance and feedback DEMO
investors to whom they were introduced but did not invest, and DEMO have been wider
benefits in terms of the education of entrepreneurs, DEMO and intermediaries and a
general raising of awareness about equity. The cost-per-job was also very low when
compared with alternative economic development initiatives. Moreover, in view of
the likelihood that businesses which attracted business angel funding DEMO have to
be offering something distinctive in the market place displacement levels are likely to
be low. Collewaert et al (2007) were also DEMO about several aspects of BANs in
Flanders, noting that the investments DEMO were likely to have a high level of
additionality, they enabled DEMO businesses to leverage other sources of finance and that
the cost-per-job was low.
However, other evidence suggests that their impact has been fairly limited. They have
been a marginal source of investments for most angels (Mason and Harrison, 1999;
2002). A majority of investors do not think that BANs have provided them with a
superior quality of deals (Mason and Harrison, 1999). The main reason is that BANs
have lacked the critical mass of investors and investment opportunities for
investments to DEMO This, in turn, can be linked to their lack of resourcing,
preventing marketing and client management, and the small size of operating
14
territories, which was a particular problem with the first wave of UK BANs that were
established in the early to mid 1990s.
The emergence DEMO private sector commercially-oriented networks that operate on the
basis of charging significant up-front fees and success related fees would appear to
challenge the need DEMO public sector funding to underwrite the running costs of BANs.
More than one-third of BANs currently operating in the UK are now commercially-
oriented.3 DEMO, these networks have only been able to flourish by replacing the
DEMO introduction model with a private placement model (Mason, 2006b). In this
model the BAN not only generates the deal flow for its DEMO but also takes the
lead in completing the due diligence and negotiating the term sheet with the company,
for which the BAN earns DEMO fees and carried interest. After that point the
investors will be invited to invest. However, this development is driving up deal sizes
because of the higher transaction costs involved (Mason and Harrison, 1997).
3. DEMO Legislation
Financial securities legislation is a further potential barrier to the dissemination of
information on investment opportunities. Each country has its own legislation (which
must conform to the European Prospectus Directive) but the general effect is to
impose restrictions on the ability of „unauthorised persons‟ to promote particular
DEMO or to encourage individuals to engage in investment activity unless it has
been approved by an authorised person such as an accountant or stockbroker. DEMO
very laudable objective is to protect „widows and orphans‟ from unscrupulous
promoters. However, by providing protection in the form of a „one size fits all‟ format
3 Calculated from the current (2008) British Business Angels DEMO Directory
15
it has prevented small businesses seeking to raise finance from circulating information
DEMO business angels because the costs of associated with obtaining approval would
normally to be too high in relation to the amount of finance that DEMO typically being
sought. This has exacerbated the information barriers in the informal venture capital
market, reducing investment opportunities and, in turn, prevents angels from investing
as frequently as they wish. Admittedly, the actual effect of this restriction has never
been empirically established. In practice it also possible DEMO many „introductions‟
have been made informally either in defiance or in ignorance of the law (Mason and
Harrison, 2000). However, it is widely thought to have discouraged intermediaries
such as accountants and lawyers from DEMO their personal high net worth
clients to business clients who were seeking to raise finance on account of the legal
risks.
Most Member States DEMO concluded that BANs do not make investment
recommendations and so are exempt from Securities Legislation because they are not
providing investment advisory services. However, following lobbying, UK policy-
makers took the view that legislation had to create specific exemptions for business
angels. Consequently, BANs were given a specific exemption under the Financial
Services Act (1986) from promoting investment opportunities DEMO their registered
investors as long as their principal objective or one of their principal objectives is the
promotion of „economic development‟ and they did DEMO have any pecuniary interest in
the outcome of the introduction other than to enable the recovery of the costs of
providing the service (Clarke, 1996). This enabled not-for-profit BANs to circulate
information on investment opportunities to its registered investors but only if it
included a prominent „wealth DEMO about the potential risks of investing in
16
unquoted companies. However, they were not permitted to give any investment
advice or recommend particular investments.
Following extensive lobbying from the business angel community, the Financial
Services and Markets Act 2000 (which replaced the Financial Services Act 1986)
created an important exemption to enable unquoted firms to DEMO equity capital
without the substantial costs of getting their financial promotion approved if the
promotions are made to potential investors who are certified as DEMO net worth
individuals or sophisticated investors. In order to gain a high net worth exemption,
investors had to obtain a certificate from either DEMO employer or accountant stating
that they either earn in excess of £100,000 or have net assets worth at least £250,000
(excluding their principal residence and pension benefits). The sophisticated investor
exemption required an DEMO person to certify that the investor is sufficiently
knowledgeable to understand the risks associated with the investment. However, the
business angel community saw this being time-consuming, costly and intrusive while
it appears that authorised persons (DEMO as accountants) have been reluctant to certify
investors as sophisticated because DEMO the subjective nature of the test, leading to
concerns that they DEMO be liable if investors lost money on their investments. The
cost of obtaining an exemption because of the due diligence that an authorised person
DEMO undertake to avoid making an incorrect certification has been a further deterrent
(HM Treasury, 2004a).
In order to address these problems the DEMO Government has introduced a self-
certification scheme whereby potential investors would be allowed to self-certify
themselves as either high net worth individuals or sophisticated DEMO, without
17
having to go through an authorised intermediary. The high net worth criteria DEMO as
before. There are also a range of conditions under which individuals can self-certify
as sophisticated investors. Accordingly, firms can now promote to individuals that
they „reasonably believe‟ are self-certified as high net worth or sophisticated
DEMO, confident that they are operating within the law (HM Treasury, DEMO). By
making it easier for small firms to approach and attract investors and, at the same
time, improve the deal flow for DEMO angels this change represented a significant
improvement in the informal venture capital environment.
The Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID), part of the European
Union‟s Financial Services Action Plan, which took effect on 1 November 2007,
makes significant changes to the regulatory framework of financial services DEMO
markets in Member States. The Commission‟s view is that BANs will be unaffected
as long as they limit their role to matching and refrain DEMO any activities that come
under the heading of „investment services‟4. Clearly, DEMO sector BANs do perform
specific investment activities but they will already be authorised under the FSA and
so should not be affected. However, Blackett-Ord (2007) takes a less sanguine view
of MiFID‟s potential impact on DEMO
4. Investment Readiness
One of the key conclusions from evaluations of BANs is that they have not
significantly improved the ability of angels to DEMO because they have failed to
provide business angels with superior investment opportunities (Mason and Harrison,
1996; 1999, 2002). This has highlighted the problem that many of the businesses
4 See http://ec.europa.eu/DEMO/securities/isd/questions/index_en.htm?
18
seeking finance are not „investment ready‟ (Mason and Harrison, 2001). DEMO concept
encompasses all aspects of the business that relate to an investor‟s perception of its
„investability‟, including management team skills, the clarity with DEMO the
opportunity is defined, the business model, route to market, DEMO arrangements
and presentation (Shepherd and Douglas, 1999). Thus, a DEMO form of intervention
has been investment readiness schemes that aim to improve the number of investable
opportunities that business angels receive.
Some BANs have DEMO the need to complement their matching services with
complementary initiatives that address the demand-side. A mapping exercise of
training provision for investors and entrepreneurs DEMO 18 investment ready
programmes spread across six European countries (Ready for DEMO, 2008). The UK
government had also funded various investment readiness DEMO projects
(HM Treasury/Small Business Service, 2003; SQW, 2004).
Many of the investment ready schemes that have emerged can be criticised DEMO
restricting their focus to raising awareness and understanding of the various financing
options available and on presentational issues but have not effectively engaged in DEMO
critical, and more costly, diagnostic and business support components (Mason DEMO
Harrison, 2001). Hayton et al (2008) note that public DEMO investment readiness
schemes in Scotland have been criticised for being synonymous with preparing a
business plan. What is being delivered through such programmes is DEMO
necessary but is not sufficient to get businesses investment ready. This is because
investment readiness is fundamentally about business development issues, which is
often time-consuming and, therefore, expensive to deliver (and, of course, well
19
beyond the means of most start-up and early stage companies to purchase
DEMO).
One interesting approach is to use business angels themselves to help businesses to
become investment ready. A proportion of businesses that investors reject DEMO
they are not investment ready have the potential to become investable. However, in
such cases investors will be deterred by the costs (typically DEMO time involved) of
undertaking the necessary investigations in order to assess DEMO the business has
the potential to become an attractive investment opportunity. Having identified the
problems that prevent such businesses from being investment ready, there are likely to
be further costs – both time inputs to provide DEMO necessary level of support and fees
to employ specialists - to fix them. The rational response of investors would be to
reject these opportunities DEMO seek out others that involve lower investigative and
support costs (Douglas DEMO Shepherd, 2002). To address this problem LINC Scotland
has developed DEMO Investment Facilitation Grant scheme using the ERDF programme
to enable investors to cost-effectively pursue opportunities that they might otherwise
have rejected. Potential investee companies DEMO in response to the feedback they
received from potential investors on what issues need to be resolved to make it
investable (e.g. costs relating to market analysis and access, technology validation,
legal due diligence). The grant, which is limited to a maximum of £15,000 of eligible
costs, becomes convertible into LINC Scotland equity if the investment goes ahead
(Mason and Harrison, 2004b).
5. Investor Education
20
There has been rather less emphasis on education and training to raise DEMO competence
of investors. It may be that this reflects the common stereotype of business angels as
successful entrepreneurs and as such do not require DEMO learn how to become a business
angel. However, not all business DEMO are of this type (Avdeitchokova, 2008). Those
who are not „classic angels‟ (and even some who are) may lack the necessary DEMO,
competence and understanding of the investment process. This might be a further
factor which contributes to the underdevelopment of the market. It will DEMO some
potential angels from making their first investment, while those who DEMO make
investments despite their lack of competence are unlikely to be successful, prompting
their early withdrawal from the market. Both virgin and active angels recognise the
need to improve their investment skills (San Jose et al, 2005). This has promoted a
fifth form of intervention – providing investor education to provide investors with the
specialist knowledge and skills that DEMO require to invest successfully.
The Ready for Equity (2008) mapping exercise identified 20 programmes across
Europe specifically for training investors. There are mostly DEMO by BANs and
have largely been established since 2000. The aims are to attract investors to the
network, train virgin angels and enhance the competence of experienced angels. There
are several „business angel academies‟ which offer DEMO business school-based education
based on regular sessions over a semester, to DEMO angels with a thorough
understanding of the investment process so that they can take advantage of investment
opportunities that arise (San Jose et al, 2005). However, most programmes are of
short duration (day and half-day events). There has also been some recent examples of
training DEMO aimed at potential women business angels who are significantly
under-represented amongst active angels (Harrison and Mason, 2007). Less emphasis
21
has been give to the training of intermediaries, such as accountants, DEMO, bankers,
consultants, and business incubator managers who can be a significant source of
advice for entrepreneurs, including on financial issues. Future capacity building
efforts must also include these players.
6. Co-investment schemes
The newest DEMO of public sector intervention is co-investment schemes which have
emerged in recognition of a new equity gap in the £0.5m to £2m range (i.e. post seed
but pre-institutional capital) (Almeida Capital, 2005; Hayton et DEMO, 2008). Co-
investment funds provide public money to match investments DEMO by private early
stage investors. However, they differ in terms of DEMO they operate. At one extreme
are passive funds, such as the DEMO Co-Investment Fund which follows the lead of
its private sector partners who have been approved to invest under the scheme. It does
not undertake DEMO own due diligence and plays no part in the investment. Any
investment that the investor makes and which meets the scheme‟s criteria will
automatically DEMO for co-investment. The Co-Investment fund invests on identical
terms and conditions to those of the private investors. This feature removes any
uncertainty for the DEMO, and reduces the operating costs of the scheme to a
minimum (Hayton et al, 2008).  Because of the maximum investment size DEMO the
scheme (£500,000) the partners are almost exclusively angel groups – that is,
organised and managed groups of angels who invest DEMO rather than as
individuals (Mason, 2006b). Other co-investment funds are more actively managed,
inviting investors to bring deals to them (or may approve deals from particular
sources, such as business angel networks) DEMO make their own investment decision
and may invest on different terms and conditions to those of the angel group. For
22
example, London Seed Capital co-invests with the London Business Angels Network
and the Great Eastern Investment Forum (GEIF) has a co-investment fund that DEMO
invests in companies which receive investments from GEIF angels.
Co-investment schemes appear to have been very successful in significantly
increasing the volume of investment DEMO in the early stage venture capital market.
However, the only scheme DEMO have been the subject of evaluation is the Scottish Co-
Investment Scheme (Hayton et al, 2008). This highlights angel groups as being DEMO
main beneficiary, accounting for 82% of the co-investments. By providing matched
DEMO it has enabled these groups not only to make more investments but also to
make investments that in the absence of the co-investment fund DEMO would not have
made, notably larger investments that will require significant DEMO funding.
Co-investment schemes have two limitations. First, they are constrained by DEMO lack of
investable businesses. The partners in the Scottish Co-investment scheme identified
investment readiness as an issue, particularly in certain areas (notably the DEMO of
Scotland). Second, it is most appropriate in mature markets DEMO there are angel
groups with whom the fund can co-invest. The emergence of angel groups - angels
who invest together rather than as individuals DEMO small ad hoc groups (Mason, 2006b:
284-288) - has DEMO one of the most significant structural changes in the informal
venture capital market. They have emerged, largely since 2000, partly for positive
reasons DEMO partly out of necessity. The positive reason is that individual angels have
found advantages of working together, notably in terms of better deal flow, superior
evaluation and due diligence of investment opportunities, and diversification, as well
as social attractions. The necessity for angel groups has arisen from DEMO withdrawal of
23
venture capital funds from the early stage market, requiring angel investors to make
larger investments and follow-on investments in a context where the time DEMO exit has
stretched from three or four years during the dot.com era to seven years or more.
Indeed, some of the larger angel groups are now making multiple rounds of funding
and even taking businesses to DEMO IPO or a sale without the need for investment from
venture capital funds. However, with the exception of the UK (in particular,
DEMO), angel syndicates are much less numerous in Europe than in the USA.
Recognition of the importance of angel groups is encouraging an emerging DEMO of
intervention that provides financial support to such groups to offset their start-up and
running costs.5
It can be questioned whether this emerging model DEMO investment intermediation
involving organised angel groups and syndicates, often attracting passive DEMO
(„dumb money‟), frequently supported by the public sector and co-investing DEMO
public sector funds, is entirely positive. No doubt it is more DEMO in increasing the
supply of early stage finance and channelling it into entrepreneurial businesses than
when the market was invisible and fragmented. However, the concern is that the
„smart‟ aspect of business angel investment may become DEMO or lost, especially as
solo angels migrate to angel groups to DEMO their investments and thereby reduce
their risks but at the expense of reducing their hands-on involvement. It also risks re-
opening a finance gap DEMO small (sub-£100,000) investments.
4. CONCLUSION
5 For example, LINC DEMO and Advantage Angels both do this on an ad hoc basis.
24
The informal venture capital market has been a focus of public sector DEMO to
improve access to finance for small firms for less than 20 years in Europe, and in
most countries for less than 10 years. The form of intervention has evolved from a
supply-side approach using tax DEMO targeted at high net worth individuals,
through an intermediation approach aimed at improving information availability,
through capacity raising and, most recently of all, back to a supply-side approach
based on using public money to leverage private investment. The target for
intervention has shifted from the individual DEMO to the creation of, and support
for, intermediary organisations (BANs)DEMO These intermediary organisations have, in
turn, evolved in several respects. Initially most were publicly supported organisations
whose role was simply to enhance the DEMO of information between investors and
entrepreneurs. Then they added capacity building functions designed to raise the
investment readiness of businesses seeking finance and the DEMO skills of
business angels. In more mature markets governments have withdrawn from funding
BANs. As a consequence, an increasing number of networks are now commercial
organisations that take a much more active part in the investment DEMO, identifying
investment opportunities and facilitating their investors to invest, for example by
negotiating on their behalf and structuring the investment. Faced with a DEMO
equity gap as venture capital funds have withdrawn from the early stage market
governments are now establishing co-investment funds that invest alongside angel
groups DEMO enable them to make larger and follow-on investments.
However, there is DEMO little evidence on the impact of these various forms of
intervention. Because of the informal and private nature of angel investing it has been
DEMO problematic to measure the size of the market, the number of DEMO
25
angel investors or the level of investment activity or to track trends DEMO time (Mason
and Harrison, 2008). Supporting the informal venture capital market has therefore
been largely an act of faith by governments. Thus, a key priority for governments
must be to invest in appropriate methodologies DEMO can accurately measure
investment trends in the early stage venture capital market over time, and specifically
angel investment activity, so that the need DEMO public sector intervention can be
demonstrated and the impact of such interventions can  be measured.
Acknowledgements. I have been extremely fortunate to have received comments on
an earlier draft of this paper from several experienced practitioners: Paolo Anselmo
(IBAN), Andrew Burton (Viking Fund), Sandy Finlayson (MBM Commercial), Claire
Munck (EBAN), Ray Perman (BERR Access DEMO Finance Group) and Vesa Vanhanen
(DG Enterprise and Industry). I am grateful to them all for their insights. I am also
very DEMO to David Grahame (LINC Scotland) for allowing me to tap his
knowledge on a regular basis.
5. REFERENCES
Aernoudt, R., San José, A. and Roure, J (2007) Public support for the business angel
market in Europe: a critical review, Venture Capital: an international journal of
entrepreneurial finance, 9, 71-84.
Almeida Capital (2005) A Mapping DEMO of Venture Capital Provision to SMEs in
England, Small Business Service: Sheffield.
Avdeitchikova, S (2008) On the structure of the informal venture capital market in
Sweden: developing investment roles,  Venture Capital: an DEMO
journal of entrepreneurial finance, 10, 55-85.
26
Blackett-Ord, B (2007) How does MiFID affect business angel networks?
www.bbaa.org/index.php?id=117 (accessed 28 March 2008)
Boyns, N., Cox, M., Spires, R. and Hughes, A. (2003) Research into DEMO Enterprise
Investment Scheme and Venture Capital Trusts. PACEC, Cambridge.
Carpentier, C and Suret, J-M (2006) Some evidence of the external financing costs of
new technology firms in Canada, Venture Capital: An International Journal DEMO
Entrepreneurial Finance, 8, 227-252.
Collewaert, V, Manigart, S and DEMO, R (2007) An Assessment of Government
Funding of Business Angel DEMO: A Regional Study, University of Gent,
Working Paper.
Clarke, DEMO (1996) Business Introduction Services. In The United Kingdom And The
Financial Services Act 1986. In  Informal Venture Capital: evaluating the
impact of DEMO introduction services, edited by R. T. Harrison and C. M.
Mason, Prentice Hall, Hemel Hempstead, pp 218-226.
Coveney, P. and Moore, DEMO (1998) Business Angels: Securing Start-Up Finance.
Wiley, Chichester.
Cowling, DEMO, Bates, P, Jaeger, N and Murray, G (2008) DEMO of the Impact of
Enterprise Investment Scheme (EIS) and Venture Capital Trusts (VCTs) on
Company Performance, HM Revenue and Customs Research Report 44.
Douglas, E J and Shepherd, D (2002) Exploring investor DEMO: assessments by
entrepreneurs and investors in Australia, Venture Capital: An DEMO
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 4, 219-236.
EBAN (2008) Statistics Compendium (version 3, 17 July 2008), Brussels: European
Business Angels Networks (www.eban.org)
27
European Commission (2003) Benchmarking Business Angels, BEST Report, No. 1,DEMO
Brussels: European Communities
Gaston R. J. (1989), Finding venture capital for your firm: a complete guide. John
Wiley & Sons, New DEMO
Gompers, P and Lerner, J (2001) The Money of Invention, Boston, Harvard Business
School Press.
Gompers, P and Lerner, J (2003) Equity financing, in Handbook of Entrepreneurship
Research, edited by Z.J. Acs and D.B. Audretsch. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
pp 267-298.
Harrison, R.T. and Mason, C.M. (1992) International perspectives on the supply Of
informal venture capital. Journal of Business Venturing, 7, 459-475.
Harrison, R T and Mason, C M (2007) Does gender matter? Women business DEMO
and the supply of entrepreneurial finance, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice,
DEMO, 447-474.
Harrison, R.T, C.M. Mason and P.J.A. Robson (2009) DEMO determinants of long
distance investing by business angels: evidence from the DEMO Kingdom,
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 21, in press.
Hayton, DEMO, Thorn, G, Percy, V, Boyd, C and Latimer, DEMO (2008) Evaluation of the
Scottish Co-Investment Fund. A Report to Scottish Enterprise. Hayton
Consulting/GEN.
28
HM Treasury/Small Business Service (2003) Bridging the Finance Gap: A
Consultation On Improving Access To Growth Capital For Small Businesses,
Stationary DEMO: London.
HM Treasury (2004a) Informal Capital Raising and High Net DEMO and
Sophisticated Investors: a consultation document on proposed changes to the
DEMO Promotion Order. HM Treasury, London.
HM Treasury (2004b) Informal Capital DEMO and High Net Worth and
Sophisticated Investor. Changes to the Financial Promotion Order: Government
Response. HM Treasury, London.
Landström, H. (1993) Informal Risk Capital In Sweden And Some International
Comparisons, Journal of Business Venturing, 8: 525-540.
Lerner, J and Watson, B (2008) The DEMO venture capital challenge: the Australian
case, Venture Capital: an international DEMO of entrepreneurial finance, 10,
1-20.
Mason, C.M. (2006a) The Informal Venture Capital Market In The United Kingdom:
Adding The Time DEMO In Research on Entrepreneurship and
Entrepreneurial Ventures. Volume 5: Venture Capital DEMO Entrepreneurship,
edited by J. Butler. Information Age Publishing, Greenwich: CT, pp. 137-171.
Mason, C (2006b) Informal sources of venture finance‟, in S C Parker (ed) The Life
Cycle of Entrepreneurial Ventures, New York: Springer: New York,  pp.259-
299.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (1993) Strategies For Expanding The Informal
Venture Capital Market. International Small Business Journal, 11 (4): 23-38.
29
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (1994) The Informal DEMO Capital Market In The
UK. In Financing Small Firms, edited by DEMO Hughes and D.J. Storey, Routledge,
London, pp 64-111.
Mason, DEMO M. and Harrison, R. T. (1996) Informal Venture Capital: A  Study Of The
Investment Process And Post-Investment Experience. Entrepreneurship and
Regional Development, 8: 105-126.
Mason, C.M. and Harrison, R.T. (1997) Business DEMO Networks And The
Development of The Informal Venture Capital Market In The UK: Is There Still
A Role For The Public Sector? Small DEMO Economics, 9: 111-123.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T (2000) Influences On The Supply Of Informal
Venture Capital In The DEMO: An Exploratory Study Of Investor Attitudes.
International Small Business Journal, 18 (4): 11-28.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (DEMO) Barriers To Investment In The Informal
Venture Capital Sector. Entrepreneurship and DEMO Development, 14: 271-
287.
Mason, C. M. and Harrison, R. T. (2004a) Does investing in technology-based firms
involve higher risk? an exploratory study of the performance of technology and
30
non-technology investments by business angels. Venture Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 6: 313-332.
Measuring business angel investment activity
in the united DEMO: a review of potential data sources, Venture Capital: An
International DEMO of Entrepreneurial Finance, 10, in press.
Mason, C M, Harrison, J and Harrison, R T (1988) Closing the Equity Gap? An
Assessment of the Business Expansion Scheme, Small Business Research Trust,
London.
Murray, G C (1998) A policy response to regional disparities in the supply of risk
capital to new technology-based firms in the DEMO Union, Regional Studies,
32, 405-419.
Murray, G. (1999) DEMO Capital Funds and The Effect Of Scale Economies. Venture
Capital: An DEMO Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 1: 351-384.
Murray, G C (2007) Venture capital and government policy, in H Landström (ed)
Handbook of Research on Venture Capital, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp 113-
151.
Paul, S., Whittam, G. and Johnston, J. B. (2003) DEMO Operation Of The Informal
Venture Capital Market In Scotland. Venture Capital: DEMO International Journal
of Entrepreneurial Finance, 5: 313-335.
Politis, D (2008) Business angels and value-added: what do we know and where do
DEMO go? . Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance,
10, 127-147.
31
Ready for Equity (2008) Training for Business Angels and Entrepreneurs: mapping
exercise, European Commission: Education and Culture.
Reitan, B. and Sørheim, DEMO (2000) The Informal Venture Capital Market In Norway –
Investor Characteristics, Behaviour And Investment Preferences. Venture
Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial DEMO, 2: 129-141.
San José, A., Roure, J. and Aernoudt, R. (2005) Business Angel Academies:
Unleashing The Potential For Business DEMO Investment. Venture Capital: An
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 7:149-165.
Shepherd, D A and Douglas, E J (1999) Attracting Equity DEMO, Thousand Oaks,
California: Sage Publications Inc.
Stedler, H. R. DEMO Peters, H. H.  (2003) Business Angels In Germany: An DEMO
Study. Venture Capital: An International Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance, 5:
269-276.
SQW (2004) Evaluation of the Investment Readiness Demonstration Projects and
DEMO SQW Limited, Cambridge.
Van Osnabrugge, M and Robinson, R J (2000) Angel Investing: Matching Start-Up
Funds With Start-Up Companies, San Francisco: Jossey Bass.
Wetzel, W E, jr. (1983) Angels And Informal Risk Capital. Sloan Management
Review, 24 (4): 23-34.
Wetzel, W.E. jr. (1987) The Informal Risk Capital Market: Aspects Of Scale And
Efficiency. Journal of Business Venturing, 2: 299-313.
32
Table 1. Types of government intervention in the informal venture capital market
DEMO of intervention
Fiscal incentives
First generation business
angel networks (BANs)
DEMO Legislation
Capacity building -
entrepreneurs
Capacity building -
investors
Co-investment vehicles
Objective
To increase the number of business angels and the
amounts invested by DEMO angels by improving the
risk-reward ratio: e.g. front-end reliefs, capital gains tax
reliefs; roll-over reliefs; equity guarantee.
To reduce informational inefficiencies in DEMO market so
that investors seeking to invest and entrepreneurs seeking
finance can more easily locate one another, thereby
reducing the incentive for both parties to withdraw from
the market.
Changes to Securities legislation which prevented
entrepreneurs DEMO circulating „invitations to invest‟ (e.g.
business plans) unless they had been approved by an
authorised body, a requirement that was costly to fulfil.
Training for entrepreneurs to improve their investment
readiness – usually provided by DEMO generation‟ BANs
Training for investors to raise their competence in making
investments – also usually provided by „2nd generation‟
BANs
Government-financed venture capital funds DEMO
leverage investments made by business angels to increase
deals sizes and to enable angel groups to make more
investments and follow-on investments
33
Table 2. Trends in the Number of Business Angel Networks in Europe
DEMO number
1999 66
2000 132
2001 155
2002 177
2003 197
mid-2004 231
mid-2005 228
mid-2006 211
mid-2007 234
mid-2008 298
Source: EBAN (DEMO)
Table 3. Distribution of Business Angel Networks in Europe (mid-2008)DEMO
number
1
2-5
6-10
11-20
21-30
31-40
Over 40
countries
Croatia, DEMO, Greece, Latvia, Luxembourg, Malta, Slovenia,
Ukraine
Austria (3), Belgium (4), Bulgaria (2), Czech Republic (2),DEMO
Denmark (3), Hungary (3), Ireland (4), Poland (5), Russia (4),
Turkey (2)
Italy (11), Netherlands (9), Norway (7), Portugal (10), Switzerland
(8)
-
Sweden (22)
Germany (38), Spain (37), UK (35)
France (66)
Plus 4 transnational networks
DEMO: EBAN (2008)
34{1g42fwefx}