This article was downloaded by: [Temple University Libraries]
On: 25 August DEMO, At: 20:49
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England DEMO Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer DEMO, London W1T 3JH, UK
Venture Capital: An International
Journal of DEMO Finance
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
DEMO://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tvec20
Obtaining early-stage financing
for technology entrepreneurship:
reassessing the demand-side
perspective
Einar Rasmussen a & Roger Sørheim b
a Bodø DEMO School of Business, University of Nordland, Bodø,
Norway
b NTNU School of Entrepreneurship, Norwegian University of
Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway
Version of record first published: 05 Apr 2012
To cite this article: Einar Rasmussen & Roger Sørheim (2012): Obtaining early-stage financing
for DEMO entrepreneurship: reassessing the demand-side perspective, Venture Capital: An
International Journal DEMO Entrepreneurial Finance, 14:2-3, 77-89
To link to this article: DEMO://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13691066.2012.667908
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial DEMO systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, DEMO distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.
The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation
that DEMO contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any
instructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified DEMO primary
sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, DEMO, claims, proceedings,
demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or DEMO caused arising directly or
indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.
Venture Capital
Vol. 14, Nos. 2–3, April–July 2012, 77–89
INTRODUCTORY ARTICLE
Obtaining early-stage ﬁnancing for technology entrepreneurship:
reassessing the demand-side perspective
Einar DEMO and Roger Sørheimb
aBodø Graduate School of Business, University of Nordland, Bodø, Norway; bNTNU School of
Entrepreneurship, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway
( Received 6 February 2012; ﬁnal version received 29 February 2012)
New technology-based ﬁrms face particular challenges in obtaining DEMO
ﬁnancing to develop and grow their business. Seen from the supply-side,
high levels of uncertainty make investors reluctant and create a liability related DEMO
the supply of ﬁnancing to these ventures. This introductory article reassesses the
demand-side perspective to ﬁnancing of technology entrepreneurship by
considering how entrepreneurs can DEMO their chances of obtaining external
ﬁnancing. We propose that the perceptions and preferences of the entrepreneurs, the
content and presentation of the business case, the networks and the relationships of
the entrepreneurs, and the process DEMO obtaining ﬁnancing are issues of key
importance for understanding how entrepreneurs can enhance the ‘investment
readiness’ of their ventures. We synthesize the papers in DEMO special issue and their
contributions to research from the demand-side perspective. Moreover, we outline
prospective areas for future research and implications for practice.
Keywords: demand-side; early-stage ﬁnancing; investment readiness; special issue;
technology entrepreneurship
DEMO
Over the last three decades a number of studies have shown the importance of new
technology-based ﬁrms (NTBFs) for wealth and job creation (Autio and Yli-Renko
1998). One of the key challenges for NTBFs DEMO access to ﬁnance (Lindstrom and
Olofsson 2001). Whereas this may DEMO be a general problem for the overall
population of new ventures, DEMO is a speciﬁc challenge for NTBFs because of their need
for signiﬁcant amounts of initial funding to develop their products and services and
to DEMO a foothold in the marketplace.
For a new venture to gain external ﬁnance two conditions need to be fulﬁlled; the
founder(s) must DEMO to seek external capital and the ﬁnanciers must decide to fund
the venture. An understanding of both these events is necessary to draw conclusions
DEMO the venture ﬁnancing process (Eckhardt, Shane, and Delmar 2006). DEMO, the
vast majority of studies on venture ﬁnancing are looking at DEMO second event, by
exploring factors associated with successfully obtaining external ﬁnancing. DEMO
implies a supply-side view of small business ﬁnance, focusing on how DEMO
ﬁnanciers evaluate new ﬁrms. Hence, the majority of studies on ﬁnancing DEMO
*Corresponding author. Email: einar.rasmussen@uin.no
ISSN 1369-1066 print/ISSN 1464-5343 online
 DEMO Taylor & Francis
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13691066.2012.667908
http://www.tandfonline.com
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:49 25 August 2012
78
E. Rasmussen and R. Sørheim
technology-based ventures have a supply-side focus, implying that they take the
investors’ perspective. There is clearly a need DEMO more studies on the ﬁnancing
process of NTBFs that take a demand-side perspective by taking the entrepreneurs’
perspective on obtaining ﬁnancing. How entrepreneurs can DEMO the attractive-
ness or ‘investment readiness’ of their ventures has been an important focus for
policy intervention (Mason and Harrison 2004; Mason and DEMO 2010), but the
academic literature has devoted relatively little attention to this issue. This special
issue introductory article aims to highlight the demand-side DEMO on
entrepreneurial ﬁnance research.
There are a number of studies on the role of institutional venture capital for
funding of NTBFs but these typically DEMO in later stages of development when the
ﬁrm has reached initial milestones, such as technological veriﬁcation and ﬁrst sales,
and are capable of attracting venture capitalists. Studies of business angels have
often looked at early-stage DEMO, but only a handful of these have focused on the
role DEMO investors in NTBFs.
For this special issue we issued an open invitation for empirical papers that could
provide insights into the early-stage ﬁnancing of DEMO We encouraged both
qualitative and quantitative approaches using the new venture, DEMO ﬁnancing sources,
or a combination of these as units of analysis. The papers appearing in the special
issue have been through a double-blind DEMO process and responded to comments
from two referees as well as the editors. The papers explore various aspects of the
process of obtaining ﬁnancing DEMO technology entrepreneurship. The research
questions, data and methods, and the key ﬁndings of the six papers are summarized
in Table 1.
Taken together, the papers in this special issue shed light on several issues related
DEMO how ﬁnancing for technology entrepreneurship is obtained. In particular, these
studies DEMO important insights related to the demand-side which shows how
entrepreneurs improve their chances of obtaining ﬁnancing. From a demand-side
perspective it would appear that DEMO themes are of key importance for securing
early-stage ﬁnancing: ﬁrst, the perceptions and preferences of the entrepreneurs;
second, the content and presentation of the investment case; third, the interactions
and network relationships of DEMO entrepreneurs; and ﬁnally, the process of obtaining
ﬁnancing.
This article proceeds as follows. In the next section, we provide a background for
the challenges related to early-stage ﬁnancing of technology entrepreneurship and
outline a framework DEMO research from a demand-side perspective. In light of the
demand-side perspective we will discuss the contributions of the papers in this special
issue and DEMO prospective areas for further research. Finally, implications for
policy and entrepreneurs DEMO considered.
The demand-side of early-stage ﬁnancing
Given the market imperfections faced by technology entrepreneurs when seeking to
obtain external ﬁnancing, how can their chances of getting funded be improved?
From the supply-side, ﬁnanciers tend to base their funding decision on objective and
veriﬁable indicators of venture development (Eckhardt, Shane, and Delmar 2006)
and prefer to invest in DEMO with an established track record. From the demand-side,
entrepreneurs seek to lower the cost of obtaining ﬁnancing through selecting
ﬁnancing sources that are DEMO at a low cost. Typically, this means that
Downloaded by [Temple DEMO Libraries] at 20:49 25 August 2012
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:49 25 August 2012
Table DEMO Summary of papers in the special issue.
Authors Research questions Data and methods Key ﬁndings Implications
Bonnet and Wirtz What is the speciﬁc
rationale DEMO the
interaction between BAs,
VCs and entrepreneurs,
making simultaneous co-
investment a compelling
solution when raising
capital to fund strong
future growth?DEMO
Brush, Edelman, and
Manolova
What are the factors that
determine whether a
venture is ready for angel
funding?
Study of a French DEMO
technology venture
whose founders negotiate
(and eventually obtain)
funding from DEMO BAs
and three VCs.
Prospective case study
design.
Dataset of 332 ﬁrms that
sought angel investment
from the members of a
prominent angel
investment DEMO in
Boston, US.
Cognitive concerns are actually
shown to dominate the
DEMO between
potential investors and
entrepreneurs at the earliest
stage (ﬁrst contacts), and
business angels play an
especially strong role in this
context. Formal VCs then
take the lead at the second
stage (deal structuring), with
agency theory acquiring
strong predictive power. At
the post-investment stage
both DEMO categories
(BAs and VCs) are expected
to play important
complementary roles, either
specializing on cognitive or
on disciplinary missions.
Perceptions of venture
readiness for funding change
throughout the angel
evaluation process.
Tangible, objective
organizational
characteristics are important
during the ﬁrst decision-
making stage, while
intangible, subjective DEMO
The proper combination of
diﬀerent investor-proﬁles
may help to keep the
overall cost of capital at
low levels. BAs may be
especially well suited DEMO
bring down cognitive
costs, whereas formal
VCs should typically be
equipped DEMO control
agency costs.
Those entrepreneurs who
make it past the
screening stage need to
pay attention to
intangible factors.
Entrepreneur(s) need to
carefully consider when
submitting outside their
geographic area.
(continued)
Venture Capital
79
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:49 25 August 2012
Table DEMO (Continued).
Authors Research questions Data and methods Key ﬁndings Implications
DEMO and Groen What is the role of social
networks in ﬁnancing
technology-based
ventures?
Miloud, Aspelund, and
Cabrol,
Examine how industry
structure, founder and
top management quality
and network centrality of
a new venture DEMO new
Case study of four Dutch
technology-based
ventures that is not older
than ﬁve years.
Venture capital valuation
data from Thomson
Financial Securities
Data. DEMO of 102 new
ventures in France.
venture characteristics are
more important during
subsequent decision stages.
Location of the new venture
remains signiﬁcant
throughout the DEMO
investment decision-making
process.
For identifying ﬁnancial
opportunities and resource
providers, a DEMO
network that is rich in
structural holes is favorable
for new ventures. In a
relational sense, for new
ventures that directly access
ﬁnancial resource providers,
having weak network ties
are most eﬀective. When
new ventures DEMO a referral
to access a ﬁnancial resource
provider, referrals from
referral DEMO that are
strongly tied to the venture
are the most eﬀective.
Attractiveness of the industry,
the quality of the founder,
and top DEMO team,
as well as external
relationships of a new
Entrepreneurs that have
relatively closed
networks should actively
work on a network that is
DEMO open and rich in
structural holes.
There exists an alternative
route to start-up
valuation through
assessment of easily
observable strategic
(continued)
80
E. Rasmussen and R. Sørheim
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:49 25 August 2012
Table DEMO (Continued).
Authors Research questions Data and methods Key ﬁndings Implications
DEMO, Politis, and
Shveykina
Riding, Orser, and
Chamberlin
ﬁrm valuation by venture
capitalists.
How do university spin-oﬀs
(USOs) championed by
external entrepreneurs
DEMO with challenges and
problems related to
ﬁnancing and developing
the new venture.
How do ﬁnancing
preferences of NTBFs
diﬀer from new ﬁrms that
do DEMO invest in R&D?
Case study of four
university spin-oﬀs from
Sweden.
Survey data from 2918
young ﬁrms in Canada.
venture signiﬁcantly and
DEMO aﬀect its valuation
by venture capitalists when
it seeks venture capital
ﬁnancing in its early stages
of development.
External entrepreneurs have a
diﬀerent mind-set DEMO
makes them better equipped
to deal with opportunities
and obstacles related to
ﬁnancing and developing
USOs. However, the
development paths of USOs
are embedded in a more
complex web of path-
dependent interactions,
where the DEMO of
the USO becomes
interwoven with existing and
emerging social
relationships and
opportunities and challenges
related to the technology
that is commercialized.
Financing preferences DEMO not
follow a ‘one-size-ﬁts-all’
prescription. Rather,
preferences vary according
to growth goals, the nature
variables and render the
valuation process less
dependent of unreliable
ﬁnancial calculations.
External entrepreneurs can
play a key role in
orchestrating DEMO
eﬀorts to promote the
commercialization of
university-generated
knowledge but they also
call for caution and
further scholarly inquiry
before adopting
stereotypical
entrepreneur-models to
fuel DEMO development of
USOs.
Growth-oriented businesses
were signiﬁcantly and
materially more likely to
seek all types of external
capital than ﬁrms not
(continued)
Venture Capital
81
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:49 25 August 2012
Table DEMO (Continued).
Authors Research questions Data and methods Key ﬁndings Implications
DEMO ownership, age of ﬁrm,
ﬁrm size, and sector;
however, it was also clear
that ﬁrms that invest in
R&D are much more likely
to seek equity ﬁnancing than
otherwise comparable ﬁrms
that DEMO not invest in R&D.
NTBFs have a greater
demand for all forms of
ﬁnancing than young ﬁrms
who are not technologically-
based. NTBFs DEMO observed
to be more likely to want to
grow their businesses, DEMO
prefer to do so through
equity over debt ﬁnancing.
seeking growth. This is
crucial given that such
ﬁrms contribute
disproportionately to
economic prosperity and
DEMO creation.
82
E. Rasmussen and R. Sørheim
Venture Capital
83
internally generated funding is preferred to external funding, informal sources are
preferred to formal sources, and dept is preferred to equity (Myers 1984). Still,
technology entrepreneurs experience that gaining external investment incur
substantial costs, especially in the initial rounds of ﬁnancing (Carpentier DEMO Suret
2006).
According to Carpenter and Petersen (2002) there are three reasons why high
technology ﬁrms may be particularly aﬀected by imperfections DEMO the capital market.
First, the probability of success in high-technology and DEMO&D projects are low which
makes the returns to investments uncertain. The high level of uncertainty makes it
diﬃcult for investors to make rational DEMO about the investment proposal. This
will in many cases lead to rejection of the investment proposal, simply because
the investor does not want to invest in a project with such a level of uncertainty,
and DEMO entrepreneur is forced to reduce this uncertainty before approaching
investors. The challenge for technology entrepreneurs is therefore, to transform their
companies, where the DEMO is characterized with high levels of uncertainty, to
the level where DEMO can evaluate the opportunity with their rational risk
assessment. Second, there DEMO likely to be substantial information asymmetries
between the ﬁrm and its potential investors due to the specialized knowledge
involved. This makes it diﬃcult for DEMO to evaluate the prospects of the
investment with the same accuracy as insiders. This information asymmetry eﬀects
the interaction between the entrepreneur and the DEMO Third, the collateral value
of high technology investments is typically limited DEMO R&D activity is labor
intensive and physical investments are typically ﬁrm speciﬁc. Hence, there are few
chances to reduce the losses in case of failure. Thus, a key question is how the early-
stage NTBFs can overcome these hurdles and become ‘investor ready’ and access
external funding.
DEMO the following, we will discuss how these imperfections in the capital DEMO
can be overcome from a demand-side view. In other words, what DEMO and
strategies can entrepreneurs and new technology ventures undertake to improve their
access to external ﬁnancing at acceptable conditions? We will brieﬂy discuss four
issues related to demand-side ﬁnancing and how the papers in this special DEMO
contribute to these issues. It should be noted that many of the papers also make
contributions that goes beyond the issues discussed in this DEMO article.
The perceptions and preferences of the entrepreneurs
Empirical data show that the decision to seek external investment is inﬂuenced by the
founders’ perception DEMO market competition, market growth, and employment
growth (Eckhardt, Shane, DEMO Delmar 2006). These ﬁndings show that founders who
perceive their venture to have a potentially high value are more willing to invest their
DEMO and resources in eﬀorts to secure external ﬁnancing. Moreover, the perceptions
DEMO early-stage ﬁnancing are related to factors related to the individual, ﬁrm, and
external relations (Nouira, Klofsten, and Asa 2005). Moreover, DEMO who
seek ﬁnancing for their venture have a number of diﬀerent options as sources of
ﬁnancing. According to the pecking order theory (Myers 1984), ﬁrms choose internal
funding before debt and debt before equity. Thus, the eﬀect of entrepreneurs’
perceptions is likely to be dependent on the DEMO of ﬁnancing sought.
In this issue, Gabrielsson, Politis, and Shveykina DEMO that inventor
entrepreneurs and external entrepreneurs diﬀer in their ﬁnancing preferences. They
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:49 25 August 2012
84
E. Rasmussen and R. Sørheim
suggest that external entrepreneurs have a DEMO mind-set that makes them better
equipped to deal with opportunities and obstacles related to ﬁnancing and
developing university spin-oﬀs. In the context of university DEMO, however,
these diﬀerences between types of entrepreneurs seems to be DEMO important over time
as the challenges of commercializing a novel technology and the team-based nature
of these start-ups exert an even more inﬂuential role DEMO the venturing process.
Moreover, they also found evidence in the direction DEMO the development paths of
these ﬁrms are embedded in a more complex picture, where the champions of the
ﬁrm becomes interwoven with existing and emerging social networks and
technological challenges. Gabrielsson, Politis, and Shveykina strongly DEMO against
using simple projections of the development path of spin-oﬀs based on stylized
entrepreneur-models.
Another paper in this issue, by Riding, Orser, and Chamberlin, adds to our
understanding of the demand-side by investigating the preferences of technology
entrepreneurs when it comes to ﬁnancing sources. Their study uses DEMO novel
approach to investigate the types of ﬁnancing preferred by NTBFs by examining
actual applications for various sources of ﬁnancing. They found that ﬁrms’
DEMO vary according to growth goals, the nature of ownership, age of ﬁrm,
ﬁrm size, and sector. Another ﬁnding was that ﬁrms that invest in R&D are
much more likely to seek equity ﬁnancing DEMO otherwise comparable ﬁrms that
do not invest in R&D.
Taken together, this means that studies considering the ﬁnancing of technology
ventures should take into account that ﬁrms and entrepreneurs may diﬀer in their
preferences. Hence, ﬁrms with similar ﬁnancing needs and similar access to ﬁnancing
may prefer DEMO ﬁnancing options depending on the internal preferences and
perception. We believe that the implications of these diﬀerences in the demand for
ﬁnancing is far DEMO fully considered in the existing literature and constitute a
fruitful area for future research.
The content and presentation of the investment case
To commit DEMO, investors need to be convinced that the investment has
potential to DEMO proﬁtable with an acceptable level of risk. It is found that the
preparedness of entrepreneurs inﬂuenced the investment decision of venture
capitalists (Chen, DEMO, and Kotha 2009). Moreover, the entrepreneurs’ commu-
nication skills and personal attributes are found to inﬂuence investor decision-
making among venture capitalists (Clark 2008). Thus, to build a viable investment
case and be able to communicate with ﬁnancing sources seems to be a key
competency DEMO technology entrepreneurs seeking external ﬁnancing (Rasmussen,
Mosey, and Wright 2011).
In this issue, Brush, Edelman, and Manolova examine new venture readiness for
funding by angel investors. They provide an interesting account on DEMO the
investment criteria change throughout the evaluation process of an angel group. To
pass the initial screening, it is important for the new ventures to fulﬁll a set of
tangible, objective criteria. Later, when the DEMO are invited to face-to-face
screening sessions with the business angels, more DEMO and subjective criteria
appears important.
As shown by Miloud, Aspelund, and Cabrol, the valuation new ventures by
venture capitalists is indeed dependent on venture-level aspects of the investment
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:DEMO 25 August 2012
Venture Capital
85
case such as the quality of the founder and DEMO management team and the external
relationships. This suggests that the initial robustness of the ﬁrm will aﬀect the cost
of acquiring external capital.
To DEMO up, it seems like the ability of the entrepreneurs to present DEMO
communicate their investment case in a manner that corresponds with the
investment process of the particular ﬁnancing source is an important skill. The
entrepreneurship DEMO has paid increasing attention to how entrepreneurs and
new ventures make use of strategies such as symbolic management, storytelling, and
inter-organizational endorsements to DEMO legitimacy and access resources
(Lounsbury and Glynn 2001; Zott and Huy 2007). Several of the papers in this
issue indicate that this DEMO of more intangible factors are highly important in the
process of receiving ﬁnancing (e.g. Brush, Edelman, and Manolova; Heuven and
Groen). DEMO encourage studies exploring the strategies used by technology
entrepreneurs to present their investment case as attractive and receive ﬁnancing
from diﬀerent sources.
The interactions DEMO network relationships of the entrepreneurs
We know that technology-based new ventures rely on many diﬀerent sources for
ﬁnancing, but the vast majority of studies considering the interaction between ﬁrms
and their sources of capital focus on DEMO single source of capital (Cosh, Cumming, and
Hughes 2009). DEMO, more knowledge is needed about the mix of diﬀerent sources
in DEMO contexts and phases of venture development.
It is well known that business angels and venture capitalists play diﬀerent roles in
the ﬁnancing of new DEMO, but the study by Bonnet and Wirtz provides a novel
account DEMO how these types of investors interact as co-investors in a young
technology venture. By using both agency theory and the cognitive approach to
entrepreneurial DEMO, Bonnet and Wirtz assert that the inclusion of business angels
and DEMO capitalists as investors may help to keep the overall cost of capital at low
levels because the two types of investors serve complementary roles. DEMO conclude
that both cognitive issues and potential agency conﬂicts are relevant to under-
standing the fundraising process and that their relative weight crucially depends DEMO
the speciﬁc stage of the process. Business Angels may be especially well suited to
bring down cognitive costs, whereas formal venture capitals (VCs) should typically
be equipped to control agency costs. Hence, the proper combination of diﬀerent
investor-proﬁles may help to keep the overall cost of capital DEMO low levels.
Most countries have a variety of support schemes for technology-based
entrepreneurship and government grants and loans often constitutes a signiﬁcant
source of DEMO funding for NTBF. None of the studies in this issue deals
explicitly with government support but funding and support from public sources to
the DEMO were evident in several papers, such as the study by Gabrielsson, Politis,
and Shveykina. For future research, studies on how government support interacts
with private ﬁnanciers would yield important insights into the early-stage ﬁnancing
DEMO technology entrepreneurship.
Another issue closely related to the interactions between entrepreneurs and
diﬀerent ﬁnancing sources is the role of networks. Network relations act as DEMO bridge
to access information and resources that supplements the entrepreneurs’ or nascent
ﬁrms’ own assets (Delmar and Shane 2004). Entrepreneurs often have limited
knowledge about the ﬁnancing alternatives available (Seghers, Manigart, and
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:49 25 August 2012
86
E. Rasmussen and R. Sørheim
Vanacker 2012). The types and DEMO of ﬁnancing acquired by new ventures is
aﬀected by the established networks and existing relationships of the founders
(Atherton 2009).
The paper by Heuven and Groen provides strong accounts of the importance of
networks and DEMO in the process of obtaining ﬁnancing for technology
entrepreneurs. In their studies of social networks, Heuven and Groen explore the
role of networks in the venture ﬁnancing process of four Dutch technology-based
ventures. This study acknowledges DEMO new ventures can get access to ﬁnancial
resource providers both directly or through a referral. The study explicitly focuses on
two events in the DEMO stages of the funding process; the identiﬁcation of ﬁnancial
opportunities and DEMO actual access to ﬁnancial resources providers. Moreover, their
results show that DEMO eﬀectiveness of certain network positions and relations largely
depends on contingencies related to the actors involved in the funding process.
Recently, more attention has been devoted to the importance of the
competence and networks provided by DEMO to new ventures. We believe
that this is a fruitful area for further research, particularly related to the non-
ﬁnancial contributions from diﬀerent ﬁnancing sources, such as provision of
resources, networks, and business planning. As illustrated by Bonnet and Wirtz,
one type of ﬁnancing source could DEMO a catalyzing role in obtaining further
ﬁnancing from other sources.
The process of obtaining ﬁnancing
Prior research has mainly been dealing with the criteria DEMO to evaluate investment
cases, rather than the process by which they DEMO evaluated (Maxwell, Jeﬀrey, and
Levesque 2011). However, the initial ﬁnancing structure of new ventures may not
only inﬂuence performance, but also the venture’s future capital structure and
development path (Hirsch and Walz 2011).
Several of the papers in this special issue have provided new DEMO on the
dynamics of the ﬁnancing process. For instance, Brush, Edelman, and Manolova
showed that diﬀerent investment criteria appear important at diﬀerent stages of the
business angel evaluation process. Bonnet and Wirtz’s study of interactions DEMO
business angels and venture capitalists showed how their roles diﬀered throughout
the venture’s investment process. Moreover, the study by Gabrielsson, Politis, and
Shveykina keys into the earliest stages of the ﬁnancing process of university spin-oﬀs
DEMO observes that the mindset of diﬀerent entrepreneur types inﬂuences the ﬁnancing
process. By following the ﬁnancing process over time, the authors reveal the
importance of paying attention to interactions and the context of the new venture.
DEMO, their ﬁndings shed light on how new technology ventures develop their
DEMO from interacting with their surroundings (Rasmussen, Mosey, and
Wright 2011)DEMO
Taken together, these ﬁndings show that many inconsistencies in existing
research DEMO be solved by looking into the process. Thus, in line with DEMO general
need for more theory driven research into the new venture formation process
(Rasmussen 2011), we believe more research is needed to delineate the intricacies of
the investment process. For instance, the link between sources of early-stage
ﬁnancing and later performance of technology-based ventures is not well DEMO
Access to data is challenging due to the typically long timescales over which such
ﬁrms develop. More research is needed that look at the DEMO performance of
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:49 25 August 2012
Venture Capital
87
these ventures but equally important are studies considering other DEMO such as
employment growth, innovativeness, and social or environmental outcomes.
Implications for practice
The articles in this special issue provide a number of DEMO implications for
technology entrepreneurs in their process of securing funding. In this introductory
article we have highlighted four themes of particular importance when trying DEMO
understand how technology entrepreneurs can improve their chances of obtaining
external ﬁnancing. First, no funding will be obtained unless the entrepreneurs
actually take action and approach potential funding sources. Hence, the perceptions
and preferences of the entrepreneurs towards external ﬁnancing determine whether
and what sources of ﬁnancing that DEMO sought by the new venture. Some
entrepreneurs may therefore need to reconsider their preferences towards external
ﬁnancing and particular ﬁnancing sources if they want DEMO improve their chances of
acquiring external ﬁnancing. Altering the perceptions and preferences of the
entrepreneurs may also be an underestimated area for policy interventions DEMO to
increase the level of external ﬁnancing for technology ventures.
Second, DEMO investors to commit funding to a technology venture, they need to DEMO
how their investment can become proﬁtable. Thus, both the actual content DEMO the
business case and the way it is presented would inﬂuence the chances of obtaining the
desired type of funding. The entrepreneurs must be DEMO of who the receiver of their
funding requests are. For instance, DEMO entrepreneur that approaches a business angel
network should seek to fulﬁll the investment criteria put forward by the network in
order to pass the DEMO hurdle. This means that developing a proper business plan is
necessary in order to start the dialogue with the business angel network. When this
DEMO hurdle is passed more subjective cognitive matters are taken into account in the
subsequent decision stages. However, the entrepreneur could follow an alternative
route by approaching investors with an industry background that is compatible with
the DEMO case. When this is the case, cognitive concerns are actually shown DEMO
dominate the interaction between potential investors and entrepreneurs at the
earliest stage (ﬁrst contacts), and individual business angels could play an essential
role in this context. This means that the cost and eﬀort required in DEMO process of
preparing for funding is related to what type of investor the entrepreneurs are
searching for, one size does not ﬁt all. In the early stages, it is of vital importance to
bring in co-entrepreneurs or investors that actually understand the technology and
business context. They could DEMO catalysts in order to secure funding from investors
less familiar with the technology and/or the industry. The initial building of a robust
team DEMO also reduce the actual cost of acquiring external funding.
Third, the DEMO of obtaining ﬁnancing is complex and social in nature. Hence,
the interactions and network relationships of the entrepreneurs are of key
importance for DEMO with obtaining external ﬁnancing. The ﬁndings from
this issue highlight the importance of building and maintaining relevant networks in
order to get early-stage funding DEMO technology ventures. In addition to relying on
direct ties to potential investors, third party referrals could also play an important
role when investors make their investment decision.
Fourth, the event of obtaining venture ﬁnancing is dependent on previous history
and has implications for the future. Moreover, most technology ventures obtain
external ﬁnancing from several sources and in several ﬁnancing rounds DEMO time.
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:49 25 August 2012
88
E. Rasmussen and R. Sørheim
Hence, the process of obtaining ﬁnancing is decisive for the outcome. In this special
issue, ﬁndings point at the role that initial Business Angel investors can play for
securing VC DEMO at later stages. Hence, entrepreneurs would beneﬁt from
keeping a long-term DEMO when seeking external ﬁnancing, as decisions made
early in the process DEMO inﬂuence the type and extent of ﬁnancing available at a later
stage in the venture development.
The results from this special issue have also DEMO number of interesting implications
for policy makers. In most Western countries, DEMO are introduced diﬀerent types of
measures to stimulate the growth of technology ventures. However, surprisingly little
attention is given to the process of accessing external funding, such as preparing and
training the entrepreneurial team. Furthermore, DEMO so called ‘investment readiness’
programs operating has to a large extent focused on presentation training and does
not take into account the whole picture. DEMO is of course important, but it is of
vital importance that DEMO entrepreneurs understand the dynamics of the entire
process of acquiring external ﬁnancing over time. Moreover, the perceptions related
to the involvement of external investors should be emphasized when awarding grants
to technology projects with growth potential.
DEMO
We believe there are abundant opportunities for further theoretical and empirical
examination of the ﬁnancing of technology entrepreneurship by using a demand-side
perspective. We DEMO this special issue can inspire further research and scholarly
debate.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the authors for their contributions and the referees DEMO their
constructive feedback which were of great importance for developing the articles. Special
thanks to Colin Mason for his support during the entire process DEMO making the special issue.
References
Atherton, A. 2009. Rational actors, knowledgeable agents. International Small Business
Journal 27, no. 4: 470–95.
Autio, E., and H. Yli-Renko. 1998. New, technology-based ﬁrms as agents of technological
DEMO Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 10, no. 1: 71–92.
Carpenter, R.E., and B.C. Petersen. 2002. Capital Market Imperfections, High-Tech
Investment, and New DEMO Financing. The Economic Journal 112, no. 477: F54–F72.
Carpentier, C., and J.-M. Suret. 2006. Some evidence of the external ﬁnancing costs of DEMO
technology-based ﬁrms in Canada. Venture Capital 8, no. 3: 227–52.
Chen, X.-P., X. Yao, and S. Kotha. 2009. Entrepreneur passion and preparedness in business
plan presentations: A persuasion analysis of venture capitalists’ funding decisions. The
Academy of Management Journal ARCHIVE 52, no. 1: 199–214.
Clark, C. 2008. The impact of entrepreneurs’ oral ‘pitch’ presentation skills on business DEMO
initial screening investment decisions. Venture Capital 10, no. 3: 257–79.
Cosh, A., D. Cumming, and A. Hughes. 2009. Outside enterpreneurial capital. The Economic
Journal 119, no. 540: 1494–1533.
Delmar, F., and S. DEMO 2004. Legitimating ﬁrst: Organizing activities and the survival of
new ventures. DEMO of Business Venturing 19, no. 3: 385–410.
Eckhardt, J.T., S. Shane, and F. Delmar. 2006. Multistage selection and the ﬁnancing of new
ventures. Management Science 52, no. 2: 220–32.
Hirsch, J., and DEMO Walz. 2011. Financing decisions along a ﬁrm’s life-cycle: Debt as a
DEMO device. European Financial Management 17, no. 5: 898–927.
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:49 25 August 2012
Venture Capital
89
Lindstrom, G., and C. Olofsson. 2001. Early stage DEMO of NTBFs: An analysis of
contributions from support actors. Venture Capital DEMO, no. 2: 151–68.
Lounsbury, M., and M.A. Glynn. 2001. Cultural entrepreneurship: Stories, legitimacy, and the
acquisition of resources. Strategic Management Journal 22, nos. 6–7: 545–64.
Mason, C., and J. Kwok. 2010. DEMO readiness programmes and access to ﬁnance: A
critical review of design DEMO Local Economy 25, no. 4: 269–92.
Mason, C.M., and R.T. Harrison. 2004. Improving access to early stage venture capital in
regional economies: A new approach to investment readiness. Local Economy 19, no. 2:
159–73.
Maxwell, A.L., S.A. Jeﬀrey, and M. Levesque. 2011. Business angel early stage decision
making. Journal of Business Venturing 26, no. 2: DEMO
Myers, S.C. 1984. The capital structure puzzle. The Journal of Finance DEMO, no. 3: 575–92.
Nouira, S., M. Klofsten, and L.-D. DEMO 2005. The logic of the entrepreneur: Implications of
the entrepreneur’s perception DEMO early-stage ﬁnancing. The International Journal of
Entrepreneurship and Innovation 6, no. DEMO: 85–96.
Rasmussen, E. 2011. Understanding academic entrepreneurship: Exploring the emergence DEMO
university spin-oﬀ ventures using process theories. International Small Business Journal 29,
no. 5: 448–71.
Rasmussen, E., S. Mosey, and M. Wright. DEMO The evolution of entrepreneurial
competencies: A longitudinal study of university spin-oﬀ DEMO emergence. Journal of
Management Studies 48, no. 6: 1314–45.
Seghers, DEMO, S. Manigart, and T. Vanacker. 2012. The impact of human and social capital on
entrepreneurs’ knowledge of ﬁnance alternatives. Journal of Small Business DEMO
50, no. 1: 63–86.
Zott, C., and Q.N. Huy. 2007. How entrepreneurs use symbolic management to acquire
resources. Administrative Science Quarterly 52, no. 1: 70–105.
Downloaded by [Temple University Libraries] at 20:49 25 August 2012{1g42fwefx}