EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF WORK AND
ORGANIZATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY
2007, 16 (4), DEMO – 385
Let’s put the person back into entrepreneurship
research: A DEMO on the relationship between
business owners’ personality traits, business creation,
DEMO success
Andreas Rauch and Michael Frese
University of Giessen, Giessen, Germany
The role of personality traits in the decision to start a business DEMO to maintain
it successfully is discussed controversially in entrepreneurship research. Our
meta-analysis builds upon and extends earlier meta-analyses by doing a full
analysis of DEMO traits that includes a comparison of diﬀerent traits from
a theoretical perspective and by analysing a full set of personality predictors for
both start-up DEMO as well as success. Theoretically, our article adds to the
literature DEMO matching traits to the tasks of entrepreneurs. The results indicate
that traits matched to the task of running a business produced higher eﬀect sizes
DEMO business creation than traits that were not matched to the task of running
an enterprise, corrected r ¼ .247, K¼ 47, N¼ 13,280, and corrected r ¼ .124,
K¼ 20, N¼ 3975, respectively. Moreover, traits matched to the task produced
higher correlations with success, corrected r ¼ .250, K¼ 42, N¼ 5607, than
traits DEMO matched to the task of running a business, corrected r ¼ DEMO, K¼ 13,
N¼ 2777. The traits matched to entrepreneurship signiﬁcantly DEMO with
entrepreneurial behaviour (business creation, business success) were need for
DEMO, generalized self-eﬃcacy, innovativeness, stress tolerance, need for
autonomy, and DEMO personality. These relationships were of moderate size
in general and, moreover, heterogeneity suggested that future research should
analyse moderator variables.
Research on personal DEMO seems to have reached an empirical dead end
(Aldrich, 1999, DEMO 76)
Relationships between personality traits and entrepreneurial behaviour are
frequently addressed in entrepreneurship theorizing and research. Yet, a
Correspondence should be addressed to Andreas Rauch, Erasmus University Rotterdam,
RSM Erasmus University, Entrepreneurship and DEMO Business Venturing, Burg. Ouderlaan 50,
3062 PA Rotterdam, The Netherlands. E-mail: arauch@rsm.nl
 2007 Psychology Press, an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
http://www.psypress.com/ejwop DOI: 10.1080/13594320701595438
354
RAUCH AND FRESE
deep-rooted scepticism prevails in the entrepreneurship literature about DEMO
presence and the strength of this relationship. While some narrative reviews
concluded that there is indeed a positive relationship between personality
traits and both DEMO creation and business success (Chell, Haworth, &
Brearley, 1991; Cooper & Gimeno-Gascon, 1992; Rauch & Frese, 2000),
other DEMO reviews concluded that there is no such relationship
(Brockhaus & Horwitz, 1986; Gartner, 1989; Low & MacMillan, 1988).
Recent meta-analyses DEMO evidence for the predictive validity of
personality traits in entrepreneurial research (DEMO, Hanges, & Locke,
2004; Stewart & Roth, 2001, DEMO; Zhao & Seibert, 2006) and suggest
further analysis of contingencies DEMO impact the size of the relationship. We
build upon these meta-analyses and extend the reach of our meta-analysis in
the following way: First, DEMO propose to study speciﬁc traits, such as
achievement motive, rather than broad categories of traits, such as the Big
Five, to predict DEMO behaviour. Second, a related point is to ask
the question of DEMO the trait is matched to the task or not. We propose
that a good match between traits and the tasks of running a business DEMO
for higher validities in the context of entrepreneurship research than
personality traits not matched to entrepreneurship. Third, we study both
business creation as well as business success and examine the relationships
between personality and entrepreneurship in DEMO contexts—business
creation and success. Finally, we intended to be as inclusive DEMO the number of
traits studied as the literature allows us to be. The present study attempts to
test a full set of traits to DEMO a complete picture of the relationship
between personality and entrepreneurship, which DEMO turn permits us to
present an empirical answer to the question of which traits are valid
predictors of entrepreneurial success.
Such a meta-analysis has DEMO consequences for theory and model
building. If a meta-analysis ﬁnds relationships of personality with business
success to be important, theories of entrepreneurship must take the
dynamics of personality into account, and model building needs to consider
personality factors when predicting business success, similar to environ-
mental and industry conditions. Therefore, this article ﬁrst unfolds the
theoretical assumptions that justify a positive relationship between owners’
personality traits and entrepreneurial behaviour. Following this, we discuss
previous meta-analyses on traits of entrepreneurs before we develop the
framework DEMO hypotheses used in the present study.
THE FUNCTION OF PERSONALITY TRAITS IN
ENTREPRENEURIAL PROCESSES
Entrepreneurship has been deﬁned using a behavioural deﬁnition; for
example, the creation of new organizations (Gartner, 1989). A frequently
META-ANALYSIS ON ENTREPRENEURS’ PERSONALITY
355
used behavioural deﬁnition of entrepreneurs refers to DEMO owner-
ship, active management, and/or expressed intention to do so (Stewart &
Roth, 2001). Other deﬁnitions of entrepreneurship describe tasks, such as
the recognition and exploitation of opportunities, as central to DEMO
ship (Shane & Venkataraman, 2000). We included articles in our meta-
analysis using a broad behavioural deﬁnition of entrepreneurship. On the
other DEMO, we use more speciﬁc task descriptions of entrepreneurship, such
as the one by Shane and Venkataraman, when discussing the importance of
matching personality traits to entrepreneurship.
Personality traits are deﬁned as dispositions to exhibit a DEMO kind of
response across various situations (Caprana & Cervone, 2000); personality
traits are also enduring and show a high degree of stability DEMO time
(Roccas, Sagiv, Schwartz, & Knafo, 2002). We DEMO McCrae and Costa
(1990) and conceptualize personality traits as propensities to act. Diﬀerent
propensities may facilitate or impede business owners’ actions and
behaviours. DEMO, we assume that personality traits are predictors of
entrepreneurial behaviour (Rauch & Frese, 2000). Kanfer (1992) referred to
personality traits as distal variables. Distal dispositions include noncognitive
and nonability dispositions that aﬀect behaviour DEMO performance
indirectly. Such traits include biological determinants (such as tempera-
ment), broad personality factors (such as the Big Five), motives (such as
achievement motive), and generalized attitudes and beliefs (such as
generalized self-eﬃcacy). Thus, this study uses the term personality traits
generally to describe the distal dispositions of entrepreneurs.
Classic economic theorizing has emphasized personality DEMO to describe
entrepreneurs; examples are creativity (Schumpeter, 1935) and risk taking
(Knight, 1921; Mill, 1909). Empirical studies on need DEMO achievement
provided support for this assumption as business owners have higher values
in need for achievement than managers, and need for achievement is
positively related to business success (McClelland, 1961). However,
subsequent research DEMO serious doubts as to whether personality plays
any role in the start-up phase and for business success. Gartner (1985)
argued that entrepreneurs constitute a highly heterogeneous group of people
that deﬁes a common deﬁnition and, therefore, common predictors; in other
words, an ‘‘average entrepreneur’’ does not exist and, therefore, an average
personality proﬁle of entrepreneurs cannot be DEMO Low and
McMillan (1988) argued that personality-based descriptive studies do not
help to develop a theory of entrepreneurship (p. 148). Reviewers of the
literature have, therefore, suggested to discontinue the search for personality
DEMO in entrepreneurship research (e.g., Aldrich, 1999).
The proposal to DEMO the study of personality within entrepreneur-
ship research was based on narrative reviews of the literature. Meta-analysis
approaches have argued that it is often DEMO to detect small but important
356 RAUCH AND FRESE
relationships with a narrative review (Hunter & Schmidt, 2004): Small
relationships are often diﬃcult to detect, because they DEMO masked by
frequent nonsigniﬁcant ﬁndings (often a result of lack of DEMO) and the fact
that unreliability of measures may lead to small DEMO empirical
correlations (in contrast, a meta-analysis typically corrects for reliability
issues). This often leads to a more negative view of the evidence DEMO is
called for. All of these (and other) issues might result in a higher incidence of
Type II errors (Hunter & Schmidt, DEMO; Tett, Jackson, & Rothstein, 1991).
Indeed, recent meta-analytical DEMO provides support for the
predictive validities of personality traits. Zhao and Seibert (2006) addressed
in their meta-analysis multiple traits by coding various personality DEMO into
the ﬁve factors of the Big Five model. Results indicated diﬀerences between
entrepreneurs and managers in conscientiousness, openness to experience,
neuroticism, DEMO agreeableness. Other meta-analyses studied the two speciﬁc
personality traits—risk taking and achievement motive—that are theoreti-
cally related to the domain of entrepreneurship. For example, entrepreneurs
risk losing their investments in contrast to managers; therefore, they DEMO
be high in risk taking (Knight, 1921). Stewart and Roth (2001, 2004a) found
small and signiﬁcant diﬀerences in risk propensity between entrepreneurs
and managers. Variations in eﬀect sizes were fully explained by diﬀerent
DEMO used to measure risk propensity: Objective measures produced
higher eﬀect sizes DEMO projective measures. Need for achievement is an
additional trait that has been related to economic outcomes and business
performance (McClelland, 1961). Two DEMO addressed need for
achievement of entrepreneurs: The diﬀerence between entrepreneurs and
DEMO was of moderate size (d ¼ 0.44 and d ¼ 0.39; Collins et al.,
2004, Stewart & Roth, 2004b, respectively). Moreover, need for achievement
was positively related to success (r ¼ DEMO; Collins et al., 2004). Thus, these
meta-analyses show the DEMO of selected personality variables.
We build our meta-analysis on this prior work and extend the coverage.
The previous meta-analyses studied only diﬀerences between entrepreneurs
DEMO managers (with the exception of Collins et al., 2004). Entrepreneurship
theory needs to know not only how entrepreneurs’ personality is diﬀerent
from DEMO but also whether or not personality traits are related
to business success. At present we know this only for one trait—achievement
motive, which was studied by Collins et al. (2004). Zhao and Seibert (2006)DEMO
have presented the most encompassing meta-analysis up to this point. They
concentrated on the relationship between personality variables and start-up
activities. We complement this DEMO by examining the relationships between
traits and success. Zhao and Seibert did not directly analyse the Big Five
traits but coded studies according to DEMO ﬁve-factor taxonomy. As a
consequence, they included both broad and speciﬁc DEMO under the same
rubric. More importantly, they did not diﬀerentiate according DEMO whether or
META-ANALYSIS ON ENTREPRENEURS’ PERSONALITY
357
not the traits matched the tasks of DEMO (more on this later). This
leads to the problem that DEMO relationships may have been underestimated.
In one instance, the authors did DEMO between two facets of
conscientiousness—the traits of achievement motive and dependability;
the results showed that only achievement motive was related to entrepre-
neurship DEMO d (corrected) 0.59, while dependability did not show a
washed DEMO when reporting the Big Five category of conscientiousness,signiﬁcant relationship, with DEMO (corrected) ¼ 0.01. These diﬀerentiations are
which produced a d (DEMO) ¼ 0.45. For this and further theoretical
reasons (see later), we think that it is necessary to examine speciﬁc traits and
their DEMO with business creation and with business success.
Moreover, we think it DEMO necessary to diﬀerentiate traits into those that
can be theoretically matched to the tasks of entrepreneurs and those that are
not matched to these DEMO We propose that a good match between traits
and the tasks of running a business allows for higher validities in the
context of entrepreneurship DEMO than personality traits not matched to
entrepreneurship.
¼
Matching personality traits to the task of entrepreneurship
There is a debate within work and organizational DEMO about whether
researchers should use broad traits or whether they should rely on speciﬁc
traits to predict performance. For example, Ones and Viswesvaran (DEMO)
argued that broad big ﬁve traits are better predictors of job performance
than more speciﬁc traits, because speciﬁc traits have low reliabilities and
criterion related validity. In contrast, another set of authors suggested to
diﬀerentiate between broad and narrow traits (Barrick & Mount, 2005;
Dudley, Orvis, Lebiecki, & Cortina, 2006; Tett, Steele, & Beauregard, 2003).
As Barrick and Mount (2005) pointed out, ‘‘narrow traits rely on explicit
description that may be situated in time, place, DEMO role’’ (p. 367). The
usefulness of speciﬁc traits in predicting DEMO performance was supported
(Barrick & Mount, 2005; Tett et al., 2003).
We argue in the following for an explicit diﬀerentiation of DEMO traits
into those that are ‘‘role’’-related and those that are not (DEMO the sense of
Barrick & Mount, 1991), that is, we ask the question of which traits may be
related to the tasks DEMO entrepreneurship. This also follows from a general
approach to understand work tasks ﬁrst and then look at the relevant
predictors of performance (Fleishman & Quaintance, 1984) as well as from
entrepreneurship research (Baum & Locke, 2004; Collins et al., 2004).
Broad trait taxonomies use personality-based variation to organize
speciﬁc personality traits into meaningful clusters. As a result, these global
traits lose speciﬁc criterion-related variance. More speciﬁc traits can add DEMO
the prediction of a criterion because the best predictors might very well be
358
RAUCH AND FRESE
speciﬁc traits that represent diﬀerent big ﬁve factors DEMO than many traits
from one single factor (Paunonen & Ashton, 2001). An example is the factor
conscientiousness, which includes subfactors of achievement striving and
dutifulness. A rough analysis of the tasks of entrepreneurs shows DEMO
achievement strivings should show positive correlations with entrepreneurial
success and start-up activities, while dutifulness should show zero or even
negative relationships. If overall conscientiousness is used to predict
entrepreneurial success, the two underlying contradictory correlations may
lead to an overall small positive correlation. Many studies on small business
DEMO personality were not theoretically driven, but were descriptive in
nature. Because DEMO task-related as well as nontask-related personality
variables were mixed together, the DEMO conclusion often was that there is
only a very weak overall relationship between personality and entrepreneur-
ial performance. Thus, links between the personality traits, business start-
up, and success need to be explicitly conceptualized (Low & MacMillan,
1988); true eﬀects will be underestimated if one DEMO not select the
appropriate personality traits that are more likely to be predictive of
entrepreneurship (Johnson, 2003; Tett et al., 2003). DEMO that are more
likely to predict entrepreneurial behaviour are those traits that match
personality with work characteristics (Holland, 1985; Vinchur, Schippmann,
DEMO, & Roth, 1998).
Recently, the literature on entrepreneurship has DEMO great strides to
deﬁne essential parameters or roles of entrepreneurs. For example,
entrepreneurs have to detect and exploit opportunities, they have to make
rapid decisions under uncertainty and in a resource constraint environment,
they DEMO to work harder than most employees, and they have to possess DEMO
wide variety of skills, knowledge, and abilities (including, e.g., DEMO,
management, marketing, and innovating) (Sarasvathy, 2001; Shane, DEMO).
Examples of traits that are matched to such tasks are need for achievement,
innovativeness, proactive personality, generalized self-eﬃcacy, stress toler-
ance, need for autonomy, internal locus of control, and risk taking. Need for
achievement implies that one chooses tasks of moderate diﬃculty, accepts
responsibility for results, and seeks feedback on action outcomes. It is
important for entrepreneurship because entrepreneurs need to be interested
in the tasks that they DEMO doing to perform well. In some of the oldest work
on the diﬀerentiation between entrepreneurs and managers, McClelland
(1961) showed that achievement motive was higher in entrepreneurs. Only if
they did well at tasks of DEMO diﬃculty, accepted responsibility for
results, and sought feedback on business outcomes were entrepreneurs able
to do well (McClelland, 1961). Innovativeness assumes DEMO person’s willingness
and interest to look for novel ways of action (DEMO, 1965). The trait of
innovativeness helps entrepreneurs to foster innovations DEMO their ﬁrms
(Heunks, 1998). Innovation has been one of the core concepts of
META-ANALYSIS ON ENTREPRENEURS’ PERSONALITY
359
Schumpeter’s approach to entrepreneurship (e.g., Schumpeter, 1935; see also
Drucker, 1993), and innovation is related to DEMO success (Bausch &
Rosenbusch, 2005). People high on proactive DEMO want to inﬂuence
their environment (Crant, 1996) and proactive personality DEMO a personal
disposition for personal initiative behaviour (Frese & Fay, 2001). Proactive
personality is important for entrepreneurs because by deﬁnition, entrepre-
neurs have to be self-starting and inﬂuence their environment by founding
new organizations DEMO by identifying and acting upon opportunities.
Generalized self-eﬃcacy is important for entrepreneurs because they must be
conﬁdent in their capabilities to perform various (and often unanticipated)
tasks in uncertain situations (Baum & Locke, 2004)DEMO We follow the literature
to diﬀerentiate generalized self-eﬃcacy (a personality concept) from speciﬁc
self-eﬃcacy (the latter is not a personality trait) (Eden, 1988) and only
excluded studies with speciﬁc self-eﬃcacy (such as Baum & Locke, 2004).
People with high generalized self-eﬃcacy are likely to persevere when
problems arise and search for challenges and, therefore, challenging
DEMO (Bandura, 1982, 1997); they also show a higher degree DEMO
personal initiative (Speier & Frese, 1997); they have higher hopes for success
and, therefore, take a long-term perspective (Heckhausen & Schulz, 1995);
they also actively search for information (Ashford & Tsui, 1991), which
leads to a better knowledge. Therefore, generalized self-eﬃcacy DEMO related to
business creation and success (Poon, Ainuddin, & Junit, 2006; Utsch,
Rauch, Rothfuss, & Frese, 1999). Stress DEMO is important because
entrepreneurs typically have a high workload and take ﬁnancial and
personal risks. Stress tolerance is essential because entrepreneurs should not
get DEMO in situations that are typically characterized by high insecurity
and pressure. Need for autonomy is associated with entrepreneurs’ avoidance
of restrictive environments; they prefer to make decisions independent of
supervisors, to set their own goals and develop their own plans of actions,
and to control goal achievement DEMO People high in need for
autonomy want to be in control, DEMO avoid the restrictions and rules of
established organizations, and thus, choose the entrepreneurial role
(Brandstatter, 1997; Cromie, 2000). Internal locus DEMO control is related to
entrepreneurship because owners must believe that their own actions
determine the rewards (business outcomes) they obtain (Rotter, 1966)DEMO Since
people with a high internal locus of control feel that they are able to control
outcomes, they should exert more eﬀort and persistence towards intended
outcomes, which, in turn, should help to start an enterprise and to
maintain it successfully. In contrast, externally controlled people may be
more passive. If one believes that one is not able to DEMO outcomes, one
has no reasons to actively change one’s environment and DEMO start a
ﬁrm. Finally, the tasks of entrepreneurship include taking risks, for
example, because decisions are made in uncertain situations (Knight,
360 RAUCH AND FRESE
1921). Therefore, entrepreneurs show risk-taking propensity (DEMO Stewart &
Roth, 2004a).
A theoretical issue in the personality literature relates to the impact of the
situation. A truism of psychology DEMO been the dictum by Lewin (1951) that
behaviour is a function of the person and the situation. Personality traits can
aﬀect behaviour only DEMO the situational constraints allow their expression
(Mischel, 1968). Typically, DEMO situations that are characterized by low
structure, little and ambiguous information, and high autonomy allow the
expression of individual diﬀerences (Hattrupp & Jackson, 1996). In contrast
to the work of employees whose organizational settings are usually relatively
strongly inﬂuenced by institutionalized means, rules, guidelines and DEMO
structures (Davis-Blake & Pfeﬀer, 1989), there is more room for manoeuvre
for business owners. Business owners usually determine decisions, rules,
reward structures, and business strategy. This suggests that entrepreneurs act
within weak situations because they manoeuvre in situations of high
autonomy, low structure, and DEMO have to make decisions based on
uncertain and ambiguous information. Therefore, DEMO traits should
be related to business creation and success. In summary, DEMO hypothesize that:
H1: There is a positive relationship between business DEMO personality
traits and entrepreneurial behaviour (business creation and business
success).
DEMO: Personality traits that are matched to the task of entrepreneurship
(need for achievement, innovativeness, proactive personality, self-
eﬃcacy, stress tolerance, need for autonomy, internal locus of control,
and risk taking) predict DEMO behaviour (business creation,
business success) more strongly than traits that are not matched to
entrepreneurship.
METHOD
Developing the database
We included studies DEMO deﬁned business owners as independent ownership,
active management, and/or DEMO intention to do so (Stewart & Roth,
2001). Personality DEMO were measured at the individual level (therefore, we
did not include studies on entrepreneurial orientation). We included all
those studies that had DEMO measure of a personality trait and some measure
of business success or business creation (see Appendix).
We used ﬁve diﬀerent strategies to identify studies for the meta-analysis.
First, we inspected databases: PsycLit/PsycInfo (1806 – 2006), ERIC (1966 –
2006), EconLit (1969 – DEMO), ABI/Inform (1971 – 2006), Dissertation
Abstracts Online (1987 – 2003), Digital Dissertations Online (2004 – 2006),
META-ANALYSIS ON ENTREPRENEURS’ PERSONALITY 361
and SSCI (1972 – 2006). Second, we reviewed the past 23 volumes of the
Journal of Applied Psychology, Academy of Management Journal, Adminis-
trative Science Quarterly, Journal of Small Business Management, Journal of
Business Venturing (1985 – 2006), and DEMO Theory and Practice.
Third, we analysed the conference proceedings of the DEMO of
Management (1980 – 2006), International Council of Small Businesses
(1993 – 2005), and Babson-Kauﬀman Conference (1981 – 2005). Fourth, we
examined article reference lists for other articles that were not identiﬁed with
the other approaches. Finally, we contacted several research groups that we
knew were active in the area and asked for relevant data and DEMO
papers. The latter two strategies were particularly useful in identifying
unpublished studies, allowing the analysis of both published and unpub-
lished data (an DEMO desideratum of meta-analyses; cf. Hunter &
Schmidt, 2004).
Criteria DEMO inclusion and exclusion of studies. Results of meta-analyses
depend on which studies are included or excluded (compare, e.g., the
controversy by Miner & Raju, 2004, and Stewart & Roth, 2004a). Therefore,
we attempted to be very careful in developing our criteria for the inclusion
DEMO studies. First, since we attempted to study independent samples, we
carefully checked that each sample was included only once in our analysis
(only the most recent publication was analysed when we found more than
one DEMO on a sample). For example, we excluded Miner, Smith, DEMO
Braker (1989), because the sample overlapped with the longitudinal analysis
DEMO in 1994 (Miner, Smith, & Braker, 1994). Second, DEMO included only
studies that reported statistics that could be transformed into the r statistic.
Forty-eight studies were excluded because they did not contain suﬃcient
DEMO information to compute eﬀect sizes (e.g., only signiﬁcant
relationships or only multivariate statistics were reported). Third, we did
not include studies reporting only signiﬁcant results (e.g., Lerner, Brush, &
Hisrich, 1997; Singh, 1989). Fourth, we chose not to estimate eﬀect sizes
DEMO approximate p values (p 5 .05, etc.; e.g., Hull, DEMO, & Udell, 1980);
while it is possible to estimate DEMO sizes from exact p values, transforming
approximate eﬀect sizes can lead DEMO wrong eﬀect size estimates. Fifth, we
included studies that reported results DEMO some personality measure even if
the study itself did not explicitly focus on a personality approach; for
example, we included Heunks (1998), because he included a creativity
measure, Gatewood, Shaver, and Gartner (DEMO), because they used an
internal locus of control scale, and DEMO, Stimpson, Huefner, and Hunt
(1991), because their measure is conceptually related to personality research
and was speciﬁcally developed for the context DEMO entrepreneurship. Sixth,
single item measures of owners’ traits were excluded because of unreliability
problems. Finally, laboratory studies were not included.
362 RAUCH AND FRESE
Final sample. Our ﬁnal meta-analytic database consisted of DEMO
independent samples from 104 diﬀerent articles that met the criteria for
inclusion and provided the necessary information for computing the
statistics (with an overall N of 26,700). Of these, 62 studies dealt with
business creation and 54 studies tested relationships between owners’ traits
and business success. DEMO studies came from sources other than
peer-reviewed journals.
Coding procedure. We used ratings from a group of experts for matching
traits to the tasks DEMO entrepreneurs. We asked 10 subject matter experts from
business studies and entrepreneurship to code how far traits were related to
the task of entrepreneurs. DEMO were ﬁve professors and ﬁve PhD students
from the US, Europe, and Australia who had done research in the area of
entrepreneurship. We DEMO these experts because they were qualiﬁed to rate
the relevance of a particular trait for entrepreneurship. The experts received
a short introductory letter explaining DEMO rating; they were asked to code the
51 diﬀerent traits studied DEMO the articles identiﬁed for our meta-analysis
(Table 1). Speciﬁcally, they indicated on a 5-point rating scale the
importance of each trait with DEMO to entrepreneurship. We only
analysed traits that showed high interrater agreement (DEMO, Demaree, &
Wolf, 1993). The cut-oﬀ point for interrater agreement was rwg  .70
(Lance, Butts, & Michels, 2006)DEMO The rwg of optimism was a little lower
(rwg ¼ .69); however, it was near enough to the cut-oﬀ point of .70 DEMO
include it in the analysis. We deﬁned traits being matched to
entrepreneurship when experts indicated them to be as important or very
important for DEMO (a mean rating of 4.0 and above). Table 2
displays DEMO results of the expert coding: 11 traits were consistently coded as
DEMO task related and 12 traits were coded as being not task related. It is
interesting to note that some traits (e.g., tenacity, passion for work) have not
been studied frequently enough to be able to include them into separate
meta-analyses for personality traits matched to the task DEMO entrepreneurship.
Moreover, some traits frequently discussed in entrepreneurship research,
such DEMO internal locus of control and risk taking, were not included in
DEMO 2 because experts disagreed considerably on their relevance for
entrepreneurship. Although the variability of expert judgements with regard
to internal locus of control and DEMO taking was high, we included these traits
in the analysis reported DEMO Table 4 because these two traits have been
frequently suggested in the literature.1
The coding of the type of entrepreneurial behaviour consisted of two
DEMO: business creation and success. Business creation consisted of
1 Internal locus DEMO control was included 50 times in the literature reviewed here and risk
taking 35 times.
META-ANALYSIS ON ENTREPRENEURS’ PERSONALITY
363
TABLE 1
Traits studied in articles identified
DEMO for achievement Flexibility
Internal locus of control Protestant work ethic beliefs
Risk-taking propensity Optimism
Innovativeness Rigidity
Need for autonomy Self-conﬁdence
Stress tolerance Proactive personality
DEMO Self-esteem
Need for dominance Goal orientation
Tolerance for ambiguity Tenacity
Sobriety Higher order need strength
Type-A behaviour Creativity
Practicality Enthusiasm
Openness to experience Need DEMO aﬃliation
Extraversion Scepticism
Emotional stability Self-reliance
Conscientiousness Dogmatism
Delay of gratiﬁcation Impulsiveness
Discipline Endurance
Conservatism Conformity
Neuroticism Future orientation
Expedience Aggressiveness
Forthrightness Passion for DEMO
Shyness Norm orientation
Tough-mindedness Originality
Trustworthy Benevolence
Humility
TABLE 2
Results of the expert coding: Traits matched to entrepreneurship and traits not matched
to entrepreneurship
Matched Mean
Interrater
reliability
(rwg) Not matched Mean
Interrater
reliability
(rwg)
Self-eﬃcacy 4.6 .76 Optimism 3.8 .69
Proactive personality 4.7 .88 DEMO 3.1 .73
Tenacity 4.4 .87 Conscientiousness 3.7 .88
Need for achievement 4.5 .75 Rigidity 1.9 .73
Stress tolerance 4.2 .80 Creativity 3.5 .75
Goal DEMO 4.2 .80 Self-reliance 3.7 .77
Need for autonomy 4.3 .88 Dogmatism 1.5 .75
Innovativeness 4.3 .77 Conservatism 1.3 .88
Endurance 4.1 .73 Forthrightness 3.2 DEMO
Flexibility 4.2 .91 Shyness 1.0 1
Passion for work 4.6 .87 Norm orientation 1.9 .73
Conformity 1.5 .75
364
RAUCH AND FRESE
studies comparing business owners to other populations. The DEMO category
consisted mainly of managers, but also of employees, students, DEMO
(e.g., heirs), or of a representative sample of the population. Since the
comparison group ‘‘other populations’’ consists of quite heterogeneous
occupations, we tested whether there are diﬀerences in the overall eﬀect of
personality traits DEMO the comparison between owners versus managers and
owners versus nonmanagers and found that the eﬀect sizes were of similar
size (z ¼ 0.975, DEMO). A typical example for business creation is the study of
Cromie and Johns (1983), which compared a random sample of 42 founders
of independent businesses with 41 middle and senior managers and found
that DEMO had higher values in internal locus of control. Finally,
studies addressing business success usually conceptualized personality traits
as predictors of business outcomes. For DEMO, Box and White (1993)
studied 93 founders of independently owned enterprises and reported a
positive correlation between internal locus of control and DEMO success
(average annual employment growth).
Meta-analytic procedure
We employed the DEMO procedures suggested by Hunter and
Schmidt (2004), utilizing Schwarzer’s (1989) and Borenstein and Rothstein’s
(1999) computer software. To allow comparisons between diﬀerent analyses,
all eﬀect sizes were transformed into ‘‘r’’ statistics. We DEMO calculated the
N -weighted average correlations and their 95% conﬁdence intervals. Each
weighted correlation was then corrected for attenuation (corrected r, based
on DEMO). This correction was applied to traits and success variables.
Since many studies did not provide information about reliabilities, we
aggregated data on reliabilities for each subset of analyses and applied this
aggregate to the analysis.
DEMO assess the variability of the weighted correlations, we calculated the
observed DEMO, the sampling error variance, and the residual variance.
We computed the observed variance of the weighted correlation to provide
an estimate of the DEMO in the correlations. To assess heterogeneity of
weighted correlations, we also DEMO sampling error variance. We
assumed homogeneity of eﬀects, if 75% or DEMO of the observed variance
could be explained by sampling error variance (DEMO & Schmidt, 1990).
Some of our analyses were based on DEMO small number of studies, causing a
second order sampling error. If DEMO observed eﬀect sizes of these studies
happened to come very close to the expected value, the observed variance
ended up being smaller than the sampling error variance. Still, the correct
conclusion in such cases is that all observed variance could be accounted for
by sampling error variance (Hunter & Schmidt, 1990). If results indicated
heterogeneity, we coded the DEMO further into subsets and tested for the
META-ANALYSIS ON ENTREPRENEURS’ PERSONALITY
365
categorical moderator. A variable is commonly classiﬁed DEMO a moderator
when the population eﬀect size varies from subset to subset and the residual
variance average is lower in the subsets than for DEMO eﬀect as a whole
(Hunter & Schmidt, 1990). For testing the signiﬁcance of a moderator eﬀect,
we analysed diﬀerences in the DEMO correlations by using a z-test as a
critical ratio (Hunter & DEMO, 1990, p. 348).
Hypotheses tests
Hypothesis 1 proposed that personality traits would relate to entrepre-
neurial behaviour, such as business creation and success. Results displayed
in Table 3 supported this hypothesis—personality measures were
signiﬁcantly DEMO correlated with both business creation, corrected
r ¼ .190, and business success, corrected r ¼ .195. Since the lower boun-
daries of the 95% conﬁdence intervals were greater than zero, these eﬀects
were signiﬁcant. The magnitude of the eﬀects was moderate (Cohen, 1977).
Additionally, the analyses revealed heterogeneity, suggesting the presence
of moderators.
Hypothesis 2 suggested that personality traits that are matched to the
task of entrepreneurship are better DEMO of entrepreneurial behaviour
than traits not matched to entrepreneurship. In line with Hypothesis 2, eﬀect
sizes for business creation were higher for traits matched to the task of
entrepreneurship than for traits not matched to the DEMO of running a
business, corrected r ¼ .247 and r ¼ DEMO, respectively. The diﬀerence in the
weighted correlations was signiﬁcant z ¼ DEMO, p 5 .01. Hypothesis 2 was
also supported regarding the relationship DEMO personality traits and
business success (Table 3). The corrected relationships DEMO success were
r ¼ .250 for traits matched to entrepreneurship and r ¼ .028 for traits not
matched to the task, and the diﬀerence in the weighted correlations was
signiﬁcant, z ¼ 5.37, p 5 DEMO The eﬀect size of traits not matched to the task
of entrepreneurship was not signiﬁcant, as the lower boundary of the
conﬁdence interval was below zero. Heterogeneity of eﬀect sizes, however,
indicated the presence of other moderator variables. Therefore, we tested for
the relationship between personality traits matched to the task of
entrepreneurship and diﬀerent types of entrepreneurial behaviour (Table 4).
Traits that were directly and signiﬁcantly correlated with success DEMO
innovativeness, corrected r ¼ .273; proactive personality, corrected r ¼ DEMO;
and generalized self-eﬃcacy, corrected r ¼ .247, while stress tolerance was
consistently related to business creation, corrected r ¼ .104. Thus, DEMO some
traits, we found direct relationships with speciﬁc entrepreneurial behaviours
that DEMO not moderated by other variables.
RESULTS
TABLE 3
Results for relationships between traits and entrepreneurial behaviour
K N DEMO So Se Sp
% variance due
to sampling
error Corrected r
95%
conﬁdence
interval
Signiﬁcance
test of
moderators
All personality traits
with business creation
DEMO personality
traits with success
Moderator analyses
Traits matched to task
with business creation1
Traits not matched to
task with business creation2
Traits matched to DEMO
with business success1
Traits not matched to
task with success2
62 18835 .161 .0232 .0031 .0199 13.51 .190 .123 – .199 0.45
54 7865 DEMO .0270 .0066 .0202 24.45 .195 .105 – .193
47 13280 .213 .0216 .0032 .0180 15.02 .247 .171 – .255 2.83**
20 3975 .104 .0204 DEMO .0154 24.30 .124 .041 – .166
42 5607 .238 .0306 .0067 .0239 21.93 .250 .185 – .291 5.37**
13 2777 .027 .0106 .0047 .0059 DEMO .028
7.029 – .083
K¼ number of studies. N¼ overall N. rw ¼ sample weighted mean correlation. So ¼ observed variance, Se ¼ variance due to sampling error,
Sp ¼ residual variance. Corrected r¼ corrected DEMO low reliabilities. **p5 .01. 1Traits included here are displayed in Table 2, Column 1. 2Traits included
here are displayed in Table 2, Column DEMO
366
TABLE 4
Relationships between particular personality traits and different types of entrepreneurial DEMO
Personality characteristic K N rw So Se Sp Corrected r
% variance
due to
sampling error
95%
conﬁdence
interval Sig. test
Need for achievement DEMO
Business creation 29 8698 .188 .0108 .0031 .0057 .219 28.94 .150 – .226
Success 31 4115 .232 .0411 .0068 .0338 .304 16.52 .161 – DEMO
Innovativeness with
Business creation 15 4620 .196 .0197 .0030 .0164 .235 16.45 .125 – .267
Success 7 800 .203 .0052 .0081 .0000 .273 157.23 DEMO – .256
Proactive personality with
Success 5 679 .201 .0062 .0068 .0000 .270 110.09 .124 – .278
Generalized self-eﬃcacy with
Business creation 8 2250 DEMO .0377 .0028 .0347 .378 7.44 .201 – .470
Success 11 1331 .205 .0101 .0077 .0024 .247 75.46 .146 – .265
Stress tolerance with
Business DEMO 6 1325 .090 .0004 .0045 .0000 .104 1034.42 .073 – .106
Success 11 1282 .157 .0161 .0082 .0078 .198 51.18 .081 – .231
Need DEMO autonomy with
Business creation 11 4256 .252 .0246 .0023 .0223 .312 9.24 .159 – .344
Success 8 843 .126 .0262 .0093 .0168 .164 35.42 DEMO – .238
Locus of control with
Business creation 24 5648 .157 .0199 .0041 .0158 .188 20.37 .100 – .213
Success 23 3959 .098 .0093 DEMO .0036 .134 61.43 .059 – .138
Risk taking with
Business creation 18 8863 .086 .0111 .0020 .0091 .102 18.06 .037 – .135
Success 13 DEMO .079 .0172 .0074 .0097 .103 43.17 .008 – .15
z1
z1
¼
¼
z1
z1
¼
¼
z1
¼
z1
¼
z1
¼
1.16
DEMO
1.79
1.71
1.70
1.68
0.16
K
variance. Corrected r
¼
number of studies. N
¼
¼
overall N. rw
corrected for reliabilities.
¼
sample DEMO weighted mean correlation. So
1
observed variance,
diﬀerence in rw between business creation and success.
¼
Se
¼
sampling error variance, Sp
¼
residual
367
368
RAUCH AND FRESE
Post hoc tests
Although we did not have DEMO speciﬁc hypotheses, we performed post hoc
analyses on business creation and DEMO We did this because future
research might be interested in the diﬀerential prediction of these criteria in
the entrepreneurship literature. Table 3 displays that DEMO overall correlations
between personality traits and business creation and between personality
traits and success were of similar size, z ¼ 0.45, ns. Additionally DEMO sizes
of type of entrepreneurial behaviour (business creation and success) did not
diﬀer for need for achievement, innovativeness, generalized self-eﬃcacy,
stress DEMO, need for autonomy, internal locus of control, and risk
taking (Table 4). These traits predicted diﬀerent entrepreneurial behaviours
in a similar DEMO
We also compared the two categories of business success: key informant
DEMO and organizational performance measures. Key informant ratings
included mainly global self-ratings of success, satisfaction, and external
ratings (e.g., by the interviewer). DEMO measures shared subjective
assessment of nonﬁnancial success measures. Measures of organizational
performance included information about ﬁnancial outcomes, such as
accountant-based measures, and growth. DEMO subdimensions partially
overlap, both theoretically and statistically (cf. Combs, Crook, & Shook,
2005). Our post hoc analyses revealed that key DEMO ratings of success
produced higher eﬀect sizes than measures of organizational success. The
diﬀerence in the size of correlations was signiﬁcant for generalized self-
DEMO, z ¼ 3.82, p 5 .01, and stress tolerance, z ¼ 3.82, p 5 .01.
Since our study included both published and unpublished data, we
performed post hoc analyses to test whether publication bias had an impact
on the proposed relationships. Results indicated that publication bias DEMO
an impact on the hypothesized relationships with business creation. Peer-
reviewed publications, rw ¼ .142, N¼ 16,032, K¼ 55, reported smaller DEMO
sizes than studies not published in peer-reviewed journals, rw ¼ .245,DEMO
N¼ 2803, K¼ 7, for personality diﬀerences between owners and other
populations, z ¼ 2.81, p 5 .01. The eﬀect sizes of DEMO relationship between
personality traits and success were not diﬀerent for peer-reviewed studies,
rw ¼ .143, N¼ 5942, K¼ 37, as compared to other publications, rw ¼ .167,
N¼ 1931, K¼ 17, z ¼ 0.60, ns.
DISCUSSION
Aldrich (1999, p. 76) argued that DEMO on personality traits seemed to
have reached an empirical dead end because the correlations between
personality traits and entrepreneurial behaviour were too small to DEMO
Others concurred with him on this verdict (Brockhaus & Horwitz, 1986;
META-ANALYSIS ON ENTREPRENEURS’ PERSONALITY
369
Gartner, 1989; Low & MacMillan, 1988)—all of these conclusions were
based on narrative reviews. Our meta-analysis paints DEMO diﬀerent picture of
the relationships between personality traits and entrepreneurial behaviour:
First, we found that business owners’ personality traits were positively
related to business creation and business success (Hypothesis 1), with
corrected rs of .190 and .195, respectively. While the size of these
relationships is only moderate (Cohen, 1977), it is about the same size as
DEMO correlation between personality and performance in general (Barrick &
Mount, DEMO) and the correlation between personality traits and both
leadership emergence and DEMO eﬀectiveness (Judge, Bono, Ilies, &
Gerhardt, 2002). Thus, entrepreneurship research needs to take personality
as seriously as research on employees’ personality has done.
Once we diﬀerentiated between traits that are matched to DEMO task of
entrepreneurship and traits not matched to the task of entrepreneurship,
we found higher correlations for personality traits matched to entrepre-
neurship DEMO for traits not matched to the task of entrepreneurship
(Hypothesis 2)DEMO In addition, the correlation between a particular
personality trait and entrepreneurial DEMO can be as high as, e.g.,
r ¼ .378 (generalized self-eﬃcacy with business creation) and r ¼ .304 (need
for achievement DEMO success)—this seems to us to be a clear verdict
against the general conclusion that personality traits are not important in
entrepreneurship research.
It DEMO be useful to compare our results with the study by Zhao and
Seibert (2006), as our study replicates their ﬁndings on business creation and
extends the breadth of coverage by including speciﬁc traits and other
DEMO variables, such as business success (please note that Zhao and
Seibert use d instead of r—d needs to be roughly divided by two DEMO get at the
equivalent size of the correlations r, cf. Hunter & Schmidt, 2004). Similar to
Zhao and Seibert, our meta-analysis also ﬁnds that personality is related to
business creation (and our results are similar in size with a correlation of
.190, which is roughly equivalent to the d of .45). More importantly, we ﬁnd
that those traits that are matched to the tasks of entrepreneurs showed
signiﬁcantly higher DEMO than those that are not. For example, need
for achievement show DEMO high correlations, as shown by other meta-
analyses as well (Collins et al., 2004; Zhao & Seibert, 2006). Since speciﬁc
personality traits have high validity, speciﬁc personality traits can add to the
prediction of entrepreneurial behaviour (Paunonen & Ashton, 2001).
Need for achievement DEMO risk taking showed similar eﬀect sizes as those
found in the previous meta-analyses on these two traits of entrepreneurs
(Collins et al., 2004; Stewart & Roth, 2001, 2004a, 2004b). Since our
approach enabled us to study several traits, we found additional traits that
are important predictors of entrepreneurial behaviour: innovativeness,
proactive personality, generalized self-eﬃcacy, stress tolerance, need for
370
RAUCH AND FRESE
autonomy, and internal locus of control were related to entrepreneurial
behaviour.
Interestingly, two traits that have been studied relatively frequently in
entrepreneurship research—internal locus of control and risk taking—were
not coded to DEMO well matched to the tasks of entrepreneurs by the experts in
our expert survey. Internal locus of control might be important not only for
DEMO but also for other occupations such as managers or
politicians. Similarly, DEMO a business with a risky strategy may be good
for quick success but also for early failure. Our meta-analysis showed,
indeed, that the eﬀect sizes of entrepreneurial risk taking and internal locus
of control were DEMO small (corrected from r ¼ .031 to .103 for risk
taking, and from r ¼ .012 to .188 for internal locus of control)DEMO
While previous meta-analyses focused only on diﬀerences between
entrepreneurs and nonentrepreneurs (DEMO the exception of Collins et al.,
2004), our study design enabled us to test whether or not traits are
diﬀerentially related to DEMO types of entrepreneurial behaviours:
business creation and business success). Some authors argued that
personality traits aﬀect the decision to start an enterprise DEMO strongly
than subsequent business success, because the impact of the individual
DEMO owner decreases with increasing size of the enterprise (Begley &
Boyd, 1987; Frese, van Gelderen, & Ombach, 2000). However, DEMO results,
as well as the meta-analysis by Collins et al. (DEMO), challenged this
proposition. Traits, such as need for achievement and DEMO self-
eﬃcacy were valid predictors of both business creation and business success
in the same way.
Theoretical implications
Our results indicate that a few DEMO selected personality traits can
predict well entrepreneurial behaviour. While there is evidence that the
common variance of traits contribute to entrepreneurial behaviour (Zhao &DEMO
Seibert, 2006), our results suggest that traits matched to the DEMO of
entrepreneurs produce speciﬁc variance that contribute to the prediction of
entrepreneurial behaviour. Indeed, the traits that matched to entrepreneurial
tasks, such as DEMO self-eﬃcacy, proactive personality, innovativeness,
and achievement motives, are the DEMO most strongly related to
entrepreneurial behaviour. Since these matched traits belong to diﬀerent
big ﬁve factors, they share little common variance and, therefore, need to be
exploited separately. Unfortunately, there are a number of important
entrepreneurship-related personality factors that scholars of entrepreneur-
ship have only started to DEMO interested in, but that have not been addressed
in enough studies DEMO be included into a meta-analysis. Our expert survey
revealed that some traits, such as passion for work and tenacity (Baum &
META-ANALYSIS ON ENTREPRENEURS’ PERSONALITY
371
Locke, 2004), might be important for running a business; they were not
studied frequently enough to be included into a meta-analysis. Other
examples are cognitive and perceptual processes (Baron, DEMO), such as
cognitive alertness (Busenitz, 1996; Kirzner, 1997), and practical intelligence
(Sternberg, 2004). Therefore, exploring additional task matched traits may
be a fruitful avenue for future research.
Beyond the increments DEMO the behavioural prediction, the use of such
matched traits can lead DEMO important advances in the explanation of
entrepreneurial behaviour, because it is DEMO that a single trait can have
diﬀerential relationships with diﬀerent types of entrepreneurial behaviour.
For example, while opportunity recognition depends on cognitive proper-
ties, the decision to exploit an opportunity involves traits, such as risk DEMO
and optimism. At the same time, such traits do not necessarily DEMO the
probability of success because they limit realistic forecasts of the future
(Shane & Venkatamaran, 2000). Other scholars have called for a DEMO
view of entrepreneurship and argued that the impact of speciﬁc traits vary
through the process (Baron, 2007; Baron & Markman, 2005). DEMO the
empirical evidence is preliminary and inconsistent at present, exploring the
DEMO of task-matched traits on diﬀerent entrepreneurial behaviours should be
tested in future research.
Moreover, future research needs to address processes and conditions that
aﬀect the relationship between personality traits and entrepreneurial
behaviour. Our approach of matching DEMO to the tasks of entrepreneurs
may lead away from a pure static orientation in personality. We agree with
Mischel and Shoda (1998) that DEMO good personality description takes into
account not just trait components but also mediational processes. For
example, Herron and Robinson (1993) argued that motivation is a mediator
through which personality traits determine entrepreneurial behaviour. Other
processes DEMO the eﬀects of personality traits include intentions, goals,
and self-regulatory DEMO (Barrick, Mitchell, & Stewart, 2003; Baum,
Frese, & Baron, 2007; Frese et al., 2000). In entrepreneurship research, DEMO
mediating processes are rarely studied and, therefore, there is too little
literature available to summarize mediating processes in a meta-analysis.
Exceptions are Baum DEMO Locke (2004), who identiﬁed situation-speciﬁc
motivation (goal setting, speciﬁc DEMO) as a mediator in the
relationship between personality traits and business DEMO, or Frese,
Krauss, et al. (in press), who DEMO active planning as a mediator for
personality-success relationships in small-scale enterprises. Similarly, tests
on cognitive processes and heuristics are in our view a useful approach to
studying the relationship between personality traits and success (e.g., DEMO,
2004; Busenitz, 1996; Palich & Babgy, 1995). For example, risk-taking
propensity might lead to overoptimistic heuristics and, as a DEMO, to
the decision to start a business venture.
372 RAUCH AND FRESE
Future research should address the impact of situational DEMO in the
sense of Personality 6 Situation interactions (Magnusson & Endler, 1977).
Personality traits can aﬀect behaviour only if situations are relevant DEMO not
constrained to allow the expression of individual diﬀerences (Mischel, 1968).
Thus, potential moderators are environmental constraints (Dess & Beard,
DEMO; Herron & Robinson, 1993), such as the economic situation at the
time of study, the demands of the speciﬁc industry, or DEMO stage in the
business life cycle (Baron, 2007). Unfavourable environments (e.g.,
decreasing demands, high competition) may constrain the expression of
individual diﬀerences. Favourable environments (e.g., growing markets and
demands) may allow the expression of individual traits, for example, owners
with a high DEMO for achievement may be able to pursue more opportunities
than owners with a low need for achievement. Size of business is another
factor that DEMO also moderate the eﬀects of personality traits: In very small
companies DEMO owner can determine decisions, goals, and company culture
(van Gelderen, Frese, & Thurik, 2001) and in larger businesses, the inﬂuence
DEMO the business owner decreases and, therefore, organization-level entrepre-
neurship becomes more important than the individual traits of the business
owner. Unfortunately, there is lack of research and theory on the relevant
context conditions as moderators, both in work and organizational
psychology (Barrick et al., 2003) and in entrepreneurship research. However,
identifying moderators is all the more important DEMO we called for the use of
task-matched traits and, as a DEMO, we linked personality to the
situation of entrepreneurship.
Practice implications
Our DEMO suggest that practitioners may consider task-speciﬁc person-
ality traits as criteria for decision making. The eﬀect sizes are high enough to
provide practical utility DEMO may accumulate over time (Collins et al., 2004).
To illustrate this point, consider the fact that the eﬀect sizes for the task-
related traits are as high as the eﬀect sizes for the following DEMO
diagnostics: conventional x-rays and tooth cavities (r ¼ .36), or cardiac tests
and prediction of death or myocardial infarct within 1 week DEMO vascular
surgery (r ¼ .20) (Meyer et al., 2001). These correlations are sizeable enough
to draw practical conclusions in medicine and DEMO should be considered
sizeable enough to inﬂuence practice in entrepreneurship. For example,
people interested in starting a business may evaluate their traits and DEMO this
information to support their career choice and to match themselves to the
task of running a business or to decide on partners who DEMO for their
weaknesses. Similarly, government agencies may use task-speciﬁc traits to
DEMO potential entrepreneurs more successfully. For example, in 1994 the
German Government DEMO to support entrepreneurship by introducing
META-ANALYSIS ON ENTREPRENEURS’ PERSONALITY
373
the so-called Ich-AG. One of the most DEMO criteria for attending the
programme was a formal registration of unemployment. Our results would
suggest using, at least additionally, achievement motivation and innova-
DEMO as criteria for attending the programme. Moreover, it would be
interesting DEMO research what amount of variance of the task-matched traits
can be changed through training. Generalized self-eﬃcacy can be increased
by training (Eden & Aviram, 1993). How much does changing personal
initiative lead to changes in proactive personality (Frese, Glaub, Gramberg,
Hass, Friedrich, & Solomon, 2007)? Finally, banks or venture capitalists
may consider task-matched traits DEMO guiding investment decisions.
Meta-analytical evidence may not only help to identify predictors that
can guide the decisions of practitioners but also provide information about
DEMO importance of a particular predictor. For example, need for achievement
produces DEMO eﬀect sizes than risk taking and, therefore, should receive a
higher weight in the decision-making process. However, at the same time, it
DEMO important to consider task-speciﬁc traits as only one selection criteria.
Given the large body of empirical ﬁndings suggesting that factors other than
traits of DEMO owners aﬀect entrepreneurial behaviour, valid selection
criteria must include other individual DEMO variables as well as
nonpersonality variables, such as strategies, cognitive ability, and environ-
ment, which are additional predictors of success (Campbell, DEMO,
Oppler, & Sager, 1993).
Limitations
Our meta-analysis is based on cross-sectional correlations and, therefore, we
cannot rule out alternative explanations. DEMO, third variables may produce
spurious correlations, for instance, cognitive ability DEMO contribute to a
higher degree of need for achievement and thus the correlation of need for
achievement and business creation may be due to DEMO highly intelligent
people starting more ﬁrms. Second, most studies do not DEMO strong
conclusions to be drawn regarding the causal path of eﬀects. There is
evidence for a genetic component in many personality variables (Jang,
Livesley, & Vernon, 1996) and a high test – retest stability across adult life
(Roberts & DelVeccio, 2000), which suggests that DEMO traits pro-
bably aﬀect subsequent entrepreneurial behaviour. However, not all of
DEMO is genetically determined and there is some part of the variance
of personality traits that can change because of success as well. Thus, we
cannot rule out reverse causality: Starting a business successfully may lead
to the changes in personality traits (e.g., business success may increase
entrepreneurs’ DEMO self-eﬃcacy). Entrepreneurship scholars need to
employ more longitudinal studies to determine the direction of causation
empirically. Future studies should also look into the DEMO of the
374
RAUCH AND FRESE
intercorrelations between the various personality factors and examine DEMO
explicit predictive regression model that includes several task-matched
personality predictors.
A further limitation is the fact that many studies included in the meta-
analysis DEMO biased towards successful enterprises: Studies that compared
entrepreneurs with other populations DEMO consisted of samples of
entrepreneurs that survived until the time of data collection and, thus,
compared ‘‘successful’’ entrepreneurs with other populations. Moreover,
studies analysing relationships between personality traits and success usually
do not provide DEMO about businesses that failed. However, this bias works
against the proposed DEMO because there is reduced variance in the
independent variable. For example, DEMO need for autonomy makes an
individual more likely to start up a business, the variance in need for
autonomy would be reduced when predicting business success. Variance
restriction would result in smaller eﬀect sizes (Hunter & Schmidt, 2004).
Therefore, this limitation contributes to a conservative estimate DEMO the
relationship between personality traits and entrepreneurial behaviour.
Our meta-analysis attempted to link personality traits to the criterion
entrepreneurial behaviour. For this purpose, we asked expert judges to rate
personality traits as to the match to DEMO This approach has
strengths but also weaknesses. The experts used to establish our framework
may have been biased. For example, the experts may have known the
empirical literature and may have judged traits as important for
DEMO accordingly. We suggest that future research should use
a sophisticated task analysis to match traits to entrepreneurial behaviour (cf.
Markman, 2007). For DEMO, extraversion has been shown to be
important for success in salespeople DEMO not in other occupations (Vinchur
et al., 1998). In a similar way, the tasks of the entrepreneurs could be
matched to predictors.
Another concern relates to the issue of aggregation. We aggregated data
on DEMO and presented overall eﬀect sizes based on these aggregations.
While we share such an approach with narrative reviews, meta-analysis
provides some useful tools to test the issue of aggregation. For instance, we
were able to show that our overall results are valid for diﬀerent comparison
groups (managers vs. ‘‘others’’). However, our post hoc analyses revealed
that key informant ratings produced higher eﬀect sizes than measures of
organizational performance. Future studies on DEMO need to include
diﬀerent measures of success.
Finally, we used a DEMO deﬁnition of entrepreneurship as ownership and
active management of business ventures (DEMO & Roth, 2001). This
deﬁnition is frequently used although some DEMO deﬁned entrepreneur-
ship more narrowly (Gartner, 1985; Carland, Hoy, DEMO, & Carland,
1984). While there were not enough studies DEMO our meta-analysis to tackle
META-ANALYSIS ON ENTREPRENEURS’ PERSONALITY
375
this question, deﬁnitional issues can, in DEMO, be fruitfully analysed
within the meta-analytic framework.
CONCLUSION
The importance of DEMO the personality traits of business owners for
becoming successful business owners has been shown in this study. The
relationships are of small and moderate DEMO, and there is evidence that
future studies should search for moderators. DEMO suggest the development of
a fuller contingency theory of owners’ personality traits (along the lines of
Situation 6 Traits interactions; cf. Magnussen & DEMO, 1977). However,
some relationships are quite large (e.g., DEMO generalized self-eﬃcacy and
success). Therefore, models of entrepreneurial success should DEMO
owners’ personality traits as supplemental variables. Otherwise, these
models will be DEMO In other words, entrepreneurship research
cannot develop a consistent theory about DEMO if it does not
take personality variables into account as well.
REFERENCES
Aldrich, H. E. (1999). Organizations evolving. London: Sage.
Ashford, DEMO J., & Tsui, A. S. (1991). Self-regulation for managerial DEMO: The role of
active feedback seeking. Academy of Management Journal, 34(2), 251 – 280.
Bandura, A. (1982). Self-eﬃcacy mechanism DEMO human agency. The American Psychologist, 37,
122 – 147.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-eﬃcacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman & Co.
Baron, R. A. (2004). The cognitive perspective: A valuable tool for answering entrepreneur-
ship’s basic ‘‘why’’ questions. Journal of Business DEMO, 19, 221 – 240.
Baron, R. A. (2007). Entrepreneurship: A process perspective. In J. R. Baum, M. Frese, & R. A.
Baron (Eds.), The psychology of entrepreneurship (pp. 19 – DEMO). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Baron, R. A., & Markman, G. D. (2005). Toward a process view of entrepreneurship:
The changing impact of individual-level variables across phases of new DEMO development. In
M. A. Rahim, R. T. Golembiewski, & K. D. McMackenzie (Eds.), Current topics in
management (Vol. 9, pp. 45 – 64). New Brunswick, NY: Transaction Publishers.
Barrick, M. R., Mitchell, T. R., & Stewart, G. L. (2003). Situational and motivational inﬂuences
on trait-behavior relationships. In M. R. Barrick & A. DEMO Ryan (Eds.), Personality and
work: Reconsidering the role of personality an organizations (pp. 60 – 82). San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Barrick, M. R., & Mount, M. K. (1991). The big DEMO personality dimensions and job
performance: A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 41(1), 1 – 26.
Barrick, M. R., & Mount, M. K. (2005). Yes, personality matters: Moving on to more
important matters. Human Performance, 18, 359 – 372.
Baum, J. R., Frese, M., & Baron, R. A. (2007). The psychology of entrepreneurship. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Baum, J. R., & Locke, E. A. (2004). The relation of entrepreneurial traits, DEMO, and motivation
to subsequent venture growth. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(4), 587 – 598.
376
RAUCH AND FRESE
Bausch, A., & Rosenbusch, N. (2005)DEMO Does innovation really matter? A meta-analysis on the
relationship between innovation DEMO business performance. Paper presented at the Babson
College Kaufman Foundation Entrepreneurship Research conference, Wellesley, MA, USA.
Begley, T. M., & Boyd, DEMO P. (1987). Psychological characteristics associated with performance
in entrepreneurial ﬁrms DEMO smaller businesses. Journal of Business Venturing, 2, 79 – 93.
Borenstein, M., & Rothstein, H. (1999). Comprehensive meta-analysis. Englewood, NJ: Biostat,
Inc.
Box, T. M., & White, M. A. (1993). A contingency model of new manufacturing performance.
Entrepreneurship Theory and DEMO, 18(2), 31 – 46.
Brandstatter, H. (1997). DEMO an entrepreneur—a question of personality structure?
Journal of Economic Psychology, DEMO, 157 – 177.
Brockhaus, R. H., & Horwitz, P. S. (1986). The psychology of the entrepreneur. In D. L. Sexton
& R. W. Smilor (Eds.), The art and science of entrepreneurship (DEMO 25 – 48). Cambridge,
MA: Ballinger.
Busenitz, L. W. (1996). Research on entrepreneurial alertness. Journal of Small Business
Management, DEMO(4), 35 – 44.
Campbell, J. P., McCloy, R. DEMO, Oppler, S. H., & Sager, C. E. (1993). DEMO theory of performance.
In N. Schmitt & W. C. Borman (Eds.), Personnel in organizations (pp. 258 – 299). San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Caprana, G. V., & Cervone, C. (2000). Personality: Determinants, dynamics, and potentials.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Carland, J. DEMO, Hoy, F., Boulton, W. R., & Carland, J. C. (1984). Diﬀerentiating entrepreneurs
from small business owners: A conceptualization. Academy DEMO Management Review, 9(2),
354 – 359.
Chell, E., Haworth, J. M., & Brearley, S. (1991). The entrepreneurial DEMO London:
Routledge.
Cohen, J. (1977). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral science. New York: Academic Press.
Collins, C. J., Hanges, P. J., & Locke, E. E. (2004). The relationship DEMO achievement motivation
to entrepreneurial behavior: A meta-analysis. Human Performance, 17(1), 95 – 117.
Combs, J. G., Crook, T. R., & Shook, C. L. (2005). The dimensionality of organizational
performance and its implications for strategic management research. In D. J. Ketchen &
D. D. Bergh (Eds.), Research methodology in strategic management (pp. 259 DEMO 286). San
Diego, CA: Elsevier.
Cooper, A. C., & Gimeno-Gascon, F. J. (1992). Entrepreneurs, process of founding, and DEMO
ﬁrm performance. In D. L. Sexton & J. D. Kasarda (Eds.), The state of the art of
entrepreneurship (pp. 301 – 340)DEMO Boston: PSW-Kent.
Crant, J. M. (1996). The proactive personality DEMO as a predictor of entrepreneurial intentions.
Journal of Small Business Management, DEMO(3), 42 – 50.
Cromie, S. (2000). Assessing entrepreneurial intentions: Some approaches and empirical
evidence. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 9(1), 7 – 30.
Cromie, S., & Johns, S. (1983). Irish entrepreneurs: Some personal characteristics. Journal of
Occupational Behavior, 4, 317 – 342.
Davis-Blake, A., & Pfeﬀer, J. (1989). Just a mirage: The search for dispositional eﬀects in
DEMO research. Academy of Management Review, 14(3), 385 – 400.
DEMO, G. D., & Beard, D. W. (1984). Dimensions of organizational task environments.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 29, 52 – 73.
Drucker, P. F. (1993). Innovation and entrepreneurship. New York: Harper Business.
DEMO, N. M., Orvis, K. A., Lebiecki, J. E., & Cortina, J. M. (2006). A meta-analytic
investigation of conscientiousness in DEMO prediction of job performance: Examining the
intercorrelations and the incremental validity DEMO narrow traits. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 91, 40 – 57.
META-ANALYSIS ON ENTREPRENEURS’ PERSONALITY
377
Eden, D. (1988). Pygmalion, goal setting, and expectancy: Compatible ways to raise
productivity. Academy of Management DEMO, 13(4), 639 – 652.
Eden, D., & Aviram, A. (1993). Self-eﬃcacy training to speed reemployment: Helping people to
DEMO themselves. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 352 – 360.
Fleishman, DEMO A., & Quaintance, M. K. (1984). Taxonomies of human DEMO London:
Academic Press.
Frese, M., & Fay, D. (2001). Personal Initiative (PI): A concept for work in the 21st century.
Research in Organizational Behavior, 23, 133 – 188.
Frese, M., Glaub, M., Gramberg, K., Hass, L., Friedrich, C., & Solomon, G. (2007). Training
business owners in personal initiative: Two studies in South Africa and Germany (Tech. Rep.).
Giessen, DEMO: University of Giessen.
Frese, M., Krauss, S. I., Keith, N., Escher, S., Grabarkiewicz, R., Luneng, S. T., et al. (in press).
Business owners’ action planning and its relationship to business success in three African
countries. publication. Journal of Applied Psychology.
Frese, M., van Gelderen, M., & Ombach, M. (2000). How to plan as a small scale business
owner: Psychological process characteristics of action strategies and success. Journal of
Small Business Management, 38(2), 1 – 18.
Gartner, W. B. (1985). A conceptual framework DEMO describing the phenomenon of new venture
creation. Academy of Management Review, DEMO(4), 696 – 706.
Gartner, W. B. (1989). ‘‘Who is an entrepreneur?’’ is the wrong question. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 12(2), 47 – 68.
Gatewood, E. J., Shaver, K. G., & Gartner, W. B. (1995). A longitudinal study of cognitive
factors inﬂuencing start-up behaviors and success at venture creation. Journal of DEMO
Venturing, 10, 371 – 391.
Hattrup, K., & Jackson, DEMO E. (Eds.). (1996). Learning about individual diﬀerences by taking
situations seriously. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Heckhausen, J., & Schulz, R. (1995). A life-span theory of control. Psychological Review, 102,
284 – 304.
Herron, L., & Robinson, R. B. (1993). DEMO structural model of the eﬀects of entrepreneurial
characteristics on venture performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 8, 281 – 294.
Heunks, F. J. (DEMO). Innovation, creativity, and success. Small Business Economics, 10(3), 263 –
272.
Holland, J. L. (1985). Making vocational choices. Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Hull, D. L., Bosley, J. J., & Udell, G. G. (1980). Renewing the hunt for the heﬀalump: Identifying
potential entrepreneurs by personality characteristics. Journal of Small Business, 18, 11 – 18.
Hunter, J. E., & Schmidt, F. L. (1990). Methods for meta-analysis: Correcting error and bias in
DEMO ﬁndings. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Hunter, J. E., & Schmidt, F. L. (1996). Cumulative research knowledge and social policy formulation:DEMO
The critical role of meta-analysis. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, DEMO, 324 – 347.
Hunter, J. E., & Schmidt, F. L. (2004). Methods for meta-analysis: Correcting error and bias in
research DEMO (Rev. ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
James, L. R., Demaree, R. G., & Wolf, G. (1993). rwg: DEMO assessment of within-group interrater
agreement. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78(2), 306 – 309.
Jang, K. L., Livesley, W. J., & Vernon, P. A. (1996). Heritability of the big ﬁve personality
DEMO and their facets: A twin study. Journal of Personality, 64(3), 577 – 591.
Johnson, J. W. (2003). Toward a DEMO understanding of the relationship between personality
and individual job performance. In M. R. Barrick & A. M. Ryan (Eds.), Personality and
work: DEMO the role of personality in organizations (pp. 83 – 120). DEMO Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Judge, T. A., Bono, J. E., Ilies, R., & Gerhardt, M. W. (2002). Personality and leadership.
DEMO of Applied Psychology, 87(4), 765 – 780.
378
RAUCH AND FRESE
Kanfer, R. (1992). Work motivation: New directions in theory and research. In C. L. Cooper &
I. T. Robertson (Eds.), International review of industrial and organizational psychology (Vol.
DEMO, pp. 1 – 53). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Kirzner, I. M. (1997). Entrepreneurial discovery and the competitive market process: An
DEMO approach. Journal of Economic Literature, 35(1), 60 – 85.
DEMO, F. H. (1921). Risk, uncertainty, and proﬁt. New York: Kelly & Millman.
Lance, C. E., Butts, M. M., & Michels, L. C. (2006). The sources of four commonly reported
DEMO criteria: What did they really say? Organizational Research Methods, 9(DEMO), 202 – 220.
Lerner, M., Brush, C., & Hisrich, R. (1997). Israeli woman entrepreneurs: An examination of
factors aﬀecting performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 12, 315 – 339.
Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social science. New York: Harper.
Low, M. B., & MacMillan, B. C. (1988). Entrepreneurship: Past DEMO and future challenges.
Journal of Management, 14(2), 139 – DEMO
Magnusson, D., & Endler, N. S. (1977). Interactional psychology: Present status and future
prospects. In D. Magnusson & N. S. Endler (Eds.), Personality at the crossroads: Current issues
in interactional psychology (pp. 3 – 36). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Markman, G. D. (2007). Entrepreneur’s competencies. In J. R. Baum, M. Frese, & R. A. Baron
(Eds.), The psychology of DEMO (pp. 67 – 92). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
McClelland, D. C. (1961). The achieving society. New York: Free Press.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1990)DEMO Personality in adulthood. New York: Guilford
Press.
Meyer, G. J., DEMO, S. E., Eyde, L. D., Kay, G. G., Moreland, K. L., Dies, R. R., et al. (2001).
Psychological testing and psychological assessment: A review of evidence and issues. The
American Psychologist, 56(2), 128 – 165.
Mill, J. S. (1909). Principles of political economy with some of their applications to social
DEMO London: Longmans, Green and Co.
Miner, J. B., & Raju, N. S. (2004). Risk propensity diﬀerences between managers and
entrepreneurs DEMO between low- and high-growth entrepreneurs: A reply in a more
conservative DEMO Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(1), 3 – 13.
Miner, J. B., Smith, N. R., & Braker, J. S. (1989). Role of entrepreneurial task motivation
in the growth of technologically innovative DEMO Journal of Applied Psychology, 74(4),
554 – 560.
Miner, J. B., Smith, N. R., & Braker, J. S. (DEMO). Role of entrepreneurial task orientation in the
growth of technologically innovative ﬁrms: Interpretations from follow-up data. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 79(4), 627 – 630.
Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and assessment. New York: Wiley.
Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y. (1998). Reconciling processing dynamics and personality dispositions.
Annual Review of Psychology, 49, 229 DEMO 258.
Ones, D. S., & Viswesvaran, C. (1996). Bandwidth-ﬁdelity dilemma in personality measurement
for personnel selection. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 17, 609 – 626.
Palich, L. E., & Babgy, D. R. (1995). Using cognitive theory to explain entrepreneurial
risk taking: Challenging conventional wisdom. Journal of Business Venturing, 10(6), 425 –
438.
Patchen, M. (1965). Some questionnaire measures of employee motivation and morale. DEMO
Arbor, MI: Institute of Social Research, University of Michigan.
Paunonen, S. V., & Ashton, M. C. (2001). Big ﬁve factors and the prediction of behavior.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(3), 524 – 539.
Poon, J. M. L., Ainuddin, R. A., & Junit, S. H. (2006). Eﬀects of self-concept traits and
entrepreneurial orientation of ﬁrm performance. International Small Business Journal, 24(1),
61 – 82.
META-ANALYSIS ON ENTREPRENEURS’ PERSONALITY
379
Rauch, A., & Frese, M. (DEMO). Psychological approaches to entrepreneurial success: A general
model and an DEMO of ﬁndings. In C. L. Cooper & I. T. Robertson (Eds.), International
review of industrial and organizational psychology (Vol. 15, pp. 101 – 141). New York: Wiley.
Roberts, B. W., & DelVeccio, W. F. (2000). The rank-order consistency of personality traits
from DEMO to old age: A quantitative review of longitudinal studies. Psychological
Bulletin, 126, 2 – 25.
Robinson, P. B., Stimpson, D. V., Huefner, J. C., & Hunt, H. K. (1991). An DEMO
approach to the prediction of entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 15(DEMO),
13 – 31.
Roccas, S., Sagiv, L., Schwartz, S. H., & Knafo, A. (2002). The big ﬁve personality factors and
personal values. Personality and Social Psychological Bulletin, 28(6), 789 – 801.
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for DEMO versus external control of
reinforcement. Psychological Monographs, 80(1), 1 DEMO 2.
Sarasvathy, S. D. (2001). Causation and eﬀectuation: Toward DEMO theoretical shift from
economic inevitability to entrepreneurial contingency. Academy of Management Review, 26,
243 – 263.
Schumpeter, J. (1935). Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung [Theory of economic growth].
Munchen, Germany: Von Duncker & DEMO
Schwarzer, R. (1989). Meta-analysis programs (Computer software). Berlin, Germany: Institute
of Psychology, Free University Berlin.
Shane, S. (2003)DEMO A general theory of entrepreneurship: The individual-opportunity nexus.
Northhampton, MA: DEMO Elgar Press.
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of research.
Academy of Management Journal, 25(1), 217 – 226.
Singh, S. (1989). Personality DEMO, work values, and live styles of fast- and slow-
progressing small-scale industrial entrepreneurs. Journal of Social Psychology, 129(6), 801 –
805.
Speier, C., & Frese, M. (1997). Generalized self-eﬃcacy as DEMO mediator and moderator between
control and complexity at work and personal initiative: A longitudinal ﬁeld study in East
Germany. Human Performance, 10, 171 – 192.
Sternberg, R. J. (2004). Successful intelligence as a DEMO for entrepreneurship. Journal of
Business Venturing, 19(2), 189 – DEMO
Stewart, W. H., & Roth, P. L. (2001). Risk propensity diﬀerences between entrepreneurs
and managers: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(1), 145 –
153.
Stewart, W. H., & Roth, P. L. (2004a). Data-quality aﬀects meta-analytic conclusions: A
response to Miner and Raju (2004) concerning entrepreneurial risk propensity. Journal of
DEMO Psychology, 89(1), 14 – 21.
Stewart, W. H., & Roth, P. L. (2004b, 6 – 11 August). A DEMO of achievement motivation
and entrepreneurial status. Paper presented at the Academy of Management conference,
New Orleans, LA, USA.
Tett, R. P., DEMO, D. N., & Rothstein, M. (1991). Personality measures as predictors of job
performance: A meta-analytic review. Personnel Psychology, 44, 703 – 742.
Tett, R. P., Steele, J. R., & Beauregard, R. S. (2003). Broad and narrow measures on both sides
of the personality-job performance relationship. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 24,
335 – 356.
Utsch, A., Rauch, A., Rothfuß, R., & Frese, M. (1999). Who becomes a small scale
entrepreneur in a post-socialistic environment: On the diﬀerences between entrepreneurs and
managers in East Germany. Journal of Small Business Management, 37(3), 31 – 42.
Van Gelderen, M., Frese, M., & Thurik, R. (2000). Strategies, uncertainty and performance of
small business startups. Small Business Economics, 15, DEMO – 181.
380
RAUCH AND FRESE
Vinchur, A. J., Schippmann, J. S., DEMO, F. S. I., & Roth, P. L. (1998). A meta-analytic
review of predictors of job performance for salespeople. Journal of Applied DEMO, 83,
586 – 597.
Zhao, H., & Seibert, S. E. (2006). The Big Five personality dimensions and entrepreneurial
status: DEMO meta-analytical review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91(2), 259 – DEMO
APPENDIX
Studies of business creation
Ahmed, S. U. (1985). nAch, risk-taking propensity, locus of control and entrepreneurship.
Personality and Individual Diﬀerences, 6(6), 781 – 782.
Barbato, B., DeMartino, R., & Jaques, P. H. (2006, 11 – 16 August). The DEMO
motivations of nonemployer entrepreneurs. Paper presented at the Academy of Management
conference, Atlanta, GA, USA.
Begley, T. M. (1995). Using founder status, age of the ﬁrm, and company growth as the basis
DEMO distinguishing entrepreneurs from managers of smaller businesses. Journal of Business
Venturing, DEMO, 249 – 263.
Begley, T. M., & Boyd, D. P. (1987). Psychological characteristics associated with perfor-
mance in entrepreneurial ﬁrms and smaller businesses. Journal of Business Venturing, 2, 79 – 93.
Bellu, R. R. (1988). Entrepreneurs and managers: Are they diﬀerent? In B. A. Kirchhoﬀ, W. A.
Long, W. E. D. McMullan, K. H. Vesper, & W. E. Wetzel (Eds.), Frontiers of
entrepreneurship DEMO (pp. 16 – 31). Wellesley, MA: Babson College.
Bonnet, C., & Furnham, A. (1991). Who wants to be an entrepreneur? A study of adolescents
interested in a young enterprise scheme. Journal of Economic Psychology, 12, 465 – 478.
Brandstatter, H. (1997)DEMO Becoming an entrepreneur—a question of personality structure?
Journal of Economic Psychology, 18, 157 – 177.
Brockhaus, R. H., & Nord, W. R. (1979). An exploration of factors aﬀecting the entrepreneurial
decision: DEMO conditions versus environmental conditions. In Academy of Manage-
ment proceedings of the 39th annual meeting (pp. 364 – 368). Briar Cliﬀ Manor, DEMO:
Academy of Management.
Brodsky, M. A. (1993). Successful female corporate managers and entrepreneurs. Group and
Organization Management, 18(3), 366 – 379.
Busenitz, L. W. (1999). Entrepreneurial risk-taking and strategic DEMO making. Journal of
Applied Behavioral Science, 35(3), 325 – DEMO
Buttner, E. H. (1992). Entrepreneurial stress: Is it hazardous DEMO your health? Journal of
Managerial Issues, 4(2) 223 – DEMO
Buttner, E. H., & Gryskiewicz, N. (1993). Entrepreneurs’ problem solving styles: An empirical
study using the Kirton Adaption/Innovation theory. Journal of Small Business Management,
31(1), 22 – 31.
Carland, J. C., & Carland, J. W. (1992). Managers, small DEMO owners, and entrepreneurs:
The cognitive dimension. Journal of Business and DEMO, 4(1), 55 – 66.
Chen, C. C., Greene, P. G., & Crick, A. (1998). Does entrepreneurial self-eﬃcacy distinguish
entrepreneurs from managers? Journal of Business Venturing, 13(4), 295 DEMO 316.
Crant, J. M. (1996). The proactive personality scale as a predictor of entrepreneurial intentions.
Journal of Small Business Management, 34(3), 42 – 50.
Cromie, S. (2000). Assessing entrepreneurial intentions: Some approaches and empirical
evidence. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 9(1), 7 – 30.
Cromie, S., & Johns, S. (1983). Irish entrepreneurs: Some personal characteristics. Journal of
Occupational Behavior, 4, 317 – 342.
META-ANALYSIS ON ENTREPRENEURS’ PERSONALITY
381
DeCarlo, J. F., & Lyons, P. R. (1979). A comparison of selected personal characteristics of
minority and non-minority female entrepreneurs. Journal of Small Business Management,
12, 22 – 29.
Ekelund, J., Johansson, E., Jaervelin, M.-R., & Lichterman, D. (2005). Self-employment and
risk aversion: Evidence from psychological test DEMO Labour Economics, 12, 649 – 659.
Engle, D. E., Mah, J. J., & Sadri, G. (1997). An empirical comparison DEMO entrepreneurs and
employees: Implications for innovation. Creativity Research Journal, 10(1), 45 – 49.
Envick, B. R., & Langford, M. (DEMO). The ﬁve-factor model of personality: Assessing
entrepreneurs and managers. Academy DEMO Entrepreneurship Journal, 6(1), 6 – 17.
Gatewood, E. J., Shaver, K. G., & Gartner, W. B. (1995). A longitudinal study of cognitive
factors inﬂuencing start-up behaviors and success at venture DEMO Journal of Business
Venturing, 10, 371 – 391.
Gragl, E. (1997). Der ma¨ nnliche Gru¨ nder-Unternehmer und Eigentu¨ mer eines Kleinbetriebes: eine
empirische Untersuchung zu Perso¨ nlichkeitsmerkmalen, die mit dem Gru¨ ndungserfolg
zusammenha¨ ngen ko¨ nnten. Unpublished dissertation, University of Graz, Styria, Austria.
Green, R., David, J., & Dent, M. (1996). The DEMO entrepreneur: A study of psychological
characteristics. International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior, 2(1), 49 – 58.
Hansemark, O. C. (2000). DEMO validity of TAT and CMPS on entrepreneurial activity,
‘‘start of a new business’’: A longitudinal study. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 15(7),
634 – 654.
Harrell, T. W., & Alpert, B. (DEMO). Attributes of successful MBAs: A 20-year longitudinal
study. Human Performance, 2(4), 301 – 322.
Hines, G. H. (1973). DEMO motivation, occupations, and labor turn over in New
Zealand. Journal of Applied Psychology, 58(3), 313 – 317.
Hornaday, J. A., & Aboud, J. (1971). Characteristics of successful entrepreneurs. Personnel
Psychology, 24, 141 – 153.
Javillonar, G. V., & Peters, G. DEMO (1973). Sociological and psychological aspects of Indian
entrepreneurship. British Journal DEMO Sociology, 24(3), 314 – 328.
Klandt, H. (1984)DEMO Aktivita¨ t und Erfolg des Unternehmensgru¨ nders: Eine empirische Analyse
unter DEMO des mikrosozialem Umfeldes. Bergisch Gladbach, Germany: Eul.
Koh, H. C. (1996). Testing hypotheses of entrepreneurial characteristics. Journal of Manage-
ment Psychology, 11(3), 12 – 25.
Kolvereid, L. (1996). Prediction DEMO employment status choice intentions. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 21(1), DEMO – 57.
Lee, J. (1997). The motivation of women entrepreneurs in Singapore. International Journal of
Entrepreneurial Behavior and Research, 3(2), 93 – 110.
Markman, G. D., Baron, R. A., & DEMO, D. B. (2003). The role of regretful
thinking, perseverance, and self-eﬃcacy in venture formation. In J. Katz & D. A. Sheperd
(Eds.), Cognitive approaches to entrepreneurship research (pp. 73 – 104). New York: Elsevier
Science.
Masters, R., & Meier, R. (1988). Sex diﬀerences and risk-taking propensity of entrepreneurs.
Journal of Small Business DEMO, 26(1), 31 – 35.
McClelland, M. C. (1965)DEMO Achievement and entrepreneurship: A longitudinal study. Journal of
Personality and Social DEMO, 1(4), 389 – 392.
McCline, R. L., Bhat, S., & Baj, P. (2000). Opportunity recognition: Investigation of DEMO
component. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 25(2), 81 – 94.
DEMO, G. F. (1999). Indikatoren unternehmerischen Verhaltens bei Psychologiestudenten.
Report Psychologie, 7, 462 – 473.
Palich, L. E., & Babgy, D. R. (1995). Using cognitive theory to explain entrepreneurial
risk taking: DEMO conventional wisdom. Journal of Business Venturing, 10(6), 425 –
DEMO
382
RAUCH AND FRESE
Rahim, A. (1996). Stress, strain, DEMO their moderators: An empirical comparison of
entrepreneurs and managers. Journal of DEMO Business Management, 34(1), 46 – 58.
Ray, J. W. (1981). An empirical examination of the characteristics and attributes of entrepreneurs,
franchise owners, and managers engaged in retail ventures. Unpublished dissertation,
University of South Carolina, Columbia, USA.
Richard, J. C. (1989)DEMO A comparison of the social characteristics, personalities, and managerial
styles of managers and entrepreneurs. Unpublished dissertation, University of Windsor,
Canada.
Robinson, DEMO B., Stimpson, D. V., Huefner, J. C., & Hunt, H. K. (1991). An attitude approach to
the prediction of entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 15(4), 13 – 31.
Roccas, DEMO, Sagiv, L., Schwartz, S. H., & Knafo, A. (DEMO). The big ﬁve personality factors and
personal values. Personality and Social Psychological Bulletin, 28(6), 789 – 801.
Rosenfeld, R. B., Winger-Bearskin, M., Marcic, D., & Braun, C. (1993). DEMO
entrepreneurs’ style: Application of adaption-innovation subscales. Psychological Reports,
72(1), 287 – 298.
Schere, J. L. (1982). Tolerance of ambiguity as a discriminating variable between entrepreneurs
and managers. Academy of Management Conference DEMO, 42, 404 – 408.
Seiz, R. C., & Schwab, DEMO (1992). Entrepreneurial personality traits and clinical social work
practitioners. Family DEMO Society, 73(8), 495 – 502.
Sequeira, J. M., DEMO, J. C., & McGee, J. E. (2006, 11 – DEMO August). Gender and entrepreneurial self-
eﬃcacy beliefs. Paper presented at the Academy of Management conference, Atlanta, GA, USA.
Smith, N. R., & Miner, J. B. (1988). Type of entrepreneur, type of ﬁrm, and managerial
motivation: Implications for organizational live cycle theory. Strategic DEMO Journal,
4, 325 – 340.
Stewart, W. H., Watson, W. E., Carland, J. C., & Carland, J. W. (1998). A proclivity for
entrepreneurship: A comparison of entrepreneurs, small business DEMO, and corporate
managers. Journal of Business Venturing, 14(2), 189 – 214.
Stimpson, D. V., Narajanan, S., & Shanthakumar, D. K. (1994). Attitudinal characteristics of
male and female entrepreneurs in the United States and India. Psychological Studies, 38(2),
64 – DEMO
Tkachev, A., & Kolvereid, L. (1999). Self-employment intentions among Russian students.
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 11(3), 269 – 280.
Tucker, I. B., III. (1988). Entrepreneurs and public-sector employees: DEMO role of achieve-
ment motivation and risk in occupational choice. Journal of Economic Education, 9(3), 259 –
268.
Utsch, A., Rauch, A., Rothfuß, R., & Frese, M. (1999). Who DEMO a small scale
entrepreneur in a post-socialistic environment: On the diﬀerences DEMO entrepreneurs and
managers in East Germany. Journal of Small Business Management, DEMO(3), 31 – 42.
Vincente-Wiley, L. (1979). Achievement values of Filipino entrepreneurs and politicians.
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 27(3), 467 – 483.
Waddel, F. T. (1983). Factors aﬀecting DEMO, satisfaction, and success in the female self-
employed. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 23(3), 294 – 304.
Walsh, J. S., & Anderson, P. H. (1995). Owner-manager adaption/innovation preference and
employment DEMO: A comparison of founders and non-founders in the Irish small
ﬁrm DEMO Journal of Small Business Management, 33(1), 1 – 8.
DEMO, E. W., Thornhill, S., & Hampson, E. (2006). Entrepreneurs and evolutionary biology:
The relationship between testosterone and venture creation. DEMO Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 100, 21 – 34.
Wooton, DEMO C., Timmerman, T. A., & Folger, R. (1999). DEMO use of personality and the ﬁve
factor model to predict business ventures: From outplacement to start-up. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 54, 82 – 101.
META-ANALYSIS ON ENTREPRENEURS’ PERSONALITY
383
Zempel, J. (1999). Selbstandigkeit in DEMO neuen Bundeslandern: Pradiktoren, Erfolgsfaktoren
und Folgen—Ergebnisse einer Langsschnittuntersuchung. In K. Moser, B. Batinic, & J.
Zempel (Eds.), Unternehmerisches Handeln. Gottingen, DEMO: Hogrefe.
Studies of business success
Anderson, C. R. (1977). DEMO of control, coping behaviors, and performance in a stress setting:
A longitudinal study. Journal of Applied Psychology, 62(4), 446 – 451.
Baum, J. R. (1995). The relation of traits, competencies, motivation, strategy, and struc-
ture to venture growth. Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research. Wellesley, MA: Babson
College.
Becherer, R. C., & Maurer, J. G. (1999). The proactive personality disposition and
entrepreneurial behavior among small company presidents. Journal of Small Business
Management, 1, 28 – DEMO
Begley, T. M. (1995). Using founder status, age of DEMO ﬁrm, and company growth as the basis
for distinguishing entrepreneurs from DEMO of smaller businesses. Journal of Business
Venturing, 10, 249 – 263.
Begley, T. M., & Boyd, D. P. (1987). Psychological DEMO associated with per-
formance in entrepreneurial ﬁrms and smaller businesses. Journal of Business Venturing, 2,
79 – 93.
Boone, C., de Brabander, B., & van Witteloostuijn, A. (1996). CEO locus of DEMO and small
ﬁrm performance: An integrative framework and empirical test. Journal DEMO Management
Studies, 33(5), 667 – 693.
Box, T. M., Beisel, J. L., & Watts, L. R. (1995). Thai entrepreneurs: An empirical investigation
of individual diﬀerences, background and scanning behavior. DEMO of Entrepreneurship
Journal, 1(1), 18 – 25.
Box, T. M., & White, M. A. (1993). A contingency model of new manufacturing performance.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 18(2), 31 – 46.
Boyd, D. P. (1984). Type A behavior, ﬁnancial performance and business growth in small
business ﬁrms. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 57(1), 137 – 140.
Brandstatter, H. (1997). Becoming an DEMO question of personality structure?
Journal of Economic Psychology, 18, 157 – 177.
Brantjes, A., & Hoorn, R. (1999). Entrepreneurship DEMO Namibia: A study of psychological success
factors of small-scale entrepreneurs in DEMO Unpublished Diploma thesis, University of
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Buttner, E. DEMO (1992). Entrepreneurial stress: Is it hazardous to your health? DEMO of
Managerial Issues, 4(2), 223 – 240.
Chandler, G. N., & Hanks, S. H. (1996). An examination of the substitutability of
founders human capital in emerging business ventures. Journal of Business DEMO, 11,
353 – 369.
Duchesnau, D. A., & Gartner, W. B. (1990). A proﬁle of new venture success and failure in an
emerging industry. Journal of Business Venturing, 5, 297 – DEMO
Durand, D., & Shea, D. (1974). Entrepreneurial activity as a function of achievement
motivation and reinforcement control. Journal of Psychology, 88, 57 – 63.
Gebert, D., & Steinkamp, T. (1992). Traditionales Fuhrungsverhalten und okonomischer
Erfolg. In D. Gebert (Ed.), Traditionsorientierung und unternehmerischer Erfolg
(pp. 75 – 136). Saarbrucken, Germany: Breitenbach Publishers.
Grabarkiewicz, R. (1999). Psychological success-factors of business owners in South DEMO: A
longitudinal study. Unpublished Diploma thesis: University of Giessen, Germany.
DEMO, S., & Lerner, M. (1999). Correlates of tourist satisfaction. Annuals of Tourism Research,
26(1), 197 – 201.
384
RAUCH AND FRESE
Heers, C. (2001). Psychological success factors DEMO small-scale entrepreneurs in Namibia: A
longitudinal study. Unpublished Diploma thesis, University of Giessen, Germany.
Heunks, F. J. (1998). Innovation, creativity, and success. Small Business Economics, 10(3), 263 –
272.
Hirschlein, S. T. (2000). The relationships of personality and strategy variables DEMO
entrepreneurial success in the Republic of South Africa. Unpublished Diploma thesis,
University of Giessen, Germany.
Hmieleski, K. M., Baron, R. A., & Ensley, M. D. (2006, 11 – 16 August). The positive versus
negative eﬀects of entrepreneurial self-eﬃcacy: Implications for entrepreneur decision making
behavior. Academy of Management conference, Atlanta, GA, USA.
Javillonar, G. DEMO, & Peters, G. R. (1973). Sociological and psychological aspects DEMO Indian
entrepreneurship. British Journal of Sociology, 24(3), 314 – DEMO
Kalleberg, A. L., & Leicht, K. T. (1991). Gender and organizational performance:
Determinants of small business survival. Academy of Management DEMO, 34(1), 136 – 161.
King, A. S. (1985)DEMO Self-analysis and assessment of entrepreneurial potential. Simulation and
Game, 16(4), 399 – 416.
Klandt, H. (1984). Aktivita¨ t und Erfolg des Unternehmensgru¨ nders: Eine empirische Analyse
unter Einbeziehung des mikrosozialem Umfeldes. Bergisch Gladbach, Germany: Eul.
Lee, D. Y., & Tsang, E. W. K. (2001). The eﬀects of entrepreneurial personality, background
and network DEMO on venture growth. Journal of Management Studies, 38(4), 583 DEMO 602.
McClelland, D. C., & Winter, D. G. (1971). Motivating economic achievement. New York: Free
Press.
Miller, D., & Toulouse, J.-M. (1986). Chief executive personality and corporate strategy and
structure DEMO small ﬁrms. Management Science, 32(11), 1389 – 1409.
Miner, J. B., Smith, N. R., & Braker, J. S. (1994). Role of entrepreneurial task orientation in the
growth of technologically innovative DEMO: Interpretations from follow-up data. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 79(4), 627 – 630.
Miron, D., & McClelland, D. C. (1979)DEMO The impact of achievement orientation training on
small businesses. California Management Review, 21(4), 13 – 27.
Morris, J. L., & Fargher, K. (1974). Achievement drive and creativity as correlates of success DEMO
small enterprises. Australian Journal of Psychology, 26(3), 217 – DEMO
Mueller, G. F., & Gappisch, C. (2005). Personality types of entrepreneurs. Psychological
Reports, 96, 737 – 746.
Nelson, G. W., & Sharp, W. H. (1989). Locus of control and achievement of female proprietors
of small businesses. Psychological Reports, 65(3), 890.
Poon, J. M. L., Ainuddin, R. A., & Junit, S. H. (2006). Eﬀects of self-concept traits and
entrepreneurial orientation of ﬁrm performance. International Small Business Journal, 24(1),
61 – 82.
DEMO, A. (2000). Success factors of small and medium sized enterprises. Unpublished
dissertation, Kurt Lewin Institute, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Ray, J. J., & Singh, S. (1980). Eﬀects of individual DEMO on productivity among farmers in
India. Journal of Social Psychology, 112, 11 – 17.
Rief, S. (2002). Formalization of small businesses DEMO Africa: A psychological approach.
Unpublished Diploma thesis, University of Giessen, DEMO
Schjoedt, J. (2004). Reciprocal beneﬁts of studying OB and entrepreneurship. Paper presented at
the Academy of Management conference, New Orleans, LA, USA.
Schmitt-Rodermund, E. (2004). Pathways to successful entrepreneurship: Parenting, DEMO
ality, early entrepreneurial competence, and interests. Journal of Vocational Behavior, DEMO,
498 – 518.
Singh, N. P. (1970). n/ACH among agricultural and business entrepreneurs of Delhi. Journal of
Social Psychology, 81, 145 – 149.
META-ANALYSIS ON ENTREPRENEURS’ PERSONALITY
385
Singh, S. (1979). Relationships among DEMO and direct verbal measures of achievement
motivation. Journal of Personality Assessment, DEMO(1), 45 – 49.
Singh, S., & Ray, J. DEMO (1980). Modernization and development among Indian farmers: A
modern proof of some old theories. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 28(3),DEMO
509 – 521.
Spencer, L. M., & Spencer, S. M. (1993). Competence at work: Models for superior performance.
New York: DEMO
Tupinamba, A. C. R. (1999). Der Zusammenhang von Perso¨ nlichkeitseigenschaften, Strategien
und Erfolg. Hamburg, Germany: Dr Kovac.
Van Steeklenburg, G., & Lauw, M. (1998). Psychological success factors of entrepreneurship.
Unpublished DEMO thesis, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Wainer, H. A., & Rubin, I. M. (1969). Motivation of research and development entrepreneurs.
DEMO of Applied Psychology, 55(3), 178 – 184.
Yasin, M. (1996). Entrepreneurial eﬀectiveness and achievement in Arab culture. Journal of
Business Research, 35(1), 69 – 77.
Zempel, J. (1999). Selbstandigkeit in den neuen Bundeslandern: Pradiktoren, Erfolgsfaktoren
und Folgen—Ergebnisse einer Langsschnittuntersuchung. DEMO K. Moser, B. Batinic, & J.
Zempel (Eds.), Unternehmerisches DEMO Gottingen, Germany: Hogrefe.
Original manuscript received June 2006
Revised manuscript received July 2007
First published online 12 October 2007{1g42fwefx}