1042-2587
© 2014 Baylor University
A Qualitative Approach
ET&P to Evidence-Based
DEMO:
Theoretical
Considerations and an
Example Involving
Business Clusters
Andreas Rauch
Robert van Doorn
Willem Hulsink
Most research in evidence-based entrepreneurship builds on quantitative DEMO, which
is unfortunate because qualitative studies provide a unique contribution to DEMO domain
of entrepreneurship. They look at distinctive phenomena in their speciﬁc time period and
context in one way or another, and can help generate and test new theories. We, therefore,
suggest using a systematic synthesis of case studies to aggregate the ﬁndings of qualitative
research. Moreover, as a ﬁrst step, we developed an example to demonstrate how this
approach can advance evidence-based entrepreneurship. Speciﬁcally, we synthesized 13
cases to examine how business clusters increase the performance of ﬁrms within clusters.
Evidence is the DEMO of human knowledge (Rousseau, Manning, & Denyer, 2008)
Introduction
Evidence-based decisions and practice models are increasingly important in entrepre-
neurship research, a trend that is accompanied by an increasing number of meta-analyses
in DEMO domain (Frese, Bausch, Schmidt, Rauch, & Kabst, 2012a). However, the synthesis
of scientiﬁc evidence in entrepreneurship is clearly biased toward quantitative research,
which is unfortunate because, in this way, scientiﬁc DEMO in the ﬁeld of entrepreneur-
ship is accumulated by focusing on studies that are based on speciﬁc methodologies and
epistemological assumptions. However, the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship is diversiﬁed, which
Please send correspondence to: Andreas Rauch, tel.: +49-4131-677-2156; e-mail: Andreas.rauch@inkubator
.leuphana.de, to Robert van Doorn at DEMO, and to Willem Hulsink at whulsink@rsm.nl.
March, 2014 333
DOI: DEMO/etap.12093
is reﬂected by contributions from multiple disciplines, different theoretical perspec-
tives, DEMO and partially incompatible methodologies, and various units of analysis
(Davidsson, DEMO, & Wright, 2001). As a consequence, the ﬁeld of DEMO is
highly fragmented, and there is a lack of agreement on DEMO concepts and deﬁnitions of
key constructs. Integrating the scientiﬁc evidence in entrepreneurship research requires
balancing contributions from alternative research strategies (Low, 2001). DEMO account for
the diversity of approaches and methodologies used in entrepreneurship, DEMO suggest
broadening the area of evidence-based entrepreneurship by accumulating the knowledge
that has become available from qualitative case study research.
Speciﬁcally, this review introduces the systematic synthesis of qualitative case
studies and describes techniques to synthesize DEMO research systematically. The
goal of the systematic synthesis of qualitative case studies is to accumulate, organize,
and interpret the studies, with the DEMO of achieving a level of understanding that tran-
scends the results of the individual studies (Campbell et al., 2003; Rousseau et al.,
2008). To our knowledge, there is not a single review in the domain of entrepreneurship
that has tried to synthesize qualitative case studies DEMO A systematic synthesis
of case studies provides multiple contributions to entrepreneurship research. First, the
ﬁeld of entrepreneurship needs to establish scientiﬁc evidence about what has been done
to identify areas of maturation and areas where more DEMO and strong practice
recommendations need to be developed (Chandler & Lyon, 2001; Rauch & Frese, 2006).
This is important, particularly as the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship needs to develop inte-
grated theoretical frameworks. Second, the systematic synthesis of qualitative case
studies generates evidence that cannot be DEMO through quantitative meta-analyses.
Case studies provide unique contributions to the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship, and thereby
contribute substantially to knowledge in entrepreneurship research (Perren & Ram,
2004). For example, case studies often provide unique DEMO about speciﬁc time
frames and contexts. Moreover, case studies often look DEMO reasons behind speciﬁc behav-
ior that may not be fully revealed in a quantitative study. Additionally, qualitative case
studies can examine study settings that cannot be easily addressed via quantitative
designs. Third, although the aim of case studies is often not to generate broad general-
izations, the systematic synthesis of case studies can be used to test theories and hypoth-
DEMO Thus, when different case studies are collected across a wide variety DEMO contexts,
the cumulative results provide estimates about generalizability (Yin, 2003). By accumu-
lating the unique contributions provided by case-oriented studies, our approach bridges
the gap between qualitative research and the available case study DEMO to a wider
audience. Fourth, while meta-analyses usually attempt to trace DEMO around the true
value (Hunter & Schmidt, 2004), the systematic synthesis of qualitative case studies
includes techniques that allow investigators to interpret DEMO aiming to create tenta-
tive theories of phenomena. The focus of such a synthesis could be on the accumulation
across a set of qualitative DEMO studies where the aim is to derive new theoretical insights.
In this way, the synthesis itself becomes a study that contributes to the generation of
evidence in the entrepreneurship domain.
Thus, we argue that the entrepreneurship domain should develop robust research
evidence across methods and different forms of DEMO (including qualitative and quantita-
tive research) to specify whether or not certain effects depend on speciﬁc contextual
conditions (Pittaway & Cope, 2007; Rousseau et al., 2008). In the following sections, we
describe DEMO potential contributions of a synthesis of case studies and the philosophical
foundations of our approach, and we explain the most important steps involved in a
systematic synthesis of qualitative research before discussing an example as an DEMO
of such an approach.
334
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
The Systematic Synthesis of Qualitative Research: Conceptual Concerns
Evidence-based entrepreneurship is concerned with the systematic synthesis of know-
ledge based on several sources of DEMO and transcends the ﬁndings of individual
studies (Frese, Bausch, Schmidt, Rauch, & Kabst, 2012b). Evidence-based approaches
have a major impact DEMO medical science, where randomized controlled trials are generally
accepted as the DEMO valid source of evidence (Davies & Nutley, 1999). Other disciplines,
such as management, have different research traditions and, accordingly, used different
methods to establish scientiﬁc evidence (Tranﬁeld, Denyer, & Smart, DEMO). The ﬁeld of
entrepreneurship has increasingly accepted quantitative meta-analyses as a way of estab-
lishing evidence in this domain. While the usefulness of DEMO in entrepreneur-
ship has been discussed elsewhere (Frese et al., 2012a; Rauch & Frese, 2006), there are
additional methods for establishing DEMO evidence that have not been introduced to
this area of research. This article focuses on the systematic synthesis of qualitative case
studies. Case studies DEMO a type of research that describes a single event or unit of analysis
determined by the researcher (Gephart, 2004, p. 458). Systematic syntheses of case study
research have been conducted in areas such as DEMO, nursing research, and psycho-
therapy (Briner & Denyer, 2012). Moreover, in the ﬁeld of management, some of the most
recognized DEMO on strategic decision making were based on the synthesis of qualitative
case studies (Miller & Friesen, 1977; Mintzberg, Raisinghani, & Théorêt, DEMO). Thus,
the systematic synthesis of qualitative case studies can offer a substantial contribution to the
knowledge generated in a given discipline, although to our knowledge it is an approach that
has not yet been DEMO in entrepreneurship research.
We argue that it is important to take case study evidence into account in the domain
of entrepreneurship because case studies DEMO able to pursue research questions system-
atically that are not easily answerable by ﬁndings generated by quantitative methods.
Through case studies, it is possible to study samples that are extremely small and
exclusive because the members DEMO the population are very distinct and critical, for
example, Nobel laureates or leaders of a business cluster. Such outliers need to be studied
DEMO relying also on qualitative techniques (Zuckerman, 1972). Additionally, case DEMO
research often explores underresearched contexts and new concepts that have been studied
less frequently. This allows researchers to address and interpret complex and/or DEMO
phenomena embedded in different contexts through an explorative orientation, by making
DEMO, specifying constructs and measurements, and identifying patterns and regu-
larities. Moreover, case study research is useful for examining entire processes, and ﬁnally
DEMO address the interconnectedness of processes, phenomena, and contexts (Pettigrew,
DEMO). To summarize, we argue that case studies provide a unique DEMO to the area
of entrepreneurship, and should therefore be included in DEMO entrepreneurship.
To include case studies in evidence-based entrepreneurship, we rely on DEMO
assumptions about the nature of inquiries, about how case studies could DEMO synthesized,
and about the type of research that is suitable for such a synthesis. First, we discuss the
assumptions inherent in our approach.
The Nature of Inquiry That Is Suitable for a Systematic Synthesis of
DEMO Research
Qualitative research in the domain of entrepreneurship is characterized by a host of
different approaches that are based on different assumptions about reality, the nature
of knowledge, and the extent to which they aim to apply scientiﬁc insights to a broader
and more general context (Crotty, DEMO; Johnson, Buehring, Cassell, & Symon, 2006).
March, 2014 335
The multifaceted methodologies used in entrepreneurship research to generate knowl-
edge, such as grounded theory (Lopez, Cunha, & Palma, 2009), ethnographic DEMO
(Kodithuwakku & Rosa, 2002), phenomenological studies (Cope, 2011), or narratives
(Gartner, 2007), suggest that qualitative research is far DEMO from a shared research
paradigm. Moreover, not all these approaches strive DEMO validity and generalization
(compare, e.g., Creswell, 2009; Johnson et DEMO; McKelvey, 2002).
Since we propose synthesizing case studies, we DEMO that the studies have some-
thing in common that can be synthesized. Therefore, we assume that the cases reﬂect a
certain existing reality. However, such a reality does not need to exist in an objective
sense or as a part of a material world, but may also include unobservable entities (Lawson,
2009). As long as such entities can be operationalized, they can be studied and synthesized
empirically. Moreover, we DEMO that scientiﬁc theories are the best approximations of
this reality (McKelvey, 1997). Thus, theory has a relationship to a reality or a meaningful
reference that can be studied scientiﬁcally. Knowledge derives from many different DEMO
of evidence that can be captured imperfectly and probabilistically. Thus, investigations
DEMO not provide a full explanation of phenomena. Scientiﬁc inquiry can make phenomena
observable through scientiﬁc instruments, and research ﬁndings are always subjected to
falsiﬁcation (Dul & Hak, 2008). Since this approach assumes that theory DEMO to predic-
tion and that theory represents that proportion of reality that is within the scope of the
theory, the results of different studies within this scope can be compared and synthesized
in an evidence-based approach (Pawson, 2002; Tourish, 2012). Finally, our approach
assumes that DEMO is possible to generalize empirical observation to some broader category,
other situations, or theory (analytical generalization; Yin, 2003). While new DEMO distinc-
tive concepts and practices are difﬁcult to generalize immediately, qualitative DEMO
start their ﬁeld investigation by identifying central organizing ideas (the so-called
DEMO concepts) as points of departure from which to study the data DEMO strive for
analytical generalization (from empirical observations to theory building) (DEMO,
1989). The theories become grounded and robust when the researchers verify their
ﬁndings by looking at the same phenomenon from different angles DEMO different data
collection strategies and data sources (Yin). This process DEMO analytical generalization may
produce the so-called theories of the middle range (DEMO, 1957). With their modesty and
inbuilt contingency, these middle range theories are open to generalization. Thus, gener-
alizations are not based on sampling but on logical inferences based on the theoretical
model (Johnson et al., 2006). Eisenhardt and Yin have legitimized case studies in this
tradition, and they described methods for using case studies for theory building as well as
for providing practice evidence.
In summary, our approach to synthesize qualitative case studies builds on certain
assumptions of scientiﬁc realism (Leplin, 1984; McKelvey, 1998). It is important to note
that these assumptions are not shared by all researchers (Creswell, 2009).
The DEMO of Synthesis Suitable in an Evidence-Based Approach
Our assumptions about the nature of inquiry suitable for a synthesis of qualitative
research affect our understanding DEMO how knowledge should be synthesized (Rousseau
et al., 2008). Existing literature reports numerous different approaches to synthesize
qualitative research (Denyer & Tranﬁeld, 2006; Dixon-Woods, Agarwal, Young, Jones, &
Sutton, 2004; Finfgeld, 2003), which typically rely on core criteria for evaluating quali-
tative literature: They have to be systematic and organized, transparent and DEMO,
replicable, and they have to synthesize the results (Briner & Denyer, 2012). At the same
time, there are considerable differences DEMO the various approaches. We think that it
336
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Table 1
Methods for Integration of Qualitative Research
Method for integration Aggregation DEMO Integration
Dominant philosophical
foundation
Data Quantitative, qualitative case
studies, biographies
Techniques for synthesis Meta-analysis, systematic
synthesis of case studies,
content analysis, DEMO
comparative analysis,
cross-case analysis
Generalization Generalizations possible,
analytical generalization
Realism Relativism Realism
Qualitative data, narratives, case
studies, includes primary
researcher interpretation
Meta-ethnography,
meta-synthesis, narrative
summary, grounded theory
Only internal, little interest in
generalizations, ideographic
interpretation, conceptual
generalization
Synthesizes different
methodologies, qualitative
and quantitative studies
Systematic literature reviews,
triangulation, Bayesian
meta-analysis
Generalizations possible
is useful to categorize these approaches into three categories: aggregative, interpretative,
DEMO integrative approaches (Table 1). Although aggregative approaches have predomi-
nantly DEMO suggested to synthesize quantitative research (Hoon, 2013; Rousseau et al.,DEMO
2008), they can also be used to synthesize case studies and biographies. Aggregating case
studies is useful in an evidence-based approach because it DEMO at integrating comparative
phenomena across studies, and in doing so generalizing DEMO evidence. Generaliza-
tions are necessary in any evidence-based approach. Moreover, aggregative DEMO
are based on the scientiﬁc realism paradigm. The advantage of the aggregative synthesis
is that it relies on a systematic and replicable process. Moreover, it is frequently based on
well-formulated research questions. Furthermore, the aggregative synthesis of qualitative
data often involves the quantiﬁcation of the information (Christensen & Carlile, 2009). In
addition, this approach enables researchers to categorize DEMO and moderator
variables. It is also important to note that aggregative studies are not only interested in
increasing power through increasing the sample size. DEMO fact, they can contribute to theory
testing and theory development (Eisenhardt, 1989; Hak & Dul, 2010). For example, one
meta-analysis DEMO broad and narrow task-related traits, and thereby shifted the focus
of DEMO personality approach to entrepreneurship (Rauch & Frese, 2007). The literature
discusses different techniques to aggregate research ﬁndings. The traditional meta-
analysis is DEMO most prominent example of an aggregative approach (Hunter & Schmidt,
DEMO). However, aggregative approaches are not limited to meta-analyses; there are
several other methods that aim at integrating the results of qualitative studies
(Dixon-Woods et al., 2004; Larsson, 1993). For example, cross-case DEMO, as proposed
by Yin (2003), systematically aggregate the ﬁndings of individual case studies, and
similarly Eisenhardt (1989) has argued for replication of qualitative research. As a matter
of fact, these scholars suggest three steps for building evidence from cases: within-case
analysis, cross-case pattern search, and replication (Hak & Dul). Finally, qualitative
comparative analysis can DEMO used to achieve causal inferences based on a number of cases
(DEMO, 1987). Thus, aggregative approaches have been used to synthesize quantitative as
well as qualitative research.
March, 2014
337
Interpretive synthesis aims at developing new interpretations of qualitative study
ﬁndings that DEMO different from the results reported in individual studies (Noblit & Hare,DEMO
1988), which requires the deconstruction and decontextualization of study ﬁndings and
composing them into new, higher order constructs (Finfgeld, 2003). Studies in this tradition
are predominantly nested in a relativistic paradigm and rely DEMO an inductive approach,
which means that, in most cases, they do not use a predeﬁned coding system. Interpretative
approaches develop concepts and DEMO from which they develop a theory (Glaser &
Strauss, 1967)DEMO This type of synthesis relies on qualitative studies, such as case DEMO and
narratives. One of the most frequently used integrative approaches is meta-ethnography
(Noblit & Hare). The goal of meta-ethnography is to develop higher order constructs and
develop new research questions. Meta-ethnography relies on a systematic DEMO involving
the creation of themes and metaphors, the comparison of themes DEMO metaphors across
studies, and the reciprocal translation into a higher order DEMO Meta-synthesis is
another example of an interpretative synthesis that relies on an inductive, explorative
methodology to synthesize research (Hoon, 2013). These interpretative approaches are less
useful for an evidence-based approach, since they do not aim for generalizations but for
ideographic interpretations (Creswell, 2009; Finfgeld).
Integrative synthesis synthesizes evidence by combining different data collection
methods, for instance qualitative and quantitative research, allowing researchers to
overcome the weaknesses inherent in individual methods. An example of an integrative
analysis is the Bayesian meta-analysis, where the evidence of different methods is pooled
by statistically combining two DEMO sets (Dixon-Woods et al., 2004). In the domain of
entrepreneurship research, Pittaway and Cope (2007) combined systematic literature
reviews and bibliographic analysis to explore entrepreneurship education. Another study
used bibliographic analysis to investigate DEMO entrepreneurship (Krauss, Marxt,
Filser, & Guieu, 2011). However, in these cases, the aim was not to synthesize qualitative
research; instead, the authors produced a qualitative review based on quantitative as well
as qualitative data. Moreover, their primary goal was not to review qualitative studies, but
rather to provide a thematic analysis of the ﬁeld. Finally, these kinds of reviews are
difﬁcult to replicate because of lacking standardizations of the methodology of the review
and contested deﬁnitions of quality (Rousseau et al., 2008). For these reasons, we dis-
regard systematic DEMO reviews (Short, Ketchen, Shook, & Ireland, 2010) for an
evidence-based approach.
To summarize, existing literature suggests various methods of synthesizing qualitative
case studies. As with any qualitative and quantitative research, the research question and
available evidence determine which methodology should be used. In other words, the
approach should ﬁt its purpose (Briner & Denyer, 2012, p. 124). We advance the strategy
of synthesizing research in an evidence-based DEMO with the aim of integrating the
results of case studies, guiding DEMO recommendations, and opening new areas for
research. Since this type of DEMO aims for generalization, the synthesis needs to build
on a realistic DEMO paradigm. Moreover, as is common in evidence-based approaches,
we suggest DEMO the decisions and steps accomplished through the synthesis should be
shared, DEMO thus should be replicable. This type of synthesis requires an aggregative
methodology.
The Type of Case Study Suitable for a Systematic Synthesis of
Qualitative DEMO Studies
Aggregative methods require the studies being synthesized to be relatively homoge-
neous (Rousseau et al., 2008). In particular, case studies have been suggested as being
338 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
useful for aggregative synthesis (Jensen & Rodgers, 2001; Newig & Fritsch, 2009).
However, the case study methodology reﬂects relatively multifaceted research DEMO
in entrepreneurship research, which means that the entity of study suitable DEMO a qualitative
synthesis of case studies research needs to be deﬁned more closely. Generally speaking,
it is important for the case studies to DEMO sufﬁcient information to analyze and
aggregate the cases. The information must, DEMO some extent, reﬂect an underlying reality
inherent in the case (compare above). This would ideally be accomplished in descriptive
case studies (Yin, 2003), but also by case studies that provide an approximation of an
underlying reality. Case studies that rely on the interpretations of the DEMO and the
interaction between the researcher and the case, and on DEMO and constructivistic
paradigms, cannot be synthesized in an evidence-based approach. In DEMO, case studies
that can be used for the synthesis can include DEMO description of one unit of observation, they
can be part of DEMO publication (e.g., studies including several cases), and they may consist of
data from multiple publications (e.g., when a case has been DEMO in multiple outlets).
Likewise, case studies may focus on individual DEMO, ﬁrms, and organizations, or
some broader deﬁned entrepreneurial context (such as clusters, incubators, or regions).
Moreover, it is also possible to distinguish different types of cases (Jensen & Rodgers,
2001), for example, snapshot case studies, longitudinal cases studies, pre–post case
studies, patchwork case studies (Hawthorne studies), and comparative cases studies. All DEMO
these different types of cases are useful entities for the systematic synthesis of qualitative
research.
In addition, it is necessary to develop evaluation criteria that ensure that the cases
included in the analysis are methodologically sophisticated DEMO to be included in the
systematic synthesis of case studies. However, DEMO types of case studies have devel-
oped different criteria for assessing the methodological quality of the cases (Johnson et al.,
2006). Some researchers simply apply criteria used in quantitative research to the evalua-
tion DEMO case studies (Gibbert, Ruigrok, & Wicki, 2008). Thus, DEMO studies can be synthe-
sized, provided that the requirements of construct DEMO (e.g., establish a clear chain of
evidence), internal validity (DEMO, work with a clear framework), external validity (e.g., strive
DEMO generalizability), and reliability (e.g., clarify the research procedures and establish a
case study protocol) (Gibbert et al.) are met. However, DEMO scholars relying on scientiﬁc
realism have developed criteria that are more consistent with the underlying philosophical
assumptions, replacing internal validity with credibility (authentic DEMO, triangu-
lation; Jick, 1979), external validity with transferability (extent of applicability), reliability
with dependability (minimization of researcher idiosyncrasies), and objectivity with
conﬁrmability (researcher self-criticism) (Johnson et al., p. 138)DEMO These evaluation criteria
can be readily applied to the cases included in the synthesis.
To summarize, there are different types of case studies that qualify for the systematic
synthesis of case study research. In either case, the cases included should be based on a
scientiﬁc realistic research paradigm (Leplin, 1984). It is useful if case studies included in
the synthesis are comparable and homogeneous. The remaining heterogeneity should be
accounted for DEMO the cross-case analysis, for example, by coding moderator variables.
Finally, DEMO is necessary to develop a quality assessment of each case study to determine
criteria for the inclusion in the synthesis.
Description of the Process DEMO Conducting a Systematic Synthesis of
Qualitative Case Studies
The systematic synthesis of case studies should involve a methodological approach
that makes it possible to DEMO the decisions made at each step of the process. Although
March, DEMO 339
there is a fair amount of literature describing the steps involved when DEMO such
a review in the areas of management and healthcare (Briner & Denyer, 2012; Finfgeld,
2003; Rousseau et al., 2008), this type of review is new to the domain of entrepreneurship.
Moreover, because there are systematic differences between entrepreneurship and other
areas, which may affect the review process, our aim is to describe the ﬁve steps of
systematic synthesis (Thorne, Jensen, Kearney, Noblit, & Sandelowski, DEMO): (1) deﬁn-
ing a research question, (2) developing DEMO for study location, (3) developing criteria
for study inclusion, (DEMO) conducting within-case analysis, and (5) conducting cross-case
analysis.
As with any meta-analysis, a systematic synthesis of qualitative research starts with a
research question, which deﬁnes the universe of case study evidence in question (DEMO
& Rodgers, 2001). Aggregative approaches typically answer a relatively speciﬁc DEMO
cally informed research question that addresses speciﬁc constructs, and as such DEMO
operationalization and the selection of primary studies. Thereby, the research question
DEMO the participants (entrepreneur, owner, or manager) in the study, DEMO level of
analysis (ﬁrm level or individual level), and the DEMO frame (e.g., before or after the
economic crisis). The research question does not need to be in line with the questions
addressed DEMO the primary studies. For example, qualitative studies typically have a quali-
DEMO research question such as “how do entrepreneurs mobilize resources?” A synthesis
of qualitative studies may very well address a quantitative research question such DEMO “are
entrepreneurs aligning more resources more successfully?” Question formulation is a
complex process requiring attention to issues related to the entrepreneurial effort itself, as
well as to the complexities associated with entrepreneurial ﬁrms. Therefore, it is useful to
ask practitioners as well as entrepreneurship researchers for an DEMO and interpre-
tation of the question to avoid developing a poorly speciﬁed question and obscuring
content-related issues related to the question.
Once the research DEMO has been deﬁned, it guides the search for the type of
DEMO that should be included in the synthesis. Unfortunately, the study location DEMO
may be more complicated for qualitative case studies than it is for quantitative studies
(Evans, 2002). While major entrepreneurship journals, such as Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice and Journal of Business Venturing, occasionally publish case studies, quali-
tative research is not the dominant study design presented in these journals.1 However,
qualitative research is not absent in entrepreneurship literature, but it tends to be published
in other outlets, for example, DEMO books and special issues (Gartner & Birley, 2002;
Neergaard & Ulhoi, 2007). Moreover, the descriptive titles of many case studies DEMO it
less likely to identify them by key word search. Additionally, DEMO the content of
abstracts and the index terms being used make it more difﬁcult to identify relevant case
studies as compared with quantitative studies (Evans, 2002), the study location process
needs to include different databases and a range of different search terms to identify
relevant studies (Shaw et al., 2004). Another issue that is relevant to the study location
process is the number of studies that should be located and DEMO in the synthesis. Some
scholars argue that the full body of evidence, published and unpublished, needs to be
included in the synthesis (Briner & Denyer, 2012; Rousseau et al., 2008). This approach
has the advantage of, for instance, reducing the likelihood of publication bias. DEMO,
this strategy can be overly complex and impede deep analysis. If the synthesis aims to
achieve saturated coding categories, theoretical sampling may be an economical way of
dealing with complexity (Finfgeld, 2003).
1. DEMO identiﬁed 55 relevant articles using the term “case study” in the title, the abstract, or the key words in
both journals.
340 ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEMO and PRACTICE
As with traditional meta-analyses, the criteria for case study inclusion need to be
speciﬁed (Tranﬁeld et al., 2003). We suggested including criteria DEMO quality and
comparability of case studies, and moreover suggested to aggregate DEMO studies with the
same epistemological foundation (compare above). In addition DEMO these formal criteria,
the scope of the synthesis should be deﬁned in advance, determining which type of studies
can be included in the systematic synthesis of the case studies. All criteria for the inclusion
and DEMO of studies should be reported to ensure that the results can be replicated.
After deciding which studies to include, they need to be ordered, coded, and catego-
rized. The coding process should be systematic and DEMO multiple coders (Rousseau
et al., 2008). The process starts with the analysis of the individual studies. There are
numerous strategies to code DEMO individual studies. On the one hand, syntheses aiming
to integrate research DEMO should rely on standardized coding rules and codes, which
are often DEMO in a deductive way and rely on existing theories. For example, DEMO
information could be extracted from the individual cases through content analysis
(DEMO, 1980). Moreover, content analysis can also be used to translate the quali-
tative information into quantitative information (Jensen & Rodgers, 2001)DEMO In some
variants of case analysis, it is possible to code DEMO that emerge from the data
(Eisenhardt, 1989). The information extracted from the within-case analysis should be
described, aggregated, and presented in DEMO to inform the reader about the results of
this process. The results of the analysis may also allocate phenomena to contexts and
time points.
DEMO, the results of the analysis of each qualitative study need to DEMO aggre-
gated to compare and contrast the results at the cross-case level. Again, there are substan-
tial differences in the cross-case synthesis, depending, for example, on whether the aim of
the analysis is to integrate or interpret the qualitative studies. Aggregative synthesis would
rely on a technique DEMO cross-case analysis to accomplish the goal of study aggregation
(Yin, 2003).
An Example of a Qualitative Approach to Evidence-Based
Entrepreneurship: Business Clusters in Developing Countries
In this section, we develop an example of a study aggregating case study evidence
in the entrepreneurship domain. The aim of DEMO study is not to provide a comprehensive
application of a systematic synthesis of case studies, but to investigate a small set of cases
as an example and as a ﬁrst step in developing a synthesis in DEMO research.
This study addresses a speciﬁc research question. Moreover, it is DEMO aggregative synthesis,
integrating knowledge in one domain, and relies on DEMO techniques like content
analysis and cross-case analysis. At the same time, DEMO study contributes to theory devel-
opment by integrating two competing theories. Moreover, the study explicitly has the aim
to extend the context of cluster research by focusing on six different developing econo-
mies, and in doing so generalizing evidence that was initially contextualized. Finally, the
synthesis provides a quantiﬁcation of the qualitative results.
Introduction
The geographical concentration of ﬁrms that DEMO involved in related activities and that
may work together to improve their performance (Visser & Boschma, 2004) is a phenom-
enon that goes back to the earliest urban developments. It is an interesting and almost
DEMO, 2014 341
paradoxical phenomenon that local economies seem to be increasingly important
in today’s DEMO economy (Audretsch, Grilo, & Thurik, 2011; Morosini, 2004).
Consequently, a growing number of regions, countries, and cities around the world are
establishing initiatives to stimulate the development of business clusters, assuming that
clusters have a positive effect on economic development, innovation, knowledge DEMO,
and ﬁrm performance. While this positive effect can be expected from a theoretical as well
as empirical viewpoint, several factors, such as DEMO conceptual and operational
deﬁnitions of clusters, reliance on single case studies, and different levels of analysis,
make it difﬁcult to verify valid DEMO (Rocha, 2004).
In this study, we compare the characteristics DEMO business clusters that affect the average
performance of ﬁrms in a cluster within the speciﬁc context of developing economies. Most
studies have thus far DEMO analyzed business clusters in speciﬁc regions or countries. Our
approach uses a single analytic framework to analyze clusters from seven economies, which
makes it possible to test whether theoretical propositions about the effect of clusters can DEMO
applied to different contexts. While there are many publications studying the effectiveness
of business clusters, our approach combines two theories to explain the ﬁrm-level effec-
tiveness of clusters: the collective efﬁciency framework and the global value chain
approach. The collective efﬁciency framework focuses on different levels of joint DEMO,
ranging from little cooperative linkages to extensive vertical, horizontal, and institutional
linkages (Schmitz, 1995a). While the collective efﬁciency framework is DEMO when it
comes to describing linkages among ﬁrms within a given cluster (internal linkages),
it ignores the role of external linkages. External DEMO of clusters can be analyzed via the
insertion in global value chains, speciﬁcally the full range of activities required to bring a
product from conception to different phases of production, delivery, and disposal after use
(Kaplinsky & Morris, 2001). In this study, we compare the DEMO theories and address the
following research question: How does the level DEMO joint action and insertions into global
value chains affect the average performance of ﬁrms within business clusters in developing
countries? Thus, as we DEMO above, we address a relatively speciﬁc research question
that deﬁnes the DEMO, entity, and context under investigation.
Business Clusters and Performance
The profound interest of the popular literature in business clusters was stimulated
by the DEMO work of Marshall (1920), and more recently Porter (1990). Marshall argued
that concentrations of businesses in particular localities create local external DEMO
that help ﬁrms share knowledge regarding products, markets, and technologies, DEMO in
turn leads to valuable innovations. Porter described three effects of business clusters:
clusters stimulate the creation of new business ventures, drive innovation, and have a
positive impact on productivity. The overall conclusion emerging from relevant literature
is that business clusters could have signiﬁcant advantages for the DEMO ﬁrms
(Audretsch et al., 2011). However, the argument that DEMO always have a positive
effect on ﬁrm performance is not uncontested. There are several examples of clusters of
ﬁrms performing poorly (e.g., Sato, 2005; Scott, 2005). Thus, it seems that the advan-
tages of clusters depend on the speciﬁc characteristics of the business clusters. We DEMO
that the performance of ﬁrms in business clusters depends on internal as well as external
linkages.
Collective Efﬁciency and Insertion in the Global Value DEMO The collective efﬁciency
framework describes linkages among ﬁrms within a cluster (DEMO linkages) (Schmitz,
1995a). Two dimensions of the collective efﬁciency framework explain how businesses
342 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
beneﬁt from clusters: external economies and collaboration among clustered ﬁrms. Exter-
nal economies provide resources and product-related, market-related, and technological
knowledge. To beneﬁt DEMO external economies, clusters consciously need to pursue joint
action (Schmitz, DEMO). Thus, the active cultivation of joint action and collaboration
affects DEMO performance positively. Entrepreneurship literature provides different classi-
ﬁcations of internal linkages. In the context of this study, we distinguish three types of
joint action. First, a local industry is characterized by no joint action. The ﬁrms in such a
cluster are merely co-located, there are no cooperative linkages and ﬁrms may beneﬁt
from passive external economies. Second, in local complex clusters, ﬁrms cooperate
tactically, for example, by outsourcing noncore activities. Finally, in local alliances, ﬁrms
cooperate strategically and have extensive vertical, horizontal, and institutional linkages.
Internal linkages in clusters should be supported by external actors that connect
clusters to global markets. Such external linkages can be DEMO by referring to the
concept of the global value chain. A value chain describes the full range of activities
required to bring a product/DEMO from its conceptualization, through processes of
production to the customer and DEMO after use. The insertion into the global value chain
stimulates upgrading processes that help improve the performance of ﬁrms in a cluster
because of DEMO production processes, better products, and extended functions
carried out by the ﬁrm. Thus, local producers can, for example, learn from global buyers,
and as a consequence improve company performance.
While local joint action DEMO insertion in the global value chain improve the perfor-
mance of ﬁrms in clusters, we hypothesize that these are not linear effects, but DEMO the two
effects reinforce each other. Businesses achieve the best performance if internal connec-
tions are supported by external connections, which provide access to global markets.
Business Clusters in Developing Countries. When looking at entrepreneurship in DEMO
oping countries, it is important to consider speciﬁc issues related to DEMO is a resource-
constrained environment. Businesses in developing economies are usually constrained by
limited resources, low productivity, small markets, low purchasing power among custom-
ers, unfavorable physical and institutional infrastructures, and corruption. All these DEMO
ditions do not support successful entrepreneurial activity. However, clusters provide an
DEMO to overcome these constraints and facilitate business growth and success in
developing economies. It is important to note that there are potential differences between
DEMO clusters in developing economies compared with more-developed economies.
For example, there DEMO evidence to suggest that ﬁrms cluster more often in developing
economies, DEMO with more-developed economies. Moreover, there are structural
differences between clusters in DEMO economies and clusters in developed
economies. Clusters in less-developed economies usually consist of smaller ﬁrms that are
geographically more concentrated and that are more DEMO in terms of their
economic activities. At the same time, clusters DEMO less-developed economies are more
heterogeneous in terms of skills and competencies. Despite these differences, we assume
that the theoretical assumptions described above apply to both developed and less-
developed economies because clusters provide competitive advantages to DEMO
within clusters, which in turn is related to business performance.
Method
DEMO Location. In our general recommendations, we discussed that the study location
DEMO may aim to locate all relevant studies, or alternatively may be DEMO to some
March, 2014
343
theoretical sampling. Since our research question already restricts studies to a particular
DEMO, we decided to attempt to locate the broadest possible array of DEMO in this
context. In order to locate case studies, we used DEMO word searches in ABI/Inform and in
Econlit, combining the term DEMO with “lowly developed economies,” “LDC,” and
“developing country.” Furthermore, DEMO examined the databases of institutions that support
entrepreneurship in developing economies (DEMO Bank, ILO, UNU-Merit Maastricht,
Institute of Development Studies, Institute DEMO Industrial Development Policy, and SNV).
In addition, we systematically searched key journals that address entrepreneurship in
developing countries: World Development, Entrepreneurship & Regional Development,
Journal of Developmental Entrepreneurship, and Journal of Development DEMO More-
over, we checked the references of narrative reviews. Finally, we asked experts in the ﬁeld
to name additional clusters we did not DEMO with the former strategies. Thus, as we
suggested in our general DEMO, the study location process involved a range
of different strategies to DEMO cases, exceeding the range of strategies usually used in
quantitative meta-analyses (cf. O’Boyle, Pollack, & Rutherford, 2012; Read, Song, &
Smit, 2009; Rosenbusch, Rauch, & Bausch, 2013). This procedure allowed us to identify
case studies involving 80 business clusters.
Selection Criteria. DEMO used case studies conducted by independent research groups.
As recommended in the third step of the description of the systematic synthesis of
qualitative research, we developed selection criteria specifying the scope of the study
(criteria 1–3) as well as criteria ensuring the quality of studies included in the synthe-
sis (criteria 4 and 5): (1) The cases had to deﬁne clusters as geographical concentra-
tions of ﬁrms that are involved DEMO the same or similar activities, and that may specialize,
subcontract, or cooperate. (2) The cases describe clusters in low-income economies, as
deﬁned by the World Bank. (3) The cases provide sufﬁcient information DEMO code busi-
ness performance, levels of joint action, and insertion in the global value chain. (4) The
original publication did not use DEMO case to analyze joint action and/or insertion into
the global value chain. While this criterion is not necessary for a systematic synthesis
of DEMO case studies, we introduced it because we aimed to avoid biases DEMO
duced in the original case description, which could occur, for example, when the case
description focuses predominantly on joint action (Schmitz, 1995b, 1999a). (5) We vali-
dated our data through cross-veriﬁcation; DEMO, we included cases when we had
information from at least two DEMO (Yin, 2003). First, in 12 clusters, we inte-
grated information from different publications to create a more complete picture
(Appendix 1). Second, in eight cases, we had access to one “expert” DEMO knew the
cluster well and who checked our coding of the cluster characteristics. As with criterion
4, this is not a necessary criterion for a systematic synthesis of case studies, but it
allowed us to create a more complete picture of the case (Jensen & Rodgers, 2001)DEMO
These selection criteria reduced the initial 80 clusters to the 13 clusters coded for the
purpose of our study (Appendix 1). Four of the 13 clusters were located in Africa, three
in Latin America, DEMO six in Southeast Asia.
Measurement. To extract the relevant information from the individual case studies, we
developed a detailed coding scheme in advance, DEMO anchors for the coding. Thus,
as we suggested in our general recommendation, we used a deductive approach to analyze
the cases. The dependent variable was the average performance of ﬁrms within a cluster.
We followed DEMO recommendations by Venkatraman and Ramanujam (1986) and differ-
entiated between ﬁnancial (e.g., proﬁts, overall performance, sales growth, proﬁt growth)
and operational performance (including, e.g., competitive advantage, innovation,
344 ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEMO and PRACTICE
improvements in technology, quality, skills levels). Independent variables were the DEMO
of local joint action and insertion into the global value chain. The level of local joint action
was coded in three categories: (1) local industries with no joint action, (2) local complex
with specialization, and (3) local alliance with strategic cooperation. The coding of the
insertion into the global value chain was carried out for suppliers as DEMO as buyers. A low
level of insertion was coded if external relationships focused only on import or export.
A high level of insertion was DEMO if supplier and/or buyer directly assist in upgrading
processes or products. Appendix 1 provides a detailed description of each cluster, the
references of the sources used to analyze the cluster, and the data analysis results of our
coding efforts.
Data Analysis. The qualitative case study analysis consisted DEMO two main activities. As
we recommended, we ﬁrst performed a separate DEMO analysis of each case. Subse-
quently, we performed a cross-case analysis (compare step 5 of the general recommen-
dations). First, we developed a case data ﬁle for each case, listing the characteristics of
the data sources, a case study description that covers general cluster characteristics as
well as history, and the relevant information that was found in the literature regarding the
concepts local joint action, insertion into global value chains, and the performance of
the ﬁrms in the cluster. Second, for DEMO case, we developed a data analysis table that
systematically organized the DEMO along the three concepts level of joint action,
insertion into the global value chain, and performance (compare Appendix 1). Third, we
coded the extent of local joint action, insertion into a global value chain, and performance
within the cluster, which enabled us to translate DEMO qualitative information included in
the data analysis table into quantitative information. The cross-case analysis, ﬁnally, was
performed by pattern matching and cross-case analysis, as suggested by Yin (2003). To
display our results, we DEMO ﬁgures that organized the cases along the dimensions
of our constructs. Moreover, the quantitative information that was extracted allowed us to
perform additional correlation analyses to test the relationships between the independent
and dependent variables.
Results DEMO Discussion
Figure 1 presents the results with regard to the relationship between the level of
joint action and ﬁrm performance. The general trend indicated DEMO the clusters with
the highest levels of joint action achieved the highest levels of performance (Otigba
and Pekalongan). However, this relationship was DEMO supported for the Marikina
cluster, which showed a moderate to high DEMO of joint action, but a low-average level
of ﬁrm performance. Thus, a high level of joint action is not always associated with high
DEMO
With regard to the Marikina cluster, its low level of average DEMO may be due
to a lack of external linkages with global value chains (Figure 2). Similarly, the majority
of clusters with no DEMO into the global value chain also showed low levels of
performance—with the exception of the Suame cluster, which showed moderate levels
of average performance. At the same time, only two of the ﬁve clusters with high
levels of insertion into global value chains also showed high levels of DEMO perfor-
mance. It would appear that insertion into global value chains is a necessary but not
sufﬁcient condition for high-average performance levels.
Therefore, we analyzed the combined effect of local joint action and insertion in
global DEMO chains on performance (Figure 3), which revealed that the two DEMO with
March, 2014
345
Figure 1
Level of Joint Action and Performance
High
2.Otigba
10.Pekalongan
Moderate
DEMO
1.Nnewi
3.Suame
6.Gamarra2
7.Bucaramanga
12.Cebu
4.Kamukunji
5.Gamarra1
8.Jepara
13.Pampanga
9.Ceper
11.Marikina
Local industry                       DEMO complex       Local alliance
Level of joint action
the highest levels of average performance (Otigba and Pekalongan) were characterized
both by DEMO levels of joint action and insertion into global value chains. Because all
clusters with low-average performance showed low scores in at least one of DEMO two
dimensions (joint action and/or insertion in the global value DEMO), we conclude that the
interaction between local joint action and insertion into global value chains is the best
predictor of performance of ﬁrm DEMO business clusters.
Our qualitative synthesis of cases allowed us to run some quantitative analyses as
well, although the sample size is relatively small to expect robust results. The Spearman
rank correlation between local joint action and DEMO was r = .63 (p < .01), the
relationship between DEMO in global value chains and performance was r = .68
(p < .01), and the relationship between a combined index (level of DEMO action with
insertion in the global value chain) and performance was DEMO = .73 (p < .01).
Our synthesis of qualitative case DEMO of business clusters suggested three
contributions to the literature. First, most DEMO studies look at the effects of either
internal or external linkages of business clusters. Our analysis revealed that the combi-
nation of local joint DEMO and insertion into global value chains helps explain the
performance of ﬁrms in clusters, which means that both internal and external linkages
need to be taken into account. Second, our results contribute to the conceptual problems
found in cluster literature, which make it difﬁcult to generalize the results (Rocha, 2004).
346
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Level of performance
Figure 2
Insertion into Global Value Chains and Average Level of Performance
DEMO
2.Otigba
10.Pekalongan
Moderate
3.Suame
1.Nnewi
6.Gamarra2
7.Bucaramanga
12.Cebu
Low
4.Kamukunji
5.Gamarra1
9.Ceper
11.Marikina
13.Pampanga
8.Jepara
No insertion in GVCs Some insertion in GVCs Insertion DEMO GVCs
Insertion in global value chains (GVCs)
For example, relying on single case studies contextualized research ﬁndings. With
our systematic synthesis of DEMO studies, we showed that generalizations are indicated.
Third, our study focused on clusters in developing economies. Most approaches to
business clusters were developed DEMO the Western world, as were the two frameworks
we used to DEMO the performance of business clusters. We showed that the results can
be generalized beyond speciﬁc economic contexts. Thus, business clusters provide
an opportunity to overcome the environmental constraints that businesses face in
less-developed economies.
Our study DEMO some limitations that suggest avenues for future research. The ﬁrst
issue is related to the question of causality. It is possible that the high DEMO of
clusters leads to increased joint action in a cluster. Moreover, DEMO may be easier for
clusters that perform well to establish external linkages compared with clusters perform-
ing less well. Due to our design, we were unable to test the causality of the reported
relationships. However, our analysis of the Gamarra cluster indicated that joint action
and insertion into DEMO value chains improved subsequent performance. Such causality
March, 2014
347
Level DEMO performance
Figure 3
Cross-Case Analysis of Relationship Between Insertion into Global Value
Chains DEMO Level of Local Joint Action Within Cluster and Level of
Performance Within Cluster
Coevolution
High
Local alliance
3.Suame
Strategic interfirm
cooperation
2.Otigba
1.Nnewi
6.Gam2
DEMO
Local complex
7.Buca
9.Ceper
12.Cebu
Specialization
13.Pampanga
8.Jepara
11.Marikina
Local industry
External economies
Low
4.Kamukunji
5.Gam1
No insertion Some insertion Insertion
Insertion in global DEMO chain (GVC)
N.B. The third dimension in this graph, the average performance level within a business cluster, is indicated by the size of
the circles. The three possible values (low, moderate, high) DEMO equivalent to the three circle sizes (small, medium, large).
DEMO three clusters, the longitudinal element is indicated by the dotted circle, that is, the former performance level.
issues can be addressed very well in a synthesis of qualitative cases studies, for example,
by synthesizing pre–post case studies (Jensen & Rodgers, 2001). Second, our analysis
was based on secondary data, which may be biased by the intentions of the original
authors. We tried to minimize such biases by relying DEMO multiple sources for each case
description, and moreover we veriﬁed our DEMO by involving experts familiar with
the original clusters. Third, we did DEMO test for moderator variables that could affect the
results. For example, DEMO stage of cluster development and the type of industry may
affect internal and external linkages. While the limited number of cases included in our
DEMO made it difﬁcult to address such moderator variables, this type of DEMO is
very possible in a systematic synthesis of qualitative research, and DEMO opens avenues
for future research.
348
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Level of joint action
Since the synthesis aimed for generalizations, our results can be used by institut-
ions interested in enterprise development because we provide information about areas
DEMO for intervention. Entrepreneurs may beneﬁt from the results because they provide
guidelines for useful cooperation with other enterprises. Finally, we provide suggestions
on how to promote entrepreneurship in less-developed economies.
General Discussion
While evidence-based entrepreneurship is DEMO increasingly accepted in the
ﬁeld of entrepreneurship, it is predominantly based DEMO evidence drawn from quantitative
studies. However, scientiﬁc knowledge in entrepreneurship is DEMO restricted to quanti-
tative research. Important concepts like network structure (Elfring & Hulsink, 2007),
effectuation (Sarasvathy, 2001), and research into business clusters (as demonstrated
above) have been developed and advanced through DEMO research. We argue that
the cumulative evidence of a discipline includes knowledge from multiple sources of
quantitative as well as qualitative evidence (Rousseau et al., 2008). Thus, evidence-based
best practices need to include qualitative DEMO In the present contribution, we devel-
oped the systematic synthesis of DEMO research and provided an example of such an
approach.
Theoretical Implications
The systematic synthesis of case study research provides several implications for
entrepreneurship research. DEMO of all, the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship needs to develop
inventories about DEMO knowledge in the ﬁeld. While the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship
has advanced considerably in the last two decades, more and more studies have begun
to focus on a vast number of different subjects and theoretical frameworks (Davidsson
et al., 2001; Low, 2001). This development leads to an increasing fragmentation of the
ﬁeld. However, any discipline has to build evidence in areas of maturation and map
scientiﬁc evidence in order to provide DEMO recommendation. For example, our syn-
thesis of case studies revealed that DEMO positively affect the performance of ﬁrms in
a cluster. Such established evidence also suggests points of departure for future research.
In general, the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship predominantly uses quantitative studies, and
consequently meta-analysis to establish such scientiﬁc evidence. Thus, there is a domi-
nance of quantitative studies in the ﬁeld, possibly because research designs and methods
continually improved in quantitative entrepreneurship research, increasing the legiti-
macy of this type of research (DEMO, Shook, Morris, & Madden, 2010). However, 9.5%
of DEMO appearing in entrepreneurship journals can be classiﬁed as case studies
(Chandler & Lyon, 2001). We argue that this type of research needs DEMO be considered in
evidence-based entrepreneurship. Case study research can be increasingly valuable to a
discipline, if the cases involved motivate an interesting research question, if they inspire
new ideas, and if they illustrate concrete examples DEMO constructs (Siggelkow, 2007). At
the same time, we assume DEMO it is inevitable for case study research to increase meth-
odological practices to increase its legitimacy in entrepreneurship research, including,
for example, DEMO use of secondary data and triangulation, the description of coding
procedures DEMO of the analysis, and detailed information about quality concerns. Guide-
lines DEMO are well understood by editors and reviewers have been described by
Eisenhardt (1991) and Yin (2003).
March, 2014
349
Second, a systematic synthesis of qualitative research can test theories and concepts
that have been developed in the ﬁeld of entrepreneurship. New theories are DEMO in
conceptual papers or may have emerged from case study research. About 30% of the
papers published in the domain of entrepreneurship are conceptual DEMO nature (Chandler &
Lyon, 2001). However, rather than introducing more and more new concepts and theories,
entrepreneurship research needs to DEMO these theories rigorously to establish what we
know and, based on DEMO knowledge, to identify areas for future inquiry (Low &
MacMillan, 1988). The synthesis of qualitative case studies provides the tools necessary
DEMO achieve such evidence.
Third, the systematic synthesis of case study research DEMO to theory develop-
ment, and thus can go beyond just summarizing DEMO evidence. For example, cases
can be synthesized with the aim of DEMO or enhancing the conceptualization of
constructs. Moreover, a synthesis can compare DEMO theoretical assumptions, for
example, with regard to whether the relationship between human capital and performance
is better explained by opportunity costs or by DEMO theory. In addition, a systematic
synthesis of case studies could compare DEMO relationship between constructs, such as the
relationship between network characteristics and DEMO activities. Our illustrative
example attained this type of contribution by integrating two different frameworks used to
explain the effects of business clusters.
Finally, a systematic synthesis of case studies allows researchers to develop new
theories or DEMO adjust existing theories. While we suggested developing speciﬁc coding
categories in a deductive way, and thus specifying speciﬁc categories in advance, the cod-
DEMO system should be ﬂexible enough to allow new categories to emerge through the case
analysis (Eisenhardt, 1989). Thus, the systematic synthesis of qualitative case studies can
have different aims, from describing phenomena to developing and testing theories.
Limitations
We are aware that applying a systematic synthesis DEMO case study research to entrepre-
neurship requires additional considerations to exploit the full potential of such a synthesis.
A ﬁrst issue is the question DEMO whether or not it is legitimate to synthesize qualitative
research. Epistemologically speaking, qualitative research is not always suitable for an
evidence-based approach. We argued that case studies that build on scientiﬁc realism
are suitable for a DEMO However, case study research often involves interaction
among the researcher, the data, the context, and the interpretation, and often focuses on
a relativistic paradigm. While there are techniques available to aggregate this type of
DEMO (Campbell et al., 2003), these approaches are not primarily designed to provide
generalizations, and thus are not suitable for an evidence-based approach. Other qualita-
tive research, however, aims at replicating results and making DEMO accessible to practi-
tioners. In this way, our approach contributes to DEMO type of qualitative research by making
the results of this research accessible to a wider audience.
Second, the systematic synthesis of case studies aggregates the evidence from differ-
ent case studies that look at phenomena from DEMO angles and contexts, and that use
different sources of information. As DEMO consequence, the synthesis loses the ideographic
information inherent in individual case DEMO Thus, the generalizations are achieved at
the expense of unique phenomena DEMO in individual case studies. Therefore, it is
important to build in DEMO in the analysis that are theoretically indicated. Given
that there are sufﬁcient cases available, this could be achieved by coding and analyzing
subsets of cases.
350
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Third, the systematic synthesis of qualitative research is not a homogeneous approach.
We advanced a speciﬁc synthesis of qualitative case studies. However, there are a number
of different techniques available to synthesize different types of qualitative DEMO, and
they all have different strengths and weaknesses (Dixon-Woods et al., 2004; Rousseau
et al., 2008). For example, they are DEMO in varying degrees to variations in the study
design.
Fourth, there DEMO a number of methodological challenges that need to be addressed
when developing this approach to entrepreneurship further. For example, entrepreneurship
research needs to develop methodological standards for evaluating qualitative research
and the systematic syntheses of qualitative DEMO As with quantitative meta-analyses,
the process of the systematic synthesis of case-oriented research could be performed by a
team, which could be used to evaluate the consistency of the study location process, the
coding process, and the synthesis of the information (Campbell et al., 2003). Moreover,
there should be a clear set of quality criteria to DEMO each study before including it into
the synthesis (Jensen & Rodgers, 2001). An additional quality assessment should address
each of the steps DEMO a systematic synthesis: an explicit purpose, a systematic approach to
study location, explicit criteria for study inclusion, a comprehensive within and cross-
DEMO analysis, and a clear interpretation of the ﬁndings.
Finally, aggregating the ﬁndings of qualitative research is a complex and challenging
matter. For example, the judgments required for ﬁnding and extracting the relevant
information from qualitative DEMO are relatively complex, and this process requires a
deep understanding of DEMO language and methodology used in a given ﬁeld. Additionally,
all these decisions need to be documented and shared.
Future Research
We believe that DEMO are a number of areas in entrepreneurship research that would
beneﬁt from a systematic synthesis of case studies. For example, there is a continuing
debate in the domain of entrepreneurship about the deﬁnition of the concept DEMO opportu-
nity. While some authors deﬁne opportunities as situations that are recognized by indi-
viduals (Eckhardt & Shane, 2003, 2013; Shane & DEMO, 2000), others claim that
opportunities are created (Alvarez & Barney, 2007). Both approaches build on a realist
epistemology (Alvarez & DEMO). Moreover, there are a number of case studies that
evaluate DEMO recognition (Duxbury, 2012). A systematic synthesis of such case
studies can provide an overview of the empirical evidence, and thereby contribute to the
debate on the origins of business opportunities.
Moreover, complex topics that cannot be easily addressed by quantitative inquiries
can beneﬁt from a synthesis DEMO qualitative case studies. For example, existing literature on
business models is DEMO with a complex phenomenon that explains how ﬁrms create
value for their customers (Magretta, 2002). While there is agreement in the entrepreneur-
DEMO literature that business models are an important construct, the literature is DEMO
and characterized by different conceptualizations of the construct (George & Bock, 2011).
A systematic synthesis of case studies on business models could DEMO develop the con-
ceptual boundaries of the concept across case studies. In addition, such a synthesis could
investigate the consequences of business models. For example, a business model should
affect how ﬁrms recognize and exploit existing opportunities. Moreover, providing value
for customers should have positive effects on ﬁrm performance.
Finally, the notion that entrepreneurial behavior is embedded in contexts can
be systematically addressed in this type of review. Such contexts are usually DEMO
explicitly in qualitative studies, and therefore a systematic synthesis can account DEMO such
March, 2014
351
contextual conditions. For example, some authors argue that opportunity exploitation is
associated with uncertainty (Knight, 1921). A qualitative synthesis could examine whether
DEMO affects the proposed relationships. Another avenue could be the examination
of a process-based view in entrepreneurship (Baron & Markman, 2004). In this DEMO, to
examine the antecedents and consequences of entrepreneurial behavior, the synthesis
needs to achieve an interpretation of the evolution of phenomena over time. DEMO,
a systematic synthesis of qualitative research could work with conditional validation and
causality, and in doing so identify necessary and sufﬁcient conditions.
Conclusions
In this study, we have argued that evidence-based entrepreneurship needs to synthe-
size case studies as well. This is important for two reasons. First, the systematic review
of case-oriented research in entrepreneurship helps generate knowledge in DEMO ﬁeld. This
evidence is not restricted to what we know, but DEMO can also uncover issues that we do not
know yet and that need further examination. Second, a systematic review of qualitative
research in entrepreneurship provides knowledge that is contextualized in the sense of
what works for DEMO and under which circumstances (Denyer & Tranﬁeld, 2006). As
such, evidence-based entrepreneurship makes knowledge accessible to practitioners
and provides strong implications for actions and behavior. To summarize, our approach
contributes to evidence-based entrepreneurship, DEMO should synthesize knowledge and
generalizations relying on multiple methods and designs (DEMO et al., 2008).
352
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Appendix 1: Data Analysis Table
1. Nnewi (Nigeria) 2. Otigba (DEMO) 3. Suame (Ghana)
Used studies:
— Study 1 a) Brautigam (1997) a) Oyelaran-Oyeyinka (2006) a) Adeya (2006)DEMO
— Study 2 b) Oyelaran-Oyeyinka (1997, 2001, 2004) b) Abiola (2006b) b) Obeng (2002)
— .... c) Uzor (2004) c) McCormick (1998)
d) Abiola (2006a) d) ProInvest (2005)
e) ProInvest (2005)
Cluster characteristics:
DEMO Activities Different branches of motor spare parts Computer hardware and software trade and production Metalworking, mechanical engineering, and vehicle repair services
— Roots DEMO the 1960s/early 1970s, with a marketplace specialized in motor Early DEMO, starting with sales of components and equipment 1920s/1930s
spare parts
DEMO Further characteristics Place: Nnewi, Nigeria, urban
Firms and workers: About 510 ﬁrms, with estimated workforce of
10,000; 10–15 larger companies (2005)
Local joint action: → Moderate level, local complex
— DEMO linkages — Cooperative competition (a)
— Joint import of raw DEMO (c)
— Sharing of equipment, technicians, transportation costs, and
information (c)
— Joint ﬁnancing and advertising (c)
— DEMO last years the horizontal linkages did not increase very
much (a)DEMO
— Vertical linkages — Relationships developing with suppliers
— Extensive cooperation with domestic buyers on quality
improvement
— Vertical backward subcontracting is yet to DEMO (b)
— Institutional linkages — Several institutions employing multilateral activities (e.g., trade
fairs and training)
Global value chains: → Unbalanced, some insertion (upstream)
— Upstream — Much reliance on and cooperation with suppliers from abroad
(esp. Taiwan)
— More than 50% of ﬁrms is importing more than 80% of their
machinery
— Downstream — DEMO of ﬁrms are engaged in limited export activities to other
African countries
— Very low level of cooperation
— Weak export position
Place: Lagos, Nigeria, urban
Firms and workers: More than 5,000 MSEs, DEMO than 10,000
employed, approx. 8 employees per ﬁrm (2006)
→ High level, local alliance
— Unusually high cooperation
— High level of subcontracting
— Cooperative competition
— All ﬁrms cooperate with each other DEMO associations
— Joint marketing, quality improvement, information exchange,
advertising, DEMO warehousing
— Free ﬂow of price information, technological support, and
market information
— Considerable vertical linkages
— Extensive cooperation with suppliers
— Cooperation DEMO buyers
— CAPDAN very important as association for security (with
police), for ﬁght against piracy (with Microsoft), for trafﬁc
problems (with city council)
— Other associations for lobbying on national level
— DEMO institutions entered the cluster
→ Insertion
— Many import linkages with ﬁrms in Asian countries
— Import of foreign-branded computer products from companies
like DEMO
— Joint venture agreements with ﬁrms from developed world
— Approx. 50% of ﬁrms export to foreign countries
— Share of exports increased year DEMO year (mostly to Western
Africa)
— Enhanced cooperation with global DEMO, esp. on information
exchange, quality improvement, and joint marketing
Place: Kumasi, Ghana, suburbs, rural
Firms and workers: Between 10 and DEMO,000 micro-ﬁrms; total
workforce more than 80,000 (2005)
→ Moderate to high level, local complex-alliance
— Some horizontal specialization within the cluster (a, d)
— Extensive horizontal subcontracting (c)
— Some examples of (strategic) horizontal cooperation, like a
cooperative for mechanics to purchase and share equipment (d)
— Little contact between larger and smaller ﬁrms (c)
— Main input is scrap metal, DEMO by several traders within the
cluster area (d)
— Presence DEMO some vertical links with engineering ﬁrms (a, c)
— Strong vertical bilateral linkages between garages and metal
workshops: joint production (c)DEMO
— Signiﬁcant number of institutions involved in the development of
the cluster (a, d)
— ITTU (Intermediate Technology Transfer Unit), a technical
support and consulting unit, fosters technology upgrading (a, d)
— Training courses for workers given by institute (a, d)
DEMO No insertion
— Just some importing of raw materials (new steel) (d)
— Mainly focused on domestic markets (d)
— DEMO evidence of (informal) sales to customers from neighboring
countries (a, b, d)
March, 2014
353
Appendix 1: Continued
1. Nnewi (Nigeria) 2. Otigba (Nigeria) 3. Suame (Ghana)
Performance: → Moderate performance: quite well operationally, DEMO outstanding
ﬁnancially
— Financial — Few indications, no evidence of positive DEMO in real incomes
— Indirect: the average capacity utilization rate is DEMO above
national average
— Operational — Job creation: both before and DEMO 1996 the cluster performed
well on this indicator
— However, most DEMO (after 96) is caused by foreign technical
staff
— Outstanding resistance of the ﬁrms in the Nnewi cluster to the
Nigerian economic crisis DEMO the 1980s and early 1990s
→ High performance: sketchy on ﬁnancial DEMO, clear on
operational perf.
— Direct: turnover and proﬁtability increased during past years
— Indirect: increasing export rate
— Increasing export rate points to constant quality in products and
processes
— High job creation rate, mostly for unskilled local people
— Ongoing growth of the cluster (entrepreneurial culture)
— Unique knowledge presence
→ Moderate performance: quite well operationally, not well
ﬁnancially
— Fall in demand for most ﬁrms and also many went out of
business, despite growing market and good technological
capabilities (c)
— 1984: 40,000 workers; 2002: 80,000 DEMO; projections:
growth to 100,000 workers (b)
— Average growth rate of number of workers of 8% (b)
— Adoption of relatively complex technologies and machines (a)
— “Suame Magazine has grown to become the largest informal
manufacturing area in Ghana and one DEMO the biggest in the whole
of West Africa” (d: 39)
4. Kamikunji (Kenya) 5. and 6. Gamarra (Peru) 7. Bucaramanga (Colombia)
Used studies:
— Study 1 a) McCormick (1998) a) Visser (1999, 2000) a) Pietrobelli and Barrera (2002)DEMO
— Study 2 b) ProInvest (2005) b) Alosilla (2002)DEMO b) Pietrobelli and Rabellotti (2004)
— .... c) Kinyanjui (2006) c) La Republica, 26/01/05 and 26/11/06† c) Giuliani et al. (2005)
d) Bezdin (2005)†
DEMO characteristics:
— Activities Metalworking (large variety) Garments Garments
— Roots Around 1985 Roots in 1945 Mid 1970s
— Further characteristics Place: Nairobi, Kenya, suburbs (urban) Place: Lima, Peru, urban area Place: Bucaramanga, Col., semi-urban area
Firms and workers: over 2,000 DEMO, total employment Firms and workers: Around 14,000 shops; 20,DEMO entrepreneurs; Firms and workers: 1,600 ﬁrms, mainly SMEs, no big ﬁrms, average
between 3,000–5,000 (2005) 90,000 workers; total annual turnover of 800 million U.S. dollars employment: 37, average 20 customers per ﬁrm (1995)
(2004)
Local joint action: Low level, local industry: some indications of moving upwards Until 1995: Moderate level, local complex
→ Low level, local industry — Index DEMO JA: medium (b, c)
Between 1995 and 2006:
DEMO Moves toward moderate level:
local complex
354
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
— Horizontal linkages — Horizontal joint action is somehow present (a)
— Some cooperation among wheelbarrow producers: joint
purchasing and welding (b)DEMO
— No evidence of further emerging cooperative linkages (b)
— DEMO variations of products (c)
— Presence of informal groupings of DEMO making similar
products, difﬁculties because of a lack of standardization (a, c)
— Some bilateral exchange of tools and equipment (a)DEMO
Before 1995 (a):
— cooperation low
— low level of subcontracting
— no capacity contracting
— some specialization in ﬁnishing
— dispersed DEMO more active in subcontracting and cooperation
Between 1995 and 2006:
— 2002: voice of businessmen in Gamarra is still hardly heard due
to organizational weaknesses (b)
— 2005: Gamarra Card is introduced (credit card developed by
ﬁrms themselves) (c)
— Vertical linkages — DEMO (job) specialization is totally absent, all ﬁrms produce
everything alone (b)
— Linkages with domestic suppliers and buyers are purely
market-based, no cooperation or technical assistance (b)
— Vertical joint action is entirely missing (a)
— Before 1995: low level of vertical DEMO (a)
— Before 1995: no vertical cooperation with suppliers or other
parties (a)
— Institutional linkages — Limited business association activities (b) Before 1995:
— The Kamukunji is more a self-help DEMO than a business — no cooperative institutional linkages (a)
association (b) Between 1995 and 2006:
— Government supports the cluster since the end of the 1980s — 1995: ﬁve initiatives to form associations (a)
(e.g., building of sheds) (c) — 2002: voice of businessmen in Gamarra is hardly heard due to
— Government DEMO association organize annually an exhibition and organizational weaknesses (b)
skill DEMO programs — 2005/2006: important role for the Coordinating Committee
— DEMO: “most of the 20 case studies do not pay membership (CEG) in Gamarra (c)
fees or attend meetings when they are DEMO,” the — 2005: department of production very intimately tied to
DEMO do not trust the government (c: 12) formation of good DEMO and training in Gamarra (d)
— Lack of links between DEMO cluster and learning institutions (c)
Global value chains: → No insertion Until 1995:
→ No insertion
Between 1995 and 2006:
DEMO Some insertion
— Upstream — Mainly local supplies (b) — Firms in cluster mainly use superior Pyma or Tanguïs cotton
varieties (only grown in Peru) (a)
— Downstream — Almost only local market (b)
— A few linkages with some foreign (informal) customers (mainly
from Uganda and Rwanda), but only market-based without
cooperation (b, c)
— In 1990s: ﬁrms in the Gamarra cluster are DEMO internationally
competitive (some of them tried to export, none of them with
success) (a)
— In 2000s: more and more international markets are gained
(United States, Venezuela, Ecuador, Chile, Bolivia) (c)
— In 2006: self-imposed reduction of exports to Ecuador and
Chile to be able to cover domestic demand (c)
— Outsourcing of production when ﬁrms cannot handle a large
order (a)
— Outsourcing of services that require special skills (a)
— Horizontal specialization: diversiﬁcation (a)
— Group of ﬁrms work together for one DEMO, offering
different quality/designs (a)
— Machinery is innovated in strong cooperation with small local
workshops (a)
— Interaction within business community increases (a)
— Cooperation between complementary ﬁrms much higher than
between ﬁrms with same products (a)
— Jointly organized trade fairs (together with Chamber of
Commerce) (a)
— Strong inter-ﬁrm associative attitude not yet developed (a)
— No vertical specialization: +80% DEMO ﬁrms carry out entire
process internally (a)
— No strong DEMO of labor (a)
— No strong backward linkages because of DEMO of loss of control
and authority (a)
— Strong inter-ﬁrm DEMO attitude not yet developed (a)
— Successful attempts to set DEMO business association: e.g.,
Cotexcon, set up joint procurement of raw materials, which led
to price stabilization and increased competitiveness (a)
DEMO Several national associations have ofﬁces in the cluster → leads
to ﬂow of information (a)
— Sectoral association failed due to individualistic behavior (a)
— Active Chamber of Commerce
— SENA offers labor training and other services (a)
— Should be further developed, still DEMO the “youthfulness of
the cluster” (a)
→ Insertion
— Presence DEMO mainly global chains (b, c)
— More than 80% of fabrics used for production is imported,
mainly from United States (a)
— Formation of Cotexcon (joint importing) decreased dependency
on intermediaries (a)
— Most enterprises obtain technologies from local subsidiaries of
global DEMO providers
— Majority of output is exported (18 of 25 surveyed DEMO,
exported more than 60% of their output) (a)
— Main export markets: United States and Latin America (a)
— DEMO export markets: Saudi Arabia, Hong Kong (a)
— Foreign DEMO helped ﬁrms in the cluster to upgrade their
technologies (a)
DEMO, 2014
355
Appendix 1: Continued
4. Kamikunji (Kenya) 5. and 6. Gamarra (DEMO) 7. Bucaramanga (Colombia)
Performance:
— Financial — Estimates say it is unlikely that the total turnover exceeds 10
million U.S.$ (approx. 5,000 U.S.$ per ﬁrm per year) (b)
— Unofﬁcial DEMO: 80% of wheelbarrows and 75% of metal boxes
in Kenya are DEMO in the area (c)
— Operational — Slow production processes (b)
— Low quality of products (b)
— Little technological development (except wheelbarrow
production) (a, b)
— Kamukunji is DEMO large petty commodity cluster which realizes
only a few of the potential beneﬁts of clustering
→ Low performance: could improve Until beginning of 1990s:
→ High performance (because of external economies)
After liberalization:
→ Eroding performance
Between 1995 and 2006:
→ Signs of increased DEMO
— Until 1990, annual growth in domestic sales (a)
— After 1990, more international competition (a)
— In 1993, signiﬁcant performance gap on average gross sales
between clustered and dispersed ﬁrms (a)
— In 1994, performance gap on average gross sales between
clustered and dispersed ﬁrms has almost disappeared (sales
erosion of 27% between 1993 and 1994) (a)
— Expected sales growth between Christmas period DEMO 2005 and
2006 is 20 to 25% (c)
— Recent DEMO in demand due to higher prices (c)
— In 1993, clustered ﬁrms experienced higher employment growth,
average wages, and less unpaid family labor than dispersed ﬁrms
(a)
— Recent increase in demand due to higher quality (c)
— More and more (international) markets are penetrated (c)
→ Moderate performance: better than other DEMO clusters
but not impressive
(No data could be found)
— DEMO clusters appear to be better equipped to face international
competition than other garment clusters in Colombia (a)
— The culture within ﬁrms in the cluster is progressive and
dynamic (a)
— There are examples of start-ups in the cluster (a)
— Some product and process upgrading, but below average (over
40 cases) (b, c)
8. Jepara (Indonesia) 9. Ceper (Indonesia) 10. Pekalongan (Indonesia)
Cluster characteristics:
— Activities Furniture Metal casting (both ﬁnal and intermediate production) Textiles (wide range)
— Roots Long history, dating back to precolonial times. Modern cluster The colonial times, based on supplying equipment to sugarcane Long history
since the 1980s farmers
Used studies:
— DEMO 1
— Study 2
a) Sandee et al. (2002)
b) Loebis and Schmitz (2005)
c) Sandee et al. (2000)DEMO
d) Indonesia Matters, 09-01-06
a) Sandee et al. (2002)
b) Sato (2005)
c) Perry (2005)
a) Sandee et al. (2002)
b) Tambunan (2006)
356
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
— Further characteristics Place: Central Java, Jepara, rural area
Firms and workers: 3,500 ﬁrms; 57,000 employees; mainly small
ﬁrms, DEMO also more than 100 ﬁrms with close to 100 workers
(2000)DEMO
Local joint action: → Low level, local industry
Place: Central DEMO, rural area
Firms and workers: 18,650 ﬁrms; more than DEMO,000 workers;
mostly small ﬁrms (2000)
→ High level, local alliance
— Horizontal linkages — Horizontal cooperation inhibited because of distrust DEMO — Strong horizontal specialization (a)
ﬁrms (use of illegal wood) (a, b) — Group of strong local entrepreneurs are active DEMO both
production and marketing (a)
— Collaboration among producers to DEMO prices, quality,
employment conditions, etc. (a)
— Informal DEMO to discuss important issues (a)
— Multi-tier subcontracting networks (a)
— Leading/pioneering ﬁrms take the lead and other ﬁrms follow
(b)
— Marketing is responsibility of wholesalers that sell the textiles
DEMO stores throughout Indonesia (a)
— Multi-tier subcontracting networks (subcontracting production
to home workers) (a)
— The relationships of ﬁrms with DEMO largest order provider tends
to be long term (b)
— DEMO information sharing, provision of working capital, and
stimulation of technology progress, can be found (however to
limited extent, and with wide variations) (b)
— Institutional linkages — Direct government support played limited DEMO (a) — Active government promotion by providing technical support — No formal association: trust is high between producers and
— No cooperative, DEMO associations (a) and developing common service facility (a) workers (DEMO)
— Regular complaints about the negative role of the government — However, government support is lowly evaluated (b) — Women’s cooperative gives female home workers access to
(too much control and bad management of wood supplies: — State-sponsored cooperative for small ﬁrms (a) small amounts of working capital (a)
illegal logging) (a) — More DEMO ﬁrms with subcontracting linkages seems to be — Government support by providing technical support (a)
— Dilemma for government: assisting small ﬁrms DEMO result in able to absorb knowledge from institutions; other ﬁrms more DEMO Government erected a local wholesale market to be used by
support of illegal logging, but it leads to employment and difﬁculties (b) local small ﬁrms (a)
income (b) — State enterprises are active in cluster (a)
Global value chains: → Insertion → No DEMO → Insertion
— Upstream — Local supplies combined with some imports (DEMO) — Limited imports of spare parts and components (a) — DEMO long involvement with Javanese, Arab, and
Chinese-Indonesian producers and traders (DEMO)
— Some of its inputs are imported (a)
— DEMO — Extensive exporting networks (a) — No direct participation in exporting (indirectly: Ceper products — For long involvement with Javanese, Arab, DEMO
— In 2000, Jepara furniture was exported to 68 countries (a) are used in products that are exported) (a) Chinese-Indonesian producers DEMO traders (a)
— Many global buyers established their own their DEMO factories — Foreign assistance is lowly evaluated compared with domestic — 40% output is exported (a)
in Jepara (mainly joint ventures): DEMO buyers link the assistance (b) — Foreign buyers are more and more involved in development
demand in the West to production in cluster (a) of export trade since the crisis (1997–98) (a)
DEMO Foreign buyers determine technology upgrading, creating and — The export network DEMO many countries, prominent
ﬁnancing new units (a) African presence (a)
— Relationships between SMEs and foreign buyers are not really — DEMO overseas trade networks (b)
collaborative (b)
— Vertical linkages — Existence of subcontracting networks with speciﬁc parts of
furniture production being DEMO to specialized small
ﬁrms and craftsmen (a)
Place: Central Java, rural area
Firms and workers: close to 332 ﬁrms; 3,875 employees; most ﬁrms
less than 20 employees (late 2001)
→ DEMO level, local industry-complex
→ “Except for passive search and reach effects DEMO clustering, both
passive and active externalities (. . .) seem DEMO be limited in
Ceper” (b, p. 160)
— Low level of horizontal specialization (b)
— Little evidence of joint procurement, DEMO, recruitment, and
so on (b)
— Large producers own DEMO equipment, smaller ﬁrms rent speciﬁc
services from the larger ﬁrms (a)
— Smaller ﬁrms make use of a common service facility (Unit
Pelayanan Teknis) for receiving orders and buying inputs (a, b)
— Linkages with ﬁrms outside the cluster were preferred above ties
to DEMO (c)
— Top-layer ﬁrms are engaged in subcontracting (a, DEMO)
— Development of labor specialization is limited (b)
— DEMO and smaller ﬁrms have a clear preference to sell directly
to nearby markets outside the cluster (a, b, c)
March, 2014
DEMO
Appendix 1: Continued
8. Jepara (Indonesia) 9. Ceper (Indonesia) 10. Pekalongan (Indonesia)
Performance: → Formerly high performance, currently rapidly declining
performance
— Financial — Jepara cluster was responsible for growth of furniture DEMO
from U.S.$3.8 million (1989) to U.S.$97 million (1996) and
U.S.$147 million (1998) (c)
— In 1998, Jepara had a DEMO share in total Indonesian furniture
exports (a)
— Between 1996 DEMO 2000, the number of exported containers
increased from 200 to 2,DEMO per month; however, at the end of
2002 this has decreased with 40% (a)
— Since 2004, export sales decreased with DEMO per year to just 112
million U.S.$ in 2006 (d)
DEMO Export margins for the bigger ﬁrms decreased by 20% or more
between 2000 and 2003 (b)
— The declining exports of Jepara mirrors the nationwide average
increasing furniture exports (d)
— Operational — Between 1997 and 2002, the number of production units
increased from 2,439 to 3,700 (b)
— Between 1997 and 2002, employment DEMO from 38,264 to
58,210 workers (b)
— Between DEMO and 2002, workers earnings increased
substantially (estimated, with 10–15% per DEMO between 1997
and 2002)
— Wages in this cluster are above the minimum, but not the highest
in the area
— Complaints about quality (due to too rapid growth)
— Skills not sufﬁcient to fulﬁll international demand
— Infrastructural problems (due to too rapid growth)
Problems:
— use of illegal raw materials → illegal logging of DEMO
young trees (cost-saver)
— foreign buyers demand certiﬁed wood, but the certiﬁcation is
suspended because the state lost control over the timber DEMO
→ Boost based on the devaluation and depreciation of currency
→ Lack of cooperation, therefore, unable to deal with problems
→ Low performance
DEMO Comparative advantage of Ceper gradually decreased (demand
decreased, lost markets to other metal casting clusters) (a)
— Not able to maintain DEMO good performance (a)
— In the late 1990s, Ceper accounted for almost a third of
Indonesia’s annual metal cast production (c)
— Between 1998 and 2001, the number of workers decreased from
5,000 to 3,875 (a)
— In 1997, cluster contained DEMO ﬁrms (b) and in 2001, the
cluster contained 332 ﬁrms (a)
— Ceper decreased in size, while other metal casting cluster
expanded (a)
— Recent attempts to upgrade technologies failed (a)DEMO
→ High performance (somewhat sketchy)
— In general, sales increased since 1998 (a)
— In particular, export sales increased (signiﬁcantly) since 1998 (a)
— Number of ﬁrms increased by 29% DEMO 1998 (a)
— Employment increased by 20% since 1998 (home workers
increased) (a)
— Increasing sales caused more workers to DEMO new enterprises (a)
358
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
11. Marikina (Philippines) 12. Cebu (Philippines) 13. Pampanga (Philippines)
Used studies:
— Study 1
— Study 2
b) Beerepoot (DEMO)
b) Beerepoot (2005a)
Cluster characteristics:
— Activities Shoe industry (cheap, low-quality shoes) Furniture (outdoor, antique reproduction, and DEMO) Furniture
— Roots Beginning of the twentieth century In the 1950s DEMO 1940s, closely related to nearby U.S. military bases
— Further characteristics DEMO: Philippines, Marikina, urban area Place: Philippines, Metro Cebu, urban area Place: Philippines, Pampanga, province (rural)
Firms and workers: 248 ﬁrms, mostly small-sized, some larger Firms and workers: around 303 ﬁrms and 45,000 workers (1999);
with hundreds of employees (2004) many small ﬁrms; some larger; largest around 2,750 workers
Local joint action: → Local complex, starting to move to local DEMO → Local complex
→ “Cluster beneﬁts from some dynamic cluster advantages”
(DEMO, p. 173)
— Horizontal linkages — Presence of “tightly-wrought webs DEMO social interaction” — Horizontal specialization of ﬁrms occurs
— Firms subcontract the demand that exceeds their own capacity — Cooperation initiatives within the cluster (formation of network
— Strong sense of own identity and distinctiveness (e.g., own shoe relations)
museum in the city) — However, no intensive (strategic) cooperation between ﬁrms;
— Collective attempts to improve DEMO cooperative bases of independency is higher valued
production — Little loyalty of larger manufacturers to small manufacturers
— Several cooperatives owned by the (small) ﬁrms, providing loan (upgrading of small ﬁrms not a goal for the larger ﬁrms)
facilities, reduced costs of purchasing, own (collective) brands, — Decreasing trust between employers and workers → results in
DEMO more outsourcing
— Beneﬁting from economies of scale by forming small supply
consortia
— However, still some distrust and progress should be made to
establish a culture of collaboration and joint political action
— Ingredients present, but still no real culture of collaboration
— Vertical linkages — Production DEMO vertically disintegrated ﬁrms
— Specialized tasks are subcontracted to independent workshops
— Many standard component are brought in
— Even the larger ﬁrms regularly DEMO batches of work
— Threatened predominantly by the increasing import of parts
from China
Firms and workers: around 376 ﬁrms, most of them DEMO less than
10 workers (1999); 10,000 people employed (2002)
→ Local industry
→ “Cluster depends on static cluster advantages” (c, p. 173)
— Firms are very specialized horizontally: entire streets DEMO
specialized in speciﬁc products
— No network relations, only transactions
— DEMO competition between subcontractors because they have to
bid for orders from exporters
— Some subcontractors formed small groups to cooperate and help
each other (sharing equipment, training, etc.)
— Cooperation between exporters is almost DEMO
a) Scott (2005) a) Beerepoot (2004)
— Many DEMO materials are sourced from other Philippine islands
— Degree of outsourcing between direct exporters and
subcontractors differs per subsector
— The production process is DEMO and more split up into several
small tasks that are outsourced to subcontractors and/or
homeworkers
— Little trust between contractors and subcontractors, but network
relations emerging
a) Beerepoot (2004)
— Production process is DEMO up into different stages for different
ﬁrms: extensive use of subcontractors
DEMO No network relations, only transactions: subcontractors are not
rewarded for their loyalty to their exporters, and there is hardly
any exchange of information
c) Beerepoot (2005b)
c) Beerepoot (2005b)
March, 2014
359
Appendix 1: Continued
11. Marikina (Philippines) 12. Cebu (Philippines) 13. Pampanga (Philippines)
— Institutional linkages — Presence of “associational and institutional infrastructures”
— PFFI (Philippine Footwear Federation Inc.): broad cross-section
of shoe manufacturers in Marikina, representing the cluster in
domestic and foreign forums, DEMO cluster with consultancy
services and training programs
— League of Filipino Shoemaker aims to ensure that imports do
not evade the remaining tariff regulations
DEMO Philippine Footwear Academy: provides training courses,
technical advice
— Leather DEMO Industry Master Plan (1996): governmental
study about current weaknesses, with the aim to promote and
foster the cluster
— Speciﬁc legislation by DEMO to promote the development
of the cluster
— Active participation of the local government
Global value chains: → No insertion
— Upstream — Larger ﬁrms imported their machinery from countries like
Taiwan and Italy
— Downstream DEMO Only for domestic markets (intense competition with other
countries, mostly China)
— Firms in the cluster never been incorporated into signiﬁcant
cooperation DEMO foreign buyers: “capacity for export activity is
notably underdeveloped”
— Links DEMO global value chains are totally absent
— Recently some manufacturers started to reach to global markets
by participating in international trade fairs
Performance:
DEMO Low performance
— Early 1970s: government and international donor organizations
started DEMO pay attention to the cluster
— Trips to foreign furniture fairs were organized by government
— 1974: establishment of furniture trade association in Cebu and
trade support organizations in Manila
— 1991: ﬁrst own international furniture exhibit organized in
cluster
— Most exporting ﬁrms are registered with the DEMO of
Investment, which gives them various incentives like 6 years of
DEMO holiday and low import duties
— Strong presence of business associations, DEMO government, and
training institutes → facilitates information exchange and
upgrading processes
DEMO Association CFIF very active, but still weak on lobbying
→ Insertion
DEMO “the furniture exporters (. . .) are also part of an international
value chain” (e, p. 54)
— Several raw materials (e.g., wood) are imported from countries
like New Zealand and Malaysia
DEMO Knowledge is imported via foreign links (e.g., German
consultants for training)
— 1982: British furniture company started an establishment in the
cluster (antique reproductions), still active in the cluster →
fostered upgrading (DEMO, attracting new foreign buyers)
— After 1982: more and more foreign buyers began to buy from
ﬁrms in the cluster (following British pioneer)
— Around 175 ﬁrms export directly to foreign markets
— DEMO foreign buyers have agencies inside the cluster
— Own international furniture exhibit (3,097 foreign buyers visited
it in 2002)
— Main export markets: United States (62%) and Japan (9%)
→ Moderate DEMO (high compared to total Philippine
furniture industry)
— No strong DEMO business association that stimulates joint
initiatives
— Present associations are ineffective and lack common initiatives
— The “Furniture City” (where ﬁrms can rent production space)
failed (wrong location)
— Well-equipped training center is not in use because of lack of
expertise and funding
— There is DEMO craftsmen school; however, it is not well functioning
→ Some insertion
— No data (suppose domestic supplies)
— Via initial sales to U.S. military, direct exports to the U.S.
market became possible
— Currently, domestic market most important and preferred
— Around 110 exporting ﬁrms
— No foreign buyer agents in the cluster
— Attempt to set up DEMO furniture exhibit, with little
success: only 861 foreign buyers in 2003
→ Low performance (especially exporting, but growing)
360
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY DEMO PRACTICE
— Financial — Very low proﬁtability margins — Cluster managed to enter DEMO higher quality, better prices foreign
furniture market
— Cebu cluster exports DEMO between 1998 and 2002 with
14%: from 210 million U.S.$ to DEMO million U.S.$ (total
Philippine furniture industry with 30% between 1996 and DEMO)
— The wooden furniture sector in Cebu showed impressive growing
export sales (from 24.7 million U.S.$ in 1998 to 2001.3 million
U.S.$ 2002: 270% growth)
— As an estimation, a ﬁrm in Cebu DEMO between 750,000 and
800,000 U.S.$ per year (2002)
DEMO Operational — The industry is in great disarray, uncertain future — DEMO average approx. 148 workers per ﬁrm
— The cluster lost the worldwide competition battle from direct — The cluster made a shift toward better DEMO during last
competitors from clusters in Brazil (Sinos), China, or Mexico; decades (e.g., greater recognition of local designs in
most notably with regard to attracting the attention of overseas international shows and magazines)DEMO
traders and buyers — Dynamic entrepreneurial environment where many ﬁrms start
— Number of ﬁrms declined rapidly: 513 in 1994 to 248 in 2004 operations, but also many ﬁrms close
— Much dissatisfaction with quality of locally made inputs — Cluster managed to become less dependent on rattan DEMO
production → rattan is subjected to quick changes in demand
— Chinese threats (Cebu ﬁrms have a much lower productivity
rate)
— The cluster still has a reputation for unreliability in deliveries
— The Cebu DEMO is heading for difﬁcult times, but it has
survived other crises DEMO the past 25 years (experiencing similar
problems as 25 years ago)DEMO
†Translated by Oline-Translater.com.
— As an estimation, a ﬁrm in Pampanga DEMO almost
120,000 U.S.$ per year (2002)
— Pampanga cluster DEMO increased between 1996 and 2000 with
163% (total Philippine industry with DEMO), and between 1998
and 2002 with 15%
— On average, DEMO 26 workers per ﬁrm
— Quality too low to satisfy foreign demands
March, 2014
361
REFERENCES
Abiola, B. (2006a). Knowledge, technology, and growth: The case study of Nnewi Auto Parts Cluster in
Nigeria. New York: World Bank.
Abiola, B. (2006b). Knowledge, technology, and growth: The case study of Otigba Computer Village cluster
in Nigeria. Unpublished manuscript, World Bank Technical Report, Washington, DC.
Adeya, N. (2006). Knowledge, technology and growth: The case study of Suame Manufacturing Enterprise
Cluster in Ghana. New York: World Bank.
Alosilla, J.I. (2002). Gamarra: DEMO Peru de los peruanos. Quehacer, 136(3), 66–71.
Alvarez, S.A. & Barney, J.B. (2007). Discovery and creation: Alternative theories of entrepreneurial action.
Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 1(1–2), 11–26.
Alvarez, S.A. & Barney, J.B. (2013). Epistemology, opportunities, and entrepreneurship: Comments DEMO
Venkataraman et al. (2012) and Shane (2012). Academy of DEMO Review, 38(1), 154–157.
Audretsch, D.B., Grilo, I., & Thurik, A.R. (2011). Globalization, entrepreneurship, and the region. In
M. Fritsch (Ed.), Handbook of research on entrepreneurship and regional development (pp. 11–32).
Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Baron, R.A. & DEMO, G.D. (2004). Toward a process view of entrepreneurship: The DEMO impact
of individual-level variables across phases of new ﬁrm development. In M.A. Rahim, R.T. Golembiewski, &
K.D. Mackenzie (Eds.), Current topics DEMO management (pp. 44–64). New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction
Publishers.
Beerepoot, N. (2004). Learning in small enterprise clusters: The role of DEMO workers in the diffusion of
knowledge in the Philippines. International Journal of Technology and Globalization, 1(1), 78–91.
Beerepoot, N. (2005a). Collective learning by artisanal subcontractors in a Philippine furniture cluster.
Tijdschrift vor DEMO en Sociale Geograﬁe, 96(5), 573–584.
Beerepoot, N. (2005b)DEMO Collective learning in small enterprise clusters, skilled workers, labour market
dynamics and knowledge accumulation in the Philippine furniture industry. Unpublished doctoral disserta-
tion, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam.
Bezdin, D.L. (2005). En la Suscripcion de la renovacion del convenio entre la coordinadora de empresarios de
Gamarra DEMO Indecopi [Speech].
Brautigam, D. (1997). Substituting for the state: DEMO and industry development in Eastern Nigeria.
World Development, 25(7), DEMO
Briner, R.B. & Denyer, D. (2012). Systematic review and DEMO synthesis as a practice and scholarship
tool. In D.M. Rousseau (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of evidence based management (pp. 112–129). New DEMO:
Oxford University Press.
Campbell, R., Pound, P., Pope, DEMO, Britten, N., Pill, R., Morgan, M., et al. (2003). Evaluating meta-
ethnography: A synthesis of qualitative research on lay experiences of diabetes and diabetes care. Social
Science & Medicine, 56(4), 671–684.
Chandler, G.N. & Lyon, D.W. (2001). Issues of research design and construct measurement in entrepreneur-
ship research. Entrepreneurship Theory and DEMO, 25(4), 101–113.
Christensen, C.M. & Carlile, P.R. (2009). Course research: Using the case method to build and teach
management theory. Academy of Management Learning and Education, 8(9), 240–251.
362 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Cope, J. (2011). Entrepreneurial learning from failure: An interpretative phenomenological analysis. Journal
of Business Venturing, 26(6), 604–623.
Creswell, J.W. (2009). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among ﬁve traditions. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Crook, T.R., Shook, C.L., Morris, M.L., & Madden, T.M. (2010). Are we there yet? An DEMO of research
design and construct measurement practices in entrepreneurship research. Organizational Research Methods,
13(1), 192–206.
Crotty, M. (1998). The DEMO of social research: Meaning and perspective in the research process.
London: Sage.
Davidsson, P., Low, M., & Wright, M. (2001)DEMO Editor’s introduction: Low and McMillan ten years on:
Achievements and DEMO directions for entrepreneurship research. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice,
25(4), 5–15.
Davies, H.T.O. & Nutley, S.N. (1999). The rise and rise of evidence in health care. Public Money &
Management, 19(DEMO), 9–16.
Denyer, D. & Tranﬁeld, D. (2006). Using DEMO research synthesis to build an actionable knowledge base.
Management Decision, 44(DEMO), 213–227.
Dixon-Woods, M., Agarwal, S., Young, B., Jones, D., & Sutton, A. (2004). Integrative approaches to
qualitative DEMO quantitative evidence. London: Health Development Agency.
Dul, J. & Hak, DEMO (2008). Case study methodology in business research. Oxford: Elsevier.
Duxbury, T. (2012). Towards more case study research in entrepreneurship. Technology DEMO Manage-
ment Review, 2(3), 9–17.
Eckhardt, J.T. & Shane, S.A. (2003). Opportunities and entrepreneurship. Journal of Management, 29(3),
333–349.
Eckhardt, J.T. & Shane, S.A. (2013). Response DEMO the commentaries: The individual-opportunity (IO) nexus
integrates objective and subjective DEMO of entrepreneurship. Academy of Management Review, 38(1),
160–163.
Eisenhardt, K.M. (1989). Building theories from case study research. Academy of DEMO Review, 14(4),
532–550.
Eisenhardt, K.M. (1991). Better stories and better constructs: The case for rigor and comparative logic. The
Academy of Management Review, 16(3), 620–627.
Elfring, T. & DEMO, W. (2007). Networking by entrepreneurs: Patterns of tie formation DEMO emerging
organizations. Organization Studies, 28(12), 1849–1872.
Evans, D. (DEMO). Database searches for qualitative research. Journal of the Medical Library Association,
90(3), 290–293.
Finfgeld, D.L. (2003). Metasynthesis: The state of the art—So far. Qualitative Health Research, 13(7),
DEMO doi:10.1177/1049732303253462
Frese, M., Bausch, A., Schmidt, P., Rauch, A., & Kabst, R. (2012a). Evidence-based entrepreneurship (EBE):
A systematic approach to cumulative science. In D. Rousseau (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of evidence based
management (pp. 92–111). New DEMO: Oxford University Press.
March, 2014 363
Frese, M., Bausch, A., Schmidt, P., Rauch, A., & Kabst, R. (2012b). Evidence-based entrepreneurship (EBE):
Cumulative science, action principles, and bridging the gap between science and practice. Foundations DEMO
Trends in Entrepreneurship, 8(1), 1–62.
Gartner, W.B. (2007)DEMO Entrepreneurial narrative and a science of the imagination. Entrepreneurial Narrative
Greif Symposium on Emerging Organizations, 22(5), 613–627.
Gartner, W.B. & Birley, S. (2002). Qualitative methods in entrepreneurial research. Journal of Business
Venturing, 17(5), 387–395.
George, G. & Bock, A.J. (2011)DEMO The business model in practice and its implications for entrepreneurship
research. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 35(1), 83–111.
Gephart, R.P. (2004). Qualitative research and the Academy of Management Journal. Academy of Manage-
ment DEMO, 47(4), 454–482.
Gibbert, M., Ruigrok, W., & DEMO, B. (2008). What passes as a rigorous case study? DEMO Management
Journal, 29, 1465–1474.
Giuliani, E., Pietrobelli, C., & Rabellotti, R. (2005). Upgrading in global value chains: Lessons from Latin
American clusters. World Development, 33(4), 549–573.
Glaser, B.G. & Strauss, A.L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies DEMO qualitative research.
Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Hak, T. & Dul, DEMO (2010). Theory-building with cases. In A.J. Mills, G. Durepos, & E. Wiebe (Eds.),
Encyclopedia of case study research (pp. DEMO). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hoon, C. (2013). Meta-synthesis of qualitative case studies: An approach to theory building. Organizational
Research Methods, 16(4), 501–521.
Hunter, J.E. & Schmidt, F.L. (2004)DEMO Methods for meta-analysis: Correcting error and bias in research
ﬁndings. Newbury DEMO, CA: Sage.
Jensen, J.L. & Rodgers, R. (2001). DEMO the intellectual gold of case study research. Public Adminis-
tration Review, DEMO(2), 235–246.
Jick, T.D. (1979). Mixing qualitative and quantitative methods: Triangulation in action. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 24(4), 602–611.
DEMO, P., Buehring, A., Cassell, C., & Symon, G. (2006). Evaluating qualitative management research:
Towards a contingent criteriology. International DEMO of Management Reviews, 8(3), 131–156.
Kaplinsky, R. & Morris, M. (2001). A handbook of value chain research (Vol. 113). Sussex, U.K.: IDRC.
Kinyanjui, M.N. (2006). Knowledge, technology and growth: The case study of Kamukunji Jua Kali Enter-
prise Cluster in Kenya. New York: World Bank.
Knight, F.H. (1921). Risk, uncertainty, and proﬁt. New York: Kelly and Millman.
Kodithuwakku, S.S. & Rosa, P. (2002). The entrepreneurial process and economic success in a constrained
environment. Journal of Business Venturing, 17, 431–465.
Krauss, S., Marxt, C., Filser, M., & Guieu, G. (2011). Strategic entrepreneurship: Analyse der Strukturen und
Entwicklung des Forschungsfeldes [Strategic entrepreneurship: DEMO of the structure and development of
the research ﬁeld]. Zeitschrift für KMU und Entrepreneurship, 59(3), 203–228.
Krippendorff, K. (1980). Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
364 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Larsson, R. (1993). Case survey methodology: Quantitative analysis of patterns across case studies. The
Academy of Management Journal, 36(6), 1515–1546.
Lawson, T. (2009). Ontology and economics: Tony Lawson and his critics. London: Routledge.
Leplin, J. (1984). Scientiﬁc realism. Berkeley: DEMO of California Press.
Loebis, L. & Schmitz, H. (2005). DEMO furniture makers: Globalization winner of losers? Development in
Practice, 15(DEMO/4), 514–521.
Lopez, M.P., Cunha, M.P., & Palma, DEMO (2009). Cases studies on what entrepreneurs actually do to attract
DEMO: A two-route framework. Journal of Enterprising Culture, 17(3), 323–349.
Low, M.B. (2001). The adolescence of entrepreneurship research: Speciﬁcation of purpose. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 25(4), 9–26.
Low, M.B. & MacMillan, B. (1988). Entrepreneurship: Past research and future challenges. DEMO of
Management, 14(2), 139–162.
Magretta, J. (2002). DEMO business models matter. Harvard Business Review, 80(5), 86–92.
Marshall, A. (1920). Principles of economics. London: McMillan.
McCormick, D. (DEMO). Enterprise clusters in Africa: On the way to industrialization? Brighton, Institute of
Development Studies, University of Sussex.
McKelvey, B. (1997)DEMO Organization positivism: Separating myth from reality: Presented at the Macro
Organizational Behavior Science Meeting. Los Angeles: The Anderson School at UCLA.
McKelvey, DEMO (1998). “Good” science from postmodernist ontology: Realism, complexity theory, and
emergent dissipative structures. Non-linearity and the Organization Conference, Las Cruces, DEMO
McKelvey, B. (2002). Postmodernism vs. truth in management theory. In E.A. Locke (Ed.), Modernism and
management: Pros, cons, and DEMO (pp. 113–168). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Merton, R.K. (1957). Social theory and social structure. New York: Free Press.
Miller, D. & DEMO, P.H. (1977). Strategy-making in context: Ten empirical archetypes. Journal DEMO
Management Studies, 14(3), 253–280.
Mintzberg, H., Raisinghani, D., & Théorêt, A. (1976). The structure of “unstructured” decision processes.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 21(2), 246–275.
Morosini, P. (2004). Industrial clusters, knowledge integration and performance. World Development, 32(2),
306–326.
Neergaard, H. & Ulhoi, J.P. (2007). Handbook of qualitative research methods in entrepreneurship.
Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Newig, J. & Fritsch, O. (2009). The case survey method and applications in DEMO science. APSA 2009
Toronto Meeting Paper.
Noblit, G.W. & Hare, R.D. (1988). Meta-ethnography: Synthesizing qualitative studies. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
O’Boyle, E.H., Jr., Pollack, J.M., & Rutherford, M.W. (2012). Exploring the relation between family involve-
ment and ﬁrms’ ﬁnancial performance: A meta-analysis of main and moderator effects. Journal of Business
Venturing, 27(1), 1–18.
March, 2014 365
Obeng, G.Y. (2002). Kumasi Suame Magazine. Kumasi (Ghana): Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and
Technology.
Oyelaran-Oyeyinka, B. (1997). Newi: An emergent industry cluster in Nigeria. Ibadan: Technopol Publishers.
Oyelaran-Oyeyinka, B. (2001). Networks and linkages in African manufacturing ﬁrms: A Nigerian case study.
Discussion paper, UNU/Intech.
Oyelaran-Oyeyinka, B. (2004). Networking technological change and industrialization: The case of small and
medium ﬁrms in Nigeria. Special paper series, 20, ATPS.
Oyelaran-Oyeyinka, B. (2006). Learning DEMO and knowledge in local industries: The Otigba computer
hardware cluster in DEMO Working paper series, UNU/Intech.
Pawson, R. (2002). Evidence-based DEMO: The promise of “realist synthesis.” Evaluation, 8(3), 340–358.
Perren, L. & Ram, M. (2004). Case-study method in small business and entrepreneurial research: Mapping
boundaries and perspectives. International Small Business Journal, DEMO(1), 83–101.
Perry, M. (2005). Business clusters in the south: A critical appraisal from Indonesian evidence. Singapore
Journal of Tropical Geography, 26(2), 227–243.
Pettigrew, A.M. (1997). What is a processual analysis? Scandinavian Journal of Management, 13(4), 337–
348.
DEMO, C. & Barrera, T.O. (2002). Enterprise clusters and industrial DEMO in Columbia’s fashion sector.
European Planning Studies, 10(5), 541–562.
DEMO, C. & Rabellotti, R. (2004). Upgrading in clusters and DEMO chains in Latin America: The role of
policies. Washington, DC: DEMO Development Bank.
Pittaway, L. & Cope, J. (2007). Entrepreneurship DEMO: A systematic review of evidence. International
Small Business Journal, 25(5), 479–510.
Porter, M.E. (1990). The competitive advantage of nations. DEMO York: Free Press.
ProInvest. (2005). The ProInvest program and cluster and enterprise networks. Economisti Associati,
Bologna, Italy.
Ragin, C. (1987). The comparative method: Moving beyond qualitative and quantitative strategies. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press.
Rauch, A. & Frese, M. (DEMO). Meta-analysis as a tool for developing entrepreneurship research and theory.
In J. Wiklund, D.P. Dimov, J. Katz, & D. Shepherd (Eds.), Advances in entrepreneurship, Firm emergence,
and growth (pp. 29–52). London: Elsevier.
Rauch, A. & Frese, M. (2007). Let’s DEMO the person back into entrepreneurship research: A meta-analysis of
the relationship DEMO business owners’ personality traits, business creation and success. European Journal
of DEMO and Organizational Psychology, 16(4), 353–385.
Read, S., Song, M., & Smit, W. (2009). A meta-analytic review of effectuation and venture performance.
Journal of Business Venturing, 24(6), 573–587.
Rocha, H.O. (2004). Entrepreneurship and development: The role of clusters. Small Business Economics, 23,
363–400.
Rosenbusch, N., Rauch, A., & Bausch, A. (2013). The mediating role of entrepreneurial orientation in DEMO task
environment–performance relationship: A meta-analysis. Journal of Management, 39(3), 633–659.
366 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Rousseau, D.M., Manning, J., & Denyer, D. (2008). DEMO in management and organizational science:
Assembling the ﬁeld’s full weight of scientiﬁc knowledge through syntheses. Academy of Management
Annals, 2(1), 475–515.
Sandee, H., Andadari, R.K., & Sulandjari, S. (2000). DEMO ﬁrm development during good times and bad. In
C. Manning & P.v. Diermen (Eds.), Indonesia transition: Social aspects of reformasi and crisis (pp. 184–198).
Singapore: Institute of South-East Asian Studies.
Sandee, H., Isdijoso, B., & Sulandjari, S. (2002). SME clusters in DEMO: An analysis of growth dynamics
and employment conditions. Geneva: International Labour Organization.
Sarasvathy, S.D. (2001). Causation and effectuation: Toward a theoretical shift from economic inevitability to
entrepreneurial contingency. Academy of Management Review, 26(2), 243–263.
Sato, Y. (2005). Linkage formations by small DEMO: The case of a rural cluster in Indonesia. Bulletin of
Indonesian DEMO Studies, 36(1), 137–166.
Schmitz, H. (1995a). Collective DEMO: Growth path for small-scale industry. The Journal of Development
Studies, 31(4), 529–566.
Schmitz, H. (1995b). Small shoemakers and fordist DEMO: Tale of a supercluster. Industrial Organization and
Manufacturing Competitiveness in Developing DEMO, 23(1), 9–28.
Schmitz, H. (1999a). Collective efﬁciency DEMO increasing returns. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 23,
465–483.
Scott, A.J. (2005). The shoe industry of Marikina City, Philippines: A developing-country cluster in crisis.
Philippine Journal of Third World Studies, 20(2), 76–99.
Shane, S. & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of research. Academy of
Management Review, 25(1), 217–226.
Shaw, R., Booth, A., Sutton, A., Miller, T., Smith, J., Young, B., et al. (2004). DEMO qualitative research: An
evaluation of search strategies. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 4(1), 1–5.
Short, J.C., Ketchen, D.J., Shook, C.L., & Ireland, R.D. (2010). The concept of “opportunity” in entrepre-
neurship research: Past accomplishments and future challenges. Journal of Management, 36(DEMO), 40–65.
Siggelkow, N. (2007). Persuasion with case studies. Academy of Management Journal, 50(1), 20–24.
Tambunan, T. (2006). Development of small and medium scale industry clusters in Indonesia. Kadin
Indonesia DEMO
Thorne, S., Jensen, L., Kearney, M.H., Noblit, G., & Sandelowski, M. (2004). Qualitative metasynthesis:
Reﬂections on methodological DEMO and ideological agenda. Qualitative Health Research, 14(10),
1342–1365.
Tourish, D. (2012). “Evidence based management,” or “evidence oriented organizing”? A critical realist
perspective. Organization, 20(2), 173–192.
Tranﬁeld, D., Denyer, D., & Smart, P. (2003). Towards a methodology DEMO developing evidence-informed
management knowledge by means of systematic review. British Journal of Management, 14(3), 207–222.
Uzor, O.O. (2004). Small- and medium-scale enterprise cluster development in the South-Eastern region of
Nigeria. Paper presented DEMO the 86 Weltwirtschaftliches Colloquium der Universitaet Bremen.
Venkatraman, N. & Ramanujam, V. (1986). Measurement of business performance in strategy research: A
DEMO of approaches. Academy of Management Review, 11, 801–814.
March, 2014 DEMO
Visser, E. (1999). A comparison of clustered and dispersed ﬁrms DEMO the small-scale clothing industry of Lima.
World Development, 27(9), DEMO
Visser, E. (2000). Structural adjustment and cluster advantages: A DEMO from Peru. In A. Sverrisson & M.P.v.
Dijk (Eds.), Local DEMO in turmoil, the effects of deregulation and globalization (pp. 77–94). London:
MacMillan.
Visser, E. & Boschma, R. (2004). Learning in districts: Novelty and lock-in in a regional context. European
Planning Studies, 12(6), 793–808.
Yin, R.K. (2003). Case study research, design and methods (3rd ed.). London: Sage.
Zuckerman, H. (1972). Interviewing an ultra-elite. Public Opinion Quarterly, 36(2), 159–175.
Andreas Rauch is a Professor for Entrepreneurship in Regional Enterprises, Leuphana University Lüneburg,
Scharnhorststrasse 1, 21335 Lueneburg, Germany.
Robert van Doorn is DEMO BA graduate from the Rotterdam School of Management, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Willem Hulsink is Associate Professor in the Rotterdam School of Management, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
We would like to thank Meine-Pieter van Dijk for valuable comments DEMO our paper.
368
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE{1g42fwefx}