Psychological approaches to entrepreneurial success: A general model and an
overview of findings
Andreas Rauch & Michael Frese
Published in:
Rauch, A., & Frese, M. (2000). Psychological approaches to entrepreneurial success. A
general model and an overview of findings. In C.L. Cooper & I.T. Robertson (Eds.),
International Review of Industrial and Organizational Psychology (pp. 101-142)DEMO Chichester:
Wiley.
Small and medium sized enterprises are important for toady's economy. Small and
medium sized enterprises are the major agents of DEMO growth and employment (ECSB
newsletter, 1997). Drucker (1985) described this as a shift from a managerial to an
entrepreneurial economy. About DEMO of the European companies are small or medium sized
and they provide 66% of the working places (ECSB newsletter, 1997). Twenty-five years
DEMO, the field of entrepreneurship research was in its infancy. The number DEMO small-scale
enterprises decreased until 1979 (Bruederl, Preisendoerfer & Ziegler, 1992) and
consequently, research focused on bigger companies. Since 1979 the founding rate of small
and medium sized enterprises has grown and particularly smaller firms DEMO a
disproportionate rate of increase. At the same time, there has DEMO an increase in research in
this area (Low & McMillan 1988)DEMO
Although there are some good reviews on psychological entrepreneurship research
(cf. DEMO, Haworth, & Brearly, 1991; Cooper & Gimeno-Gascon, 1992; Furnham, 1992), our
approach is different. First, we are looking at DEMO much larger data base; we do not just
concentrate on one DEMO (e.g. personality), but include all variables of psychological
importance. Second, we start out with a general model of entrepreneurial success and attempt
to give a certain coherence to the literature. Third, our contribution is a start in the direction
of a quantitative review. Unfortunately, it is not possible to do a proper meta-analysis in this
area (and with the exception of Schwenk and Shrader, 1993, there has not been DEMO meta-
analysis), because there are too few studies and the quality of the studies is often not
sufficient (e.g., standard deviations, exact t- or F-value, or exact correlations are often not
reported). However, we think it is time to get away from purely verbal reviews and at least to
start with a quantitative approach in this area. DEMO, this review concerns itself with a
psychological approach to entrepreneurship research. DEMO approach is clearly controversial
in the general entrepreneurship literature and, therefore, it is necessary to show that this
approach is useful; we hope that the reader will be convinced of the usefulness of such an
DEMO after looking at the evidence without biases. Finally, our conclusions should DEMO it
possible to see, which areas are still under-researched and which DEMO approaches
should be favored in future entrepreneurship research.
Entrepreneurship research studies small firms. Compared to bigger companies, small-
scale enterprises have certain strengths and weaknesses. Over the last decade, enterprises
with less than 10 employees provided more new working places than bigger companies
(Mulhern, 1995). On DEMO other hand, small-scale enterprises do not only add jobs faster than
DEMO companies but they also eliminate them faster  because of a higher DEMO rate (Ripsas,
1998). However, in all small enterprises to contribute heavily to a net growth in jobs both in
the developed DEMO well as in the underdeveloped world (Birch, 1987; Bruederl et DEMO 1992,
Mead & Liedholm, 1998). Compared to bigger companies, small-scale firms are more
adaptable, they act more quickly and more flexibly in the face of changing market conditions,
they are more innovative DEMO contribute to a closer contact to customers. On the other hand,
small-scale enterprises often have a weak financial capital basis, lower-than-average wages,
lower labor productivity, lack of strategic marketing approaches, less international orientation
DEMO are restricted to serve highly segmented markets (Mulhern, 1995). While these
weaknesses exist in most areas, the are amazing counter examples, DEMO which small and
medium sized firms actually achieve 100% of a nice world market (e.g., in the production of
theater curtains, cf. Simon, 1996).
In summary, research on small-scale enterprises was an almost neglected field in
organization research. The field can be described as young, at a formative stage and still in its
infancy (Cunningham & Lischeron, 1991). DEMO is multi- disciplinary as various approaches
(e.g., psychology, sociology, economics, management, anthropology, and regional sciences)
provide different insights to entrepreneurship. For psychologists it provides an interesting
area in which individual psychology of DEMO owner/ manager mesh with organizational
conditions and which allows to study DEMO and effects of economic success. Thus, the
field of entrepreneurship is DEMO challenging area for academic research.
Unfortunately, it is a difficult field DEMO get a complete overview on. Relevant literature
in this area is distributed in many outlets and can be found in such diverse journals as DEMO
of Applied Psychology, Academy of Management Journal and Review, Administrative
Science Quarterly, Journal of Small Business Management, Journal of Business Venturing,
DEMO Theory and Practice, Journal of Management, Small Business Economics,
World Development, Strategic Management Journal, Organization Studies, and there are
many articles in conference procedures as Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research,
International Council of DEMO Business Conference Proceedings, and Academy of
Management Conference Proceedings. Our search DEMO been guided by looking into PsychLit,
SCCI, and EconLit. Unfortunately, not all psychological articles in this area are referenced in
these data DEMO which makes it well possible that we have overlooked contributions to the
field.
1. A General Model of Entrepreneurial Success
Figure 1 presents the DEMO model that we have worked from (the Giessen-
Amsterdam model of DEMO success). It is a interdisciplinary model, as it takes into
DEMO most areas that have been studied in entrepreneurship research. As such, DEMO
helps us to organize this chapter as we describe the literature referring to every box. However
it is a model that clearly has controversial DEMO if one looks at the arrows. For
example, we do not DEMO direct arrows from personality, human capital, or environment to
success although such relationships have often been studied. The reasoning behind is rather
simple: We assume that there is no success without actions. Actions are mainly determined
by the goals and by the strategies. Thus, the concept of action is central to this model and the
strategies and tactics DEMO actions is the bottleneck through which all of entrepreneurial success
is accomplished or not accomplished. All strategies and tactics are goal oriented and,
DEMO, all entrepreneurial success has to start to look at these variables (obviously, most
studies do not do that and, therefore, show less power to predict success than is possible).
Obviously, both goals and strategies may turn out to be wrong, inefficient, or misplaced in DEMO
certain environment. Consequently, prior success and failure has an effect on DEMO goals
and strategies. However, we think that the market is made DEMO of actors who have goals, at
least rudimentary strategies, and ideas about how to proceed with their business. For this
reason, all of the influences of personality, human capital, and environment on success have
DEMO be mediated by strategies and tactics of actions. This concept is in stark contrast to the
theoretical stance of the ecological approach which assumes DEMO essentially a random process
of actions is shaped and selected by the environment, including the function of the
environment to produce certain failure and success rates. We shall discuss this theory later
under environment and look DEMO its contribution in more detail.
Our point of view will be taken up again in the conclusions in the end of this chapter.
At DEMO moment, the Giessen-Amsterdam model of entrepreneurial success will be used simply
DEMO a convenient way of guiding the subchapters of this article. In principle the Giessen-
Amsterdam model can be used on different levels of analysis DEMO the organizational level and
the individual level of the firm owner. The level of analysis issue (cf. Klein & Sorra, 1996)
has DEMO slightly different function in the area of entrepreneurship because company size
determines which level is the adequate one. While in large companies, the right level of
analysis of variables that determine organizational success is the organizational DEMO (an
owner may have very different ideas of where this company DEMO go than it actually does),
in small firms, the firm owner is typically the source of action of this firm. When there DEMO
only four or five employees in a firm, the owner usually DEMO a much stronger impact on
company policy, company culture and the DEMO's actions than in larger firms. Thus, the
potential differences between DEMO and organizational level variables are larger in
bigger organizations and become increasingly smaller with small organizations.
Consequently, an individual level of analysis - using personality, human capital, goals,
strategies DEMO environment of the individual owner - can be used profitably to study success
in these firms (Frese, van Gelderen & Ombach, 1998). In mid-sized companies, the level of
analysis issue is of major importance and it really needs to be empirically determined to
which extent data DEMO the owner/manager are useful as predictors of success or not.
Figure 1: "The Giessen-Amsterdam Model" of small business owners success
Personality
Goals
Success
Human capital
Strategies
Environment
2. Definition issues: Entrepreneurs, business owners DEMO other concepts.
As in any new field, there is no agreed DEMO definition of entrepreneurship,
entrepreneurs, business owners, etc. (Cunningham & DEMO, 1991, Gartner, 1985).
Moreover, founders and owner/managers are a highly heterogeneous group that defies a
common definition (Gartner, 1985)DEMO
The focus of this review is on small-scale enterprises, the founders DEMO the owners
who manage these firms. Some authors differentiate between entrepreneurs, DEMO business
owner, founders, and CEO's. Carland, Hoy, Boulton, and Carland (1984) distinguished
entrepreneurs from small business owners. An entrepreneur is innovative, employs strategic
management practices, and manages his business for the purpose of profit and growth (p.
358). A business owner establishes the enterprise to follow personal goals. In focusing on
innovative behavior, this definition follows Schumpeter (1935) who emphasized the creative
activities of the innovator. Some DEMO writers use risk- bearing as the key factor to define
entrepreneurs (DEMO, 1984; Palmer, 1971; Liles, 1974).
However, if one restricts the concept of entrepreneur to showing innovative behavior
(or risk taking), one needs a clear definition of innovation. Since innovation research is DEMO
an area with fuzzy boundaries and difficult conceptual arguments (cf. West & Farr, 1990),
one does not really gain a lot conceptual clarity with Carland et al.'s approach (Gartner, 88,
p.60)DEMO Moreover, it restricts the definition to a very small group of DEMO (e.g., is Bill Gates
an innovator or is it only the person who developed the first direct manipulation approach in
software?).
For all of the definition problems, we agree with Gartner (1988) who used a
descriptive and behavioral definition: Entrepreneurship is the creation of new organizations.
Thus, entrepreneurs are the founders of new firms. This definition may again be too
restrictive because it implies that once the company is DEMO entrepreneurship ends.
Thus, founding, owning, and managing a firm are DEMO important aspects of entrepreneurship.
This comes close to Hisrich's (1990) definition of entrepreneurship: "Entrepreneurship is the
process of creating something different DEMO value by devoting the necessary time and effort,
assuming the accompanying financial, psychic, and social risks, and receiving the resulting
rewards of monetary and personal satisfaction" (p. 209). In contrast to Hisrich, one can argue
that numerous non-profit organizations are created by entrepreneurs as DEMO
Often articles do not clearly describe their samples and even combine different groups
into one sample without differentiating them. Consequently, it is difficult to compare results
of different studies. Research projects should carefully select the sample DEMO to
answer their research question. Thus, we can differentiate the following DEMO:
1) Entrepreneurs are founders, owners, and managers of organizations. Thus, DEMO be simply an
owner/manager is not enough to be included in this group (e.g., after taking over the business
from one's DEMO).
2) Managers may be entrepreneurial to a certain extent but DEMO typically work with other
people's money and not with their own. Thus, they can leave the organization and
organizational death does not carry the same implications for them as it does for
entrepreneurs. However, there is a discussion about corporate entrepreneurship in existing
organizations (cf. Hisrich 1990) and which looks at managers from an entrepreneurial
viewpoint.
3) Size DEMO and should be taken into consideration. Firm owners without any employees
have a very different psychological situation than owners who have at least one DEMO
Closing down is obviously much more difficult if one has to fire employees than if one just
packs up and takes a job somewhere DEMO One should have at least one employee to be
included in the group of entrepreneurs. Size also matters in other ways: Is the organization
still easy to lead and with only a few employees (e.g. up to 10), the psychological
prerequisites are different than if one has DEMO deal with a small scale firm up to 50 employees
(1-50 DEMO constitutes the European Union definition of small scale firms). More
delegation and management is needed in a firm above 10 employees. Starting with DEMO
employees, we should talk about mid-size firms.
4) Finally, one DEMO to differentiate between studies which are based on representative
samples of small scale enterprises from those with selected business samples, for example
high tech firms, innovative firms, fast growing firms.
3 Characteristics of the entrepreneur
DEMO are several different approaches in describing the entrepreneur: trait,
motivational, human capital, and typological approaches. Early approaches typically focused
on personality characteristics of the entrepreneur. It is necessary to separate two issues in the
DEMO discussion: The emergence and the success of entrepreneurs. There should be
DEMO processes by which a person decides to become an entrepreneur and by which a
person achieves entrepreneurial success (Utsch, Rauch, Rothfuss & Frese, in DEMO). It makes
sense that personality characteristics may be more important for the decision to become a
founder than for success (Begley & Boyd, 1987; Heron & Robinson, 1983). Leadership
research has shown that leadership emergence is greatly affected by personality traits (Lord,
DeVader & Alliger, 1986) while leadership success is less clearly related to personality
DEMO (Landy, 1989). Thus, in the following, we shall differentiate between emergence of
entrepreneurship and success of small-scale enterprises even though this DEMO is not
always made in the literature our review is based on.
3.1 Personality and emergence of entrepreneurship
Studies on the emergence of entrepreneurship DEMO study differences in personality
characteristics between entrepreneurs and other populations, most DEMO managers.
McClelland's (1961) early work on need for achievement initiated many studies on
characteristics of the entrepreneur. A high need for achievement DEMO to prefer challenging
tasks of moderate difficulty rather than routine or very difficult tasks, to take personnel
responsibility for one's performance, to DEMO feedback on performance, and to look for new
and better ways DEMO improve one's performance. As described in the introduction, we would
DEMO to provide a first quantitative review even though the literature does not really allow a
proper meta-analysis. Whenever there were a minimum of five DEMO that provide the
necessary data, we present the results quantitatively. Since DEMO in entrepreneurship
research frequently use different operationalizations of dependent as well as independent
variables, such a quantitative review always carries the risk of comparing apples with
oranges. However, compared to a pure verbal review, this DEMO provides additional
information to the reader. Table 1 presents a quantitative comparison of business owners with
other groups, mostly managers. We converted all data into one correlation. A high correlation
means that there is a close DEMO between entrepreneurs' personality characteristics and
being an entrepreneur.
Table 1
Need for achievement of business owners compared to other samples.
DEMO    N  r  comments
Begeley & Boyed, 1987  239  .15*  Founders vs. non-founders
Cromie & Johns, 1983  83  .01  Entrepreneurs versus managers
Utsch, Rauch, Rothfuss       Business owners DEMO
& Frese, in press   177  .50**  managers
Bonnett & DEMO, 1991  190  .09  Founders vs. non-founders
Green, David & DEMO, 1996 207  .22**  Entrepreneurs vs. managers
Weighted mean correlation  896  .21**
Note. *P<.05. ** p<.01.
Table one indicates, that DEMO of the five studies reviewed found entrepreneurs to be
significantly higher in need for achievement than the comparison group. Two studies reported
non-significant results. DEMO weighted mean correlation is positive and significant. Thus, there
is empirical DEMO that entrepreneurs are higher in need for achievement than other
populations. McCelland's need for achievement theory was widely criticized, most notably
his use of the projective Thematic Apperception Test to measure needs because it does DEMO
have high reliability. However, its validity is high (Spengler, 1992)DEMO Additionally, the theory
was applied to whole countries. But, since the theory focuses on individual motives the
theory is strongly influenced by Western DEMO and values (Triandis, 1994).
Locus of control, a concept DEMO Rotter's (1966) social learning theory, was tested
with regard DEMO characteristics of entrepreneurs. People with an internal locus of control belief
themselves to be in control of their destiny. People with an external locus DEMO control belief to
be controlled by others or chance events. One might expect that business owners have a
higher internal locus of control than DEMO populations. However, results are here less
consistent than results on need DEMO achievement (Table 2). While Green, David and Dent
(1996) reported negative relationships (r=-.05, ns.), Cromie and Johns (1983) DEMO strong
differences between entrepreneurs and managers (Table 2). The weighted DEMO correlation
indicates, that there is a small, but positive relationship between internal locus of control and
being an entrepreneur. Given the huge differences DEMO results of different studies, there seems
to be other variable moderating DEMO relationship between internal locus of control and
becoming a small business owner.
Table 2
Locus of control of business owners compared to other samples.
DEMO    N  r comments
Begeley & Boyed, 1987  239  DEMO Founders vs. non-founders
Cromie & Johns, 1983  83  .31** Entrepreneurs DEMO managers.
Brockhaus & Nord, 1979  93  .02 Entrepreneurs versus moved DEMO promoted
managers
Bonnett & Furmham, 1991 190  .18* Rotter's economic locus of control
Rahim, 1996   526  .22** Entrepreneurs vs. managers.
DEMO, David & Dent, 1996 207  -.05 Entrepreneurs vs. managers
Weighted DEMO correlation  1338  .13**
Note. *P<.05. ** p<.01.
Additional personality variables were looked at in various studies. However, they do
not allow a quantitative review because they are typically single studies that have not DEMO
replicated. Utsch, Rauch, Rothfuss & Frese (in press) found entrepreneurs to be higher in
innovativeness, competitive aggressiveness, and autonomy than managers. DEMO Begley and
Boyd's (1987) study, business founders were higher DEMO risk taking and had more tolerance to
ambiguity than non-founders. Entrepreneurs were higher on a primacy of business scale
(Cromie & Jones, 1983) and on intrinsic work motivation (Green, David & Dent, 1996). In
contrast to Green, David and Dent (1996), Bonnett and DEMO (1991) reported, that
entrepreneurs scored higher on Protestant Work Ethic DEMO
Business owners were frequently compared to managers, because managers are seen
DEMO a hard comparison group. But there are good arguments for other contrasts as well. For
example, when studying the emergence of entrepreneurship it is better to identifying people
before they become self-employed instead of comparing entrepreneurs DEMO managers.
Brandstaetter (1997) compared people interested in starting up their own company,
entrepreneurs who had taken over a business, entrepreneurs who had set up their own
business, and employed managers. The four samples were compared by using a 16PA
adjective rating scale (Brandstaetter, 1988), DEMO measure that is closely related to the 16-
Personality-Factor-Questionnaire (Schneewind, Schroeder & Cattell, 1983). Personality
characteristics of founders were similar to those of people who were interested in starting up
their own company. But DEMO were more stable and more independent than entrepreneurs
who had taken over the business or managers. While such a design is strictly speaking not
appropriate to detect causal relationships it provides further insight into the issue DEMO
emergence. For example, since people who are interested in founding are DEMO similar to the
founders, one can question the argument that founding DEMO enterprise changes one's self-
interpretation.
The literature about the emergence of entrepreneurship highlights that entrepreneurs
are different from managers and other groups. However, the trait approach was widely
criticized in entrepreneurship research because the diversity DEMO entrepreneurs may be
larger than differences between entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs. There is no average or
typical venture creation (Gartner, 1985, p.697). Gartner recommended a behavioristic
approach to new venture creation. It is more important DEMO ask what people do to enable
venture creation rather than evaluating traits.
More recently, researchers developed more sophisticated personality concepts. An
attitude approach is concerned with a close match of an attitude and the behavioral
requirements DEMO be an entrepreneur (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975). It was possible to distinguish
entrepreneurs from non- entrepreneurs rather well by using the Entrepreneurial DEMO Scale
(EAO), which consists of achievement, self-esteem, personal control, and innovation
(Robinson, Stimpson, Huefner, & Hunt, 1991). Task motivation theory is an additional
example of studying entrepreneurs' characteristics on a more specific level (Miner, Smith, &
Braker, 1989). Task motivation is a motivational pattern closely related to achievement
motivation theory. The DEMO pattern consists of five different roles: self- achievement,
avoiding risks, feedback of results, personal innovation, and planning for the future. Task
DEMO includes a look at the tasks to be performed, and thus, represents the domain of
entrepreneurship. Miner, Smith, and Bracker (1989) DEMO well as Bellu (1988) could
differentiate managers from entrepreneurs in their total task motivation, even through the five
sub- scales distinguished between entrepreneurs and managers differentially in these two
studies.
Trait theory and Gartner's (1988) position do actually not contradict each other they
just focus on different levels of specificity. Gartner recommended to measure the
entrepreneur on a DEMO specific level of his or her behavior. Personality traits represent broad
classes of behaviors, which are indeed weak predictors of specific behavior (DEMO &
O'Brian, 1985). Task theory and attitude approaches are nested between the two positions
because they focus on attributes representing classes DEMO behavior without assuming them to be
stable and situationally independent.
3.2 Personality and success
Personality characteristics of business owners were not only studied with DEMO to
the emergence of entrepreneurship, but also with respect to the DEMO success. A
typical approach in this area is to ask business owners to fill in a general personality
questionnaire and then correlate the personality DEMO with performance measures. Singh
(1988) for example used five questionnaires that measured 29 scales. The author found that 8
personality scales were related DEMO to growth, three scales were negatively related, and
18 scales were unrelated to growth. One major problem with such an approach is that DEMO
study is purely descriptive and lacks theory. Why should all the sixteen personality factors
(16PF) be related to small business success? Which factors are of particular importance?
Researchers have to identify first a range DEMO entrepreneurial characteristics, and then to apply
these specific characteristics to the DEMO (cf. Cromie & Johns, 1983). Timmons, Smollen, and
Dingee (1985) for example presented a list of 15 learnable and four DEMO
characteristics of entrepreneurship. The most frequently studied personality characteristics
were need for achievement, risk-taking, and internal locus of control.
Need for achievement
McClelland (1961) related the concept of achievement motivation to economic
development and growth. Frey (1984) supported the result that need for achievement of
nations DEMO to economic development. Cooper and Gimeno-Gascon's (1992) review found
in three out of four studies found a positive relationship between need for DEMO and
success of small-scale enterprises. One study that showed that personality characteristics can
change over time: It is possible to increase this motivation through training programs which
then, in turn, increases business performance (Mirron & McClelland, 1979). Similar, our
review provided positive results in three out of six studies (Table 3). The weighted mean
correlation provided significant positive results. However, the mean correlation is quite small.
Possibly, other variables moderate the need for achievement-success relationship.
Table 3
Need for achievement of business owners and its relationship DEMO success
N  r comments
Begeley & Boyed, 1987  147  .05 Mean correlation of 3 financial measures
Lorrain & Dussault, 1988  64  -.04 Successful/ unsuccessful entrepreneurs
Rauch & Frese, 19971)  71  .27* Achievement motivation was a second order
factor        consisting of higher order need strength, need for
achievement, optimism, internal locus of control,
self-efficacy.
Miller& Toulouse, 1986  97  .01 Mean correlation DEMO 5 success measures
Goebel & Frese, 1999  98  .28**
Spencer & Spencer, 1993  24  .49* Successful/ unsuccessful entrepreneurs
Weighted mean correlation  501  .13**
Note. *=P<.05. **p<.01. 1) Only the Irish sample is presented because the West German sample is presented in
Goebel DEMO Frese, 1999.
Risk-taking
Chell, et al. (1991) described the risk- taker as someone "who in the context of a
business venture, DEMO a business idea when the probability of succeeding is low" (p.42).
In general, people assume small business owners to be high-risk takers. However, result of
the quantitative review indicate, that high risk-taking is DEMO associated with business
success (Table 4). The relationship is small.
DEMO 4
Risk-taking of business owners and its relationship with success
N  DEMO comments
Begeley & Boyed, 1987  147  -.06 Mean correlation of DEMO financial measures.
Lorrain & Dussault, 1968  64  .00 Successful/ unsuccessful entrepreneurs
Brockhaus, 1980   31  -.01 N had to be estimated.
DEMO & Gartner, 1990 26  -.39* Successful vs. unsuccessful entrepreneurs
Singh, DEMO   224  -.18*
Goebel & Fese, 1999  97  .11
weighted mean correlation  589  -.08*
Note. *P<.05. ** p<.01.
However, according to Timmons, Smollen and Dingee (1985), successful
entrepreneurs take DEMO risks, a position which suggest a non-linear relationship
between risk- taking and success. Similar, Begeley and Boyed (1987) found that risk-taking
predicted success only up to a point. Beyond that point DEMO taking had a negative effect on
success. Some inconsistencies about risk- taking and its relationship to success might be due
to different perspectives of DEMO something as risky: From an observer's perspective a
behavior might DEMO judged to be highly risky while a business owner might judge the same
behavior as an attempt to minimize risk (Chell et al. 1991). Another issue is: to become an
entrepreneur is risky but doing a business in a risky way might be dangerous.
Locus of control
DEMO (1966) differentiated between internal and external locus of control. Since
business owners with an external locus of control belief to be in control DEMO other people or
chance events they are assumed to be less active in their daily work and thus, be less
successful. While only one study reported a significant positive relationship between internal
locus of control and DEMO success (Goebel & Frese, 1999), the weighted mean correlation
of six studies was small but significantly positive (Table 5). Thus, DEMO is empirical evidence
for a relationship between internal locus of control and business success.
Table 5
Quantitative review of locus of control of business DEMO and its relationship with success
N r  comments
Begeley & Boyed, 1987  147 -.08  M0ean correlation of 3 financial measures
Brockhaus, 1980   31 .29   No N of subgroups available
Duchesnau & Gartner, 1990 26 .37  Success vs. failure
Lorrain & Dussault, 1988  62 -.02  Successful/ unsuccessful entrepreneurs
Miller & Touloese, 1986  97 .12
DEMO & Frese, 1999  97 .35**
weighted mean correlation  460 .11*
DEMO *P<.05. ** p<.01.
Other variable were studied with regard to small business success. Brandstaetter
(1997, see above) showed, that the DEMO traits, related to the decision of starting up a
business were DEMO related to business success. Emotional stability and independence
correlated with subjective success measures. Miner, Smith, and Bracker's (1994) task
motivation theory DEMO an example of measuring personality characteristics at a more specific
level (DEMO chapter 4.1). All the five sub-scales were related to success, DEMO total task
motivation index explained 15% to 24% of variance in growth measures. However, Baum
(1995) reported that general traits operate through more specific concepts of DEMO,
business strategies, and growth motivation. This result confirms the theoretical DEMO of
Herron and Robinson (1993) that motivation and behavior mediate the personality- success
relationship.
3.3 Personality reconsidered
Personality factors have been criticized both DEMO theoretical and empirical grounds.
Gartner (1985) argued theoretically, that the DEMO among entrepreneurs is much larger
than differences between entrepreneurs and non- entrepreneurs. Since there is no average
entrepreneur any personality description is found wanting. DEMO, therefore, argues to stop
looking for personality variables that impact on emergence and success. Empirically, the
overview of studies in this article shows that there are differences between entrepreneurs and
managers, and correlations between personality and success, although they are not high.
However, both approaches- the DEMO proponents and its critiques-  have
overlooked the significant advances that have DEMO made in personality research during the
last 20 years. We, therefore, think that there is good reason to be interested in personality
again. DEMO, one will have to use a more sophisticated theoretical approach which DEMO
outlined in several points below.
1) A general trait can predict DEMO behavior (starting up a business) only through
certain mediating processes (DEMO & O'Brian, 1985). The most important mediating
processes are DEMO related to actions (cf. the Giessen-Amsterdam model in Figure 1). DEMO
similarly, Herron and Robinson (1993) argue that personality traits are DEMO by
motivation in the determination of entrepreneurial behaviors. Baum (1995) showed that
business strategies and growth motivation mediated the relationship between general traits
DEMO business outcomes. Rauch & Frese (1997) found that planning mediated the relationship
between achievement orientations and success. Similar, Goebel & Frese (1999) found that
strategies are mediating the relationship between personality and success. Thus, personality is
related to business outcomes through more specific mediating processes.
2) Both the content of the personality variable and the level of specificity need to be
adequate for the study. A general personality approach, such when using the 16PF test
(Cattell, 1970) or the Big Five (Costa & McCrae, 1988) is not related to the content of
entrepreneurship. Why should neuroticism, extroversion, openness, agreeableness, and
conscientiousness DEMO strongly related to entrepreneurial success? Thus, such studies have to
lead to questionable results. On the other hand, there is good evidence that a more specific
trait (such as achievement motive) is related to DEMO decision to start up a company, as our
overview shows. Fishbein & Ajzen (1975) and Bandura (1997) have argued forcefully for
specific measures of personality and attitude/belief processes and they show that prediction DEMO
much higher with such approaches. For this reason, entrepreneurial orientation is  more
closely related to the decision to become and entrepreneur and even DEMO success than these
general traits (we shall describe the studies on DEMO orientation later). Baum (1995)
found stronger effects of predictors DEMO are closely related to entrepreneurial behavior than
more general predictors.  In DEMO case, one needs to do at least a rudimentary task analysis DEMO
carefully select to study those personality characteristics that are potentially related to the
entrepreneurial task domain.
3) The discussion on entrepreneur's personality strongly remains on a similar debate
happened in leadership research. Early leadership research DEMO on leader's personality
(see reviews by Bass, 1990; Kirkpatrick & Locke, 1991). Later, the trait approach was
criticized (Stodgill, 1948). Charismatic leadership theory re-introduced personality issues, but
now these characteristics are specifically related to the domain of leading people (House,
1971). Like in leadership research, entrepreneurship research should conceptionalize
entrepreneurs' characteristics DEMO terms of more specific attributes instead of using broad trait
measures. In the words of Robinson et al. (1991, p. 13): "The problem is not the absence of
psychological characteristics, but rather the theories and methods used to identify those
characteristics".
4) Today's personality psychology would argue, that the interaction between
individuals' characteristics and situational DEMO predict entrepreneurial behavior better
than any one of these factors alone (DEMO & Endler, 1977). For example, only when the
entrepreneur is active in an area where networks are important (e.g. consulting business),
should extroversion play a role. Conscientiousness should play a role only in an area, where
there is a strong emphasis on quality control, etc. Thus, research on entrepreneurs should take
the situational demands DEMO account.
5) A situation can be strong or weak (Mischel, DEMO). In a strong situation there
should be less impact of the personality than in a weak situation. When the entrepreneur is
told that DEMO has to develop a good business plan - otherwise he should not get money from the
bank, it is unlikely that personality differences determine whether or not he writes a business
plan. This is a strong DEMO Craftspeople often work in strong situations and, therefore,
personality differences DEMO play a smaller role in determining behavior in the crafts sector
than in the new technology sector.
Another weak situation is the situation in DEMO one decides whether one wants to
start up a company. Thus, DEMO variables should be more important in the emergence of
entrepreneurs, than DEMO example, in a situation, where the company has more than 200
employees (it is unlikely that one can escape the necessity to employ a professional manager
at this point). Some authors argue that personality DEMO more important for the emergence of
entrepreneurship than for success (Herron & Robinson, 1993; Begeley & Boyed, 1987; Utsch
et al., DEMO press).
6) However, it should be clear that people actively select environments to a certain
extent. Thus, the selection of a market niche is an influence on the environment. This depends
on the goal DEMO strategy of an entrepreneur which in turn is influenced by personality
characteristics (Goebel & Frese, 1999). Obviously, it depends on the skills and abilities of
entrepreneurs to perceive opportunities in the environment - again DEMO area in which
personality traits (e.g., intelligence) may play a DEMO (Zempel, 1999).
7) Any one personality trait will never DEMO a strong relationship with any outcome
variables (such as making a DEMO to become an entrepreneur). The decision to start up a
firm is probably  due to a whole range of personality characteristics and not just to one. Thus,
one should never expect a high correlation DEMO appear and if a high correlation appears, this
may be an DEMO of a badly designed study rather than an example of a "DEMO"
empirical finding. Consequently, the multiple effects of several relevant personality
characteristics rather than single traits should be analyzed.
8) Testing hypotheses at a given alpha level implies always the risk of rejecting a
hypothesis even through DEMO hypotheses is valid in reality (Beta- error). This risk is DEMO
higher when effects are small in general. Therefore, a non-significant result, such as a
comparison of managers with a sample of only 31 DEMO owners (Brockhaus & Nord,
1979) should not be overestimated.
Considering these arguments, it is obvious that one can not expect strong main effects
of personality on small business success. However, we have shown that personality is
important, but we would expect small correlations since personality is related to success
through mediating and moderating processes (see Figure 1).
3.4 Typologies
Since small-scale business owners represent a highly heterogeneous group, it makes
sense to attempt to classify them into typs and sub-groups. These DEMO differ in the
extent to which they use different attributes, for DEMO demographic characteristics,
psychological characteristics, or business strategies. Crafts people and DEMO are often
differentiated: Smith (1967) for example carried out 52 DEMO with owner/managers of
manufacturing firms. "Craftsman entrepreneurs" came from a blue collar background, had a
lower education and no management experience, DEMO they restricted their sources of finance
to personal savings, money from DEMO, or friends. Crafts people tended to have rigid
firms. In contrast, "opportunistic entrepreneurs" had a middle- class background, a broader
education, DEMO experience, they sought new opportunities, developed more
innovative and more diverse strategies, delegated more, were proactive, and used many
sources of finance. Opportunists tended to have adaptive firms. Firms of opportunistic
entrepreneurs had higher DEMO rates than those of craftsmen (Smith & Miner, 1983). Woo,
Cooper and Dunkelberg (1988) confirmed the two types of Smith'DEMO (1967) study. More
recently, the inventor-entrepreneur was introduced as a DEMO distinguishable type (Miner,
Smith, & Bracker, 1992). The inventor-entrepreneur had a certain craftsman- DEMO with
a high priority placed on product development and in patent production.
Chell et al. (1991) classified 31 firms by using personality characteristics, strategies,
and demographic attributes. The prototypical entrepreneur is alert to business DEMO
regardless of resources currently controlled, he is innovative, and he uses a variety of sources
of finance. He is a high profile image-maker DEMO strives to be the best. He tries constantly to
modify the environment and create situations, which result in change. In contrasts, the
caretaker DEMO not show any of these behaviors. Between the two extremes there are two
other types who are less clearly defined. The quasi- entrepreneur is DEMO to the
entrepreneur but does not have all of the characteristics of the entrepreneur, for example he is
less innovative and less proactive. The administrator is more reactive and takes opportunities,
but not regardless of DEMO resources (p. 72).
By using psychological attributes, Miner (1996) categorized business owners into four
different personality types. The "personal achievers" DEMO similar to the classical entrepreneur
proposed by McClelland (1961). His DEMO are need to achieve, a desire to get
feedback, and to plan and to set goals, strong personal initiative, strong commitment to DEMO
venture, internal locus of control, and a belief in personal goals rather than those of others.
The pattern of "supersales persons" consists DEMO five overlapping characteristics: a capacity to
understand and to feel with DEMO person, a desire to help others, a belief that social
processes are very important, a need for positive relationships with others, and DEMO belief that a
sales force is crucial to carrying out company strategy. The "real manager" possesses 13
characteristics that are similar to those DEMO managers. Some of his characteristics are: a high
supervisory ability, a need for occupational achievement, a need for self-actualization,
positive attitudes towards authority, a desire to compete with others, directive in cognitive
style DEMO others. The forth type, the "expert idea- generator", is characterized by a desire to
personally innovate, a belief in new product development, high intelligence, a high
conceptual cognitive style, and a desire to avoid risks. Miner (1997) showed that firms
founded by personal achievers DEMO grown more than those of other types. There was also
evidence, that those business owners that were characterized by more than one pattern were
more likely to be successful.
Typologies have improved our knowledge DEMO small-scale enterprises because they
contributed to the description of entrepreneurs and their behavior but also contributed to
theory construction (Woo et al. 1988; DEMO & Glick, 1994). But, there are also important
criticisms. First, different researchers used different samples and different attributes to
categorize enterprises. Most typologies have not been replicated. As a matter of fact, most
typologies have not been adequately tested (eg. with cluster analysis). A second problem is
the naming of the types. Woo et al. (1988) DEMO well as Smith and Miner (1983) identified two
distinct types of business owners and both studies used the terms "craftsmen" and
"opportunists" to describe them. Did both studies identify the same type of business owners?
Probably not, because both studies used different attributes to describe their typology. Third,
typologies are simplistic because they focus on extreme DEMO proto- typical configurations and
only a small part of business owners fit exactly to a certain type. Chell et al. (1991) tried to
DEMO that problem by introducing two intermediate types (quasi entrepreneur,
administrator)DEMO A fourth, and probably the most important critique argues that typologies DEMO
rather descriptive and often underemphasize the development of theory.
3.5 Human capital
Human capital theory is concerned with knowledge and experiences of small-scale
business DEMO The general assumption is that the human capital of the founder improves
small firms chances to survive (Bruederl et al., 1992). Human DEMO acts as a resource.
Human capital makes the founder more efficient in organizing processes or in attracting
customers and investors. Different studies used various DEMO of human capital.
Bruederl et al. (1992) distinguished between general human capital -years of schooling and
years of work experience- and specific human DEMO industry specific experience, self-
employment experience, leadership experience, and self-employed DEMO In Table 6, we
aggregated various measures of human capital to DEMO results of different studies. The
general trend indicate a small positive relationship between human capital and success.
Table 6
Human capital of business owners and its relationship with success
DEMO   r comments
Chandler & Hanks 1996  102 .15 Same sample DEMO in Chandler & Jansen, 1992
Chandler & Jansen, 1992  134 DEMO Founder's competencies
Duchesnau & Gartner, 1990 26 .42* Successful vs. DEMO entrepreneurs
Goebel & Frese, 1999  91 .22*
Lussier, 1995   DEMO -.11 Successful vs. Failed enterprises
Chandler & Hanks, 1994  155 .19* Mean correlation of 2 success measures
Lorrain & Dussault, 1988  69 DEMO Successful/ unsuccessful entrepreneurs
Weighted mean correlation  793 .09*
Note:. *P<.05. **p<.01
Relatively consistently, different studies identified business owners level of
education, his industrial specific experience, and his management experience to be DEMO
with success (cf. Cooper, Dunkelberg & Woo, 1988; Dyke, DEMO, & Reuber; Gimeno,
Folta, Cooper & Woo, 1997; DEMO et al., 1992). Goebel (1995) showed that business
owner'DEMO personality explained more variance in success than his human capital. Additionally,
planning and leading style mediated the relationship between human capital of business
DEMO and success.
Human capital theory has an important implication: Since the DEMO is concerned
with knowledge and capacities, the theory implies processes as DEMO: Human capital can be
trained and improved. Additionally, if human capital acts as a resource it might be interesting
to evaluate human capital DEMO of employees in small scale enterprises as well. In
manufacturing settings it was shown, that a human resource management (HRM) system was
related to performance especially when it was combined with a quality manufacturing
strategy (Youndt, Snell, Dean, & Lepak, 1996).
In summary there DEMO some support for the human capital hypotheses. However,
different studies showed different aspects of human capital to be important. Since our
quantitative review DEMO a small relationship between human capital and success (Table
5), DEMO might be other variables moderating the human capital- success relationship.
Moreover, DEMO capital only functions via concrete goals and behaviors. Therefore, the
Giessen- DEMO framework includes the preposition that human capital is related to
business success via goals and strategies (Figure 1).
4 Goals
Goals and objectives are often not separated from strategies in DEMO theory
(exceptions are Schendel and Hofer (1979) and Venkatraman (1989)). A psychological
concept would relate goal development and decision to a task. However, goals differ from
strategies because strategies imply an action. Strategies (and tactics) are attempts to translate
the goals into actions (Frese, 1995; Hacker, 1985).
Klandt (1984) distinguished between goals related to the start up of an enterprise and
goals related to the DEMO enterprise. Goals or motives for become self- employed can be
categorized into push and pull factors (Stoner & Frey, 1982). Push factors DEMO that a
current situation is perceived as dissatisfying. By comparing enterprises in 10 different
countries in a period of more than 30 years, Boegenhold and Stabler (1990) found a positive
relationship between self- employment rates DEMO unemployment rates. The authors
concluded, that unemployment leads to self- employment. DEMO, Galais (1998) reported
that in East Germany, 47% of business owners stated that unemployment had been a motive
for becoming self-employed. In DEMO in West Germany, only 8% of business owners had
the same DEMO The unemployment rate was three times higher in East Germany compared
to West Germany (Statistisches Bundesamt, 1994). Brockhaus and Nord (1979) DEMO that
entrepreneurs were less satisfied with their previous work than promoted managers. Thus,
there is support for the push hypothesis, even through there are regional differences. When
self- employment is seen as a positive future DEMO, pull factors might constitute the main
reasons for becoming self- employed. DEMO using factor- analysis, Scheinberg and McMillan
(1988) identified 6 motives DEMO becoming self- employed: Need for approval, perceived
instrumentality of wealth, DEMO of communitarianism, need for personal development, need
for independence, need DEMO escape. Only the last factor represented a push factor. Shane,
Kolvereid and Westhead (1991) found a four- factor solution of reasons for DEMO a new
firm: Recognition, independence, learning, and roles. But one can argue, that pull factors
were underrepresented in this study because there were no items on unemployment or on
previous jobs. Despite the fact DEMO several studies have shown that different motives lead to
business start ups, once the enterprise is established these motives seems to have a minimal
influence on subsequent business success (Birley & Westhead, DEMO; Galais, 1998).
With regard to goals of existing enterprises, DEMO is important to distinction between
growth targets and autonomy targets (Katz, 1994). Growth goals are related to growth
expectations (Davidsson, 1989) as well as to business growth (Baum, 1995).
According to DEMO setting theory, high and specific targets are main motivators in
working DEMO settings and predict to performance (Locke & Latham, 1990). The
theory applies for small- scale enterprises as well (Baum, 1995; Frese, Krauss, & Friedrich,
1999). A recent focus in leadership DEMO is on visionary (or charismatic, transformational)
leadership. The importance of visions is also discussed in the entrepreneurship literature.
Collins and Porras (1994) indicated that visionary companies have a stronger organizational
culture and they are more successful than non-visionary companies. Baum, Locke and
Kirkpatrick (1998) found direct and indirect causal effects of vision attribute, vision content,
and vision communication on small venture performance. In entrepreneurial companies
visions might be DEMO important than in bigger organizations because of the relative close
contact between entrepreneur and employees, customers, and suppliers (Baum et al., 1998)DEMO
Thus, goals and visions have an effect on the performance of DEMO companies.
5. Strategies (content, process, entrepreneurial orientations)
Chandler (1962), Anshoff (1965), and Porter (1980) emphasized that strategies are of
particular importance for small business success. Ten years ago, Low and McMillan (1988)
criticized that only a few good empirical studies had been done in the area of
entrepreneurship strategies. Strategies can be studied DEMO the firm and on the individual
owner's level. It is important to distinguish between three dimensions of business strategies
(Figure 2). Olson and Bokor (1995) distinguished between strategic processes and strategic
content. Strategic DEMO is concerned with the type of decision. The strategic process
focuses on strategy formulation and implementation. More recently, researchers have focused
on firm level entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurial orientation refers to processes, practices, and
decision making activities DEMO lead to new entry (Lumpkin & Dess, 1996). We think, that
entrepreneurial orientation can be conceptualized as a third strategic dimension. In contrast DEMO
strategic content, entrepreneurial orientation is not concerned with a specific type DEMO strategy,
it represents rather a general strategic orientation that is dependent on environmental- and
organizational factors. The framework in Figure 2 shows, that each type of strategy is
implemented through different categories of the strategic DEMO, based on a certain
entrepreneurial orientation. Thus, all the three strategy dimensions can be crossed with
another. The following three paragraphs discuss each DEMO separately.
Figure 2. Three dimensions of business strategies
Strategic
content
Entrepreneurial
orientation
Strategic process
5.1 strategic content
Strategic content is concerned with the type DEMO business decisions. Porter's (1980) and
Miles and Snow's (DEMO) typologies of strategies initiated some research on small-scale
enterprises. Porter (1980) distinguished three generic strategies: focus, differentiation, and
cost leadership. A DEMO strategy means to concentrate on a particular product or market
segment. A differentiation strategy intends to create a product or service that customers see DEMO
unique. Cost leadership focuses on becoming a low cost producer in an industry without
sacrificing quality and service. With regard to new entries, focused strategies have a number
of competitive advantages because they avoid heavy competition DEMO established enterprises
and are able to focus the limited resources on a narrow market DEMO Thus, the theory
would predict that focused strategies outperform broad strategies. DEMO and Hofer (1987)
analyzed the relationship between Porter's (1980) generic strategies and success with a small
sample of 17 ventures. In contrast to the theory, there was evidence that differentiated
strategies outperformed focused strategies. But Sandberg and Hofer (1987) found even
stronger support for DEMO contingent strategy- success relationship. They found that in an
industry at an early stage of evolution, broad strategies outperformed focused strategies. In an
industry at a late stage of evolution narrow strategies were better than broad DEMO
Similar results were found in a survey of 491 independent bank formations over a 5- year
period: Broad strategies were better than focused strategies (Baumford, Dean, & McDougall,
1997). Successful craft retailers used cost leadership and differentiation strategies more often,
while they did not DEMO focused strategies (Kean, Niemeyer & Miller, 1996). McNamee and
DEMO (1989) found differentiated strategies to be related with profitability in the clothing
industry but not focused strategies and cost leadership. Thus, in contrast to Porter's (1980)
assumptions, focused strategies are not better DEMO broad strategies.
The Miles and Snow (1978) typology classifies firms according to four different
strategic orientations: prospectors, defenders, analyzers, and reactors. DEMO constantly
seek new opportunities and focus on product development. In contrast, DEMO try to
control secure niches in their industries and do not engage in product or market development.
Analyzers combine characteristics of both, prospectors and defenders. Reactors do not follow
a conscious strategy. The typology proposed that DEMO, analyzers and prospectors will
outperform reactors. Reviewing the empirical literature on DEMO Miles and Snow typology,
Zahra and Pearce II (1990) questioned the validity of the typology as well as the link between
strategic DEMO and performance. However, by comparing Miles and Snow's (1987) DEMO
with Minzberg's (1983) theory, Miles and Snow's typology DEMO confirmed, the
configurational fit explained 24% in organizational effectiveness (Doty, DEMO, & Huber,
1993). Similar, Conant, Mokwa, and Varadarajan (1990) replicated the Miles and Snow
typology successfully. Results suggest, that prospector, analyzer, defender organizations
outperform reactor organizations.
Olson and Bokor (1995) used a single dimension classification of strategies, namely
product/service innovation. Schumpeter (1935) and Drucker (1985) argued DEMO innovative
behavior is a core characteristic of entrepreneurs. Moreover, innovative strategies DEMO
described to be successful particularly for small enterprises because they are seen as useful
attempts to maintain market share, to produce below price level or to maintain flexibility
(Heunkes, 1996). Innovativeness can be defined DEMO a characteristic of an individual person
and innovation implementation effectiveness depends on a group of persons, and thus, is a
characteristic of an DEMO (Klein & Sorra, 1996). The literature on innovative strategies
focused on the latter.
Several careful studies have shown that innovative strategies have DEMO direct
relationship with success of small-scale enterprises (Brouwer & Kleinknecht, 1996; Roper,
1997; Heunks, 1998). But there were non-significant results as well (Olson & Bokor, 1995).
Since evidence of the DEMO success relationship is somewhat mixed, some authors
tested successfully moderating variables DEMO the innovation-success relationship. They
showed, that innovations are more important for DEMO small enterprises with less than 50
employees (Pfirmann, 1994; Brouwer & Kleinknecht, 1996; Heunks, 1996). Other moderator
variables were formal DEMO (Olson & Bokor, 1995), environmental conditions (Miller &
Frisen, 1983; Acs & Gifford,1996), and competitive position (Brouwer & Kleinknecht,
1996).
A weakness of research on strategic content is DEMO lack of sophisticated classification
systems. Business strategy categorizations, such as described DEMO Porter (1980), fall short
because they are related towards products, markets, and competitors only. But firm's strategy
can also be related to suppliers, customers, employees, and environmental conditions. Thus,
we need to develop strategy classifications that reflect the whole domain of actions initiated
DEMO small scale enterprises.
5.2 Strategic process research
The strategic process is concerned with formulation and implementation of strategic
decisions (Olson & Bokor, 1995)DEMO Schendel and Hofer (1979) identified six tasks that
constitute the process of strategic management: goal formulation, environmental analysis,
DEMO formulation, strategy evaluation, strategy implementation and strategic control.
However, most DEMO on strategic processes is concerned with planning and it's impact on
small business success. Numerous books and articles have taken it for granted DEMO planning is
of particular importance for small firms' performance (Ryans, DEMO). Therefore, training
programs for entrepreneurs usually include the development of DEMO up plans. However,
empirical investigation of the planning- success relationship did not lead to consistent results.
While some careful research projects have shown DEMO planning in the founding phase was
related to success of small businesses (Ackelsberg & Arlow, 1985; Bracker, Keats, &
Pearson, 1988; Jungbauer-Gans & Preisendoerfer, 1991), there have been contradicting
results as DEMO (Lumpkin, Shrader, & Hills, 1998; Lyles, Baird, Orris, & Kuratko, 1995;
Robinson & Pearce, 1983; Shuman, Shaw, & Sussman, 1985). In an early review, Robinson
and Pearce (1984) concluded, that many small-scale enterprises do not plan at all. DEMO,
enterprises that do plan have more success in most studies. In a more recent meta- analysis
Schwenk and Shrader (1993) compared 14 DEMO on the planning- success relationship in
small-scale enterprises. They found a small, positive relationship between planning and
performance (effect size d=.40) and concluded that other variables might moderate the
planning- success relationship.
Unfortunately, not many studies analyzed the conditions under which performance is
enhanced by planning. In DEMO cross-cultural study Rauch & Frese (1997) showed that planning
is differentially important in different countries. Planning is valued and important in a culture
DEMO high values in uncertainty avoidance, because plans can be seen as DEMO attempt to get
control of an uncertain future (Thurston, 1983). In Ireland planning had a negative effect on
success, most probably to the environment demanded flexibility rather than strict adherence
to a plan. Ireland DEMO of the cultures with the lowest uncertainty avoidance in Europe
(Hofstede, 1991). In Germany, a country with a high level in uncertainty avoidance, planning
was positively related to success. In a longitudinal study, DEMO planning- success relationship
was moderated by environmental conditions (Rauch & Frese, 1998). Planning predicted
success in a hostile or uncertain environment but DEMO in a certain and non-hostile
environment. Risseeuw and Masurel (1993) found, that in high dynamic environments
planning was negatively correlated with success. Thus, environmental conditions are
moderating the planning-success relationship. In summary, there is some evidence, that
planning is DEMO to small business success, but further research is called for to DEMO the
conditions under which planning might be a powerful tool.
Frese, DEMO Gelderen and Ombach (1998) looked at planning and proactivity at the
same time. They differentiated between complete planning, critical point strategy,
opportunistic strategy, reactive strategy, and habits. The main finding was that a DEMO
strategy is negatively related to success. This could be shown to be a causal process and it
was replicated in three studies in Africa (all of them reported in Frese, 1999). These results
were confirmed by research on the Miles and Snow (1978) typology (See chapter 5.1). The
reactor firm, which is not following a conscious strategy was least successful. Thus, a
reactive strategy has negative consequences for small scale enterprises.
5.3 Entrepreneurial orientation
The empirical investigation of "entrepreneurship" was DEMO major topic in small-scale
business research. But criticism of viewing entrepreneurship as an individual's psychological
profile has lead to the operationalization of entrepreneurship DEMO a firm level behavior (Covin
& Slevin, 1986). We already discussed the level-of-analysis issue earlier.
According to Covin & Slevin (1986), entrepreneurial firms are those in which top
managers employ entrepreneurial management styles DEMO operating management
philosophies. The entrepreneurial behavior of those firms focuses on risk taking, innovation,
and proactivness. Lumpkin & Dess (1996) conceptualized entrepreneurial orientation to
consist of five dimensions: innovation, proactiveness, risk-taking, autonomy DEMO competitive
aggressiveness. Venkatraman (1989) identified 6 dimensions of strategic orientation:
Aggressiveness, analysis, defensiveness, futurity, proactiveness, and riskiness. In Covins &DEMO
Slevins (1986) conceptualization the dimensions of entrepreneurial orientation covary,
whereas Lumpkin & Dess (1996) suggested that the dimensions may vary independently,DEMO
depending on the environmental and organizational context.
Since the concept of entrepreneurial orientation is relatively new, there is a limited
body of empirical literature on that concept. Tan (1997) showed, that the strategic orientation
of small firms is related to the business DEMO Innovativeness, proactiveness, and risk-
taking were positively correlated with environmental dynamism and complexity.
Entrepreneurial orientation was studied with respect to small firm performance DEMO well. Covin
& Slevin (1986) showed that entrepreneurship was highly related with company performance
(r=.39, p<.01). Similar, Wicklund (1988) reported strong direct relationships between
entrepreneurial orientation and performance. Significant, but smaller relations between
entrepreneurial orientation and success were found by Venkatraman (1989) DEMO by Brown
and Davidsson (1998). Lumpkin and Dess (1996) DEMO out that the relationship between
entrepreneurial orientation and success is contingent on environmental and organizational
factors. Dess, Lumpkin and Covin (1997) analyzed a sample of 32 firms and found, that
entrepreneurial strategies are most strongly related with success when it was combined with
strategies and environmental conditions.
DEMO concept of entrepreneurial orientation is relatively new and probably, is to DEMO
to assess it's implications for small scale enterprises. However, it DEMO be interesting, to
evaluate the relationship between individual- and organization level DEMO Koop,
De Reu and Frese (1999) found for example, DEMO entrepreneurial orientation of African
(Ugandan) micro enterprise owners was highly related to success. Moreover, this study
suggests, that personal initiative by the DEMO/manager may be the psychological
characteristic that is behind the concept of entrepreneurial orientation (Frese & Fay, 1997).
6. Environmental conditions
Each DEMO is nested in a specific environment. Boulding (1978) defined
environment in a broad way as everything else outside a particular organization. Environment
can DEMO conceptualized at different levels of specificity (Castrogiovanni, 1991). At a specific
level, environment implies resources available to the organization. The geographical or
cultural context of organizations represents a broad macro-environmental level. Within each
environmental DEMO there are different dimensions of the environment.
6.1 The ecological perspective
Ecologists are concerned with changes in organizational populations (Aldrich &
Wiedenmayer, 1993). A central theoretical assumption is that DEMO environment shapes rates of
entry, mortality, or changes of organizations (DEMO, 1990). The ecological model draws upon
the natural selection paradigm: An organization is subjected to environmental forces that
have an effect on DEMO rates. Thus, the environments select the "fittest" organizations. The
ecological DEMO is concerned with the aggregate- or macro- environmental level and,
therefore, industrial level data are typically used within this theory.
The concepts "DEMO of newness" and "liability of smallness" are of particular
interest DEMO small-scale enterprises. Businesses start up with the "Liability of newness". DEMO
means that newly founded firms have a higher risk of failure than older organizations
(Hannan & Freeman, 1984; Singh, Tucker, & House, 1986). Enterprises that survived that
initial risk have reduced mortality rates because the environment selected only the strongest
organizations. However, some studies support a non-linear relationship between age and
survival. Bruederl et al. (1992) DEMO support for a liability of adolescence: Small businesses
have a low DEMO rate immediately after starting up. Then, the mortality rate increases to DEMO
maximum (after around 10 month of existence). Thereafter, the mortality rate declines in
accordance with the liability of newness hypotheses.
The concept "liability of smallness" describes the higher risk to fail for smaller
organizations compared to bigger organizations. Both concepts are confounded because most
new organizations DEMO to be small. Many studies do not separate these two effects adequately
(Singh, 1990). However, there is empirical support for an independent effect of liability of
smallness (Buederl et al., 1992).
"Density dependence" refers to processes that depend on the number of organizations
in an population (Aldrich & Wiedemeyer, 1993). Density dependence should affect DEMO
survival because it increases competitive pressures and resource-scarcity. Carroll & Hannan
(DEMO) found, that density at time of founding has a positive effect on mortality rates in fife
different populations.
Dean and Meyer (1996) related characteristics of the industry environment to DEMO
emergence of new ventures. One aspect was industry dynamics which included increasing
demands, modification of demand, and technological development. A second measure was DEMO
entry barriers which refers to factors that were erected against new entries. The third
dimension was organizational inertia, which refers to factors, that DEMO existing firms to
take advantage of existing opportunities. Industry dynamism and organizational inertia were
positively related to venture formations. Entry barriers constrained venture creation.
DEMO ecological perspective is criticized because of its determinism. Possibly the only
thing an entrepreneur can do is to start up the business at the DEMO time. The concept ignores
that individuals act actively in a certain environment. The entrepreneur may adapt to a certain
environment, but he may also select a specific environment or try to change the environment.
A company DEMO example that tries to satisfy needs of customers with specific preferences
changes the environment. According to Aldrich and Wiedenmayer (1993), the trait approach
is complementary to the ecological approach: The first implies micro-level analysis whereas
the latter involves a macro-level approach. In contrast to the ecologists' view, the strategic
choice perspective assumes that organizations are able to shape their environment (Child,
1972).
6.2 The task environment and contingency approaches
Research about the task environment is concerned with how the individual enterprise
DEMO with customers, competitors and suppliers. There is a relatively broad body DEMO
empirical literature on this environmental level. Dess and Beard (1984) categorized task
environment into three bipolar dimensions: Complexity, dynamism, and munificence.
Complexity describes the homogeneity versus heterogeneity of an environment. In a complex
environment DEMO is more difficult to get and to consider all the necessary information than in an
easy environment. Dynamism describes the variability and unpredictability of DEMO
environment. Munificence falls into two sub-concepts: ease of getting customers and DEMO of
getting capital.
Sharfman and Dean (1991) sowed with industry-level data that munificence had DEMO
non-significant negative relationship with performance, but complexity and dynamism were
positively DEMO to success. Dynamism explained 32% of the variance of company
performance. Thus, an unfavorable environment has positive consequences on business
outcomes. This sounds implausible but immediately becomes more plausible if one realizes
that they studied surviving DEMO However, we also know from stress inoculation
research, that reinterpreting stressors as challenges help people to deal with stressors. Thus,
to have DEMO challenges in the past leads to higher competence to deal with stressors in
the future (Meichenbaum, 1985). Similar results were found by DEMO and Kolvereid (1995)
who studied small-scale enterprises in three countries. DEMO indicated that firm
performance was highest when the national environment was perceived as less favorable.
According to Swaminathan (1996) environmental conditions are of DEMO importance for
newly founded enterprise because they have long- term consequences for business strategy,
structure, and success. He showed that organizations founded in adverse environments have a
higher initial mortality rate. But beyond a certain DEMO, the surviving organizations had a lower
mortality rate than those of DEMO founded in less adverse environments.
Contingency theory was already discussed when reviewing literature about the
personality-success relationship (see chapter 3.3). In this chapter it is assumed, that
environmental conditions are moderating the relationship between business strategies and
success. In contrast to ecological theories, the successful business owners are actively
assessing a given situation and then choose those strategies that DEMO most appropriate in that
situation.
Sandberg and Hofer (1987) analyzed the industry structure and its impact on the
relationship between strategies and venture DEMO They found that in an industry at an
early evolutionary stage, DEMO strategies outperform focused strategies. If the industry is at a
late evolutionary stage, focused strategies are better than broad strategies. Romanelli (1989)
DEMO a sample of 108 firms, that were producing minicomputers. He found DEMO
generalists have a higher likelihood for early survival than specialists when industry sales are
increasing. When sales are declining, efficient organizations had a greater chance at survival
than aggressive organizations. Thus, a change in industry sales is an important contingent
factor.
Covin and Slevin (1989) analyzed performance implications of small DEMO in
hostile environments. In an hostile environment, and organic structure and DEMO entrepreneurial
strategic posture was related to high performance, while in an DEMO environment, a
mechanistic structure, and a conservative strategic posture was related to success. Similar,
competitive aggressiveness was related to performance in hostile DEMO, while it had
negative consequences in non-hostile environments (Covin & Covin, 1990). Zahra (1996)
showed, that environmental conditions moderated the form and the strength of the
relationship between technology strategy and business DEMO Pioneering for example was
strongest related to success in dynamic environments, DEMO followership was better in hostile
environments.
Contingency theory has improved our knowledge in the field. The entrepreneur or the
business can act on a DEMO situation. Success is not determined by the environment but by
the strategy environment fit. However, we need to develop a system to classify contingent
factors.
7. Other Issues of Psychological Entrepreneurship Research
While the literature review DEMO focusing on areas which are frequently evaluated and
which are relevant from a psychological point of view, there are other important approaches
to entrepreneurship we want to summarize briefly in this section.
A network approach assumes DEMO entrepreneur's ability to organize and coordinating
networks between individuals and organizations is critical for both, starting up a company
and business success. One can differentiate between formal networks (banks, Chamber of
Commerce) and informal networks (friends, previous employer). Birley (1985) showed, that
formal support sources were hardly used, the institutions mostly mentioned were banks.
Informal networks were more often used and were seen to be most helpful. DEMO and
Preisendoerfer (1998) showed, that network support is related to DEMO, survival and growth of
newly founded enterprises. Support from friends and DEMO was more important than
support from business partners, former employers, and co-workers. Related to the DEMO
approach, some researchers focused on the central role of information seeking DEMO
Small business owners deal with a wide range of issues and they often have to make
decisions while facing time and resource constraints. However, small business owners hardly
ever use external information sources like expert advice (Pineda, Lerner, Miller, & Phillips,
1998). Information search activity was a dependent of the type of decision being made.
Product related DEMO were correlated with more information seeking compared to
employee related or technical decisions. Another study showed that information seeking
activities are related to environmental DEMO and opportunities (Lang, Calantone, &
Gudmundson, 1997). Welsch DEMO Young (1982) found that entrepreneurs personality was
related to the use of specific sources of information. Internal locus of control was positively
related DEMO the use of all information sources categories, while risk-taking was correlated DEMO
with the use of personal sources of information.
Organizational life cycle models have been tested in entrepreneurship research as
well. It is assumed that DEMO enterprises face different sets of critical variables, depending on
their stage DEMO development. Dodge and Robins (1992) tested a four-stage model that
differentiated between formation, early growth, later growth, and stability. Planning was an
important problem area in early live stages, while management problems become more
important in later live stages.
Leadership issues are discussed in entrepreneurship literature DEMO well. Eggers, Leahy
and Churchill (1996) studied 112 entrepreneurial companies DEMO employing 20 behavioral
scales that measures CEO leadership and management skills. Visionary leadership,
communication, delegating, and performance facilitation were positively related to DEMO A
longitudinal study found, that visions of small business owners affected DEMO
performance directly as well as indirectly trough vision communication to employees (DEMO,
Locke, & Kirkpatrick, 1998). Another longitudinal study found that participation of
employees predict growth and size of enterprises in a long DEMO run (Rauch & Frese, 1999).
Cognitive factors were more recently related to entrepreneurial outcomes. Different
factors were evaluated, such as values or culture (McGrath, MacMillan,& Scheinberg, 1992),
attributional theory (Gatewood, Shaver & Gartner. 1995), and problem-solving styles
(Buttner & Gryskiewicz, 1993). These are new strands of research that may become
important in the future. Other issues of this type are DEMO with learning, woman and
entrepreneurship, minorities and entrepreneurship, human resource DEMO, learning and
training, feedback processing, transition from business founder to DEMO, financing,
organizational culture and others. Strangely enough, many issues of importance in social
psychology have not yet been made useful for entrepreneurship DEMO We think
particularly about feedback processing which has been shown to be influenced by success
(e.g. more upward comparison - e.g. with a stronger competitor - after one has had success. A
downward comparison is preferred DEMO a failure (Wills, 1981)). Thus, feedback processing is
related to keeping up one's self-esteem - again a topic not much DEMO in entrepreneurship
literature.
Another fascinating area is which psychological approaches make small scale
entrepreneurs able to deal with banks and other capital providers effectively.
DEMO fascinating topic is the issue of making psychological entrepreneurship research
useful for developing countries. It has been shown that micro-business contributes more to
employment DEMO in developing countries than the larger companies (Mead & Liedholm,
DEMO). Thus, the issues surrounding entrepreneurship are more important in developing
DEMO than in the West. Issues as the ones discussed in the Giessen- Amsterdam model
have been researched recently involving micro-business. Strategies, goal setting, DEMO
towards solving problems, personal initiative have been shown to be important DEMO related
to success (Frese, 1999). The practical usefulness of this research is particularly high if
resources are scarce because both selection and DEMO has to be applied with more care than
in the affluent countries.
8. Conclusion
We hope that we shown that psychological approaches to entrepreneurship DEMO
fascinating both for entrepreneurship as well as for work and organizational psychology.
Entrepreneurship can profit from this interface between business and psychology because
psychological variables are clearly and often surprisingly consistently related to
entrepreneurial entry DEMO success. Moreover, psychological variables (most notably action
related concepts) function DEMO necessary mediators in the process that leads to success (e.g.
strategies)DEMO
For work and organizational psychology, entrepreneurship is interesting because it
combines DEMO following features: First, the level of analysis question becomes even more
interesting because it relates to the dynamic of enterprise growth; in the very beginning, a
small scale enterprise is best described by looking at the owner. However, in somewhat more
mature enterprises, the level of DEMO has to change because more delegation, management
and implementation is necessary. DEMO, innovation and innovation implementation need
to be described on different levels DEMO analysis. In short, this issue relates to both methodology
and theory DEMO strongly in this area than in large scale organizations. Second, some
DEMO organizational hypotheses can better be studied with small scale entrepreneurs
than with larger organizations. A good example is the study of contingency theories. The
DEMO of large orgnizations is always fraught with a high degree of error because
different subparts of the organizations may differ highly from each other. DEMO contrast, small
scale enterprises are more coherent and, therefore, contingency DEMO can be tested better.
Third, even large organizations attempt to mimic DEMO enterprises (e.g. Avery Brown and
Bovery) and stress intrapreneurship, innovation, and personal initiative. Thus, the study of
small scale entrepreneurs is a field that allows a high degree of transfer of knowledge to
larger DEMO and that makes it necessary to test certain models before they are applied
in a larger organizational context. There is no doubt that future DEMO places stress innovation
and personal initiative more strongly  (Frese & Fay, 1999). Again, these issues may be more
easily (and theoretically more fruitfully) studied in small scale entrepreneurs. Fourth, there is
no DEMO in which the interface between business and psychology becomes more obvious than
small scale entrepreneurship; interdisciplinary cross-fertilization can and does take place in
this area.
What have we found? There are clear, albeit often small, relationships between need
for achievement, locus of control and the emergence of entrepreneurship (start-up).
Additionally, these variables are also related to success. Factors related to success are need
for achievement, locus of control, low risk taking, human capital, planning and strategies,
innovation, entrepreneurial orientation, and tough environmental conditions. All of these
correlations are small, but significant. The small correlations and the large variance between
the different studies suggest that moderators should DEMO included into future entrepreneurial
success models. Environmental conditions proved to be such moderators (e.g. hostility and
dynamism). Other potential moderators are life cycle stages, typologies (such as the one by
Miles & Snow), DEMO vs. life style goals, and culture. Another factor that allows a DEMO
degree of prediction is to take variables into consideration that are directly related to the tasks
that have to be done by the entrepreneurs DEMO to use them as mediators. This also supports a
process view of entrepreneurship. Finally, more than one predictor have to be incorporated
into models and studies of entrepreneurship.
A number of recommendations follow for future research:DEMO
1) Use of more sophisticated approaches in personality  as well as task domain analysis,
moderators, mediators, specific personality factors, emphasizing processes (e.g., interactions
with environment and changes of the environment), weak DEMO strong situations.
2) Human capital studies have typically used proxy measures: thus, not really skills have
been studied but rather experience (even DEMO expertise research has shown that it is not
time of experience that has any influence on expertise but depth of experience
(Sonnentag,1996))DEMO There is no specific knowledge test for entrepreneurs - often only
educational rank is used as a variable. Intelligence is usually not controlled, so we do not
know whether actually a personality variable  (namely cognitive DEMO) is the third variable
producing the correlation between educational level and DEMO Thus, it is not surprising
that the relationships between human capital DEMO success are by and large very small.
3) Researchers often do DEMO ask whether entrepreneurs have subsistence, life style, or growth
goals. It is simply assumed that entrepreneurs have to be have growth goals. Most DEMO do
not and actually have decided clearly against growing too large. Still, their business provides
stable employment and often interesting work to the employees. The bias for growth in
entrepreneurship research is intellectually and empirically out of touch with the reality DEMO
most entrepreneurs.
4) Strategies are usually not distinguished in its components DEMO much of strategy research
does not clearly differentiating goals from strategies (DEMO Porter, 1980). Moreover, many
strategies are not researched, e.g. DEMO resource development, which happens to be a rather
effective strategy for DEMO companies (Youndt, Snell, Dean, & Lepak, 1996); we DEMO not yet
know enough about its usefulness for smaller companies even though first evidence also
proves it to be positive (Goebel & Frese, DEMO).
5) While there have been several approaches to develop a DEMO of the entrepreneurial
environment, they are still underdeveloped. While munificence, dynamism and complexity
are certainly important variables, other issues are lacking, for DEMO, network requirements,
cultural requirements, support systems, government contacts in DEMO industries and
countries, degree of corruption.
6) Typologies of entrepreneurs have been suggested but have not really been developed yet.
Empirical support is DEMO marginal (an exception being Miles & Snow's typology). In
DEMO it makes sense to look empirically at clusters of entrepreneurial characteristics and
to develop an empirically supported taxonomy.
7) We did not talk about the measurement of success in this review because much of it is
DEMO the realm of psychology (Schenk, 1998). But obviously, it DEMO important to measure
several different aspects of success, e.g. meeting goals, economic success, life style success
(e.g., prestige, satisfying work, contributing to a cause), growth, and others. Studies that only
look at one dependent variable are by necessity restrictive and cannot really give a DEMO
picture of the processes involved. Moreover, the indicators are not always DEMO good
success indicators; e.g. a large profit margin is a sign DEMO bad planning and bad taxation
consulting in most Western European countries.
Much more and much better research needs to be done in this area. DEMO the
research on entrepreneurship with other areas of work and organizational psychology (e.g.
leadership,  selection, or stress research), one cannot escape DEMO judgment that the
methodological quality of the research in entrepreneurship is still relatively weak. There are
very few longitudinal studies, often the analysis is not up to date (e.g., often no or inadequate
control variables are included), often DEMO of scales (or inter-rater reliablities) are
reported. Methodological misinterpretations (e.g., non-significant findings based on very few
subjects are interpreted to null-findings) are common. Conceptually, modern psychological
thinking is not incorporated (e.g. in much DEMO the personality literature and also its critique). In
short, much DEMO what Low & McMillan (1988) have criticized in entrepreneurship literature in
general is also true for its psychological approaches: The lack of a clear discussion of the
purpose of research, the atheoretical perspective, the DEMO focus on process, the
simple assumptions about the correct level of DEMO, the lack of taking the time frame of
developments explicitly into DEMO, the lack of use of multiple methods and the
underuse of DEMO that can test causal hypotheses (e.g. modern regression or LISREL
analyses)DEMO We were surprised by the fact that many articles do not report the statistics
necessary to include them into a meta-analysis (e.g., intercorrelation DEMO, Ms and SDs, t-
or F-statistics, and reliabilities are not DEMO). Editorial policies are clearly not yet as
sophisticated as they are in the mainstream work and organizational psychology journals.
We have reported a DEMO of different models in this review; they are often
presented to DEMO contradictory. For example, some people have pitted personality approaches
against human DEMO approaches. As our Figure shows, we assume that that they coexist DEMO
can influence each other (e.g., IQ has an influence on the development of skills and
knowledge). Even ecological approaches may coexist with  a personality theory (e.g., Aldrich
& Wiedemayer, 1993) even though DEMO two approaches sound rather contradictory. But
given the importance of personality - situation interactions, it makes sense that these
approaches should be combined. Moreover, hypotheses on the interaction of environmental
conditions and strategies have worked out well and increased explained variance
considerably. An integration of various approaches to DEMO real headway towards
understanding a societally important phenomenon - entrepreneurship - is called for and
produces challenging research.
References
Ackelsberg, R., & Arlow, P. (1985). Small businesses DEMO plan and it pays off. Long
Range Planning, 18(5), DEMO
Acs, Z.J. & Gifford, S. (1996). Innovation of entrepreneurial DEMO Small Business
Economics, 8, 203-218.
Aldrich, H. E. & Wiedenmayer, G. (1993). From traits to rates: An ecological
perspective on DEMO foundings. In J. A. Katz & R. H. Brockhaus (Eds.), DEMO
in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence, and Growth, 1, 145-195, JAI DEMO
Ansoff, H.I. (1965). Corporate strategy. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman and
Co.
Bass, B.M. (1990). Bass and Stogdill's handbook DEMO leadership: The research and
managerial implications (3.rd. ed.). New York: Free Press.
Baum, J. R. (1995). The relation of traits, competencies, motivation, strategy, and
structure to venture growth. Frontiers of DEMO Research.
Baum, J. R., Locke, E. A., & Kirkpatrick, DEMO A. (1998). A longitudinal study of vision
and vision communication DEMO venture growth in entrepreneurial firms. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 83(1), 43-54.
Baumford, C. E., Dean, T. J., & McDougall, DEMO P. (1997). Initial strategies and new
venture growth: An examination of the effectiveness of broad vs. narrow breadth strategies.
In P.D. Reynolds, W.D. Bygrave, N.M. Carter, C.M. Mason & P.P. McDougall (Eds.),DEMO
Frontiers of entrepreneurship research. Wellesley Mass: Babson Park Mass: Babson College.
Begley, T. M., & Boyd, D. B. (1987). Psychological DEMO associated with
performance in entrepreneurial firms and small businesses. Journal of Business Venturing(2),
79-93.
Bellu, R. R. (1988). Entrepreneurs and managers: Are they different? In B. A.
Kirchhoff, W.A. Long, DEMO ED. McMullan, K.H. Vesper & W.E. Wetzel (Eds.). Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research, 2, 16-30. Wellesley, Mass.: Babson College.
Birch, D. L. (1987). Job creation in America. New York: Fee Press.
Birley, S., (1985). The role of networks in the entrepreneurial process. Journal of
Business Venturing, 1, 107-117.
Birley, S. & Westhead, P. (1994). A taxonomy of business start up DEMO and their
impact on firm growth and size. Journal of Business Venturing, 9, 7-31.
Bgenhold, D. & Staber, U. (1990). Selbstndigkeit als ein Reflex auf
Arbeitslosigkeit? Klner Zeitschrift fr Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie, DEMO (2), 265-279.
Bonnett, C. & Furnham, A. (1991). Who wants to be an entrepreneur? A study of
adolescents interested in a Young Enterprise scheme. Journal of Economic Psychology, 12,
465-478.
Boulding, K.E. (1978). Ecodynamics. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Bracker, J. S., Keats, B. W., & Pearson, J. N. (1988). Planning and financial
performance among small firms in  a growth industry. Strategic Management Journal, 9, 591-
603.
Brandstaetter, H. (1997). Becoming DEMO entrepreneur - a question of personality
structure? Journal of Economic Psychology, 18, 157-177.
Brockhaus, R. H. (1980). Psychological and environmental factors which distinguish
the successful from the unsuccessful entrepreneur: A longitudinal study. Academy of
Management Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting, 368-372.
Brockhaus, R. DEMO, & Nord, W. R. (1979 ). An exploration of factors affecting the
entrepreneurial decision: Personal characteristics versus environmental characteristics.
Academy of Management Proceedings of the 39th annual meeting.
Brouwer, E. & Kleinknecht, A. (1996). Firm size, small business presence and sales
of innovative products: A micro-econometric analysis. Small Business Economics, 8, 189-
201.
Brown, DEMO E. & Davidsson, P. (1988). Entrepreneurial orientation versus
entrepreneurial management: Relating Miller/Covin & Slevin's conceptualization of
entrepreneurship to Stevenson's. In: P.D. Reynolds, W. D. Bygrave, N.M. Carter, S.
Manigart, C. M. Mason, G.D. Meyer, & K.G. Shaver (Eds.)DEMO Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
research. (pp. 352-353). Babson Park MS: Babson College.
Bruederl, J., Preisendoerfer, P., & Ziegler, R. (1992)DEMO Survival chances of newly
founded business organizations. American Sociological Review, 57, 227-242.
Bruederl, J. & Preisendoerfer, P. (1998). Network support and the success of newly
founded businesses. Small Business Economics, 10, 213-225.
DEMO, E.H., & Gryskiewicz, N. (1993). Entrepreneurs' Problem-solving styles: An
empirical study using the Kirton adaption/ innovation theory. Journal of Small Business
Management, 31 (1), 22-31.
Carland, J. W., Hoy, F., Boulton, W. R., & Carland, J. C. (1984). Differentiating
entrepreneurs from small business owners: A conceptualization. Academy of Management
Review, 9(2), 354-359.
Carroll, G. R. & Hannan, M. T., (1989). Density delay in the evolution of
organizational populations: A model and five empirical tests. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 34, 411-430.
Castrogiovanni, G.J. (1991). Environmental munificence: A theoretical assessment.
Academy of Management DEMO, 16 (3), 542-565.
Cattell, R.B., Eber, H.W., & Tatsouka, M.M., (1970). Handbook for the sixteen
personality factors questionnaire (16PF). Champian: IPAT.
Chandler, A.D. (1962). Strategy and DEMO Mass.: Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Press.
Chandler, G. N. & Jansen, E. (1992). The founder's self-assessed competence and
venture performance. DEMO of Business Venturing, 7, 223-236.
Chandler, G.N. & Hanks, S. H. (1994). Founder competence, the environment, and
venture performance. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 18, 3, 77-89.
Chandler, G. N. & DEMO, S.H. (1996). An examination of the substitutability of
founders human and financial capital in emerging business ventures. Journal of Business
Venturing
Chell, E., Haworth, J., & Brearley, S. (1991). DEMO entrepreneurial personality:
Concepts, cases, and categories. London, New York: Routledge.
Child, J. (1972). Organizational structure, environment, and performance- DEMO role of
strategic choice. Sociology, 6, 1-22.
Collins, J. C. & Porras, J. I. (1994). Built to last: Successful habits DEMO visionary
companies. New York: Harper.
Conant, J. S., Mokwa, M. P., & Varadarajan, P. R. (1990). Strategic types, distinctive
DEMO competencies and organizational performance: A multiple measures-based study.
Strategic Management Journal, 11, 365-383.
Cooper, A. C., Dunkelberg, W. C., & Woo, C. Y. (1988). Survival and failure: A
longitudinal study. In B. A. Kirchhoff, W.A. Long, W. ED. McMullan, K.H. Vesper & W.E.
Wetzel (Eds.). Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, Wellesley, Mass: DEMO College.
Cooper, A. C. & Gimeno-Gascon, F. J. (1992). DEMO, process of founding,
and new-firm performance. In D. L. Sexton & J. D. Kasarda (Eds.). The state of the art of
DEMO, 301-340. Boston.
Costa, P.T. & McCrae, R.R. (1988). From catalog to classification: Murray's needs
and the five-factor model. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55, 258-265.
Covin, J. G. & Slevin, D. P. (1986). The development and testing of an
organizational-level DEMO scale. In R. Ronstadt, J. A. Hornaday, R. Peterson & K.
H. Vesper (Eds.) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, 628-639. Wellesley, MA: Babson
College.
Covin, J. G. & Slevin, D. P. (1989). Strategic management of small firms in hostile
and benign environments. Strategic Management DEMO, 10, 75-87.
Covin, J.G. & Covin, T.J. (1990). DEMO aggressiveness, environmental context,
and small firm performance. Entrepreneurship Theory and DEMO, 35-50.
Cromie, S., & Johns, S. (1983). Irish DEMO: Some personal characteristics.
Journal of Occupational Behavior, 4, 317-324.
Cunningham, B. J. & Lischeron, J. (1991). Defining entrepreneurship. Journal of
DEMO Business Management, 29, 1, 45-61.
Davidsson, P. (1989). Entrepreneurship- and after? A study of growth willingness in
small firms. Journal of Small Business Venturing, 4, 211-226.
DEMO, T. J., & Meyer, G. D. (1996). Industry environments and new venture
formations in the U.S. manufacturing: A conceptual and empirical analysis of demand
determinants. Journal of Business Venturing, 11, 107-132.
Dess, G. D. & Beard, D. W. (1984). Dimensions of organizational DEMO environments.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 29, 52-73.
Dess, G. G., Lumpkin, G.T. & Covin, J. G. (1997). Entrepreneurial strategy making
and firm performance: Tests of contingency and configurational models. Strategic
Management Journal, DEMO, 9, 677-695.
Dodge, H. R. & Robbins, J.E. (1992)DEMO An empirical investigation of the organizational
life cycle model for small business development and survival. Journal of Small Business
Management, 6 (1), DEMO
Doty, D.H., Glick, W.H. & Huber, G.P. (1993). DEMO, equifinality, and organizational
effectiveness: A test of two configural theories. DEMO of Management Journal, 36 (6),
1196-1250.
Doty, D. H. & Glick, W. H. (1994). Typologies as a unique form DEMO theory building:
Toward improved understanding and modeling. Academy of Management Review, 19 (2),
230-251.
Drucker, P. F. (1985). Innovation and entrepreneurship. New York: Harper.
Duchesneau, D. A. & Gartner, W.B. (1990). A profile of new venture success and
failure in an emerging industry. Journal of Business Venturing, 5, 297-312.
Dyke, L.S., DEMO, E.M. & Reuber, A.R. An inter-industry examination of the
impact of owner experience on firm performance. Journal of Small Business Management.
Eggers, J. H., Leahy, K. T., & Churchill, N. C. (1996). Leadership, management, and
culture in high-performance entrepreneurial companies. In Frontiers of DEMO
research, Babson: Babson- College.
Epstein, S., & O'Brian, DEMO J. (1985). The person-situation debate in historical and
current perspective. DEMO Bulletin, 98, 513-537.
European Council for Small Business (1997). Newsletter, 4, 5.
Fishbein, M. & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention and behavior. An
introduction to theory and research. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Frese, M., Krauss, S. & Friedrich, S. (1999). Micro-business in DEMO In M.
Frese (Eds.) Psychological approaches to micro-enterprises in Africa. Greenwood.
Frese, M. (1995). Entrepreneurship in East Europe: A general model and empirical
findings. In C.L. Cooper & D.M. Rousseau (Eds.). Trends in Organizational Behavior, 2, 69-
81.
Frese, M. (1999). DEMO approaches to micro-enterprises in Africa.
Greenwood.
Frese, M., Van Gelderen, DEMO, & Ombach, M. (1998). How to plan as a DEMO scale
business owner: Psychological process characteristics of action strategies and success.
DEMO for publication.
Frese, M., & Fay, D. (1997). Personal initiative (PI): A concept for work in the 21th
century. Submitted foe publication.
Frey, R. S. (1984). Does n-Achievement cause economic DEMO? A cross-
lagged panel analysis of the McClellant thesis. The Journal DEMO Social Psychology, 122, 67-70.
Furnham, A. (1992). Personality and productivity. London: Routledge.
Galais, N. (1998). Motive und Beweggruende fuer die Selbstaendigkeit und ihre
Bedeutung fuer den Erfolg. In M.Frese (Eds.) DEMO Unternehmensgruender, 89-98.
Goettingen: Hofgrefe.
Gartner, W.B. (1985). A conceptual framework for describing the phenomenon of
new venture creation. Academy of Management DEMO, 10, 4, 696-706.
Gartner, W. B. (1988). "Who is an entrepreneur?" is the wrong question.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 12(2), 47-68.
Gatewood, E. J., Shaver, K.G., & DEMO, W.B. (1995). A longitudinal study of
cognitive factors influencing start-up behaviors and success at venture creation. Journal of
Business Venturing, 10, DEMO
Gimeno, J., Folta, T.B., Cooper, A.C., & Woo, C.Y. (1997). Survival of the Fittest:
Entrepreneurial human capital and the persistence of underperforming firms. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 42, 750-783.
Goebel, S. (1995). Der Zusammenhang zwischen Personeneigenschaften, Strategien
und Erfolg bei Kleinunternehmern. DEMO master thesis, University of Giessen,
Department of Psychology.
Goebel, S., & Frese, M. (1999). Persoenlichkeit, Strategien und Erfolg bei
DEMO In K. Moser, B. Batinic, J. Zempel. Unternehmerisch erfolgreiches
Handeln. Goettingen: Hogrefe.
Green, R., David, R. G. & Dent, M. (DEMO). The Russian entrepreneur: a study of
psychological characteristics. International Journal DEMO Entrepreneurial Behavior, 2 (1), 49-58.
Hacker, W. (1985). Activity: A fruitful concept in industrial psychology. In M. Frese
& J. Sabini (Eds.). Goal directed behavior: The concept of action in DEMO (pp. 262-
284). London: Erlbaum.
Hannan, M.T. & Freeman, J. (1984). Structural inertial and organizational change.
American Sociological Review, DEMO, 149-164.
Herron, L. & Robinson, R.B. (1993). A structural model of the effects of
entrepreneurial characteristics on venture performance. Journal of DEMO Venturing, 8
,281-294.
Heunks, F. J. (1996). Innovation, DEMO, and success. Small Business Economics,
8, 263-272.
Hisrich, R. DEMO (1990). Entrepreneurship/ Intrapreneurship. American Psychologist,
45(2), 209-222.
Hofstede, G. (1991). Cultures and organizations: Software of the mind. London:
McGraw- Hill.
House, R.J. (1977). A 1976 theory DEMO charismatic leadership. In J. G. Hunt, & L.L.
Larson (Eds.). Leadership: The cutting edge, pp. 189-207. Southerm III: University Press.
Jungbauer-Gans, M., & Preisendoerfer, P. (1991). Verbessern eine gruendliche
DEMO und sorgfaeltige Planung die Erfolgschancen neugegruendeter Betriebe?
Zeitschrift fuer betriebswirtschaftliche Forschung, 43, 987-996.
Katz, J. A. (1994). Modeling entrepreneurial career DEMO: Concepts and
Considerations. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 4, 23-39.
Kean, R. C., Niemeyer, S. & Miller, N. C. (1996). DEMO strategies in the craft
product retailing industry. Journal of Small Business Management, 34, (1), 13-23.
Kirkpatrick, S.A., & Locke, E.A. (1991). Leadership: Do traits matter? The Academy
of Management Executive, 5 (2), 48-60.
Klandt, H. (1984). Aktivitaet und Erfolg des Unternehmensgruenders. Eine
empirische Analyse unter Einbeziehung des mikrosozialen Umfeldes. Reihe Gruendung,DEMO
Innovation und Beratung. Bergisch-Gladbach.
Klein, K. J., & Sorra, J. DEMO (1996). The challenge of innovation implementation.
Academy of Management Review, 21 (4), 1055-1080.
Koop, De Reu and Frese (1999). Entrepreneurial orientation, initiative, and
environmental forces in Uganda. In M. Frese (Eds.), Psychological approaches to micro-
enterprises in Africa. Greenwood.
Landy, F.J. (1989). Psychology of work behavior. Belmont California: Wadsworth.
Inc.
Lang, J.R., Calantone, R.J. & Gudmundson, D., (1997). Small firm information
seeking as a response to environmental threats and opportunities. Journal of DEMO Business
Management, 11-23.
Liles, P. R. (1974). Who are DEMO entrepreneurs? MSU Business Topics, 22, 1, 5-14.
Locke, E. DEMO, & Latham, G. P. (1990). A theory of goal DEMO and task performance.
Englewood Cliffs, NY: Prentice-Hall.
Lord, R.G., DeVader, C.L., & Alliger, G.M. (1986). A Meta-analysis of the DEMO
between personality traits and leadership perceptions: A application of validity evaluation
DEMO Journal of Applied Psychology, 71, 402-410.
Lorrain, J, & Dussault, L. (1988). Relation between psychological DEMO,
administrative behaviors, and success of founder entrepreneurs at the start DEMO stage. In In B.
A. Kirchhoff, W.A. Long, W. ED. McMullan, K.H. Vesper & W.E. Wetzel (Eds.), Frontiers
of Entrepreneurship Research DEMO 150-164. Wellesley, Mass.: Babson Colege.
Low B. M. & McMillan, DEMO C. (1988). Entrepreneurship: Past research and future
challenges. Journal of Management, 14, 2, 139-162.
Lumpkin, G. T., & Dess, DEMO D. (1996). Clarifying the entrepreneurial orientation
construct and linking it DEMO performance. Academy of Management Review, 21(1), 135-172.
Lumpkin, G. T., Shrader, R. C., & Hills, G. E. (1998). Does formal business planning
enhance the performance of new ventures? In: DEMO Reynolds, W. D. Bygrave, N.M. Carter,
S. Manigart, C. DEMO Mason, G.D. Meyer, & K.G. Shaver (Eds.). Frontiers of DEMO
research. Pp. 180-189. Babson Park MS: Babson College.
Lussier, R.N. (DEMO). A nonfinancial business success versus failure prediction model
for young firms. Journal of Small Business Management, 1, 8-20.
Lyles, M. A., DEMO, I. S., Orris, B., & Kuratko, D. F. (1995). Formalized planning is
small business: Increasing strategic choices. Journal of Small Business Management, 2, 38-
50.
Magnusson, D. & Endler, N.S. (1977). Interactional psychology: Present status and
future development. In D. Magnusson & N. S. Endler (Eds.). Personality at the cross roads:
Current issues and interactional psychology, pp. 3-36. Hillsdale, N.Y.: Lawrence Erlbaum
Assoc.
McClelland, D.C. (1961). The achieving society. Princeton, NJ: DEMO Nostrand Co.
McGrath, R.G., MacMillan, I.C. & Scheinberg, S. (DEMO). Elitists, risk-takers, and
rugged individualists? An exploratory analysis of DEMO differences between entrepreneurs
and non-entrepreneurs. Journal of Business Venturing, 2, 115-135.
McNamee, P. & McHugh, M. (1989). Competitive Strategies in the clothing industry.
Long Range Planning, 22,4,63-71.
Mead, D.C., & Liedholm, C. (1998). The dynamics of micro and small enterprises DEMO
developing countries. World Development, 26 (1), 61-74.
Meichenbaum, D.H. (1985). Stress inoculation training. New York: Pergamon Press.
Miles, R., & Snow, C. (1978). Organizational strategy, structure, and process. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Mill, J.S. (1984). Principles DEMO political economy with some application to social
philosophy. London: John W. DEMO
Miller, D. & Friessen, P. H. (1983). Strategy-making and DEMO: The third link.
Strategic Management Journal, 4, 221-235.
Miller, D. & Toulouse, J. (1986). Chief executive personality and corporate strategy
DEMO structure in small firms. Management Science, 32 (11), 1389-1409.
Miner, J. B. (1996). The 4 routes to entrepreneurial success. San DEMO: Berrett-
Koehler.
Miner, J. B. (1997). A psychological typology DEMO its relationship to entrepreneurial
success. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 9, 319-334.
Miner, J. B., Smith, N. R., & Bracker, J. S. (1989). Role of entrepreneurial task
motivation in the growth of technologically innovative firms. Journal of Applied Psychology,
74(4), 554-560.
Miner, J. B., Smith, N. R., & Bracker, J. S. (1992). Defining the inventor-entrepreneur
in the context of established typologies. Journal of DEMO Venturing, 7, 103-113.
Miner, J. B., Smith, N. R., & Bracker, J. S. (1994). Role of entrepreneurial task
motivation DEMO the growth of technologically innovative firms. Interpretations from follow-up
data. Journal of Applied Psychology, 79(4), 627-630.
Minzberg, H.T. (1983). Structure in fives: Designing effective organizations.
Englewood Cliffs, NY: Prentice-Hall.
Mirron, DEMO, & McClelland, D. C. (1979). The impact of achievement DEMO
training on small businesses. California Management Review, 21(4), 13-28.
DEMO, W. (1968). Personality and assessment. New York: Wiley.
Mulhern, A. (1995). The SME sector in Europe: A broad perspective. DEMO of
Small Business Management, 33(3), 83-87.
Olson, P. D., & Bokor, D. W. (1995). Strategy DEMO interaction: Effects on
growth performance in small, start up firms. Journal of Small Business Management, 27(1),
34-44.
Palmer, M. (DEMO). The application of psychological testing to entrepreneurial
potential. California Management Review, 13, 32-38.
Pineda, R.C., Lerner, L.D., Miller, M.C., & Phillips, S.J. (1998). An investigation of
factors affecting the information search activities of small business managers. Journal of
Small Business Management , DEMO
Pfirmann, O. (1994). The geography of innovation in small- and medium sized firms
in West Germany. Small Business Economics, 6, 41-54.
DEMO, M. (1980). Competitive strategy. New York: Free Press.
Rahim, A. (1996). Stress, strain, and their moderators: An empirical DEMO of
entrepreneurs and managers. Journal of Small Business Management, 1, 46-58.
Rauch, A., & Frese, M. (1997, ). Does planning DEMO? Relations between planning
and success in small enterprises in Ireland and DEMO Germany. Paper presented at the 42nd
World Conference of the ICSB International Council for Small Business, San Francisco.
Rauch, A., & Frese, DEMO (1998). A contingency approach to small scale business
success: a longitudinal study on the effects of environmental hostility and uncertainty on the
DEMO of planning and success. In: P.D. Reynolds, W. D. Bygrave, DEMO Carter, S.
Manigart, C. M. Mason, G.D. Meyer, & K.G. Shaver (Eds.). Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
research. Pp. 190-200. Babson Park MS: Babson College.
Rauch, A., & Frese, M. (1999). Employees in small-scale enterprises. A longitudinal
study on the relationship between employee's DEMO and small-scale enterprise success.
Paper submitted for publication.
Ripsas, S. (1998). Towards an interdisciplinary theory of entrepreneurship. Small
Business Economics, 10,103-115.
Risseeuw, P. & Masurel, E. (1993). The role of planning in small firms: empirical
evidence from the service industry. Small Business Economics, 6, 313-322.
Robinson, P. B., Stimpson, D. V., Huefner, J. C., & Hunt, H. K. (1991). An attitude
approach to the prediction of entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice(2), 13-
31.
Robinson, R. B., & Pearce, J. A. (1983). The impact of formalized strategic planning
on financial performance in small organizations. Strategic Management Journal, 4, 197-207.
Robinson, R. B., & Pearce, J. A. (1984). Research thrusts in small firm strategic
planning. Academy of Management Review, 9(1), 128-137.
Romanelli, E. (1989). Environments and strategies of DEMO start up: Effects on
early survival. Administrative Science Quarterly, 34, DEMO
Roper, S. (1997). Product innovation and small business growth: DEMO comparison of the
strategies of German, U.K., and Irish companies. Small Business Economics, 9, 523-527.
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized DEMO for internal versus external control of
reinforcement. Psychological Monographs, 609(80), 1.
Ryans, C. C. (1997). Resources: Writing a business DEMO Journal of Small Business
Management, 35(2), 95-98.
Sandberg, W. R., & Hofer, C. W. (1987). Improving new venture performance: The
role  of strategy, industry structure, and the entrepreneur. Journal DEMO Business Venturing, 2, 5-
28.
Scheinberg, S., & McMillan, DEMO (1988). A 11 country study of motivation to start a
DEMO In: B.A. Kirchhoff, W.A. Long, W. ED. McMullan, K.H. Vesper & W.E. Wetzel
(Eds.). Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, 669-687. Wellesley, Mass.: Babson College.
Schendel, D. E. & Hofer, C. W. (DEMO). Strategic management. Boston, Little, Brown.
Schenk, R. (1998). Beurteilung des Unternehmenserfolges. In M. Frese (Eds.).
Erfolgreiche Unternehmensgruender. Psychologische Analysen und praktische Anleitungen
fuer Unternehmer in Ost- und Westdeutschland. (pp. 59-82) DEMO: Hogrefe.
Schneewind, K.A., Schroeder, G., & Cattell, R.B. (DEMO). Der 16-Persoenlichkeits-
Faktorentest- 16PF. Bern: Huber.
Schumpeter, J. (1935)DEMO Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung (Theory of
economic development). 4Th Ed. DEMO, Leipzig: Von Duncker & Humbold
Schwenk, C. R., & Shrader, C. B. (1993). Effects DEMO formal strategic planning on
financial performance in small firms: A meta- DEMO Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 48-53.
Shane, S., Kolvereid, L., & Westhead, P. (1991). An exploratory examination of
reasons leading to new firm formations across country and gender. Journal of Business
Venturing, 6, 431-446.
Shane, S. & Kolvereid, L. (1995). National environment, strategy, and new venture
performance: A three country study. Journal of DEMO Business Management, 29, 2, 37-50.
Sharfman, M. P. & Dean, J. W. (1991). Conceptualizing and measuring the
organizational environment: A multidimensional approach. Journal of Management, 17, (4),
681-700.
Shuman, J. C., Shaw, J. J., & Sussman, G. (1985). Strategic planning in smaller rapid
growth firms. Long Range Planning, 18(6), 48-53.
Simon, H. (1996). Die heimlichen Gewinner (The hidden champions). Frankfurt:
Campus.
Singh, J. V. (1990). Organizational DEMO and organizational evolution. In J. V.
Singh (Ed.), Organizational evolution: New directions (pp. 11-20). London: Sage.
Singh, J. V., DEMO, D. J., & House, R. J. (1986). Organizational legitimacy and the
liability of newness. Administrative Science Quarterly, 31, 171-193.
Singh, S. (1988). Personality characteristics, work values, and live styles of fast- and
slow- progressing small-scale industrial entrepreneurs. Journal of Social Psychology, 129(6),
801-805.
Smith, N.R. (1967). The entrepreneur and his firm: The relationship between type of
man and type of company. East Lansing, Michigan: Michigan state University Press.
Smith, N. R., & DEMO, J. B. (1983). Type of entrepreneur, type of firm, and
managerial motivation: Implications for organizational life circle theory. Strategic
Management Journal, 4, 325-340.
Sonnentag, S. (1996). Planning and knowledge about strategies: their relationship to
work characteristics in software design. Behavior & Information Technology, 15 (DEMO), 213-
225.
Spencer, L.M., & Spencer, S.M. (1993). Competence at work: models for superior
performance. New York: John Wiley & sons, Inc.
Spengler, W.D. (1992). Validity of questionnaire and DEMO measures of need foe
achievement. Two meta-analyses. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 140-154.
Statistisches Jahrbuch fuer das Ausland (1994). Statistisches Bundesamt (Eds.).
DEMO/Poerschel.
Stogdill, R.M. (1948). Personal factors associated with leadership. A survey of the
literature. Journal of Psychology, 25, 35-71.
Stoner, C., & Fry, F.F. (1982). The entrepreneurial decision: Dissatisfaction or
DEMO Journal of Small Business Management, April, 39-44.
Swaminathan, A. (1996). Environmental conditions at founding and organizational
mortality: A trial-by-fire model. Academy of Management Journal, 39(5), 1350-1377.
Tan, J. (1997). Regulatory environment and strategic orientations in a transitional
economy: A study of Chinese private enterprise. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice
Thurston, P.H. (1983). DEMO smaller companies make formal plans? Harvard
Business Review, 9, 162-188.
DEMO, J. A., Smollen, L. E., & Dingee, A. L. DEMO (1985). New venture creation.
Homewood, Ill.: Irvine.
Triandis, H. C. (1994). Cross-cultural industrial and organizational psychology. In H.
C. Triandis, M. D. Dunette, & L. M. Hough. Handbook of Industrial and DEMO
Psychology, 4, 2, 103-172.
Utsch, A., Rauch, A., DEMO, R., & Frese, M. (in press). Who becomes a small
scale entrepreneur in a post- socialist environment: On the differences between entrepreneurs
and managers in East Germany. Journal of Small Business Management.
Venkatraman, N. (1989). Strategic orientation of business enterprises: The construct,
DEMO, and measurement. Management Science, 35 (8), 942-962.
Wall, A. (1998). An empirical investigation of the production function DEMO the family
firm. Journal of Small Business Management, 4 , 24-32.
DEMO, H.P. & Young, E.C. (1982). The information source selection DEMO: The
role of entrepreneurial personality characteristics. Journal of Small Business Management,DEMO
(2) 49-57.
West, M. A. & Farr, J. L. (DEMO). Innovation and creativity at work: Psychological
and organizational strategies. Chichester, England: Wiley.
Wicklund, J. (1998). Entrepreneurial orientation as predictor of performance and
entrepreneurial behavior in small firms. In: P.D. Reynolds, W. DEMO Bygrave, N.M. Carter, S.
Manigart, C. M. Mason, G.D. Meyer, & K.G. Shaver (Eds.). Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research. pp. 281-296. DEMO Park MS: Babson College.
Wills, T.A. (1981). Downward comparison DEMO in social psychology.
Psychological Bulletin, 90, 245-271.
Woo, C. Y., Cooper, A. C. & Dunkelberg, W. C., (1988). Entrepreneurial DEMO:
definition and implication. In B. A. Kirchhoff, W.A. Long, W. ED. McMullan, K.H. Vesper
& W.E. Wetzel (Eds.). Frontiers of DEMO Research Wellesley, Mass.: Babson
College.
Youndt, M. A., Snell, DEMO A., Dean, J. W., & Lepak, D. P. (1996)DEMO Human resource
management, manufacturing strategy, and firm performance. Academy of Management
Journal, 39, 4, 836-866.
Zahra, S. A., & Pearce II, J. A. (1990). Research evidence on the Miles-Snow
typology. Journal DEMO Management, 16(4), 751-768.
Zahra, S. A. (1996). DEMO strategy and financial performance: Examining the
moderating role of the firm'DEMO competitive environment. Journal of Business Venturing, 11,
189-219.
Zempel, J. (1999). Selbstaendigkeit in den neuen Bundeslaendern: Praediktoren,
Erfolgsfaktoren und DEMO - Ergebnisse einer Laengsschnittuntersuchung. In K. Moser, B.
Batinic, J. Zempel. Unternehmerisch erfolgreiches Handeln. Goettingen: Hogrefe.{1g42fwefx}