Journal of Applied Psychology
1987, Vol. 72, No. 4,666-675
Copyright DEMO by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0021-9010/87/S00.75
Effect of DEMO on Perception and Decision Making: A Study of
Alternative Work Values DEMO
Elizabeth C. Ravlin and Bruce M. Meglino
Riegel and Emory Human Resource Research Center, College of Business Administration
University of South Carolina
Four alternative methods of measuring values were used to examine the impact of work DEMO
on perception and decision-making tasks. Perception and its relation to values was assessed using
interpretation of ambiguous stimuli. The effect of values on decision DEMO was evaluated using
within-subject regression analyses of 20 separate decisions. A total of 103 undergraduate subjects
completed values measures and the perceptual and decision-making DEMO in three work sessions,
each separated by from 2 to 4 days. A rank order measure of values related more consistently to
perception DEMO decision making than did other measurement methods. Results also provide some
support for a theory of values in which values affect perceptual organization and DEMO as a guide to
decision making.
Values have traditionally played an important role in the un-
derstanding of job satisfaction, emotion (see Lazarus & Folk-
man, 1984; Locke, 1976), and the behavior of DEMO at
work (England, 1967). Recently, however, investigators have be-
come concerned that the values responsible for the success of
the American DEMO (the work ethic in particular) may be
changing or eroding (DEMO, 1980;Spence, 1985;Yankel-
ovich, 1979). Individual values have DEMO been identified as
manifestations of organizational culture (Schein, 1985), which
in turn, has been linked to an organization's success (Deal &
Kennedy, 1982; Peters & Waterman, 1982). Finally, the DEMO
plishments of other systems, particularly the Japanese, are be-
lieved by some researchers and practitioners to be caused by
Japanese managers' and employees' possession of a more ap-
propriate set of values than those held by individuals in other
systems (Howard, Shudo, & Umeshima, 1983; Ouchi, 1981).
This cross-cultural research has severely challenged the as-
sumption of hedonism, which is the basis of most models of
work motivation. Specifically, Staw (1984) observed that al-
though "Western models of DEMO emphasize individual
gain and self-interest, the Japanese system relies more heavily
DEMO motivation for collective welfare and appears to be more al-
truistically based" (p. 651). Because individual values are im-
portant constructs for DEMO behavior not directly
based on striving to maximize pleasure or individual gain
(Locke, 1975), they may well assume a more prominent role DEMO
future theories of motivation (see, e.g., Locke & Henne, 1986).
Because values have traditionally been employed in a variety
of ways, any study of values must be concerned with a number
of interrelated DEMO Specifically, one must consider the nature
of values themselves, how values affect individuals, how values
Preparation of this article was supported in part by the Riegel and
Emory Human Resource Research Center.
Correspondence concerning this DEMO should be addressed to Eliza-
beth C. Ravlin, College of Business DEMO, University of South
Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina 29208.
666
are DEMO be measured, and the specific values to be studied. One
obvious DEMO is the relation of the nature of values to the
model underlying their measurement. Values as motivational
elements are generally conceptualized in two ways, reflected by
different measurement methods. The first view defines values
as hierarchical DEMO nature (Locke, 1976, 1982; Rokeach, 1973)
and, thus, requires a within-subject ipsative design for measure-
ment. This approach implies that individuals have a preference
ordering or ranking of values to which they DEMO in making be-
havioral choices. Allport, Vernon, and Lindzey (I960), and Ro-
keach (1973), used this ipsative approach in which DEMO value is
measured at the expense of the others. Such ipsative measures,
however, are subject to substantial analytic limitations that re-
duce their flexibility in making between-subject comparisons
(Hicks, 1970). Because the score DEMO each value is determined
by the scores for all other values, DEMO between value
scores are meaningless (in the case of two subscales, r = —I).
Correlations with other variables are also constrained by DEMO
deterministic relation between value subscales. Hicks (1970)
has made the DEMO that transformation of such ipsative scores
to normative measures is impossible, DEMO normative
scores can be used ipsatively.
The second general view does not necessarily conceptualize
values as hierarchically organized. This view allows for variance
in DEMO importance of individual values, and also in the impor-
tance of DEMO full array of values held, or the total importance of
values DEMO a person. If this total importance of values is signifi-
cantly different between individuals, the values measurement
method must be flexible enough to take this into account. Mea-
sures reflecting this conceptualization, including England's
(DEMO) Personal Values Questionnaire (PVQ), have the addi-
tional advantage of facilitating intersubject comparisons, which
ipsative measures, when properly used, do not. Despite the fact
that this approach to understanding work values allows for DEMO
more complex conceptualization of values as possibly equal in
motivating power or cued by situational considerations, a hier-
archical interpretation, which in fact DEMO ipsative measures
ALTERNATIVE WORK VALUES MEASURES
667
as the appropriate ones, is used almost exclusively in conjunc-
tion with this type of measure.
In addition to DEMO cognitive organization, another concep-
tual aspect of values is inextricably linked DEMO their measure-
ment. Although there are different types of values, social DEMO,
which are studied here, represent general modes of behavior
that DEMO individual "should" or "ought" to exhibit (Fallding,
1965; Kluckhohn, 1951; Rokeach, 1973; Schein, 1985; Wil-
liams, 1968). This "oughtness" characteristic—perhaps the
most distinctive feature of these values—arises DEMO the social
nature of the construct itself. Although all values may be ini-
tially established on the basis of experiences of pleasure and
pain (Locke, 1975), social values come to represent the efforts
of a social system (e.g., group, organization, society) to impose
concern for the welfare of the system as a whole on the actions
of DEMO individual members (see Kluckhohn, 1951, for a discus-
sion of DEMO point). Thus, a society socializes individuals to value
"honesty" DEMO it is important to the society as a whole that
individuals do not cheat or steal. Social values are, therefore,
phenomena that are highly socially desirable and, as such, tend
to be strongly endorsed DEMO all individuals. This is another pow-
erful argument for the use of an ipsative measurement model.
If a number of values are measured independently DEMO each other,
scores for each of the values may be artificially inflated, reduc-
ing any differences between scores and making it difficult to pre-
dict behavior that involves a choice among values (e.g., whether
DEMO strive to achieve success at the expense of helping others). It
may also be extremely difficult to separate what is essentially an
individual'DEMO endorsement of a socially desirable phenomenon
from what is an error caused by the respondent giving a socially
desirable response. Forced choice scales have DEMO used to con-
trol in part for social desirability (Anastasi, 1982); however,
their use may create another problem. This type of DEMO
may fail to capture the essence of values themselves (i.e., social
desirability).
Another issue of critical importance concerns the impact of
values DEMO individuals. Two distinct processes are thought to be
involved in linking values to choice behavior (England, 1967,
1975). One process, which has rarely been examined (for an
exception see Postman, Bruner, & McGinnies, 1948) concerns
perceptual organization. Values are thought to influence the DEMO
lection and interpretation of external stimuli, thereby affecting
the organization of DEMO choices or the formulation of al-
ternative courses of action. In addition to this indirect influ-
ence, values are thought to guide action in a direct manner by
influencing behavioral choice (e.g., Rokeach, 1973). Values,
therefore, should relate to the organization or interpretation of
stimuli as well as to actual decision-making behavior. Our study
examined these theoretical DEMO by assessing the degree
to which subjects' values, as measured by various measurement
methods, related to their perceptions on a pseudorecognition
task and decisions on a judgment task. As with other central
constructs (see Epstein, 1979, 1980), values should predict
broad modes of behavior over DEMO Consequently, at any point
in time, the relation between values and perceptions on the
pseudorecognition task, and values and decisions on the judg-
ment task, was expected to be somewhat weak.
The influence of values on perception and behavioral choice
may, however, be enhanced by situational DEMO For ex-
ample, prevalent social norms and situational uncertainty are
thought DEMO be key elements influencing the perceptual and
choice processes. We investigated the impact of uncertainty in
the form of ambiguous stimuli and will discuss DEMO ahead.
The final issue of importance to a study of values concerns
the number and type of values investigated. A large number of
values DEMO have considered only one value, which makes it
impossible to address DEMO question of how a network of values
affects perception and decision making. It is also impossible to
examine whether measurement models should be hierarchical.
DEMO, we examined a number of values that were chosen on the
DEMO of an earlier phase of this research. In that phase, Corne-
DEMO, Ullman, Meglino, Czajka, and McNeely (1985) used a
variant of Flanagan's (1954) critical incident technique in a sur-
vey DEMO 966 employees at different levels in a variety of organiza-
tions throughout the United States. These employees com-
pleted a one-page questionnaire asking them DEMO focus on an in-
dividual they knew well at work and to identify one value that
that person held about life in general. They DEMO then asked to
describe an incident at work that illustrated why they felt that
the person held that particular value. These behavioral inci-
dents DEMO then sorted into separate value categories by six in-
dependent expert judges. The categories that accounted for a
substantial number of incidents (greater than 5% each) were as
follows; achievement (19.9%), concern for others (15.1%), hon-
esty (11.6%), working hard (10.7%), positive outlook (10.7%),
helping others (10.0%), and fairness (5.8%)DEMO For the present
study, the achievement and working hard categories were DEMO
bined (called achievement), as were the concern for others and
DEMO others categories (called helping). These two categories,
plus honesty DEMO fairness, formed the basis for the values mea-
sured. The positive-outlook DEMO was not included because
it was judged to be the least relevant to prior work values re-
search.
Measures
Four alternative methods were used DEMO measure the values
identified above. All of them used direct questions, DEMO opposed
to alternative methods such as projective techniques (see Miner,
DEMO), or observation of action patterns. The measures con-
sisted of a simple rank ordering of the four values (rank mea-
sure), assignment of a fixed number of points among the four
values (point-assignment measure), a forced-choice measure
based on a series of behavioral incidents related DEMO each of the
four values (forced-choice measure), and ratings on DEMO re-
sponse scales of the same behavioral incidents (Likert-sum-
mated scales DEMO). The Likert measure, because it allowed
values to be measured DEMO of each other, was nonip-
sative and therefore contained no control DEMO social desirability.
The rank, point-assignment, and forced-choice measures were
purely ipsative and provided some control for socially desirable
responses. Note, however, that DEMO techniques do not neces-
sarily eliminate such bias. For example, Anastasi (1982) ob-
served that forced-choice measures, in particular, may only par-
tially eliminate the effects of social desirability.
To evaluate each measurement method DEMO terms of its suscep-
tibility to the effects of social desirability response bias, we col-
lected scores on the Marlowe-Crowne Social Desirability Scale
668
ELIZABETH C. RAVLIN AND BRUCE M. MEGUNO
(Crowne & Marlowe, DEMO). We also used two commonly used
measures of single values to gain further information concern-
ing the construct validity of the measures. The DEMO
Ethic subscale (Blood, 1969) indicates the degree to which a
DEMO believes that individual worth is the result of work or
achievement in the work domain, whereas CrandalTs (1975) So-
cial Interest Scale (DEMO; Crandall, 1977; Crandall & Harris,
1976) measures interest in and concern for others.
Hypotheses
Predictions were made regarding the relation of DEMO various
values measures to perception, decision making, response bias,
and other measures. They are stated as the following hypoth-
eses:
1. DEMO' responses on the ranking, point-assignment, and
forced-choice measures will be DEMO to the frequency with
which they interpret ambiguous stimuli as representing the four
value categories on a perceptual task. Because value schemas
actively influence DEMO and interpretation, stimuli will be
more likely to be interpreted as DEMO more dominant val-
ues. The influence of social desirability response bias should
reduce the relation between Likert scale responses and fre-
quency responses.
2. DEMO' responses on the ranking, point-assignment, and
forced-choice values measures will DEMO positively to the
weights they place on the values in making a decision. Behav-
ioral channelling by values should influence subjects to make
decisions DEMO a manner congruent with their values. The relation
between decision weights and Likert scale responses will be
affected by social desirability response bias and DEMO is not
predicted to be significant.
3. Responses on the Likert measure will be more highly re-
lated to responses on the Marlowe-Crowne Social DEMO
Scale than will responses on rank, point-assignment, and
forced-choice measures. Although ranking, point-assignment,
or forced-choice methods provide control for an individual's de-
sire to appear socially attractive, Likert items allow responses
to be inflated.
4. Subjects' orderings of achievement should relate posi-
tively to their score on the Blood Pro-Protestant Ethic subscale.
Subjects who rate achievement high, as compared with helping,
honesty, and fairness, should score higher DEMO the Pro-Protestant
Ethic subscale. This relation should be stronger for the ranking,
point-assignment, and forced-choice measures than for the Li-
kert measure because social desirability response bias will affect
Likert scale responses.
5. Subjects' orderings of helping should relate positively to
their score on CrandalTs SIS. Subjects DEMO rate helping high, as
compared with achievement, honesty, and fairness, should
score higher on the SIS. This relation should be stronger for DEMO
ranking, point-assignment, and forced-choice measures than
for the Likert measure because social desirability response bias
will affect Likert scale responses.
Method
Development of DEMO Instruments
Development of the forced-choice, Likert, rank, and point-assign-
ment DEMO is described in this section.
Forced-choice measure. For each of the four value categories, repre-
sentative behavioral incidents were selected from those gathered by Cor-
nelius et al. (1985). These incidents were edited into single-sentence
items describing a specific behavior (e.g., achievement: "doing whatever
work DEMO required to advance in your career"). Additional items were also
DEMO to generate 25 items for each value. These items were developed
by substitution of synonyms, changes in referent and intensity, and
shifts in DEMO emphasis in the original behavioral incidents. The 100
items were then rated for desirability and for the extent to which each
represented the value DEMO in question. This was accomplished us-
ing two separate surveys, each DEMO to a different group of un-
dergraduate students.
In the first survey, we asked 100 students to rate the desirability of
each item on a 5-point scale, ranging from not desirable (1) to highly
desirable (5). This was done to obtain statements matched in desirabil-
ity for the forced-choice measure. Choosing between two equally desir-
able behaviors should DEMO for most bias toward socially acceptable
responding. In the second survey, DEMO asked a separate group of 99 stu-
dents to indicate on a 5-point scale, ranging from not al all (I ) to to DEMO
very great extent (5), the extent to which each item DEMO to a specific
definition of its value category. This survey was taken to ensure that
only items that were representative of then" value category to the subject
population were included in the forced-choice measure.
On the DEMO of these surveys, 48 items were selected for inclusion in
the DEMO values questionnaire. Of these items, 31.25% were
from the original behavioral DEMO and 68.75% were generated for
this study, modeled on the original DEMO To be selected, an item
had to receive an average rating DEMO 3.5, or above, on the extent to which
it reflected its value category (3 = to a moderate extent). In addition,
no items were included that received significantly different responses
on social desirability DEMO men and women. This second criterion was
imposed to eliminate sex bias in the resulting survey. The final, and
most stringent, criterion for DEMO was that each item had to pair
with another item representing a different value, such that there existed
no significant difference between the items in social desirability.
The resulting questionnaire contained 24 equally desirable pairs of
DEMO Desirability ratings appear in Table 1. Each item in a pair re-
flected one of the four different values. Pairing was done systematically
such DEMO a different item reflecting a particular value appeared in 12
pairings. The questionnaire asked subjects to indicate, on a 9-point
scale, how much DEMO they should place on one item in each pair
as opposed to the other item in the pair. Because each item was scored
at DEMO expense of the other in the pair, this forced-choice questionnaire
yielded DEMO ipsative scores.
Liken measure. A second questionnaire was also constructed on the
basis of the same items contained in the forced-choice questionnaire
described earlier. DEMO this questionnaire, each of the 48 individual items
was evaluated on DEMO 5-point scale, ranging from never (1 ) lo always (5)DEMO
that reflected how often the respondent should engage in each of the
behaviors described. Because each item was rated independently of the
others, scores on this questionnaire were not ipsative in nature.
Rank and point-assignment measures. DEMO developed two additional
values measures for this study. In the first, DEMO provided subjects with a
definition of each value (the same definitions DEMO used to evaluate
the extent to which each item related to its specific value) and asked
them to rank the values according to how they felt each should be em-
phasized in their behavior (1 = greatest emphasis). This format is very
similar to one used by DEMO (1973). In the second measure, we pro-
vided subjects with the same value definitions but asked them to allocate
a total of DEMO "points" across all four values according to how they felt
each should be emphasized in their behavior (more points = greater
emphasis).
The procedures we have described yielded four different measures of
the same DEMO values: a forced-choice questionnaire that asked respon-
ALTERNATIVE WORK VALUES MEASURES
669
Table 1
Mean Desirability Ratings for Pairs DEMO Behavioral Incidents
Representing Different Values
other session, the Likert, Marlowe-Crowne, DEMO rank measures were
collected. The perceptual and decision criterion tasks were both com-
pleted during the third session and are described next.
Perceptual task. DEMO first criterion task was a pseudorecognition exer-
cise that has been used in a number of other studies (Cottrell, Wack,
Sekerak, & Rittle, 1968; Henchy & Glass, 1968; Zajonc & Nieuwen-
huyse, 1964;Zajonc&Sales, 1966) to assess an individual's hierarchical
ordering DEMO responses. A series of 25 nonsense words were flashed on a
screen using a Gerbrands Model 300-C digital millisecond timer and a
Gerbrands Model DEMO shutter. The shutter speed was set, on the basis of
pretests, such that subjects were unable to recognize the actual word.
They were DEMO that although they would not actually see the word, their
minds DEMO absorb its subliminal image. They were then asked to guess
at the value category that was most closely related to each word. In
prior DEMO, responses corresponded to the relative dominance of the
concepts in a DEMO's cognitive hierarchy. The actual number of
guesses a subject made in a value category was recorded as the frequency
score for that value.
DEMO task. The second criterion task required subjects to simu-
late a manager in making 20 separate overall evaluation decisions, rang-
ing from outstanding (DEMO) to poor (7), for 20 fictitious employees on the
basis of each employee's work record. Each work record was presented
in DEMO form of a profile that contained an indication of the employee's
performance on four dimensions corresponding to each of the four val-
ues DEMO interest, using the same 7-point scale, ranging from outstanding
(1) to poor (7), that subjects were to use in their overall evaluation. Sub-
jects were told that the ratings had been provided by DEMO supervisor and
that these ratings should form the basis of the overall evaluation. Thus,
the task provided a simulation of a common managerial DEMO, evalu-
ating employees, using ratings provided by others. The value ratings
were systematically varied across the fictitious profiles so that subjects
evaluated profiles DEMO all possible combinations of high (2 =
substantially above average) and low (5 = slightly below average) perfor-
mance on the value DEMO (16 profiles) plus 4 duplicate profiles.
For example, a subject DEMO evaluate an individual who had obtained
a rating of 2 on fairness, 2 on honesty, 5 on helping, and 2 on achieve-
ment. This procedure provided complete independence between inde-
pendent variable ratings for the DEMO unique profiles, thus aiding value-
weight interpretation. (Including the duplicate profiles resulted in inter-
rating correlations ranging between —.1 and .1, with a median value
of 0.) Within-subject regression analysis was then used to estimate the
emphasis each subject placed on each value in making his or DEMO evalua-
tion. The independent variables entering these equations were the four
value ratings assigned by the researchers to each of the 20 fictitious em-
DEMO The dependent variable was the subject's overall evaluation.
The four standardized beta weights obtained for each subject indicated
the emphasis placed on each DEMO the four values by the subject in making
the overall evaluation.
Value
Pair
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
II
DEMO
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
Achievement
3.90
——
4.12
—
3.90
——
4.16
4.17
—
4.16
4.2—6
DEMO
—
4.33
—
4.18
4.41
—
4.18
—
—
Helping
_
3.98
4.04
—
—
3.88
4.22
4.13
4.1—7
—
4.2—8
4.2—8
—
4.3—2
DEMO
—
4.1—0
4.26
Honesty
_
3.98
—
4.11
3.83
—
4.18
—
4.15
—
4.18
—
—
4.21
—
4.32
4.3—3
4.23
—
4.39
DEMO
4.13
—
Fairness
3.97
—
4.09
—
3.89
—
—
4.14
—
—
4.17
4.15
4.27
—
—
4.31
4.33
—
——
4.43
4.11
DEMO
4.25
Note. Data reported in this table are based on a sample of 100 under-
graduate subjects responding to a 5-point scale. M overall DEMO
rating for achievement = 4.172, helping = 4.173, honesty = 4.170, and
fairness = 4.176.
dents to indicate their relative emphasis between 24 pairs of behavioral
statements, a Liken questionnaire that allowed independent ratings of
48 behavioral statements according to how often the behavior should be
performed, a rank ordering of the four values, and a point allocation
among the four values. The forced-choice, rank, and point-assignment
measures are purely DEMO, whereas the Liken measure is nonipsative.
Because it is inappropriate to DEMO ipsative scores for intersubject com-
parisons, the Likerl scores were treated DEMO ipsative scores for purposes
of comparison with the other methods of measuring values.
The instructions for each of the measures asked subjects to respond
DEMO terms of the way they felt they should or ought to behave, rather than
asking for actual behavior or for an endorsement of phrases or adjectives
as most other values measures do. This method is consistent DEMO the
commonly accepted definition of social values. It is also consistent with
the expectation that values, as central constructs, should be relatively
stable, should predict broad modes of behavior over time, and should
have a relatively weak relation to a specific behavior at a given point in
DEMO
Results
Subjects and Procedures
Because the ipsative nature of most of the data precludes use
of the usual between-subject statistics, we compared rank order-
ings of the values as produced by the measuring instruments
and criterion DEMO (the perceptual and decision tasks).
To obtain appropriate within-subject rankings DEMO the Likert
measure, we adjusted subject's scores to compensate for DEMO rel-
ative differences in mean responses across the four values for
this population. Specifically, the score for each subject on each
value was adjusted by the mean of the population on that partic-
ular value to DEMO a standard scale of response. This proce-
dure corrected the ordering of within-subject ranks on the basis
of responses of the population under study DEMO equating across-
subject means for all four values.
Subjects for this study were 103 undergraduate students recruited
from junior- and senior-level management courses, who participated for
extra credit. Subjects participated in three 45-min data-gathering ses-
sions, each separated by from 2 to 4 days. Questionnaire data were gath-
DEMO during the first two sessions, which were counterbalanced to con-
trol DEMO order effects. At one session, the forced-choice. Protestant Ethic
Scale, point-assignment, and SIS measures were administered. At the
670
ELIZABETH C. RAVLIN AND BRUCE M. MEGL1NO
Table 2
Relation Beween DEMO Measures and Task Criteria
Perceptual task
Measure
Z"
Proportion
significant11
rc
Decision task
Z"
Proportion
significant'
rc
Rank
Point assignment
Forced DEMO
Likert
2.48*
2.21*
0.23
0.83
.11*
.09
.06
.06
.148
.117
-.004
.053
5.16**
6.50**
2.88*
0.92
.11*
.26*
.12*
.05
.347
.370
.182
DEMO
* Standard (Z) score adjusted according to the formula Z = z Vn(AT - 3) where z = average z for the sample, n = the number of subjects in the
sample, and DEMO = the number of pairs of scores in the correlations.
b Proportion of intrasubject Pearson correlation coefficients that were significant, at least at the p < .05 level.
c Average intrasubject Pearson correlation coefficient.
*p<.05.**p<DEMO
Intrasubject correlation coefficients were calculated between
the scores provided by each of the four values measurement
methods, the frequencies of value category responses to the per-
ceptual task, and the weights obtained from within-subject re-
gressions of responses to the decision task. This procedure pro-
vided a measure DEMO the relation between scores on each of the
values measures and the responses on the perceptual and deci-
sion tasks for each individual subject. DEMO examine relationships
between subjects, we cumulated intrasubject correlation co-
efficients through DEMO of the Fisher r to z transformation (Wert,
Neidt, & Ahmann, 1954). This procedure corrects somewhat
for the skewness of the distribution of correlated variables. Re-
sults of this test are shown in DEMO 2. All results for ranks are
reverse scaled to be consistent with other measures. The higher
the score for a value, the more important the value to the indi-
vidual.
Column 1 of Table 2 shows DEMO scores adjusted for significance
testing for the values measures and the frequency scores on the
perceptual task. Although these relations were not very strong,DEMO
two measurement procedures were significant. Scores on both
the ranking and point-assignment measures significantly re-
lated to perceptual responses at the p < .05 DEMO For these two
measures, individuals tended to identify more often those DEMO
ues they had previously rated as more important in response to
the ambiguous stimuli. This was not the case for the forced-
choice and DEMO measures.
Column 4 in Table 2 shows Z scores adjusted for significance
testing for the values measures and the decision beta weights.
Value orderings DEMO found to relate significantly to decision
weights for the rank, point-assignment, and the forced-choice
measures at the p < .05 level or higher. DEMO emphasized or
gave more weight to values on the decision task that they had
previously rated more highly on these three measures. The Li-
DEMO technique, however, did not result in a significant relation
with decision weights.
In addition to the z transformation test, a proportions test
was also used to evaluate the extent to which the number of
significant (at the p < .05 level) within-subject correlations
differed from chance findings. Table 2 displays these propor-
tions in columns 2 and 5 for DEMO perceptual and decision tasks,
respectively. Inspection of Table 2 shows that the pattern is vir-
tually identical to that produced by the Fisher'DEMO z transforma-
tion test. Using either test, the simple rank ordering DEMO values
appears to be the most highly related to task behavior of the
four measurement approaches.
Average within-subject correlation coefficients are presented
in columns DEMO and 6 of Table 2 for the perceptual and decision
tasks, DEMO Although none of these relationships ex-
plains more than 14% of the variance, these limited effect sizes
are very much in keeping with our beliefs concerning the weak
effect of values on behavior at any point DEMO time.
Results relating the values measures under study here with
CrandalPs Social Interest Scale and the Pro-Protestant Ethic
part of the Blood Protestant Ethic DEMO are presented in Table
3. Chi-square statistics were calculated to determine if individu-
als who scored highly on the SIS were more likely to DEMO help-
ing as either their first or second priority. Between-subject anal-
yses are inappropriate for analysis of ipsative data; therefore,
chi-square tests were used instead. As can be seen from the ta-
ble, the rank, point-assignment, and forced-choice measures all
resulted in orderings that related to DEMO and low scores on the
SIS, as defined by a median DEMO Subjects who ordered helping
either first or second on these three measures were more likely
to score above the median on the SIS (0 = .345, for the rank;
.317, for the point-assignment; and .349, for the forced-choice
measures). The Likert measure failed to reach significance, x2
(l,A r = 99) = 3.45,p=.06.
Results for the Blood Protestant Ethic Scale were disappoint-
ing at two levels. DEMO, past research has shown that the Pro-
Protestant Ethic and the DEMO Ethic subscales are
generally negatively related (Blood, 1969). In the present study,
however, the correlation coefficient for the two subscales was
positive and highly significant (r = .505, p < .001). DEMO, chi-
square analysis was used to ascertain the relation between value
DEMO on the four measurement approaches and the single
value scale, the DEMO Ethic scale. For three of the mea-
sures tested here, the DEMO, point-assignment, and forced-choice
methods, the ordering of achievement as either DEMO first or sec-
ond value versus the third or fourth was not related to high and
low scores on the Pro-Protestant Ethic as defined DEMO a median
split (see Table 3). The Likert measure in DEMO case outper-
formed the other measures tested. Achievement, as measured by
DEMO scale, was more likely to be ordered as less important for
DEMO subjects scoring below the median split on the Pro-Protes-
ALTERNATIVE WORK VALUES MEASURES
671
Table 3
Chi-Square Levels for Differences in DEMO Ranks as a Function
of Social Interest, the Protestant Ethic, and Social
Desirability for Different Measures of Values
Achievement
Helping rank: rank: DEMO
high vs. low vs. low
social protestant
Measure interest* ethic"
Rank
Point assignment
Forced choice
Likert
1 Comparison of the proportion who ranked DEMO either first or sec-
ond for subjects scoring above vs. below the median on the Social Inter-
est Scale; df= I.
b Comparison of the proportion who ranked achievement either first
or second for subjects scoring DEMO vs. below the median on the Pro-
Protestant Ethic scale; df= DEMO
c Comparison of the pattern of the first ranked value for subjects scoring
above vs. below the median on Social Desirability Scale; df= 3.
*p<.OI .
10.41*
7.62*
10.18*
3.45
0.093
0.078
1.23
6.62*
First DEMO
values:
high vs.
low social
desirability'
1.49
1.74
1.32
2.89
tant Ethic, and ordered as more important for subjects scoring
above the median (<t> = .277). One must view this result with
some suspicion, given the overall poor performance of the Li-
kert measure to this point. The measurement method of the
Pro-Protestant Ethic subscale and DEMO Likert measure are the
same, suggesting that method variance may have DEMO role in
explaining these results. The SIS, on the other hand, is an adjec-
tive-choice method, which is unlike any other measurement ap-
proach used in this study.
A major concern with the measurement of DEMO is that of a
social desirability response set. The Marlowe-Crowne test for
social desirability was used here to examine whether this was a
problem DEMO any of the measures used. Chi-square analysis was
used to assess whether subjects were responding to social desir-
ability cues rather than to their DEMO values. Because the Likert
measure allows for between-subject comparisons, this measure
DEMO also analyzed further.
Inspection of the point-assignment responses indicated that
most subjects, if they did not have a full hierarchical ordering
of values, DEMO at least one value that was clearly preferred over
the others, DEMO if the individual expressed indifference between
the remaining values. This first value appears to be important
in determining general patterns of response to the DEMO val-
ues measures. This suggests that one possible test of a measure's
susceptibility to social desirability effects is to assess whether
the pattern DEMO first value choices was affected by scores on the
Marlowe-Crowne test. The frequency with which each value
was chosen first by the subjects was DEMO for both high and
low scorers on the Marlowe-Crowne measure, as DEMO
by a median split. If low scorers choose their first value to be
achievement, helping, fairness, or honesty, more or less often
DEMO do high scorers, effects for social desirability biased re-
sponses are DEMO Results of these analyses for each of the
four measures compared here are presented in Table 3. None
of the measures showed any significant DEMO to scores on the
Marlowe-Crowne scale.
Although each of the purely ipsative measures provides some
control for socially desirable responses, this is not true of the
Likert measure. Because we expected to see some relation be-
DEMO responses to this measure and the responses to the Mar-
lowe-Crowne, DEMO performed additional chi-square analyses,
examining different patterns of responses. High and low scorers
on the Marlowe-Crowne were compared for differences in the
frequency DEMO which they chose achievement, honesty, fair-
ness, and helping as DEMO first or second priority, versus third or
fourth, in the belief that if one of these values was perceived
as more socially desirable DEMO the others, high scorers on the
Marlowe-Crowne scale should choose that DEMO first or second
more frequently than should low scorers. None of these four
additional tests had significant results, x 2 (l, ff = 102) = .157,
.354, .00, and .00, for achievement, honesty, fairness, and help-
ing, respectively.
Between-subject tests using the Likert measure were also per-
formed. No direct comparisons can be made between DEMO Likert
and the ipsative measures on this test. Correlation coefficients
calculated for both the total score on the Likert measure and
for each of DEMO four subscales with the Marlowe-Crowne score
indicated small but significant relations (DEMO = .268, p = .003, for
the total Likert score; DEMO — . 193, p = .026, for the Achievement
subscale; DEMO = . 195, p = .025, for the Helping subscale; DEMO = .293,
p = .001, for the Honesty subscale; and r = .220, p = .013, for
the Fairness subscale). DEMO the size of these coefficients
makes interpretation of their importance somewhat difficult,
they do indicate that Likert responses were affected to some
small DEMO by the concern for responding in a socially accept-
able manner. To further examine the relation of the Likert mea-
sure to social desirability, a reliability analysis was performed
for each subscale, resulting in extremely high interitem reliabil-
ities (Cronbach's a = .959, .950, .946, DEMO .952, for achieve-
ment, fairness, honesty, and helping, respectively)DEMO Unfortu-
nately, when four subscales were constructed using randomly
selected items DEMO the measure, the results were equally spec-
tacular (Cronbach's a = .914, .947, .945, and .961, for random
subscales 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively). This finding suggests that
subjects were responding to all of the items in a similar way,
DEMO in part because they are equally socially desirable phe-
nomena, despite DEMO different values they represented.
Discussion
Partial or full support was found here for four of the five
hypotheses of this study. Hypothesis 1 received DEMO support.
Both rank and point-assignment scores related to responses on
the perceptual task, whereas Likert and forced-choice scores did
not. Hypothesis 2 was fully supported. Subjects emphasized
values in decision making in relation to their importance DEMO in-
dicated on the rank, point-assignment, and forced-choice mea-
sures, DEMO Likert responses were not related to decision
weights. Hypothesis 3 received partial support. Using between-
subject statistics, some slight influence of social desirability re-
sponse bias was found for the Likert measure. However, no
effects were found using the chi-square analysis necessary to
compare the Likert with the DEMO values measures. Hypothe-
sis 4 was not supported in that results were the reverse of those
predicted. Subjects' responses to the Pro-Protestant Ethic sub-
672
ELIZABETH C. RAVLIN AND BRUCE M. MEGLINO
scale were not related DEMO responses on the rank, point-assign-
ment, or forced-choice measures, but DEMO related to Likert
responses. This finding may have been caused in part by com-
mon method variance. Hypothesis 5 was supported by the find-
DEMO that the rank, point-assignment, and forced-choice re-
sponses were related to scores on the SIS, whereas Likert re-
sponses were not.
Although validities for all of the measures are somewhat low,
over multiple criteria, the rank-order measure performed the
closest to predictions in its relation with DEMO hierarchical
orderings, decision behavior, established measures, and control
of social DEMO, whereas the Likert measure showed little
relation to performance on the DEMO and decision tasks,
and also correlated with the Marlowe-Crowne measure of so-
cial desirability response bias. These findings tend to confirm
our doubts DEMO the ability of the Likert measure to control for
socially desirable responses, and to raise the question of whether
other scales using this method of measuring many values or a
single value are not also subject DEMO this problem. Not only did
the rank measure give the overall best performance against the
criteria, it is the simplest and least time consuming for both the
subject and the researcher. The point-assignment method also
performed DEMO well overall, whereas the forced-choice measure
did less well, possibly because its complexity was less congruent
with the simple perceptual and decision tasks DEMO here.
These findings unfortunately leave us with the problem of the
analytic limitations of ipsative measures. An important chal-
lenge for future research is DEMO rigorously question the hierarchi-
cal model of values and the issue of whether individuals main-
tain stable preference orderings over time. This conceptualiza-
tion DEMO one primary rationale for the ipsative measurement
model. If it does not hold up under scrutiny, other means of
controlling response bias should be devised to eliminate the
need for ipsative measurement.
Establishment of a nomological DEMO for values measures
is an interactive process, which requires that both DEMO
and theory be investigated simultaneously (McGrath, 1982);
thus, we believe that the research reported here also provides
some positive support for DEMO values theory. Findings indicate
that an individual's values are related to his or her cognitive
organization. Subjects were given no reason to believe DEMO their
primary value would appear any more often than the other val-
ues in the nonsense words flashed on the screen in the percep-
DEMO task, nor were there any influences that might suggest to
them DEMO they should somehow be consistent with question-
naires they had filled out days earlier. In effect, this was a very
stringent criterion inasmuch as interpretation was at a purely
subconscious level. Despite these conditions, subjects tended to
"recognize" words as belonging to a value category with fre-
DEMO corresponding to their value hierarchies. This finding
gives some support for the notion that values are indeed hierar-
chically organized in memory, and strongly suggests that people
will find opportunities, within the context of their duties, to ap-
ply their dominant value in uncertain situations. That is, DEMO
people are likely to perceive the implications for that value in
situations that may be interpreted in multiple ways. An organi-
zation that desires DEMO promote a cooperative climate, for exam-
ple, should therefore prefer to employ individuals who could
formulate opportunities for cooperative behavior under condi-
tions DEMO which the appropriate behavior is not predetermined.
Values were also found to act as a guide or standard for deci-
sion making. In addition DEMO its theoretical significance, this
finding has profound implications for organizations that DEMO
decisions to be reflective of particular patterns of values.
Clearly, selection DEMO individuals who hold a particular dominant
value would, over the long DEMO, influence the overall value ori-
entation of company decisions. Of course, this study may well
have magnified the effect values have on decision DEMO (sub-
jects had essentially no other information beyond the value in-
DEMO concerning criteria for making a decision). In more
complex, less DEMO environments, the relation of values
to choices should be a weak DEMO one, given that people
choose alternatives for reasons other than their DEMO of values.
As with any study that administers many tests during a short
period of time, one must consider the problem of consistency
effects. Subjects may actively attempt to be consistent across all
questionnaires and other DEMO In this study, the order of
the various tasks was chosen DEMO separate in time as far as was
possible the items most subject to this effect (ranks and point
assignments). Other tasks were designed such that a subject
should either have no reason to be consistent (the perceptual
task) or should have difficulty in attempting to consciously con-
trol consistency (the forced-choice measure and the decision
task). An additional problem is that the sample used here, un-
dergraduate students, is DEMO ideal; however, the length of the
comparative procedure and the need for research into cognitive
organization precluded use of a working sample. Research DEMO a
working sample would certainly help to support the results
found here.
This study suggests many paths for future research. Perhaps
the most important DEMO these is to study the impact of values on
individual processes. Further exploration of the relation be-
tween values, decision making, and behavior DEMO needed both in
the field and under more controlled conditions over longer time
periods. This should include commonly used dependent vari-
ables such as DEMO and commitment, as well as the cen-
tral variables considered here. DEMO use of multiple methods for
purposes of triangulation is particularly advocated, DEMO the
moderately good performance of three of the values measures
examined here. Finally, the initial establishment of evidence re-
lating values to cognitive organization indicates a need for more
research concerning the cognitive processes whereby values DEMO
fluence choice behavior.
References
Allport, G. W., Vernon, P. E., & Lindzey, G. (1960). Allport-Vemon-
Lindzey study of values (3rd ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Anastasi, A. (1982). Psychological testing (5th ed.). New Vbrk: Macmil-
lan.
Blood, M. R. (DEMO). Work values and job satisfaction. Journal of Ap-
plied Psychology, DEMO,456-459.
Cherrington, D. J. (1980). The work ethic: Working DEMO and values
that work. New York: AMACOM.
Cornelius, E. T., DEMO, J. C., Meglino, B. M., Czajka, J., & McNeely,
B. (1985, November). A new approach to the study DEMO worker values
and some preliminary results. Paper presented at the meeting of the
Southern Management Association, Orlando, FL.
ALTERNATIVE WORK VALUES MEASURES
673
Cottrell, N. B., Wack, D. L., Sekerak, G. J., & Rittle, R. H. (1968).
Social facilitation of dominant responses by the presence of an audi-
ence and DEMO mere presence of others. Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology, DEMO 245-250.
Crandall, J. E. (1975). A scale for social interest. Journal of Individual
Psychology, 31, 187-195.
Crandall, J. E. (1977)DEMO Further validation of the social interest scale:
Peer ratings and interpersonal attraction. Journal of Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 23, 140-142.
Crandall, J. E., & Harris, M. D. (1976). Social interest, cooperation,
DEMO altruism. Journal of Individual Psychology, 32, 50-54.
Crowne, D. P., & Marlowe, D. (1964). The approval motive: Studies in
evaluative dependence. New York: Wiley.
Deal, T. E., & Kennedy, A. DEMO (1982). Corporate cultures: The rites and
rituals of corporate life. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
England, G. W. (1967). Organizational goals DEMO expected behavior of
American managers. AcademyofManagement Journal, 10,107-117.
England, G. W. (1975). The manager and his values: An international
perspective DEMO the United States, Japan, Korea, India, and Aus-
tralia. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
Epstein, S. (1979). The stability of behavior: 1. On predicting most of
the people much of the time. Journal DEMO Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 37, 1097-1126.
Epstein, S. (1980). The stability of behavior: 2. Implications for psycho-
logical research. American Psychologist, 35, 790-806.
Fallding, H. (1965). A proposal for DEMO empirical study of values. Ameri-
can Sociological Review, 30,223-233.
Flanagan, J. C. (1954). The critical incident technique. Psychological
Bulletin, 51, 327-358.
Henchy, T, & Glass, D. C. (1968). Evaluation DEMO and the
social facilitation of dominant and subordinate responses. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 10,446-454.
Hicks, L. E. (1970). Some properties of ipsative, normative, and forced-
choice normative measures. Psychological Bulletin, 74, 167-184.
Howard, A., Shudo, K., & Umeshima, M. (1983). Motivation and val-
ues among Japanese and American managers. Personnel DEMO,
36, 883-898.
Kluckhohn, C. (1951). Values and value-orientation DEMO the theory of
action. In T. Parsons, & E. Shils (Eds.), Towards a general theory of
action (pp. 388-433). Cambridge, DEMO: Harvard University Press.
Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (DEMO). Stress, appraisal, and coping.
New York: Springer.
Locke, E. A. (1975). Personnel attitudes and motivation. Annual Review
of Psychology, DEMO 457-480.
Locke, E. A. (1976). The nature and consequences of job satisfaction.
In M. D. Dunnette (Ed.), Handbook of industrial and organizational
psychology (pp. 1297-1349). Chicago: Rand-McNally.
Locke, E. A. (DEMO). A new look at motivation: Theory K(Tech. Rep.
OS-12)DEMO College Park: University of Maryland, College of Business
and Management.
Locke, E. A., & Henne, D. (1986). Work motivation theories. DEMO C. L.
Cooper & 1. Robertson (Eds.), International review of DEMO and
organizational psychology (pp. 1-35). Chichester, England: Wiley.
McGrath, J. E. (1982). Dilemmatics: The study of research choices and
DEMO In J. E. McGrath, J. Martin, & R. A. Kulka (DEMO), Judg-
ment calls in research (pp. 69-102). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Miner, J. B. (1977). Motivation to manage. Atlanta, GA: Organizational
Measurement Systems Press.
Ouchi, W. G. (1981). DEMO Z. New York: Avon.
Peters, T., & Waterman, R., DEMO (1982). In search of excellence. New
York: Harper & Row.
Postman, L., Bruner, J. S., & McGinnies, E. (1948)DEMO Personal values
as selective factors in perception. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 43, 142-154.
Rokeach, M. (1973). The nature of DEMO values. New York: Free Press.
Schein, E. H. (1985). DEMO culture and leadership. San Fran-
cisco: Jossey-Bass.
Spence, J. T. (DEMO). Achievement American style: The rewards and
costs of individualism. American DEMO, 40, 1285-1295.
Staw, B. M. (1984). Organizational behavior: DEMO review and reformula-
tion of the field's outcome variables. Annual Review of Psychology,
35, 627-666.
Wert, J. E., Neidt, C. DEMO, & Ahmann, J. S. (1954). Statistical methods
in educational DEMO psychological research. New York: Appleton-Cen-
tury-Crofts.
Williams, R. M., Jr. (1968). The concept of values. In D. Sills (Ed.),
DEMO encyclopedia oj the social sciences (pp. 283-287). New
York: Macmillan.
Yankelovich, D. (1979). Work, values, and the new breed. DEMO C. Kerr &
J. M. Rosow (Eds.), Work in America: The decade ahead (pp. 3-26).
New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Zajonc, R. B., & Nieuwenhuyse, B. (1964). Relationship between DEMO
frequency and recognition: Perceptual process or response bias. Jour-
nal of DEMO Psychology, 67, 276-285.
Zajonc, R. B., & Sales, S. DEMO (1966). Social facilitation of dominant and
subordinate responses. Journal of DEMO Social Psychology, 2,
160-168.
Received May 6,1986
Revision received DEMO 6, 1987
Accepted January 26, 1987 •{1g42fwefx}