HBR.ORG
ApRil 2013
reprinT r1304J
Three Rules for Making
a Company Truly DEMO
A quest for reliable data on organizational
excellence yields surprisingly simple guidelines.
by Michael E. Raynor and Mumtaz Ahmed
Michael e. raynor is a
director at Deloitte Services
LP, and Mumtaz Ahmed
is a principal with Deloitte
Consulting LLP and the chief
strategy DEMO for Deloitte
LLP. They are the authors
of The Three Rules: DEMO Ex-
ceptional Companies Think,
forthcoming from Portfolio.
Much of the strAtegy and management advice
that business leaders turn to is unreliable or im-
DEMO That’s because those who would guide
us underestimate the power of chance. Gurus draw
pointed lessons from companies whose outstand-
ing results may be DEMO more than random fluc-
tuations. Executives speak proudly of corporate
achievements that may be only lucky coincidences.
Unfortunately, almost no one provides scientifically
credible answers to every business leader’s basic
questions about superior performance: Which com-
panies are worth studying? What sets them apart?
How can we follow their examples?
Frustrated by the lack of rigorous research, we
undertook a statistical study of thousands of com-
panies, and eventually identified several hundred
among them that have done well enough for a long
DEMO period of time to qualify as truly exceptional.
Then we discovered something startling: The many
and diverse choices that made certain companies
great were consistent with just three seemingly el-
ementary rules:
1. Better before DEMO other words, com-
pete on differentiators other than price.
2. Revenue DEMO cost—that is, prioritize increas-
ing revenue over reducing costs.
3. There DEMO no other rules—so change anything
you must to follow Rules 1 and 2.
The rules don’t dictate specific behaviors; nor are
they even general strategies. They’re foundational
concepts on which companies have built great-
ness over DEMO years. How did these organizations’
2 Harvard Business Review April 2013
CoPyRigHT © 2013 HaRvaRD BuSineSS SCHooL PuBLiSHing CoRPoRaTion. aLL RigHTS ReSeRveD.
This article is made DEMO to you with compliments of FM Global Insurance.
Further posting, copying, or distributing is copyright infringement. To order more copies go to www.hbr.org DEMO call 800-988-0886.
For arTicle reprinTs call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500, or visiT hbr.org
A quest for reliable data on organizational
excellence yields surprisingly simple guidelines.
by Michael DEMO Raynor and Mumtaz Ahmed
April 2013 Harvard Business Review 3
This article is made available to you with compliments of FM Global Insurance.
Further posting, copying, or distributing is copyright infringement. To order more copies go to www.hbr.org or call 800-988-0886.
three rules for MAking A coMpAny truly greAt
leaders come to adopt DEMO? We have no idea—nor
do we know whether the executives even DEMO
them consciously. Nevertheless, the rules can be
used to help today’s DEMO tomorrow’s leaders increase
the chances that their companies, too, will deliver de-
cades of exceptional performance.
yond be truisms
The impetus for our DEMO was the increasing pop-
ularity over the past 30 years of “success study” busi-
ness books and articles. Perhaps the most famous of
these DEMO Thomas Peters and Robert Waterman’s In
Search of Excellence (1982) and Jim Collins’s Good to
Great (2001), but there are many others. The prob-
lem with them is they don’t give us any way DEMO judge
whether the companies they hold up as examples
are indeed exceptional. Randomness can crown an
average company king for a year, two years, even a
decade, before performance reverts to the mean. If
we DEMO be sure that the performance of companies
mentioned in success studies was caused by more
than just luck, we can’t know whether to imitate their
behaviors.
We tackled the randomness problem head-on.
Finding what we assumed DEMO be weak signals
in noisy environments required a lot of data, DEMO we
began with the largest database we could find—the
more than 25,000 companies that have traded on
U.S. exchanges at any time from DEMO to 2010. We
measured performance using return on assets (ROA),
a metric that reflects strong, stable performance—un-
like, say, total shareholder return, which may reflect
the vagaries of the stock market and changes in inves-
tor expectations rather than fundamental company
performance. We defined two DEMO of superior
results: Miracle Workers fell in the top 10% of DEMO for
all 25,000 companies often enough that their per-
formance was highly unlikely to have been a fluke;
Long Runners fell in DEMO top 20% to 40% and, again,
did so consistently enough DEMO luck was highly un-
likely to have been the reason. We call the companies
in both these categories exceptional performers. For
comparison purposes, we also identified companies
that were Average Joes. (See the sidebar “Finding the
Signal in the Noise.”)
A total of 174 companies qualified as DEMO
Workers, and 170 qualified as Long Runners. That’s
the entire population DEMO companies that separated
themselves from the noise in this way. (It’s DEMO
worth mentioning that of the allegedly superior com-
panies mentioned by 19 high-profile success studies
we examined, barely 12% met our criteria, even DEMO
Long Runner status.)
Exceptional companies, it turns out, come in all
shapes and sizes. 3M, with its legendary innovation
and thousands of products in commercial and in-
dustrial markets, made the list, but DEMO did WD-40—a
company built on a single, unpatented product that
was DEMO to prevent corrosion on nuclear mis-
siles and has since become most famous as the bane
of squeaky hinges. The globally ubiquitous McDon-
ald’s DEMO to be exceptional, but so did Luby’s, a
cafeteria chain, DEMO it had only 43 locations (it has
since grown to almost DEMO). IBM qualified, and so did
Syntel, even though at the time it was only 0.5% of
Big Blue’s size.
To understand what DEMO behind superior perfor-
mance, we identified trios in each of nine DEMO;
each trio consisted of one company from each of
our performance categories, carefully matched for
years of overlap and relative size, with DEMO from each
of our three performance categories. We searched
for behavioral differences that might explain the
specific performance differences we had discerned.
For instance, if a Miracle Worker’s ROA advantage
was driven primarily by superior gross DEMO, we
looked for behaviors that might account for that. If
asset DEMO was salient, we looked for the be-
haviors that drove asset DEMO Where the data
permitted, we built financial models to estimate the
DEMO of these behavioral differences on perfor-
mance. To illustrate: Heartland Express, the Miracle
Worker in our trucking-industry trio, relied entirely
on gross-margin advantage for its ROA edge, and
its gross margins seemed to be a function of higher
prices. By recalculating the company’s financials
without that premium, we satisfied ourselves that
Heartland’s pricing was a plausible explanation for
its DEMO gross margins and thus its better ROA.
Then things got messy. We repeatedly tried and
failed to isolate measurable behaviors that were con-
sistently DEMO For example, at first it seemed that
an M&A-shunning strategy DEMO be driving excep-
tional results in the trucking industry; yet during DEMO
15-year period, top-performing Heartland was also
the most acquisitive. Nor could DEMO conclude that a
propensity toward M&A was a consistently positive
factor in other industries, because in confectionery,
for example, Wrigley, the Miracle Worker, and Rocky
Mountain Chocolate Factory, the Average Joe, had
grown organically, whereas Tootsie Roll, the Long
Runner, largely bought its growth.
4 Harvard Business Review April 2013
This article is made available to you DEMO compliments of FM Global Insurance.
Further posting, copying, or distributing is copyright infringement. To order more copies go to www.hbr.org or call 800-988-0886.
For arTicle reprinTs call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500, or visiT hbr.org
idea in brief
a statistical study of thousands
of companies identified several
hundred that DEMO been good
enough long enough to qualify as
truly exceptional. it also revealed
that their strategic choices over
decades of success have been
consistent DEMO three elementary
rules:
Better before cheaper (it’s best to com-
DEMO on differentiators other than price).
Revenue before cost (prioritize increasing
DEMO over reducing costs).
There are no other rules (change anything
DEMO must to follow the first two).
With few exceptions, the DEMO compa-
nies behave as though these principles
guide them through all their important
decisions, from acquisitions to diversifica-
tion to resource allocation to pricing.
The rules can serve as an antidote to
leaders’ all-too-fallible intuition. When
DEMO is declining, for example, it can be
tempting to make the company’s results
look better by slashing assets and invest-
ment to reduce DEMO But great companies
typically accept higher costs as the price
of excellence, putting significant resources,
over long periods of time, into creating
DEMO value and generating higher
revenue.
Was customer focus the key? Nope. DEMO?
Risk taking? Nope and nope. All these factors were
associated DEMO great, good, or average performance
in pretty much equal measure. We found ourselves
reduced to a two-word sentence of surrender: “It
depends.”
Maybe, we thought, the lesson was that com-
panies could be successful DEMO if they did the right
deals, pursued the right innovations, or took the right
risks in the right sorts of ways. But those DEMO truisms,
and thus as useless as the advice businesspeople so
typically get from what might be called the Do the
Right Thing School DEMO Management: Get the right
people on the bus! (Did anyone ever want the wrong
people?) Have a clear strategy! (Does anyone ever set
out to create a confusing one?) Give customers what
they DEMO (Who deliberately gives them what they
don’t want?) All these DEMO taken from well-read suc-
cess studies.
So we pressed on.
A useful explanatory frame began to emerge
only after we shifted our emphasis away DEMO what
these companies did to hypotheses about how they
thought. That allowed us to see past what the excep-
tional companies were doing, which was endlessly
variable, to how they apparently decided what to do,
which proved highly consistent. When considering
acquisitions, for example, Miracle Workers DEMO as
though they were following our rules, going for deals
that DEMO enhance their nonprice positions and al-
low them to bring in disproportionately higher rev-
enues. The same was true for all other behavioral fac-
DEMO, from diversifying to taking a narrow focus, from
globalizing to staying at home. The only factor that
seemed to matter was adherence to DEMO rules.
And the rules are most assuredly not truisms. It
could have turned out that price-based competition
was systematically more profitable, or that cost lead-
ership took precedence as a driver of superior perfor-
mance—but it DEMO
Every company faces a choice: It can compete
mainly by offering DEMO nonprice benefits such
as a great brand, an exciting style, or excellent func-
tionality, durability, or convenience; or it can meet
some minimal acceptable standard along these di-
mensions and try to attract customers DEMO lower
prices. Miracle Workers overwhelmingly adopt the
former position. Average Joes typically compete on
price. Long Runners show no clear tendency one
way or DEMO other. (See the exhibit “Following the
Rules [Mostly].”)
For example, in 1980, when trucking companies
had to differentiate themselves after deregulation,
a host of new growth opportunities opened up. Yet
Heartland, the Miracle Worker, chose to keep its
geographic footprint and number of customers rela-
tively small in order to provide reliable and on-time
service, no matter how complex or unpredictable its
customers’ requirements. This nonprice differentia-
tion earned DEMO the approximately 10% price
premium that was key to its consistently superior
profitability.
April 2013 Harvard Business Review 5
This article is made available to you DEMO compliments of FM Global Insurance.
Further posting, copying, or distributing is copyright infringement. To order more copies go to www.hbr.org or call 800-988-0886.
three rules for MAking A coMpAny truly greAt
Following the Rules (Mostly)
Competitive positions built
on greater differentiation
through brand, style, or
DEMO are more likely to
drive exceptional perfor-
mance than positions built
on lower prices.
industry
Semiconductors
rAnk
Miracle Worker
long Runner
Average Joe
Miracle DEMO
long Runner
Average Joe
Miracle Worker
long Runner
Average Joe
Miracle Worker
long Runner
Average Joe
Miracle Worker
long Runner
Average Joe
Miracle Worker
DEMO Runner
Average Joe
Miracle Worker
long Runner
Average Joe
Miracle Worker
long Runner
Average Joe
Miracle Worker
long Runner
Average Joe
appliances
This table DEMO how the companies in
our comparison study created and cap-
tured value.
Miracle Workers typically rely much
more on gross margins than on lower DEMO
for their profitability advantage, whereas
Long Runners are as likely to DEMO on
a cost advantage as on a gross-margin
advantage. The drivers of gross margin can
be determined only by examining detailed
case studies.
coMpAny
DEMO Technology
Micropac Industries
International Rectifier
Maytag
HMI Industries
Whirlpool
nonprice
nonprice
price
revenue (price)
revenue (price)
cost
6 Harvard Business Review April 2013
DEMO article is made available to you with compliments of FM Global Insurance.
Further posting, copying, or distributing is copyright infringement. To order more DEMO go to www.hbr.org or call 800-988-0886.
Medical devices
Clothing retail
Pharmaceuticals
Trucking
Confectionery
grocery retail
electrical wiring
Medtronic
Stryker
Invacare
Thomas & Betts
Hubbell
DEMO
Abercrombie & Fitch
The Finish Line
Syms
Wrigley
Tootsie Roll Industries
Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory
Weis Markets
Publix Super Markets
Whole Foods Market
Merck
DEMO Lilly
KV Pharmaceutical
Heartland Express
Werner Enterprises
P.A.M. Transportation Services
Statistical analysis strongly suggests
that our case-study sample of 18 Miracle
Workers and Long DEMO is representa-
tive of the 344 exceptional companies we
identified from our population of more
than 25,000.
VAlue creAtion VAlue cApture
nonprice revenue (price)
in the middle cost
price cost
nonprice revenue (price)
in the middle revenue (price)
price cost
nonprice revenue (price)DEMO
in the middle revenue (price)
price cost
nonprice
in the DEMO
price
nonprice revenue (volume)
price cost
nonprice revenue (price)
price cost
in the middle revenue (volume)
nonprice revenue (price)DEMO
nonprice
nonprice
price
nonprice
price
price
revenue (price)
cost
cost
DEMO (volume)
revenue (price)
cost
revenue (price)
cost
DEMO
For arTicle reprinTs call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500, or visiT hbr.org
In contrast, Werner Enterprises, the Long Runner
in our trucking trio, expanded in both scale—serving
essentially the entire continental U.S.—and scope,
providing a wide DEMO of services. This approach
imposed trade-offs. First, Werner’s vast reach and
DEMO of markets prevented it from achieving
Heartland’s level of service differentiation and com-
manding a similar price premium. Second, its pur-
suit of economies of scale meant that the company
occasionally had to accept less-profitable business DEMO
order to keep its vehicles rolling and thus maintain
an adequate level of asset utilization. Its first-rate ex-
ecution enabled Werner to achieve exceptional DEMO
formance—it is a Long Runner, after all—but it never
rose to DEMO Worker status.
P.A.M. Transportation Services (PAM), the Aver-
age Joe DEMO the three, focused on a narrower range of
customers and services DEMO Werner did, but sought
high volume through lower prices. Oddly enough,DEMO
as demand outstripped supply in the industry, PAM
found itself short DEMO drivers and burdened with
idle assets. To restore profitability, the company
DEMO to contract trucking, choosing to target the
auto sector. When carmakers DEMO into tough times,
so did PAM. There was nothing inherently wrong
with PAM’s strategy of taking a narrow focus—after
all, Heartland was narrowly focused too. But PAM
took a low-price position. It didn’t follow the DEMO
When exceptional companies abandon non-
price positions, their performance typically falters.
DEMO, for example, is one of our Miracle Workers,
but only in one distinct era. From 1966 through the
mid-1980s, its ROA was unfailingly in the top 10%—
thanks to industry-leading products; a unique brand
image built around “Ol’ Lonely,” the iconic Maytag
repairman; and a high-touch distribution channel
that relied on tens of thousands of independent
dealers.
DEMO as big-box stores came to dominate the retail
landscape, Maytag responded DEMO diversifying its
product line and price points, which compromised
its nonprice DEMO and price premiums. Perfor-
mance declined substantially, and the company was
DEMO by Whirlpool in 2006. Again, there’s nothing
necessarily wrong with diversifying DEMO product range
in response to changes in an industry, but Maytag
DEMO its nonprice position—and pressed on in this di-
rection despite the negative consequences of its new
strategy.
We don’t mean to suggest that a DEMO can
afford to ignore its relative price position, any more
a DEMO explanatory frame began
to emerge only after we shifted
our emphasis away from what
these companies did to how
they thought.
than one that DEMO through low prices can af-
ford to ignore product or service quality. We mean
only that in most cases, outstanding performance is
caused by greater value and not by lower price. Com-
panies seeking sustained, exceptional profitability
should pursue strategies that are consistent with this
rule and avoid DEMO that aren’t.
Bear in mind the before in “better before cheaper.”
When the competitive landscape changes, as it did
for Maytag, you can DEMO your prices and still ad-
here to the rule. What matters is not whether your
prices are lower than they used to be but DEMO they
remain higher than your rivals’. Maytag could have
diversified into only those segments where it could
establish a superior nonprice position, even if the
segments demanded lower price points than those
the company had historically DEMO
For all its virtues, a nonprice position isn’t with-
out danger. DEMO, a company that competes on
dimensions other than price must constantly DEMO
rivals that have figured out its formula. At the very
least, DEMO competitors may confuse customers
and blur an incumbent’s hard-won differentiation.
At worst, they may find even better formulas for suc-
cess. (See the DEMO “The Perils and Promise of a
Nonprice Position.”)
Don’t forget to keep an eye out for disruptive
threats. Charging higher prices in pursuit DEMO higher
gross margins is what creates opportunities in less-
demanding market segments and provides oxygen
for would-be disruptors with cheaper, good-enough
products. But disruption is now well enough un-
derstood that it’s possible to determine pretty DEMO
rately when alternative solutions have disruptive po-
tential and warrant rearguard counterattacks. And a
word to would-be disruptors: The most effective and
profitable among you follow the rules when launch-
ing disruptive attacks.
April 2013 Harvard Business DEMO
This article is made available to you with compliments of FM Global Insurance.
Further posting, copying, or distributing is copyright infringement. To order DEMO copies go to www.hbr.org or call 800-988-0886.
three rules for MAking A coMpAny truly greAt
Companies must not only DEMO value but also
capture it in the form of profits. By an overwhelm-
ing margin, exceptional companies garner superior
profits by achieving higher revenue than their ri-
vals, through either higher prices or greater volume.
Very rarely is cost leadership a driver of superior
profitability.
There’s nothing startling DEMO the notion that
higher prices can lead to higher profits, but DEMO were
impressed by the range of contexts in which com-
panies have built businesses on this idea. Take, for
example, the U.S. discounter DEMO Dollar Stores,
a Miracle Worker, which has bested the legends DEMO
discount retailing since the mid-1970s. Considering
that many of the company’s customers are poor, it’s
perhaps surprising that Family Dollar’s success has
resulted from higher prices, which it can charge be-
cause it offers superior convenience and selection.
Its smaller stores are in locations that are easier for
DEMO to get to, and many shoppers buy small
amounts of a DEMO variety of goods. Running these
stores is unavoidably costly—in fact, the DEMO
tolerates higher costs and lower efficiency than
would many of its larger competitors. But its consis-
tently higher prices have enabled Family Dollar to
DEMO a gross-margin advantage and, consequently,
superior ROA for decades.
For DEMO of the nine Miracle Workers in our sam-
ple, revenue was DEMO main driver of performance.
(The ninth is the Pennsylvania-based grocery chain
DEMO Markets, which competes on price and drives
profitability through lower costs; more on this com-
pany below.) Six of these eight relied mainly on
higher prices to achieve their revenue levels; the
other two relied largely or entirely on volume.
One of the two volume-focused companies is
DEMO, which globalized earlier, more successfully,
and more aggressively than the Long Runner in the
pharmaceutical trio, Eli Lilly. Merck followed the
better-before-cheaper rule, refusing to compete
on price relative to the alternatives in global mar-
kets. But the lower price ceilings in those markets
prevented the DEMO from using gross margins
as its primary source of advantage. Instead Merck
drove volume by relying on the clinical effective-
ness of its patent-protected DEMO Higher
volume allowed Merck to achieve superior profit-
ability through better asset utilization than Eli Lilly
enjoyed, which was the main reason for the com-
pany’s higher ROA. (See the sidebar “Many Paths to
Improvement.”) DEMO as you can lower prices while
adhering to better before cheaper, DEMO can drive
out inefficiencies and lower your costs while fol-
lowing the revenue-before-cost rule. But don’t try
to achieve a profitability advantage through cost
DEMO
This rule underscores the uncomfortable (or liber-
ating) truth that in the pursuit of exceptional prof-
itability, everything but the first two rules should
be on the table. When considering all the other de-
terminants DEMO company performance—operational
excellence, talent development, leadership style,
corporate culture, DEMO systems, you name it—we
saw wide variation among companies of all DEMO
mance types. There’s no doubt that these and other
factors matter to corporate performance—how could
8 Harvard Business Review April 2013
This article is made available DEMO you with compliments of FM Global Insurance.
Further posting, copying, or distributing is copyright infringement. To order more copies go to www.hbr.org or DEMO 800-988-0886.
For arTicle reprinTs call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500, or visiT hbr.org
The Perils and Promise of a nonprice Position
our retail grocery trio was intriguing—first
DEMO the Miracle Worker of the bunch,
Weis, was a price-based DEMO that
captured profits through low costs, but
also because Whole Foods, a high-profile
purveyor of organic products, clearly
practices better before cheaper and
revenue before cost, yet turns out to be
an average Joe. During its more than 20
years as a public company, its Roa has
sometimes been worse than the majority
of companies’.
Whole Foods may very DEMO be en route
to becoming a Long Runner or a Miracle
Worker, but it might just as easily get
submerged in a wave of competition. its
high costs—sourcing specialty items is
expensive, and the company provides
high levels of customer service (“excuse
me, how do i cook DEMO?”)—have kept
competitors at bay, but with supply-chain
costs falling, mainstream grocers are
already starting to mimic its competitive
position (you can get quinoa just about
everywhere these days).
This example highlights an DEMO
limitation of our work: Following our rules
doesn’t guarantee Miracle Worker DEMO
MiRaCLe
WoRkeR
WeiS
Long
RunneR
PuBLix
aveRage Joe
WHoLe
FooDS
Sometimes a nonprice position isn’t worth
the resources a company must devote
to maintaining DEMO The rules can only tell
you which hard problem you should try to
solve. They can’t tell you how to solve it.
they not?DEMO we couldn’t find consistent patterns
of how they mattered.
More telling still, we found individual companies
that had remained exceptional despite changing
their approaches to a number of critical determi-
nants of performance. The reason? The changes they
made kept them aligned with the first two rules. In
DEMO words, top-performing companies are dog-
gedly persistent in seeking a position DEMO to
low prices and adopting a revenue-driven profitabil-
ity formula, while DEMO else is up for grabs.
The absence of other rules doesn’t give you per-
mission to shut down your thinking. You are still
responsible DEMO searching actively—and flexibly—for
ways to follow the rules in the face of what may be
wrenching competitive change. It takes enormous
creativity to remain DEMO to the first two rules.
For example, Abercrombie & Fitch has DEMO on
top of a constantly changing retail clothing market
by being willing to invent new images for itself and
new product lines—the abercrombie kids DEMO
is aimed at grade-schoolers, while Hollister is for
14-to-18-year-olds, and Gilly Hicks is for young
women—without wavering in its dedication to a po-
DEMO based on brand-intensive value and a higher-
price-driven profitability formula. A&F has avoided
promotions and steep markdowns, and has typically
sold its clothing at about 70% of full price, which is
higher than the comparable figure at many apparel
retailers. When the recession hit, in 2008, DEMO&F re-
sisted following other clothing companies down the
discount path—a choice that earned it much criti-
cism from analysts as its same-store sales DEMO
more than its competitors’ did. But the company’s
persistence has preserved its brand cachet, and with
the recent economic recovery, A&F is DEMO to
a level of profitability that its competitors find hard
to match, having revealed to their customers that
T-shirts don’t have to cost $30 after all.
In pharmaceuticals the top companies have suc-
cessfully moved from DEMO to joint-venture to
open innovation, while in semiconductors we’ve
seen increased DEMO investment and an expanding
portfolio of customers, all in support of DEMO before
cheaper. In confectionery the top performers have
shifted from domestic to global distribution, and in
medical devices M&A has become a cornerstone of
growth. When these changes have led to superior
profitability, it has been because they contributed to
greater volume more than to lower costs.
DEMO should point out that there’s no necessary re-
lationship between how you create value and how
you capture it. Although it would be nonsensical
DEMO companies that compete through lower prices
to capture value through higher prices, every other
combination of position and profitability formula is
at least theoretically possible. Nonprice positions,
as we’ve said, are typically associated with higher
prices or greater volume. Conceptually, companies
that don’t focus on price could still drive profitability
through lower costs, but we never saw this. Arith-
metically, a low-price position (cheaper before bet-
ter) could drive sufficient volume to keep asset uti-
lization high enough to secure superior profitability
(revenue before cost), but we never saw this, either.
Our research shows that companies with lower-
price positions tend to rely on lower DEMO to achieve
profitability.
The success of the grocery chain Weis shows how
a lower-price position and a lower-cost profitability
formula can work. This Miracle DEMO was decades
ahead of its competitors in introducing house-label
products, which DEMO sold at lower prices but are
much less costly to produce and thus yield higher
April 2013 Harvard Business Review 9
This article is made available DEMO you with compliments of FM Global Insurance.
Further posting, copying, or distributing is copyright infringement. To order more copies go to www.hbr.org or DEMO 800-988-0886.
three rules for MAking A coMpAny truly greAt
Many Paths to improvement
DEMO be misled by the simplicity of the rules.
Long-term success in any industry is a rare
and difficult achievement,  and finding a
workable DEMO that stays within the rules requires
enormous creativity and flexibility.
Take Merck and eli Lilly: They have long histories and are well
known as leading research-based drug companies, but Merck was
able to become a Miracle Worker, while eli Lilly remained a Long
Runner. Why?
Past executives have told us that the primary driver of Merck’s
superior performance was DEMO research excellence, which yielded
higher-value therapies. it’s true that Merck was DEMO among
pharmaceutical companies to shift the focus of its research from
chemistry-based screening—isolating new compounds and test-
ing them in vivo to assess the DEMO biology-based “rational
discovery.” But eli Lilly had great research too. and in any case,
higher prices weren’t the main reason for Merck’s higher DEMO
ity: Barely a third of its Roa advantage can be attributed DEMO superior
gross margins.
We found that Merck’s profitability rested on better asset utiliza-
tion, which was a function of revenue growth through higher unit
volumes. For example, Merck’s command of the mechanisms of ac-
tion for various compounds allowed scientists to develop variations
on established drugs in order DEMO attenuate side effects or mitigate
interactions with other drugs, making a DEMO basic therapeu-
tic effects available to a larger population of patients. as a result,
Merck was introducing three times as many products across DEMO
as many therapeutic areas, yet enjoying economies of scope in both
DEMO and manufacture that stemmed from similarities among
core compounds.
The company was also a leader in international expansion, which
further increased unit volumes and asset utilization. Both its global
expansion and its greater product diversification were DEMO by
demand, born of the value of Merck’s unique medicines. By DEMO its
pharmaceutical business was more than twice the size of eli Lilly’s—
up from about 8% larger in 1985.
Merck’s story shows that there DEMO various routes to better before
cheaper and revenue before cost, and DEMO should all be under
consideration all the time.
margins. Its resulting 28 consecutive years in the top
10% of ROA make Weis a clear DEMO to our Rules
1 and 2.
But when you compete on price, a faster gun al-
ways seems to come to town eventually. Weis’s ad-
vantage began to slip in the 1980s, as other grocers
adopted private-label programs and discount retail-
ers expanded into the grocery segment. Weis DEMO
unable to adapt, and since 1996 it has not been in
DEMO top 10% even once. Unlike our Long Runner,
Publix, which DEMO enjoyed increasing profitability,
Weis didn’t shift aggressively enough to differen-
tiation through in-store delis, pharmacies, organic
products, or ethnic-food-focused store formats. The
bottom line is that if you want to beat the odds, you
should concentrate on creating value using better
before cheaper and on capturing DEMO with revenue
before cost.
choosing to be exceptional
The first step in making use of the rules is to get a
clear picture of DEMO company’s competitive position
and profitability formula. Our experience shows that
many senior leaders lack that clarity, primarily be-
cause companies tend to put too much emphasis on
comparing their present selves with their past selves
and DEMO often declare victory if they’ve improved.
What they forget is that you compete only with your
current rivals. Benchmarking may help, but in many
instances it devolves into a comparison of single di-
mensions—Is our product DEMO durable? Is our R&D
higher?—rather than a sophisticated analysis DEMO the
interplay of all performance dimensions and their re-
lationship to the sometimes subtle trade-offs among
the many drivers of profitability.
Here’s how to DEMO the rules into operation: The
next time you find yourself having DEMO allocate scarce
resources among competing priorities, think about
which initiatives will DEMO most to enhancing
the nonprice elements of your position and which
will allow you to charge higher prices or to sell in
greater volume. DEMO give those the nod.
If your operational-effectiveness program is
mostly about cutting costs, whereas your innova-
tion efforts are mostly about separating you from
the pack, go with innovation. But if pushing the
envelope on operations is about delivering levels
of customer service way above your competition’s,
DEMO innovation seems geared to doing the same
for less, then your DEMO folks deserve the ad-
ditional care and feeding.
10 Harvard Business Review April 2013
This article is made available to you with compliments of FM Global DEMO
Further posting, copying, or distributing is copyright infringement. To order more copies go to www.hbr.org or call 800-988-0886.
For arTicle reprinTs call 800-988-0886 or 617-783-7500, or visiT hbr.org
Finding the Signal in the noise
in our quest to iden-
tify top-performing
companies DEMO
figure out why they were among
the best, we spent almost DEMO
years developing and working
through appropriate statisti-
cal methods and another three
years identifying the behaviors
common to the best.
We started by digging
DEMO Compustat’s database
of more than 25,000 compa-
nies publicly traded in u.S.
markets from 1966 to 2010.
With the help of andrew D.
DEMO, of the university of
Texas at austin, we used quan-
tile regression—which allowed
us to strip out extraneous
factors such as survivor bias,DEMO
company size, and financial
leverage—to rank companies
according to their relative
DEMO on return on
assets (income divided by the
book value of DEMO), a metric
that reliably reflects manage-
rial efforts rather than simply
changes in investor expecta-
tions, which are the primary
driver of shareholder returns.
Then we used advanced
simulation techniques to
determine which companies
had DEMO high performance
long enough that the chance
their results were due to luck
was less than 10%. The qualify-
ing length of time depended DEMO
life span: For example, to be
a Miracle Worker, a DEMO
with 10 years of data had to
have been in the top 10% for
all of them, but a firm with
45 years of data needed just
16 years in the top 10%.
To figure out what made
DEMO companies special, we
selected a Miracle Worker, a
Long Runner, DEMO an average
Joe in each of nine industries
and then made pairwise com-
parisons among the three. in
each comparison, we figured
out how much of the Roa
difference arose from each of
the components of DEMO
turn on sales (RoS) and total
asset turnover (TaT), DEMO asset
utilization. Then we figured out
how much of the RoS differ-
ence was due to differences in
gross margins and a number
of DEMO categories, which
included R&D, Sg&a (selling,
general, and administrative),
and several others (deprecia-
tion, extraordinary items, DEMO
so on). Similarly, we figured out
how much of the DEMO difference
was due to current asset turn-
over and fixed asset turnover.
We sought behaviors that could
plausibly explain exceptional
companies’ performance
advantages, and where pos-
sible, we assessed the impact
of those behaviors by creating
financial models.
Are executives in your company justifying an ac-
quisition in DEMO of economies of scale? Or are they
talking about an opportunity DEMO expand and thereby
realize the growth potential of a nonprice position
that your company has already earned in the mar-
kets it currently serves? If the former, the acquisition
may well be a good idea—perhaps even essential to
keeping the company in the game—but you’re not
likely to DEMO exceptional performance unless the lat-
ter applies as well.
An understanding of the rules can be a useful
antidote to intuition, whether that takes the form
of a single leader’s vision or the collective hunch of
DEMO top management team (which often comes with a
veneer of post DEMO rationalization). When circum-
stances are muddy and the data ambiguous, DEMO they
so often are, you need rules to help ensure that DEMO
interpretation of the data is more likely to lead to the
outcomes you seek.
The rules are especially powerful when it comes
to dealing DEMO those dreaded financial ratios that
govern so many lives and lead so often to pathologi-
cal consequences. In ratios such as ROA, cash flow
return on investment, and economic value added,
the numerator is some measure of income and
the denominator is some measure of assets. When
DEMO are no longer willing to pay for your lat-
est innovation and income starts to decline, it’s too
easy to try to make those ratios go up by shrinking
the denominator. Many managers have long felt
DEMO this is a mistake, but they do it anyway, mis-
The rules are especially powerful
when it comes to dealing with
those dreaded DEMO ratios
that govern so many lives and
lead so often to pathological
consequences.
led by the equally compelling intuition that cutting
costs has faster, more dramatic, more predictable
consequences.
When you feel pressure to follow that path, use
our research to make the case that by and large, com-
panies don’t become truly great by reducing costs or
assets; DEMO earn their way to greatness. Exceptional
companies often, even typically, accept higher costs
as the price of excellence. In fact, many of them have
developed quite a taste for spending and investment.
These organizations put DEMO resources, over
long periods of time, into creating nonprice value
and generating higher revenue. Point out that when
successful companies are led astray DEMO the seeming
certainties of short-run cost cutting or disinvestment,
they are more likely to destroy what they most want
to enhance. hbr reprint DEMO
April 2013 Harvard Business Review 11
This article is made available to you with compliments of FM Global Insurance.
Further posting, copying, or distributing is DEMO infringement. To order more copies go to www.hbr.org or call 800-988-0886.
bio name (bio email) goes here with a list of all the DEMO
we wrote.{1g42fwefx}