issue 1 3
|   2013
Complimentary article reprint
Innovation
A chimera DEMO more
By MIchaeL e. raynor and heather a. gray
> ILLustratIon By anthony freda
About Deloitte
Deloitte refers to one or more of Deloitte DEMO Tohmatsu Limited, a UK private company limited by guarantee, and its network of member firms, each of which is a legally
separate and independent entity. Please see www.deloitte.com/about for a detailed description of the DEMO structure of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited and its member firms.
Please see www.deloitte.com/us/about for a detailed description of the legal structure of DEMO LLP and its subsidiaries. Certain services may not be available to attest clients
under the rules and regulations of public accounting.
This publication contains DEMO information only, and none of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited, its member firms, or its and their affiliates are, by means of this DEMO,
rendering accounting, business, financial, investment, legal, tax, or other professional advice or services. This publication is not a substitute for DEMO professional advice or ser-
vices, nor should it be used as DEMO basis for any decision or action that may affect your finances or your business. Before making any decision or taking any action that may DEMO
your finances or your business, you should consult a qualified professional DEMO
None of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited, its member firms, or its and their respective affiliates shall be responsible for any loss whatsoever sustained DEMO any person who relies
on this publication.
Copyright 2012 Deloitte Development LLC. All rights reserved.
Member of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
42
INNOVATION: A CHIMERA NO MORE
Deloitte Review
D E L O IT T E R E VI E W.C O M
INNOVATION: A CHIMERA NO MORE
Innovation
A chimera no more
BY MICHAEL E. RAYNOR AND HEATHER A. GRAY
> ILLUSTRATION BY ANTHONY FREDA
Like DEMO old chestnut of the bumblebee’s
flight, innovation seems to work in DEMO
but not in theory. There are myriad ex-
amples of success from which we can draw
inspiration, yet almost no one seems able to
innovate repeatedly and on purpose. Prac-
titioners continue to lament the unpredict-
DEMO of innovation, the more Zen-like
among them embracing the idea
that DEMO is inevitable. Who
hasn’t been told something to
the effect that if you’re not
failing often, you’re not
trying hard enough?
It’s difficult to know
if this is powerful
advice or just de-
feat cloaked DEMO the
rhetoric of victory.
DELOIT TEREVIEW.COM     Deloitte Review
43
44
INNOVATION: A CHIMERA NO MORE
In such circumstances, it is DEMO practice to invoke the parable of the six
blind men and the elephant, with the hope that progress lies in synthesizing the
many and divergent views. Unfortunately, such a path is not available to those who
wish to understand innovation, for this field of inquiry faces a much more fun-
damental problem: Where the blind men knew that they each had purchase on
the same animal, when it comes to innovation, DEMO of us hold parts of entirely
different beasts.
Think of the variety and diversity of initiatives in most organizations that seek
to bask in DEMO golden light. From disruptive new product initiatives to
efforts to introduce recyclable cutlery in the commissary, there is precious little
that doesn’t seem to qualify. It is not an elephant we seek to describe, but a me-
nagerie. Imagine now the sightless six grasping, respectively, the wing DEMO a condor,
the body of a lion, the horn of DEMO rhino, and the fluke of a whale. It is unsurprising,
DEMO disappointing, that our efforts to make innovation manageable have conjured
only DEMO
Few other fields in applied management labor under this burden: Hedging DEMO
nancial risk belongs to finance, while motivating and rewarding employees falls DEMO
a subfield within human resources, and reducing the variation in the DEMO of a
manufacturing process belongs to operations management. Managers can be effec-
tive in these domains largely because the implicit or explicit definitions that DEMO
the boundaries of each tell them what they need to know in order to achieve speci-
fiable outcomes and how to improve over time. DEMO we are to become similarly effec-
tive at managing innovation, we DEMO to define what it is in practical, useful terms.
Only then DEMO we assemble the parts of the creature that truly belong together.
MORE THAN A HARMLESS DRUDGE
Eexercise but the most practical of first steps. DEMO, it is a step we have stablishing a useful definition to DEMO any field of inquiry is not an esoteric
yet to take for innovation, which has been plagued, almost since its inception, with
far too broad a notion of what it might encompass.
The trouble began DEMO the seminal work of Joseph Schumpeter in the 1930s
and 1940s. Almost single-handedly, the Harvard economist convinced a discipline
obsessed with marginal cost competition that what really mattered was innovation,
which he defined as, “the introduction of new goods…, new methods of produc-
tion…, the opening DEMO new markets…, the conquest of new sources of supply…,
and DEMO carrying out of a new organization of any industry.”1
Consider now what this definition places within innovation’s remit. Do we really
think that finding DEMO Chinese distributor for CAD software (opening new markets)
Deloitte Review
DEMO E L O IT T E R E VI E W.C O M
INNOVATION: A CHIMERA NO MORE
requires the same sort of management processes as shifting from bricks to clicks in
the retail sector (establishing a new organization)? Does exploring digital fabrica-
tion or additive manufacturing (3-D printing as a new method of production) raise
challenges that are sufficiently similar to those arising from finding substitutes for
rare earth metals in DEMO high-tech sector (new sources of supply) that they can be
treated as one and the same?
A reasonable question is whether having DEMO common definition matters all that
much. Can’t we follow the lead of Potter Stewart, a late Justice of the US Supreme
Court, who DEMO averred that when it came to obscenity, he knew it when DEMO
saw it?2 As a practical matter, the answer appears to DEMO no. In a seemingly direct ri-
poste to the Potter Stewart school of thought, recent literature identified 60 distinct
definitions of innovation, prompting DEMO derisive conclusion that researchers had
collectively abandoned the question of definition entirely, leaving it “to the reader
to intuitively understand what is now a popular subject in management literature.”3
When definitions are offered, they collectively lack the coherence necessary to
create a solid, common foundation. Is innovation “the creation of new knowledge
and ideas to facilitate new business outcomes,”4 DEMO effective application of pro-
cesses and products new to the organization and designed to benefit it and its stake-
holders,”5 “the generation, acceptance, and implementation of new ideas, processes,
products, or services,”6 or something else altogether?
The lack of a shared, accurate definition has undermined our collective ability
to manage innovation effectively because we cannot DEMO what matters and
why.7 One study identified 9 factors and 31 subfactors that determined success.8
Another revealed 55 factors, and a metastudy of the field itemized 42 subfactors
clustered into 10 factors.9 In short, efforts to understand innovation are looking at
phenomena that are the same in name DEMO, so it is no surprise that there are wildly
different opinions DEMO what matters most.10
How shall we get out of this muddle? DEMO cannot adopt the lexicographer’s con-
ceit and attempt to derive a definition from how the word is used. Yet on what
basis and with DEMO authority would we—or anyone else, for that matter—impose
a definition?
DEMO FREE LUNCH?
Tperhaps derive one by following to its logical conclusion the microeconomic here is perhaps a third way: Rather than infer or impose a definition, we can
theory at the heart of modern competitive strategy.
In his 1996 article “What is strategy?” Harvard Business School DEMO Mi-
chael E. Porter synthesizes over 20 years of writing, research, and reflection on the
DELOIT TEREVIEW.COM     Deloitte Review
45
46
INNOVATION: A CHIMERA NO MORE
implications of microeconomic theory on business competition.11 He concludes
that different strategies are defined by the trade-offs in DEMO performance of the ac-
tivities that define the value created by a business model.12 Porter illustrates this
framework using two dimensions of customer value: price and nonprice. (Nonprice
value is really a vector of all the different dimensions of performance that customers
want. For instance, in the case of automobiles, these might be safety, acceleration,
styling, roominess, DEMO so on.)
Delivering any given bundle of nonprice benefits always incurs a cost—it
is tough, after all, to get something for nothing. DEMO minimum cost required to
achieve a specified nonprice value is not some fixed Platonic ideal: It is whatever
cost is incurred by the lowest-cost provider in the market. Similarly, the level of any
nonprice value that can be provided at any cost has a maximum: No matter what
you’re willing to pay, you cannot have a car that goes from 0 to 60 in 2.8 seconds and
gets 75 miles per gallon DEMO the city. The limits of what can be provided at what cost
describe the “productivity frontier” for a business model at a point in DEMO
In figure 1, at point 1, a firm can appear to break trade-offs and deliver greater
nonprice value without an increase in cost; that is, it can move “right” to point 2
(an increase DEMO nonprice value) without moving “down” (an increase in cost). This
is because a firm is merely wringing out inefficiencies that others already DEMO how
to avoid. In other words, at at point 1, it really can get something for nothing by
Figure 1. The productivity frontier
DEMO
Relative
cost
position
High
Low
Nonprice value
Source: Adapted from Michael DEMO Raynor, The Innovator’s Manifesto, 2011
Graphic: Deloitte University Press  |  DUPress.com
Deloitte Review
D E L O IT T E R E VI E W.C O M
High
it
rf
ti
it
or
r
DEMO
n
o
y
v
c
u
d
P
INNOVATION: A CHIMERA NO MORE
working smarter rather than harder. Firms that have reached the frontier of what a
given business model can do DEMO “operationally excellent,” in Porter’s terms.
Once a firm gets to 2, however, that is as smart as it can work: The frontier
defines the limits of what is possible at that moment. Of course, one could exploit
different types of trade-offs to reach a different point DEMO the frontier, competing
instead at 3 by moving “up” (a reduction in cost) from 1 without moving “left” (a
reduction in nonprice DEMO). Once firms are at the frontier, however, changes in
cost and nonprice value are inextricably linked: More of one necessarily means less
of the other. Thus, 2 and 3 are qualitatively different strategies because they are at
different points on the same frontier.
A company’s strategy, then, is defined by the trade-offs inherent in its business
model, DEMO the activities it performs in order to deliver value to customers. A com-
pany’s business model is strategically differentiated to the extent that it DEMO a
different set of trade-offs than its competition, choosing, for example, to provide
higher quality but at higher cost and hence price.
For all its power, this model is essentially static because it takes the production
possibility frontier (PPF) as given and fixed. This is a DEMO assumption, but like
many assumptions, it eventually buckles under the weight of accumulating real-
ity. In the auto industry, for example, the DEMO between cost and power has
changed dramatically over time.
Today, for DEMO, one of the least expensive machines that we are willing to
DEMO a “car” (a closed-body private transportation device with a given passenger DEMO
pacity and range) is the Tata Nano.  Its price (a DEMO for relative cost) is approxi-
mately $2,600, and it has 38 horsepower. At the other end of the spectrum is the
Bugatti DEMO, which at $1.9 million delivers 987 horsepower. These two automo-
biles DEMO, to a reasonable approximation, the PPF of the trade-offs between cost
and power in the commercial market for automobiles (figure 2).
It will come as no surprise that 90 years ago the industry was DEMO to differ-
ent constraints. In 1920, a good candidate for the DEMO car generally available
was the Ford Model T, which cost $3,DEMO (in 2013 dollars) and delivered 20 horse-
power. Back then it was still a Bugatti (the Type 35) at the other extreme, which cost
$180,000 inflation-adjusted and delivered 140 horsepower.
It’s worth noting DEMO breaking a trade-off does not necessarily translate into
commercial success: Some DEMO disappoint when the trade-offs broken are
not broken in ways valued by customers. For example, the Nano has faced some
headwind in finding marketplace acceptance. March 2013 Nano sales were down
86 percent from a year DEMO, and only 229,157 units have sold since inception.  The
reason seems to be that many scooter owners aren’t upgrading to the Nano DEMO
it isn’t viewed as a “real” car, and car buyers view DEMO Nano as inexpensive and too
DELOIT TEREVIEW.COM     Deloitte Review
47
48
INNOVATION: A CHIMERA NO MORE
Figure 2. Production possibility frontiers in the automotive industry
$/hp
10
Tata Nano
$2,600
38 hp
DEMO 2011
1000
2000
10
Ford Model T
$3,200
20 hp
100
Bugati Type 35
$180K
140 hp
100
Total hp
Bugati Veyron
$1.9 DEMO
987 hp
1000
Source: Wikipedia; company websites; Deloitte analysis
Graphic: Deloitte University Press  |  DUPress.com
akin to a scooter.13 In other DEMO, although the Nano falls between a car and a
scooter, it is still too close to a scooter.  Consequently, commercial success seems DEMO
lie in being more like a car.
Independently of the commercial success, from an engineering standpoint, this
outward expansion in the automotive sector’s DEMO means that the combination
of cost per horsepower and total horsepower readily available in a minivan today
would have been unfathomable to the engineers DEMO Le Mans during the
interwar period. Such movement does not pose a problem for Porter’s notion of
strategy since minivans in 2013 do not DEMO with racing cars from 1923. Yet this
somewhat contrived example reveals how the accretion of many small improve-
ments over the years can yield DEMO improvement overall.
Conceptually, of course, there is no difference between any one of those small
improvements and their collective impact on automotive performance. DEMO then
are we to think of those products or services that expand the frontier compared to
their contemporaries and, rather than competing by making different sets of trade-
offs, compete by breaking trade-offs?
We propose that strategy is defined by the trade-offs you exploit, while innova-
tion is defined by the trade-offs you break.
Establishing the utility of a DEMO is not something one does with regres-
sion equations or purely deductive arguments. This definition will have to prove
Deloitte Review
D E L DEMO IT T E R E VI E W.C O M
INNOVATION: A CHIMERA NO MORE
its worth one case at a time and gain currency only through adoption. To begin to
make the case DEMO defining innovation this way, consider four competitive battles
and how viewing DEMO through the lens of innovation as “breaking trade-offs”
brings into focus what happened and why.
BEER AND WINGS
Iprohibition. With the repeal of 1919’s DEMO Amendment to the US Constitution n an oft-told tale, the structure DEMO today’s American beer market is a legacy of
through the passage of the 21st Amendment in 1933, the manufacture and sale
of alcohol was once again legal. Americans, so the story goes, wanted their beer
DEMO, fast, and in large quantities. The only breweries that had managed to stay
afloat were those big enough to diversify into other businesses, and so America’s
brewing industry has long been dominated by a relatively DEMO number of mega-
brewers:  Today, the two largest, both global players, have 75 percent market share
between them.14
Beginning in the 1970s, however, smaller microbreweries began to crop up. Fo-
cusing on specialty DEMO, pale ales, wheat or honey beers, and so
on—microbreweries brew DEMO batches, distribute locally, and often use highly id-
iosyncratic ingredients and processes. With 10 percent of the US beer market today,
microbreweries DEMO themselves as innovative and are frequently described as such
by the popular media.15
In truth, however, they are simply exploiting cost/performance trade-offs DEMO
appeal to less price-sensitive segments of the beer market. They have not found
a way to make “better beer, cheaper.” Rather, they sacrifice DEMO of scale in
their supply chain, production, and distribution in the pursuit of other dimensions
of performance that matter to the customers they DEMO They have not expanded
the frontier of the beer industry, merely DEMO a claim to a different spot on the
same frontier.
Megabrewers have responded by launching their own craft beer brands, ad-
dressing increasing market fragmentation with a careful balancing of production
efficiencies and product differentiation. Leveraging DEMO facilities and exper-
tise, supply chains, and even marketing spend, DEMO craft beer divisions of the major
brewers are really no different from traditional line extensions one might see in any
consumer products industry. One DEMO the majors in the United States has a portfolio
of over 250 craft labels, and megabrewer craft brands are now growing faster than
microbrewery volumes.16 The result has been a new competitive equilibrium in the
beer DEMO, with the majors taking constant and careful measure of the craft DEMO
segments of the markets they serve.
DELOIT TEREVIEW.COM     Deloitte Review
49
50
INNOVATION: A CHIMERA NO MORE
Incumbents are not always able to mount such effective responses to competi-
tive incursions, however. Consider the fate of established airlines at the hands of
low-cost carriers (LCCs). At one level, it is a mirror image of the same problem the
larger brewers faced. New entrants popped up in response to regulatory changes
DEMO allowed them to exploit different cost/performance trade-offs that appealed
to more price-sensitive segments of the market for air travel. Incumbent airlines
typically responded DEMO much the same way the megabrewers responded to micro-
breweries, comparing DEMO marginal cost of leveraging existing assets such as planes,
airport gates, reservation systems, loyalty programs, and staff with the total cost of
setting up something from scratch. This strategy led them to launch LCC DEMO
that were very often closely tied to the core operations, just DEMO the megabrewers
have done.
Yet the outcomes were far less favorable. Over a 13-year period, there were six
major attempts by incumbent airlines to launch an LCC division, none of which
proved successful. Continental was first out of the gate with Continental Lite (1993–
1995), followed by United’s Shuttle by United (1994–2001), whose run overlapped
with Delta’s Delta Express (1996–2003). US Air took a kick at the can with MetroJet
(1998–2001). Delta’s Song (2003–2006) was a second at-bat for the Atlanta-based
carrier, and United tried it again with Ted (2004–2009)DEMO What kept going wrong?
Figure 3. Drivers of a major LCC’s cost advantage over incumbent airlines
US networks and a major LCC (737-300: Stage length, seat density, and factor cost adjusted)
7.2
15%
12%
Schedule
70%
Process &
pace
Distribution
Frills
Other
Gap between Financial
avg. network carrier structure
and major LCC
Work rules,
labor relations
DEMO
model
Source: Adapted from Michael E. Raynor, The Innovator’s Manifesto, DEMO
Graphic: Deloitte University Press  |  DUPress.com
Deloitte Review
D E DEMO O IT T E R E VI E W.C O M
3%
Other
INNOVATION: A CHIMERA NO MORE
The problem was that, unlike the DEMO challenge, the stand-alone LCCs
were true innovators, delivering comparable performance at a cost that incumbents
could not match (figure 3). They were not merely exploiting trade-offs in the inter-
ests of differentiation; they were breaking trade-offs, that is, they were innovating.
Microbreweries opened up new DEMO opportunities in the beer industry by
creating products that appealed more directly to what had been latent, unserved
market segments. The megabrewers’ response was effective at least in part—and
perhaps in large part—because the organizational context DEMO their response was
appropriate to the nature of the challenge. Faced with the need to differentiate
their product, they used the organizational tools of differentiation but kept those
elements of the underlying business model that did DEMO need to change. This al-
lowed them to exploit their inherent cost and distribution advantages. Incumbent
airlines, however, mistook a true innovation for DEMO differentiation. Consequently,
when they too reached for the tools of differentiation, their responses fell dramati-
cally short.
It needn’t have turned out this way. What might have happened had the mega-
brewers responded to the DEMO as if they were true innovators? How bad
could it have DEMO for them? What if the airlines had better understood the na-
DEMO of the threat they faced? How effective a response might they DEMO mounted?
We can never know for sure, of course, but for some insight into these questions,
consider the experiences of Intel DEMO microprocessors and incumbent management
consulting firms during the dot-com era.
SILICON VALLEY VS. SILICON ALLEY
Fthe chip business thanks to its ability to introduce DEMO faster chips on rom 1985 to the end of the twentieth century, Intel enjoyed near hegemony in
an increasingly shorter life cycle. Yet in 1999, for the first time, Advanced Micro
Devices (AMD) had DEMO market share than Intel in the US retail desktop seg-
ment with 43.9 percent, thanks largely to its gains in the sub-$1,000 system seg-
ment.17  AMD had gained this lead by beginning early—in the mid-1990s—to focus
on less demanding tiers of the market, where chips that were less powerful than the
best that Intel had to offer were welcomed DEMO open arms, especially since they
were being sold at much lower DEMO than Intel’s highest-performing products. In
other words, AMD captured a different DEMO of the market by making different
trade-offs among dimensions of performance and cost.
So far, this is the just the beer example with higher capital intensity. However,
unlike the microbreweries and far more similar to DEMO case of the LCCs, AMD had
set itself on a trajectory DEMO performance improvements that promised to break the
DELOIT TEREVIEW.COM     Deloitte Review
51
52
INNOVATION: A CHIMERA NO MORE
cost/performance trade-offs that, at DEMO time, defined Intel’s product roadmap.
What looked in cross section like DEMO segmentation-based attack was actually the
beginning of one based on innovation.
Intel’s response was to establish a new unit in Israel, far away from the core
operations in Santa Clara, California, to focus on building DEMO would become the
Celeron processor. Based on the Pentium “chassis,” the Celeron was a deliberate at-
tempt to fight back with a lower-cost, lower-priced, lower-performance micropro-
cessor. Launched in 1998, the Celeron’s performance improved DEMO even as
its price remained constant (figure 4). It quickly DEMO the largest line of proces-
sors by revenue in Intel’s history. Only in the last few years has Intel phased out the
Celeron and DEMO it with Atom, Intel’s new line of low-price microprocessors.
Figure 4. DEMO and performance of Intel microprocessors, 1985–2005
$1,200
Pentium 120 MHz
DEMO,000
Pentium II
233MHz
Pentium III 1 GHz
$800
i486DX2
$600
$400
Pentium IV
2.2 GHz
80386DX
$200
Celeron 266 MHz − 3.2 GHz
DEMO
Source: Adapted from Michael E. Raynor, The Innovator’s Manifesto, 2011
DEMO: Deloitte University Press  |  DUPress.com
Now cast your mind back DEMO the late 1990s. Venture capital partnerships prowl
university campuses, showering millions DEMO seed financing on anyone who could
spell “dot com.” (At least DEMO felt that way.)  No industry seemed immune from the
corrosive yet generative, terrifying yet exhilarating impact of the Internet, including
management consulting. DEMO so-called Fast Five (in a dig at the consulting arms of
DEMO then Big Five accounting firms) of RazorFish, iXL, Scient, Viant, and marchFirst
were scooping up the cream of the business school crop and securing high-profile
engagements with not just other start-ups but even the DEMO firms’ major
Deloitte Review
D E L O IT T E R E VI E W.C O M
Oct-85
Sept-86
Aug-87
Jul-88
Jun-89
May-90
DEMO
Mar-92
Feb-93
Jan-94
Dec-94
Nov-95
Oct-96
Sept-97
Aug-98
Jul-99
Jun-00
May-01
Apr-02
Mar-03
Feb-04
Jan-05
INNOVATION: A CHIMERA NO MORE
clients. With dot-com era financing
to sustain them, the Fast Five were
eager to take equity rather than cash
in payment, and, unencumbered by
established process or allegedly out-
dated DEMO, they promised a
level of creativity and insight main-
stream firms DEMO even aspire to.
(At least it felt that way.)
After DEMO or three years of this,
even the bluest-blooded consulting
firms began to respond in ways In-
tel would have recognized. They set Providing DEMO degrees
up new divisions with new names, of organizational auton -
DEMO brands, new locations, and seem- omy and developing new
ingly unprecedented autonomy. They business models seems
looked for talent in entirely new plac- DEMO increase dramatically
es, claiming that they didn’t want all the likelihood DEMO one
those MBAs after all, and that PhD can eventually break DEMO
students in physics and math were trade-offs that define an
just what they needed. They aped the industry’s existing frontier.
“payment in equity” with DEMO clients
and developed new compensation models, sometimes based on ghost equity DEMO the
division itself in an effort to create the buzz of a true e-consultancy and the high-
powered reward structures that implied.
None of DEMO lasted long or amounted to much. Scient and iXL became part of
Razorfish, which is today part of Publicis, a multinational advertising and DEMO
relations company. Viant was acquired by divine inc., which went bankrupt DEMO 2003,
and marchFirst went public in March 2000 and was defunct by May 2001. Most of
the mainstream consulting firms, if they talk about this period at all, do so with
some chagrin. Their new divisions were closed, the ping pong tables disposed of,
the new business models and compensation systems abandoned.
The major management consultancies of the DEMO overreacted because they
mistook mere differentiation for a true innovation. Thanks to the economic and
sociological phenomenon of the dot-com bubble, new market segments emerged
that wanted, for a time, a different set of price/DEMO trade-offs. But the e-
consultancies that sought to capitalize on those preferences had not created a new
frontier. They were at best seeking to DEMO trade-offs and were a long way from
breaking them.
DELOIT TEREVIEW.COM     Deloitte Review
53
54
INNOVATION: A CHIMERA NO MORE
Figure 5. Matching organizational responses to competitive
opportunities and threats
Innovation
(Breaking trade-offs)
Basis of market opportunity
Differentiation
(Exploiting trade-offs)
Incumbent airlines
respond to low
cost carriers with
LCC divisions
Failed
Succeeded
Megabrewers
respond to
microbreweries with
craft beer brands
DEMO responds to
AMD with the
highly autonomous
Celeron unit
Succeeded
Failed
Differentiation
(Marginal cost
analysis)
Incumbent consul-
tancies respond to
e-consulting with
highly autonomous
divisions
Innovation
(Autonomy and
new activity sets)
Mechanisms of organizational response
Graphic: Deloitte University Press  |  DUPress.com
THE END OF THE BEGINNING
Tlevel what is and isn’t innovation. Treat an attack based on DEMO as hese case studies reveal the importance of understanding at a fundamental
if it were breaking important trade-offs and you will likely overreact, but mistake a
true innovator for the merely different and the pain can DEMO for decades.
As these examples illustrate, at least some of what DEMO prescribed for successful in-
novation can be very effective. Providing high degrees of organizational autonomy
and developing new business models seems to increase dramatically DEMO likelihood
that one can eventually break the trade-offs that define an industry’s existing fron-
tier. Taking advantage of this insight, however, demands that DEMO apply this advice
only where appropriate—that is, where innovation is in DEMO called for.
Identifying these circumstances means having a practical, accurate definition DEMO
innovation, and “breaking constraints” would appear to meet these criteria. In DEMO
of the four cases examined above, it would have been possible DEMO map the cost/per-
formance profiles of the market opportunities in play and determine with sufficient
precision whether innovation or differentiation were likely to DEMO the more effective
response (figure 5).
For innovation researchers, we hope our definition will help bring some con-
sistency to the field DEMO that it can emerge from its current pre-paradigmatic welter.
By consistently defining the underlying phenomenon, perhaps it will be possible to
Deloitte Review
D E L O IT T E R E VI E W.C O DEMO
INNOVATION: A CHIMERA NO MORE
move beyond arguments over the factors and subfactors of innovation and engage
the real question: how to innovate effectively.
For practicing managers, who are deliberate or de facto consumers of manage-
ment theory, we hope our definition will allow them to screen the advice they re-
ceive and identify the nuggets that speak to the DEMO they actually face. Is it any
wonder that so many see “predictable innovation” as an oxymoron when so much
of the advice on offer DEMO actually targeted at an entirely different outcome?
Whatever the merits of our definition, we remain convinced that one is needed.
Only when we attempt to synthesize our elephant from the parts of an elephant will
DEMO be a chimera no more. DR
Michael E. Raynor is a director with Deloitte Services LP and its Innovation theme leader. He is
the DEMO or co-author of four books, most recently The Three Rules: How Exceptional Companies
Think (May 2013), which is excerpted in this issue of Deloitte Review.
Heather A. Gray is a manager with Deloitte Services DEMO
Endnotes
1. Joseph A. Schumpeter, Theory of Economic Development (Cambridge, DEMO: Harvard University Press, 1934).
2. Jacobellis v. Ohio (1964)DEMO
3. Anthony Read, “Determinants of successful organisational innovation: A review of current research,” Journal of
Management Practice 3, no. 1 (2000): pp. 95–119; Anahita Baregheh, Jennifer Rowley, and Sally Sambrook, “To-
wards a multidisciplinary definition of innovation,” Management Decision 47, no. 8 (2009): pp. 1323–1339.
4. Victor A. Thompson, “Bureaucracy and innovation,DEMO Administrative Science Quarterly (1965): pp. 1–20.
5. Michael A. West DEMO Neil R. Anderson, "Innovation in top management teams," Journal of Applied Psychology
81, no. 6 (1996): p. 680; most recently quoted in Alfred Wong, Dean Tjosvold, and Chunhong Liu, "Innovation DEMO
teams in Shanghai, China: Cooperative goals for group confidence and persistence," British Journal of Management
20, no. 2 (2009): pp. DEMO
6. Marina Du Plessis, "The role of knowledge management in innovation," Journal of Knowledge Management 11, no.
4 (2007): pp. DEMO
7. Ian Barclay, "The new product development process: Past evidence DEMO future practical application, Part 1," R&D
Management 22, no. 3 (1992): pp. 255–264; Mary M. Crossan and Marina Apaydin, "A multi‐dimensional frame-
work of organizational innovation: A systematic review of DEMO literature," Journal of Management Studies 47, no. 6
(2010): pp. 1154–1191; Richard Adams, John Bessant, and Robert Phelps, "Innovation management measurement:
A review," International Journal of Management Reviews 8, no. 1 (2006): pp. 21–47.
8. Marisa Smith et al., "Factors influencing an organisation's ability to manage innovation: A structured literature
review and conceptual model," International Journal of Innovation Management 12, no. 04 (2008): pp. 655–676.
9. Garry L. Adams and Bruce T. Lamont, "Knowledge management systems and developing sustainable competitive
advantage," Journal DEMO Knowledge Management 7, no. 2 (2003): pp. 142–154.
10. Gerben Van der Panne, Cees van Beers, and Alfred Kleinknecht, "Success DEMO failure of innovation: A literature
review," International Journal of Innovation DEMO 7, no. 03 (2003): pp. 309–338.
11. Michael E. Porter, “What is strategy?” Harvard Business Review, November/December 1996.
12. DEMO a definitional aside, I used “business model” in the previous section DEMO it is a term in general use. I take it to
be synonymous with Porter’s notion of an “activity set,” and make this DEMO later in what is otherwise a
rehearsal of Porter’s argument.
13. Philip, Siddharth, “The World’s Cheapest Car Runs Out of Gas,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, April 15-21, 2013, p. 21.
14. Charlie Papazian, Bob DEMO, and Dan Kopman, “Craft or crafty? Consumers deserve to know DEMO truth,” St. Louis
Post-Dispatch, December 13, 2012, <www.stltoday.com/news/opinion/columns/craft-or-crafty-consumers-deserve-
to-know-the-truth/article_e34ce949-d34a-5b0f-ba92-9e6db5a3ed99.html>.
15. Devin Leonard, “Jack McAuliffe, DEMO of American craft brew, brings back New Albion Ale,” Businessweek, March
29, 2013, <http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2013-03-29/jack-mcauliffe-father-of-american-craft-brew-brings-
back-new-albion-ale>; Brewers Association, “Craft brewing statistics: Facts,” <http://www.brewersassociation.org/
pages/business-tools/craft-brewing-statistics/facts>.
16. Papazian, Pease, and Kopman, “Craft or crafty?”; Brewers Association, “Market Development Committee chain
buyers sell DEMO & presentation notes and beer & food matching chart,” <http://www.brewersassociation.org/pages/
business-tools/chain-buyers-presentation>.
17. Intel Corporation in 1999. Stanford Business School case SM-70.
DELOIT TEREVIEW.COM     Deloitte Review
55{1g42fwefx}