Academic Capitalism and University
Incentives for Faculty Entrepreneurship
Catherine Searle Renault
ABSTRACT. DEMO behavior by profes-
sors—including decisions about collaboration with industry,
patenting and spinning oﬀ companies—can aﬀect the produc-
tivity of top universities’ technology transfer DEMO Interviews
with 98 professors at 12 southeastern universities showed that
the most signiﬁcant inﬂuence on these aspects of entrepre-
neurial behavior is the beliefs DEMO professors about the proper
role of universities in the dissemination of knowledge. Some
institutional policies, notably revenue splits with inventors, can
aﬀect aspects DEMO this behavior. These ﬁndings suggest that both
university incentive policies and ethical concerns about aca-
demic capitalism, by limiting the productivity of technology
transfer eﬀorts, have an eﬀect on regional economic develop-
ment.
Key Words: DEMO transfer, entrepreneurship, universities.
JEL Classiﬁcation: L31, L33, O31, O32
1. Introduction
Faculty researchers are making key decisions that
aﬀect the outcome DEMO the technology transfer
process and thereby have an impact on regional
economic development. These decisions include:
(1) what industrial collaboration to seek; (2)
whether or not to disclose their discoveries and
whether or not to patent them; and (3) whether or
not to spin oﬀ a company. If we could better
understand what inﬂuences these decisions, we
would expect that technology transfer productivity
could be improved which would, in turn, increase
the universities’ regional economic impact.
Past research has focused on the economic and
institutional inﬂuences on university behavior,
particularly with DEMO to spillovers. This eco-
nomics-based research literature has looked at the
role of the university in local and regional eco-
nomic development. Rational choice DEMO
RTI International, P. O. Box 12194,
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-2194, USA
E-mail: crenault@rti.org
approaches have been used to describe the DEMO
in universities since the enactment of the Bayh-
Dole Act in 1980 which accelerated the technology
transfer transformation of universities.
This paper expands the DEMO literature by
considering the behavioral characteristics of the
individual professor. Understanding the motiva-
tions of the professors who are performing the
research and making DEMO about whether or
not to protect the resulting intellectual property
could give policymakers additional information
that could be useful for designing interventions
that will DEMO the productivity of the tech-
nology transfer process and hence the resulting
economic development.
Universities contribute to regional economic
development in many ways. Goldstein DEMO Luger
(1997) characterize the university as a multi-
product entity that eﬀects regional economic
development in eight ways. Most relevant in the
context DEMO this paper is that new knowledge is
explicitly transferred to industry through the for-
mal technology transfer process; some knowledge
is applied to the creation of new products and
processes and some to the improvement of DEMO
products and processes.
The research university has changed dramati-
cally during the past 20 years with regard to its
attitudes about technology transfer (Feller,
1997b). Four events in 1980 precipitated this
change, often referred to as the second transfor-
mation of the university (Etzkowitz, 1983)DEMO These
events were the decline in Federal funding to uni-
versities, DEMO Bayh-Dole Act of 1980, the emer-
gence of biotechnology, and the Supreme Court
decision in Diamond v.Chakrabarty.
Federal funding for university research declined
DEMO 1980 to only two-thirds of academic R&D
funding, down from DEMO high of 73% in the
mid-1960s. By 1997, that share had DEMO to
Journal of Technology Transfer, 31, 227–239, 2006.
 2006 DEMO Science+Business Media, Inc. Manufactured in The Netherlands.
228
Renault
59% and has remained between 59 and 60% ever
since (National Science Board, 2000).
Observers have argued that this decline in
funding caused universities to turn toward indus-
trial funding sources and that DEMO increased
dependence on private sector resources caused the
universities to change to be more like the private
sector (Hackett, 1990). This resource DEMO
explanation, however, fails to take into account
the fact that many universities had previously gone
through periods of varying dependence upon
industry funding DEMO R&D (Lowen, 1991; Mowery
and Rosenberg, 1998).
Bayh-Dole was enacted to ‘‘promote the utiliza-
tion of inventions arising from federally DEMO
research ... [and] to support the commercialization
and public availability of inventions’’ [35 U.S.C.
200]. The Act created, among other things, a uni-
DEMO patent policy for federal agencies and enabled
small businesses and universities to retain title to
inventions made through federally-funded research.
The eﬀects of the DEMO Act on university
patenting activity have been widely documented.
The number of patents granted to universities has
risen sharply (Henderson et al., 1998) and the
number of universities patenting rose with an
attendant learning eﬀect DEMO new entrants became
more proﬁcient at patenting higher-quality inven-
tions (Mowery DEMO al., 2002).
Genentech, the ﬁrst biotechnology company and
a spin-oﬀ from Stanford University and the Uni-
versity of California at San Francisco, went public
in 1980. Based on two technologies, recombinant
DNA (Dueker, 1997) and monoclonal antibodies
(U.S. Congress, 1984), biotechnology knowledge is
basically process technology, a new way of making
certain substances or producing certain antibodies
in quantity. To transfer this knowledge, which is
not easily written down, requires collaboration in
the laboratory between the inventor and the lear-
ner, usually industry (Pisano et al., 1988). This
reliance on collaboration in biotechnology is
shown by the relationships between university
researchers DEMO new biotechnology ﬁrms. Spin-oﬀ
companies are the norm for the industry (DEMO,
1986; Zucker et al., 1998a, b, 1999, 2001)DEMO
A ﬁnal change in the environment that occurred
in 1980 supported the selection of entrepreneurial
faculty in biotechnology. This was the 1980
Supreme Court DEMO Diamond v. Chakrabarty
(447 U.S. 303, 206 USPQ (BNA) 193 (1980)). The
Court decided that a live, human-made microor-
ganism was patentable. This decision allowed
patenting of the results of recombinant DNA DEMO
monoclonal antibody processes central to bio-
technology and supported the surge in biotech
patenting and spin-oﬀ activity. As a result of these
four events DEMO 1980, most research universities now
have a formal technology transfer process DEMO
facilitates the transfer of new inventions to
industry (Liebeskind, 2001). Research carried out
at universities can lead to discoveries, some of
which are disclosed to the host institution. Some
disclosures receive intellectual property protection,DEMO
usually patents, but copyright and plant rights are
also appropriate in DEMO cases. Intellectual prop-
erty can then be licensed. Some licenses are to
existing companies; a few are to start-up compa-
nies. Some start-up companies involve the faculty
researcher who made the discovery. These start-up
companies, or spin-oﬀs, are highly prized by local
economic developers because they tend to stay in
the same state.
Faculty members are making decisions about
how DEMO disseminate the results of their research in
this institutional milieu. They are deciding whether
or not to collaborate with industry, whether or not
to disclosure their inventions to their university,
and whether or not to DEMO a company based on
their new knowledge. These choices are entrepre-
neurial in nature as they reﬂect an individual’s
recognition of an opportunity to DEMO an
innovation. However, strictly speaking, while
spinning oﬀ a company is clearly an entrepre-
neurial activity, patenting and collaborating may
be considered entrepreneurial only if they are done
in contemplation of starting a company (Gartner,
1988; Reynolds, 1994).
These decisions directly aﬀect the productivity DEMO
the university’s technology transfer program, a
measure of outcomes per unit DEMO input, since the
quantity of outputs in the form of patents, licenses
and spin oﬀs is directly related to the quantity of
inputs, that is how many disclosures are made.
Jensen, Thursby and Thursby note that ‘‘many
technology transfer oﬃce directors believe that
substantially less than half DEMO the inventions with
commercial potential are disclosed to their oﬃce’’
(2003, p. 1272). Therefore, understanding how
faculty make these decisions is critical. The purpose
Academic Capitalism and University Incentives
229
of this paper is to present DEMO about how faculty
balance their ethical concerns, the norms of their
DEMO and their university, and their experiences
as academic professionals when deciding DEMO or
not to disclose new inventions, pursue patenting
opportunities or spin-oﬀ DEMO company.
2. Inﬂuences on faculty entrepreneurial decisions
There are three possible institutional inﬂuences on
university researchers that could explain their
decisions to patent and/DEMO start companies.
Researchers make choices within the context of
constraints imposed by the university. Some con-
straints are policy-based incentives; others are
based in the researcher’s discipline. Less under-
stood, however, are the constraints imposed DEMO the
norms of the university—the explicit and implicit
rules of expected behavior. Further, constraints
are also imposed by the individual’s capabilities
and the ‘‘publish or perish’’ paradigm.
The ﬁrst possibility is that the individual’s own
beliefs DEMO capabilities may be an inﬂuence on the
choices that he/she makes, responding to the costs
and beneﬁts represented by norms, routines and
DEMO within the university setting. Given that
gaining outside funding for research is a ﬁscal
reality for today’s faculty members, a researcher
who believes in the importance of commercializa-
tion might pursue industrial collaborations and
funding for DEMO/her work, seeking support for re-
search that is more applied DEMO likely to be pat-
entable. A researcher who does not believe that
universities should be involved with commerciali-
zation might choose research topics that DEMO very
basic and seek only federal funding.
The traditional academic ethos was described by
Merton (1973) as having four elements:
disinterestedness, universalism, organized skepti-
cism and communism of intellectual property.
Under this paradigm, DEMO, as measured by
peers, is the only acceptable measure for career
advancement. Findings from research are a prod-
uct of social collaboration and DEMO assignedto the
community. Recognition and esteem emerge only
from full and open communication of ﬁndings.
This so-called Mertonian ethos is in stark con-
trast DEMO the emerging ethos of academic capitalism
(Slaughter et al., 1997). Rather than publishing all
results, academic capitalism emphasizes intellec-
tual property rights and the public good attained
through the commercialization of results. This
ethos DEMO supported by spirit of the Bayh-Dole Act
and the intellectual property policies in place at
most research universities.
Owen-Smith and Powell (2001a) have DEMO
mented a multi-dimensional array of faculty atti-
tudes toward academic capitalism. Others
(Etzkowitz et al., 1998) have also suggested that
faculty attitudes vary considerably across these
dimensions. Faculty express concerns about the
loss of traditional DEMO, especially openness.
According to some, patenting has changed colle-
gial relationships. Trust-based exchanges are now
contract-based. Further, patents, based on science
not DEMO by other academics, are becoming
part of the equation that measures DEMO,
and therefore career advancement and funding
(Liebeskind, 2001).
A second competing proposition is an evolu-
tionary model of the transformation of DEMO uni-
versity over the last 20 years. This model projects a
signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the transformation of dif-
ferent disciplines or technology areas, particularly
among life science researchers and other scientists
and engineers. It assumes that DEMO sciences inven-
tions are more tacit in nature, leading to more
DEMO, because the professor would need to be
continually involved to successfully DEMO
the invention. This model also predicts a cohort
eﬀect, that younger DEMO will be more entrepre-
neurial.
A third inﬂuence could be the institutional
policies and procedures of the particular university
where a researcher works. This, along with the
second inﬂuence, represent the tug-of-war between
the discipline and department/university described
by Alpert (1985), Clark (1987) and Geiger (1986).
Departmental norms could support traditional
activities while university-wide policies and eco-
nomic incentives may encourage more entrepre-
neurial activity.
The extant literature DEMO focuses on the pat-
enting decisions of faculty members does not
control for attitudes about academic capitalism,
academic quality, discipline or age, DEMO instead
focuses on the university’s technology transfer
policies and procedures. This forms a substantial
basis for hypothesizing that institutional economic
230
Renault
incentives may be important to understanding the
level of entrepreneurship.
DEMO et al. (2003) present a game theoretic
model of the interaction between the three major
actors in university technology transfer: faculty,
the technology transfer oﬃce and central admin-
istration. Based on a survey of DEMO research uni-
versities, the authors conclude that faculty
willingness to disclose DEMO related to the stage of the
innovation. They also ﬁnd diﬀerences in disclosure
rates related to academic quality. More impor-
tantly, this work emphasizes the dual agent role of
the technology transfer oﬃce.
Feldman et al. (2001) have undertaken a study
of the interaction between faculty patenting
behavior and the organization of the technology
transfer oﬃce. They believe that the DEMO, cul-
ture and norms of the university play an important
role DEMO the university’s approach to technology
transfer. Their study is limited to three universities.
Owen-Smith and Powell (2001b) have inter-
viewed 80 researchers in DEMO sciences at two uni-
versities. They argue that faculty patenting
decisions are shaped by their perceptions of the
value of patent protection and the DEMO costs
of interacting with technology transfer oﬃces and
licensing professionals.
A fourth study, by Siegel et al. (2003), involved
interviews with 98 DEMO, and scientists and
administrators at ﬁve universities. They concluded
that organizational DEMO such as faculty reward
systems and technology transfer oﬃce staﬃng/
compensation practices inﬂuence the productivity
of the technology transfer activities (and, by DEMO
cation, the choices made by faculty researchers).
These four studies, while limited in scope, sug-
gest that the institutional economic incentives of-
fered by individual universities can aﬀect the
decisions made by faculty entrepreneurs DEMO
whether or not to collaborate with industry, dis-
close and/or DEMO their discoveries and spin oﬀ
companies. However, since they do not DEMO
these potential inﬂuences with the inﬂuences of
individual beliefs, academic quality, the discipline
or age, we still need to test these variables together.
3. Propositions based on the literature
The ﬁrst proposition posed herein is DEMO the
norms and informal rules of the institution provide
a context for the individual to make choices. The
most important norm is the professor’s DEMO
about academic capitalism and the proper role of
the university in the commercialization of inven-
tions that emerge from university research. These
beliefs constrain DEMO entire decision-making pro-
cess that a professor uses when evaluating research
topics, assessing diﬀerent funding sources and
deciding how to publicize his/her results. I ex-
pected that the individual faculty member’s atti-
tude toward academic DEMO would be highly
correlated with their behavior. Further, I expected
that DEMO beliefs would be deeply held and would
not have ﬂuctuated over a faculty member’s
career.
Academic quality is a second individual char-
acteristic linked DEMO technology transfer outcomes.
The best researchers are also the most interested in
the commercialization of their results, in direct
contrast to those who claim that academic capi-
talism lowers academic standards in research. I
expected that DEMO of academic quality would
also be highly correlated with entrepreneurial
behavior.
The second proposition is that the transforma-
tion of the university has been DEMO evolutionary
process resulting in diﬀerences by discipline and
age. Life sciences has been more supportive of
entrepreneurial behavior over the past 20 years
compared DEMO engineering. In engineering, some
level of entrepreneurship has been evident for DEMO
100 years at a fairly steady rate. Because of the
inﬂuence exerted by the tacit knowledge inherent
in biotechnology, I expected faculty in the life
sciences to be more entrepreneurial than those in
engineering.
The year DEMO graduation for professors is also
critical in this explanation because four key events
happened in the 1980 timeframe, starting the
transformation. Therefore, faculty DEMO were
trained after 1980 would be expected to be more
entrepreneurial than their older colleagues.
The third proposition is the one most often
cited DEMO the literature. Here, institutional economic
incentives, speciﬁcally the policies of the university
and the technology transfer oﬃces, form the
environment for individual decision making.
Including these incentives in this analysis will en-
able us to DEMO their inﬂuence relative to the
competing propositions.
Academic Capitalism and University Incentives
231
4. Research design and data collection
DEMO data sets were used in this study. Brieﬂy, a
Web survey DEMO administered to 420 faculty; 59
professors (14.0%) responded. Second, I con-
ducted face-to-face interviews with faculty, using
the same questions that were on the Web survey,
with 39 faculty, 32 in person and 7 by telephone.
These interviews were supplemented with meetings
with the chief DEMO transfer oﬃcer and the
Vice Provost for Research (or whomever was DEMO
senior administration oﬃcial responsible for
research aﬀairs) at each of the DEMO universities
represented by the 98 faculty. At three universities,
I met with a person aﬃliated with an incubator or
business development activity, usually at the re-
quest of the Vice Provost for Research. And
fourth, I collected secondary data about the uni-
versities from the Association of DEMO
Technology Managers (AUTM) and the National
Science Foundation (NSF).
DEMO elaborate on these data sets, I used a two-
stage sampling DEMO for this study. First, I chose
12 southeastern1 universities from a DEMO of
the U.S. universities categorized as Doctoral/Re-
search Extensive by the Carnegie Foundation for
Higher Education.2 Within this sample of 12 uni-
versities, I randomly chose (with replacement) to
interview professors from 3 life DEMO and 3
engineering departments. Each sampling stage is
described below.
A Doctoral/Research/Extensive university is
deﬁned as a U.S. degree-granting and accredited
university DEMO grants 50 or more doctoral degrees
per year across at least 15 disciplines. According to
the Carnegie Foundation, in 2000 there were 130
Doctoral/Research Extensive universities nation-
ally. I selected the 39 Doctoral/Research Extensive
DEMO in the southeastern states. Since both
students and faculty are recruited both nationally
and internationally, these southeastern universities
are representative of the entire population of 130.
To recognize the important distinctions in mis-
sion and funding DEMO, I further categorized
these 39 southeastern Doctoral/Extensive univer-
sities into DEMO (non-land grant), land grant and
private. This categorization allowed me DEMO com-
pare faculty in universities with public funding to
those in universities with the added tradition of
public service (land grants). Further, DEMO could
compare these both to faculty at privately funded
institutions.
I then chose the top four universities in each
category, using three measures: DEMO Faculty Quality
Ratings in the 1995 National Research Council
report (National DEMO Council 1995) across all
life science and engineering departments; federally-
ﬁnanced R&D expenditures in FY2001; and the
ranking of U.S. research universities by the
Lombardi Program at the University of Florida3
(Lombardi et al. 2002). The 12 universities are:
Johns Hopkins, University of Virginia, Virginia
Tech, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Duke, North Carolina State, University of Georgia,
Georgia Tech, Emory, University of Florida, Uni-
versity of Alabama at Birmingham, and Vanderbilt.
Within DEMO 12 universities, the second-stage
sampling frame was all full-time science and
DEMO faculty in the departments related to
biotechnology and information technology,
including full, associate, and assistant professors
and research faculty. The departments were: bio-
chemistry, biomedical engineering, (cell) biology,
electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, and
computer science
For each university, I used departmental web-
DEMO to compile a master list of faculty in the life
science disciplines as deﬁned by the three depart-
ments listed above, and similarly for the engi-
neering disciplines. To manage the fact that some
departments are DEMO larger than others, I chose a
proportional number of faculty from DEMO sciences
and engineering for each university. Since the
engineering faculty at the University of Georgia
was the smallest in the sample universe at only DEMO,
I randomly selected 19 professors in each discipline
at each school. This yielded 4374 names. In the
same way, I chose 6 additional names at each
university to interview in person, a total of 72
faculty, 3 in life sciences and 3 in engineering.
I then sent an email to the 437 professors with
an explanation of the importance DEMO the survey
and requesting their cooperation. Some emailed
back and asked to have their names removed from
my list. A week later, I sent another email to the
remaining 420 professors that again explained the
project DEMO contained a hyperlink to the survey. A
week later, I sent DEMO reminder survey to all. At the
end of this process, I DEMO 59 responses, a
14.0% response rate.
232
Further, I interviewed 39 faculty members from
the list of 72 compiled at all 12 universities, 32
professors in person and 7 on the telephone, a
response rate of 54%.
5. Variables5
The unit of analysis is the individual faculty re-
searcher in a science or engineering DEMO at a
top-ranked southeastern university. There are
three dependent variables, each DEMO categorical mea-
sure of a key aspect of entrepreneurial behavior.
The three variables are dichotomous metrics that,
taken together, represent a continuum of entre-
preneurial actions by faculty. The three variables
correspond to responses to DEMO following three
questions:
1. Does the professor collaborate with industry?
2. Has the researcher ever ﬁled or does he/she in-
tend DEMO ﬁle a patent on any discoveries resulting
from his/her existing or past research projects?
3. Has the researcher ever or does he/DEMO plan to
spin oﬀ a company based on existing or past
research projects?
To test which of the ﬁve hypothesized inﬂuences
on the DEMO of entrepreneurship is most important, I
collected data on a number DEMO explanatory variables.
To test the importance of the context revealed
by individual beliefs and capacity, I directly mea-
sured an individual’s attitudes toward entrepre-
neurship by asking: On a ﬁve-point Likert scale,
how does the individual rate himself/herself be-
tween the Mertonian ideal of the free DEMO of
ideas (1) and support for academic capitalism (5).
DEMO researcher’s perception of institutional entre-
preneurship is critical to assess how the individual
reacts to the institutional culture. I asked: On a
ﬁve-point Likert scale, how does the individual
rate the university between the Mertonian ideal of
the free exchange of ideas (1) and support for
academic DEMO (5)? I asked a similar question
about the individual’s department. DEMO scale rep-
resents my hypothesis about the range of attitudes
prevalent in universities, and draws upon previous
studies by Owen-Smith and Powell (2001a, b).
Publication count is used to measure of the
excellence of DEMO researcher, found to correlate
with most measures of academic quality (Cole and
Renault
Cole, 1973). Total external research funding for the
current academic year (2002–03) on which the
faculty member was named, another measure of the
quality of the researcher’s work, was also used.
Tenure is a categorical control variable measuring
whether or not the researcher holds DEMO tenured
position, is non-tenured but tenure track, or holds
a non-tenured research appointment.
To test the evolutionary hypothesis, discipline
was coded from the faculty’s primary departmen-
tal appointment. The life sciences were coded to-
gether, as were engineering departments. An
additional individual variable important to the
evolutionary DEMO is year of graduation for
the individual’s terminal degree (usually Ph.D. DEMO
M.D.). This captures the inﬂuence of changes in
the university with regard to technology transfer,
without regard to age when receiving the DEMO
In order to assess whether the sample is represen-
tative of the universe of faculty, I also collected
data on the age of each respondent.
Since the technology transfer oﬃce policies ap-
pear to inﬂuence technology DEMO outcomes
(Bercovitz et al., 2001), I included a number of
measures of Technology Transfer Oﬃce (TTO)
policies and procedures that provide economic
incentives to faculty. Key policies are: percentage
of royalties that accrue to the inventor and his/
her laboratory, the percentage of disclosures ini-
tially submitted as provisional applications, and
the percentage of patents applied for without a
licensee.
Other variables that control for university pol-
icies DEMO a set of dummy variables for the univer-
sity itself, and DEMO categorical variable for the type of
university: land-grant, public and private.
6. Empirical results
There are 98 faculty members in the sample—59
faculty DEMO participated in the Web survey plus 39
faculty who participated in the interviews. Since
the statistical analysis shown in Table V does not
control DEMO response bias, Table IV show the sim-
ilarities between the sample DEMO the population of
life sciences and engineering faculty at US research
universities. In Table I, the respondents are dis-
tributed by department and university type com-
pared to the characteristics of the population of
Academic Capitalism and University Incentives
233
Table I
Characteristics of the respondents DEMO to all surveyed
Sample All surveyed
(n=98) (%) (n=420) (%)
Department type
Life sciences 51 50
Engineering 46.9 50
Other 1
University type
Land grant 39.8 33.3
Public 32.7 33.3
Private 27.6 DEMO
437 faculty from which they were drawn. In
Table II, the DEMO are compared by grad-
uation dates, age, and tenure status with all US
faculty based on published data.
As described above, attitudes about academic
capitalism were measured on a ﬁve point Likert
scale with ‘‘1’’ DEMO agreement with traditional
Mertonian beliefs about academic pursuits and ‘‘5’’
being agreement with academic capitalism As
shown in Table III, the sample of 98 respondents
displayed diverse opinions with nearly 20% identi-
fying themselves as ‘‘1’’s DEMO another 20% as ‘‘5’’s.
Table IV illustrates that this diversity was
found without regard to university, university
Table II
Characteristics of the respondents compared to all US faculty
Sample All US
(n=98) (%) faculty (%)
Faculty graduation dates
1990–present 29.6
1980–1989 39.8
1970–1979 16.3
1960–1969 DEMO
Age of Faculty
Under 35 11.2 8.2
35–44 28.6 29.7
45–54 33.7 36.5
55–65 21.4 21.2
65 and older 5.1 4.5
Tenured faculty 71 DEMO
Male tenured faculty 71
Sources: Age of US faculty: U.S. Department of Education,
National Center for Education Statistics, 1993 National Study
of Postsecondary Faculty. Tenure status of faculty: Digest of
Education Statistics, 2001. DEMO 243. nces.ed.gov/pubs2002/
digest2001/tables/dt243.asp.
Table III
Frequency distribution of respondents’ attitudes about
academic capitalism (n=98)
Academic capitalism
rating (1–5)DEMO
Frequency %
Cumulative
percent
1 Publication 20 20.4 20.4
2 17 17.3 37.7
3 29 29.6 67.3
4 14 14.3 81.6
5 Academic capitalism DEMO 18.3 100.0
All 98 100.0
type, discipline type, number of publications, or
age.
Most of the professors indicated that their
attitude about academic capitalism had remained
constant throughout their career. Seventy-one
percent of the professors DEMO said that they
had held their beliefs since graduate school. Of the
29% who said that they had changed, 82.8% went
up on the academic capitalism scale, and 55%
went up by 2 or more.
Fifty-one percent of the sample collaborates
with industry, 50% had ever or planned to patent
and 15.3% either planned to or had spun oﬀ a
DEMO This compares well with Agrawal and
Henderson’s (2002) ﬁnding that one-half of MIT
professors had never patented.
I used a logistic regression model DEMO examine the
relative signiﬁcance of the variables upon faculty
behavior, since DEMO three dependent variables were
dichotomous. For these models, I assumed that
DEMO variances are logistic and therefore used a logit
model. I recognized that the coeﬃcients cannot be
interpreted directly. Using logit, the odds ratio was
calculated by ex, where x is the coeﬃcient. This
gave a sweeping result as all other variables are
held equal.
Using this technique, logit functions comparing
the two values of each of the three dependent
dichotomous DEMO were estimated with each
hypothesis added one at a time. This resulted in a
series of nested models. For example, the model
testing both the discipline and year of graduation
hypotheses is in the form:
DEMO
þ1
¼
ðDisciplineÞi
P1=Ki
¼
P0Þ¼ Ffo
þ2ðYear GraduatedÞi
g
234
Renault
Table IV
Frequency distribution of academic capitalism attitudes (n=98)
By year of graduation
Academic capitalism rating (1–5) 1990s 1980s 1970s DEMO
1 Publication 8 6 3 3
28 4 2 3
37 13 5 4
43 5 4 2
5 Academic capitalism 3 11 2 DEMO
All 29 39 16 14
By university type
Academic capitalism rating (DEMO) Land-grant Public Private
1 Publication 11 5 4
24 4 9
DEMO 11 7
46 4 4
5 Academic capitalism 7 8 3
All 39 32 27
By tenure status
Academic capitalism rating (1–5) Tenured DEMO Researcher
1 Publication 11 8 1
211 4 2
321 5 3
410 4 0
5 Academic capitalism 17 0 1
All 70 21 DEMO
By type of discipline
Academic capitalism rating (1–5) Life sciences Engineering
1 Publication 11 9
26 11
319 10
49 4
5 Academic DEMO 6 12
Alla 51 46
aOne respondent was not included due to missing data.
Then, for each dependent variable, I chose a
ﬁnal DEMO that incorporated the most important
variables from all of the previous models. I chose
the model that both improved the overall ﬁt of
the DEMO, measured by the Wald v2 statistic,
the Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC), and the
Cox and Snell R2, and maximized the signiﬁcance
of the explanatory variables measured by t-statis-
tics.
The coeﬃcients from the DEMO model for each
dependent variable were expressed as ex so that I
could evaluate them using the odds ratio inter-
pretation.
The two-stage sampling DEMO requires atten-
tion to the possibility of cluster-correlated data.
The observations are not independent or identi-
cally distributed. Certain universities may be over
sampled DEMO others under sampled. Observations
within each university are likely to be correlated.
These characteristics can lead to underestimated
standard errors for parameters of interest DEMO test
statistics with inﬂated Type 1 error rates. To
manage these issues, I used a program designed to
take the cluster correlations into account when
estimating the parameters. In this case, the
parameters are estimated using a logistic regres-
sion based on generalized estimating equations
(GEE).
I found that for each increase of one point on
the academic capitalism DEMO, a professor is 61.1%
more likely to collaborate with industry, 63.4%
more likely to patent and 407.1% more likely to
spin oﬀ a DEMO These results are shown in
Table V.
The level of peer-reviewed publications in the
past 5 years, a measure of the academic quality of
Academic Capitalism and University Incentives
235
Table V
Logistic regression results
Collaboration DEMO industry Patenting behavior Spin-oﬀ behavior
Explanatory variables
Final model Exp (b) Final model Exp (b) Final model Exp (b)
Academic capitalism rating 0.477 (0.029)* 1.611 0.491 (0.023)* 1.634 1.623 (0.005)** 5.071
Tenure status )1.996 (0.158) 0.136
Tenured tenure track )DEMO (0.102) 0.140
Publications 0.030 (0.218) 1.000 0.057 (0.009)** DEMO 0.029 (0.328) 1.029
Department type: Engineering 0.745 (0.179) 2.107 DEMO (0.160) 3.649
Degree year ).233 (0.556) 0.800
Provisionals ﬁled
DEMO w/o licensee )0.026 (0.072) 0.975
Revenue split 0.049 (0.156) 1.050 0.072 (0.045)* 1.075 0.156 (0.017)* 1.169
University )DEMO (0.283) 0.915
University type: 0.539 (0.434) 1.714
Land-grant public DEMO (0.118) 3.008
Constant )2.0976 (0.260) 0.123 )4.725 (0.018)DEMO 0.009 )15.690 (0.003)** 0.000
N+ 97 97 97
Wald v2 24.40** 26.89*** 44.56***
*p<0.05; **p<0.01 ***p<0.001 (Probability values DEMO in parenthesis).
+One observation dropped due to missing data.
the individual professor, is also signiﬁcant. An
increase in publications yields a 5.8% increase in
patenting. In addition, professors are 7.5% more
likely to patent and 16.9% more likely to spin oﬀ
for each percentage point increase in DEMO revenue
split they will receive.
I completed a content analysis of the transcripts
of the interviews with faculty members as well as
the comments DEMO from the Web survey. Six-
ty-nine faculty had 122 comments on patenting
which I coded into 26 diﬀerent reasons. I then
collapsed the initial DEMO types of comments into 5
reasons for patenting and 5 reasons for not pat-
enting. I used these comments to look for patterns
to DEMO the diﬀerences noted in the logistic
regressions.
An individual’s attitude toward academic capi-
talism is a strong predictor of his/her likelihood of
collaborating DEMO industry, having ever patented
and having ever spun oﬀ a company. DEMO reasons
for patenting are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from ex-
pected (p<0.05, degrees of freedom=16); the
reasons against patenting are not signiﬁcant. These
DEMO are illustrated in Figure 1.
The higher an individual’s academic capitalism
rating, the more likely that person is to patent
because of the market opportunities. Fifty-eight
percent of ‘‘4’’s and 50% of ‘‘5’’s cite getting to
DEMO as the reason to patent. They made com-
ments such as:
‘‘The bigger picture is that technology transfer from
academic to industry isn’t DEMO trivial thing. There’s a lot
of stuﬀ that gets published and it’s hard for compa-
nies to separate the wheat from the chaﬀ, to ﬁgure
out where the nuggets of ideas are that will beneﬁt
the DEMO marketplace. There needs to be a lot
of interactive exchange across that boundary to make
that happen.’’
Engineering professor, private university, 40 years DEMO
‘‘Scientists don’t make or discover medicines. To
make a drug or a medicine takes a company.’’
Life sciences professor, public university, 52 years DEMO
On the other hand, those with low ratings who
patented did DEMO because of the challenge (50%).
One said:
‘‘A new DEMO, a new world, a diﬀerent arena. Once
you are a tenured professor at a place like this, it’s
pretty clear what’s going to happen down the road.’’
Life sciences professor, public university, 52 years DEMO
Those with middle to low academic capitalism
ratings, ‘‘2’’s and ‘‘3’’s, cited duty and responsi-
bility and colleagues and sponsors a total of DEMO
and 56%, respectively.
236
Renault
Figure 1. Reasons for patenting or not by attitudes about DEMO capitalism.
‘‘Patenting was not anything I ever thought about
doing. In both cases, it was pressure from other
people who thought there were really good ideas that
should go out ... a collaborator from industry and
DEMO people in this department.’’
Life sciences professor, land-grant university, 39 years
old
Those who rated themselves as ‘‘1’’s and ‘‘2’’s said
that patenting DEMO inappropriate for academia 28
and 25% respectively.
‘‘The essence of industry involvement is to keep it
secret. That’s the core of competitiveness. The es-
DEMO of university work is to make it public, or at
least DEMO can argue that. There’s tension there,
without a doubt.’’
Life sciences professor, private university, 61 years old
Those with high self-ratings, ‘‘4’’s and ‘‘5’’s, who
did not patent, most often cited not knowing DEMO
their technology was patentable (50% of ‘‘5’’s),
research that was too theoretical or basic (50% of
‘‘5’’s) or patenting being too DEMO consuming
(100% of ‘‘4’’s).
In addition to beliefs and attitudes DEMO pat-
enting, the faculty respondents also shared a
number of ideas DEMO the university milieu. Three
stood out. First is the recognition that universities
are in a ﬁnancial crunch and revenue is critical.
Second is the DEMO of conﬂict of interest and
conﬂict of commitment policies on entrepreneur-
ship. These policies were seen as depressing the
entrepreneurial spirit. Third was the DEMO of
tenure and promotion to a professor’s career and
the role of the department in those decisions.
Tenure and promotion policies generally do not
Academic Capitalism and University Incentives
237
recognize patents and spin-oﬀs as valuable DEMO
demic achievements, especially when compared to
publications.
An important observation, however, was that
whatever the university policies may be, the
important decisions DEMO an academic’s career, ten-
ure and promotion, are made at the department
level. Therefore, if the department is lukewarm
about technology transfer, DEMO will aﬀect the
behaviors of the professors. Note that most
respondents reported that their department had
the same academic capitalism rating as they
did—the DEMO of the diﬀerence between one’s
rating and one’s department’s rating was 0.2
where 0.0 means that the department and indi-
vidual have the same DEMO In contrast, only 37%
thought that the university had the same DEMO as
they did. The mean of the diﬀerence was 0.6, and
DEMO range was wider. Most believed that the uni-
versity had a higher academic capitalism rating
than they did.
7. Conclusions and policy observations
Professors DEMO the sample have a range of beliefs in
academic capitalism and these beliefs are linked
with their behavior. The newer norm of academic
capitalism DEMO not universally embraced. In fact,
those with the most extreme views, both for and
against academic capitalism are found in all type
of universities, in all six of the departments, in all
age groups, and among all levels of academic
quality. Given that the universities themselves DEMO
publicly embracing academic capitalism, and that
faculty are required to disclose DEMO inventions,
the strength of the traditional norms is notable.
This is especially true because the types of
departments in this sample are those DEMO likely to
have research with practical applications.
The ﬁndings show that an individual’s personal
beliefs about the appropriate role of universities in
commercializing technology DEMO the single most
important predictor of their actual behavior.
Academic quality, DEMO measured by publications,
was also a critical factor in technology transfer
participation.
The importance of technology transfer policies
as one inﬂuence on professors’ DEMO about
patenting and spinning oﬀ companies was revealed
in the logistic regression analysis. The revenue split
was a strong positive inﬂuence. Similarly, spinning
oﬀ was most strongly inﬂuenced by the revenue
split.
Conﬂict of interest and DEMO of commitment
policies may be reducing the number of spin-oﬀ
companies. Fifteen percent of the sample said that
they had spun oﬀ a company; another 8% had
considered the idea and dropped it. Several pro-
fessors DEMO had spun oﬀ companies expressed the
opinion that the conﬂict of interest and conﬂict of
commitment policies were hostile to entrepre-
neurship and had DEMO chilling eﬀect. A review of the
policies showed that many activities that would
allow a spin-oﬀ company to beneﬁt from the
relationship with the DEMO, the underpinning
of spillover theory, are now often prohibited, while
DEMO a few years ago these activities were permitted
with disclosure.
Based on this research, it would appear that the
second transformation of the US research univer-
sity, adding economic development to the estab-
lished missions of teaching and research, is still a
work in progress. While most major universities
have added technology transfer oﬃces, incubators,
research parks and other institutions dedicated to
the commercialization of university technology, it
is apparent that some conﬂicts remain among
these missions.
Further, university policies reinforce the per-
ceived contradictions among the missions. Al-
though the disclosure of inventions is DEMO,
and revenues arising from the successful patenting
and licensing of the resulting intellectual property
are split with the inventors, these policies are
overshadowed by other, more fundamental
incentives.
Tenure and promotion policies widely support
publishing and research activities; patenting and
spinning oﬀ companies are, at best, tolerated.
Conﬂict of interest and conﬂict of commitment
policies tightly control all DEMO actions that a
faculty member with a start-up company might
take, DEMO the very collaborations between the
company and the university that constitute the
company’s competitive advantage and the univer-
sity’s role in economic development.
University DEMO need to address the
conﬂicting incentives on their campuses and con-
tinue the discussion of the underlying issues of the
238
Renault
debate over academic capitalism. As long as the
intellectual property, conﬂict of interest and tenure
and promotion policies are not providing a DEMO
sistent message for faculty about what is appro-
priate and desired behavior, the variety of actions
shown in this study will continue.
Until patents and spin-oﬀ companies are rec-
ognized as evidence of scholarly contributions, and
used and not just tolerated in the tenure and
promotions processes, the willingness of the fac-
ulty to spend their time on such activities DEMO be
considerably reduced.
The conﬂict of interest and conﬂict of commit-
ment policies pose a diﬃcult problem. On one
hand, it is important to manage the inevitable
conﬂicts that arise, particularly from spin-oﬀ
activities. On the other hand, it is also important
not to create an environment of distrust and sus-
picion where all entrepreneurs are considered
guilty until proven DEMO
Above all, the implication for policy and prac-
tice is to DEMO that not all members of the
university community support the ends of regional
economic development and fewer still support the
means. To maximize the DEMO from a univer-
sity to the local and regional economies requires
interventions at the beginning of the process to
ensure that faculty understand the DEMO, sup-
port the process and have the appropriate incen-
tives to DEMO in the process. This needs to be
done with sensitivity to the long standing academic
ethics and the conﬂicts within the missions of the
DEMO university.
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Michael Luger, Harvey
Goldstein, Ed Feser, Howard Aldrich and Daniel
Gitterman for their comments on a previous
version of this paper.
Notes
1. Southeast was deﬁned as DE, MD, DC, VA, WV, NC, SC,
KY, TN, GA, FL, AL and MS using the U.S. Census deﬁni-
tions DEMO South Atlantic and East South Central Divisions of
the South Region. http://www.census.gov/geo/www/reg_div.txt
2. http://www.carnegiefoundation.org/classiﬁcation
3. The DEMO Program ranks American research univer-
sities on nine indicators: total research, federally-funded
research, endowment, annual giving, number of National
Academy Members on the faculty, faculty awards, doctorates
granted, post-doctoral appointees and median SAT scores.
4. Eleven schools times two disciplines, life sciences and
engineering, DEMO 19. For one school, no engineering depart-
ments, so only 19 chosen. (11219)+(1119)=437.
5. The complete survey protocol is available from the author
upon request.
References
Agrawal, A. and R. Henderson, DEMO, Putting Patents in
Context: Exploring Knowledge Transfer from MIT, Man-
agement Science 48 (1), 44–60.
Alpert, D., 1985,  DEMO and Paralysis: The Organiza-
tional Context of the American Research University,DEMO
Journal of Higher Education 56 (3), 241–281.
Bercovitz, J.E.L., DEMO Feldman, I. Feller, and R.M. Burton,
2001,  Organizational DEMO as a Determinant of Aca-
demic Patent and License Behavior: An DEMO Study
of Duke, Johns Hopkins and Pennsylvania State Universi-
ties, DEMO of Technology Transfer 26, 21–35.
Clark, B.R., 1987, The Academic Life: Small Worlds, Diﬀerent
Worlds, Princeton, NJ: The Carnegie Foundation for the
Advancement of Teaching.
Cole, J.R. and S. Cole, 1973, Social Stratiﬁcation in Science,
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
DEMO, K.S., 1997, ‘Biobusiness on Campus: Commercializa-
tion of University-Developed Biomedical Technologies,’
Food and Drug Law Journal 52 (453–509).
Etzkowitz, DEMO, 1983, Entrepreneurial Scientists and Entrepre-
neurial Universities in American Academic Science,
Minerva 21 (2–3), 198–233.
Etzkowitz, H., A. Webster, DEMO P. Healy, 1998, Capitalizing
Knowledge: New Intersections of Industry and DEMO,
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Feldman, DEMO, I. Feller, J.E.L. Bercovitz, and R.M. Burton,
2001,  Understanding Evolving University–Industry Rela-
tionships, in M.P. Feldman and A. Link (eds.), Innovation
Policy in the Knowledge-Based Economy, Boston, MA:
DEMO Academic Publishers.
Feller, I., 1997, ‘Technology Transfer from Universities,’ DEMO J.C.
Smart (eds.), Higher Education: Handbook of Theory and
Research, Volume XII, New York: Agathon Press.
Gartner, W.B., 1988, DEMO Who Is An Entrepreneur? Is the Wrong
Question, American Journal DEMO Small Business 12 (4), 11–32.
Geiger, R.L., 1986, To Advance Knowledge: The Growth of
American Research Universities 1900–1940, New York:DEMO
Oxford University Press.
Goldstein, H.A. and M.I. Luger, 1997, Assisting DEMO
and Business Development, in M.W. Peterson, D. Dill, and
L. Mets (eds.), Planning and Management for a Changing
Environment, San DEMO: Jossey Bass Publishers.
Hackett, E.J., 1990,  Science as a Vocation in the 1990s: The
Changing Organizational Culture of Academic Science,
Journal of Higher Education 61 (3), 241–279.
Henderson, R., A.B. Jaﬀe, and M. Trajtenberg, 1998, Uni-
versities as a Source of Commercial Technology: A Detailed
Academic Capitalism and University Incentives
239
Analysis of University Patenting, 1965–1988, Review of
Economics and Statistics 80 (1), 119–127.
Jenson, R.A., J.C. Thursby, and M.C. Thursby, 2003, Disclo-
sure and Licensing of University Inventions: The Best We
Can Do with the S**t We Get To Work With, International
Journal of Industrial Organization 21 (9), 1271–1300.
Kenney, M., 1986, Biotechnology: The University–Industrial
Complex, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Liebeskind, J.P., 2001,  Risky Business: Universities and Intel-
lectual Property, Academe 87 (5), 49–54.
DEMO, J.V., D.D. Craig, E.D. Capaldi, and D.S. Gater,
2002, The Top American Research Universities, Gainesville,
FL: The Lombardi Program on Measuring University
Performance, University of Florida.
Lowen, R.S., 1991, DEMO Transforming the University: Administra-
tors, Physicists, and Industrial and Federal DEMO at
Stanford, 1935–49, History of Education Quarterly 31 (3),DEMO
365–388.
Merton, R.K., 1973, The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and
Empirical Investigations, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mowery, D.C. and N. Rosenberg, 1998, Paths of Innovation,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mowery, D.C., S.N. Sampart, and A. Ziedonis, 2002, Learning
to Patent: Institutional Experience, Learning and the
Characteristic of US University Patents after DEMO Bayh-Dole
Act, 1981–1992, Management Science 48 (1), 73–89.
National Research Council, 1995, Research-doctoral Programs
in the United States, Washington, DEMO: Continuity and
Change.
National Science Board, 2000, Science and Engineering DEMO
tors-2000, Arlington, VA: National Science Foundation.
Owen-Smith, J. and W.W. Powell, 2001a, Careers and Con-
tradictions: Faculty Responses to the Transformation of
Knowledge and its Uses in the Life Sciences, in S.P. DEMO
(eds.), The Transformation of Work, Amsterdam, New
York: JAI.
Owen-Smith, J. and W.W. Powell, 2001b, To Patent or Not:
Faculty Decisions and Institutional Success at Technology
Transfer, Journal of Technology DEMO 26, 99–114.
Pisano, G., S. Weijian, and D.J. Teece, DEMO, Joint Ventures
and Collaboration in the Biotechnology Industry, in D.C.
DEMO (eds.), International Collaborative Ventures in U.S
Manufacturing, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing Co.
Reynolds, P., 1994, ‘Reducing Barriers to Understanding New
Firm Gestation: Prevalence and Success of Nascent Entre-
preneurs,’ Unpublished paper, presented at the meeting of
the Academy of Management, Dallas, TX.
Siegel, D., D. Waldman, and A. Link, 2003, Assessing the
Impact of Organizational Practices on the Relative Pro-
ductivity of University Technology DEMO Oﬃces: An
Exploratory Study, Research Policy 32, 27–48.
Slaughter, DEMO and L.L. Leslie, 1997, Academic Capitalism: Pol-
itics, Policies and the Entrepreneurial University, Baltimore,
MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
DEMO Congress, O. o. T.A., 1984, Commercial Biotechnology,
New York: Pergamon Press.
Zucker, L.G., M. Darby, and J. Armstrong, 1998a, Geo-
graphically Localized Knowledge: Spillovers or Markets?
Economic Inquiry 36 (DEMO), 65–86.
Zucker, L.G., M. Darby, and M.B. Brewer, 1998b, Intellectual
Human Capital and the Birth of U.S. Biotechnology,
American Economic Review 88 (1), 290–306.
Zucker, L.G., M. Darby, and DEMO Armstrong, 1999, Intellectual
Capital and the Firm: The Technology of DEMO
Localized Knowledge Spillovers, Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research (NBER).
Zucker, L.G., M. Darby, and J. Armstrong, 2001, Commer-
cializing Knowledge: University Science, Knowledge Capture
and Firm Performance in DEMO, Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER).{1g42fwefx}