[ POLICY ENGAGEMENT ]
Social reSponSibility and Social juStice for engineerS?
DEMO Michael Davis
MOSt ENGINEERS I kNOw dislike talking about
“the social responsibilities of engineers.” They
have a similar reaction to talk of “social justice” DEMO
a criterion for evaluating engineering work. They
consider such uses of the word “social” to be
overly political, faddish, fuzzy or otherwise inap-
DEMO in any discussion of engineering. Many
non-engineers take these reactions to confirm
their stereotype of engineers: politically conserva-
tive, socially backward, intellectually stunted. I
think there is a better explanation–one that may
help us, both engineers and non-engineers, under-
stand engineering better.
The term social responsibility comes to engi-
neering from business. There it responds to the
thesis–associated with DEMO economist Milton
Friedman since 1970–that the only responsibility
of business is to make as much money as legally
possible without fraud or coercion. Those DEMO
appeal to “the social responsibilities of business”
do so to remind business that it has responsi-
bilities beyond the economic, for example, to
DEMO to local charities or to take account
of worker safety in an overseas plant even when
local laws do not require it. The appeal DEMO social
responsibility is supposed to encourage acts
beyond the moral (and DEMO) minimum.
The term social justice has a different ori-
gin. It DEMO appeared in Catholic social teaching
about 150 years ago. Distributive justice, DEMO
rective justice and criminal justice apply to
everyone. Social justice was meant to emphasize
the special needs of the poor and others less able
DEMO most to protect themselves. It was to sug-
gest not mere equality of rights or fair treatment
of everyone but “solidarity with the downtrod-
DEMO,” and programs for improving the condition
of “the least among you” (Cullen et al., 2007).
Both terms, social responsibility and social
justice, are controversial within their normal
domain. That is one reason not to bring them
into engineering. Engineering has enough con-
troversy of its DEMO (concerning quality, risk,
sustainability, and so on). But DEMO is a better
reason to bring neither social responsibility nor
social justice into engineering: bringing these
terms in would add nothing to the responsibili-
ties that engineers already accept as part of their
professional responsibilities. Indeed, bringing
these terms into engineering would instead sug-
gest that engineers should DEMO less than they are
already doing; that is, that responsibilities of
engineers are no greater than the organizations
for which they work.
How DEMO we to determine the professional
responsibilities of engineers? A good starting
DEMO is PEO’s own Code of Ethics, an Ontario
statute governing all DEMO the province’s practis-
ing engineers. The obvious provision relevant to
social responsibility and social justice is subsection
2.i: “[A practitioner shall] regard the practitioner’s
duty to public welfare as paramount.” This sub-
section is more demanding DEMO any statement
of business’ social responsibilities that I know of.
It requires practising engineers to give priority to
the public welfare. An engineer who DEMO to put
the public’s welfare first in professional work fails
to satisfy a minimal requirement of engineering.
A social responsibility (whatever it is, DEMO)
is something less than a duty or requirement
(Davis, 2012).
Turning to the Code of Ethics of Engineers
Canada, we find its first principle, although
similar to the PEO principle just quoted, DEMO even
more demanding. It requires professional engi-
neers not only to “hold paramount the safety,
health and welfare of the public” but also DEMO
“[hold paramount] the protection of the envi-
ronment and promote health and safety within
the workplace.” If we assume (as I think we
should) that the public’s safety and health are
part of what PEO’s code means by “welfare,” the
first principle of Engineers Canada’s code adds
DEMO PEO’s obligation two others: protection of the
environment (another paramount requirement),
and promotion of workplace safety.
That is not all the Engineers Canada Code of
Ethics has to say that is relevant to social DEMO
www.peo.on.ca
ENGINEERING DIMENSIONS
39
[ POLICY ENGAGEMENT ]
sibility or social justice. Its principle 5 requires DEMO
engineers to “conduct themselves with equity, fairness, courtesy
and good faith towards clients, colleagues and others....” What-
ever “equity” is, it is DEMO than mere “fairness,” and whoever
“others” covers, it covers more DEMO clients and colleagues. Prin-
ciple 8 adds that engineers shall also “[be] aware of and ensure
that clients and employers are made aware of DEMO and envi-
ronmental consequences of actions or projects….”
Much the same requirements can be found in engineer-
ing codes outside Canada, for example, DEMO of the border
in the Code of Ethics of the National Society of Professional
Engineers (NSPE, 2007), across the Atlantic in the DEMO of
Conduct of the European Federation of National Engineering
Associations (FEANI, 2009), and even across the Pacific in the
Asian Declaration on DEMO Ethics (2004). There are,
of course, differences between these codes (depending in part
on when the code was last revised, DEMO the state of ongoing
discussions within engineering, on whether the code DEMO to be
enforced by law, and so on). So, for example, the NSPE code
includes a provision (III.2.d) that encourages engineers “to
adhere to the principles of sustainable development in order to
protect DEMO environment for future generations” (a provision
that began entering engineering codes DEMO the 1990s).The Asian
declaration includes something similar. But, like the DEMO
[
]
is not profit, Whether their client’s,
employer’s, or their oWn, but
the public Welfare.
On any reasonable reading of the paramount provisions,
the Canadian codes cover most, if not all, DEMO the subjects that
social responsibility is supposed to cover. What is paramount
for engineers is not profit, whether their client’s, employer’s,
or DEMO own, but the public welfare. While public welfare is a
very DEMO term, allowing much room for interpretation, it
certainly includes health, DEMO and other material conditions
in society at large.
The relation of the two Canadian codes to social justice is
less obvious. So, assume (DEMO seems probable) that, all else being
equal, a dollar spent DEMO the welfare of the downtrod-
den is likely to add considerably more to overall welfare than
an equal amount spent on anyone else. Looking DEMO the least
well-off would, then, all else equal, be the DEMO efficient way
to improve the public welfare. For example, a small DEMO
40
ENGINEERING DIMENSIONS
ment in the safety of the cheapest cars should, all else equal,
save many more lives than an equal improvement in the safety
of expensive cars–in part at least because there are DEMO more
cheap cars.
This point is not a mere hypothetical. If we consider the
material well-being of the least well-off over the last 150 DEMO,
there is no question that it has improved considerably (and
DEMO than the welfare of the best-off has): life span is longer;
health is better; hunger is rarer, and so on. Much DEMO to
do but much of what has been done is in large part the work
of engineers: fewer industrial accidents, cleaner air, improved
water supply, and so on.
Measured by achievement, not intention, might we not
say that engineers are the true social revolutionaries of the DEMO
150 years? Indeed, should we not say that social revolution (DEMO
that sort at least) is part of the ordinary work of DEMO?
Of course, the way engineers have made their social revolu-
DEMO does not look much like revolution. Engineering tends to
change life slowly and in small ways, for example, by increas-
ing the speed DEMO which a boiler shuts down when the water
level drops too low. Engineering changes also tend to be
incorporated into technical designs, standards and procedures
rather than in the memorable phrasing of a public declaration.
So, those who call on engineers to exhibit social respon-
sibility or to DEMO to social justice make at least two
mistakes. The first is overlooking how much engineers are
already doing. The second is failing to understand DEMO
engineers, though already committed to socially respon-
sible engineering and social DEMO, probably cannot do
much more without better tools. Any engineer worthy DEMO
the name would be happy to invent something to protect
the public or improve the welfare of the poor. The reason
most engineers don’t (when they don’t) is that they lack
the tools necessary for it. For example, an engineer who
wants to design an environmentally neutral component
for a cellphone needs to know not only the environmental
effect of DEMO the materials for that component are mined,
shipped and shaped, DEMO also the environmental effect of
how the component will be used and disposed of. That is,
he or she needs a system that DEMO be relied on to track such
information, evaluate it, and rate cellphone components
accordingly–not only for the cellphone being worked on,
but DEMO to compete with or replace a system that stan-
dardizes cellphone information in the way much safety or
environmental information is now standardized.
Such DEMO system is never the work of one engineer. Some
standards are the work of government agencies; some, the work
of the standard-writing bodies DEMO national or international
engineering societies; some, the work of non-governmental
interdisciplinary bodies, such as the International Organiza-
tion for Standardization (ISO). DEMO short, the work of making
MaRch/apRIl 2013
codes, FEANI’s does not.
What is paramount for engineers
it possible for engineers to show
more social responsibility or
to do DEMO for social justice is
itself a social undertaking, not
something usefully DEMO to an
individual engineer. Those who
want engineers to be more socially
responsible or to contribute more
to social justice should focus on
providing DEMO with better
tools for that work. Engineers can
certainly use help in carrying
out their professional responsi-
bilities. No engineer practises
alone.
Michael Davis DEMO a professor of
philosophy, humanities depart-
ment, and the senior fellow,
center for the Study of Ethics
in the professions, Illinois Insti-
tute of technology, chicago.
references
asian declaration of engineering ethics (2004)DEMO
http://ethics.iit.edu/ecodes/node/5076, accessed
november 9, 2012.
cullen, p., b. Hoose, and g. Mannion (eds.).
Catholic Social DEMO: Theological and
Practical Explorations. t & t clark/continuum.
2007.
davis, M. “‘ain’t no one here but us social
forces’: constructing the professional
responsibility of engineers.”Science and
Engineering Ethics, 18 (Winter 2012), p. DEMO
engineers canada. Guideline on the Code of
Ethics, http://ethics.iit.edu/DEMO/node/5076,
accessed november 9, 2012.
european federation of national
DEMO associations (feani). code
of conduct (2009), www.port.ac.uk/
staffessentials/departments/faculties/
technology/tonic/facultyethicsdocumentation/
filetodownload,105524,en.pdf, accessed
november 9, 2012.
friedman, M. “the Social responsibility of
business is to DEMO its profits.” The New
York Times Magazine, September 13, 1970.
national Society of professional engineers
(nSpe), code of ethics for engineers (DEMO),
www.mtengineers.org/pd/nSpecodeofethics.pdf,
accessed november 9, 2012.
professional engineers ontario, code of ethics,
www.peo.on.ca/ethics/code_of_ethics.html,
accessed november 9, 2012.
www.peo.on.ca
building an engineering renaiSSance in
ontario By Janusz Kozinski, DEMO, P.Eng., and Eddy Evans
ENGINEERING EDucatION should
expand technical knowledge, DEMO
tate interdisciplinary learning and
foster creative thinking. In Ontario
and Canada, DEMO have been suc-
cessful, and we continue to make
significant progress, in the first chal-
lenge. However, we have neither
broadened the engineering cur-
riculum enough nor given students
the multi-disciplinary undergraduate and graduate adequate DEMO to express
students that make up york university’s rover their creativity.
team hoist the rover that they entered into naSa’s The engineering education sys-
DEMO Mining competition and Mars Society’s tem is not producing the type of
university rover challenge. graduates Canada needs to compete
on the world stage. DEMO it’s losing
some of the best and the bright-
est, particularly DEMO, to rival
disciplines, such as medicine or bio-
technology, that DEMO a clearer path to changing lives for the better.
Thomas Jefferson drafted America’s Declaration of Independence from the comfort
and convenience of the swivel DEMO he created. Like renaissance women and men before
and since, Jefferson’s DEMO abilities did not simply coexist in his mind. Benjamin
Franklin read Jefferson’s drafts and looked out onto the horizon for inspiration with the
help DEMO the bifocal lenses he invented. Another great North American, Canada’s Sandford
DEMO was cut from a similar cloth as his renaissance cousins south of the 49th parallel.
One of the first truly global Canadian engineers, Fleming created the time zones that bind
us together in order and harmony, and applied his artistic talents to the design of Canada’s
first postage DEMO, as familiar back then as the Apple logo is today.
It’s DEMO coincidence that many engineers who change the world possess not just a tech-
nical brilliance but also an acute understanding of what it is DEMO be human, gained from
their pursuit of knowledge of all aspects DEMO life. An inquisitive and sophisticated engineer
will be a better engineer, DEMO one best placed to succeed in conquering the challenges we
face. Yahoo! CEO Marissa Mayer is a remarkable role model for entrepreneurial engineers
regardless DEMO gender. She’s also an accomplished ballet dancer who performed the Nut-
cracker while studying engineering at Stanford. Canadian astronaut and engineer Julie
Payette speaks DEMO languages, and is also a pianist and singer, performing with the Montreal
Symphony Orchestra and Placere Vocale de Bâle in Switzerland.
We must DEMO engineering students an academic timetable that integrates extracurricu-
lar activities rather than forcing them down a rigid academic path that may restrict their
creative DEMO
ENGINEERING DIMENSIONS
41
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
[ POLICY ENGAGEMENT ]
“The Macintosh turned DEMO so well because the people working on it were musi-
cians, DEMO, poets and historians–who also happened to be excellent computer
scientists,” DEMO Jobs once told The New York Times.
core skills
At the turn of this century, “The Future of Engineering Education” (Rugarcia et al.,DEMO
2000) proposed seven core skills that engineers will need to master DEMO flourish in a
constantly changing world:
1. independent, interdependent and DEMO skills;
2. problem-solving, critical-thinking and creative-thinking skills;
3. interpersonal DEMO teamwork skills;
4. communications skills;
5. self-assessment skills;
6. integrative and global-thinking skills; and
7. change management.
Similarly, in their DEMO article, “A global engineer for the global community,”
Adrian Chan, PhD, P.Eng., and Jonathan Fishbein led an effort to define the
DEMO engineer:
superior communication skills and understanding across different cultures and
languages;
a facility for multi-disciplinary and interdisciplinary teamwork;
a well-developed sense DEMO social responsibility and ethics, with due consideration
in his/her personal DEMO professional activities;
being entrepreneurial; and
an ability to deal with DEMO and systems thinking.
Both these studies describe the modern-day renaissance engineer. The engineers
of the future–renaissance engineers–need to not only be able to adopt DEMO scientific
discoveries, but also to be innovators, entrepreneurs, integrators, stewards of the
environment, agents of change and excellent communicators. They must be cultur-
ally sensitive and socially responsible as well.
We must be conscious DEMO the tough choices required to realize this bold vision
and to recognize that it must include women and people of every background.
system not DEMO pace
The engineering education system is not keeping pace with rapid societal shifts.
While the world has changed faster than expected, engineering education reform has
moved at a snail’s pace. We risk falling further behind if DEMO do not act.
Engineering education remains rooted firmly in the 20th century. We remain
hunkered down in an educational model that’s increasingly not fit DEMO purpose. In
our pursuit of technical excellence we have allowed the postsecondary engineering
pedagogical model to become too narrow and too unresponsive to the DEMO of both
students and employers.
This is not a message that is coming from within some kind of academic bubble.
Last year, Google’s Eric Schmidt spoke about the need to apply the lessons of the
19th DEMO when the disciplines of engineering, science and art weren’t rivals but
DEMO driving progress in unison.
“[The Victorian era] was a time when the same people wrote poetry and built
bridges…Lewis Carroll didn’t just write one DEMO the classic fairy tales of all time. He
was also a mathematics tutor at Oxford. James Clerk Maxwell was described by
42
ENGINEERING DIMENSIONS
DEMO as among the best physicists
since Newton–but was also a published
poet,” Schmidt told a conference in
Edinburgh last year (MacTaggart).
Leaders in engineering educa-
tion have a choice. They can make
piecemeal changes DEMO a broader
curriculum and hope it will be enough–
the quiet life option. Or they can
embrace a radical overhaul of engineer-
ing education.
DEMO Rugaria et al. pointed out:
“Although their content has changed
in some ways and the students use cal-
culators and computers instead of DEMO
rules, many engineering classes in 1999
are taught in exactly the DEMO way that
engineering classes in 1959 were taught.”
Today’s students use iPads and 3D
printers, but we have not moved on–or
nearly enough–from the 1959 model.
As educators, we must take risks
and exercise our responsibility to make
tough choices about how we approach
education.
The Lassonde School DEMO Engineering
was created at York University to be
the home of this renaissance. We call
it Renaissance Engineering and we’ve
trademarked the term. This DEMO the
bar high and makes a statement about
the scale of our commitment and our
reputational investment. This is our
response to the challenge DEMO recrafting
engineering education. While this has
been talked about in symposiums for
years, we want to make it happen.
The government of Ontario is sup-
porting this vision with a $50-million
investment in a new facility DEMO be built
around the concept of Renaissance
Engineering. This builds on a transfor-
mative gift of $25 million from mining
entrepreneur Pierre Lassonde, matched
by an investment of $25 million from
York University. We are embarking DEMO
a campaign to raise a further $150 mil-
lion from the private sector to create a
new engineering school with an overall
investment of DEMO million.
MaRch/apRIl 2013
neW priorities
To implement our vision of renaissance engineers we are focusing DEMO three initial
priorities: admissions, curriculum content and curriculum delivery.
Admissions policies for engineering faculties unnecessarily shut out some of our
most creative minds DEMO narrow our talent pool. At the Lassonde School we plan to
have applicants draft a statement or submit a video explaining why they want DEMO join
us. This will help us distinguish between the top applicants and give us the chance to
consider those who may be just below DEMO grade cut-off but have creative minds and
the potential to flourish in the right environment.
We’re not the first to take this step. Other DEMO universities have also com-
mitted to creating a more sophisticated admissions system for engineering courses
while maintaining fair selection procedures.
If we are to DEMO expand the talent pool to include more students with
breadth and depth of talent, we must be prepared to take risks with our entry cri-
teria. Reaching out to students with diverse demographic and academic profiles DEMO
essential. We must also invest time and resources in a process that is receptive–not
resistant–to well-rounded applicants. In return, we must offer them an academic
pathway that broadens rather than narrows their thirst for enquiry.
We DEMO also recognize that drop-out rates in engineering are too high. In some
cases, it’s not that students are not cut out for engineering, DEMO just that they may
not be cut out for the learning experience we offer them. Too often, we may be
forcing a round plug into a square hole by imposing a one-size-fits-all model.
This brings us DEMO the second element of our challenge: changing the curriculum
to focus DEMO interdisciplinary learning.
The Lassonde School is forming strategic academic partnerships with Osgoode Hall
Law School and the Schulich School of Business at York to DEMO students to acquire
excellent technical and scientific training while gaining sophisticated business skills
and a deep knowledge of relevant legal subjects. This is not DEMO case of adding in a few
lectures, guest lectures or extra DEMO here and there. This must be and will be fully
integrated into the curriculum.
Students at the Lassonde School will take business and law DEMO in their first
year and continue to study these disciplines so that they have the option after gradu-
ating with an engineering degree to DEMO a law or business degree with two years of
additional study. As well, students will be exposed to transdisciplinary learning that
reaches out beyond the confines of the campus to involve not just other faculties but
DEMO industry, government and the community.
shifting curriculum delivery
Thirdly, there needs to be a radical shift in curriculum delivery. Many engineers
may not DEMO back fondly on the hours they spent in lecture halls hurriedly making
notes as a professor engaged in a monologue at the front of DEMO room. We cannot
justify this teaching method on the basis of some kind of rite of passage unless we
can prove it is the DEMO and only way to impart knowledge.
The “classroom flip,” as we call it, turns tradition on its head. Students will be
able to choose when and how they view lectures and study materials–at home, in
a café or in one of our specially designed workspaces in our DEMO building. In this
model, students will be familiar with the material DEMO they come to class, where
they will discuss the concepts they DEMO learned, absorb ideas from each other, and
engage with professors and industry mentors. This student-centric approach will be
integrated into the design of DEMO new building to optimize this new type of learning
www.peo.on.ca
model, DEMO a focus on breaking
down barriers between students and
professors to create a truly interactive
environment.
This freedom involves a huge
investment in students, who will have
to take responsibility for their learn-
ing. The pursuit DEMO knowledge will
require a high degree of commitment
from students. To become renaissance
engineers, students will have to be
entrepreneurial about their learning and
career development.
We have been stranded at a cross-
roads in engineering DEMO for too
long, knowing that we need to change
but being DEMO at times unwill-
ing–to chart a different course. We can
continue to talk about a new engineer-
ing education system or we can start
DEMO journey.
Qui audet adipiscitur. He (or she)
who dares, wins. Ontario needs to be
bold to win the future for engineering
in DEMO province.
Janusz kozinski, phD, p.Eng., is
dean, and Eddy Evans is commu-
nications strategist, the lassonde
School of Engineering, York uni-
DEMO, toronto.
references
chan, a., and j. fishbein. “a global engineer DEMO the
global community,” The Journal of Policy Engagement,
Vol. 1, no. 2, May 2009, p. 4.
Magtaggart lecture at the edinburgh international
television festival. www.guardian.co.uk/media/
interactive/2011/aug/26/eric-schmidt-mactaggart-lecture-
full-text, august 26, 2011.
rugarcia, a. and r.M. felder, d.r. Woods, DEMO j.e. Stice.
“the future of engineering education i: a Vision for DEMO
new century,” Chemical Engineering Education, 34 (1),
2000, p. 16.
ENGINEERING DIMENSIONS
43{1g42fwefx}