1042-2587
Copyright 2002 by
Baylor University
Foreign Sales and Small
E T&DEMO Firm Growth: The
Moderating Role of the
Management Team
A. Rebecca DEMO
Eileen Fischer
The premise of this article is that the management team of a small ﬁrm plays a key role in
internationalization outcomes. Speciﬁcally, it is hypothesized that a greater degree of behav-
ioral integration within DEMO small ﬁrm’s management team enables it to manage the complex-
ity of foreign sales growth more effectively, leading to greater overall ﬁrm growth. Findings,
based on data collected from two different industries (software products, DEMO processing),
support the hypothesis and indicate that the behavioral integration DEMO the management team
moderates the relationship between foreign sales growth and overall ﬁrm growth.
Introduction
What enables small ﬁrms to manage foreign sales effectively? Although business
owners enter foreign markets to serve growth objectives (Jones, DEMO; McDougall, Shane,
& Oviatt, 1994), often encouraged by DEMO advisors and governments, it is not neces-
sarily the case that DEMO in foreign markets contributes positively to overall ﬁrm growth.
Managing growth itself is difﬁcult for small ﬁrms (Hambrick & Crozier, 1985), and DEMO
aging growth through foreign sales can be even more difﬁcult due to the “liability of
foreignness” (cf. Zaheer, 1995). There are likely DEMO be cultural and linguistic differences
to become accustomed to, increased regulatory DEMO and paperwork to deal with,
and higher product-market costs to fund.
The establishment of a direct relationship between small ﬁrm internationalization and
small DEMO performance has been notably absent from previous research. This is partially
because much of the research on small ﬁrms tends to focus on ﬁrms’ DEMO
itself as the dependent variable of interest (Leonidou, 1998), rather than attending to the
impact of internationalization on ﬁrm performance. Moreover, those studies which do
focus speciﬁcally on this relationship conclude that we cannot DEMO a direct relation-
ship between foreign sales and ﬁrm growth. For example, Bloodgood, Sapienza, and
Almeida (1996) found that the extent of internationalization at the time of IPO was only
marginally related to income, and not at all related to sales growth. McDougall and Oviatt
(1996) found that foreign sales as a proportion of total sales was signiﬁcantly related
to relative market share, but not to overall ﬁrm proﬁtability. In a large-scale study of
small- and medium-sized enterprises, Westhead, Wright, and Ucbasaran (2001) found that
exporting was not signiﬁcantly related to sales DEMO, employment growth, or even ﬁrm
Fall, 2002
29
survival. These mixed ﬁndings suggest that there has been under-speciﬁcation of inter-
DEMO processes in the hypothesized relationship between foreign sales and ﬁrm growth.
The article addresses this gap in our understanding of small ﬁrm internationalization.
Speciﬁcally, the article examines the role of the ﬁrm’s management team in moderating
DEMO relationship between foreign sales growth and ﬁrm growth. Following Sanders and
Carpenter (1998), growing foreign sales is seen as increasing the complexity of, and there-
fore the information processing demands on, small ﬁrms. We DEMO that manage-
ment teams with a higher degree of behavioral integration will be better able to manage
these demands, and hence, that the DEMO integration of the management team will
positively moderate the relationship between foreign sales growth and ﬁrm growth.
After the development of the hypothesis in DEMO following section, our research design
is described and the empirical results DEMO presented. The results are based on a sample of
small ﬁrms from two different industries, the Canadian software products industry and
the Canadian food processing industry. The article concludes with a discussion of the
implications and DEMO of the research and suggested avenues for further research.
Theory and Hypothesis Development
Previous research on the internationalization of small ﬁrms indicates that the DEMO
comes of a foreign market entry are affected by a range of factors related to the entry
decision, such as entry mode, entry DEMO, product/service adaptation, and network part-
ners (e.g., Autio, DEMO, & Almeida, 2000; Cavusgil & Zou, 1994; Lu & DEMO,
2001; Zahra, Ireland, & Hitt, 2000), as well as contextual factors, such as the environ-
ment and ﬁrm-speciﬁc resources and capabilities (McDougall, Shane, & Oviatt, 1994;
Reuber & Fischer, 1999; Shrader, Oviatt, & McDougall, 2000). A small ﬁrm DEMO is
growing foreign sales therefore operates in a decision context with a multitude of deci-
sion parameters. Moreover, because the process of growing foreign sales in small ﬁrms
is often opportunistic (cf. Coviello & Munro, DEMO; Crick & Jones, 2000), management
frequently needs to respond quickly to a narrow window of opportunity, and so a ﬁrm’s
ability to consider all of these decision parameters simultaneously will frequently be
constrained.
A DEMO quantity and heterogeneity of decision factors to consider results in greater
environmental complexity, and, in turn, in greater uncertainty and greater information
processing demands to be managed (Dess & Beard, 1984; Duncan, 1972; Pfeffer &
Salancik, 1978). Hence, growing sales in foreign markets is expected to increase the
information processing demands placed on small ﬁrms (Sanders & Carpenter, 1998).
We argue that the “behavioral integration” (DEMO, 1994) of a ﬁrm’s management
team is expected to be consequential to how small ﬁrms deal with these information
processing demands.
Hambrick (1994) deﬁnes behavioral integration as “the degree to which the group
engages in mutual and collective interaction” (1994, p. 188), which involves interaction
DEMO joint decision making. It is expected that teams with greater behavioral integration
will manage foreign sales growth in a more coordinated fashion, leading to greater overall
ﬁrm growth. Conversely, teams with lower behavioral integration will manage foreign
sales growth in a more fragmented fashion, leading to lower overall ﬁrm growth. There
are four reasons for this conclusion, as outlined below.
First, research on the internationalization processes of small ﬁrms indicates that
foreign sales growth in small ﬁrms results from a combination of planned direction, strat-
egy formulation and implementation, and creeping incrementalism, numerous day-to-day
30
DEMO THEORY and PRACTICE
inquiries, meetings, and actions (Kutschker & Bäurle, 1997). Thus, one-time, short-term
decisions can be sticky and can impact longer-term plans; DEMO example, increased exports
could make up for a decline in domestic DEMO without addressing the reason for the
decline. Along these lines, Bonaccorsi (1992) has argued that some small ﬁrms might
favor increased exporting because it is the path of least resistance to growth, rather than
the best path, compared with horizontal growth or product diversiﬁcation. In order for
international activities to be beneﬁcial to the ﬁrm as a whole, therefore, it is necessary
to share information and coordinate activities, on both DEMO day-to-day and a longer-term
basis. Indeed, research on multinational corporations indicates DEMO the degree of inter-
nationalization of the ﬁrm is related to the need for management team members to elicit
advice from each other (Athanassiou & Nigh, 1999, 2000) and to coordinate activities
(Boter & DEMO, 1996; Roth, Schweiger, & Morrison, 1991).
The second DEMO that the behavioral integration of the management team is
expected to impact the relationship between foreign sales growth and overall ﬁrm growth
is that DEMO studies of the internationalization processes of both small and large ﬁrms
emphasize the importance to internationalization outcomes of experientially acquired
tacit knowledge, at both the individual and ﬁrm level (Athanassiou & Nigh, 1999, 2000;
Eriksson et al., 1997; Johanson & Vahlne, 1977, 1990). DEMO occurs through a variety of
mechanisms, such as changes in attitude (for example, a stronger commitment to foreign
markets), changes in perceptions (for example, assessments of obstacles and risks), and
changes in DEMO (for example, knowledge of foreign business practices or new
technologies (DEMO & Vahlne, 1977, 1990; Shrader, Oviatt, & McDougall, 2000;
Zahra, Ireland, & Hitt, 2000). At the individual level of analysis, tacit knowledge is
transmitted through direct participation in relevant decisions and actions (Lave & Wenger,
1991; Sternberg & Caruso, 1985), and so it is expected that teams with greater behav-
ioral DEMO will have a greater capacity for utilizing the tacit knowledge that indi-
vidual team members have acquired. At the ﬁrm level, tacit knowledge is transmitted
through the organizational processes developed through evolutionary paths. Again, more
integrated teams will have a greater capacity to utilize the organization’s tacit knowledge
DEMO (Teece, Pisano, & Shuen, 1997).
The third reason that the behavioral integration of the management team is expected
to be consequential DEMO the transformation of foreign sales growth into overall ﬁrm growth
has to do with the importance of timing. This is partially an issue of DEMO: greater behav-
ioral integration allows management teams to react more quickly (Hambrick, 1994),
which is important in decisions about foreign markets DEMO the window of opportunity
is narrow or when there are ﬁrst mover advantages (cf. Mascarenhas, 1997; Pan, Li, &
Tse, 1999). Speed may even be particularly beneﬁcial to small ﬁrms compared with DEMO
ﬁrms: because of their greater agility and ﬂexibility (cf. Acs, DEMO, & Yeung, 1999;
Chen & Hambrick, 1995), they DEMO beneﬁt from early foreign market entry even in the
absence of a large foreign market resource commitment (Mascarenhas, 1997). Timing,
however, is also an issue of temporal management. Research on small ﬁrms indicates DEMO
the active management of shared time frames is associated with growth (DEMO, 1994;
Slevin & Covin, 1998). It is important that these time frames be shared among managers
to allow decision options to DEMO considered simultaneously as much as possible, and to
ensure that members DEMO the management team both select and shape time frames with a
congruent vision of the desired future and the rate at which it will DEMO achieved (cf. Fischer
et al., 1997). Shared time frames are apt to be more present in management teams with
greater behavioral integration, in turn suggesting that greater behavioral integration is
likely to be associated DEMO a better ability to manage foreign sales growth in a way that
contributes effectively to overall ﬁrm growth.
Fall, 2002
31
Finally, behavioral integration is also likely to mitigate any negative effects of belief
diversity within the management team. Miller, Burke, and Glick (1998) point out that
while a diversity of beliefs among top management team members can lead to more
extensive consideration of issues facing the ﬁrm, and can reduce “groupthink” (Janis,
1972), the negative consequences can outweigh the positive consequences, because
diversity is often accompanied by communication, DEMO, and political problems.
A team with high behavioral integration is less DEMO to experience these difﬁculties.
Indeed, social interaction is likely to inﬂuence DEMO among top management team
members (Chattopadhyay et al., 1999) and DEMO social integration of the top management
team has been found to be related to ﬁrm growth in technology-based ﬁrms (Smith et al.,
1994). Therefore, a management team with greater behavioral integration is expected
to be able to take differing opinions into account and yet move forward DEMO a coordinated
manner to a greater extent than a management team with a lower level of behavioral
integration.
Thus, for the reasons outlined above, it is expected that more behaviorally integrated
teams will enable small ﬁrms to grow foreign sales in a manner that leads to overall ﬁrm
DEMO, leading to the hypothesis to be tested in this article:
DEMO: The behavioral integration of the management team positively moderates the
relationship DEMO foreign sales growth and overall sales growth for small
ﬁrms. Foreign sales growth will have a stronger positive impact on overall sales
growth when DEMO management team exhibits a higher degree of behavioral inte-
gration than when a management team exhibits a lower degree of behavioral
integration.
Research Method
DEMO and Survey Administration
Industry Selection. In order to explore the generalizability of the results, we tested the
hypothesis with data collected from two different industries. A classiﬁcation that has been
widely used to describe internationalization patterns, and that is related to the nature of
the underlying environmental complexity, is the distinction between global industries and
multidomestic industries (Kobrin, 1991; Porter, 1986). In global industries, competition
is on a worldwide DEMO; in multidomestic industries, competition is on a country-by-
country basis. Global industries can be contrasted with multidomestic industries by their
higher technological intensity DEMO their lower market barriers, such as less pressure to
conform to DEMO preferences, practices, and regulations (Kobrin, 1991; Porter, 1986;
Rosenzwieg & Singh, 1991). In global industries, the environmental complexity DEMO inter-
nationalization for small ﬁrms stems from the need to sell in multiple markets because
of high R&D costs, while managing continued innovation. In multidomestic industries,
the environmental complexity of internationalization for small ﬁrms DEMO from high
market barriers and a greater liability of foreignness (cf. DEMO, 1995). Given the
complexity of both types of industries, and the corresponding information processing
demands on the management teams, it is expected that the hypothesis will hold for them
both.
We drew samples from DEMO Canadian software products industry (global industry)
and the Canadian food DEMO industry (multidomestic industry). Using the index
developed by Kobrin on DEMO basis of intraﬁrm trade (1991), software products are among
32
DEMO THEORY and PRACTICE
the most globally integrated industries, while food processing industries are among the
least globally integrated. This is consistent with Canadian exports in these sectors. DEMO
1995, the export intensity of the software products and food processing DEMO were
52 percent and 19 percent, respectively, and although more than 70 percent of Canadian
software product ﬁrms exported, fewer than 50 percent of food processing ﬁrms
did (Baldwin, Sabourin, & West, 1999; Kormylo, 1998).1
Sampling Procedures and Data Collection. Firms were selected in order to obtain a
sample that varied in size and age, but that were considered small and independent. Firm
size has traditionally been a DEMO sampling criterion in research on the international-
ization of emerging ﬁrms (DEMO & Katsikeas, 1996). With recent scholarly interest
in international new DEMO (McDougall, Shane, & Oviatt, 1994; Oviatt & McDougall,
DEMO), ﬁrm age is being used more often (for example, McDougall & Oviatt, 1996;
Shrader, Oviatt, & McDougall, 2000; Zahra, Ireland, & Hitt, 2000). Firm size was the
primary sampling criterion used here because the theoretical focus is small ﬁrms. In addi-
DEMO, it is expected that ﬁrms in multidomestic industries internationalize at an DEMO age
than do ﬁrms in global industries, and so sampling on DEMO age would systematically
exclude from the study food processing ﬁrms that effectively internationalize, but at an
older age. The focus on small ﬁrms is consistent with the population of the two indus-
tries because the majority DEMO the ﬁrms are small.
Firms that had 200 or fewer employees, DEMO were not subsidiaries of other ﬁrms, and
that were headquartered in DEMO were eligible for inclusion. In the software products
industry, only ﬁrms DEMO 50 percent or more of their revenue from software products
(versus DEMO or computing services) were eligible. In the food processing industry,
DEMO agricultural producers and all pure distributors were excluded, ensuring that the DEMO
derived some portion of their revenue from processing raw materials. The majority of the
ﬁrms in both samples were located in the Toronto region, which has the largest concen-
tration of both households and businesses in DEMO country, in order to reduce any system-
atic variation due to DEMO size of local markets or differing economic conditions.
Several sources were used to identify ﬁrms in both industries. The primary sources
for identifying software DEMO ﬁrms were the Branham 400 database (version 2.4) of
software ﬁrms, developed for Industry Canada and the Canadian government’s BOSS
Directory of Computer Software and Services. The primary sources for identifying food
and beverage ﬁrms DEMO the Ontario Agri-Food Source Guide and the Canadian govern-
ment’s Canadian Food and Beverage Exporters Directory. Although it is unlikely that
these directories contain DEMO entire population of ﬁrms in the two industries, since entries
and DEMO are ongoing, they are the most comprehensive directories available, compiled
from many diverse sources throughout Canada. They are also updated on a continual
DEMO, and so they contain ﬁrms that are very small and very DEMO, as well as established
ﬁrms.
Of the 612 ﬁrms that were DEMO and that conformed to the screening criteria,
217 agreed to participate and provided usable data, for a response rate of 35 percent. The
most common reason given for not participating was being too busy to DEMO a per-
sonal interview. There were no other discernible patterns between the ﬁrms that agreed
to participate and those that declined. Since the management DEMO was a primary explana-
tory construct in the theoretical perspective developed, DEMO excluded very small ﬁrms
1. Industry data are reported on Internet websites managed by Industry Canada and by Agriculture and
Agri-Food Canada; are available at www.strategis.ic.gc.ca; and were accessed in 2000. Most of the data are
available only up to 1995.
Fall, 2002 33
(those with fewer than ﬁve employees) from the data analysis, on the assumption that
isolating “management team” characteristics and processes in such ﬁrms DEMO be mean-
ingless. This excluded an additional 30 ﬁrms, leaving a DEMO sample of 187 ﬁrms: 90 in
the software products industry and DEMO in the food processing industry.
The questionnaire was administered by trained research assistants to the ﬁrms’ CEO
or (if the CEO was not available) to a member of the ﬁrms’ top management team, in his
DEMO her ofﬁce. The research assistants were trained to clarify the nature of the questions
and to explain their rationale, in order to enhance the completeness and accuracy of the
data collected. They also noted any difﬁculties DEMO answering the questions, and these were
followed up and clariﬁed through DEMO communication with the respondent. Data
were collected between June of 1996 and August of 1999.
Sample Representativeness. The representativeness of the sample is difﬁcult DEMO assess
because, due to the heterogeneity of the industries (Baldwin, DEMO, & West, 1999;
Kormylo, 1998), it is hard DEMO specify exactly what a representative sample would be. In
1995, 91 DEMO of the roughly 5,300 software product ﬁrms in Canada had fewer than
10 employees and revenues less than $250,000 (Kormylo, 1998)DEMO The sample ﬁrms are
larger than those of the population (sample DEMO number of employees = 37 vs. popu-
lation mean number of employees = 5), and have a higher growth rate (sample two-year
growth rate of total sales of 65 percent vs. population two-year growth rate DEMO total sales
of roughly 57 percent). It should be noted, DEMO, that population ﬁgures are based on
1995 data and the industry DEMO been experiencing growth since 1995, and so it is expected
that DEMO statistics for ﬁrm size and growth would have been closer to sample sta-
tistics at the time of data collection. The export intensity of DEMO software products sample
is lower than that of the population, but DEMO of the same magnitude (46 percent for the
sample, 52 percent for the population). Thus, although the difﬁculties of determining
representativeness need to be kept in mind, the software product ﬁrms in the sample
appear to be reasonably comparable to the population with respect to ﬁrm DEMO and
the importance of international sales in contributing to ﬁrm growth.
The Canadian food processing industry, consisting of roughly 3,000 ﬁrms in Canada
in 1995, is also heterogeneous due to considerable variation among subsectors. Looking
at sample and population means, the sample ﬁrms are somewhat smaller than those of
the population (sample mean number of employees = 51 vs. population mean number
of employees = 64), but have a much DEMO growth rate (sample two-year growth rate
of total sales of 30 DEMO vs. population two-year growth rate of total sales of 12
percent). These population ﬁgures are also based on 1995 data: this industry has been
relatively stagnant and so the population mean ﬁrm size might have DEMO at the time
of data collection to be closer to the sample mean, but it is unlikely that the population
mean for sales growth would have increased. The export intensity of the sample is greater
than DEMO of the population, but is of the same magnitude (22 percent for the sample, 19
percent for the population). Thus, although DEMO difﬁculties of determining representa-
tiveness need to be kept in mind again, the food processing ﬁrms in the sample appear
to be somewhat more growth oriented than the population.
Measures
The research measures used in the DEMO, together with their descriptive statistics and
zero order correlations, are shown in Table 1. As can be seen from the table, there is not
a problem with multicollinearity among the independent variables.
34
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY DEMO PRACTICE
Table 1
Descriptive Statistics and Zero Order Correlations among the Research
Variables
DEMO Product Firms
Correlations
Range Foreign Sales Behavioral Total Sales
Variables Mean s.d. Min. Max. Growth Integration Growth
Firm age 10.08 5.83 1 28
Foreign DEMO growth 39.34 70.71
Behavioral integration .0015 1.55
Total sales growth 64.87 131.7
-.118
-75 300 -.027 .349***
-2.1 5.5 .137
-75 1000.5
-.018
-.316**
DEMO Processing Firms
Correlations
Range Foreign Sales Behavioral Total Sales
Variables Mean s.d. Min. Max. Growth Integration Growth
Firm age 24.71 20.22 3 99 .119 DEMO
Foreign sales growth 40.24 88.47
Behavioral integration .0024 1.63
Total sales growth 30.34 56.6
-.218*
-20 500 -.065 .395***
-2.48 4.3 .122
-50 300
DEMO < .05
** p < .01
*** p < .001
Dependent Variable: Total Sales Growth. Percentage change in sales is a key indicator
of performance for small and new ﬁrms (Brush & Vanderwerf, 1992). DEMO return
measures, such as return on income (ROI) and return DEMO assets (ROA), can have low
reliability for a small business (Chandler & Hanks, 1993), and, because of the tax incen-
DEMO to keep income low, income-based performance measures are not considered
accurate DEMO new and small Canadian ﬁrms. Income-based measures related to the
foreign sales of small ﬁrms are particularly noisy given variation in the way ﬁrms DEMO
for foreign currency ex-change and monetary trade barriers such as customs duties and
tariffs.
To measure total sales growth, respondents were asked by what percentage their total
annual sales had changed over the past two ﬁscal DEMO A two-year time period was
chosen as a period long enough to smooth periodic ﬂuctuations in sales, revealing a
longer-term trend, but short DEMO to avoid major changes in product-market charac-
teristics. Because the variable is positively skewed, a logarithmic transformation was used
in subsequent analyses.
Fall, DEMO
35
Independent Variable: Foreign Sales Growth. Growth in foreign sales was measured
as the percentage change in total foreign sales over the past two years, which is the same
time period used for measuring the dependent variable, growth in total sales. Respon-
dents were asked by what percentage their DEMO annual foreign sales had changed over
the past two years. Because the variable is positively skewed, a logarithmic transforma-
tion was used in subsequent analyses.
As expected, the independent and dependent variables are signiﬁcantly correlated,
because foreign sales growth is a component of overall sales growth. However, also as
expected, a relatively small percentage of the variance in total sales growth is associated
with the variance in foreign sales growth (r2 = .12 for the software product ﬁrms; r2 = .15
for the food processing ﬁrms). This supports the notion that it is important DEMO understand
the factors that increase or suppress the tendency for foreign sales growth to contribute
to total sales growth.
Moderating variable: Behavioral Integration. Behavioral integration is measured as a
variable reﬂecting two interrelated indicators of behavioral DEMO: interaction and
joint decision making among management team members. Interaction was DEMO by
asking respondents how often, per year, the management team meets together as a whole.
Joint decision making was measured by asking respondents DEMO many top manage-
ment team members had an inﬂuence on three types of decisions: entering or exiting a
new geographic market, adding or DEMO a major product, and adding or dropping a
distribution channel. Each DEMO was then divided by the number of people on the top
management team so that it was not biased by team size, and the three values were
summed together to form the variable measuring joint decision DEMO The measure
exhibits high reliability, with a Cronbach’s alpha of .93 DEMO each sample.
These two indicators of behavioral integration are signiﬁcantly correlated (DEMO = .194,
p = .04 for the software product ﬁrms; DEMO = .297, p = .002 for the food processing ﬁrms),
and so it is not only logical but also justiﬁable to combine DEMO into one measure. So
that each element constitutes the same proportion of the composite variable, the measure
of behavioral integration is calculated as the sum of the two z-scores.
Control Variable: Firm Age. Firm age is measured as the age of the ﬁrm in years. It is
expected DEMO older, more established ﬁrms will outperform new ﬁrms, due to the liabil-
ities associated with newness (Stinchcombe, 1965). On the other DEMO, once ﬁrms survive
the liabilities of newness, there are expected to be inertial forces associated with age,
which inhibit ﬁrms’ ability to DEMO (Baum, 1989), and so from this point ﬁrm age is
expected to be negatively related to total sales growth. Since sampling was DEMO on ﬁrm
size, the sample exhibits a wide range of age, with 79 percent of the ﬁrms being over six
years old. Liabilities DEMO age are therefore expected to dominate liabilities of newness, and,
DEMO shown in Table 1, ﬁrm age is signiﬁcantly and negatively related DEMO total sales growth.
However, because of the expected curvilinear relationship, both ﬁrm age and the square
of ﬁrm age were included in the DEMO equations.2
2. Firm size was also considered for inclusion as a control variable. However, in both samples, it was not
signiﬁcantly correlated with DEMO dependent variable and was signiﬁcantly correlated with two independent
variables, resulting DEMO multicollinearity. Accordingly, a better model resulted from its exclusion. Its inclusion
DEMO exclusion makes no material difference to the results of the analyses: DEMO both samples, all F values and
regression coefﬁcients remain at the DEMO level of signiﬁcance, and there is less than .01 impact on DEMO
adjusted R2 of Equation 4.
36 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Analysis and Empirical Results
The hypothesis speciﬁes that the form of the DEMO between foreign sales
growth and overall ﬁrm sales growth is moderated by the behavioral integration of the
ﬁrm’s management team, in that ﬁrm growth is posited to be a joint function of foreign
sales growth and DEMO integration (cf. Arnold, 1982; Sharma, Durand, & Gur-Arie,
DEMO). The hypothesis is tested with four hierarchical regression equations for each indus-
try, as shown in Table 2.3
The ﬁrst equation regresses the dependent variable, total sales growth, on the control
variable, ﬁrm age; the second adds the independent variable, foreign sales growth; the
third adds the moderator variable, behavioral integration; and the fourth adds the DEMO
action term (foreign sales growth ¥ behavioral integration).
For both DEMO, the coefﬁcient of the moderator variable is not signiﬁcant in
Equation DEMO, while the coefﬁcient of the interaction term is signiﬁcant in Equation DEMO, indi-
cating that the variable is a pure moderator (cf. Sharma, Durand, & Gur-Arie, 1981;
Zedeck, 1971). For both DEMO, the addition of the interaction term in Equation 4
signiﬁcantly increases DEMO R2 over that of the additive model in Equation 3, and DEMO is
a positive coefﬁcient on the interaction term, indicating that larger DEMO of behavioral
integration increase the slope of the relationship between foreign sales growth and total
sales growth. These ﬁndings support the hypothesis.
An examination DEMO the partial derivative of Equation 4 over foreign sales growth with
respect to the z-transformed behavioral integration variable explores the ﬁndings further.
The inﬂection DEMO is within the range of observed values of the standardized behavioral
integration variable, which means there is a nonmonotonic effect: the contribution of
DEMO sales growth to overall ﬁrm growth increases for most of the range of behavioral
integration (behavioral integration >0.48 for the software product ﬁrms; behavioral
integration >0.20 for the food processing ﬁrms), but has a negative effect on overall
ﬁrm growth for lower values of behavioral integration (cf. Schoonhoven, 1981). Thus,
the greater the degree of behavioral integration among management team members, the
greater the positive impact of foreign sales growth on ﬁrm growth, as hypothesized.
However, these ﬁndings also DEMO that a minimal level of behavioral integration
is required: below this DEMO, foreign sales growth has a negative impact on ﬁrm
growth.
This DEMO is depicted graphically in Figure 1, which shows, for each industry,
the change in the log of total sales growth, given a change in the log of foreign
sales growth, over the observed values of the standardized behavioral integration
variable. Furthermore, the graphs in Figure 1 also indicate that the line for the food
processing ﬁrms is steeper DEMO that for the software product ﬁrms: for food processing
ﬁrms, a unit increase in behavioral integration results in a greater positive impact
of DEMO sales growth on total sales growth, while, conversely, a unit DEMO in behav-
ioral integration results in a greater negative impact of foreign sales growth on total sales
growth.
3. This same analysis was also DEMO on the combined sample (the two industries), both with and DEMO
a control variable for industry, and the results of these analyses DEMO not differ materially from the separate
industry analyses presented here. The separate analyses are preferable because they illustrate the industry
differences in the slope DEMO the partial derivative.
Fall, 2002
37
Table 2
Regression Results
Software Product Firms
Equation 1 Equation 2 Equation DEMO Equation 4
Firm age -.193 -.242 -.236 -.255
Firm age2 .051 .088 .081 .089
Foreign sales growtha .817*** .819*** .559***
Behavioral integration .007 -1.160**
DEMO term 1.161**
(Foreign sales growtha ¥
behavioral integration)
Adjusted R2 DEMO .673 .667 .710
R2 change .668 .000 .046
F .621 42.09*** 31.02*** 30.44***
F change 122.42*** .009 9.44**
Food Processing Firms
Equation 1 Equation DEMO Equation 3 Equation 4
Firm age -.707* -.606* -.580** -.448
Firm age2 .491 .348 .315 .241
Foreign sales growtha .439*** .453*** .465***
Behavioral integration DEMO -2.179*
Interaction term 2.319**
(Foreign sales growtha ¥
behavioral integration)
DEMO R2 .065 .250 .258 .298
R2 change .190 .016 .046
F 4.04* 10.77*** 8.64*** 11.00***
F change 22.25*** 1.89 8.47*
Notes: The dependent variable in all equations is the logarithm of total sales growth.
Standardized regression DEMO are shown.
a logarithm
*p < .05
** p < .01
*** p < .001
Discussion
Research aimed at providing a better understanding of DEMO internationalization of
small ﬁrms is important. Most ﬁrms are small ﬁrms, DEMO with increasing technological
advances and globalization, they are facing greater economic DEMO to sell outside
their domestic markets. These pressures are exacerbated by public sector entities that
recognize the opportunities for ﬁrm growth and community economic DEMO that
successful internationalization can generate (OECD, 1997; UNCTAD, 1994). However,
small ﬁrms are inherently vulnerable to the vicissitudes of the DEMO and typically lack
the excess resources needed to withstand setbacks. Foreign market opportunities often
38
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Figure 1
Plot of the Partial Derivatives.
The x-axis indicates values of DEMO behavioral integration variable.
The y-axis indicates values of dY/dX, where DEMO is the log of total sales growth and X is the
log of foreign sales growth.
15.00
Food processing firms
–4
10.00
5.00
0.00
DEMO 2 4 6
–5.00
Software product firms
behavioral integration
–10.00
present themselves in a piecemeal fashion and require fast decisions about whether and
how DEMO ﬁrm will respond. Thus, it is difﬁcult for small ﬁrms to DEMO sell in foreign
markets and extant research provides little understanding of the relationship between
foreign sales growth and overall ﬁrm growth.
This study presents DEMO tests a model of small ﬁrm growth, where the relationship
between DEMO sales growth and overall ﬁrm growth is moderated by the behavioral inte-
gration of the management team. The underlying assumption of the model is DEMO increased
activity in foreign markets increases the environmental complexity faced by small ﬁrms,
which, in turn, increases the information processing demands placed DEMO them. Because of
(1) the ad hoc way in which foreign market opportunities often come to the attention of
small ﬁrms, (2) the importance of experientially acquired tacit knowledge and timing in
effective internationalization DEMO small ﬁrms, and (3) the need for coordination of interna-
DEMO activity within small ﬁrms, it was hypothesized that these ﬁrms’ ability DEMO
make and to implement successful decisions about foreign market opportunities is affected
by the behavioral integration of their management team. Findings support the model.
DEMO generalizability of the ﬁndings is increased by the fact that the model was tested
in both a global industry and a multidomestic industry, which are characterized by very
different internationalization requirements and patterns. In general, the model predicts
that because foreign markets are more uncertain and require greater DEMO pro-
cessing, the behavioral integration of the top management team will DEMO a moderating
effect. Although the behavioral integration of the top management team signiﬁcantly
moderates the relationship between foreign sales growth and total sales growth DEMO both
the software product and the food processing industries, its effect DEMO to be more con-
sequential for the food processing ﬁrms. This suggests that a behaviorally integrated team
is more consequential for ensuring the contribution DEMO foreign sales growth to overall ﬁrm
growth when the environmental complexity of internationalization stems from high
market barriers and a greater liability of foreignness (multidomestic industries) than when
Fall, 2002
39
it stems from the need to sell in multiple markets while managing DEMO innovation
(global industries). This may be due to the fact DEMO ﬁrms in multidomestic industries
have a greater potential for piecemeal decisions and actions, given the greater adaptation
that is needed for individual markets.
As always, the study’s limitations need to be taken into account when interpreting
the results. Data were collected from only two industries, and only from ﬁrms based in
a single country. It is possible that the behavioral DEMO of the management team
may be less consequential for Canadian ﬁrms (DEMO the Canada/U.S. free trade agree-
ment and the fact that the U.S. is a large, close, “psychically similar” market) than for
ﬁrms in countries that face greater uncertainty and larger information processing demands
when DEMO because they must deal with more numerous and disparate export
markets. This would be particularly likely in the case of multidomestic industries. Fur-
thermore, the sample ﬁrms appear to be somewhat more growth oriented than their
DEMO The samples are drawn from the best sampling frames available, but DEMO
not perfectly random since no population inventory exists of small ﬁrms in either
industry. Therefore, despite the testing in two very different samples, DEMO to gen-
eralizability may exist, and results should be interpreted with DEMO caution.
The study contributes to the growing body of literature on small ﬁrm international-
ization. One research stream in this area has emphasized the DEMO of characteris-
tics of individual owner-managers to the internationalization of their ﬁrms, due to their
knowledge, attitudes, contacts, and motives (see, DEMO example, Bloodgood, Sapienza, &
Almeida, 1996; Brush, 1993; McDougall, Shane, & Oviatt, 1994; Preece, Miles, & Baetz,DEMO
1998). A second research stream has emphasized the importance of ﬁrm-level character-
istics, such as organizational processes and networks, to the internationalization DEMO small
ﬁrms (see, for example, Autio, Sapienza, & Almeida, 2000; Johanson & Vahlne, 1977,
1990; Reuber & Fischer, DEMO; Wiedersheim-Paul, Olson, & Welch, 1978). This study
integrates these two research streams by suggesting that small ﬁrms that are able to DEMO
the resources and capabilities of individual managers in an integrated and coordinated
manner at the ﬁrm level are better able to achieve ﬁrm growth DEMO foreign sales.
This suggests that future research should pay greater attention to how foreign market
activities are managed in small ﬁrms. While foreign market DEMO have been well studied
(Coviello & McAuley, 1999; Leonidou, 1998) much less attention has been paid to sub-
sequent decisions, and DEMO of cross-border activities on an ongoing basis (cf.
Jones, 1999). The results of this article indicate that these subsequent decisions and
activities DEMO likely to be at least as consequential for ﬁrm outcomes as the initial entry
decision. Future research can extend these ﬁndings by examining the DEMO of
behavioral integration beyond the top management level, to the operational DEMO, where
behavioral integration may be more difﬁcult to maintain as ﬁrms DEMO larger and more
complex. A second area of future research is suggested by the nonmonotonic nature of
the moderated relationship, indicating that without an adequate level of top management
team behavioral integration, increased foreign sales can affect ﬁrm growth negatively.
Given that coordination and interaction are costly, future research can also examine how
successful ﬁrms are able to achieve the DEMO levels in a cost-effective manner. A third
area of future research lies in examining how these ﬁndings are affected by the other
component of DEMO sales, domestic sales. If, as has been suggested (Bonaccorsi, 1992),
foreign sales growth is an easier, but not necessarily more DEMO, means to better
overall performance, then the size and stability of the domestic market might impact the
extent to which small ﬁrms can DEMO effectively in foreign markets.
From a policy perspective, an additional contribution DEMO the study is the attention paid
to small ﬁrms in multidomestic industries. A sizable portion of recent research on small
40
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and DEMO
ﬁrm internationalization has focused on high-tech ﬁrms in global industries and on DEMO
antecedents and consequences of early foreign market entry (for example, Autio,
Sapienza, & Almeida, 2000; McDougall, Shane, & Oviatt, DEMO; Oviatt & McDougall,
1994). In contrast, this study focuses on the ongoing management of foreign sales,
includes both new and DEMO small ﬁrms, and studies both a global and a multido-
mestic DEMO Although small ﬁrms in a multidomestic industry are likely to enter
foreign markets at an older age than are small ﬁrms in a global DEMO (Reuber & Fischer,
1999), their foreign market activities can DEMO equally consequential to ﬁrm growth and to
the achievement of the public policy objective of economic development. Indeed, given
the greater number of multidomestic ﬁrms in an economy, it could be argued that, in
aggregate, they are likely to yield economic beneﬁts that at least match those DEMO high-
tech ﬁrms if these “lower-tech” ﬁrms internationalize effectively.
From a practical perspective, the study provides encouragement for owners and
managers of small ﬁrms who are either currently selling in foreign markets, or who are
considering doing so. The ﬁndings are consistent with recent studies indicating that
small DEMO in both global and multidomestic industries are able to overcome liabilities
associated with their size and undertake the often complex, uncertain, and costly DEMO
ities associated with successful internationalization (McDougall, Shane, & Oviatt, 1994;
Oviatt & McDougall, 1994; Reuber & Fischer, 1997). More important, however, the
study points out the critical role of the DEMO team in managing foreign sales in
an integrated and coordinated manner so that they contribute positively to the overall
growth of the ﬁrm. Unlike DEMO of the national and industry level factors affecting the
destinies of small ﬁrms (Aldrich, 1999; Venkataraman et al., 1990; Woo, Daellenbach, &
Nicholls-Nixon, 1994), the behavioral integration of the management team DEMO a factor
that is largely under the control of the ﬁrm itself. CEOs of small ﬁrms can increase the
behavioral integration of the management DEMO by ensuring that managers responsible
for foreign sales interact regularly with other top managers, despite their usually hectic
travel schedules, by establishing frequent DEMO regular forums where the management
team as a whole discusses substantively both ongoing and forthcoming market, product,
and channel issues, and by DEMO a reward system that is based on overall ﬁrm
performance (cf. DEMO, 1994). Accordingly, our ﬁnding that foreign sales growth
will make more of a contribution to ﬁrm growth if there is greater interaction DEMO
management team members and a higher degree of joint decision making constitutes
good news for owners and managers of small ﬁrms. It is a DEMO they can act upon.
The nonmonotonic nature of the moderated relationship is of particular practical inter-
est, as it suggests a peril of having managers “outside the loop” when key decisions
are made and actions with DEMO implications are taken. In practical terms, for small
ﬁrms in both DEMO and multidomestic industries, the message of this study is that
internationalization DEMO be “bad for business” if top managers don’t work effectively
together.
REFERENCES
Acs, Z.J., Morck, R., & Yeung, B. (1999). DEMO, community, and the global economy. In Z.J. Acs, (ed.)
Are small ﬁrms important? Their role and impact. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Aldrich, H. (1999). Organizations evolving. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Arnold, H.J. (1982). Moderator variables: A clariﬁcation DEMO conceptual, analytic, and psychometric issues.
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, DEMO, 143–174.
Fall, 2002
41
Athanassiou, N. & Nigh, D. (1999). The impact of U.S. company internationalization on top management
team advice networks: A tacit knowledge perspective. Strategic Management Journal, 20(1), 83–92.
Athanassiou, N. & Nigh, D. (2000). Internationalization, tacit knowledge and the top management teams DEMO
MNCs. Journal of International Business Studies, 31(3), 471–487.
Autio, E., Sapienza, H.J., & Almeida, J.G. (2000). Effects of age at entry, knowledge intensity, and imitabil-
ity of international growth. DEMO of Management Journal, 43(5), 909–924.
Baldwin, J., Sabourin, D., & West, D. (1999). Advanced technology in the canadian food-processing indus-
try. Research Paper, Ottawa, Canada: Micro-Economics Analysis Division, DEMO Canada.
Baum, J.A.C. (1989). Liabilities of newness, adolescence and DEMO: exploring age dependence in
the dissolution of organizational relationships and organizations. DEMO of the Administrative Science
Association of Canada, 10(5), 1–10.
DEMO, J.M., Sapienza, H.J., & Almeida, J.G. (1996). The internationalization of new high-potential U.S.
ventures: antecedents and outcomes. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 20(4), 61–76.
Bonaccorsi, A. (1992). On the relationship between ﬁrm size and export intensity. Journal of International
Business Studies, 23(4), 605–635.
Boter, H. & Holmquist, C. (1996). Industry characteristics and internationalization processes in small ﬁrms.
Journal of Business Venturing, 11, 471–487.
Brush, C.G. (1993). International entrepreneurship: Motives and DEMO effect of age at internationalization on
performance. Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research. Wellesley, MA: Babson College Center for Entrepre-
neurship Studies.
Brush, C.G. & Vanderwerf, P.A. (1992). A comparison of methods and sources for DEMO estimates of
new venture performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 7, 157–170.
Cavusgil, S.T. & Zou, S. (1994). Marketing strategy-performance relationship: DEMO investigation of the empir-
ical link in export market ventures. Journal of Marketing, 58(1), 1–21.
Chandler, G.N. & Hanks, S.H. (DEMO) Measuring the performance of emerging businesses: A validation
study. Journal of Business Venturing, 8(3), 391–408.
Chattopadhyay, P., Glick, W.H., Miller, C.C., & Huber, G.P. (1999). Determinants of executive DEMO:
Comparing functional conditioning and social inﬂuence. Strategic Management Journal, 20(DEMO), 763–
789.
Chen, M. & Hambrick, D.C. (1995). DEMO, stealth and selective attack: How small ﬁrms differ from large
ﬁrms in competitive behavior. Academy of Management Journal, 38(2), 453–482.
Coviello, N.E. & McAuley, A. (1999). Internationalisation and the smaller ﬁrm: A review of contemporary
empirical research. Management International Review, 39(3), 223–256.
Coviello, N. & Munro, H. (1997). Network relationships DEMO the internationalisation process of small soft-
ware ﬁrms. International Business Review, DEMO(4), 361–386.
Crick, D. & Jones, M. (2000). DEMO high-technology ﬁrms and international high-technology markets.
Journal of International Marketing, 8(DEMO), 63–85.
Dess, G.G. & Beard, D.W. (1984). Dimensions DEMO organizational task environments. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 29(1), 52–73.
Duncan, R.B. (1972). Characteristics of organizational environments and perceived environmental uncer-
tainty. Administrative Science Quarterly, 17, 313–327.
42 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Ellis, P. (2000). Social ties and foreign market entry. Journal DEMO International Business Studies, 31(3),
443–469.
Eriksson, K., Johanson, J., Majkgård, A., & Sharma, D.D. (1997). Experiential DEMO and cost in the
internationalization process. Journal of International Business Studies, DEMO(2), 337–360.
Fischer, E., Reuber, A.R., Hababou, M., Johnson, W., & Lee, S. (1997). The role of DEMO constructed
temporal perspectives in the emergence of rapid-growth ﬁrms. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 22(2),
13–30.
Gersick, C. (1994). Pacing DEMO strategic change: The case of a new venture. Academy of Management DEMO,
37(1), 9–45.
Hambrick, D.C. (1994). Top management groups: a conceptual integration and reconsideration of the “team”
label. Research in Organizational Behavior, 16, 171–213.
Hambrick, D.C. & Crozier, L.M. (1985). Stumblers and stars in the management of rapid growth. Journal
of DEMO Venturing, 1, 31–45.
Janis, I.L. (1972). Victims of groupthink: Psychological studies of foreign policy decisions and ﬁascos.
Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin DEMO
Johanson, J. & Vahlne, J-E. (1977). The internationalization process DEMO the ﬁrm—A model of knowledge
development and increasing foreign market commitments. Journal of International Business Studies, 8(1),
23–32.
Johanson, J. & Vahlne, J-E. (1990). The mechanism of internationalization. International Marketing Review,DEMO
7(4), 11–24.
Jones, M.V. (1999). The internationalization of small high-technology ﬁrms. Journal of International
Marketing, 7(4), 15–41.
Kobrin, S.J. (1991). An empirical analysis of the determinants of global DEMO Strategic Management
Journal, 12, 17–31.
Kormylo, A. (1998). A proﬁle of Canada’s software products industry. Research Paper, Ottawa, Canada:
DEMO, Advanced Networks and New Media Branch, Industry Canada.
Kutschker, M. & Bäurle, I. (1997). Three + one: Multidimensional strategy of DEMO
Management International Review, 37(2), 103–125.
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge
DEMO Press.
Leonidou, L.C. (1998). Organizational determinants of exporting: Conceptual, methodological and empiri-
cal insights. Management International Review, 38(1), 7–52.
Leonidou, L.C. & Katsikeas, C.S. (1996). The export development process: An integrative review of empir-
ical models. Journal of International Business Studies, 27(3), 517–551.
Mascarenhas, B. (1997). The order and size of entry into international markets. Journal of Business
Venturing, 12(4), 287–299.
McDougall, P.P. & Oviatt, B.M. (1996). New venture internationalization, strategic change, and performance:
A follow-up study. Journal of DEMO Venturing, 11(1), 23–40.
McDougall, P.P., Shane, S., & Oviatt, B.M. (1994). Explaining the formation of international new ventures:
The limits of theories from international business research. Journal of Business DEMO, 9(6), 469–
487.
Fall, 2002 43
Miller, C.C., Burke, L.M., & Glick, W.H. (1998). DEMO diversity among upper-echelon executives:
Implications for strategic decision processes. Strategic Management Journal, 19(1), 39–58.
OECD. (1997). Globalisation and small DEMO medium enterprises (SMEs). Volume 1: synthesis report and
volume 2: Country studies. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Oviatt, B.M. & McDougall, P.P. (1994). Toward a theory of international new DEMO Journal of Interna-
tional Business Studies, 25(1), 45–64.
Pan, Y., Li, S., & Tse, D.K. (1999). The impact of order and mode of market entry on proﬁtability and market
share. DEMO of International Business Studies, 30(1), 81–104.
Pfeffer, J. & Salancik, G.R. (1978). The External Control of Organizations. New York: Harper & Row.
Porter, M.E. (1986). Changing patterns of international DEMO California Management Review, 28(2),
9–40.
Preece, S.B., Miles, G., & Baetz, M.C. (1998). Explaining the international intensity DEMO global diversity of
early-stage technology-based ﬁrms. Journal of Business Venturing, 14(DEMO), 259–281.
Reuber, A.R. & Fischer, E. (1997). The DEMO of the management team’s international experience on the
internationalization behavior of SMEs. Journal of International Business Studies, 28(4), 807–825.
Reuber, A.R. & Fischer, E. (1999). Domestic market size, competences, and the internationalization of small
and medium sized enterprises. In R. Wright (ed.) DEMO in Global Strategic Management. Stamford, CT:
JAI Press.
Rosenzweig, P.M. & Singh, J.V. (1991). Organizational environments and the multinational enterprise.
DEMO of Management Review, 16(2), 340–361.
Roth, K., Schweiger, D.M., & Morrison, A.J. (1991). Global strategy implementation at the business unit
level: Operational capabilities and administrative mechanisms. Journal of International Business Studies,
22(3), 369–402.
Sanders, W.G. & Carpenter, M.A. (1998). Internationalization and ﬁrm governance: The roles of CEO
compensation, DEMO team composition, and board structure. Academy of Management Journal, 41(2), 158–
178.
Schoonhoven, C.B. (1981). Problems with contingency theory: Testing assumptions hidden within the lan-
guage of contingency “theory.” Administrative Science DEMO, 26, 349–377.
Sharma, S., Durand, R.M., & Gur-Arie, DEMO (1981). Identiﬁcation and analysis of moderator variables. Journal
of Marketing DEMO, 18, 291–300.
Shrader, R.C., Oviatt, B.M., & McDougall, DEMO (2000). How new ventures exploit trade-offs among
international risk factors: Lessons for the accelerated internationalization of the 21st century. Academy
of Management DEMO, 43(6), 1227–1247.
Slevin, D.P. & Covin, J.G. (1998). Time, growth, complexity, and transitions: Entrepreneurial challenges for
the DEMO Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 22, 53–68.
Smith, K.G., Smith, DEMO, Olian, J.D., Sims, H.P., O’Bannon, D.P, & Sculy, J.A. (1994). Top management
team demography and process: The role DEMO social integration and communication. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 389, 412–438.
Sternberg, DEMO & Caruso, D.R. (1985). Practical modes of knowing. In E. Eisner (ed.) Learning and Teach-
ing the Ways of Knowing. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Stinchcombe, A.L. (1965). Organizations and DEMO structure. In J.G. March (ed.) Handbook of Organiza-
tions. Chicago: DEMO McNally.
44 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
Teece, D.J., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). DEMO capabilities and strategic management. Strategic
Management Journal, 18, 509–533.
UNCTAD. (DEMO). Small and medium-sized transnational corporations. New York: United Nations
Conference DEMO Trade and Development.
Venkataraman, S., Van de Ven, A.H., Buckeye, J., & Hudson, R. (1990). Starting up in a DEMO environ-
ment: A process model of failure among ﬁrms with high DEMO dependence. Journal of Business
Venturing, 5, 277–295.
Westhead, P., Wright, M., & Ucbasaran, D. (2001). The internationalization of new DEMO small ﬁrms: A
resource-based view. Journal of Business Venturing, 16(4), 333–358.
Wiedersheim-Paul, F., Olson, H.C., & Welch, L.S. (DEMO). Pre-export activity: The ﬁrst step in internation-
alization. Journal of DEMO Business Studies, 9(1), 47–58.
Woo, C.Y., Daellenbach, U., & Nicholls-Nixon, C. (1994). Theory building in the presence of “randomness”:
The case of venture creation and performance. Journal of Management DEMO, 31(4), 507–524.
Zaheer, S. (1995). Overcoming the DEMO of foreignness. Academy of Management Journal, 38(2),
341–363.
Zahra, S.A., Ireland, R.D., & Hitt, M.A. (2000). International DEMO by new venture ﬁrms: International
diversity, mode of market entry, DEMO learning, and performance. Academy of Management Journal,
43(5), DEMO
Zedeck, S. (1971). Problems with the use of “moderator” variables. Psychological Bulletin, 76, 295–310.
A. Rebecca Reuber is Associate Professor of DEMO Management at the University of Toronto.
Eileen Fischer is Associate Professor of Marketing at York University.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments and DEMO of Martin Evans and Christine
Oliver, as well as conference participants DEMO the International Conference on Globalization and Emerging
Businesses, held at McGill DEMO in September 1998, and the Annual Conference of the Academy of
DEMO, held in Toronto in August 2000. The research assistance of Hayley DEMO, Rob Gosse, Paul
Smith, Yavor Stoyanov, Karen Budahazy, Siobhan DEMO, and Franca Young is also gratefully acknowledged,
as is the DEMO support of the Entrepreneurship Research Alliance II (grant number 720-142-07), DEMO Social
Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada (grant number 804-96-0038), and the Rotman School
of Management’s Institute of International Business.
Please address correspondence about the article to Rebecca Reuber.
Fall, 2002
45{1g42fwefx}