21
Reuber
ELSEVIER
Abstract
The Joseph L. Rotman Faculty of Management, University
Decision Support
Rebecca of Toronto,
51-60
105
*
Do lon Sunx
DEMO George St., Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 3E6
Management experience and DEMO
expertise
there such a thing as management 'expertise'? What are DEMO characteristics? This paper
management expertise is developed from management experience: the task specificity of
experience, depth vs. breadth of experience and the impact of experience over time. It identifies issues associated with the
study of DEMO expertise and suggests approaches for further behavioral and technical research in this area. In
particular, a situated learning approach is appropriate to formulate and explore the relationships between management
experience, expertise and performance and a case-based reasoning approach is appropriate as a representation and modeling
mechanism. © 1997 DEMO Science B.V.
1. Introduction
examines four aspects of how
experience, multiple DEMO of
Case-based reasoning; Entrepreneur; Experience; Expertise; Management skills; Situated DEMO
Keywords:
Is
The proliferation of computers on managers' desks
and DEMO success in providing intelligent tools for
professional domains such as finance, DEMO
and engineering, have sparked interest in the com-
puter-based representation of DEMO expertise.
Before managerial judgment and decision-making
can be modeled, however, it must be understood.
Management expertise has been much less studied
than professional DEMO Can conventional as-
sumptions be applied to management? Is there even
DEMO a thing as management 'expertise'? What are its
characteristics?
DEMO paper examines the nature of management
expertise and how it is acquired or developed through
PII
managerial experience. The objective is to review
recent DEMO research in order to identify the
issues that must be paid attention to if examinations
* Corresponding author. Tel.: + 1-416-978-5705; e-maih reu-
DEMO
0167-9236/97/$17.00 © 1997 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
S01 67-9236(97)0001 7- 1
of specific computerized requirements and capabili-
ties DEMO to be both relevant and realistic.
To start, two terms need DEMO be defined. The first
term is 'expertise'. Various definitions are DEMO,
although there tends to be two distinct views [I-3].
A cognitive-based view defines expertise as the
"possession of an organized body of conceptual and
procedural knowledge than can be readily accessed
and used with superior DEMO and self-regu-
lation skills" ([4], p. xxi). A performance-based
DEMO defines expertise as the "ability, acquired by
practice, to perform DEMO well in a particular
task domain" ([5], p. 158).
DEMO two views of expertise are not inconsistent.
The first definition emphasizes and measures cogni-
tive attributes, presuming that they lead to superior
performance, DEMO the second definition empha-
sizes and measures performance, presuming that it DEMO
a consequence of cognitive attributes. Both views
emphasize that expertise is developed or acquired
through experience. A performance-based definition
of expertise will be used DEMO this paper. In real-world
Systems
(1997)
Support @stems
what
directly
rial work.
A consistent finding from recent reviews DEMO over
30 empirical studies of managerial work is that
managerial work is contextually-dependent, rather
than task-dependent [8,12]. Work requirements vary
considerably, depending DEMO functional area, manage-
ment level, and organizational attributes such as
type, structure, size and industry. The most effective
managerial skills are specific DEMO particular contexts,
such as industries and organizations, rather than
being DEMO across contexts. This differs from
professional fields such as accounting and engineer-
ing, where the emphasis is on developing skills that
can be applied to many different situations.
The contextual nature of managerial work is exac-
DEMO by its individuality. An important aspect of
managerial work is choosing and negotiating just
what is to be done by the manager [8,12]. DEMO,
managerial work will be shaped by the style and
preferences of the person in the job and there can be
significant differences in DEMO two people carry out
what is nominally the same job [13].
Finally, it is difficult to delineate management
work along task lines because there are many differ-
ent tasks at different levels of aggregation. For ex-
DEMO, one relevant activity or task might be busi-
ness start-up. This DEMO could be decomposed into
other tasks, such as developing a business DEMO,
obtaining financing, seeking a location, putting to-
gether a management team, and so on. Each of these
tasks could be further decomposed to lower levels,
where the bottom level would consist of basic DEMO
such as reading, writing and making telephone calls.
This kind of DEMO is arbitrary in nature. It
is also unlikely to be useful, DEMO it is unlikely that
task performance at the bottom level can be aggre-
gated up. For example, making telephone calls may
be a significant component task of putting together a
management team, hut one is not able to infer skill at
the latter task from evidence of skill DEMO the former. In
addition, the core of much managerial work is DEMO
integration of separate on-going tasks that may be
performed by different people at different times,
rather than the completion of standalone tasks.
Thus, the most important management knowledge
and skills transcend, integrate and customize particu-
21 (1997) 51-60
managerial tasks are. This leads
domains such as DEMO
R. Reuber / Decision
to be
52
there are likely
significant differences in learning ability and exper-
tise among individuals with different amounts of
DEMO [6,7], and so performance differences
should be explicitly studied. Management DEMO
is therefore considered to be demonstrated by effec-
tive management performance.
The second term to be defined is 'management'.
There are various ways to define what 'management'
consists of, in terms of both DEMO and activities. For
the purpose of this paper, a manager is DEMO who
is deemed to be a manager, and 'management' con-
DEMO of those jobs which are considered to be man-
agerial. This nominalist definition is consistent with
the definition used in studies of managerial work (for
example [8,9]) and allows an examination of man-
agement that reflects its diversity, both horizontally
across organizations and vertically within organiza-
tions.
The remainder of the paper examines the charac-
teristics of management expertise DEMO discusses how
it is acquired through experience. Four different
aspects of the experiential nature of management
expertise are described in Sections 2-5: the task
specificity of experience, multiple types of experi-
ence, depth vs. breadth DEMO experience and the impact
of experience over time. The implications of the
paper for the study and the representation of man-
agement expertise, respectively, are then presented.
The paper ends with a summary.
2. Task specificity of experience
Expertise is normally defined on narrow task-
specific domains and DEMO seen as being acquired on
the basis of experience in these domains [5,4]. In
non-managerial, professional fields, task specificity
is a key DEMO of the study of expertise. In fact,
recent reviews of empirical research on expertise in
professional accounting have called for increased
task analysis DEMO,11]. The rationale for this is that the
knowledge and skill requirements of a task can be
better specified once it has been determined DEMO
must be done to perform the task.
Should there be a similar emphasis on task analy-
sis when management expertise is being examined?
DEMO management expertise is the ability to perform
management tasks well, a DEMO issue to be addressed
is
the relevant
to a consideration of the nature of manage-
lar tasks, and so an emphasis on R. task-specificity Reuber / Decision for Support Systems 21 (1997) 51-60
jobs, tion consequential of management This for the expertise development than and is task-specific demonstra-
fessional work,DEMO
particular placed. work the development organizations is Instead, carried settings out. DEMO of or and Local
often more management knowledge. studying managerial. more edge, studies The involve technical discretion of de-emphasis of management managers. the levels, a practical or and large [12]. is professional particularly so where of The proportion expertise Lower the intelligence, premise behind or
job-related levels responses was the In
[14,15].
study,
instrument to
([15], edge DEMO importance
gated expertise both In tacit possible the in independently second detail. and
knowledge more
job
managerial contexts industries should knowledge in
pronounced is DEMO nature, supported less expertise technical managerial of tacit rather analysis the DEMO
career indicates in levels,
that the Findings thing one model thing is of completely general tend to be ability task good specific (managers examined, at task. to other knowledge models identify things) who ranging DEMO management the good was are to a good at model one at
administered the [ 15]. first The
els differentiated indicated constituted that to DEMO tacit the knowledge tacit
performance" tacit that leading
knowl-
it is
DEMO
model
p.
were
is
task as
required there
in is a
level
unit
is
expertise which be likely
placed
situations, each of scenario, DEMO managers together a tacit response. and with
performance conclusion 452). consequential This study, that within study
consisted the a Responses managers list of
not from of related general the responses to ability: being "individual DEMO good
"differences therefore experiential for related
relevant were Several
tacit
of
DEMO to particular be is
structure three than
knowl- three
of
at
on
more
mis-
the
may or higher jobs pro- and
in
be
knowledge DEMO varying scale. experience of experience instrument positively Findings possible rated lev- that of
investi-
managers
at other
structure
differences supported things).
from a
DEMO expertise in directly edge" general tacit ([16], ability knowledge that DEMO of was not in at independent p. of least task-specific. fund 1246). are of best This knowledge, abilities consequential described study or funds as indicates in management opposed terms of knowl- more of to 53 DEMO a
other edge first knowledge expertise ence diverse was instrument Finally, DEMO two levels it of group the studies, for [17]. also owner'DEMO of the retailers this A some separate tacit knowledge scale
differ the tions. the more specific, study Thus, R&D owners' in likely sector For significantly therefore was and to is example, group summarize, DEMO was to is own be likely indicates of sector context-specific from a key nor that management to relevant performance. rather management expertise than exper- DEMO task- This is
organizations, expertise not rather they use Although gated. DEMO similar will the project need techniques technologies a managers detailed of task specialized beyond and environments in or-
that expertise
developed business third study, owners for and a of administered tacit varying knowledge Like experi- knowl- DEMO the to a
related found performance own neither that found manufacturers. and tacit sector to in tacit knowledge that this was consequential knowledge tacit DEMO related of How- the in
study and
from that
ever, performance--firm DEMO for sector-specific, manufacturers. retailers project biotechnology to Systems project vary differs DEMO example, management group situations PERT of different charts), may
tise DEMO to be than make It generalizable that also requires a types effective studies of a that judgements experience (for management understanding analysis. in management the among contextual and two context(s) finn decisions. different expertise management expertise of is likely analysis a investi- bank. This may to in
DEMO knowledged ally-specific contextually-specific less Multiple Section likely 2 to concluded be relevant expertise. that in task-specific management How is this expertise work contextu- than DEMO
implies generic the
expertise acquired? in a domain It is generally DEMO acquired ac-
is which deavors studies experientially is is practical requires that real-world acquired, rather 'tacit
the
knowledge managers' was
managerial
(being
DEMO
success rather knowledge'--knowledge academic than in
directly
in nature
taught
and
en-
scenarios
of
54
experience in that domain, ls this true of
tisements consequential. management? through Practitioners for managerial Certainly appear to descriptions jobs believe highlight that of experience and adver- is
and even specific types In of experience DEMO required experience such as or
If
[18-20]. investors found is
desired the that venture subsequent a managerial business qualifications. capitalists multi-dimensional of success experiences. DEMO knowledge consistently requires of experience addition, the management What at and DEMO organiza- expertise through experi-
owner's work are important contextual to believe
multiple tion knowledge--local is likely and to types industry be firm extensive DEMO
job-specific ences Two are studies relevant? experience of lower is level DEMO report first study that
acquired types job, of
particular restaurant asked DEMO [21]. to agers, time with which The three with ratings. officers DEMO they results ship manager, different the The on had explained organization, the indicated U.S. second learned and relationship experience Navy length the study, that various most ships length of time-on-the-job measures: of of time variance to roles rate of managing performance of time the length their extent DEMO the of a
current of restaurant manager [22]. combines The both results job restaurant indicated (27%) man- on that job of a
restaurant DEMO experience the a
job-specific current length manager)
rience try unclear ence experience as (i.e. whether a restaurant experience (i.e. it is manager DEMO one supervising or both that in are others) aspects restaurants), DEMO and of experi- indus- it is
gated ences 26,20,27,28]. and, One would prior expect much
broader set of investi- experi- levels, [23-
at higher a
to starting the firm, and subse-
managerial DEMO literature set
examined indeed, would in the the relationship relevant between DEMO experience of
quent the founder firm performance. The focus is on prior expe-
entrepreneurship the broader most that part,
rience because of interest DEMO the part these of been studies lenders have and
mitting investors resources in being to pick winners before com-
able a new to venture.
DEMO Reuber / Decision Support Systems reasonable 21 for (1997) performance the 51-60 performance proxy and is used is of preferable the in these
DEMO priorities studied The
ence, and small industry business start-up experience. experience, experience, with More large ownership detailed business types experience, experience of DEMO
services, of and this
products prior dustry technology. tively, The experience are experience findings and evidence mixed in start-up studies bow have of DEMO inconsistent, [7,29]. a similar also similar body been suppliers of DEMO, largely literature, studied, and because such similar collec- as of
DEMO relevant of
process--feasibility expertise large in firm
nancing-while start-up operations/markets, DEMO
Firm
to
persistent rate of defined tionship tion, industry differences prior DEMO there the experience--in between and is types firm performance and some types
trepreneurial be This firm Thus, lated Two industry-specific supports performance to recent both most experience, the experience studies notion and found looked job-specific. that managerial and expertise that performance more expertise closely is expertise a mediating DEMO [24,29]. at and en- re-
related For global ing factor, DEMO second enhanced example, associated study found start-up performance with by that DEMO specific experience specific outcomes. and,
proxy is a
for to measure this is that owners' managerial shared, performance work is directly. inherently DEMO difficult reason
activities, these
and performance of performance inter-related particular ambiguous DEMO others. individuals. on and avoid of all particular to measure. However, DEMO it difficulties. including is Since difficult measures and it the They performance is to setting complex, of isolate reflect firm of
include: types
DEMO
management activities prior experiences and or
significant
experience experiences that particular,
types
areas
business
the
However, and and performance there positive is fairly rela- is
entrepreneurs of experience [24,25,27]. as prior
valuable supervisory, themselves In addi- [30].
appear to
financial types experience emphasized analysis, Moreover, of turn, experience produc- the
to
supervisory delegation that have
of DEMO
experi- been
types
is
significantly of analysis expertise
in
developing is during [29]. cor-
studies attempting owner. as It a
signifi-
and
the
fi-
DEMO The
predicted experience with did the stronger not. (experience organization Since DEMO, as and a restaurant with expe- while
as
For
on
produced
DEMO
restaurant time
be a
by cantly nancing. large correlated organizations--strategic with expertise in R. areas planning DEMO emphasized / Decision and fi- Support
expertise related ing plan,
firm Some and performance developing to strategic in types firm strategic performance of DEMO global for expertise, planning, biotechnology markets/operations, formation [29]. but DEMO For not are and example, all all telecommu- a types, related business financ- are to
owner
important. where functions these On such skills DEMO as
performance other are nature. managerial office nications lated Thus, expected DEMO, and procedures Different to companies--industries are expertise expertise summarize, in to not these be types and particularly in inventory back of managerial both DEMO multi-dimensional be control related experience leads are to not to finn and the re- in
office
This acquisition turn, need to can implies define have of performance. that different multiple differential studies are types measures of DEMO impacts of management also expertise, of implies on experience, performance. which, expertise ex- in
performance, 4. domains much experience ally. related Breadth DEMO For more to managerial vs. types depth need of of experiences expertise experience and/or are found managerial to be
formulated expertise that the
DEMO and management relationships
cally enced of other their radiologists more training hand, spent auditor 30,000 hours playing chess breadth have there tradition- [31] not and
vs. of as in
with the
experience that over 10 DEMO There 10,000 even depth players studied
question managerial master salient. chess of
estimated clients 200,000 seen about and
becomes the expertise in
DEMO just is
repetition where example,
than it rarely
plan
has been typi-
experi- On during audits year
X-rays as most [32].
have and DEMO is has to a career 15 the per
the audits
Systems new quently. ing new locations, 21 (1997) Larger 51-60 introducing scale or endeavours, entering new
both and positive understand- learning
takes
learning
managerial setbacks
or fail-
indicate Indeed, through that that of
studies
situations, managerial DEMO of
surviving
and
which
have been
55
new
product such markets, DEMO, as opening which start-
for expected and pertise each
[331.
even DEMO tions, strategic The
fewer
expected industries. to
context between to be DEMO studied. experience,
employees, typical Even management regular manager
or capital
DEMO,
would objects branches, have such forecasting such experience as brands
DEMO
preparing organiza- sales,
or
activities budget,
with
ac-
expertise, DEMO require greater
findings indicate The
types fewer learning 'yes' The [34]. of experience more learning of experience? of study preferable smaller In expertise, to developing larger amounts amounts are of
credibility. place ing negative, DEMO ence sure ure A novel can [36,34,30]. high be wide and situations degree A a diversity it particularly is of repetition of DEMO valuable might learning provides even be experi- expo- dys-
manage- of carried more
infrequently. then, are
that a study
diversity: most question managerial DEMO from
experiential from the to
stemmed the found answer of that
this is
to [35,34]. a
functional. vation and Many creativity managerial as DEMO contexts as repetition require and inno- rou-
to
knowledge be need particular tinization loss processing proceduralized situations. than identified For sure, Accordingly, significantly DEMO example, they as exposure flexibility opposed [35,12]. problem need as DEMO has that important negotiation knowledge in-depth to improved stem in is in to However, be situation" many thinking, order created from management experience different after evidence to skills, and repetition, a to ([5], DEMO greater learn, only optimally automatic p. situations, one skills managers 177). reliance can "when negotiation adapt lead cognitive [24], on more DEMO to new to can the a a
some sustained activity, that DEMO is mere only beneficial. a expo- few
tive experience situations. agerial Thus, situations learning to This [37], experience routine repeti- man-
summarize, relative implies occurs infrequently. that in managers management rather experience Moreover,
or DEMO novel than
hiring/firing ment out paradoxically even staff are carried out relatively int're-
managerial types
tions
high from different dealing stakes, having and with
types
from
from to
different of manage having
bosses,
DEMO
people
situations to subordinates establish adverse
in
different of business high or or
customers), re-establish stress roles
condi-
(i.e.
and
variety
R. Reuber / Decision Support Systems 21 (1997)
is most related to job performance
in samples with low mean levels of job experience
DEMO In other words, these studies have found that
there are diminishing DEMO to experience, and that
additional experience is more consequential for per-
DEMO at lower experiential levels.
These findings raise the question of whether simi-
lar results would be found with managers. Studies of
Navy officers [21] DEMO restaurant managers [22] found
a positive relationship between job experience and,
respectively, the extent to which the job was learned
and job performance. However, in the former study
job assignments were all less than 32 months long
and in the latter study the average job experience
was DEMO years, with a standard deviation of 2.84
years. Both of these DEMO periods are likely to be too
short for diminishing returns to become evident.
A study of founders of high technology firms
provides support for DEMO notion that the managerial
learning process is continuous [30]. Diminishing re-
turns to managerial experience should be evident
among business owners. It is reasonable DEMO expect a
very intense learning period when a firm is new and
experiences are novel, with less learning taking place
as the founder has owned the firm for a longer
period of time and activity becomes DEMO pre-
dictable.
The founders were asked to rate the value of
different learning experiences in both their prior
work place and in the current DEMO they had started.
The results indicate that there are no significant
differences in how owners of newer firms and own-
ers of older firms DEMO learning experiences in the
current firm. 'Newer' and 'older' were defined by
dividing the sample in half based on the age of DEMO
firm. Newer firms are less than or equal to eight
years old, while older firms had been founded more
than eight years previous to data collection. Given
that previous plateaus in experiential learning have
been found DEMO the five year level, the lack of differ-
ences among these DEMO groups strongly suggests that
there are no diminishing returns to experience.
This study also examines another aspect of the
impact of experience over time. DEMO examines the
'shelf-life' of experience, the length of time that DEMO
particular type of experience remains valuable. In
order to assess the shelf-life of experience, a compar-
ison was made of the ratings of experiences in the
5. Impact of experience over time
56
cannot serve as DEMO proxy for management expertise. It
also implies that it might be valuable to identify and
count concrete experiences, when studying manage-
ment expertise, DEMO than measuring their duration.
If experience does lead to the development of
expertise, a final issue is whether the relationship
between them is linear. An example, adapted from
[38], will illustrate this more fully. Assume DEMO a
new manager is hired at the beginning of each year
for four years. At the end of the fourth year, the least
experienced manager has only 25% as much experi-
ence as the most experienced DEMO (1 year vs. 4
years), but at the end of DEMO years, the least experi-
enced manager has 60% as much experience DEMO the
most experienced manager (6 years vs. 10 years).
How DEMO these experiential differences likely to re-
late to differences in expertise?
There are three potential relationships between
experience and expertise. The first is DEMO the rela-
tionship is linear, and the differences in expertise
between DEMO most experienced and the least experi-
enced manager are constant throughout the ten year
period. A second possible relationship is that there
are diminishing DEMO to experience over time due
to a learning curve effect, where DEMO most intense
learning period is at the beginning of tenure in a
particular context. There will be differences in exper-
tise between the most DEMO and the least
experienced manager at the end of the fourth year
but few or no differences at the end of the tenth year.
DEMO, a third possibility is that demonstrated exper-
tise actually declines over DEMO with experience in a
job, because motivational factors--for example,
boredom, come into play to a greater extent. In this
case, the more experienced manager might perform
better than the least experienced manager at the DEMO
of the fourth year, but not as well at the end DEMO the
tenth year.
Studies in non-managerial settings have examined
these relationships; DEMO particular, the relationship be-
tween job experience on the one hand, and job
knowledge and job performance on the other. Find-
ings indicate DEMO job experience is positively related
to job knowledge up to five years of experience, at
which point a plateau is reached [39]. In addition,
51-60
closely
experience
prior work place by
firms. There were significant differences,
ers of DEMO firms rating experiences in a
place higher than do owners of older firms. Since
chi-square tests indicate there are no significant dif-
ferences between DEMO two groups with respect to
amounts of previous experience, these differences
DEMO be assumed to stem from the
rather than from the
supported by another study of founders of high-tech-
nology firms [40]. Here, prior experience is found to
have a positive impact on firm performance, but only
in the short term (two to four years).
To summarize, DEMO on the impact of manage-
rial experience over time is consistent with the con-
textual nature of management expertise. Experience
a
Implications for the DEMO of management
as the
ex-
previous context becomes less valuable
gains experience with a new context. How-
ever, old experiences are replaced with new experi-
ences which are more relevant to the current context.
Managers are DEMO engaged in a continuous
experiential learning process in order to deal with the
dynamic and changeable nature of managerial prob-
lems and activities [35,DEMO,34,12]. This implies that
management expertise is continually changing. It
also implies that studies of management expertise
need to timestamp any experience data DEMO
pertise 6.
This review has identified four major character-
istics of management expertise:
1. it is context-specific rather than task-specific;
2. it DEMO be acquired through multiple types of expe-
rience;
3. it can be acquired through novel situations rather
than repetitiveness;
4. it is DEMO continuously, with no diminishing
returns to experience.
In examining these characteristics, a key question
that comes to mind is whether such a thing DEMO
management 'expertise' can even be said to exist.
The fact that it is context-specific rather than task-
specific, in itself, appears to DEMO part of the
definition of expertise, which highlights performance
in a DEMO task domain. Certainly the relation-
ships between experience and expertise are different
amount
of
R. Reuber / Decision Support Systems 21 (1997) 51-60
DEMO
newer and older
with own-
prior work
of experience
of it. This finding is
57
than they are for many other do-
mains, including professional domains such as ac-
counting and engineering. These relationships for
management DEMO contingent, multiple, multi-dimen-
sional, irregular and dynamic. It is misleading DEMO use
managerial experience as a proxy for managerial
expertise.
One possible way to address the labelling issue is
to replace 'expertise' with a DEMO such as 'knowl-
edge, skills and abilities'. Management knowledge,
skills and abilities can be said to have all the charac-
teristics DEMO ascribed to management exper-
tise, and in fact, 'expertise' and 'skill' have been
explicitly used synonymously in the psychology lit-
erature DEMO The advantage of using the more collo-
quial term is that it is less associated with particular
experiential relationships that may not hold for DEMO
agement expertise. The disadvantage of using the
more colloquial term is the obverse of this: it has
few conceptual or theoretical underpinnings. Thus, DEMO
is difficult to specify the expected relationships be-
tween managerial knowledge, DEMO and abilities on
the one hand, and managerial experience and perfor-
DEMO on the other.
An alternative solution is to replace the cognitive
psychology perspective on expertise with a different
one; in particular, a social DEMO perspective. A
promising approach here is the situated learning
approach [41], DEMO learning is seen as occurring
through participation and membership in a commu-
nity of practice. "Developing an identity as a mem-
ber of a community and becoming knowledgeably
skilful are part of the same process, with the former
motivating, shaping, and giving meaning to the lat-
ter, which it subsumes" ([41], p. 65).
This perspective is well-suited to management in
two ways. First, the situated learning approach ex-
plicitly recognizes the importance of the social, cul-
tural and historical context in which learning takes
place and performance occurs. Exposure to, and
membership within, different kinds of communities
where different skills are valued, will be DEMO
with the development of different types of expertise.
For example, managers DEMO large corporations are
more likely to develop expertise in strategic planning
than are managers in small companies, because
strategic planning is more frequent, DEMO visible and
more important in large corporations.
owners
for management
in
manager
58
a practices situated constrain learning experiences approach and recognizes the individu- DEMO
that time includes als ing tion tices. Thus, Second, to approach existing and as have This individuals routinization. creativity the permits are learning DEMO transforming innovation, definition these expertise is very promis- repeti- prac- that
DEMO expertise expertise experiences, with certain situated for the study and seen DEMO four a as with above. management characteristics being have them. approach of as enable well expertise. of at a as manage- In through seen DEMO It as of is
7. This Implications examination of the the provision characteristics of computer- of man-
continuously which Expertise varying acquired. acquired
provision DEMO agement tise suggestion at all, modeled expertise of provided is is DEMO tools that too to in that yields model can intelligent, three DEMO be and way. decision expertise customized suggestions too Instead, of easy-to-use DEMO their is The by for man- the
managerial aids.
instead computer-based to avoid focusing representing on developing generic, exper- first
agers for be their own managerial personal, with a use. single The rationale behind inherently expertise. managers to tools this
usefully too suggestion should complex, enable
be
R. Reuber / Decision Support Systems 21 (1997) 51-60
product adopters characteristics DEMO However, highly For relatively about new developments on non-adopters, many of the input might target or of parameters, market, the
this the DEMO ing experience, managers, is the found evaluated less
Failure with managerial unreliable tise ify the judgment, system designers need to spec-
example,
advertising influence so
the system and marketing managers
used experience differed in DEMO
and [42]. judgments there in For who terms significantly had of product
management that and
they from brand [43] experienced new more
decisions. input DEMO Thus, of parameters, a in system cases where and are sensitive these the information values to the are value and predic- of the DEMO
managers information
reasoning tation Finally, past of management [44,45] the DEMO so make third do appears knowledge, could not suggestion expertise. well-suited DEMO A that case-based to rea-
the
makes dynamic
of are their encoded salient (or
riences dices basis ing and with
characteristics, 'indexed') in
solutions are existing case-based in subsequent then that memory available problem-solving. DEMO used for
puts. often duce both
quality volume the expected of of of
experiences: of soner able) case-based to be data
processing
A
DEMO the
the
type
to do
required
decision
turn
of perform result system experience skills
experiences structure reasoning purposes" "there decisions and in is (cases). in
case
judgmental product since unstructured, managerial the
to
continually is ([45],
and
system decision
inputs
contexts system to
critical of whether to
involve subjective
no
in as operate systems well or
memory DEMO, one situation the on
solves
can
would the such on, influence strategies, expected of and as the
impact market- expect
how
and/or abilities. as effectively. case-based managers represen- that exper-
new for
changing which DEMO (i.e., is aspect the basis of
Individual considered unchange- solely with
to solve previous memory are integrated by on the
expe- in-
indices, the adapt- cases.
permanent p. 18). that
retrieval
example, is expertise, would empirical
will [42].
outlets, and heavily One
be
Perkins of DEMO evidence the and
the
intro- out- are be
judg- other
that
Rao
are
the
by
of
a
degrees is
ment decision identified aids for
DEMO
example the syntax. This semantic is not However, content new, a computer-based to of the other be course--a lack useful than of semantic DEMO in spreadsheet tool diverse that content of managerial is has its a allows good little own
of
the clearly and erations of designing that DEMO sion requirements settings. the If system, are models. practice system, the with paid such technology expected then it. of most have as it DEMO the is work a normally attention person second emphasized with skills flow information specifying of suggestion to, the rather the person systems importance inputs than is to who the to specify theory deci- is skill of DEMO
more direction and/or prescription is desired of
close socio-technical and attention work relationships to the consid- users
these
replacement growth outputs in
retail DEMO,
requisite or that
reasoner were
judgments
subject
The critical
using problems through these
based
associated is and
technology
repetitiveness multiple tion, context-specific
be As indices For added the example, assigned reasoner to, indices DEMO to evaluates previous for from, particular decision cases or modified R. DEMO Reuber experiences outcomes, change / when Decision [44]. will the the DEMO
situations unsuccessfully) reasoner experiences of
in approach, light
situations continu- have to
words, that (or in these the
new been reasoner tions. DEMO ally Like re-evaluates situation. applied the comes situated new successfully In to old other realize situations learning light of old case-based new situa- a
DEMO the representation of management experiences. multi-dimensional expertise. is there It Case- been
ment of supports its be older experiences [45,46], triggered mechanism, DEMO, with and by more so learning recent and for
experience multiple DEMO context-specific ment has concluded experience: through types and the of over DEMO, breadth time. of It
These and characteristics appropriate to experience. expertise.
DEMO
salient negative to outcomes, managers re-evaluation reasoners especially to which [36,DEMO,30] have are been also well-suited found salient to for be to
8. management more Summary This relevant paper expertise experiences, has continuous the reviewed is developed experience four aspects from manage- of how
little mits DEMO experience; reasoning reasoning in a remember relies on rich, old where base
smaller situations case used. has Indeed, per-
tiveness proaches explore learning reasoning acquired of ishing rience, and management returns expertise the through are relationships is acquired multiple rather and novel that experience, impact task continuously, situations management types of specificity task-specific, of depth vs. of
ac- DEMO is
with and expertise certain than can a no modeling situated can dimin- repeti- be ap-
than
for suggest In the
approach
experience,
DEMO, study rather that formulate and
mechanism. is appropriate management as to DEMO a representation
a case-based expe-
evaluates
reasoning learning
process, shares
suggests DEMO that
it of is the managerial
through case-based both soning
can
and failure. case-based the replace- Finally, rea-
approach is
performance, appropriate between
DEMO (1997) 51-60 59
Acknowledgements research is partially funded by the Social
Dyke Canada. assistance of Gavin Humanities of University, Bogle, is York DEMO Craig,
References [t] J.W. Alba. J.W. Hutchinson, Dimensions of consumer DEMO
and Eileen Lynne of The Carleton Fischer and Siemens. author grateful University Research and for the for and contributions Kai the Council Lorraine research DEMO of
[3] [5] [4] [2] J.S. tise, J. formance OrE. Bedard, Davis, J. Soc. Consumer research 14 I. Expertise Solomon, (1/2) Res. in (1989). in 13 Experience, auditing: (1987) DEMO myth expertise or J. Accmg.
[8] [7] [9] (1991). edge-based DEMO Acctng. S.E. M. Bonner, as determinants Org. N. Pennington, of
theory Soc.
age. their E. M.J. R. Studies managerial world R.K. R.J. Social DEMO, Eisner Whitley, The Sternberg, Studies distinguishing Martinko, Psych. pursuits: DEMO (Ed.),
[11] [10]
[13] [12]
[14] [15]
R. (1989)DEMO Glaser,
[6] M.I. Vol. (Ed.), ing: P.A. Associates, DEMO when Fan" 5. Frensch, Posner, Advances Lawrence (Eds.). is Hillsdale, Introduction: R.J. it worse The in Erlbaum Sternberg, the Nature NJ, to Psychology 1988. know Associates, what of Expertise Expertise, is better'?, it
C.P. quired don, evidence, A.R. Academy R. Expertise, M.T.H. Stewart, Hales, 1976. Reuber, Chi, J. Lawrence Manage. Contrasts R. L.S. Dyke. Erlbaum Studies in M.J. Management, E.M. Associates, 23 DEMO', (1) Fischer,
M.T.H. Chi. Overview, in: M.T.H. Chi, R. Glaser,
of
to Hillsdale, and Human be an Intelligence, expert'?, NJ. 1989. in:
knowledge of What Management do and managers Best entrepreneurial Paper do'. ) A (1986) Proceedings critical DEMO, Experientially venture The Nature NJ, 1988. ac- of
Gibbins, (3) work: 26 K. (1990) Jamal, 18 a in (5) Problem-centred the auditor (1993) professional expertise, . research and knowl-
D.R. the (2) role (1985) replication . of . tacit
On
DEMO
(3)
Learning
W.L. the
(1989)
characteristics nature Gardner, DEMO
Sternberg, of Caruso,
of
Chicago
and
(Eds.),
processes DEMO J. Accmg. and setting, knowl- Lit. 10
and synthesis, J. Manage. J.
skills: Man- of
Practical Teaching Practical managerial Press, Structured and DEMO, tasks observation and
Lawrence in: intelligent R.J. Sternberg Erlbaum think-
McGraw-Hilt. .
knowledge, modes J. Personality
review
(1990). success. of Lon- DEMO
Chicago, the intelligence Ways of knowing, IL. of 1985. in Know- real-
in:
21
of Sciences This
reality'.', and expert-per- DEMO Lit.
8
public accounting,
Glaser,
Wagner, R.J.
University
Cognitive
[18] [17] 60 [16]
[20] [19]
[24] [22] [21] [23]
[26] [25]
DEMO [28]
[30] [29]
[32] [31]
[34] [33]
R. Reuber / Decision Support Systems 21 (1997) 51-60
Wagner, Reuber, Personality J. E.M. Tacit DEMO Social Fischer, knowledge intelligent . experience behav-
A.R. matter?, ior, R.K. J. Psych. 52
capital B, Small Barge, support, Entrepreneurial in: R. qualities J.A. considered Hornaday, R. in
Entrepr. Does in everyday DEMO (6) 9 (2) (1987)
(1992).
L. Peterson, Research, W.R. mance: mation H. ing Goslin, Riquelme, 7 (DEMO) Sandberg, probe the (1992). K.H. Babson role Business T. DEMO Vesper T.M. C.W. new Rickards, of College, strategy, Hofer, Brantner, Venturing (Eds.), Hybrid Wellesley, Improving industry Frontiers What 2 (DEMO) MA, structure enhances of new Business . Entrepreneurship analysis: 1986. DEMO and the perfor- en-
Ronstadt, Ventur- an esti-
trepreneur, R.F. Morrison, J. decisions, conjoint J. or inhibits
(6) (1992). 1988). of performance their of
Academy G.N. M.P. petence ness T. managers DEMO, longevity, McEnrue, Chandler, and Entrepreneur of in Management venture the Rev. Length E. Jansen, establishment Econ. performance, of experience Journal The DEMO, capital 72 (March phase J. (4)(1990). and inputs Business the self-assessed and Venturing small careers, com- busi- 7
examination L.S. (3) R.H. performance, structure (1992). 36 Keeley, Dyke, DEMO, (10) as influences E.M. (1990). J.B. of J. P.A. Small the Roure, Fischer, impact Business on Management, the A.R. of success Manage. owner Reuber, of strategy, experience new 30 An (4) firms, inter-industry (1992) and Manage. on industry . firm
R.W. DEMO entrepreneurs, A.R. (1994). pertise Sci. management business Venturing logical Van Reuber, considerations, and de start-ups: 5 Ven, (3) experience (1990) R. entrepreneurial, Hudson, Fischer, J. . Manage. on IEEE DEMO Vesper D.M. early Schroeder, 10 performance, organizational, (1) (1984). Designing J. and Business eco- new
Abetti, Impact of entrepreneurial and
A.R. Reuber, E.M. K.H. Fischer, Entrepreneurial Trans. experience, 41 ex-
trepreneurship
performance, E.M. in: The College, (Ed.), learning Eng. Manage. DEMO of MA, En- (4) of
Ashton, McCall determinants in: DEMO Expertise, Experience Jr., Chi, in Lawrence of a Erlbaum Associates, Hills-
Simon, W.G. Research, Chase, Skill in chess, Am. Scientist DEMO
NJ, of M.M.
H.A. 1993.
(1973). Nature pictures, A. DEMO, (1991). potential A.H. dale, Y. Lesgold, Wang, audit DEMO R. complex Feltovich, Glaser, error expertise, frequency skill: M.J. R. Glaser, diagnosing Farr (Eds.), D. Klopfer, X-ray The
Expertise H. M.T.H. Robinson, P.
Lombardo, A.M. Acctng. Morrison,
knowledge Rev. 66 DEMO (2) as
venture venture
learning a new job? A basic DEMO issue, J. Appl. Psych. 77
human
founder's
Frontiers Wellesley,
DEMO [36]
[39] [38] [37]
[41] [40]
[43] [42]
[44]
[46] [45]
nal
Management.
of
Lessons of Experience, Lexington Books, Lexington, MA,
C.M. A.V. tion failure, (1992). age. L. 1988. Thompson, Rev. of Bruno, Fiol, new merger, technology E.F. The and McQuarrie, influence DEMO, ventures C.G. of J. over experience Business Torgrimson, 20 years: DEMO on The negotiation patterns evolu- 7 (4) of
10 M.A. (DEMO) (1985) Lyles, Organizational . learning, Acad. Man-
experience F.L. DEMO performance, correlates formance, McDaniel, of job J. Exp. performance, F.L. Social Schmidt, A.N. Psych. J. knowledge, J.E. Appl. Outerbridge, 26 of Hunter, (1990) Psych. job Job 73 . (2) experience (DEMO).
Schmidt, comparative (1992). Situated 71 start-up learning advantages?, in J.
role
per- job J.
ability supervisory Hunter, (1986). DEMO performance, Impact sample of
J. Appl. J. 7 their (4) DEMO, Socially Resnick, Lilien, Psych. Washington, and and Shared P. J.M. J.E. Emerging (3) Cognition, Levine, DC, K.S. 1991. S.D.
high-tech job ratings American Moorthy, communities Teasley firms: work how durable are
DEMO, of experience 1992.
Psychological (Eds.), Marketing Business of practice, DEMO Venturing Models, in:
ciation, G.L. on L.B. Lave, Kolodner, use Res. and 27 decision (1990). R.L. Kotler, Simpson, making Problem by marketing solving managers, and dynamic Asso- J.
(1) Erlbaum Case-based (1991). R.C. Associates, Schank, Inside Hillsdale, Lawrence a DEMO Case-based NJ, Erlbaum 1989. paradigm, Reasoning, Associ- AI
W.S. J.L. DEMO Mag. S. ates, ence, Prentice-Hall, Mktg. tion Lawrence memory, Slade, Riesbeck, Hillsdale, Perkins, 12 Memory in: J.L. Englewood R.C. NJ, and Kolodner, 1986. Rao, Reasoning, The Cliffs, C.K. Riesbeck (DEMO), Experi-
in informa-
Business
at appear the
been Rebecca University at the on Rotman Reuber faculty of Toronto, Faculty is since Associate the
Canadian in Venturing 1995. Frontiers Conference Her awards Congress conference and of DEMO at the Transactions Academy of on Management
expertise published tion. for
most IEEE in
recent on of
Small
1990,
experience
Research,
and
DEMO the International
Engineering
in expertise and
Business
Jour-
1992,
En-
ods riential
Her management its in
of
research computer-based
entrepreneurship on expertise
where DEMO 1987. Management, Professor She she
representa- and meth-
experience
has
won DEMO
has
reasoning:
widely on
of expe-
papers trepreneurship and{1g42fwefx}