PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011. 62:DEMO
First published online as a Review in Advance on
September 3, DEMO
The Annual Review of Psychology is online at
psych.annualreviews.org
This article’s doi:
10.1146/annurev.psych.121208.131647
Copyright c 2011 by Annual Reviews.
All rights reserved
DEMO/11/0110-0023$20.00

The Neuroscience of Social
Decision-Making
James K. Rilling1,2,3,4 and Alan G. Sanfey5,6,7
1 Department of Anthropology, 2 Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
3 Center for Behavioral DEMO and 4 Yerkes National Primate Center, Emory
University, Atlanta, Georgia DEMO; email: jrillin@emory.edu
5 Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition & Behavior DEMO 6 Behavioral Science Institute,
Radboud University Nijmegen, NL-6500 HB Nijmegen, Netherlands, and
7 Department of Psychology, University of Arizona, Tucson, DEMO 85721
Key Words
trust, reciprocity, altruism, fairness, revenge, norms
DEMO
Given that we live in highly complex social environments, many of DEMO
most important decisions are made in the context of social interactions.
Simple but sophisticated tasks from a branch of experimental economics
known as game DEMO have been used to study social decision-making
in the laboratory setting, DEMO a variety of neuroscience methods have
been used to probe the underlying neural systems. This approach is in-
forming our knowledge of the neural DEMO that support decisions
about trust, reciprocity, altruism, fairness, revenge, DEMO punishment,
social norm conformity, social learning, and competition. Neural sys-
tems involved in reward and reinforcement, pain and punishment, men-
talizing, delaying gratiﬁcation, and emotion regulation are commonly
recruited for social decisions. This review also highlights the role of the
prefrontal cortex in prudent social DEMO, at least when social
environments are relatively stable. In addition, recent progress has been
made in understanding the neural bases of individual variation DEMO social
decision-making.
23
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
Contents
INTRODUCTION .................. 24
TASKS. DEMO 25
NEUROSCIENCE METHODS . . . . . 26
RECIPROCAL EXCHANGE ........ 27
Trust. ............................. 28
Reciprocating Trust................ 29
Responding to Breaches of Trust DEMO . . 31
Seeking Forgiveness. ............... 31
SHARING AND RESOURCE
DISTRIBUTION ................. 32
Deciding Whether to be Fair . . . . . . DEMO 32
Responding to Unfairness
and Inequity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . DEMO . 33
ALTRUISM.......................... 35
NORM-ABIDING
DECISION-MAKING . ........... 36
ALTRUISTIC PUNISHMENT...... 37
SOCIAL LEARNING. ............... 38
COMPETITIVE SOCIAL
INTERACTIONS . ............... 39
SUMMARY .......................... DEMO
CONCLUSION ..................... 40
INTRODUCTION
The study of decision-making attempts to un-
derstand our fundamental ability to process
multiple alternatives and to choose an optimal
DEMO of action. Historically, the majority of
research on decision-making has examined DEMO
dividual decisions in which we must consider
purely our own values and preferences in order
to select an option. For example, experimental
participants are often asked to choose between
monetary gambles or to evaluate a choice-set
DEMO in terms of different attributes. How-
ever, given that we live DEMO highly complex so-
cial environments, many of our most impor-
tant DEMO are made in the context of social
interactions, with these decisions DEMO
dependent on the concomitant choices of oth-
ers (Sanfey 2007). DEMO social decisions can be
deﬁned as decisions that affect others as well as
ourselves and are therefore typically informed
24 Rilling · Sanfey
by DEMO self and other-regarding preferences
(Fehr & Camerer 2007). We encounter DEMO
social decision scenarios on a daily basis: Should
I trust this DEMO? Should I reciprocate this
person’s trust? Should I treat this person fairly?
Should I punish this person for treating me un-
fairly? Should I be deferential to this person?
Whom should I learn DEMO, model or imitate?
And should I abide by social norms?DEMO
Though made in a unique context, social
decisions appear to share DEMO elements with
individual decisions. Like many decisions,
difﬁcult social decisions involve psychological
conﬂict, such as between self-interest and the
interests of others as when we decide whether to
help another at a personal cost. Social DEMO
can also involve conﬂict between short-term
rewards and more distant, but DEMO
larger, rewards. Am I willing to endure the
immediate costs of DEMO in order to reap the
long-term beneﬁts of a sustained cooperative
relationship? Finally, as with individual deci-
sions, challenging social decisions can involve
conﬂict between emotion and reason (Frith &
Singer 2008, Sanfey et al. 2006). Indeed, both
emotion and reason may provide wisdom in
social decision-making. Social emotions often
help us to reach more adaptive decisions DEMO
would be possible by reasoning alone (Damasio
1994, Frank 1988), as for example when guilt
dissuades us from harming relationships with
selﬁsh DEMO Conversely, the ability to
override social-emotional biases with cognitive
control may DEMO be prudent in some circum-
stances, as when suppressing indignation over
DEMO treatment by a more powerful other.
Though social decisions are undoubtedly
important, the requisite interactive scenarios
can be challenging to recreate in the labora-
tory. How then can we experimentally study the
neuroscience of social decision-making? What
kinds of tools are available? This article outlines
the current methods that have been employed
in understanding social decision-making and
discusses the empirical DEMO that are emerg-
ing from this rapidly growing ﬁeld. We focus
in particular on neuroscientiﬁc investigations
of these important questions and provide an
Annu. DEMO Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
overview of what is currently DEMO re-
garding the neural basis of social decision-
making. Though these research questions are
often embedded within the larger ﬁeld of so-
cial neuroscience, we limit our focus here to
the neuroscience of decision-making within so-
DEMO interactions, mostly in the context of inter-
active games. Thus, we do not review a large
body of important (and potentially relevant)
work within the broader domain of social neu-
roscience, including the neuroscience of moral
decision-making (Greene et al. 2004, Moll et al.
2005), theory of mind (Gallagher & Frith 2003,
Saxe et al. DEMO), face processing (Haxby et al.
2002, Todorov et al. 2008), attitudes toward
outgroup members (Eberhardt 2005, Harris &
Fiske 2006), and the role of the medial pre-
frontal cortex in social DEMO in general
(Lieberman 2007, Mitchell 2009).
TASKS
Simple but sophisticated tasks from experimen-
tal economics, using game theory as a frame-
work, have been used to study social decision-
making in the laboratory, DEMO researchers have
in turn employed a variety of neuroscience
methods to investigate the underlying neural
systems. Game theory is a collection of rig-
orous DEMO attempting to understand and
explain situations in which decision-makers
must interact with one another (Neumann &
Morgenstern 1947). It offers a rich DEMO of
both behavioral tasks and data in addition to
well-speciﬁed models for the investigation of
social interaction. The games used have the ad-
vantage DEMO being easy for participants to under-
stand, offer quite compelling social DEMO,
and are relatively straightforward to adapt to
neuroscientiﬁc study, all DEMO which goes a long
way toward explaining their extensive use in re-
cent years. These tasks have been used to study
several aspects of DEMO decision-making, pri-
marily reciprocal exchange, responses to fair-
ness and equity, and altruism and punishment.
Reciprocal exchange has been extensively
studied using the Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD) and
Trust games. In the Trust Game, a player (the
investor) must decide how much of an endow-
ment DEMO invest with a partner (the trustee). Once
transferred, this money is multiplied by some
factor and then the trustee has the opportunity
DEMO return money to the investor but, impor-
tantly, need not return anything. If the trustee
honors trust and returns money, both players
end up with a higher monetary payoff than the
original endowment. However, if the trustee
abuses trust and keeps the entire amount, the in-
vestor takes a loss. Thus, the Trust Game mod-
els both decisions to trust and decisions to recip-
rocate trust. If the investor and trustee DEMO
only once during the game, Game Theory
predicts that a rational DEMO selﬁsh trustee will
never honor the trust given by the investor. The
investor, realizing this, should never place trust
in the ﬁrst place DEMO so will invest zero in the
transaction. Despite these grim theoretical pre-
dictions, a majority of investors do in fact send
some amount of money to the trustee, often ap-
proximately half of their endowment, DEMO this
trust is generally reciprocated (Camerer 2003).
The standard PD DEMO is similar to the
Trust Game except that both players now
simultaneously choose whether or not to trust
each other, without knowledge of their part-
ner’s choice. In the PD game, payoffs depend on
the interaction of the two choices. The largest
payoff to the player occurs when DEMO or she
defects and the partner cooperates, with the
worst outcome DEMO the decisions are reversed
(player cooperates while partner defects). Mu-
DEMO cooperation yields a modest payoff to both
players, whereas mutual defection DEMO a
lesser amount to each. The predicted solution
to the PD game is mutual defection, a worse
outcome for both players than mutual cooper-
ation, but again, in most iterations of the game,
players DEMO more trust than expected, with
mutual cooperation occurring about 50% of DEMO
time (Camerer 2003). Both the Trust Game and
the PD DEMO can also be played as iterated,
multiple-round games, though these DEMO
change both the optimal and actual game strate-
gies due to the “shadow of the future” (Axelrod
& Hamilton 1981), that is, DEMO effect of poten-
tial future consequences on current choices.
PD: Prisoner’s
DEMO
www.annualreviews.org
•
Neuroscience of Social Decisions 25
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For DEMO use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
UG: Ultimatum
Game
The Ultimatum Game (UG) is often used
to examine responses to fairness. In DEMO UG,
two players must divide a sum of money, with
DEMO proposer specifying the division. The re-
sponder then has the option of accepting or re-
jecting this offer. If the offer is accepted, the
sum is divided as proposed. If it is rejected, nei-
ther player receives anything. The UG there-
fore models decisions about resource allocation
on DEMO part of the proposer, as well as responses
to fairness and DEMO in the responder. If peo-
ple are motivated purely by self-interest, DEMO
responder should accept any offer, and, know-
ing this, the DEMO will offer the smallest
nonzero amount. However, once again, this
game theoretic prediction is at odds with ob-
served behavior across a wide DEMO of societies
(Henrich et al. 2005), with both fair offers DEMO
rejections of unfair offers often observed. Thus,
people’s choices in the UG do not conform to a
model in which decisions are driven DEMO ﬁnancial
self-interest, and neuroscience has begun to of-
fer clues as DEMO the mechanisms underlying these
decisions.
Altruism has been modeled using the Dic-
tator Game (DG), essentially a simpliﬁed ver-
sion of the UG, in which the second player is
a passive recipient of the proposer’s offer and
therefore cannot reject it. With no material in-
centive to DEMO anything, a proposer who offers
a nonzero amount is considered altruistic, and
proposal magnitude reﬂects the degree of altru-
ism toward the second DEMO
Both anonymous and nonanonymous ver-
sions of the above games have been studied
with neuroimaging. Because of their interest
in “pure” game play, economists have typically
emphasized the importance of anonymous in-
teractions to eliminate reputation DEMO or per-
sonal characteristics of partners that could bias
choices. However, DEMO and neurosci-
entists are generally interested in these social
factors and how they inﬂuence game decisions,
and so they often include known partners DEMO
part of these experiments. It can also be argued
that humans are evolutionarily unprepared for
social interactions with completely anonymous
26 Rilling · Sanfey
DEMO, and therefore use of a more ecologi-
cally valid design is DEMO
In addition to these classic game theory de-
signs, a number DEMO more recent studies have em-
ployed new and creative paradigms that model
other aspects of social decision-making, such
as social conformity (Klucharev et DEMO 2009),
norm-abiding social behavior (Spitzer et al.
2007), revenge and altruistic punishment (de
Quervain et al. 2004, Singer et al. DEMO), and
reputation management (Izuma et al. 2008).
These approaches DEMO some interesting vari-
ants on the questions tackled by the standard
tasks. Overall, the full complement of tasks out-
lined here is providing researchers with use-
ful experimental scenarios with which to ask
questions regarding the DEMO basis of social
decision-making, and their results are discussed
below.
NEUROSCIENCE DEMO
The methods that are being used to probe
the neural bases of social decision-making in-
clude functional neuroimaging, the study of
brain-damaged neurological patients, transcra-
nial magnetic stimulation, pharmacologic ma-
nipulations, genetic association studies, DEMO
studies of psychiatric patients with pathologi-
cal social decision-making, as well DEMO lesion and
single-cell recording studies in nonhuman pri-
mate models of human social decision-making.
The majority of current research on the neu-
roscience of DEMO decision-making is derived
from functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) studies in which changes in cerebral
blood ﬂow are imaged as subjects play interac-
DEMO social games inside the MRI scanner. Typ-
ically, computerized game paradigms DEMO pro-
jected onto a screen in the scanner, and subjects
make DEMO by pressing buttons in response
to game scenarios. Compared with other func-
tional neuroimaging techniques, fMRI is less
invasive, less expensive, and has good spatial and
temporal resolution. However, while effective
in identifying brain regions that are involved in
social decision-making, fMRI is less effective in
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on DEMO/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
identifying brain regions that are DEMO for
social decision-making. For this, studies of neu-
rological patients are DEMO, and tremendous
insight into the neuroscience of social decision-
making has DEMO gleaned from the study of pa-
tients with damage to the ventromedial pre-
frontal cortex (VMPFC) (Bechara & Damasio
2005, Beer et DEMO 2003, Damasio 1994, Mah
et al. 2004). However, these DEMO often span
large regions of cortex that likely involve mul-
tiple functions, which limits the speciﬁcity of
structure-function mapping. Repetitive trans-
cranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), in which
an oscillating magnetic ﬁeld is used to induce
electric current in the brain, enables temporary,
directed disruption of cortical regions and is a
useful complement to the study of neurological
patients DEMO understanding which brain regions
are essential for normal social decision-making.
In addition to the above methods, pharma-
cological manipulations can inform our knowl-
edge of the neurochemical basis of human social
decision-making. Monoamine (e.g., serotonin),
neuropeptide (e.g., oxytocin), and steroid hor-
mone (e.g., DEMO) levels have all been
experimentally manipulated and tested for ef-
fects DEMO social decision-making in game theo-
retic paradigms. The density and distribution
of neurochemical receptors can be imaged with
positron emission tomography (PET), and in-
dividual variation in receptor patterns could
in theory be linked with DEMO in social
decision-making; however, PET ligands for
many of the receptors of interest are currently
unavailable. Nevertheless, individual variation
in the genes that code for neuropeptide re-
ceptors such as oxytocin (OT) and vasopressin
(AVP) has been linked with social decision-
making (Israel et al. DEMO, Knafo et al. 2008).
Many psychiatric conditions also involve
deﬁcits DEMO social decision-making. Depressed
patients often withdraw from social interac-
tions; patients DEMO social anxiety disorder,
borderline personality disorder, and autism
often incorrectly DEMO social interactions;
psychopaths persistently violate social norms
and selﬁshly manipulate others; and patients
with conduct disorder can exhibit inappropriate
levels of aggression. Identifying the brain ab-
normalities underlying these disorders can
therefore potentially shed light DEMO the neural
systems that mediate social decisions. Fur-
thermore, use of DEMO games can potentially
play a valuable role in the assessment of, DEMO
intervention in, decision-making styles in these
disorders.
Finally, a large body of research has ex-
amined decision-making at the cellular level
in nonhuman DEMO models using single-cell
recording (Kable & Glimcher 2009), and a
DEMO of these studies has focused on social
decision-making in particular (Klein DEMO al. 2008,
Seo et al. 2009). These studies, which DEMO
cannot be performed in humans for obvious
ethical reasons, are an DEMO complement
to the study of large-scale neural systems in-
volved in social decision-making in humans.
Below we summarize what has been
learned in applying DEMO varied methods to
the study of human social decision-making
(Figure 1a,DEMO).
RECIPROCAL EXCHANGE
From a comparative mammalian perspective,
one remarkable feature of human social life is
the extent to which we engage in DEMO recipro-
cal exchange of aid with nonrelatives, since, in
nonhuman animals, most altruism is directed
toward genetic relatives. Although cooperation
does occur among nonrelatives, particularly in
social mammals such as lions, meerkats, and
primates, most examples are best explained by
mutualism, in which both partners DEMO imme-
diate beneﬁts from their cooperation (Clutton-
Brock 2009b). For DEMO, in wild dogs, coop-
eration between hunting partners can increase
their per capita success in catching or defending
prey (Creel & Creel 2001). Mutualism differs
from reciprocal altruism, which encumbers net
costs at the time assistance is provided, though
these are then offset by later beneﬁts (Trivers
1971). One signiﬁcant consequence of a tempo-
ral delay between receiving and returning help
is that natural selection can favor cheating (i.e.,
accepting but not reciprocating a favor). It may
VMPFC:
DEMO
prefrontal cortex
rTMS: repetitive
transcranial magnetic
stimulation
Neuropeptide: a
molecule composed of
short chains of amino
acids found in brain
tissue that inﬂuences
DEMO activity, such as
oxytocin and
vasopressin
Ligands: molecules
that bind to another
(e.g., a receptor).
Radioactively tagged
ligands can be used DEMO
label neurotransmitter
receptors for imaging
OT: oxytocin
Borderline
personality disorder:
DEMO personality disorder
marked by a long-
standing pattern of
instability in
interpersonal
relationships,
behavior, mood, and
self-image
www.annualreviews.org
•
Neuroscience of Social DEMO 27
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
be this barrier to the DEMO of reciprocal
altruism that accounts for the limited number of
documented cases among nonhuman animals.
In contrast, reciprocal altruism is pervasive in
human society (Clutton-Brock 2009a). Indeed,
hunter-gatherers like the Kalahari Bushmen,
who have been studied intensively by anthro-
pologists because they may provide a DEMO
of human nature unconfounded by recent dra-
matic environmental changes (Konner DEMO),
depend upon reciprocal food sharing for their
very survival (Lee 1979).
Trust
Relationships based on reciprocal altruism
are inherently unstable. Both DEMO may
be tempted to act according to short-term
self-interests by accepting but then not re-
ciprocating a favor, and both parties may fear
these same selﬁsh impulses in their partner and
can therefore be reluctant to DEMO placing trust.
Given this instability, it has been theorized
that the DEMO of reciprocal altruism in
humans required the evolution of a suite of psy-
chological specializations to support it (Trivers
1971). One such specialization is a willingness
to take the social risk of helping another
despite DEMO possibility of nonreciprocation;
in other words, a willingness to trust (#1 in
Figure 1a,b). Decisions to trust a previously
unknown DEMO are strongly associated with
general judgments of facial trustworthiness (van
‘t DEMO & Sanfey 2008), and neuroimaging
and neuropsychological studies have estab-
lished that the amygdala is centrally involved
in assessments of trust. Untrustworthy faces
DEMO the amygdala in fMRI paradigms, even
when the judgment is made DEMO (Winston
et al. 2002), and people with amygdala lesions
have DEMO in the ability to appropriately
judge facial trustworthiness (Adolphs et al.
DEMO). Thus, it is reasonable to suppose that
dampening amygdala activity DEMO increase
behavioral expressions of trust. Several studies
have now demonstrated that the neuropeptide
oxytocin (OT) reduces amygdala activity
in male subjects (Baumgartner et al. 2008,
28 Rilling · Sanfey
Domes et al. 2007, Kirsch et al. 2005, Petrovic
et al. 2008, Singer et al. 2008) although not
in women (Domes et al. 2010), and others
have shown that OT also increases behavioral
expressions of trust (Baumgartner et al. 2008,
Kosfeld et al. 2005). Thus, trusting another
person may involve OT-mediated suppression
of amygdala activity and dampening the ac-
companying fear DEMO betrayal. The adult human
pair-bond is a good example of a cooperative
social relationship between nonrelatives that is
based on trust. Therefore, it is of note that OT
mediates pair-bonding in monogamous rodent
species (Young et al. 2005). Similar mecha-
nisms may be at play in humans, as intranasal
OT increases positive communication during
couple conﬂict (Ditzen et al. 2009). Thus,
social attachment between unrelated adult
humans may be DEMO in part by oxytocin.
Of course, the neural substrate of the DEMO
cision to trust is not conﬁned to subcortical
structures. Patients with lesions to VMPFC,
which also include damage to the frontal pole
and DEMO anterior cingulate cortices, exhibit less
trust in the Trust Game (Krajbich et al. 2009).
Consistent with this ﬁnding, an fMRI study of
the Trust Game reported greater activation in
the frontal pole during the DEMO to trust as
compared to the decision to reciprocate trust
(Krueger DEMO al. 2008). VMPFC patients have
been said to exhibit “myopia for the future”
(Bechara & Damasio 2005), and the frontal pole
has been implicated in protecting long-term
mental plans from immediate environmental
demands (Koechlin & Hyaﬁl 2007) and in valu-
ing future rewards (Kable & DEMO 2007).
One hypothesis is that this region registers the
long-term beneﬁts that could emerge from a
successful partnership, which can help to sur-
mount the immediate fear of betrayal associated
with deciding to trust.
Decisions DEMO trust should also be based on in-
ferences of others’ trustworthiness—if partners
do not appear trustworthy, whether assessed by
facial features or by knowledge about their past
behavior, we should be wary about interacting
with them. Therefore, trust decisions could be
expected to engage brain systems implicated in
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto DEMO 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
theory of mind. Indeed, partner feedback in the
PD game reliably activates several regions that
have been DEMO in theory of mind, includ-
ing dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC),DEMO
posterior cingulate, and the temporo-parietal
junction (TPJ), with each of these areas engaged
more when playing with a human than a com-
DEMO partner (Rilling et al. 2004a). Similarly,
another study showed DEMO DMPFC activity is
high during the initial stages of building a trust-
ing relationship but then subsides once trust
has been established (Krueger et al. 2007), sug-
gesting that this region may be involved more
DEMO in learning whether someone is
trustworthy. This was the conclusion of a recent
study that tracked social prediction errors when
following a confederate’s advice DEMO found
activity related to social prediction errors in
DMPFC, superior temporal DEMO (STS), and
TPJ (Behrens et al. 2008). Social anxiety disor-
der is associated with attenuated DMPFC acti-
vation during a trust DEMO (Sripada et al. 2009),
perhaps implying that social learning mecha-
nisms are short-circuited by the limbic hyper-
activity characteristic of this disorder (Etkin &
Wager 2007), which may lead to prematurely
judging a social stimulus as threatening.
Reciprocating Trust
As noted above, in relationships based on recip-
rocal altruism (#2 in Figure 1a,b)there is an
obvious temptation to accept but then not re-
ciprocate a favor. For DEMO, asking for help
when moving house but then not returning that
DEMO may be beneﬁcial in the short term but will
quite likely incur long-term costs by discourag-
ing the altruistic from granting future favors.
In DEMO words, reciprocity is important for the
maintenance of relationships. Throughout the
DEMO kingdom, the bias for immediate grat-
iﬁcation is strong (Kagel et al. 1995), and in
some cases, this bias prevents the establishment
of stable, cooperative relationships with others.
However, remarkably frequently, people over-
come these biases. What are the motivations for
doing so, and how does the human brain accom-
plish this? Part of the answer may be that the
short-term social reward associated with mu-
tual cooperation can DEMO the short-term
material rewards gained from cheating. That
is, the subjective DEMO of mutual cooperation
can exceed that of unilateral defection (Fehr &
Camerer 2007). Functional MRI studies of hu-
man subjects engaged in DEMO Dilemma
or related trust games have shown that recip-
rocated cooperation is associated with activa-
tion of two brain regions involved in reward
processing, the caudate nucleus (Delgado et al.
2005; Rilling et al. 2002, 2004b) and the or-
bitofrontal cortex (OFC) (Rilling et al. DEMO,
2004b). Moreover, the strength of response in
the caudate DEMO the degree of future coop-
eration (King-Casas et al. 2005, Rilling et al.
2002), suggesting that activation of this brain
region can DEMO reinforce cooperation, ei-
ther by rendering mutual cooperation immedi-
ately rewarding DEMO by providing a learning sig-
nal after feedback. Either way, evolution DEMO
have effectively removed the need to delay grat-
iﬁcation. Although the material payoff from
mutual cooperation may be realized later, the
social payoff can be immediate.
A recent study (Li et al. 2009) suggests that
DEMO act of being trusted may also be inherently
rewarding. This study focused on activation in
trustees’ brains after they learned that the in-
vestor DEMO transferred money to them. In one
condition, investors were allowed to DEMO
trustees with a ﬁnancial penalty for nonrepay-
ment, whereas in the DEMO condition this was
not possible. VMPFC was more active when
trustees received money from the investor with-
out sanction threats as opposed to with DEMO,
and the magnitude of this VMPFC activation
predicted levels of trustee repayment (Li et al.
2009). One interpretation of these ﬁndings is
that subjects anticipate keeping more money
when they are not threatened with DEMO sanc-
tions compared to when they are. Though there
are obvious dangers in assuming that activation
of reward regions implies that an act is DEMO
ently rewarding (Poldrack 2006), an alternative
and more interesting possible DEMO is
that the act of being trusted in the absence of
sanction threats is rewarding in and of itself and
DMPFC:
dorsomedial prefrontal
DEMO
TPJ:
temporo-parietal
junction
www.annualreviews.org
•
Neuroscience of Social Decisions 29
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on DEMO/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
Tryptophan: the
amino acid precursor
of serotonin
Selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitor
(SSRI): adrugthat
increases serotonin
transmission by
blocking synaptic
reuptake
Insula: an island of
cortex buried within
the sylvian ﬁssure
ACC: anterior
cingulate cortex
DLPFC: dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex
thereby DEMO reciprocation. We presum-
ably feel a greater social bond with someone
who does not threaten retribution, and this may
be a mechanism by which greed is overcome and
may also explain why patients with VMPFC le-
DEMO are less trustworthy in the Trust Game
(Krajbich et al. 2009)DEMO
Intriguingly, serotonin may modulate these
value functions. In both humans and DEMO
animals, experimental manipulation of the sero-
tonin system demonstrates that low DEMO
levels decrease the value of delayed rewards,
steepening delayed reward discounting (Denk
et al. 2005, Schweighofer et al. 2008). Lower-
ing DEMO levels through tryptophan deple-
tion decreases cooperation by second movers in
the PD game, and elevating the levels, through
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI)
treatment, has the opposite effect (Tse & Bond
2002, Wood et al. 2006). These effects of sero-
tonin may be DEMO by VMPFC, as the
human VMPFC is known to be modulated
DEMO serotonin (Robbins 2000), serotonin ago-
nists increase VMPFC metabolism (Siever et al.
1999), and tryptophan depletion mimics the
effects of VMPFC DEMO on behavior in the
UG (Crockett et al. 2008) (discussed DEMO).
Thus, serotonergic input to VMPFC may pro-
mote reciprocity through DEMO the value
of long-term beneﬁts associated with mutual
cooperation (Wood et DEMO 2006).
An alternative motivation for reciprocal be-
havior beyond a reward explanation is that it
may be driven by the minimization of potential
DEMO affect, primarily guilt. That is, the rea-
son for cooperation is that we anticipate feeling
guilty if we would not reciprocate generous be-
DEMO Here again, VMPFC patients are rele-
vant, as both qualitative observations of their
social behavior (Koenigs & Tranel 2007) as
well as DEMO formal modeling based on their
behavior in economic games (Krajbich et DEMO
2009) suggest that they have impairments in
guilt. Thus, the expression of guilt, and perhaps
more generally the elicitation of emotions based
on imagined outcomes (Krajbich et al. 2009),
can play an important DEMO in social decision-
making, and affective processing areas such as
30 DEMO · Sanfey
VMPFC and insula (see below) may be involved
in the neural instantiation of these processes.
If contemplation of defection elicits guilt,DEMO
the decision to defect might be expected to in-
volve conﬂict. Indeed, a recent study showed
that breaking a promise to reciprocate trust,
compared to honoring that same promise, was
associated with activation in the anterior cin-
gulate cortex (ACC) and the dorsolateral pre-
frontal cortex (DLPFC) (Baumgartner et al.
2009), regions consistently implicated in cog-
DEMO conﬂict and cognitive control, respec-
tively (Botvinick et al. 2001, DEMO & Cohen
2001, Pochon et al. 2008). These results sug-
DEMO that for most people, breaking a promise to
reciprocate requires cognitive DEMO, and con-
versely that honoring such a promise is our pre-
DEMO response bias. Thus, whether through
innate, genetic predispositions or through so-
cialization, the tendency to reciprocate altruism
appears to become ingrained in our biology and
overridden only with cognitive effort.
Of course, there is signiﬁcant individual
variation in the tendency to reciprocate altru-
ism, and explaining this variation is an impor-
tant challenge for social neuroscience. A recent
study DEMO subjects based on social value
orientation, a measure of the tendency DEMO value
the outcomes of others. The researchers found
that prosocial participants, DEMO valued the out-
comes of others, exhibited more ventral striatal
activity DEMO choosing to reciprocate compared
with when choosing to defect, whereas proself
DEMO had the opposite proﬁle (van den
Bos et al. 2009). DEMO ﬁndings suggest that
reciprocating, despite its lower material pay-
off, may have a higher reward value for proso-
cials, whereas defecting may have a higher re-
ward value for proselfs. Accordingly, prosocials
did in fact reciprocate more often than pro-
selfs did. This study also reported a DEMO
in activation of the insula as a function of social
value orientation, whereby prosocials showed
stronger activation when defecting and pro-
selfs showed stronger activation when recipro-
cating. Thus, defecting may be aversive to pro-
socials, whereas reciprocating may be aversive
to proselfs (van den Bos et DEMO 2009).
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
Finally, the neural correlates of decisions
about reciprocity can be altered in psychi-
atric disorders. For example, the anterior in-
sula of trustees is more active in response to
DEMO as compared to high expressions of trust
by investors. However, this DEMO insula
response is lacking in patients with border-
line personality disorder, DEMO has been in-
terpreted as suggesting that these patients, in
contrast DEMO normal controls, fail to register low
levels of trust as a DEMO violation (King-Casas
et al. 2008). In another study of the DEMO PD
game, the decision to defect was associated with
activation in DEMO and DLPFC, generally inter-
preted as reﬂecting conﬂict and exertion of DEMO
nitive effort, but not in individuals who scored
high on a DEMO of psychopathic personal-
ity. These individuals also defected at higher
rates (DEMO et al. 2007), and thus defection
may only be difﬁcult for those who did not score
high on psychopathic personality.
Responding to Breaches DEMO Trust
In the iterated PD game, as in life, uncondi-
tional cooperators are vulnerable to exploita-
tion by nonreciprocators (Axelrod 1984) (#3 in
Figure 1a,b). Thus, humans have likely evolved
psychological mechanisms to detect and avoid
cooperating with nonreciprocators (Cosmides
& Tooby 2000), which may be related to a more
generalized aversion to ‘‘free riders’’ (i.e., those
who accept beneﬁts without paying expected
costs), as suggested by behavioral economics
experiments in which people often choose to
punish free DEMO, even when the punishment
is personally costly (Fehr & Gachter 2002).
In the iterated PD game, cooperation in
combination with a partner’s defection (the
worst outcome) is associated with activation of
the anterior DEMO cortex, which may be a neu-
ral correlate of an aversive DEMO to free rid-
ing (Rilling et al. 2008) or of a more gener-
alized response to norm violations (Montague
& Lohrenz 2007). The anterior insula is in-
volved in sensing the state of the DEMO (e.g.,
heart, lungs, gut) and is activated in response
to a variety of negative social interactions, from
social exclusion (Eisenberger DEMO al. 2003), to re-
ceiving an unfair offer in an UG (Sanfey et al.
2003), to watching a loved one receive a painful
stimulus (Singer et al. 2004). Anterior insula
is also responsive to physically painful stimuli,
and its activity is correlated with skin DEMO
tance responses (Critchley et al. 2000). These
results and others DEMO that the anterior in-
sula is involved in mapping physiological states
of the body, including pain, touch, and vis-
ceral sensations of autonomic arousal (Craig
2002, Critchley 2005). The right anterior in-
sula, in particular, is thought to be a cortical
station for interoception that may play a role in
decision-making by instantiating valenced sub-
jective feeling DEMO (Damasio 1994). Finally,
recent fMRI data implicate right anterior DEMO
sula in aversive conditioning (Seymour et al.
2004). Collectively, these ﬁndings suggest that
the anterior insula may be involved in signal-
ing DEMO a social encounter has differed from
expectations and consequently marking nega-
tive interactions as aversive to help in learn-
ing to avoid such interactions DEMO the future. Al-
though the magnitude of activation in anterior
insula does not by itself predict subsequent de-
fection by the player in future DEMO with
the same nonreciprocating partner, correlated
activity (i.e., functional connectivity) between
anterior insula and lateral OFC does. This
ﬁnding is consistent with DEMO that lateral
OFC is involved in the evaluation of punish-
ing stimuli that may lead to behavioral changes
(Kringelbach & Rolls 2004).
Visceral: related to
the internal organs of
the body, including the
heart, lungs, and gut
Seeking Forgiveness
When cooperation has ruptured, it may DEMO
be beneﬁcial in the long run to try to repair
it. Indeed, the motivation to reconcile follow-
ing conﬂict seems to be present in many pri-
mate species (de Waal 2000). In the iterated
Trust Game, repair of ruptured cooperation is
often initiated by a coaxing response involving
hyper-reciprocation that encourages increasing
expressions of trust in the investor (King-Casas
et al. 2008). Interestingly, this response also ap-
pears to be deﬁcient in borderline personality
www.annualreviews.org
•
Neuroscience of Social Decisions 31
Annu. DEMO Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
disorder (King-Casas et al. 2008). The insula
response to low levels of trust, discussed above,
may be part of the neural mechanism support-
ing a decision to DEMO forgiveness.
Finally, it is important to emphasize that the
mechanisms discussed DEMO that have evolved to
support reciprocal altruism in humans are im-
perfect. Humans are often overcome by greed
or fear such that sustained, mutually beneﬁ-
cial relationships cannot be realized, or worse,
may degenerate into a bitter series of defec-
tions. One important challenge for social neu-
DEMO is to begin to specify the situations
under which cooperation does not occur. An
interesting speculation in this regard is that
trade, and later money, both of which imme-
diately discharge debts of reciprocity by effec-
tively removing the delay between giving help
and receiving payback, may have developed
to help circumvent our imperfections in this
regard (Ridley 2010).
SHARING AND RESOURCE
DISTRIBUTION
Another type of social decision that has been DEMO
tensively studied from a behavioral, economic,
and neuroscientiﬁc perspective is DEMO decision
of how to distribute limited resources among
multiple individuals. Like reciprocal altruism,
this is likely an evolutionarily ancient neces-
sity, as both archeological and ethnographic
evidence suggest that big game hunting or
scavenging was DEMO in human evolution
(Stanford & Bunn 2001). Decisions about how
DEMO distribute large kills, the successful hunting
of which often depended on DEMO among
many individuals, have signiﬁcant nutritional
and social consequences for group DEMO
and have been intensively studied by anthropol-
ogists for decades (Hawkes DEMO, Hill & Kaplan
1994). In modern Western societies, decisions
about distribution of resources are equally im-
portant, as for example when deciding how to
allocate salary raises from a ﬁxed pool of money
or DEMO medical resources should be divided up
among patients of differing need.
32 Rilling · Sanfey
Deciding Whether to be Fair
Those in control of DEMO resources often
face the decision of whether to distribute
those resources equitably or efﬁciently (#4 in
Figure 1a,b). For example, the DEMO raise pool
can be equally divided among employees or
more can be given to those who have performed
well in the past. The UG DEMO a useful experimen-
tal tool for examining both decisions about, and
DEMO to, fairness and equity. In the Ultima-
tum Game, most people can be said to be fair
in that they will offer a DEMO more than
their own personal minimum acceptable offer.
However, this is DEMO the case in VMPFC pa-
tients (Krajbich et al. 2009), DEMO instead show
“negative generosity” by offering less than they
themselves demand. Experimentally elevating
testosterone levels in men decreases UG gen-
erosity and also makes DEMO more than twice as
likely to exhibit this negative generosity effect
(DEMO et al. 2009). These two ﬁndings may be re-
lated, DEMO a recent fMRI study has linked testos-
terone with decreased VMPFC activity (Mehta
& Beer 2010). If, as mentioned above, VMPFC
patients have deﬁcits in eliciting emotions based
on imagined outcomes, then both VMPFC le-
sions and experimentally elevated testosterone
may interfere with the ability to DEMO the
partner’s emotional reaction to potential offers;
that is, they DEMO impair empathy. In fact, the
pathway from the amygdala to the DEMO is
hypothesized to be involved in perceiving dis-
tress in others and in learning to avoid behav-
iors that provoke such distress (Blair 2008), and
testosterone may impair the functioning of this
pathway (van Wingen et al. 2010). It should be
noted, however, that in DEMO to the effects
of testosterone on men, testosterone adminis-
tration actually DEMO UG offers in women
(Eisenegger et al. 2010). A possible DEMO
is that the effects on generosity in women are
actually mediated by estrogen, which testos-
terone may displace from its binding protein
(sex DEMO globulin) owing to its
greater binding afﬁnity (Wallen 2001).
In contrast to VMPFC damage and testos-
terone administration to men, both of which
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of DEMO on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
decrease generosity in the UG, intranasal OT
increases generosity (Zak et al. 2007). This ﬁnd-
ing is consistent with the generally prosocial ef-
fects of OT in both DEMO and other animals
[although OT also mediates maternal aggres-
sion in rodents and perhaps envy and gloating
in humans (Shamay-Tsoory et al. 2009)]. The
effects of OT and testosterone on UG offers,
coupled with DEMO lack of an effect on offers
in the DG that are thought to represent “pure
altruism”, suggest that they may be modulat-
ing the ability to both empathize with and pre-
dict the behavior of one’s DEMO, but in op-
posite ways (Hurlemann et al. 2010, Zak DEMO al.
2009).
The UG presents a decision about how to al-
locate resources between oneself and another,
but many important social and DEMO deci-
sions involve allocating resources among third
parties, sometimes with ambiguity DEMO
what the morally optimal choice is. An inge-
nious recent study used fMRI as participants
made decisions about how to allocate meals
to a DEMO of children living in an orphanage
in northern Uganda (Hsu et DEMO 2008). In ev-
ery decision, each of three children began DEMO
receiving 24 meals, with the participant then
forced to choose between DEMO different decision
options, each of which involved one or more
children DEMO meals. Choices involved decid-
ing between equity, in which variance among
DEMO was minimized but the overall number
of meals donated was lower, DEMO efﬁciency, in
which the overall number of meals was higher
but DEMO greater inequity among children. Ef-
ﬁciency was associated neurally with activation
in the putamen. When participants chose the
more equitable distribution, the amount of in-
equity reduced by their choice was correlated
with activation in the DEMO insula, bilaterally.
Moreover, participants who showed stronger
inequity aversion in their decision-making had
stronger responses to inequity in the bilateral
insula. As mentioned DEMO, the anterior insula
is responsive to aversive social interactions and
norm DEMO These data suggest that par-
ticipants with a stronger aversive response to
inequity may be more likely to choose equitable
divisions even at the DEMO of decreasing overall
efﬁciency. Thus, a version of a somatic marker
(Bechara & Damasio 2005) may be at the root
of our decisions to promote equity.
Responding to Unfairness
and Inequity
Moreso than any other DEMO decision, the neu-
ral basis of the response to unfairness has DEMO
probed with a variety of neuroscience methods.
An initial fMRI study showed that receiving an
unfair compared to a fair offer in the UG DEMO
associated with activation in the anterior insula,
that this activation was stronger for offers from
putative human versus computer partners, and
that it scaled to the magnitude of unfairness (#5
in Figure 1a,b). Moreover, unfair offers that
were subsequently rejected were associated
with a stronger insula response than those that
were subsequently accepted, suggesting that
the magnitude of anterior insula activation in-
ﬂuences the decision to accept or reject (Sanfey
et al. 2003). In a follow-up study, the magnitude
of skin conductance responses to unfair offers
was also found to predict the DEMO of
rejection (van ‘t Wout et al. 2006). Given that
DEMO insula activity is known to correlate
with skin conductance responses (Critchley
DEMO al. 2000), these ﬁndings suggest that visceral
feedback from the body is driving the rejection
of unfair offers. The anterior insula has also
DEMO implicated in empathy (de Vignemont
& Singer 2006), perhaps by DEMO the
somatic state and accompanying feelings of
another. Therefore, the insula DEMO to
potential inequitable distributions among
Ugandan orphans (described above) may
represent an empathic response that drives the
decision to choose in favor of DEMO more equitable
distribution.
A later fMRI study (Tabibnia et al. 2008)DEMO
replicated this insula ﬁnding and also showed
that activation of the ventrolateral prefrontal
cortex (VLPFC) was associated with accept-
ing unfair offers. Given DEMO VLPFC has been
implicated in emotion regulation (Ochsner &
Gross 2005), the results of a path analysis
www.annualreviews.org •
Neuroscience of Social DEMO 33
VLPFC: ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded DEMO www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
suggest that VLPFC contributes to DEMO
of unfair offers by reducing anterior insula–
based negative affect.
As in the domain of trust and reciprocity,
people vary in their response DEMO inequity, and
social value orientation explains a portion of
this variance. DEMO asked to evaluate the desir-
ability of pairs of rewards for both themselves
and others, prosocials dislike large absolute dif-
ferences in distributions, DEMO proselfs, or
individualists, do not. In prosocials, the magni-
tude DEMO the differences in distributions is posi-
tively correlated with amygdala activation, DEMO
not in individualists. These decisions are not af-
fected by cognitive load, implying that inequity
aversion in prosocials is driven by an automatic,
bottom-up aversive response represented in the
amygdala (Haruno & Frith 2010).
In addition to fMRI, the neural basis of the
response to unfairness has been investigated
in brain-damaged patients. Damage to the
VMPFC is associated DEMO higher rejection
rates of unfair UG offers (Koenigs & Tranel
2007, Krajbich et al. 2009), but apparently only
if the payment is DEMO and delayed (Moretti
et al. 2009). When payment is immediate DEMO
concrete (i.e., visible cash is present), rejection
rates of VMPFC patients do not differ from
those of controls. Given a role for DEMO and
frontal pole in representing the value of future
or abstract outcomes (Moretti et al. 2009),
these results have been interpreted to DEMO
that increased rejection rates in VMPFC
patients in the abstract case stem from reduced
reward value placed on future payoffs following
acceptance (Moretti et al. 2009). Regardless
of the explanation for increased rejection rates
in DEMO abstract case, it seems clear that the
VMPFC and/or the DEMO pole are important
for decision-making in this single-shot case
where there can be no long-term beneﬁt from
rejecting an offer.
Pharmacologic manipulations have pro-
DEMO some additional evidence as to the
mechanisms underlying responses to un-
fairness. Experimentally decreasing central
serotonin levels through tryptophan depletion
is associated with higher DEMO rates of unfair
34 Rilling · Sanfey
UG offers (Crockett 2009)DEMO The insula receives
dense innervation from the dorsal raphe
serotonin projection system (Way et al. 2007),
and SSRI treatment, which enhances serotonin
transmission, is associated with reduced ante-
rior insula responses to perception of emotional
stimuli (Arce et al. 2008). Tryptophan deple-
tion, on DEMO other hand, is associated with an
enhanced insula response to emotional DEMO
(Roiser et al. 2008). Thus, tryptophan depletion
may increase UG rejection rates by removing
inhibitory inﬂuences of serotonin on the insu-
lar DEMO to unfair offers. Of course, these
effects could also be mediated DEMO VMPFC, es-
pecially since, as mentioned above, they mimic
the DEMO of VMPFC lesions (Crockett 2009).
Withdrawal of serotonin from VMPFC DEMO
therefore contribute to increased rejection rates
by impairing emotion regulation (Crockett
DEMO) or by decreasing the value of an abstract
monetary reward (Moretti et al. 2009) relative
to the immediate social reward of successfully
punishing the unfair proposer (de Quervain
et al. 2004, Singer et al. DEMO) (see below).
Additional pharmacologic studies have ex-
amined the inﬂuence of sex-steroid hormones,
such as testosterone, on UG game behavior.
This has been done by examining the effects of
naturally occurring variation in DEMO lev-
els and by speciﬁc pharmacological manipula-
tions. Men who reject low offers in the UG have
higher salivary testosterone than do men who
DEMO these offers (Burnham 2007), and fol-
lowing exogenous testosterone administration,DEMO
testosterone levels are positively correlated
with UG rejection thresholds (i.e., men with
higher testosterone reject more easily) (Zak
et al. 2009). DEMO, these effects of testos-
terone do not hold for either pre- (Eisenegger
et al. 2010) or postmenopausal (Zethraeus et al.
2009) women. As mentioned above, testos-
terone has been linked with decreased VMPFC
activity (Mehta & Beer 2010) as well as de-
creased amygdala-orbitofrontal coupling (van
Wingen et al. 2010). Thus, testosterone may
increase rejection rates in men through a mech-
anism similar to tryptophan depletion: by im-
pairing emotion regulation or by modulating
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded DEMO www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
the relative reward value of DEMO versus
rejecting.
UG responder behavior has also been in-
vestigated using rTMS. Disruption of right,
but not left, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex with
rTMS is associated with decreased rejection
rates of unfair offers in the single-shot DEMO
(Knoch et al. 2006, van ‘t Wout et al. 2005).
These results suggest that right DLPFC may
be involved in the implementation DEMO fairness
norms (Spitzer et al. 2007) and in general
demonstrate that DLPFC also plays an impor-
tant, causal, role in UG decisions.
DEMO, clinical populations have also been
investigated using this task. Autistic children DEMO
more likely to accept unfair UG offers than are
controls (Sally & Hill 2006). The UG robustly
activates a neural network involved in theory
of mind processing (Rilling et al. 2004a), and
autistic children have impaired theory of mind
skills. Autistic children may therefore lack the
DEMO to perceive the unfair intent behind a low
offer (Sally & DEMO 2006), perhaps due to insufﬁ-
cient activation of a theory of mind neural net-
work (Frith 2003), and may therefore be less apt
to reject. A similar pattern holds for clinically
depressed patients, who also accept more unfair
offers than do controls (Harle et al. 2010), al-´
though the precise mechanism underlying this
latter result is still DEMO
ALTRUISM
One remarkable facet of human social behavior
is that people often decide to help others even
when it comes at personal cost, and when there
is no expectation of receiving any material re-
turns (#6 in Figure 1a,b). In experimental set-
tings, “pure” altruism has been modeled with
the DG. In this game, a player chooses how to
allocate a sum of money between themselves
and another player, in a similar manner to the
UG, but in the DG the second player is simply
a passive recipient of the offer and has no DEMO
course to punish. Differences between a given
proposer’s Ultimatum and Dictator offers can
therefore be instructive in examining the ef-
fect of both altruistic DEMO strategic concerns.
VMPFC patients give less in the DG com-
pared with normal or brain-damaged controls
(Krajbich et al. 2009), and given the associa-
tion between altruism and empathy (Batson &
Powell 2003), DEMO effect may stem from a deﬁcit
in empathy in VMPFC patients. Interestingly,
in contrast to UG offers, neither testosterone
supplementation nor OT self-administration
affects DG offers in men (Zak et al. 2007, 2009),
providing some evidence for a dissociation be-
tween generosity and altruism. In DEMO event,
if these pharmacologic manipulations do inﬂu-
ence empathy, as DEMO above, the effects
do not translate into altered DG behavior.
Despite DEMO lack of an effect of intranasal
OT on altruism in the DG, genetic studies have
implicated both the OT and AVP systems in
DG behavior. In one study, three of ﬁfteen sin-
gle nucleotide polymorphisms across the OT
receptor gene showed signiﬁcant associations
with DG offers (Israel et al. 2009). Another
study showed that longer versions of the RS3
DEMO repeat element of the vasopressin
1a receptor gene were associated with increased
AVP mRNA expression as well as larger DG al-
locations (Knafo et al. 2008). Thus, signiﬁcant
variability in altruistic behavior in the DG is
explained by genetic variation in the receptors
that bind AVP and DEMO
The ecological validity of anonymous DG
allocations as a measure of altruism is of course
questionable, as in most cases we know some-
thing about the people or causes that we sup-
port, and often they know something about
us. Two recent clever fMRI studies have used
more DEMO paradigms and scanned partici-
pants as they decide whether to donate endowed
money to a variety of real charitable organi-
zations. In one study, both accepting a mone-
tary reward and voluntarily donating money to
a DEMO charity activated the ventral tegmen-
tal area and the ventral striatum, DEMO compo-
nents of the mesolimbic dopamine system (Moll
et al. 2006)DEMO In another study, subjects showing
stronger ventral striatum activation to manda-
DEMO charitable donations were more likely to
then voluntarily give to the charity. On the
other hand, subjects showing stronger ventral
Single nucleotide
polymorphisms:
genetic variants that
differ in a single DNA
base pair
Microsatellite: any of
numerous short
segments of DNA that
are distributed
throughout the
genome, that consist
of repeated sequences
of usually two to ﬁve
nucleotides, and that
tend to vary from one
individual to another
www.annualreviews.org
•
Neuroscience DEMO Social Decisions 35
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
striatum activation to payments to DEMO
were less likely to later donate to the charity
(Harbaugh et DEMO 2007). Thus, the ventral stria-
tum, a mesencephalic dopamine system target
involved in reward processing (O’Doherty et al.
2004, Schultz 1998), may motivate decisions to
voluntarily donate money to charitable orga-
nizations. Other brain regions may also be in-
volved. In the ﬁrst of the DEMO just mentioned,
one region—the subgenual cingulate cortex—
was actually more active when donating to a
cause compared to when accepting a personal
monetary DEMO (Moll et al. 2006). One in-
terpretation of this ﬁnding DEMO that the subgen-
ual cingulate cortex represents social attach-
ment to a cause promoted by a speciﬁc charity.
The same study found that sacriﬁcing DEMO
to donate to a charity activated the VMPFC
and frontal pole to a greater extent than did ac-
cepting a personal monetary reward (Moll et al.
2006), a result consistent with the observation
that VMPFC DEMO are associated with less al-
truism in the DG.
NORM-ABIDING
DECISION-MAKING
The establishment of large-scale cooperation
through social norms is a uniquely human phe-
DEMO (#7 in Figure 1a,b). Social norms are
effective in DEMO behavior, presumably be-
cause humans are highly sensitive to the opin-
DEMO and approval of others. Two recent stud-
ies suggest that approval of others is processed
within the same ventral striatal regions that re-
spond DEMO a wide range of nonsocial rewards. One
of these studies scanned subjects using fMRI
as they made decisions about whether to do-
nate money DEMO charities, as in the above experi-
ments, but with the interesting added manipu-
lation that in some cases these donations were
observed by DEMO The presence of observers
increased both donation rates, albeit minimally,
DEMO well as the ventral striatal response that pre-
ceded decisions to donate. That the same ven-
tral striatum region was also active when choos-
DEMO to keep money for oneself in the absence of
peer observers suggests that this activation may
36 Rilling · Sanfey
reﬂect an anticipated reward DEMO presumed
peer approval (Izuma et al. 2009). In the second
DEMO, subjects were scanned as they received
feedback from others who had DEMO eval-
uated the subjects based on personality ques-
tionnaires and a videotaped self-introduction.
Receiving unambiguously positive peer evalua-
tions was associated with activation in DEMO same
region of the striatum that was also activated
by monetary reward in a nonsocial task (Izuma
et al. 2008). Thus, social DEMO seems to be
rewarding and may motivate norm-abiding de-
cisions, such DEMO when called upon to help those
in need.
Despite these positive incentives for norm-
abiding behavior, both ethnographic evidence
(Sober & Wilson 1998) and behavioral eco-
nomics experiments (Fehr & Gachter 2002)
show that some people will only abide by so-
cial norms under threat of DEMO Thus,
sensitivity to the threat of punishment is also
an important motive for norm-abiding behav-
ior. In a recent fMRI study (Spitzer et al. 2007),
subjects were imaged while playing two differ-
ent games. In one game, which resembles a DG,
subjects (player A) received a monetary endow-
ment that they could distribute freely between
themselves DEMO another player (player B). In this
game, player B is a passive recipient of player A’s
monetary transfer. In the other game, player B
could choose to pay money to ﬁnancially punish
player A DEMO having been informed of player
A’s decision. Player A transferred substantially
more money to player B in the punishment
compared with the nonpunishment condition.
DEMO subjects who showed the largest change
in monetary transfer from the nonpunishment
to the punishment condition also showed the
greatest increase in activation of DEMO the lat-
eral OFC and the right DLPFC across condi-
tions. Lateral OFC is involved in the evaluation
of punishing stimuli that may lead DEMO behavioral
changes (Kringelbach & Rolls 2004), so it may
hold DEMO subjective representation of the punish-
ment threat that motivates norm-abiding be-
havior. Activation in DLPFC is consistent with
the rTMS results described above that DEMO
cate it in the implementation of fairness norms.
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. DEMO personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
DLPFC, known for its role in cognitive con-
trol (Miller & Cohen 2001), may be overriding
a prepotent selﬁsh impulse to send less of the
endowment to player DEMO
This human sensitivity to social approval is
underscored by the ﬁnding that a conﬂict with
group opinion triggers a prediction error sig-
nal within DEMO reinforcement learning cir-
cuitry (Klucharev et al. 2009). In this DEMO
study, female participants rated female faces for
attractiveness, after which they were informed
of the “average European rating” of the face.
When participants DEMO that the group rat-
ing differed from their own, activation was DEMO
served in the rostral cingulate zone, along with
deactivation in the DEMO accumbens. Subjects
rated the same set of faces again after the fMRI
session, and in some cases adjusted their ratings
to more closely conform to the group average.
This conformity was associated with stronger
activation of DEMO rostral cingulate zone as well
as stronger deactivation of the nucleus accum-
bens, consistent with a larger error signal. Fur-
thermore, subjects with DEMO greater tendency to
conform showed greater deactivation of the
ventral striatum in response to initial noncon-
formity. Thus, error-related signals in the ros-
tral cingulate and nucleus accumbens alert us
when our decisions deviate from social DEMO
and can motivate subsequent conformity.
Social norms, and speciﬁcally the expecta-
DEMO engendered by these norms, may also
provide an explanation for cooperative DEMO
ior more generally. Research examining the
neural basis of deviations from expectation in
nonsocial contexts, such as oddball detection
paradigms, has consistently shown DEMO in
a network including anterior insula, ACC, and
supplementary motor area (SMA). The same
network has been shown to be active when
there is conﬂict with a social norm (Klucharev
et al. 2009), when conforming to a norm (Berns
et al. 2010). This suggests that decisions in-
volving both trust and reciprocation may in-
volve norm DEMO, namely the social norm
that one should both trust others and DEMO
rocate trust that has been placed in oneself.
Similarly, rejecting unfair DEMO offers is
associated with increased activity in the insula,
ACC/SMA, and DLPFC (Sanfey et al. 2003),
and dividing money under threat of sanction
(and presumably promoting greater conformity
to the norm) DEMO also associated with insula activ-
ity (Spitzer et al. 2007). DEMO, norm violation
accounts may help explain how we remember
partners with DEMO we interact. In contrast to
cheater-detection theories, which posit that we
DEMO enhanced memory for partners who de-
ceive us, a recent fMRI DEMO of the UG showed
that memory for partners was actually better
explained by whether the partners had deviated
from the subject’s initial expectations, irrespec-
tive of whether subjects had high or low ex-
pectations of these DEMO (Chang & Sanfey
2009). Violations were also associated with acti-
DEMO in the insula/ACC/SMA network. Taken
together, these results suggest DEMO enforcing a
social norm may be associated with this neural
system and that this may play an important role
in social decision-making.
ALTRUISTIC PUNISHMENT
DEMO we have discussed above, the threat of pun-
ishment is an DEMO motive for conforming
to social norms. But to be effective, the DEMO
must be credible. For most of human history,
punishment has been meted out privately rather
than by legal institutions, and the effectiveness
of such a system in stabilizing social norms is de-
pendent on some DEMO being motivated to
punish norm violators or free-riders despite any
inherent costs (Fehr & Fischbacher 2003). How
does the human brain mediate this so-called al-
truistic punishment? Two neuroimaging stud-
ies of trust and PD games have shown that brain
reward regions, including the caudate nucleus
and related structures in the ventral striatum,
are activated when subjects successfully DEMO
others who have previously treated them un-
fairly (de Quervain et DEMO 2004, Singer et al.
2006). In one study, the effect was observed
for male but not female subjects, where acti-
vation in reward areas in response to punish-
ment of a nonreciprocating partner was DEMO
related with self-reported desire for revenge
www.annualreviews.org
•
Neuroscience of Social Decisions 37
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of DEMO on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
(Singer et al. 2006). In the other study, sub-
jects showing stronger activation of reward ar-
eas were willing to incur greater costs in order to
punish the DEMO partner (de Quervain et al.
2004). Thus, the motive to altruistically punish
is correlated with, and perhaps causally related
to, activation DEMO brain reward systems.
In most modern societies, judicial institu-
tions relieve DEMO citizens of the responsi-
bility for retribution, with punishment meted
out DEMO impartial third parties. We might there-
fore expect third-party decisions about altruis-
tic punishment to be more dispassionate than
second-party punishment in the above DEMO
However, a recent fMRI study suggests other-
wise (Buckholtz et al. 2008). Here, participants
were presented with written scenarios in which
they had to decide whether a protagonist should
be punished, and if so, to what extent. Consis-
tent with previous evidence that DLPFC is im-
plicated in penalizing norm violations, DLPFC
was indeed involved in deciding whether or not
to punish based on an assessment of criminal
responsibility. However, decisions about pun-
ishment magnitude were positively correlated
with activity in regions DEMO with affective
processing, such as the amygdala. These results
are consistent DEMO the hypothesis that third-
party sanctions are fueled by negative emotions
toward norm violators (Buckholtz et al. 2008).
SOCIAL LEARNING
To a much greater extent than other ani-
mals, human behavior is shaped by what we
learn from others (Henrich & McElreath 2003,
Tomasello 1999). We learn complex subsis-
tence and occupational skills, social norms, and
DEMO speciﬁc features of our language from oth-
ers. Indeed, social learning (#8 in Figure 1a,b)
often has more inﬂuence over our DEMO
than individual learning does. For example, an
fMRI study involving the DEMO Game showed
that the prior moral reputation of a social
partner can outweigh direct experience in de-
ciding whether or not to trust the DEMO
(Delgado et al. 2005). Interestingly, when trust
38 Rilling · Sanfey
was not reciprocated by partners with good
reputations, the caudate prediction error sig-
nal of the scanned investors was blunted rel-
ative to DEMO by trustees with
neutral or bad reputations. Thus, socially
learned information DEMO lead to a suppression
of neural mechanisms involved in individual
reinforcement-based learning.
Imitation and social learning are likely de-
pendent on a putative mirror DEMO network
including the STS, inferior parietal cortex, and
inferior frontal cortex (Rizzolatti & Fogassi
2007). However, decisions about whether to
rely DEMO social stimuli for learning seem to in-
volve the anterior cingulate gyrus (ACCg). For
example, ACCg lesions in monkeys abolish so-
cial DEMO (Rudebeck et al. 2006). Additional
evidence comes from an fMRI DEMO designed
to distinguish brain regions involved in so-
cial learning from those involved in individual
reward-based learning. Participants were asked
to choose which of DEMO stimuli would yield a
reward and were able to draw on their prior
history of reinforcement as well as a confeder-
ate’s advice in DEMO their decision. Activation
in the ACCg reﬂected the value placed on con-
federate advice when deciding (Behrens et al.
2008). Thus, the DEMO is involved in valuing
information from others (Behrens et al. 2009)DEMO
Given the centrality of social learning to hu-
man behavior and the need for individuals to
learn accurate and useful information from oth-
ers, the decision of who to learn from or im-
itate is crucial (Henrich & McElreath 2003).
Natural selection may favor cognitive capaci-
ties DEMO bias individuals to learn preferentially
from those who are more successful, DEMO one
way of inferring success is through the defer-
ence or social status individuals receive from
others (Henrich & McElreath 2003). Access to
high-status individuals may therefore be valu-
able, as suggested by the observation that mon-
keys will forego food to acquire information
about dominant monkeys (Deaner et al. 2005).
In an fMRI study in which participants DEMO a
reaction-time game with both more highly
ranked players than themselves (DEMO
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
who were declared to be DEMO than them at
the game) and less highly ranked players than
DEMO (individuals who were declared to
be worse than them at the DEMO), viewing the
higher-compared with the lower-ranked player
was associated with increased ventral striatum
activation, interpreted as reﬂecting the greater
salience of the higher-ranked player (Zink et al.
2008). Thus, the ventral striatum response DEMO
high-status individuals may reﬂect our motiva-
tion to attend to and learn from them.
COMPETITIVE SOCIAL
INTERACTIONS
A major component of social life, though one
that has received relatively little research at-
tention, are decisions made in competitive
social interactions (#9 in Figure 1a,b). A re-
cent study (Hampton et al. 2008) compared
three different computational models DEMO
respect to their ability to explain subjects’ be-
havior during a competitive game in which
employees can “work” or “shirk” and employ-
ers can DEMO or “not inspect.” The model
that best ﬁt the data was an “inﬂuence learn-
ing” model, in which players make decisions
based on predictions of how their opponents
will respond to their own prior decisions. In
DEMO to the other two models, this model
unambiguously involves theory of DEMO pro-
cessing, demonstrating that mentalizing guides
decision-making in this game. Subjects DEMO as-
sumed greater inﬂuence over their partner’s
choices, and who were DEMO more strategic,
had stronger activation in DMPFC, consistent
with a DEMO body of studies implicating this re-
gion in mentalizing (see above)DEMO Activity in the
posterior STS, another putative mentalizing re-
gion (Saxe & Kanwisher 2003), corresponded
to an update signal that captured the DEMO
between the degree of inﬂuence expected on a
given trial and the actual inﬂuence exerted once
the outcome had been revealed. Therefore, this
region is involved in learning about the degree
of inﬂuence one has over DEMO partner’s strategy
(Hampton et al. 2008).
In fact, mentalizing-related neural activity
may play a more signiﬁcant role in competi-
tive than in DEMO social decision-making.
In a two-player fMRI study, participants en-
gaged in DEMO pattern-completion task either with
the help of another player (cooperation) or
with their interference (competition). Relative
to cooperation trials, competition trials DEMO
vated DMPFC. These results echo those de-
scribed above in which DMPFC activation is
high in early rounds of an interactive game
before trust DEMO cooperation have been es-
tablished but then tapers off in later rounds
once trust is ﬁrmly in place (Krueger et al.
2007).
Finally, competitive social behavior is often
motivated by envy. A recent study (DEMO
et al. 2009) used hypothetical scenarios involv-
ing social comparison to DEMO provoke
self-reported envy, the degree of which was pos-
itively correlated DEMO activation in the dorsal
anterior cingulate cortex (dACC). The dACC
DEMO been linked with social and psychological
pain, but also cognitive conﬂict, and the authors
of this paper speculate that the dACC activation
represents DEMO conﬂict between a normally posi-
tive self-concept and the feedback that someone
else is superior. Intriguingly, this activation is
correlated across subjects with the magnitude
of the ventral striatum response to a superior
other’s misfortune. So DEMO would seem that those
most prone to envy may also be most prone to
take pleasure at another’s bad luck (Takahashi
et al. 2009).
SUMMARY
Although the neurobiological study of social
decision-making is still in DEMO infancy, there are
currently enough ﬁndings to propose some ten-
tative DEMO of how the brain makes social
decisions. Clearly, prefrontal cortex plays DEMO
essential role in social decision-making. The
VMPFC/frontal pole region seems to be in-
volved in valuing the long-term beneﬁts asso-
ciated with cooperative DEMO and per-
haps also abstract rewards such as helping
www.annualreviews.org
•
Neuroscience of Social Decisions 39
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
DEMO University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
anonymous others through charity donations.
DEMO region also plays a role in regulating
emotional reactions that could jeopardize val-
ued relationships. Other prefrontal regions
are involved in different components of DEMO
decision-making. DLPFC is involved in exert-
ing cognitive effort to override selﬁsh impulses,
as when abiding by fairness norms, and VLPFC
is involved in overriding aversive reactions to
unfair treatment as well as in representing DEMO
threat of punishment from others that moti-
vates norm-abiding behavior. Finally, DEMO
is involved in learning whether someone can be
trusted as well as in strategizing during com-
petitive interactions.
However, the neural basis of social decision-
making is not conﬁned to prefrontal cortex.
The dACC seems to DEMO as a social alarm
signal (Eisenberger et al. 2003) that reacts to
social norm violations, as when breaking a
promise, deviating from DEMO opinion, or be-
ing outperformed by others (i.e., envy). DEMO
anterior insula may also play a role in sig-
naling norm violations and also mediates in-
equity aversion, aversive responses to unrecip-
rocated altruism, and motivates decisions that
restore equity. It is additionally involved in em-
pathy and third-party reactions to inequity. The
ventral striatum, a target of the mesolimbic
dopamine system, is a ﬁnal common pathway
for both social and nonsocial reward stimuli
(Montague & Berns 2002). It mediates rewards
from mutual cooperation, altruism, and social
approval and appears to motivate DEMO seek-
ing as well as attention to high-status others
as models for social learning. The amygdala is
also involved in aversive responses to inequity
DEMO also seems to mediate the fear of betrayal,
thereby inhibiting trust.
These neural systems are modulated by
a number of neurochemicals. Serotonin pro-
DEMO prosocial behavior, perhaps by augment-
ing VMPFC function, which would in turn
have several important consequences, such as
placing greater value on the long-term ben-
eﬁts of cooperative relationships, improving
emotion regulation, and perhaps DEMO
40 Rilling · Sanfey
empathy. Testosterone may have an opposite
effect on VMPFC function. OT promotes trust
through decreasing amygdala activity (in men)
and increases generosity and perhaps empa-
thy through some as yet unspeciﬁed DEMO
mechanism.
Though a full discussion is beyond the scope
of this review, it is notable that many of the
neural regions described here are also involved
in aspects of more traditional decision-making,
including valuation, risk assessment, and de-
cision conﬂict, to name but a few. Future DEMO
search might fruitfully explore the degree to
which social decision-making overlaps with the
more fundamental mechanisms employed in in-
dividual decision-making, in order to generate
a more complete model of how people choose
and decide.
CONCLUSION
DEMO review highlights the importance of a net-
work of brain regions in decisions that promote
prosocial behaviors. Areas such as the amygdala
and insula DEMO provide important affective bi-
ases to social decisions, and the prefrontal DEMO
tex appears to be involved in overriding selﬁsh
impulses, valuing abstract DEMO distant rewards
(like altruism and cooperation), and in gener-
ating DEMO prosocial emotions (such as guilt
and empathy). Interestingly, the human pre-
frontal cortex is larger than that of any other
primate, in terms of both absolute size and rel-
ative to the size of DEMO rest of the brain (Preuss
2004, Rilling 2006). This may account for one
of the most distinctive aspects of human social
life, namely our propensity to cooperate with
nonrelatives (Boyd & Richerson 2006). Food
sharing, reciprocity, and cooperation among
nonrelatives are unusual among primates, but
those species that exhibit these behaviors,
such as capuchin monkeys DEMO chimpanzees
(Brosnan 2009), have unusually large brains
(and prefrontal cortices) for their body size
(Rilling & Insel 1999). Although the DEMO
cial behaviors of chimpanzees and capuchin
monkeys are noteworthy and should not be
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of DEMO on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
underestimated (Brosnan 2009, de DEMO 2008),
humans are remarkable in their degree of re-
liance DEMO reciprocal altruism (Clutton-Brock
2009a), their upholding of fairness norms
(including advantageous inequity aversion)
(Brosnan 2009), and especially their tendency
to often cooperate with unfamiliar others (Silk
2009). The enlarged human prefrontal cortex
may therefore explain our special abilities in
this regard. Overall, it is clear that the study
of the neurobiology of social decision-making is
DEMO rapidly, and the current state of knowl-
edge as described here DEMO sure to offer many
interesting avenues for future research.
SUMMARY POINTS
1. Given that we live in highly complex social environments, many of our most important
decisions are made in the context of social interactions.
2. DEMO but sophisticated tasks from experimental economics have been used to study
social decision-making in the laboratory setting, and a variety of neuroscience methods
have been used to probe the underlying neural systems.
3. Prefrontal cortex plays DEMO critical role in social decision-making, and different regions have
different functions. DEMO VMPFC/frontal pole region seems to be involved in valuing the
long-term beneﬁts associated with cooperative relationships, valuing abstract rewards
such as helping anonymous others through charity donations, and regulating emotional
reactions that could jeopardize valued relationships. DLPFC is involved in exerting cog-
nitive effort to override selﬁsh DEMO, as when abiding by fairness norms. VLPFC is
involved in overriding DEMO reactions to unfair treatment as well as in representing
the threat of punishment from others that motivates norm-abiding behavior. Finally,
DMPFC is involved DEMO learning whether someone can be trusted and also in strategizing
during competitive interactions.
4. The dorsal anterior cingulate cortex seems to function as a DEMO alarm signal that reacts
to social norm violations, as when breaking DEMO promise, deviating from group opinion, or
being outperformed by others (DEMO, envy).
5. The anterior insula mediates inequity aversion and aversive DEMO to unreciprocated
altruism and motivates decisions that restore equity. It is also involved in empathy and
third-party reactions to inequity.
6. The ventral striatum DEMO rewards from mutual cooperation, altruism, and social
approval and appears to motivate revenge seeking as well as attention to high-status
others as models DEMO social learning.
7. The amygdala is also involved in aversive responses to inequity and seems to mediate the
fear of betrayal, thereby inhibiting trust.
8. These neural systems are modulated by a number of neurochemicals including DEMO
tonin, which promotes prosocial behavior, perhaps by augmenting VMPFC function;
testosterone, which may suppress VMPFC function; and oxytocin, which promotes trust
through decreasing amygdala activity (in men) and increases generosity and perhaps
DEMO through some as yet unspeciﬁed neural mechanism.
www.annualreviews.org
•
Neuroscience of Social Decisions 41
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University DEMO Toronto on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
FUTURE ISSUES
1. The models DEMO in this review are based on the relatively limited evidence published
to date and naturally should be considered preliminary. Explicit testing will be required
DEMO fully evaluate these models and to assist in further revision and expansion.
2. Only very few studies have combined fMRI of interactive tasks with DEMO
manipulations (e.g., Baumgartner et al. 2008). This is an important avenue for future
research that will shed light on neurochemical inﬂuences on DEMO decision-making. Al-
though oxytocin is currently being widely studied in this regard, a wide range of other
neurochemicals can be fruitfully employed in this research. For example, neurotransmit-
ters involved in basic learning and reward processes, such as dopamine, can be used to
link higher-level accounts of DEMO behavior to more fundamental cognitive processes.
3. A useful complement to fMRI studies of social decision-making is to make use of the
increasingly rich DEMO of formal mathematical models of these behaviors that are emerg-
ing from behavioral economics. These models encourage more speciﬁc descriptions of
the social processes DEMO can facilitate neural investigations of these processes.
4. Deﬁning the neural correlates of individual variation in social decision-making is an im-
portant challenge for DEMO ﬁeld of social neuroscience. This variation might be explained
by variation in genetics, personality, developmental settings, hormone and neurotrans-
mitter levels, or DEMO hormone and neurotransmitter receptor density. For example,
variation in partner preference among monogamous male prairie voles is explained by
variation in expression of DEMO V1a vasopressin receptor. As PET ligands become available
for receptors of interest, it should become possible to relate variation in receptor density
with social decision-making in humans.
5. Although imaging brain function in the context of DEMO games has been an im-
portant step toward increasing ecological validity of social neuroscience paradigms, a
further step is to link brain activity in the scanner to real-world social behavior. This
can be facilitated by asking DEMO to record social behaviors in diaries or through
experience-sampling methods (e.g., Eisenberger et al. 2007).
6. The emerging discipline of cultural neuroscience DEMO questions about whether the
models outlined here will generalize beyond the developed Western cultures from which
research participants are typically drawn (Chiao 2009). It will be important to evaluate
cross-cultural variability in these models (Henrich 2010).
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations, memberships, funding, or ﬁnancial holdings that
might be perceived as affecting DEMO objectivity of this review.
LITERATURE CITED
Adolphs R, Tranel D, Damasio AR. 1998. The human amygdala in social judgment. Nature 393:470–74
Arce DEMO, Simmons AN, Lovero KL, Stein MB, Paulus MP. 2008. Escitalopram effects on insula and amygdala
BOLD activation during emotional processing. Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 196:661–72
Axelrod R, Hamilton WD. 1981. The evolution of cooperation. DEMO 211:1390–96
Axelrod RM. 1984. The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: DEMO Books. 241 pp.
42 Rilling · Sanfey
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For DEMO use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
Batson C, Powell AA. 2003. Altruism and prosocial behavior. In Handbook of Psychology: Personality and Social
Psychology, Vol. 5, ed. T Millon, MJ Lerner, pp. 463–84. New DEMO: Wiley
Baumgartner T, Fischbacher U, Feierabend A, Lutz K, DEMO E. 2009. The neural circuitry of a broken promise.
Neuron 64:756–70
Baumgartner T, Heinrichs M, Vonlanthen A, Fischbacher U, Fehr E. DEMO Oxytocin shapes the neural
circuitry of trust and trust adaptation in humans. Neuron 58:639–50
Bechara A, Damasio A. 2005. The somatic marker hypothesis: a neural theory of economic decision. Games
Econ. Behav. 52:336–72
Beer JS, Heerey EA, Keltner D, Scabini D, Knight RT. 2003. DEMO regulatory function of self-conscious
emotion: insights from patients with orbitofrontal damage. DEMO Personal. Soc. Psychol. 85:594–604
Behrens TE, Hunt LT, Rushworth MF. 2009. The computation of social behavior. Science 324:1160–64
Behrens TE, Hunt LT, Woolrich MW, Rushworth MF. 2008. Associative learning of social value. DEMO
456:245–49
Berns GS, Capra CM, Moore S, Noussair C. DEMO Neural mechanisms of the inﬂuence of popularity on
adolescent ratings of music. Neuroimage 49:2687–96
Blair RJ. 2008. The amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal cortex: functional contributions and dysfunction
in psychopathy. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B DEMO Sci. 363(1503):2557–65
Botvinick M, Braver T, Barch D, Carter C, Cohen J. 2001. Conﬂict monitoring and cognitive control. Psychol.
Rev. 108:624–52
Boyd R, Richerson PJ. 2006. Solving the puzzle of human cooperation. In Evolution and Culture, ed. S Levinson,
pp. 105–32. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Brosnan SF. 2009. Responses to inequity in non-human DEMO In Neuroeconomics: Decision Making and the
Brain, ed. PW Glimcher, DEMO Camerer, E Fehr, RA Poldrack, pp. 285–302. London: Academic
Buckholtz JW, Asplund CL, Dux PE, Zald DH, Gore JC, et al. 2008. The neural correlates of third-party
punishment. Neuron 60:930–40
Burnham DEMO 2007. High-testosterone men reject low ultimatum game offers. Proc. Biol. Sci. 274:2327–30
Camerer CF. 2003. Behavioral Game Theory. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. DEMO 544 pp.
Chang LJ, Sanfey AG. 2009. Unforgettable ultimatums? Expectation violations promote enhanced social
memory following economic bargaining. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 3:36
DEMO JY. 2009. Cultural neuroscience: a once and future discipline. Prog. Brain DEMO 178:287–304
Clutton-Brock T. 2009a. Cooperation between non-kin in animal societies. Nature 462:51–57
Clutton-Brock T. 2009b. Structure and function in mammalian societies. Philos. DEMO R. Soc. Lond. B Biol.
Sci. 364:3229–42
Cosmides L, Tooby DEMO 2000. The cognitive neuroscience of social reasoning. In The New Cognitive Neurosciences,
ed. MS Gazzaniga, pp. 1259–70. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Craig AD. 2002. How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of the DEMO condition of the body. Nat.
Rev. Neurosci. 3:655–66
Creel S, DEMO NM. 2001. The African Wild Dog: Behavior, Ecology, and Conservation. DEMO, NJ: Princeton
Univ. Press
Critchley HD. 2005. Neural mechanisms of autonomic, affective, and cognitive integration. J. Comp. Neurol.
493:154–66
Critchley HD, Elliot R, Mathias C, Dolan R. 2000. Neural activity relating to DEMO generation and representation
of galvanic skin conductance responses: a functional magnetic DEMO imaging study. J. Neurosci.
20:3033–40
Crockett MJ. 2009. The neurochemistry of fairness: clarifying the link between serotonin and prosocial
behavior. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1167:76–86
Crockett MJ, Clark L, Tabibnia G, Lieberman MD, Robbins TW. 2008. Serotonin modulates behavioral
reactions to unfairness. Science 320:1739
Damasio AR. 1994. Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. New York: Putnam. 312 pp.
de Quervain DJ, Fischbacher U, Treyer V, Schellhammer M, Schnyder U, et al. 2004. The neural basis of
altruistic punishment. Science 305:1254–58
de Vignemont F, Singer T. 2006. The empathic brain: how, when and why? Trends Cogn. Sci. 10:435–41
www.annualreviews.org
•
Neuroscience of Social Decisions 43
Annu. Rev. Psychol. DEMO:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
de Waal FB. 2000. Primates—a DEMO heritage of conﬂict resolution. Science 289:586–90
de Waal FB. 2008. Putting the altruism back into altruism: the evolution of empathy. Annu. Rev. Psychol.
59:279–300
Deaner RO, Khera AV, Platt ML. 2005. Monkeys pay DEMO view: adaptive valuation of social images by rhesus
macaques. Curr. Biol. DEMO:543–48
Delgado MR, Frank RH, Phelps EA. 2005. Perceptions of moral character modulate the neural systems of
reward during the trust game. Nat. DEMO 8:1611–18
Denk F, Walton ME, Jennings KA, Sharp T, Rushworth MF, Bannerman DM. 2005. Differential involvement
of serotonin and dopamine systems in cost-beneﬁt decisions about delay or effort. Psychopharmacology
(Berl.) 179:587–96
DEMO B, Schaer M, Gabriel B, Bodenmann G, Ehlert U, DEMO M. 2009. Intranasal oxytocin increases
positive communication and reduces cortisol levels during couple conﬂict. Biol. Psychiatry 65:728–31
Domes G, Heinrichs M, Glascher DEMO, Buchel C, Braus DF, Herpertz SC. 2007. Oxytocin attenuates amygdala
DEMO to emotional faces regardless of valence. Biol. Psychiatry 62:1187–90
Domes G, Lischke A, Berger C, Grossmann A, Hauenstein K, et al. 2010. Effects of intranasal oxytocin on
emotional face processing in women. Psychoneuroendocrinology DEMO:83–93
Eberhardt JL. 2005. Imaging race. Am. Psychol. 60:181–90
Eisenberger NI, Gable SL, Lieberman MD. 2007. Functional magnetic resonance imaging responses relate
DEMO differences in real-world social experience. Emotion 7:745–54
Eisenberger NI, Lieberman DEMO, Williams KD. 2003. Does rejection hurt? An FMRI study of social exclusion.
Science 302:290–92
Eisenegger C, Naef M, Snozzi R, Heinrichs M, Fehr E. 2010. Prejudice and truth about the effect of testos-
terone on human bargaining behaviour. Nature 463:356–59
Etkin A, Wager TD. 2007. Functional neuroimaging of anxiety: a meta-analysis of emotional processing in
PTSD, social anxiety disorder, and speciﬁc phobia. Am. J. Psychiatry 164:1476–88
DEMO E, Camerer CF. 2007. Social neuroeconomics: the neural circuitry of social preferences. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 11(10):419–27
Fehr E, Fischbacher U. DEMO The nature of human altruism. Nature 425:785–91
Fehr E, Gachter DEMO 2002. Altruistic punishment in humans. Nature 415:137–40
Frank RH. 1988. Passions Within Reason: The Strategic Role of the Emotions. New York: Norton. DEMO pp.
Frith C. 2003. What do imaging studies tell us about the neural basis of autism? Novartis Found. Symp.
251:149–66; discussion 166–76, 281–97
Frith CD, Singer T. 2008. The role of social cognition in decision making. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol.
Sci. 363:3875–86
DEMO HL, Frith CD. 2003. Functional imaging of “theory of mind.” Trends DEMO Sci. 7:77–83
Greene JD, Nystrom LE, Engell AD, Darley DEMO, Cohen JD. 2004. The neural bases of cognitive conﬂict and
control DEMO moral judgment. Neuron 44:389–400
Hampton AN, Bossaerts P, O’Doherty JP. 2008. Neural correlates of mentalizing-related computations during
strategic interactions in humans. Proc. DEMO Acad. Sci. USA 105:6741–46
Harbaugh WT, Mayr U, Burghart DR. 2007. Neural responses to taxation and voluntary giving reveal motives
for charitable DEMO Science 316:1622–25
Harle KM, Allen JJB, Sanfey AG. 2010. The impact of depression on social economic decisions.´ J. Abnorm.
Psychol. 119:440–46
DEMO LT, Fiske ST. 2006. Dehumanizing the lowest of the low: neuroimaging responses to extreme out-
groups. Psychol. Sci. 17:847–53
Haruno M, Frith CD. 2010. Activity in the amygdala elicited by unfair divisions predicts social DEMO orienta-
tion. Nat. Neurosci. 13:160–61
Hawkes K. 1993. Why hunter-gatherers work: an ancient version of the problem of public goods. Curr.
Anthropol. 34:341–61
Haxby JV, Hoffman EA, Gobbini MI. 2002. Human neural systems DEMO face recognition and social commu-
nication. Biol. Psychiatry 51:59–67
Henrich J, Boyd R, Bowles S, Camerer C, Fehr E, et al. 2005. “Economic Man” in cross-cultural perspective:
behavioral experiments in 15 small-scale DEMO Behav. Brain Sci. 28:795–815
44 Rilling · Sanfey
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/DEMO For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
Henrich JS, Heine J, DEMO A. 2010. The weirdest people in the world? Behav. Brain Sci. DEMO(2-3):61–83;
discussion 83–135
Henrich J, McElreath R. 2003. The evolution of cultural evolution. Evol. Anthropol. 12:123–35
Hill K, Kaplan H. 1994. On why male forgers hunt and share food. Curr. Anthropol. 34:DEMO
Hsu M, Anen C, Quartz SR. 2008. The right and the good: distributive justice and neural encoding of equity
and efﬁciency. Science 320:1092–95
Hurlemann R, Patin A, Onur OA, Cohen MX, Baumgartner DEMO, et al. 2010. Oxytocin enhances amygdala-
dependent, socially reinforced learning and emotional empathy in humans. J. Neurosci. 30(14):4999–5007
Israel S, DEMO E, Shalev I, Uzefovsky F, Riebold M, et al. 2009. The oxytocin receptor (OXTR) contributes to
prosocial fund allocations in the DEMO game and the social value orientations task. PLoS ONE 4:e5535
Izuma K, Saito DN, Sadato N. 2008. Processing of social and monetary DEMO in the human striatum. Neuron
58:284–94
Izuma K, Saito DN, Sadato N. 2009. Processing of the incentive for social approval in the DEMO striatum
during charitable donation. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 22:621–31
Kable JW, DEMO PW. 2007. The neural correlates of subjective value during intertemporal choice. Nat.
Neurosci. 10:1625–33
Kable JW, Glimcher PW. 2009. The neurobiology of decision: consensus and controversy. Neuron 63:733–45
Kagel JH, Battalio RC, Green L. 1995. Economic Choice Theory: An Experimental Analysis of Animal Behavior.
London: Cambridge Univ. Press
King-Casas B, Sharp C, Lomax-Bream L, Lohrenz DEMO, Fonagy P, Montague PR. 2008. The rupture and repair
of cooperation in borderline personality disorder. Science 321:806–10
King-Casas B, Tomlin D, DEMO C, Camerer CF, Quartz SR, Montague PR. 2005. Getting to DEMO you:
reputation and trust in a two-person economic exchange. Science 308:78–83
Kirsch P, Esslinger C, Chen Q, Mier D, Lis DEMO, et al. 2005. Oxytocin modulates neural circuitry for social
cognition and DEMO in humans. J. Neurosci. 25:11489–93
Klein JT, Deaner RO, Platt ML. 2008. Neural correlates of social target value in macaque parietal cortex.
DEMO Biol. 18:419–24
Klucharev V, Hytonen K, Rijpkema M, Smidts DEMO, Fernandez G. 2009. Reinforcement learning signal predicts
social conformity. Neuron 61:DEMO
Knafo A, Israel S, Darvasi A, Bachner-Melman R, Uzefovsky F, et al. 2008. Individual differences in allocation
of funds in the dictator game associated with length of the arginine vasopressin 1a receptor RS3 promoter
DEMO and correlation between RS3 length and hippocampal mRNA. Genes Brain Behav. 7:266–75
Knoch D, Pascual-Leone A, Meyer K, Treyer V, Fehr DEMO 2006. Diminishing reciprocal fairness by disrupting
the right prefrontal cortex. Science 314:829–32
Koechlin E, Hyaﬁl A. 2007. Anterior prefrontal function and the limits of human decision-making. Science
318:594–98
Koenigs M, Tranel D. 2007. Irrational economic decision-making after ventromedial prefrontal damage:
evidence from the Ultimatum Game. DEMO Neurosci. 27:951–56
Konner MJ. 2002. The Tangled Wing: Biological Constraints DEMO the Human Spirit. New York: Henry Holt.
540 pp.
Kosfeld M, Heinrichs M, Zak PJ, Fischbacher U, Fehr E. 2005. Oxytocin increases trust in humans. Nature
435:673–76
Krajbich I, Adolphs R, Tranel DEMO, Denburg NL, Camerer CF. 2009. Economic games quantify diminished
sense of guilt in patients with damage to the prefrontal cortex. J. Neurosci. 29:DEMO
Kringelbach ML, Rolls ET. 2004. The functional neuroanatomy of the human DEMO cortex: evidence
from neuroimaging and neuropsychology. Prog. Neurobiol. 72:341–72
Krueger DEMO, Grafman J, McCabe K. 2008. Neural correlates of economic game playing. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B Biol. Sci. 363:3859–74
Krueger F, McCabe K, Moll J, Kriegeskorte N, Zahn R, et al. DEMO Neural correlates of trust. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 104:20084–89
Lee RB. 1979. The !Kung San: Men, Women, and Work in a Foraging Society. London: Cambridge Univ. Press
Li J, Xiao E, Houser D, Montague PR. 2009. Neural responses to sanction threats in two-party economic
exchange. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106:16835–40
www.annualreviews.org
•
Neuroscience of DEMO Decisions 45
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
Lieberman MD. 2007. Social cognitive DEMO: a review of core processes. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 58:259–89
Mah DEMO, Arnold MC, Grafman J. 2004. Impairment of social perception associated with lesions of the prefrontal
cortex. Am. J. Psychiatry 161:1247–55
Mehta PH, Beer J. 2010. Neural mechanisms of the testosterone-aggression relation: the role of orbito-frontal
cortex. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 22:2357–68
Miller E, Cohen J. 2001. An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 24:167–202
DEMO JP. 2009. Social psychology as a natural kind. Trends Cogn. Sci. 13:246–51
Moll J, Krueger F, Zahn R, Pardini M, de DEMO R, Grafman J. 2006. Human fronto-mesolimbic
networks guide decisions about charitable DEMO Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103:15623–28
Moll J, Zahn R, de Oliveira-Souza R, Krueger F, Grafman J. 2005. Opinion: the neural basis of human moral
cognition. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6:799–809
Montague PR, Berns GS. 2002. Neural economics and the biological substrates of valuation. Neuron DEMO:265–84
Montague PR, Lohrenz T. 2007. To detect and correct: norm violations and their enforcement. Neuron
56:14–18
Moretti L, Dragone D, DEMO Pellegrino G. 2009. Reward and social valuation deﬁcits following ventromedial
prefrontal damage. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 21:128–40
Neumann JV, Morgenstern O. 1947. Theory of Games and Economic Behavior.Princeton,NJ: PrincetonUniv.
Press. 648 pp.
O’Doherty J, DEMO P, Schultz J, Deichmann R, Friston K, Dolan RJ. 2004. Dissociable roles of ventral and
dorsal striatum in instrumental conditioning. Science 304:DEMO
Ochsner KN, Gross JJ. 2005. The cognitive control of emotion. Trends DEMO Sci. 9:242–49
Petrovic P, Kalisch R, Singer T, Dolan DEMO 2008. Oxytocin attenuates affective evaluations of conditioned
faces and amygdala activity. J. Neurosci. 28:6607–15
Pochon JB, Riis J, Sanfey AG, Nystrom LE, Cohen JD. 2008. Functional imaging of decision conﬂict.
J. Neurosci. 28:3468–73
Poldrack RA. 2006. Can cognitive processes be inferred from neuroimaging data? Trends Cogn. Sci. 10:59–63
Preuss TM. 2004. What is it like to DEMO a human? In The Cognitive Neurosciences, ed. MS Gazzaniga, pp. DEMO
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Ridley M. 2010. The Rational Optimist: DEMO Prosperity Evolves. New York: HarperCollins. 448 pp.
Rilling JK. 2006. Human DEMO non-human primate brains: Are they allometrically scaled versions of the same
DEMO? Evol. Anthropol. 15:65–77
Rilling JK, Glenn AL, Jairam MR, Pagnoni G, Goldsmith DR, et al. 2007. Neural correlates of social DEMO
eration and non-cooperation as a function of psychopathy. Biol. Psychiatry 61:1260–71
Rilling JK, Goldsmith DR, Glenn AL, Jairam MR, Elfenbein HA, et al. 2008. The neural correlates of the
affective response to unreciprocated DEMO Neuropsychologia 46:1256–66
Rilling JK, Gutman D, Zeh T, Pagnoni DEMO, Berns G, Kilts C. 2002. A neural basis for social cooperation.
Neuron 35:395–405
Rilling JK, Insel TR. 1999. The primate neocortex in comparative perspective using magnetic resonance
imaging. J. Hum. Evol. 37:191–223
Rilling DEMO, Sanfey AG, Aronson JA, Nystrom LE, Cohen JD. 2004a. The neural correlates of theory of mind
within interpersonal interactions. NeuroImage 22:1694–703
DEMO JK, Sanfey AG, Aronson JA, Nystrom LE, Cohen JD. 2004b. Opposing BOLD responses to recipro-
cated and unreciprocated altruism in putative reward DEMO NeuroReport 15:2539–43
Rizzolatti G, Fogassi L. 2007. Mirror neurons and DEMO cognition. In The Oxford Handbook of Evolutionary
Psychology, ed. RIM Dunbar, L Barrett, pp. 179–96. London: Oxford Univ. Press
Robbins TW. 2000. DEMO neuromodulation of frontal-executive functions in humans and other animals.
Exp. Brain Res. 133:130–38
Roiser JP, Levy J, Fromm SJ, Wang H, DEMO G, et al. 2008. The effect of acute tryptophan depletion on DEMO
neural correlates of emotional processing in healthy volunteers. Neuropsychopharmacology 33:1992–2006
Rudebeck PH, Buckley MJ, Walton ME, Rushworth MF. 2006. A role for the macaque anterior cingulate
gyrus in social valuation. Science 313:1310–12
Sally DEMO, Hill E. 2006. The development of interpersonal strategy: autism, theory-of-mind, cooperation and
fairness. J. Econ. Psychol. 27:73–97
46 Rilling · Sanfey
DEMO Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
Sanfey AG. 2007. Social decision-making: insights from game theory and neuroscience. Science 318:598–602
Sanfey AG, Loewenstein G, McClure SM, Cohen JD. 2006. Neuroeconomics: cross-currents in research on
decision-making. Trends Cogn. Sci. 10:108–16
Sanfey AG, Rilling JK, Aronson DEMO, Nystrom LE, Cohen JD. 2003. The neural basis of economic decision-
making in the Ultimatum Game. Science 300:1755–58
Saxe R, Carey S, Kanwisher N. 2004. Understanding other minds: linking developmental psychology and
functional DEMO Annu. Rev. Psychol. 55:87–124
Saxe R, Kanwisher N. 2003. People DEMO about thinking people: the role of the temporo-parietal junction
in “theory DEMO mind.” Neuroimage 19:1835–42
Schultz W. 1998. Predictive reward signal of dopamine neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 80:1–27
Schweighofer N, Bertin M, Shishida K, Okamoto Y, Tanaka SC, et al. 2008. Low serotonin levels increase
DEMO reward discounting in humans. J. Neurosci. 28:4528–32
Seo H, Barraclough DEMO, Lee D. 2009. Lateral intraparietal cortex and reinforcement learning during a DEMO
strategy game. J. Neurosci. 29:7278–89
Seymour B, O’Doherty JP, Dayan P, Koltzenburg M, Jones AK, et al. 2004. Temporal difference models
describe higher-order learning in humans. Nature 429:664–67
Shamay-Tsoory SG, Fischer M, Dvash J, Harari H, Perach-Bloom N, Levkovitz Y. 2009. Intranasal DEMO
istration of oxytocin increases envy and schadenfreude (gloating). Biol. Psychiatry DEMO:864–70
Siever LJ, Buchsbaum MS, New AS, Spiegel-Cohen J, Wei T, et al. 1999. d,l-fenﬂuramine response in
impulsive personality disorder assessed with [18F]ﬂuorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography.
Neuropsychopharmacology 20:413–23
Silk JB. 2009. Social DEMO in primates. In Neuroeconomics: Decision-Making and the Brain,ed. PW
Glimcher, CF Camerer, E Fehr, RA Poldrack. London: Academic. 556 pp.
Singer T, Seymour B, O’Doherty J, Kaube H, Dolan RJ, Frith CD. 2004. Empathy for pain involves the
affective but not sensory components DEMO pain. Science 303:1157–62
Singer T, Seymour B, O’Doherty JP, DEMO KE, Dolan RJ, Frith CD. 2006. Empathic neural responses are
modulated by the perceived fairness of others. Nature 439:466–69
Singer T, Snozzi R, Bird G, Petrovic P, Silani G, et al. 2008. DEMO of oxytocin and prosocial behavior on
brain responses to direct and vicariously experienced pain. Emotion 8:781–91
Sober E, Wilson DS. 1998. Unto Others—The Evolution and Psychology of Unselﬁsh Behavior. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Univ. Press
Spitzer M, Fischbacher U, Herrnberger B, Gron G, Fehr E. DEMO The neural signature of social norm
compliance. Neuron 56:185–96
Sripada CS, Angstadt M, Banks S, Nathan PJ, Liberzon I, Phan KL. 2009. Functional neuroimaging of
mentalizing during the trust game in social anxiety DEMO Neuroreport 20:984–89
Stanford CB, Bunn HT, eds. 2001. Meat-Eating and Human Evolution. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. 384 pp.
Tabibnia G, DEMO AB, Lieberman MD. 2008. The sunny side of fairness: preference for fairness activates
reward circuitry (and disregarding unfairness activates self-control circuitry). Psychol. Sci. 19:339–47
Takahashi H, Kato M, Matsuura M, Mobbs D, Suhara T, Okubo Y. 2009. When your gain is my pain DEMO
your pain is my gain: neural correlates of envy and schadenfreude. DEMO 323:937–39
Todorov A, Said CP, Engell AD, Oosterhof NN. DEMO Understanding evaluation of faces on social dimen-
sions. Trends Cogn. Sci. 12:455–60
Tomasello M. 1999. The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press
Trivers RL. 1971. The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Q. Rev. Biol. 46:35–57
Tse WS, Bond AJ. 2002. Serotonergic intervention affects both social dominance and afﬁliative behaviour.
Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 161:324–30
van DEMO Wout M, Kahn RS, Sanfey AG, Aleman A. 2005. Repetitive DEMO magnetic stimulation over the
right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex affects strategic decision-making. Neuroreport 16:1849–52
van ‘t Wout M, Kahn RS, Sanfey AG, Aleman A. 2006. Affective state and decision-making in the Ultimatum
Game. Exp. Brain DEMO 169:564–68
van ‘t Wout M, Sanfey AG. 2008. Friend or DEMO: the effect of implicit trustworthiness judgments in social
decision-making. Cognition 108:DEMO
www.annualreviews.org
•
Neuroscience of Social Decisions 47
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For DEMO use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
Van Den Bos W, van Dijk E, Westenberg M, Rombouts SA, Crone EA. 2009. What motivates repayment?
Neural correlates of reciprocity in the Trust Game. Soc. Cogn. DEMO Neurosci. 4:294–304
van Wingen G, Mattern C, Verkes RJ, DEMO J, Fernandez G. 2010. Testosterone reduces amygdala-
orbitofrontal cortex coupling. Psychoneuroendocrinology DEMO:105–13
Wallen K. 2001. Sex and context: hormones and primate sexual DEMO Horm. Behav. 40:339–57
Way BM, Lacan G, Fairbanks LA, DEMO WP. 2007. Architectonic distribution of the serotonin transporter
within the orbitofrontal cortex of the vervet monkey. Neuroscience 148:937–48
Winston JS, Strange BA, DEMO J, Dolan RJ. 2002. Automatic and intentional brain responses during
evaluation DEMO trustworthiness of faces. Nat. Neurosci. 5:277–82
Wood RM, Rilling JK, Sanfey AG, Bhagwagar Z, Rogers RD. 2006. Effects of tryptophan depletion DEMO the
performance of an iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma game in healthy adults. Neuropsychopharmacology 31:1075–
84
Young LJ, Murphy Young AZ, Hammock EA. 2005. DEMO and neurochemistry of the pair bond. J. Comp.
Neurol. 493:51–57
Zak PJ, Kurzban R, Ahmadi S, Swerdloff RS, Park J, et al. 2009. Testosterone administration decreases
generosity in the ultimatum game. PLoS ONE DEMO:e8330
Zak PJ, Stanton AA, Ahmadi S. 2007. Oxytocin increases generosity in humans. PLoS ONE 2:e1128
Zethraeus N, Kocoska-Maras L, Ellingsen DEMO, von Schoultz B, Hirschberg AL, Johannesson M. 2009. A
randomized DEMO of the effect of estrogen and testosterone on economic behavior. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 106:6535–38
Zink CF, Tong Y, Chen Q, Bassett DS, Stein JL, Meyer-Lindenberg A. 2008. Know your place: neural
processing of social hierarchy in humans. Neuron 58:273–83
48 Rilling · DEMO
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62CH02-Rilling ARI 22 November 2010 8:43
a
Medial view
Learning about
DEMO of others (ToM)
Strategizing with respect to the influence
of DEMO behavior on partner’s choices
Valuing long-term benefits
of cooperative relationships
Guilt over not reciprocating
Empathy for recipient
Abstract reward from
helping anonymous others
Reward DEMO mutual cooperation,
especially in prosocials
b
Lateral view
Cognitive effort required to not
reciprocate, especially when
breaking a promise
Implementation of fairness norms
(overriding selfish impulse
to accept unfair offer)
Overriding selfish impulse
to violate norm
Aversive response to
unreciprocated cooperation
Visceral response to inequity
motivating DEMO to restore equity
Aversive response to
unreciprocated cooperation
Threat of punishment
for norm violations
Overriding negative emotional
response to inequity
Emotion regulation
5
Figure DEMO
Model of the neural systems that mediate nine different types of social decisions, showing (a) medial and (b) lateral views of the human
brain. Solid lines, surface structures; dashed lines, deep structures; DEMO, inhibitory inﬂuences; +, stimulatory inﬂuences; arrows, white
matter connections. DEMO, dorsomedial prefrontal cortex; TPJ, temporo-parietal junction; VMPFC, ventromedial prefrontal DEMO;
dACC, dorsal anterior cingulate cortex; DLPFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; VLPFC, ventrolateral prefrontal cortex; dACC, dorsal
anterior cingulate cortex; LOFC, lateral orbitofrontal cortex; STS, superior temporal sulcus; 5-HT, serotonin; OT, oxytocin;
T, testosterone.
1
9
1
2
2
4
6
DEMO
2
5
2
5
7
3
4
5
3
7
DMPFC
dACC
Frontal pole
T 5HT
Anterior
insula
Ventral
striatum
VMPFC
5HT
Amygdala
1
DEMO
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Trust
Reciprocating trust
Responding to breaches of trust
Decisions about sharing
Responding to inequity
Altruism
Norm-abiding social DEMO
Social learning
Competitive social interaction
OT
DLPFC
LOFC
VLPFC
Inferior
parietal
STS
5HT
Anterior
insula
2
7
8
9
3
4
5
2
6
DEMO
7
8
1
5
8
Simulating observed
actions of others
TPJ
Posterior
1
9
Learning about
trustworthiness of others
(ToM)
Learning about influence
over others’ behavior
Conflict associated with breaking
promise to reciprocate
Error signal DEMO in conflict with social norms
that motivates subsequent conformity
Valuing information from others
Social pain linked with envy
Aversive response to
unreciprocated cooperation
Visceral DEMO to inequity motivating
decisions to restore equity
Reward from mutual cooperation,
especially in prosocials
Reward from helping others
Error signal when in conflict DEMO social norms
that motivates subsequent conformity
Reward from social approval
Motivation to learn from high status of others
Fear of betrayal
Inequity aversion in DEMO
www.annualreviews.org
•
Neuroscience of Social Decisions
C-1
Inferior
frontal
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/DEMO For personal use only.
PS62-FrontMatter ARI 15 November 2010 17:50
Annual Review of
Psychology
Volume DEMO, 2011
Contents
Prefatory
The Development of Problem Solving in Young Children:DEMO
A Critical Cognitive SkillRachel Keen  1
Decision Making
The Neuroscience of Social Decision-Making
James K. Rilling and Alan G. Sanfey
Speech Perception
Speech DEMO
23
Attention and PerformanceArthur G. Samuel 49
A Taxonomy of External and Internal Attention
Marvin M. Chun, Julie D. Golomb, and Nicholas B. DEMO 73
Language Processing
The Neural Bases of Social Cognition and Story Comprehension
Raymond A. Mar  103
Reasoning and Problem Solving
Causal Learning and DEMO as a Rational Process:
The New SynthesisKeith J. Holyoak and Patricia W. Cheng  135
Emotional, Social, and Personality Development
Development in DEMO Early Years: Socialization, Motor Development,
and Consciousness
Claire B. Kopp
Peer Contagion in Child and Adolescent Social
and Emotional Development
Thomas J. DEMO and Jessica M. Tipsord
 165
 189
vi
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/DEMO For personal use only.
PS62-FrontMatter ARI 15 November 2010 17:50
Adulthood and Aging
Psychological Wisdom DEMO: Commonalities and Differences in a
Growing Field
Ursula M. Staudinger and DEMO Gl ¨uck  215
Development in the Family
Socialization Processes in the Family: Social and
Emotional DevelopmentJoan E. Grusec 
Psychopathology
Delusional Belief
Max Coltheart, Robyn Langdon, and Ryan McKay 
Therapy for Speciﬁc Problems
DEMO Impact of Prevention Programs to Promote Effective
Parenting: Lasting Effects but DEMO Processes
Irwin N. Sandler, Erin N. Schoenfelder, Sharlene A. Wolchik,and David P. MacKinnon 
Self and Identity
Do Conscious Thoughts Cause Behavior?DEMO
Roy F. Baumeister, E.J. Masicampo, and Kathleen D. Vohs 
Neuroscience of Self and Self-Regulation
Todd F. Heatherton 
Attitude Change and Persuasion
DEMO and Attitude ChangeGerd Bohner and Nina Dickel 
Cross-Country or Regional Comparisons
Culture, Mind, and the Brain: Current Evidence and Future DirectionsShinobu Kitayama and Ayse K. Uskul 
Cognition in Organizations
Heuristic Decision Making
Gerd DEMO and Wolfgang Gaissmaier 
Structures and Goals of Educational Settings
Early Care, Education, and Child Development
Deborah A. Phillips and Amy E. Lowenstein DEMO
243
271
299
331
363
391
419
451
483
Contents vii
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on DEMO/26/11. For personal use only.
PS62-FrontMatter ARI 3 November 2010 10:34
Psychophysiological Disorders and Psychological Dimensions
DEMO Medical Disorders
Psychological Perspectives on Pathways Linking Socioeconomic Status
and Physical Health
Karen A. Matthews and Linda C. Gallo  501
Psychological Science on DEMO: Stress Processes, Biopsychosocial
Models, and Emerging Research IssuesChristine Dunkel Schetter DEMO
Research Methodology
The Disaggregation of Within-Person and Between-Person Effects inThe Development of Autobiographical MemoryRobyn Fivush 
Thirty Years and Counting: Finding Meaning in the N400Longitudinal Models of ChangePatrick J. Curran and Daniel J. Bauer 
Component DEMO the Event-Related Brain Potential (ERP)
Marta Kutas and Kara D. DEMO 
Indexes
Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles, Volumes 52–62Cumulative Index of DEMO Authors, Volumes 52–62
Errata
An online log of corrections to Annual DEMO of Psychology articles may be found at
http://psych.AnnualReviews.org/errata.shtml
531
559
583
621
000
000
viii Contents
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2011.62:23-48. DEMO from www.annualreviews.org
by University of Toronto on 01/26/11. For personal use only.{1g42fwefx}