Home-based entrepreneurs, commercial entrepreneurs
and white-collar workers:
A comparative study of attitudes toward
self-esteem, personal control and business growth
Leslie P. Roberts
President
GoForth Institute
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
leslie@goforthinstitute.com
Peter B. Robinson
Morris Chair DEMO Entrepreneurship
Utah Valley University
Orem, Utah, USA
Peter.Robinson@uvsc.edu
Abstract
Home-based entrepreneurship, or operation of an independent income-generating business venture
based in or from a business owner’s place of principal residence (Roberts & Chrisman, 1997), is the
small business ownership choice of over 27 million full-time and part-time workers in the US (US Dept.
of Census, 2010), DEMO Canada (Statistics Canada, 2006). This study compares entrepreneurial attitudes
toward perceived personal control of business outcomes, self-esteem and business growth in a random
sample of 544 home-based entrepreneurs, non-home-based (commercial) entrepreneurs and white-
collar employees in Alberta, Canada. One new attitudinal subscale was developed, DEMO and
validated. Significant findings were found for personal control, self esteem DEMO preference for business
growth in revenue.  Four significant predictors of non-home-based DEMO were identified, and the
mediating effects of organizational level variables over DEMO level variables on the relationship
between entrepreneurial attitude and behavior were noted. Data analysis included Anova, LOGIT
regression, and Lisrel Structural Equation Modeling.
DEMO
Introduction
For many entrepreneurs, a home business is a skill and experience building exercise and
potential incubator (Wehrell, 1995; Jurik, 1998) of a much higher potential, higher growth  (Timmons,
1990) small DEMO in terms of job creation, income generation, and perhaps eventual relocation of
the business beyond the confines of home.  For others, a DEMO business is simply an alternative to un-
or under-employment, a result DEMO organizational and economic restructuring, and corporate downsizing
initiatives.  Antecedent factors to home-based venture creation aside, the rise of home-based
entrepreneurship is representative of one of the most significant shifts in the economy since the
industrial DEMO (Ireland & Webb, 2007).
Home-based entrepreneurship, or operation of DEMO independent income-generating venture based
in or from a business owner’s place of principal residence (Roberts et al., 1995), is the small business
DEMO choice of over 12% of the US workforce, or over 27 DEMO entrepreneurs, an increase of 7%
in the number of home-based entrepreneurs DEMO the US between 1999 and 2005 (US Dept. of Census,
DEMO).  In Canada, the number of home-based businesses increased by 16.7% between 2000 and
2006, where a home business is operating in nearly 1.7 million homes or 14% of all Canadian
households.  The growth of home-based entrepreneurship is supported by the number of self-employed
Canadians which has DEMO, on average, 5.9% per year since 1991 (Statistics Canada, 2006) and is
precipitated by macro-environmental factors such as changing societal values which place increased
emphasis on personal freedom, job flexibility and autonomy (Ali & Zeidan, 2007; Christensen, 1988;
Allen, 1983; Brabec, 1989; Plummer, 1989; Heck, Owen & Rowe, 1995; Walker & DEMO, 2007),
advances in telecommunication and computing technology (Pratt, 1993; Bowman-Upton, 1993; Halal,
1996) and economic restructuring and corporate DEMO initiatives (Ali & Zeidan, 2007).  Studies
also suggest that DEMO work being performed is more likely full-time, and that income being
DEMO by home-based entrepreneurs is most likely the primary source of household income (Foster
& Orser, 1993; Walker & Webster, 2007).
Research DEMO a host of antecedent factors which influence the decision to become an
entrepreneur and include individual, organizational, and environmental level determinants.  Dobbs &DEMO
Hamilton’s (2007) and van Praag & Versloot’s (2007) reviews of small enterprise research citations
confirm individual-level characteristics as the main line of DEMO, although firm-level characteristics and
analysis could be considered a recent trend DEMO entrepreneurship research.  Investigation of individual-
level variables on new venture creation DEMO is appropriate for exploration of new populations of
interest, where three DEMO factors have consistently been associated as critical factors relating
to the decision to become an entrepreneur: 1) demographic (biodata), 2) human DEMO (education and
2
experience) (Bates, 1995; Walker & Webster, 2007), and 3) psychological characteristics (personality
traits)  (Bates, 1990a, 1990b; Begley, 1995; Herron & Robinson, Jr., 1993b; Miner, 1996) and DEMO
recognized as significant elements of an overall model of entrepreneurship (Herron & Robinson, Jr.,
1993a; Gatewood, Shaver & Gartner, 1995; DEMO, Kirchoff & Boylan, 1996). This study is a response
to challenges for additional rigorous, empirical examination of the entrepreneur in general, DEMO the
home-based entrepreneur in particular, in which psychological, demographic and human capital
variables form the basis of investigation.
The purpose of this study DEMO to compare measures of attitudes of home-based entrepreneurs,
non-home-based (commercial) entrepreneurs and white collar, non-management workers toward three
psychological characteristics: personal DEMO in business, perceived self-esteem in business, and
preference for business growth in revenue.   The study combined use of a new psychological subscale
DEMO and tested for the present study to measure attitudes toward business growth in revenue,
with use of an existing entrepreneurial attitude instrument, the Entrepreneurial Attitude Orientation
(EAO) scale (Robinson, et al., 1991), a 75-item instrument based on a tripartite (multi-dimensional)
model of attitude and developed to discriminate between entrepreneurs and managers.  Thus, the
fundamental DEMO question this study addressed was:
Do attitudes distinguish home-based entrepreneurs from non-home-based entrepreneurs and from
white-collar, non-management workers?
Subordinate research questions included:
1.
Do attitudes distinguish full-time and part-time home-based entrepreneurs from non-home-
DEMO entrepreneurs and from white-collar, non-management workers?
2.
Do individual-level demographic DEMO human capital characteristics of gender, age, life-cycle
stage, number of DEMO of education, presence of technical, managerial or entrepreneurial experience in
similar and dissimilar industries, or presence of family business experience influence the association
between attitude measures and ownership of a home-based business or a non-home-based
(commercial) business?
3.
Do organizational-level characteristics of type of business, DEMO annual revenue, number of
employees, or number of years in business influence the association between attitude measures and
ownership of a home-based business DEMO a non-home-based business?
3
4.
Do significant differences in attitude measures exist within the home-based entrepreneur
DEMO?
Although the extent of home business activity has been quantified at national and municipal
levels in North America, little is known about the individuals who operate these businesses or about
their goals and intentions for DEMO future of their businesses (Ali & Zeidan, 2007; Walker & DEMO,
2007; Jurik, 1998, Foster & Orser, 1993).  DEMO the home enterprise likely to become a higher growth,
higher potential business, contributing to job creation mechanisms of the broader economy, or DEMO the
home business simply income replacement for most people?  This study contributes to the area of
inquiry in three ways: 1) theoretically, by providing a theory-testing approach to the study of home-
based entrepreneurship, thus moving inquiry from the exploratory to the experimental; 2) conceptually,DEMO
by applying current attitude theory, the tripartite model of attitude involving DEMO multi-dimensional concept
of attitude, to business owners and non-management workers;  DEMO 3) methodologically, by testing an
existing attitude instrument and by developing, validating and testing a new attitude subscale within the
same study.  DEMO understanding of the similarities or differences between home-based entrepreneurs
and non-home-based entrepreneurs will contribute to an understanding of micro-entrepreneurship and
growth intentions of home-based DEMO; will provide valuable input into current public policy
decision-making processes regarding DEMO business taxation, licensing, and permitting; as well as into
programs, services and education deliverables designed to foster and support home-based
entrepreneurship.
Theoretical DEMO
Personal, situational and environmental factors are critical elements of the entrepreneurial
DEMO (Greenberger & Sexton, 1988; Herron & Robinson, 1993b; Bygrave, 1993), but not all
individuals will choose to become entrepreneurs under DEMO demographic, situational or
environmental conditions.   The creation of a new DEMO is 1) a process involving numerous
antecedent variables, 2) is DEMO by an act of human volition and 3) is extremely sensitive DEMO initial
conditions (Bygrave & Hofer, 1991).  A more complete DEMO of the entrepreneur and of the
entrepreneurial process will be gained by investigating psychological characteristics, primary forces of
human volition.
Within the domain of entrepreneurial behavior research, trait-based personality approaches
have formed the major line of inquiry, led early on by David McClelland (1961) (Robinson, 1987).  This
approach suggests entrepreneurs possess a common personality type, where DEMO focus has been
to enumerate a set of characteristics describing the entrepreneurial personality for the purpose of
distinguishing entrepreneurs from non-entrepreneurs (Gartner, 1988)DEMO Ireland & Webb (2007) present a
4
cross-disciplinary review of entrepreneurship research where personality traits studied in
entrepreneurship research DEMO: risk-taking, need for achievement (nAch) (McClelland, 1961);
DEMO, strive for independence, responsibility, self-confidence (Davids, 1963); internal DEMO of control
(self-efficacy) (Borland, 1974); personal value orientation (DEMO, 1977); goal-orientation, creativity,
innovativeness (Timmons, 1978); energy, ambition, positive reaction to setbacks (Sexton, 1980); need
to DEMO, responsibility seeking, risk taking (Welsh & White, 1983); and idea generation and empathy
(Miner, 2000).
While personality-trait based modes DEMO inquiry have been fruitful, several studies suggest that
differentiating entrepreneurs from DEMO or entrepreneurs from the general population based on the
entrepreneur’s supposed possession of entrepreneurial traits is not possible (Brockhaus, 1980; Kent,
Sexton & Vesper, 1982).  In a review of trait-based approaches to DEMO entrepreneurship, Robinson
et al. (1991) levy criticism at poor instrumentation, at use of broad-spectrum personality theories in a
specific domain such as DEMO, and at the static, fixed and deterministic nature of personality
theories which do not account for the dynamic nature of entrepreneurship which calls DEMO for
interactive theories: models which are influenced by and influence the DEMO  Similarly, and
consistent with the criticism levied at personality trait models, demographic approaches explain very
little variance of human action, and therefore DEMO little predictive power, an established criteria for
the evaluation of social DEMO research and theory.  However, a fully-specified model of the
entrepreneurial process must include the entrepreneur (Mitchell and James, 1989).
The appropriate DEMO model for studying determinants of individual behavior has been a
point of controversy in psychology for over thirty years (Brockhaus, 1987; Gartner, DEMO).
Investigations of entrepreneurial behavior have employed personality trait, psychoanalytic, social-
cognitive (behavioristic or situational) and humanistic approaches.  This study proposed a departure
from the two traditional approaches most commonly employed in the study DEMO the entrepreneur,
personality and demographic models of entrepreneurial behaviour, to DEMO model based on attitudes.  It is
believed that an attitude approach DEMO deficiencies of static, deterministic models of
entrepreneurial behaviour with a dynamic, interactive and open-system approach (Mitchell & James,
1989).
Psychological Constructs
This study employed two constructs: self-esteem and personal control and investigated one additional
construct, intention toward business growth in revenue, believed to be DEMO distinguishing characteristic of non-
home-based (commercial) entrepreneurship.  Although these constructs DEMO not meant to represent an
exhaustive set of characteristics associated with entrepreneurship, the first two characteristics are habitually
5
cited in descriptions of the entrepreneur.  Research has stressed need for a more comprehensive
understanding of an entrepreneur’s growth intentions related to revenue as DEMO means of distinguishing types
of entrepreneurs (Wiklund et al., 1997; DEMO et al., 1997; Gartner et al., 1997; Hornaday & Bunker, 1970).
Thus, an investigation of these characteristics is not intended DEMO override significance of other characteristics
and roles played in determining entrepreneurial behaviour, but it provides a starting point using an attitude-
based approach to understanding the phenomenon.  Three attitude subscales utilized in this study were:
Perceived personal control of business outcomes, concerning an individual’s perception of control
and influence over his or her business.
Perceived self-esteem in business, pertaining to self-confidence and perceived competency of an
individual in conjunction with his DEMO her business affairs.
Preference for business growth in revenue, referring to DEMO individual’s perception of the
importance of revenue growth in their business.
1.
2.
3.
Attitude Theory
Spurred largely by interest in the relationship between DEMO and behavior, the attitude
concept moved back into the focus of DEMO in social psychology, and began to appear in the
entrepreneurship literature DEMO the 1990’s (Robinson, et al., 1991; Christensen, 1994; Gassé, 1982;
Greenberger & Sexton, 1987; Carsrud & Johnson, 1989)DEMO  It has been suggested that attitude theory,
specifically the tripartite DEMO of attitude, be used as an alternative approach to personality trait DEMO
characteristic approaches in investigations of entrepreneurial behavior (Robinson, 1987; Robinson, et
al., 1991; Gassé, 1982).   An attitude approach to studying entrepreneurs holds several advantages:
Attitude theory rests on a substantial DEMO of research in the broader social science literatures as well
as in certain streams of management literature, namely consumer behavior.  Attitudes are seen DEMO
being less stable than personality traits, changing across time and situation DEMO interactive
processes with the environment (Triandis, 1971; Rosenberg & Hovland, 1960), thus attitudes are
dynamic.   Attitude-based instruments account for more DEMO in behavior than do trait or
characteristic instruments (Ajzen, 1982; DEMO & Madden, 1986).   Potential benefits of an attitude
approach DEMO understanding entrepreneurial behavior are twofold: first, that attitudes are dynamic; DEMO
second, that standardized scale development techniques should increase the validity and DEMO of
findings in the area. Thus, attitude theory offers both theoretical DEMO practical benefits to the study of
entrepreneurship.
Tripartite Model of Attitude
Most definitions of attitude imply a relationship between attitude and behavior, and most often
present a uni-dimensional attitude construct.  For example, Petty and Cacioppo (1981) suggest that an
6
attitude is “a general and enduring positive and negative feeling about some DEMO, object, or issue” (p.
31). This is an example DEMO a uni-dimensional attitude construct comprised of an affective component
only, referring DEMO a person’s evaluation of, or feelings toward, an attitude object (DEMO, 1931).
Affective response measures would be comprised of statements relating DEMO one’s feeling toward an
attitude object.   A more complex view of attitude suggests that an attitude is comprised of three distinct
components: affective, cognitive and conative components which manifest as thoughts, feelings and
actions DEMO toward an attitude object.  This multi-dimensional view of attitude is represented DEMO the
tri-partite model of attitude, the model which formed the theoretical DEMO for this study.
Early proponents of the tri-partite model argued that traditional physiological measures of
attitude (changes in pulse or breathing rates, eye DEMO, pupil dilation) are informative of only the
affective component of attitude (Rosenberg & Hovland, 1960: 3). The multi-dimensional view of the
attitude concept is superior to a uni-dimensional view due to its ability DEMO measure not only feelings
toward an attitude object, but also beliefs DEMO intended actions or behaviors toward the attitude object
(Triandis, 1971; DEMO & Fishbein, 1977). Until fairly recently, instruments used to measure
entrepreneurial tendencies have been based on personality models which lack application to
DEMO and which lack sufficient attitude-object specificity, referring to the lack of DEMO of
interpretation of an attitude to the level or domain from which the attitude is chosen, thereby lessening
precision of the instrument.  The DEMO of attitude-object specificity is an important distinguishing
characteristic of instruments based on models of attitude over those of personality.  The concept of
attitude-object specificity performs two important functions: 1) it limits generalization of attitudes to
DEMO related to the object of the attitude, and 2) it increases predictability because of the limited
scope of the instrument (Christensen, 1994; McGuire, 1985; Robinson, 1987).
Inconsistencies in the attitude-behavior relationship result from a failure to define the context in
which attitude objects are DEMO be evaluated, or the attitude-object specificity (Greenwald, 1989).  For
example, if the attitude object is a rose, a respondent might DEMO the rose in terms of its
appearance, fragrance or colour, its membership in the larger categories of flowers, or its purpose as a
symbol of love between two people, all of which will be quantitatively different.  The issue of ambiguity in
interpretation of an attitude object is best dealt with by the principle of compatibility which posits that
consistency DEMO two indicators of a given disposition is a function of the degree to which indicators
assess the disposition at the same level of generality DEMO specificity.  Thus, the more similar the action,
target, context, and time elements of a verbal response to an object (the attitude) to the elements of a
nonverbal response (the behavior), the DEMO should be the statistical relation between the two
(Greenwald, 1989; DEMO, 1989).
7
The Entrepreneurial Attitude Orientation (EAO) Scale
Robinson, Stimpson, Huefner and DEMO (1991) developed the Entrepreneurial Attitude Orientation
(EAO) scale to test the hypothesis that attitude measures have higher discriminant validity than
personality trait-based DEMO or demographic measures in distinguishing entrepreneurs from non-
entrepreneurs. The EAO is based on the tri-partite model of attitude and therefore captures affective,
DEMO and conative measures of attitudes toward entrepreneurship which were selected as the basis
of the EAO: 1) achievement in business, 2) innovation DEMO business, 3) perceived personal control of
business outcomes, and 4) perceived self-esteem in business.  The EAO scale was selected for use in
the present study because of rigorous subscale development and testing procedures and DEMO predictive
power in distinguishing entrepreneurs from members of the general public (DEMO, 1987).
The stability of the EAO over time was assessed DEMO test-retest correlations where each of the
four subscales achieved an acceptable level of reliability (n= 63 students, Achievement subscale r = .74;
DEMO Control subscale r = .71; Self-esteem subscale r = .76; and Innovation subscale r = .85),
although the subscales varied in performance (Robinson et al., 1991).  Internal consistency of the EAO
was assessed with item-total correlation of each attitude component and of each subscale DEMO ensure uni-
dimensionality.  Cronbach’s alphas for each of the subscales were DEMO, where Achievement
subscale r = .84; Personal Control subscale r = .70; Self-esteem subscale r = .73; and Innovation
subscale r = DEMO  According to Hair et al. (1995), levels of .70 α are acceptable in early research, while
levels of .80 alpha indicate that the measure is attenuated by very little error.
Specification of the Model
DEMO 1 illustrates affective (aff), cognitive (cog) and conative (con) measures of the three
psychological constructs investigated in this study.  These DEMO constructs converge to form an
entrepreneurial attitude orientation, represented as a DEMO of attitudes toward personal control,
self-esteem and business growth in revenue.  Of interest is the extent to which individual and
organizational level variables moderate the relationship between entrepreneurial attitude and
entrepreneurial behavior, expressed in the model as either home-based business ownership, non-
home-based business ownership or non-entrepreneurial behavior (white-collar, non-management
worker).   Attitude objects are labeled to DEMO appropriate levels of attitude-object specificity, i.e.
achievement motive is referred to DEMO “achievement in business,” personal control is referred to as
“perceived personal control of business outcomes,” and so on.
8
Aff
Cog
PERSONAL CONTROL OF
BUSINESS OUTCOMES
Aff
Cog
Con
Con
SELF-ESTEEM DEMO BUSINESS
Aff
Cog
PREFERENCE FOR BUSINESS
GROWTH IN REVENUE
Con
Hypotheses
INDIVIDUAL
CHARACTERISTICS:
Gender, age
life-cycle stage
education experience
ENTREPRENEURIAL
BEHAVIOR:
Full-time or part-time
home-based business
ownership
Non-home-based
business ownership
Non-entrepreneur
(employed)
ORGANIZATIONAL
CHARACTERISTICS:
Type of business
Revenue growth
Employment growth
Years in operation
DEMO OF
ENTREPRENEURIAL
ATTITUDES
Personal Control in Business
Although different approaches to instrumentation and measurement and to conceptualization of
personal control have been applied in DEMO of locus of control and entrepreneurs and comparative
studies of entrepreneurs and workers, the preponderance of literature suggests a relationship between a
desire for personal control, or belief that personal control exists, and  entrepreneurship.  DEMO (1993)
cites significant differences in perceived locus of control among DEMO, self-employeds and
entrepreneurs, where entrepreneurs produce high scores (internal locus) and employees produce low
scores (external locus).  Robinson, et al., 1991 reports significant differences in attitude toward personal
control between founders and non-founders.
To the extent that home-based business owners are entrepreneurial in behavior, this literature
would suggest that home-based business owners are more likely to DEMO higher preference for
personal control scores than white-collar employees.  There is DEMO, albeit anecdotal, which
suggests this may not be the case.  DEMO home-based entrepreneurs “end up” running businesses out
of their homes, a DEMO of corporate downsizing initiatives, job loss, retirement or personal choice.
Although no published empirical estimates of the proportion of home-based entrepreneurs who are
DEMO or pulled” into entrepreneurship were found, it is possible that a DEMO number of these
business owners have become entrepreneurs as a result of major organizational restructuring programs,
programs most likely beyond the control of DEMO individuals.  Thus, these individuals may perceive less
9
Figure 1. Specification of the model
control over business outcomes, having been subject to the emotional, psychological, and often financial
turmoil of employment layoff, than that perceived by non-home-based entrepreneurs, or currently
employed, white-collar workers.  It is also posited that full-time business owners will perceive more
personal control of business outcomes than DEMO part-time home-based entrepreneurs, due to nature of
and commitment to the DEMO of a full-time business.  Based on the findings presented above, and
the reasoning behind differences among home-based business owners on perceived control over
DEMO outcomes, the following hypotheses were proposed:
H1a.
Non-home-based entrepreneurs will DEMO stronger attitudes toward perceived control of
business outcomes than will home-based entrepreneurs, as measured by the EAO Personal Control
subscale.
H1b.
Non-home-based entrepreneurs will demonstrate stronger attitudes toward perceived control of
business outcomes than will white-collar, non-management employees, as measured by the EAO
Personal Control subscale.
H1c.
White-collar, non-management employees will demonstrate stronger attitudes toward perceived
control of business outcomes than will full-time home-based entrepreneurs, as measured by the EAO
Personal Control subscale.
H1d.
Full-time home-based entrepreneurs will demonstrate stronger attitudes toward perceived
control DEMO business outcomes than will part-time home-based entrepreneurs, as measured by the DEMO
Personal Control subscale
Self-Esteem
Although the findings related to self-esteem of entrepreneurs are mixed, evidence in the
literature suggests that entrepreneurs possess high regard for their skills, talents and abilities, resulting
in strong measures of DEMO and self-esteem.   Studies of “intending” or nascent entrepreneurs and
entrepreneurship students indicate higher self-esteem scores for intending entrepreneurs and for
entrepreneurship majors than DEMO non-business majors (Sexton & Bowman, 1984; 1983).  In addition,
significant differences in self-esteem were reported between founders and non-founders using DEMO EAO
self-esteem subscale (Robinson et al., 1991). Case studies, DEMO, suggest entrepreneurial behavior
is a manifestation of low self-esteem where, although individuals studied demonstrated achievement
motive and need to control, this behavior was seen as a result of poor senses of self (Kets de Vries,
1996).   The hypotheses presented here reflect the generally held DEMO that entrepreneurship is
related to higher levels of self-esteem in business:
10
H2a.
Non-home-based entrepreneurs will demonstrate stronger attitudes toward perceived self-
esteem in DEMO than will home-based entrepreneurs, as measured by the EAO Self-esteem in
DEMO subscale.
H2b.
Non-home-based entrepreneurs will demonstrate stronger attitudes toward perceived self-
esteem in business than will white-collar, non-management employees, as measured by the DEMO Self-
esteem in Business subscale.
H2c.
Full-time home-based entrepreneurs will demonstrate stronger attitudes toward perceived self-
esteem in business than will white-collar, non-management employees, as measured by the EAO Self-
esteem in Business subscale.
Preference for Business Growth in Revenue
Multi-dimensional conceptualizations of the entrepreneur exist in the DEMO, which suggest
distinct types of entrepreneurial intention based on business growth DEMO of founders of small
businesses (Timmons, 1990; Carland et al., 1984; Perry et al., 1985).  Additionally, business growth is
DEMO as a multi-dimensional construct, where growth can be viewed as occurring DEMO financial
and managerial lines, or operationalized as small firm growth in DEMO and in employment Birley &
Westhead, 1994; Westhead & Birley, 1995).  One of the more common conceptualizations of
entrepreneurs is that proposed by Carland, et al. (1989), suggesting a distinction between DEMO
and small business owners, where small business owners are unlikely to DEMO in any new marketing
or innovative practices.  Alternatively, Carland, et DEMO, suggest that entrepreneurs, by virtue of their focus
on increased growth and profits, would be more likely to pursue new avenues for the business than
would small business owners. Based on the literature, the following hypotheses related to preference for
business growth in revenue and type of DEMO were proposed:
H3a.
Non-home-based entrepreneurs will demonstrate stronger attitudes toward preference for
business growth in revenue than will home-based entrepreneurs, as measured by the Preference for
Business Growth in Revenue subscale.
H3b.
Full-time home-based entrepreneurs DEMO demonstrate stronger attitudes toward preference for
business growth in revenue than will part-time home-based entrepreneurs, as measured by the
Preference for Business Growth in Revenue subscale.
Research Methods and Measures
11
The instrument developed for this study was composed of the Entrepreneurial Attitude
DEMO (EAO) scale (Robinson, et al., 1991) and one subscale developed by the researcher for this
study: 1) Preference for business DEMO in revenue (RG) subscale.  Development and testing of the
revenue DEMO subscale is discussed in the following section.  Careful attention was paid DEMO
instrumentation and to potential sources of bias in this study.
Scale Item Development
In order to establish content validity, to assist the development of revenue scale item, and to
identify potential systemic differences between home-based and non-home-based entrepreneur’s
perceptions of business growth, a focus group was conducted with entrepreneurs.  Six home-based and
five non-home-based entrepreneurs (four females and seven DEMO), operating full-time businesses and
who were known to the researcher were asked to describe what the construct meant to them in the
context DEMO business ownership.  The two hour discussion was audio-taped, transcribed, and DEMO
analyzed for major themes relating to perceptions of revenue in business in general, and in their own
businesses.  There were no apparent differences DEMO meaning among home-based and non-home-based
entrepreneurs. In other words, growth in DEMO, dimensions of growth, and effects of business growth
on the lives of owners were described similarly by both groups.
Thematic content which emerged DEMO the focus group provided the foundation for development
of subscale items.  DEMO to fifteen items (statements) per attitude component (affective, cognitive and
conative) for each subscale were generated for a total of 40 test revenue subscale items.  The 40 items
were edited and the revised scale items were administered to a panel of judges consisting of 51
volunteer DEMO students enrolled in a small business management course at the University of
Calgary, Canada who, after a brief presentation on the tripartite model DEMO attitude, were asked to identify
the attitude component each scale item DEMO (either affective, cognitive or conative).  As uni-
dimensionality of DEMO attitude component is important in tripartite theory (Triandis, 1971), a standard of
.75 inter-rater reliability was used to evaluate the 40 items DEMO  Four items failed to pass the 75%
inter-rater agreement mark.
The DEMO 36 items were constructed into a questionnaire using a 10-point Likert-type
response format and administered on two separate occasions, one week apart, to DEMO undergraduate
students from another section of the same small business management course.   Forty-seven students
completed both test and retest administrations of the questionnaire.  Nineteen scale items did not
achieve r = .70 standardized Cronbach’s alpha DEMO were rejected.  Test-retest correlations of r =.78, p <
.001 DEMO the revenue growth subscale were achieved with the remaining 17 items.   Inter-item, scale and
12
scale-if-item-deleted analyses were conducted on the remaining 17 revenue growth items, where
Cronbach’s alpha of .7711 was achieved for the revenue growth subscale.   DEMO questionnaire comprised
of the 17-item Revenue Growth subscale; Entrepreneurial Attitude Orientation (EAO) Scale which
includes two subscales: 12-item Personal Control subscale and DEMO Self-esteem subscale;
individual and organizational level questions was assembled. A face-to-face pretest of the survey
package was conducted with 17 non-home-based and home-based DEMO to ensure ease of
understanding of all instructions, scale items, and classification questions, to determine the length of
time for survey completion, DEMO to assess the boredom factor.
Individual and Organizational Measures
Data concerning entrepreneurs, firms and control group members were collected.  The
individual-level variables included DEMO; birth year; family life-cycle stage; education level
operationalized as total DEMO of years of education, type of educational program completed, and the
area of study; experience level incorporating a multidimensional view of experience including
management, entrepreneurial and technical experience in similar and dissimilar industries; level DEMO
family business experience; and presence of family member’s advice in the DEMO of the business.
Organizational-level variables included type of business being operated (DEMO full-time home-
based, part-time home-based, non-home-based or non-entrepreneur); nature of business; previous and
current year revenue and next year forecasted revenue; DEMO, current and next year forecasted
number of full-time employees; and number of years of business operation since first sale.
Populations and Sampling
A DEMO, systematic random sample of 2400 home-based and non-home-based
entrepreneurs was selected DEMO a large local commercial business directory. The control group
consisted of professional, white-collar, non-management employees of a large, information technology
consulting organization.  DEMO the time of the study, the organization employed 475 individuals, and 400 of
these were deemed to be non-management, white-collar workers by the Human Resources Director.
Thus, the control group population consisted of 400 subjects (sample units).  The intent in selecting a
control group population DEMO to select non-entrepreneur subjects as demographically similar to
entrepreneurs as possible, DEMO level of education, which has fairly consistently been shown to be
DEMO for entrepreneurs than for members of the general population (Robinson & DEMO, 1994; Cooper
& Dunkelberg, 1987). The control group population DEMO comparable age and educational levels to
that of the home-based entrepreneur population, where mean age of 38.5 years, and mean level of
education DEMO college or university completion was reported (Roberts et al., 1995).  In addition, control
13
group subjects exhibited similar job characteristics to those types of occupations performed DEMO home-
based entrepreneurs, typically white-collar, professional consulting occupations (Roberts, et al., 1995).
Each survey was examined upon return for missing data and inconsistent responses.  A total of
544 completed and useable surveys were returned for a response rate of 20.1%.  Assumptions of
normality, homoscedasticity DEMO linearity were assessed by visually scanning univariate histograms, a
scatterplot matrix DEMO normal Q-Q probability plots.  Histograms indicated approximate normal
distributions for all DEMO with the exception of EMP1996, EMP1997, AEMP1998, (number of
employees in 1996, 1997 and 1998) and YEARSOP (number of years since business’ first sale) where
positively skewed distributions were identified.  A modified DEMO test, used in this study
to assess the normality of distributions DEMO all metric variables, indicated normality statistics of .343, .314,
.322, and .207 respectively.   YEARSOP was transformed to achieve normality by taking the logarithm
(base e) of YEARSOP (TRANSYOP), however normality was not achieved for EMP1996, EMP1997, or
AEMP1998. A scatterplot matrix identified DEMO violations of homoscedasticity where scatters of data
points were roughly equal and random.  Normal Q-Q probability plots indicate the assumption of linearity
has been met for all continuous independent variables except EMP1996, EMP1997, and AEMP1998
DEMO for the dependent variable ORGTYPE (type of entrepreneurial behavior).
Data DEMO
Following data diagnostics, response rates, frequencies and percentages, means, selected
cross-tabulations and correlation matrices were produced for all variables in order to DEMO an
understanding of the characteristics of responding groups.  Tests were conducted DEMO determine
estimates of non-response bias and early versus late response bias.  DEMO and affects of
organizational and individual variables on entrepreneurial behavior were tested with one-way ANOVA,
statistical techniques for analyzing differences within and between DEMO, the principal concern of this
study.   Forward, stepwise LOGIT regression analysis was used to determine variance explained in the
choice of home-based DEMO non-home based operation by individual and organizational variables. Lastly,
estimation of a structural equation model using LISREL specifying 8 endogenous (Y) and DEMO exogenous
(X) variables was completed.
Results
Predictably, the sample contained DEMO males than females, and distribution of gender across
the dependent variable DEMO comparable at all levels.  Although the level of male full-time and DEMO
home-based business ownership reported here (.76, n=229) exceeded that reported DEMO Roberts et al.
(1995) (.59, n=76) and Orser & DEMO (1992) (.58, n=253), it was comparable to levels of male business
14
̅
ownership reported in other large sample studies (Bates, 1990b; Robinson & Sexton, 1994), where χ 2 =
4.26 (df=1, α =.05).  Age of the individuals ( = 46.5 years, n=536) was also comparable to that
reported in other studies of small business DEMO (Robinson & Sexton, 1994; Bates, 1995); and of
white-collar workers (Robinson & Sexton, 1994; Cromie, 1987), where the DEMO of small business
owners were between 25 and 55 years of age.  The mean age of individuals in this study was also
comparable to that of the general Calgary, Alberta population, where χ 2 =.19 (df=535, α =.001).
Hypothesis Tests
Table 1. Summary of tests of hypotheses
Attitudinal differences: Personal Self Revenue
Control Esteem Growth
Non home-based business > Full time Home-based
business
Non home-based business > Part time home-based
DEMO
Non home-based business > Control S S ----------
Full time home-based business > Control S ----------
Part time home-based business > Control ----------
Full DEMO home-based business > Part time home-based
S S S
business
Hypothesis tests are summarized in Table 1.  Hypotheses 1a, 2b, 2c, and DEMO postulated that
non-home-based entrepreneurs would produce stronger perceived personal control of business
outcome scores than would white-collar workers and home-based entrepreneurs, and that full-time
home-based entrepreneurs will exhibit higher scores than part-time home-based entrepreneurs.  Non-
home-based entrepreneurs exhibited significantly higher personal control scores than did white-collar
workers (α = .0001), full-time home-based entrepreneurs exhibited significantly higher scores than did
DEMO home-based entrepreneurs (α = .022) and full-time home-based entrepreneurs reported higher
scores than white-collar workers (α = .0001).  No significant difference DEMO found between non-home-
15
based and home-based entrepreneurs for perceived personal control.  Thus, results support DEMO
1b and 1d.    Homogenous subset analysis using the S-N-K procedure DEMO three homogenous
subsets: 1) white-collar workers (personal control mean = DEMO, α = .05), 2) part-time home-based
(personal control mean DEMO 6.82, α = .05), and 3) non-home-based and full-time home-based
entrepreneurs (personal control means = 7.08, 7.26 respectively, α= .05).
Hypotheses 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d postulated non-home-based entrepreneurs would produce
higher scores than full-time home-based entrepreneurs and white-collar workers, and that full-time and
part-time home-based entrepreneurs would exhibit higher scores than white-collar workers on DEMO
self-esteem in business.  Post hoc tests provide support for hypotheses 2b, where non-home-based
entrepreneurs report a significantly higher mean score for self-esteem than DEMO workers (α = .0001).  No
significant differences were found between non-home-based and full-time or part-time home-based
entrepreneurs on self-esteem in business.  The homogenous subset analysis confirms post hoc results,
where two subsets were DEMO: 1) white-collar workers (self-esteem mean = 7.25, α = .05) and 2)
entrepreneurs (self-esteem means = 7.51, 7.60, 7.61 DEMO part-time, full-time and non-home-based
respectively, α = .05).
Hypotheses 3a and 3b posited non-home-based business owners would produce higher
preference for business DEMO in revenue scores than will full-time home-based business owners, and
that DEMO significant difference between full-time and part-time home-based business owners would be
found.  No significant difference between non-home-based and full-time home-based entrepreneurs was
found, DEMO a significant difference between full-time and part-time home-based business owners
exists for preference of business growth in revenue.   The results provided support for DEMO 5b,
but not for hypothesis 5a.   Two homogenous subsets were produced: 1) white-collar workers and part-
time home-based entrepreneurs (revenue means = 6.53, 6.69, α = .05) and 2) full-time home-based DEMO
non-home-based entrepreneurs (revenue means = 7.044, 7.10 respectively, α = DEMO).
Probability of Non-home-based (Commercial) Business Start-up
Probability of commercial business start-up, p (commercial), was assessed with a stepwise
logistic regression DEMO determine which of the individual and organization variables predicted operation of
a non-home-based business.   Results of the stepwise LOGIT regression are presented in DEMO 2 and
indicate all significant predictors were entered in four steps.  DEMO most significant predictors of
commercial operation, in order of entry, were: type of business being operated, previous year’s business
revenue, number of employees, and number of years of education of the entrepreneur.  Gender, age,
household stage, all types of experience in similar and dissimilar industries and number of years of
16
business operation were not found to be significant predictors.  Management experience in a similar
industry was the only type of experience related to the DEMO of becoming a commercial
entrepreneur, although not significantly (p. = .6999).  Not surprisingly, operation of a retail business was
the most DEMO predictor of non-home-based business operation (p. = .000). Several variables DEMO
correlated with each other, however correlation coefficients were low or insignificant, suggesting
multicollinearity was not a problem.
Table 2 Determinants of the operation DEMO a non-home-based (commercial) business
Predictor
COEF
S.E.
1. Type of business (1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
-1.649
-1.194
-3.399
-2.673
-2.237
-0.8917
.822
.673
.571
.972
.498
.510
2.    1997 revenue
.3906
.0894
3.    Number DEMO employees
.2058
.0480
4.   Years of education
.0761
.0390
Constant
-1.486
Goodness of fit      (2*0*LN(O/E))   =       377.560, d.f.  = 350, p. = .149
t
DEMO
-1.77
-5.95
-2.75
-4.49
-1.75
4.37
4.28
1.95
p
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.000
.0494
95%
confidence
interval
.999 – 1.17
DEMO – 1.09
.080 – 1.14
.010 - 0.103
.040 - 0.284
.150 – 1.12
1.24 - 1.76
1.12 – 1.35
.999 – 1.17
Mediating DEMO of individual and organizational variables
Structural equation modeling is particularly useful in exploratory stages of research, where
relevant theoretical models are at early stages of development (Hair et al., 1995).  For this analysis,
number of employees (a continuous variable), not type of entrepreneurial behavior (a categorical
variable) was used as the dependent variable y so DEMO not to violate the requirement of a metric
dependent variable of structural equation modeling techniques. The path diagram, Figure 2, specifies
five dependent (endogenous) variables including attitude subscale scores on personal control, self-
esteem DEMO revenue grown (y1 – y3), entrepreneurial attitude constellation (y4), and number of
employees (y5).  Predictor variables, or exogenous variables, included individual and organizational level
17
variables of age, gender, life-cycle stage, education, experience type, business type, revenue and years
of business operation.  Due to the large DEMO of variables in the model, observable means of
independent and organizational DEMO were used in the analyses of the model.  The Chi-square
goodness DEMO fit equaled 124.54 (301 d.f.; p = 1.0) indicating the DEMO is a good fit (Hair, et al., 1995).
The DEMO model weighting coefficients, or the level of influence that each construct DEMO on the
number of employees, appear above the arrows. The structural DEMO model illustrates quite clearly
that individual level variables have much less of an influence on firm size, as measured by number of
employees, DEMO do organizational level variables.
Figure 2. LISREL measurement model of causal relationships
INDIVIDUAL
CHARACTERISTICS
PERSONAL CONTROL OF
BUSINESS OUTCOMES
SELF-ESTEEM IN BUSINESS
PREFERENCE FOR DEMO
GROWTH IN REVENUE
0 .24
CONSTELLATION OF
ENTREPRENEURIAL
ATTITUDES
0 .19
0 .24
0 .017
0.11
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES
0 .055
ORGANIZATIONAL
CHARACTERISTICS
Discussion DEMO Findings
Significant differences in entrepreneurial attitudes were found in three areas: DEMO) between all
groups on measures of perceived personal control of business DEMO; 2) between full-time home-
based entrepreneurs and while-collar workers on measures of self-esteem in business; and 3) between
full-time and part-time entrepreneurs DEMO measures of preference for business growth in revenue.  The
population of DEMO home-based and non-home based entrepreneurs was surprisingly homogenous in
terms of individual, organizational and attitudinal measurements, which suggests that similarities, not
differences, DEMO be discovered.  Additionally, three results were of particular interest: 1) demographic
18
uniqueness of part-time home-based entrepreneurs, 2) homogenous subsets, and 3) DEMO of
experience as a predictor variable.
First, individual and organizational demographic DEMO were included in the study to control for
extraneous sources of variances and to determine the extent of differences between groups. These
variables provided DEMO insights into the individuals who operate home-based and micro-
enterprises, particularly DEMO, home-based entrepreneurs.  Part-time home-based entrepreneurs
were significantly older (mean age DEMO 51.12, years) and workers were significantly younger (mean age =
DEMO years) than were full-time and non-home-based entrepreneurs.   In addition, part-time home-
based entrepreneurs reported the highest mean number of years of education (mean edyears - 16.58
years), a  modal educational program of study of graduate university education, and the lowest level of
revenue (mode DEMO <$24,999).  This finding suggests that part-time, home-based entrepreneurs DEMO
retired, or early-retired professionals with a high level of education, who have started a home-based
business to generate a supplemental income, or to keep active.  These individuals are likely “pushed”
into entrepreneurship, indicated by DEMO perceived personal control of business outcomes scores for
part-time than full-time home-based and non-home-based entrepreneurs (mean = 6.8).
Second, homogenous subset analysis DEMO Student-Newman-Keuls (SNK) procedure indentified
two consistent subsets: 1) full-time home-based entrepreneurs and commercial entrepreneurs; and 2)
part-time home-based entrepreneurs and while-collar workers, provided by post hoc multiple
comparison tests of significance of differences on the three attitude subscales for each group, and
generated the most interesting outcomes of this research in the authors opinions.  First, that DEMO
home-based entrepreneurs are more like non-home-based entrepreneurs, than like part-time home-
DEMO and white-collar workers.  No significant differences were found between mean scores DEMO full-
time home-based entrepreneurs and non-home-based entrepreneurs for the three subscales.   This
finding contradicts what is suggested about home-based entrepreneurs in the literature, namely that
actions of home-based entrepreneurs are more attuned to the operation DEMO life-style, supplemental
income businesses.  Yet, full-time home-based and non-home-based business DEMO in this study did
not differ significantly in their attitudes toward business growth in revenue.
Homogenous subsets analysis also suggested that part-time, home-based entrepreneurs and
white-collar workers are similar in attitudes, as no significant differences were found between mean
scores for part-time home-based entrepreneurs and white-collar workers for DEMO three subscales.   It is
interesting to speculate on the reasons behind the similarities in attitude exhibited by these groups.
Perhaps stability and age DEMO for similarities, where younger, white-collar workers, married with
children present, and older, part-time home-based entrepreneurs, adult-only families, may be in stages
19
in their lives which engender a focus on stable income or income DEMO  The lower scores on
achievement in business for part-time, home-based and white-collar workers than for full-time, home-
based and non-home-based entrepreneurs, suggest DEMO these scores may be a determinant of a focus
on a more conservative goal of family income stability than on revenue and employment business
DEMO  The part-time home-based entrepreneur appears to be a conceptual link between DEMO
based and full-time home-based entrepreneurs and white-collar workers, exhibiting characteristics and
DEMO more like white-collar employed workers than entrepreneurs.
Third, much attention in DEMO literature has been given to the backgrounds of entrepreneurs, where
level DEMO education and experience are two factors previously associated with entrepreneurial success.
Not surprisingly, number of years of education was positively associated with the operation of a home-
based or non-home-based business, however, experience was not.  This may be the result of the
conceptualization of experience as a DEMO construct and operationalization of experience
as the presence or absence of managerial, technical, and entrepreneurial experience in similar or
dissimilar industries, as opposed to a continuous variable, i.e., the number of years of experience.
DEMO, contradictory to literature, experience was not a significant predictor of the operation of a
commercial small business or home-based business in this study.
DEMO contributions and implications of the research
From a theoretical perspective, this DEMO contributes to a more thorough understanding of
the home-based entrepreneur, a DEMO antecedent to the development of a more complete
understanding of the process of entrepreneurship.  Results suggest that entrepreneurs and workers can
be differentiated on the basis of attitudes toward entrepreneurship, and that studying attitudes and
behaviors may not be mutually exclusive.  While the focus of this study was on identifying the
significance of differences among groups of entrepreneurs and between DEMO and workers, the
collection of revenue and employment data links attitudes DEMO individual behavior.  These results
provide insight into the nature of different DEMO of home-based and non-home-based entrepreneurs
relative to workers.
This research also contributes to the literature regarding taxonomies of entrepreneurial types,
where part-time entrepreneurs DEMO logically form a separate subgroup for analysis.  This study also
suggests DEMO distinctions among home-based entrepreneurs are more than semantic, and that attitudes
DEMO self-esteem in business, perceived personal control of business outcomes and preference DEMO
business growth in revenue do differentiate full-time from part-time home-based business owners.  As
well, the value of studying the individual entrepreneur, in order to gain greater understanding of the
entrepreneurial process, was evidenced in this study.  Although this study focused on the micro-
20
business end of the entrepreneurial spectrum, it suggests, perhaps even more DEMO due to its
focus on the very small business, that attitudes DEMO characteristics can differentiate types of
entrepreneurs, and that attitudes and characteristics DEMO affect entrepreneurial behavior and
presumably, business outcomes.
Theoretical Limitations
This study DEMO entrepreneurs who had successfully started a small business, and not
nascent, or prospective entrepreneurs.  The fact that entrepreneurs in this study had completed the new
venture start-up process has three implications: 1) aspiring entrepreneurs DEMO differ from entrepreneurs
who are already established in business, 2) the entrepreneurial process may affect attitudes of business
founders, 3) attitudes toward DEMO may change over time, and 4) individuals who exhibit
similar characteristics and attitudes will not all become entrepreneurs. In addition, the act of venture
creation, or the time elapsed since start-up may change an individual’s attitude toward entrepreneurship.
For example, McClelland (1961) suggested that an individual’s need for achievement may lessen with
success, or over time.  The DEMO of this potential limitation could be addressed with a pre-test,
post-test experimental design which would estimate the affect of time and experience on DEMO
Methodological Limitations
Methodological issues are addressed according to major categories of research validity not
addressed previously in this paper: 1) construct validity, 2) internal validity and 3) external validity of the
findings. First, response sets, common method variance, and hypothesis guessing represent the most
significant DEMO to construct validity in this study, although scales used in the DEMO were
constructed according to standard scale development procedures designed to maximize content
saturation and to avoid problems associated with response sets.  Thus, it DEMO not believed that
instrumentation poses a significant threat to validity in this study.  Independent and dependent variable
data was, however, collected from the same respondents, suggesting potential for single source bias.  In
addition, social desirability, questionnaire items similar in content, respondent mood and length of
DEMO may contribute to common method variance.  However, because of differences in
measurement of independent and dependent variables, and the focus on development of the scales and
instrument, common method variance is not believed to be problematic; however, its existence cannot
be ruled out entirely.
Second, as with any cross-sectional, correlational design, the possibility exists that spurious
relationships DEMO been identified and that the direction of associations was misinterpreted.   In order to
minimize threats to internal validity, a large random sample was selected; however, it is still conceivable
that those respondents who participated DEMO the study are different from those individuals who did not.  A
DEMO
large number of uncontrolled variables are inherent in the entrepreneurship phenomenon itself, as well
as in the research setting, where potential interaction of variables is unpredictable.  The size of the
sample is likely to have positively influenced the internal validity of the study; however lack of control
over variables remains a potential threat to internal validity.
Finally, there is concern over the external validity of the study, mainly associated with the
sample. The sample appears to be representative of the home-based and micro-business population,DEMO
and to be large and relatively disperse with normal distributions, suggesting DEMO results can be
generalized beyond the study.  However, little is known about the home-based business owner
population and few studies exist for validation DEMO  In addition, the limit of the scope of the study
to a narrow geographic area may preclude generalizability of findings.
Directions for Research DEMO in Entrepreneurship
This study proposed use of attitude theory as a more dynamic model of the entrepreneur and
the association with entrepreneurial behavior, than traditional trait-based or characteristic approaches.
This paper provided a cursory review of DEMO underlying psychological research and highlighted
the importance of understanding historical roots of theories and methods borrowed from broader social
science contexts.  This leads to a global research program recommendation that researchers assume
more responsibility for understanding DEMO nature of theories and methods proposed for use in
entrepreneurship research.  DEMO reviewed highlighted the fact that most entrepreneurship
researchers refer to McClelland’s (DEMO) early work as the origin of the study of the psychology DEMO the
entrepreneur.  In fact, in the decade which preceded McClelland, DEMO literature is rife with
discussion relating to the inability of trait-based research, particularly single traits, to predict single acts
of behavior, a category in which the act of venture creation is most likely to fit. DEMO research program in
entrepreneurship which hopes to significantly advance knowledge of entrepreneurs and entrepreneurial
processes must have at its core the recognition that the DEMO event is dynamic, holistic,
discontinuous and unique; that it is initiated by an act of human volition; and that the individual interacts
with the environment in a dynamic and reciprocally causal way.
Although demographic DEMO has been criticized for not adding substance to the theoretical
base in entrepreneurship research (Gartner, 1988), support is given in this study DEMO continued use of
demographic research to capture changes in dimensions of the phenomenon. More than any other
personal level variables that enter the new DEMO creation process, demographic and human capital
variables are likely to change DEMO time, rendering older studies obsolete for current business start-ups.
For example, age of the entrepreneur, or life-cycle stage will reflect different social situations and
contexts of key business decisions.  Longitudinal and panel studies will capture these changes over time
22
whereas cross-sectional studies will not. More than any other approach to the DEMO of entrepreneurial
behavior, psychological studies can be criticized for lacking an DEMO of theories and methods
being borrowed and applied in the entrepreneurship literature, such as Begley’s (1995) use of the
Farmingham Type-A behavior scale developed in the 1970’s to predict coronary disease, as a scale to
distinguish founders from non-founding managers.  Interactional psychology’s more recent
conceptualizations of person-environment interaction provide an opportunity for entrepreneurship
researchers to eschew trait-based approaches and DEMO develop more complete causal models of
entrepreneurship.
Areas of Additional Research in Home-based Entrepreneurship
The results of this study suggest several topic areas for DEMO research.  First, is more
rigorous investigation of the association between attitudes and performance.  Do high scores on attitude
subscales correspond to high performance in terms of revenue or intentions toward business growth?
Second, is a study of the organizational life-cycle of home-based and micro-enterprises.  How do
organizational life-cycles of home-based and micro-businesses relate to those of larger businesses?DEMO
Third, is further investigation of part-time home-based businesses in other regions DEMO determine the
extent to which the findings here are idiosyncratic. Fourth, DEMO further investigation regarding the
psychological nature of small business owners.  This DEMO found significant differences among
entrepreneurs on three attitudes suggesting there may be other distinguishing attitudes.  Further
investigation may identify other, more successful discriminating DEMO, such as attitude toward risk-
taking in business.  Investigations of this type could produce fruitful research which could be utilized for
micro-economic development DEMO as well as furthering understanding of the entrepreneur.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank two anonymous reviewers for their insightful reviews and suggestions for
DEMO of an earlier draft of this paper.
References
Ali, S. & DEMO, S. 2007. Profiling operators of commercial homes: Gender differences, working DEMO,
University of Victoria, Victoria, Australia.
Allen, S. 1983. Production DEMO reproduction: The lives of women homeworkers, Sociological Review, 31,
DEMO 661.
Ajzen, I. 1982. On behaving in accordance with one’s attitudes, in M. P. Zanna, E. T. Higgins, & C. P.
Herman, (eds.) Consistency in Social Behavior: The Ontario Ajzen, I. 1989. DEMO structure
23
and behavior, in A. Pratkanis, S. Breckler & A. Greenwald, (DEMO), Attitude, Structure and
Function, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 241-274.
DEMO, I. & Fishbein, M. 1977. Attitude-behavior relations: A theoretical analysis DEMO review of empirical
research, Psychological Bulletin, 84, 888-918.
Ajzen, I. & Madden, T. J. 1986. Prediction of goal-directed behavior: Attitudes, intentions and perceived
behavioral control, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 22, 453-474.
Bates, T. 1990a. Entrepreneur human capital inputs and small business longevity, DEMO Review of
Economics and Statistics, 4, 551-559.
Bates, T. 1990b. DEMO databases in human resources: The characteristics of business owners database,
DEMO Journal of Human Resources, 25, 752-756.
Bates, T. 1995. Self-employment DEMO across industry groups, Journal of Business Venturing, 10, 143-
156.
DEMO, T. 1995. Using founder status, age of firm, and company DEMO rate as the basis for
distinguishing entrepreneurs from managers of smaller businesses, Journal of Business
Venturing, 10, 249-263.
Birley, S. & Westhead, P. 1994. A taxonomy of business start-up reasons and their impact on DEMO
growth and size, Journal of Business Venturing, 9, 7-31.
Borland, C. 1974. Locus of control, need for achievement and entrepreneurship, Unpublished DEMO
dissertation, University of Texas at Austin.
Bowman-Upton, N. 1993. Family-owned, DEMO businesses: An interview with Joanne H. Pratt,
Family Business Review, 6(4), 427- 435.
Brabec, B. 1989. Homemade money: The DEMO guide to success in a home-based business,
Napierville, IL: Betterway.
Brockhaus, R.H. 1980. Psychological and environmental factors which distinguish the successful from
the unsuccessful entrepreneur: A longitudinal study, Academy of Management Best Paper
DEMO, 368-372.
Brockhaus, R. H. 1987. Entrepreneurial Folklore, Journal of Small DEMO Management, 25(3), 1-6.
Bygrave, W. 1993. Theory building in the entrepreneurship paradigm, Journal of Business Venturing, 8,
255-280.
Bygrave, W. and Hofer, C. 1991. Theorizing about entrepreneurship, Entrepreneurship, Theory and
Practise, 14 (1), 7 - 26.
Carland, J.W., Hoy, F., Boulton, W. & Carland, J. 1984. Differentiating entrepreneurs from small
business owners: A conceptualization. Academy of Management Review, 9(2), DEMO
Carsrud, A. L. & Johnson, R. W. 1989. Entrepreneurship: A DEMO psychological perspective,
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 1(1), 21-31.
DEMO
Chay, Y. W. 1993. Social support, individual differences, and well-being: DEMO study of small business
entrepreneurs and employees, Journal of Organizational and DEMO Psychology, 66,
285-302.
Christensen, K. (Ed.) 1988. The new era of home-based work, Boulder, CO: Westview
Christensen, M. 1994. DEMO of Business Starters, unpublished thesis, University of Calgary, Calgary,
DEMO
Cooper, A. & Dunkelberg, W. 1987. Entrepreneurial research: Old questions, new answers, and
methodological issues, American Journal of Small Business, winter, 11-23.
Cromie, S. 1987. Motivations of aspiring male and female entrepreneurs, Journal of Occupational
Behavior, 8, 251-261.
Davids, L. E. 1963. Characteristics of small business founders in Texas and Georgia, Athens, GA:
DEMO of Business Research, University of Georgia, June.
Dobbs, M. & DEMO, R.T. 2007. Small business growth: recent evidence and new directions,
International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior & Research, 13(5) 296-322.
Foster, M. & Orser, 1993. Home-based work: Marginal activity or evolving work DEMO, Journal of Small
Business and Entrepreneurship, 13(4), 81-89.
Gartner, W. 1988. "Who is an entrepreneur?" is the wrong question, American Journal of Small
Business, 11-32.
Gartner, W., Shaver, K., Allen, K., Bhat, S., & Gatewood, E. 1997. What affects growth expectations?
Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, Wellesley, MA: Babson College, 63-64.
Gassé, Y. 1977. Entrepreneurial characteristics and practices: A study of the dynamics of small
business organizations and their effectiveness in different environments, Sherbrooke: Quebec:
Rene Prince.
Gassé, Y. 1982. Elaborations on the DEMO of the entrepreneur. In C. Kent, D. Sexton, & K. Vesper
(eds.) Encyclopedia of entrepreneurship, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 57-71.
DEMO, E., Shaver, K., & Gartner, W. 1995. A longitudinal DEMO of cognitive factors influencing start-
up behaviors and success at venture creation, Journal of Business Venturing, 10, 371-391.
Greenberger, D. & Sexton, D. 1987. A comparative analysis of the effects of the desire for DEMO
control on new venture initiations, in Churchill, N. Hornaday, J., Kirchoff, B., Krasner, O., &
Vesper, K. (Eds.), Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, Babson Park, MA: Babson College,
239-253.
Greenberger, D. B. & Sexton, D. L. 1988. An interactive model DEMO new venture initiation, Journal of Small
Business Management, 23(3), 1-7.
Greenwald, A. 1989. Why are attitudes important?  in A. Pratkanis, S. Breckler & A. Greenwald, (eds.),
Attitude, Structure and Function, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1-10.
Hair, J.F., Anderson, R. E., Tatham, R. L. & Black, W. C. 1995. Multivariate Data Analysis, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
25
Halal, W. 1996. The rise of the knowledge entrepreneur, Futurist, 30(6), 13-16.
Heck, R., Owen, A., & Rowe, B. 1995. Home-based employment and family life, London: Auburn House.
Herron, L. & Robinson, Jr., R,. 1993a. A structural model of the DEMO of entrepreneurial characteristics
on venture performance, Journal of Business Venturing, 8, 281-294.
Herron, L. & Robinson, Jr. R. 1993b. The entrepreneur and venture performance, Academy of
Management Best Paper Proceedings, 75-79.
Hornaday, J. & Bunker, C. 1970. The nature of the entrepreneur, Personnel Psychology, 24, 141-153.
Ireland, R. D. & Webb, J. 2007. A cross-disciplinary exploration of entrepreneurship research, Journal of
Management, 33(6), 891-927.
DEMO, N. 1998. Getting away and getting by. Work and Occupations, 25(1), 7-35.
Kent, C.A., Sexton, D. L., and Vesper, K. H. (Eds.) 1982. Encyclopedia of entrepreneurship, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kets de Vries, M, 1996. The anatomy of the entrepreneur: Clinical observations, Human Relations,
49(7), 853-883.
Lewis, P., Barringer, B., Jones, F., & Harrison, J. 1997. Growth in entrepreneurial firms: The impact of
business practices, founder characteristics, and future orientation,  Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research,  P.  Reynolds, W. Bygrave, N. Carter, P. Davidsson, W. Gartner, C.
Mason, & P. DEMO (eds.), Wellesley, MA: Babson College, 83-84.
McClelland, D. DEMO The achieving society, Princeton: Van Nostrand.
McGuire, W. J. 1985. DEMO and attitude change, in G. Linzey & E. Aronson (eds.) DEMO of
Social Psychology, New York: Random House, 3, 233-346.
Miner, J. B. 1996. Evidence for the existence of a set of personality types, defined by psychological
tests, that predict entrepreneurship, in P. Reynolds, Birley, S., Butler, J., Bygrave, W.,
Davidsson, P., Gartner, W. & McDougall, P. (Eds.) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research,
Babson Park, MA: Babson College, 62-76.
Miner, J.B. 2000. DEMO a psychological typology of entrepreneurs using business founders, Journal of
Applied DEMO Science, 36(1), 43-69.
Mitchell, T. & James, L. DEMO Conclusions and future directions, Academy of Management Review,
14(3), 401-407.
Orser, B. and Foster, M. 1992. Home Enterprise: Canadians DEMO Home-based Work, Published by the
National Home-based Business Project Committee, Abbotsford, B.C.
Perry, C., Macarthur, R., Meredith, G., & Cunnington, B. 1985. Need for achievement and locus of
control of Australian small business owner-managers and super-managers, International Small
Business Journal, 4(4), DEMO
Petty, R. E. & Cacioppo, J. T. 1981. Attitudes and persuasion: Classic and contemporary approaches,
Dubuque, IA: William Brown.
26
Plummer, J. 1989. Changing values, Futurist, January-February. 15-22.
Pratt, J. DEMO Myths and realities of working at home: Characteristics of homebased business DEMO
and telecomuters, Washington, D.C., Government Printing Office.
Roberts, L. & Chrisman, J.J. 1997. Under one roof: Toward a reconciliation of home-based DEMO
typologies, Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship, 13(4), 18-33.
Roberts, L., Jones, V., Long, W. & Robinson, P. DEMO The extent of home-based business activity in
Calgary, Alberta, Proceedings of the 12th Annual Canadian Conference of Small Business and
Entrepreneurship, Riverview, DEMO: CCSBE.
Robinson, P. 1987. Prediction of entrepreneurship based on an attitude consistency model, unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Department of Psychology, Brigham Young University.
Robinson, P. & Sexton, E. 1994. The effect of education and DEMO on self-employment success,
Journal of Business Venturing, 9, 141-156.
Robinson, P. B., Stimpson, D.V., Huefner, J.C., & Hunt, H. K. 1991. An attitude approach to the
prediction of entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship, Theory and Practice, Summer, 13-31.
Rosenberg, M. J. & Hovland, C. DEMO 1960. Cognitive, affective, and behavioral components of attitudes, in
C. DEMO Hovland & M. J. Rosenberg (eds.) Attitude, organization and change, New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 1-14.
Sexton, D. L. DEMO Characteristics and role demands of successful entrepreneurs, Proceedings of the
Academy DEMO Management, Detroit, 314-327.
Sexton, D. & Bowman, N. 1983. Comparative entrepreneurship characteristics of students: Preliminary
results, in J. Hornaday, J. Timmons, & K. Vesper (eds.) Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research,
Wellesley, DEMO: Babson College, 213-232.
Sexton, D. & Bowman, N. 1984. Personality inventory for potential entrepreneurs: Evaluation of a
modified JPI/PRF-E test instrument, in Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, Wellesley, MA:
Babson College, DEMO
Statistics Canada. 2006. Canada Yearbook, Ottawa: Government of Canada.
Thurstone, DEMO  1931. The measurement of social attitudes, Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 26, 249-269.
Timmons, J. A. 1990. New Venture Creation, DEMO, Ill: Richard D. Irwin.
Timmons, J. A. 1978. Characteristics and DEMO demands of entrepreneurs, American Journal of Small
Business, 3, 5-17.
DEMO, H. 1971. Attitude and attitude change, New York, John Wiley.
DEMO Dept. of Census. 2010. Characteristics of Businesses: 2005 CB10-10 US Dept. DEMO Commerce,
Washington, DC.
Van Praag, C. M. & Versloot, DEMO 2007. What is the value of entrepreneurship? A review of recent
DEMO, Small Business Economics,29, 351-382.
27
Walker, E. & Webster, B. 2007. Gender, age and self-employment: DEMO things change, some things
stay the same, Women in Management Review, 22(2), 122-135.
Walsh, S., Kirchoff, B., & Boylan, R. 1996. Founder backgrounds and entrepreneurial success:
Implications for core competence strategy application to new ventures, in P. Reynolds, Birley,
S., Butler, J., Bygrave, W., Davidsson, P., Gartner, W. & McDougall, P. (Eds.) Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research, Babson Park, MA: Babson College, 146-154
Wehrell, R. 1995. The State of Home-based Business in Atlantic Canada, Sackville, N.B.: Rural and
Small Town Programme, DEMO Allison University.
Welsh, J.A. & White, J.F. 1983. The Entrepreneur’s Master Planning Guide, Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Westhead, P. & Birley, S. 1995. Employment growth in new independent owner-managed firms in Great
Britain, International Small Business Journal, 13(3),  11-31.
Wiklund, DEMO, Davidsson, P., Delmar, F., & Aronsson, M. 1997. Expected consequences of growth and
their effect on growth willingness in different samples DEMO small firms, Frontiers of
Entrepreneurship Research, P.  Reynolds, W. Bygrave, N. Carter, P. Davidsson, W. Gartner, C.
Mason, & P. MacDougall (eds.), Wellesley, MA: Babson College, 1-16.
28{1g42fwefx}