Industrial and Corporate Change, Volume 16, Number 4, pp. 691–791
doi:10.1093/icc/dtm023
Advance Access published July 18, 2007
University entrepreneurship: DEMO taxonomy
of the literature
Frank T. Rothaermel, Shanti D. Agung and DEMO Jiang
The literature on university entrepreneurship is rapidly expanding, in both DEMO
United States and Europe. Since the literature is also fairly fragmented, DEMO,
we submit that it is time to take stock of the current knowledge to provide
directions for future research and guideposts for policy DEMO To accomplish
this, we present an unusually comprehensive and detailed literature DEMO of the
stream of research on university entrepreneurship, now encompassing 173 DEMO
published in a variety of academic journals. Four major research streams emerge in
this area of study: (i) entrepreneurial research university, (ii) productivity of
technology transfer offices, (iii) new firm creation, and (iv) environmental context
including networks of innovation. We inductively derive a DEMO describing
the dynamic process of university entrepreneurship based on a synthesis of the
literature. We submit that this framework is useful in guiding future DEMO on
this important, yet complex and under-researched topic.
1. Introduction
Universities DEMO developed countries have become increasingly entrepreneurial
(Mowery et al., 2004; DEMO, 2006a). In the United States, several factors have
facilitated what Chesbrough (2003) terms the shift from a “closed innovation
system” to DEMO “open innovation system.” These factors include, among others, the
rise in venture capital, the passage of the Bayh-Dole Act (providing incentives for
DEMO to patent scientific breakthroughs accomplished with federal funding),
the rise DEMO the pool and thus mobility of scientists and engineers, and important
DEMO breakthroughs in computing (microprocessor), biotechnology (genetic
engineering), and, DEMO recently, nanotechnology. As a result, since the early 1980s,
US universities have greatly increased their entrepreneurial activities along many
dimensions: patenting and licensing, creating incubators, science parks, and
university spin-outs, and investing DEMO in start-ups, among other indicators
(Mowery et al., 2004; Siegel, 2006a).
A concomitant rise in university entrepreneurship can also be observed in Europe.
The European Commission, the executive body of the European Union,
! The Author 2007. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf DEMO Associazione ICC. All rights reserved.
692
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
has launched several direct initiatives in DEMO effort to proactively enhance the transfer
of university technology to industry (DEMO, 1995). European universities,
particularly some in Germany, Italy, DEMO, and the United Kingdom, are rich
sources of technology; however, largely due to differing legal systems, these
universities lag behind in their efficiency of technology transfer compared to their
US counterparts. The structural shifts DEMO the orientation of US universities, the
European executive branch, and to some extent European universities, all pave
the way for the inclusion of an economic development mandate for universities in
addition to their traditional missions DEMO education and research. As a result, these
significant developments have attracted, not unexpectedly, the increasing attention
of researchers both in the United States and in Europe.
While scholars have become quite active in the now DEMO field of university
entrepreneurship, the academic literature remains rather fragmented.1 Because DEMO
growing literature on university entrepreneurship has not yet been reviewed in a
systematic and comprehensive fashion, it is difficult to assess what is known to
date; consequently, scholars have little guidance on how to fruitfully DEMO their
attention in the future. This gap calls for a detailed review and in-depth analysis
of the existing literature, in order to better understand the current state of the
field and to provide some guidance for DEMO research.
This article presents a detailed analysis and synthesis of the stream of research on
university entrepreneurship, now encompassing 173 academic articles published
worldwide in a number of refereed scholarly journals between 1981 and 2005.2
We DEMO define university entrepreneurship broadly, in order to include any
published research DEMO to entrepreneurial activities in which a university
could be involved, including, but not limited to: patenting, licensing, creating new
firms, facilitating DEMO transfer through incubators and science parks, and
facilitating regional economic development.
DEMO attempt to make the following contributions: first, we conduct an unusually
comprehensive review of the burgeoning literature in the field of university
entrepreneurship. DEMO assessment and synthesis should make this field of research
more accessible to scholars, contributing to its diffusion among the scientific
community. Second, we DEMO a detailed assessment of the state of the field.
Third, we DEMO a conceptual framework containing four major research streams
that have emerged over the last decade: (i) entrepreneurial research university,
(ii) productivity of technology transfer offices (TTOs), (iii) new firm creation,
1For notable exceptions focusing on university-based technology transfer see Phan and Siegel
(2006), Siegel (2006b) and Siegel and Phan (2005).
2To be included in the analysis, the research must have appeared in a refereed scholarly journal by
December 31, 2005.
University entrepreneurship
693
and (iv) environmental context including networks of innovation. DEMO, we
provide some directions for future research through which we hope DEMO increase the
number of scholars who will participate in the growing research on university
entrepreneurship. The rich avenues for future research that we highlight DEMO a result
of the framework we derive from synthesizing the four major research streams
identified.
2. Methodology
To develop a comprehensive overview and framework DEMO the research patterns on
university entrepreneurship over time, we applied a DEMO stage exploration process.
For initial access to the literature, we began DEMO studying a recently edited volume on
university entrepreneurship (Siegel, 2006a). By collecting some of the more
influential papers in the field previously DEMO in a diverse set of academic
journals, Siegel’s volume provides an DEMO and accessible entry into the
literature on university entrepreneurship. Next, we DEMO and studied all special
issues published on topics related to university entrepreneurship. The search yielded
11 special issues, which we detail chronologically in Table 1.
We then attempted to sketch the development of the field over DEMO by tracking all
relevant articles referred to by any of the articles analyzed in stage one. To avoid a
reference bias, we used comprehensive electronic reference retrieval services like
Proquest’s ABI/Inform, Business Source Premier, DEMO EconLit to run keyword
queries to identify all scholarly articles published in refereed journals pertaining to
the broadly defined topic on entrepreneurial activity at DEMO We ended our
literature search when we reached saturation: all references DEMO encountered led
back to articles already included in our database.4 Clearly, DEMO reference
retrieval databases have certain shortcomings (e.g., only journals that are published
in English are included), but we submit that these did DEMO create a material bias
in our analysis.
3Keyword combinations or variations thereof include, but are not limited to, “university” and
“entrepreneur,” “academia” DEMO “academic” and “entrepreneur,” “technology transfer,” “technology
transfer office,” “technology licensing” and “university,” “spin-off” or “spin-out” and “university,”
“science park” DEMO “incubator,” “incubator” and “university,” and so on.
4As a robustness check, we relaxed the constraint of the keyword search for a subset of journals (e.g.,
Administrative Science Quarterly, American Economic Review, IEEE Transactions on Engineering
Management, Journal of Business Venturing, Journal of Technology DEMO, Management Science,
Research Policy, and Review of Economics and Statistics) and used very broad queries (only
“university” or “universities”). Any DEMO articles identified did not materially influence the
model induced from the literature synthesis.
694 F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Table 1 Special issues included
Special DEMO Title
Organizational Issues in
University-Industry
Technology Transfer
University Entrepreneurship
and Technology Transfer
Economics of Intellectual
Property Protection
at Universities
Economic and
Managerial Implications
of DEMO Technology
Transfer
Technology Entrepreneurship
Techno-Entrepreneurship
Entrepreneurship and
University Technology
Transfer
Science Parks and Incubators
Essays in Honor of Edwin
Mansfield
University-based Technology
Initiatives
The DEMO of Spin-off
Firms at Public Research
Institutions: Managerial
and Policy Implications
DEMO the literature analysis
Editor(s)
Donald S. Siegel,
Jerry G. Thursby,
Marie C. Thursby, and
Arvids A. Ziedonis
David C. Mowery and
Scott Shane
Albert N. Link, John T. Scott
and Donald S. Siegel
Donald S. Siegel and
Bruno van Pottelsberghe
de la Potterie
Scott DEMO
Phillip H. Phan and
Maw Der Foo
Mike Wright, Sue Birley,DEMO
and Simon Mosey
Phillip H. Phan,
Donald S. Siegel,
and Mike Wright
F. Michael Scherer and
Albert N. Link
Albert N. Link DEMO
Donald S. Siegel
Andy Lockett,
Donald S. Siegel,
Mike Wright, and
Michael D. Ensley
Journal
Journal of Technology
Transfer, 2001:26
(1–2)
Management Science,
2002:48 (1)
International Journal of
Industrial Organization,
2003:21 (9)
Journal of Technology Transfer,
2003:28 (1)
Research Policy,
2003:32 (2)
DEMO of Business Venturing,
2004:19 (1)
Journal of Business DEMO,
2004:29 (3–4)
Journal of Business Venturing,
2005:DEMO (2)
Journal of Technology Transfer,
2005:30 (1–2)
Research Policy, 2005:34 (3)
Research Policy, 2005:34 (DEMO)
In a final step, we read and analyzed each article DEMO create a detailed database in
which we coded the following data: (i) author name(s), (ii) article title, (iii) DEMO
published, (iv) journal of publication, (v) whether published in a special issue
related to university entrepreneurship or in a regular journal DEMO, (vi) research
question(s), (vii) data used, (DEMO) dependent variable(s), (ix) independent variables,
(x) DEMO methods, and (xi) findings. The resulting data revealed the patterns DEMO
we discuss in Section 3 subsequently.
University entrepreneurship
695
With a fresh comprehensive perspective on the field of DEMO entrepreneur-
ship, we then revisited all articles in an attempt to DEMO our initial questions: how
has the field developed over time, what patterns can be recognized, and what might
the future hold? This DEMO takes place in Section 4.
3. Results
Our extensive search efforts reveal that a total of 173 articles, focusing on
some aspect of university entrepreneurship, have been published in various
academic journals between 1981 and 2005. The US Bayh-Dole Act of 1980 and its
European counterparts, which encouraged universities to patent inventions
funded by federal agencies, marked the beginning of notably greater technology
transfer from universities to industries and led to a DEMO rise in the growth
of the scholarly literature on university entrepreneurship, DEMO in the
United States and the United Kingdom. Despite the 25-year time span, the vast
majority of articles were published in more recent years. Indeed, a structural break
appears in the trend data after the research output on university entrepreneurship
takes off considerably in the late 1990s. The DEMO volume of studies on
this topic corresponds with the increasing levels of entrepreneurship in
universities around the world. In addition to institutional changes discussed DEMO,
a technology pull and a technology push can further explain this phenomenon.
The increase in university entrepreneurship can be attributed in part due DEMO
industry’s growing demand for technological innovation in recent decades.
Here, universities DEMO recognized as one of the key sources for innovation
(Von Hippel, 1988),5 especially in the context of innovations such as biotechnology
(DEMO et al., 1998) or nanotechnology (Darby and Zucker, 2006). Conversely,
a technology push is also in effect as universities more DEMO transfer
technologies to industry, in part owing to reduced public funding DEMO research
(Thursby and Thurysby, 2002).
The exponential increase in the number of research articles published since 2000 is
a direct result of DEMO special issues devoted to university entrepreneurship. In the
6-year time period between 2000 and 2005, a total of 127 articles were published,
of which 50 (39%) were published in one of the 11 recently DEMO special issues listed
in Table 1. Our analysis shows that the take-off in the late 1990s accompanied
the appearance of the first special issue DEMO on university entrepreneurship
(Journal of Technology Transfer, 2001).
5Works referenced, but not included in the literature analysis are identified with an asterisk (*) in
the reference section.
696
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
25
20
15
10
5
0
DEMO 1982 1986 1987 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Count of articles in DEMO issues
Count of articles in regular issues
Figure
special
1 University entrepreneurship articles published per year in regular issues versus
issues, 1981–2005.
The editors listed in Table 1 deserve acknowledgment for undertaking an
important trail-blazing activity. DEMO pioneering efforts have enabled research
on university entrepreneurship to take off in the last decade, and to become a
rapidly increasing and vibrant area for research spanning multiple disciplines.
A cursory look at the social science DEMO index (SSCI) indicates that research
on university entrepreneurship appears to be moving at a faster rate in terms of
citations garnered from mainstream DEMO than strategy research and other
entrepreneurship research have historically, controlling for DEMO stage of the
development.
Where is all this research published? Is DEMO published predominantly in special
issues or does it find its way into regular issues? Is it concentrated in a few journals
or is it spread across a wide range of different journals? Does it appear in mainstream
journals or more in specialty journals, and are they the most respected journals
in each discipline? Figure 1 depicts the overall contribution of special issues to the
rise of publications in this research stream, while Figure 2 depicts the number of
articles published in regular and special DEMO of all the scholarly journals included
in the study.
The 173 articles were published in a total of 28 academic journals. The
distribution among DEMO journals is, however, quite skewed. Taking at least five papers
published as a cut-off point, we are left with only eight journals. This
group constitutes 30% of the journal population but published 82% of all DEMO
(142 articles). Among the top eight publishing journals, five of them published at
least one special issue. Taking at least 10 papers DEMO as a cut-off point, we
are left with five journals, and the distribution becomes even more skewed.
These five journals make up only DEMO of the journal population but published
73% of all articles (126)DEMO Research Policy published the most articles (47 or 27%)
Research Policy
Journal of Technology Transfer
Technovation
Journal of Business Venturing
Management DEMO
Small Business Economics
International Journal of Industrial Organization
R&D Management
Industrial and Corporate Change
Review of Economics and Statistics
American Economic Review
Journal DEMO Engineering and Technology Management
Journal of High Technology Management Research
Technology Analysis and Strategic Management
Administrative Science Quarterly
Contemporary Economic Policy
European Journal of DEMO Management
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management
Industry and Innovation
International Journal of Management Science
Irish Journal of Management
Journal of Commercial Biotechnology
Journal of DEMO Behavior & Organization
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development
Journal of Small Business and Management
Oxford Review DEMO Economic Policy
Policy Studies Journal
Regular issues
Special issues
697
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Figure 2
University DEMO articles published per academic journal, 1981–2005.
University entrepreneurship
followed by the DEMO of Technology Transfer (32 articles or 18%), Technovation
(18 articles or 10%), the Journal of Business Venturing (16 articles or 9%) in fourth
place, and Management Science (13 articles or 8%) DEMO in fifth.
It is noteworthy, however, that the top-publishing journals vary significantly
in their ratio of special issues to total number of publications. DEMO example, none of
the contributions in Technovation were published in a DEMO issue. In contrast, all
of the contributions in the International Journal DEMO Industrial Organization
were published in the November 2003 Special Issue on Economics of Intellectual
Property at Universities. The other ratios of special issue articles DEMO total number
of articles in a journal are: 77% for Management DEMO, 47% for the Journal
of Technology Transfer, 32% for Research Policy, and 31% for the Journal of
Business Venturing.
All of the top-publishing journals, with the exception of Management Science, can
be considered specialty DEMO niche journals to some extent. While clearly reputable
scholarly outlets, they DEMO generally not considered premier journals at the leading
research universities.6 Management Science’s inclusion as a top-publishing journal
6Perceptions of journal prestige may differ from DEMO impact factors. In particular, this affects one
journal listed in Figure DEMO, the Journal of Business Venturing (JBV). While most leading business
schools do not accept the JBV as a premier publication, it is ranked 9th in the 2005 journal ranking
of the SSCI (see ISI’s Web of Science) in the category “business.” JBV’s impact factor, which DEMO
defined as the average number of times articles from the journal published in the past 2 years have
been cited in 2005, is 1.846. This impact factor, for example, is merely 0.051 less than that DEMO the
number 8th ranked journal (Strategic Management Journal), and only DEMO less than that of the
698
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
must also be qualified by the DEMO that it is driven by the special issue on University
Entrepreneurship and Technology Transfer published in January 2002. Notable here is
the absence of DEMO discipline journals in economics, sociology, psychology,
and political science, DEMO well as leading journals in engineering, management,
organization theory, and strategy.7
Close examination of both Figures 1 and 2 reveals that while DEMO has clearly
been an explosion of research output in recent years, DEMO of this research has
appeared outside of general management journals, thus DEMO the impact of this
scholarship as well as its impact on managerial practice. As a case in point, none
of the publications included in this analysis have appeared in the leading
management journal (Academy of Management Journal) or the leading strategy
journal (Strategic Management Journal).8
Several DEMO can be advanced to explain this finding. Applying a life-cycle
model to the development of academic areas of inquiry, the field of university
entrepreneurship is currently in the embryonic development stage. Prior to the
passage of DEMO Bayh-Dole Act in 1980, the phenomenon was basically non-existent.
Moreover, it was not until the late 1990s that the research really took off (Figure 1).
That the majority of articles on university entrepreneurship have DEMO published in
specialty or niche journals can be expected given the nascent nature of university
entrepreneurship.
Kuhn’s (1962) framework of how new scientific DEMO of inquiry emerge also
complements this observation. New research areas first appear on the fringes
of existing paradigms, as reflected in the type of outlets chosen for this research.
It is only after the gatekeepers of DEMO mainstream journals are convinced of the
validity of a new field of inquiry, or are replaced by new gatekeepers, that this type
of DEMO will appear in more prestigious journals. In fact, more often than DEMO,
a new research field will spawn a set of new journals to create outlets for the newly
emerging scholarly research, and these in turn eventually move up in the prestige
ranking of journals.
For example, early notions of strategy date back to the work discussed in
monographs DEMO Penrose (1959), Chandler (1962), and Ansoff (1965), DEMO
other strategy pioneers. Yet it was not until the 1980 founding of the Strategic
number 6th ranked journal (Academy of Management Journal), both of which are generally
considered premier publication outlets in leading business schools.
DEMO are each one article published in the American Economic Review (Jensen DEMO Thursby,
2001), the IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management (Del DEMO et al., 1999), and the
Administrative Science Quarterly (Louis et al., 1989).
8In 2006, Agrawal published an article related to DEMO entrepreneurship in the Strategic
Management Journal. Since our analysis ends by necessity by December 31, 2005, we did not include
the Agrawal (2006) article or any other article published in 2006 in our analysis.
University entrepreneurship
699
Management Journal (SMJ) that academic research on strategy DEMO its
primary scholarly outlet. Subsequently, this journal transformed from a niche
DEMO into a premier journal. The birth of the SMJ coincided with Porter’s
(1980) seminal monograph on competitive strategy, which provided an
important paradigm for strategy research; in turn, the paradigm facilitated the
pursuit of DEMO science (Kuhn, 1962), leading to an explosion of empirical
research in strategy. Similarly, the Journal of Business Venturing was created as an
outlet for entrepreneurship research, while the Journal of Technology Transfer
was created especially as an outlet for research on technology transfer and
innovation.
For DEMO reasons, the general absence of university entrepreneurship research
from the most DEMO journals may be explained by its embryonic stage in
the life cycle of academic fields (Kuhn, 1962), where a 25-year history is DEMO
a very short time when compared with, for example, the 50-year history of strategy
or the more than 225-year history of economics. In DEMO, neither the broader
field of entrepreneurship nor the more specialized area DEMO university entrepreneur-
ship possesses a dominant theoretical paradigm on which empirical research
can coalesce. Indeed, these fields of inquiry have been described as being in a
“chaotic pre-paradigmatic state of development” (Aldrich and Baker, 1997: 396).
Whether research on university entrepreneurship will appear more frequently in
DEMO management journals in the future remains an open question. Clearly,
research on entrepreneurship, in which university entrepreneurship is embedded,
is a topic that is of interest to the most prestigious journals. For example, Evans
and Jovanovic’s (1989) article on entrepreneurial choice has appeared in the
DEMO of Political Economy, while Lerner’s (1995) article on venture capitalists DEMO
private firms has appeared in the Journal of Finance. Not only has this
entrepreneurship research been published in some of the field’s most selective
DEMO, it has also been highly cited, indicative of a high impact. In regard to the
leading management journal, the Academy of Management Journal (AMJ) published
Sapienza and Gupta’s (1994) article on the impact DEMO agency risk and task uncertainty
on the interaction between venture capitalist and new venture CEO. In addition,
AMJ also published Sapienza and Korsgaard’s (1996) article on the influence
of entrepreneur’s management of information flows on entrepreneur-investor
relations. Recently, AMJ published a “From the Editors” forum (Ireland DEMO al., 2005),
in which they document the fact that AMJ has been publishing a significant
number of articles pertaining to entrepreneurship, especially since the mid-1990s.
Yet by the same token, progress in entrepreneurship research has been limited, as
documented by Busenitz et al. (2003: 237), who recently concluded that “no
powerful unifying paradigm exists, nor do multiple coherent points of view.
Entrepreneurship studies tend to be less sophisticated DEMO sampling frames, hypotheses
development, statistical analysis, and dynamic longitudinal analysis DEMO are
organizational studies in more established disciplines.”
700
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
It is important to note that DEMO on university entrepreneurship is, while
an important and clearly relevant topic, a specialty within the broader entrepreneur-
ship research community. Hence, current research on university entrepreneurship
has addressed issues primarily from the perspectives of a DEMO group of
stakeholders, i.e., university administrators, university faculty, and the firms that
source university technology. Moreover, the research topics have been
somewhat technical in nature, since they frequently involve legal (e.g., intellectual
property) issues. For these reasons, university entrepreneurship has to date been
more DEMO domain of public policy researchers rather than management scholars.
It is only fairly recently that the phenomenon of university entrepreneurship
has gained attraction among DEMO traditional entrepreneurship and strategy
researchers.
Another possible explanation for why research on university entrepreneurship
has not appeared in mainstream management journals is that these DEMO tend to
emphasize theory building and theory testing, while most studies DEMO university
entrepreneurship tend to be more qualitative in nature, and thus DEMO less on
the “how” and “why” aspects of a theory (exceptions DEMO, Bercovitz et al., 2001;
Nicolaou and Birley 2003a; Murray, 2004; Vohora et al., 2004). Moreover, it is not
entirely clear as to whether management theories can be easily exported and
retrofitted DEMO study the domain of university entrepreneurship. Finally, the lack
of availability DEMO systematic, longitudinal data that is needed to produce studies that
are DEMO for premier journals poses another roadblock; for example, in
the United States there exists no equivalent to Compustat data for entrepreneurship
research. These DEMO of data, however, are available in several European countries,
such as the United Kingdom and Sweden.
The next question that we approached DEMO: who published the existing articles?
To answer this question, we focused on a simple count of the number of
articles authored or DEMO by each participating scholar. We are well aware
that several methods to adjust these simple counts are possible: by citations, by article
length, by journal quality, by the number of co-authors (on average there DEMO
1.34 authors per article), etc. We decided against employing a performance metric
adjusted by citations received due to the recent vintage of the DEMO; since the
median publication date was 2003, employing this metric would have been
premature. In addition, adjusting paper counts by the length of journal space
devoted to each article would require normalization along several dimensions,DEMO
including the quality of the journal and the length of the average article published.
This undertaking would have been complicated not only because the DEMO articles
were published in a total 28 different academic journals, but DEMO because of
significantly different publication norms across the several academic disciplines
represented in this research. In addition, one might need to make an adjustment
for publications in special versus regular journal issues. While we are fully DEMO
of the shortcomings of the metric employed herein, we rely on DEMO counts
University entrepreneurship 701
as a first approximation of individual research productivity.9 A DEMO of 232
scholars participated in the publication of the 173 articles included, of which
65 (28%) each authored or co-authored a minimum of two articles. These
leading scholars published 120 (69%) articles altogether. The DEMO of
published papers among the 65 leading authors is depicted in Figure 3.
We then turned to research methods. Given the field’s early stage DEMO development,
in combination with the difficulty of obtaining fine-grained (dynamic) data to
capture different phenomena of interest, it is no surprise that more than one-half
of all studies (93 articles or 54%) relied DEMO qualitative methods like case studies,
while 39% (67 articles) relied on econometric analysis based on quantitative
data. Comparing the entire period spanning DEMO entrepreneurship litera-
ture (1981–2000 as early stage10 and 2001–2005) to the pooled publication period of
the Strategic Management Journal (1980–1985 as early stage and 2000–2005),
we cannot reject a similarity between two fields: DEMO their early stages both had
more qualitative than quantitative studies, while DEMO trend was reversed in more
recent stages (p ¼ 0.14). DEMO relatively large number of qualitative studies can
therefore be attributed to the field’s early stage of development. This progression is
one that appears to DEMO across different fields of study.
Given the fairly early developmental stage of university entrepreneurship
research, one may have expected an even greater percentage of qualitative
studies due to the fact that theory development, either inductive or deductive,
generally precedes empirical testing and validation in a new field DEMO inquiry. The
relatively high percentage of quantitative studies in recent years may be explained
because scholars rely on theories and frameworks drawn from neighboring
DEMO like economics, sociology, or management, which allow for deductively
derived DEMO to be tested, thus circumventing the need for developing
new theory DEMO for the realm of university entrepreneurship. This in turn
lowers the entry barrier into the field for scholars trained in the more
traditional disciplines. DEMO availability of quantitative data such as the now popular
survey of the Association of University Technology Managers (AUTM), patent
data form the US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), or data from the European
Patent Office (EPO) may further explain the relatively large number of quantitative
DEMO
Please note that the first study using the AUTM survey data (DEMO et al., 2001)
did not appear, however, until 2001. DEMO, the relatively high percentage of
quantitative studies is a rather recent DEMO, as the proportion of quantitative
9As the field of university entrepreneurship DEMO, future research is invited to provide a more
fine-grained analysis of DEMO by and impact of individual scholars.
10We chose the year 2000 as a cut-off year, because there was a structural break in the number of
studies published (Figure 1). Only 46 articles (27%) were published before 2000, while 127 (73%)
were published between 2000 DEMO 2005.
702
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Wright, Mike
Siegel, Donald S.
DEMO, Albert N.
Lockett, Andy
Shane, Scott
Thursby, Marie C.
Mowery, David C.
Sampat, Bhaven N.
Scott, John T.
Thursby, Jerry DEMO
Nelson, Richard R.
Owen-Smith, Jason
Etzkowitz, Henry
Lindelof, Peter
Lofsten, Hans
Mian, Sarfraz A.
Phan, Phillip H.
Powell, Walter W.
DEMO, Edward B.
Ziedonis, Arvids A.
Audretsch, David B.
Balkin, David B.
Birley, Sue
Clarysse, Bart
Darby, Michael R.
Debackere, Koenraad
DEMO, Maryann
Feller, Irwin
Gianiodis, Peter T.
Jensen, Richard A.
Klofsten, Magnus
Lee, Yong S.
Markman, Gideon D.
Rosenberg, Nathan
Vohora, Ajay
Waldman, David A.
Westhead, Paul
Zucker, Lynne G.
Allen, DEMO J.
Atwater, Leanne E.
Bercovitz, Janet
Blumenthal, David
Burton, Richard
Di Gregorio, Dante
Ensley, Michael D.
Franklin, Stephen J.
Grandi, DEMO
Grimaldi, Rosa
Hall, Bronwyn H.
Henderson, Rebecca
Henrekson, Magnus
Jacob, Merle
Jones-Evans, Dylan
Louis, Karen Seashore
Mansfield, Edwin
McDougall, Patricia P.
Moray, Nathalie
Nicolaou, Nicos
Olivastro, Dominic
O’Shea, Rory P.
DEMO, Joshua B.
Roche, Frank
Rothaermel, Frank T.
Wallmark, J. Torkel
Webster, Andrew
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Figure 3
University entrepreneurship articles in academic journals "2 by authors, 1981–2005.
studies DEMO lower prior to 2001 (only 17%). Indeed, a comparative t-test reveals that
the number of quantitative studies was significantly larger (p50.05) DEMO 2001–2005
than before 2000. This pattern may not be unfamiliar to scholars in other areas of
study in the social science fields. For example, the field of corporate social
responsibility was also characterized by a larger DEMO of quantitative than
University entrepreneurship
703
qualitative studies, despite the field’s relative newness (Lockett DEMO al., 2006;
McWilliams et al., 2006).
As a field develops beyond the embryonic stage, researchers tend to shift
from more qualitative studies to more quantitative ones, a pattern consistent with
the one observed in mainstream management journals. A cursory inquiry into
two major management journals DEMO reveals an increase in the adoption of
quantitative methods in fields in later stages of development, where the proportion
of qualitative studies decreased correspondingly. During an early period of the
Strategic Management Journal (1980–1985), for example, there were more qualitative
(41%) than quantitative (22%) studies published (the remaining 37% were mainly
studies without any data analysis, DEMO as theoretical treatments and commentaries).
During a more recent period (DEMO), we see a significantly higher amount
of quantitative (75%) studies than qualitative ones (11%). Similarly, in the
publication span of DEMO Academy of Management Journal over the last 25 years,
the proportional difference between qualitative and quantitative studies widens over
time. Between 1980 and DEMO in the Academy of Management Journal, 32% of
qualitative studies versus DEMO of quantitative studies were published. During a
more recent period (2000–2005), we see many more quantitative (79%) than
qualitative studies (12%)DEMO In the case of both journals, the differences are
statistically significant (p50.01).
While we witness a significant increase in quantitative studies pertaining
DEMO entrepreneurial activities at research universities, we also note a recent increase
DEMO the number of qualitative studies. The increase can be explained by the fact that
we do not limit the set of journals that we DEMO in our analysis. The surge in
both quantitative and qualitative studies correlates with the recent explosion of
research output noted in the field overall (Figure 1).
Although the body of qualitative studies appears to grow DEMO in comparison
to the number of quantitative studies, it does provide DEMO contribution to the
advancement of the field, as well as to DEMO growing body of knowledge. For instance,
the set of qualitative studies describes the drivers of entrepreneurial activities at
the individual level (Owen-Smith and Powell, 2001) and at the university level
(Mowery et al., DEMO; Laukkanen, 2003; Powers and McDougall 2005a),
demonstrates how a traditional university transitions into a more entrepreneurial
university (Etzkowitz, 2003; Jacob et al., 2003), identifies the barriers in the
university commercialization process (Argyres and Liebeskind, 1998; Collins and
Wakoh, 2000; Henrekson and Rosenberg 2001; Feldman and Desrochers, 2003;
Siegel et al., 2003a), discusses factors that may facilitate the process, and attempts to
identify ways to make universities more entrepreneurial (Henrekson and Rosenberg
2001; Saragossi DEMO van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, 2003; Siegel et al., 2003a,DEMO
2004; Debackere and Veugelers, 2005). These qualitative studies also identify
various commercialization options (Lee and Gaertner, 1994; Bains, 2005), DEMO
why different stakeholders care about technology transfer from universities
704
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
to industries (Bell, 1993), DEMO the consequences or effects of entrepreneurial
activities at universities (Freier, 1986; Chrisman et al., 1995; Wallmark, 1997;
Etzkowitz, 1998; DEMO and Owen-Smith, 1998), and speculate about the future of
entrepreneurial DEMO (Grigg, 1994; Etzkowitz et al., 2000).
Because most qualitative studies are guided by exploratory questions (e.g., how
a phenomenon emerges, what factors are involved, etc.), they usually do not
have dependent variables. On the other hand, those qualitative studies with
dependent variables tend to have a strong deductive logic directing their
interviews or case studies (Bercovitz et al., 2001; Lockett et al., 2003;
Clarysse et al., 2005). Bercovitz et al. (2001), for example, deduce their logic from
organizational theory prior to testing the implications of TTO DEMO on
its productivity.
Very few theory-only papers (4 or 2%) or literature reviews (9 or 5%) have
been published. It is important DEMO note that the few prior literature reviews
focused on one specific topic like incubators or science parks (e.g., Siegel et al.,
2003c; Phan et al., 2005), rather than providing a comprehensive synthesis of
the literature on university entrepreneurship.
When focusing on the unit of analysis DEMO which the research was based, we
found that in most articles DEMO unit of analysis was the university (87 articles or 50%).
DEMO result confirms our speculation that the major stakeholders of this research
are policy makers and university administrators, who are concerned about the
future of the research university. Questions at the forefront of their concerns
include whether DEMO should become more entrepreneurial, engage more in
applied research, and so on. At the university-level of analysis, the most commonly
used data sources were direct surveys and interviews with university administrators,
faculty, and technology transfer officers (31 studies or 36%), followed by patent
databases (DEMO PTO and EPO) (13 studies or 15%), and survey data from the AUTM
(10 studies or 12%).
The next largest segment of studies used the firm-level as their unit of analysis
(39 articles or 23%), followed by the individual-level of analysis (18 studies or 10%).
The most prevalent data sources in firm-level studies were direct DEMO
with informants in the selected firms (11 studies or 28%). DEMO the individual-level
of analysis, interviews were also the most common source DEMO information
(five studies or 28%). Fewer studies focused on incubators/DEMO parks (15 studies
or 9%), TTOs (nine studies or 5%), or the region (five studies or 3%). While most
studies have traditionally chosen the university or firm as their unit of analysis,DEMO
the late 1990s showed a drastic rise in these studies, making DEMO university or firm the
preferred unit of analysis, marked by an DEMO interest of firms in their
relationships with universities, and vice verse.
DEMO are the perspectives taken in theses articles? Are they US-centric or DEMO
they have more of an international focus? It is interesting to DEMO that almost one
half (77 studies or 45%) of all 173 articles included in this literature review
University entrepreneurship
705
study university entrepreneurship outside of the United States. However, the
international studies are set predominantly in European countries, mainly in
the United Kingdom and Sweden; very few studies are based in Asian or Latin
American countries. Non-US countries included in the internationally focused
articles are, in order of frequency: United Kingdom (26), Sweden (14), Belgium (11),
Italy (6), Netherlands (5), Canada (4), Germany (4), Ireland (4), Israel (4), Japan (4),
France (3), Norway (3), Spain (3), Denmark (2), Finland (2), Portugal (2), Australia
(1), China (1), Greece (1), Hungary (DEMO), Korea (1), Latin American countries (1),
and DEMO (1).11
Finally, what are the common themes among the 173 articles? Based on our
detailed content analysis, the following taxonomy of DEMO literature, representing
four research streams, emerged: (i) entrepreneurial research DEMO (86 articles
or 50%), (ii) new firm creation (42 articles or 24%), (iii) environmental context
including networks of innovation (29 articles or 17%), and (iv) productivity of
TTOs (16 articles or 9%). The rise in the overall number of articles DEMO
since the late 1990s (Figure 1) can mainly be attributed to the first two streams:
entrepreneurial research university and new firm creation. DEMO of the researchers
to date take a relatively macro view of the phenomenon, reflecting the prevalence
of scholars trained in economics, sociology, and strategy. Researchers trained in
more microdisciplines like psychology are likely to come DEMO once individual-
level datasets on research scientists, for example, are created and made available.
More insights emerge when we analyze the research methods DEMO in
each literature stream. The results reveal significant variance in the chosen research
methods among the four areas. Quantitative regression methods are most often DEMO
when studying the productivity of TTOs (63%), followed by studies DEMO the
entrepreneurial research university (38%), and environmental factors and
networks DEMO innovation (38%). On the other hand, the most commonly used
methods to study new firm creation are qualitative, case-based methods (64%)DEMO
The choice of methods appears to be not only a reflection of the underlying
research questions, but also conditioned upon the availability of appropriate data.
The challenge of obtaining fine-grained, preferably longitudinal data, therefore,
DEMO to be greatest at the firm-level of analysis. As discussed previously, DEMO
lack of high-quality firm-level data constitutes a significant entry barrier into the
premier management and strategy journals.
When applying the description, categorization, and DEMO development frame-
work commonly observed in the evolution of research fields (DEMO, 1962; Sutton and
Staw, 1995; Christensen et al., 2002), we find that 111 articles (64%) describe the
phenomena, 14 DEMO (8%) offer some kind of categorization, and 48 articles (28%)
theorize about underlying relationships. The large number of articles focusing on DEMO
11Please note that some articles are studying university entrepreneurship in more than one country.
706
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
description of the university entrepreneurship phenomena DEMO indicative of a highly
fragmented field in the early stages of development. This is also echoed in the small
number of categorization attempts, which can bring more focus to the research on
university entrepreneurship.
We also DEMO what theoretical lenses, if any, are applied in these articles.
Not surprisingly for an emerging field, we find that the vast majority of the articles
(71% or 122 articles) are more or less atheoretical, focusing mainly on the
description of the phenomena and/or testing casually DEMO relationships without
invoking any discernible deductive logic. Most of the articles highlight specific
knowledge characteristics (e.g., tacit versus explicit), and how different DEMO
of knowledge affect the technology transfer process. Of the 51 articles (DEMO) that use
some kind of a theoretical lens, the most common lenses are derived from
sociology (11 articles or 32%), using predominantly network theory, and
from strategic management, applying the resource-based view of DEMO firm (nine
articles or 26%).
In summary, two important observations are noteworthy. First, the vast majority of
research on university entrepreneurship is atheoretical, indicative of a field in the
embryonic stage of development. Second, all articles published using some kind of
dominant theoretical lens (34 DEMO or 20%) were published post-1998, with 32 of
these articles (DEMO) published since 2001. This latter observation is heartening, as the
field clearly appears to be moving toward more theory-driven research, a trend that is
reflective of the field’s increasing maturity.
4. Discussion
Research on university DEMO is clearly burgeoning, yet it remains
a fragmented field. Currently, no literature review exists that specifically focuses on
university entrepreneurship and provides an DEMO framework to encompass
the different pieces making up university entrepreneurship (e.g., technology transfer,
university licensing, science parks, incubators, university spin-offs, DEMO, etc.).
The development of such a framework is a worthwhile DEMO because a field
cannot advance to a stage of theory building without an agreed-upon
categorization scheme (Christensen et al., 2002). This literature DEMO and the
resulting framework will also serve to make the field of university entrepreneurship
more accessible to novices, which in turn should enhance its diffusion and impact.
In addition, the framework presented herein acknowledges how each scholar’s
contribution is related to the overall contribution of the other scholars DEMO the field,
further enhancing the process of theory building.
The four research areas that emerged from a detailed analysis of the 173 articles
DEMO(i) entrepreneurial research university, (ii) productivity of TTOs, (iii) new firm
creation, and (iv) environmental context including networks of DEMO,
University entrepreneurship
707
Environmental context including
networks of innovation
New firm creation
DEMO of technology
transfer offices
Entrepreneurial
university
Figure 4
Conceptual framework of university entrepreneurship.
capture the major research streams on university entrepreneurship and the trends
DEMO each stream over the last two decades. More importantly, the integration
DEMO interaction of the four streams mirror the dynamic and evolutionary process
of the university innovation system. The connections between the four interrelated
and complementary DEMO are illustrated in the conceptual framework that
emerged from this study, DEMO depicted in Figure 4.
In the heart of the overall university innovation system lies the “entrepreneurial
university” that generates technology advances and facilitates the DEMO
diffusion process through intermediaries such as technology transfer offices
and the creation of incubators or science parks that spawn new firms. Increasingly
engaging in DEMO with industry, the core of the university system expands
to include DEMO outside the ivory tower with the goal of transforming
inventions into innovations for the betterment of society and to enhance the
university system’s cash DEMO and capital endowments. This is the area where we have
seen an increasing number of commercialization activities in (as well as
a corresponding number of studies focusing on) licensing, new venture creations,
and the DEMO, mostly facilitated through TTOs and other network mechanisms
(e.g., incubators DEMO science parks). At the same time, universities are embedded
Facilitating DEMO process
708
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
in a larger environmental context including DEMO of innovation. Feedback
from the external environment, including policy decisions, continuously
influences the way the universities participate in entrepreneurial activities.
In recent years, policy and culture have also shifted to become more favorable
toward university DEMO As the scope of an entrepreneurial university
expands, the core of DEMO system self-organizes in order to renew and transform
its mission, and DEMO toward embracing an economic development mandate.
In turn, interactions both within DEMO university system itself and between the
system and industry continue to renew the role of the university system, affect
significant societal influences from academia to society, and vice versa, as captured
by the feedback loops DEMO Figure 4.
It is noteworthy that a few existing studies focus on the intersection of elements
within our framework: between the university system and TTOs (Jones-Evans and
Klofsten 1999; Bercovitz et al., 2001; Siegel DEMO al., 2003b), between the university
system and new firms (Di Gregorio and Shane, 2003; Lockett et al., 2003; Lockett
and DEMO, 2005), between TTOs and new firms (Siegel et al., DEMO, 2004;
Leitch and Harrison, 2005), and between new firms and their external network
(Nicolaou and Birley, 2003a,b; Johansson et al., 2005; Rothaermel and Thursby,
2005a). Eliminating the barriers DEMO innovation systems requires further studies of
how to effectively facilitate the technology transfer process and what the key
resources and capabilities that reduce these DEMO are. For instance, conflicting
opinions over the university system’s mission have DEMO consistently identified across
the four streams as a key barrier to university entrepreneurship. This issue has not
been studied in the necessary depth, such as exploring how universities
should redesign their mandates to effectively manage technology DEMO involving
TTOs, new firm creations, and linkages with external innovation networks.
We discuss each of the research streams that emerged in greater detail DEMO,
highlighting not only contrasting findings within each stream, but also DEMO for
future research.
4.1
Entrepreneurial university
The research stream on the entrepreneurial university views entrepreneurial
activity as a step in the natural evolution of DEMO university system that emphasizes
economic development in addition to the more traditional mandates of education
and research. Consequently, most of the articles in this research stream attempt
to reveal organizational designs of universities that inhibit or DEMO the
commercialization of university inventions. Studies have revolved around incentive
systems, DEMO status, location, culture, intermediary agents, focus, experience,
and DEMO role and identity. In addition to organizational design, other studies
focus DEMO the characteristics and roles of faculty and the nature of the technology
University entrepreneurship 709
to be commercialized. Table 2 depicts the studies pertaining DEMO the entrepreneurial
university.12
While the above-mentioned factors comprise internal elements of an entrepre-
neurial university, scholars have also recognized that the process of university
entrepreneurship is influenced by external factors (Etzkowitz, 2003), most
notably DEMO laws and policies like the Bayh-Dole Act in the United States
(DEMO et al., 2001; Jacob et al., 2003), the surrounding DEMO (Gulbrandsen
and Smeby, 2005), and regional conditions (Friedman and DEMO, 2003).
In this stream, entrepreneurial activities are measured in various ways: existence
of a formal program, cooperation agreements, research support, DEMO,
marketing activities, quality of commercial output (licenses, patents), DEMO
in research joint ventures, existence of incubators and science parks, etc. Figure 5
illustrates a conceptual overview of this research stream, with representative
articles that focus on certain key aspects detailed in the boxes below DEMO figure.
Overall, scholars in the entrepreneurial university research stream attempt to
DEMO important questions, such as: why are some universities more entrepreneurial
than others? (Harmon et al., 1997; Henrekson and Rosenberg, 2001; DEMO
and Powell, 2001; Coupe, 2003; Etzkowitz, 2003; Friedman and Silberman, 2003;
Jacob et al., 2003; Siegel et al., DEMO, 2004); what are the barriers to universities
becoming more entrepreneurial? (Van Dierdonck et al., 1990; Reitan, 1997; Argyres
and Liebeskind, 1998; Collins and Wakoh, 2000; Henrekson and Rosenberg, 2001;
Feldman and Desrochers, 2003; Schmiemann and Durvy, 2003; Siegel et DEMO, 2003a,
2004; Mowery and Sampat, 2005); how can DEMO be more successful
in entrepreneurial activities? (Lee and Gaertner 1994; DEMO and Silberman,
2003; Owen-Smith and Powell, 2003; Saragossi and DEMO Pottelsberghe de la Potterie,
2003; Thursby and Thursby 2004; Grandi and Grimaldi, 2005; Powers and
McDougall, 2005a); and how do entrepreneurial universities relate to entities
outside the ivory tower? (Segal, 1986; Van Dierdonck et al., 1990; Bell, 1993;
Mansfield, 1995; Narin et al., 1997; Wallmark, 1997; Hall et al., DEMO; Mowery et al.,
2001; Cohen et al., 2002; Shane, 2002b; Gulbrandsen and Smeby, 2005; Moray and
Clarysse, 2005; DEMO and Scott, 2005b). There is no smooth path for any DEMO
change (Kuhn, 1962); the shift of the university system from an ivory tower
focusing on (basic) research and teaching into a DEMO entrepreneurial source of
technology is no exception. The paradigm shift calls for facilitation from inside
the system to accelerate technology diffusion (Etzkowitz and Klofsten, 2005).
Not surprisingly, many scholars are attempting to resolve the DEMO that arise as
universities become more entrepreneurial (Del Campo et al., 1999; Jensen and
Thursby, 2001; Debackere and Veugelers, 2005), DEMO the debates pertaining to
the evolution of the traditional university mission (DEMO, 1990; Grigg, 1994;
12While some articles span multiple themes, we categorized each article based on its dominant
theme in one research DEMO only to avoid overlap and redundancy.
Table 2
Entrepreneurial
Study
Agrawal and Henderson
(2002)
Argyres and Liebeskind
(1998)
Audretsch and Lehmann
(2005)
Bains (2005)
university
Research question(s) Data
To what extent do patents
represent the magnitude,
direction, and impact of
the knowledge transfer
from a university?
What inhibits universities
from adjusting their
policy and organizational
forms to commercialize
DEMO intellectual
commons?
Are technical universities
more successful in facil-
itating the spillover and
commercialization of
knowledge than other
universities?
How can UK DEMO
make money through
commercialization
options?
Interview with 68 professors
n/a
276 IPOs of high-tech firms in
Germany and 73 public
universities
Interviews DEMO senior academics
and commercialization officers in
several British universities;
95 UK biotech firms; biotech
academia’s salaries, and business
success rates
Dependent
variable(DEMO)
Publication beha-
vior, stock of
paper citations
n/a
Firm’s DEMO
n/a
Key findings
Focus on patents, in isolation, may sig-
nificantly misrepresent the nature of
universities’ impact on the economy.
Patents alone DEMO not describe the
nature of knowledge creation and
transfer.
Social-contractual commitments and
organizational standards can affect
property rights. The barriers come from
internal and DEMO parties’ adherence
to university’s historic commitment to
the intellectual commons.
Firm performance is not influenced by the
type of university. Technical universities
do not DEMO a differential impact on
firm performance when compared to
more general universities.
Four commercialization options for
academics: licensing their intellectual
property, owning shares DEMO a spin-out,
personal consulting and writing books.
Consulting is the economically most
rewarding option.
710
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Bell (1993)
Brouwer (2005)
Chrisman et al. (1995)
What is technology transfer
(TT), and why academia,
industry, DEMO govern-
ments may have an
interest in technology
transfer?
What is the relative inven-
tive performance of inside
inventors in incumbent
firms vs. DEMO inventors
(e.g., in universities)?
What are the effects of
DEMO modes for both
outside and inside
inventors?
What are the extent and
impact of entrepreneurial
activities of the faculty of
the University of DEMO?
n/a
n/a
Survey of 367 faculty; 29 personal
DEMO
n/a
n/a
n/a
Academia has an interest in TT because of
(i) contribution to the society,
(ii) financial DEMO and (iii) access to
relevant industrial assets. Industries are
interested to (a) maintain a comparative
advantage in the core technologies,
(b) access to complementary research,
(c) save R&D time and cost,(d) build
image of affiliation with academic
partners.
Outside inventors (e.g., university inven-
tors) have greater incentives to invent if
they DEMO fully appropriate the gains
from invention. Outside inventors can
accelerate technical progress as they
prompt established firms to commer-
cialize inventions. Outside inventors
would DEMO to license to an entrant
firm when fixed fee licenses cannot be
auctioned due to the immaturity of the
invention.
Faculty entrepreneurship, which contri-
butes to the advancement of technol-
ogy and industrial diversification, has
been increasing over time. Faculty of
medicine created more ventures.
Ventures created by DEMO who remain
at the university tend to be smaller.
(continued)
DEMO entrepreneurship
711
Table 2
Continued
Study
Cohen et al. (2002)
Collins and Wakoh
(2000)
Conceicao et al.
(1998)
Coupe (2003)
Research question(s)
What are the extent and nature of the
contribution DEMO public research
(university and government research
institutes) to industrial R&D?
What are the barriers of the technol-
ogy transfer in Japan?DEMO
What are the main determinants of the
successful policies for university
intellectual property protection?
Does more money spent on academic
research lead to DEMO patents? Will
universities get more patents per
dollar spent on R&DEMO once they
established a technology transfer
office (TTO)?
Data
1478 laboratories
n/a
n/a
R&D expenditure
data and patents
Dependent DEMO(s)
Percentage of R&D
projects using public
research; suggestion
DEMO new R&D projects;
contribution to R&D
project completion
n/a
n/a
Number of university
patents
Key findings
Firms’ own manufacturing DEMO
(e.g., buyers, suppliers) are more domi-
nant sources of information compared
to public research. Public research con-
tributes to industries: (i) new R&D
projects and (ii) completion of existing
projects in DEMO measure. Large firms
use public research more than small
firms.
Japan’s barriers in university technology
transfer are: (i) little experience mana-
ging the technology transfer processes,
and (ii) lack of complementary and
intermediary DEMO that can facil-
itate transferring technologies.
University policy on intellectual property
should avoid excessive commercializa-
tion concerns that could threaten
university’s integrity.
More money DEMO on academic research
leads to more university patents, with
elasticities that DEMO similar to those
found for commercial firms. Bayh-Dole
Act was not found to have a positive
effect on patenting activities of univer-
sities. TTOs DEMO patenting output.
712
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Debackere and
Veugelers (2005)
Del Campo et al.
(1999)
DEMO (1998)
How do technology transfer mechan-
isms evolve to contribute DEMO an
effective commercialization of
academic science base?
What is the lesson from the university’s
attempt to commercialize SQUID
(superconducting quantum infer-
ence devices)?
What are the cognitive effects of the
new university/industry linkages on
the way scientists view research,
interpret the scientific role, and
interact with colleagues, companies
and universities?
Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven
R&D
n/a
150 interviews and
longitudinal case
studies of
University of
Colorado DEMO the
State University of
New York
n/a
n/a
n/a
Framework of governance structure that
captures the formation of effective
mechanisms: an appropriate organiza-
tional structure (e.g., unambiguous
regulation of ownership titles and
DEMO rights, appropriate mix of
incentive mechanisms targeted to the
research group DEMO individual research-
ers, decentralized management style, a
matrix structure for the interface/
liaison), process (e.g., a well-balanced
process to manage DEMO monitor con-
tract research), and context (e.g., active
management policy) within university.
Lessons: (i) failure of university to align
intellectual DEMO (IP) incentives are
likely to weaken the potential for a
strong IP position; (ii) Technology
transfer office needs to take a business-
like approach in identifying appropriate
technology-transfer strategies.
The closing gap between research DEMO
capitalization of knowledge has
encouraged scientist faculty to look at
their research results from two per-
spectives: traditional and entrepreneur-
ial. Three styles of participation in
technology transfer have emerged:
hands-off, knowledgeable participant,
and seamless web.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
713
Table 2
Continued
Study
Etzkowitz (2003)
Etzkowitz and
Klofsten (2005)DEMO
Etzkowitz et al.
(2000)
Research question(s)
How does DEMO university transition
from a research university into
the entrepreneurial university?
How does a university undergo its
second revolution into entrepre-
neurial university?
DEMO is the future and evolving
role of the university globally?
Data
Interviews at US universities,
case studies of European
and Latin American
DEMO, and archival
research
n/a
n/a
Dependent
variable(s)
DEMO/a
n/a
n/a
Key findings
Academic entrepreneurship is endogenous
since the internal organization of a research
university consists of research groups that
DEMO firm-like qualities (when research
funding is awarded on a competitive basis)DEMO
It is also exogenous since university-based
invention is part of the result of external
influence.
Research groups in the university share
homologous qualities with DEMO start-up firm.
There is a parallel bi-directional evolution in
a shift from an individual to a group focus.
An entrepreneurial university can generate
a DEMO strategic direction in both
academic and economic development
goals. It also follows an interactive model of
innovation that incorporates linear and
reverse linear modes.
DEMO is an entrepreneurial university with an
academic structure and function that is
based on an alignment of economic devel-
opment with research and teaching DEMO
academic missions.
714
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Feldman and
Desrochers (2003)
Feller (1990)
Freier (1986)
Friedman and
Silberman (2003)
How does historical context shape
research universities’ interaction
with commercial activity?
What are the effects that changing
university DEMO in equity
arrangements to commercialize
faculty research may have on the
traditional roles of an university?
Can research institutes contribute
to the development DEMO science-
based industry without any
industrial expertise?
What are the characteristics of
research universities that affect
the number of invention disclo-
sures? What are the university
policies, incentives, regional and
local characteristics that affect
DEMO technology transfer (TT)
output?
John Hopkins University
used for DEMO study
n/a
Weizmann Institute of
Science used for case
study
AUTM, National Research
Council, universities’
published policy on
distribution of royalty
income
DEMO/a
n/a
n/a
Invention disclosure,
licenses executed,
licenses generat-
ing income,
cumulative active
licenses, license
income
John Hopkins university has not generated
highly visible economic benefits for the
local area because DEMO was never one of the
university’s objectives. In addition, there
was DEMO general lack of incentives and
encouragement for commercial activity.
Commercialization efforts by universities have
changed the determinants of universities’
intellectual and political capital. Previously,DEMO
those types of capital were determined
solely by scientific and technical expertise.
Currently, they are also driven by universi-
ties’ role as engaged but monetarily disin-
terested participants in social discourse.
University and research institutes can DEMO
the center of science-based industries
without altering their character, as shown
DEMO one university in Israel. This model was
successfully copied by other institutions
in Israel.
Factors enhancing university TT: greater
rewards for faculty involvement in TT,
proximity to regions with concentration of
high-tech firms, a clear mission in support
of TT, and the experience of technology
transfer office. The number of invention
disclosures influences licensing agreements,
while faculty quality DEMO the number of
disclosures.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
715
Table 2
Continued
Study
Geuna (1998)
Goldfarb and
Henrekson (2003)DEMO
Research question(s)
What are the factors that
influence university parti-
cipation in R&D coopera-
tive projects supported
by the European
Union (EU)?
What are the national
policies that are most
efficient in promoting
the commercialization of
university-generated
knowledge?
Data
Population of universities in
DEMO countries (except
Austria, Finland,
Luxemburg, and
Sweden), university DEMO
acteristics, and their
frequency in EU-funded
R&D projects.
International Association
DEMO Universities (1991,
1993), and the World of
Learning (1995).
n/a
Dependent variable(s)
Whether a university participated
in DEMO EU-funded R&D project;
number of times a university
participated in EU-funded R&D
projects.
n/a
Key findings
The probability of taking DEMO in an EU-
funded R&D project depends primarily
on the scientific research productivity of
the respective university. Scientific
research productivity, size of university,
scientific fields, and differences among
countries explain the frequency of
university participation in EU-funded
R&D projects.
Top-down nature of Swedish policies of
DEMO university inventions
and Swedish academic environment
discourage academics in actively parti-
cipating in the commercialization of
their inventions. US institutional setting,
characterized by DEMO among
universities for research funds and
scientists, has led to a DEMO active
commercialization of faculty inventions.
716
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Grandi and Grimaldi
(2005)
Grigg (1994)
Gulbrandsen and
Smeby (2005)
Hall et al. (2001)
What are the organizational
factors of an university
that affect the success of
its start-ups ?
42 Italian university
start-ups
How do universities need to n/a
change given DEMO new
realities?
What does industry funding
contribute to university
faculty’s research and
entrepreneurial activities?
1967 tenured professors at
four Norwegian
universities
Why DEMO the percentage of
universities as a research
partner in RJV (research
DEMO ventures) so low
(only 15%)? What are the
barriers?
38 Advanced Technology
Program projects
Market attractiveness and articula-
tion of business DEMO (BI)
n/a
Publication output, commercial
output (patents, commercial
products, and new firms,
consulting contracts)
Probability of insurmountable
intellectual property (IP) barriers
(i) Attractiveness of BI is positively influ-
DEMO by the market orientation of the
academic founders as well as their
frequency of interaction with external
agents. (ii) Articulation of BI is DEMO
affected by the role-articulation as well
as prior joint experience of the academic
founders.
Universities need to be entrepreneurial
organizations if they are to DEMO and
sustain their role and purpose in society,
which is to foster creativity and
responsiveness to change in cultural
and ethical as well DEMO in scientific,
technological and economics
dimensions.
There exists a significant relationship
between industry funding and research
performance: faculty with industry
funding conduct more applied research,
collaborate more with external
researchers both in academia and DEMO
industry, and report more scientific
publications and entrepreneurial results.
IP issues DEMO firms and universities do
exist. The likelihood of IP issues
increases when (i) the research is
expected to lead to less appropriable
results, (ii) the firm has had partnering
experience with a university, and (iii) the
duration of research is relatively short.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
717
Table 2
Continued
Study
Research question(s)
Hall et al. (2003)
What roles do universities
play in research partner-
ships? What are the
economic consequences
associated with such
roles?
Harmon et al. (1997) Does the technology trans-
fer (TT) process depend
on size and age of reci-
pient (firm)?
Does the explosion of uni-
DEMO patenting imply an
increasing university
contribution?
Henderson et al.
(1998)DEMO
Data
352 Advanced
Technology Program
pre-commercial
research projects
19 companies who had
acquired 23 different
technologies
Patents assigned to
universities in period
1965–mid 1992, and
citations of those
patents until the end
of 1992.
Dependent variable(DEMO)
Probability of early termina-
tion, difficulty of acquir-
ing basic DEMO,
problems in the project,
unproductive research
time and cost, DEMO
mance (new applications
of technology developed,
commercialized sooner
than expected)DEMO
n/a
Importance of patent (total
citations received), gener-
ality DEMO patent
Key findings
Projects with university involvement tend to be in
areas involving new science and therefore experi-
ence more difficulty and delay, yet are more likely
not to be aborted prematurely. Universities are
contributing to DEMO research awareness and
insights.
Identified five TT processes based on source of
technology and nature of the transferee. Most
successful transfers are based on DEMO prior
connections between people in the laboratories
and in the business communities.
The relative importance and generality of university
patents has fallen at the DEMO time as the sheer
number of university patents has increased.
718
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Henrekson and
Rosenberg (2001)
Hicks et al. (2001)
Jacob DEMO al. (2003)
Jensen and Thursby
(2001)
What are the key institu-
tional factors that are
crucial determinants of
science-based
entrepreneurship?
DEMO the national innovation
system itself being
reshaped during this time
of transition? Can we see
at least a hint of new US
national system of inno-
vation emerging?
How does one Swedish
University become an
DEMO
university?
Does giving the right to a
university to license its
inventions increase the
speed of
commercialization?
National accounts, basic n/a
science and technol-
ogy statistics, main
economic indicators;
science and engineer-
ing indicators
CHI’s Tech-Line" data-
base, Social Citation
Index
n/a
DEMO University of
Technology
n/a
62 TTOs of US
universities
Managers responses to out-
come about license rev-
enue, license agreements
executed, inventions
DEMO, spon-
sored research, and
patents awarded
The authors point out the weaknesses of the Swedish
incentive structure: low rate of return to human
capital investment, low incentives to become an
entrepreneur and to expand existing entrepre-
neurial ventures, and low incentives within the
university system to become more entrepreneurial.
It follows that to become a more entrepreneurial
university, there need to be stronger individual
incentives.
One of the changes underway is DEMO enhanced
entrepreneurial activity by universities. For
instance, universities have played an DEMO role
in patenting (e.g., Harvard and MIT in Boston).
There also has been intensifying of links between
research and innovation (e.g., DEMO higher citation
rates of patents to scientific papers).
Creating an entrepreneurial university requires
changes in infrastructure and culture. Elements for
Swedish innovation policy DEMO macrolevel (policy
vision and implementation) and microlevel (uni-
versity organization) flexibility and diversity.
Vast majority of inventions licensed are so embryonic
that DEMO managers consider inventor
cooperation in further development crucial for the
commercialization process. To induce such coop-
eration from research faculty, they have to be
provided with piece-rate incentive, e.g., royalty.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
719
Table 2
Study
Continued
Kenney and Goe
(2004)
Klofsten and Jones-
Evans (2000)
Laukkanen (2003)
Lee (1996)
Research question(s)
What explains the difference of
professorial entrepreneurship
patterns?
What DEMO the entrepreneurial
activities of academics in two
small European countries
(Sweden DEMO Ireland)?
What are the drivers and issues
when a university DEMO the
third task (regional engine of
innovation and economic
growth)?
What is the emerging role that US
academics are expected to play
DEMO economic development? What
roles they believe they can play in
industrial DEMO?
Data
Historical data on
UC-Berkeley and
Stanford and 179
mail surveys at both
universities.
1194 academics from
four universities in
Sweden, and 663
academics from five
universities in
Ireland
Interview with four
faculty members
A DEMO survey of
approx. 1000
faculty
Dependent
variable(s)
n/a
n/a
n/a
Faculty support for
user-oriented
applied research,
faculty support DEMO
commercialization
of university
research
Key findings
Being embedded in an academic department and
disciplines in which cultures are supportive to
entrepreneurial activity can help DEMO the
disincentives created by a university environment
that is not strongly supportive of these activities.
There is considerable entrepreneurial experience
among academics in both DEMO and Ireland.
There is a high degree of involvement in soft
activities such as consultancy and contract
research but not in new firm creation DEMO
technology spin-offs.
It is important for faculty to understand basic
economic mechanisms and preconditions of busi-
ness. Research suggests unintentional, but dys-
functional business attitudes of faculty.
Most faculty support universities’ active role in
economic development. DEMO, a majority of
them refused the idea of a close business
DEMO with private industry. Two concerns
regarding university technology transfer are raised:
(i) the perception of declining federal R&D support,
(ii) interference of university-industry cooperation
with academic freedom.
720
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Lee (2000)
Lee et al. (1994)
Link and Scott
(2005)
What are the incentives for faculty
members to collaborate with
DEMO and for firms to collaborate
with university faculty?
Does commercialization of aca-
demic invention have a place in a
research university?
Under DEMO conditions will a
research joint venture (RJV)
involve a university DEMO a research
partner?
Two separate but
similar surveys con-
ducted in 1997, one
for faculty members
(N¼ 427) and
another for industry
technology man-
agers in member
firms of the
Association for
University
Technology
DEMO
(N¼ 306).
Iowa State University
913 RJVs
n/a
n/DEMO
Probability of univer-
sity participation
in an RJV
The most significant benefit realized by firms through
collaboration is an increased access to new
university DEMO and discoveries, and the most
significant benefits by faculty members is DEMO
plementing their own academic research by
securing funds for graduate students and lab
equipment, and by seeking insights into their own
research. A relatively small percentage of faculty
members believe that such collaboration offers
entrepreneurial opportunity DEMO them.
The probability of commercializing academic
research depends on the speed and the ability of
the university to reduce its commercial risk.
Commercialization of DEMO invention is not a
sequential process.
Larger RJVs are more likely to invite a university to
join the venture as a research partner than DEMO
RJVs, because larger ventures are less likely to
expect substantial additional DEMO prob-
lems because larger ventures have both a lower
marginal cost and receive a higher marginal value
from university R&D contribution to the DEMO
innovative output.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
721
Table 2
Continued
Study
Louis et al. (1989)
Louis et al. (2001)
Lowe (1993)
Research question(s)
What are DEMO behavioral
patterns of academic
entrepreneurs?
Are there differences in entre-
preneurial behavior between
clinical and non-clinical
faculty in the life sciences and
industry DEMO?
Which mechanism will univer-
sities choose in exploiting
their innovations: DEMO,
licensing, collaboration, or
consultancy?
Data
997 scientists and key adminis-
trators in major research
universities
847 clinical and non-clinical
life sciences DEMO in 49 US
universities.
203 respondents from British
universities
Dependent variable(s)
Large-scale science, supple-
mental income, industrial
support for university
research, patenting, direct
commercial involvement
Secrecy about own research,
productivity in teaching and
publishing, service
n/a
Key findings
Life scientists in research-intensive
universities are modestly entrepre-
neurial. There is some evidence that
they have become DEMO interested
in commercial activities. Individual-
level variables are important in pre-
dicting large-scale science and sup-
plemental income. Institutions
cannot easily engineer
entrepreneurship.
Non-clinical DEMO are more likely to
be involved in academic-industry
relationships. Non-clinical faculty are
more likely to be secretive about
their research. Faculty involved in
entrepreneurial DEMO are more
likely to be secretive about their
research in general.
Internal appropriability and external
appropriability determine the overall
opportunity of an innovation and
DEMO in understanding university’s
optimum exploitation options. Both
appropriabilities help universities to
decide the appropriate exploitation
mechanism.
722
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Mansfield (1995)
Mansfield (1998)
Markman et al.
(2004)
What are characteristics of uni- 66 firms and 321 scientists
versities that DEMO contribu-
ted the most towards
technological changes in the
economy?
Does the finding of the con-
tribution of academic
research in Mansfield (1991)
continue to hold?
77 major firms
Does the incentive system DEMO
entrepreneurial activities at
US universities?
Interviews with 128 TTO direc-
tors, AUTM licensing surveys
Contribution to technological
change (the number of cita-
DEMO to faculty’s work)
n/a
The number of equity licenses
to new ventures, the number
of university business incu-
bators, the number DEMO
startup ventures that are
based on university
technology
The extent to which a university is
credited by firms are related directly
to the quality DEMO university’s faculty
in the relevant department, to the
R&D expenditures DEMO the university,
and the proportion of the industry’s
members located near by. For basic
research, firms strive for best scien-
tists regardless the location. For
applied research, location does
matter.
The evidence for 1986–1994 confirms
earlier results for 1975–1985.
Compared to the previous findings,
however, there is an increase in the
percentage of new products and
processes based DEMO academic
research and a decrease in the
average time lag between academic
research results and the first
commercialization.
Incentives to scientists and to their
DEMO are negatively related
to entrepreneurial activity. Pay to
transfer technology offices’ person-
nel is positively related to entrepre-
neurial activity.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
723
Table 2
Study
Continued
Mok (2005)
Moray and
Clarysse (2005)DEMO
Research question(s) Data
How and what strategies do
universities in DEMO Kong
have adopted to promote an
entrepreneurial spirit and
practices among academics?
What is the role of the
Government of the Hong
Kong DEMO Administrative
Region (HKSAR) in promoting
entrepreneurship?
How do changes of technology
transfer (TT) policies in the
parent organization affect
resource endowments DEMO
entrepreneurial firms?
n/a
Interviews, survey and second-
ary data DEMO a public
research organization in
Belgium and its science-
based entrepreneurial firms
Dependent
variable(s)
n/a
n/a
Key findings
The HKSAR DEMO a coordinator and facilitator
role to engage the university and industry in
collaboration and fostering entrepreneur-
ship. HKSTAR has promoted entrepreneuri-
alism by extending DEMO network system and
involving non-governmental actors in
entrepreneurial activities. The reductions of
government financing in higher education
coupled with revitalization and marketiza-
tion processes DEMO universities may enhance
university entrepreneurial activities.
Changes in TT policies and practices have an
impact on entrepreneurial firms’ resource
endowments (financial, technology, and
people) and performance (financial value
and employment). Development of a
DEMO incubator requires continuous
organizational learning.
724
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Morgan et al.
(2001)
Mowery et al.
(2001)
Mowery DEMO
Sampat
(2001b)
n/a
Is the Bayh-Dole Act the basic
DEMO of the rise of university
patenting and licensing, or
have other DEMO influenced
growth in these activities?
How did US university patent
policies and university
patenting evolve during the
‘pre-Bayh-Dole’ era?
Patent applications, grant
awards and commercializa-
tion outcomes from two
1995 National Science
Foundation surveys
DEMO and licensing activ-
ities from University of
California, Stanford
University, and Columbia
University
US Patent and Trademark
Office’s (USPTO), DIALOG
Corporation’s Patents/
CLAIMS database, NBER
database
n/a
n/a
n/a
The paper defined and used some new
indicators—patent activity rates, patent
activity shares and patent success rates—to
examine patent activity by faculty’s
employment sector, educational field, age,
gender, status and location, technological
area, and DEMO S&E job characteristics.
A significant portion of university patent
activities results in commercialized outputs.
Study recommends that NSF collect survey
data on patenting DEMO, including com-
mercialization outcomes, of the S&E work-
force at least every four years.
Bayh-Dole was only one of several important
factors (e.g., federal financial support,
shifted portfolio of university research)
behind the rise of university patenting and
licensing activity. The act appears to DEMO
had little effect on the content of academic
research. Nevertheless, it DEMO the entry
into patenting and licensing by many
universities.
The data show rapid growth of patenting by
private universities during 1970s, the
expansion of direct university involvement
in patent management, and the steady
growth of biomedical patents as a share of
overall university patenting during the
postwar period.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
725
Table 2
Continued
Study
Mowery and
Sampat (2005)
Research question(s)
Can the model of US
university-industry
technology transfer be
applied in DEMO OECD
countries?
Mowery et al.
(2002)
Whether and why DEMO the
importance of the post
1980s patents improve
during the 1980s and
1990s?
Data
n/a
All university patents
applied (1981–1992),
DEMO issued before
1994
Dependent variable(s)
n/a
The number of citations (to
academic patents or to the
sample of non-academic
control patents), the number
of citations (to academic
patents-incumbent, to aca-
demic DEMO, to
the sample of non-academic
control patents)
Key findings
Paper DEMO the effect of Bayh-Dole on
university-industry collaboration and tech-
nology transfer in the United States, and
concludes that efforts to emulate the Bayh-
Dole in other OECD countries are likely to
have modest success at best DEMO
greater attention to the underlying struc-
tural differences among the higher educa-
tion systems of these nations.
The importance of entrant institutions’
patents improved DEMO the 1980s and
1990s, thus increasing the average impor-
tance of DEMO academic patents relative to
non-academic patents. Links with a
research corporation during the ‘pre-Bayh-
Dole’ era has little influence over changes in
the importance DEMO generality of incum-
bent or entrant institutions’ patents during
the 1980s and 1990s.
726
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Mowery and
Ziedonis
(2002)
Narin et al.
(1997)
Nelson (2005)
Whether and how academic
patent quality and quantity
have changed DEMO and
after the Bayh-Dole Act (BDA)
in the United States?DEMO
What is the contribution of
public science to industrial
technology?
In regards to university tech-
nology licensing activities,
how can multiple logics DEMO
enacted and manipulated;
and how can the results of
the manipulation become
institutionalized?
Invention disclosures,
patents, and licenses
of Columbia
University, University
of California and
Stanford University
430,226 non-patent
references of the
397,660 US patents
issued in 1987–1988
and 1993–1994
Data associated with DEMO
music department
(such as licensing
activities and gradu-
ates) at Stanford
University.
Importance of patent, general-
ity of patent
n/a
n/a
Effects of BDA on patenting and the content
of academic research are DEMO to be
modest in two universities. After BDA
licensing intensified but with declining
yield. Authors found no decrease of
importance and generality of patents DEMO
two universities after BDA, in contrast to
Henderson et al. (1998). However, less
experienced incumbents and new entrant
universities appear to have lower patent
quality than that of the experienced uni-
versities, which may explain the overall
decreasing quality.
Public science is a driving force behind DEMO
technology and supporting US industry.
Science that is contributing to high tech-
nology is mainstream, quite basic, quite
recent, and published in highly influential
journals.
The paper examines the Stanford University
music department’s activities, and the
interaction between technical, commercial,
and musical logics over a 30-year period.
The positive feedback between various
logics leads to a mutual dependence,DEMO
solidifying the centrality of musical com-
position within the department while
emphasizing the complementary role of
technical and commercial efforts.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
727
Table 2
Continued
Study
Nelson (2001)
Nerkar and Shane
(2003)DEMO
Oliver (2004)
Owen-Smith (2003)
Research question(s)
n/a
When do start-ups that
exploit patented aca-
demic knowledge
survive?
DEMO are the relations
between existing scientific
collaborations and the
capital (scientific DEMO
intellectual) of scientists?
Does their institutional
employment affect the
relationship?DEMO
What is the effect of
increased university
engagement in commer-
cial activities?
Data
n/a
128 firms founded to
exploit MIT-assigned
inventions, interviews
with founders, and a
survey of R&D managers
Survey of 291
biotechnology-related
scientists in Israel
18 years of panel data of
89 most DEMO
sive US universities,
USPTO data.
Dependent variable(s)
n/a
Hazard rate of failure
Number of academic,
industrial, local, interna-
DEMO, and total
collaborations
Patents, publications’
impact, R&D expenditures
Key DEMO
Observes the performance of universities after
Bayh-Dole. To be effective over the long
run, universities should stay focused in the
arenas of open public science and educa-
tion, that is, focus on their comparative
advantage DEMO national innovation systems.
Start-up’s survival is a function of the effec-
tiveness of radical technology and patent
protection scope. Those two factors are
contingent DEMO and moderated by the
industry environment (i.e., industry
concentration).
At the time of the survey, few scientists in
Israel had industrial collaborations.
Scientists with significantly more industrial
collaborations were more likely to submit
patent DEMO
Increased patenting and commercial engage-
ment of US universities has altered the rules
of inter-university competition. The success
in competition becomes dependent on
interplay DEMO commercial and
academic achievements.
728
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Owen-Smith and Powell
(2001)
Owen-Smith and Powell
(2003)
Powell DEMO Owen-Smith
(1998)
What are the factors that
explain faculty
disclosures?DEMO
How do universities learn to
commercialize research
and develop the capacity
to patent effectively?
What are the primary fac-
tors that blur the DEMO
of labor between acade-
mia and industry in life
sciences? What DEMO the
consequences for univer-
sities treating knowledge
as intellectual property?
Two university campuses
Panel data of 89 universi-
ties, interview with two
TLOs
Data were from National
Science Board
n/a
Number of forward cita-
DEMO, blockbuster patents
n/a
Faculty decisions to disclose are shaped by
DEMO perceptions of the benefits of patent
protection. The incentives are influenced by
the perceived costs of interacting with
technology transfer offices and by institu-
DEMO environments (supportive or opposi-
tional to commercialization).
The increase of DEMO enhances the
impact of patent-portfolios. Connections to
commercial networks are of great value,
but too many linkages can preclude the
development of a DEMO flow of higher
impact patents. The advantages of
embeddedness and experience depend
upon having both available stocks of basic
life science and a higher DEMO flow of
patents.
Changes in the nature of knowledge, in
federal DEMO and corporate practice have
caused the irreversible change of research
universities. Key factors driving the devel-
opment in life sciences and the blurring
boundary DEMO the expanding opportunities,
not resource scarcity. In consequence, it
might DEMO the traditional university goal.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
729
Table 2
Continued
Study
Powers and McDougall
(2005a)
Poyago-Theotoky et al.
(2002)
Reitan (1997)
Research question(s) Data
How do the university’s
technology transfer (TT)
strategy and its local
environment affect the
university’s TT success at
spinning-off firms?
What are the antecedents
DEMO consequences of
policies to promote
university-industry
partnerships?
Was a specific entrepre-
neurial program appro-
priate and successful?
134 US universities
(92 public, 42 private)
data from various sources
n/a
64 entrepreneurs in Norway
Dependent variable(s)
The number of licenses with
private companies DEMO
subsequently went
public, royalties received
on product sales
n/a
n/DEMO
Key findings
University TT selectivity, TT support, and
the local entrepreneurial density have
main effects on TT performance. At
public universities, entrepreneurial den-
sity negatively moderates the relation
between university TT selectivity and its
success DEMO spinning-off firms.
Review of the literature indicates that
there is still little knowledge about the
impact of the rise of university–industry
partnerships. These partnerships DEMO
needed to address innovation market
failures, especially those relating to
basic DEMO
The entrepreneurial program was not
appropriate in terms of compatibility,
complementarity, and realism. It was
successful quantitatively (number of
start-ups, survival, DEMO commercial uti-
lization rates). But it was not successful
in creating substantial employment.
730
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Roberts and Peters
(1981)
Rosenberg and Nelson
(1994)
Sampat DEMO al. (2003)
Why do so few university-
generated ideas ever
DEMO commercial
impact?
What are universities’ roles
in promoting technical
advances in American
university (given historical
and current
circumstances)?
Does the result DEMO
Henderson et al. (1998)’s
study hold if the study is
DEMO using a larger
period of data set?
Interview with 66 faculty
members from four
departments at MIT
n/a
University patents applied
(1975–1988); patent
granted before 1992;
counts of citations until
the end DEMO 1999.
n/a
n/a
Importance of patent (total
citations received), gener-
ality of patent
Although a majority of faculty can be
expected to generate ideas of potential
commercial value, a smaller fraction of
them act to commercialize the ideas.
Commercialization behavior is linked to
background characteristics DEMO the
person and is predicted by the previous
behaviors.
Although strength of university research
lies in basic research, significant portion
of university research are allocated in
engineering and applied science.
University should develop policy con-
cerning DEMO division of labor between
basic and applied research since indus-
try does a better job in the short-term
problem solving.
Result of Henderson et DEMO study reflect
changes in the intertemporal distribu-
tion of citations to university patents,
rather than a significant change in the
total number of DEMO these patents
eventually receive. Quality decline iden-
tified by Henderson et al. disappears in
the analysis with longer time period.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
731
Table 2
Continued
Study
Saragossi et al.
(2003)
Schmiemann and
Durvy (2003)
Segal (1986)
Research question(s)
What is DEMO evolution of
patenting perfor-
mance in Belgian
Universities?
n/a
What is implied by the
Cambridge
Phenomenon?
Data
European patent appli-
cations DEMO six Belgian
universities
n/a
n/a
Dependent variable(s)
n/a
n/a
n/a
Key findings
Patent applications increased in the DEMO nineties.
One determinant of patenting performance is the
effective collaboration with specialized institu-
tions. Patent statistics could be a misleading
indicator of university’s technological DEMO
since inventions can be assigned to other
institutions.
Authors examine some differences in university
technology transfer between Europe and the
United States. They suggest DEMO European uni-
versities can enhance their effectiveness in tech-
nology transfer if such activities are given more
visibility and prestige, enhanced public support,
and formal procedures to facilitate benchmarking.
Cambridge Phenomenon is the growth of DEMO
industries inside and around Cambridge, England.
Here, small firms and universities have special
roles. It implies that the university-industry linkages
are central to DEMO start-ups’ strategic evolution,
but this was under-researched and misunderstood
in Britain.
732
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Shane (2004b)
Shane (2002)
Siegel et al. (2003a)
What is the effect of the
Bayh-Dole Act in the
US on DEMO
patenting?
How does the interac-
tion between
university and
entrepreneurial firms
differ from that
between university
and large firms?
What are the DEMO
and outcomes of UITT
(university–industry
technology transfer)?
And how to improve
the process?
Patents assigned to
universities across 117
lines of DEMO
n/a
98 interviews with UITT
stakeholders
Annual log-odds of the
university share of
patents
n/a
n/a
The effectiveness of licensing in DEMO line of business is
significantly correlated with university’s share of
patents in the post-Bayh-Dole period, but not in
the pre-Bayh-Dole period. The Bayh-Dole Act
provided incentives for universities to increase
patenting in those fields in which DEMO is an
effective mechanism for acquiring new technical
knowledge.
There are six different ways in which university-
entrepreneurial firm interaction may differ from
university-large DEMO interaction in contract
research, four ways in consulting, eight ways in
technology licensing, and three ways in technol-
ogy development.
Three categories of stakeholders (university scientists,
university technology managers and administra-
tors, firm DEMO and entrepreneurs) have
different perspectives on the outputs of UITT.
Barriers DEMO UITT: culture clashes, bureaucratic
inflexibility, poorly designed reward systems, and
ineffective management of TTO. How to improve:
eradicating cultural and informational DEMO;
flexible university policies; improve staffing prac-
tices; devote more resources to UITT; reward the
engagement in UITT; encourage informal rela-
tionships DEMO social networks.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
733
Table 2
Continued
Study
Research question(s)
Siegel et al.
(2004)
How do stakeholders of
university-industry
technology transfer (UITT)
define the outputs of the
process? What are the
organizational/managerial
barriers to UITT?
Sine et al. (2003)
Thursby and
Kemp (2002)
DEMO are the effects of institu-
tional prestige on the ability
of a university to license its
inventions?
What is the overall productivity
of DEMO licensing activ-
ities as well as the produc-
tivity of individual
universities?
Data
55 interviews of
98 UITT stake-
holders at five US
DEMO
universities
Licensing rate of
102 US universities
from (AUTM), US
DEMO & World
Report, Gourman
Report
AUTM licensing
survey data of US
DEMO
Dependent variable(s)
n/a
Annual count of new
technology licensing
and option agree-
ments established
by the university
University’s efficiency
measured by DEMO
paring its commer-
cialization input
(i.e., TTO staffs and
federal support) and
output (licenses,
patents, royalties,
and disclosures)
Key findings
Proposed improvements: greater rewards for faculty
involvement in TT; allocate DEMO resources to TTO;
mutual understanding, especially in terms of culture;DEMO
establishing personal relationships between scientists
and practitioners which are more important than
contractual relationships in UITT; TTO staff with
experience and skills in marketing, negotiation, and
know-how; and increase of university flexibility.
Finally, university DEMO in UITT will increase its
basic research activities.
Institutional prestige influences the number of licenses
that a university annually generates over and above
the DEMO that is explained by the university’s past
licensing performance.
The increase of commercial activities is attributed to the
changing environment within universities and an
DEMO desire of industries for university technol-
ogies. Private universities tend to be more efficient in
commercialization than public, while universities with
a medical school are less likely to be efficient. The
lower the research quality of DEMO university the more
efficient it is in commercial activity. The low efficiency
of high-quality research universities in TT may be a
result of the DEMO for outputs unrelated to
licensing (such as basic research) instead of incom-
petence in licensing.
734
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Thursby and
Thursby (2004)
Thursby and
Thursby (2005)
Van DEMO
et al. (1990)
How important are university
faculty in the DEMO and
development of inventions?
What is the relationship
between faculty gender and
faculty disclosure and licen-
sing activity?
What are the attitudes DEMO the
Belgian academic community
towards university-industry
technology transfer?
112 firms that
recently licensed
university
inventions
4621 science and
engineering
faculty at eleven
US DEMO
over 17-year
period. These
faculty are listed in
PhD-granting
departments in
National Research
Council 1995
report.
300 university
laboratories at 13
Belgian universities
The DEMO of time
that faculty are used
in further
development
First regression:
gender. Second:
whether there is a
disclosure or not.
n/a
DEMO participation through informal and formal
channels is important to licensing process. The use of
faculty through sponsored research in lieu of license is
closely DEMO to the amount of basic research
conducted by firms. The use of faculty within the
terms of a license is related to the prevalence DEMO
personal contacts between industry researchers and
university faculty.
There are 8.55% of the faculty who are female, and
mostly younger faculty. These women are most
represented in the biological sciences. They are less
likely to disclose DEMO than men while there are
no significant differences in publication patterns. The
disclosure activity of women and men converges over
the sample period.
Authors’ DEMO refute the received wisdom that
academia has a cultural aversion towards involvement
with industry. Professors fear, however, that industrial
liaison office will control DEMO relationship with
industry. Technology brokerage firms, as a transfer
mechanism, are considered less effective due to the
importance of personal relations.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
735
Table 2
Continued
Study
Van Looy et al.
(2004)
Wallmark (DEMO)
Wright et al. (2004a)
Research question(s)
Can DEMO and
scientific performance in
academia be reconciled?
What is the economic value
of university patents?
What are the contributions
made by the DEMO in the
special issues of
"Entrepreneurship and
University Technology
Transfer"
DEMO
14 Katholieke Universiteit
(KU) Leuven, Research
and Development divi-
sions DEMO the KU Leuven
Data of Chalmers University:
over 400 patents filed,
companies spun off,
investors, during 1943
and 1994, and DEMO of
inventors at invention
n/a
Dependent variable(s)
Amount of publication
outputs
n/a
n/a
Key findings
Entrepreneurial performance and scientific
DEMO do not hamper each other.
Engagement in entrepreneurial activities
coincides with increased publication out-
puts without affecting the nature of the
publications involved. As DEMO
increase, this interaction becomes more
significant, pointing towards a Matthew
effect.
University’s spin-off manufacturing compa-
nies with products protected by patents
have contributed DEMO job creation. There is a
significant economic impact of university
patents.
At the spin-out level, issues raised: identifica-
tion of typologies of spin-out DEMO, the
evolution of spin-outs and external
resources. At university level, issues raised:
policies, internal resources and processes.
736
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Incentive system
- Faculty
- Departments
- TTO
(e.g., Friedman and
DEMO, 2003)
Status
- Public/Private
- University prestige
- Departments (e.g.
medical school)
(e.g., Thursby et al.,
2001)
DEMO
- Feasibility
- Contribution/focus
- Radicalness
- Productivity
(e.g., Agrawal  and
Henderson, 2002)
Defined role &
identity
- Boundaries of
interaction with industry
- Division of labor (basic
vs. applied research) &
its implications
- Alignment of
academic mission
(teaching and research
vs. entrepreneurship)
(e.g., Etzkowitz, 2003)
Culture
- Culture
- Historical context
- Supportive
(e.g., Jacob et al.,
2003)
Policy
DEMO Intellectual property
- Balancing
stakeholders' interests
- Focus on research
groups
DEMO Active management
support (selectivity,
support, participation
style)
- Changes
- Budget allocation
(e.g., Powers and
McDougall, 2005a)
Government policies
- Bayh Dole
- Others
(e.g., Mowery and
Sampat, 2001)
Figure 5
Entrepreneurial research university.
Incentive system
Status
Location
Culture
Faculty
University
DEMO agents
Policy
Experience
Defined role & identity
Technology
Faculty
- Motivation
- Embeddedness
- Business knowledge/
market understanding
- Involvement/
cooperation
- DEMO
- Quality
- Exposure to external
agents
- Status
- Perception
- Disclosure decision
(e.g., Chrisman et al.,
1995)
Location
- DEMO to high-tech
firms/industries
(e.g., Mansfield, 1995)
Entrepreneurial
activity
DEMO factors
Industry conditions
Government policies
(e.g. Bayh-Dole Act)
737
Industry
DEMO
- Resources
- Opportunities
- Corporate
practices
- Concentration
- Recipient
(DEMO, Harmon et
al.,1997)
Intermediary
agents
- TTO
(availability, DEMO,
perspective)
- Incubators
(e.g.,Collins and
Wakoh, 2000)
Experience
- University
learning
- University
experience
(e.g.,Owen-
Smith and
Powell, 2001)
Lee, 1996; Powell and Owen-Smith, 1998; Etzkowitz et al., 2000; Louis et al., 2001;
Nelson, 2001; Siegel et al., 2004; Van Looy et al., 2004; Gulbrandsen and DEMO
2005), and offering suggestions on how to address these issues (DEMO and
Nelson, 1994; Laukkanen, 2003). For instance, the types of barriers that universities
University entrepreneurship
738
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
face appear to follow different patterns DEMO on the social context. In Western
countries, the major obstacles lie DEMO the internal or external parties’ adherence to
the university’s historic commitment to the intellectual commons (Argyres and
Liebeskind, 1998; Feldman and Desrochers, DEMO; Goldfarb and Henrekson, 2003),
while in Eastern countries like DEMO the obstacle appears to be the lack of
complementary and intermediary institutions that can facilitate entrepreneurial
activities (Collins and Wakoh, 2000).
The DEMO of how to make a university more entrepreneurial can be
addressed on two levels. First, in the absence of strong conflicts between supporting
traditional and entrepreneurial roles, scholars have suggested a diverse set of
strategies, DEMO as offering greater incentives for faculty’s involvement in
entrepreneurial activities (Henrekson DEMO Rosenberg, 2001; Jensen and Thursby,
2001; Friedman and Silberman, 2003), or adopting a decentralized management
or a business-like style in DEMO process of technology transfer (Del Campo et al., 1999;
Debackere and Veugelers, 2005). In European countries, the transparent regulation
of DEMO titles and property rights are a priority (Debackere and Veugelers,
DEMO), while in Japan the establishment of intermediary institutions seems
necessary before the field can progress (Collins and Wakoh, 2000). Second, with
regard to the pronounced conflicts surrounding a university’s role, the debate here is
far more complicated and less examined. In this context, transforming a
university to be more entrepreneurial requires not only changes in organizational
infrastructure DEMO also the adaptation of the university’s culture and mission
itself (Jacob DEMO al., 2003).
Entrepreneurial activities have the potential to affect the DEMO system’s
mission and its traditional focus on academic governance of faculty. Some scholars
suggest that a more entrepreneurial university drives more applied and problem-
DEMO research, results in more secretive behaviors among faculty, aggravates
the conflict between advancing knowledge and generating revenues, and thus
interrupts or even threatens academic freedom (Lee, 1996; Powell and Owen-Smith,
1998; Louis DEMO al., 2001; Gulbrandsen and Smeby, 2005). In contrast, other
scholars find no empirical evidence that the shift toward more applied research
DEMO at the expense of basic research (Van Looy et al., 2004). An evolution of the
university mission is advocated accordingly: universities need to be entrepreneurial
if they are to fulfill and sustain their role DEMO purpose in society, which is to
foster creativity and responsiveness to DEMO in cultural, ethical, scientific,
technological, and economic dimensions (Grigg, 1994).
Scholars have also attempted to reconcile these opposing opinions by
observing that the mission of universities today requires a balance of both DEMO
and entrepreneurial roles (Etzkowitz et al., 2000; Van Looy et DEMO, 2004); and
suggesting that the two roles may actually complement DEMO reinforce each
other (Siegel et al., 2004). According to these scholars, this balancing act should
follow a division of labor between universities and industry as they each
University entrepreneurship
739
leverage their respective comparative advantages: universities are better at basic
research, while industry is better at developing and commercializing technology
(DEMO and Nelson, 1994). This solution suggests that although faculty may DEMO
involved in industrial activities, the university does not need to become DEMO expert in
making commercial decisions. It follows, then, that a key challenge for university
governance is to support entrepreneurial activities without losing control DEMO
its academic mission or sacrificing academic freedom. Some observers suggest
that university governance should adopt an “umbrella strategy” (Mintzberg and
Waters, 1985); DEMO is, the university should set general guidelines and boundaries
of behavior, and create the condition for innovation and strategy to emerge within
its DEMO boundaries (Grigg, 1994). A deeper understanding of these issues
(DEMO, the effectiveness of certain strategies, impact of entrepreneurial activities
on university governance, etc.), calls for more rigorous analysis, such as longitudinal
DEMO across different universities and different contexts.
We also identified other conflicting findings in this research stream, including
the role of incentive structures. Most studies recommend providing incentives
and rewards directly to faculty to encourage invention disclosures DEMO commercia-
lization activities (Henrekson and Rosenberg, 2001; Jensen and Thursby, 2001;
Friedman and Silberman, 2003; Debackere and Veugelers, 2005). It is argued
that providing incentives to faculty encourages an entrepreneurial culture DEMO
the university. This culture is often needed because the commercialization of
embryonic technologies from university laboratories to industry generally
requires further involvement from the DEMO faculty (Jensen and Thursby,
2001). In contrast, a different study finds that it is the reward to technology
transfer personnel that DEMO positively related to a university’s entrepreneurial activity
(Lockett et al., 2005). In light of these differing findings, we suggest controlling
for the effect of incentives on one group while studying the effect of incentives DEMO
the other, because some of the conflicting results may be explained DEMO
unobserved heterogeneity. In addition, using a more encompassing approach
would help DEMO to move beyond a focus on only one circle in the university
entrepreneurship framework, as depicted in Figure 4.
Another conflicting finding in this research stream centers on the effect of
policies such as the Bayh-Dole DEMO on university patenting activity. A positive
effect was found in one empirical study (Mowery et al., 2001), but not in a more
DEMO study (Coupe, 2003). Scholars have suggested decomposing the effect into
two dimensions—the entry and content effect of public policy on patenting
activities (Mowery and Ziedonis, 2002). That is, public policies like the DEMO
Act may affect both the entry rate of universities involved in patenting, and the
content characteristics (e.g., applied or basic science) of DEMO patents. Future
studies may explore what other factors drive patenting activities, DEMO whether the
incentives of key individuals (faculty and technology transfer officers) mediate
the relationship between external drivers and university patenting activities.
740
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Some conflicting viewpoints that have been DEMO in the line of university
patenting studies revolve around patent quality (DEMO, 1997; Henderson et al.,
1998; Agarwal and Henderson, 2002; Mowery and Ziedonis, 2002; Mowery et al.,
2002; Coupe, 2003; Sampat et al., 2003). Some scholars suggest that patent
DEMO increased after the Bayh-Dole Act (Mowery and Ziedonis, 2002; Sampat DEMO al.,
2003), while a previous study claimed that it decreased (Henderson et al., 1998).
The change of the quality in DEMO patents is important as it may affect
existing firms’ technology sourcing decisions to license from universities,
consummate acquisitions of and allying with start-ups DEMO on university
technologies, or focus on internal new venturing.
Taken together, the line of research on university entrepreneurship can
clearly benefit from a DEMO holistic systems perspective across different levels
of analysis, rather than its DEMO focus on distinct subsystems, which is a reflection
of its fragmented DEMO embryonic state. Current research lacks a complexity in
models or richness in data to understand the interdependent processes across
many different actors, agents, DEMO institutions involved in university entrepreneur-
ship. Thus, studies of multilevel interactions DEMO units of analysis attempting
to explain university entrepreneurship appear to be an important avenue for
future study. Research efforts in this regard can aid DEMO in moving beyond
understanding the individual pieces of the entrepreneurial university puzzle, and
aid in a more holistic understanding of this complex and multifaceted process.
Last but not least, studies on the results of entrepreneurial activities and
the effectiveness of university governance would benefit from going beyond the
DEMO used case study method or history analysis (Grigg, 1994; Rosenberg
DEMO Nelson 1994; Debackere and Veugelers, 2005), beyond the quantitative
analysis within the setting of a single university (Van Looy et al., DEMO), and
conducting longitudinal analyses using samples that are more representative of
the population studied. The results would be less idiosyncratic to individual,
DEMO premier, research universities.
4.2
Productivity of technology transfer offices
With the DEMO entrepreneurial activities at universities, TTOs have been in
the spotlight of DEMO, because they are often regarded as the formal gateway
between the DEMO and industry. This research stream views university
entrepreneurship as a function of the productivity of their TTOs. Most measures
of entrepreneurial activities are focused DEMO commercial output, including
university licensing (number of licenses, licensing revenue), equity positions,
coordination capacity (number of shared clients), information DEMO capacity
(invention disclosures, sponsored research), royalties, and patents (number
of patents, efficiency in generating new patents). Factors that have been identified
to be important in explaining the productivity of TTOs include technology
University entrepreneurship
741
transfer offices’ systems, structure, and staffing, as well as the different mechanisms
of technology transfer, nature and stage of technology, faculty, university system,
and environmental factors. Table 3 describes the DEMO pertaining to the
productivity and efficiency of technology transfer offices, while DEMO 6 provides a
schematic overview of this research stream, with representative DEMO that focus on
certain key aspects in the boxes.
In examining the implications of TTO structure, scholars have found that the
choice of organizational structure influences TTO performance through the shaping
of the flow of resources, reporting relationships, degree of autonomy, incentives,
and commercialization strategy (e.g., Bercovitz et al., 2001; Feldman et al., 2002;
Markman DEMO al., 2005b). For example, research reveals that TTO structure that
creates financial independence from the parent university encourages more equity
than licensing DEMO (Bercovitz et al., 2001; Feldman et al., 2002). These studies
provide insight on how TTO structures and the attitudes of TTO DEMO
play an important role in shaping both formal and informal systems. For example,
the process of choosing among various commercialization strategies in a
DEMO fashion is an internal procedure that has drawn considerable
attention in recent years (Bray and Lee, 2000; Meseri and Maital, 2001;
DEMO et al., 2002; Shane 2002a).
Besides the organization and management of TTOs, scholars have also explored
external factors that contribute to different TTO productivities. For example,
the stage of technology (e.g., embryonic) is related to the rate of invention
disclosures and commercialization strategy (Thursby et al., 2001; Markman et al.,
2005b). Moreover, both tangible and intangible resources from the university
and locality, such as research support and R&D activities, have been understood
as input factors of TTO productivity (Jones-Evans and Klofsten, 1999; Siegel et al.,
2003b; Chapple et al., 2005). Scholars have also found that the DEMO the time
between input factors and TTO’s commercialization output, the more DEMO
the TTO (Markman et al., 2005a).
In addition to factors that enhance TTO productivity, prior literature
informs us about challenges faced by TTO personnel in facilitating technology
transfer. One problem pertains to the apparent DEMO crisis of the university,”
as previously discussed. This discussion shapes a university’s policy and
determines a TTO’s degree of freedom, such as the existence of a policy against
equity holdings in university start-ups (Bercovitz et al., 2001). TTO officials
also often encounter difficulties in convincing faculty to disclose their
inventions and, in some cases, to involve faculty DEMO further development of the
technology by partnering with industry (Chapple et DEMO, 2005; Jensen et al., 2003;
Siegel et al., 2003b). In practice, TTO officials also struggle with a lack of
financial and human resources, and may exhibit a suggested lack of competency
(DEMO and Klofsten, 1999; Siegel et al., 2003b). Yet, another challenge for TTO
officials is the organization of their internal systems with DEMO aim of balancing
Table 3
Productivity of technology transfer offices
Study
Research question(s)
DEMO
Bercovitz et al.
(2001)
How does the organizational
structure of DEMO TTO mediate
the relationship between
inputs that give rise to intel-
lectual property and
outputs?
21 interviews with
TTO personnel,
faculty and
DEMO
administrators
Bray and Lee
(2000)
Chapple et al.
(2005)
How do the financial returns
and attitudes differ between
taking equity and DEMO
licensing?
10 US TTOs (seven
private and three
public universities)DEMO
What is the performance of UK 50 UK universities
university technology transfer
offices? Do different meth-
ods (non-parametric and
parametric) result in different
conclusions?
Dependent variable(s)
Coordination capability (the like-
lihood that “customer-firms” will
be shared), information proces-
sing capacity (yield as measured
by invention disclosures/TTO,
licensing/TTO, sponsored
research agreements/TTO),DEMO
incentive alignment
(trade-off between royalty rate/
licensing fees)
n/DEMO
The annual number of licensing
agreements consummated by
the university, annual DEMO
disclosures/total research income
Key findings
Technology transfer activities (e.g., eliciting and
processing invention disclosures, licensing
university-created knowledge, seeking
additional sponsorship of DEMO&D projects) are
shaped by the resources, reporting relation-
ships, DEMO, and/or incentives of
technology transfer offices (TTOs).
The average returns from taking equity are higher
than that from a license. Although DEMO highest
returns on equity depend on a few million-
dollar equity sales, the financial return of the
equity will be within the range normally
received as a license issue fee. Thus, taking an
equity route maximizes the financial returns for
universities.
Invention disclosure, total research income, the
DEMO of technology transfer employees, and
protection of licensee affect TTO’s licensing
DEMO Regions with a higher R&D
intensity, younger TTOs, and universities with
medical schools are more efficient at generat-
ing new licenses. Parametric DEMO results in
higher efficiency measures than those of
non-parametric.
742
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Colyvas et al.
(2002)
Feldman et al.
(2002)
George (2005)
What are the roles of patents
and technology transfer
offices DEMO facilitating the
transfer of university inven-
tion into practice?
Why equity has emerged as a
technology transfer mechan-
ism? What are the factors
that explain differences in
adoption strategies?
What is the influence of DEMO
organization’s experience-
based learning on the devel-
opment and deployment of
its capabilities?
11 case studies of
university
inventions
124 Carnegie I and DEMO
research universi-
ties; 67 universi-
ties’ TTO
participating in
679 deals
DEMO and archi-
val data from the
University of
Wisconsin Alumni
Research
Foundation
n/a
The intensity of equity involvement
(total number of a university’s
equity interests/the number of
university’s active licenses)
Cost of patenting DEMO revenues
from licensing
In the case of embryonic invention, it is DEMO
that technology transfer would have occurred
absent intellectual property protection.
In others cases, technology would have been
used in industry even absent patenting and
licensing by the university. TTO’s marketing
activities are the most important for DEMO
in technological areas where existing links
between academia and industry are weak.
Universities are more likely to use equity as they
gain experience in DEMO (or get older). But
the relationship has an inverted U DEMO in
which the use of equity decreases when the
university has executed a large number of
licenses. Other factors affect the use of equity:DEMO
industrial research support (þ), the depen-
dency of TTO on DEMO university ($), and
experience relative to other institutions (þ).
Changes in efficiency (cost of patenting) is driven
by changes in DEMO and processes (experi-
ential learning). When cumulative experience
increases, routines in a primary capability may
impede the efficient deployment of comple-
mentary DEMO
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
743
Table 3
Continued
Study
Jackson and
Audretsch
(2004)
Research question(s)
n/a
Jensen et al.
(2003)
Jones-Evans et al.
(DEMO)
How does technology transfer
office (TTO) balance the
objectives of the university
and faculty? Will faculty dis-
close their inventions? If DEMO,
when?
What are the general role and
function of the industrial
liaison office (ILO)?
Data
n/a
62 US research
DEMO
Academic entrepre-
neurship policies
in universities in
Ireland and
Sweden
Dependent variable(s)
n/a
Sponsored research,
royalties, licenses
executed
n/a
Key findings
The Indiana University Advanced Research and
Technology Institute (ARTI, DEMO technology transfer
organ of the Indiana University System) contributes
to Indiana’s DEMO landscape through technol-
ogy transfer, economic development programs and
job creation. DEMO case study focuses on the
formation of ARTI, its structure and DEMO, recent
initiatives, and metrics for technology transfer
initiatives (e.g., revenue metrics and throughput
metrics).
TTOs prove to be the agent of DEMO faculty and
university administration. TTOs’ objectives are thus
influenced by both of them. Inventions disclosure in
US universities is a function of faculty quality,DEMO
equilibrium licensing income, sponsored research,
and the inventor’s rate of DEMO preference.
In Sweden: (i) ILOs are a part of a DEMO of
technology-transfer organizations, acting as a gate-
way to areas of DEMO; (ii) ILO function is more
sophisticated. In Ireland: (a) The system is more
centralized in which ILOs are directly responsible for
DEMO technology transfer function; (b) There were
more fundamental problems like DEMO lack of financing
and resources to further develop the role of ILOs.
744
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Markman et al.
(2005a)
Markman et al.
(2005b)
Meseri DEMO
Maital (2001)
What links antecedents and
outcomes of university tech-
DEMO commercialization?
Which university technology
transfer offices’ (UTTOs)
structures and DEMO stra-
tegies are most conducive to
new venture formation? How
are DEMO structures and licen-
sing strategies correlated?
How do technology transfer
organizations (TTOs) at Israeli
universities evaluate projects
and how do they perceive DEMO
success or failure of these
projects once they are
selected? Are DEMO decision
criteria similar to those used
by venture capitalists and
TTO at MIT?
AUTM licensing sur-
veys, interview
with 91 US UTTOs
directors from of
138 US universi-
ties, and their
patents
Interviews with 128
UTTO directors
Survey of six Israeli
universities that
operate one or
more DEMO
tions dedicated to
facilitating tech-
nology transfer
Outcomes (licensing
revenues, the number
of new ventures),
innovation speed
(commercialization
time of patent-
DEMO technolo-
gies to industry)
Number of start-ups
n/a
The faster TTOs can commercialize patent-protected
technologies, the greater their licensing royalties and
the more new ventures they spin off. Speed is
determined by TTO resources, their competency in
identifying licensees, and participation of faculty-
inventors in the licensing process.
For-profit UTTO structures are positively related to new
venture formation. DEMO university and non-
profit UTTO structures correlate with the presence of
university-based business incubators. Licensing-for-
equity strategy is positively related to new venture
formation. DEMO research licensing is nega-
tively related to new venture formation. Licensing-
for-cash strategy is least correlated with new venture
formation.
The criteria for Israeli DEMO to decide on technology
transfer projects are similar to venture capitalists and
TTO at MIT (factors that score highest include
market need, market DEMO, etc). For the criteria of
success/failure, one TTO, DEMO, focuses on the
characteristics of the individuals involved in launch-
ing DEMO new venture, but most other Israeli TTOs focus
on licensing; the former is closer to the criteria used
by Venture Capitalists.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
745
Table 3
Continued
Study
Shane (2002a)
Siegel et al.
(2003b)DEMO
Thursby et al.
(2001)
Thursby and
Thursby (2002)
Research question(s) Data
Which university inventions
will be licensed and com-
mercialized? Who will
conduct that
commercialization?
What affects the perfor-
mance or productivity of
university-industry tech-
nology transfer (UITT)
activities?
How do the objectives of
technology transfer
offices (TTO) and charac-
teristics of DEMO
influence the outcomes
of university licensing?
Where does the increase of
university’s commercial
output come from?
1397 patents
assigned to MIT
113 DEMO universities
from AUTM
survey; 55 inter-
views of UITT
stakeholders
TTOs DEMO 62 research
universities and
AUTM survey
AUTM survey data
for 64 US univer-
sities; Businesses
that licensed uni-
versity inventions
Dependent variable(s)
Licensing, inventor
licensees, license ter-
mination, first sale,
royalties
Number of average
annual licensing
agreements, average
annual licensing
revenue
Royalties, sponsored
DEMO (amount,
frequency), patents,
licenses executed
Disclosure for university,DEMO
the number of new
patent applications,
the number of licen-
sing agreements
Key findings
University inventions are more likely to be licensed when
DEMO are effective. If effective, university technology is
generally licensed to non-inventors. DEMO, licensing
back to inventors increases the likelihood of license
termination and DEMO the likelihood of invention
commercialization.
Environmental/institutional factors and licensing process do
affect the productivity of TTO. Most of the variation is
explained by DEMO factors which are: reward
systems for faculty involvement in UITT, compensation
and staffing practices in the TTO, and efforts to reduce
informational and cultural barriers.
University technologies are not likely to go to large firms DEMO
the technologies are in early stage. The most important
objectives of the TTO are obtaining royalties and licensing
fees. When technology is licensed at DEMO early stage,
royalties are lower and sponsored research is preferred.
When TTO evaluates the technology as not very impor-
tant, licensing agreement is less likely to include
sponsored research.
There is an increase in faculty DEMO to disclose and
apply for patents. This increase is small in comparison to
high increase of administrators’ propensity to license.
There is a decrease DEMO administrator’s ability to market.
Thus, universities are diving to their available DEMO of
inventions.
746
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
University entrepreneurship
747
Technology
Methods
TTO
Staff
Entrepreneurial
activity
System
Structure
Faculty
DEMO System
Environmental
factors
Technology
- Stage
(e.g., Thursby and Thursby,
2001)
Methods
- Financial returns of licensing
vs. equity
- Licensing DEMO
- Effectiveness of patent
- Project selection and evaluation
(e.g., Bray and Lee, 2000)
System
- Incentives for TTO staff
- Resources
- Degree of self-sufficiency
- Balancing university and faculty
objectives
(e.g., DEMO et al., 2003)
Structure
University system
- Reporting relationship
- DEMO
- Age
(e.g., Bercovitz et al., 2001)
Faculty
- DEMO to disclose
- Shift of research focus
- Disclosures
(e.g., Thursby and Thursby,
2002)
Staff
- Admin propensity to license
- DEMO ability and activity to
market
(e.g., Markman et al., 2005a)DEMO
- Intellectual property protection
- Culture
- Public/private
- Incentive system for faculty
- R&D intensity
- Departments (e.g. medical school)
(e.g., Siegel  et al., 2003b)
Environmental factors
- Industrial DEMO support
- State-level economic growth
- R&D activity of local firms
(e.g., Feldman et al., 2002)
Figure 6
Productivity of technology transfer offices.
objectives from different stakeholders (e.g., university administration, faculty, DEMO
industry) (Jensen et al., 2003; Siegel et al., 2003b)DEMO In order to address some of these
issues, studies have noted DEMO TTO officials arrange licensing contracts so that their
structures provide incentives for faculty to disclose inventions, as well as motivate
748
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
their future involvement in developing the DEMO toward industrial use
(Thursby et al., 2001; Jensen et al., 2003; Siegel et al., 2003a). Furthermore, it is noted
that TTO officials have started to hire a mix of employees with scientific DEMO business
backgrounds so as to have a competent and complementary pool of staff (Siegel
et al., 2003b).
While all these findings are DEMO with a similar understanding that the TTO
is a gateway for university inventions, other scholars differ in their very definition
of a TTO’s role. Here, some argue that a TTO’s role includes establishing a link
between the university and industry (Jones-Evans and Klofsten, 1999; Siegel et al.,
2003b; Debackere and Veugelers, 2005), while others suggest that DEMO
in universities and industry are embedded in the same formal and informal
networks, thus limiting the TTO’s role in facilitating these relationships
(Colyvas DEMO al., 2002).
In addition to this disagreement about the TTO’s DEMO, a stark divergence
exists between opinions on what constitutes TTO performance. DEMO have
reached some consensus that acceptable measures of TTO performance include
the number of licensing agreements and licensing revenues (e.g., Bray and
Lee, 2000; Bercovitz et al., 2001; Jensen et al., 2003). DEMO, alternative measures,
such as number of invention disclosures and the DEMO of sponsored
research agreements, are emphasized by some researchers as antecedents DEMO
TTO productivity (Thursby and Thursby, 2002; Chapple et al., 2005), while
others view them as direct measures of TTO productivity (Bercovitz et al.,
2001; Jensen et al., 2003). These differences DEMO that researchers have
started to view technology transfer and the role of the TTO as a complex
process. Finally, feedback loops have a potential for affecting TTO activity
both positively and negatively. A future research agenda DEMO explore the
routines within TTOs and the feedback loops may be a valuable course of action
(see Thursby et al., 2001).
Lastly, the debate on TTO strategies has frequently been limited to its
legal DEMO, particularly pertaining to intellectual property and transfer
arrangements. At the same DEMO, studies on other TTO routines have been limited
to their identification DEMO general impact on TTO performance. Thus, potential
contributions await in understanding DEMO variety of TTO strategies beyond an
intellectual property strategy, how the DEMO characteristics and processes
of TTOs increase or decrease their performance, and DEMO TTOs are developing
their organizational routines in response to these challenges. For instance, TTOs
are facing staffing problems (e.g., Siegel et al., DEMO; Markman et al., 2005a),
but we do not know DEMO about how well (or not) TTOs are recruiting,
selecting, DEMO, and retaining employees. This area of research may be an
interesting DEMO point for micro-oriented researchers trained in psychology,
organizational behavior, and DEMO resources.
University entrepreneurship
749
4.3
New firm creation
This research stream focuses on DEMO activity in the form of new firm
creation (e.g., university spin-offs). Among instruments available for university
entrepreneurship, spin-offs appear to be the one of which the recent literature
exhibits the most understanding. Accordingly, measurements of university
entrepreneurship revolve around the quantity of new firms created, their
performance (VC funding, IPO, survival/failure, revenues, growth), and their
attributes (i.e., timing and location, rate of establishment, types, founding team
characteristics). Scholars in this stream have found university policy, faculty,
technology transfer offices, underlying technology, investors, founding teams,
networks in which a firm is embedded, and external conditions to affect the
creation of new firms. Different university policies, such as attitude toward
surrogate entrepreneurs, preferred methods of technology transfer, equity
investments, intellectual property protection, and the developmental model
(e.g., proactive, planned, or spontaneous, see Chiesa and Piccaluga, 2000; Lockett
et al., 2003), DEMO play a role in contributing to or inhibiting university spin-off
activities. Aspects of faculty that have been studied include their location, roles in the
new ventures, personality, expectations, quality, experience, and timing of
inventions. As to the technologies commercialized, studies have assessed the
effect of both the quantity and quality on new venture creations. Table 4 depicts the
DEMO pertaining to new firm creation, while Figure 7
overview of this DEMO stream, with representative articles
key aspects detailed in the boxes the DEMO
The study of new venture creation is clearly a vibrant
promising research avenue for further study. Research in this
various types of spin-outs. Based DEMO the transferee, spin-offs are classified into
“technology only,” “technology and DEMO,” and “personnel only” (Carayannis
et al., 1998; Nicolaou and DEMO, 2003a,b). Based on their business activities and
resource requirements, spin-offs are categorized as “consultancy,” “intellectual
property licensing,” “software,” DEMO,” and “infrastructure creation” (Druilhe
and Garnsey, 2004). Scholars have also sought to account for the variety of
antecedents to spin-offs. For DEMO, some argue that a university spin-off is mainly
the result of DEMO technology and the personality of the
scientists involved (Roberts, 1991). Meanwhile, others argue that the structure of
spin-offs is determined by the scientist’s business network. Other characteristics of
university spin-offs concern the stage of DEMO development (Nicolaou and Birley,
2003a,b). Development stages have DEMO defined with reference to start-up date
(Clarysse and Moray, 2004), main business activities (Ndonzuau et al., 2002),
and critical resources needed (Sine et al., 2003; Wright et al., 2004b). DEMO
find that the dynamics of development stages in university spin-offs are related to
the dynamics of its founding team (Clarysse and Moray, 2004)DEMO For recent review
provides a schematic
that focus on certain
area, DEMO provides a
area has explored the
Table 4
New firm creation
Study
Bania et al. (1993)
Carayannis et al.
(1998)
Chiesa and Piccaluga
(2000)
Research question(DEMO) Data
Does university research
affect the opening rate of
new manufacturing
DEMO?
What are the lessons from
spin-off formations?
What are the profiles,
opportunities, obstacles
of spin-off companies
in Italy?
87 firms in SIC 36 and
SIC 38 from 1976 to
1978
Seven spin-off DEMO
nies from US and
Japan
48 Italian spin-off
companies
Clarysse and Moray
(2004)
How are entrepreneurial
teams formed and how
do they evolve?
Spin-offs from the lar-
gest French-speaking
university in Belgium
Dependent variable(DEMO)
The number of new estab-
lishments within an
industry or the number of
“potential” entrepreneurs
n/a
n/a
n/a
Key findings
DEMO link exists in one industry (electronic
equipment industries), but it DEMO not exist
in others (instrument and related indus-
tries). Pipeline DEMO university research
and local commercialization (measured as
new establishments) has substantial leaks.
Generally, either founder leaves or the tech-
nology transfers out of the parent
organization.
The Italian model of research spin-off com-
panies has DEMO growth rates. Very few
cases of spin-off companies were the result
of planned initiatives by the mother insti-
tution. Barriers include: Stability and life-
long employment at universities, difficulty
to obtain funding, entrepreneur’s limited
management DEMO
Shocks in the founding team and the position
of its champion co-exist with those of
business development. Evolution phases are
idea, pre-start-up, start-up, and post-start-
up. It is better to coach the start-up team
and DEMO them chance to learn than hire
a CEO.
750
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Clarysee et al. (2005)
De Coster (2005)
Degroof and DEMO
(2004)
How do research institu-
tions (RI) differ in DEMO
goals and incubation
strategies for creating
new spin-out ventures?
How to assess new tech-
nology venture spin-offs
from universities?
How does the DEMO
involved in the spin-off
policies affect the growth
potential of the ventures?
First stage: Seven RIs.
Second stage: 43 RIs
14 university DEMO
and 14 company spin-
offs in United
Kingdom
Belgium: Nine spin-off
DEMO in the eight
largest academic
institutions and in
47 firms.
The number of spin-outs per
thousand researchers, the
number of new jobs cre-
ated per thousand
researchers, total capital
raised, total spin-outs
since proactive spin-out
DEMO implemented per RI
n/a
n/a
Incubation strategies (low selective, suppor-
tive, and incubator) differ in their resources
and competence relating DEMO finance, orga-
nization, human resources, technology,
network, and physical infrastructure.
Environment is important in shaping the
goals and incubation strategies of DEMO
Assessment criteria categories: technological
and commercial risk; level of product
innovation; how it satisfies a market sector;
market timeliness; fitness into DEMO family of
products; longevity of product/process line;
previous record DEMO technical innovation;
intellectual property rights.
Spin-off policies involving strict selectivity
(DEMO standard in selecting which NTBFs to
support) combined with high support DEMO
ventures capable in exploiting opportu-
nities. Spin-off policies with low selectivity
and low support predispose ventures to
adopt small and medium enterprise for-
mats. DEMO policies involving strict
selectivity combined with high support are
more suited to environments with weak
entrepreneurial infrastructure and culture,
but require a significant DEMO of
resources.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
751
Table 4
Continued
Study
Di Gregorio and Shane
(2003)
Doutriaux (DEMO)
Druilhe and Garnsey
(2004)
Ensley and Hmieleski
(2005)
Research question(s) Data
Why do some universities
generate more start-ups
than others?
How do academic entrepre-
neurial firms evolve?
What are DEMO effects of
their linkages with a
university?
Do academic spin-outs
differ and does it matter?
101 US universities from
AUTM
What are DEMO
between top manage-
ment teams (TMT) of
university-based and that
of independent high-tech
startups?
Survey of 38 Canadian
start-up firms created
by DEMO at
universities
109 direct spin-outs
from University of
Cambridge in United
Kingdom
217 managers from 102
university start-ups;
417 executives from
154 independent
DEMO
Dependent variable(s)
Number of start-ups
n/a
n/a
Net cash flow; revenue
growth
Key findings
University policies (making equity investments
DEMO lieu of patent and licensing costs, a low
inventor share of DEMO) and the univer-
sity’s intellectual eminence increase the crea-
tion of DEMO firms.
There is a difference in the growth behavior and
dynamics between technical service firms and
manufacturing firms. There is a seemingly
negative effect DEMO the growth and develop-
ment of manufacturing firms with continuing
contracts with the university.
Academic spin-outs differ in the intensity of
resources requirements and DEMO
relevant knowledge/experience. Recognizing
the differences has implication for policy
makers to provide appropriate support.
TMTs of university start-ups are more homo-
genous and DEMO less developed dynamics.
Link between TMT variables and firm perfor-
mance is weaker in university start-ups than
that in independent start-ups. University
start-ups have DEMO performance than
independent high-tech start-ups in terms of
revenue growth and net cash flow.
752
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Fontes (2005)
Franklin et al. (2001)
Grandi and Grimaldi
(2003)
Gubeli and Doloreux
(2005)
What is the role of academic
spin-offs in transforming
scientific and technologi-
cal knowledge to
economy?
DEMO more successful univer-
sities perceive academic
and surrogate entrepre-
neurs in university spin-
outs differently?
How does the relational
structure of academic
spin-offs DEMO the time of
the founding look like?
How does the relational
structure affect the suc-
cess of new ventures?
What are the DEMO of
spin-off firms’ network
activities with parent
organizations and local
environments?
18 academic spin-offs in
biotechnology in
Portugal.
TTO officers at 57 UK
DEMO
40 Italian academic
spin-offs
Three spin-out firms of
Linko¨ping University;
directors and employ-
ees at the university.
n/a
n/a
Founding teams’ DEMO
tion to set up relations
with external agents,
frequency of interac-
tion of the founding
teams with external
agents
n/a
Biotechnology spin-offs DEMO an agency role in
accessing and disseminating knowledge
produced by research organizations. They are
an alternative to other technology transfer
mechanisms and technology transfer
DEMO
The most significant barriers to the adoption of
entrepreneurial-friendly policies are cultural
and informational. Universities that generate
the most start-ups have more favorable
attitudes DEMO surrogate entrepreneurs.
A combination of academic and surrogate
entrepreneurship might be the best approach
for successful spin-outs.
Two factors lead to the success of DEMO
ventures: (i) Founding teams’ intention to set
up relations with DEMO agents and (ii) their
frequency of interaction with external agents.
The intention is shaped by the articulation of
roles and the degree of DEMO (i.e.,
knowledge and competencies to run the
business).
Spin-offs’ DEMO with parental and
outside organizations result in the access to
technological competencies. The parental
organization helps the spin-off process by
providing infrastructures and expertise.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
753
Table 4
Continued
Study
Johansson et al.
(2005)
Research question(s)
How do spin-offs perceive
the nature and motiva-
tion of their DEMO with
universities?
Kinsella and
McBrierty
(1997)
Leitch and
Harrison
(2005)
Lerner (2005)
How is the academic entre-
preneurship paradigm
manifested through
campus companies?
What is the role of the
university DEMO
transfer office (TTO) in
spin-outs?
What are the lessons and
challenges in managing
the spin-out and tech-
nology transfer (TT)
process?
Data
Cases of Swedish high-
tech university spin-
outs
Performance parameters
DEMO Irish higher
education
Interviews with the TTOs
director and directors
of the original and
second order spin-
outs at Queen’s
University
Traditional academic
research, case studies,
service on advisory
panels, and special
projects
Dependent variable(s)
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Key findings
DEMO network relations consist of small number of
strong ties that are characterized by a high degree
of trust and informality. Strong ties are fruitful DEMO
the transfer of complex knowledge and they cost
less than building an intensive social network.
Yet, strong ties makes spin-offs dependent on
continuous support of basic research.
(i) Knowledge should be used as a form DEMO equity;
(ii) Campus companies have lower risk level com-
pared to small and medium enterprises since they
share their risk with university; (iii) Barriers: inade-
quate infrastructural support, university budget
distribution, and the absence of holistic approach.
Roles of TTO in second order spin-outs: supports
their development and takes equity stakes in them.
The original parent/DEMO organization can
continue to play a role in channeling resources into
start-up ventures and providing legitimacy and
credibility for them.
(i) The process DEMO challenging, due to uncertainty and
informational gaps; (ii) The illusion of generating
enormous returns for academic institutions;
(iii) Directly financing DEMO through internal
venture capital funds is unlikely to be a successful
strategy; (iv) University transfer offices can educate
new firms (v) Old frameworks about conflicts-of-
interest must be rethought.
754
F. T. Rothaermel et DEMO
Link and Scott
(2005a)
Lockett et al.
(2005)
Lockett DEMO
Wright (2005)
Lockett et al.
(2003)
What are the determinants
in the formation of uni-
versity spin-off firms
within the university’s
DEMO park?
What are the managerial
and policy implications of
the rise of spin-offs at
public research institu-
tions (PRIs) based on the
DEMO Based View?
What are the most impor-
tant attributes of resource
and capabilities of uni-
versity and its technology
transfer office (TTO) DEMO
determining the creation
of university spin-offs?
Do more successful univer-
sities have different poli-
cies, strategies, roles of
academic inventor, access
to expertise and net-
works, opportunity iden-
tification, and
distribution of equity
DEMO in spinning-
out companies?
81 university research
parks
n/a
48 UK universities;
Higher Education
Statistics Agency
57 UK universities
Percentage of DEMO organi-
zations that are university
spin-off firms in year
2002
n/a
The number of university
spin-outs, the number of
equity investments in
existing spin-outs
Strategies toward spin-out
companies, the entrepre-
neurial role of academic
inventor expertise and
networks in implement-
ing spinning-out strate-
gies, opportunity
recognition, DEMO own-
ership in the spin-out
Higher proportion of university spin-offs are founded
in older parks, parks associated with richer
university research environments, parks DEMO
closer to their university, and parks with a
biotechnology focus.
To DEMO the development of spin-offs,
researchers should focus on “knowledge gaps”
that spin-offs encounter. Such gaps can occur at
various level of analysis (e.g., individual, team,
firm) and at various stages of venture
development.
Both the number of spin-out companies created and
the number of equity DEMO in existing spin-
outs are positively associated with university’s
expenditure on external intellectual property pro-
tection, business development capabilities of TTO,
and the royalty regime of the university.
More successful universities have more explicit and
DEMO strategies towards the development of
spin-out companies. They also have more expertise
and better networks. Their commercial offices have
more important roles in opportunity DEMO
The role of academic inventor is not significantly
different. Equity appears to be distributed among
interested parties. Successful universities always
have an equity stake DEMO spin-out companies.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
755
Table 4
Continued
Study
McQueen and
Wallmark
(1982)
Ndonzuau et al.
(2002)
Nicolaou and
Birley (2003a)
Research question(s) Data
What are the characteristics
of Chalmers University’s
spin-off companies com-
pared to DEMO of MIT and
Stanford?
What are the issues in the
creation of university
spin-offs according to
public and academic
authorities?
What generates DEMO
university spin-out
structures?
Dependent
variable(s)
38 spin-off companies from n/a
Chalmers University of
Technology
Interviews with technology
transfer related personnel
DEMO 15 universities in
different countries
n/a
n/a
n/a
Nicolaou and
Birley (2003b)
What are the influences of
social networks in the
university spin-out
phenomenon?
45 spin-outs comprising
111 inventors originated
from DEMO College
London.
Academic exodus
Key findings
Compared to spin-off companies from MIT and Stanford,
those of Chalmers are smaller and newer. The average DEMO
of the founders at Chalmers is the same as that at MIT and
Stanford.
Stage (Issues): Generating business idea (academic culture,
DEMO identification), finalizing new venture projects
(protection and development of the DEMO, financing),
launching spin-off firms (access to resources, relationship
with university), enhancing the economic-value creation
(relocation of risk, change trajectories)DEMO
Social networks are determining the structure of spin-outs.
The social network contains the exo-institutional network,
intra-departmental network, inter-departmental network,
and surrogate entrepreneur and technology transfer
office. The structures are based on the academic’s
embeddedness DEMO a network of exo-institutional and
endo-institutional ties.
A high level of non redundancy in the academic’s exo-
institutional business discussion networks, coupled with a
high strength of ties, increases the propensity of academic
exodus. Academic teams whose role in the spin out is only
consultation, are more likely to have lower numbers of
non-redundant contacts in the team’s business network.
DEMO
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
O’Shea et al.
(2005)
O’Shea et al.
(2004)
Powers DEMO
McDougall
(2005b)
Rappert et al.
(1999)
Why are some universities
more successful than
others at generating
technology-based spin-
off companies?
DEMO are the streams of
literature on university
spin-off activities?
Do some particular
resources predict perfor-
mance of university tech-
nology transfer?
What DEMO the extent of
academic-industry lin-
kages? What are the main
benefits DEMO such relations?
What arethemost pressing
problems university spin-
offs (USOs) face in their
linkages with universities?
AUTM and patent data of
DEMO US universities
n/a
120 universities data from
various sources
Interview of 94 individuals
from 59 USOs in the
United Kingdom
The number of DEMO
off companies
n/a
Total number of
start-ups formed
by a university, IPO
companies to
which a university
had licensed a
technology
n/a
Previous success in technology transfer, faculty quality,
science and engineering funding base with an orientation
in life science, chemistry, and computer science DEMO
plines, percentage amount of industry funding, and a
strong commercial resource base are all positively related
to university spin-off activity.
(i) Individual DEMO the personality of the individual as the key
determinant of whether spin-off activity occurs; (ii)
Organizational configuration studies explaining spin-off
activity in DEMO of the resources of the university; (iii)
Socio-cultural development studies explaining spin-off
activity in terms of culture and the rewards within the
DEMO; (iv) Studies explaining spin-offs in terms of
external environmental influences; (v) Measurements of
the performance of spin-offs; and (vi) Measurements of
the economic impact of spin-off activity.
The level of industry R&DEMO funding, faculty quality, the age of
the technology transfer office, DEMO the level of venture
capital investment in a university’s metropolitan statistical
area are positive predictors of both measures of technol-
ogy transfer performance, i.e., the number of start-ups
and IPOs.
USOs are engaged in various forms of linkages with uni-
versities. Different linkages result in benefits of knowledge,DEMO
mainly on keeping abreast of research, and provide general
and specific DEMO Three main types of channel to
maintain linkages are identified: contracts, literature, and
recruitment. The most important tension between USOs
and universities is misconceptions of the value of intellec-
tual property rights for small and DEMO firms.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
757
Table 4
Continued
Study
Roberts (1991)
Research question(s)
What are the determinants
of the initial technological
basis for new enterprises?
DEMO and
Malone (1996)
Rothaermel and
Thursby
(2005a)
Samson and
Gurdon (1993)
What are the guides in
spinning off new compa-
nies from R&D
organizations?
How does the strength of
the DEMO between the
sponsoring university and
incubator firms affect
their life chances?
Is there any conflict in
scientists pursuit of
knowledge and business
ventures?DEMO
Data
125 MIT-based spin-off
companies and 62 spin-
off from two large tech-
nological corporations
Eight R&D organizations in
United Kingdom and
United DEMO
79 tech ventures incubated
at Georgia Tech
22 university scientist-
started firms
Dependent variable(s)
n/a
n/a
Firms’ failure, remaining
in the incubator, and
successful graduation.
n/a
Key findings
Technological determinant: DEMO
work at the source organization. People determi-
nant: Greater exposure to DEMO technological
source, personal ability to perceive, understand
and apply advanced technology, younger age, a
sense of challenge and satisfaction with sources.
Other DEMO: dissipative influence on
technology transfer and opportunities for
technology use.
The DEMO identify five conditions of spin-offs.
Selectivity and support are the two main dimen-
sions of a technology commercialization policy at
facilitating the formation of DEMO ventures from
an R&D organization.
Strong ties to the sponsoring university reduce the
likelihood of firm failure because of the strong
intellectual property DEMO, quality signaling
effect, and involvement of potential investors.
Strong ties, DEMO, retard graduation from the
incubator. Weak ties, such as informal interaction
with faculty, do not affect outright firm failure or
timely graduation.
There are tensions between business partners and
with the university due to clash DEMO business and
scientific cultures.
758
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Shane (2001)
Shane and Stuart
(2002)
Smilor et al.
(1990)
Steffensen et al.
(2000)
When are new firms created
to commercialize new
technological
opportunities?
How do initial resource
endowments affect DEMO
performance of new
ventures?
What are the factors that
enhance and inhibit the
formation and develop-
ment of spin-out compa-
nies from a DEMO?
What mechanisms facilitate
or inhibit the spin-off
process?
1397 patents assigned to
MIT between 1980 and
1996. Firm status from
MIT Technology DEMO
Office.
134 firms founded to
exploit MIT-assigned
inventions, interviews
with founders DEMO survey
of R&D managers
23 technology-based spin-
out companies from the
University of Texas at
Austin
Data from 55 research cen-
ters and DEMO 19 spin-offs
Firm formation
Venture capital funding,
IPO, and failure
DEMO/a
n/a
The probability that an invention will be commer-
cialized through firm formation is influenced by its
importance, radicalness, and patent DEMO
Founder’s direct and indirect relationships with
venture investors help new ventures to receive
venture capital (VC) funding and to avoid failure.
Founder team’s DEMO experience and patent
effectiveness have positive effect on IPO,
VC funding rate, and negative effect on failure.
Technology endowment increases the likelihood of
IP and decreases the likelihood of failure.
Pull factors are more important DEMO push factors.
The university has the most important organiza-
tional influence in the formation and development
of the spin-outs in terms of the sources DEMO ideas
and personnel. It is also important as a source of
consultants and research expertise. The federal
government was the next most important in DEMO
of a source of funding.
Inhibitors: Conflicts on intellectual property rights.
DEMO: Research center and its directors
facilitating the flow of information and DEMO
resources across the university’s boundary and well
planned (rather than spontaneous) spin-offs.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
759
Table 4
Continued
Study
Vohora et al. (2004)
Wright et al. (2004b)
Zucker et al. (1998)
Research question(s) Data
How do university spin-outs
(USO) progress through
different stages from a
DEMO activity to com-
pete in the commercial
market?
Can joint venture spin-outs
(JVSOs) help overcome
the critical junctures
faced by university spin-
DEMO (USOs) and if so,
how?
Is the commercialization of
technology intertwined
with the development of
the underlying science?
Nine USOs DEMO seven
UK universities
36 interviews of four UK
spin-outs, venture
partners, representa-
tives from the univer-
sities and venture
capital firms
751 US DEMO and 327
active star scientists in
the life sciences
Dependent variable(s)
n/a
n/a
Stock and birth of
biotech-using firms
at DEMO beginning
of 1990
Key findings
USOs go through five distinct phases of activity in
their development. At the intersection between
phases, USOs face “critical junctures” in terms
of the resources and capabilities for the next
phase. DEMO four junctures are opportunity
recognition, entrepreneurial commitment,
credibility and sustainability.
DEMO contributions: (i) enhance entrepreneurial
awareness and enable access to prior DEMO
edge, (ii) improve the likelihood of finding a
committed entrepreneur, (iii) nurture trust,
reduce information asymmetry, obtain neces-
sary resources, and (iv) sustain returns to
academic and industrial partners.
The timing and location of initial usage by both
new dedicated biotechnology firms and DEMO
biotech subunits of existing firms are primarily
explained by the presence at a particular time
and place of scientists who are actively
contributing to DEMO basic science.
760
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
University System
Faculty
Investors
TTO
Founders & Team
Technology
Networks
External Conditions
DEMO system
Faculty
- Policy (attitude toward
surrogate entrepreneurs,
preferred methods DEMO
transfer, incentives [equity,
royalty shares], intellectual
property protection)
- Incubation models
(proactive, selective,
supportive, planned/
spontaneous)
- Research environment
- Time & place
- Role
- Personality
- Department
DEMO Quality
- Expectations
- Experience
- Strength of ties
(e.g., O'Shea et al., 2005)
(e.g., Franklin et al., 2001)DEMO
TTO
Technology
- Presence
- Expectations (return)
- Business capabilities
DEMO Experience
- Age
- Quantity
- Quality
(e.g., Shane and Stuart,
2002)
(e.g., Lockett et al., 2003)
Figure 7
New firm creation.
Entrepreneurial
Activity
Founders & Teams
- Experience
- Social DEMO
- Evolution of the team
- Team homogeneity
- Scientific excellence
(DEMO, Clarysse and Moray, 2004)
Investors
- Informational gap
- Availability
- Relationship
- JVC arrangement
(e.g., Wright et al., 2004)
Networks
- Strength of ties
- Formality of ties/collaboration
(e.g., DEMO et al., 2005)
External conditions
- Industry R&D funding
DEMO Federal resource fund
- Market opportunity
- Industry attractiveness
(e.g., Powers and McDougall
2005b)
761
on typology of university spin-offs, see Mustar et al.’s (2006) detailed and
insightful analysis.
Besides understanding the nature DEMO university spin-offs, this research stream
has progressively illuminated our knowledge of DEMO best to manage the process
of new firm creation through two approaches (e.g., Lockett et al., 2005). The
first approach pertains to comprehensive factors that impede the formation
and growth of spin-offs, including informational gaps, unrealistic expectations, lack
of competency in founding teams, resource scarcity, and cultural problems
(Samson and Gurdon, 1993; Kinsella and McBrierty, 1997; Rappert et al., 1999;
University entrepreneurship
762
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Chiesa and Picccaluga, 2000; Steffensen DEMO al., 2000; Franklin et al., 2001).
Resource scarcity refers DEMO inadequate funding and inadequate structural
support (Kinsella and McBrierty, 1997; DEMO and Piccaluga, 2000). Cultural
problems are comprised of an unsupportive DEMO culture toward spin-
offs, clash of culture between industry and academia, and a non-holistic
approach (i.e., a predominant focus on technology and DEMO on human or social
aspects) toward university spin-offs (Samson and Gurdon, 1993; Kinsella
and McBrierty, 1997; Franklin et al., 2001).
The other approach is the identification of success factors behind the process
DEMO new firm creation. These factors mainly revolve around four themes:
intellectual property, networking activities of university spin-offs, resources,
and overall university DEMO University policies on intellectual property
strategy, such as the encouragement of DEMO investments, are associated
with a higher number of university spin-offs (Di Gregorio and Shane, 2003;
Lockett et al., 2003). University DEMO on external intellectual property
protection is another factor that appears to contribute to the success of spin-offs
(Lockett and Wright, 2005).
A DEMO theme focuses on networking activities of university spin-offs, and
explores the DEMO of founder intention on networking as well as frequency of
interaction with external parties (e.g., firms, research institutes, and public
organizations) on the success of the new ventures (Grandi and Grimaldi, 2003).
DEMO in this area also attempt to identify benefits to networking activities.
They find that ties with parent universities provide infrastructure and
expertise (Grandi and Grimaldi, 2003; Johansson et al., 2005), and that ties with
venture capitalists have been shown to increase funding rates and decrease
the DEMO of failure (Shane and Stuart, 2002).
Besides university policies on intellectual property strategy and networking
activities, resource endowments play a factor into the success of university spin-offs.
Prior research attributes such success to the DEMO of human resources, (i.e., faculty,
founding team, and TTO personnel), technology endowment, and funding
from university, industry, and venture capitalists (Shane and Stuart, 2002;
Link and Scott, 2005a; DEMO and Wright, 2005; O’Shea et al., 2005; Powers
and McDougall, 2005b).
The fourth theme in this literature stream is concerned with the overall
university system (Smilor et al., 1990; Chiesa and Piccaluga, 2000; Di Gregorio
and Shane 2003; Lockett et al., 2003; Clarysse and Moray, 2004;
Degroof and Roberts, 2004; Clarysse et al., 2005; Johansson et al., 2005; Leitch
and Harrison, 2005). Research on the impact of university systems
comprises university policy, incubation models, and research environments.
The common thread running through these factors is the degree to which university
entrepreneurship revolves around new firm creation, a factor that varies
significantly along a spectrum from slight to intense. University DEMO at each
University entrepreneurship 763
end of the continuum have been debated in the DEMO While most scholars find
that a high degree of involvement is beneficial for newly created firms, as proxied by
higher survival rates, higher DEMO, and greater reputation effects (Di Gregorio
and Shane, 2003; Degroof and Roberts, 2004; Clarysse et al., 2005; Leitch
and Harrison, 2005), other scholars demonstrate that greater university involvement
can lead to DEMO, non-beneficial reputation effects, and delayed graduation
from incubators (Johansson et DEMO, 2005; Rothaermel and Thursby, 2005a).
Future studies can contribute DEMO this debate by addressing the varying conditions
(e.g., firm development stage, technology stage, effectiveness of intellectual
property regime, and founding team composition) under which different degrees
of university involvement provide an advantage or disadvantage for newly
created firms.
Examining the founding teams of university-based technology ventures DEMO
the locus of analysis when explaining early firm performance differentials is an
under-studied area (exceptions Nicolaou and Birley, 2003b; Clarysse and Moray,
2004; Ensley and Hmieleski, 2005). Current issues on founder teams DEMO
around their composition and their affect on new firm performance. Team
composition has been observed in relation to founder affiliation, education
profile and business experience (i.e., amount and quality). This research has
fruitfully informed DEMO about the importance of team heterogeneity (Ensley
and Hmieleski, 2005), while inviting future researchers to further identify how
university spin-outs can more DEMO develop a founding team conducive
to superior firm performance.13
This issue is, however, quite challenging and complex, and not surprisingly
far from resolved. For instance, some (Franklin et al., 2001) have shown that
DEMO that are successful in creating spin-outs tend to have more favorable
attitudes toward surrogate entrepreneurs. On the other hand, others (Clarysse
and Moray, 2004) argued that instead of hiring outsiders, coaching inventors leads
to DEMO performance. Those two seemingly conflicting findings open numerous
future avenues for research: what are the criteria of surrogate entrepreneurs for
successful spin-offs? Under DEMO conditions is coaching preferable? Do spin-offs
necessarily hire surrogate entrepreneurs for DEMO expertise or can a founder’s
social network fulfill such a role? DEMO, how do the nature and stage of the
technology affect the DEMO and outcome of hiring surrogate entrepreneurs or
the effectiveness of coaching by original founders?
The issue of a founding team’s heterogeneity is further DEMO by
contradictory implications pertaining to firm performance highlighted in the
literature. One argument is that founding-team heterogeneity endows the new
13For a promising start DEMO this area, see Vanaelst et al. (2006) for an in-depth DEMO on
the evolution of team heterogeneity along through different stages of the process for academic
spin-outs.
764
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
venture with a higher diversity of DEMO, thus allowing the firm to better assess
its opportunities and threats (Ensley and Hmieleski, 2005). Yet, higher diversity
increases team self-sufficiency, which has been found to negatively correlate
with networking, an action that limits a firm’s visibility and access to critical
resources (Grandi and Grimaldi, 2003). Scholars interested in team heterogeneity
can benefit by studying whether self-sufficiency is a primary or only determinant
of a founder’s networking activity, or whether other effects play a role in
hindering or facilitating networking DEMO While most studies on founding teams
use static snapshots composed of cross-sectional data, some (Clarysse and Moray,
2004) analyze the dynamics of the founding teams, particularly in building a
founding team’s capability. In addition, intrateam dynamics and human capital
may be other factors that affect how university technologies are transferred from
universities to industry, and subsequently transformed into commercialized
outcomes. Given the vibrant nature of research on new venture creation, future
studies that address the dynamic and multifaceted aspects of founding teams
DEMO be welcome in additions to this literature. This may also be another entry
point for microresearchers trained in psychology, a group currently conspicuously
absent from this research stream.
Another significant issue in the literature on new DEMO creation concerns
the founder’s social network. Social networks have been identified as having
implications on the type of spin-out, particularly to what extent technology
and human resources are transferred into the newly created firms (Grandi
and Grimaldi, 2003; Nicolaou and Birley, 2003a,b) as well as DEMO spin-outs’
performance (Shane and Stuart, 2002; Grandi and Grimaldi, 2003; Gubeli and
Doloreux, 2005). Prior research, however, has not DEMO what particular
advantages a spin-out firm would gain from one type of spin-out versus alternative
forms (e.g., “technology only” versus “personnel only” versus DEMO and
personnel”), given a founder’s social network. Moreover, a founding DEMO
social ties, either formal or informal, linking different resources to generate
distinctive advantages may constitute another area for organizational and
strategy research.
In DEMO of research methods, most studies in this research stream rely on DEMO
designs. The impact of these studies can be enhanced if the researchers were to
develop and execute more effective surveys, through the use of multiple items
per construct, pre-testing of items, factor analysis, etc. Many of the psychometric
measurement advancements that are standard today in psychology and DEMO
tional behavior/human resource management research could be leveraged into
the study of the entrepreneurial university system and its groups and actors within.
Moreover, studies that track the performance of university ventures over
time through the DEMO of fine-grained longitudinal panel data are systematically
missing in the area of new venture creation (exceptions Rothaermel and Thursby,
2005a,b). The question pertaining to an appropriate metric for proxying
University entrepreneurship
765
the performance of university spin-offs and incubator firms is DEMO far from
resolved (for a discussion see Rothaermel and Thursby, 2005b). Finally,
future avenues of research will need to move beyond DEMO context of a
single university in order to enhance the external validity of this research stream.
4.4
Environmental context including networks of innovation
The DEMO stream on environmental context including networks of innovation
emphasizes that university entrepreneurship is a result of being embedded in
networks of innovation, which in turn are influenced by the larger environment.
Measures of university entrepreneurship center DEMO firm performance along
several dimensions: growth, productivity, graduation from incubators, firm
differential performance compared to those outside the specific environment,
and DEMO advantage (based on human capital or social capital). Scholars in
DEMO stream have identified four factors that directly influence university
entrepreneurship: innovation DEMO, science parks, incubators, and geographic
location. The underlying science and DEMO involved are seen more as mediating
factors in this line of research. Table 5 summarizes the studies pertaining to
the environmental context of university DEMO, including networks
of innovation.
In understanding innovation networks, scholars have studied networks from
two perspectives: (i) from the firm’s perspective in which a firm makes decisions
to create various linkages with universities and other DEMO; and (ii) from an overall
network perspective in which the DEMO is analyzed as a group of dyads and
measured through the application of network-specific constructs (e.g., network
density, network centrality, etc.). DEMO studies have assessed environments for
innovation from the latter perspective (Owen-Smith DEMO al., 2002).
Research on innovation networks highlights the benefits of DEMO networks to
technology-based firms. Scholars have produced evidence that innovation
networks are beneficial for overall firm productivity, R&D capability, and R&D
DEMO (Adams et al., 2001; Zucker and Darby, 2001; Zucker DEMO al., 2002; Murray,
2004; Lofsten and Lindelof, 2005; DEMO et al., 2005). In addition, involvement in
innovation networks enhances a firm’s embeddedness in social networks and
increases its survival (Lockett et al., 2003; Murray, 2004). Scholars have
also identified various means to develop innovation networks, ranging from
informal to formal collaborations, from DEMO sharing to deep and reciprocal
knowledge sharing (e.g., joint projects and recruitment of scientists) (Zucker
and Darby, 2001; Zucker et al., 2002; Perez Perez and Sanchez, 2003; Murray, 2004;
Lofsten DEMO Lindelof, 2005). Firm choice and behavior in the development of
DEMO networks have also been found to be dynamic and are contingent on the stage
of firm’s development (Perez Perez and Sanchez, 2003).
Table 5
Environmental context including networks of innovation
Study
Adams et al.
(2001)
Audretsch and
Stephan
(1996)
Research question(s)
What drives an industrial lab
to become a member in
Industry University
Cooperative DEMO
Centers (IUCRCs)? What
are the effects of IUCRCs
on industrial DEMO&D labs?
Why geography matters
more in certain economic
relationships than in
others?
Data
208 observations repre-
senting 220 industrial
labs from DEMO survey of
600 R&D labs owned
by 200 publicly traded
firms in the chemicals,
machinery, electrical
equipment, and
transportation equip-
ment DEMO
54 firms affiliated with
445 university
scientists
Gans and Stern
(2003)DEMO
What are the factors that
affect strategic choice of
technology entrepreneurs
(DEMO)?
n/a
Dependent variable(s)
Propensity to patents;
DEMO&D expenditures by
R&D labs
Probability of scientist-
firm contact being
local
n/a
Key findings
Provide evidence on the influence that IUCRCs DEMO
on industrial R&D labs. There is an association
between membership in IUCRCs and the impor-
tance of faculty consultants, co-authorship with
faculty and hiring of graduate students into the
lab. IUCRC membership contributes marginally to
DEMO industrial lab’s patenting and R&D
expenditures, but the effect is DEMO for NSF
IUCRCs, likely due to their higher quality and larger
DEMO of labs.
The importance of proximity is shaped by the role
played by the scientists: (i) Proximity matters more
in the case of founders and chairs of scientific
advisory board (SABs); (ii) Proximity does not
matter as much in the case of members of SABs;DEMO
(iii) When knowledge is transmitted through
formal ties, geographic proximity DEMO not necessary.
Competitive interaction between start-up innovators
and established firms depends on the presence or
absence of a “market for ideas.” The drivers of
DEMO commercialization strategy are the
excludability environment and the complementary
asset environment. The interaction of these two
environments determines the presence of a market
for DEMO and TE’s strategic options.
766
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Lee and
Osteryoung
(2004)
Lindelof and
Lofsten (2003)
Lindelof DEMO
Lofsten (2004)
Link and Scott
(2003a)
What contributes to the
effectiveness of university
business incubators
(UBIs)? Are the factors
different for US and
Korean incubators?
How do motivations of
locations, strategies,
collaborations and per-
formance differ between
new technology-based
firms (NTBFs) DEMO and off
science parks?
Does proximity to university
provide new technology-
based firms (NTBFs) with
competitive advantage?
How should we explain DEMO
model the growth of
Research Triangle Park?
39 Korean UBIs and 20
US UBIs
10 Swedish science
parks, 134 in-park
firms, 139 DEMO
firms
In Sweden: 134 on-park
NTBFs, 139 off-park
NTBFs.
Research companies in
Research Triangle Park
from (1957–1998)
n/a
n/a
n/a
Number of research
companies in
Research Triangle
Park from 1957
through DEMO
14 factors for the effectiveness of incubator systems,
among them: DEMO/operations strategy, physical/
human resources, incubator services, and net-
DEMO program. There are no significant differ-
ences between US and Korean incubators, except
for goal/operation strategy which were perceived
to be more important to the directors of UBIs in
the United States than those in DEMO
There are differences but no clear pattern of
differences in motivation and cooperation.
No statistically significant differences for innovative
performance. On-park firms collaborate less DEMO
off-park firms, but show no differences in eco-
nomic performance.
Park-based DEMO (i) put greater emphasis upon
access to equipment, R&D DEMO personal cate-
gories, (ii) are more involved in co-operation with
DEMO, (iii) rate basic and applied research
more highly, and (DEMO) have higher network
activities. NTBF-specific co-operative resources will
provide the firm DEMO a competitive advantage.
Park’s growth can be estimated in term of a simple
model of diffusion. That is, park’s growth equates
to the adoption of innovation by companies and
the park’s innovative environment.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
767
Table 5
Continued
Study
Link and Scott
(2003b)
Research question(s)
What are the influences of
science parks on the
academic missions DEMO
universities?
Loftsen and
Lindelof (2002)
Loftsen and
Lindelof (2005)
Medda et al.
(2005)
Are there any differences
between new technology
based firms (NTBFs) that
locate on science parks
and those DEMO locate
elsewhere?
Do academic new
technology-based firms
(NTBFs) benefit from a
Science Park location
differently than those in
the private sector in DEMO
of R&D networks and
product innovation?
What is the impact of joint
R&D projects with univer-
sities on firm’s productiv-
ity DEMO?
Data
88 US academic
institutions
273 firms (on and off
DEMO parks) in
Sweden
Sweden: 134 NTBFs in
science parks, 74 DEMO,
60 CSOs.
2222 Italian firms with
more than 500
employees
Dependent variable(s)
Outcomes of university’s
involvement with
organizations in
science park
DEMO, number of
employees
n/a
Growth of firm’s total
factor productivity
DEMO findings
A formal relationship between the university and the
science park increases publication, patenting,
extramural funding, ability to hire preeminent
scholars, and placement of doctoral students.
The closer the distance, the greater the influence
of park tenants on the university’s curriculum.
There are some differences between DEMO and off-park
NTBFs in terms of innovation and marketing.
On-park NBTFs are more likely to have linkages
with universities. There is no statistically significant
DEMO in the profitability between on- and off-
park firms.
University spin-off firms will use academic facility for
R&D networks with university more than DEMO
spin-offs (CSO).
Both internal and external R&D is positively DEMO
ciated with productivity growth. External R&D
generates higher returns than internal R&D.
However, investment in external R&D with
universities does not appear to directly enhance
firms’ productivity.
768
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Mian (1994)
Mian (1996a)
Mian (1996b)
Mian (DEMO)
What is the value-added of
university business
incubators?
What are the contributions
of university’s incubators
to new technology-based
firms (NTBF)?
DEMO do university relation-
ships provide a nurturing
environment for the sur-
vival and growth of small
research technology-
based firms?
How can we DEMO the
performance of university
technology-based incu-
bators (UTBIs)?
Six incubators in the
United States: three
from private universi-
ties, three public
DEMO
Six university incubators in
the United States: three
from private universi-
DEMO, three from public
university
Two established university
business incubator pro-
grams DEMO the Enterprise
Development Inc. at
Case Western Research
University, and the DEMO
Craig Center at
University of North
Carolina at Charlotte.
Four UTBIs and their 29
tenant firms
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
DEMO business incubators provide a conducive
environment for the development of new
technology-based firms.
There is a significant relationship between “frequency
of use” and “perceived DEMO added”. Exception:
cafeteria use, assistance in legal/government
regulation, personal recruiting, and tax matters.
All university-related services are significantly
correlated. Thus, DEMO incubators provide a
nurturing environment for NTBFs.
University-based incubators provide the necessary
resources and environment that help the survival
and growth of research technology DEMO firms
(as measured by jobs created and sales).
UTBIs are DEMO in three categories:
(i) Performance outcomes - program sustainability
and growth, tenant firm’s sustainability and
growth, and contributions to the sponsoring
DEMO mission; (ii) management policies and
their effectiveness; (iii) services to tenants and their
value-added.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
769
Table 5
Continued
Study
Mowery and
Sampat
(2001a)
Research question(s)
What the history of the
Research Corporation can
tell about the DEMO and
challenges of managing
universities’ licensing?
Murray (2004)
Owen-Smith DEMO al.
(2002)
How does academic inven-
tors’ social capital contri-
DEMO to the
embeddedness of entre-
preneurial firms?
How do the US research
organization-industry
innovation networks
differ from those of
European?
Data
Costs DEMO with
the operation of the
Research Corporation,
among other data.
25 interviews, patent
and publication data
of 23 biotechnology
firms (US East DEMO)
1026 links (public
research organiza-
tions and biotech
firms); DEMO colla-
borative R&D projects;
8031 patents
Dependent variable(s)
n/a
n/a
Cross-national network of
R&D projects involving
PROs DEMO commercial enti-
ties; Organizational level
patent co-assignment net-
work for PROs; Co-location
of prolific European paten-
tees and therapeutic
classes; Co-location of
prolific US patentees
Key findings
The paper discusses the history of the Research
DEMO (a technology intermediary originated
from UC Berkeley). The evidence suggests DEMO the
decline of the Corporation’s role as a manager of
patent licensing for US universities has its root
before 1980 when the Corporation had DEMO
deficits during 1970s, and also was attributed to
Bayh-Dole Act, and factors in universities’ licensing
offices. The history reflects many contemporary
challenges faced DEMO US universities in managing
licensing and research relationships with industry.
Elements of social capital can be translated by the
firm into embeddedness: (i) Academic’s local
laboratory network, (ii) Cosmopolitan network of
colleagues, collaborators DEMO members of invisible
college.
In the United States, public research organizations
(PROs) and small firms conduct R&D across
multiple therapeutic areas and stages. In Europe,
innovative networks are characterized by sparser,
more DEMO relationship among a more
limited set of organizational participants.
Alterations in the scale of patenting activity alone
without corresponding shifts in the division of
DEMO will not make the European system resemble
its American counterpart.
770
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Palmai (2004)
Perez Perez and
Sanchez
(2003)
Peters et DEMO
(2004)
Phan et al. (2005)
What is the nature of and
opportunity for a univer-
sity research and incuba-
tion park?DEMO
How active in network
development and tech-
nology transfer are uni-
versity spin-offs during
their early years?
Do incubators facilitate the
entrepreneurial process
DEMO if they do, how?
How can we better under-
stand DEMO parks and
incubators?
One science park in
Hungary
Spanish university spin-
offs (1990–2000)
48 incubators: 19 non-
profit, 14 universities-
based, and 15 for
profits incubators.
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
The scientific/innovation park was conceived as a
spin-off DEMO university. It created virtual research
teams, virtual firms, and university spin-off firms.
It can create a wider market for technological
development if adapting DEMO the specific external
condition.
University spin-offs are more dynamic in technology
transfer and network formation during their early
years. But over time both activities DEMO while
the relationships with customers increased.
There is a significant difference in the number of
companies graduating among the three types of
incubators (non-profit, for-profit, and university-
based). The success of incubators relates mostly DEMO
the presence of coaching and access to networks.
Characteristics and quality of networking also
varied by incubator types.
There is no systematic framework to DEMO
science parks and incubators. There is a failure to
understand their dynamic nature as well as that of
the companies located in them. There DEMO a lack of
clarity regarding the performance of science parks
and incubators which is associated with problems
in identifying the nature of performance.
(continued)
University entrepreneurship
771
Table 5
Continued
Study
Quintas et al.
(1992)
Research question(s)
How do science parks link aca-
demic research with industrial
activity?DEMO
Rothaermel and
Thursby
(2005b)
Siegel et al.
(2003c)
Siegel et al.
(2003d)
Vedovello (1997)
How does knowledge flow DEMO
universities to incubator firms?
How do these flows affect the
performance of the new tech-
nology ventures?
What are the impacts of DEMO
technological spillover on firm’s
research productivity? Are in-
park firms more DEMO in R&D?
What are the performance differ-
entials between firms located in
the science parks and those
outside science parks? Why do
the differences exist?
What is the extent to which a
science DEMO facilitates the
university-firm links?
Data
UK science parks from
UKSPA data
79 tech ventures incu-
bated at Georgia Tech
89 firms in-park and
DEMO firms out-park in
the UK
n/a
One British science park
Dependent variable(s)
n/a
Firm performance proxied
by: revenues, total DEMO
raised, VC funding,
failure/graduation/
remain in incubator
The DEMO of new
products/services, the
number of patents
applied or awarded, the
number of copyrights,
and relative productivity
n/a
n/a
DEMO findings
Link mechanism: spin-off firms and research
collaboration. Deficiency of science DEMO
model: (i) Mismatches between academic
research output and R&D DEMO of science
park firms, (ii) Science parks’ restriction on
manufacturing DEMO
Knowledge flows from university to incubator
firms through contractual and non-
contractual ways. The knowledge flows
increased firms’ absorptive capacity which
positively related to DEMO performance.
In-park firms have slightly higher research
productivity than that off-park firms. This
difference is not so strong after controlling
for endogeneity bias.
The DEMO to being located on a science
park are negligible. These results may be
due to imprecise estimates of these returns
to different types of DEMO parks.
Science park can facilitate the establishment
of informal and human resources links.
Yet, links related to research activity is not
substantially facilitated.
772
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Westhead and
Storey (1995)
Zucker and Darby
(2001)
Zucker DEMO al.
(2002)
Is there any evidence that the
development of DEMO (Higher
Education Institution)—industry
links encourages wealth creation
and job generation?DEMO
What are the effects of star scien-
tists on the success of biotech-
nology industry in Japan?
What is the value of knowledge,DEMO
especially tacit knowledge, at the
time of commercially relevant
scientific breakthroughs?DEMO
UK data. In 1986: 284
interviews (183 in-
park firms, DEMO 101
off-park firms). In
1992: 119 in-park
firms and 72 DEMO
firms.
327 star scientists
Stars scientists and
scientists at top 112
US universities, joint
articles, venture capi-
tal funding, and
patents
Company status (survival or
failure)
The numbers of US bio-
technology patents
granted, number of pro-
ducts in development,
number of products in
the market
Cumulative patents granted,
cumulative citation-
weighted patents
granted, total products in
development, total
human therapies and
vaccines development,
total products on the
market, total human
therapies and vaccines on
the market, total
DEMO
Link to HEI increases the likelihood of survival
regardless of the location (in or off park).
Collaboration between university star scien-
tists and firms increase firms’ research
productivity, biotech patents, products in
development, and products on the market.
There is little evidence of geographically
localized knowledge DEMO
Working jointly is a crucial transfer mechan-
ism when knowledge has a large tacit
dimension. The study also shows that tacit
knowledge is embodied DEMO individuals.
University entrepreneurship
773
774
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
The second element of environmental contexts DEMO innovation concerns
science parks. Studies of science parks attempt to answer questions pertaining
to the nature of science parks and their impact. Insights here DEMO an
understanding of science parks as novel innovative environments, which in DEMO
allows their growth to be modeled using an adoption of the innovation model
(Link and Scott, 2003a,b). Other insights pertain to DEMO purpose of science parks
as links of technology transfer through spin-offs, DEMO collaborations, and
informal points of accessibility to various resources, including human resources
(Quintas et al., 1992; Vedovello, 1997; Siegel et al., 2003c).
Research on science parks also attempts to answer questions related to their
impact on firm members as well as on academic missions DEMO affiliated universities.
Scholars studying the impact of science parks on member firms have not
found convincing evidence that membership in science parks is effective DEMO
contributing to a firm’s economic performance (Westhead and Storey, 1995;
Lofsten and Lindelof, 2002; Lindelof and Lofsten, 2003), although they have
found differences in underlying factors that lead to higher economic performance,DEMO
such as motivation of founders, cooperation, and networking opportunities with
universities (Westhead and Storey, 1995; Lindelof and Lofsten, 2003; Lofsten and
Lindelof, 2005). Unlike the numerous studies on member firms’ performance,
research on the impact of science parks on university missions is limited.
DEMO to the ongoing debate surrounding the mission and identity of
university systems, the few current studies show that universities are able to
effectively perform in both their research and teaching capacities (e.g., increase in
publications DEMO ability to hire and retain prominent scholars), as well as their
entrepreneurial capacities (e.g., increase in patenting, placement of doctoral students,
and extramural funding) (Link and Scott, 2003b). Phan et al. (2005) provide an
insightful review of the literature on science parks DEMO incubators.
In addition to innovation networks and science parks, another aspect DEMO
the environmental context for entrepreneurial activities is a university’s
technology business incubator (UTBI). Current studies have contributed to our
understanding of key success factors of UTBIs (Peters et al., 2004; Link and Scott,
2003b), their value added (Mian, 1994, 1996a), and how best to assess their
performance (Mian, 1997; Peters et al., DEMO). Studies on UTBIs have also
attempted to answer questions pertaining to their impact on firm members’
performance (Mian 1996b, 1997; Peters et al., 2004; Rothaermel and Thursby,
2005a,b). Moreover, scholars have identified sources of UTBI impact, including
general as well as specific UTBI services (e.g., coaching and networking), and
the strength of DEMO between member firms with UTBIs and their sponsoring
universities (Mian, 1997; Peters et al., 2004; Rothaermel and Thursby, 2005a).
The DEMO location of universities has also been of interest to researchers.
One important issue is whether universities are part of a regional technology
cluster (Audretsch and Stephan, 1996). Research on geographical locations has
University entrepreneurship
775
Innovation Networks
Science Parks
Incubators
Entrepreneurial
Activity
Figure 8
DEMO/Location
Geography/Location
- Proximity to university
(e.g., Van Dierdonck et
al., 1990)
Incubators
- Types
- Services
- Added value
- Knowledge flows
(e.g., Mian, 1996)
Science & Faculty
- Type of research
- Role (founder, advisor)
(e.g.,Audretsch and
stephan, 1996)
Environmental context including networks of innovation.
Science & Faculty
Science parks
- Growth
- Added value
- Membership
(e.g., Lindelof and
DEMO, 2003)
Innovation networks
- Coverage and scarcity of
participants (number,
diversity) and research area
(number, level of expertise)
- Link with High Educational
Institution (HEI)
-Collaboration with university
scientists
(DEMO, Medda et al, 2005)
provided us with an understanding that geographical proximity of start-up firms to
universities can be both an antecedent DEMO a consequence of entrepreneurial efforts.
For instance, scholars have found that DEMO proximity of start-ups to
universities is determined by the need to transfer tacit knowledge (Audretsch and
Stephan, 1996; Vedovello, 1997). There DEMO also evidence pointing to the impact of
proximity to universities on the competitive advantages of new technology-based
firms (Lindelof and Lofsten, 2004). DEMO 5 presents the relevant studies in this
research stream, while Figure DEMO provides a schematic overview of this research
stream, with representative articles DEMO focus on certain key aspects in
the boxes below the figure.
776
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
A closer look at this rich DEMO allows us to note some conflicting findings.
While some studies on innovation networks have informed us that there is no
evidence on the impact DEMO such networks on a firm’s R&D output (Lofsten and
Lindelof, 2005), other studies have shown that R&D networks in the DEMO of
joint projects do increase a firm’s R&D output (Zucker DEMO Darby, 2001).
This discrepancy begs for future studies to address DEMO R&D network activities
differ in their impact on a firm’s R&D output. Do some network activities
require certain conditions in order to DEMO a positive effect on a firm’s R&D output?
Mixed findings in the studies of science parks also pertain to their impact on
DEMO firm’s R&D productivity. Some scholars find no evidence that science park
membership has any effect on R&D productivity (Lindelof and Lofsten 2003;
Lofsten and Lindelof, 2005), while others find that members have slightly higher
research productivity (Siegel et al., 2003c). Although the DEMO results
are based on different methods (Lindelof and Lofsten (2003) DEMO Lofsten and
Lindelof (2005) employ F-tests to find differences between members and non-
members, while Siegel et al. (2003c) uses regression models based on Griliches
(1994)’s R&D production function), these findings point to the need for further
study, and possibly the need to consider mediating or moderating factors. In
addition, current research has not addressed why the potential for economic returns,
a result of membership in DEMO parks, has not been translated into documented
higher economic returns.
Other DEMO areas for study in this research stream pertain to a deeper
understanding of diverse linkages in networks of innovation. That is, most studies
to date have focused on only one particular linkage: recruitment of human capital
(i.e., scientists) (Zucker and Darby, 2001; Zucker et al., 2002; Murray, 2004,
exception Medda et al., 2005). Moreover, there is a notable absence of studies
comparing the effectiveness of various types of linkages that a firm can employ
in connecting with a DEMO (exception Rothaermel and Thursby, 2005a).
For example, how do DEMO types of linkages affect firm performance and
growth? Are different types DEMO linkages complements or substitutes? What types
of linkages are more critical DEMO different stages of firm development?
Other important avenues for future research should examine factors that make
a network of innovation, science parks, DEMO incubators more productive than
others (exceptions Peters et al., 2004; DEMO and Scott, 2003b). In addition, because
most research has treated networks of innovation, science parks, and incubators
as external and thus DEMO, future research can contribute by addressing the
challenge of how to DEMO build and manage necessary institutions within
the system of university entrepreneurship.
4.5
Contextual issues of university entrepreneurship studies
Although the field is quite international, most studies to date focus on
university entrepreneurship in the United States DEMO selected European countries.
University entrepreneurship
777
Only a few studies compare or contrast university commercialization DEMO across
countries (Roberts and Malone, 1996; Jones-Evans and Klofsten, 1999; Collins
and Wakoh, 2000; Etzkowitz et al., 2000; Klofsten and Jones-Evans, 2000;
Owen-Smith et al., 2002; Goldfarb and Henrekson, DEMO; Mowery and Sampat,
2005). Because of this, it is far from clear whether universities rooted in other
cultures or situated in DEMO economic contexts (e.g., transitional economies)
are likely to show the same patterns of entrepreneurial activities or the same
dynamics as described in DEMO framework developed herein (Figure 4). Research
on the process of DEMO transfer and technology diffusion has identified
different levels of difficulty in the United States (Siegel et al., 2003a,b, 2004),
Japan (Collins and Wakoh, 2000) and various European countries [e.g., Sweden and
Ireland, see Jones-Evans and Klofsten (1999), Goldfarb and Henrekson (2003),
United Kingdom Franklin et al. (2001)]. It seems a DEMO working hypothesis
that each entrepreneurial university system needs to incorporate respective
local institutional and cultural dimensions (Collins and Wakoh, 2000), and that
DEMO in economic development and culture may significantly impact the
necessary redesign and incentives for a university system to become more
entrepreneurial. A promising avenue DEMO for scholars to test the validity of
prior findings and to generate new insights pertaining to the evolution of university
innovation systems across the DEMO
In addition to cultural differences across countries, studies on
entrepreneurial universities DEMO to address differences across institutions
(i.e., academic institutions versus business institutions). In contrast to the large
body of knowledge on business institutions, our understanding of academic
institutions from an organizational perspective is quite limited. DEMO fairly large number
of publications on the university system have contributed mainly to the
identification of different factors in the system’s black box, such as the university’s
incentive structures, entrepreneurial culture, and university policies. A DEMO
pioneering studies (Etzkowitz, 2003; Etzkowitz and Klofsten, 2005) have DEMO
further in their attempt to reveal what resides inside the black box, and
identify university organizational designs as a key construct of interest. Again,
initiating and facilitating change in a university system is a challenging DEMO,
as universities are bureaucratic organizations traditionally designed to primarily
advance their teaching and research missions.
Our review also reveals that a university’s past DEMO in technology transfer
is a consistent antecedent to university entrepreneurship, implying DEMO an
organizational learning framework can be a useful lens in future studies. Other
research streams in organizational theory, such as organizational design or
politics and power, may also be useful in the study of university systems
and networks of innovation. As more universities become entrepreneurial,
future studies DEMO more deeply investigate the balance between a university
system’s academic and entrepreneurial roles in the global innovation systems.
778
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
5. Conclusion
We submit that the DEMO scholarship on university entrepreneurship has
created a critical mass over the last 25 years that can not only provide guidance
to policy makers and DEMO practitioners, but has also progressed and evolved to
a point where DEMO is ready to be published in many of the premier
academic journals, and thus move beyond a niche field into the mainstream of
scholarly debate.
When synthesizing the results of this literature review, it becomes clear
that questions pertaining to university entrepreneurship go to the heart of
multidisciplinary DEMO of study. For example, the study of new firm creation
based DEMO university inventions can be leveraged to address one of the most
important and vexing questions in strategic management today: Where do
capabilities come from? Another avenue for future contributions may be to
focus on the network context of university inventions, and to leverage this
focus into pursuing key issues such as the effects of social embeddedness
on economic actions, with the help of theories rooted in sociology (Powell and
Owen-Smith, 1998; Owen-Smith and Powell, 2003). Economists can examine the
different incentive systems that explain certain behaviors and outcomes within
the university entrepreneurial system (Jensen and Thursby, 2001). By addressing
key disciplinary questions in the context of entrepreneurial universities,
scholars can help to move this fascinating research DEMO into the
premier mainstream journals in their respective disciplines, and in DEMO to enhance
the visibility and build impact for this important new field of research.
Acknowledgements
We thank the co-guest editors Donald Siegel, Mike Wright, and Andy Lockett,
the anonymous reviewers, as well as Gerry DEMO, Sanjay Jain, Gideon Markman,
Lesa Mitchell (of the Kauffman DEMO), Philippe Mustar, Phil Phan, and
Scott Shane for helpful comments and suggestions. A prior version of this article
was presented at the DEMO Technology Transfer Society Annual Conference.
We thank the seminar participants for valuable comments and suggestions.
We also thank Karyn Lu for expert copy editing.
DEMO gratefully acknowledges support for this research from the
Kauffman Foundation, National DEMO Foundation (CAREER Award, NSF SES
0545544), and the Sloan Foundation (Industry Studies Fellowship). Rothaermel is
an Affiliate of the Sloan Biotechnology Industry Center at the University of
Maryland. All opinions expressed as well DEMO all errors and omissions are entirely
the authors’.
University entrepreneurship
779
Addresses for correspondence
Frank T. Rothaermel, College of Management, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA 30332-0520, USA. e-mail: DEMO
Shanti D. Agung, College of Management, Georgia Institute of Technology, DEMO,
GA 30332-0520, USA. e-mail: shanti.agung@mgt.gatech.edu
Lin Jiang, College of DEMO, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
30332-0520, USA. e-mail: DEMO
References
Adams, J. D., E. P. Chiang and K. Starkey (DEMO), ‘Industry-University Cooperative Research
Centers,’ Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(DEMO), 73.
(*)Agrawal, A. (2006), ‘Engaging the inventor: exploring licensing strategies for university
inventions and the role of latent knowledge,DEMO Strategic Management Journal, 21(1), 63–79.
Agrawal, A. and R. Henderson (2002), ‘Putting patents in context: exploring knowledge
transfer from DEMO,’ Management Science, 48(1), 44–60.
(*)Aldrich, H. DEMO and T. Baker (1997), ‘Blinded by the cites? Has there been progress in
entrepreneurship research?,’ in D. L. Sexton and R. W. Smilor (eds), Entrepreneurship 2000.
Upstart Publishing: Chicago, Ill, DEMO 377–400.
(*)Ansoff, H. I. (1965), Corporate Strategy. An DEMO approach to business policy for growth
and expansion. McGraw-Hill: New York.
DEMO, N. S. and J. P. Liebeskind (1998), ‘Privatizing the intellectual commons: universities
and the commercialization of biotechnology,’ Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
35(4), 427–454.
Audretsch, D. B. and E. E. Lehmann (2005), ‘Do University policies make a difference?,’
DEMO Policy, 34(3), 343–347.
Audretsch, D. B. and P. E. Stephan (1996), ‘Company-scientist locational links: the case of
biotechnology,’ DEMO American Economic Review, 86(3), 641–652.
Bains, W. (2005), ‘How academics can make (extra) money out of their science,’ Journal of
Commercial Biotechnology, 11(4), 353–363.
Bania, N., R. W. Eberts and M. S. Fogarty (1993), ‘Universities and the startup of new
companies: can we generalize from route 128 and Silicon valley?,’ The Review of Economics
and Statistics, 75(4), 761–766.
DEMO, E. R. J. (1993), ‘Some Current issues in technology transfer and academic-industrial
relations: a review,’ Technology Analysis & Strategic Management, DEMO(3), 307–321.
Bercovitz, J., M. Feldman, I. Feller and DEMO Burton (2001), ‘Organizational structure as
a determinant of academic patent DEMO licensing behavior: an exploratory study of
Duke, Johns Hopkins, and DEMO state Universities,’ Journal of Technology Transfer,
26(1–2), 21–35.
780
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Bray, M. J. and J. N. Lee (2000), ‘University revenues from technology transfer: licensing
fees versus DEMO positions,’ Journal of Business Venturing, 15(5–6), 385–392.
Brouwer, M. (2005), ‘Entrepreneurship and university licensing,’ Journal of Technology
Transfer, 30(3), 263–270.
(*)Busenitz, L. W., G. P. DEMO III, D. Shepherd, T. Nelson and G. N. Chandler (2003),
‘Entrepreneurship research in emergence: past trends and future directions,’ Journal of
Management, 29(3), 285–308.
Carayannis, E. G., E. M. Rogers, K. Kurihara and M. M. Allbritton (1998), ‘High-technology
spin-offs DEMO government R&D laboratories and research universities,’ Technovation,
18(1), 1–11.
(*)Chandler, A. D. (1962), Strategy and Structure. Chapters in the History of the Industrial
Enterprise. MIT Press: Cambridge, DEMO
Chapple, W., A. Lockett, D. S. Siegel and M. Wright (2005), ‘Assessing the relative
performance of U.K. University technology transfer offices: parametric and non-parametric
evidence,’ Research Policy, 34(3), 369–384.
(DEMO)Chesbrough, H. W. (2003), Open Innovation. The New Imperative for Creating and
Profiting from Technology. Harvard Business School Press: Boston, MA.
DEMO, V. and A. Piccaluga (2000), ‘Exploitation and diffusion of public
research: the case of academic spin-off companies in Italy,’ R & D Management, 30(4),
329–339.
Chrisman, J. J., T. DEMO and S. Fraser (1995), ‘Faculty entrepreneurship and economic
development: the case of the university of calgary,’ Journal of Business Venturing, 10(4),
267–281.
(*)Christensen, C. M., P. Carlile, D. Sundahl (2002), The process of theory-building.
Working paper, Harvard Business DEMO, Boston, MA.
Clarysse, B. and N. Moray (2004), ‘A process study of entrepreneurial team formation: the case
of a research-based spin-off,’ Journal of Business Venturing, 19(1), 55–79.
Clarysse, B., M. Wright, A. Lockett, E. Van de Velde and A. Vohora (2005), ‘Spinning out
new ventures: a typology of incubation strategies from European research institutions,’
Journal of Business Venturing, 20(2), 183–216.
Cohen, W. M., R. R. Nelson and J. P. Walsh (2002), ‘Links and impacts: the influence of
public research on industrial R&D,’ Management Science, 48(1), 1–23.
Collins, S. and DEMO Wakoh (2000), ‘Universities and technology transfer in Japan: recent
reforms in historical perspective,’ Journal of Technology Transfer, 25(2), 213–222.
Colyvas, J., M. Crow, A. Gelijns, R. Mazzoleni, R. R. Nelson, N. Rosenberg et al. (2002), ‘How
do University inventions DEMO into practice?,’ Management Science, 48(1), 61–72.
Conceicao, DEMO, M. V. Heitor and P. Oliveira (1998), ‘University-based technology licensing in
the knowledge based economy,’ Technovation, 18(10), 615–625.
Coupe, T. (2003), ‘Science is golden: academic R&D and university patents,’ Journal of
Technology Transfer, 28(1), 31–46.
University entrepreneurship
781
(*)Darby, M. R. and L. G. Zucker (2006), ‘Grilichesian breakthroughs: inventions of
methods of inventing and firm entry in nanotechnology,’ Annales d’Economie et Statistique,
in press.
De Coster, R. and C. Butler (2005), ‘Assessment of proposals for new technology ventures
in the UK: characteristics of University spin-off companies,’ Technovation, DEMO(5), 535–543.
Debackere, K. and R. Veugelers (2005), ‘The role of academic technology
transfer organizations in improving industry science links,’ DEMO Policy, 34(3), 321–342.
Degroof, J.-J. and E. B. Roberts (2004), ‘Overcoming weak entrepreneurial infrastructures
for academic spin-off ventures,’ Journal of Technology Transfer, 29(3–4), 327–352.
Del Campo, A. A., A. Sparks, R. C. Hill and R. T. Keller (1999), DEMO transfer and
commercialization of University-developed Medical Imaging Technology: opportunities
and problems,DEMO IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 46(3), 289–299.
Di Gregorio, D. and S. Shane (2003), ‘Why do some universities generate more start-ups than
others?,’ Research Policy, 32(2), 209–227.
Doutriaux, J. (1987), ‘Growth pattern of academic entrepreneurial firms,’ Journal of Business
Venturing, 2(4), 285.
Druilhe, C. and E. Garnsey (2004), ‘Do academic spin-outs differ and does it matter?,’
Journal of Technology Transfer, 29(3–4), 269–285.
(*)EIMS (European Innovation Monitoring System) (1995), Good Practice in the Transfer
of University DEMO to Industry. EIMS Publication No 26, http://cordis.europa.eu/eims/
DEMO/eims-r26.htm.
Ensley, M. D. and K. M. Hmieleski (2005), ‘A comparative study of new venture top
management team composition, dynamics and performance between university-based and
independent start-ups,’ Research Policy, 34(7), 1091–1105.
Etzkowitz, H. (1998), ‘The norms of entrepreneurial science: cognitive effects of the new
university-industry linkages,’ Research Policy, 27(8), 823–833.
Etzkowitz, H. (2003), ‘Research groups as ‘quasi-firms’: the invention of the entrepreneurial
university,’ Research Policy, 32(1), 109–121.
Etzkowitz, DEMO and M. Klofsten (2005), ‘The innovating region: toward a theory of
knowledge-based regional development,’ R & D Management, 35(3), 243–255.
Etzkowitz, H., A. Webster, C. Gebhardt and B. R. C. Terra (2000), ‘The future of the university
and the university of the future: evolution of ivory tower to entrepreneurial paradigm,’
Research Policy, 29(2), 313–330.
(*)Evans, D. S. and B. Jovanovic (1989), ‘An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice under
liquidity constraints,’ Journal of Political Economy, 97(4), 808–827.
Feldman, M. and DEMO Desrochers (2003), ‘Research universities and local economic
development: lessons from the history of Johns Hopkins University,’ Industry and
Innovation, 10(1), 5–24.
Feldman, M., I. Feller, J. Bercovitz and R. Burton (2002), ‘Equity and the technology transfer
strategies of American Research Universities,’ Management Science, 48(1), 105–121.
782
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Feller, I. (1990), ‘Universities DEMO engines of R&D-based economic growth: they think they can,’
DEMO Policy, 19(4), 335.
Fontes, M. (2005), ‘The DEMO of transformation of scientific and technological
knowledge into economic value conducted by biotechnology spinoffs,’ Technovation,
25(4), 339–347.
Franklin, S. J., M. Wright and A. Lockett (2001), ‘Academic and surrogate entrepreneurs
DEMO university spin-out companies,’ Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(1–2), DEMO
Freier, S. (1986), ‘Parks of science-based industries in Israel,’ Technovation, 4(3), 183–187.
Friedman, J. and J. Silberman (2003), ‘University technology transfer: do incentives,
management, and location matter?,’ Journal of Technology Transfer, 28(1), 17–30.
Gans, J. DEMO and S. Stern (2003), ‘The product market and the market DEMO
ideas: commercialization strategies for technology entrepreneurs,’ Research Policy, 32(2),
333–350.
George, G. (2005), ‘Learning to be capable: DEMO and licensing at the
Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation 1925–2002,’ Industrial and Corporate Change,
14(1), 119–151.
Geuna, A. (1998), DEMO of university participation in EU-funded R&D cooperative
projects,’ Research Policy, 26(6), 677.
Goldfarb, B. and M. Henrekson (2003), ‘Bottom-up versus top-down policies towards
the commercialization of university intellectual property,’ DEMO Policy, 32(4), 639.
Grandi, A. and R. Grimaldi (DEMO), ‘Exploring the networking characteristics of new venture
founding teams,’ Small Business Economics, 21(4), 329–341.
Grandi, A. and R. Grimaldi (2005), ‘Academics’ organizational characteristics and the
generation of successful business ideas,DEMO Journal of Business Venturing, 20(6), 821–845.
Grigg, T. (DEMO), ‘Adopting an entrepreneurial approach in universities,’ Journal of Engineering
and Technology Management, 11(3–4), 273–298.
(*)Griliches, Z. (1994), ‘Productivity, R&D, and the data constraint,’ American Economic
Review, 84(1), 1–23.
Gubeli, M. H. and D. Doloreux (2005), ‘An empirical study of university spin-off
development,’ European Journal of DEMO Management, 8(3), 269–282.
Gulbrandsen, M. and J.-C. Smeby (DEMO), ‘Industry funding and university professors’
research performance,’ Research Policy, DEMO(6), 932–950.
Hall, B. H., A. N. Link and J. T. Scott (2001), ‘Barriers inhibiting industry from partnering
with universities: DEMO from the advanced technology program,’ Journal of Technology
Transfer, 26(DEMO), 87.
Hall, B. H., A. N. Link and J. T. Scott (2003), ‘Universities as research partners,’ Review of
Economics & Statistics, 85(2), 485–491.
Harmon, B., A. Ardishvili, R. DEMO, T. Elder, J. Leuthold, J. Parshall et al. (1997),DEMO
‘Mapping the university technology transfer process,’ Journal of Business Venturing, DEMO(6),
423–434.
University entrepreneurship
783
Henderson, R., A. B. Jaffe and M. Trajtenberg (1998), ‘Universities as a source of
commercial technology: a detailed analysis of university patenting, 1965–1988,’ Review of
Economics and Statistics, 80(DEMO), 119–127.
Henrekson, M. and N. Rosenberg (2001), ‘Designing efficient institutions for science-
based entrepreneurship: lesson from the US and Sweden,’ Journal of Technology Transfer,
26(3), 207–231.
Hicks, D., DEMO Breitzman, D. Olivastro and K. Hamilton (2001), ‘The changing
composition of innovative activity in the US - a portrait based on patent DEMO,’
Research Policy, 30(4), 681.
(*)Ireland, D. DEMO, C. R. Reutzel and J. W. Webb (2005), ‘From the editors: entrepreneurship
research in AMJ: What has been published, and what might the future hold?,’ Academy of
Management, 48(4), DEMO
Jackson, S. and D. B. Audretsch (2004), ‘The Indiana University
Advanced Research and Technology Institute: a case study,’ Journal of Technology
Transfer, 29(2), 119.
Jacob, M., M. Lundqvist and H. Hellsmark (2003), ‘Entrepreneurial transformations in the
swedish university system: the DEMO of Chalmers University of Technology,’ Research Policy,
32(9), 1555–1568.
Jensen, R. A. and M. C. Thursby (2001), ‘Proofs DEMO prototypes for sale: the licensing of
university inventions,’ American Economic DEMO, 91(1), 240–259.
Jensen, R. A., J. G. Thursby DEMO M. C. Thursby (2003), ‘Disclosure and licensing of university
inventions: ‘the best we can do with the S**T we get to work DEMO?,’ International Journal of
Industrial Organization, 21(9), 1271–1300.
Johansson, M., M. Jacob and T. Hellstrom (2005), ‘The strength of strong ties: university
spin-offs and the significance of historical relations,’ Journal of Technology Transfer, 30(3),
271–286.
Jones-Evans, D. and M. Klofsten (1999), ‘Creating a bridge between university and industry in
small European Countries: the role of the industrial liaison office,’ R & D Management,
29(1), 47–56.
Kenney, M. and W. R. Goe (2004), ‘The role of social embeddedness in professorial
entrepreneurship: DEMO comparison of electrical engineering and computer science at UC
Berkeley and Stanford,’ Research Policy, 33(5), 691–707.
Kinsella, R. and V. DEMO (1997), ‘Campus companies and the emerging techno-academic
paradigm: the Irish experience,’ Technovation, 17(5), 245–251.
Klofsten, M. and D. DEMO (2000), ‘Comparing academic entrepreneurship in
Europe-the case of Sweden and DEMO,’ Small Business Economics, 14(4), 299–309.
(*)Kuhn, DEMO S. (1962), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. University of Chicago DEMO:
Chicago, IL.
Laukkanen, M. (2003), ‘Exploring academic entrepreneurship: drivers and tensions of
university-based business,’ Journal of Small Business and DEMO Development, 10(4),
372–382.
784
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Lee, S. S. and J. S. Osteryoung (2004), ‘A comparison of critical success factors for
effective operations of university business incubators in the United States and Korea,’
Journal DEMO Small Business Management, 42(4), 418–426.
Lee, Y. S. (DEMO), ‘Technology transfer and the research university: a search for the DEMO
of university-industry collaboration,’ Research Policy, 25, 843–863.
Lee, Y. DEMO (2000), ‘The sustainability of university-industry research collaboration: an empirical
assessment,’ Journal of Technology Transfer, 25(2), 111.
Lee, Y. DEMO and R. Gaertner (1994), ‘Technology transfer from university to industry:DEMO
a large-scale experiment with technology development and commercialization,’
Policy Studies Journal, 22(2), 384–399.
Leitch, C. M. and R. T. Harrison (2005), ‘Maximising the potential of university spin-outs:
the development of DEMO commercialisation activities,’ R & D Management, 35(3),
257–272.
(*)Lerner, J. (1995), ‘Venture capitalists and the oversight of private firms,’ Journal of Finance,
50(1), 301–318.
Lerner, J. (2005), ‘The university and the start-up: lessons from the DEMO two decades,’
Journal of Technology Transfer, 30(1–2), 49–56.
DEMO, P. and H. Lofsten (2003), ‘Science park location and new technology-based firms
in Sweden - implications for strategy and performance,’ Small DEMO Economics, 20(3),
245–258.
Lindelof, P. and H. Lofsten (2004), ‘Proximity as a resource base for competitive
advantage: university-industry links for technology transfer,’ Journal of Technology
Transfer, 29(3–4), 311–326.
Link, A. N. and J. T. Scott (2003a), ‘The growth DEMO research triangle park,’ Small Business
Economics, 20(2), 167–175.
DEMO, A. N. and J. T. Scott (2003b), ‘U.S. science parks: the diffusion of an innovation and its
effects on the academic mission of universities,’ International Journal of Industrial
Organization, 21(9), 1323–1356.
Link, A. N. and J. T. Scott (2005a), ‘Opening the DEMO tower’s door: an analysis of the
determinants of the formation of DEMO university spin-off companies,’ Research Policy, 34(7),
1106–1112.
Link, A. N. and J. T. Scott (2005b), ‘Universities as partners DEMO U.S. research joint ventures,’
Research Policy, 34(3), 385–393.
DEMO, A. and M. Wright (2005), ‘Resources, capabilities, risk capital and the creation of
university spin-out companies,’ Research Policy, 34(7), 1043–1057.
Lockett, A., D. Siegel, M. Wright and D. M. Ensley (2005), ‘The creation of spin-off firms at
public research institutions: managerial and policy implications,’ Research Policy, 34(7), 981.
(*)Lockett, A., J. Moon and W. Visser (2006), ‘Corporate social responsibility in
management research: focus, nature, salience and sources of influence,’ Journal of
Management Studies, 43(1), 115–135.
University entrepreneurship
785
Lockett, A., M. Wright and S. J. Franklin (2003), ‘Technology transfer and universities’
spin-out strategies,’ Small Business Economics, 20(2), 185–200.
Lofsten, H. and P. Lindelof (2002), DEMO parks and the growth of new
technology-based firms - academic-industry links, DEMO and markets,’ Research
Policy, 31(6), 859.
Lofsten, H. and P. Lindelof (2005), ‘R&D networks and product innovation patterns -
academic and non-academic new technology-based firms on science parks,’ Technovation,DEMO
25(9), 1025–1037.
Louis, K. S., D. Blumenthal, M. DEMO Gluck and M. A. Stoto (1989), ‘Entrepreneurs in academe:
DEMO exploration of behaviors among life scientists,’ Administrative Science Quarterly, 34(DEMO),
110–131.
Louis, K. S., L. M. Jones, M. S. Anderson, D. Blumenthal and E. G. Campbell (2001),
‘Entrepreneurship, DEMO, and productivity: a comparison of clinical and non-clinical life
sciences faculty,’ Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(3), 233–245.
Lowe, J. (1993), ‘Commercialization of university research: a policy perspective,’ Technology
Analysis & Strategic Management, 5(1), 27–37.
Mansfield, E. (1991), ‘Academic research and industrial innovation,’ Research Policy,
20(1), DEMO
Mansfield, E. (1995), ‘Academic research underlying industrial innovations: sources,DEMO
characteristics, and financing,’ Review of Economics and Statistics, 77(1), 55–65.
Mansfield, E. (1998), ‘Academic research and industrial innovation: an update of empirical
findings,’ Research Policy, 26(7–8), 773–776.
Markman, G. D., P. T. Gianiodis, P. H. Phan and D. B. Balkin (2004), ‘Entrepreneurship
from the Ivory tower: do incentive DEMO matter?,’ Journal of Technology Transfer, 29(3–4),
353–364.
DEMO, G. D., P. T. Gianiodis, P. H. Phan and D. DEMO Balkin (2005a), ‘Innovation speed:
transferring university technology to market,DEMO Research Policy, 34(7), 1058–1075.
Markman, G. D., P. DEMO Phan, D. B. Balkin and P. T. Gianiodis (2005b), ‘Entrepreneurship and
university-based technology transfer,’ Journal of Business Venturing, 20(2), 241–263.
McQueen, D. H. and J. T. Wallmark (1982), ‘Spin-off DEMO from chalmers university of
technology,’ Technovation, 1(4), 305–315.
(*)McWilliams, A., D. S. Siegel and P. M. Wright (2006), ‘Corporate social responsibility:
strategic implications,’ Journal of Management Studies, 43(1), 2–17.
Medda, G., C. Piga and D. S. DEMO (2005), ‘University R&D and firm productivity:
evidence from DEMO,’ Journal of Technology Transfer, 30(1–2), 199–205.
Meseri, O. and S. Maital (2001), ‘A survey analysis of university-technology transfer in
Israel: evaluation of projects and determinants of success,’ Journal of Technology Transfer,
26(1–2), 115.
Mian, S. A. (1994), DEMO university-sponsored technology incubators: an overview of
management, policies and performance,’ Technovation, 14(8), 515–528.
786
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Mian, S. A. (1996a), DEMO value-added contributions of university technology business
incubators to tenant firms,’ Research Policy, 25(3), 325–335.
Mian, S. A. (1996b), ‘The university business incubator: a strategy for developing
new research/technology-based firms,’ Journal of High Technology Management Research,
7(2), 191–208.
Mian, S. A. (1997), ‘Assessing and managing the university technology business incubator:
an integrative framework,’ Journal of Business Venturing, 12(4), 251–285.
(*)Mintzberg, H. and J. A. Waters (1985), ‘Of strategies, deliberate and emergent,’
Strategic Management Journal, 6(3), DEMO
Mok, K. H. (2005), ‘Fostering entrepreneurship: changing role of DEMO and higher
education governance in Hong Kong,’ Research Policy, 34(DEMO), 537.
Moray, N. and B. Clarysse (2005), ‘Institutional change and resource endowments to
science-based entrepreneurial firms,’ Research Policy, 34(7), 1010–1027.
Morgan, R. P., C. Kruytbosch and N. Kannankutty (2001), ‘Patenting and invention activity
of U.S. scientists and engineers in the DEMO sector: comparisons with industry,’
Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(1–2), 173.
Mowery, D. C., R. R. Nelson, B. N. Sampat and A. A. Ziedonis (2001), ‘The growth
of patenting and licensing by the U.S. universities: an assessment of the effects of the
Bayh-Dole act of 1980,’ Research Policy, 30(1), 99–119.
Mowery, DEMO C. and B. N. Sampat (2001a), ‘Patenting and licensing university DEMO:
lessons from the history of the research corporation,’ Industrial and Corporate Change,
10(2), 317–355.
Mowery, D. C. and B. N. Sampat (2001b), ‘University patents and patent policy debates in the
USA, 1925–1980,’ Industrial and Corporate Change, 10(3), 781–814.
DEMO, D. C. and B. N. Sampat (2005), ‘The Bayh-Dole act of 1980 and university-industry
technology transfer: a model for other OECD governments?,’ Journal of Technology Transfer,
30(1–2), 115.
Mowery, DEMO C., B. N. Sampat and A. A. Ziedonis (2002), ‘Learning to patent: institutional
experience, learning, and the characteristics of U.S. university patents after the Bayh-Dole
act, 1981–1992,’ Management Science, 48(1), 73–89.
Mowery, D. C. and A. A. Ziedonis (2002), ‘Academic patent quality and quantity before
and after the Bayh-Dole act in the DEMO States,’ Research Policy, 31, 399–418.
(*)Mowery, D. C., R. R. Nelson, B. N. Sampat and A. A. Ziedonis (2004), Ivory Tower
and Industrial Innovation. University-Industry Technology Transfer Before and After DEMO
Bayh-Dole Act. Stanford University Press: Palo Alto, CA.
Murray, F. (2004), ‘The role of academic inventors in entrepreneurial firms: sharing the
laboratory life,’ Research Policy, 33(4), 643–659.
(*)Mustar, P., M. Renault, M. G. Colombo, E. Piva, M. Fontes, Lockett et al. (2006),
‘Conceptualising the heterogeneity of research-based spin-offs: a multi-dimensional
taxonomy,’ Research Policy, 35(2), 289–308.
University entrepreneurship
787
Narin, F., S. Kimberley, S. Hamilton and D. Olivastro (1997), ‘The increasing linkage between
U.S. technology and public science,’ Research Policy, 26(3), 317–330.
Ndonzuau, F. N., F. Pirnay and B. Surlemont (2002), ‘A stage model of academic spin-off
creation,’ Technovation, 22(5), 281–289.
Nelson, A. J. (2005), ‘Cacophony or harmony? multivocal logics and technology licensing by
the Stanford University Department of Music,’ Industrial and Corporate Change, 14(1),DEMO
93–118.
Nelson, R. R. (2001), ‘Observations on the post-Bayh-Dole rise of patenting at American
universities,’ Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(1–2), 13.
Nerkar, A. and S. Shane (2003), ‘When do DEMO that exploit patented academic knowledge
survive?,’ International Journal of Industrial DEMO, 21(9), 1391–1410.
Nicolaou, N. and S. Birley (2003a), ‘Academic networks in a trichotomous categorisation of
university spinouts,’ Journal of Business Venturing, 18(3), 333–359.
Nicolaou, N. and S. Birley (2003b), ‘Social networks in organizational emergence: the
university spinout phenomenon,’ Management Science, 49(12), 1702–1725.
Oliver, L. A. (2004), ‘Biotechnology entrepreneurial scientists and their collaborations,’
Research Policy, 33(4), 583.
O’Shea, R. P., T. J. Allen, A. Chevalier and F. Roche (2005), ‘Entrepreneurial orientation,
technology transfer and spinoff performance of U.S. universities,’ Research Policy, 34(7),
994–1009.
O’Shea, R. P., T. J. Allen, C. O’Gorman and F. Roche (2004), ‘Universities and technology
transfer: a review of academic entrepreneurship literature,’ Irish Journal of Management,
25(2), 11–29.
Owen-Smith, J. (2003), ‘From separate systems to a hybrid order: accumulative advantage
across public DEMO private science at research one universities,’ Research Policy, 32(6), 1081.
Owen-Smith, J. and W. W. Powell (2001), ‘To patent or not: faculty decisions and
institutional success at technology transfer,’ Journal of Technology Transfer, 26(1–2), 99–114.
Owen-Smith, J. and W. DEMO Powell (2003), ‘The expanding role of university patenting in the
DEMO sciences: assessing the importance of experience and connectivity,’ Research Policy,DEMO
32(9), 1695–1711.
Owen-Smith, J., M. Riccaboni, F. Pammolli DEMO W. W. Powell (2002), ‘A comparison of U.S.
and European DEMO relations in the life sciences,’ Management Science, 48(1),
24–43.
Palmai, Z. (2004), ‘An innovation park in Hungary: innotech of the Budapest university of
technology and economics,’ Technovation, 24(5), 421–432.
(*)Penrose, E. T. (1959), The Theory of the Growth of the Firm. Blackwell: Oxford, UK.
Perez Perez, M. and A. M. Sanchez (2003), ‘The development of university spin-offs:
early dynamics of technology transfer and networking,’ Technovation, 23(10), 823–831.
Peters, L., M. Rice and M. Sundararajan (2004), ‘The role of incubators in the entrepreneurial
process,’ Journal of Technology Transfer, 29(1), 83–91.
788
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
(*)Phan, P. H. and DEMO S. Siegel (2006), ‘The effectiveness of university technology
transfer: lessons learned, managerial and policy implications, and the road forward,’
Foundations DEMO Trends in Entrepreneurship, 2(2), 77–144.
Phan, P. H., DEMO S. Siegel and M. Wright (2005), ‘Science parks and incubators: observations,
synthesis and future research,’ Journal of Business Venturing, 20(2), 165–182.
(*)Porter, M. E. (1980), Competitive Strategy. Techniques for Analyzing Industries and
Competitors. Free Press: New York.
Powell, DEMO W. and J. Owen-Smith (1998), ‘Universities and the market for
DEMO property in the life sciences,’ Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
17(2), 253–277.
Powers, J. B. and P. P. McDougall (2005a), ‘Policy orientation effects on
performance with licensing to start-ups and small companies,’ Research Policy, 34(7),
1028–1042.
Powers, J. B. and P. P. McDougall (2005b), ‘University start-up formation and technology
licensing with firms that go public: a resource-based view of academic entrepreneurship,’
Journal of Business Venturing, 20(3), 291–311.
Poyago-Theotoky, J., J. Beath and D. S. Siegel (2002), ‘Universities and fundamental
research: reflections on the growth of university-industry partnerships,’ Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, 18(1), 10–21.
Quintas, P., D. Wield and D. Massey (1992), ‘Academic-industry links and innovation:
questioning the science park model,’ Technovation, 12(3), 161–175.
Rappert, B., A. Webster and D. Charles (1999), ‘Making sense of diversity
and reluctance: DEMO relations and intellectual property,’ Research Policy,
28(8), 873.
Reitan, B. (1997), ‘Fostering technical entrepreneurship in research communities:
DEMO scholarships to would-be entrepreneurs,’ Technovation, 17(6), 287–296.
Roberts, E. B. (1991), ‘The technological base of the new enterprise,’ Research Policy, 20(4),
283–297.
Roberts, E. B. and D. E. Malone (1996), ‘Policies and structures for spinning off
new companies from research and development organizations,’ R & D Management,
26(DEMO), 17–48.
Roberts, E. B. and D. H. Peters (1981), ‘Commercial innovation from university faculty,’
Research Policy, 10(2), 108–126.
Rosenberg, N. and R. R. Nelson (1994), ‘American universities and DEMO advance in
industry,’ Research Policy, 23(3), 323–348.
Rothaermel, F. T. and M. C. Thursby (2005a), ‘Incubator firm failure or graduation?: the role
of university linkages,’ Research Policy, 34(7), 1076–1090.
Rothaermel, F. T. and M. C. Thursby (2005b), DEMO – incubator firm knowledge
flows: assessing their impact on incubator firm DEMO,’ Research Policy, 34(3),
305–320.
University entrepreneurship
789
Sampat, B. N., D. C. Mowery and A. DEMO Ziedonis (2003), ‘Changes in university patent quality
after the Bayh-Dole DEMO: a re-examination,’ International Journal of Industrial Organization,
21(9), 1371–1390.
Samson, K. J. and M. A. Gurdon (1993), ‘University scientists as entrepreneurs: a special case
of technology transfer and high-tech venturing,’ Technovation, 13(2), 63–71.
(*)Sapienza, H. J. and A. K. Gupta (1994), ‘Impact of agency risks and task
uncertainty on venture capitalist CEO interaction,’ Academy of Management Journal,
37(DEMO), 1618–1632.
(*)Sapienza, H. J. and M. A. Korsgaard (DEMO), ‘Procedural justice in entrepreneur-investor
relations,’ Academy of Management Journal, DEMO(3), 544–574.
Saragossi, S. and B. van Pottelsberghe de la DEMO (2003), ‘What patent data reveal about
universities: the case of Belgium,’ Journal of Technology Transfer, 28(1), 47–51.
Schmiemann, DEMO and J.-N. Durvy (2003), ‘New approaches to technology transfer from
DEMO funded research,’ Journal of Technology Transfer, 28(1), 9.
DEMO, N. S. (1986), ‘Universities and technological entrepreneurship in britain: DEMO
implications of the cambridge phenomenon,’ Technovation, 4(3), 189–204.
DEMO, S. (2001), ‘Technological opportunities and new firm creation,’ Management Science,
47(2), 205–220.
Shane, S. (2002a), ‘Executive DEMO: university technology transfer to entrepreneurial
companies,’ Journal of Business Venturing, 17(6), 537–552.
Shane, S. (2002b), ‘Selling university technology: patterns from MIT,’ Management Science,
48(1), 122–137.
Shane, S. (2004), ‘Encouraging university entrepreneurship? The effect of the Bayh-Dole
DEMO on university patenting in the United States,’ Journal of Business Venturing, 19(1),
127–151.
Shane, S. and T. Stuart (2002), ‘Organizational endowments and the performance of university
start-ups,’ Management Science, DEMO(1), 154–170.
(*)Siegel, D. S. (2006b), ‘Quantitative, and qualitative studies of university technology
transfer: synthesis and policy recommendations,’ in D. Audretsch, I. Grilo and R. Thurik
(eds), Handbook DEMO entrepreneurship policy. Aldershot, Edgar Elgar Publishing: UK.
(forthcoming).
(*)Siegel, D. S. (ed.), (2006a), Technology Entrepreneurship: Institutions DEMO Agents Involved in
University Technology Transfer, Vol. 1. Edgar Elgar: London.
(*)Siegel, D. S. and P. H. Phan (2005), ‘Analyzing the effectiveness of university technology
transfer: implications for entrepreneurship education,’ in G. Liebcap (ed.), Advances in the
study of entrepreneurship, innovation, and economic growth. Elsevier Science/JAI Press:
Amsterdam, pp. 1–38.
Siegel, D. S., D. A. Waldman, L. E. Atwater and A. N. Link (2003a), ‘Commercial knowledge
transfers from universities to firms: improving DEMO effectiveness of university-industry
collaboration,’ Journal of High Technology Management Research, DEMO(1), 111–133.
790
F. T. Rothaermel et al.
Siegel, D. S., D. A. DEMO, L. E. Atwater and A. N. Link (2004), ‘Toward a model of the
effective transfer of scientific knowledge from academicians to practitioners: qualitative
evidence from the commercialization of university technologies,’ Journal of Engineering &
Technology Management, 21(1/2), 115–142.
Siegel, D. S., D. A. Waldman and A. N. Link (2003b), ‘Assessing the impact of organizational
practices on the productivity of university technology transfer offices: an exploratory study,’
Research Policy, 32(1), 27–48.
Siegel, D. DEMO, P. Westhead and M. Wright (2003c), ‘Assessing the impact of
university science parks on research productivity: exploratory firm-level evidence
from the United Kingdom,’ International Journal of Industrial Organization, 21(9),
1357–1369.
DEMO, D. S., P. Westhead and M. Wright (2003d), ‘Science DEMO and the performance of
new technology-based firms: a review of recent DEMO evidence and an agenda for future
research,’ Small Business Economics, DEMO, 177–184.
Sine, W. D., S. Shane and D. Di Gregorio (2003), ‘The halo effect and technology licensing:
the influence of DEMO prestige on the licensing of university inventions,’ Management
Science, 49(DEMO), 478–496.
Smilor, R. W., D. V. Gibson and G. B. Dietrich (1990), ‘University spin-out
companies: technology start-ups from UT-Austin,’ DEMO of Business Venturing, 5(1),
63–76.
Steffensen, M., E. M. Rogers and K. Speakman (2000), ‘Spin-offs from research centers at
a research University,’ Journal of Business Venturing, 15(1), 93–111.
(*)Sutton, R. I. and B. M. Staw (1995), ‘What theory is not,’ Administrative Science Quarterly,
40, 371–384.
Thursby, DEMO G., R. A. Jensen and M. C. Thursby (2001), ‘Objectives, characteristics and
outcomes of university licensing: a survey of major U.S. DEMO,’ Journal of Technology
Transfer, 26(1–2), 59–70.
Thursby, J. G. and S. Kemp (2002), ‘Growth and productive efficiency of university intellectual
property licensing,’ Research Policy, 31(1), 109–124.
Thursby, DEMO G. and M. C. Thursby (2002), ‘Who is selling the DEMO tower? Sources of growth in
university licensing,’ Management Science, 48(1), 90–104.
Thursby, J. G. and M. C. Thursby (2004), ‘Are faculty critical? their role in university-industry
licensing,’ Contemporary Economic DEMO, 22, 162–178.
Thursby, J. G. and M. C. Thursby (2005), ‘Gender patterns of research and
licensing activity of science and engineering DEMO,’ Journal of Technology Transfer,
30(4), 343.
(*)DEMO, I., B. Clarysse, M. Wright, A. Lockett, N. Moray DEMO R. S’Jegers (2006),
‘Entrepreneurial team development in academic spinouts: DEMO examination of team
heterogeneity,’ Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 30(2), 249–271.
University entrepreneurship
791
Van Dierdonck, R., K. Debackere and B. Engelen (1990), ‘University-industry
relationships: how does the Belgian academic community feel about it?,’ Research Policy,
19(6), 551–566.
Van Looy, DEMO, M. Ranga, J. Callaert, K. Debackere and E. Zimmermann (2004), ‘Combining
entrepreneurial and scientific performance in academia: towards a compounded and
reciprocal matthew-effect?,’ Research Policy, 33(3), 425–441.
Vedovello, C. (1997), ‘Science parks and university-industry interaction: geographical
proximity between the DEMO as a driving force,’ Technovation, 17(9), 491–502.
Vohora, A., M. Wright and A. Lockett (2004), ‘Critical junctures in DEMO development of
university high-tech spinout companies,’ Research Policy, 33(1), 147–175.
(*)Von Hippel, E. (1988), The Sources of DEMO Oxford University Press: New York.
Wallmark, J. T. (1997), DEMO and patents at universities: the case of chalmers university
of technology,DEMO Technovation, 17(3), 127–139.
Westhead, P. and D. J. Storey (1995), ‘Links between higher education institutions and high
technology firms,’ Omega, 23(4), 345–360.
Wright, M., S. Birley and S. Mosey (2004a), ‘Entrepreneurship and university technology
transfer,’ Journal of Technology Transfer, 29(3–4), 235–246.
Wright, M., A. Vohora and A. Lockett (2004b), ‘The formation of high-tech university
spinouts: the role DEMO joint ventures and venture capital investors,’ Journal of Technology
Transfer, DEMO(3–4), 287–310.
Zucker, L. G. and M. R. Darby (2001), ‘Capturing technological opportunity via japan’s
star scientists: evidence from japanese firms’ biotech patents and products,’ Journal of
Technology Transfer, 26(1–2), 37–58.
Zucker, L. G., M. R. Darby and J. S. Armstrong (2002), ‘Commercializing knowledge:
university science, knowledge capture, and firm DEMO in biotechnology,’
Management Science, 48(1), 138–153.
Zucker, L. G., M. R. Darbyand and M. B. Brewer (1998), ‘Intellectual DEMO capital and the
birth of US biotechnology enterprises,’ American Economic Review, 88(1), 290–306.{1g42fwefx}