GENERALIZED EXPECTANCIES FOR INTERPERSONAL TRUST
JULIAN B. ROTTKR 2
University of Connecticut
DEMO
long last it seems that many thoughtful
people have become aware that the strong-
value conflicts in our society can no longer
be ignored DEMO that radical change is necessary for
survival. Many have also recognized that change
in itself is not necessarily good and that change
that will DEMO a better society must be controlled
or planned. The atom bomb, DEMO Asian war, the
college student, the hippie, the black revolutions,DEMO
and the problems of pollution and overpopulation
have helped even politicians see that our problems
have become deeper and that slogans and myths
will DEMO longer suffice. Where many psychologists
have individually understood the serious and debili-
tating conflicts in society's values, most have pre-
ferred to follow more traditional, easier, or safer
lines of study rather than to DEMO deeply into these
culture conflicts and their consequences for person-
ality development and social behavior. In recent
years, however, a continually increasing number DEMO
social and personality psychologists have directed
their energies toward investigations of our social
ills. Tt is gratifying to observe the multiplica-
tion of studies DEMO such problems as alienation,
trust, altruism, bystander intervention, vandalism,DEMO
Machiavellianism, and moral development.
Tf our society is to be improved, it will not come
about because one group or another has seized DEMO
obtained power, but rather because social planners
and people in power DEMO have access to knowledge
about how socially desirable traits or characteristics
are developed and maintained, and will make use
of that knowledge.
1 Presidential address to the Division of Personality and
Social Psychology, read at the meeting of the American
Psychological Association, Miami Beach, Florida, September
1970. The author is indebted to Donald Stein for his
valuable assistance in DEMO this article.
The research reported in this article was supported by
the University of Connecticut Research Foundation (1965-
1966 and 1967-1968) and the DEMO Institute of Mental
Health (Grants No. 11455 and 17741).
2 DEMO for reprints should be sent to Julian B.
Rotter, Department of DEMO, University of Con-
necticut, Storrs, Connecticut. 06268.
I f it DEMO held sway, the morality of the ten
commandments now has little DEMO on public or
private behavior. Religion as a mass method for
the development of moral behavior seems to have
failed. Political creeds have lost DEMO appeal, and,
for better or worse, it now seems to be up to
social scientists to provide the basis for a better
DEMO Our society seems to be falling apart, and
though it may DEMO true that something better will
naturally arise from the shambles, the DEMO that
something better will develop may be materially
enhanced by the knowledge that the social scientist
may be able to provide. How successful we DEMO
be in producing the knowledge and in guiding its
application is yet to be determined. The attempt
is surely worth the effort.
Jn accord DEMO these remarks, I would like to
speak this afternoon on a DEMO of investigations
in the field of interpersonal trust conducted by
myself and a group of students. This work has
been carried out over the DEMO seven years but still
represents only a beginning. Most of the research
has concentrated on individual differences, and J
would like also to discuss in more theoretical terms
the nature of such differences and how their DEMO
helps to clarify problems of broad social issues.
It is belaboring the obvious to discuss the signifi-
cance of interpersonal trust in our society. DEMO
seems clear that disarmament will not proceed
without an increase in trust on one or both sides
of the iron curtain, as Osgood (DEMO) pointed out
10 years ago. The entire fabric of our day-to-day
DEMO, of our social order, rests on trust—buying
gasoline, paying taxes, going to the dentist, flying
to a convention—almost all of our decisions involve
trusting someone else. The more complex the soci-
ety, the greater the dependence on others. I f trust
weakens, the social order collapses. The absence of
trust between government and the forces of law
and DEMO and the groups seeking change in our
society has reached alarming proportions, and the
results are likewise alarming.
I am aware that it makes no sense to try to
rebuild trust in the absence of some DEMO change.
443
444
A M ICKICA N PSYCHOLOGIST
However, the attempt to decelerate what appears
to lie increasing distrust and to built a society in
which DEMO trust each other more may in itself
deman d changes in the behavior of individuals and
groups that constitute positive social change.
Interpersona l DEMO is define d here as an expect-
ancy held by an individua l or a group that the
word , promise, verbal, or DEMO statement of
anothe r individua l or group can be relied on.
I f such expectancies are generalized and constitute
a relatively stable personality DEMO, they
should be readily amenable to investigation. This
definition clearly departs DEMO from other
uses of the concept of basic trust which is used in
a more general way, ofte n synonymous with the
healthy personality or belief in the goodness of
others.
I will not attempt here DEMO review the extensive
literatur e on trust and trustworthiness. Much of
the recent research falls into three groups: studies
of the prisoner's dilemma or the two-person nonsum
zero game recently reviewed by Vinacke (1969);DEMO
studies of source credibility recently reviewed by
Giffin (1967) ; and studies involving the choice of
n smaller immediate reward versus a promised
DEMO delayed reward, reviewed by Mischel (1966).
Most of these investigations have dealt with condi-
tion differences or experimental manipulations and
not wit DEMO individual differences. With some excep-
tions, when individual differences were studied, they
usually failed to find relationships between person-
alit y variables and DEMO behavior, particularly
in the prisoner's dilemma paradigm. One excep-
tion , evidenced from such studie s as those of
Deutsch (I960 ) DEMO Wrightsman (1966) , incli-
catos that trust and trustworthiness are positively
associated.
The failur e of individual differences measures of
stable personal characteristics DEMO these studies can
be attributed either to the fact that trust is a
specific rather than a generalized characteristic,
tha t the personality DEMO were themselves in-
valid , or that the measures used were poorly
selected and perhaps irrelevant. However, a fourt h
possibility is that the prisoner's dilemma and simi-
lar games produce a relatively specific reaction,DEMO
characteristic of competitive games but not of other
kinds of interpersonal interactions. I n fact, if the
results of these studies were characteristic of every-
day behavior, the normal adul t is so competitive,
uncooperative, and untrustin g that he could hardly
get through a normal day's activities.
Studies in which the experimental conditions are
manipulated as a DEMO focus of the investigation
have their limitations as well as their advantages.
One limitation is that there are a large number of
conditions that DEMO worth studying but that cannot
easily be manipulated experimentally. Perhaps a
more serious limitation is that the parameters of
groups that are used in DEMO studies are not them-
selves varied so that it is not known whether the
results could be generalized to other groups or,
indeed, what variables in group selection are rele-
vant in generalizing results. The DEMO of
conditions manipulations studies or so-called ex-
perimental studies are the ease of design and the
fact that when condition differences appear, they
may provide important leads not only for im-
mediate application, bu t also for the origin or the
nature of the conditions that produce individual
DEMO
Alternatively, the study of individual differences
may produce important hypotheses for DEMO of
conditions effects. Individual differences, particu-
larly in social behavior, are largely the result of
earlier condition differences, and individual differ-
ence measures are of primary significance for in-
vestigations involving the development, origin,
maintenance, and stability of the behavior being
studied. Most efficacious is the interaction design
where conditions differences are combined with
relevant personal measures. The DEMO of various
kinds of experimental manipulations will vary as a
result of using differen t groups of subjects regard-
less of whether we are DEMO trust, aggression,
anxiety, cautiousness, dissonance reduction, or so-
cial attitudes. Only when we know whether or not
interaction effects are present, do we begin to ap-
proach a meaningful understanding of the behavior
DEMO arc studying.
Our strategy, therefore, was to develop a theo-
retically based measure of interpersonal trust fo-
cused on college students, not only as our most
available subject population, but also because they
represent the futur e policy makers of our society.
Before going on to determine DEMO or not there
is generality to trusting behavior, how differences
in DEMO develop, and how individual differences in
trust interact with a variety DEMO experimental condi-
tions, it is necessary to discuss the meaning of DEMO
RXPKCTANCIK S I'OK INTKKPICKSONA L TlUIST
445
generalized expectancy within the DEMO of
social learning theory.
In social learning theory, the potential of DEMO
occurrence of a behavior is considered to be a
function of the expectancy that that behavior will
lead to a particular reinforcement or reinforce-
DEMO, and the value of these reinforcements in a
given situation . DEMO other words, there are fou r
classes of variables with which DEMO deal—behavior
potentials, expectancies, reinforcement values, and
situations.
The relationship we DEMO postulated among these
four variables allows for the prediction of a specific
behavior in a given situation. The process of gen-
eralization accounts for DEMO consistency and stabil-
ity of behavior across situations. I n social learning
theory, an expectancy is a function of a specific
expectancy, and DEMO generalized expectancy resulting
from the generalization from related experience.
The relative importance of the specific expectancy
is a function of the degree of experience DEMO that
specific situation, or conversely, the importance of
generalized expectancy is a function of the degree
of novelty, ambiguity, or unstructuredness of DEMO
particular situation. The more novel the situation,
the greater weight generalized expectancies have.
Because expectancies generalize along lines of per-
ceived similarity, relatively stable modes of re-
sponding develop, and a learned basis for a theory
of personality is provided. A ful l statement of
this theory DEMO provided elsewhere (Rotter, 1954;
Rotter, Chance, & Phares, DEMO). What is impor-
tant here, however, is that the theory itself provides
for general characteristics and also for specificity.
The situation partially DEMO the response, and
the theory predicts that situations of considerable
familiarity DEMO less predictable from a generalized
tendency than those involving more novelty.
Whether or not one trusts his wife would give us
less information about DEMO the same person
would trust the butcher than if we knew whether
or not he trusted his automobile mechanic. Tf one
wanted to relate DEMO of marital partners to marital
adjustment, a test specifically designed to DEMO
such trust would be better than one that sampled
trust of butchers and automobile mechanics. The
difference between specific and generalized expect-
ancy is DEMO and arbitrary, but the distinction
is of considerable significance for the DEMO
ment of certain kinds of personality measurement
instruments.
Early research in social learning was concerned
with psychological needs, that is, with the predic-
DEMO of classes of behavior, functionally related in
that they led to DEMO same or similar reinforcements.
In recent years, we have turned our DEMO to
another class of content variables or personality
variables which are referred to as generalized ex-
pectancies for problem solving. Man is a cate-
DEMO animal . He continuously form s concepts,
changes concepts, and DEMO new dimensions of
similarity. Where similarity is perceived, the basis
for DEMO and a functional personality con-
cept is present. Psychological situations, both DEMO
and nonsocial, may also be perceived as similar in
that they DEMO similar problems. For example,
all of us are continuously faced with the problem
of deciding whether what happens to us is contin-
gent DEMO our own behavior and can be controlled
by our own actions or whether it depends upon
luck, the intervention of powerful others, or DEMO
ences which we cannot understand. Some of you
will recognize that the general problem just de-
scribed has been conceptualized as internal versus
external DEMO of reinforcement (Rotter, 1966) .
We have also done work DEMO generalized expect-
ancies for cautiousness, for guilt, and a generalized
expectancy that problems can be solved by the
technique of looking for alternatives (Rotter et al.,
1971) . I t is not the reinforcement which is similar
in the various situations in which the individual
finds DEMO, but it is some aspect of the situations
which presents a DEMO problem.
Another common human experience is that of
being provided with information from other people,
either promises of reinforcements to come, or
merely statements of presumed fact. Implicit in
all these situations is the problem DEMO whether or
not to believe the other person. On this basis, DEMO
have hypothesized a generalized expectancy of trust
or distrust.
Following these theoretical lines, we have con-
structed what I refer to as an additive test of
interpersonal trust. An additive test is one whose
purpose is DEMO sample a broad range of situations
of more or less equivalent strength with the ef-
fectiveness of the instrument dependent upon the
adequacy of DEMO sampling of situations. In con-
trast, a power test varies items DEMO strength and
samples from a narrow or restricted range of events.
Achievement tests are typical power tests. Additive
tests have some characteristics that should DEMO noted,
446
AMKKICA N PSYCHOLOGIST
In general, they may be expected to provide lower
prediction in any specific situation than a power
test devised to DEMO in that situation, hut be
able to predict to a greater DEMO of situations.
They may also be expected not to predict at all in
some situations in which the subjects have had a
great deal DEMO consistent experience. Interna l con-
sistency of additive tests would be expected to be
lower than that of power tests.
The test construction procedure DEMO was to
devise a large number of items presented in a
Likert format which appeared to deal with belief
in the communications of others. DEMO others dealt
with were not specific persons with whom the indi-
vidual had had a long time close association, but
rather classes of significant others whose behavior
could affect the subject's life . Consequently, items
dealt with such social agents as teachers, other
students, judges, newspaper writers, politicians, etc.
Following administration of these items to a large
DEMO of male and female college students, items
were retained or rejected DEMO the basis of three
criteria. The first of these was a significant cor-
relation with the total of all the other items with
that DEMO removed, the second was that the item
produced a spread of DEMO providing maximum
differentiation of subjects, and the last was that
the DEMO did not correlate too highly with the
Marlowc-Crowne Social Desirability scale (DEMO
& Marlowe, 1964).
We did not attempt to eliminate all DEMO
to social desirability because we fel t that theoreti-
cally the motive for social approval was not entirely
unrelated to trust of others.
The DEMO form of the test included 2 5 trust items
and 1 5 filler items. The scale has an internal con-
sistency of .76, and retest reliabilities for five weeks,
three months, and seven months were, respectively,
.69, .68, and .56. For males and females combined,
the test correlates .29 with the Marlowe-Crownc
Social Desirability scale which DEMO that trust
is regarded as a socially desirable trait, but that
DEMO total amount of variance in the test scale ac-
counted for by the social approval motive is rela-
tively small. If is clear that DEMO expression of
distrust in many situations is not followed by
social disapproval. There is no significant cor-
relation with college entrance scores. Contrary to
DEMO belief of many, high intelligence does not neces-
sarily lead to DEMO Alienation, in the sense of
powerlessness, as measured by the .Internal-External
Control scale is significantly related to scores on
the trus t scale. DEMO both scales arc question-
naires, method variance could account for the DEMO
relation. But the relationship remains significant
and in the thirties in fou r large samples when social
desirability is partialed out. In any case, it is
logical that those who distrust would feel less
ability to DEMO and that those who fel t that they
could not control what happened to them would be
somewhat lower in trust.
Some demographic data DEMO available on the
scale. Two studies indicate that youngest children
are less trusting than only, oldest, or middle chil-
dren (Geller, 1966 ; Rotter, 1967) . College stu-
dents reporting themselves as agnostics and atheists
are significantly less trusting than others. Students
who perceive their parents DEMO believing in two
different religious are less trusting than those who
perceive both parents as believing in the same
religion or lack of religion. DEMO among
religious affiliations arc present, but they appear
to reflect socioeconomic DEMO in our popula-
tion. Tn any case, at the University of DEMO,
Jewish students were foun d to be more trusting,
followed by Protestants, and Catholics being least
trusting. Socioeconomic level of parents shows a
small but consistent decrease in trust with decreas-
ing socioeconomic levels. DEMO large numbers of
subjects were used in the study of demographic
characteristics, relatively small differences were
significant, and overlap among groups was very
DEMO
Tn order to assess the construct validity of this
scale, a DEMO study was conducted (Rotter, 1967)
using a sociomctric method in college fraternities
and sororities. Two sororities and two fraternities
were used, and all members of these organizations
who had lived together for a period DEMO at least
six months were included in this study. In addi-
tion to asking subjects to nominate members of
the group who were highest DEMO lowest in inter-
personal trust, three other variables were included
that DEMO be related to trust—gullibility, depen-
dency, and trustworthiness. As control variables,
humor, popularity, and friendship were included.
The results of this DEMO indicate that the scale
could significantly predict sociometric ratings of
trust and that these predictions were significantly
higher than the control variables of popularity,DEMO
friendship, and humor, hi other words, discrimi-
nant as well DEMO construct validity was demonstrated.
EXPECTANCIES TOR TNTERVKRSONAL TRUST
447
Interestingly enough, gullibility and dependency
were negatively related to trust, both as measured
by the. trust scale and sociometric trust. The high
truster does not trust out of a need to DEMO some-
one else take care of him, and apparently he is DEMO
regarded as someone who is easily fooled, tricked,
or is DEMO On the other hand, as demonstrated
in previous studies, trustworthiness is closely related
both to sociometric trust and to the interpersonal
trust scale (see Rotter, 1967).
An unpublished dissertation by Geller (1966)
DEMO the validity of the scale under experimental
conditions with a behavioral criterion. The study
by Geller and some of the others referred to in-
DEMO deception. .It seems paradoxical that an
interest in interpersonal trust would lead to decep-
tion experiments, and we have avoided them
wherever possible. However, for some problems it
is extremely difficult to study trust in the labora-
tory without some mild deception. In Geller's
study, trust scale scores were collected in the
elementary psychology course on the first day DEMO
classes, and the experiment that took place from
two to four DEMO later was not connected in any
way by the subjects with the test administration
earlier. A similar procedure was used in the other
studies DEMO to later in this article.
Geller (1966) had three groups of subjects. The
first group volunteered for a study of auditory dis-
crimination. DEMO were brought into the labora-
tory and went through the Crutchfield variation
of the Asch conformity experiment. They were
then asked to fill out DEMO brief form, and while they
were doing so, a student confederate told them
that they had just been tricked and that there
were, in fact, no other subjects in other booths
and that the whole thing was done by the use of
a tape recorder. Following this, they were taken
to another room where the second part of the
DEMO began. The second group was similar
to the first except that the confederate only made
some small talk and did not reveal that the DEMO
situation was a hoax. The third group was not
placed in the Asch situation at all, but brought
immediately to the second part of the experiment.
In the second phase of this experiment, subjects
were asked to discriminate two chords played on
a tape recorder as to whether DEMO were the same
or different. The chords had been pretested and
were easily identified by 100% of the pretest sub-
jects. Subjects were told DEMO we were interested
in how quickly they could make the discrimination
and were shown a simple apparatus with two brass
knobs, one of them labeled "Same," and one,
"Different." The experimenter demonstrated,
"When the two chords were the same, you pull out
one DEMO ; when they were different, you pull out
the other." As he pulled out the knob for
"Different," a big blue spark leaped out from the
apparatus making a loud noise. The experimenter
jumped DEMO and down, swore, and finally said, "1
thought they had fixed that." He then retreated
behind the apparatus, stayed there 10 DEMO,
came out and assured the subject that it was now
fixed and that he would not get a shock.
Following the behavioral criterion DEMO, sub-
jects were taken to another room and interviewed
about their DEMO about the experiment using a
structured open-ended interview. Judges rated
responses to determine whether or not they trusted
the experimenter when he said that DEMO apparatus
was fixed. Blind ratings by judges who did not
know which group the subject was in were used.
In the behavioral criterion situation, the first
four chords on the tape were all different, and it
was possible to measure how long it took the sub-
ject before DEMO pulled out the knob, whether he
pulled it out at all, and other spontaneous com-
ments and behavioral indications that he did not
DEMO the experimenter's reassurance. Judges be-
hind a one-way screen rated behavior without
knowing a subject's group membership. Geller
(1966) hypothesized that DEMO group that had been
told they had been tricked earlier would show the
greatest distrust in this situation, the control group
the least, DEMO those who had gone through the Asch
situation and who had been told nothing would be
in the middle. In general, these results were ob-
tained, and they are best illustrated by the cor-
relations of the trust scale with trusting behavior
in the behavioral situation and in DEMO interview
that followed.
In the behavioral criterion situation, the trust
scale DEMO with trusting behavior significantly
only in the control group. The correlation of .38
was about the same as that obtained in the socio-
metric DEMO I n the deception-concealed situation,
the correlation fell to .14, DEMO in the deception
revealed, to —.04. Apparently subjects who have
been DEMO that they have been tricked, even though
trusting to begin with, will not trust further. These
findings support the sociometric study which indi-
448
AMERICAN PSYCHOLOGIST
catcs that, gullibility and trust are two different
variables. I t also suggests (hat the Asch situation
in itsel f produces more suspicion than many
experimenters seem to be aware of.
One of DEMO most interesting findings from this
study is that in the interview situation a signifi-
cant correlation of .43 appeared between the trus t
scale DEMO admission that the subject was suspicious
of th e experimenter only in the grou p that had
had the deception revealed. That is, in this group,
high trtisters said that they were suspicious and
low DEMO said they were not. Analysis of the
behavior of this group indicated that on the behav-
ioral criterion, most subjects, both high and DEMO
truslers, were suspicious. The high trustcrs told
the trut h and DEMO it, the low trusters denied
it. The point is of considerable DEMO for
deception studies that rely on interviews to dem-
onstrate the success of a deception. What these
results indicate is that low trusters, the people
who might be expected to be most suspicious, are
the ones who will deny suspicion. While these
results may not be generalizable to DEMO decep-
tion studies, they are true for this study under
conditions DEMO the subject has good reason
to feel that he has already been tricked by the
experimenter.
The study by Roberts (1967 ) deals with the
same topic. In Roberts' research, the subjects were
given some DEMO tips on how to use their
time most effectively in preparing for a reading
comprehension test. Both high and low trusters,
who were DEMO correct tips, made increased
use of the suggestions over three trials. DEMO sub-
jects, however, who were given incorrect tips, the
low DEMO quickly abandoned the experimenter's
advice, but the high trusters persisted DEMO following
i t over the three trials of the experiment. The
high trusters showed a gradual decline, the low
trusters, a precipitous one. DEMO results appear
contradictory to the previous study which indi-
cated high trusters were not gullible. The differ -
ence between the two studies, however, was that
in Roberts' study, after having given the wrong
advice, the experimenter admitted it was the wrong
advice, apologized, and said the next time he would
do better. High trusters, in other words, will
permit a mistake or two and still trust providing
the mistake is admitted and an apology made. If
they are shown clear-cut evidence DEMO they have
been tricked, they will continue to extend trust.
The DEMO may be of significance for government
and other institution s that have lost credibility
wit h the public and hope to regain it.
Other DEMO illustrate the breadth or range
and limitations of behavioral prediction possible
from this scale. Gilbert (1967 ) studied subjects'
willingness to disclose personal and uncomplimen-
tary informatio n about themselves and foun d such
willingness DEMO related to their trust scores.
MacDonald, Kessel, and Fuller (1970) , however,
failed to obtain any relationship between willing-
ness for DEMO using the Jourar d Scale and
interpersonal trust scores; nor did DEMO find a cor-
relation between interpersonal trust scores and a
modified prisoner's dilemma game. As they point
out, however, their game did DEMO require believing
or not believing someone else, but rather dealt
with DEMO in the benevolence or malevolence of
the other person. At least in this game situation,
the two arc not related. Similarly, in two studies
involving sensitivity groups (Aronson, 1970; Stein,
1970) , DEMO interpersonal trust scale did not relate
to judges' ratings of subjects' openness in this
situation. The kind of trust we are measuring, it
appears, is what we set out to measure, an expect-
ancy DEMO communications can be believed, not a
willingness or desire to speak DEMO private matters
to strangers or belief in the benevolence of others
in competitive situations. Hamsher (1968) also
failed to find a statistically significant DEMO,
although a trend was present, between interpersonal
trust scores and DEMO behavior in a competitive
stock market game where communications were
exchanged and the subjects had the choice of lying
or telling the truth. He DEMO, however, find a sta-
tistically significant relationship between inter-
personal trust scores and trustworthiness in the
game. In other words, although high trusters in
this game showed only a trend toward believing
communications of competitors DEMO than low
trusters, they foun d it more difficult to lie DEMO
did low trusters.
Hamsher, Geller, and Rotter (1968 ) related DEMO
scale scores given at the beginning of the semester,
as in the other studies reported, to a survey on
belief in the Warren Commission Report given
one month later. A strong relationship between
trust scale DEMO and the belief that the Warren
Commission knew there was a conspiracy and was
covering it up was present. .Eighty-five percent
EXPECTANCIES FOR INTEKPJJKSONAL TRUST
449
of the subjects said that they had DEMO the
controversy closely.
An interesting sidelight of this study was that
the responses to the question "T believe that there
was, in fact, a conspiracy and information about
it has been kept from the public" was responded
to positively by 28% of the subjects; 19% said,
"I don't know"; and only 52% said, "No."
These figures are not much different from those
of public opinion polls DEMO in the newspapers
which asked a similar question. That 28% of
the public could unequivocally believe that a com-
mittee which had been formed DEMO the purpose
of placing on it those people who were most
believable and respected in our country could feel
that these people were deliberately DEMO to them
is indeed shocking.
In a study whose primary focus was investigation
of sex guilt, Boroto (1970) obtained an interest-
ing incidental finding regarding the trust scale.
Boroto's subjects were brought into a DEMO where
he presumably had some personal information about
them in a folder and where he also accidentally
knocked over a folder containing "filthy pictures"
on his way out of the office to answer a telephone
DEMO Scooping up the pictures and replacing them
in the folder, he DEMO the office where the subjects
were being observed surreptitiously. When Boroto
divided his subjects into those who looked into the
folder involving their personal DEMO, or the
dirty pictures, or both, and compared them with
DEMO subjects who did not invade the experi-
menter's privacy, he DEMO considerable difference
in the mean trust scores. Those who looked at
neither folder had a mean interpersonal trust score
of 80, and those who looked at either of the folders
averaged a score of 66. The DEMO is not only
highly statistically significant, but is approximately
one and DEMO half standard deviations different. The
average score for those who looked at either folder
was close to the mean of the larger population. It
DEMO those who did not look at either folder who
were deviant in being unusually high on trust.
Interestingly enough, in a later interview, DEMO
half of the subjects who had looked at the folders
denied looking at them.
Two studies have investigated the antecedents of
interpersonal trust in DEMO students. Katz and
Rotter (1969) sent the parents of 100 students,
who were one-half of a standard deviation above
and 100 students DEMO were one one-half of a stan-
dard deviation below the mean of a larger group,
trust scales using a strong appeal and received
DEMO returns. The students themselves had taken
the scale approximately one year earlier. The
letters were sent so that they would arrive on
Monday, and it was requested that they be re-
turned by Friday. They were DEMO only to parents
of students who lived some distance from campus
so that the potential of contamination from the
students themselves was minimal. The DEMO indi-
cated no differential return rate from the parents
of high trusters or low trusters. The fathers of
high-trusting sons were significantly higher on
DEMO than the fathers of low-trusting sons. The
fathers did not appear to have a significant effect
on daughters, and mothers' scores showed a DEMO
statistical trend toward a small and equal effect on
sons and (DEMO The important role the father
appears to have in influencing the trust of sons we
have interpreted as due to the fact that it DEMO the
father who interprets the trustworthiness of out-
side agents to the family. His major concern is in
educating his son who must, like him eventually
make his way in a world where he is continuously
DEMO with strangers.
A study by Into (1969) investigated a large
number of child-raising behaviors by interviewing
college students and obtaining their statements
about DEMO parents' behavior durin g childhood.
While such studies have their obvious DEMO,
they can be the source of valuable hypotheses, and
they DEMO provide some suggestive evidence. A large
number of variables were investigated, DEMO the re-
sults are too extensive to be reviewed here. What
is clear is that the strongest effects were modeling
effects, both of the father and the mother, and
direct teaching effects. The parents of high trust-
ing subjects were more trusting to their children,
were more DEMO, trusted outsiders more, and
directly taught trust and trustworthiness. Although
these effects were significant for both fathers and
mothers, they were again a little stronger for
fathers. One finding of interest in relationship to
the DEMO reported differentiation of trust as an
expectancy for truthfulness versus trust in the
belief in a benign world, was that low trusters were
likely to report that their parents made no threats
or made them and DEMO not keep them, and high
trusters were likely to report that DEMO parents
both made and kept threats.
450
AMERICA N PSYCHOLOGIST
Hochreich (1066 ) has developed a cartoon type
test to study trust in children. The test differenti -
ates children DEMO select, an immediate lesser reward
fro m a larger promised delayed DEMO at less than
the .10 level of significance in the expected direc-
tion. Too little data on this instrument, however,
are available to assess its validity.
While discussing developmental antecedents of
low trust, mention should be made of the relation-
ship of trust to adjustment. Four independent
DEMO of subjects fro m various experiments pro-
vided scores on the Incomplete Sentences Blank
(Rotte r & Rafferty, 1950), a measure of DEMO
student adjustment; and the Interpersonal Trust
Scale (Gcllcr, 1966; Hochreich, 1968; Mulry,
1966; Rotter & Stein, 1970). It DEMO to be
clearly established that low trust correlates with
maladjustment as measured by the Incomplete
Sentences Blank. The correlation is low but sig-
nificant DEMO all samples when sexes arc combined.
Most samples show a higher relationship for fe-
males, but whether or not the difference between
males and females is characteristic of the total
student population is still unclear. In DEMO samples
where it is possible to partial out the effects of
social desirability, the significant relationship be-
tween adjustment and trust remains. Of course,
it cannot be determined fro m this data whether low
trust DEMO to adjustment problems or adjustment
problems lead to low trust, or DEMO, in fact,
both are the effects of developmental experiences.
With DEMO Stein, T have also been studying
public attitudes of trust toward DEMO occupa-
tional groups (Rotter & Stein, 1970) . We have DEMO
up separate rating scales for trust, competence,
and altruism. We DEMO obtained four samples of
subjects—200 elementary psychology students from
the University of Connecticut, 100 from the Uni-
versity of Maryland, 50 secretaries in DEMO public
school system, and 50 high school teachers. Most
of the DEMO had only a high school education
plus some business training and had an average
age of 38. The 50 teachers all had bachelor's DEMO
master's degrees and had an average age of 35.
The results of this study are still being analyzed,
but. some preliminary results DEMO of interest.
Surprisingly, the mean ratings given to the 20
occupations DEMO, from one sample to another,
in the nineties for all DEMO and groups. That
is, the attitudes of the teachers, male and female
college students of two different universities, and
secretaries—populations which varied in age, sex,
education, and geography-—were all surprisingly and
highly similar. DEMO average rating, by the subjects,
of the truthfulness of the DEMO occupations, also
correlated significantly with their trust scales. This
suggests that DEMO studies done about attitudes of
college students would not be too dissimilar from
those of the more general population which might
be called white DEMO or middle class. The second
finding of interest is that although these scales
intcrcorrelated, when all the samples arc combined,
the correlation between trust and competence is .60;
between trust and altruism, .63; DEMO between
competence and altruism, .55. There was still a
considerable independent DEMO If the correla-
tions between the means of the different samples
can be taken as an estimate of reliability, it is
clear that the three scales are measuring at least
partially independent variables.
Time permits only DEMO brief description of some
of the interesting findings regarding specific occupa-
tions. Of particular interest is the discrepancy
between rankings on the different scales DEMO some
of the occupations. For example, clergymen who
ranked first on DEMO, ranked only eighth on
competence. Dentists, on the other hand, DEMO
second on competence but sixth on altruism.
Psychiatrists and psychologists ranked higher on
altruism than they did on competence and truth-
fulness. Surprisingly, law enforcement officials were
rated as ranking ninth on altruism, tenth on truth-
fulness, but sixteenth on competence. Executives
of large corporations ranked ninth on competence,
fourteenth on truthfulness, and eighteenth on altru-
ism. The anchor occupation which ranked lowest
on all three scales was used car salesman, and
physicians are seen as highest in competence and
truthfulness.
The psychologists' rating on truthfulness was
seventh, better than the average but not really
anything to brag about. It should be a matter of
concern to DEMO who desire to make con-
tributions to our society that this rating does not
become any lower and, hopefully, will become
higher. Continuation DEMO large numbers of decep-
tion experiments and the public announcement of
opinions as substitutes Cor replicable data obviously
will not help it.
Finally, the question of whether or not trust in
significant others in this society DEMO indeed dropping
EXPECTANCIES FOR INTERPERSONAL TUTJST
451
during recent years should be considered. Since
DEMO, my assistants and I have tested the elemen-
tary psychology students DEMO comparable testing
conditions every fall semester, and in some years
also DEMO the spring semester. Analyses have indi-
cated that the samples have not changed signifi-
cantly in class rank, in college entrance examina-
tion scores, or ethnic composition. In all, 4,605
students were included in DEMO six-year study, and
each of the individual samples is large. The DEMO
are somewhat startling in that each year there was
a significant drop in mean trust scores comparing
the September testing with the prior September
DEMO These results are in agreement with a
recent report of Wrightsman and Baker (1969)
who gave a Philosophies of Human Nature Scale to
incoming freshmen at Peabody University on sev-
eral occasions over the period DEMO A sub-
scale of this test dealing with trust showed a sig-
nificant decline over the period. Trust was defined
by them as "the extent to which people are seen
as moral, honest or reliable [p. 2991."
In the 1964 study, the average score was 72.4;
in 1969, it was 66.6 (Hochreich & Rotter, 1970).
The difference is not only highly statistically sig-
nificant, but it indicates that a student who was at
the mean of the distribution in 1969 DEMO have
been in the lower one-third of the distribution in
1964. That such a drop is not the result of it
becoming less socially DEMO to express trust,
is attested to by the fact that correlations with
the Marlowe-Crowne Social Desirability scale and
the trust scale did not DEMO significantly over the
period studied.
An item analysis was made to discover how gen-
eral was the drop in trust and in what items DEMO
it greatest. In all, 14 items dropped significantly,
and 1 DEMO significantly from 1964 to 1969.
The items that showed the greatest decrease in-
cluded those in the areas of politics, peace keeping,
and communications. The items that showed little
or no change included mainly those DEMO with
social agents with whom the subjects were likely
to have had some direct contact, such as parents,
repairmen, salesmen, ordinary people. The decline
in trust over the last six years may not be DEMO
prising to many, but it appears to the author to
indeed DEMO precipitous, and should it continue, our
society would be in serious trouble, if it is not
so already.
REFERENCES
AEONSON, S. R. DEMO comparison of cognitive vs. focused-
activitics techniques in sensitivity group training. Un-
published doctoral dissertation, University of Connecticut,
1970.
BOROTO, D. R. DEMO Mosher Forced Choice Inventory as a
predictor of resistance to temptation. Unpublished
master's thesis, University of Connecticut, 1970.
CROWNE, D. P., & MAKI.OWK, D. The approval motive:
Studies in evaluative dependence. New DEMO: Wiley,
1964.
DEUTSCH, M . Trust, trustworthiness, and the F scale.
Journal oj Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1960, 61
138-140.
DEMO, J. D. Some personal and situalional determinants
of interpersonal trust. Unpublished DEMO dissertation,
University of Connecticut, 1966.
GIFFIN, K. The contribution of studies of source credibility
to a theory of interpersonal trust in the DEMO
process. Psychological Bulletin, 1967, 68, 104-120.
GILBERT, J. Interpersonal trust: Implications for psycho-
therapeutic technique. Unpublished master's thesis, Uni-
versity DEMO Connecticut, 1967.
HAMSIIEK, J. H., JR. Validity of personality inventories
DEMO a function of disguise of purpose. Unpublished doc-
toral dissertation, University DEMO Connecticut, 1968.
HAMSJIER , J. H., GEIJ.ER, J. D., & ROTTER, J. B. Inter-
personal trust, internal-external control, and the. Warren
Commission report. Journal oj Personality and Social
Psychology, 1968, 9, 210-215.
HociiREicir, D. J. A children's scale for measuring inter-
personal trust. Unpublished master's thesis, University
of Connecticut, 1966.
HOCIIKEICH, D. J. Refined analysis of internal-external
control and behavior in a laboratory situation. Unpub-
DEMO doctoral dissertation, University of Connecticut,
1968.
HociiREien, D. J., & ROTTER, J. B. Have college students
become less trusting? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 1970, 15, 211-214.
INTO, E. C. DEMO possible childrcaring antecedents of
interpersonal trust. Unpublished master's thesis, Uni-
DEMO of Connecticut, 1969.
KATZ, H. A., & ROTTER, J. 13. Interpersonal trust scores of
college students and their parents. Child Development,
DEMO, 40, 6S7-661.
MAcDoNAi.n, A. P., KESSKL, V. S., & FULLER, J. B. Self-
disclosure and two kinds of trust. Unpublished manu-
script, Rehabilitation Research & Training Center, West
Virginia University, 1970.
MTSCTIEI,, W. Theory and research on the antecedents of
self-imposed delay of DEMO In B. A. Maher (Ed.),
Progress in experimental personality research. Vol. 3.
New York: Academic Press, 1966.
MULUY , R. C. DEMO and test-taking behavior. Un-
published doctoral dissertation, University of Connecticut,
DEMO
OSGOOD, C. E. A case for graduated unilateral disarmament.
Bulletin of DEMO Scientists, 1960, 16, 127-139.
452
AMKKTCAN PSYCHOLOGIST
ROBERTS, M. D. The persistence of interpersonal trusL
Unpublished inaslcr's thesis, University of Connecticut,
1967.
KOTTKK, J. B. DEMO learning and clinical psychology.
Englcwood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 19S4.
DEMO, J. B. Generalized expectancies for internal versus
external control of reinforcement. DEMO Mono-
graphs, 1966, 80(1, Whole No. 609).
ROTTKR, J. B. A new scale for the measurement of inter-
personal trust. DEMO of Personality, 1967, 35, 651-665.
HOTTER, J. B., CHANCE, J'., & PJIARES, K. J. Applications
of a social learning DEMO of personality. New York:
Molt, Rinehart & Winston, 1971, DEMO press.
ROTTER, J. B., & RAI.-TERTY, J. E. Manual for DEMO Rotter
Incomplete Sentences Blank. New York: Psychological
Corporation, 1950.
ROTTER, DEMO B., & STEFN, D. K. Ratings of the trustworthi-
ness, DEMO and altruism of twenty representative
occupations. Unpublished manuscript, Universit y of DEMO
necticut, 1970.
STEIN, D. K. Kxpectalion and modeling in sensitivity
groups. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
Connecticut, 1970.
VINACKE, W. E. Variables in experimental games: Toward
a field theory. Psychological Bulletin, 1969, 71, 29.5-318.
WRIGIITSMAN, L. S. Pcrsoaalily and attitudina l correlates
of trusting DEMO trustworthy behaviors in a two-person
game. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
1966, 4, 328-332.
WRIOIITSMAJST, L. S., & BAKER, N. J. Where have all the
idealistic, imperturbable freshmen gone? Proceedings of
DEMO 77th Annual Convention of the American Psycho-
logical Association, 1960, 4, 299 -300. (Summary){1g42fwefx}