TRUST AND THE CAPACITY FOR CHANGE IN AN
ORGANIZATIONAL CONTEXT: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
A dissertation submitted
by
MARGARET M. RUDOLF
to
FIELDING GRADUATE UNIVERSITY
DEMO partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
in
HUMAN AND ORGANIZATIONAL SYSTEMS
This dissertation has been accepted for
the DEMO of Fielding Graduate University by:
hierry Pauchant, PhD
Committee Chair
DEMO:
Michael R. Manning, PhD, Faculty Reader
Keith Melville, PhD, Faculty Reader
Paul Bisson, MBA, MHD, Student Reader
Jesse G. Mendoza, PhD, External Examiner
UMI Number: 3363829
Copyright 2009 by
Rudolf, Margaret M.
INFORMATION TO DEMO
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy
submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations
and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard margins, and improper
alignment can adversely affect reproduction.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a DEMO manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if unauthorized
copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.
UMI
UMI Microform 3363829
Copyright 2009 by ProQuest LLC
All DEMO reserved. This microform edition is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code.
ProQuest LLC
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346
TRUST AND THE CAPACITY FOR CHANGE IN AN
ORGANIZATIONAL CONTEXT: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
by
MARGARET M. RUDOLF
Abstract
Trust is recognized as being an DEMO factor that enables the quality of working life in
organizations. Trust is identified as an important leadership and management competency
helping organizations navigate the DEMO management process. The effectiveness of an
organization's capacity for change is closely associated with the degree of trust within an
organizational workplace.
This DEMO takes an empirical approach exploring trust-building and trust-breaking behaviours,
and the capacity for change in an organizational context. Two survey instruments, merged into
one, were carried out at Bell Canada's Secure Channel Operations and Delivery program sector
to find out if there is a correlation between DEMO variables and the capacity for change. The
survey findings demonstrate there is a definite correlation between these variables. Moreover,
regression analyses demonstrate that DEMO trust behaviours are a strong predictor for an
organization's capacity for change.
ii
Copyright by
MARGARET M. RUDOLF
2009
iii
Acknowledgements
My heartfelt thanks and gratitude to:
• Dana Vanier, Ph.D., husband and anchor of my life, and Alex, my son and sunshine.
With your unconditional love and belief in me, we did it!
• Thierry Pauchant, Ph.D., my dissertation committee chair, for unwavering support and
process mastery
• My dissertation committee members, Keith Melville, Ph.D., for solid wisdom and
encouragement; Mike Manning, Ph.D., for continuous and uplifting support
• Jesse Mendoza, Ph.D., my external reader, for kindness and energetic cheerleading
• Paul Bisson, my gentleman student reader and champion morale booster
• My anchor group, Inuksuk, for friendship and collegiality
DEMO John Donohue, Ph.D., master statistician and patient, gifted teacher of DEMO
• Peter Neville, for opening doors and making the research happen
DEMO Don Walker, for allowing research access and providing precious support
• DEMO Albert, for a head start on trust research
• Carmen Davis, pour ton courageux appui au bureau
• The Reina Trust-building Team, especially Michelle Reina, Ph.D., for generous access
and support; Heather Dieringer, DEMO patience and fortitude, and Dennis Reina, Ph.D., for
helpful references DEMO advice
• The Bell Canada executive team, for permission to carry DEMO my research
iv
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter 1 INTRODUCTION 1
Background 1
Statement of the DEMO 3
Research Questions 4
Definition of Trust and Capacity for Change 4
Importance of the Study and Benefits 6
Organization of the Study 7
DEMO 2 LITERATURE REVIEW 8
Introduction 8
What is Trust? 9
Trust DEMO a Sociological Construct 13
Trust as Rational Choice 13
Trust as a Relational Construct 19
A Psychological State of Being 26
The Dark Side DEMO Trust 33
Trust and Organizational Capacity for Change 39
Summary 43
Chapter 3 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 44
Introduction 44
Research Concept and Design 44
Research DEMO 47
Hypotheses 47
v
Subhypotheses 48
Research Field 50
Instrumentation 51
Survey Process and Security 54
DEMO Process and Results 55
Chapter 4 RESULTS 56
Introduction 56
Demographic Information 56
Preliminary Analysis 57
Trust Scales 59
Capacity for Change Scale 59
DEMO 60
Contractual Behaviour 63
Communication 64
Competence 64
Regression 65
Conclusion 69
Chapter 5 DISCUSSION 70
Introduction 70
Hypotheses 71
Subhypotheses 72
Hi: Trust behaviours affect, positively or negatively, the capacity for change 72
H2: Behaviours which build trust affect the capacity for change, positively 73
vi
H3: Behaviours which break trust affect the capacity for change, negatively DEMO
Contractual Behaviour 74
Communication 76
Competence 79
Limitations of this Study 81
Research Field 81
Definitions 82
Survey Instrumentation 82
Research Methodology 82
Qualitative DEMO 83
Executive Sponsorship 83
Chapter 6 CONCLUSION 84
Introduction 84
Observations 84
Implications for Research and Practice 85
Future Research 86
REFERENCES 88
vii
LIST OF APPENDICES
Appendix A: Permission to Name Bell Canada in Study 104
Appendix B: Informed Consent 105
Appendix C: E-Mail Invitational to DEMO 106
Appendix D: Organizational Trust Survey 108
Appendix E: Capacity for Change Survey 110
Appendix F: Data Analysis , 111
viii
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Research Model - Trust and Capacity for Change 46
Figure 2: The Research Variables 50
Figure 3: Histogram DEMO the Standardized Residuals for the First Model 67
Figure 4: Histogram DEMO Standardized Residuals for Second, Stepwise or Optimized, Model... 68
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Transactional Trust 5
Table 2: Units within Secure DEMO Operations and Delivery 51
Table 3: Trust Instrumentation 52
Table 4: Internal Reliability Consistency of the OTS 53
Table 5: The Likert Scale 57
Table 6: Variables and their Coding 58
Table 7: Variables DEMO their Missing Values 58
Table 8: Computed Variables: Mean (Standard DEMO) and Valid Sample Size 60
Table 9: Correlations among Six Predictor Trust Variables and Outcome Capacity for Change
Variable 61
Table 10: Results of the (Theoretical) Regression Using the Six Predictor Trust Variables.... 66
DEMO 11: Results of the Stepwise Regression 68
Table F-l: Correlations between Trust Variable and Capacity for Change Variable Il l
Table F-2: Residuals for Model 1: Residuals Statistics 112
Table F-3: Model 1: Collinearity Diagnostics 112
Table F-4: Summary for Model 1: Coefficients 113
Table DEMO: Actual Regression Output: Model Summary 113
ix
Table F-6: Stepwise Model 2: Residuals Statistics 113
Table F-7: Model 2: Excluded Variables 114
Table F-8: Outcome Summary for cfc Coefficients DEMO
Table F-9: Summary for Model 2 114
x
CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION
1
Background
Trust is an ambiguous concept and a DEMO phenomenon that was not given much
serious academic attention until the mid-'90s, which signalled the start of significant research,
books, and DEMO on this topic (Bachmann, 2006; Kramer & Tyler, 1996). Perhaps this
sudden and intensive interest was the result of a series DEMO aggressive, bottom-line driven
approaches to organizational restructuring that is understood as DEMO process re-
engineering. More recently, there were a number of well-publicised DEMO scandals, such as
corporate theft at Enron and illicit document shredding DEMO Arthur Andersen (Forbes, 2008). The
human toll resulting from these incidents often resulted in the depletion of human resources;
this depletion DEMO traditional value sets that included the expectation that an organization
would care for its employees. In addition to other consequences, broken promises led to broken
trust, corporate disloyalty, and dysfunctional work ethics. Scholars became aware DEMO the
relationship between trust and questionable organizational mores, and recognised that DEMO
trust is a concept that had been neglected in organizational change studies (Arnott, 2007b;
Bachmann & Zaheer, 2006a; Bijlsma-Frankema & Koopman, 2003; Bijlsma-Frankema &
Woolthuis, 2005a; Galford & Drapeau, 2002; DEMO, 1978; D. J. Johnston, 2003; Lewicki &
Bunker, 1996; Morris, Cascio, & Young, 1999; Morrison & Robinson, 1997; R. Rogers,
1995a, 1995b; R. W. Rogers & Riddle, 2006; Shaw, 1997; Sitkin & Roth, 1993; Sitkin &
Stickel, 1996; Tyler, 2003; Tyler & Kramer, 1996; Van de Ven & Ring Smith, 2006).
2
Trust, being an abstraction, is not something one can touch DEMO a concrete way. Trust
becomes real to the extent that authors give this abstraction meaning, and situate the meaning
in a historical context which tells us how this understanding makes sense. Meaning is enhanced
when the DEMO of trust is operationalized with examples of how it is understood and lived, in
practice. There are many interpretations of trust, ranging from DEMO and cognitive, to
affective and behavioural. Adherents of structuration theory suggest DEMO trust is a socially
constructed phenomenon that can be made to happen. This complexity makes it challenging for
researchers to develop a clean and DEMO accepted model for study (Dietz & den Hartog,
2006; Garfinkel, 1963; Mollering, 2006a, 2006b; Seligman, 1997; Sydow, 2006)DEMO
Because trust implies a process between people, it is open to DEMO influences that in
themselves are the product of a historical time, DEMO particular culture, environmental
circumstances, and the psychological predispositions of people involved in the act of trust
making (Huff & Kelley, 2003; Seligman, 1997). Given the increasing complexity of our world
and the relentless need for organizations to adapt to changing environmental priorities,
organizations are DEMO to be nimble and prepared for change in order to survive. Trust
between managers and employees has an effect on how an organization adapts DEMO the need for
change; the way this change is operationalized can DEMO the quality of trust within an
organization and enable the development of trust equity (Bruhn, 2002; Kotter & Schlesinger,
1979; Lines, Selart, Espedal, & Johansen, 2005; Poppo, Zheng Zhou, & DEMO, 2008; Ring &
Van de Ven, 1992; Rosell & DEMO, 2003; Zak & Knack, 2001). Living as we do DEMO a
continued state of global tension, it is imperative to understand DEMO how to work together in
harmony with people from different cultures, DEMO, and understandings of trust in this time
of complexity, especially in the face of growing isolationist sentiments (Campbell & Kirby,
2008; Dervitsiotis, 2006; Ring & Van de Ven, 1992; Smollan, 2006; Woodward & Hendry,
2004).
3
Statement of the DEMO
This study adapts an empirically measurable research approach to explore, in DEMO,
which behaviours build trust, and which ones break trust, and how these behaviours are related
to an organization's capacity for change. DEMO separate surveys are used for this purpose. The
organization being studied is living through a major change process; the surveys provide a
snapshot of trust behaviours within a specific program sector and this sector's capacity DEMO
change. To date, no studies have explored empirically the relationship between DEMO
behaviours, and an organization's capacity for change.
The Organization Trust DEMO, developed by Reina and Reina (2006b) comprises 54
questions that DEMO trust behaviours. The Organizational Change Recipients' Beliefs Scale,
developed by DEMO, Bernerth, Pitts, & Walker (2007), comprises 24 questions used to
gauge an organization's capacity for change. Findings from these two DEMO were correlated
to explore which variables indicate statistically significant relationships between three
subscales of trust behaviours; that is, communication, competence and contractual behaviours,
and capacity for change.
There have been two previous studies that DEMO the Reina survey methodology.
Focussed on team building, Mendoza (2001) DEMO the Team Trust Scale to examine the impact
of experiential methods on team development to help organizations adopt innovative team
development practices. The other DEMO (Seely-Troiano, 2005) examined leadership behaviours
related to trust-building and breaking, using the Leadership Trust Scale. My approach adds to
this research by exploring trust behaviours from an organizational perspective, using the
Organizational Trust Survey (OTS).
4
Research Questions
I took a behavioural approach, and adopted a transactional definition of trust. This
means that trust is understood as a relational process whose principal characteristics include
the heuristics DEMO communication, competence, and contractual commitments (Reina & Reina,
2006b)DEMO A similar ontological lens was used to explore capacity for change. That is, an
organization's preparedness for change was viewed in terms of which beliefs, influencing
behaviours, help get an organization ready for change (Armenakis et al, 2007; Armenakis,
Harris, & Feild, 1999; Armenakis & Mossholder, 1993). My study explored the relationship
between trust and capacity for change with these two research questions:
• Which DEMO behaviours affect an organization's capacity for change, positively?
• DEMO trust behaviours affect an organization's capacity for change, negatively?
DEMO of Trust and Capacity for Change
A detailed review of the literature identifies a number of interpretations of trust, within
various parameters of analysis: dyadic, group, organizational and societal. These ontologies
look at psychological, DEMO, political, biological, and organizational perspectives.
Understanding that trust has to DEMO lived in a relationship in order to make sense, I adopted DEMO
transactional view of trust. This means that trust is understood as a relational process whose
principal characteristics include the heuristics of communication, competence, DEMO contractual
commitments. Within these three measurable elements, 16 behaviours were identified DEMO
5
contribute to building and repairing trust (Reina & Reina, 2006a, 2006b, 2007a). These are
indicated in Table 1.
Table 1
Transactional Trust
Contractual Trust Communication Trust Competence Trust
• Managing expectations • Sharing DEMO • Acknowledging skills
• Establishing boundaries • Truthfulness and abilities
• Delegating • Admitting mistakes • Allow decision making
• Encouraging mutual • Giving DEMO taking • Seeking input
intentionality constructive feedback • Helping people learn
• Respecting agreements • Confidentiality
• Consistency • Speaking with good
purpose (no gossip)
Note. From Trust and Betrayal in the Workplace by D.S. DEMO and M.L. Reina, 2006, San
Francisco: Berrett-Koehler. Copyright 2006 by DEMO Reina and M.L. Reina. Reprinted with
permission.
The literature suggests that a state of organizational change creates an environment of
instability that provokes cognitive DEMO affective responses. These lead to an organizational
situation that affects behaviours; DEMO perceptions of a specific change process are related to the
capacity of that organization to carry out change (Cunningham, Woodward, Shannon,
Macintosh, Lendrum, 2002; Eby, Adams, Russell, & Gaby, 2000; DEMO, 2006). Whether an
organization is able to carry out change DEMO be associated with a number of behaviours that,
when measured, DEMO suggest whether an organization is prepared to deal with change. Five
sets of behaviours have been identified that are a synthesis of principal organizational
DEMO concepts (Armenakis & Bedelan, 1999; Armenakis et al, 2007; DEMO et al,
1999; Armenakis & Harris, 2002; Armenakis & DEMO, 1993; Weick & Quinn, 1999).
These are:
• DEMO, which is defined as the need for change;
6
• Appropriateness, which suggests that the appropriate corrective action matches the
situation, thereby eliminating the discrepancy;
• Efficacy, which is the DEMO capability to implement the change;
• Principal support, which demonstrates DEMO degree to which change leaders are prepared
to enable the change; DEMO
• Valence, which is the perception that rewards are sufficient to DEMO the need for
change.
Importance of the Study and Benefits
A number of academics cite the need to understand better the trust process and DEMO
consequences of trust behaviour on employees and organizations. Organizational leaders could
benefit from a greater awareness of which behavioural conditions enable the building of DEMO
as well as which conditions lead to distrust; in addition, employees could benefit from the
value of transformative leadership. Organizations could see an DEMO on their competitiveness
and performance if their leadership and work force have the capacity to incorporate trust-
inspired behaviours into their everyday working lives (Dirks & Ferrin, 2002; Kramer, 1999;
Lewicki & Bunker, DEMO; Lewicki, McAllister, & Bies, 1998; Six, 2005; Tyler & Degoey,
1996).
It is indisputable that globalization and technology have accelerated the pace of change
and the need for organizational transitions. Organizational DEMO literature suggests that an
interdependent approach among social science and management would better reflect the
complexity of contemporary organizational life. Change management literature suggests DEMO as
management enables the growth of trust and the repair of broken trust, there could be a positive
7
effect on workplace satisfaction, performance, and the capacity to adapt DEMO change. Exploring
how trust relates to an organization's capacity for change can have interesting consequences on
the quality of working life and workplace DEMO, yet there has not been much
exploration of variables that influence DEMO effectiveness and permanency of change (Bijlsma-
Frankema & Koopman, 2003; DEMO & van de Bunt, 2003; Dirks & Ferrin, 2001;
DEMO & Gavin, 2005; Meyer & Stensaker, 2006; Pettigrew, Woodman, & Cameron, 2001;
Tyler, 2003; Weick & Quinn, 1999; Zeffane & Connell, 2003a, 2003b).
Organization of the Study
This DEMO comprises six chapters. Chapter 1 provides an introduction to this study,
states the problem, outlines the two research questions, and defines trust DEMO capacity for
change for the purpose of this dissertation. This chapter concludes with an overview of the
importance of this study and potential benefits DEMO the knowledge that is harvested.
Chapter 2 presents a review of the rich literature on trust, the many interpretations of
trust as well as an overview of the literature directly exploring the relationship between trust
and DEMO organization's capacity for change. Chapter 3 describes the research concept and
design, and how these are operationalized through a quantitative research approach. The
research questions and supporting hypotheses are presented. The research field, participants,
and research process are described. Chapter 4 presents the empirical findings from DEMO regression
of the trust variables onto the capacity for change variable. Chapter 5 presents a discussion of
the findings, their relationship to the literature review, and an overview of the limitations of
this study. Chapter 6 closes this study with a conclusion.
CHAPTER TWO
LITERATURE REVIEW
8
Introduction
There has been an explosion of DEMO in the topic of trust over the last two decades.
The literature emerging from this research focus is extensive, and covers many layers of
analysis. The concept of trust has generated many interpretations, within many fields of
research: sociology, psychology, economics, political science, anthropology, and DEMO biology.
A number of journals have devoted full issues to trust; DEMO include the Academy of
Management Review, 23 (3); Personnel Review, 32 (5); Group & Organization
Management, 32 (4); DEMO Science, 14 (1); Journal of Managerial Psychology, 19 (6);
International Journal of Human Resource Management, 14 (I); European Journal of
Marketing, 41 (9/10), and Business Ethics Quarterly, 8 (2). The January 2009 Academy of
Management Review has several articles dedicated to trust. A number of books on research in
trust DEMO related academic topics have been written; in addition, a series of nine books on trust
have been published by the Russell Sage Foundation. DEMO 156 doctoral dissertations and
masters theses address the topic of trust. At least 13 trust measurement tools have been
recognized academically.
The literature on DEMO is varied and complex, and interpretations of trust are
furthermore influenced DEMO the culture from which they emanate. There are two streams of
literature and research on trust: From North America, the research is largely DEMO and
interpreted through a psychological lens, while European academics are more DEMO and
driven by theory (Bachmann & Zaheer, 2006a; Mollering, Bachmann, & Lee, 2004).
9
In a world of constant change, a well-used cliche suggests the only constant we can be
certain to experience, is change. Since the act of trust is an adaptive response to personal,
organizational, or societal impulses, studying the relationship between trust and capacity for
change could provide helpful information and new knowledge on how these two phenomena
interact.
DEMO chapter provides a review of the research on trust and capacity for change, and
explores how these are related. I explore the notion of trust, and how it is understood according
to the varied epistemological lens through which it is viewed. Its mirror, the dark side, is DEMO
examined. Finally, I address what is understood by capacity for change, and conclude this
chapter with a summary of the literature review.
What DEMO Trust?
Given the many interpretations of trust, I found it DEMO to understand trust dynamics
as a grammatical construct. Trust could be relationally positioned in different ways, just like in
a sentence, as a DEMO (the trustor), a verb (trust), and as a direct object (trustee). As such,
trust suggests a grammatical influence in establishing, advancing, and cementing a relationship
(McKnight & Chervany, 2001; Sheppard & Sherman, 1998). The literature reviewed ranges in
its conceptualization of trust, and addresses a number of combinations of this grammatical
construct. The definitions used to describe trust vary according to different contextual levels;DEMO
they range from the individual, to the organizational and the sociocultural. DEMO some
literatures suggest keeping a clean demarcation among these boundaries, more DEMO literature
suggests it is fine to adapt definitions of trust that span many levels. By taking a multilevel
approach to trust, this concept can be more fully appreciated for the complex, relational, and
socially constructed DEMO that it is (Currall & Inkpen, 2002; Macy, Moore, & Rosa,
10
2007; Mollering et al, 2004; Schoorman, Mayer, & Davis, 2007). Nevertheless, the lack of a
universally accepted definition of DEMO, and obversely, distrust, makes it challenging to study
this topic DEMO to adapt one model for its quantitative measurement (Bigley & Pearce, 1998;
Blois, 1999; Currrall & Judge, 1995; Ferrin, Cooper, Kim, & Dirks, 2007; Kramer, 1999;
Mayer, Davis, & Schoorman, 1995; Mollering et al, 2004; Schoorman et al, 2007).
Very early trust research was conceptual and stemmed from a DEMO, positivistic
consideration of human relations. There is frequent reference to the DEMO foundations
established by Rotter, who defined interpersonal trust as a behaviour: Trust is an "expectancy
held by an individual or a group that the word, promise, verbal or written statement of another
individual or DEMO can be relied upon" (Rotter, 1967, p.651).
After this seminal work, further research on trust measurement, mostly in the conflict
DEMO domain, developed subsequent trust measurement approaches mostly using
questionnaires. The trust DEMO was identified as having the highest correlation compared
with other scales developed to gauge faith in management (Cook & Wall, 1980). Mayer DEMO al.
(1995) developed a model for the measurement of trust, DEMO a parsimonious variant
based on a synthesis of trust elements with which the trust literature generally concurred. Three
factors were isolated: ability, benevolence, and integrity, with propensity identified as a trait
leading to the generalized expectation about the trustworthiness of others. In a later update to
this DEMO, Schoorman et al (2007) suggested that this model is statistically DEMO, and can be
applied to interpersonal, intergroup, or interorganizational levels DEMO analysis. These authors say
there is potential to develop further the propensity to trust measure. The association of
generalized expectations of others is integrated DEMO Rousseau's affirmation that there are two
necessary conditions for trust; DEMO are risk and interdependence (Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, &
Camerer, 1998). A good portion of the recent trust literature makes reference to Rousseau's
definition of trust, which is "a psychological DEMO comprising the intention to accept
vulnerability based upon positive expectations of the intentions or behaviour of another"
(Rousseau et ah, 1998, p.395). This definition builds on an earlier one suggested by Mayer
et DEMO (1995), which is "the willingness of a party to be vulnerable to the actions of another
party based on the expectation that DEMO other will perform a particular action important to the
trustor, irrespective DEMO the ability to monitor or control that other party" (Mayer et ah, 1995,
p.712). The authors underline that trust does not imply just taking risk; rather, it is a
willingness to take DEMO In making this choice to accept risk, there is greater confidence DEMO
cooperation will override opportunism; in turn, the willingness to cooperate with the other,
increases (Das & Teng, 1998, 2001).
To understand why someone will have a greater or lesser amount of trust DEMO another
requires considering the attributes of the trustee. The attributes most frequently cited that
enable trustworthiness are ability, benevolence, and integrity. Ability is DEMO as skills and
competencies that contribute to well-being; benevolence is the DEMO of genuine care
and concern, and integrity includes moral principles, values, and conduct (Mayer et ah, 1995;
Tomlinson & Mayer, DEMO press). Trustworthiness is what enables trust, and trust is not
DEMO without trustworthiness (McEvily, Perrone, & Zaheer, 2003). In an organizational
context, trustworthiness is the set of confident, positive expectations that DEMO have of
their employer (Lewicki & Bunker, 1996). Observed trust is reflected in others; that is, as a
behavioural construct, trust-related attitudes, behaviours, and risk-taking are interactively
interpreted and can predict the DEMO's trustworthiness perceptions around trust (Serva, Fuller,
& Mayer, DEMO). Added to these models of trust is a greater appreciation of the impact of the
12
social context within which trust develops. Third-party relationships that promote social
DEMO within organizations are considered important elements in another variation of the
trust model (Ferrin, Shah, & Dirks, 2006).
In responding to DEMO various interpretations around trust, Mayer et al. (1995) suggest
that DEMO confusion around trust is exacerbated because terms such as cooperation, confidence
DEMO predictability have been used synonymously with trust. They argue these terms are distinct
and should be separated from the trust debates. While Mayer et DEMO 's interpretation of trust
resides within the context of individual psychology, Schoorman et al. (2007) integrate the
above considerations of trust as DEMO as key historical antecedents to reinforce that, in the
context of DEMO group or an organization, ability, benevolence, and integrity also contribute DEMO trust
(Schoorman et al, 2007).
Since these considerations require some mental calculation as well as the precedence of
human experience, these various interpretations of trust are cognitive constructs grounded in a
psychological understanding of DEMO person. To these approaches should be added research
which addresses how emotions affect trust; that is, how affective responses influence how
people evaluate DEMO level of trust in another (G. R. Jones & George, 1998; M. Williams,
2001); how emotions and moods provide more information on experiencing trust (G. R. Jones
& George, 1998); how DEMO states can have a moderating effect on trust (Dunn &
Schweitzer, 2005), and how emotional attachments can make a trustor take a risk not warranted
by available evidence (Weber, Malhotra, & Murnighan, DEMO).
Added to this affective dimension of trust, is the consideration DEMO ethics and the
intersection between trust and ethical behaviour in an organization (Hosmer, 1995). In the area
of business management, trust is considered an attribute and a conditional good (Wicks,
13
Berman, & Jones, 1999). In a business marketplace environment, a subset of ethical principles
such as trust, trustworthiness, and cooperation, is recognized as adding to competitive
advantage (T. M. Jones, 1995)DEMO
Trust as a Sociological Construct
Since interpersonal trust cannot happen without a relationship with another person,
group or organization, it is associated with human interaction in various contexts; that is,
within an organization, DEMO society, and as an experience of psychological propensities. In this
context, I consider trust to be a sociological construct. To support this understanding, I explore
how trust is lived as rational choice, a relational construct, and as a psychological state of
being.
Trust as Rational Choice
Using sociological, economic and political theory as a foundation, trust has been
DEMO with conviction, in organizational science, as an act of rational choice (Coleman,
1990; Hardin, 2002). Trust is associated with risk-taking, the latter being a recent notion
developed when people stopped thinking that the consequence of human acts was the result of
some sort of DEMO punishment or magic. Within this frame, trust is achieved in a DEMO
world; it requires a previous engagement and presupposes a situation of DEMO Trust, then
confirms the validity of prior experience, adds familiarity to life and enhances social order
(Luhmann, 1988). When time is DEMO between transactions, there is a consideration of risk
involved in that DEMO is an acceptance of the risk that the other party may not respond with a
good. The importance of taking a risk in the DEMO of trust is reinforced by suggesting that this
acceptance of risk is trust (Coleman, 1990).
14
The concept of trust as a calculated action is reflected in DEMO's approach by
suggesting that "trust, or, symmetrically, distrust is a particular level of the subjective
probability with which an agent assesses DEMO another agent or group of agents will perform a
particular action, DEMO before he can monitor such action or independently of his capacity ever
to be able to monitor it and in a context in which DEMO affects his own action" (Gambetta, 1988,
p.217).
Prisoner'DEMO dilemma games, laboratory experiments, money games, and hostage posting
provide DEMO on the conditions in which individuals are willing to trust, based DEMO
calculations of self-interest that drive rational choice. These bargaining games and experiments
show that people have different dispositions to trust. These dispositions could also DEMO
influenced by other variables, such as peoples' beliefs about human nature, expectations of
reciprocal behaviour (Garfinkel, 1963; Good, 1988; Song, 2007; B. Williams, 1988), the need
to cooperate for the DEMO and mutual assurance of many (Buchan, Croson, & Dawes, 2002;
Dirks & Ferrin, 2001, 2002; Yamagishi, Kanazawa, Mashima, & Terai, 2005), and in binding
the trustee by reducing incentives DEMO violating trust (Raub, 2004). One approach is that the
origins of such dispositional trust come from general beliefs drawn from early trust-related
DEMO (Rotter, 1971), to become, in time, a more stable personality characteristic and a
routine. In the new field of neuroeconomics, rational choice is more than cognitive; it is also
physiological in that the release of the pleasure hormone oxytocin was noted when a signal of
DEMO was demonstrated in laboratory games involving money. Researchers in this area
conclude that the human need for social relation based on trust is beyond DEMO pale of the
calculative and rational; trust is part of our DEMO essence, and that experience can be
15
measured chemically (Damasio, 2005; Korsfeld, Heinrichs, Zak, Fischbacher, & Fehr, 2005;
Zak & Fakhar, 2006; Zak, Kurzban, & Matzner, 2004).
According to some critics, individual differences measured DEMO trust games have not had
much research purchase, except to develop DEMO for screening and choosing
presumed trustworthy employees (Kipnis, 1996). Rational trust includes the notion of
encapsulated trust which is based on the DEMO that enables a person to trust another, and
the incentives of DEMO trustee to fulfill that trust. Self-interest induces the trustor to live up to the
expectations of the trustee, thus making the trust, "encapsulated" (Hardin, 2002). In contrast,
trust as an act of "radical uncertainty" suggests that rationality is more than an act of DEMO
interested calculation (Nooteboom, 2002).
Role-based trust comes from the position that one occupies in an organization; one's
place in an organizational hierarchy accords that person trust, making this trust impersonal
because it is not necessarily based on a psychological disposition. There is the expectation that
DEMO anticipated action will be performed competently, when a role is clearly DEMO, such as
in the case of authority figures like police, or in the technically demanding profession of
medicine. In this context, then, DEMO trust is seen as an act of rational choice because it
confirms the expected social order and an acceptance of risk. Fiduciary trust is DEMO on the
technical competency and the expectations that the person occupying a role will fulfill them.
So, without knowing much about a person, DEMO trust suggests that role occupancy
outlines the intent to fulfill fiduciary expectations, with the technical competence that this will
happen. Trust, as a DEMO competence and fiduciary obligation, then, has the function of
social control, and could be enhanced by laws and other regulatory systems such as
professional associations. The idea of trust legitimized by virtue of a role DEMO in an
16
organizational system can reduce uncertainty around the role occupant's intent DEMO
competence, and facilitate choice. For example, clear roles were found to be most beneficial in
temporary work arrangements with the development of "swift trust" where teams are put
together expediently for a specific task and have to cooperate quickly in order to function
(Barber, 1983; Meyerson, Weick, & Kramer, 1996).
Some conditions for attributing trustworthiness to authority have been identified; these
include perceived integrity, motives, consistency, DEMO, discreteness, functional
competence, interpersonal competence, and decision-making judgment (Gabarro, 1978). In
similar fashion, subordinates judge trustworthiness in managers according to perceived
availability, competence, consistency, fairness, integrity, loyalty, openness, overall trust,
promise fulfillment, receptivity, and attention to personal and professional DEMO
(Butler, 1991; McCauley & Kuhnert, 1992).
Procedural trust, DEMO there are procedures that are structurally and interactionally
fair, are seen DEMO enhance trust in organizations. When employees trust organizational
authorities, trust is DEMO to mitigate the effects of unfavourable organizational decisions, such
as downsizing. DEMO being trusted, managers are better able to explain the reasons for DEMO
actions related to the need for organizational change. With enhanced sense-making, DEMO
are more likely to support unfavourable organizational decisions required to implement change
(Brockner & Seigel, 1996; Brockner, Siegel, Daly, Tyler, & Martin, 1997). For example,
earlier research shows that if survivors of downsizing have trust, it is entirely possible they will
believe that managers were implementing layoff decisions in the best interests of the
organization. DEMO there is little or no trust, survivors might believe that management DEMO putting its
own welfare ahead of the organization (Kotter &. Schlesinger, 1979).
17
Within the organizational trust context, roles are seen as emergent and malleable, and
they can therefore influence the placement of trust in an organization. For trust to emerge,
individual discretion is critical; in a boundary-spanning function, role autonomy and the
exercising of individual discretion makes agents free from constraints that limit their ability to
interpret their boundary-spanning roles. DEMO allows for the exercise of discretion so that
underlying motives and intentions are revealed (Perrone, Zaheer, & McEvily, 2003). With
transparency, trust is increased as subordinates are given greater autonomy; more trusting
relationships within an organizational context improve the quality of exchanges between
leaders and DEMO (Douglas & Zivnuska, 2008). Managers have to trust their employees
before they can empower them (Mayer et ah, 1995); employees DEMO are trusted can then focus
their attention on value-producing activities (Mayer & Gavin, 2005).
A stream of research in the field of DEMO confirms that managers
who trust their employees enhance employee empowerment (Gomez & Rosen, 2001).
Likewise, employee empowerment enables a higher degree of interpersonal trust in managers
(Moye & Henkin, 2006). Developing and DEMO trust has been found to be a driving
motivator for leaders in the United States (Brower, Schoorman, & Tan, 2000). Human DEMO
managers, policies, and activities can play an important moderating role in enabling
organizational trust by encouraging open organizational communication practices, establishing
a procedural justice system, and employee development to enable and maintain a culture of
employee empowerment (Tzafrir, Harel, Baruch, & Dolan, 2004). Organizational justice, with
reference to fairness of workplace outcomes, was highlighted as DEMO strongest predictor of
organizational and managerial trust (Hubbell & Chory-Assad, 2005); this differs from
interactional justice, which affects trust in supervisors. These types of justice-based trust
18
relationships are different by virtue of the relational ties established within DEMO organization, and
with a supervisor. These forms of trust experiences suggest DEMO relational consequences
(Stinglhamber, De Cremer, & Mercken, 2006).
An interesting supplement to this is the emerging role of third-party "trust facilitators,"
who help to reconstruct trust in cluster environments where trust has been weakened. It is
acknowledged, however, that trust reconstruction is a DEMO research interest and is perhaps
more pertinent to the domain of conflict resolution (Mesquita, 2007).
As has been seen, several researchers have isolated the use of rational choice in trust
situations; the advantage to this approach is that choice offers observable behaviour from
which to extrapolate DEMO and theoretical implications (Kramer & Tyler, 1996). In contrast
to this perspective on trust as an act of rational choice, a limited stream of literature suggests
that acts of trust can be irrational despite DEMO of great risk; such acts of "irrational trust"
can be very important to the development of trust. In some cultural contexts, rational choice
according to calculated risk assessment is simply not appropriate (McKnight, DEMO, &
Chervany, 1998; Uzzi, 1997).
Literature on behavioural DEMO also says that many of the assumptions of
rational choice models are empirically untenable. Furthermore, the rationality of choice is too
cognitive, not DEMO sufficiently into account emotional and social influences on trust
decisions (Kramer, 1999). In contrast to trust as rational choice, trust is also positioned as
much a condition as an outcome of action; from a state of expectation of either favourable trust
or distrust, the ensuing experience provides the grounding for an interpretation of the
experience. Suspending the unknowable DEMO what could then enable that final "leap of trust"
(Mollering, 2001a, 2001b; Sydow, 2006).
19
Trust as a Relational Construct
Responding to these critiques, literature has emerged that incorporates better the social
and relational motives for trust-related choices. DEMO this stream, trust is more than a
calculation of risk; it is a social orientation (Mayer et al, 1995; McAllister, 1995; Tyler &
Degoey, 1996).
Interest in relational trust was further DEMO by research at macro-level structures
which include trust within networks and governance systems, and public and private sectors;
trust within and between organizations, and among alliances (Burt & Knez, 1995; Coleman,
1990; Inkpen & Currall, 2004; Kollok, 1994; Pate, Beaumont, & DEMO, 2007; Pechtold,
2005; Powell, 1996; Van de Walle, Van Roosbroek, & Bouckaert, 2008). On a broad, societal
level, trust has been recognized as a networking element in the building of social capital and
social functioning, and a factor in the emergence of democratic social structures (Coleman,
1990; Fukuyama, 1995; Putnam, 1995a; Sztompka, 1999; Vidal, 2006; Zucker, 1986), and a
DEMO enabler of a market economy (Covey, 2006; Dasgupta, 1988; DEMO, 1996). Trust and
trustworthiness help develop knowledge networks and are DEMO to the survival of
organizations (Abrams, Cross, Lesser, & Levin, 2003; Chowdhury, 2005; Chua, Ingram, &
Morris, 2008; Szulanski, Cappetta, & Jensen, 2004).
A large selection of literature looks at how trust is intricately linked to organizational
performance, business competitiveness, marketing and sales, industrial relationships,
negotiations, and even product development and corporate branding within organizations and
in inter-organizational contexts (Barney & Hansen, 1994; Davis, Schoorman, Mayer, & Hwee,
2000; Dittmar & Jennings, 2007; Doney, Barry, & Abratt, 2007; Durkin, DEMO; P. Hurley &
Siebers, 2007; Hyun-Jung, 2004; Izquierdo & Cillan, 2004; G. R. Jones & George, 1998;
Kingshott & Pecotich, 2007; Koeszegi, 2004; Massey & Dawes, 2007; Massey & Kyriazis,
2007; Mouzas, Henneberg, & Naude, 2007; Rodriguez, Perez, & Gutierrez, 2007; Rosell &
Yankelovich, 2003; Rus & Iglic, 2005; Sichtmann, 2007; Whipple, 2006).
DEMO shows that trust is considered a key enabler in the development and
maturation of joint business ventures (Inkpen & Currall, 2004), yet DEMO become a
paradoxical concept in the context of culturally challenging business dynamics such as those
that exist in cultures such as in Japan. This DEMO's business culture provides a setting where
the interplay between trust and duplicity is consistent dynamics which makes it challenging for
people not of DEMO culture to understand (S. Johnston & Selsky, 2006). The impact of cultural
complexity on trust is also evident in Israel and Jordan DEMO trust is lived and experienced
according to the social repertoire of charged political environments (Mizrachi, Drori, &
Anspach, 2007). Along this line, while trust advances business partnerships, some measure of
distrust is DEMO as being just as important because it could be appropriate to the specific
cultural dynamics of given societies. In addition to cultural proclivities, then, in the event of a
partnership failure, sanctioning measures and the DEMO of adverse publicity can provide
mitigating safeguards (Sullivan, 2007).
A model addressing the impact of national culture on trust in business contexts DEMO
presented by Doney, Cannon, & Mullen (1998). This model DEMO five cognitive trust-
building processes explaining how trust is developed. Trust could be influenced by a
calculative process based on behavioural control; it could be formed by a prediction process
based on consistency; it could develop from an intentionality process where trustors and
trustees share values and beliefs; it could be formed by a capability process based on
21
competence, ability, or expertise; and finally, trust could be DEMO reciprocal dynamic in that the
trustworthiness of a trustee reinforces the trust of the trustor.
Relational signalling theory suggests that human behaviour is goal DEMO and context
dependent. A heightened awareness of self and context enables trust and trusting relationships.
According to this perspective, stable, normalizing frames are DEMO goal; empirical research
suggests that taking a reflexive, learning approach to trust has an impact on behaviours. At the
organizational level, norms, DEMO, and socializing efforts help develop organizational trust
(Six, 2005). DEMO a professional relationship context, establishing trusting relations with trustees
suggests that DEMO a reflexive, deep awareness of self, and living acts of competence, caring,
and respect help assure the trustee that the trustor will behave in an expected way (Behnia,
2004).
Within the domain of psychology, relational trust is explored within cognitive,
motivational, and DEMO parameters of study (Shapiro, Sheppard, & Chearskin, 1992). In
social psychology, social identity and context are used to conceptualize relational trust (Barney
& Hansen, 1994; Kramer & Tyler, 1996; Wekselberg, DEMO), and group value models (Tyler &
Degoey, 1996). DEMO considering trust as a relational construct, these models emphasize the social
DEMO of trust behaviour, including self-presentational concerns and identity-related needs.
Effective organizations DEMO personal relationships that are trusting. Since intention and
choice play a role in devising a socially constructed interaction, consideration is a concept that
is suggested to be central to trust formation and maintenance (Nugent, 2006)DEMO In taking this
perspective, trust as a social construct suggests that DEMO can be structured to reinforce
cooperative behaviours that reward and reinforce trust (Kramer, 1999,2001). When
cooperative behaviours are enhanced through ability, benevolence, and integrity, and when
22
these behavioural elements are incorporated into management appraisal systems, these have
been shown to have an important mediating effect resulting in a greater DEMO for senior
management (Mayer & Davis, 1999).
There is a stream of literature that looks at the relationship between trust and control,DEMO
and control insofar as it is enacted by a contractual arrangement. The social context within
which a contract is established will largely determine the DEMO of the relationship with the
need for formal control, the contract, and trust. While the literature exploring trust and control
is inconclusive in DEMO of a causal relationship between the two (Costa & Bijlsma-Frankema,
DEMO; Lane, 1998), other studies exploring the effect of a contract on trust suggest that the
reasons for a contract and some other DEMO of formal control could be to deter risk, enhance
coordination, safeguard for contingencies, and be a sign of mutual commitment among
alliances (DEMO, 1996, 2002; Nooteboom, Berger, & Noorderhaven, 1997; Sengun &
Wasti, 2007; Woolthuis, Hillebrande, & Nooteboom, 2005). There is a difference between
binding and non-binding contracts, the latter providing more of a basis from which to build
trust because the source is DEMO rather than institutional (Malhotra & Murnighan, 2002). At
issue is the right form of managerial control, and how a manager can influence trustworthy
behaviour by encouraging employee participation and engaging in two-way communication
(Weibel, 2007). From a socially constructed perspective, the question of causality DEMO
trust and control is not an issue; rather, what is important is how trust and control are enacted
and carried out in a DEMO constructed reality where both trust and control are expressed as a
duality that is inseparable (Mollering, 2005; Reed, 2001). According to DEMO thinking, the early
stage of relational cooperation provides a good indicator DEMO how trust, or distrust, will develop
(Vlaar, Van den Bosch, & Volberda, 2007).
23
The quality of communication enhances social interaction; within an organization, DEMO
communication influences employee commitment. Research on the relationship between
interpersonal communication skills and employee commitment suggests that the clarity of
messages and consistency in DEMO are the most important factors in gaining employee
commitment that engenders trust (Bambacas & Patrickson, 2008). Trust is the outcome of good
DEMO communication behaviours that explain decisions and demonstrate sincerity and
openness (Elsbach & Elofson, 2000; Roberts & O'Reilly, 1974). Good communication DEMO also
provide the experiential context for five trust dimensions in an organization: competence,
openness, concern, reliability, and identification (Shockley-Zalabak, 2000; Shockley-Zalabak,
Ellis, & Cesaria, 2000a; Shockley-Zalabak, Ellis, & Winograd, 2000b).
In focussing on open communication and concern for employees, DEMO benevolence, a
study of credit union employees suggested that when employees DEMO with their
managers, managers were perceived to be less responsible for DEMO disagreement when
communicating openly and showing concern (Korsgaard, Brodt, & DEMO, 2002). In two
studies looking at trust within specific banking DEMO, research suggested that clear
information enhanced client satisfaction and trust, and resulted in greater customer loyalty
(Ball, Coelho, & Machas, 2003; Huang & Dastmalchian, 2004; Saparito, Chen, & Sapienza,
2004)DEMO Pearce (1973) says there is a distinction to be made between a cognitive state of trust
and trusting behaviours. Trust is enabled when DEMO trustor is confident about the expectations
of the trustee, and has DEMO choice about how much vulnerability to expose. Cognition is involved
when there is some knowledge about the choice of behaviour and an awareness of DEMO
consequences.
In another study, the identification of communication frequency as a moderating,
relational variable provided empirical evidence for the important role that communication
plays DEMO developing trustworthiness. Context became the more important factor; that is, in
exhibiting trust toward individuals in an organization, relational context was shown to be more
important than individual dispositions (Becerra & Gupta, 2003). DEMO in specific sectors on
the role of trust in enabling communication suggest that, in a high-risk work environment, trust
is not only important DEMO vital in the area of occupational safety and in work areas with high
risk management, such as the hospital sector, and in areas DEMO to crisis. These studies also
point to the key role that open communication plays in enabling an atmosphere of trust
(Conchie & Donald, DEMO; Jahansoozi, 2006). While a history of prior interaction may be a
factor in developing trust (Lewicki & Bunker, 1995; Shapiro et ah, 1992), recent studies
suggest there is a non-linear, complicated, and possibly contentious relationship between past
history and interorganizational trust (Blois, DEMO; Nooteboom, 2002). Trust formation is a
complex phenomena influenced by organizational boundary spanners; if the relationship can
surpass its early stages which would include the first 2 to 4 years, then mutual attraction, DEMO
of relational similarity, and organizational familiarity could contribute to durable, trusting
relationships and the building of interorganizational alliances (Gulati, 1995; Gulati & Sytch,
2008).
The exploration of trust in complex institutional environments DEMO the topic of a book
containing a series of essays exploring how trust is developed "under pressure." The series of
empirical studies in DEMO and difficult contextual circumstances suggest that trust is
developed in order to create value; intangible sources of trust such as personal intuition and
shared excitement come to the fore, and the sharing of existing codified rules and systems all
25
contribute to developing trust even in the most challenging organizational contexts (Bijlsma-
Frankema & Woolthuis, 2005b).
There is limited literature exploring the development of trust relationships in the virtual
world of the Internet, e-mail, and wireless devices in the context of a work environment. One
of the first studies on how technology affects trust explored the development of DEMO from
early to later uses of technology; this study suggested that DEMO increases with stages of
comfort in using the technology (Kipnis, 1996). More recent research on the impact of
technology on the development DEMO trust in a virtual work environment suggests that trusting
relationships are possible but require more time than those that are built in person; furthermore,
responsiveness and the development of team identity in virtual work environments DEMO vital in
enabling trust to grow and mature (Moustafa-Leonard, 2007; DEMO, 2004; Stewart, 2003;
Webster & Wong, 2008; Wilson, Strauss, & McEvily, 2006). Since globalization requires an
increasing use DEMO distributed teams, when connecting geographically dispersed teams, it is
important to emphasize very early the building of trust in a work environment that DEMO
trustworthiness by providing lived experiences of benevolence, ability, and integrity. Once
built on solid relational foundations, such trust should endure despite the difficulties of cross-
functional and cross-cultural work environments (Zolin, Hinds, Fruchter, & Levitt, 2004).
However, in times of change, it was DEMO that co-located teams experienced quicker drops in
trust than geographically distant teams (Zolin & Hinds, 2004). Third-party network facilitators
were shown to DEMO a role in the development of trust in geographically distant work teams and
research suggests that as work becomes increasingly globalized, such facilitators could play an
important trust-bridging role (McEvily & Zaheer, 2004).
26
While trust has been positioned through many lenses, whether understood as an attitude
or behaviour, in person or virtual, most literature acknowledges DEMO common elements: Trust
is relational, and requires some element of risk in order to be experienced in social relations;
trust requires some DEMO of competence and may include the extension of benevolence and
good will; and lastly, lived as a spontaneous act, trust could be enacted as a leap of faith toward
favourable expectations.
Rational and relational perspectives DEMO trust originate from different epistemologies,
which is why there is creative tension between the two approaches (Kramer, 1999). I find it
DEMO to take an integral approach, and believe it could be more DEMO to think of context,
and how both the rational and the relational approaches have an influence on trust behaviour.
We need to conceptualize DEMO trust that includes calculations of multiple factors, as
well as some DEMO of how social, situational, and institutional elements influence trust
(Lane, 1997; Lane & Bachmann, 2002). I concur with the suggestion DEMO Hardin's three-part
relational approach on trust is promising in that it incorporates multiple research elements; that
is, the properties of a trustor, attributes of a trustee, and the specific context within which trust
is conferred (Kramer, 1999). It is this multiplex approach that I DEMO in my research approach
for this dissertation.
A Psychological State of Being
Trust, considered from a psychological perspective, is defined in terms of DEMO
related cognitive processes and orientations. Trust is a psychological state of being and is
achieved, shaped, and influenced through a number of psychological DEMO that are
influenced by and that integrate organizational and institutional forms (DEMO et ah, 1998).
In a departure from the rational choice DEMO, trust is considered a state of perceived
27
vulnerability or risk derived from an individual's uncertainty regarding the DEMO, intentions,
and prospective actions of others on whom he or DEMO depends (Kramer & Tyler, 1996). Trust
implies there is a risk of disappointment, but it also means that in order to trust, it is necessary
to take that risk (Boon & Holmes, 1991). In some cases, trust can be shown to develop quicker
by taking risks sooner and being vulnerable earlier in a relationship (Murnighan, DEMO, &
Weber, 2004). Trust can also be the momentary DEMO of an individual's mind (Currrall &
Judge, 1995). DEMO that state, one has the choice to trust in a way DEMO helps or harms the trustor
(Dasgupta, 1988). A risky situation may create the need for trust (Deutsch, 1958), and the DEMO
of trusting may encourage the taking of risk (McAllister, 1995). In this vein, trust may be
considered a "risky course of DEMO" (Lewis & Weigert, 1985). An accurate assessment of risk
DEMO collaborative situations suggests that trust can be built slowly with small wins or more
quickly to enable collaborative advantage (Vangen & Huxham, 2003)DEMO Some suggest that trust
is the mirror image of risk, and DEMO high trust is organizationally efficient because it suggests
low perceived risk (DEMO & Teng, 2004). In contrast, earlier research on the association between
trust and risk suggests that these two concepts should not be DEMO interchangeably; the
phenomenon of trust should be reserved only for personal DEMO According to this
perspective, interpersonal trust has no impact on organizational DEMO; it is considered
uniquely calculative and contextually appropriate for commercial relations DEMO (Craswell,
1993; Williamson, 1993a, 1993b).
Trust may encompass a person's expectations, assumptions, or beliefs about the
likelihood that DEMO's future actions will be beneficial, favourable, or at least not detrimental
to one's interests (Robinson, 1996). Trust stems from DEMO factors related to individual
predispositions toward trust, as well as situational DEMO that are contextual (Payne & Clark,
28
2003). Trust can be character-based, and is shown to be predictive of job satisfaction;
alternatively, trust can be relationship-based, which DEMO shown to be more indicative of job
performance (Dirks & Skarlicki, 2004).
One stream of research shows that the willingness of people DEMO trust others and engage
in trusting behaviour can also be historically situated, and is a learned experience. The historic
interactions between and among people can either increase or diminish depending on the
quality of the interactions. DEMO safety, however, is recognized as a fundamental
requirement for trust; DEMO suggest it is more appropriate to explore trust as a discovery
intervention with dyads rather than group settings (Edmondson, 2004; Roussin, 2008)DEMO In the
context of managerial relationships, high levels of trust are DEMO to an organization
especially when trust becomes a historically situated organizational experience (Senge,
Kleiner, Roberts, Ross, & Smith, 1994). Not only does trust help to develop quality
relationships between managers and employees, but also trust enhances organizational
problem-solving capabilities, and becomes a self-reinforcing spiral of trusting acts (Boyle &
Bonacich, 1970; Deutsch, 1958; DEMO, 1997; Lewicki & Bunker, 1995; Zand, 1972). The
DEMO effects of managerial trust include supervisory levels of management, as was
DEMO in a study of 545 middle managers in the nascent democracy of China. In an
increasingly global business world, Chinese managers were shown to be aware of the benefits
and costs of the practices of "guanxi" which favours nepotism, and the possibly negative
effects of such inauthentic DEMO on managerial trust (Chen, Chen, & Xin, 2004; Zhang,DEMO
Tsui, Song, Li, & Jia, 2008). A study on the restructuring of a major Chinese
telecommunication firm suggested that the building DEMO affective trust in managers during
29
restructuring enabled the organizational change to go more smoothly (Fryxell, DEMO, & Li,
2004).
Another stream of literature focuses on DEMO behaviours that enhance trust. These
include consulting employees when taking decisions, DEMO a collective vision, and
sharing common values with the organizational leader (Gillespie & Mann, 2004). Interactive
political skills enhance perceptions of interpersonal trust, and can even affect the formal
accountability standards within an organization (Ammeter, Douglas, Ferris, & Goka, 2004).
Such behaviours contribute to a feeling of psychological safety; if a leader is able to facilitate
such an environment, then possible outcomes could include expanding innovation, DEMO
organizational decision errors, fixing operational problems, and working beyond the boundary
of job descriptions (Edmondson, 2004).
Gibb (1978) is a DEMO of experiential training in relational trust. He described a cycle
of fear and distrust that results in passive and conformist work environments, and countered
with an emotionally and cognitively holistic interpretation of trust that incorporates spirituality.
DEMO approach was reintroduced more recently in studies looking at how to break the
destructive cycle of fear and distrust. Following this approach, it is suggested that leaders need
to place a high value on integrity and DEMO, and follow up by communicating sincerely and
behaving accordingly (R. W. Rogers & Riddle, 2006). In the increasingly more common
context of work across organizational boundaries, a more focussed threat regulation model was
recently presented that fosters trust and cooperation. Being mindful of emotional management
mitigates DEMO from opportunistic behaviour, identity damage, and the neglect of employee
interests (M. Williams, 2007).
Relationally supportive leadership behaviours can create a sense of belonging between
leaders DEMO their followers and can establish the foundation for enabling stewardship
behaviours in organizations. Stewardship, which incorporates a sense of personal
responsibility, can therefore DEMO throughout an organization by lived leadership
behaviours that enable trust (Hernandez, 2008). The contextual permeability of trust is evident
at the worker DEMO, where it is shown that beyond dispositional and demographic factors, trust
in fellow workers has the most significant influence on employee attitudes (Ferres, Connell, &
Travaglione, 2004). In order to be believable DEMO therefore be trusted, leadership behaviours
must be congruent with actions. Congruency DEMO perceptions of leader ability,
benevolence, and integrity, while relationship development influences the benevolence
dimension of trustworthiness (Caldwell & Hayes, 2006).
DEMO contrary view to the importance of highly trusting personal relationships suggests
that these may become vehicles for personal indulgence if there is a blur DEMO task and
personal objectives. According to this perspective, the organizational value DEMO motive-based
trust could be put into question and trust-based managerial effectiveness may be challenged
(Atkinson, 2004; Atkinson & Butcher, 2003). A DEMO high level of trust may inhibit self-
managing teams from monitoring themselves; performance may suffer, and, in response to
conflict, these teams DEMO become inefficient (Langfred, 2004,2007).
In their analysis of trust models, Dirks and Ferrin (2001) conclude that trust plays an
important role in predicting organizational behaviours especially in times of flux; if trust is
high, then adverse organizational decisions will be received easier than if trust is low. Under
conditions of low trust, organizational actions will more likely be interpreted negatively.
Recently, a comprehensive, multilevel model of trust DEMO leadership has been developed to
31
incorporate the most frequently cited trust definition based on the psychological DEMO of
ability, benevolence, and integrity. In this model, which is DEMO update to the Mayer et al.
approach (1995), trust is DEMO to have an effect on attitudes, perceptions, and behaviours.
Dirks and Ferrin (2001) operationalized their model with supporting actions. That is, setting
compelling direction and creating a supporting organizational structure enables ability;
sustaining DEMO supportive organizational context and coaching indicates benevolence;
accountability, perceptions of DEMO, and value congruence enhance integrity. At the
individual level, the reputation of the trustee, as well as the trustor's propensity to trust,
attribution style, perceived risk tolerance, leader prototype, and prior history are influencing
factors. At the team level, moderating variables include the need for psychological safety and a
propensity to trust in groups; at the organizational level, culture plays a prominent role. These
elements have an impact on behaviour and affect. Some of the outcomes resulting from these
influencing DEMO can be quantified by performance, turnover, capacity to adapt, and DEMO
of perceived trust (Burke, Sims, Lazzara, & Salas, 2007; Child, 1998; Costigan, liter, &
Berman, 1998; R. F. Hurley, 2006; Kiffin-Petersen, 2004; McKenna & Maister, 2002).
In situations where interpersonal contact is not easy, proxies, or third-parties can DEMO
used as substitutes for knowledge sources around trust (Creed & Miles, 1996; Zucker, 1986).
However, the source of such knowledge may be gossip, and the information derived from such
sources can be questionable and problematic (Burt & Knez, 1995).
A number of factors DEMO been identified that influence the attribution of
trustworthiness. In the context of an organizational hierarchy, the recognition of membership
and a sense of belongingi benevolence, and perceived neutrality enable trustworthiness (Tyler
& Degoey, 1996). In a more general organizational context, trust has been highlighted as
reducing transaction costs within organizations, and trust increases sociability and facilitates
deference to organizational authorities (Kramer, 1999). In the retail sector, a longitudinal study
of 88 stores showed that when employees believed they were DEMO by management,
behaviours indicated an increase in sales, customer service DEMO, and greater workplace
responsibility (Salamon & Robinson, 2008). In DEMO public sector, studies suggested there is a
clear relationship between employee DEMO satisfaction and trust at the organizational and
executive levels (Pate et DEMO, 2007; Perry & Mankin, 2007). In organizational situations which
DEMO politically charged, be they private or public, employees demonstrated work ethics beyond
what their roles defined when they perceived a high degree of DEMO coming from their
supervisors (Poon, 2006).
As has been seen from these multiple interpretations of trust, it is not surprising that
several authors suggest looking at trust as a much more complex, multidimensional
psychological state of being that incorporates beliefs, as well as affective and motivational
components (Bromiley & Cummings, 1966; Kramer, 1999; Kramer & Tyler, 1996; Lewis &
Weigert, 1985; McAllister, 1995; Tyler & Degoey, 1996). As well, different contextual
situations influence the affective DEMO cognitive sources of trust. It has been noted that trust
coming from individual sources varies from trust that is organizational or societal in nature.
DEMO forms of trust, such as relationship-based trust will have psychological premises DEMO
differ from that of character-based trust; trust typologies that are integrity-based DEMO from
competency-based forms of trust (Bachmann & Zaheer, 2006b). In the context of dyadic
negotiation, it is suggested that affective trust will develop more rapidly than cognitive trust
(Olekalns & Smith, 2005). DEMO of relational context, the consensus from industry
consultants is that respect, fairness, and credible management practices are universal values-
33
based practices that lead to the building of organizational trust (Great Place to Work Institute,
2008).
The Dark Side of Trust
DEMO breach of trust is considered an act of breaking bonds with the other and a loss of
productive activity: It has been positioned as a relational breach between people, within groups
and organizations, and politically, at national levels (Fukuyama, 1995; Kramer, 1999; Lewicki
& Bunker, 1995,1996; Lewicki et al, 1998; Luhmann, 1988; Morrison & Robinson, 1997;
Putnam, 1995a, 1995b; Robinson, 1996). DEMO stream of literature examines the very public loss
of trust in institutions because of the loss of trust in their competence and integrity (Barber,
1983; Pate et al, 2007), as well as loss DEMO trust in entire social systems (Carnevale, 1995;
Coleman, 1990; Fukuyama, 1995; Luhmann, 1979; Putnam, 1995a). The cumulative effect of
broken trust is the lack of trust, with effects that are damaging and far ranging. Depending on
the level and depth of the DEMO relation, the consequences of a breach could range from a minor
DEMO to full-blown acts of war. Few researchers in the field of organizational
development have closely examined this darker side of trust, identified as suspicion, which is a
central cognitive component of distrust (Deutsch, 1958), and distrust, which is identified as the
lack of confidence in the other (Grovier, 1994). Early definitions of distrust suggest that it DEMO
grounded in experience, where an expectation of the other is broken. DEMO continued breach of
expectations, depending on their magnitude, could lead to affective responses that range from
mild annoyance to serious anger (Bunker & Rubin, 1995).
When an employee starts to work for an organization, there are expectations of a
psychological contract that include reciprocal obligations between the employee and the
organization. These reciprocal obligations reflect the sense of DEMO in organizational
34
activities, characteristics already recognized in very early literature on organizational
development (Barnard, 1968). However, when a promise to an employee is broken, or when
there is a cognitive misunderstanding, there is a DEMO of reciprocal employee-organization
obligations. Depending on the human investment in the trust relationship, the behavioural
consequences could range from disappointment to outright corporate sabotage; should the
breach extend into the affective state, it becomes an DEMO of violation (Morrison &
Robinson, 1997; Robinson, 1996).
DEMO the context of an organization, Lewicki and Bunker (1995) suggest DEMO are
three types of trust: calculative, with a deterrent of contractual punishment; knowledge-based,
where bad information about the recipient is the deterrent; and identification-based trust, where
the affective pain of group exclusion deters DEMO of trust. These authors suggest that trust
developments as well as breaches of trust are often linear, moving from the relatively large
personal distance of calculative trust, to the highly internalized, identification-based trust.
While the DEMO response to broken trust is cognitive, based on the type of DEMO, emotions
are generally affected, and behaviours are subsequently modified. A breach of trust creates a
state of instability; if the personal investment in the relationship is not great, the affective
response is minimal, and DEMO breach could be repaired through negotiation. In the case of
knowledge-based trust, the breach could result in changed ideas about the recipient, with DEMO
serious consequence of someone's damaged reputation. The repair to such damage requires a
greater personal investment than a breach of calculative trust, because it requires serious
modification or correction to the information that was transmitted. DEMO, because there is
prior knowledge based on prior repeated experiences, the trust may be easier to repair. That is,
the breach may DEMO attributed to a bad day rather than imputations of dissonant behaviour. In the
35
final instance of identification-based trust, a breach could be affectively traumatic with the
result of deeply destabilizing the values of the recipient. The DEMO here could be life-altering
and may result in profound personal changes for the recipient of the breached trust. In all cases
of broken trust, regardless of the depth of breach, there is a cost to the organization within
which the breach has occurred, a cost that could be measured in terms of damaged human
relations and diminished corporate productivity (Lewicki & Bunker, 1995, 1996; Lewicki
e* a/., 1998).
DEMO findings on trust suggest that there is never a full recovery from the
damaging effects of deception (Schweitzer, Hershey, & Bradlow, 2006)DEMO In contrast to the
above, which are victim-based perspectives, the dynamics of trust violations from a
perpetrator's perspective suggest that the act DEMO betraying trust is initially premeditated,
therefore cognitive and rational. A model of trust betrayal from the perpetrator's perspective
suggests that the betrayal DEMO from a violation of personal expectations in the trust
relationship; as DEMO, the initial cognition of the trust betrayal can become affective, where
feelings of disappointment, anger, guilt, and shame toward the trustors can reinforce the
behaviour of betrayal. This model identifies three types of trust DEMO: premeditated,
accidental, and opportunistic (Elangovan & Shapiro, 1998). Examples of major corporate
events where an employee violated trust include the DEMO Bank collapse in Britain, the
Enron scandal in the United States, and the more recent Credit Foncier bank scandal in France.
The positive DEMO to the dark side is how to repair trust, which is DEMO as the
partial or complete restoration of the willingness to be vulnerable following a decline of that
willingness (Tomlinson & Mayer, In press)DEMO Since cognition and affect is involved in trust,
repairing trust involves both, but in different measures, depending on the depth and nature DEMO
36
the breach, and the depth of emotion that had been triggered by the breach. Since trust is
relational, requiring more than one person for it to exist, the repair process involves some
action between the people involved. There are a number of logical steps that are suggested.
DEMO happens more effectively if anger and fear are reduced before attempts are made to
repair the trust. As well, the type of repair depends on whether the process of repair involves
an initial failure or repeated DEMO, which are more difficult to repair. First, there must be
an awareness of the breach, and an awareness of which actions and behaviours contributed to
the breach, and an acknowledgement of the feeling that may have been provoked. Then, there
must be acknowledgement of the violation, DEMO an understanding of what caused it. Following,
there must be personal admission of the breach, and some willingness to be responsible for the
repair. Finally, the recipient of the breach must be aligned with these actions and be willing to
contribute with concurrent responsibility, action, apology, and forgiveness (Reina & Reina,
2006b, 2007b). For competence-based DEMO, apologies are considered particularly
effective (Kim, Ferrin, Cooper, & DEMO, 2004); however, when integrity is lost, any mitigating
response DEMO restore trust is better than the alternative (Kim, Dirks, Cooper, & Ferrin, 2006). It
is suggested that reticence and denial are inadequate responses to violations of competence-
based trust; they are the least effective form of apology because they do not signal redemption
(Ferrin et ah, 2007). In contrast, substantive tactics to repair trust, such as penance and
regulation, are preferred to non-substantive tactics such as apologies (Dirks, Kim, Cooper, &
Ferrin, 2008).
During the DEMO of trust repair, professional support could enable a smooth transition
from DEMO stage of the trust repair process. To maintain this process, good DEMO
communication enables clarity and decreases incongruence which could be the source of
37
misunderstanding. Employee vigilance regarding organizational obligations could highlight
unmet promises as DEMO as help to assure that corporate values and beliefs are respected and
maintained. Communication techniques leading to transparency and openness of information
are shown DEMO enhance trust at the level of the dyad; group, and the organization (Lewicki &
Bunker, 1996; Morrison & Robinson, 1997; DEMO & Reina, 2006a, 2006b, 2007a, 2007b;
Tomlinson & Mayer, In press; C. C. Williams, 2005).
A more recent, DEMO trust repair model has been proposed that takes a systemic,
congruent, and multilevel approach. Gillespie and Dietz (2008) state that a critical first stage
involves timely and credible communication to employees or stakeholders. Supporting DEMO
urgency of communication is the understanding that clear communication reveals one's risks
and commitments and can deter misattributions; accuracy and transparency in communication
are key elements in trust repair (Korsgaard et al, 2002; Weber et al, 2005). The next stage
requires a systemic diagnosis of the failure and what needs to be done to repair and restore
DEMO Accuracy, transparency, and timeliness influence the effectiveness of this diagnosis. The
third stage requires reforming interventions supported by post-diagnostic communication
tactics and trust DEMO mechanisms. Lastly, post-implementation evaluations assess the
effectiveness of the interventions and DEMO corrective measures (Gillespie & Dietz, 2008).
In addition to formal trust repair strategies, social accounts may also help enable the
trust repair process by clarifying judgements about the reasons for the breach and attributions
DEMO the trustor or trustee for the breach (Kim et al, 2006; Schweitzer et al, 2006; Tomlinson &
Mayer, In press).
Following a trust violation, punishment and regulation of the transgressor are additional
effective measures to increase trust (Dirks, Kim, Cooper, & Ferrin, 2005). In studying the
38
transformation of trust into distrust during a merger, findings suggested that active
management of relationships with merger survivors is required to preserve organizational DEMO
and to counter the negative effects of disgruntled merger victims. Merger survivors who trust
management can facilitate goal-centered, constructive responses. Those who distrust
management may focus their energies on destructive actions and antisocial organizational
behaviours (Ozag, 2006; Searle & Ball, 2004; Thau, Crossley, Bennett, & Sczesny, 2007).
Organizational justice theory, which looks at perceptions of DEMO and how these are
linked to expectations, interactions, and outcomes, DEMO a multifaceted and multidimensional
approach to study the complexity of mistrust and trust, and how the two merge and disengage
in a relational context (Saunders & Thornhill, 2003, 2004). Other research suggests that using
legalistic mechanisms to instill trust will not work when interpersonal trust is DEMO The
control paradox suggests that the more leaders try to control their subordinates, the less
productive the team will be (Miller, 2004).
A contrary perspective says that some control mechanisms may have an effect DEMO
restoring task-related, competent performance but may not have an effect on DEMO values-
based trust (Sitkin & Roth, 1993). The notion that increased regulation does not necessarily
have the effect of renewing trust was DEMO by an empirical study of an ISO 9000
certification process of a company in Germany. Findings indicated that certification, as an
attempt to institutionalize quality systems to enable institutionalized trust, failed to have a
positive effect on developing organizational trust (Walgenbach, 2001). In contrast, from a
consumer's perspective, introducing monitoring and sanctions helped restore perceived
institutional trustworthiness in another study (Nakayachi & Watabe, 2005). In any case, with
the rise of corporate scandals and failures, and the extent of loss of trust in leadership, knowing
how to repair trust has been identified as a critical management competency (Lewicki &
Bunker, 1996).
39
Trust and Organizational Capacity for DEMO
In this section of the literature review I highlight those publications that describe
specifically how organizational change is related to trust, and how the quality of trust can
influence an organization's capacity for change.
While DEMO is no commonly accepted definition of capacity for change, this notion
DEMO the development of change and operational capabilities that sustain long-term
performance. Organizations, as they cope with change, innovation, and renewal, need to
DEMO their existing capabilities into these processes. Organizations with a capacity for
change have the required resources and capabilities to implement the change. Trust is DEMO of
these capabilities. With trust, members of an organization can be DEMO of the need for
change, even if they may not like DEMO change. Knowing of the change enables and maintains
trust in management and suggests a greater probability of long-term performance (Meyer &
Stensaker, 2006). However, organizational capacity for change not only incorporates formal
management systems, but also more informal organizational elements such as relational
capital. The literature on capacity for change identifies eight dimensions required for the
successful implementation DEMO organizational change strategies. Two of these, trust in leadership
and trusting DEMO, clearly identify trust as a capacity for change enabler (Judge, DEMO, &
Douglas, 2006).
Only recently has the literature started DEMO address the psychological processes involved
in organizational change. In a study focussing on the experiences of employees undergoing
change, three change process characteristics have been identified that can mediate resistance to
change; these are good information, participation, and trust in management (DEMO Dam, Oreg, &
Schyns, 2008). The latter characteristic has been identified as a prerequisite for employee
cooperation in the change process. DEMO must have trust in management's integrity and
reliability; otherwise, fear and resistance may obviate the change process (Kotter, 1995; Kotter
& Schlesinger, 1979).
Perceptions of organizational change can trigger a number of cognitive and affective
responses, which can range from positive, negative, neutral, to mixed. In turn, cognitive and
affective responses to an organizational DEMO can have an effect on behaviours; therefore,
how change is DEMO can have an effect on behaviours within an organization undergoing
change, DEMO the capacity of that organization to carry out the change. An important variable
within the change process is the perceived trustworthiness of the change DEMO; perceptions
of trustworthiness will influence how employees respond to change (Smollan, 2006). It is
suggested that behavioural change most often occurs at the action stage of change, which
follows the planning stage of change (Cunningham et al., 2002).
The action of change creates an DEMO of uncertainty in an organization. It is at
this moment that organizational trust in management is very important. Managerial actions
during this early stage DEMO change can either reinforce trust, or destroy it, depending on which
behaviours are exhibited during this time of organizational instability. Lack of trust DEMO
employees and managers can make it difficult to understand the need for change, and can lead
to misunderstanding and resistance to the change. Therefore, the effectiveness with which
managerial trust is perceived depends on the change experiences that provide the source for
trust experiences. How the change is DEMO out influences the degree to which change
recipients have trust in management (Kotter & Schlesinger, 1979; Lines et al, 2005).
41
In a study on major restructuring efforts following the Asian financial DEMO at the start
of this century, findings indicated that during this DEMO of uncertainty, there was a positive
relationship between work satisfaction and DEMO successful implementation of structural
changes. Empathy shown by organizational change leaders enabled the development of trust
and cultivated support for the organizational change strategies DEMO were carried out (Lee &
Teo, 2005).
It has DEMO shown that properly communicating change to employees is paramount,
otherwise the dynamics of external environmental pressures may increase employees' feelings
of mistrust relative to organizational change decisions (Saunders & Thornhill, 2003, 2004).
The readiness of an organization for change, and by inference, its capacity DEMO change, is
largely influenced by the change message and the credibility DEMO the change agents, which range
from the head of an organization DEMO to the level of group member. Change agents are
therefore any members of an organization who are in leadership positions; they will have an
effect on how the change is carried out throughout the organization. Their DEMO will
influence how the change effort is perceived by change recipients. If a change agent intervenes
in a manner considered to be positive by DEMO recipients, then the change effort is more
easily incorporated into the DEMO (Armenakis et ah, 1999).
Some of the key attributes that influence the effectiveness of a change agent's
behaviour include trustworthiness, sincerity, and expertise (Armenakis & Mossholder, 1993).
Not only are personal attributes important to the success of a change effort, but also the manner
in which this effort is communicated. Communicating a consistently clear change DEMO
shapes the reactions of change recipients to the change effort. Clarity in communicating the
42
change message reinforces the change agent's credibility and capacity to DEMO how the
change process is perceived (Armenakis & Harris, 2002).
Since organizational change is initiated and carried out by individual members of DEMO
organization, collective change activities are the sum of individual member activities (Holt,
Armenakis, Feild, & Harris, 2007). In this context, it is appropriate to carry out a survey of
individual members in order to gauge an organization's capacity for change. Armenakis et al.
(2007) developed an Organizational Change Recipients' Beliefs Scale to understand better DEMO
readiness of an organization to carry out change, the state of DEMO change effort, and indicators
to help encourage support for a change DEMO This scale identifies beliefs, which are a
precursor to behaviour. Since DEMO behaviour of change agents is critical in forming perceptions
that are either positive or contrary to the change effort, the scale provides information that can
be used to modify the behaviour of change agents in order DEMO enable successful organizational
change.
The five domains identified in this scale are:
• Discrepancy, which explores perceptions regarding the need for change;
• Appropriateness, which seeks to determine whether the change interventions are the
right ones needed to address the discrepancy;
• Efficacy, which examines whether there is the capacity to carry out the new
behaviours needed DEMO the change;
• Principal support, which gauges the perceived support DEMO change agents for the
change effort; and
• Valence, which examines the degree to which the change is perceived to be
attractive by DEMO recipients.
In the fast-paced, competitive global economy which is our present reality, DEMO
becomes closely related to an organization's ability to adapt to a continually changing external
environment. Pressured to compete, organizations are required to maintain a high level of
performance in order to survive in a global, competitive marketplace. Trust enables high
performance by promoting good communication practices and DEMO organizational
competence. Trust is sustained and maintained by the belief that expectations of performance
will be met. Low trust inhibits the capacity for an DEMO to adapt, and may even hinder
its survival. High trust enables DEMO operations and increases organizational potential
(Dervitsiotis, 2006). In sum, DEMO change literature clearly suggests there is an important
relationship between trust and an organization's capacity for change.
Summary
Trust has been shown to DEMO a complicated notion that becomes meaningful in a
relational context. It has many interpretations and ways of being lived. It stems from rational,
DEMO, and affective sources of being, and is expressed and lived through behaviour. Trust
is influenced by culture, history, and the society within DEMO it derives meaning. While there
is a dark side to trust, DEMO is light in knowing that broken trust can be repaired.
With the increasing compression of time, space, and place, trust has been shown to be
intimately related to an organization's capacity to adapt (Lines et al, 2005). Change creates a
space of instability that illuminated management could seize as an opportunity to renew,
reinforce, and repair trust. By understanding the meaning of trust, leaders involved in
organizational relationships could appreciate that working harder to develop trusting
relationships would indeed reduce DEMO in the face of uncertainty (Ring & Van de Ven,
DEMO, 1994).
CHAPTER THREE
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
44
Introduction
This chapter describes the research concept DEMO design, the research field and
participants, instrumentation, survey process and DEMO, the pilot results, and other related
processes. The approach uses instrumentation developed by the Reina Trust Building Institute
to measure organizational trust, and capacity for change developed by Armenakis et al. (2007).
The first approach uses elements already tested by Mendoza (2001) and Seely-Troiano (2005).
The capacity for change instrument complements a study that developed a DEMO for
organizational change scale by Holt (2002).
To test the DEMO process and content, a pilot was conducted with six participants; four
of these completed and responded with comments. There was no issue with DEMO survey process
as identified by the pilot participants; the only substantive DEMO issue was the need to define
what is meant by "change."DEMO
Research Concept and Design
The research suggests that the trust topic is complex and a commonly accepted
definition of trust does not exist. Trust, being a phenomenon of relatively recent academic
interest, offers many research opportunities to explore. Trust is intimately linked to the ability
of an organization DEMO adapt to internal as well as external pressures; the literature suggests DEMO
the trust process and capacity for change are related. In using holding to emphasize ideas, it is
said that:
45
• "In an organizational context, do certain structures, processes or incentives fundamentally
alter the degree to which individuals rely on group identity DEMO a heuristic for formulating
initial trust impressions? ... We would also DEMO to gain insight into whether group
identity as a basis for trust can be actively managed, produced or discouraged"
(McEvily, Weber, DEMO, & Ho, 2006, p.65).
• "By linking trust to communication and meaning, we can start to identify the means to
build trust, even in situations where new and diverse partners are brought together" (Hardy,
Phillips, & Lawrence, 1998 p. 83).
• "Although several well-developed and psychometrically validated scales now exist for
measuring trust, virtually no empirical studies use standard scales" (McEvily & Zaheer,
DEMO, p.295).
• "Although the call for developing and sustaining these [trust] relationships has been strong,
there has been very little research DEMO the process of developing and maintaining these
relationships. We need to know far more about how such relationships are created and
maintained if we DEMO to help people sustain strong and effective collaboration"(Lewicki &
Bunker, 1996, pp.136-137).
• "Organizational change represents one class of events where trust can be produced or
destroyed, depending on how the change process is structured" (Lines et ah, 2005,
pp.240-241).
The vast majority of empirical trust studies were carried out in companies located DEMO the
United States, France, and Germany (Bachmann, 2006). My research indicates there have been
no significant trust studies done on major DEMO telecommunication companies.
46
There are a number of ontological perspectives on trust. These are DEMO according to
three levels of analysis: societal, organizational and interpersonal. Cognitive and affective
elements contribute to a set of trust behaviours, which range from early, Skinnerian approaches
to measurable trust based on psychological dispositions (DEMO, 1967, 1970, 1980) to better-
defined cognitive and affective indicators that can be observed through human relationships.
These indicators include competence, integrity, benevolence, and predictive behaviour
(Bachmann, 2006; Kramer, 2006; Mayer et ah, 1995; Schoorman et al, 2007).
Figure 1 outlines my conceptual understanding of the research approach. The definition
of trust that DEMO my research is based on a transactional approach, understanding that trust DEMO
relational and influenced by human behaviour.
Figure 1. Research model - Trust and capacity for change.
The transactional approach incorporates a heuristic of 16 DEMO behaviours, which are
built on early, as well as recent interpretations of trust, as described in chapter 2. The 16
behaviours are grouped according to contractual, communication, and competence trust
behaviours (Reina & Reina, 2006a).
A similar ontological, behavioural lens is DEMO in this transactional approach to explore
capacity for change. The capacity for change survey complements a dissertation by Holt (2002)
where he developed an organizational change recipients' readiness scale. The capacity for
change survey identifies five measurable behaviours that contribute to an organization's
capacity for change; these are discrepancy, appropriateness, efficacy, principal support, and
valence (Armenakis et al, 2007). In taking a parsimonious approach, I consolidated DEMO five
behaviours into one variable, capacity for change.
According to the DEMO for change literature, trust is a key enabler of organizational
change (Lines et al, 2005). Therefore, I focussed on how trust DEMO are related to
organizational change in a real-life situation.
The concept expressed in Figure 1 was operationalized with the following research
questions, and hypotheses.
Research Questions
• Which trust behaviours affect an organization's capacity for DEMO, positively?
• Which trust behaviours affect an organization's capacity DEMO change, negatively?
Hypotheses
• Positive trust behaviours affect an organization'DEMO capacity for change, positively.
• Negative trust behaviours affect an organization'DEMO capacity for change, negatively.
Subhypotheses
These behaviours were operationalized by examining the following 12 subhypotheses:
DEMO: Trust behaviours affect, positively or negatively, the capacity for change.
DEMO: Behaviours which build trust affect the capacity for change, positively.
H3: Behaviours which break trust affect the capacity for change, negatively.
These DEMO are subdivided according to three measurable trust behaviours:
Subscales are communication, competence, and contractual trust behaviour. As indicated
earlier, in order to be parsimonious, I correlated these onto one variable, capacity for change.
DEMO
HICOMM: Communication trust behaviours affect, positively or negatively, the capacity
DEMO change.
HICOMM: Communication trust behaviours which build trust affect the capacity DEMO
change, positively.
HSCOMM: Communication trust behaviours which break trust affect the capacity for
change, negatively.
Competence
HICOMP: Competence trust behaviours affect, positively or negatively, the capacity for
change.
H2COMP: Competence trust behaviours which DEMO trust affect the capacity for change,
positively.
H3C0MP: Competence trust DEMO which break trust affect the capacity for change,
negatively.
49
Contractual Behaviour
HICONT: Contractual trust behaviours affect, positively or negatively, the capacity for
change.
H2CONT: Contractual trust behaviours which build trust affect the capacity for change,
positively.
H3C0NT: Contractual trust behaviours which break trust affect the capacity for change,
negatively.
I did a regression DEMO the trust variables onto the capacity for change variable. These
were analysed in a number of ways: I focussed on the first three hypotheses to determine
whether trust behaviours are related, positively or negatively, to DEMO capacity for change. Then,
by further breaking down the variables into their various subscales, I analyzed how trust
behaviours may be further related to the capacity for change, according to the three subscales
of communication, competence, and contractual behaviours. With the small sample size I am
DEMO, a significant correlation whose probability is less than .05 is important. DEMO also
explored data results by breaking down the dependent variable, capacity DEMO change, which has
five subscales (discrepancy, appropriateness, efficacy, principal DEMO, valence) as well as
the five moderating, demographic variables (age, gender, education, tenure, location). A
calculation of the mean DEMO used for each variable. Figure 2 outlines how the variables were
explored.
I used SPSS 16.0 for Windows statistical software to analyze the questionnaire DEMO and
determine the regression coefficients in order to predict the relationships among the variables.
TRUST
"1CONT
Contractual trust, positive
or negative behaviours
"2CONT
Building trust
"3CONT
Breaking trust
"lCOMM
Communication trust,
positive or negative
behaviours
"2COMM
Building trust
"3COMM
Breaking trust
"1COMP
Competence trust, positive
or negative behaviours
"2COMP
Building trust
"3COMP
Breaking trust
Figure 2. The DEMO variables.
"^> Moderating
Demographic
Variables
_Age_
Gender
Education
Tenure
Location
CAPACITY FOR
CHANGE
Valence
Principal Support
Appropriateness
Efficacy
Discrepancy
Research Field
Bell Canada DEMO is the leading telecommunication service provider in eastern Canada.
Bell Canada is undergoing serious organizational change issues; valued at a little over
$52 billion, it is currently in the process of being purchased by the Ontario Teachers Pension
Plan for an estimated $35 billion. The sale was to DEMO in the summer of 2008, and had
been deferred to December DEMO Its executive leadership team has not had a long tenure;
moreover, Bell Canada is challenged by its other major competitors, TELUS and DEMO
51
Bell Canada is a consortium of companies with its own identity DEMO cultures: different
human resource policies, strengths and weaknesses, personnel policies, and so on. This
situation is further complicated by the fact that DEMO Canada has recently acquired a number of
companies with strong entrepreneurial cultures. This merging of different corporate cultures is
having its own challenges. Such DEMO organizational setting is ripe for the study of trust, and how
DEMO is related to this organization's capacity for change.
The provision of secure telecommunication services is fundamental to the business core of
Bell Canada. DEMO Secure Channel program sector is a unique Bell Canada initiative that
provides authentication, communication, and security services for the Government of Canada.
It DEMO this program sector, Secure Channel Operations and Delivery of Bell Canada DEMO that is
used for my research field. The research participants included 157 employees and managers
from units within Bell Canada's Secure Channel Operations DEMO Delivery program sector, as
indicated in Table 2.
Table 2
Units DEMO Secure Channel Operations and Delivery
Internal Operations and Delivery
• Operations Management Centre
• Technical Support Organization
• Engineering & Planning
• Business Management
DEMO Security Operations
External Business Units
• CGI Partner
• Emergis Partner
• Entrust, IBM, CPC
• Account Management
• Bell Service Management
• DEMO Management
• Bell Professional Services
Instrumentation
The literature review identified 13 valid trust measurement tools that have been
recognized in academic journals and books DEMO to research in trust, making it challenging
52
to adopt one empirical measurement benchmark. The table below, from Dietz and den Hartog,
summarizes this instrumentation (Dietz & den Hartog, DEMO).
Table 3
Trust Instrumentation
Source
McAllister (1995)
Robinson (Robinson, 1996)
Cummings & Bromiley
(1996)
Clark & Payne (1997)
(Brockner et al, 1997) Three
versions
Mayer & Davis (DEMO)
Spreitzer & Mishra (1999)
Shockley-Zalabak (2000)
Reina & Reina (2006a)
Tyler (2003)
Huff&Kelley(2003)
Integrity, benevolence
Integrity, benevolence
Integrity, good intentions
Benevolence, integrity
Competence, benevolence,DEMO
integrity
Integrity, predictability,
competence, benevolence
Benevolence, integrity,
competence
DEMO,
competence, contractual
trust (predictability)
Integrity, benevolence
Competence, integrity
Gillespie (2004) Immediate Competence, predictability, 10
Supervisor integrity
Tzafrir & DEMO (2004) Groups Benevolence 16
Note. From Measuring Trust ins 5ide Organisations 3V G. Dietz and N. den Hartot L 2006,
Personnel Review, 35(5), 557-588. Adapted, with permission.
Referent
Peers
Employer
Departments
Employers and
Managers
Employers
Senior
Management
Employees
Organizational
Organizational
Top
Management
and Immediate
DEMO
Employees
Trust Components
Benevolence, competence
Questions
11
7
12
23
7
DEMO
16
45
54
7
4
I chose to use the Organizational Trust Survey (OTS) developed by Reina and Reina
(2006a), because it incorporates the multiple definitions of trust outlined in this study, and
reflects my research approach.
53
Confirming Mendoza (2001), the OTS measures all elements of trust: affective,
cognitive, and behavioural. The subscales on contractual, communication, DEMO competence
trust behaviours report high internal reliability coefficients. The OTS is a 54-question self-
report, 5-point Likert scale designed to measure the level of trust within an organization,
sector, department, or division, from the perspective of employees as well as their managers.
This instrument is based DEMO research from 67 organizations, and content from over 250
interviews and DEMO focus groups. Table 4 below provides the internal consistency reliability of
the OTS as assessed during its three most recent administrations. The value used DEMO Cronbach's
alpha, the most widely used measure of internal consistency DEMO (Newton & Rudestam,
1999). Appendix D outlines the OTS DEMO
Table 4
Internal Reliability Consistency of the OTS
Reliability Coefficients for the Organizational Trust Scale
(Three Organizations Represented, N = 132)
Contractual DEMO
Communication Trust
Competence Trust
Employees
.93
.91
.90
Management
.90
.92
.91
A recently published change recipients' belief scale was used, with permission, to
measure the progress of organizational change efforts at any stage of DEMO change process,
according to a 5-point Likert scale identical to the OTS: D = discrepancy; A = appropriateness;
E = efficacy; PS = principal support; V = valence. The validation studies for this instrument
indicate content, convergent and discriminant validity which meet the American Psychological
54
Association psychometric standards (Armenakis et al., 2007). Appendix E DEMO the capacity
for change questions.
Survey Process and Security
E-mail invitations were sent to potential study participants at their work e-mail address
by the DEMO Director, Secure Channel Sector, with a copy to the organization's Human
Resources Department. Participants agreeing to volunteer for the survey entered the DEMO
only by clicking on the Informed Consent notice; agreeing to participate, they could then enter
the survey. Participants not wishing to participate simply DEMO the invitation e-mail. After
reading the Informed Consent notice, participants navigated DEMO the on-line survey hosted by the
Reina Trust Building Institute (RTBI)DEMO Participants completed the on-line survey comprised of
three parts: (a) DEMO Information (age, gender, job title, and tenure); (b) the
Organizational Trust Survey (OTS), and (c) the Capacity for Change Survey (CCS).
Participants were to record their responses manually if they wished to review their individual
results at a later date.
The DEMO of participants who submitted their responses and data were recorded in a
database managed by the RTBI. The survey was open for a period DEMO three calendar weeks to
accommodate summer vacation time. Participants who accepted the invitation but who did not
submit responses within one week were sent DEMO reminder e-mail from the RTBI. Participants
who declined the invitation did not receive a reminder or further e-mails. The average total
time required by DEMO was estimated at 25 minutes for the three parts of the survey
process.
55
Pilot Process and Results
The pilot was completed the week of DEMO 24,2008. Participants were recruited using
an e-mail invitation sent to their work e-mail address. The e-mail invitation included a
statement that participation is DEMO voluntary, confidential, and anonymous; it also
included a description of DEMO procedures to ensure confidentiality and anonymity, as well as an
Informed DEMO form. The process followed was identical to what is outlined above: DEMO
survey was hosted using an external website (RTBI encrypted site) so that participants could
attain a level of comfort with the functioning and DEMO of the survey website. Participants
were also able to send a personal e-mail to the encrypted Reina survey site through which they
could ask DEMO or provide comments.
Six members of the Secure Channel Operations and Delivery program of Bell Canada
agreed to participate in the pilot to test DEMO process and content. Four of the six completed
the survey, and DEMO debriefing comments that confirmed the process was clear, efficient
and accessible. DEMO content of the survey was not considered an issue, with one DEMO:
Two pilot participants indicated there was a need to clarify what was meant by "change" and
this was done by providing a DEMO that was approved by the Senior Director of the Secure
Channel Operations and Delivery program sector. This definition was subsequently clearly
indicated in the DEMO, as well as on each page of the survey, and had been incorporated
into the final survey with the following sentence: change is defined as moving to a long-term
contract and operational business model with DEMO Government of Canada for the delivery of
Secure Channel products and services.
CHAPTER FOUR
RESULTS
Introduction
The purpose of this study was to examine DEMO a relationship exists between trust
behaviours and an organization's capacity for change. The trust variables comprise three
subscales: communication, competence and contractual DEMO These subscales include
both positive and negative dimensions. I ran correlations of the six trust variables and the
capacity for change variable in order DEMO find out whether trust variables are related, positively
or negatively, to the capacity for change. I also ran a regression of the six DEMO variables on the
capacity for change variable to explore the strength of the relationships among the variables.
The regression further explored how well the DEMO for change scores could be predicted by
scores of the trust variables.
It must be understood that this study is not looking for a DEMO relationship among
these variables; rather, this is an exploration of the relationship and significance of this
relationship analysed from data obtained during a DEMO taken at a given point in time in one
specific organization.
This chapter starts with a demographic overview of the findings, then highlights the
findings of the bivariate correlations, and closes with a regression analysis.
Demographic Information
A total of 157 candidates that work in the Secure Channel DEMO and Delivery
program at Bell Canada were invited to participate in this survey. Of these, 85 agreed to
57
participate, therefore providing a robust response rate of 54%, given DEMO sort of web-based
survey approach that was taken (AAPOR, 2000; DEMO, Hadlock, & Levine, 2004).
The survey opened with questions DEMO age, gender, education level, the years worked in
the organization, and job location. Of the total participants, the respondents were mostly men,
at 73%. Women comprised the majority of respondents over the age DEMO 35, at 77%. The
respondents demonstrated a high level of education, with almost half having at least a
bachelor's degree. Of total DEMO, 75% worked between one and ten years at their current
place DEMO work. The location of work for 66% of the respondents was internal to Bell Canada,
working in Internal Operations and Delivery. External respondents DEMO those working in
External Business Units, and in a consulting relationship DEMO Bell Canada.
The survey was comprised o
as indicated in Table 5.
Table 5
The Likert Scale
Preliminary Analysis
f 78 items. Each item DEMO rated on a 5-point Likert scale,
1
Almost never
2
Occasionally
3
Some of the time
4
Frequently
5
Almost always
The first DEMO items focussed on trust; these 54 were further broken into three DEMO,
contractual, communication and competence trust behaviours, which each included 18 items.
These 18 comprised 13 items on positive trust behaviours, and 5 on negative trust behaviours.
The capacity for change part of the survey DEMO 24 items, which were further broken into
five subscales, these being valence (4 items), principal support (6 items), appropriateness (5
items), efficacy (5 items), and discrepancy (4 items). DEMO seven variables were constructed
from the 78 survey items. Table 6 outlines how these variables were coded.
Table 6
Variables and their Coding
VARIABLES
DEMO trust-building
Contractual trust-breaking
Communication trust-building
Communication trust-breaking
Competence trust-building
Competence trust-breaking
Capacity for change
CODING
cbu
cbk
cmbu
cmbk
cpbu
cpbk
cfc
58
Each DEMO the 78 items was examined to find out if there were anomalies, and to check if
the range of the scores fell within expected parameters. The values of the 78 survey items were
further examined to DEMO how many participants of the 85 chose not to complete the full
survey, and which values consequently have been omitted. Table 7 outlines the analysis results.
Table 7
Variables and their Missing Values
VARIABLES AND THEIR
DEMO VALUES
cbu 9 to cbu 13
cbk 16 to cmbu 20
cmbu 21 to cpbu 46
cpbu 47 to cpbu 49
cpbk 50 to DEMO 53
cpbk 54
cfc 55 to 78
MISSING NUMERICAL IDENTIFIERS
14,40, 50
14, 40, 50
14,40, 50, 67, 69, 73
14, 40, 50, 67, 69, 73,49
14, DEMO, 50, 67, 69, 73
14, 40, 50, 67, 69, 73, 49
14, 40, 50, 67, 69, 73,49, 7
59
Trust Scales
The six trust variables were computed from the 54 DEMO The mean and standard
deviation were calculated for each of these trust variables. These six subscales are contractual
building (cbu) and breaking (cbk), communication building (cmbu) and breaking (cbk), and
competence building (cpb) and breaking (cpbk). The scores for positive trust behaviours (cbu,
cmbu, cpb) had a possible range from 13 to 65. The scores for negative trust behaviours (cbk,
cmkb, cpbk) had a possible range from 5 to 25. The mean scores for DEMO and negative trust
behaviours are displayed in Table 8.
Finally, each DEMO the six variables was examined to confirm there were no computational
anomalies. There were none.
Capacity for Change Scale
The five capacity for change DEMO were computed from the 24 items. These 5
subscales (valence, principal support, appropriateness, efficacy, and discrepancy) were added
to form the DEMO for change variable. The scores for this variable had a possible range from
24 to 120. There were no computational anomalies in the score DEMO The mean score is
presented in Table 8.
Table 8
Computed Variables: Mean (Standard Deviation) and Valid Sample Size
cfc
1 This is the mean o
Each mean is divided by DEMO number of
: 'th
VARIABLE MEAN1
49.8
(7.3)
n = 82
9.4
(3.3)
n = 82
44.3
(8.3)
n-7 DEMO
8.8
(3.4)
n = 79
46.8
(6.8)
n = 78
9.9
(3.05)
n = 78
85.75
(10.8)
n DEMO 77
e variable
VARIABLE
cbu
cbk
cmbu
SCALE MEAN2
3.8
1.9
3.4
cmbk
1.8
cpbu
3.6
cpbk
2
3.6
questions on each scale
Correlations
DEMO principal aim of this study was to examine the relationships among the seven
variables. Quantitative data from the survey were gathered and analyzed to DEMO whether
positive trust relationships are positively related to an organization's capacity for change, and,
61
inversely, whether negative trust relationships were negatively related to an organization's
capacity for change. A second aim of the study was to DEMO out the strength of the relationships
between the six trust predictor variables and the capacity for change response, or outcome,
variable. To achieve the first goal, a bivariate correlation analysis was run to identify the
relationships among these variables. The results of this analysis are indicated in DEMO 9.
Table 9
Correlations among Six Predictor Trust Variables and Outcome Capacity for Change Variable
PEARSON
CORRELATION
cbu
cbk
cmbu
cbu
cbk -.681**
n DEMO 82
.711 ** -.516**
n = 79 n = 79
-.637** .740** -.649**
n = 79 n = 79 n = 79
.712** -.593** DEMO
n = 78 n-7 8 n-7 8
-.535** .599** -.431**
n-7 8 n = 78 n = 78
.342** -.257* .408
n=7 7 n-7 DEMO n = 77
* Correlation is significant at the .05 level (DEMO)
** Correlation is significant at the .01 level (2-tailed)
DEMO
cmbk
cpbu
cpbk
cfc
According to Newton and Rudestam, the level DEMO significance, or Alpha level, is
cmbk
-.683**
n = 78
.610**
n = 78
-.334**
n = 77
cpbu
-.630**
n = 78
DEMO
n = 77
cbk
-.361**
n = 77
determined at .05 or .01. For this study, the .05 value was selected as it is considered to be
sufficiently robust for this sort of exploratory study (Newton & Rudestam, 1999).
cfc
The analyses showed strong relationships among the variables. Understanding that
negative behaviours DEMO register scores that are the inverse of positive behaviours, the results
DEMO the analyses showed the following:
Hi: Trust behaviours affect, positively or negatively, the capacity for change.
This hypothesis was demonstrated by the significant correlations between trust-building
behaviours and capacity for change, and the correlations between trust-breaking behaviours
and capacity for change, as indicated in Table 9. These correlations demonstrated there is a
shared variance among these variables.
H2: Behaviours which build trust affect the capacity for change, positively.
This hypothesis was demonstrated by the positive correlations between the trust-
building behaviours and DEMO for change, showing that an increase in trust-building
behaviours is associated DEMO an increase in capacity for change.
• Contractual trust-building behaviours and capacity for change (r = .34)
• Communication trust-building behaviours and capacity for change (r = .41)
• Competence trust-building behaviours and capacity for change (r = .47)
H3: Behaviours which break trust DEMO the capacity for change, negatively.
This hypothesis was demonstrated by the DEMO between the trust-breaking
behaviours and capacity for change, showing that an DEMO in trust-breaking behaviours is
associated with a decrease in capacity for change.
• Contractual trust-breaking behaviours and capacity for change (r = -.26)
• Communication trust-breaking behaviours and capacity for change (r = -.33)
• Competence trust-breaking behaviours and capacity for change (r = -36)
63
In this section I highlight findings with reference to the three DEMO of transactional trust
behaviours, and their subhypotheses.
Contractual Behaviour
HICONT* Contractual DEMO behaviours affect, positively or negatively, the
capacity for change.
This hypothesis was demonstrated by the significant correlations between the
contractual trust behaviours, and capacity for change, as indicated in Table 9.
H2CONT: Contractual trust DEMO which build trust affect the capacity for
change, positively.
This hypothesis DEMO demonstrated by the significant correlations between the
contractual trust-building behaviours, and DEMO for change. The relationship is positive
because the correlation is positive; DEMO, showing that an increase in contractual trust-
building behaviours is associated DEMO an increase in capacity for change.
• Contractual trust-building behaviours and capacity for change (r = .34)
H3CONT: Contractual trust behaviours which DEMO trust affect the capacity for
change, negatively.
This hypothesis was demonstrated DEMO the significant correlations between the
contractual trust-breaking behaviours, and capacity for DEMO The relationship is negative
because the correlation is negative; therefore, an increase in contractual trust-breaking
behaviours is associated with a decrease in capacity DEMO change.
• Contractual trust-breaking behaviours and capacity for change (r = DEMO)
64
Communication
HICOMM: Communication trust behaviours affect, positively or negatively, the
capacity for change.
This hypothesis was demonstrated by the significant correlations between DEMO
communication trust behaviours, and capacity for change, as indicated in Table 9.
H2COMM: Communication trust behaviours which build trust affect the capacity
for change, positively.
This hypothesis was demonstrated by the significant correlations between the
communication trust-building behaviours, and capacity for change. The relationship is positive
because the correlation is positive; therefore, an increase in communication trust-building
behaviours DEMO associated with an increase in capacity for change.
• Communication trust-building behaviours and capacity for change (r = .41)
HJCOMM: Communication trust DEMO which break trust affect the capacity
for change, negatively.
This hypothesis DEMO demonstrated by the significant correlations between the
communication trust-breaking behaviours, and DEMO for change. The relationship is
negative because the correlation is negative; DEMO an increase in communication trust-
breaking behaviours is associated with a decrease in capacity for change.
• Communication trust-breaking behaviours and capacity for change (r = -.33)
Competence
HICOMP"' Competence trust behaviours affect, positively or negatively, the
capacity for change.
65
This hypothesis was demonstrated by the significant correlations between the
competence DEMO behaviours, and capacity for change, as indicated in Table 9.
H2COMP: Competence trust behaviours which build trust affect the capacity for
change, DEMO
This hypothesis was demonstrated by the significant correlations between the
competence trust-building behaviours, and capacity for change. The relationship is positive
because the correlation is positive; therefore, an increase in competence trust-building
behaviours is associated DEMO an increase in capacity for change.
• Competence trust-building behaviours and capacity for change (r = .47)
HbcoMp: Competence trust behaviours which DEMO trust affect the capacity for
change, negatively.
This hypothesis was demonstrated DEMO the significant correlations between the
competence trust-breaking behaviours, and capacity for DEMO The relationship is negative
because the correlation is negative; therefore an DEMO in competence trust-breaking
behaviours is associated with a decrease in capacity for change.
• Competence trust-breaking behaviours and capacity for change (r = -36)
Regression
I now address the second aim of my study by DEMO findings from the two
regression models appropriate for this sort of exploratory analysis. For both models, there was
sufficient data provided by 77 out of 85 respondents. Two approaches were taken for the two
regression models. DEMO is, the first is a theoretical model of the six predictor DEMO variables on
the outcome or results variable, which was capacity for DEMO The second approach uses
66
stepwise regression to find the best statistical model that provides the DEMO mathematical
outcome.
The first regression model is represented by this equation:
Y = a + biXi + b2X2 + b3X3 + b4X4 + DEMO + beXe
It is operationalized by this equation:
cfc = a + bi(cbu) + b2(cbk) + b3(cmbu) + b^cmbk) + bs(cpbu) + b6(cpbk)
The results of this DEMO regression results in a significant model, where p < .05, which is
the significance, accounts for 24% of the variance. This, therefore, is an important finding
especially given the small sample size. However, even if the sample size is small, it is an
entirely appropriate size for my research purposes because I was doing a correlation regression
exploratory DEMO (Donohue, personal communication, 2008).
Table 10
Results of the (Theoretical) Regression Using the Six Predictor Trust Variables
COMPONENT
CONSTANT
cbu
cbk
cmbu
cmbk
cpbu
cpbk
B-WEIGHT
57.05
-.04
.31
.24
.04
.5
-.61
DEMO
SIG. (T TEST)*
-.03
.09
.18
.01
.31
-.17
.87
DEMO
.32
.32
.11
.25
*t test with degrees of freedom = 76
This theoretical model assumes this is what the relationship among the variables DEMO
be. In the discussion section of this dissertation, I outline how DEMO operationalization of this
theory is substantiated by the literature.
67
The equation that results from this regression analysis is:
cfc DEMO 57.05 -.04(cbu) + .31(cbk) + .24(cmbu) + DEMO(cmbk) + .5(cpbu)-.61(cpbk)
The residual values were DEMO and the ranges fell within expectations. Therefore, the
theoretical model fits DEMO data, as can be seen from the histogram below.
Dependent Variable: Capacity for Change
-3-2-101
2
Mean--1 56E-1?
Std Dev =0 96
DEMO
Regression Standardized Residual
Figure 3. Histogram of the standardized residuals for the first model.
I now advance to an analysis of the second model. DEMO results show significant
outcomes, where p < .05, accounts for 22% of the variance. These findings are also important
given the small sample DEMO Because this is a stepwise regression, the computations resulted in
the DEMO mathematical model using the competence trust-building predictor variable. The
computation concluded that none of the other predictor variables contributed significantly to
this model.
Table 11
Results of the Stepwise Regression
COMPONENT
B-WEIGHT
CONSTANT
50.97
cpbu
DEMO
*t test with degrees of freedom = 76
BETA-WEIGHT
0.47
SIG. (DEMO TEST)*
<.05
<.05
68
Therefore, the regression produced this DEMO:
cfc = 50.97+.75 (cpbu)
The results of this analysis DEMO that when all six predictor variables were included
in the stepwise regression, there was an explained variance of 24%. When running the stepwise
regression just for the capacity for change variable, the competence-building predictor variable
was the most important, producing an explained variance of 22%.
The distribution of the residual values was verified and the ranges of the scores fall
DEMO expectations. The histogram below indicates the results of this stepwise regression.
Dependent Variable: Capacity for Change
-3-2-1
0 1 2
Mean*-4.96E-16
Std. Dev. =0.993
N=77
Regression Standardized Residual
Figure 4. Histogram of standardized residuals for second, stepwise or optimized, model.
69
Conclusion
In this chapter I examined the relationship between trust behaviours DEMO the capacity
for change. Correlations were run of the six trust variables and the capacity for change variable
to find out whether trust variables DEMO related, positively or negatively, to the capacity for
change. As expected and predicted by the extensive literature on trust, the analysis showed that
there was a strong association between positive trust behaviours and an organization'DEMO capacity
for change. Negative trust behaviours were strongly, and negatively, associated with an
organization's capacity for change.
I also wanted to explore DEMO strength of the relationships among the variables and how
well the capacity for change scores could be predicted by scores of the trust variables. DEMO
regression models were run; the first, a theoretical regression model, DEMO a significant
linear relationship between the six trust predictor variables and the one capacity for change
outcome variable. The second model looked at a DEMO of computations to find out the best
mathematical model; the results DEMO to the competence trust-building predictor variable as
contributing the most significantly to this model, and therefore, to an organization's capacity
for change.
DEMO significance of these findings and their relationship to the literature review is
discussed more fully in the next chapter.
CHAPTER FIVE
DISCUSSION
70
Introduction
The literature review highlighted the complexity of DEMO concept of trust, as well as
distrust. This review suggested there DEMO no agreed definition and understanding of these
concepts. In order to relate the results of my research with the literature review, I confine my
discussion to the organizational context within which trust is experienced, and, DEMO possible,
identify those behavioural characteristics which most closely reflect the transactional definition
of trust adopted by the trust survey instrument I used. That DEMO, transactional trust is lived in
relationship, and is experienced through three sets of behaviours. Contractual trust comprises
the management of expectations, establishing boundaries, delegating, encouraging mutual
intentionality, respecting agreements, and consistency of behaviour. DEMO trust
includes sharing information, truthfulness, admitting mistakes, giving and taking DEMO
feedback, confidentiality, and speaking with good purpose. Lastly, competence trust
DEMO include acknowledging skills and abilities, letting people make decisions, seeking
input, and helping people learn. These sets of behaviours can build trust, DEMO break it (Reina &
Reina, 2006b). The literature review DEMO that trust is a key enabler of change. In an
unstable environment where an organization moves from one state to another, trust between
managers and employees helps mitigate concern of the uncertainty surrounding the change
(Armenakis et al, 1999; Lines et ah, 2005; Saunders & Thornhill, 2004), and therefore adds to
the capacity for change in an DEMO context.
This chapter outlines how the state of trust within an organization is DEMO to its
capacity for change, understanding that what follows is not DEMO suggestion there are causal
relationships between findings and hypotheses. I now refer systematically to the two main
hypotheses, and their subhypotheses as outlined in the previous chapter:
71
Hypotheses
1. Positive trust behaviours affect an DEMO's capacity for change, positively.
2. Negative trust behaviours affect an DEMO's capacity for change, negatively.
Of the many elements that were DEMO to characterize trust, the literature
emphasizes ability, benevolence, integrity, expectations, and propensity to trust the other.
Evidence of these behavioural characteristics, DEMO performed well, reinforce the trustor's positive
expectations that the risk DEMO trust was well intentioned (Mayer et al, 1995; Rousseau et DEMO,
1998; Schoorman et al, 2007). This, in turn, leads to trustworthiness and an increase in mutual
cooperation and sociability within DEMO organizational context. Trust and its mirror,
trustworthiness, provide employees with DEMO confidence of positive expectations they may have
of their employer (Lewicki & Bunker, 1996). With trust and confidence in management's
integrity DEMO reliability, resistance to change is mediated, and the acceptance of change is more
probable because the communication, coming from trusted management, makes DEMO need for
change believable (Kotter, 1995; Meyer & Stensaker, 2006; Smollan, 2006).
As a converse to positive trust behaviours, the breach of trust is understood as a rupture
in relationship, and a broken promise to employee commitments in the context of an
organization. The DEMO could be calculative, and could be rooted in cognition, where the
actor is fully aware of what is being done, as well as rooted in the affect, where feelings are
hurt and the ensuing negative emotions could compromise the sense of psychological safety in
72
a workplace environment (Lewicki & Bunker, 1995, 1996; Lewicki DEMO ah, 1998; Reina &
Reina, 2006b). During a time of organizational change, trust in management's integrity and its
reliability have been highlighted as an absolute requirement to gain employee cooperation
during the DEMO process (Cunningham et al, 2002; Kotter & Schlesinger, 1979).
Numerical results from the correlation analysis demonstrate that empirically, there are
significant correlations between trust-building behaviours and capacity for change, and there
are significant correlations between trust-breaking behaviours and capacity for change.
Furthermore, as trust-building behaviours increase, the capacity for change increases. As trust-
breaking behaviours increase, DEMO is a decrease in the capacity for change.
Subhypotheses
Hi: Trust DEMO affect, positively or negatively, the capacity for change.
A number of behaviours have been identified which can build trust, or break it. In
addition to those behaviours cited in hypothesis 1 and 2, a stream of literature outlines how
these behaviours, if lived in practice, provide DEMO to employees of whether these
behaviours have consequences on trust-building, or DEMO In an organization,
behaviours are observed to support whether positive expectations can be fulfilled, and whether
the placement of trust was not futile. In particular, people who occupy roles in fiduciary
positions, such as DEMO, are closely observed for their functional and interpersonal
competence, openness, DEMO, consistency, judgment, and integrity (Barber, 1983; Butler,
1991; McCauley & Kuhnert, 1992). In a time of change, trust in management, as exemplified
by managerial behaviour, has been identified as DEMO important change process characteristic
73
(Cunningham et al, 2002; van Dam et ah, 2008)DEMO Logically, then, behaviours contrary to these
would impede the organizational change process.
Numerical results from the correlation analysis demonstrate that empirically, there are
significant correlations between trust-building behaviours and capacity for change, and trust-
breaking behaviours and capacity for change.
flb: Behaviours which build trust affect the capacity for change, positively.
The literature review suggests that trust is influenced by a psychological state of being,
and is achieved through a DEMO of psychological processes that are the result of personal
attributes as well as experiences in organizations and institutions (Kramer, Brewer, & Hanna,
1996; Rousseau et ah, 1998). As organizations engage in the DEMO of change, the state of
uncertainty surrounding the change suggests this DEMO a risky situation (Deutsch, 1958). The
literature says that in order to trust, and to perceive that the act of trusting was worth the risk,
there has to be a belief that another'DEMO future actions will be beneficial (Robinson, 1996). If
trusting behaviour, then, is historically situated and a learned experience, then qualitative
interactions in the workplace can increase the feeling of psychological safety (Edmondson,
2004). In such an environment, possible outcomes could lead to greater innovation and
working beyond the limitation of job descriptions, all essential attributes in times of
organizational flux. In such circumstances, if trust is high, then difficult organizational
decisions such as those taken in a time of change could be received more receptively (Dirks &
Ferrin, 2001), thus facilitating the change process.
The empirical findings demonstrate there are positive DEMO between trust-
building behaviours and capacity for change. Moreover, an increase DEMO trust-building
behaviours is associated with an increase in capacity for change.
74
H3: Behaviours which break trust affect the capacity for change, DEMO
The stream of literature which addresses the darker side of trust says that a breach of
trust creates a state of instability; depending on the depth of the breach, the effect could range
from being a minor nuisance, to becoming the cause of a life-altering experience. The literature
concurs that regardless of the type of breach that is incurred, there will be a cost to an
organization. This cost, in a time of change, could be measured by damaged human relations
and lost corporate productivity (Lewicki & Bunker, 1995, 1996; Lewicki et al, 1998), factors
suggesting it would be harder to carry out change. The DEMO between trust-breaking
behaviours and capacity for change show that an increase in trust-breaking behaviours is
associated with a decrease in capacity for change.
Contractual DEMO
HICONT: Contractual trust behaviours affect, positively or negatively, the
capacity DEMO change.
When trust is positioned as leading to a generalized expectation of the trustworthiness
of others, implicit in this understanding is a contractual relationship between the trustor and
trustee. If the risk taken to trust has DEMO rewarded with a fulfillment of this expectation, then
there is incentive DEMO continue trusting. This, in turn, enables cooperation within an
organizational context (Barber, 1983; Das & Teng, 1998, 2001; Mayer et DEMO, 1995; Schoorman
et al., 2007). In contrary fashion, if the expectation is not fulfilled, then this implies that the
contractual relationship between trustor and trustee, to some extent, has been breached, and
this breach could result in distrust. The effects could be diminished corporate DEMO, and
higher organizational costs in terms of damaged human relations (Lewicki & Bunker, 1995,
75
1996; Lewicki et al.,1998; Morrison & Robinson, 1997; DEMO, 1996). Such a toxic
organizational situation is not conducive to DEMO adaptability required for change (Lines et al.,
2005; Saunders & Thornhill, 2004). The empirical analysis reinforces this notional relationship
by showing there are significant correlations between contractual trust behaviours and capacity
for change.
DEMO: Contractual trust behaviours which build trust affect the capacity for
change, positively.
In addition to meeting positive expectations of the other, a contractual relationship
between trustor and trustee could enhance behavioural coordination and be a DEMO sign of
mutual commitment; it could also be used to deter DEMO risk within an organizational
context (Costa & Bijlsma-Frankema, 2007; Lane, 1998; Lane & Bachmann, 2002). There are
many ways of DEMO contractual arrangements; what is important is the degree of
control that DEMO manager wants to carry out, and the extent to which this DEMO impact on trust
between employee and manager in an organization. Trustworthy behaviour is enabled when a
manager loosens formal, authoritative control and encourages employee participation (Weibel,
2007). Consistent behaviour, respected agreements, and delegation improve the quality of
exchanges within an organization (Douglas & Zivnuska, DEMO); employees who are trusted and
empowered can focus their attention on organizational requirements (Mayer & Gavin, 2005)
such as refocused priorities DEMO a time of organizational transition (Kotter & Schlesinger,
1979). DEMO empirical findings point to significant correlations between contractual trust-
building behaviours and capacity for change. The relationship is positive since the correlation
is positive; therefore, an increase in contractual trust-building behaviours is associated with an
increase in capacity for change.
H3CONT
" Contractual trust behaviours which break trust affect the capacity for
DEMO, negatively.
The literature clearly identifies which contractual trust behaviours break trust. DEMO is, a
rupture in relationship with the other signifies a breached DEMO arrangement, since
positive expectations of benevolence, integrity, and agreements will DEMO have been met. The
lack of congruency in contractual trust behaviour can even become a source of challenge to
managerial authority and effectiveness (Atkinson, 2004; Atkinson & Butcher, 2003; Caldwell
& Hayes, 2006), characteristics which are not helpful to an organization in a time of DEMO
(Dirks & Ferrin, 2001). The validity of this concept was demonstrated by the significant
correlations between the contractual trust-breaking behaviours, and capacity for change. The
relationship is negative because the correlation is negative; therefore, findings show that an
increase in contractual trust-breaking behaviours is associated with a decrease in capacity for
change.
Communication
HICOMM*. Communication trust behaviours affect, positively or negatively, the
capacity for change.
Trust, as a relational DEMO in an organizational context, requires social interaction
between employees, and employees and managers. The clarity of messages enhances
credibility of the delivery, therefore enabling the building of trust between receptor and
deliverer of the communication. DEMO is recognized as the outcome of good organizational
communication; as decisions DEMO explained and made believable, openness demonstrates
sincerity and accessibility (Bambacas & Patrickson, 2008; Elsbach & Elofson, 2000; Reina &
Reina, DEMO, 2006b, 2007a, 2007b). Open and sincere communication is an DEMO of
genuine concern for employees; for this reason, such acts of perceived DEMO help to
make organizational change more acceptable (Korsgaard et al, 2002; C. C. Williams, 2005). If
good communication increases organizational congruence, then inauthentic, poor
communication adds to the state of uncertainty surrounding the change process. Poor
communication adds to misunderstanding, and even fear during this unstable time (Lewicki &
Bunker, 1996; Morrison & Robinson, 1997). The state of perceived organizational
trustworthiness influences how employees respond to DEMO (Meyer & Stensaker, 2006;
Smollan, 2006). The empirical DEMO demonstrate there are significant correlations between
communication trust behaviours, and capacity DEMO change
H2COMM: Communication trust behaviours which build trust affect the capacity
DEMO change, positively.
In addition to the effects of communication trust-building behaviours DEMO
above, good organizational communication practices enable competence, openness, concern,
DEMO and identification with others (Shockley-Zalabak, 2000; Shockley-Zalabak et al.,
DEMO; Shockley-Zalabak et al., 2000b). Such a process of identification goes a long way to
encourage two-way communication between employees and managers. Despite DEMO position of
authority occupied by managers, trust can be socially constructed DEMO a duality, where,
interestingly, control and trust become inseparable (DEMO, 2005; Reed, 2001) and one is
not detrimental to the other. In an organizational context, where trust and control are one, DEMO
exchanges between managers and employees are enhanced as psychological safety is enabled;
such organizational openness is recognized as improving problem-solving capabilities and
openness DEMO new learning, all essential attributes in a time of organizational transition
(Deutsch, 1958; Edmondson, 2004; Fisher, 1997; Gillespie, 2003; DEMO & Bunker, 1995;
78
Senge et ah, 1994). As has been already stated, DEMO the reason for a change helps
make the change process easier to implement. In addition, being open about the change and
being accessible for more information maintains trust in management; such acts of leadership
which help develop trusting followers are recognized as important capacity for change enablers
(Dervitsiotis, 2006; Judge etal, 2006; Meyer & Stensaker, 2006; Smollan, 2006). The
empirical analysis shows there are significant correlations between communication DEMO
building behaviours and capacity for change. The relationship between the variables is positive
because the correlations are positive; therefore, an increase in communication DEMO
behaviours is associated with an increase in capacity for change.
H3COMM: DEMO trust behaviours which break trust affect the capacity
for change, negatively.
DEMO has been shown in the above hypotheses how important good organizational
communication is to an organization's capacity for change. Taking a converse perspective,DEMO
inauthentic and bad organizational communication leads to misunderstanding and uncertainty
around a change process; at worst, bad communication leads to corporate distrust (Saunders &
Thornhill, 2004). An atmosphere of distrust during a change, such as a merger, is a serious
vulnerability which can lead to acts of destruction or even sabotage by those affected by the
change (Ozag, 2006; Searle & Ball, 2004; Thau et al, 2007). The empirical analysis
demonstrates significant correlations between communication trust-breaking behaviours and
DEMO for change. The relationship is negative because the correlation is negative, DEMO so, an
increase in communication trust-breaking behaviours is associated with a DEMO in capacity
for change.
79
Competence
HICOMP: Competence trust behaviours affect, positively or negatively, the
capacity for change.
The importance of recognizing employee contributions to the health DEMO an organization,
by acknowledging their abilities, seeking input, and supporting continuous learning are traits
acknowledged in well-known, popular literature on organizations (DEMO, 1995; Kotter &
Schlesinger, 1979; Senge et al, 1994). It has been stated that supporting these traits enables an
organization DEMO deal with the pressure of change, since employees will feel empowered DEMO
these contractual trust behaviours and will feel more inclined to support the organization
through the transition process (Dirks & Ferrin, 2001). It DEMO also been stated that when
promises to employees are broken, there DEMO an unquestionable, negative consequence on an
organization. This consequence can be DEMO in terms of lost creativity and productivity;
when positive, traits DEMO essential to help an organization through the change process
(Morrison & DEMO, 1997; Robinson, 1996). The empirical findings from my analysis DEMO
there are significant correlations between competence trust behaviours, and capacity for
DEMO
H2COMPJ Competence trust behaviours which build trust affect the capacity for
change, positively.
Early trust literatures, including classics on organizational theory, stress the importance
of competence and integrity in organizations. The expectation that a promise DEMO be "relied
upon" provides the conceptual foundation for trust (Rotter, 1970). Competence, integrity, and
realized promises are traits recognized as DEMO so vital they are said to affect the very survival
of an organizational system (Barber, 1983; Barnard, 1968; Coleman, 1990; Gabarro, 1978;
Luhmann, 1979), not to say of society as a whole. The generalized expectation of trust, and of
trustworthiness, are behavioural characteristics that DEMO open exchanges between employees
and managers in an organizational context, and DEMO participatory, democratic styles of
management that engender qualitative workplaces (Douglas & Zivnuska, 2008; Mayer &
Gavin, 2005; Rousseau et al, DEMO; Schoorman, Mayer, & Davis, 1996; Six, 2005). A stream
of literature suggests that trust can be reinforced through historical experiences; viewed
through this lens, then, repeated acts of trust result in DEMO spiral of repeated trust (Zand, 1972)
that helps to ensure the trustee that the trustor will behave in an expected way (Behnia, 2004).
Such leadership behaviours, then, when linked to accountability standards in an organization,
contribute strongly to a sense of psychological safety DEMO the workplace, and enable the
characteristics needed to develop a capacity DEMO change during times of transition. Such
characteristics include the ability to innovate, deal with organizational problems, and be
flexible enough to work beyond DEMO confines of job descriptions (Ammeter et al, 2004;
Armenakis et al, 1999; Armenakis & Mossholder, 1993; Edmondson, 2004; Gibb, 1978).
The empirical analysis resulted in demonstrating significant correlations between competence
DEMO behaviours, and capacity for change. The relationship is positive because the
DEMO is positive; therefore, an increase in competence trust-building behaviours is
associated with an increase in capacity for change. In addition, it is important to note that in
my stepwise regression to find the best statistical DEMO, I discovered that competence is the
mediator variable that contributed the DEMO significantly to my computations.
H3COMP: Competence trust behaviours which break trust DEMO the capacity for
change, negatively.
81
If competence trust behaviours are based on ability, benevolence, integrity, a generalized
expectation of the trustworthiness of others, acknowledging the skills and abilities of others,
seeking input, and enabling a learning environment (DEMO et al, 1995; Reina & Reina, 2007a,
2007b; Rousseau et al, 1998; Schoorman et al, 2007), then evidence contrary to these
characteristics could be indicative of a breach in competence trust DEMO Literature
focussed on organizational leadership highlights the consequences of a workplace environment
rife with distrust. Particularly in a time of change, it is unlikely that disgruntled and angry
employees will be supportive of an organization in DEMO Some literature even suggests
that employees may engage in destructive activities to damage the organization (Bunker &
Rubin, 1995; Morrison & Robinson, 1997; Ozag, 2006; Robinson, 1996; Searle & Ball, 2004;DEMO
Thau et al, 2007). This notion was demonstrated by the DEMO correlations between the
competence trust-breaking behaviours, and capacity for change. The DEMO is negative
because the correlation is negative; therefore, an increase in competence trust-breaking
behaviours is associated with a decrease in capacity for change.
DEMO of this Study
Research Field
The research was based on a survey which was carried out during a specific point in
time, in one organizational program sector. The sample size was limited to people working in
DEMO program sector; while the participation rate was very good, it could have been interesting
to have more people take part in the survey, and to include other program sectors within Bell
Canada.
A big complication arose during the early stages of my research invitation DEMO Bell
Canada's participation. Just as the survey was about to be launched, a major staff change
stalled the survey process. The resultant survey process delays could have affected survey
participation, and the quality of survey responses.
82
Definitions
I used a definition of trust developed by the DEMO Trust Building Institute; other
variants could have been considered. The capacity DEMO change definition was limited to the one
defined by Armenakis et al. (2007).
Survey Instrumentation
The survey which I used to quantify trust behaviours was developed according to one
specific set of definitions related to DEMO; while I found these definitions to be comprehensive,
it could DEMO been interesting to consider other trust survey instruments which follow other
variations on trust to gauge the level of trust within an organization. The DEMO is true for the
capacity for change portion of the survey. Other interpretations of capacity for change could
have added more dimension to my DEMO of the capacity for change, and could have
been reflected in DEMO different survey approach.
Research Methodology
I did a correlation of trust variables onto capacity for change to find out if these were
related; a regression analysis addressed the strength of this relationship, and explored the
possibility of predictor variables. This exploratory approach did not investigate if there was DEMO
causal relationship among the variables.
83
Capacity for change was studied by taking a parsimonious approach: that is, I collapsed
five subscales of capacity for change, into one DEMO For a more accurate understanding of
elements conducive to an organization's capacity for change, it could be interesting to take a
more detailed approach and examine correlations among all five capacity for change subscales,
DEMO trust variables.
Qualitative Data
I did not incorporate the gathering of qualitative information into my final analysis. The
addition of a qualitative perspective on DEMO and capacity for change would have added a
different contextual flavour to the findings, and greater richness to this study.
Executive Sponsorship
Executive sponsorship of my research allowed me to enter and work with Bell Canada
DEMO in order to carry out my doctoral research. However, in having DEMO sponsor
my research and sign off e-mails to employees inviting them to participate in my research,
executive involvement may have affected the response DEMO as well as the quality of the
responses.
84
CHAPTER SIX
CONCLUSION
Introduction
In this final chapter I share my DEMO and significant findings, suggest some
implications for research and practice, and end with suggestions for future research.
Observations
I found it important to DEMO that trust gained such prominence in academic circles, as
well as DEMO practice, over the last two decades. It took, however, a DEMO of
organizational business disasters to realize that treating people like material assets has
consequences, one of these being the lack of trust resulting in the erosion of loyalty and
corporate allegiance. With globalization and the economic DEMO of countries, it is
indisputable that organizations and the people working DEMO them need to be flexible and
adaptable to the pressures of change, in order to survive and even flourish. However,
organizations also need to consider the human toll of not carrying out corporate transitions
with DEMO and care.
This study showed that trust behaviours are clearly associated with an organization's
capacity for change. Interestingly, computations showed that the competence trust-building
predictor variable contributed the most significantly to the capacity for change. DEMO my mind,
this means that people in organizations have to live up to their commitments and the
expectations made of them, or there may be consequences on capacity for change, and the
effectiveness of organizational change processes.
85
Implications for Research and Practice
There are a number of ways that understanding the relationship DEMO trust and the
capacity for change could benefit research, as well DEMO organizations. On a conceptual level,
while there are many interpretations of trust, perhaps a closer examination of what behaviours
enable trust, and DEMO ones break trust, could lead to a more reflexive awareness of DEMO
responsibility in making trust "happen" (Mollering, 2006a, 2006b; Six, 2005; Vlaar et al,
2007). Based on this greater DEMO of self, perhaps the work that Gibb (1978) initiated
could DEMO retrieved, refreshed, and updated to include current academic thinking in social
constructionism.
With regard to research methodology, the use of surveys is helpful in providing a
snapshot of the current state of an organization at DEMO point in time. However, it would be
interesting and useful if DEMO behaviours and capacity for change indicators could be updated to
deal with globalization challenges such as multiculruralism, religious and ethnic diversity, and
gender (Arnott, 2007a, 2007b; Bachmann & Zaheer, 2006a; Doney et al, 2007; Mizrachi et
al, 2007; Poppo et al, 2008; DEMO et al, 2007; Tsui-Auch & Mollering, 2007;
Waldman, de Luque, Washburn, & House, 2006; Wasti, Tan, Brower, & Onder, 2007).
On the practical side, having a greater awareness DEMO the importance of trust can mitigate
the effects of downsizing before and after it happens. Greater involvement of senior managers
with employees in a DEMO of change is likely to increase trust. For management practice,
enacting trust could encourage more constructive responses of survivors in downsized
organizations when DEMO more humane approach to organizational change is taken (Clark &
86
Payne, 1997; Lines etal, 2005; Meyer & Stensaker, 2006; Mishra, 1996; Smollan, 2006). To
implement better trust-based management DEMO, performance appraisals and reward
policies might consider the role of trust DEMO its impact on organizational performance (Mayer
& Davis, 1999; Mayer & Gavin, 2005; Spreitzer & Mishra, 1999). If trust in DEMO is
low, this could become an opportunity to build trust. In DEMO context, organizational change
could be designed to build trust as a DEMO objective, with the benefits of positive change
becoming secondary objectives. Careful DEMO as the change is carried out could positively
affect employees' trust DEMO management; such a consideration could be especially attractive for
those managers DEMO a proclivity toward democratic work processes (Lines et al, 2005; DEMO
& Reina, 2006a, 2006b, 2007b; Tomlinson & Mayer, In DEMO). Understanding how to repair
broken trust could regenerate the workplace by renewing corporate commitment, loyalty, and
maybe even support for change (Gillespie & Dietz, 2008; Lewicki & Bunker, 1996; Morrison
& Robinson, 1997; Reina & Reina, 2006b; C. C. Williams, 2005).
DEMO Research
With reference to research methodology, future researchers may be interested DEMO
establishing causal relationships between trust and the capacity for change variables in order to
increase the internal validity of the findings in relation to DEMO statistical analysis. Longitudinal
research could also be an interesting approach in settings where change is initiated, and after it
had been implemented, to DEMO out how trust affected the change process, and whether the
organization DEMO trust behavioural competencies into performance measures or other
means of measuring results. A new survey instrument could be considered, with factor analysis
to figure out if the survey is viable. While there is considerable literature on DEMO
change, there is not much research on the link between organizational DEMO and trust. In light
87
of the great resurgence of interest in trust, and considering the state of global uncertainty, this
could be an important area for future research. In addition, the darker side of trust merits
research attention in order to understand better the relational as well as the organizational costs
DEMO broken trust, and the benefits of trust repair in regenerating workplace DEMO, with a renewed
belief in corporate values.
88
REFERENCES
AAPOR. (2000). Standard definitions: Final dispositions of case DEMO and outcome rates for
surveys. Ann Arbor, MI: American Association for Public Opinion Research.
Abrams, L. C , Cross, R., Lesser, DEMO, & Levin, D. Z. (2003). Nurturing interpersonal trust in
DEMO networks. The Academy of Management Executive, 17(4), 64-76.
Ammeter, A., Douglas, C , Ferris, G. R., & Goka, H. (2004). A social relationship
conceptualization of trust and accountability in organizations. Human Resource
Management Review, 14(1), 47-65.
Armenakis, A. A., & Bedelan, A. G. (1999). Organizational change: A review of theory and
research in the 1990s. Journal of Management, 25(3), 293-315.
Armenakis, A. A., Bernerth, J. B., Pitts, J. P., & Walker, J. H. (2007). Organizational Change
Recipients' Beliefs DEMO: Development of an assessment instrument. The Journal of
Applied Behavioral Science, 43(4), 481-505.
Armenakis, A. A., Harris, G. S., & Feild, S. H. (1999). Making change permanent: A model DEMO
institutionalizing change interventions. In W. A. Pasmore & R. W. Woodman (DEMO),
Research in organizational change and development (Vol. 12, pp. DEMO). Stamford,
CT: JAI Press.
Armenakis, A. A., & DEMO, S. G. (2002). Crafting a change message to create
transformational readiness. Journal of Organizational Change Management, 15(2),
169-183.
Armenakis, A. A., & Mossholder, S. G. (1993). Creating readiness for organizational change.
Human Relations, 46(6), 681-704.
Arnott, D. C. (2007a). Research on trust: A bibliography and brief bibliometric analysis of the
special issue submissions. European Journal of Marketing, 41(9/10), 1203-1240.
Arnott, D. C. (2007b). Trust-current thinking and future research. DEMO Journal of
Marketing, 41(9/10), 981-987.
Atkinson, S. (DEMO). Senior management relationships and trust: An exploratory study. Journal
of DEMO Psychology, 19(6), 571-587.
Atkinson, S., & Butcher, D. (2003). Trust in managerial relationships. Journal of Managerial
Psychology, 18(DEMO), 282-304.
Bachmann, R. (2006). Trust and/or power: DEMO a sociological theory of organizational
relationships. In R. Bachmann & A. Zaheer (Eds.), Handbook of trust research (pp.
393-408). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Bachmann, R., & Zaheer, A. (2006a). Introduction. In R. Bachmann & A. Zaheer (Eds.),
Handbook of trust DEMO (pp. 1-12). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Bachmann, R., & Zaheer, A. (Eds.). (2006b). Handbook of trust research. DEMO, UK:
Edward Elgar.
Ball, D., Coelho, P., & DEMO, A. (2003). The role of communication and trust in explaining
customer loyalty. European Journal of Marketing, 38(9/10), 1272-1293.
Bambacas, M., & Patrickson, M. (2008). Interpersonal communication skills that DEMO
organisational commitment. Journal of Communication Management, 12(1), 51-72.
Barber, B. (1983). The logic and limits of trust. New Brunswick, DEMO: Rutgers University Press.
Barnard, C. (1968). The functions of DEMO executive. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
89
Barney, J. B., & Hansen, M. H. (1994). DEMO as a source of competitive advantage.
Strategic Management Journal, 15, 175-190.
Becerra, M., & Gupta, A. K. (2003). Perceived trustworthiness DEMO the organization: The
moderating impact of communication frequency on trustor and DEMO effects.
Organization Science, 14(1), 32-44.
Behnia, B. (2004)DEMO Trust building from the perspective of survivors of war and torture. The
Social Service Review, 78(1), 26.
Bigley, G., & Pearce, J. (1998). Straining for shared meaning in organizational science:
DEMO of trust and distrust. The Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 405-421.
Bijlsma-Frankema, K., & Koopman, P. (2003). Introduction: DEMO within organisations.
Personnel Review, 32(5), 543-555.
Bijlsma-Frankema, K., & van de Bunt, G. G. (2003). Antecedents of trust in managers: A
"bottom up" approach. Personnel Review, 32(5), DEMO
Bijlsma-Frankema, K., & Woolthuis, R. (2005a). Introduction: Trust DEMO pressure. In K.
Bijlsma-Frankema & R. Woolthuis (Eds.), Trust under DEMO Northampton, MA:
Edward Elgar.
Bijlsma-Frankema, K., & Woolthuis, R. K. (Eds.). (2005b). Trust under pressure: Empirical
investigations of trust and trust building in uncertain circumstances. Northampton,
MA: Edward Elgar.
Blois, K. (1999). Trust in business to business relationships: An evaluation of its status.
Journal of Management Studies, 36(2), 197-215.
Boon, S. D., & Holmes, J. G. (1991). The DEMO of interpersonal trust: Resolving
uncertainty in the face of risk. In DEMO Hinde & J. Groebel (Eds.), Cooperation and
prosocial behaviour. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Boyle, R., & Bonacich, P. (1970). DEMO development of trust and mistrust in mixed-motives
games. Sociometry, 33,123-139.
DEMO, J., & Seigel, P. (1996). Understanding the interaction between procedural and
distributive justice. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations:
Frontiers of theory and research (pp. 390-413). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Brockner, J., Siegel, P. A., Daly, J. P., Tyler, T., & Martin, C. (1997). When trust matters: The
moderating effect of outcome favourability. Administrative Science Quarterly, 42, 558-
583.
Bromiley, P., & Cummings, L. (1966). Transaction costs in organizations with trust. In R. J.
Bies, R. J. Lewicki, & B. H. Sheppard (Eds.), Research on negotiation in organizations
(pp. 219-247). Greenwich, CT: JAI.
Brower, DEMO H., Schoorman, F. D., & Tan, H. H. (2000)DEMO A model of relational leadership: The
integration of trust and leader-member DEMO Leadership Quarterly, 11, 227-250.
Bruhn, J. (2002). Trust and the health of organizations. New York: Kluwer Academic Plenum.
Buchan, N. DEMO, Croson, R. T. A., & Dawes, R. M. (2002)DEMO Swift neighbors and persistent
strangers: A cross-cultural investigation of trust and DEMO in social exchange. The
American Journal of Sociology, 108(1), DEMO
Bunker, B. B., & Rubin, J. Z. (Eds.). (DEMO). Conflict, cooperation and justice. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Burke, S. C , Sims, D. E., Lazzara, E. H., & Salas, E. (2007). Trust in leadership: A multilevel
review and integration. DEMO Leadership Quarterly, 18, 606-632.
90
Burt, R., & Knez, M. (1995). Third-party gossip DEMO trust. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler
(Eds.), DEMO in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research (pp. 68-69). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Butler, J. K. (1991). Toward understanding DEMO measuring conditions of trust: Evolution of a
condition of trust inventory. DEMO of Management, 17(3), 643-663.
Caldwell, C , & Hayes, L. A. (2006). Leadership, trustworthiness and the mediating lens.
Journal of Management Development, 26(3), 261-281.
Campbell, C , & DEMO, J. (2008). The "foreign" backlash. MacLean's, 121, 24-25.
Carnevale, D. G. (1995). Trustworthy government: Leadership and management strategies for
building trust and high performance. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Chen, DEMO C , Chen, Y.-R., & Xin, K. (2004). Guanxi practices and trust in management: A
procedural justice perspective. Organization Science, DEMO(2), 200-209.
Child, J. (1998). Trust and international strategic alliances: The case of Sino-Soviet joint
ventures. In C. Lane & R. Bachmann (Eds.), Trust within and between organizations
(pp. 241-272). DEMO: Oxford University Press.
Chowdhury, S. (2005). The role of DEMO and cognition based trust in complex knowledge
sharing. Journal of Managerial Issues, 17(3), 310-326.
Chua, R. Y. J., Ingram, P., & Morris, M. (2008). From the head and the heart: Locating
cognition- and affect-based trust in managers' professional networks. Academy of
Management Journal, 51(3), 436-452.
Clark, M. C , & Payne, R. L. (1997). The nature and structure of workers' trust DEMO management.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 18(3), 205-229.
Coleman, J. (1990). Foundations of social theory. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Conchie, S. M., & Donald, I. J. (2007). The functions DEMO development of safety-specific trust
and distrust. Safety Science, ¥5(2008), DEMO
Cook, J., & Wall, T. (1980). New work attitude measures of trust, organizational commitment
and personal need non-fulfillment. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 55(1), 39-52.
Costa, A. C , & Bijlsma-Frankema, K. (2007). Trust and control interrelations: New
perspectives on the DEMO nexus. Group and Organization Management, 32(4),
392-407.
Costigan, DEMO D., liter, S. S., & Berman, J. J. (1998)DEMO A multi-dimensional study of trust in
organizations. Journal of Managerial Issues, DEMO(3), 303-317.
Covey, S. M. (2006). The speed of trust. New York: Free Press.
Craswell, R. (1993). On the uses of "trust": Comment on Williamson "calculativeness, trust
and economic organization". Journal of Law and Economics, 36(1), 487-500.
Creed, W. D., & Miles, R. E. (1996). Trust in DEMO: A conceptual framework linking
organizational forms, managerial philosophies, and the DEMO costs of controls. In
R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (DEMO), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and
research (pp. 16-38). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Cummings, L. L., & Bromiley, P. (1996). The organizational trust inventory (OTI):
Development and validation. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in
organizations: Frontiers of theory and research (pp. 302-330). Thousand DEMO, CA:
Sage.
91
Cunningham, C , Woodward, C , Shannon, H., Macintosh, J., Lendrum, B., Rosenbloom, D., et
al. (2002). DEMO for organizational change: A longitudinal study of workplace,
psychological and DEMO correlates. Journal of Occupational and Organizational
Psychology, 75, 377-392.
Currall, DEMO, & Inkpen, A. (2002). A multilevel approach to trust DEMO Journal of
International Studies, 55(3), 479-495.
Currrall, S. C , & Judge, T. A. (1995). Measuring trust between organizational DEMO role
persons. Organization Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 64(2), DEMO
Damasio, A. (2005). Brain trust. Nature, 435(2), DEMO
Das, T. K., & Teng, B.-S. (1998). Between trust and control: Developing confidence in partner
cooperation in alliances. The Academy of Management Review, 25(3), 491-512.
Das, T. K., & Teng, B.-S. (2001). Trust, control, and risk in strategic alliances: An integrated
framework. Organization Studies, 22(2), 251-283.
Das, T. DEMO, & Teng, B.-S. (2004). The risk-based view of trust: A conceptual framework.
Journal of Business and Psychology, 19(1), 85-116.
Dasgupta, P. (1988). Trust as a commodity. In D. Gambetta (Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking
cooperative relations (pp. 49-72). DEMO York: Basil Blackwell.
Davis, J. H., Schoorman, F. D., DEMO, R. C , & Hwee, T. H. (2000). The DEMO general
manager and business unit performance: Empirical evidence of a competitive
DEMO Strategic Management Journal, 21(5), 563-576.
Dervitsiotis, K. N. (DEMO). Building trust for excellence in performance and adaptation to
change. Total Quality Management, 17(7), 795-810.
Deutsch, M. (1958). Trust and suspicion. The Journal of Conflict Resolution, 2(4), 265-279.
Dietz, G., & den Hartog, N. (2006). Measuring trust inside DEMO Personnel Review,
35(5), 557-588.
Dirks, K., & Ferrin, D. (2001). The role of trust in organizational settings. Organization
DEMO, 12(4), 450-467.
Dirks, K., & Ferrin, D. (DEMO). Trust in leadership: Meta-analytic findings and implications for
research and DEMO Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(4), 611-628.
Dirks, K., DEMO, P., Cooper, C , & Ferrin, D. (2005). DEMO repent or prevent? Annual Meeting of
the Academy of Management. Honolulu, Hawaii.
Dirks, K., Kim, P., Cooper, C , & Ferrin, D. (2008). Understanding the effects of substantive
responses on trust DEMO a transgression. Unpublished manuscript.
Dirks, K., & Skarlicki, D. (2004). Trust in leaders: Existing research and emerging issues. In
R. M. Kramer & K. S. Cook (Eds.), Trust and distrust in organizations (pp. 21-40).
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Dittmar, K. J., & Jennings, K. R. (2007). Trust and engagement. Leadership Excellence,
24(11), S.
Doney, P. M., Barry, J. M., & Abratt, R. (2007). Trust determinants and outcomes in global
B2B services. European Journal of Marketing, 41(9/10), 1096-1116.
Doney, P. M., Cannon, J. P., & Mullen, M. R. (DEMO). Understanding the influence of national
culture on the development of trust. The Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 601-
620.
Douglas, DEMO , & Zivnuska, S. (2008). Developing trust in leaders: DEMO antecedent of firm
performance. S.A.M. Advanced Management Journal, 75(1), DEMO
92
Dunn, J. R., & Schweitzer, M. E. (2005). DEMO and believing: The influence of emotion on
trust. Journal of Personality DEMO Social Psychology, 88(5), 736-748.
Durkin, D. (2007). DEMO loyalty and employee engagement add up to corporate profits.
ClOmedia, pp. DEMO
Eby, L. T., Adams, D. T., Russell, J. E., & Gaby, S. H. (2000). Perceptions of organizational
readiness for DEMO: Factors related to employees' reactions to the implementation of
team-based selling. Human Relations, 53(3), 419-442.
Edmondson, A. C. (2004). Psychological safety, trust and learning in organizations: A group-
level analysis. DEMO R. M. Kramer & K. S. Cook (Eds.), Trust and DEMO in
organizations (pp. 239-272). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Elangovan, A. R., & Shapiro, D. L. (1998). Betrayal of DEMO in organizations. The Academy of
Management Review, 23(3), 547-566.
DEMO, K., & Elofson, G. (2000). How the packaging of decision explanation affects
perceptions of trustworthiness. Academy of Management Journal, 43(1), 80-89.
Ferres, N., Connell, J., & Travaglione, A. (DEMO). Co-worker trust as a social catalyst for
constructive employee attitudes. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 19(6), 608-622.
Ferrin, D. L., Cooper, C. D., Kim, P. H., & Dirks, K. T. (DEMO). Silence speaks volumes: The
effectiveness of reticence in comparison to DEMO and denial for responding to
integrity- and competence-based trust violations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92(4),
893-908.
Ferrin, D. L., Shah, P. P., & Dirks, K. T. (2006). Direct and indirect effects of third-party
relationships on interpersonal trust. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91(4), 870-883.
Fisher, J. R. (1997). What is trust? Executive Excellence, 14(6), 12.
Forbes. (2008). The corporate DEMO sheet. Retrieved November 13, 2008, from
http://www.forbes.com/2002/07/25/accountingtracker.html
Fryxell, G. E., Dooley, R. S., & Li, W.-S. (2004). The role of trustworthiness in maintaining
employee commitment during restructuring in China. Asia Pacific Journal of
Management, 21, 515-533.
Fukuyama, F. (1995). Trust: The social virtues and the creation of DEMO New York: Free
Press.
Gabarro, J. J. (1978). The DEMO of trust and expectations. In A. G. Athos & J. J.
Gabarro (Eds.), Interpersonal behavior: Communication and understanding in
relationships (pp. 290-303). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Galford, R. M., & DEMO, A. S. (2002). The trusted leader. New York: Free DEMO
Gambetta, D. (1988). Can we trust trust? In D. DEMO (Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking
cooperative relations. New York: DEMO Blackwell.
Garfinkel, H. (1963). A conception of, and experiments DEMO, "trust" as a condition of stable
concerted actions. In O. DEMO Harvey (Ed.), Motivation and social interaction: Cognitive
determinants (pp. DEMO). New York: The Ronald Press Company.
Gibb, J. (1978)DEMO Trust: A new view of personal and organizational development. Los Angeles:DEMO
Guild of Tutors Press.
Gillespie, N. (2003). Measuring trust in working relationships: The Behavioural Trust
Inventory. Seattle, WA: Academy of Management Meeting.
Gillespie, N., & Dietz, G. (2008). Trust repair DEMO an organization-level failure. Academy of
Management Review, 34(\).
93
Gillespie, N., & Mann, L. (2004). Transformational leadership DEMO shared values: The building
blocks of trust. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 19(6), 588-606.
Gomez, C , & Rosen, B. (2001). The leader-member exchange as a link between managerial
trust and employee DEMO Group and Organization Management, 26(1), 53-
69.
Good, D. (1988). Individuals, interpersonal relations, and trust. In Trust: Making DEMO breaking
cooperative relations (pp. 31-48). New York: Basil Blackwell.
Great Place to Work Institute. (2008). Cultural practices of the best companies. Retrieved
April 28,2008, from http://www.greatplacetowork.com/great/culture.php
Grovier, DEMO (1994). An epistemology of trust. InternationalJournal of Moral Social Studies, 8,
155-174.
Gulati, R. (1995). Does familiarity breed trust? The implications of repeated ties for
contractual choice in alliances. Academy of DEMO Journal, 38(1), 85-112.
Gulati, R., & Sytch, M. (2008). Does familiarity breed trust? Revisiting the antecedents of
trust. DEMO and Decision Economics, 29, 1165-2008.
Hardin, R. (2002). Trust and trustworthiness. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Hardy, C., Phillips, DEMO, & Lawrence, T. (1998). Distinguishing trust and power in
DEMO relations: Forms and facades of trust. In C. Lane & R. DEMO
(Eds.), Trust within and between organizations (pp. 64-87). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Hernandez, M. (2008). Promoting stewardship behavior in organizations: A leadership model.
Journal of Business Ethics, 80,121-128.
Holt, D. T. (2002). Readiness for change: The development of a DEMO Auburn University,
Auburn, Alabama.
Holt, D. T., Armenakis, A. A., Feild, H. S., & Harris, G. S. (2007). Readiness for
organizational change: The systematic development of a scale. The Journal of Applied
Behavioral Science, 43(2), 232-255.
Hosmer, L. T. (1995). Trust: The connecting link between organizational theory and
philosophical ethics. The Academy of Management Review, 20(2), 379-402.
Huang, J., & Dastmalchian, A. (2004). Implications of trust and distrust for DEMO
Personnel Review, 35(4), 361-377.
Hubbell, A. P., & DEMO, R. M. (2005). Motivating factors: Perceptions of justice and
DEMO relationship with managerial and organizational trust. Communication Studies,
56(1), 47-69.
Huff, L., & Kelley, L. (2003). Levels of DEMO trust in individualist versus collectivist
societies: A seven-nation study. Organization Science, 14(\), 81-90.
Hurley, P., & Siebers, J. (2007)DEMO Companies without trust will fail to thrive. Strategic
Communication Management, 11(DEMO), 7.
Hurley, R. F. (2006, September). The decision DEMO trust. Harvard Business Review, pp. 55-62.
Hyun- Jung, L. (2004)DEMO The role of competence-based trust and organizational identification in
continuous improvement. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 19(6), 623-639.
Inkpen, A. C , & Currall, S. C. (2004). The coevolution of trust, control DEMO learning in joint
ventures. Organization Science, 15(5), 586-599.
Izquierdo, C. C , & Cillan, J. G. (2004). The interaction DEMO dependence and trust in long-term
industrial relationships. European Journal of Marketing, DEMO(%), 974-994.
94
Jahansoozi, J. (2006). Organization-stakeholder relationships: Exploring trust and
transparency. The Journal of Management Development, 25(10), 942-955.
Johnston, D. DEMO (2003). Building trust. OECD Observer, 3.
Johnston, S., & Selsky, W. J. (2006). Duality and paradox: Trust and duplicity in Japanese
business practice. Organization Studies, 27(2), 183-205.
Jones, DEMO R., & George, J. M. (1998). The experience and DEMO of trust: Implications for
cooperation and teamwork. The Academy of Management DEMO, 25(3), 531-546.
Jones, T. M. (1995). Instrumental DEMO theory: A synthesis of ethics and economics.
Academy of Management Review, 20(2), 404-437.
Judge, W. Q., Bowler, M., & DEMO, T. (2006). Preparing for organizational change:
Evolution of the organizational capacity for change construct, Academy of Management
Best Conference Paper.
Kaplowitz, M., Hadlock, T., & Levine, R. (2004). A DEMO of web and mail survey
response rates. Public Opinion Quarterly, 68(DEMO), 94-101.
Kay, N. M. (1996). The economics of trust. International Journal of the Economics of
Business, 3(2), 249-260.
Kiffin-Petersen, S. (2004). Trust: A neglected variable in team effectiveness research. Journal
of the Australian and New Zealand Academy of Management, 10(1), 38-53.
Kim, P. H., Dirks, K. T., Cooper, C. D., & Ferrin, D. L. (2006). When more blame is better
than less: The implications of internal vs. external attributions for the repair of trust
after a competence vs. integrity-based violation of trust. Organization DEMO and
Human Decision Processes, 99, 49-65.
Kim, P. H., Ferrin, D. L., Cooper, C. D., & Dirks, K. T. (DEMO). Removing the shadow of
suspicion: The effects of apology versus DEMO for repairing competence versus
integrity based trust violations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(1), 104-118.
Kingshott, R. P. J., & Pecotich, DEMO (2007). The impact of psychological contracts on trust and
commitment DEMO supplier-distributor relationships. European Journal of Marketing,
41(9/10), 1053-1072.
Kipnis, D. (1996). Trust and technology. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in
organizations: Frontiers of theory and research (pp. 39-50). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Koeszegi, S. T. (2004). Trust-building strategies in inter-organizational negotiations. Journal
of Managerial Psychology, 19(6), 640-660.
Kollok, P. (1994). The emergence of exchange structures: An experimental study of
uncertainty, commitment and trust. DEMO Journal of Sociology, 100, 313-345.
Korsfeld, M., Heinrichs, M., Zak, P. J., Fischbacher, U., & Fehr, E. (2005)DEMO Oxytocin increases
trust in humans. Nature, 435(2), 673-676.
Korsgaard, M. A., Brodt, S. E., & Whitener, E. M. (2002). Trust in the face of conflict: The
role of managerial trustworthy behavior and organizational context. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 57,312-319.
Kotter, DEMO P. (1995). Leading change: Why transformation efforts fail. Harvard Business
Review, 73(2), 59-67.
Kotter, J. P., & Schlesinger, DEMO A. (1979). Choosing strategies for change. Harvard Business
Review, 55(2), 4-11.
Kramer, R. M. (1999). Trust and distrust DEMO organizations: Emerging perspectives, enduring
questions. Annual Review of Psychology, 50, 569-598.
95
Kramer, R. M. (2001). Identity and trust in organizations: One anatomy of a productive but
problematic relationship. In M. A. Hogg & D. J. Terry (Eds.), Social identity processes
in organizational contexts (pp. 167-179). Philadelphia, PA: Psychology Press.
Kramer, R. M. (DEMO). Trust as situated cognition: An ecological perspective on trust
decisions. DEMO R. Bachmann & A. Zaheer (Eds.), Handbook of trust research (pp. 68-84).
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Kramer, R. M., DEMO, M. B., & Hanna, B. (1996). Collective trust and collective action in
organizations: The decision to trust as a social decision. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler
(Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research (pp. 357-389).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Kramer, R. M., & Tyler, T. R. (Eds.). (1996). Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and
research. DEMO Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lane, C. (1997). Trust in organizations. Frontiers of theory and research. Organization Studies,
18(3% 523.
Lane, C. (1998). Introduction: Theories and issues in the study of DEMO In C. Lane & R.
Bachmann (Eds.), Trust within and DEMO organizations (pp. 1-30). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Lane, C , & Bachmann, R. (Eds.). (2002). Trust within and DEMO organizations: Conceptual
issues and empirical applications. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Langfred, C. W. (2004). Too much of a good thing? Negative effects of high trust and
individual autonomy in self-managing teams. Academy of DEMO Journal, 47(3),
385-399.
Langfred, C. W. (2007). The downside of self-management: A longitudinal study of the effects
of conflict on trust, autonomy, and task interdependence in self-managing teams.
Academy of DEMO Journal, 50(4), 885-900.
Lee, G., & Teo, A. (2005). Organizational restructuring: Impact on trust and work satisfaction.
Asia DEMO Journal of Management, 22, 23-39.
Lewicki, R., & Bunker, DEMO (1995). Trust in relationships: A model of development and decline.
In B. B. Bunker & J. Z. Rubin (Eds.), Conflict, DEMO, and justice (pp. 133-173).
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Lewicki, R., & Bunker, B. (1996). Developing and maintaining trust in work relationships. In
R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations (pp. 114-139). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lewicki, DEMO, McAllister, D., & Bies, R. (1998). Trust and DEMO: New relationships and
realities. The Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 438-458.
Lewis, J. D., & Weigert, A. J. (1985)DEMO Trust as a social reality. Social Forces, 63, 967-985.
Lines, DEMO, Selart, M., Espedal, B., & Johansen, B. (2005)DEMO The production of trust during
organizational change. Journal of Change Management, DEMO(2), 221-245.
Luhmann, N. (1979). Trust and power. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Luhmann, N. (1988). Familiarity, DEMO, trust: Problems and alternatives. In D. Gambetta
(Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations (pp. 94-107). New York: Basil
DEMO
Macy, B. A., Moore, C. B., & Rosa, J.-F. (2007). Meso trust: Modeling the antecedents and
consequences of multiple forms of organizational trust. Unpublished manuscript.
Malhotra, D„ & Murnighan, K. (2002). The effects of contracts on interpersonal trust.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 47(3), 534-559.
96
Massey, G. R., & Dawes, P. L. (2007). DEMO characteristics, trust, conflict and effectiveness
in marketing/sales working relationships. European Journal of Marketing, 41(9/10),
1117-1145.
Massey, G. R., & Kyriazis, E. (2007). Interpersonal trust between marketing and R&D during
new product development projects. European Journal of Marketing, 41(9/10), 1146-
1172.
Mayer, R. C , & Davis, J. (1999). The effect of the performance appraisal system on trust for
DEMO: A field quasi-experiment. Journal of Applied Psychology, 84(1), 123-
136.
Mayer, R. C , Davis, J., & Schoorman, D. (1995). An integrative model of organizational trust.
The Academy of Management DEMO, 20(3), 709-733.
Mayer, R. C , & Gavin, DEMO (2005). Trust in management and performance: Who minds the
shop while the employees watch the boss? Academy of Management Journal, 48(DEMO),
874-887.
McAllister, D. J. (1995). Affect and cognition DEMO trust as foundations for interpersonal
cooperation in organizations. Academy of Management Journal, 38(1), 24-59.
McCauley, D. P., & Kuhnert, K. DEMO (1992). A theoretical review and empirical investigation of
employee trust DEMO management. Public Administration Quarterly, 16(2), 265-284.
McEvily, B., DEMO, V., & Zaheer, A. (2003). Trust as an organizing principle. Organization
Science, 14(1), 91-106.
McEvily, B., Weber, DEMO, Bicchieri, C , & Ho, V. (2006). Can groups be trusted? An
experimental study of trust in collective entities. In R. Bachmann & A. Zaheer (Eds.),
Handbook of trust research (pp. 52-67). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
McEvily, B., & Zaheer, A. (2004). Psychological safety, trust, and learning in organizations: DEMO
group-level lens. In R. M. Kramer & K. S. Cook (Eds.), Trust and distrust in
organizations. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
McEvily, B., & Zaheer, A. (2006). Does trust still matter? DEMO on the role of trust in inter-
organizational exchange. In R. Bachmann & A. Zaheer (Eds.), Handbook of trust
research (pp. 280-300)DEMO Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
McKenna, J. P., & Maister, DEMO H. (2002). Team trust. Executive Excellence, 19(5), 13-14.
McKnight, D. H., & Chervany, N. L. (2001). What DEMO means in e-commerce customer
relationships: An interdisciplinary conceptual typology. International Journal DEMO
Electronic Commerce, 6(2), 35-59.
McKnight, D. H., Cummings, L., & Chervany, N. L. (1998). Initial trust formation in new
organizational relationships. The Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 473-490.
Mendoza, J. (2001). Trust and team building: A study comparing traditional and experiential
team building methods in relation to trust development. The DEMO of New
Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Mesquita, L. F. (2007). Starting over when the bickering never ends: Rebuilding aggregate
trust among clustered firms through trust facilitators. The Academy of Management
Review, 32(1), 72-91.
Meyer, C. B., & Stensaker, I. G. (2006)DEMO Developing capacity for change. Journal of Change
Management, 6(2), DEMO
Meyerson, D., Weick, K., & Kramer, R. M. (1996). Swift trust and temporary groups. In R. M.
Kramer & T. DEMO Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: Frontiers of theory and research
(pp. 166-195). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
97
Miller, G. J. (2004). Monitoring, rules and the control paradox: Can the good soldier Svejk be
trusted? In R. M. DEMO & K. S. Cook (Eds.), Trust and distrust in organizations (pp.
99-126). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Mishra, A. K. (1996). Organizational response to crisis: The centrality of trust. In R. M.
Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations: DEMO of theory and research
(pp. 261-287). Thousand Oaks, CA: DEMO
Mizrachi, N., Drori, I., & Anspach, R. R. (2007). Repertoires of trust: The practice of trust in a
multinational organization amid political conflict. American Sociological Review,
72(1), 143-166.
Mollering, G. (2001a). The nature of trust: From Georg Simmerl to DEMO theory of expectation,
interpretation and suspension. Sociology, 35(2), DEMO
Mollering, G. (2001b). Trust. A sociological theory. Organization Studies, DEMO(2), 370-375.
Mollering, G. (2005). The trust/control duality: An integrative perspective on positive
expectations of others. International Sociology, 20(DEMO), 283-305.
Mollering, G. (2006a). Trust, institutions, agency: DEMO a neoinstitutional theory of trust. In
R. Bachmann & A. Zaheer (DEMO), Handbook of trust research (pp. 355-376).
Cheltenham, UK: DEMO Elgar.
Mollering, G. (2006b). Trust: Reason, routine, reflexivity. DEMO: Elsevier.
Mollering, G., Bachmann, R., & Lee, S. H. (2004). Introduction: Understanding organizational
trust - foundations, constellations, and DEMO of operationalisation. Journal of
Managerial Psychology, 19(6), 556-570.
Morris, J. R., Cascio, W. F., & Young, C. E. (1999). Downsizing after all these years:
Questions and answers about who DEMO it, how many did it, and who benefited from it.
Organizational Dynamics, 27(3), 78-87.
Morrison, E. W., & Robinson, DEMO L. (1997). When employees feel betrayed: A model of how
psychological contract violation develops. Academy of Management Review, 22(\).
Moustafa-Leonard, K. (2007). Trust and the manager-subordinate dyad: Virtual work as a
unique contract. Journal of Behavioral and Applied Management, 8(3), 197-202.
Mouzas, S., Henneberg, S., & Naude, P. (2007)DEMO Trust and reliance in business relationships.
European Journal of Marketing, 41(DEMO/10), 1016-1032.
Moye, M. J., & Henkin, A. B. (2006). Exploring associations between employee empowerment
and interpersonal trust in managers. DEMO Journal of Management Development, 25(2),
101-117.
Murnighan, K., Malhotra, D., & Weber, M. J. (2004). Paradoxes of DEMO: Empirical and
theoretical departures from a traditional model. In R. M. DEMO & K. S. Cook (Eds.),
Trust and distrust in organizations (pp. 293-326). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Nakayachi, K., & Watabe, M. (2005). Restoring trustworthiness after adverse events: The
DEMO effects of voluntary "hostage posting" on trust. Organization Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 97, 1-17.
Newton, R., & Rudestam, K. E. (1999). Your statistical consultant: Answers to your data
analysis questions. DEMO Oaks, CA: Sage.
Nooteboom, B. (1996). Trust, opportunism DEMO governance: A process and control model.
Organization Studies, 17(6), 985-1010.
Nooteboom, B. (2002). Trust: Forms, foundations, functions and failures. Cheltenham, UK:
Edward Elgar.
98
Nooteboom, B., Berger, H., & Noorderhaven, N. G. (DEMO). Effects of trust and governance on
relational risk. Academy of Management Journal, 40(2), 308-338.
Nugent, P. D. (2006). The creation of trust through interaction and exchange: The role of
consideration in organizations. Group & Organizational Management, 31(6), 628-650.
Olekalns, M., & Smith, P. (2005). Moments in time: Metacognition, trust, and outcomes n
dyadic negotiations. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, DEMO
Ozag, D. (2006). The relationship between the trust, hope DEMO normative and continuance
commitment of merger survivors. Journal of Management Development, DEMO(9), 870-
883.
Pate, J., Beaumont, P., & Stewart, S. (2007). Trust in senior management in the public sector.
DEMO Relations, 29(5), 458-468.
Payne, R. L., & Clark, M. C. (2003). Dispositional and situational determinants of trust in two
types of managers. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 14(1), 128-
138.
Pearce, B. W. (1973). Trust in interpersonal communication, Annual Meeting of the
International Communication Association. Montreal, Canada.
Pechtold, A. (2005). Trust is the key. OECD Observer, 7-8.
Perrone, V., Zaheer, A., & McEvily, B. (2003). Free to be DEMO? Organizational constraints
on trust in boundary spanners. Organization Science, 14(A), 422-439.
Perry, R. W., & Mankin, L. D. (2007)DEMO Organizational trust, trust in the chief executive and
work satisfaction. Public DEMO Management, 36(2), 165-179.
Pettigrew, A., Woodman, R., & Cameron, K. (2001). Studying organizational change and
development: Challenges DEMO future research. Academy of Management Journal, 44(4),
691'-713.
Poon, J. M. L. (2006). Trust-in-supervisor and helping co-workers: Moderating effect of
perceived politics. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 21(6), 518-532.
Poppo, L., Zheng Zhou, K., & Ryu, S. (2008)DEMO Alternative origins to interorganizational trust:
An interdependence perspective on the shadow of the past and the shadow of the future.
Organization Science, 19(1), 39-55.
Powell, W. (1996). Trust in governance structures. DEMO R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust
in DEMO (pp. 51-67). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Putnam, R. D. (1995a). Bowling alone: America's declining social capital. Journal of
DEMO, 6(1), 65-78.
Putnam, R. D. (1995b, December). Tuning in, tuning out: The strange disappearance of social
capital in DEMO Political Science and Politics, pp. 664-683.
Ramo, H. (2004). DEMO of trust: Temporal and spatial factors of trust in organizations.
Journal DEMO Managerial Psychology, 19(8), 760-775.
Raub, W. (2004). DEMO posting as a mechanism of trust: Binding, compensation, and
signalling. DEMO and Society, 16(3), 319-365.
Reed, M. I. (2001)DEMO Organization, trust and control: A realist analysis. Organization Studies,
22(2), 201-228.
Reina, D. S., & Reina, M. L. (DEMO). Rebuilding trust within organizations. The Systems
Thinker, 17(1), DEMO
Reina, D. S., & Reina, M. L. (2006b). Trust and betrayal in the workplace. San Francisco:
Berrett-Koehler.
99
Reina, D. S., & Reina, M. L. (2007a). DEMO sustainable trust. OD Practitioner: Journal of
Organization Development Network, 39(1), 36-41.
Reina, D. S., & Reina, M. L. (2007b)DEMO Rebuilding trust. Leadership Excellence, 24(2), 17-18.
Ring, P. S., & Van de Ven, A. H. (1992). Structuring cooperative relationships between
organizations. Strategic Management Journal, 13(7), 483-493.
Ring, P. DEMO, & Van de Ven, A. H. (1994). Developmental processes DEMO cooperative
interorganizational relationships. The Academy of Management Review, 19(1), DEMO
Roberts, K. H., & O'Reilly, C. A. (1974). Failures in upward communication in organizations:
Three possible culprits. Academy of DEMO Journal, 17(2), 205-215.
Robinson, S. L. (1996). DEMO and breach of the psychological contract. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 41(4), 574-599.
Rodriguez, N. G., Perez, J. S., & Gutierrez, DEMO A. (2007). Interfunctional trust as a determining
factor of a DEMO product performance. European Journal of Marketing, 41(5/6), 678-
DEMO
Rogers, R. (1995a). The psychological contract of trust - Part I. Executive Development, 8(1),
15-19.
Rogers, R. (1995b)DEMO The psychological contract of trust - Part II. Executive Development, 8(DEMO),
7-1.
Rogers, R. W., & Riddle, S. (2006)DEMO Trust in the workplace. The Catalyst, 35(2), 13-26.
Rosell, S., & Yankelovich, D. (2003, May 15-17). Making trust DEMO competitive asset: Breaking
out of narrow frameworks (Report of the Special Meeting of Senior Executives on "The
Deeper Crisis of Trust," New York).
Rotter, J. B. (1967). A new scale for DEMO measurement of interpersonal trust. American
Psychological Association, 35(4), 651-665.
DEMO, J. B. (1970). Generalized expectancies for interpersonal trust. Paper presented at the
Meeting of the American Psychological Association, Miami Beach, FL.
DEMO, J. B. (1971). Generalized expectancies for interpersonal trust. American Psychological
Association, 26(4), 443-452.
Rotter, J. B. (1980). Interpersonal trust, trustworthiness, and gullibility. American
Psychologist, 35, 1-7.
Rousseau, D. M., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R. S., & Camerer, DEMO (1998). Not so different after all: A
cross-discipline view of trust. The Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 393-404.
Roussin, DEMO J. (2008). Increasing trust, psychological safety, and team performance DEMO
dyadic leadership discovery. Small Group Research, 39(2), 224-248.
Rus, A., & Iglic, H. (2005). Trust, governance and performance: The role of institutional and
interpersonal trust in SME development. International Sociology, 20(3), 371-390.
Salamon, S. D., & Robinson, S. L. (2008). Trust that binds: The impact of collective felt trust
DEMO organizational performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93(3), 593-601.
Saparito, P. A., Chen, C. C , & Sapienza, H. J. (DEMO). The role of relational trust in bank-small
firm relationships. Academy of Management Journal, 47(3), 400-410.
Saunders, M. N. K., & Thornhill, A. (2003). Organisational justice, trust and the management
of change. Personnel Review, 32(3), 360-375.
Saunders, M. N. K., & Thornhill, A. (2004). Trust and mistrust in organizations: An
exploration using an organizational justice framework. European Journal of Work and
Organizational DEMO, 13(4), 493-515.
100
Schoorman, F. D., Mayer, R. C , & Davis, DEMO (2007). An integrative model of organizational
trust: Past, present DEMO future. The Academy of Management Review, 32(2), 344-354.
Schoorman, F. D., Mayer, R. C , & Davis, J. H. (DEMO). Social influence, social interaction, and
social psychology in the study of trust. The Academy of Management Review, 21(2),
337.
DEMO, M. E., Hershey, J. C , & Bradlow, E. T. (2006). Promises and lies: Restoring
violated trust. Organizational Behavior and DEMO Decision Processes, 101, 1-19.
Searle, R., & Ball, K. (2004). The development of trust and distrust in a merger. Journal DEMO
Managerial Psychology, 19(1), 708-721.
Seely-Troiano, V. (2005). DEMO 'perceptions regarding trust in their organizations. Barry
University, Miami Shores, DEMO
Seligman, A. B. (1997). The problem of trust. Princeton, DEMO: Princeton University Press.
Senge, P., Kleiner, A., Roberts, C , Ross, R., & Smith, B. (1994). The fifth DEMO fieldbook.
New York: Doubleday.
Sengun, A. E., & Wasti, N. S. (2007). Trust, control and risk: A test of Das and Teng's
conceptual framework for pharmaceutical buyer-seller relationships. Group and
Organization DEMO, 52(4), 430-465.
Serva, M., Fuller, M., & DEMO, R. C. (2005). The reciprocal nature of trust: A DEMO
study of interacting teams. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 26(2005), DEMO
Shapiro, D. L., Sheppard, B. H., & Chearskin, L. (1992). Business on a handshake. Negotiation
Journal, 8, 365-377.
Shaw, R. B. (1997). Trust in the balance: Building successful organizations DEMO results,
integrity, and concern. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Sheppard, B. DEMO, & Sherman, D. M. (1998). The grammars of trust: A model and general
implications. The Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 422-437.
Shockley-Zalabak, P. (2000). What drives organizational trust? Total Communication
Measurement, 2(9), 264-268.
Shockley-Zalabak, P., Ellis, K., & Cesaria, R. (2000a). I ABC Research Foundation unveils
new DEMO on trust. Communication World, 17(6), 7-9.
Shockley-Zalabak, P., DEMO, K., & Winograd, G. (2000b). Organizational trust: What DEMO means,
why it matters. Organization Development Journal, 18(4), DEMO
Sichtmann, C. (2007). An analysis of antecedents and consequences of trust in a corporate
brand. European Journal of Marketing, 41(9/10), 999-1015.
Sitkin, S. B., & Roth, N. L. (1993)DEMO Explaining the limited effectiveness of legalistic
"remedies" for trust/distrust. Organization Science, 4, 367-392.
Sitkin, S. B., & Stickel, D. (DEMO). The road to hell: The dynamics of distrust in an DEMO of
quality. In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.), Trust in organizations (pp. 196-215).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
DEMO, F. (2005). The trouble with trust. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Smollan, R. K. (2006). Minds, hearts and deeds: DEMO, affective and behavioural
responses to change. Journal of Change Management, 6(2), 143-158.
Song, F. (2007). Trust and reciprocity behavior DEMO behavioral forecasts: Individuals versus
group-representatives. Games and Economic Behavior, 62, DEMO
Spreitzer, G. M., & Mishra, A. K. (1999). Giving up control without losing control: Trust and
its substitutes' effects on DEMO involving employees in decision making. Group and
Organization Management, 24(2), 155-187.
Stewart, K. J. (2003). Trust transfer on the World Wide DEMO Organization Science, 14(1), 5-
17.
Stinglhamber, F., De DEMO, D., & Mercken, L. (2006). Perceived support as a mediator of
the relationship between justice and trust: A multiple foci approach. Group and
Organization Management, 31(4), 442-468.
Sullivan, R. (2007). Building trust through governance. The Journal of Corporate Citizenship,
25(DEMO), 55-76.
Sydow, J. (2006). How can systems trust systems? A structuration perspective on trust-
building in inter-organizational relations. In R. Bachmann & A. Zaheer (Eds.),
Handbook of trust research (pp. 377-392). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Sztompka, P. (1999). Trust: A sociological theory. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University
Press.
Szulanski, C , Cappetta, R., & Jensen, R. (2004). When and how DEMO matters:
Knowledge transfer and the moderating effects of causal ambiguity. Organization
Science, 15(5), 600-613.
Thau, S., Crossley, C , DEMO, R., & Sczesny, S. (2007). The relationship between trust,
attachment and antisocial work behaviors. Human Relations, 60(%), 1155-1180.
Tomlinson, E., & Mayer, R. C. (In press). The DEMO of causal attribution dimensions in trust
repair. The Academy of Management Review, 34(1).
Tsui-Auch, L. S., & Mollering, G. (2007). Wary managers/investors: Vulnerability, control,
trust, and distrust in foreign enterprises in China. Retrieved November 19, 2007, from
http://DEMO/people/gm/publikation_en.asp#journal
Tyler, T. R. (2003). Trust within organisations. Personnel Review, 32(5), 556-568.
Tyler, T. R., & Degoey, P. (1996). Trust in organizational authorities: The influence of motive
attributions on willingness to accept decisions. In R. M. Kramer & T. DEMO Tyler (Eds.),
Trust in organizations (pp. 331-357). Thousand DEMO, CA: Sage.
Tyler, T. R., & Kramer, R. M. (1996). Whither trust? In R. M. Kramer & T. R. Tyler (Eds.),
Trust in organizations (pp. 1-15). Thousand Oaks, DEMO: Sage.
Tzafrir, S. S., & Dolan, S. L. (2004)DEMO Trust me: A scale for measuring manager-employee trust.
Management Research, 2(2), 115.
Tzafrir, S. S., Harel, G. H., Baruch, Y., & Dolan, S. L. (2004). The consequences of emerging
HRM practices for employees' trust in their managers. Personnel Review, 33(DEMO/6), 628-
647.
Uzzi, B. (1997). Social structure and competition in interfirm networks: The paradox of
embeddedness. Administrative Science Quarterly, DEMO(1), 35-67.
van Dam, K., Oreg, S., & Schyns, B. (2008). Daily work contexts and resistance to
organisational change: The role of leader-member exchange, development climate, and
change process characteristics. DEMO Psychology, 57(2), 313-334.
Van de Ven, A., & DEMO Smith, P. (2006). Relying on trust in cooperative inter-organizational
relationships. In R. Bachmann & A. Zaheer (Eds.), Handbook of trust research (pp.
144-164). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Van de Walle, DEMO, Van Roosbroek, S., & Bouckaert, G. (2008). Trust DEMO the public sector: Is
there any evidence for a long-term decline? International Review of Administrative
Sciences, 74(47), 47-64.
102
Vangen, S., & Huxham, C. (2003). Nurturing collaborative DEMO: Building trust in
interorganizational collaboration. The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 39(1), 5-
31.
Vidal, I. (2006). Reflections on DEMO market, networking and trust. Public Management Review,
8(4), DEMO
Vlaar, P. W., Van den Bosch, F. A., & Volberda, H. W. (2007). On the evolution of trust,
distrust DEMO formal coordination and control in interorganizational relationships:
Toward an integrative framework. Group and Organization Management, 32(4), 407-
430.
Waldman, D. DEMO, de Luque, M. S., Washburn, N., & House, R. J. (2006). Cultural and
leadership predictors of corporate social responsibility values of top management: A
GLOBE study of 15 countries. Journal of International Business Studies, 37, 823-837.
Walgenbach, P. (2001). The production DEMO distrust by means of producing trust. Organization
Studies, 22(4), DEMO
Wasti, A. S., Tan, H. H., Brower, H. H., & Onder, C. (2007). Cross-cultural measurement of
supervisor trustworthiness: An assessment of measurement invariance across three
cultures. Leadership Quarterly, 18,477-489.
Weber, J. M., Malhotra, D., & Murnighan, J. K. (2005)DEMO Normal acts of irrational trust:
Motivated attributions and the trust development process. Research in Organizational
Behavior, 26,75-101.
Webster, J., & Wong, W. K. P. (2008). Comparing traditional and virtual group forms:DEMO
Identity, communication and trust in naturally occurring project teams. The
International DEMO of Human Resource Management, 19(1), 41-62.
Weibel, A. (DEMO). Formal control and trustworthiness: Shall the twain never meet? Group and
Organization Management, 32(4), 500-518.
Weick, K. E., & Quinn, R. E. (1999). Organizational change and development. Annual Review
DEMO Psychology, 50, 361-386.
Wekselberg, V. (1996). Reduced "social" in a new model of organizational trust. The Academy
of Management Review, 21(2), 333-335.
Whipple, R. (2006). Build trust. Leadership DEMO, 23(12), 10.
Wicks, A. C , Berman, S. DEMO, & Jones, T. M. (1999). The structure of optimal DEMO: Moral and
strategic implications. The Academy of Management Review, 24(\), 99-116.
Williams, B. (1988). Formal structures and social reality. DEMO D. Gambetta (Ed.), Trust: Making
and breaking cooperative relations (DEMO 3-13). New York: Basil Blackwell.
Williams, C. C. (2005)DEMO Trust diffusion: The effect of interpersonal trust on structure, function,
and organizational transparency. Business and Society, 44(3), 357-368.
Williams, DEMO (2001). In whom we trust: Group membership as an effective context for trust
development. The Academy of Management Review, 26(3), 377-396.
Williams, M. (2007). Building genuine trust through interpersonal emotion DEMO: A
threat regulation model of trust and collaboration across boundaries. The DEMO of
Management Review, 32(2), 595-620.
Williamson, O. (1993a)DEMO Calculated trust, a reply to Craswell's comment on Williamson.
Journal DEMO Law and Economics, 36(2), 501-502.
Williamson, O. (1993b)DEMO Calculativeness, trust and economic organization. Journal of Law and
Economics, 36(1), 453-486.
103
Wilson, J. M., Strauss, S. G., & McEvily, B. (2006). All in due time: The development of trust
in DEMO and face-to-face teams. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 99(1), 16-33.
Woodward, S., & Hendry, C. (2004). Leading and coping with change. Journal of Change
Management, 4(2), 155-183.
Woolthuis, R. K., Hillebrande, B., & Nooteboom, B. (2005). DEMO, contract and relationship
development. Organization Studies, 26(6), 813-840.
Yamagishi, T., Kanazawa, S., Mashima, R., & Terai, S. (DEMO). Separating trust from
cooperation in a dynamic relationship: Prisoner's DEMO with variable dependence.
Rationality and Society, 17(3), 275-308.
Zak, P. J., & Fakhar, A. (2006). Neuroactive hormones and interpersonal trust: International
evidence. Economics and Human Biology, 30,1-18.
Zak, P. J., & Knack, S. (2001). Trust and growth. The Economic Journal, 3, 295-321.
Zak, P. J., Kurzban, R., & DEMO, W. (2004). The neurobiology of trust. Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences, 1032, 224-227.
Zand, D. E. (1972)DEMO Trust and managerial problem solving. Administrative Science Quarterly,
17(2), 229-229.
Zeffane, R., & Connell, J. (2003a). Editor's DEMO International Journal of Human
Resource Management, 14(1), 1-2.
Zeffane, R., & Connell, J. (2003b). Trust and HRM in the new millenium. International
Journal of Human Resource Management, 14(1), 3-11.
Zhang, A. Y., Tsui, A. S., Song, L. J., DEMO, C , & Jia, L. (2008). How do I DEMO thee? The
employee organization relationship, supervisory support, and middle manager DEMO in
the organization. Human Resource Management, 47(\), 111-132.
Zolin, R., & Hinds, P. (2004). Trust in context: The DEMO of interpersonal trust in
geographically distributed work. In R. M. Kramer & K. S. Cook (Eds.), Trust and
distrust in organizations (pp. DEMO). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Zolin, R., Hinds, P. J., Fruchter, R., & Levitt, R. E. (2004). Interpersonal trust in cross-
functional global teams: A longitudinal study. Information and Organization, 14(1), 1-
26.
Zucker, L. G. (1986). Production of trust: Institutional sources of economic structure, 1840-
1920. Research in DEMO Behavior, 8, 53-111.
Appendix A: Permission to Name Bell Canada in Study
Original Message
From: len.mcquat@bell.ca [mailto:len.mcquat@bell.ca]
Sent: June 3, 2008 9:13 AM
To: Rudolf, Margaret
Subject: RE: Invoices regarding Trust research
I don'DEMO see an issue identifying Bell in this.
Len McQuat
Senior Director
Bell Enterprise Group
Original Message
From: Margaret.Rudolf@tbs-sct.gc.ca [mailto:Margaret.Rudolf@tbs-sct.gc.ca]
Sent: June 3, 2008 9:12 AM
To: McQuat, Len (A276914)
Subject: DEMO: Invoices regarding Trust research
I have an important question to ask DEMO confidentiality. Are you the right person to ask
regarding the degree to which I may identify Bell as my research field, once I start drafting the
dissertation, or should I ask Don? (That is, DEMO the company, but not the sector and
certainly not the survey DEMO).
Thank you.
Margaret Rudolf
105
Appendix B: Informed Consent
You have been invited to participate in a research study, entitled The Relationship between
Trust and Capacity for Change, conducted by Margaret Rudolf, a doctoral student in the
School of DEMO and Organizational Systems at Fielding Graduate University, Santa Barbara,
CA. DEMO study is supervised by Thierry Pauchant, Ph.D. This research involves the DEMO of
trust in organizations and is part of Margaret's Fielding course work in preparation for her
dissertation research. You are being asked to DEMO in this study because you were
referred by Mr. Kenneth Smith. Your participation is entirely voluntary; should you choose not
to participate, please DEMO that Mr. Smith will not be advised as to your choice.
The study involves the completion of a two-part survey, which includes The Reina
Organizational Trust Scale and Capacity for Change survey to be arranged at DEMO
convenience. The two parts will come together as one seamless survey for your feedback entry.
Answering the survey should not take more than 30 DEMO The researcher may ask you to
provide feedback on the survey process to make sure that the process is clear, and does not
pose an excessive burden on the respondent's time.
The information you provide DEMO be kept strictly confidential. The informed consent forms and
other identifying information will be kept separate from the data. All study records will be DEMO
on a server which is accessible only to the researcher at her secure site, and the confidential
Research Assistant, who has signed the DEMO Professional Assistance Confidentiality
Agreement. All study records will be destroyed by the researcher 3 years after the study is
complete.
The results of this DEMO will be used as a pilot and will be included in a Knowledge
Assessment paper.
You may develop greater personal awareness of your behaviour DEMO a trust relationship, at a time
when your organization is undergoing DEMO as a result of your participation in this research.
The risks to you are considered minimal; should you experience emotional discomfort during
or after the survey, please contact the regional Bell Canada Employee Assistance Office.
You may withdraw from this study at any time, either during or after your participation,
without negative consequences. Should you withdraw, your data will be eliminated from the
study and will be destroyed. No compensation will DEMO provided for participation.
You will be provided a summary of the final results. If you have any questions about any
aspect of this study DEMO your involvement, please tell the Researcher before proceeding with the
survey. DEMO Rudolf can be reached at 613-295—4700.
You may also contact the supervising faculty if you have questions or concerns your
participation in this study DEMO contacting Fielding Graduate University IRB by email at
irb@fielding.edu or by telephone at 805-898-4033. Please save a copy of this consent notice
for your DEMO
By clicking on NEXT you are indicating your agreement to proceed with this survey.
106
Appendix C: E-Mail Invitational to Participate
Dear ,
Our project, Secure Channel, and our people are currently experiencing an exceptionally high
period of change through the evolving requirements of our customers as well as DEMO within
our companies.
I believe we hold a mutual desire to have a workplace where we are respected, where coming
to work will bring challenge and enjoyment, and where we are proud to work in a time of
change. I am inviting you to participate in a learning DEMO about building trust and
navigating change by completing a two-part survey.
The first part is the Reina Organizational Trust Scale® which measures the level DEMO trust in the
behaviors that we practice in our organization. The second part is the Capacity for Change
survey which will help us find DEMO how we're navigating with the current pace of change in our
organization. The two parts will come together as one seamless survey for DEMO feedback entry.
This survey will help further our understanding of where we may focus our attention in the
trust-building and change processes. As mentioned DEMO our last Secure Channel town hall, I have
been working with DEMO Rudolf and this input will form the basis of her Ph.D. dissertation.
Although not directly involved, the Bell executive team (Vanda, Jean & Gary) fully endorse
the value of this groundbreaking study - to the best of our knowledge, this is the first Ph.D.
dissertation that focuses on the relationship of how trust impacts the ability for effective
change DEMO a major Canadian organization.
Margaret's study has been reviewed and approved by the Fielding Graduate University
Institutional Review Board.
It is important for DEMO to know that you will be provided with the results of this survey. As
with any survey, the greater the participation the more effective the results so our goal is 100%
completion. Participation is completely optional DEMO your participation is important! The
survey will be open beginning June 15 with a planned completion date of June 18.1 want to
assure you DEMO your responses are anonymous, as no one's identity will be DEMO The
aggregate data will be shared as a synthesized feedback report. The survey has been approved
by Bell Canada and Fielding Graduate University's DEMO Review Board and the results
will be reported in a Ph.D. dissertation for this University.
You will be asked a series of demographic questions DEMO the instrument. These are both for
research purposes and for feedback purposes. The data will be broken down into categories of
information to enhance DEMO understanding of your input and to support use of the information
in a meaningful way. You will also be asked questions regarding your view DEMO the
organization, management, and employees' behaviors.
107
Step-by-step instructions for completing the survey are attached to this email DEMO you will need
our Survey Instrument Code which is [INSTRUMENT CODE] in order to log in to the survey.
It will take you approximately DEMO minutes to complete the survey. Please take the time to get
involved through completion by [CLOSE DATE]! Together we can make a difference for
DEMO and for those we encounter every day!
Don Walker
Senior Director-Secure Channel
Bell Enterprise Group
Appendix D: Organizational Trust Survey
108
The Likert Scale
1 = Almost never | 2 = Occasionally | 3 = Some of the time DEMO 4 = Frequently | 5 = Almost always
SURVEY QUESTIONS
1. CONTRACTUAL TRUST
BUILDING TRUST
1. Are dependable; you can count on them to follow through
2. Keep agreements or renegotiate
3. Are committed to doing DEMO good job
4. Expectations are appropriate - not too high nor too low
5. Act with mutually serving intentions and do not have hidden DEMO
6. Agree on the purpose/mission of this organization
7. Support one another and the common good of the organization
8. Are generally consistent DEMO their behavior with one another
9. Are clear and explicit in their expectations of subordinates.
10. Foliows-up when delegating to subordinates
11. Give employees DEMO responsibility along with the authority to accomplish the mission.
12. Are generally consistent in their behavior
13. They live the values they espouse; they "walk the talk"
BREAKING TRUST
14. Deceive one another for personal gain
15. Intentionally try to sabotage others or the organization to "get even" for perceived
wrongs
16. Accept credit for work they did not perform
17. Sends mixed messages by saying one thing and doing another
DEMO Expectations of subordinates are unreasonable
2. COMMUNICATION
BUILDING TRUST
1. Communicate openly and honestly with each other
2. Address incidents of betrayal directly with DEMO individual(s) involved
3. Actively strive to build supportive and productive DEMO
4. Speak their mind even when others disagree
5. Openly admit and take responsibility for the mistakes they make
6. Speak directly to the DEMO with whom they have a concern or issue
7. Receive constructive feedback without getting defensive
8. Share information that is DEMO to each other's j obs
9. Provides coaching and feedback when needed
10. Gives constructive feedback in ways that are timely and helpful
DEMO Points out risky situations to employees and to one another
12. Willingly shares information that is pertinent to employees' jobs
13. Receives constructive feedback without getting defensive
BREAKING TRUST
14. Share confidential information inappropriately
15. Gossip DEMO participate in unfair criticism about other people
16. Employees speak negatively to each other
17. "Shoots the messenger" who brings bad news
18. DEMO and avoids responsibility for mistakes
3. COMPETENCE
BUILDING TRUST
1. Capable of performing their j ob responsibilities
2. View mistakes as opportunities to learn
DEMO Are given the training necessary to do their jobs
4. Have confidence in their ability to keep up with the changing demands made of DEMO
5. Have the freedom and flexibility necessary to do their jobs
6. Seek the input of their co-workers in order to solve problems
7. DEMO current with the latest information, skills, and technologies needed to do their
jobs
8. Confidence in the judgment of the management of this DEMO
9. They take action on important matters
10. Gathers and weighs information before making decisions on important matters
11. Helps employees learn new skills DEMO lead to a higher degree of expertise
12. Seeks the input of employees in order to solve problems
13. Keeps current with the latest DEMO, skills, and technologies needed to effectively
perform their jobs
BREAKING TRUST
14. Unwilling to consider new ideas or methods
15. Avoid seeking ways DEMO improve their skills and work processes
16. Restrict each other's freedom to make decisions
17. Micro-manages subordinates
18. Fails to take action on DEMO matters
Note. From Trust and Betrayal in the Workplace by D.S. Reina and M.L. Reina, 2006, San
Francisco: Berrett-Koehler. Copyright 2006 by D.S. Reina and M.L. Reina. Reprinted with
permission.
110
Appendix E: Capacity for Change Survey
The Likert Scale
1 = Almost never | 2 = Occasionally | 3 = Some of the DEMO | 4 = Frequently | 5 = Almost always
There are five scales: D = discrepancy; A = appropriateness; E = efficacy; DEMO = principal
support; V = valence. Each of these can be DEMO independently.
1. This change will benefit me (V)
2. Most DEMO my respected peers embrace the proposed organizational change
(PS)
3. DEMO believe the proposed organizational change will have a favorable effect
on our operations (A)
4. I have the capability to implement the change that is initiated (E)
5. We need to change the way we do some things in this organization (D)
6. With this change in my job, I will experience more self-fulfillment (V)
DEMO The top leaders in this organization are "walking the talk" (DEMO)
8. The change in our operations will improve the performance of our
organization (A)
9. I can implement this change in my job (E)
10. We need to improve the way we operate in this organization (D)
11. I will earn higher pay from my job after this change (V)
12. The top leaders support this change (PS)
13. The change that we are implementing is correct for our situation (A)
14. I am capable of successfully performing my job duties with the proposed
organizational change (E)
15. We need to improve our effectiveness by changing our operations (D)
16. The change in my job assignments will increase my feelings of
DEMO (V)
17. The majority of my respected peers are dedicated DEMO making this change
work (PS)
18. When I think about DEMO change, I realize it is appropriate for our
organization (A)
19. I believe we can successfully implement this change (E)
20. A change is needed to improve our operations (D)
21. My immediate manager is in favor of this change (PS)
22. This organizational change will prove to be best for our situation (A)
23. We have the capability to successfully implement this change (E)
24. My immediate manager encourages me to support the change (PS)
Note. From Organizational Change Recipients' Beliefs Scale: Development of an Assessment
DEMO by A.A. Armenakis, J.B. Bernerth, J.P. Pitts, and J.H. Walker, 2007, The Journal of
Applied Behavioral Science, 43(4), 481-505. DEMO with permission.
111
Appendix F: Data Analysis
Table F-l
Correlations between Trust Variable and Capacity for Change Variable
Capacity for Change
Contractual Trust-building
Contractual Trust-breaking
Communication DEMO
Communication Trust-breaking
Competence Trust-building
Competence Trust-breaking
Capacity for Change
Contractual Trust-building
Contractual Trust-breaking
Communication Trust-building
Communication Trust-breaking
Competence Trust-building
Competence Trust-breaking
Capacity for Change
DEMO Trust-building
Contractual Trust-breaking
Communication Trust-building
Communication Trust-breaking
Competence Trust-building
Competence Trust-breaking
t>0
&0
O
o
*—i
i
S
"5
B 5
a
DEMO
O
p
J
?
I
_ , ,
a
o
o
O
o
d
Pearson Correlation
1.00 0.34 -0.26
0.34 1.00 -0.71
-0.26 DEMO 1.00
0.41 0.71 -0.55
-0.33 -0.66 0.73
0.47 0.73 -0.59
-0.36 -0.55 0.59
GO
Ci
•i- a
w
a
o
(3
a
a
a
a
U
3
o
H
0.41
0.71
-0.55
1.00
-0.68
0.76
-0.43
DEMO
o
£
3
-i-»
w
6
H
(3
o
<B
o
"H
3
a
a
U
o
-0.33
-0.66
0.73
-0.68
1.00
-0.68
0.60
• *-4
3
•9
4~ *
<D
o
S3
OJ
+-i
O H
a
o
o
0.47
0.73
-0.59
0.76
-0.68
1.00
-0.62
DEMO (1-tailed)
0.00
0.00
0.01 0.00
0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00
0.00 DEMO
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
DEMO
0.00
N
77.00 77.00
77.00 77.00
77.00 77.00
77.00 77.00
77.00 77.00
77.00 77.00
77.00 77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
DEMO
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
<L>
U
•?
a
O
C
J
J
4- 4
a,
a
U
o
DEMO
-0.55
0.59
-0.43
0.60
-0.62
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
77.00
ntra
ntra
Trus
Tru
bui
DEMO
-breaki
-buildi:
Iding
aking
Table F-3
Table F-2
Residuals for Model 1: Residuals Statistics a
Minimum Maximum
Predicted Value 73.14 98.10
Residual -28.30 18.54
Std. Predicted Value -2.38 DEMO
Std. Residual -2.89 1.89
a. Dependent Variable: Capacity for Change
Mean
DEMO
0.00
0.00
0.00
Std. Deviation
5.31
9.39
1.00
0.96
112
Model 1: Collinearity Diagnostics a
Dimension Eigen Condition Variance
value Index Proportions
(Constant) Contractual Communication Competence
Trust Trust Trust
Building Breaking Building Breaking Building Breaking
DEMO 6.65 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
2 0.26 5.09 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.04 0.00 0.01
3 0.04 12.81 0.00 0.00 DEMO 0.00 0.13 0.00 0.77
4 0.03 14.38 0.00 0.01 0.65 0.00 0.52 0.00 0.00
5 0.01 29.13 0.05 0.15 0.02 0.88 0.24 0.02 0.01
DEMO 0.00 36.94 0.01 0.56 0.12 0.06 0.00 0.66 0.05
7 0.00 48.76 0.94 0.27 0.10 0.05 0.06 0.32 0.16
a. Dependent Variable: Capacity for Change
113
Table F-4
Summary for Model 1: Coefficients a
Unstandardized Standardized t Sig. Collinearity
Coefficients Coefficients Statistics
Std. Beta Tolerance VIF
Error
(Constant) DEMO 18.30 3.12 0.00
Contractual Trust-building -0.04 0.27 -0.03 -0.17 0.87 0.32
Contractual Trust-breaking 0.31 0.57 0.09 0.54 0.59 0.35
Communication Trust-building 0.24 0.24 0.18 DEMO 0.32 0.33
Communication Trust-breaking 0.44 0.58 0.01 0.08 0.94 0.32
Competence Trust-building 0.50 0.31 0.31 1.63 0.11 0.30
Competence Trust-breaking -0.61 0.53 -0.17 -1.17 DEMO 0.50
a. Dependent Variable: Capacity for Change
3.13
2.83
3.05
3.10
DEMO
2.00
Table F-5
Actual Regression Output: Model Summary a'b
Model
DEMO
R Square
Adjusted R Square
1 0.49 0.24 0.18
a. Predictors: (Constant), Competence Trust-breaking, Communication Trust-building,
Contractual Trust-breaking, Contractual Trust-building, Communication Trust-breaking,
Competence Trust-building
b. Dependent Variable: Capacity for Change
Table F-6
Stepwise Model 2: Residuals Statistics a
Minimum Maximum Mean
Predicted Value 73.36 95.75
Residual -27.09 18.66
Std. Predicted Value -2.46 1.98
Std. Residual DEMO 1.94
a. Dependent Variable: Capacity for Change
85.75
0.00
0.00
0.00
DEMO Deviation
5.04
9.54
1.00
0.99
114
Table F-7
Model 2; Excluded Variables a'
Beta In
Sig. Partial Collinearity
Correlation Statistics
Tolerance VIF
Contractual Trust-building 0.00 0.03 0.97 0.00 DEMO 2.11
Contractual Trust-breaking 0.03 0.20 0.84 0.02 0.66 1.52
Communication Trust-building 0.13 0.81 0.42 0.09 0.43 2.33
Communication Trust-breaking -0.03 -0.27 0.81 -0.03 0.54 DEMO
Competence Trust-breaking -0.12 -0.90 0.37 -0.10 0.62 1.62
a. Predictors in the Model: (Constant), Competence Trust-building
b. Dependent Variable: Capacity for Change
Minimum
Tolerance
0.47
0.66
0.43
0.52
0.62
Table F-8
Outcome Summary for DEMO Coefficients a
Unstandardized Standardized t
Coefficients Coefficients
Beta
(Constant) 50.97
Competence Trust-building 0.75
a. Dependent Variable: Capacity for Change
0.47
6.64
4.58
Table F-9
Summary for Model 2"'b
Sig. Collinearity
Statistics
Tolerance VIF
0.00
0.00
1.00 1.00
R
0.47
R Square
0.22
a. Predictors: (Constant), Competence Trust-building
b. Dependent Variable: Capacity for Change{1g42fwefx}