Applied Psychological Measurement
http://apm.sagepub.com
Appropriate Moderated Regression and Inappropriate Research DEMO: A Demonstration of
Information Loss Due to Scale Coarseness
Craig J. DEMO, Jeffrey K. Pinto and Philip Bobko
Applied Psychological Measurement 1991; 15; 257
DOI: 10.1177/014662169101500305
The online version of this article can DEMO found at:
http://apm.sagepub.com
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
Additional services and information for Applied Psychological Measurement can be found at:DEMO
Email Alerts: http://apm.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://apm.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DEMO http://apm.sagepub.com/cgi/content/refs/15/3/257
Downloaded from http://apm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on February 17, 2010
Appropriate Moderated Regression and
Inappropriate Research Strategy: A Demonstration
of Information Loss Due to Scale Coarseness
Craig J. Russell
Rutgers University
Jeffrey K. Pinto
DEMO of Maine
Philip Bobko
Rutgers University
Paunonen and Jackson (1988) demonstrated
that stepwise moderated regression provides a test
of interaction effects that protects DEMO nominal
Type I error rate. However, the stepwise procedure
has also DEMO characterized as failing to detect
interaction effects in empirical studies. This issue
has led to questions regarding the method’s
statistical power (Bobko, 1986; Zedeck, 1971) in
applied research. It is demonstrated that, because
of a research strategy frequently used in empirical
investigations, the probability of Type II error in
detecting a true interaction effect is unknown.
Specifically, the number of scale steps used in
measuring the dependent variable is shown DEMO
result in a form of systematic error that can
spuriously increase or decrease the expected effect
size of the interaction. The problem is also DEMO
ed in the context of testing more complex models.
Recommendations for eliminating this problem in
future research designs are provided. Index terms:
information DEMO, interaction effects, Likert scales,
moderated regression, response transformation.
Stepwise DEMO regression analysis was first
described by Saunders (1955, 1956) as DEMO statistical
tool for assessing moderator effects at an individu-
al level of analysis. Shortly thereafter, Chow (1960)
described an identical procedure for DEMO in-
teraction effects at a macro level of organizational
research. Since that time, the infrequency in the
applied psychological literature of findings sup-
portive of moderator effects has fueled concerns
over the power of the procedure (Zedeck, 1971).
More recently, Bobko (1986) and Venkatraman
(1989) have reported specific concerns regarding
the correspondence or &dquo;fit&dquo; between an interac-
tive conceptual framework and statistical pro-
cedures used to DEMO the framework.
The difficulty in detecting interactions has
often been attributed to multicollinearity among
predictor variables, particularly between a
multiplicative interaction and its respective com-
ponent main effects (Drazin Van de Ven, 1985;
Sockloff, 1976a, 1976b). Unfortunately, recent at-
tempts to statistically control for DEMO
effects (e.g., Morris, Sherman, & Mansfield,
1986) have DEMO proved fruitful (Cronbach, 1987).
Although Paunonen and Jackson (1988)DEMO
demonstrated that stepwise moderated regression
is not susceptible to inflation of Type I error in
the presence of multicollinearity, Cronbach (1987)
has DEMO called for more sensitive research
strategies for the detection of interaction effects.
Because the statistical procedure is sound,
what alternate research strategies should DEMO pur-
sued ? At best, an investigator is confronted with
a DEMO theory that dictates the strategy
of choice. For example, Bobko (1986) demon-
257
Downloaded from http://apm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on February 17, 2010
&
258
strated a research strategy of specific cell con-
trasts for theories DEMO particular or-
dinal interactions. Unfortunately, as noted by
Cronbach (1987) DEMO Venkatraman (1989), ap-
plied researchers are frequently faced with models
DEMO are weakly specified.
Yet another strategy focuses on the reduction
of measurement error (Schwab, 1980). Busemeyer
and Jones (1983) demonstrated how DEMO
error influences the power of moderated regres-
sion (see their Equation DEMO). Specifically, suppose
a regression model attempts to predict a criterion
(Y) from two independent variables (Xl, X,) and
their interaction. Busemeyer and Jones (1983)
demonstrated that measurement error in the in-
dependent variables X, and X, reduces the ex-
pected effect size DEMO moderated regression (i.e.,
the difference in the squared multiple correlation,DEMO
R 2, between the multiplicative and additive
models) when a true multiplicative relationship
exists between X, and X2 and the dependent
variable Y. Using instruments with known
reliabilities and Busemeyer and Jones’ formula,
investigators DEMO determine the expected effect
size if a true multiplicative relationship exists and
hence identify sample size needed to yield ade-
quate statistical power.
Cohen (1983) and Peters and Van Voorhis
(1940) demonstrated the impact of information
loss in the dependent variable on simple Pearson
product-moment correlations. This DEMO
loss may occur when a continuous dependent
variable is reduced to a small set of categories
by the investigator in a known way. Cox (1950)
demonstrated how
to minimize
the loss of
infor-
mation by DEMO optimally-sized groups of ob-
servations taken from a continuous distribution.
All prior work in this area has focused on infor-
mation loss that occurs DEMO some known fashion.
However, no study has examined the consequence
of DEMO responding to a discrete scale when,
in fact, the underlying DEMO is continuous.
This paper demonstrates that the number of op-
tions on the dependent scale will be a source of
unknown systematic error in DEMO regres-
sion and, in turn, will spuriously increase or
decrease underlying statistical power.
Systematic Error and Information Loss
In applied research, most constructs of interest
are continuous. The actual number of options
available on response DEMO is often discrete. That
is, X,, X,, and Y DEMO often measured on 1- to
5-point Likert scales (e.g., Stahl & Harrell, 1981;
Russell, 1985). Furthermore, note that if the three
variables are all measured on 5-point Likert
scales, then the empirical interaction term
X, X X2 is arithmetically defined by a 1- to
25-point scale. Thus, the measurement of Y (1 to
5) does not necessarily map, in any straight-
forward way, onto the 25-point DEMO term
from the regression analysis. Information is lost
when a &dquo;DEMO&dquo; response scale is used to
represent a near continuous or &dquo;fine&dquo; Y varia-
ble. As demonstrated below, this phenomenon
DEMO direct implications for systematic contribu-
tions to error variation in the Likert response
format.
The original Likert method of scale construc-
tion involved the DEMO of con-
tinuous psychological constructs by summing
responses to questions of opinion (Likert, 1932).
Likert’s response scales contained five scale steps
(strongly agree, agree, undecided, disagree, and
strongly disagree). Likert and DEMO demon-
strated that this procedure resulted in low levels
of random error variation (i.e., high reliability)
in resultant scale scores (Edwards & Kenney, 1946;
Likert, 1932; Rasmussen, 1989). Furthermore,
DEMO, Showalter, and Tyrer (1985) and
Jenkins and Taber (1977), using monte carlo
studies, demonstrated that no substantial reduc-
tion in DEMO
error occurs when
the number
of
scale steps exceeds a range of five to seven points.
However, systematic error may be introduced
when respondents are faced with a fine, true
underlying response and a coarse, DEMO 5-point
response scale. The systematic error occurs when
information from the fine/true response is lost
as it is placed on a coarse 5-point DEMO scale.
Although Cohen (1983) and Peters and Van
Voorhis (1940) demonstrated the impact on sim-
Downloaded from http://apm.sagepub.com at UNIV DEMO WATERLOO on February 17, 2010
259
ple linear regression analyses when the in-
vestigator decides how to DEMO a continuous
Y variable into categories in some known way, the
DEMO of requiring respondents to perform the
transformation in some unknown way has not
been considered. It is hypothesized that the
increased range of potential DEMO characteriz-
ing a &dquo;true&dquo; response in interactive regression will
lead to even greater information loss and larger
opportunity for systematic error DEMO in simple
linear regression. Because people respond to on-
ly one question at a time, dependent scale scores
derived by summing responses to multiple Likert-
type items will also suffer from this information
loss.
For example, in a test of a multiplicative ex-
pectancy theory model, Stahl and Harrell (1981)
used a within-persons design with 11 levels of
valence, three levels of expectancy, and an
11-point dependent response scale. If DEMO
used a multiplicative function of expectancy and
valence to arrive at estimates of motivational
force, they were faced with placing a 33-point
(3 DEMO 11) latent response space onto an overt
11-point dependent scale. Interestingly, the fin-
dings of Stahl and Harrell failed to support a
multiplicative DEMO model for the majori-
ty of respondents.
In contrast, Arnold (1981) used a within-
persons design with five levels of each indepen-
dent variable (expectancy and valence) and 150
levels of the dependent variable (motivational
force). A multiplicative expectancy theory model
(force = expectancy x valence) would require
25 points in the dependent response space. Using
a 150-point response scale, Arnold certainly gave
respondents sufficient options on Y to portray
their &dquo;true&dquo; response, regardless of whether a
multiplicative or additive model was correct. In
contrast to Stahl and Harrell (1981), Arnold
found substantial evidence supporting the multi-
plicative formulation of expectancy DEMO These
conflicting findings may be related to the in-
vestigators’ choice of response scales. The
presence of a true interaction effect can create
more DEMO responses than actual response op-
tions available. When respondents are faced with
a scale on the dependent variable that does not
have a sufficient DEMO of response options, in-
formation loss is unavoidable.
The purpose of DEMO analyses presented below
was to demonstrate how information loss caus-
ed by the overt response scale has an unknown
influence on effect sizes found DEMO moderated
regression analysis. For purposes of explication,
two examples of hypothetical regression data were
generated in which the dependent scale (Y) did
DEMO have a sufficient number of options to reflect
either a multiplicative effect or an additive effect.
An additive example demonstrates one way in-
formation DEMO be lost when two variables are
additively combined.
’The Data
Multiplicative Example
Three sets of dependent responses were
generated for purposes of illustration. Dependent
DEMO Y,, Y,, and Y, were generated from the
same DEMO of X, and Xz observations. Each in-
dependent variable was characterized DEMO a 5-point
scale (1, 2, 3, 4, 5) in a fixed effects two-way
ANOVA design (each level of X, and DEMO occurred
with equal frequency). Thus, X, and X2each had
a mean of 3 and standard deviation of 1.41 (each
value of X, was paired with every value of X2 so
that rl,z = 0.0).
The dependent scale (Yl) was created simply
by multiplying DEMO, and X2 (YI = X, x X2). The
resultant DEMO range was from 1 to 25 and
represented the &dquo;true DEMO&dquo; response expected
from a respondent who used a multiplicative
combination DEMO X, and X2, who responded to the
dependent variable response scale (Y,) with no
random measurement error, and who was given
DEMO dependent variable response scale that permit-
ted all responses to be made without any infor-
mation loss.
Information loss in the second dependent scale
(Y2) was created in one step by multiplying Xl and
X2and then recoding the data into five equal in-
tervals. Specifically, all products of X, and X2be-
Downloaded from http://apm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on February 17, 2010
260
tween 1 and 5 were assumed
to elicit a mean
overt
DEMO on the Y, scale of 1, original Y, values
between DEMO and 10 were assumed to elicit a mean
overt Y, response DEMO 2, and so forth. This was
meant to represent what might DEMO when a
5-point dependent variable response scale is used
to portray a 25-point latent response space. With
Y, representing the respondent’s &dquo;true&DEMO; original
response, Y2 represented the response expected
from a respondent who used a multiplicative
combination of X, and X,, who responded to the
dependent variable response scale (Y,) with no
random measurement error, and who was given
a coarse dependent response scale that caused in-
formation to be lost from the &dquo;true&dquo; Y, response.
Information loss in the third dependent scale
(Y,) was created in two steps by taking the square
root of the product of X, and X2 and rounding
to the nearest integer. Although it seems unlike-
DEMO that respondents can perform square root func-
tions &dquo;in their DEMO,&dquo; there is strong evidence
from laboratory investigations of psychophysical
scaling that respondents do perform the mathe-
matical equivalent of this procedure (Anderson,
1982; Birnbaum & Veit, 1974). There is no rea-
DEMO to believe that the YZ or Y3 transformation is
more appropriate than the other. However, infor-
mation must be eliminated somehow if the
&DEMO;true&dquo; response is to be placed on the five-point
scale, and Yz and Y, are both viable examples of
how information loss might occur. Table 1 con-
tains all possible combinations of X, and X2
variables with their associated Y,, Y2, and Y,
responses.
Analyses and Results
Stepwise moderated regression analysis was
performed for each of DEMO dependent variables
Yj, Y,, and Y,. The effect size DEMO interest was
&dquo;muli - ~dd from the following equations (Cohen
& Cohen, 1983):
Table 1
Complete Set of Independent Variables
DEMO Dependent Variables for
Multiplicative Example
These effect sizes are reported in Table 2. First,
note that R 2 = 1.00 for Y&dquo; because Y, was con-
structed as the product of X, and DEMO no ran-
dom measurement error. Further, when there was
no information DEMO due to limited response op-
tions, Ra,,a = .90 and the incremental effect for
the interaction term is R~1U1t - R add DEMO = .10. In con-
trast, if the 5-point dependent response scale
DEMO information loss due to rounding latent
responses within equal-sized intervals (i.e., Y2),
the additive effect decreased and the expected
Table 2
Moderated Regression Effect Sizes
Downloaded from http://apm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO DEMO February 17, 2010
261
effect size for the interaction increased to .180.
When the 5-point DEMO response scale caus-
ed information loss through rounding the square
root of the latent response to the nearest integer
(i.e., ~3), the DEMO interaction effect size
decreased to .023.
It should be noted that the above univariate
distributions of X, and X2were uniform. When
the procedures were replicated under conditions
of normally distributed and/or correlated in-
dependent variables, the pattern of results was
the same.
It is of interest to DEMO that relative to Y,, the
Radd for Y, was substantially DEMO and the Radd
for Y was slightly higher. R£~j, decreased for DEMO
Y2 and Y,. It is the differential size of these
changes that contributed to inflation or deflation
of R~1U1t - Radd for the DEMO and Y3 transformations.
There is no apparent theoretical explanation that
might account for the substantial drop in ~d for
Y,. However, Table 1 suggests that the Y2 trans-
formation resulted in a disproportionate amount
of DEMO &dquo;systematic&dquo; error occurring in the lower
range of values, resulting in moderate range re-
striction (there were more Is for DEMO than for Y3).
Although both the Y2 and Y, transformations
DEMO a strong rank ordering among the 25
possible &dquo;true&dquo; responses, the effect of the result-
ant &dquo;ties&dquo; or grouping of Y, values into the &dquo;1&dquo;
category DEMO Y2 had a stronger attenuation effect
on Ra~,~ than was the case for Y,.
An Additive Example
The Data
Two sets of DEMO responses were gener-
ated. Dependent scales Y, and YZ were generated
DEMO the previous array of X, and XZ observa-
tions. As in DEMO multiplicative example, each in-
dependent variable was characterized by a 5-point
DEMO with each value observed with equal fre-
quency.
The first dependent scale (Y,) was created by
simply adding X, and X2 (again, under the as-
sumption of no random measurement error). The
resultant response range was from 2 to 10 and in-
dividual scores represented DEMO &dquo;true score&dquo; re-
sponse expected from a respondent who used an
additive combination of X, and X2, who respond-
ed DEMO the dependent response scale (Y,) with no
random measurement error, and who was given a
dependent response scale that permitted all re-
DEMO to be made without any information loss.
The second dependent response scale (Y,) was
created by summing X, and X2 and then DEMO
the sum into five equal intervals (original Y,
responses of DEMO and 2 were recoded as 1, responses
of 3 and 4 DEMO recoded as 2, and so forth) under
the assumption of no measurement error. Hence,
similar to the multiplicative example, YZ
represented the response expected from a respon-
dent who used an additive combination of DEMO,
and X2, who responded to the dependent
response scale (Yz) with no random measurement
error, and who was given a dependent DEMO
scale that required information loss from the true
Y, response. Table DEMO contains all possible com-
binations of X, and XZ variables with DEMO
associated Y, and Y2 responses.
Analysis and Results
By definition, the regression of the additive
combination of X, and XZ onto Y, DEMO
R2 = 1.00. When the Y2 dependent variable was
regressed onto an additive combination of Xj and
X2, 1Zz = .951. Hence, the DEMO loss im-
posed on Y2 would decrease the likelihood of
detecting a true additive effect. Although Peters
and Van Voorhis (1940) and Cohen (1983)
demonstrated that the coarseness of the depen-
dent scale will DEMO simple correlations, the
same transformation will also attenuate additive
main effects DEMO multiple regression. Note that this
type of result is also demonstrated in the R,,2,, col-
umn of Table 2 for the Y2 dependent variable,
whereas the opposite effect-that is, an inflation
of jR~d&horbar;occurred for Y3 (however, dependent
variables in Table 2 are DEMO of a
multiplicative model, not an additive model).
Discussion
The DEMO clearly demonstrate that alternate
Downloaded from http://apm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on February 17, 2010
262
Table 3
Complete Set of
Independent Variables and
Dependent Variables for
DEMO Example
transformations of people’s original responses
can spuriously increase or decrease the expected
effect size in moderated regression analysis.
When a research design fails DEMO provide a respon-
dent with an overt response scale that is at least
as large as their original response space, incor-
rect conclusions can be drawn from moderated
regression analysis. This is a critical finding in
DEMO analysis of applied research in which the
testing of interactive theories is frequent (e.g., Ar-
nold, 1981; Prescott, 1986; Russell, 1985;
Venkatraman, 1989). As noted earlier, Cronbach
(1987) has DEMO for alternative research strategies
that are sensitive to interactive effects. A possi-
ble research strategy is the a priori identification
of theoretical response domains DEMO dependent
response scales are developed. In turn, this iden-
tification process DEMO help guarantee that the
operational measurement of the dependent
variable contains a sufficient number of response
options.
Future research needs to examine the process
DEMO how information loss occurs and how
characteristics of the measurement situation (DEMO,
anchor response format, predictor collinearity)
influence the transformation. It DEMO also possible
that the size of the &dquo;reduction&dquo; task will deter-
mine the type of transformation used by the
respondent. For DEMO, if Xl and X2 are mea-
sured on 1- to 10-point DEMO, an additive model
would yield a response space ranging from Y DEMO 2
to 20 whereas a multiplicative model would yield
a response space ranging from 1 to 100. Respon-
dents may use different &dquo;reduction&dquo; processes to
make small versus large dependent &dquo;response
reductions.&DEMO;
The current examples implicitly assume some
cognitive reduction process by the respondents;
that is, the respondents have to somehow
&dquo;squeeze&DEMO; their latent dependent response to fit
it onto the discrete overt DEMO scale (Ander-
son, 1982, labeled this the &dquo;response function&dquo;).
As one solution, researchers might consider us-
ing dependent DEMO formats that allow respon-
dents to use a continuous response scale.
Arnold’s (1981) and Norman’s (1986) use of a
mark on a DEMO segment permitted them to use
the mark’s distance from the end of the line (in
millimeters) as a dependent scale value, effectively
creating a continuous scale score. Although creat-
ing a somewhat cumbersome coding task, this
procedure might permit more accurate reflection
of a &dquo;true&dquo; underlying multiplicative response.
With an increasing number of questionnaires be-
ing administered on personal computers, software
that will present a relatively unobtrusive means
of obtaining computer-generated response lines
on the screen, with the respondent asked to use
a mouse to place a mark on the line, might soon
be seen. The computer would then generate a very
precise measurement of DEMO mark’s position on
the line, effectively eliminating the awkward re-
quirements DEMO using a ruler to quantify each per-
son’s response (the procedure DEMO been used by
Downloaded from http://apm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on February 17, 2010
263
Arnold, 1981, and Norman, 1986).
An additional approach to overcoming the
cognitive problem in applied research of response
reduction that is DEMO by scale coarseness
would require investigators to shift their initial
focus from the dependent variable to the indepen-
dent variables. Specifically, investigators must
identify the number of conceptually distinct levels
possible for each independent variable before
DEMO measurement scales for the dependent
variable. For example, Arnold (1981) DEMO the
results of earlier work by Shanteau (1974) to iden-
tify five levels of expectancy. Under these cir-
cumstances, manipulation checks become doubly
important to ensure that each independent vari-
able has its intended effect DEMO that the expected
number of levels of effect are present. If
manipulation of an independent variable yields
more &dquo;levels&dquo; than anticipated, moderated re-
gression results may be essentially uninter-
pretable.
Busemeyer and Jones (1983) noted that when
respondents go through some unknown trans-
formation between their true response and the
observed response, interpretation of moderated
regression analysis becomes problematic. The
current study reaffirmed and extended this no-
tion by DEMO how systematic response error
is produced in the instance in which the number
of scale options on Y does not match the num-
ber DEMO possible responses created by the multipli-
cation of Xl and X2. The conflicting results of
Arnold (1981) and Stahl and Harrell (1981), and
potentially of any other empirical tests of inter-
active theories, may be due to the different
number of dependent scale options used in DEMO
study.
As noted above, the current examples have all
been depicted DEMO a cognitively-oriented inter-
action model (Expectancy Theory). A multiplica-
tive DEMO was further assumed between
fixed treatment effects (five &dquo;fixed&dquo; levels of X,
and X2 were specified a priori) and DEMO dependent
measure obtained by asking questions of the
&dquo;treated&dquo; sample. These results should general-
ize to more complex models (e.g., DEMO or
disjunctive decision models), to random effects
designs, and/or DEMO archival measures as the
dependent variable.
A more complex model would involve both ad-
ditive and multiplicative effects, that is,
Y = X, + X2 + X, x X2. Using this model,
data DEMO generated to create an initial Yi, &dquo;true&dquo;
dependent response scale (with a maximum value
of 5 + 5 + 5 x 5 = 35), and a Y2 dependent
response scale in DEMO all values of Y, between
1 and 7 were coded as DEMO, values between 8 and
14 were coded as 2, and so forth. For Yi,
Rm&dquo;,t = 1.00 (by definition) and Radd = .941,
yielding a difference of .059. For Yz, R2.,,, = .949
and Iza~d = .900, yielding a difference DEMO .049.
Hence, the same &dquo;grouping&dquo; transformation
used for DEMO throughout these examples resulted
in an inflated interaction effect size for a &dquo;true&dquo;
multiplicative model, and an attenuated interac-
tion DEMO size for a &dquo;true&dquo; combined multi-
plicative-additive model. The same type of trans-
formation will differentially impact the ability to
detect DEMO &dquo;true&dquo; models. Models with
three- or four-way interaction terms and/or
exponential functions will drastically increase the
number of possible values DEMO the dependent
variable space. Accurate testing of these more
elaborate functions would require a nearly con-
tinuous dependent response scale.
A
similar situation arises DEMO
random
effects
designs are considered. If the independent vari-
ables are truly continuous and the levels observed
by the investigator are specific to the DEMO at
hand (e.g., the primary valence variable of Stahl
& Harrell, 1981), the investigator is again faced
with an infinite dependent variable space and the
need to use a continuous dependent response
scale. Thus, for all but the simplest models, in-
vestigators should explore nontraditional means
of operationalizing their dependent variables.
These might include the cumbersome and labor
DEMO coding required to measure respondents’
marks placed on an anchored line segment (Ar-
nold, 1981), the development of optical scanning
technology or DEMO that accurately measures
the distance down a line segment that respon-
Downloaded from http://apm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on February 17, 2010
264
dents mark, or exploration of magnitude estima-
tion procedures.
The examples throughout this paper focused
on psychological dependent measures that require
responses from DEMO Hence, it was implicitly
assumed that respondents reduce or &dquo;squeeze&dquo;
their &dquo;fine&dquo; latent dependent response to fit DEMO
a &dquo;coarse&dquo; dependent response scale. These ar-
guments should also apply to studies using de-
pendent variables &dquo;reduced&dquo; DEMO some other man-
ner. For example, Prescott (1986) examined the
DEMO effect of organizational environment
and corporate strategy on an organization’s
return on investment (ROI) using archival data.
In this instance, ROI was captured with a continu-
ous measure in monetary terms. However, what
if the archival data had
been reduced to intervals
or ranges of ROI values, a common condition in
archival databases available to organizational
psychologists? Although the term &dquo;response
reduction&dquo; could be used to describe informa-
DEMO loss due to coarse operationalizations of a
fine dependent variable space, DEMO are many
ways in which a coarse operationalization can
lead to information loss. Archivists making deci-
sions of convenience to use coarse categories to
DEMO continuous data (e.g., as in Y2) are
but one example. DEMO researchers must be
alert to alternate sources of information loss if
they are to accurately test all but the simplest
models. Again, the interest is not in knowing a
priori the optimal number of groupings to
DEMO information loss (Cox, 1950) or in iden-
tifying the effect DEMO all possible transformations
might have on the ability to detect nonlinear
models. Rather, the goal is to prevent spurious
conclusions from being drawn when research de-
signs unintentionally lose critical information
from the dependent variable, through response
reduction or any other means.
Related Measurement Issues
As noted above, it could be argued that in
survey research the measurement of the DEMO
dent variable becomes continuous when people’s
responses are summed across multiple dependent
scale items. For example, 10 dependent scale items
with 1- to 5-point response scales are typically
summed to yield a dependent scale score rang-
DEMO from 10 to 50. Unfortunately, although an
investigator may sum responses DEMO items to
yield a composite dependent scale, responses are
made sequentially DEMO each item. Adding item
responses to form a dependent scale score effec-
tively controls for the effects of random in-
fluences on people’s responses. DEMO, it does
not necessarily negate any information loss or
&dquo;reduction&dquo; that might have occurred in their
item responses prior to summation into a single
scale score. In fact, the systematic error may
cumulate across the sum. Again, more basic
research is needed concerning the response reduc-
tion process.
Finally, it should also be noted that the effect
of information loss described here is different
from simple range restriction. Range DEMO
occurs when a measure contains observations
from only a portion of the potential range of
responses. Correlations between a measure suf-
fering from range DEMO and any predictor
variable will then be attenuated. In contrast, the
DEMO loss due to &dquo;response reduction&dquo;
does not eliminate DEMO from a portion
of the potential range of responses. The response
reduction involves the respondent’s placement of
all potential responses on a scale that DEMO not
have enough options to differentiate among all
of the responses. The variance is not necessarily
reduced; rather, the number of options within DEMO
given range is limited. The results here indicate
that, depending on DEMO people &dquo;reduce&dquo; their
responses, the result could yield DEMO spurious at-
tenuation or increase in effect size.
The analyses presented here demonstrate that
the number of response options on the depen-
dent scale DEMO severely influence the effect sizes
in moderated regression analysis. As demonstrat-
ed above, it is critical to give respondents enough
space when searching for moderator effects in ap-
plied psychological research and/or to be alert DEMO
sources of information loss in archival data. More
basic research is needed regarding (1) how peo-
Downloaded from http://apm.sagepub.com at UNIV DEMO WATERLOO on February 17, 2010
265
ple actually reduce &dquo;true&dquo; continuous responses
to yield DEMO overt response to discrete response
options and (2) the relative efficacy of using con-
tinuous response scales to operationalize depen-
dent responses.
References
DEMO, N. H. (1982). Methods of information integra-
tion theory. New York: Academic Press.
Arnold, H. J. (1981). A test of the multiplicative
hypothesis of expectancy-valence theories of work
motivation. Academy of Management DEMO, 24,
128-141.
Birnbaum, M., & Veit, C. T. (DEMO). Scale convergence
as a criterion for rescaling: Information integration
with DEMO, ratio, and averaging tasks. Percep-
tion and Psychophysics, 15, 7-15.
Bobko, P. (1986). A solution to some dilemmas when
testing DEMO about ordinal interactions. Jour-
nal of Applied Psychology, 71, 323-326.
Busemeyer, J. R., & Jones, L. E. (1983). Analysis of
DEMO combination rules when the causal
variables are measured with error. Psychological
Bulletin, 93, 549-562.
Chow, G. (1960). Test of equality between DEMO of coef-
ficients in two linear regressions. Econometrica, 28,
591-604.
DEMO, D. V., Showalter, D., & Tyrer, P. J. (1985).
The effect of number of rating scale categories on
levels of DEMO reliability: A monte carlo in-
vestigation. Applied Psychological Measurement, 9,
31-36.
Cohen, J. (1983). The cost of dichotomization. Applied
Psychological DEMO, 7, 249-253.
Cohen, J., & Cohen, P. (1983). Applied multiple regres-
sion/correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences
(2nd ed.). Hillsdale NJ: Erlbaum.
Cox, D. R. (1950). Note on grouping. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 52, 543-547.
Cronbach, L. J. (1987). Statistical tests for moderator
variables: Flaws in analyses DEMO proposed.
Psychological Bulletin, 102, 414-417.
Drazin, R., & Van Der Ven, A. H. (1985). An examina-
tion of alternative forms DEMO fit in contingency
theory. Administrative Science Quarterly, 30, 514-539.
Edwards, DEMO L., & Kenney, K. C. (1946). A comparison
of DEMO Thurstone and Likert techniques of attitude
scale construction. Journal of Applied Psychology,
30, 72-83.
Jenkins, G. D., & Taber, T. D. (1977). A monte carlo
study of factors affecting three indices of DEMO
scale reliability. Journal of Applied Psychology, 62,
392-398.
Likert, R. A. (1932). A technique for the measurement
of attitudes. Archives of Psychology, New York, No.
140.
Morris, J. H., Sherman, J. D., & Mansfield, E. R.
(1986). Failures to detect moderating effects with
ordinary least squares-moderated multiple regres-
sion : Some reasons and DEMO remedy. Psychological
Bulletin, 99, 282-288.
Norman, K. L. (1986). Importance of factors in the
review of grant proposals. Journal of Applied
DEMO, 71, 156-162.
Paunonen, S. V., & Jackson, D. N. (1988). Type I er-
ror rates for moderated multiple regression analysis.
DEMO of Applied Psychology, 73, 569-573.
Peters, C. C., & Van Voorhis, W. R. (1940). Statistical
procedures and their mathematical bases. DEMO York:
McGraw-Hill.
Prescott, J. E. (1986). Environment as a moderator of
strategy-performance relationship. Academy of
Management Journal, 29, 329-346.
Rasmussen, J. L. (1989). Analysis of Likert-scale data:
A reinterpretation of Gregoire and Driver.
Psychological Bulletin, 105, 167-170.
Russell, C. J. (DEMO). Individual decision processes in
an assessment center. Journal ofApplied Psychology,
70, 737-746.
Saunders, D. R. (1955). The "moderator variable" as
a useful tool in prediction. Proceedings of the 1954
Invitational Conference DEMO Testing Problems (pp.
54-58). Princeton NJ: Educational Testing Service.
Saunders, D. R. (1956). Moderator variables in predic-
tion. Educational and DEMO Measurement, 16,
209-222.
Schwab, D. P. (1980). Construct DEMO in organiza-
tional behavior. In B. M. Staw & L. L. Cummings
(Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (pp.
3-43). Greenwich CT: JAI Press.
Shanteau, J. C. (1974). Component processes in risky
DEMO making. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
103, 680-691.
Sockloff, A. (DEMO). The analysis of nonlinearity via
linear regression with polynomial and product
variables: An examination. Review of Educational
Research, 46, 267-291.
Sockloff, DEMO (1976b). Spurious product correlation.
Educational and Psychological Measurement, 36,
33-44.
Stahl, M. J., & Harrell, A. M. (1981). DEMO effort
decisions with behavioral decision theory: Toward
an individual differences model DEMO expectancy
theory. Organizational Behavior and Human Perfor-
mance, 27, 303-325.
Venkatraman, N. (1989). The concept of fit in strategy
research: Toward verbal and statistical correspon-
dence. Academy of Management Review, 14, 423-444.
DEMO from http://apm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on February 17, DEMO
266
Zedeck, S. (1971). Problems with the use of &dquo;modera-
tor&dquo; variables. Psychological Bulletin, 76, 295-310.
Ackra&reg;wletl~rn~nts
The authors thank Edward Alf, Jerome Busemeyer, Mar-
tin Evans, Frank Schmidt, and Eugene Stone for their com-
ments on an earlier draft of this report. Partial support
for this project was provided by the DEMO Coun-
cil for Business Studies Research Grants program of Ract-
gers University Revisions were made while the senior
author held a visiting appointment at DEMO Krannert
Gradate School of Management, Purdue University The
authors also thank DEMO anonymous reviewer for suggesting
questions of generalization to more complex models.
~leath&reg;r’s Address
Send requests for reprints or further information to
Craig DEMO Russell, Department of Management, College
of Business, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge
LA 70803-6312, U.S.A.
Downloaded from http://apm.sagepub.com at UNIV OF WATERLOO on February 17, 2010{1g42fwefx}