N-DM005 – EE – OG
Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience
2008, 8 (4), 355-362
doi:10.3758/CABN.8.4.355
Dual or unitary system?
Two alternative models of decision making
Aldo Rustichini
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
In recent years, a lively debate in neuroeconomics has focused DEMO what appears to be a fundamental question:
Is the brain a unitary or a dual system? We are still far from a consensus view. The accumulating evidence sup-
ports both sides of the debate. A DEMO for the difficulty in reaching a convincing solution is that we do not yet
have a clear theoretical model for either position. Here I DEMO the basic elements and potential building blocks
for such theories, using DEMO in large measure from classical decision theory and game theory.
In recent years, a lively debate in neuroeconomics has
focused on a fundamental question: Is the brain a unitary
or a dual system? When facing DEMO choice of an economic
nature, we may formulate two hypotheses about DEMO the
final decision is made. According to one view, the brain
DEMO as a unified system, in the role of information pro-
cessor: This system elaborates the inputs provided by the
description of the choices, and eventually produces a final
decision. Different units may take part in DEMO process, and
each may provide separate elements for the evaluation of
DEMO available options. The activity of these elements is not
controlled by any central unit, and coordination may re-
quire some way of integrating the inputs provided by the
different units. No one of the units, however, can reach a
decision on its own.
According to the alternative view, most of our choices,
and all of the interesting ones, DEMO an internal conflict
between two (or perhaps more) well-defined and complete
preferences about the available outcomes. It may be useful
to think of DEMO such preference as a “self.” The reason for
this name is that each of these two selves could in principle
reach a decision on DEMO own, and from this point of view is
very similar to DEMO individual. When the potential choices
of the two selves agree, the DEMO is naturally the com-
monly preferred choice. When they disagree, some DEMO
of resolving the conflict is necessary: For example, the
intensity of the preference of each self may determine the
option chosen, or a control unit may override the choice
made by one of the units. DEMO, an additional concept is
needed to provide a prediction on the DEMO outcome—for
example, the Nash equilibrium concept.
After this brief review, the next section makes clear that
a consensus view is still far from DEMO achieved. The ac-
cumulating evidence supports both sides of the debate. A
reason for the difficulty in reaching a convincing solution
has been that DEMO do not yet have a clear theoretical model
of either of the positions. The purpose of this study is to
review the basic elements DEMO potential building blocks of
such theories, using sources in large measure DEMO classi-
cal decision theory and game theory.
Dual and Unitary Systems: DEMO
Three separate sets of experimental evidence have in-
formed the ideas on this matter. If we focus only on eco-
nomic choices that do DEMO involve other individuals, three
different environments have been considered.
Early and DEMO rewards. The first environment involves
choices among outcomes that occur at different points in
time. For example, the subject has to choose between the
payment of $10 today and the payment of $12 in a week.
DEMO this case, the two-selves hypothesis assumes a tension
between short-run and DEMO preferences. The short-
run preference favors immediate rewards and is less sensi-
tive to future ones. The long-run preference has opposite
inclinations, and so is more able to trade off the advan-
tages of payments at DEMO points in time.
In brain-imaging studies, the hypothesis that two sys-
DEMO may be simultaneously active when the choice is
made should be reflected in differential activation of
distinguishable neural systems. This is, of course, DEMO nec-
essary condition; the fact that different systems are ac-
tivated, however, is not by itself sufficient to prove the
dual-system hypothesis. The short-run preference is as-
sumed to be located in the limbic system, the long-run
preference in the lateral prefrontal cortex. This prediction
has been DEMO, and support for it was found by McClure,
Laibson, Loewenstein, and Cohen (2004), for the case
of monetary payments, and McClure, Ericson, Laibson,
Loewenstein, and Cohen (2007), for DEMO case of primary
rewards. The strategy in these studies was to compare the
brain activation for choices that included an immediate
reward and for DEMO between delayed outcomes only.
Areas more strongly activated in the former case should
correspond to the short-run preference, whereas those ac-
A. Rustichini, DEMO
355
Copyright 2008 Psychonomic Society, Inc.
356
Rustichini
tivated in all choices should correspond to the long-run
preference.
DEMO opposite point of view, corresponding to the unified-
system hypothesis, was presented and defended by Kable
and Glimcher (2007). Their results showed that neural
activity in ventral striatum, medial prefrontal cortex, and
posterior DEMO cortex tracks the subjective value of
monetary rewards. The subjective value to the subject is
determined independently of the choices that are made.
The DEMO hypothesis is supported by the finding that
the subjective value of rewards in time is represented in
the human brain within regions that are DEMO of the
date of the earlier payment. This study did not use choices
including immediate payments; thus, further studies will
be desirable that DEMO a focus on subjective value with
choices that include an immediate reward.
Risky and ambiguous choices. The second environment
involves choices under uncertainty. In DEMO typical experimen-
tal design, the subject has to choose between two DEMO,
where a lottery is a promise to pay a specified amount that
depends on the realization of a random outcome. The cru-
cial DEMO stems from the nature of the uncertainty. In
a risky lottery, DEMO probability of each outcome is explicitly
and clearly specified to the subject. In an ambiguous lottery,
these probabilities are not specified explicitly, but instead
are left to the subject to evaluate. In addition, the environ-
ment defining the probability is sufficiently unfamiliar to
the subjects that they DEMO only evaluate it imprecisely, and
will naturally not be confident of DEMO own belief.
In this case, the two selves are assumed to DEMO in-
dependently on risky and ambiguous choices. The differ-
ent neural structures involved are regions that have been
found to be active in the DEMO of such emotions as
fear (the amygdala). The dual-system view DEMO presented
and defended by Hsu, Bhatt, Adolphs, Tranel, and Cam-
erer (2005), and the unified-system view by Levy, Rusti-
chini, and Glimcher (2007).
Gains and losses. The third environment also involves
choices under uncertainty, but this time the crucial dif-
ference concerns not the probability but the outcomes.
Here, the two selves in the dual-system hypothesis have
different attitudes toward gains and losses. Examples of
such dual DEMO were presented by Breiter, Aharon,
Kahneman, Dale, and Shizgal (2001), Kahn et al. (2002),
Dickhaut et al. (2003), Kuhnen and Knutson (2005), and
Knutson, Taylor, Kaufman, DEMO, and Glover (2005).
The unified-system point of view was presented by Tom,
Fox, Trepel, and Poldrack (2007).
Cognitive skills and preferences. The puzzle has been
made more interesting in the recent DEMO by a set of experi-
mental findings that relate choice to cognitive skills. The
question that these experiments were addressing was natu-
ral, given the premises we have seen so far. Independently
of whether one adopts DEMO unitary or the dual-self model, a
natural conjecture is that cognitive DEMO affect economic
choices.
For example, if one accepts the premises that DEMO impul-
sive self strongly prefers the immediate delivery of a re-
ward to a later delivery and that self-control is necessary to
override this DEMO, then, if higher cognitive skills are
associated with stronger self-control, DEMO skills should
correspond to more effective self-regulation. Thus, higher
cognitive skills DEMO be associated with less-impatient
choices and more willingness to postpone consumption.
A similar conclusion, however, would follow from a
unitary model, in which the emphasis is on choice as in-
formation processing: A later payment is more complex
to analyze than a present one, and people typically dislike
options that they cannot clearly understand. Thus, every-
thing else being equal, a subject who is higher in cognitive
skills should be more inclined to choose the later payment
than a subject with lower skills DEMO be.
Behavioral findings. The leading hypothesis, sup-
ported by experimental test, of Mischel, Shoda, and Rod-
riguez (1989) links self-control and DEMO: Self-
control within the child in choices between immediate and
future DEMO predicts cognitive and social competence
in the adolescent.
How cognitive skills affect choices in other environ-
ments—for example, choice under uncertainty—is less
clear. An individual more inclined to save than to con-
sume today might be DEMO more likely to avoid
risky choice and to display more prudent behavior when
choosing under uncertainty. The experimental findings
(Benjamin, Brown, & Shapiro, 2006; Burks et al., 2007;
Burks, Carpenter, Götte, & Rustichini, 2008; Dohmen,
Falk, Huffman, & Sunde, 2007) show just the opposite:
Subjects with higher cognitive skills are also DEMO
more willing to take calculated risks.
The relationship between cognitive skills and risk tak-
ing is complex and imposes restrictions on the theories
that DEMO to explain it. This effect is not monotonic: If one
looks DEMO the mean intelligence quotient (IQ) according to
categories of risk-seeking behavior, the highest mean is
reached just below risk neutrality. Also, the DEMO is dif-
ferent when losses are involved; in this case, subjects with
lower IQ are more risk seeking. In both cases, higher-IQ
subjects are closer to the risk neutrality benchmark. The
common link with cognitive DEMO induces a correlation
among preferences. Subjects displaying higher patience in
intertemporal choices are also more risk-taking.
The finding that cognitive skills affect economic be-
DEMO extends to behavior in games: Subjects with higher
cognitive skills are DEMO to have a stronger awareness
of the social implications of their actions. They are more
generous and cooperative, but also are more willing to
retaliate when they observe negative behavior directed at
them. Although the latter DEMO is indirectly related to
our general topic of decision making, it DEMO the gen-
eral hypothesis that the effect of general cognitive ability
extends its influence to more general decision making,
beyond single-player economic choice.
DEMO load, transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS), and transcranial direct current stimulation
(tDCS). A test of the general hypothesis that cognitive
skills affect preferences has been provided by experi-
ments in which the cognitive skills DEMO modified, either
by nonintrusive methods, such as cognitive loads and dis-
tractors, or by more intrusive procedures, such as TMS.
Examples of DEMO use of cognitive loads are in Shiv and
Dua l oR unitaRy Decision Making?
357
Fedorikhin (1999), Ward and Mann (2000), and Benjamin
et al. (2006); in DEMO articles, the result seems to be that
impulsive choice is strengthened DEMO cognitive load.
The connection between these results and the rest of
the evidence is not yet clear. For example, in Knoch et al.
(DEMO), subjects were asked to choose between two lot-
teries, one DEMO which—call it X—was more risky than the
other—call it Y. Say the X lottery has outcome x with
probability p, and outcome 2x otherwise; the Y lottery
has outcome 2y with probability p, and outcome DEMO other-
wise, with y . x. For example, if p 5 5/6, x 5 20, and y 5
80, lottery X pays $20 with probability 5/6 and 2$20 with
probability 1/6. DEMO Y, on the other hand, pays 2$80
with probability 5/6 and $80 with probability 1/6. Lottery
X has a positive, and lottery Y a negative, expected value.
Lottery X also has a smaller variance. The only redeeming
quality of lottery Y is that it has DEMO larger maximum pay-
ment; this fact was particularly salient in the DEMO
of the lotteries used in Knoch et al.’s experiment, in which
DEMO the positive payment was displayed.
Subjects received repetitive TMS (rTMS) on the right or
the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), or a sham
treatment. Subjects who were treated in the right DLPFC
chose the DEMO lottery about 20% of the time, as opposed to
slightly less DEMO 10% of the time for the other two groups.
The difference was significant, so the impairment pro-
duced by the rTMS on the right DLPFC produced more
risky behavior. The difference in the effects of the DEMO
and left treatments indicated a likely right lateralization
of some important component of the decision process.
Similar results were found with a different method, tDCS
(Fecteau et al., 2007), for ambiguous choices.
Dual-Self Models
DEMO was mentioned earlier, a multiple-selves model pre-
dicts that the brain-activity DEMO behavioral correlates of
economic choices are the output of conflicts between differ-
ent neural circuits, each of them, in some sense, pursuing an
independent and potentially conflicting aim. Early presen-
tations of the dual-self idea DEMO be found in Strotz (1955),
Pollack (1968), and DEMO and Pollack (1968), within eco-
nomics, and Mischel et al. (1989), within psychology.
Time inconsistency. Strotz (1956) and later Pollack
(1968) focused on the phenomenon of time inconsistency.
That is, when planning at time 0, a decision maker might
and should plan ahead and choose what to do not only
in the current period, but also in future ones. This is a
necessary prerequisite for good planning: For example, a
decision to save today cannot be effective if the decision
maker does not also plan when and how much to spend
DEMO consumption in the future. So, a plan made today is
both DEMO choice of action today and a sequence of choices
in future days, to be executed when the time comes. A
decision maker is time-inconsistent if the action planned
at time 0 for a future period is DEMO from the one actu-
ally chosen during that period; in other DEMO, the choices
made in the future are different from those that DEMO part
of the earlier plan.
Time inconsistency can be interpreted naturally as the
behavioral manifestation of a conflict between two selves:
one inclined DEMO consume more today, the other inclined to
save for the future. DEMO (1968) and Phelps and Pollack
(1968) noted that a decision maker who discounts the fu-
ture in a way different from exponential DEMO may
exhibit time inconsistency. For example, suppose that the
decision maker DEMO the utilities at future times accord-
ing to the sequence
(1, βδ, βδ2, . . . , βδt, . . . )DEMO
Exponential discounting occurs when β 5 1. When the
decision maker makes a plan at time 1, the trade-off be-
tween consumption at times 2 and 3 is given by the ratio of
the two factors, which is δ. The trade-off between times 1
and 2 is instead DEMO Only when β 5 1 are the ratios the
same between times 1 and 2 and times 2 and 3.
If β , 1, however, when the second period comes, the
trade-off between the present DEMO the future changes to βδ,
and consequently the choices differ from those planned
earlier. The factor β measures the degree of the inconsis-
DEMO and suggests the degree of underlying conflict be-
tween the two selves: It indicates that the benefits from all
future consumptions are uniformly reduced by β. When
tomorrow becomes today, all consumptions but the cur-
rent one are reduced by β, and the valuation of future ben-
efits is always biased in favor of present consumption.
Time inconsistency represents a DEMO because, with
no further specifications, the theory does not predict be-
havior. Phelps and Pollack (1968) proposed a solution, by
considering the problem as a game between the decision
makers at each point in DEMO Each of these decision makers
(or selves) chooses a saving rate—that is, a linear function
from available income to amount saved. The equilibrium
vector of choices satisfies the Nash equilibrium condition
that the choice described DEMO the equilibrium is the optimal
one if the other choices are taken as given. The solution
has been applied to a conflict between selves (instead of
a conflict between generations, as in Phelps & Pollack,
1968) by Laibson (1997).
Temptation. The introduction of game theoretic DEMO
cepts in the field of decision making has been considered
an unnecessary complication by some theorists, who view
as undesirable the use of a conceptual structure designed to
analyze multisubject interactions to study a single-subject
problem. DEMO example, multisubject concepts bring to the
analysis problems, such as a multiplicity of equilibria, that
weaken the predictive power of the theory.
These theorists have suggested the use of cleaner axi-
omatic models based on DEMO more sophisticated object of
choice: menus (Dekel, Lipman, & Rustichini, 2001, in
press; Gul & Pesendorfer, 2001). Every choice DEMO make
typically implies a different set of choices available for us
in the future, which we might call a menu. For example,
when we choose one restaurant instead of another, we are
literally choosing a menu. When we decide the amount we
save today, we decide the menu of consumptions available
tomorrow. The freedom to choose at later dates DEMO
by a menu may reveal something important about the deci-
sion maker. For example, if a decision maker always likes
larger menus, this DEMO a preference for flexibility. But
if the decision maker sometimes chooses a smaller menu
358
Rustichini
rather than a larger one, when both are available at the same
cost, this reveals a preference for commitment, which may
DEMO induced by the awareness that new options might be
tempting in the future. Hence, the conscious choice of a
smaller menu reveals that the subject is exercising self-
control. This idea is the basic element in DEMO simple model
that I will use later to present a unified approach to dual-
system theory in different environments.
Self-control. In psychology, Mischel et al. (1989) intro-
duced the idea that a difference in the DEMO of children
who face the temptation of an immediate consumption
reveals deep character differences in the children. Mis-
chel et al. measured individual differences DEMO self-control
among children by offering them treats and then leaving
the room; the children had the option of waiting to the end
of a period and getting the most preferred object, or call-
ing the experimenter back before the end and getting the
least preferred one. Mischel et DEMO found that differences
in this preference were already clear in the preschool years
and were enduring: The 4-year-old children who were able
to delay gratification more effectively achieved higher
school performance in later years and were DEMO able to
cope with frustration and stress.
A model with short- and long-run selves. A simple
model of the dual-system theory was presented by DEMO
berg and Levine (2006; see also Bernheim & Rangel,
2004; Loewenstein & O’Donoghue, 2007). As an intro-
duction to the DEMO idea in this model, consider a simple
consumption-and-saving problem: An individual lives for
infinitely many days, earns every day a given amount of
wealth, and has to decide how much to consume and how
much to save. The wealth saved produces an additional
amount of wealth (e.g., through interest) and carries over
to the next day. The individual DEMO consumption and does
not derive any intrinsic pleasure from saving, although DEMO
or she may want to save in order to increase future con-
sumption. How does this individual decide on the amount
to consume each DEMO?
In Fudenberg and Levine (2006), this decision is the
DEMO of a game played between a long-run self (LRS)
and DEMO sum of the utilities of all of the short-run selves
(SRSs): In this game, future utility is discounted.
The choice in a DEMO is made by the SRS in that day,
and no one else. The only way the LRS can affect choices is
through self-control. DEMO paying the appropriate amount, the
LRS can make sure that any DEMO action the LRS desires
is finally chosen by the SRS. However, DEMO is a psychologi-
cal effort that is costly to exercise: The DEMO to implement an
action a is proportional to the temptation, which DEMO the dif-
ference between the maximum utility the SRS could derive
from a free choice of action (with no self-control) and the
utility DEMO from action a. The utility that both the LRS
and the SRSs experience is the net utility, including this
cost. How does such an individual choose?
Time preferences. Let us begin with choice of pay-
DEMO over time. We denote by ($x, t) the promise to DEMO
the amount $x to the subject, t days in the future. DEMO
sider the choice between a payment today and a larger
payment later—for instance, the choice between ($10, 0)
and ($12, 7). The SRS will choose the payment today, in-
dependently of the size of the future payment, because this
money increases the consumption that is feasible today,
and hence the SRS’s utility, whereas the future payment
has no effect on current consumption.
The LRS instead will consider DEMO compare the ben-
eficial effects on the utilities of the self today and of the
self in a week. In general, if the future payment is suffi-
ciently larger than the payment today, the LRS will want
the future payment for the good of the future SRSs and
DEMO choose to exercise self-control. Since self-control is
costly, the choice will DEMO biased in the direction of the taste
for current consumption of the current SRS: The subject’s
choice will be made with less patience than it would be if
the LRS had full control of the choice DEMO no cost. Now
consider instead the choice between two payments, both
DEMO in the future, such as ($10, 30) and ($12, 37). In
this choice, the SRS has no interest at stake, so the choice
can in effect be made by the LRS with no payment of
self-control costs. Thus, this choice of the individual will
appear to be motivated by a greater degree of patience.
In summary, the choice between $10 earlier and $12
a week later is reversed DEMO the earlier payment occurs
today, as opposed to when it occurs DEMO a month, and this
reversal occurs because the SRS is dominant DEMO the first
choice, but the LRS is dominant in the second.
DEMO preferences. Suppose that the LRS has decided
the amount of self-control and the SRS is left with an
amount of money (pocket cash) DEMO spend. Since the SRS
is only interested in the present consumption, DEMO plan is
to spend all of the money.
Now suppose that our individual is offered a lottery. The
individual can either accept the lottery, and pay the loss or
cash the wins, or stay with the current amount of money.
Suppose, too, that the LRS gets to DEMO the choice of ac-
cepting or rejecting the lottery. How will this choice be
made? The LRS will look forward and consider the pos-
sible actions that could be taken once the outcome of the
lottery DEMO revealed, when the LRS will again have the op-
portunity to DEMO and to exercise self-control, if needed.
Before we proceed, a brief reminder about the effect
of wealth on risk aversion is necessary. The DEMO of
a lottery is added to the wealth that was available to the
individual before the lottery. The same individual (with a
given utility function) will look at these outcomes differ-
ently, depending on the DEMO of wealth available. If the
amount is small, a loss might DEMO the individual’s wealth
to very low, undesirable levels. This possibility will DEMO
heavily in the decision, and the individual will try to avoid
DEMO The same individual facing the same loss with a higher
level of wealth will find this occurrence not so undesir-
able, and thus will be more inclined to risk a loss for the
benefits of a DEMO In summary, the same individual will be
more risk averse with DEMO smaller than with a larger amount
of initial wealth.
Suppose that the amount at stake is small in comparison
with total savings and pocket DEMO In the case of a win,
a new intervention of the LRS will not be needed, and the
individual will consume the entire cash available. In this
case, the payment from the lottery will be evaluated from
the point of view of the small wealth represented by DEMO
Dua l oR unitaRy Decision Making?
359
pocket cash plus the DEMO, and so the individual will behave
in a more risk-averse way.
DEMO instead that the amount at stake is large. Now the
potential beneficial effect on future selves from an additional
amount saved out of the DEMO gain is important enough to
warrant an intervention of the LRS, DEMO will then exercise
self-control and consume in that period less than the total
new amount. The gain from the lottery is now considered
from DEMO point of view of the total wealth, a larger amount,
DEMO so the individual will behave in a less risk-averse way.
In summary, the dual-self model predicts very risk-averse
behavior from subjects for small amounts, which does not
translate into a similar risk aversion for larger stakes (as
predicted, e.g., in the calibration theorem of Rabin, 2000)DEMO
Cognitive skills and preferences. In this dual-system
model, cognitive skills affect DEMO by affecting the abil-
ity to exercise self-control: Better cognitive skills DEMO
better self-control. In the specific Fudenberg and Levine
(2006) model, DEMO principle can be formulated by assign-
ing a lower cost of self-control to individuals with higher
cognitive skills, or alternatively a larger range and ef-
fectiveness of the self-control mechanism. The effect of
higher cognitive skills DEMO choices is now easy to see if we
consider two extreme cases. Take two individuals with the
same utility over consumption and the same DEMO
time preference, but with different costs of self-control:
The first DEMO zero cost, and the second has infinite cost.
The first is DEMO patient as the LRS optimal planner would
be if allowed to choose directly. The second, on the other
hand, chooses to immediately consume DEMO that is avail-
able. The intermediate cases of self-control give the ap-
propriate intermediate cases in choice.
Unitary-System Models
The key idea of dual-system DEMO is the conflict be-
tween the two selves; in unitary models DEMO decision mak-
ing, the idea instead is that choice is information DEMO
ing. Obviously, the hard part of the task for a unitary DEMO
is to specify a model of decision making and then to show
how it can provide an explanation of possibly paradoxical
behavior in different DEMO In addition, the model
will have to provide an explanation of DEMO connection be-
tween cognitive skills and choices, with the restrictions
imposed DEMO the experimental findings illustrated earlier.
The starting point of this exposition is the notion of
order.
Orders. The notion of order is perhaps familiar: A set
has total order if, for any two options x and y, a decision
maker can always decide whether he or she strictly prefers
x to y, or vice versa, or is indifferent between DEMO two. Note
that the order has two constituents: the strict preference
DEMO and the indifference relation.
The strict preference is transitive: If x DEMO strictly pre-
ferred to y and y is strictly preferred to z, then x is strictly
preferred to z. The indifference relation is reflexive (x is
indifferent to x) and symmetric (if x is indifferent to y,
then y is indifferent to x). The indifference DEMO is also
transitive: If x is indifferent to y and y DEMO indifferent to z,
then x is indifferent to z. This last condition is probably the
most unlikely from the empirical point of view.
DEMO indifference. A classic example can il-
lustrate the motivation for this key idea. Suppose you like
your coffee with sugar. You are first asked DEMO choose be-
tween two cups, one with one grain of sugar DEMO the other
with no sugar at all. You will not perceive any difference
in taste when you take sips from the two, so you will be
indifferent. Then you are asked to choose between a cup
DEMO two grains and a cup with one grain; the outcome will
DEMO the same. In any binary choice between a cup with n
grains and a cup with n 1 1 grains, you will be indifferent,
up to a value N, your ideal amount of sugar. But if some-
one asks you to choose between a cup with 0 DEMO one with
N grains of sugar, you will prefer the second DEMO Here, the
indifference relation is not transitive (Armstrong, 1939):
The fact that you are indifferent between option n and op-
tion DEMO 1 1 for every n from 0 to N does not imply that you
are indifferent between option 0 and option N.
The reason DEMO the lack of transitivity is clear: Our
senses and perception have DEMO discriminatory power,
and each of us is characterized by a just noticeable differ-
ence (JND). We perceive a difference between two stimuli
only when the difference is larger than this threshold. The
JND is DEMO different among individuals, and can be
taken as a good measure DEMO an individual’s discriminatory
ability. This idea can be extended from sensory perception
to the cognitive judgment that is involved in the evaluation
of economic DEMO at the moment of choice.
Semiorders. The concept of semiorder (introduced DEMO
Luce, 1956) is the appropriate generalization if one does
not want to assume that the indifference order is transitive.
An individual who has DEMO semiorder can still decide, facing
any pair x and y, whether one of the two options, and which,
is strictly preferred, DEMO whether he or she is indifferent. The
strict preference relation is transitive, and the indifference
relation is reflexive and symmetric. However, unlike with
DEMO total order described above, the indifference relation is
not transitive. What DEMO this difference?
Going back to the simple example, suppose that DEMO
decision maker has to choose between pairs of options
from the set x0, x1, and x2 (zero, one, and two lumps of
sugar in the coffee, respectively). He or she claims to be
indifferent between x0 and x1 and between x1 and x2, but
definitely prefers x2 to x0. This can be interpreted as the
result of DEMO separate factors: The individual truly prefers
x2 to x1 to x0 (but does not acknowledge the fact), and so
has a true DEMO of, say, u(xi) 5 i. The available discrimi-
natory DEMO, however, does not allow the perception of
a difference in utility smaller than 2. The combination
of the true underlying utility with the DEMO of the
discriminatory power produces the pattern of choices
described.
Luce’s (DEMO) theorem states that this decomposition
into two factors is general: Take an individual who does
not exhibit a total order on options, but just a semiorder.
We can think of this individual’s choices as resulting DEMO
the combination of a deep but unconscious utility and
poor discriminatory power. If the individual could per-
ceive the differences among the utilities of DEMO different
options according to the true utility, he or she would DEMO
play a total order on the options—in particular, a transi-
360
Rustichini
tive indifference. Under the effect of poor discriminatory
power, though, only a difference larger than a minimum
threshold is perceptible; x DEMO be preferred to y only when
the difference in utility between the two is larger than
some minimum value. When this is not the DEMO, the sub-
ject is indifferent. The theorem shows that from a DEMO
of choices, we can elicit precisely both the unconscious
utility and DEMO discriminatory power.
Dimensions of choice. A concept like semiorder can
explain why people are more indecisive than might seem
reasonable, but it cannot explain any paradoxical behav-
ior. To do this, we must make the model richer. Let us
begin with the observation that options are typically char-
DEMO by several dimensions. For example, a specific
food can be described DEMO its taste and its nutritional value.
Similarly, a lottery is described DEMO the amount of money
you can win in each event and each event’s probability.
Individuals make choices by aggregating this rich set of
characteristics DEMO a single value. However, this aggrega-
tion is difficult, particularly when the characteristics are
numerous and different. Individuals may therefore pro-
ceed by DEMO each characteristic separately, thus
decomposing the original complex problem into several
DEMO ones.
One procedure to accomplish this decomposition seems
natural (Rubinstein, 1988, 2003) and can be illustrated by
the choice among payments over DEMO Recall that (x, t) is
the promise of a payment DEMO at time t. In the choice between
(x, t) and ( y, s), the subject may begin by considering each
coordinate DEMO If he or she finds that x . y and
t , s, the choice is clearly in favor of (x, t). If the values s
and t are different, but the difference is not large enough
to be noticeable, the comparison between x and y becomes
the decisive factor. Saying that a difference is “not large
enough DEMO be noticeable” of course introduces an indif-
ference relation between probability values. This relation
is typically not transitive: Small, hard-to-notice differ-
ences may DEMO up until they become noticeable. Now we
can apply the conceptual structure we have seen before
to the comparison that the decision maker applies DEMO
each coordinate. If the subject’s power to discriminate the
characteristics is not perfect, this procedure may produce
paradoxical behavior such as we have seen in the earlier
examples.
Time preferences. Consider a subject who picks
($10, 0)—that is, $10 immediately—over ($12, 7)—$12
in a DEMO If this subject’s utility is both separable and
discounted exponentially, this DEMO that
δ0u(10) .δ7u(12),
which implies that
δ30u(10) .δ37u(12),
and therefore he or she should also choose ($10, 30) over
($12, 37). However, subjects typically reverse their choices
and choose ($12, 37) over ($10, 30).
This can be explained by the difficulty in integrating the
time of DEMO and the amount paid into a single choice.
In the choice between ($10, 0) and ($12, 7), time 0 (pay-
DEMO is immediate) is perceived as very different from
time 7, so time becomes the dominant consideration, and
this tilts the balance in favor of the first option. However,
in the choice between ($10, DEMO) and ($12, 37), the dates
30 and 37 days DEMO the future are not perceived as very dif-
ferent (although the DEMO of the interval between the two
is 7 days, just as DEMO), and now the fact that the amount
$12 is larger than $10 becomes the decisive factor.
Risk preferences. Consider now choices under un-
DEMO Here, the focus is on lotteries that give some
positive amount DEMO dollars x with some probability p, or $0
otherwise. We can DEMO describe these lotteries with
the pair (x, p), so the decision maker needs to consider two
coordinates, given by the amount paid and the probability
of payment. This choice is now very similar to DEMO choice
among payments over time. Let us see how this procedure
can explain, for example, Allais’s paradox.
When asked to choose between L1 DEMO ($3,000, 1) and
L2 5 ($4,000, .8), subjects typically choose L1 over L2.
Now consider the two composite lotteries that give you
L1 (or, respectively, L2) with probability .25, and $0 with
probability .75. Call these lotteries L3 and L4. In DEMO of
the description just given, it seems natural to predict that
DEMO decision maker will ignore the event occurring with
probability .75, since DEMO is the same in both cases, and will
therefore prefer L3 DEMO L4 if and only if L1 was preferred
to L2.
However, DEMO we compute the probability over outcomes,
we see that L3 5 ($3,000, .25) and L4 5 ($4,000, .20).
Now the common observation is that subjects who chose
L1 over L2 DEMO now choose L4 over L3, thereby contradict-
ing what would seem DEMO to expect.
The explanation of this fact may be that when a subject
compares ($3,000, 1) with ($4,000, .8), the probability 1
is perceived as very different from .8, and the subject does
not want to risk losing everything. However, when compar-
ing ($3,000, .25) and ($4,000, .20), the difference between
.25 and .20 is not noticeable, so the comparison between
$3,000 and $4,000 becomes the dominant factor.
Cognitive skills and preferences. DEMO do cognitive
skills affect choices in this model? A dependent variable
DEMO is natural to consider first is the coarseness of the
indifference relation. Take, for any value, the set of all
other values that DEMO subject does not perfectly discrimi-
nate from it. For example, take DEMO any probability p the
set of probabilities that the individual does not distinguish
from p. We can compare two individuals by looking at
these DEMO for each of them. If, for any such p, this set is
larger for the first individual than it is for the second, we
say that the former has coarser perception, or information
processing, DEMO does the latter.
A natural assumption is that individuals with lower
cognitive skills have coarser information processing. For
this reason, their choices will be different from those of
individuals with higher cognitive function, even if their
underlying “deep” preference is the same. Suppose, for
instance, that two DEMO makers are asked to make
several choices. All of the choices involve the same lot-
tery (x, p) and degenerate lotteries ( y, 1), which pay an
amount y with certainty. The value of y varies in the dif-
ferent choices.
Dua l oR unitaRy Decision Making?
361
The two decision makers DEMO identical utilities but
different information processing abilities: For both, the
“deep” utility of a sure payment y* is the same as that of DEMO
lottery (x, p). The first decision maker has extremely accu-
rate judgment, and so chooses the lottery when y , y*, DEMO
the sure payment otherwise. The second decision maker’s
judgment is not as accurate as the first’s. When the differ-
ence in utility between the DEMO payment and the lottery
is below the JND, the second decision DEMO can only
choose randomly. The choices of the two decision makers
are therefore different, since for some values below y* the
second chooses the sure payment, and for some values
above the threshold chooses the lottery instead.
This model predicts a difference in the pattern of
choices of DEMO decision makers with different cognitive
abilities, but only because processing is DEMO noisy for
the coarser decision maker. The experimental evidence
(see Burks DEMO al., 2007) supports this result: For example,
lower IQ DEMO are associated with larger numbers of in-
consistencies in decision making. The same experimental
evidence, however, suggests that the effect of different
cognitive DEMO is deeper, because it introduces a system-
atic bias—for example, making individuals with higher
cognitive ability more patient and more willing to take
DEMO A satisfactory theory of this difference is the subject
of current research.
Conclusions
This article has reviewed the available theories of deci-
sion making, derived from a long tradition in economic
theory, and in particular, DEMO theory. A discussion of
the possible neural basis underlying either the information
processing in the unitary model or the conflicting selves
in the dual-self DEMO would be the next natural step, but
such a discussion was DEMO part of the intent here.
The two views each have natural strengths and weak-
nesses. The unitary view has the natural advantage of par-
DEMO explanation; Occam’s razor works in its favor.
The discipline imposed by DEMO assumption of a single
decision-making unit, on the other hand, makes explana-
tion of inconsistencies in the data harder to achieve. The
most DEMO direction for the theoretical research on
the unitary model seems a satisfactory model of the effect
of cognitive skills on preferences.
The dual-self model, on the other hand, naturally fits ob-
servations in which the patterns of decision appear incon-
sistent. Time inconsistency in choice is the first DEMO most
natural example. This inconsistency is easily explained if
different selves take control in different circumstances.
The main difficulty for the dual model is DEMO, at the
moment, different theories and different models have been
developed for each choice environment. The different par-
adigms seem to correspond to DEMO different intuitive
ideas about the selves that are in conflict. For example,
the self that biases decision over time in favor of present
DEMO is motivated by impulsive behavior, whereas the
self that is activated DEMO ambiguous choices seems to be
motivated by fear. Clearly, a theory DEMO invokes differ-
ent pairs of selves for each different environment is not
satisfactory. The Fudenberg and Levine (2006) model is
the best attempt DEMO to provide a unified theory of
the dual-self model across different environments. Still,
even with this model the results probably depend on the
DEMO details of a particular instantiation. The robust-
ness of the link between the theory and experiments is
still to be seen.
Research into this DEMO is active, and probably the most
useful contributions will come from DEMO tests of
the connection between cognitive skills and preferences.
The most useful of the experiments will be those that test
the two theories directly. DEMO of the evidence currently
available goes in the right direction but still does not pro-
vide a satisfactory answer. For example, the results of
Knoch et al.’s (2006) experiment seem compatible with
both models. A DEMO interpretation suggests that a self
attracted by high rewards (but not DEMO of their prob-
ability) is free to operate in subjects with DEMO in the
DLPFC. A unitary model would simply observe that when
information processing is impaired, a simple judgment
based on the partial information that is more salient (the
higher reward of the more risky lottery) DEMO bias choice
in the direction of the risky lottery. Ultimately, the DEMO
models may not even be mutually exclusive, so the truth
might DEMO found in a rich integration of the two.
AUThOR NOTE
I thank the three referees and the editor for numerous comments that
have improved DEMO substance and presentation of this article. Correspon-
dence may be sent to A. Rustichini, Department of Economics, Univer-
sity of Minnesota, Heller Hall 1035, 271 19th Avenue South, Minneapo-
lis, MN 55455 (e-mail: arust@econ.umn.edu).
REfERENCES
Armstrong, W. E. (1939). The determinateness of DEMO utility function.
Economic Journal, 49, 453-467.
Benjamin, D. J., Brown, S. A., & Shapiro, J. M. (2006). Who is DEMO
havioral”? Cognitive ability and anomalous preferences. Unpub-
lished working paper.
Bernheim, B. D., & Rangel, A. (2004). Addiction and cue-triggered
decision processes. American Economic Review, 94, 1558-1590.
Breiter, H. C., Aharon, I., Kahneman, D., Dale, A., & Shizgal, P.
(2001). Functional imaging of neural responses to expectancy and
experience of monetary DEMO and losses. Neuron, 30, 619-639.
Burks, S.V., Carpenter, J. DEMO, Götte, L., Monaco, K., Rustichini, A.,
& Porter, K. (2007). Using behavioral economic field experiments
at a large DEMO carrier: The context and design of the Truckers and
Turnover Project. DEMO Paper No. 2789, Institute for the Study
of Labor.
Burks, S. V., Carpenter, J. P., Götte, L., & Rustichini, A. (2008).
Cognitive skills explain economic preferences, strategic behavior, and
job DEMO Discussion Paper No. 3609, Institute for the Study
of Labor.
Dekel, E., Lipman, B. L., & Rustichini, A. (2001). Representing
preferences with a unique subjective state space. Econometrica, 69,
891-934.
Dekel, E., Lipman, B. L., & Rustichini, A. (in press)DEMO Temptation-
driven preferences. Review of Economic Studies.
Dickhaut, J., McCabe, DEMO, Nagode, J. C., Rustichini, A., Smith, K.,
& Pardo, J. V. (2003). The impact of the certainty context DEMO the
process of choice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
100, 3536-3541.
Dohmen, T., Falk, A., Huffman, D., & Sunde, U. (2007). Are risk
aversion and impatience related to DEMO ability? Discussion
Paper No. 2735, Institute for the Study of Labor.
Fecteau, S., Pascual-Leone, A., Zald, D. H., Liguori, P.,
Théoret, H., Boggio, P. S., & Fregni, F. (DEMO). Activation of pre-
362
Rustichini
frontal cortex by transcranial direct current stimulation reduces appe-
tite DEMO risk during ambiguous decision making. Journal of Neurosci-
ence, 27, 6212-6218.
Fudenberg, D., & Levine, D. K. (2006). A dual-self DEMO of impulse
control. American Economic Review, 96, 1449-1476.
Gul, F., & Pesendorfer, W. (2001). Temptation and self-control.
Econometrica, 69, DEMO
Hsu, M., Bhatt, M., Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., & Camerer, C. F.
(2005). Neural systems responding to degrees DEMO uncertainty in human
decision-making. Science, 310, 1680-1683.
Kable, J. W., & Glimcher, P. W. (2007). The neural correlates of sub-
DEMO value during intertemporal choice. Nature Neuroscience, 10,
1625-1633.
Kahn, I., Yeshurun, Y., Rothstein, P., Fried, I., Ben-Bashat, D., &
Hendler, T. (2002). The role of amygdala in signaling prospective
outcome of choice. Neuron, 33, 983-994.
Knoch, D., Gianotti, L. R., Pascual-Leone, A., Treyer, V., Re-
gard, M., Hohmann., M., & Brugger, P. (2006). Disruption of right
DEMO cortex by low-frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation induces risk-taking behavior. Journal of Neuroscience,
26, 6469-6472.
Knutson, B., Taylor, J., Kaufman, DEMO, Peterson, R., & Glover, G.
(2005). Distributed neural DEMO of expected value. Journal
of Neuroscience, 25, 4806-4812.
Kuhnen, C. DEMO, & Knutson, B. (2005). The neural basis of financial
DEMO taking. Neuron, 47, 763-770.
Laibson, D. (1997). Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 112, 443-477.
Levy, I., Rustichini, A., & Glimcher, P. W. (2007, November). DEMO
single system represents subjective value under both risky and am-
biguous decision-making in humans. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the Society for DEMO, San Diego.
Loewenstein, G., & O’Donoghue, T. (2007). DEMO the heat of the mo-
ment: Modelling interaction between affect and DEMO Working
paper, Cornell University.
Luce, R. D. (1956). Semiorders DEMO a theory of utility discrimination.
Econometrica, 24, 178-191.
McClure, S. DEMO, Ericson, K. M., Laibson, D. I., Loewenstein, G., &
Cohen, J. D. (2007). Time discounting for primary rewards. DEMO
of Neuroscience, 27, 5796-5804.
McClure, S. M., Laibson, D. DEMO, Loewenstein, G., & Cohen, J. D.
(2004). Separate DEMO systems value immediate and delayed mon-
etary rewards. Science, 306, 503-507.
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. I. (1989)DEMO Delay of gratifi-
cation in children. Science, 244, 933-938.
Phelps, DEMO S., & Pollack, R. A. (1968). On second-best national DEMO
ing and game-equilibrium growth. Review of Economic Studies, 35,
185-199.
DEMO, R. A. (1968). Consistent planning. Review of Economic Stud-
ies, 35, 201-208.
Rabin, M. (2000). Risk aversion and expected-utility DEMO: A calibra-
tion theorem. Econometrica, 68, 1281-1292.
Rubinstein, A. (DEMO). Similarity and decision making under risk. Jour-
nal of Economic Theory, 46, 145-153.
Rubinstein, A. (2003). “Economics and psychology”? The case of hyper-
bolic discounting. International Economic Review, 44, 1207-1216.
Shiv, B., & Fedorikhin, A. (1999). Heart and mind in conflict: The in-
terplay of affect and cognition in consumer decision making. Journal
of Consumer Research, 26, 278-292.
Strotz, R. H. (1956). DEMO and inconsistency in dynamic utility
maximization. Review of Economic Studies, 23, 165-180.
Tom, S. M., Fox, C. R., Trepel, C., & Poldrack, R. A. (2007). The
neural basis of loss aversion in decision-making under risk. Science,
315, 515-518.
Ward, A., & Mann, T. (2000). Don’t mind if I do: Disinhibited eating
under cognitive load. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology,
78, 753-763.
(Manuscript received April 14, 2008;
revision accepted for publication July DEMO, 2008.){1g42fwefx}