The Intuitive Executive: Understanding and Applying 'Gut Feel' in Decision-Making
Author(s): Eugene Sadler-Smith and Erella Shefy
Source: The Academy of Management Executive (1993-2005), Vol. 18, No. 4, Decision-Making
and Firm Success (Nov., 2004), pp. 76-91
Published by: Academy of Management
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/4166125
Accessed: 01/11/2010 16:DEMO
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not DEMO an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, DEMO you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/DEMO?publisherCode=aom.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page DEMO such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
DEMO in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about DEMO, please contact support@jstor.org.
Academy of Management is collaborating with JSTOR to DEMO, preserve and extend access to The Academy
of Management Executive (1993-2005).
http://www.jstor.org
Academy of Management
Executive, 2004, Vol. 18, No. 4
The
Understanding and
'gut
feel'
intuitive
in
executive:
applying
decision-making
Eugene Sadler-Smith and Erella Shefy
Executive Overview
Even though the conditions under which executives DEMO may sometimes limit or
even preclude the use of rational analysis, DEMO is nevertheless the norm in many
organizational decision processes. Intuition, on DEMO other hand, is often considered to be
the antithesis of this DEMO and is usually overlooked or disregarded in decision-
making. However, in DEMO years there has been resurgence of interest in intuition,
perhaps because of some dissatisfaction with rationality and its limits and also because
some DEMO are now arguing that much of cognition occurs automatically outside
of consciousness and in the realm of intuition.
Knowledge of intuition has made significant DEMO in recent years, and it can now
be understood as a DEMO phenomenon involving interplay between knowing
(intuition-as-expertise) and sensing (intuition-as-feeling). DEMO, rather than being
set in opposition to each other, intuition and rational analysis are better conceived of as
two parallel systems of knowing. DEMO this backdrop we consider the significance of
the two facets of intuition for executive decision-making processes. From this integrated
perspective we offer some guidelines DEMO executives can make more effective and
intelligent use of intuition in ways that acknowledge its limitations while maximizing its
potential in enhancing firm success DEMO complex and fast-moving business environments.
Balancing Intuition and Rationality
Executive intuition is the skill of focusing on those
potentially important but sometimes faint signals
DEMO fuel imagination, creativity, and innovation
and feed corporate success in globally competitive
business environments. A former vice president of
the leading cosmetic MNC DEMO'Oreal is quoted as
saying that decision-making intelligence requires
a fine balancing of two seemingly contradictory
capabilities: intuition and rationality. The first one
allows executives to pick up on important but
weak signals; the second enables executives to act
on them. The CEO of the same company sees DEMO
challenge for executives as a matter of imagina-
tion and intuition in equal parts: "It is intuition
[when one asks] 'What do these brands have that
just might seduce the world?' But also in DEMO of
imagination, [one asks] 'What could they become
to seduce the world?' "1
We are only too well aware that businesses are
76
often contradictory, ambiguous, and surprising
places, and that their environments are becoming
increasingly complex and unpredictable. Together
these factors make fragmented and DEMO de-
mands upon executives. Fast, high-quality, strate-
gic decision-making in this context represents a
fundamental dynamic capability in high-perform-
ing organizations. The traditional DEMO to this
challenge has been rational analysis: information
is collected, collated, analyzed and interpreted, al-
ternatives are formulated, and a logical choice is
consciously arrived at.2 However, in modern busi-
ness environments, a DEMO of factors can affect
the efficacy of an exclusively rational process.
Strategies and tactics can be thrown off course by
factors ranging from wars, global terrorism, and
new diseases to more mundane everyday matters
such as computer glitches and minor accounting
foul-ups. Technological advancement and devel-
opments in DEMO systems and processes
have contributed to an explosion in the volume of
2004
data that executives may be required to deal with.
The volume DEMO complexity of available informa-
tion has the potential to be overwhelming. The
CEO of a major energy corporation recently made
this point quite succinctly:DEMO
Ignoring them [intuitions] has led to some bad
decisions.. .you have to learn to trust your
intuition. Otherwise, at the point when you've
gathered enough data to be 99.99 per cent
certain that the decision DEMO're about to make
is the correct one, that decision has DEMO
obsolete.3
On the other hand, individuals and firms are often
exhorted DEMO undertake new venturing opportunities
in novel and unfamiliar environments where, for
DEMO, there may be an information vacuum.
The requirement for fast decisions DEMO the limits
of human beings' rational information-processing
capacities may combine to DEMO severe de-
mands upon executives' cognitive capabilities to
handle masses of DEMO at the necessary
speed. This may result in a combination of volume-
induced and/or complexity-induced information
overload that may limit or even preclude DEMO
and deliberate consideration and balancing of al-
ternative courses of action.4 Even when working in
overloaded, uncertain, and fast-moving conditions,
rationality is DEMO as indispensable in many strate-
gic management decision processes. Moreover, as
DEMO as the education and training of executives go,
rationality is, DEMO a few exceptions, still the norm in
the business and management DEMO curriculum.
Intuition is a capacity for attaining direct
knowledge or understanding without the
apparent intrusion of rational thought or
logical inference.
Intuition is a DEMO for attaining direct knowl-
edge or understanding without the apparent intru-
sion of rational thought or logical inference. Our
fundamental precept in the context DEMO executive
decision-making is twofold: firstly, intuition is as
important as rational analysis in many decision
processes; secondly, there are ways in which DEMO
ecutives can improve their intuitive knowledge,
understanding, and skill.
In DEMO article, we aim to review and synthesize
relevant theory and research DEMO order to suggest
how executives may be able to better focus upon
ways in which intuition may affect their personal
decision-making behaviors and upon DEMO in
Sadler-Smith and Shefy
77
which they might use intuition more intelligently.
Drawing upon extant theory and research, we
present an integrated and up-to-date account that
identifies two principal facets of intuition and
which explores their DEMO for executive deci-
sion-making behaviors. Recommendations for how
executives can put this knowledge into action in
order to enhance their decision-making follow
each section. DEMO guidelines are also summa-
rized later in Table 1.
Rationality and Decision-Making
Being rational entails the acquisition of knowl-
edge through the power of DEMO reasoning
and deliberative analytical thought. The pre-emi-
nence of the rational paradigm in management is
often justified by the assumptions that executives
are inherently DEMO decision-makers who seek
to maximize outcomes in a world where business
environments are considered objective entities
and successful strategies are the product of delib-
DEMO planning.5 In practice this means: the more
information, the better; 'cool and calm' strategic
thinking should not be debased by feelings; DEMO
cient thought and behavior must be called upon to
subjugate emotion; DEMO good organizations man-
age employees' feelings or design them out of DEMO
process.6 Sticking rigidly to such a position raises
a number of problems.
For example, being exclusively rational requires
some measure of agreement about goals since
these will determine what information should be
collected and how it DEMO be analyzed. Agree-
ment about cause-and-effect relationships is sim-
ilarly important since this will inform plans and
predictions about future actions and their out-
DEMO There is an inherent assumption that
knowledge is recognizable and valuable only
when it is explicit, untainted by feelings, and open
to conscious DEMO and introspection. Against
this rational backdrop, the significance of uncon-
scious DEMO processes and feelings should not
be underestimated or overlooked since they can be
a source of intuitively based judgments that may
provide an alternative DEMO consciously derived ra-
tional choices.
An important issue at the root of debates about
the utility of rationality is the role of uncertainty
and DEMO availability of information upon which
executives may base their decisions. The relation-
ship between decision-making and uncertainty
has been interpreted and explained in a DEMO of
different ways. For example, some have argued
that uncertainty increases DEMO degree of proce-
dural rationality that is required in order that in-
78
Academy of Management
Executive
November
formation gaps can be filled and DEMO may
be removed by further analyses.7 Some studies
suggest that rational decision-making does have
situational superiority under particular sets of cir-
cumstances.8 Other research DEMO revealed a nega-
tive relationship between uncertainty (the extent to
which DEMO problem is similar to others that have
been dealt with in the past) and rationality (the
extent to which information search, analysis, DEMO
use of quantitative techniques contribute to a de-
cision choice).9 The rational method can undeni-
ably lead to effective decisions.'0 However, when
outcomes are difficult to predict through rational
means, executives need to acknowledge the uncer-
tainties, be more tolerant of ambiguities, be able to
DEMO to complexities in pragmatic, intelligent
and fast ways in the face DEMO the unknown, and
recognize the potential that their intuitive judg-
ments DEMO offer. Moreover, where decisions do
have to be taken speedily and DEMO cognitive econ-
omy in the face of an overwhelming mass of infor-
mation or tight deadlines, executives may have no
choice but to rely upon intelligent intuitive judg-
ments rather than on non-existent or not-yet-in-
vented DEMO
When deliberative rational thought is not
achievable or desirable (for example, where un-
ambiguous or sufficient 'hard' data is not immedi-
ately DEMO hand, might never be available at all, or
where creative solutions to problems are needed),
one way of managing and coping with uncertainty
and complexity and of 'thinking outside of the box'
is by relying upon intuition. As an outcome of an
unconscious process in DEMO there is little or no
apparent intrusion of deliberative rational
thought, DEMO can be considered 'soft data'
that may be treated as DEMO hypotheses ("Do
the facts and figures back up my intuition?") or
used to check out a rationally derived choice ("How
do I feel about the decision I've made?"). In this
DEMO, a carefully crafted intuitive knowledge,
understanding, and skill may endow executives
with the capacity for insight, speed of response,
and the capability to solve problems and make
decisions in more satisfying and creative DEMO
There are those who offer the view that affect is
data, DEMO of a rather special kind" but with the
important caveat that DEMO mental pro-
cesses and affect should not be treated as direc-
tives, but neither should they be ignored or dis-
missed as irrelevant. There are also those who
argue that it is not possible to make DEMO de-
cisions without using intuition. We prefer to argue
that executives need to be able to recognize and
understand intuition, accept it, establish DEMO in
which they can be comfortable with it, and lever-
age DEMO potential for success and well-being both
for themselves and for those whom they lead. This
knowledge, understanding, and skill constitute an
intuitive awareness, and in our view the question
of how this may be developed DEMO important both for
executives themselves and for those educators and
consultants whose aim it is to improve executives'
decision-making skills. This is especially DEMO
tant given that management education and train-
ing in general appear to be lacking in this regard
(there are of course notable exceptions). Research-
based knowledge allied to our own experiences in
training and developing DEMO' intuitive skills
leads us to the view that executives can begin DEMO
understand and craft their individual intuitive de-
cision-making capabilities by following some
fairly straightforward guidelines.
Intuition and Management
The subject of intuition has figured DEMO philosophy,
psychology, and the social and natural sciences
over the DEMO from Aristotle and Ovid, through
Spinoza, Michael Faraday, and William DEMO, to
the 20th century where Henri Bergson, Carl Jung,
Bertrand Russell, Jonas Salk, and Albert Einstein
all attested to the value DEMO intuition as a unique
way of knowing. Intuition in management was dis-
cussed explicitly as far back as Chester Barnard's
Functions of the DEMO in 1938, but over the
intervening decades, despite occasional bouts of
rhetoric, it has (with a few exceptions) tended to be
downplayed or overlooked. However, in recent
years there has been something of a resurgence of
interest in intuition among academics and practi-
tioners, perhaps because of a dissatisfaction with
rationality and its limits,'2 perhaps because it res-
onates with the more holistic and spiritual Zeit-
geist of the DEMO 20th and early 21st centuries, and
also because some psychologists are DEMO arguing
that much, if not most, of cognition occurs automat-
ically outside of consciousness.13
Intuition is difficult to describe but easy to rec-
DEMO Many of us will be intimately familiar with
our own intuitions and will probably be able to
identify, and may even envy or admire, those indi-
viduals who confidently display a 'gut feel' for
complex situations and who appear to have an
'instinct' for grasping key DEMO quickly. They can
often instantaneously recognize in a highly con-
vincing manner whether an investment is likely to
turn sour, whether a potential hire is good or bad,
whether a new product will make it DEMO not; but
frustratingly they may find it difficult to articulate
the DEMO behind these decisions which may just
'feel right.'
2004
Sadler-Smith and Shefy
Do Executives Use Intuition?
If one accepts, firstly, that rationality has limits (to
the extent that it may DEMO be applicable exclusively
in certain situations), and secondly that intuition is
a naturalistic phenomenon to which human beings
are subject, the question then is raised as to
whether or not executives use intuition when mak-
DEMO decisions. A moment's introspection may re-
veal that even if we do not see ourselves as natu-
rally intuitive decision-makers, we may be the
reluctant recipients of our own intuitions because
of their pervasiveness and DEMO nature. In-
tuitions are not arrived at through an effort of will.
If it is inevitable that executives will experience
intuition, we may then ask just when and how they
use it.
When do executives
use DEMO?
Research suggests that executives do make signif-
icant use of intuition. For example, in an interna-
tional study, Parikh and his colleagues DEMO
managers to indicate from a list of functional areas
of decision-making those in which they thought
intuition has a role to play.'4 A DEMO of respon-
dents felt that intuition was significant for deci-
sions in corporate strategy and planning, market-
ing, human resource development, research and
development, public relations, investments and
acquisitions, and mergers and alliances. A minor-
ity of respondents felt that intuition has a role to
play DEMO decisions relating to capital expenditure,
finance, and production and operations DEMO
ment.
Research suggests that executives
make significant use of intuition.
do
An overwhelming majority felt that many senior
managers use intuition to some extent DEMO making
decisions, that it can contribute to greater success,
and DEMO it should form part of the management
education and development curriculum. Other in-
terview-based research in the USA suggests that
intuitive decisions are most DEMO viewed by
executives themselves as being based upon expe-
rience (expertise DEMO has been built up, is held in
a mental map or DEMO, and influences conscious
thought and behavior but not always by any DEMO
parent deliberative rational means) and feelings
(where affect in the form of a gut feeling can exert a
quite compelling influence upon decision DEMO).'5
79
How do executives use intuition?
Isenberg identified a number of ways in which
executives use intuition: sensing a problem; DEMO
forming pre-programmed behavior patterns; pro-
ducing an integrated picture; as a check on ratio-
nal analysis; and as a way to by-pass analysis.'6
Arguably, therefore, becoming a more effective de-
cision-maker is about DEMO to make sense of
intuition, judging when to trust it, and feeling con-
fident enough through practice to use it. For exam-
ple, a director of a global consultancy firm said:
Intuition presents the DEMO of turning
ideas into action and speeding up decision-
making. I would not like to see managers
consciously squashing their intuition. I would
much DEMO they went around saying "I think
we should do this because DEMO feel it might
work."'7
Hayashi argued that a 'business instinct' (intuition)
is an important factor in singling out successful
performers DEMO that intuition is needed increas-
ingly as people climb the corporate ladder. He
cited the views of a senior executive of one the
world'DEMO largest pharmaceutical companies:
Very often people will do a brilliant job up
through the middle-management levels
where it's heavily quantitative, in terms of the
decision-making. But then they reach senior
management, where the problems get more
complex and ambiguous, and we discover
that their judgment or intuition is not what it
should be. And when that happens, it's a big
problem.'8
It is not only high fliers in DEMO corporations
who have testified to the value of intuition; there is
DEMO long tradition of systematic research into the role
of intuition in clinical practice in health and re-
lated fields, particularly in relation to the differ-
ences between experts and novices. In educational
management, a study of the intuitive experiences
among a sample of college principals found that
they DEMO experienced intuition-as-feelings which
surfaced early on during complex decision-making
and was combined with rational analysis at some
point in the process.'9
In addition DEMO the case study-based and anec-
dotal accounts, there have been quantitatively
DEMO empirical studies of management intuition
which suggest that: senior managers are DEMO to
be more intuitive than their middle and junior
counterparts; small DEMO entrepreneurs are as
80
Academy of Management Executive
intuitive as senior managers in large firms; and
executives in high-growth small businesses are
likely to be more intuitive DEMO their lower-growth
counterparts. Studies of executive thinking using
cognitive mapping techniques revealed that many
senior managers traded depth of information for a
breadth that DEMO in the whole view and in which
they used narratives and symbols in the forms of
personal experiences in rationalizing their intui-
tive decisions.20
DEMO Myers Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) is a ques-
tionnaire that can be used to assess the extent to
which (among other things) DEMO make sense of
their perceptions of the world through intuition. A
long tradition of management research using the
MBTI21 has concluded that intuitive managers DEMO
more likely than other types to favor more abstract
information and perceptual processes, be inclined
toward idealistic, unconventional, and creative be-
haviors, DEMO engage in strategic planning activi-
ties more frequently and effectively. Intuitive types
tend also to feel self-sufficient and trusting of their
own judgment, able to live with ambiguities and
uncertainties,22 and also be confident in DEMO informa-
tion they have at hand (paradoxically, too much in-
formation can lead to decreased decision perfor-
mance but increased feelings of satisfaction23)DEMO
Intuition in Organizations
Research suggests that the proportion of execu-
tives with an intuitive preference is likely to in-
crease with seniority. This is DEMO in at
least two ways. Intuitive skills (such as holistic
and DEMO thinking) may help some executives
to attain senior positions; hence, DEMO types
may thus become disproportionately represented
at higher levels in organizations. Alternatively, top
executives' job responsibilities may demand that
they hone their existing DEMO capabilities more
fully than managers lower down the hierarchy.
From a career development and human resource
planning perspective, it is important that execu-
tives have the opportunity to develop the neces-
sary decision skills and cognitive DEMO (in-
cluding those that are intuitively based) to fit the
demands of their current or future job roles.
Organizational power may also play DEMO impor-
tant part in shaping the extent to which intuition is
used and 'owned up' to. For example, seniority may
legitimize the use of intuitive approaches by
groups such as managers and executives while
employees DEMO down the hierarchy, even though
they may be subject to their DEMO intuitions, may
feel the need to legitimize their decisions by ratio-
DEMO through collecting 'hard data' and anatlyz-
November
ing it. Moreover, DEMO at all levels may not
be predisposed to openly admitting to colleagues,
superiors, or subordinates that they might be basing
their actions on their gut feelings. Hence one might
speculate on how widespread 'closet intuition' is.
Research suggests that the proportion of
executives with an intuitive preference is
likely to increase with seniority.
The extent to which intuition is DEMO in decision-
making may also be influenced by external stake-
holders, DEMO upon their level of influence.
Where this is high, they may DEMO or implicitly
insist upon rational procedures in support of deci-
sions. Finally, executives themselves may be re-
quired to display rationality to convince or impress
those who exercise power over them (or those whom
they manage) of the legitimacy of their actions.
Recommendation 1: Open up the DEMO
As a psychological process, intuition is automatic
and involuntary. Research also DEMO that intu-
ition as an organizational process is widespread
across a number of important functional areas of
management. Against this background, the work-
ing environment of executives can support or sup-
press this automatic and involuntary DEMO
through socio-cultural factors which may lead, for
example, to general conformance to a rational par-
adigm (for example, by 'group-think') and collec-
tive forms of cognitive inertia (such as 'grooved
thinking'24)DEMO The concomitant danger is that if intu-
ition is continually suppressed, DEMO may cease to
operate25 or may be driven underground. Execu-
tives may then come to rely upon it privately and
covertly with a potentially DEMO effect upon
individual and collective learning. The following
questions may help you to gauge the extent to
which you rely upon intuition in your DEMO
making.
Do you trust your hunches when confronted by
an important decision?
Do you feel in your body if a decision is right DEMO
wrong?
Do you put a lot of faith in your initial feelings
about people and situations?
Do you put more emphasis on DEMO than data
when you make a decision?
Do you rely on your gut feelings when dealing
with people?
Do you trust your DEMO when arriving at
2004
Sadler-Smith and Shefy
the reasons for making a decision even if DEMO
can't explain why?
Does your intuition often turn out to have been
right all along?
What is (or would be) DEMO reaction in your orga-
nization to decisions made on the basis that they
felt right?
Do you keep your intuitions close to your DEMO? If
so, why?26
Defining Intuition
Intuition is often depicted in a variety of ways,
sometimes with connotations of mystery and the
DEMO At other times it may be confused
with biological and cognitive processes such as
instinct and insight. The root of the term 'intuition'
may be traced to the Latin intueor or intueri mean-
ing 'to contemplate' or 'look within.' Daniel Kahne-
man and Amos Tversky defined intuitive judg-
ments as those that are arrived at by an informal
DEMO unstructured mode of reasoning without the
use of analytical methods or deliberative calcula-
tion.27 Theory and research suggest that intuition
encompasses expertise, judgment and implicit
learning, sensitivity and feelings, rumination, in-
cubation, and creativity.28 DEMO how do executives
themselves understand intuition? In Parikh's stud-
ies, executives were asked to indicate what they
personally understood by the term 'intuition.' De-
scriptions offered included: decision or perception
without recourse to DEMO or rational methods;
inherent perception; inexplicable comprehension;
a feeling DEMO comes from within; integration of
previous experience; and processing of accumu-
lated information (only a very small minority of
respondents described it as a 'sixth sense').
We define intuition as a form of DEMO that
manifests itself as an awareness of thoughts, feel-
ings, or bodily sense connected to a deeper percep-
tion, understanding, and way DEMO making sense of
the world that may not be achieved easily or at all
by other means.
Recommendation
2: Don't mix up your I's
A well-honed understanding of intuition does not
confuse it with: (1) insight: this literally means see-
ing the solution to the problem, and while we may
not always be able to see in a visual sense the
solution that we have arrived at, we can usually
explain its elements and their logical inter-rela-
tionships. Hence insight ultimately DEMO conscious
and explicable (sometimes after a process of incu-
bation-see below); (2) instinct: these are the in-
built fast biological reactions DEMO which evolution
has equipped us in order that we can respond to
81
stimuli in ways that maximize our chances of sur-
vival in DEMO face of a physical threat; (3) incubation:
this is DEMO unconscious processing of information
which may yield an insight solution in the apocry-
phal (and insightful) 'eureka' moment. Incubation
is related to DEMO (and insight) in that it is the
unconscious part of a process whereby an intuition
(something that we feel but may be unable to ar-
ticulate) may become validated as an insight (an
explicable DEMO to a problem).29 However, not
all intuitions become insights; their logical rela-
tions may not become clear, and they may remain
for a time as un-validated hazy felt senses or
hunches which may eventually DEMO their accu-
racy or otherwise. Similarly not all insights come
to us via intuitions, in that the solution may come
very quickly, and DEMO developing felt sense may not
be discernable.
Sources of Intuition
'What DEMO the sources of intuition?' is a crucial
question in coming to an understanding of the role
that intuition can play in decision-making and
DEMO it may be managed more effectively. Is intu-
ition tacit knowledge30 acquired through implicit
learning? Is it the output from a library of expertise
built up over many years? Is it a response driven
by significant emotional memories? Is it derived
from deeper bodily feelings? Or is DEMO a combination
of all these things? As noted earlier, intuition dif-
fers from instinct (in-built automatic fast biological
responses) and from insight (literally 'seeing' a
solution to a problem and its logical relations)DEMO
'What are the sources of intuition?' is a
crucial question DEMO coming to an
understanding of the role that intuition
can play in decision-making
Intuition relies on both expertise (manifested as
subconscious decision heuristics) DEMO feelings
(manifested as the affect associated with a partic-
ular stimulus)DEMO From this standpoint a view
emerges of intuition as a form of cognition that
operates in two ways: 'knowing' (what we will DEMO
'intuition-as-expertise' and the related notion of
intuition as an aspect of sense-making); and in a
way that connects mind and body through 'feeling'
(we will call this interpretation 'intuition-as-feel-
ing').
There are two further key points to be made at
this juncture. First, intuition-as-knowing and intu-
ition-as-feeling interact and may be indistinguish-
able from the DEMO of view of the individual. Sec-
82
ond, intuition as a way of knowing also may sit
comfortably alongside rationality as an alterna-
tive or complementary form of cognition. There DEMO
of course other interpretations of intuition, includ-
ing the spiritual and DEMO perspectives, but we
have chosen not to consider these here.3'
DEMO Intuition-as-Expertise
Consider the following hypothetical vignette
based on an amalgam of many of the senior exec-
utives with whom we have worked:
Daniel DEMO a senior executive with fifteen years
of experience. He has been in many challeng-
ing and varied situations that have de-
manded quick and DEMO action throughout
his career. One of the qualities that those
around him admire in Daniel is his ability to
make quick and often accurate DEMO in
the face of complex problems. But it wasn't
always like that for Daniel. As a young and
inexperienced manager straight out of DEMO
MBA, he made mistakes like everybody else.
He often couldn't DEMO the woods for the trees.
The consequences of some decisions that he
made were significant; others were less criti-
cal. However, what is DEMO is that he
learned explicitly and implicitly from his ex-
periences. He internalized the lessons
learned (sometimes tacitly), noticed connec-
tions that were reinforced by feedback, and
acquired new routines and rules of behavior
(DEMO without realizing it), and these
became part of his cognitive makeup (even
though he may not be able to articulate this).
The upshot of this is that when Daniel
meets simple or not-so-simple situations DEMO
those that he has met in the past, or that share
DEMO features with past experiences, he can
call upon a repertoire of DEMO responses
and search for a fit. Daniel's knowledge base
is akin to an expert system built up over many
years of hard work DEMO learning consciously
and unconsciously through experience and
accumulating wisdom. Often when he makes
a decision or gives a view on an issue, it looks
to outsiders uncannily like a 'management
instinct,' but much of this is experience and
analysis frozen over time into familiar rou-
tines and DEMO responses which give him
a confidence in his own intuitive capabilities
to the extent that more often than not he does
not need to DEMO himself to information
overload and the risk of analysis paralysis.
Academy of Management
Executive
But how can executives, like our hypothetical
Daniel, acquire DEMO expertise that enables them to
respond intuitively to problems and decisions and
come up with a single viable option? One way is
through explicit and implicit learning processes.
The concept of explicit learning is familiar to DEMO as
an observable or conscious process often with an
element of intent. Implicit learning, on the other
hand, is a way in which DEMO is acquired by
processes that are largely involuntary and inde-
pendent of any conscious attempt to learn.32 Im-
plicit learning is pervasive and may DEMO in the
acquisition of tacit knowledge that cannot be de-
scribed or explained easily but which is stored in
long-term memory in a variety DEMO mental structures
or patterns of thinking. This knowledge may take
the form of images, episodes, or narratives and can
be stored as rules (often too complex for verbal
exposition) for how to achieve specific goals in
particular situations.
The quality and utility of the knowledge
gained from DEMO and unplanned
learning opportunities depend upon the
extent to which feedback is used
positively to nurture intuitive skills and
develop good intuitions.
The quality DEMO utility of the knowledge gained
from incidental and unplanned learning opportu-
nities depend upon the extent to which feedback is
used positively to nurture DEMO skills and de-
velop good intuitions. However, feedback is like a
DEMO sword, and the form it takes and the
way it is DEMO are crucial in determining if an
executive's environment enhances or suppresses
good intuitions. Hogarth describes environments
that enhance intuition through good feedback as
'kind' structures for learning; 'wicked' structures
for learning on the DEMO hand are those contexts
that may suppress intuition or lead to the develop-
ment of poor intuitive awareness through little or
low-quality feedback.33
Many DEMO be aware of classic experiments in
which chess grand masters' recall DEMO be-
came perplexed by the random placing on the
board of the chess pieces (in this situation their
recall was no better than that of a novice) com-
pared with their superior recall when the place-
ment of the pieces was meaningful (non-random
and patterned, as they DEMO be in a real game and
thus encoded or approximated in long-term mem-
ory).34 This helps to explain how it is that when DEMO
expert encounters a problem where the informa-
November
2004
Sadler-Smith and Shefy
83
tion can be matched to a familiar DEMO, a deci-
sion protocol may be executed almost automatically.
In other DEMO studies, participants have
been required to recognize a coherent pattern and
DEMO they were uncertain were asked to guess. The
results led the researchers to conclude that indi-
viduals can respond in a discriminative way to
DEMO that they could not consciously and
explicitly identify and that it was tacit understand-
ing that guided their intuitive hunches.35 In a dif-
ferent DEMO, Klein's study of split-second deci-
sion-making by firefighters found little DEMO
corresponded to the accepted rational model;
rather there appeared to be a rapid and uncon-
scious situation assessment and recognition from
an array DEMO stored templates followed by the taking
of appropriate action when a fit was found.36
In certain situations, in bypassing in-depth con-
scious attempts at analysis, intuition enables ex-
ecutives to move rapidly to a plausible and credi-
ble solution. This interpretation of intuition as an
unconscious expertise differs DEMO models of
purely heuristic thinking in that the latter are nar-
rowly focused on predetermined rules, whereas
the former is based upon a broad constellation of
past experiences, knowledge, skills, perceptions,
and feelings held tacitly and often arrived at by an
implicit perception of the total DEMO before
conscious awareness takes hold. Tacitly held
knowledge does have behavioral correlates. For
example, researchers have found significant rela-
tionships between executives' levels DEMO tacit
knowledge and a number of criterion measures
including success in generating new businesses
and performance in managerial simulation exer-
cises.38
In many situations DEMO is simply not possible for
an individual to explore in a rigorous, methodical,
and exhaustively analytical manner all the data
that he or she confronts; indeed to do so might
result in analysis paralysis. The reason for this is
that rational analysis as an information-process-
ing capacity DEMO not be suited to the volume or
complexity of the information load encountered.
Compounding this overload problem is the as-
sumption that having more DEMO leads to
more rational decisions. Instead of rigorously ex-
ploring all the available options, the experienced,
intuitive executive's cognitive system becomes
programmed to look for cues that relate to previ-
ously experienced patterns. The DEMO managing
director of Whirlpool Australia, when asked to re-
flect on DEMO important decisions he faced through-
out his career, summed up the DEMO of gut-
feel when he said that it is crucial for executives to
"lssemble the facts in a meaningful way; CEOs
have an DEMO about them, they have an instinc-
tive nature, they are watching, listening, gathering
all of the time. If you are not doing DEMO as a CEO,
then you are not fulfilling your role."39 The mental
shortcuts that follow from the meaningful weaving
together of these DEMO facts are efficient
ways for the manager to deal with complex and
fast-changing situations where information-pro-
cessing resources may be at a premium. The DEMO
is an optimization of cognitive load.
This process works well in the situations where
a fit with an extant pattern is found. However,
DEMO expertise may not work so smoothly if the
new situation has features that do not appear to
match or approximate those that have been DEMO
ously encountered. Klein argues that in these sit-
uations individuals look for further cues to try to
interpret any anomalies, keeping perceptions open
and attuned, and constructing narratives that
make sense and overcome the 'background DEMO'
that may impede efforts at interpretation. Under
these circumstances intuition may be thought of as
a sense-making process40 whereby concepts and
their relationships DEMO be re-defined and adjust-
ments made to the relevant mental structures to
take situational differences into account. The
structures themselves become adapted and more
DEMO through the process of learning. For
new information to be accommodated in this way
can take time. Hence it may take longer to arrive DEMO
a solution that 'feels' right, and therefore the deci-
sion DEMO may be more labored and more de-
manding of cognitive resources.
Recommendation
3: Elicit good feedback
The actions and experiences of executives and the
associated implicit learning processes are impor-
tant tools in building intuitions.41 However, learn-
ing through implicit processes can become passive
and reactive. In this DEMO executives' learning
is likely to be strongly influenced by the charac-
DEMO of the task or the context in which they
find themselves. As noted earlier, the knowledge
gained from incidental and unplanned learning
opportunities depends crucially upon feedback (for
example, in terms of Hogarth's 'kind' and 'wicked'
structures for learning). The feedback that an DEMO
ecutive receives can be misleading. For example,
if he or she is surrounded by employees who are
not prepared to challenge decisions made DEMO the
top, the learning structure of the environment may
be wicked DEMO the sense that it is unlikely to lead to
good intuitions because wrong lessons will have
been learned. Contrast this with a more construc-
DEMO criticaxl environment or an experienced
84
coach or mentor who is able to give honest, accu-
rate, and constructive feedback on an executive's
behaviors, attitudes, and performance. This would
help create an environment with a kind learning
structure which DEMO turn may lead to good intuitions
because the right lessons will have been learned
from a more faithful and honest interpretation of
action.42
How DEMO or wicked is your learning environ-
ment? For example, in terms of the extent to
which intuition is supported or suppressed,
and DEMO terms of the quality of the feedback
that you receive?
How could you make it less wicked for nurtur-
ing your intuitive skills?DEMO
What could you do to make it kinder for nur-
turing your intuitive skills?
2. Intuition-as-Feeling
For many people intuition is synonymous with 'gut
feel,' and this somatic view of intuition (from the
Greek soma for 'body' and meaning a bodily sense)
is ubiquitous DEMO cultures and languages. For
example, in Hebrew we have the phrase DEMO
beten, literally 'feeling stomach.' One approach to
understanding this feelings-based DEMO is
by examining recent neuropsychological research.
The following experiment was reported in the New
York Times in 1997:
The neurologist Antonio Damasio and DEMO col-
leagues Hannah Damasio, Antoine Bechara,
and Daniel Tranel explored DEMO levels of emo-
tion felt by participants during a card game in
which the decision to choose from decks A
and B resulted in DEMO gains or losses,
whereas deciding to choose from decks C and
D resulted in small gains or losses. Emotional
reactions during the game DEMO measured
using changes in skin conductance that occur
as a result of 'micro-sweating.' Damasio was
interested in the ways in which participants
appeared DEMO learn unconscious decision be-
haviors to avoid decks A and B (DEMO micro-
sweating is thought to reflect tiny flickers of
emotion that are below the level of conscious
awareness). The measures revealed that par-
DEMO experienced a marked increase in
skin conductance prior to choosing from
decks A and B, even though they were unable
to verbalize what they were doing and why.
From Damasio's research it appeared that a DEMO
awareness below participants' level of conscious-
Academy of Management
Executive
ness DEMO a somatic response (manifested as
micro-sweating) to the effect that the decision to
choose from decks A and B was undesirable. The
tacit DEMO governing these feelings appeared to
be activated (and in a sense DEMO more than the
explicit system) before participants were con-
sciously aware DEMO they had made a decision.
Furthermore, the observation that participants
couldn'DEMO articulate these feelings adds weight to
the view of intuition as having unconscious and
somatic components. In his research Damasio fo-
cused on negative DEMO of decision choices,
arguing that physiological somatic markers force
attention to the undesirable outcomes that may
accrue from certain actions. The sensation associ-
DEMO with this unconscious process is an unpleas-
ant gut feeling.
Goleman argued that as well as serving as a
warning against certain courses of DEMO, intui-
tions can also operate positively to alert us to op-
DEMO and that being attuned to personal feel-
ings (bodily senses) makes for sounder personal
decision-making.43 The neural scientist Joseph Le-
Doux argued that DEMO when we are conscious of
the outcome of an appraisal of a situation, such as
feelings toward a particular person (for example, a
feeling of like or dislike), we do not necessarily
consciously understand DEMO basis of the appraisal
(knowing why we have the feeling). DEMO conscious
outcome may be based upon our inarticulable gut
feel.
In evolutionary terms the limbic system which is
implicated in these intuitive processes is DEMO of the
older parts of the brain and may be a source of the
intuitive signals that manifest themselves as au-
tomatic somatic alarm DEMO LeDoux suggests that
the amygdala (a part of the forebrain's DEMO sys-
tem involved in functions relating to anger and
aggression) may DEMO direct control over our
actions before the higher centers of the brain are
fully aware of what is happening (referred to by
some as 'emotional hi-jacking'44). These bodily
senses may aid executives' decision-making DEMO
quickly and covertly sifting through fine details
and providing feelings-based signals for or
against a course of action, but on the other hand
they may also override the higher centers of the
brain and play a DEMO role in the ways in which
emotions impact upon our actions.
Recommendation 4: Get a feel for your batting
average
Gut feelings are inevitable, but effective learning
from them is not. Paying particular attention to the
success of intuitions is important because we alre
November
2004
all prone to fears, emotions, and sources of bias45
which DEMO impact upon the efficacy of intuitive
decision-making. Testing out the validity of gut
feelings over time can help an individual execu-
tive determine how DEMO trust she or he can put in
them.
Gut feelings are inevitable, but effective
learning from them is not.
This personal benchmarking is a vital part of the
development of intuitive awareness because it can
assist DEMO validating a gut feel, identifying mis-
leading inferences and counteracting any DEMO
position to over-rely on intuition in situations when
a rational approach may be more appropriate. It
also can help to distinguish intuition from fears
DEMO other emotions. Furthermore, the emotional
reward and euphoric feelings that an DEMO
may get by intuitively "calling it right" need to be
balanced against other less accurate intuitive
judgment calls that might be made just DEMO often
but which sometimes might be overlooked or mis-
construed in the absence of critical reflection. The
following questions can be used to get DEMO more
systematic feel for your batting average46 in the
context of specific incidents where gut feel played
some role.
Think of an instance where DEMO relied on your
gut feel that resulted in a positive outcome.
What was the context? What happened and
what were the consequences? Can DEMO iden-
tify the assumptions and inferences that led
you to follow the gut feel? What were they?
Think of an instance where you relied on gut
feel that resulted in a negative outcome.
What was DEMO context? What happened and
what were the consequences? Can you iden-
tify the assumptions and inferences that led
you to follow the gut DEMO? What were they?
Intuition and Imagery
One aspect of intuition DEMO to both the exper-
tise-based and feelings-based perspectives is the
limitation imposed by language upon the expres-
sion of intuitions. Attempts at verbalization can
DEMO access to the more tacit ways of knowing
such as intuition,47 and the unconscious incuba-
tions that eventually lead to insight may literally
DEMO beyond words. Language by its nature seg-
ments and analyzes our experiences of the world
Sadler-Smith and Shefy
85
into concepts, and we also use words as a means of
expressing our understanding of the relationships
DEMO concepts. When an executive eventually
solves a problem by insight, the DEMO is that he or
she can probably explain the solution. But unlike
insights, intuitions cannot be readily put into
words (indeed this is DEMO of the key differences
between insight and intuition). The anthropologist
Charles Laughlin argued that limiting legitimate
knowledge to that which the brain's DEMO
structures can express acts to restrict the scope of
human knowing.48 Hence, in some ways language
is a double-edged sword that enables us to label
and express our emotions, thoughts, and intentions
but also restricts DEMO thinking by acting as a sieve,
filtering our experiences of and feelings about the
world through a verbal screen. The word (a sym-
bol) is substituted for the experience or feeling;
hence when we try to express our intuitions, we
communicate them second-hand through the lin-
guistic symbols which we use in order to represent
them to others.
DEMO may manifest itself as an image or nar-
rative. Historical and anecdotal accounts testify to
the important role that imagery plays in creative
and DEMO functioning. Many scientists and
technologists attach a great deal of importance to
mental images in the process of idea generation,
scientific problem solving, and invention.49 Cre-
ative intuition is a valuable tool for those decisions
DEMO require divergent thinking processes. Since it
is not necessarily a verbal process and hence is
difficult to articulate, the use of images provides
an alternative to the linear, convergent processing
that the "censoring" function of verbalization and
rational analysis may impose upon creative intu-
ition.
Recommendation
5: Use imagery
It has been argued that the mode of presentation of
DEMO problem can exert an influence over the way in
which it is solved. Drawing upon research involv-
ing a number of decision-making and probability-
DEMO tasks (such as the card problem, the age-
drinking problem, DEMO the 'Linda' problem) in
which participants often overlook disconfirmation,
DEMO argued that visual presentations can pro-
voke an intuitive understanding which is arrived
at implicitly and held tacitly but which may pro-
vide an DEMO way of identifying anomalies.
The more people are able to think visually, the
more likely they are to use intuitive processes.50
The following is a simple decision visualization
exercise.5'
86
Imagine that you are in a place that you know
and DEMO walking down a well-worn path.
While you are walking, you are DEMO over a
situation that is challenging you. The path
breaks ahead of you into a number of routes,
each representing one of your DEMO
Notice how you feel when you contemplate
each one. Where does each path take you?
What is each path's effect on you? How hard
is it to visualize walking down one path?
Does DEMO path feel better than the others?
Visualize your chosen path in a number of
years time? How does this feel to you?
Exercises relying exclusively upon narratives and
images based upon meaningful (concrete rather
than abstract) contexts can be helpful in postpon-
ing the censorship of language and rational anal-
ysis and also in enabling executives to make DEMO
plicit judgments that may be difficult to articulate
verbally.52 This does not mean that problems visu-
alized necessarily will be solved correctly, but the
use of imagery may create better conditions for
intuitive processes to occur.
DEMO Beware!
It has been said of intuition that it is 'sometimes
DEMO but never in doubt.' The buzz from making
great decision calls DEMO intuition can be quite
seductive. However, bias (with the possibility of
attendant negative consequences) is just as likely
to be present in intuitive decisions as in any other
types of decision processes. Hence, it is important
that the feelings of certitude that may accompany
some intuitions are DEMO to scrutiny and that
they are managed as effectively as possible in
order to overcome any biases and to ameliorate
negative outcomes. Not all DEMO of bias apply
across all kinds of decision processes,53 and in this
regard executives need to beware of a number of
potential sources DEMO error and bias in relation to
intuition.
(1) Ease of recall: individuals judge events that
are easy to remember as being more frequent than
those that are less easily recalled. Successful in-
tuitions may be DEMO recalled and hence judged
to be more frequent than they actually are. This in
turn may have the effect of reinforcing the belief
that DEMO intuitive judgment calls are fre-
quent. Executives should ask themselves: Are
DEMO intuitions as frequent as they
appear to be and poor intuitive judgment calls
simply forgotten?
(2) Presumed associations: individuals tend to
overestimate the probability of two events co-oc-
Academy of Management Executive
November
curring, and the strength of the presumed relation-
ship may be fallacious. Executives DEMO probe
their intuitive feelings about a decision and the
associated cause-and-effect relationships and try
to distinguish intuition from fallacies.
(3) Over-confidence: the emotional reward from
past successes in intuitive judgments may give
rise to an DEMO feeling of the infallibility of
intuition, which may in turn contribute DEMO the illu-
sion of control and lead to over-confidence in one's
intuitive decision-making abilities. Executives
should try to distinguish intuition from over-confi-
dence DEMO be realistic about their abilities to con-
trol events through intuitive or rational means.
(4) Confirmation bias: we tend to seek confirma-
tory evidence for what we think is true and neglect
the search for DEMO evidence. What we
want to happen and what might happen may be
two very different things so the emotion of desire
and the feelings DEMO the rightness or wrongness
of a course of action need to be weighed up as
objectively as possible. Executives should try to
distinguish intuition DEMO wishful thinking.
(5) Hindsight bias: we sometimes overestimate
the degree DEMO which an outcome was correctly pre-
dicted. The 'knew-it-all-along' (or 'I should have
followed my gut feel all along') syndrome can DEMO a
significant source of error in human judgment. Ex-
ecutives should try to distinguish intuition from
20-20 hindsight by developing explanations for the
occurrence DEMO outcomes that did not happen and by
examining the ways in which a distorted view of the
past may influence their decision-making in the DEMO
ture.54
Recommendation
6: Play devil's advocate
Sources of bias can DEMO individuals to adopt a
closed mind when it comes to challenging the in-
formation that supports their intuitions (or indeed
their rationality). Belief perseverance can be coun-
teracted by getting into the habit of constructing DEMO
narrative for why a contrary theory might be true.55
Devil's advocacy is a procedure in which one or
more persons (or oneself in the absence of others)
raise objections to favored choices, challenge un-
derlying assumptions, and point out alternatives.
By playing devil's advocate and generating
counter-arguments, executives can probe intuitive
decisions for inconsistencies, inaccuracies, and ir-
relevancies.56 Alternative courses of action can
then be suggested and explored. DEMO process can
expose weaknesses in an executive's intuitions or
provide support for them, but either way the impor-
tant thing is that the opportunity has been pro-
vided for refutation. Devil's advocacy has been
2004
Sadler-Smith and Shefy
87
shown to produce significantly higher-quality de-
cisions DEMO to consensus group decisions
and is especially useful in ill-structured problem
scenarios of the type where intuition might need to
be relied upon. The DEMO of a 'positive hunch'
should be checked out by actively DEMO facts
that might corroborate or invalidate the hunch.57
Executives can play devil's advocate by asking
these questions of their own or others' intuitions:
Are you mixing up your intuitions with easily
remembered (significant) DEMO?
Are you underestimating
rence of two events?
the chance co-occur-
Are you being over-confident
ments?
in your judg-
Are you looking DEMO confirmatory evidence for
what you hope is true and neglecting any
contrary evidence?
Are you mixing
thinking?
up intuition
with wishful
Are DEMO sometimes
guilty of 20-20 hindsight?
Balancing Intuition and Rationality
A central feature of critiques of the rational deci-
sion model was that organizational DEMO
and the cognitive capacity of decision-makers may
combine to render rational decisions 'good enough'
(satisficing) rather than 'ideal' (optimizing) behav-
iors. Hence, outcomes are not irrational but are
reasoned only within limits.58 This treatment of
rationality as bounded is one way in which exec-
DEMO can reduce the cognitive load placed upon
them. It is important to stress that within this pur-
view we are not proposing that intuition DEMO better
than rationality, or indeed vice versa. We are sug-
gesting DEMO a single-minded emphasis on ratio-
nality (or intuition) presents a partial view. Execu-
tives might achieve a more balanced perspective
by considering both DEMO and intuition as
complementary and mutually reinforcing compo-
nents of a decision strategy.
Intuition is a composite phenomenon that incor-
porates expertise and feeling, and as such is
linked to mental processes both in the cerebellum
DEMO the limbic system and to bodily felt senses. It
is not simply educated ('smart') guessing; it is more
than 'flight or DEMO' (instinct) and is distinct from
eureka' experiences (insight). DEMO resides at a level
below consciousness, axrises cognitively, affec-
tively, DEMO somatically and is manifested as a
'hunch' or 'gut feel.' These feelings may be associ-
ated with images or narratives or an DEMO feel-
ing of certitude about the rightness or wrongness
of a course of action. When used intelligently, in-
tuition has the potential to enhance executive
judgment and decision-making.
Intuitive knowledge, understanding, and skill
can be DEMO through experience and practice,59
and over two decades ago Taggart and Robey60
made a plea that the management education cur-
riculum should include DEMO However, in our
view, both as graduates of and teachers in man-
agement schools in our respective countries (the
UK and Israel), the overall situation suggests that
little has changed in the intervening twenty DEMO
One can see reasons why the rational model pre-
vails: it DEMO safe, comforting, and reassuring, and in
many situations it works DEMO well. The intui-
tive model has more risks attached to it, DEMO be
disconcerting, paradoxical and ambiguous, and in
many routine situations is probably inadvisable.
However, intuition is pervasive, automatic, and in-
voluntary; DEMO executives have much to gain
from being able to accept it and manage it. More-
over, there are time-pressured and creative prob-
lem-solving situations where intuition is important
and even necessary; therefore executives need to
be able to harness its potential while being aware
of its dangers.
Intuitive DEMO,
skill can be learned
and practice.
understanding, and
through experience
DEMO 7: Capture and validate your
intuitions
Hunches and gut feelings arise DEMO, most
often when the intuitive mind is given freedom to
roam. DEMO the natural tendency of the rational
mind is to censor intuitions before they have a
chance to be fully explicated and tested. It is DEMO
sible for individual executives to develop tech-
niques that may assist in creating the appropriate
psychological and physiological conditions for in-
tuitions (the 'DEMO state') and also to develop the
skills to capture, in DEMO systematic way, intuitions
when they do occur. The importance of the DEMO
environment and the creation of the appropriate
inner state which may promote an intuitive 'flow'
are discussed elsewhere.6'
With regard to capturing this flow, it is possible
through training to recognize and record intuitions
88
Recommendation
1. Open up the closet
2. Don't mix up DEMO I's
3. Elicit good feedback
4. Get a feel for your
batting average
5. Use imagery
6. Play devil's advocate
7. Capture DEMO validate
your intuitions
Academy of Management
Executive
November
Table 1
Guidelines
for Developing
Intuitive Awareness
Description
To what extent do you: experience intuition; DEMO your feelings; count on intuitive
judgments; suppress hunches; covertly rely DEMO gut feel?
Instinct, insight, and intuition are not synonymous; DEMO distinguishing
between your instincts, your insights, and your intuitions.
Seek feedback on your intuitive judgments; build confidence in your gut feel;
create a learning environment in which you can develop better intuitive
awareness.
Benchmark DEMO intuitions; get a sense for how reliable your hunches are; ask
yourself how your intuitive judgment might be improved.
Use imagery rather than DEMO; literally visualize potential future scenarios that
take your gut feelings into DEMO
Test out intuitive judgments; raise objections to them; generate
counter-arguments; DEMO how robust gut feel is when challenged.
Create the inner state to give your intuitive mind the freedom to roam; capture
your creative intuitions; log them before they are censored by rational
analysis.
before the censorship of rationality takes over.
Once captured (admittedly in what may be the
less-than-satisfactory medium of the written or
spoken word), they can be DEMO and evaluated
and patterns in the intuitive process identified.
One way of doing this is by keeping a diary or
otherwise documenting62 the intuition DEMO terms of:
the time of day at which it occurred; DEMO content; the
physical location at the time; its form (words, im-
ages, bodily feelings); and a reflection upon any
biases, DEMO, or wishful thinking that might con-
taminate the intuition. This is DEMO successfully
achieved through a formalized diary process over
a pre-defined period with personal reflection and
feedback.63 This and the other recommendations
for developing intuitive DEMO are summa-
rized in Table 1.
Becoming Intuitively Intelligent
The relationship between intuition and rationality
can work in a number of ways. For example, pro-
ceeding from intuition to rational analysis repre-
sents a 'validation' DEMO in which gut feeling
may be checked out by rational analysis by posing
questions such as 'Do the data back up my hunch?'DEMO
Proceeding from rational analysis to intuition rep-
resents an 'incubation' sequence in which intuition
provides an expertise-based or feelings-based val-
idation for judgments DEMO at through rational
analysis. For example, executives can ponder in a
DEMO manner, 'What does my experi-
ence tell me about this decision?' 'Are there any
lessons from the past that I can draw on?' or 'How
does this decision feel to me?' Allowing one's
thinking to iterate between intuition and rational
analysis may allow DEMO mode to reinforce the
other until an optimal judgment can be made that
satisfies both the 'hard' elements (the facts and
figures) DEMO 'soft' elements (the hunch or gut feel).
This process DEMO provide a means by which bi-
ases from one source can be offset by those from
the other.64 It may also provide a 'cooling-off' mech-
anism for managing any overconfidence65 that
may accompany a rationally or intuitively derived
decision choice.
Intuition and rationality are two parallel sys-
tems DEMO knowing; in this sense they are dual pro-
cesses. The conscious DEMO system has been
described as intentional, analytic, primarily ver-
bal, DEMO relatively emotion-free; it encodes infor-
mation in abstract symbols and concepts. DEMO in-
tuitive system has been described as automatic,
holistic, primarily DEMO, and associated with
emotion and feeling; it encodes information in con-
crete forms such as examples, images, and sto-
ries66 and as DEMO decision heuristics. Re-
search indicates that both the expertise and
feeling facets of intuition originate below the level
of conscious awareness and are inter-linked. DEMO
rational system exists in conscious awareness
alongside the intuitive system. The rational and
the intuitive systems are not unbridgeable, and the
challenge is to weave the two together67 and inte-
grate intuition with rationality in order DEMO make
intelligent use of intuitive judgments. Successful
decision-makers are those who, DEMO the words Adam
Smith, "do not necessarily have a complete portrait
of themselves, warts and all, but they do have the
ability DEMO stop abruptly when their own intuition
and what is happening Out There are suddenly out
of kilter. "68
2004
The intuitive and rational mindsets are at the
heart of an DEMO dynamic in executives' cog-
nition. The dichotomy of intuition and rationality DEMO
a false one. Moreover, the portrayal of intuition as
the infallible DEMO ineffable 'good guy' and rational-
ity as the mechanistic but manageable 'bad guy
(or vice versa) is biased and erroneous.69 It makes
no sense to talk of intuition versus rationality but
only of intuition DEMO rationality. By considering
only rationality, one is left with a partial DEMO of
knowing the world and its possibilities. Intuition
and rationality are complementary to the extent
that executives need to be able to learn how DEMO use
each to fit the demands of particular decision-mak-
ing situations. The education and training of exec-
utives emphasizes rational analysis and, by and
large, appears to pay scant regard to creative in-
tuition. The challenge is for executives to extend,
possibly through training, self-development, feed-
DEMO, and coaching, their own repertoire of skills
and strategies for intuitive judgment and to apply
them frequently and naturally, and in doing so
acquire a more comprehensive armory of decision-
making skills.
Intuition and rationality DEMO two parallel
systems of knowing; in this sense they
are dual DEMO
Intuition is a natural component of executives'
thinking but one that, although we are often all too
aware of it, we may DEMO to ignore or consign to the
closet, perhaps because it is DEMO as unscien-
tific and irrational. Intuition-as-expertise and intu-
ition-as-feeling are unconscious but explicable;
when understood and managed effectively, they
can be a powerful force in complex and fast-mov-
ing business environments and can lead to DEMO
proved executive decision-making capabilities
through the development of a finely tuned intuitive
intelligence.
Endnotes
1 Robert Salmon, former vice-president of L'Oreal (http://www.
refresher.com/!signals); Lindsey Owen-Jones, chairman and
chief executive officer DEMO L'Oreal, in Business Week Online, 28
June 1999.
2 Davis, S.H., & Davis, P.B. 2003. The intuitive dimensions of
administrative decision-making. Lanham: Scarecrow; Eisen-
hardt, K.M. 1999. Strategy as decision-making. Sloan Manage-
ment Review, Spring: 65-72. For a summary of the dominant
paradigms, see Das, T.K., & Teng, B-S. 1999. Cognitive biases
and strategic decision processes: An integrative perspective.
Journal of Management Studies, 36(6): 757-778. The question
remains as to where an intuitive decision mode fits within the
spectrum of approaches identified by Das and Teng, op. cit., 759.
Sadler-Smith and Shefy
89
3 Hayashi, A.M. 2001. When to DEMO your gut. Harvard Busi-
ness Review, February: 59-65.
' Huber, DEMO, & Daft, R.L. 1987. The information environments
of organisations. In F.M. Javlin, et al. (Eds.). Handbook of orga-
nizational communication. Newbury DEMO, CA: Sage.
5Hodgkinson, G.P., & Sparrow, P. 2002. The DEMO orga-
nization. Buckingham: Open University Press discusses the im-
portance of DEMO and intention.
6Fineman, S. 1996: Emotion and learning. In S.R. Clegg, C.
Hardy, & W.R. Nord (Eds). Handbook of organization studies.
London: Sage: 545.
7 Leblebici, H., & Salancik, G.R. 1981. Effects of environmental
uncertainty on information and decisions in banks. Administra-
tive DEMO Quarterly, 26(4): 578 -596; Narayanan, V.K., & Fahey,
L. 1982. The micro-politics of strategy formulation. Academy of
Management Review, 7(1): 25-34; Bourgeois, L.J., & Eisenhardt,
K.M. 1988. Strategic decision processes in high velocity environ-
ments: Four cases in the micro-computer industry. Management
Science, 34(7): 816-835.
8 The relationship between procedural rationality and deci-
sion-making effectiveness (DME) was positive and statistically
DEMO and when controlling for environmental instability
(r = 0.35, p < 0.01; t = 2.30, p < 0.05). See: Dean, DEMO, & Sharf man,
M.P. 1996. Does decision-making matter: A study of strategic
decision-making effectiveness. Academy of Management Jour-
nal, 39(2): 368-396.
'The correlation between rationality and uncertainty was
negative and statistically significant (r = -0.38, p < 0.01). See:
Dean, J.W., & Sharfman, M.P. 1993. Procedural rationality in the
strategic decision-making process. DEMO of Management
Studies, 30(4): 587-620.
")Daft, R.L., & Lengel, H.R. 1986. Organizational information
requirements, media richness and structural design. Manage-
ment Science, 32(5): 554-571. The research findings in support of
these contrasting viewpoints are themselves somewhat com-
plex. For example, Dean & Sharf man (1993) found that decision-
makers engaged in less DEMO processes of strategic deci-
sion-making when faced with highly uncertain problems;
whereas when there was little competitive threat, little per-
ceived external control, and the issues being faced were well
understood, executives used rational DEMO Fredrickson &
Mitchell (1984) reported a negative relationship between ratio-
DEMO and organizational performance and used it as introduc-
tory evidence that rational models are not appropriate for some
environments. Further research by Fredrickson (1984) estab-
lished a positive relationship between rationality and perfor-
mance in stable environments. See Fredrickson, J.W., & Mitch-
ell, T.R. 1984. Strategic decision processes: Comprehensiveness
and performance in an industry with an unstable environment.
Academy of Management Journal, 27(2): 399-423; Fredrickson,
J.W. 1984. DEMO comprehensiveness of strategic decision pro-
cesses: Extension, observations, future directions. DEMO of
Management Journal, 27(3): 445-466; Priem, R.L., Rasheed, A., &
Kotulik, A. 1995. Rationality in strategic decision processes,DEMO
environmental dynamism and firm performance. Journal of
Management, 21 (5): 913-929.
'" Goleman, D. 1998. Working with emotional intelligence.
New York: Bantam Books.
2 Hodgkinson & Sparrow, op. cit.
13 Bargh, J.A., & Chartrand, T.L. 1999. The unbearable auto-
maticity of being. American Psychologist, 54(7): 462-479.
14 Parikh, J. 1994. Intuition: The new frontier of management.
Oxford: Blackwell Business.
15 Burke, L.A., & Miller, M.K. 1999. Taking the mystery out of
intuitive decision-making. The Academy of Management Exec-
utive, 13(4): 91-99.
90
Academy of Management Executive
November
16 Isenberg, D.J. 1984. How senior managers think. Harvard
Business Review, November/December: 81-90.
17 Overell, S. 2001. Trust you gut. Director, July: 28.
18 Hayashi, 2001, DEMO cit., 61.
19 Benner, P., & Tanner, C. 1987. How expert nurses use intuition.
American Journal of Nursing, January: 23-31; Davis & Davis, op. cit.
20 See Allinson, C.W., & Hayes, DEMO 1996. The Cognitive Style
Index: A measure of intuition-analysis for organizational DEMO
search. Journal of Management Studies, 33(1): 19-135; Allinson,
C.W., Chell, E., & Hayes, J. 2000. Intuition and entrepreneurial
DEMO European Journal of Work and Organizational Psy-
chology, 9: 31-43; DEMO, E. 2004. Cognitive style and the
management of small and medium DEMO enterprises. Organi-
zation Studies, 25: 155- 181; Clarke, I., & Mackaness, W. 2001.
Management intuition: An interpretative account of structure
and content of decision schemas using cognitive maps. Journal
of Management Studies, 38(2): 147-172.
21 Gardner, W.L., & Martinko, M.J. 1996. Using the MBTI to
study managers: A literature review and research agenda. Jour-
nal of Management, 22(1): 45-83.
22 Westcott, M.R. 1968. DEMO a contemporary psychology of
intuition. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
23 O'Reilly, C.A. 1980. Individuals and information overload
in organizations: DEMO more necessarily better? Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 23(4): 684-696.
24 Sparrow, P.R. 1999. Strategy and cognition: Understanding
the role DEMO management knowledge structures, organizational
memory and information overload. Creativity and Innovation
DEMO, 8(2): 140-148.
25 McCutcheon, H.H.I., & Pincombe, J. 2001. Intuition: An im-
portant tool in the practice of nursing. Journal of Advanced
Nursing, 35: 342-348; Atkinson, L. 2000. Trusting your DEMO judg-
ment. In Atkinson, T., & Claxton, G. (Eds). 2000. The intuitive
practitioner. Buckingham: Open University Press: 53-66; Gold-
berg, P. 1989. The many faces of intuition. In W.H. Agor (Ed.)DEMO
Intuition in organisations: Leading and managing productively.
Newbury Park, CA.: DEMO Publications.
26 The questions are useful only as a starting point for self-
reflection and should not be used a basis for typecasting. For
DEMO, Einstein is seen by many as the archetypal rational
mind. but DEMO is widely reported as recognizing intuition as the
Isower of all true science.' See Dunne, B.J. 1997. Subjectivity and
intuition in the scientific DEMO In R. Davis-Floyd & P. Sven
Arvidson (Eds), Intuition: The inside story: Interdisciplinary per-
spectives. London: Routledge. For valid and reliable DEMO
measures of intuition and their psychometric evaluation, the
following research may DEMO consulted: Allinson & Hayes, 1996,
op. cit.; Epstein, S., et al. 1996. Individual differences in intui-
tive-experiential and analytical-reasoning thinking styles. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71: 390-405; Hodgkin-
son, G.P., & Sadler-Smith, E. 2003. Complex or unitary? A
critique DEMO empirical reassessment of the Allinson-Hayes
Cognitive Style Index. Journal of Occupational and Organiza-
tional Psychology, 76: 243-268; Scott, S.G., & Bruce, DEMO 1994.
Determinants of innovative behavior: A path model of individ-
ual DEMO in the workplace. Academy of Management Jour-
nal, 37: 580-607.
27 Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. 1982. On the study of statisti-
cal intuitions. Cognition, 11: 123-141.
28 Claxton, G. 2001. The anatomy of intuition. In Atkinson, T.,
& Claxton, G. (Eds). The intuitive practitioner. Buckingham:
Open University Press: 32-52.
29 This is the way in which Wallas (1926) described intuition
in the context DEMO creativity and insight in his incubation-illumi-
nation theory of creativity. See Wallas, G. 1926. The art of
thought. New York: Harcourt Brace.
30 DEMO argued that there existed a tacit knowledge
whose contents are not part of one's normal consciousness or
open to introspection (in essence 'DEMO know more than we can
tell'). See Polanyi. M. 1966. DEMO tacit dimension. New York:
Doubleday.
31 See Vaughan, F. 1979. DEMO intuition. New York:
Doubleday.
32 Reber, A.S. 1993. Implicit learning DEMO tacit knowledge:
An essay on the cognitive unconscious. New York: DEMO
University Press. Recent advances in cognitive science and
artificial intelligence suggest that intuition-as-expertise is
an outcome of long periods of learning and expertise. See
DEMO, E.W.K. 2004. Towards a scientific inquiry into super-
stitious business decision DEMO Organization Studies, 25:
923-946.
33 Hogarth. R.M. 2001. Educating intuition. DEMO: The Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.
34 Simon, H.A. 1989. Making management decisions: The role
of intuition and emotion. In W.H. Agor (DEMO). Intuition in organi-
zations: Leading and managing productively. Newbury Park,DEMO
CA.: Sage.
" Bowers, K.S., et al. 1990. Intuition in DEMO context of discov-
ery. Cognitive Psychology, 22: 72-110.
36 Klein, DEMO 2003. Intuition at work: Why developing your gut
instincts will make DEMO better at what you do. New York: Cur-
rency Doubleday.
37 DEMO & Davis, op. cit., 59; Bruner, J.S. 1960. The process of
education. Cambridge, MA.: Harvard University Press.
38 Wagner, R.K. 2002. Smart people doing dumb things: A case
of managerial incompetence. In R.J. Sternberg (Ed.). Why smart
people can be so stupid. New Haven & London: Yale University
Press. Related research also suggests that: (1) tacit knowledge
is not related to IQ; (2) the relationship DEMO tacit knowledge
and performance is independent of relations between person-
ality and performance.
39http://www.ceoforum.com.au/20021 0_reflections.cfm.
40 Klein, op. cit., 124; Jenkins. M., & Johnson, G. 1997. Entrepre-
neurial intentions and outcomes: A comparative causal map-
ping study. Journal of Management Studies, 34 (DEMO Issue):
895-920.
41 Weick, K.E. 2001. Making sense of the organisation. Oxford:
Blackwell Business.
42 Hogarth. op. cit.
43 Damasio, A.R. 1994. Descartes' error: Emotion, reason and
the human brain. New York: Harper Collins/Quill; Goleman, D.
1996. Emotional intelligence: Why it DEMO matter more than IQ.
London: Bloomsbury.
44 LeDoux, J. 1996. The emotional brain. New York: Touch-
stone/Simon & Schuster. Goleman uses the term 'emotional
hijacking' in his popularization of LeDoux's research. See: Go-
leman, D., 1996, op. cit.
45 Russo, J.E., & Schoemaker, P.H.J. 1992. Managing overcon-
fidence. Sloan Management Review, Winter: 7-17; Taggart, W.
1997. Discovering and understanding intuition. Exceptional Hu-
man Experience, 15(2): 174-188.
46 'Batting average' is used in the DEMO game of cricket; an
alternative might be 'strike rate.'
47 Hogarth, op. cit.
48 Laughlin, C. 1997. The nature of intuition: A neuropsycho-
logical approach. In R. Davis-Floyd & P. Sven Arvidson (Eds).
Intuition: The inside story: Interdisciplinary perspectives. Lon-
don: Routledge.
49 Ward, T.B., Smith. S.M., & Finke, R.A. 1999. Creative cogni-
DEMO In R.J. Sternberg (Ed.). The handbook of creativity. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. The quantum physicist
Richard Feynman claimed that one of DEMO reasons Einstein
failed to develop a unified theory was that he stopped thinking
in concrete physical images and turned to the manipulation of
2004
Sadler-Smith and Shefy
91
equations. See Monsay, E.H. 1997. Intuition in the development
of scientific theory and practice. In R. Davis-Floyd & P. DEMO
Arvidson (Eds). Intuition: The inside story: Interdisciplinary per-
spectives. DEMO: Routledge. Numerous examples exist in the
history of thought in science, the arts, and many other fields of
human endeavor which attest to the significant role played by
imagery (visual, auditory, and kinesthetic).
50 Hogarth, op. cit., 231.
51Adapted from Watts, G.W. 1993. Exercises for bringing
head and heart together. Training & Development, November:
17-19.
52 See: Reid, P. 2002. How to think: Building your mental
muscle. London: Prentice Hall.
5 Das & Teng, op. cit.
54Bukszar, E., & Connolly, T. 1988. Hindsight bias and strate-
gic choice: Some problems in learning from experience. Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 31(3): 628-641.
5 Myers, D.G. 2002. Intuition: Its powers and DEMO New Ha-
ven: Yale University Press: 118.
5 Russo, J.E., & Schoemaker, P.H.J. 1992. Managing overcon-
fidence. Sloan Management Review, Winter: 7-17; Schwenk,
C.R. 1984. Devil's advocacy in managerial decision-making.
Journal of Management Studies, 21: 153-168.
57 Schweiger, D.M., Sandberg, W.R., & Rechner, P.L. 1989. Ex-
periential effects of dialectical enquiry, devil's advocacy, and
consensus approaches to strategic decision-making. Academy
of Management Journal, 32: 745-772; Herbert, T.T., & Estes, R.W.
1977. Improving DEMO planning by formalising dissent: The
corporate devil's advocate. Academy of DEMO Review, 2:
662-667; Rowan, op. cit., 196.
5 See, for example, Miller, S.J., Hickson, D.J., & Wilson, D.C.
1999. Decision-making in organizations. In Clegg, S.R., Hardy,
C., & Nord, W.R. (Eds). Managing in organizations: Current is-
sues. London: Sage; Klein, G. 2003. Intuition at work. New York:
Century Doubleday; Davis & Davis, op. cit.
59Monsay (1997) cites the DEMO of scholars including Carl
Rogers and Jonas Salk in support of the assertion that under
the right conditions intuition can be developed. See Monsay,DEMO
E.H. 1997. Intuition in the development of scientific theory and
practice. In R. Davis-Floyd & P. Sven Arvidson (Eds). Intuition:
The inside story: Interdisciplinary perspectives. London:
Routledge.
60 Taggart, W., & Robey, D. 1981. Minds and managers: On the
dual nature of human DEMO processing and manage-
ment. Academy of Management Review, 6: 187-195.
6 For example, being mindful is an acute awareness of one's
surroundings, thoughts, and behaviors and is engendered by
pausing and examining our DEMO and feeling states as
dispassionately as we can through a non-reactive awareness
and openness to whatever the object of our attention is and our
DEMO, with the aim of avoiding premature cognitive commit-
ment (see Austin, J.H. 1998. Zen and the brain. Cambridge, MA.:
The MIT DEMO). Taggart described a quiet, relaxed mind that is
focused upon DEMO present moment and free of distracting fears
and desires as the sine qua non of intuitive experience (1997, op.
cit., 182). Intuitive flow experiences are discussed extensively in
Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1992. Flow: The DEMO of happiness.
London: Rider.
62 Taggart, op. cit., 181; Agor, op. cit., 222-223.
' Sadler-Smith, E, & Shefy, E. 2004. Developing intuition:
Becoming smarter by thinking less. Academy of Management
Best DEMO Proceedings, Academy of Management Annual
Meeting, New Orleans, Louisiana, August 2004.
6 Shapiro, S., & Spence, M.T. 1997. Managerial intuition: DEMO
conceptual and operational framework. Business Horizons, Jan-
uary/February: 63-68.
6 Russo & Schoemaker, op. cit.
6 See Epstein, S. 1994. Integration DEMO the cognitive and the
psychodynamic unconscious. American Psychologist, 49: 709-
724. Stanovich and West make a similar distinction between
System 1 processes that DEMO fast, heuristic, associative, and
automatic and System 2 processes that DEMO rule-based, slow,
load heavily on working memory, and are controlled. See
Stanovich, K.E., & West, R.F. 2000. Individual differences in
reasoning: Implications for the rationality debate? Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 23: DEMO
67 Haidt, J. 2001. The emotional dog and its rational tail: A
social intuitionist approach to moral judgment. Psychological
Review, 108(4): 814-834.
6 Slovic, P. 1972. Psychological study of human judgment:
Implications for investment decision-making. The Journal of
Finance, 27(4): 779-799.
6 Writers such as the anthropologist Charles Laughlin at-
tribute this dichotomy to DEMO historical association of intuition
with metaphysics and religion. In the Enlightenment and be-
yond, religion became the nemesis of science, and hence the
'intuitional baby' was thrown out with the 'metaphysical bath-
water.' See Laughlin, C. 1997. The nature of intuition: A neuro-
psychological approach. DEMO R. Davis-Floyd & P. Sven Arvidson
(Eds). Intuition the inside DEMO: Interdisciplinary perspectives.
London: Routledge.
_,*
4
/
Eugene Sadler-Smith DEMO profes-
sor of management develop-
ment at the School of Manage-
ment, University of Surrey, UK.
For seven years up until 1994 he
DEMO a manager in the HR func-
tion of a large gas company. He
has published research papers
in journals such as Organiza-
tion Studies DEMO Journal of Or-
ganizational Behavior and is on
the advisory Board for the Brit-
ish Journal of Management.
Contact: e.sadler-smith@surrey.
ac.uk.
Erella Shefy is managing direc-
tor of Humanager Consulting,
Israel. She has master's DEMO
grees from Tel Aviv and Lesley
Universities and extensive con-
sulting experience. She has pub-
lished papers in journals such as
Human Relations. Her DEMO in-
terests are organizational devel-
opment, team development,
coaching, and management de-
velopment. She integrates east-
em philosophies such as Bud-
dhism DEMO Taoism and holistic
methods into her practice. Con-
tact: shefye@bezeqint.net.{1g42fwefx}