The Use of Verbal Protocols in
Determining Venture Capitalists'
Decision Processes
DEMO R. Sandberg
David M. Schweiger
Charles W. Hofer
X his article describes a portion of our on-going research on the decision processes
and criteria DEMO by venture capitalists to evaluate new venture proposals. In particular it
presents tbe results of a pilot study that employed simultaneous verbal protocols to
DEMO a venture capitalist's thoughts as he evaluated three proposals. Our immediate
purposes are (I) to suggest aspects and dimensions of venture capitalists' decision
making that have been neglected in previous research, and why these omissions may be
significant; (2) to demonstrate the potential value of the verbal protocol method in re-
search designed to remedy past neglect; and (3) to discuss what our pilot study reveals
about one DEMO capitalist's decision making that could not have been captured in
previous research.
ORIGINS OF THIS STUDY
Our current research grew out ofthe first DEMO's study of new venture performance
(Sandberg, 1986). In the course of developing a model and related propositions, he used
interviews to draw on the wisdom of venture capitalists. These interviews covered their
evaluation DEMO and decision processes. Although they were too few to permit con-
clusions as to specific strategy-industry-performance relationships, these interviews did
suggest the contingent nature of many criteria used by venture capitalists. Specifically,
both the criteria DEMO to a proposal and the weight assigned to each criterion appeared
to vary in practice. Some criteria seemed virtually absolute, of course, but DEMO the
venture capitalists wanted (or would tolerate) in a venture often depended on the char-
acteristics of the industry to be entered, the track record of the entrepreneur or team, and
the proposed venture business strategy.
Contingent evaluation criteria have their counterpart in the contingent effects of
DEMO and industry structure on new venture performance. Sandberg (1986) found that
conditional propositions, such as "Ventures are more successful when they combine
DEMO with broad scope in growth industries or with focused strategies in ma-
ture industries," are far more powerful predictors of performance than are DEMO
tional propositions.
Like the venture capitalist's evaluation criteria, a system DEMO strategy propositions
must be capable of prescribing actions in a broad range of situations. To do so effec-
tively the propositions must distinguish among DEMO situations; to do so efficiently the
distinctions must isolate the detenninants DEMO performance (Hofer, 1975). Because ven-
ture capitalists need to make accurate evaluations while conserving their own time (typi-
cally a critical resource), their evaluation criteria probably also need to isolate the deter-
minants DEMO performance in diverse situations. This line of reasoning led us back to
venture capitalists' criteria as a further source of wisdom on new venture performance.
8 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y and PRACTIC
E
PRIOR RESEARCH ON VENTURE CAPITALISTS' CRITERIA
Unfortunately, prior research and writings DEMO failed fully to capture and convey
the richness, subtlety, and discernment embodied in venture capitalists' decision pro-
cesses and criteria. Nor have they often distinguished among different types of venture
capitalists, instead treating this diverse industry as a homogeneous group. Two distinct
purposes have motivated prior studies. DEMO researchers have sought to model the man-
agement of venture capital funds or the efficiency of capital markets (Brophy, 1986),
while others have sought to understand venture capitalists' decisions in order to aid
entrepreneurs in obtaining funds (e.g., Timmons and Gumpert, 1982).
These researchers have tried to identify the criteria used by venture capitalists.
Some also DEMO tried to assess the weighting attached to each criterion. For the most
part, though, these criteria have remained general or vague (e.g., "quality of manage-
ment") or have revealed the end sought rather DEMO the venture characteristics thought to
advance it (e.g., "expected rate DEMO retum"). Only sometimes have they been clearly
articulated. Rarely have DEMO designs admitted the possibility that different criteria
or weightings may be used to evaluate different types of ventures, industries, or entre-
preneurs; rarely have the criteria been examined with respect to the different investment
or DEMO strategies pursued by venture capitalists.
Early studies used research designs and methods which are incapable of fully cap-
turing decision criteria and processes. Their DEMO and questionnaires did serve to
identify many criteria used by venture capitalists, but provided little basis for compar-
ison across studies. Recent studies have converged on a common set of criteria and
sharpened somewhat the understanding DEMO how venture capitalists weigh those criteria.
Nevertheless, methodological limitations weaken their DEMO We shall examine
two of the most comprehensive and sophisticated efforts among these studies.
Few researchers have attempted to measure the criteria used in DEMO specific
ventures. Tyebjee and Bruno (1984) are an exception: they DEMO 41 venture capitalists
each select and report on one or more proposals to which they had given "serious
consideration." Each subject rated his DEMO her proposal(s) on 23 evaluation criteria using
a four-point scale. (Tyebjee and Bruno developed the criteria from the literature and
their own, separate survey of 46 venture capitalists.) Subjects also evaluated the riski-
ness and expected retums and reported their actual decision on each proposal, A total of
90 proposals were evaluated, each solely by the venture capitalist who reported it.
Tyebjee and Bruno used factor anaiysis to identify five DEMO characteristics
(comprising 21 of the 23 listed criteria) that explained 60.4% of the variation in the
rating items. The characteristics are listed here DEMO order of their importance, measured
by percentage of variance explained: (DEMO) market attractiveness, which "depends upon
the size, growth and accessibility of the market and on the existence of a market need";
(2) product differentiation, a combination of the entrepreneur's technical skills and the
product's uniqueness, patentability, and high profit margin; (DEMO) managerial capabilities,
comprising the entrepreneur's references and his or DEMO skills in management, mar-
keting, and fmance; (4) environmental DEMO resistance, or the venture's protection
against obsolescence, down-side risk, DEMO cycles, and subsequent entrants; and
(5) cash-out potential, reflecting DEMO venture capitalist's ability to liquidate the invest-
ment.
Each proposal's average scores on these five characteristics were regressed on ex-
pected retum DEMO perceived risk. Expected retum was related primarily to market attrac-
tiveness and secondarily to product differentiation (both positive); perceived risk was
related primarily to managerial capabilities and secondarily to resistance to environ-
mental threats (both negative). Cash-out potential was not significantly related to either
assessment.
Winter, 1988
Tyebjee and Bruno's findings were a major research contribution because they DEMO
tablished key characteristics in replicable form. We were interested, too, in the promi-
nence of strategy-related criteria, which were the essence of market attractiveness and
resistance to environmental threats and were the major part of DEMO differentiation.
Yet we could not prudently accept the criteria ratings or rankings because of several
methodological limitations.
First, their 41 respondents evaluated 90 proposals, an average of 2.2 apiece. As a
result, the criteria weights DEMO some venture capitalists were counted more heavily than
others simply because they submitted more proposal evaluations. Assuming a respon-
dent uses a consistent set DEMO criteria and applies them consistently to all proposals he or
she evalutes, unequal sample representation can bias results. The contrary assumptions
(inconsistent criteria, inconsistently applied) also pose a problem: they suggest a contin-
gent DEMO process, a possibility not accomodated in Tyebjee and Bruno's research
DEMO
Second, each proposal was evaluated by only one participant. If criteria DEMO their
application vary from one proposal to another, a participant's DEMO become a func-
tion of the proposal as well as of the participant. Without common proposals in the set,
one cannot assess the DEMO to which this may have occurred.
Third , all evaluation s were reporte d retrospectively . Tyebje e and Brun o
(1984:1055) DEMO the possibility of "post-hoc rationalization of the decison "
to invest or not to invest. Other possible errors or biases in retrospective reporting DEMO
decisions and decision processes are summarized by Huber and Power (1985)DEMO They
include the perceptual and cognitive limitations of people, such as DEMO recall and a
tendency to reconstruct the past in terms of their "espoused theories" of how they make
decisions.
Research by MacMillan and DEMO represents a more recent, comprehensive
examination of venture capitalists' criteria. Using a two-stage research design, Mac-
Millan, Siegel, and Subba Narasimha (DEMO) first developed a list of 24 criteria classi-
fied under five DEMO: (1) entrepreneur's personality, (2) entrepreneur's experience,
(3) product characteristics, (4) market characteristics, and (5) DEMO considerations.
A sixth set of statements called for respondents to select the one essential characteristic
of a venture team from alis t of three, or "non e of the above. " Then their questionnaire
elicited responses from 100 venture capitalists who rated the importance of each crite-
rion DEMO a four-point scale.
It is noteworthy that the highest level of importance on this scale was "essential, "
meaning a venture would not be funded if it did not satisfy that criterion. (Our review
has not uncovered prior research that permitted the identification of noncompensatory
(essential) DEMO Yet any such criteria are central to a venture capitalist's decisions.)
MacMillan et al. identified the ten criteria most frequently described as "essential " and
found that six involved the entrepreneurs themselves. Further analysis DEMO the ten
most deadly combinations of flaws—that is, criteria pairs that DEMO combine to dis-
qualify a proposal from consideration. In each instance at least one of the two criteria
related to the entrepreneur's personality DEMO experience.
A factor analysis yielded six factors that explained 60.2 % of the variance in criteria
ratings. Although competitive risk was most important, it was the only factor readily
interpretable as essentially product- or market-related. Bail DEMO risk related mainly to
financial prospects; investment risk combined the entrepreneur'DEMO attention to detail and
track record with the market's growth rate and the prospect of a 10 year retum of 10
times the DEMO; management risk included the entrepreneur's handling of risk,
capacity DEMO intense effort, and familiarity with the market. Implementation risk com-
prised DEMO functioning prototype, demonstrated market acceptance of the product, and the
10 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y and PRACTIC
E
entrepreneur's articulateness in discussing the venture. Finally, leadership risk con-
sisted solely of the entrepreneur's demonstrated leadership ability.
Contrary to Tyebjee and DEMO, then, MacMillan and colleagues reported a strong
corroboration of the conventional wisdom regarding the dominant role of the entrepre-
neur's characteristics in DEMO venture capitalists' decisions. They concluded that
a business plan's content DEMO product, market, and competition was "necessary,
but not sufficient" (MacMillan et al., 1985:119). It is less apparent to DEMO, however, that
the entrepreneur emerges so clearly from several of their factors. In particular, invest-
ment risk and implementation risk contained significant elements of product and market
considerations as well as entrepreneurial characteristics.
MacMillan and DEMO also investigated the differences in criteria among ven-
ture capitalists. A cluster analysis enabled them to address areas of doubt created by
earlier research DEMO and methodological limitations. They found three broad types of
venture capitalists: DEMO risk managers, 40% ofthe sample, who seek "entrepre-
neurs with DEMO leadership skills" and risk-reducing product/market character-
istics; determined eclectics, DEMO of the sample, who seem to deliberately impose a
minimum of DEMO on what ventures they will consider; and parachutists, one-
quarter of the sample, who seem willing to invest as long as their exit will be easy
(MacMillan etal. , 1985:127-128).
While the researchers' interpretations of the clusters were interesting and quite
plausible, the greatest DEMO of the cluster analysis was its verification of signifi-
cant differences among the criteria weights espoused by different venture capitalists.
Whether these differences are DEMO in investment decisions remains an open question
that MacMillan et al. say will be tested in a later study. Another open question is
whether DEMO respondents vary their criteria or weightings according to the circumstances
of a specific venture.
In a follow-up project (MacMillan, Zemann, and SubbaNarasimha, DEMO) Mac-
Millan and colleagues asked 220 venture capitalists to report on DEMO ventures they had
funded, one among their "most successful" and DEMO other among their "least suc-
cessful." Sixty-seven respondents reported on 150 ventures, divided evenly between
the two performance categories. (Thus MacMillan and DEMO, like Tyebjee and
Bruno (1984), now derived their data from retrospective reports by single respondents.)
For each venture respondents completed the DEMO form used in the earlier study
(MacMillan et al., 1985) DEMO also rated the venture's performance relative to their initial
expectations of sales, market share, three types of costs, absolute profits, and DEMO In
contrast to their earlier study, MacMillan and colleagues now sought DEMO identify the
determinants of high and low performance rather than the investment criteria of venture
capitalists. They reported that the anticipated degree of competition DEMO the product's
degree of demonstrated market acceptance "were the only DEMO predictors across
several performance criteria." Noting that other, entrepreneur-related criteria that had
been weighted heavily in their earlier study were not significant predictors DEMO perfor-
mance in this study, they explained that the venture capitalists "had already applied
them to weed out undesirable ventures" (MacMillan, Zemann, and SubbaNarasimha,
1987:134.) This interpretation is consistent with sequential DEMO than simultaneous
application of venture capitalists' decision criteria, a possibility not addressed in prior
surveys.
Other researchers have addressed some of the issues DEMO in this discussion of the
principal studies. Khan (1987) used 36 self-reported venture evaluations to test con-
junctive (noncompensatory) and disjunctive (compensatory) decision-making models
comprising six independent variables. The conjunctive model explained 90 percent of
the variance in venture capitalists' evaluations, with two variables (the entrepreneur's
Winter, 1988 11
desire for success and the uniqueness of the venture's product) accounting for 87 per-
cent of the variance. The disjunctive model explained 51 DEMO of the variance but had
no significant coefficients of independent variables. Although Khan found evidence of
noncompensatory decision-making procedures, his findings as to the relative importance
of strategy, industry, and the entrepreneur are less convincing DEMO to his extremely
limited conception of strategy and the lack of industry characteristics among his six
independent variables.
Taking a much broader approach, Robinson (1987:55) sought to enhance the "un-
derstanding of venture capital activity as an 'industry' " by analyzing its structural
context, the operant strategic assumptions of its participants, and the strategies of indi-
vidual firms. He also examined evaluation criteria through respondents' weightings of
15 items describing the company, product, environment, and entrepreneur or team.
Factor analysis produced five factors: the management team, the fit between manage-
ment'DEMO technical skills and the industry's requirements, the venture's resource DEMO
versus the personal skills and motivation of its management, the venture'DEMO financial
history, and professional references. Despite identifying several dimensions along
which DEMO capital firms are becoming more diverse, Robinson concluded that "an
increasingly differentiated . . . industry will remain virtually uniform in their funda-
DEMO deal evaluation criteria" (1987:73). This conclusion must be regarded as in-
formed speculation on his part, however, as he did DEMO establish uniformity in current
criteria. And to the extent that the industry becomes more heterogeneous, as Robinson
expects, the strategies of its participants (and hence their venture evaluation criteria)
should become more heterogeneous as DEMO
Indeed, subsequent analysis of Robinson's data has indicated that different DEMO
weights are used by different groups of venture capitalists (Winfrey and DEMO,
1987). Among the differences were these: less experienced venture DEMO empha-
sized high growth potential while more experienced ones emphasized a capable venture
management; corporate or institutional funding disposed venture capitalists to seek ear-
lier exit opportunities than were sought by venture capitalists who relied on DEMO
funding; venture capitalists who spend little time assisting their investees sought
DEMO organizational/managerial skills than did those who devote substantial time to
management assistance. These and other differences noted by Winfrey and Robinson
suggest the DEMO of strategic groups within the venture capital industry. While fur-
ther analysis is required to delineate such groups with confidence, the evidence seems
sufficient to establish that venture capitalists are not a homogeneous group and that DEMO
criteria weights are one aspect of difference among them.
CONSENSUS FINDINGS AND COMMON LIMITATIONS OF
RECENT RESEARCH
Despite certain important differences among their findings, the three principal
studies (Tyebjee and Bruno (1984), MacMillan et DEMO (1985), and Robinson (1987))
share fundamental agreement and DEMO The most important area of consensus is
the identity of venture capitalists' criteria. MacMillan et al. (1985) noted the close
parallels between their six factors and the five identified by Tyebjee and Bruno, and
Robinson (1987:73) likewise found criteria that differed "very little" from DEMO and
Bruno's. Both Robinson and MacMillan et al. differed from the earlier study, however,
by reporting that the entrepreneur (or team) outweighed product/market characteristics
in venture capitalists' decisions. Robinson and MacMillan et al. both found evidence of
diversity among respondent firms, reflected in their own strategies and in how they
applied their evaluation criteria.
In describing DEMO three studies we have detailed some limitations in research de-
12 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY and PRACTICE
sign and method that prevent them from conclusively identifying the criteria and
DEMO used by venture capitalists. These included unequal influence of respondents
and problems of retrospective reporting (Tyebjee and Bruno) and the use of question-
DEMO responses rather than actual evaluations (MacMillan et al., Robinson).
Each study also is vulnerable to the conscious and unconscious errors and biases
DEMO may accompany self-reporting. As MacMillan et al. (1985:122) noted, DEMO
may be influenced to make what they believe to be desirable responses. An additional
problem is present in self-reports on decision criteria, however. Other researchers have
found that self-reporting tends to overstate the number of criteria DEMO used and to
understate the weighting of the most important criteria (DEMO and Zimmerer, 1984).
Venture capitali.sts frequently state that "the entrepreneur" or "management" accounts
for most of their decision, yet self-reported DEMO weights show many criteria involved
and none truly dominant. The abundance of significant criteria in self-report surveys is
consistent with the aforementioned tendency to DEMO the number of criteria used.
One wonders, are venture capitalists more DEMO chroniclers of their decision criteria,
or might they too rely on only a few criteria in practice?
Finally, none ofthe cited research directly examined the decision process, a broader
concept that involves both the criteria and how and when they are applied. To the extent
that DEMO studies attempted to address issues of process, they inferred process from
DEMO' Decision researchers note the shortcomings of this approach (Svenson,
1979:86):
It is gradually becoming clear that human decision making cannot be understood by
simply studying final decisions. The perceptual, emotional and cognitive processes
which ultimately lead to the choice of a decision altemative must DEMO be studied if
we want to gain an adequate understanding of human decision making.
By studying the processes that lead to venture capitalists' decisions, one might un-
cover evidence of several interesting phenomena. For example, DEMO sequences in which
information is sought and criteria are applied could reveal venture capitalists' priorities
and possible tradeoffs among criteria. Prevalent pattems in infonnation seeking could
guide the organization and presentation of material in business plans, too. Tradeoffs
might point to areas an entrepreneur could bolster to offset DEMO less readily corrected
weakness. Greater understanding ofthe decision processes also could enable identifica-
tion of noncompensatory (i.e., essential) criteria and of the conditions governing contin-
gent criteria or weightings.
In the remainder of this article, we explain how simultaneous verbal protocols might
overcome these shortcomings and report DEMO our pilot study using this approach.
SIMULTANfEOUS VERBAL PROTOCOLS
Researchers have used simultaneous verbal protocols to trace the processes involved
in investment trust decisions, strategic decisions, the design of management information
systems, and other problem-solving DEMO decision-making activities. (For further ex-
I. Researchers sometimes use an "input-output" approach to infer decision processes. Although this ap-
proach has serious limitations, it is more effective than the use of outputs alone. None of the studies
discussed herein measured or controlled for inputs (i.e.. proposed ventures), so none could be termed an
input-output study. Instead, each studied only self-reported criteria or decisions on unspecified, non-stan-
dard ventures.
Winter, DEMO
1
3
amples and citations, see Schweiger (1983).) Simultaneous verbal protocols are tran-
scripts of individuals' conscious thought processes. This methodology (Schweiger. An-
DEMO and Locke, 1985) commonly involves asking subjects simply to "think DEMO"
while solving a problem or making a decision. Typically their verbalizations are tape-
recorded, transcribed, and then content analyzed via some coding DEMO devised for
the specific research questions. Coded protocols have been used in both exploratory and
hypothesis testing research and appear to be "an accurate and unobtrusive method-
ology" for studying managerial decision making at the individual level (Schweiger,
1983:190).
The usefulness of verbal protocols depends on the validity of the reports given by
the subjects. As with DEMO self-report research methodology, subjects may not provide
valid responses. Ericsson and DEMO (1980) have specified the conditions under which
verbal reports are most likely to be accurate: (a) the information to be reported is the
focus of attention; (b) the task or cognitive processes are not highly routinized through
habit or repetition; (c) only a short time elapses between performance and verbalization;
(d) verbalization does not DEMO excessive encoding (i.e., processing, reconceptua-
lizing, interpretation, inference, etc.); (e) reports are oral; (f) subjects are free from
cognitive overload and distractions; (g) the questions and instructions are clear and
specific; and (h) completeness in reporting is encouraged.
The deliberations of a venture capitalist, tape-recorded as he evaluates a proposal
for the first time, closely approximate these ideal conditions. Certainly the venture capi-
talist focuses on evaluating the proposal and the cognitive processes are not highly
DEMO; simultaneous recording enables oral reporting and eliminates any time lag.
Verbalization DEMO no encoding beyond what the venture capitalist normally and
freely does, DEMO no attributions, categorization, or other mental processes are spe-
cifically required. Venture capitalists normally isolate themselves long enough to read a
proposal and DEMO interruptions during that time. Finally, clear and specific instructions
and complete DEMO are relatively easy to ensure in this instance. Therefore the
verbal protocol is an appropriate method for studying the venture capitalist's decision
process.
DEMO PILOT STUDY
As part of a broader investigation of venture capitalists' DEMO processes, we have
performed a pilot study using simultaneous verbal protocols DEMO one venture capitalist as
he evaluated three venture proposals. Our purpose in this pilot study, of course, was not
to reach final conclusions DEMO to the decision processes and criteria used by venture
capitalists. Rather, DEMO sought to determine the practicability and potential value of this
methodology to entrepreneurship and venture capital research. Thus our "findings"
really are indications of what verbal protocols can reveal that would not have been
captured DEMO previous research.
Subject and Methodology
The subject was a general partner in an SBIC that had made more than a dozen
investments in the DEMO + years since its founding. Most of these investments had been
first-stage or seed capital financings. The SBIC's total portfolio value and typical DEMO
vestment size placed it somewhat (but not substantially) below the average for venture
capital firms. (Because we have promised confidentiality and are presenting only one
venture capitalist's protocols, we cannot describe him any more precisely or com-
pletely.)
14 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y and PRACTIC
E
Two of the authors visited the subject in his office and spent DEMO minutes briefing
him on the purpose of this study and instructing him on "thinking aloud" and complete
reporting. They did not mention any DEMO or opinions on the research topic, nor
did they discuss enterpreneurs DEMO new ventures in any form. By prearrangement the
venture capitalist had saved three proposals that had reached him during the previous
few days. The DEMO gave him a tape recorder and left his office, returning only
DEMO he had completed his evaluation of all three proposals. At that time, they inter-
viewed him for about 25 minutes, asking specific questions DEMO his firm's investment
policies, internal workings, and similar matters that will be of interest in their broader
research.
Transcripts of the tape-recorded DEMO were coded according to a scheme
jointly developed by the authors, DEMO previous research to guide their choice of cate-
gories. Each "thought DEMO" (a single idea expressed by the venture capitalist) was
assigned DEMO a category that described its subject matter. It was also identified as being
either an examination of the plan or a reflection on its DEMO, and placed sequentially
in the overall process. The assignments and placements DEMO arrived at through discus-
sion by two of the authors.
Results
The venture capitalist's decision process with respect to one venture is represented
DEMO Figure I. The thought units are arranged in sequence, as indicated DEMO the arrows
connecting them. Each thought unit is placed beneath a column heading that describes
the information it sought or the evaluation it made. DEMO of the headings are self-ex-
planatory, but a few require comment. DEMO refers to units that are not related to
any one category, DEMO involve the venture capitalist's initiation of the process or his
overall conclusions and plans for further action. GENERAL USE OF FUNDS refers to
DEMO the proceeds of the financing deal would be used, while THE DEMO refers to the
pricing and structuring of the financing. ADEQUACY OF THE PLAN refers to the
document's content, organization, style, format, DEMO (The headings of empty columns
on each page are omitted.)
DEMO sequence of thoughts reveals several interesting aspects of his decision making.
Early on we see conscious choices to examine the product (#5) and DEMO continue doing so
before "the numbers" (#7). This decision DEMO him to consider the venture's competi-
tive position (#8), DEMO thought given to a similar company in the area (#9) and to his
own, experience-based theories about the marketing and operational disadvantages of
smaller companies (#10-12). He returned to specific consideration of the product
(#13-14) before examining the financial projections (#15).
This sequence, DEMO undertaken, suggests a desire to establish a context for
assessing the DEMO projections. We believe it also provided a basis for assessing
management capabilities. Although the venture capitalist did not articulate this purpose,
he made DEMO mental link some time later (#40 and #42). Even if DEMO venture capitalist
does not consciously assign top priority in his overall evaluation to the product and
competitive position, we believe his early impressions of the venture's feasibility may
influence his subsequent evaluations of management capabilities.
DEMO this instance we sense the venture capitalist's mounting skepticism of those capa-
bilities. He rather severely criticized the business plan's organization and DEMO
(#16 and #18) just before examining the backgrounds of the principals (#19), and
immediately noted the absence of these data (#20) despite his specific request that they
be included (#21). There followed three more reflections on management capabilities,
including repeated concern over the DEMO of data (#24). Nearing the end of his evalua-
Wlnter, 1988
16
i
O 2
< o
Z L
U
O, VJ
5 P
O ti-
O
O
F
VJ
O
IT o
16
00
z
DEMO .
g
•a
> c
•oa
_
c s
u, 1
DEMO
._ _
c
o
u
o
o
z
o 2
O c
E ff
n O
L
£ 2 .9 P
E O ^
DEMO S -
£ E
js |
E S'
• o
•a .s
< E
o.
ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEOR
Y and PRACTICE
LU
CC
g
DEMO
DUC
rERi
Iona
Infor•mat
lin PI
Ct'B
itu:
IIPPV
9 3
Z d
< o
U
O C
J d
Q
DEMO
Winter, 1988
1
7
r 1 r 1 r—1 r 1
"o
1 0
' 2
u
a)
O
O
n
Q.
HI
(D
a
Ui£
o
.c
a
oo
IS
(D
TJ
O
a
C
£
D
o a
O £
t . J l_
CO f • ^
CO DEMO CO
C C
D
Ic
ra o
c •;;
CC
DEMO
u .
O
(0 t
X 0)
LU tr.
UJ
DEMO
c
1C
O o
S3
o i
1
15
c
o
(DEMO
i
£
"5
u
c:
n
£.
Li
5
i :
«
u
c
0)
(D
Q.
O l
c
3
i n
c
O l
o
ma
c
ID
n
a
a
DEMO
a
"o
a
c
«
1
E
E
O
c
< DEMO 1 1 i 1
c
D E
5c ^ *
^
zo
5
<5 =" o
:
2 LJ.
iE CC
hie}
5k Print:ipal
-Parent Co.
-Ventur
lan
-Manag
Con cer
Capi
hat
ttie
DEMO
010
no.
oed
tion, the venture capitalist returned to the issue of management capability in the specific
venture context (#40 and #42).
Without denying the impact of management capabilities on this venture capitalist's
decision, we note the prominence of strategic and fmancial evaluations and reflections
in this protocol. Of DEMO thought units, 11 related to strategy (product, competition, and
market) and 10 to financial performance or use of funds. At the very least, these units
established the venture context, as recounted above. It DEMO possible that they played a far
greater role in this venture capitalist's evaluation. (Space does not permit discussion of
his other protocols, DEMO our preliminary analyses indicate similarly important roles for
strategic and financial considerations.)
CONCLUSIONS
Examining decision processes, rather than merely criteria, is vital DEMO capturing ven-
ture capitalists' wisdom. This pilot study has demonstrated the DEMO richness of data
available through simultaneous verbal protocols. In our next stage of research, we are
collecting various data on the participants and are using a standard set of venture pro-
posals to permit identification of DEMO process differences attributable to (I) differ-
ences among ventures and (DEMO) different strategies or practices among venture capitalists.
REFERENCES
Brophy, D. J. (1986). Venture capital research. In D, L. Sexton and R. DEMO Smilor (Ed.) The An and
Science of Enlrepreneurship. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, pp. 119-143.
Ericsson. K. A. and Simon, H. A. (1980). Verbal reports as data. Psychological Review, 87, 215-251.
Hofer, C. W. (1975), Toward acontingency theory of business strategy. i4cadcm>'o/DEMO/.
/S(4), 784-810.
Huber, G. P. and Power, DEMO J. (1985). Retrospective reports of strategic-level managers: Guidelines for
increasing their accuracy. Strategic Management Journal, 6(2), 171-180.
Khan, A. DEMO (1987). Assessing venture capital investments with noncompensatory behavioral decision
models. DEMO of Business Venturing, 2(3), 193-205.
MacMillan, I. C . Siegel, R., and Subba Narasimha, P. N. (1985). Criteria DEMO by venture capitalists to
evaluate new venture proposals. Journal of Business Venturing, /(I) , 119-128.
MacMillan. I. C , Fremann, L.. and Subba Narasimha, P. N. (1987). Criteria distinguishing successful
from unsuccessful DEMO in the venture screening process. Journal of Business Venturing, 2(2)DEMO 123-137.
Robinson, R. B. Jr. (1985). Emerging strategies in the venture capital industry. Journal of Business Ven-
turing, 2(1), 53-71.
Sandberg, W, R. (1986). New venture performance: The role DEMO strategy and industry structure. Lexington,
MA: Heath.
Schweiger, D. M. (1983). Is the simultaneous verbal protocol a viable method for studying managerial
problem solving and decision making? Academy of Management Journal, 26(DEMO), 185-192.
Schweiger. D. M., Anderson. C. R., and Locke, DEMO A. (1985). Complex decision making; A longitudinal
study of process and performance. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 36, 245-272.
Stahl, M. J. and Zimmerer. T. W. (1984). Modeling strategic acquisition policies: A simulation of execu-
tives' acquisition decisions. Academy of Management Journal, 27{2), 369-383.
Winter, 1988 19
Svenson, O. (1979). Process descriptions of decision making. Organizational Behavior DEMO Human Perfor-
mance, 23, 86-112.
Timmons, J, and Gumpert, DEMO (1982). Discard many old rules about gening venture capital. Harvard
DEMO Review. 60(1). 273-280.
Tyebjee, T. T. and Bruno, A. V. (1984). A model of venture capitalist investment activity. Management
Science, 30(9), 1051-1066.
Winfrey, F. L. and Robinson, R. B. Jr. (1987). Criteria for new venture investment across different stra-
tegic groups within the venture capital industry. Paper presented at the annual meeting DEMO the Academy of
Management, New Orleans.
William R. Sandberg is Assistant DEMO of Management at the University of South Carolina.
David M. Schweiger is Associate Professor of Management of the University of South Carolina.
Charles W. DEMO is Professor of Management at the University of Georgia.
This study is part of a research project supported by the Center for Entrepreneurial Studies, New York
University. An earlier version appeared in Frontiers of Enterpreneurship Research DEMO the proceedings of
the Seventh Annual Babson College Entrepreneurship Research Conference.
20 ENTREPRENEURSHIP THEORY an d PRACTICE
{1g42fwefx}