Procedural Justice in Entrepreneur-Investor Relations
Harry J. Sapienza; M. Audrey Korsgaard
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 39, No. 3. (Jun., 1996), pp. 544-574.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199606%2939%3A3%3C544%3APJIER%3E2.0.CO%3B2-4
The Academy of Management Journal is currently published by Academy of Management.
Your use DEMO the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have DEMO
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a DEMO or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
DEMO JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the DEMO regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/aom.html.
Each copy of any part DEMO a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is DEMO trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported DEMO libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Fri Dec 7 11:30:12 DEMO
PROCEDURAL JUSTICE IN ENTREPRENEUR-
INVESTOR RELATIONS
HARRY J. SAPIENZA
M. AUDREY KORSGAARD
DEMO of South Carolina
This research used a procedural justice perspective to examine the
impact of entrepreneurs' management of information flows in the form
of feedback and influence on entrepreneur-investor relations. We con-
ducted both an experiment DEMO master's-level business students and a
field survey of venture capitalists regarding their relations with the
CEOs of their portfolio companies. The findings revealed DEMO importance
of timely feedback in promoting positive relations between investor
and entrepreneur. Together, the studies provide strong evidence for the
usefulness of procedural justice theory as a framework for understand-
ing the management of interorganizational relations DEMO new ven-
tures.
Among the most difficult challenges facing entrepreneurs seeking to
build a high-potential venture is that of financing its ongoing needs (By-
grave & Timmons, 1992). Because such ventures require significant infusions
of capital whose timing cannot easily be anticipated in advance, entrepre-
neurs seek alliances with reliable sources of outside funding. Larson (1992)
showed that the social aspects of these alliances are critical to their coordina-
tion DEMO maintenance. Specifically, she showed that when the economic
interests of entrepreneurs DEMO outsiders are governed through positive social
interaction, such partnerships endure. CEOs DEMO new firms enhance the proba-
bility of success when they establish the kind of relationship described by
Larson. Important relationships inevitably develop between entrepreneurs
DEMO outside investors (Bruno & Tyebjee, 1985), but research on how entrepre-
neurs sustain or manage their relationships with investors is scant (Sapienza,
1989). At issue for entrepreneurs is how to foster the DEMO and behaviors
necessary for sustaining an effective relationship.
Entrepreneurial CEOs must secure both investors' trust and their support
for venture strategies. Engendering the trust of an influential investor will
enhance an entrepreneur's reputation and help DEMO other exchange
relationships, such as those with suppliers and buyers (MacMillan, Kulow, &
Khoylian, 1989). A supportive investor can also DEMO secure timely funding
We would like to thank Bruce Meglino and two anonymous reviewers for this journal for
their help on earlier versions.
1996
Snpienzn and Korsgnnrd
545
from others and intercede to quash dissent DEMO board members doubtful of
the strategies preferred by the entrepreneur. Although investors' trust and
decision support are important, entrepreneurs may be most affected DEMO how
aggressively the investors monitor ventures and how willing they are to
supply them with additional funds. Van de Ven and Walker (1984) DEMO
out that monitoring can lead to conflict in interorganizational relations. If
monitoring involves data production, analysis, and presentation, entrepre-
neurs may find it costly and oppressive. These activities draw entrepreneurs
from their productive activities and DEMO decision making. Finally, if inves-
tors decide not to reinvest in DEMO ventures, entrepreneurs may be in the
unenviable position of convincing new DEMO that the ventures are worth-
while, despite the fact that their DEMO backers will no longer support
them.
Previous studies of interfirm alliances have suggested that interactions
help form attitudes and norms in entrepreneur-investor pairs (Larson, 1992;
Ring &Van de Ven, 1992; Van de Ven & Walker, 1984). Particularly important
will be how much feedback entrepreneurs DEMO provide investors and how
much investor involvement they ought to encourage (DEMO & Gupta,
1994). Entrepreneurs may see good reasons to provide timely information and
encourage involvement from investors. First, timely feedback may enhance
investors' ability to provide useful strategic advice (Gorman & Sahlman,
DEMO; MacMillan et al., 1989). Further, timely communication helps create
DEMO spirit of partnership and enhances entrepreneurs' chances of gaining sup-
port DEMO strategic initiatives (Kim & Mauborgne, 1993; Ring & Van de DEMO,
1994). Finally, when entrepreneurs keep investors apprised of developing
DEMO, they increase the chances that additional infusions of capital will be
DEMO when needed.
Although provision of timely feedback appears to offer benefits, DEMO
dotal accounts from venture capitalists and entrepreneurs indicate that
entrepreneurs provide much less feedback than investors desire, often to
the point of creating significant conflict (e.g., Rock, 1987; Sapienza, 1989).
Good reasons, DEMO and professional, may be behind the entrepreneurs'
reluctance to share DEMO Many entrepreneurs start their businesses
because they seek autonomy and decision-making control (Dubini, 1989);
to constantly report, consult, or share decision-making authority may
defeat their own purpose. Sharing information also diminishes a CEO'DEMO
power over a board because, as agency theory suggests, it diminishes the
CEO's informational advantages over outsiders (Jensen & Meckling, 1976)DEMO
Further, because most investment agreements contain provisions for the
removal of DEMO CEO by the board of directors if certain performance
standards are not met (Gladstone, 1988), entrepreneurial CEOs will have
an incentive to DEMO or obscure performance results when things are going
poorly. Fully revealing even excellent performance may also undermine the
entrepreneur's interests, for it may increase the price investors can extract
if they sell their shares back DEMO the venture. Finally, feedback is time-
546
Academy of Management Journal
June
consuming and may undermine investors' confidence in the leadership
of the venture.
The above discussion suggests that entrepreneurs DEMO a serious dilemma,
a dilemma whose resolution will have a significant impact on venture out-
comes. On the one hand, withholding information may undermine trust and
support, induce excessive monitoring, and hamper timely access DEMO needed
funds. On the other hand, providing feedback is costly, sacrifices entrepre-
neurs' informational leverage, and may shake investors' confidence without
significantly improving decisions. The fear of loss of power or dismissal is
no DEMO a powerful force for entrepreneurs. But will their position be en-
hanced or harmed by freely sharing information? We propose in this investi-
gation that procedural justice theory can provide insights into how entrepre-
neurs might DEMO manage investor relations through their handling of
the decision-making process. Originally developed as an extension of equity
theory (Thibaut & Walker, 1975), DEMO justice theory has proven to
be a powerful framework for understanding the impact of decision proce-
dures on intrafirm relations (Kim & Mauborgne, DEMO, 1993; Korsgaard,
Schweiger, & Sapienza, 1995). The cited studies have shown that how deci-
sion procedures are conducted shapes the DEMO and actions of those
engaged in the process. Most studies employing procedural justice theory
have been conducted in the context of intrafirm, superior-subordinate rela-
tions (Sheppard, Lewicki, & Minton, 1992). If applicable across DEMO
tional boundaries and in nonhierarchical relations, this perspective can pro-
vide DEMO as to how entrepreneurs should manage their relations with
investors.
This article reports the results of two studies, a laboratory experiment
and a field study, designed to examine the impact of entrepreneurs' decision-
making behavior DEMO outside investors. Specifically, we used procedural jus-
tice theory to focus DEMO how the entrepreneurs' provision of feedback and
responses to the investors' attempts at influence affect the latter's impressions
of the justice of DEMO decision procedures, and consequently, the extent to
which investors (1)DEMO entrepreneurial CEOs, (2) are committed to their
decisions, (3) closely monitor their actions, and (4) are willing to reinvest
in the ventures. The use of both studies was critical to adequately test DEMO
theory and understand the phenomenon. The causal ordering among such
attitudes and behaviors as procedural justice, trust, commitment, and moni-
toring is difficult to disentangle. Therefore, we conducted a lab experiment
that allowed us to introduce the variables in the temporal order suggested by
procedural justice theory. DEMO, entrepreneur-investor relations involve
millions of dollars and, at times, highly DEMO and volatile relations.
Such factors may not be fully captured in a lab setting. Because we deemed
it necessary to study the phenomenon in DEMO field under realistic, but not
controllable, conditions, we also conducted DEMO large-sample survey of venture
capitalists on the effects of entrepreneurs' decision-making DEMO In sum-
mary, our aim was to shed light both on DEMO relations and
on the generalizability of the procedural justice framework.
1996
Sapienza and Korsgaard
547
PROCEDURAL JUSTICE AND ENTREPRENEUR-INVESTOR RELATIONS
Procedural justice DEMO is concerned with individuals' reactions to
decisions in which they are DEMO invested but that they cannot directly
or fully control. This theory evolved from equity theory (Adams, 1965),
which focuses on the fair distribution of resources in exchange relationships.
In contrast to equity theory, which emphasizes the outcome of decisions,
procedural justice theory examines the impact DEMO the process of decision
making on the quality of exchange relationships (DEMO & Tyler, 1988).' The
theory suggests that individuals value just procedures because they provide
a means of indirect control over a decision DEMO direct control is not possible
(Thibaut & Walker, 1975). Even when a particular decision has adverse out-
comes for an individual, just procedures ensure the individual that, over
time, he or she will DEMO what is due from the exchange relationship. In
essence, just procedures DEMO individuals to feel that their interests are
being protected over the long run (Lind & Tyler, 1988).
Research in this area has DEMO that procedural justice is an
important determinant of attitudes and behavior, DEMO when the out-
come of a decision is unfavorable (Lind & DEMO, 1988). Indeed, procedural
justice is positively related to trust in a decision maker (Folger & Konovsky,
1989; Korsgaard et al., 1995), commitment to a decision (Korsgaard et al.,
1995), cooperative behaviors (Kim & Mauborgne, 1993; Moorman, 1991), and
DEMO to remain in a relationship (Schaubroeck, May, & Brown, 1994).
Thus, procedural justice is likely to have a positive impact on investor atti-
tudes and behaviors important to entrepreneur-investor relationships.
Procedural justice provides DEMO useful framework for understanding entre-
preneur-investor relations for several reasons. First, DEMO justice helps
explain exchange relationships in which one party does not have direct
control over decisions, a situation similar to the indirect role investors play
in the day-to-day operations of new ventures (Gorman & Sahlman, DEMO).
Second, the perception of procedural justice is a determinant of DEMO kinds
of attitudes and behaviors important to effective entrepreneur-investor rela-
tions. Finally, this framework suggests how two core issues in entrepreneur-
investor relations, DEMO' provision of timely feedback and investors'
influence, affect attitudes and behavior.
Research and theory on procedural justice have identified numerous
aspects of DEMO procedures that promote perceptions of proce-
dural justice. We focus on two aspects that are particularly relevant to the
context of entrepreneur-investor relations: the entrepreneur's provision of
timely feedback and the investor's influence over DEMO making. By timely
' Recently, researchers have begun to distinguish between DEMO justice and interac-
tional justice. Whereas procedural justice concerns the fairness of the formal procedures used
to make decisions, interactional justice concerns the fairness of the actions of the decision
makers enacting those procedures and is DEMO to include behaviors that are within the
discretion of the decision makers, such as providing timely feedback (Moorman, 1991).
548
Academy of Management Journal
June
feedback, we mean information that allows the investor to stay up to date
on the performance of a DEMO This information will be on both the good
and bad consequences of decisions. Because it demonstrates a willingness
to share information, timely feedback is an important sign of a decision
maker's openness and honesty. According DEMO procedural justice theory, indi-
viduals perceive as just those decision-making procedures DEMO provide assur-
ance that their self-interests are protected. In the context of this study, we
examine how CEOs' propensity to provide timely feedback DEMO strategic deci-
sions shapes investors' attitudes and behaviors through procedural justice.
DEMO feedback operates both on a symbolic level-indicating CEOs' consid-
eration of DEMO needs-and on a practical level, providing investors with
information critical to DEMO ongoing interests.
Influence refers to the extent to which individuals affected by a decision
can directly affect the outcome of the decision. Theory suggests DEMO when
individuals are unable to directly control the decision, they are DEMO apt to
pay attention to the procedures used to make it (DEMO & Li, 1990).Because
influence provides a means by which individuals DEMO protect their self-
interests, when influence is low, the procedures followed to make decisions
become more critical. Thus, procedural factors such as timely feedback will
have greater impact on perceptions of procedural justice (or a lack thereof3
when influence is low. In terms of the issues investigated DEMO, this reasoning
suggests that investors will be particularly attuned to the DEMO of feed-
back when they have little influence over the strategic decisions made by
the entrepreneur.
In summary, applying the previously cited research and theory on proce-
dural justice to entrepreneur-investor relations suggests a model, displayed
in Figure 1. This model depicts the impact of timely feedback and DEMO
on the following investor attitudes and behaviors: trust in an entrepreneur,DEMO
commitment to his or her strategic decisions, monitoring of the venture,DEMO
and willingness to reinvest. The model specifies that timely feedback and
influence over decisions jointly affect investors' attitudes and behaviors only
through the mediating impact of procedural justice. This model represents
a strong assumption regarding the DEMO role of procedural justice and
thus provides a stringent test of the idea's relevance in this context. That is,
because we posit DEMO procedural justice fully mediates the effects of feedback
and influence on investor attitudes and behaviors, no direct paths from
feedback and influence to these outcomes appear in Figure 1.We do expect
influence and feedback to affect DEMO attitudes and behaviors; however,
we expect these relationships to be DEMO by procedural justice in such
a way that no direct effects of feedback and influence will be observed when
procedural justice is accounted for. DEMO, in order to test the mediating
role of justice, we must first demonstrate that feedback and influence affect
investor attitudes and behavior. Below, we describe the rationale for the
impact of feedback and influence on DEMO attitudes and behavior. We
then describe the mediating role of procedural justice.
Sapienza and Korsgaard
FIGURE 1
Hypothesized Fully Mediated Modela
0
0
Investing
"he dashed lines indicate nonsignificant paths. These lines represent our expecta-
tion DEMO feedback and influence will be related to investor attitudes and behavior hut
that these relationships will not be significant once justice is accounted for.
DEMO Impact of Timely Feedback
Justice theorists have argued that providing timely feedback on the re-
sults of decisions is important in creating a sense DEMO procedural justice
(Aram & Salipante, 1981; Folger & Bies, 1989). In various decision contexts,
such as performance evaluations and hiring, timely feedback enhances per-
ceptions of procedural justice, even when the decisions are unfavorable (Bies,
1986; Folger & Konovsky, 1989; Taylor, Tracy, Harrison, Renard, & Carroll,
1992). In addition, DEMO studies found that timely feedback affected trust in
the decision maker and acceptance of decisions (Folger & Konovsky, 1989;
Taylor et al., 1992).
Research in the context of entrepreneur-investor relations supports the
view DEMO the timeliness of feedback from entrepreneurs will affect investors'
perceptions of procedural justice, trust in the entrepreneurs, and commit-
ment to their DEMO Sapienza and colleagues (Sapienza, 1989; Sapienza &
Amason, 1993) have shown that the decision-making process affects how
satisfied investors are with DEMO and how much conflict the invest-
ors perceive in the relationship. A common complaint from venture capital
investors is that entrepreneurs are reluctant to DEMO information (Rock, 1987;
u
Decision
Monitoring
Trust
550
Academy of Management Journal
June
Sapienza, 1989). Because investors literally become venture partners with
entrepreneurs and reach formal and informal agreements on DEMO provision
of feedback (Gladstone, 1988), they are likely to perceive a lack of feedback
as an unfair violation of the investment agreement. DEMO a violation is likely
to undermine the investor's trust in the entrepreneur. Further, delayed feed-
back hampers the investor's ability to evaluate or aid the venture. All other
things being equal, investors who receive a great deal of timely feedback are
more likely to develop a DEMO to the strategic direction a venture is
taking than those who are in the dark about what has been happening with
the venture. In DEMO, then, we expect that investors who receive less timely
feedback will be dissatisfied with the manner in which the entrepreneur is
managing the DEMO of information.
Research and theory on justice in organizations also suggest that decision
processes affect the behaviors of those affected by those decisions (Moorman,
1991; Schaubroeck et al., 1994; Sheppard et al., 1992)DEMO We expect the timeli-
ness of feedback to affect monitoring and reinvesting. Timely feedback should
reduce the need for monitoring, for it provides information that an investor
would otherwise have to actively gather. Further, the provision of timely
feedback is likely to reduce the monitoring burden for investors DEMO they
are less likely to perceive a need to scrutinize data offered openly. Support
for this logic can be gleaned from agency theory (Jensen & Meckling, 1976),
which might characterize entrepreneurs' provision of timely feedback as a
"bonding" mechanism reducing a principal's need to DEMO effort monitor-
ing. Timely feedback will also reduce investors' uncertainty regarding DEMO
future of a venture, enhancing their ability to negotiate a reinvestment DEMO
fair to both sides. As a demonstration of openness and honesty, DEMO feed-
back also provides a signal to investors that their interests will be protected
should they invest additional funds. Finally, like Schaubroeck and colleagues
(1994), Larson (1992) argued that relationships with both an economic and
a social bond are likely to endure.
In summary, we have argued that investors are affected by the substantive
and symbolic value of DEMO information they receive from entrepreneurs. Spe-
cifically, when entrepreneurs provide timely DEMO, investors are likely
to perceive them as following just decision procedures, to trust them, and
to be committed to the strategic direction they wish to pursue. Further, we
expect that timely feedback will also reduce investors' propensity to monitor
ventures and increase their willingness to provide additional funding to
them. More formally, our first set of hypotheses is
Hypothesis la: The timeliness of feedback on company
performance affects investors' perceptions DEMO procedural
justice-the more timely an entrepreneur's feedback, the
greater an DEMO's perception of procedural justice.
Hypothesis 16: The timeliness of feedback DEMO company
performance affects investors' trust in an entrepreneur-
Sapienza and Korsgaard
the more timely the entrepreneur's feedback, the greater
an investor's trust in the entrepreneur.
Hypothesis Ic: The timeliness of feedback on company
performance affects investors' commitment to an entrepre-
neur's decisions-the more timely the entrepreneur's feed-
back, the greater an investor's decision commitment.
Hypothesis 1 d: The timeliness of feedback on company
performance affects investors' frequency of monitoring-
the more timely an entrepreneur's feedback, the less fre-
quent an investor's monitoring.
Hypothesis le: DEMO timeliness of feedback on company
performance affects investors' willingness to invest DEMO the
venture-the more timely an entrepreneur's feedback, the
greater an DEMO's propensity to reinvest.
The Moderating Impact of Investor Influence
Just procedures provide a means by which individuals can ensure that
their interests are DEMO when they cannot directly control a decision
(Thibaut & Walker, 1975). Research has suggested that the less individuals
can directly control or DEMO a decision, the more strongly they react to
the procedures used DEMO make it (Korsgaard et al., 1995; Tyler, Rasinski, &
Spodick, 1985). Thus, procedural factors such as the timeliness of DEMO
are likely to have stronger effects when investors have little direct influence
over entrepreneurs' decisions.
Both Rock (1987) and Sapienza (1989) emphasized that outside investors
with significant stakes in their investments expect to materially DEMO
the strategic direction of their investments. Rosenstein (1988) showed that
venture capitalists are actively involved in the strategic decisions made by the
CEOs DEMO their portfolio companies. However, the level of investors'
involvement and DEMO can vary significantly from venture to venture
(Gorman & Sahlman, 1989; Sapienza, 1989). Further, Barney, Busenitz, Fiet,
and Moesel (1994) found that entrepreneurs' receptivity to advice from out-
side investors also varies significantly across ventures. Justice theory suggests
that when investors believe DEMO their advice is being ignored or that they
have little direct influence over decisions, they have little recourse but to
focus on signals regarding the procedural justice of decision routines
(Leung & Li, 1990).
DEMO argued earlier that timely feedback would be a significant determi-
nant of investors' perceptions of procedural justice and their consequent
attitudes and actions. The above logic suggests that the less investors feel they
can influence entrepreneurs' decisions, the more important these procedures
become. Thus, we expect that DEMO effects of timely feedback on investors'
attitudes and behaviors will increase as investors' influence decreases. Spe-
cifically, we hypothesize five moderating effects DEMO investors' influence.
552
Academy of Management Journal
June
Hypothesis 2a: When investors' influence DEMO low, timely
feedback from an entrepreneur will have a stronger impact
DEMO procedural justice.
Hypothesis 2b: When investors' influence is low, timely
DEMO from an entrepreneur will have a stronger impact
on trust in the entrepreneur.
Hypothesis 2c: When investors' influence is low, timely
feedback from an entrepreneur will have a strongerimpact
on decision commitment.
Hypothesis 2d: When investors' influence is low, timely
feedback from an entrepreneur will have DEMO stronger impact
on frequency of monitoring.
Hypothesis 2e: When investors' influence is low, timely
feedback from an entrepreneur will have a stronger impact
on propensity to reinvest.
The Mediating Role of Procedural Justice
Implicit in DEMO previous arguments is the idea that the effect of timely
feedback on entrepreneur-investor relations is due to perceptions of pro-
cedural justice. Indeed, Korsgaard and colleagues (1995) found that proce-
dural justice partially mediated the DEMO of decision procedures on at-
titudes such as decision commitment and trust. Further, perceptions of
procedural justice have been linked to behavior as well. In a study of
corporate-subsidiary relations, Kim and Mauborgne (1993) found that subsid-
iaries' perceptions of greater procedural justice on the part of corporate
headquarters led subsidiaries to increased cooperative behavior. Schau-
broeck and colleagues (1994) found that those who perceived decision proce-
dures as just were less likely to want to terminate relationships. In view of
these findings, it appears likely that when investors perceive greater evidence
of procedural justice DEMO the part of entrepreneurs, they will trust the entrepre-
neurs more, be more committed to their decisions, monitor ventures less
frequently, and DEMO more inclined to make further capital commitments to
the venture. Thus, DEMO of procedural justice should mediate the
impact of timely feedback and influence on entrepreneur-investor relations.
Hypothesis 3a: Perceptions of procedural justice mediate
the effects of feedback on trust in an entrepreneur.
Hypothesis 3b: Perceptions of procedural justice mediate
the effects of feedback on decision commitment.
Hypothesis 3c: Perceptions of procedural justice mediate
the effects of feedback on frequency of monitoring.
DEMO 3d: Perceptions of procedural justice mediate
the effects of feedback on DEMO to reinvest.
Sapienza and Korsgaard
Hypothesis 4a: Perceptions of procedural justice mediate
the interactive effects of feedback and influence on trust
in an entrepreneur.
Hypothesis 4b: Perceptions of procedural justice mediate
the interactive effects of feedback and influence DEMO deci-
sion commitment.
Hypothesis 4c: Perceptions of procedural justice mediate
the DEMO effects of feedback and influence on fre-
quency of monitoring.
Hypothesis 4d: Perceptions of procedural justice mediate
the interactive effects of feedback and influence on pro-
pensity to reinvest.
STUDY 1
Methods
Participants and design. A DEMO within-subjects design was used
in which timeliness of feedback (high vs. DEMO) and influence (high vs. low)
were manipulated. Subjects were drawn from graduate management courses
at a large southern university. Forty-four students voluntarily DEMO
in the study in groups of 10 to 20, acting as DEMO managing a portfolio of
four ventures. Each venture represented a different condition (high feedback1
high influence, high feedbackllow influence, and so forth), so that subjects
were exposed to all four conditions simultaneously.
Task and DEMO We designed a computer simulation based on
the extant literature on entrepreneur-investor relations. The simulation is a
variation on the Algebra Company (Conlon & Parks, 1990), in which the
product of the company is the solution to an equation. An agent (or entrepre-
neur) is presented DEMO an equation, such as Y = 2 + a, and asked to estimate
the value of Y.A principal (an investor) is the DEMO source of capital for
buying information that will help solve the equation. Whereas in Conlon
and Parks, graduate students served as principals and undergraduates as
agents, in this research all subjects took the investor role, DEMO the entrepre-
neurs' actions were in fact programmed responses. In other DEMO, the com-
puter simulated the role of entrepreneur.
The simulation in DEMO research consisted of three blocks of five trials.
To start the game, the investors gave each company $200 to buy information
over the first block of five trials and gave advice to the "entrepreneurs"
on a strategy for purchasing information. The investors were told that the
entrepreneurs DEMO the option of sending them a comment on the results of
the last decision at the end of each trial. Investors could also monitor DEMO
company's performance by purchasing an outcome report at a cost of $20
per inquiry. At the end of the block of trials, investors received a general
summary of each company's performance, which consisted of a simple state-
ment indicating whether the company lost money, broke even, or earned
554
Academy of Management Journal
June
money during that block of five DEMO Investors then had another opportunity
to invest in and give advice to each company, and the next block of trials
began. The same procedure was followed for the second and third blocks of
trials. At the DEMO of the third block, investors learned how much they had
made (company earnings minus information investments and monitoring
purchases). All communications were DEMO through the computer, and
subjects were physically separated so that they DEMO not talk to each other.
To provide an incentive, we told DEMO that they were competing against
all other subjects to make the most money and that the winner would be
announced in their next class DEMO The simulation lasted approximately
30 minutes; subjects then completed a brief DEMO concerning their
perceptions of the entrepreneurs and were debriefed.
Prior to starting, we demonstrated the simulation from the perspectives
of both entrepreneur and investor. Subjects were told that the computer
simulation was networked and that they DEMO be interacting with other
subjects in the room. Subjects were told that some would assume the role
of entrepreneur and others would take the DEMO of investor, but as noted
above, in reality all subjects were given the role of investor. We controlled
the simulation so that each DEMO the four entrepreneurs represented different
levels of feedback and influence; the DEMO' performance was also con-
trolled, with all companies performing poorly in the first block of trials,
breaking even in the second, and making money in the third. This trend
across the blocks was designed DEMO reflect the performance pattern of new
ventures. Performance differences between companies were random and
trivial.
Manipulations. Influence was manipulated by varying the extent to
DEMO entrepreneurs followed subjects' advice. As investors, subjects were
told that they should advise entrepreneurs on how to buy information. Sub-
jects were presented DEMO a menu offering four buying strategies, all of which
involved buying DEMO in later rather than earlier trials. Two of the
entrepreneurs followed this advice; the other two followed a strategy that
was in direct opposition to the strategy recommended by the subject.
Timeliness of feedback was manipulated DEMO having two of the entrepre-
neurs provide a feedback comment after each trial and two provide no com-
ments. Subjects were led to believe DEMO entrepreneurs could choose from a
menu of comments indicating the result of the last decision or could send
no comment. At the end of DEMO block of trials, the simulation provided
subjects with a summary of DEMO company's performance over the last five
trials. Thus, subjects received DEMO performance data on all companies; only
the timeliness of the feedback DEMO
Measures. After the simulation, subjects completed a questionnaire as-
sessing perceptions DEMO to each entrepreneur. All items are listed in the
Appendix. Procedural justice was measured by two 7-point Likert-type items
assessing perceptions of the extent DEMO which the entrepreneur treated the
subject fairly in the course of decision making. We adapted these items from
Lind, Kurtz, Musante, Walker, DEMO Thibaut (1980). Trust in the entrepre-
1996
Sapienza and Korsgaard
555
TABLE 1
Means, Standard Deviations, Correlations, and Reliabilities for Variables
in Study la
Variable
Mean
s.d.
1
2
DEMO
4
5
6
1. Feedbackh
2. Influence"
3. Procedural justice
4. Trust in entrepreneur
5. Decision commitment
6. Frequency of monitoring
7. Investing
DEMO
0.50
4.45
4.09
4.35
3.82
297
0.50
0.50
1.47
0.72
0.63
2.87
60.2
.OO
.36
.77
.38
.62
.50
.75
.57
.62
.I3
.ll
(.86)
.83
.91
-.29
.64
(.83)
.94
-.54
.77
(DEMO)
.27
.72
.69
-- -
--
"can within-subjects correlations are DEMO Correlations of .25 or larger are significant
at p < .lo. Correlations of .30 or larger are significant at p < .05. Reliabilities are DEMO
in parentheses.
Feedback and influence are coded 1 = high, 0 DEMO low.
neur, adapted from Roberts and O'Reilly (1974), was measured by three 7-
point items assessing subjects' trust in the entrepreneur. Commitment to
decisions was measured by two 7-point Likert-type items adapted from DEMO
and Lind (1987) regarding subjects' commitment to the decisions made DEMO
the entrepreneur. Monitoring was assessed by the number of times subjects
inquired about the performance of the company. Subjects could inquire on
a company'DEMO performance as often as they desired. Investing was measured
by the total amount of money subjects invested in a venture across all
trials.
A DEMO 7-point Likert-type item, measuring the extent to which subjects
thought the DEMO provided them with timely feedback, served as the
manipulation check for DEMO Two 7-point Likert-type items assessing
the perceived influence subjects had over entrepreneurs' decisions served
as the manipulation check for influence. Table 1 gives descriptive statistics,
reliabilities, and correlations for all measures; in terms of DEMO, all the
multi-item measures had an acceptable coefficient alpha of .70 DEMO better
(Nunnally, 1978). Table 2 reports means for each condition.
Results of Study 1
Analysis of manipulation checks revealed that both manipulations DEMO
successful. Subjects reported that entrepreneurs in the high-feedback
condition provided significantly more timely feedback than entrepreneurs
in the low-feedback condition (meanhi,,, = DEMO, meanl,, = 1.91;t,, = 13.96,
p < DEMO). Subjects indicated that they had significantly greater influence over
entrepreneurs in the high-influence condition than over those in the low-
influence condition (meanhigh = 4.31, meanl,, = 2.57; t,, = 4.90, p < .01).
To assess the effects of feedback and influence on DEMO and behavior,
we first assessed the impact of the independent variables on all dependent
variables simultaneously using a doubly multivariate analysis of variance
556
Academy of Management Journal
June
TABLE 2
Cell Means and Standard DEMO for Dependent Variables in Study 1
Dependent Variable
Procedural justice
Trust in entrepreneur
Decision commitment
Frequency of
monitoring
Investing
Low Influence
Low
Feedback
High
DEMO
Mean
3.40
2.82
3.45
5.12
248
s.d.
1.21
1.02
1.22
3.33
109
Mean
4.07
4.36
4.19
2.93
322
s.d.
1.36
1.35
1.40
3.62
71.9
DEMO Influence
Low
Feedback
High
Feedback
Mean
s.d.
Mean
s.d.
5.03
4.03
4.73
1.35
1.32
1.48
5.28
5.14
5.02
1.14
1.24
1.22
(MANOVA). These results, summarized in Table 3, show a main effect of
feedback DEMO all variables. To determine the specific nature of these effects,
separate repeated-measures MANOVAs were then conducted on each depen-
dent variable; these are also summarized in Table 3.
TABLE 3
Results of Within-Subjects MANOVAs for DEMO and Influence Effects
in Study 1
Analyses
Doubly multivariate analysis
Individual analyses
Procedural justice
Trust in entrepreneur
Decision commitment
Frequency of monitoring
Investing
Independent DEMO
Feedback
Influence
Feedback X influence
Feedback
Influence
Feedback X influence
Feedback
Influence
Feedback x influence
Feedback
Influence
Feedback X influence
Feedback
Influence
Feedback X DEMO
Feedback
Influence
Feedback X influence
F
16.90***
5.88***
1.29
16.11***
22.84***
3.80~
63.54***
18.58***
4.28*
10.29**
14.24***
2.25
25.63***
~.97~
0.05
22.88***
4.24*
5.77*
DEMO
37
37
37
43
4 3
43
43
43
43
4 3
4 3
43
4 2
4 2
4 2
43
43
43
DEMO
.70
.44
.15
.2 7
.35
.08
.60
.30
.09
.19
.25
.05
.38
.07
.00
.35
.09
.12
1996
Sapienza and Korsgaard
557
Results supported all the hypothesized effects of DEMO feedback. Hy-
pothesis la predicts that timely feedback will affect perceptions of procedural
justice. As Table 3 indicates, investors thought entrepreneurs who provided
timely feedback treated them more fairly than those who did not (meanhigh
= 4.68, mean,,, = 4.22). Hypothesis lb, that timely feedback would increase
trust, was also confirmed (meantligh 4.75, meanl,, = 3.42), as were Hypothe-
sis lc, that timely feedback would result in greater commitment to the entre-
preneurs' decisions (meanh,gtl 4.61, mean,,, = 4.09), Hypothesis Id, that
feedback would reduce DEMO, (meanhigh 4.89, mean,,, = 2.76), and
Hypothesis le, that feedback would positively affect investing (meanhigh
323, meanl,, = 273).
Hypotheses 2a-2e predict that the effects of feedback will be DEMO
when influence is low. This relationship was not supported for decision
commitment (Hypothesis 2c) or for frequency of monitoring (Hypothesis 2d).
A marginally significant interaction of feedback and influence was observed
for perceptions of DEMO justice (Hypothesis 2a), and the pattern of
means, reported in Table 2, was in the hypothesized direction. Further,
trust was significantly affected by the interaction of feedback and influence
(Hypothesis 2b). A post hoc contrast on mean trust ratings, reported in Table
2, DEMO supported the hypothesis. Specifically, timely feedback had a stronger
positive impact DEMO trust in the low-influence condition. Finally, the interac-
tion of feedback DEMO influence had a significant effect on investing (Hypothe-
sis 2e). DEMO post hoc contrast of the group means indicated that the impact of
feedback on investing was more positive in the low-influence condition than
in DEMO high-influence condition.
Hypotheses 3a-3d and Hypotheses 4a-4d predict that perceptions of
procedural justice will mediate the impact of feedback (3a-3d) and the impact
DEMO the interaction of feedback and influence (4a-4d) on trust, commitment,DEMO
monitoring, and investing. According to Baron and Kenny (1986), mediation
is demonstrated when three conditions are met. First, the predictors (feed-
DEMO and the interaction of feedback and influence) must be related to DEMO
mediator (procedural justice). The previously reported MANOVA for proce-
dural DEMO supports this condition. Second, the mediator must be related
to the DEMO variables (commitment, trust, monitoring, and investing).
This condition was supported by correlations reported in Table 1,indicating
that all relationships between DEMO justice and the dependent variables
were significant, except for the correlation DEMO procedural justice and
monitoring, which was marginally significant. Third, the previously signifi-
cant relationship between the predictor variables and dependent variables
should be DEMO or substantially reduced when the mediator is ac-
counted for. To test this condition, we conducted a series of multivariate
analyses of covariance (DEMO) with procedural justice (the mediator)
as the covariate; the DEMO of these tests are elaborated below. When these
three conditions had been met and evidence of mediation thus obtained, we
estimated the indirect effects of the independent variables (Baron & Kenny,
=
=
=
=
558
Academy of Management Journal
June
1986).' A significant indirect path coefficient at this step provides final evi-
dence of mediation.
The previous DEMO indicated that both the main effect of feedback
and the interaction of feedback and influence were significant predictors of
trust. When procedural justice was DEMO as a covariate, the main effect
of feedback was still significant (F,,,, = 34.46, p < .01), although the magni-
tude of this effect was notably smaller (without justice as a covariate, eta2 =
.60; with justice as a covariate, eta2 = .45). Further, the indirect path of
feedback via procedural justice was significant (b = ,257,t,, = 2.07,p < .05).
DEMO result indicates that procedural justice partially mediates the impact of
feedback on trust (Hypothesis 3a). The interaction of feedback and influence
was no longer significant when procedural justice was included as a covariate
(F,,,, = 2.51, n.s.; eta2 = .06), suggesting that procedural DEMO may also
mediate the impact of feedback and influence on trust. However, the indirect
path of the interaction was not significant (b = ,046,t,, = 1.14, n.s.), indicating
that perceptions of procedural justice did not mediate the joint effect of
feedback and influence (Hypothesis 4a).
The previous analysis indicated that for decision commitment the main
DEMO of feedback was significant. When procedural justice was included as
a covariate, this effect was no longer significant (F,,,, = 0.60, n.s.; eta2 = .01),
and the indirect path of feedback (through procedural justice) was significant
(b = .401, t,, = 3.10, p < .05). Thus, the impact of feedback on DEMO
commitment was fully mediated by perceptions of procedural justice (Hy-
pothesis DEMO). Because the interaction of feedback and influence was not
significantly related to decision commitment, no test of mediation was possi-
ble for this variable (Hypothesis 4b).
Previously, feedback was shown to have a DEMO effect on the frequency
of monitoring. When procedural justice was included as a covariate, the
effect remained significant (F, ,, = 21.2, p < .01; without justice, eta2 = .38;
with justice, eta2 = .35), and the indirect path was not significant (b = .211,
t,, = 0.77, n.s.). Thus, the DEMO mediating role of procedural justice
was not supported for the frequency of monitoring (Hypothesis 312). The lack
of an interaction effect of feedback and influence on monitoring made a test
of mediation unnecessary (Hypothesis 4c).
Without perceptions of procedural justice accounted for, both the main
effect of feedback and the interaction of feedback and influence had a signifi-
DEMO effect on investing. With justice included as a covariate, the main DEMO
of feedback was still significant, though notably smaller (F,,,, = 7.65, p <
2The indirect path coefficient is determined by DEMO product of the direct effects:
bindireLleffectbl X b2, where b, is a path coefficient for the effect of the independent variable on
DEMO mediator and b2 is a path coefficient for the effect of the mediator on the dependent variable.
The significance test for the indirect path DEMO is determined by this coefficient by its
standard error. This test is t-distributed. The standard error of the path coefficient is computed
as follows: db2,s2, + b2,s2,+ s2,s2,, where sZl is the standard error for path coefficient bl and sZ2
is the standard DEMO for path coefficient b,.
=
1996
Sapienza and Korsgaard
559
.01; without justice, eta2 = .35; with justice, eta2 = .16), and the indirect
path of feedback was significant (b= 15.7, t,, = 2.15, p < .05). These results
indicate that procedural justice partially mediated the impact of DEMO
on investing (Hypothesis 3d). Finally, although the feedback-by-influence
interaction was no longer significant when procedural justice was added to
the equation (F,,,, = 2.22, n.s.; without justice, eta2 = .12; DEMO justice, eta2
= .05), neither was the indirect path (b = 8.66, t,, = 1.57, n.s.). This result
suggests DEMO procedural justice did not mediate the joint effect of feedback
and influence on investing (Hypothesis 4d).
In summary, the mediation analyses revealed DEMO procedural justice
partially or fully mediated the impact of feedback on trust (Hypothesis 3a),
commitment (Hypothesis 3b), and investing (Hypothesis DEMO). However, pro-
cedural justice did not affect the impact of DEMO on monitoring (Hypothe-
sis 3c). Further, procedural justice did not mediate the effects on trust and
investing of the feedback-by-influence interaction (Hypothesis 4a and Hy-
pothesis 4d, respectively).
Discussion
The purpose of Study 1was to examine the causal impact of the timeli-
ness of feedback DEMO influence on entrepreneur-investor relations. Hypothe-
sis 1,concerning the main effect of feedback, received strong support for all
variables. Timely feedback provided by an entrepreneur led investors to feel
the entrepreneur's decision making style was DEMO, to trust the entrepreneur,
to be committed to the entrepreneur'DEMO decisions, to monitor the venture less
frequently, and to invest more resources in the venture.
Hypotheses concerning the moderating effect of influence (2a-2e) were
supported for procedural justice, trust, and investing but not for decision
commitment or monitoring. These results suggest that when investors have
little DEMO control, timely feedback is particularly important to their
perceptions of fairness, their trust, and their willingness to reinvest. For
decision commitment and monitoring, feedback appears important regardless
of the degree of investors' influence. Another DEMO is that subjects in
the experiment had not developed high expectations about entrepreneurs'
following their advice. It is also possible that the ease DEMO monitoring in the
simulation may have limited our ability to detect a moderating effect of
influence. That is, although subjects had to "pay" to monitor ventures, the
effort and cost of monitoring were minimal relative to real-world scenarios.
Consequently, subjects may have exercised less discretion in choosing to
monitor ventures than would actual investors. Subjects may have monitored
ventures DEMO which they did not receive timely feedback, regardless of their
ability DEMO influence the entrepreneur, simply because it was easy to do so.
DEMO final set of hypotheses, concerning the mediating role of procedural
justice (Hypotheses 3a-3d and Hypotheses 4a-4d) received weaker support.
Procedural justice partially or fully mediated the impact of feedback on
trust, commitment, and investing. DEMO finding suggests that perceptions of
procedural justice play an important role in fostering favorable entrepreneur-
560
Academy of Management Journal
June
investor relationships, although it does not appear to play the same role in
the frequency of monitoring. Procedural DEMO did not mediate the inter-
active effect of feedback and influence on any of the variables. The joint
effects of feedback and influence may DEMO affect investors' attitudes and
behavior. Alternatively, these findings might indicate that factors other than
procedural justice play a critical role in determining the DEMO of these
relations. Substantive interpretations of null findings should be made with
caution, however. The low power associated with a small sample may cause
the mixed findings for Hypotheses 2 and 3. Given the sample size DEMO 44, the
power to detect an effect of moderate size is DEMO to .51. Further research
will help clarify the role of procedural justice in the context of investor-
entrepreneur relations.
Finally, it is noteworthy that influence had a significant effect on all the
dependent variables. Subjects perceived DEMO procedural justice, trusted
the entrepreneur more, monitored less, and invested DEMO when they were
able to influence decisions. Given that influence allows for the protection of
self-interest, a critical mechanism underlying the effects of procedural justice
(Lind & Tyler, 1988), these findings are not surprising.
DEMO experimental design of Study 1 allowed for a rigorous test of the
causal impact of feedback and influence on investor attitudes and behavior
because DEMO allowed us to introduce the independent variables in a controlled
fashion. However, experimental conditions never perfectly mirror real-world
situations and may produce limited generalizability. Therefore, in order to
ensure the external validity and reliability of the above findings, we con-
ducted a second study, a field survey DEMO venture capitalists concerning how
feedback and influence accorded by their entrepreneurial CEOs affected their
attitudes and behaviors. Because this study served as a field DEMO, the
same hypotheses were tested as in Study 1.
STUDY 2
DEMO and Procedure
The sample consisted of one partner from each of 118 venture capital
firms geographically dispersed across the U.S. The mean age of DEMO firms
was 11 years, the average capital under management was $89 DEMO, and
the average number of partnersltop managers per firm was four. DEMO used
Pratt's Guide to Venture Capital Sources (Lim & Weissberg, 1994) to obtain
the names and addresses of venture capitalists in the 48 contiguous states
in the United States. In order to control for DEMO effects of differences in
involvement, monitoring, and investment purposes, we DEMO several
sampling constraints. First, we chose only firms listed as private DEMO
capital firms investing their own funds; thus, we excluded corporate subsidi-
aries and government-sponsored investment companies such as Small Busi-
ness Investment Corporations (SBICs). Second, in order to ensure that enough
time for relationships to develop had elapsed, we excluded all firms less
than two years old. Applying these constraints yielded 408 venture capital
1996
Sapienza and Korsgaard
561
firms. We then sent a survey to DEMO randomly selected member of the top
management of each of these firms. To further ensure comparability across
the sample, in the letter to the venture capitalists we asked them to respond
on a venture that fulfilled DEMO two following conditions: the respondent was
on the venture's board DEMO directors and had been so for at least two but not
more than five years.
Four surveys were undeliverable and were returned; two others were
not completed by venture capitalists because they had no ventures that
DEMO our criteria. The resulting sampling population was 402; we received
complete DEMO from 118 venture capital firms for a response rate
of 29 percent. Our response rate is rather high for a sample of this sort; for
their surveys of partners of venture capital firms, MacMillan and colleagues
(1989) had a response rate of 18 percent. Nonetheless, we compared respon-
dents to nonrespondents on capital under management and venture capital
firm DEMO and found no significant differences; thus, we have no reason to
believe that nonresponse bias poses a problem in this study.
Measures
The DEMO variables in this study were constructed from the venture
capitalists' responses DEMO a multi-item survey; all responses were on five-point
Likert-type scales. The DEMO lists the items. Table 4 displays the means,
standard deviations, DEMO, and reliabilities for all measures; all the
multi-item measures meet an acceptable level of reliability with coefficient
alphas of .70 or better (Nunnally, 1978).
Independent variables. Venture capitalists assessed feedback from ven-
tures' DEMO and their own levels of influence on the ventures for the prior
12-month period. Feedback was measured by four items developed by us
assessing DEMO extent to which CEOs had provided the investor with timely
feedback on strategic decisions and venture performance over the prior 12
months. Influence was DEMO by four items assessing the extent to which
the venture capitalist could influence the strategic direction and decisions
of the CEO; these were adapted from Lind, Lissak, and Conlon (1983).
Dependent variables. Procedural justice was measured by four items
adapted from Lind and colleagues (1980) DEMO the fairness of the proce-
dures used by a CEO to conduct board meetings and make strategic decisions.
The four-item measure of trust, adapted from Roberts and O'Reilly (1974),
concerned venture capitalists' assessment of the extent to which they be-
lieved a CEO to be DEMO, sincere, and trustworthy. Commitment to deci-
sions,based on Earley and Lind (1987), was measured by three items assessing
the extent to which venture capitalists supported the strategic directions
taken by the CEOs. Frequency DEMO monitoring was measured by two items
assessing the extent to which the investors sought additional performance
reports and documentation, and investing was measured by four items assess-
ing whether they had taken or would take every DEMO to invest in the
venture. We developed these final two measures for this study.
TABLE 4
Means, Standard Deviations, Correlations, and Reliabilities for All Variables in Study 2"
Variable
-.
1. Years since investment
2. New DEMO experience
3. Years of experience
4. Feedback
5. Influence
6. Procedural justice
7. 'I'rust in entrepreneur
8. Decision conlmitment
9. Frequencv of
monitoring
10. investing
'3 Correlations greater than
in parentheses
Mean
3.83
0.36
13.42
4.27
3.92
4.06
4.32
4.27
3.35
3.43
1.02
1.29
.15 are significant
DEMO
2.36
0.48
7.61
0.75
0.69
0.78
0.76
0.80
1
.I3
.I6
.I 1
.06
.06
.16
.03
.I3
.l9
.07
.I0
.03
.04
.I6
DEMO
at p < .10. Correlations greater than
2
.19
.02
.07
-.01
.02
.08
3
.0l
.03
.01
.02
.O6
4
(.93)
.43
.65
.74
.55
b
5
6
7
8
9
10
(.70)
.30
.46
.3 8
(.95)
.63
.64
(.89)
.59
(.94)
.01
.14
-.20
.14
.23
.07
.20
.09
(.78)
.05
(.87)
.19 are significant at p < .05. Reliabilities are reported
2
<-?
%
3
%
5
2
?+
4
DEMO
5
3
5
C
1996
Sapienza and Korsgaard
563
Control variables. Because most venture capital firms DEMO out of a given
venture in three to five years (Bygrave & Timmons, 1992), the length of the
investment relationship will place DEMO on reinvestment. Conse-
quently, we used the years since the initial DEMO as a control variable.
Because trust can also be affected by perceptions of an entrepreneur's compe-
tence and experience (Sapienza & Gupta, DEMO), we also included two indica-
tors of an entrepreneur's experience as control variables: CEO's years of
industry experience and CEO's prior new venture experience (coded 0 = no,
1 = yes).
Results of Study 2
We used LISREL 7 (Joreskog & Sorbom, 1989) to test all hypotheses
via path analyses. This procedure allows DEMO both omnibus tests of sets of
hypotheses (to assess how well DEMO model as a whole fits the data) and
individual tests of DEMO hypotheses (to assess whether specific paths are
significant). Table 5 DEMO the results of model tests. This table presents
three fit indexes: DEMO goodness-of-fit index (GFI), the normal fit index (NFI;
Bentler & Bonnett, 1980), and the chi-square goodness-of-fit test. The GFI
assesses the correspondence between the observed and hypothesized covari-
ances. Values greater than DEMO are considered indicative of good fit; however,
more complex models DEMO likely to yield inflated GFIs. The NFI provides an
index of the model fit relative to a null model (i.e., a model in DEMO no
relationships are hypothesized). Values greater than .80 are considered indic-
ative of good fit. The chi-square goodness-of-fit test assesses whether the
observed DEMO differ significantly from the hypothesized model. A
nonsignificant chi-square indicates a good fit; however, the test is sensitive
to the complexity of the DEMO To make a more definitive assessment of
model fit, we directly DEMO models by conducting nested model tests
(Loehlin, 1987).
Nested model tests involve comparing the chi-squares of models that
differ in the number DEMO paths hypothesized. A significant difference in chi-
square indicates that the more complex model provides a better fit. We
analyzed four nested models: (DEMO)a null model, whereby no relationships are
posited, (2) a direct model, in which only direct effects of the independent
variables on all dependent variables are posited, (3) an indirect model, in
DEMO only indirect effects of the independent variables via procedural jus-
TABLE 5
Results of Path Model Tests for Study 2
Model
1. Null
2. DEMO
3. Indirect
4. Saturated
x2
264.31*
39.75*
74.91*
8.67
df
40
10
18
6
GFI
.66
.93
.89
.99
NFI
.85
.72
.97
Comparison
DEMO vs. 1
4 vs. 3
4 vs. 2
x2ai~
224.57*
66.24*
31.08*
dfdi~
30
12
4
564
Academy of Management Journal
June
tice are posited (the hypothesized model seen in Figure I),and (4) a saturated
model, in DEMO both direct and indirect effects of the independent variables
are posited. A significant difference between the chi-squares of the null
model and the direct DEMO would provide support for the effects of feedback
and the interaction of feedback and influence on the dependent variables
(Hypotheses 1and 2). We tested Hypotheses 3 and 4 by two model compari-
sons, first comparing the direct model to the saturated model to assess
whether a saturated DEMO specifying both direct and indirect effects (i.e.,
partial mediation) fit the data better than a model specifying direct effects
only. Next, we compared the indirect model-our hypothesized model-to
the saturated model to test whether DEMO model specifying indirect effects only
(i.e., full mediation) fit the DEMO as well as a model specifying direct and
indirect effects (i.e., partial mediation). (Note that the indirect model cannot
be compared to the direct model, since they are not nested.) Table 5 reports
DEMO results of the nested model tests, and Table 6 summarizes the DEMO for
specific paths.
Hypotheses la-le predict that timely feedback will affect investors'
perceptions of procedural justice, trust in an entrepreneur, commitment to
DEMO 6
Unstandardized Path Coefficients for Study 2"
Variables
Direct effects of feedback
Procedural justice
Trust
Decision commitment
Monitoring
Investing
Direct effects of feedback DEMO influence
Procedural justice
Trust
Decision commitment
Monitoring
Investing
Direct effects of procedural justice
Trust
Decision commitment
Monitoring
Investing
Indirect effects of feedback
Trust
Decision DEMO
Monitoring
Investing
Direct Model
Indirect Model
Saturated Model
" Years since investment, new venture experience, years of experience, and influence were
included in each model as control variables. Since these variables were not of substantive
DEMO, their effects are not listed in this table.
t < .10
1996
Sapienza and Korsgaard
565
decisions, frequency of monitoring, and investing. DEMO 2a-2e predict
that feedback will have a stronger impact on all five dependent variables
when influence is low. We first simultaneously tested these hypotheses DEMO
examining the fit of the direct model. As Table 5 indicates, DEMO direct model
provided a fit superior to that of the null model (XZdiff = 224.57, p < .05).
The fit indexes also DEMO that the direct model provided a good fit to
the data (DEMO = .93; NFI = .85). An examination of specific paths, however,
provided only qualified support for the model. As the first DEMO of Table
6 shows, feedback had a significant effect on all DEMO except investing
(Hypotheses le), and it had a marginally significant DEMO on commitment
(Hypotheses lc). Thus, three of the first five hypotheses were fully supported;
one was marginally supported. The interaction of DEMO and influence, on
the other hand, was significant for two: DEMO (Hypotheses 2b) and monitoring
(Hypotheses 2d). To illustrate the DEMO effect on trust, we performed
a median split on influence and DEMO the correlation between feedback
and trust for investors with high influence and investors with low influence
(Cohen & Cohen, 1983). The pattern DEMO subgroup correlations supported the
hypothesized relationship, in that the positive impact DEMO feedback on trust
was stronger when influence was low (r = DEMO) than when influence was
high (r= .65). Similarly, we DEMO the interaction effect on monitoring
by computing subgroup correlations between feedback and monitoring for
investors with high and low influence. As expected, the negative impact of
feedback on monitoring was stronger when influence was low (r = -.40) than
when it was high (r= .04). Thus, the hypothesized interaction of feedback and
influence received support for two of DEMO five dependent variables.
The final set of hypotheses predicts that procedural justice will mediate
the impacts of feedback (Hypotheses 3a-3d) and of feedback DEMO influence
(Hypotheses 4a-4d) on trust, commitment, monitoring, and investing. DEMO,
we compared nested models to assess all mediation hypotheses simultane-
ously. As Table 5 indicates (comparisons 4 vs. 3 and 4 vs. 2), the saturated
model provided a fit significantly superior to both the DEMO model (Ydiff=
31.08,p < .05) and the indirect model (,$d,ff = 66.24,p < .05). These analyses
suggest that DEMO partial mediation model (i.e., both direct and indirect effects
of predictors) provided the best fit of the data. Figure 2 displays the saturated
model and its path coefficients.
To demonstrate mediation for specific relationships, we examined the
three conditions necessary for mediation (explained above in the context of
Study 1). We assessed the condition that the predictor variables DEMO related
to the mediator by the path coefficients for the direct model. The first column
of Table 6 shows that feedback was significantly related DEMO procedural justice
but that feedback times influence was not. Therefore, procedural DEMO could
mediate the effects of feedback, but it could not mediate DEMO interactive
effects of feedback and influence; thus, no tests of Hypotheses 4a-4d were
conducted. The significant relationship between procedural justice and all
dependent DEMO in the indirect model (see column 2 of Table 6) satisfied
the second condition for mediation. We assessed the third condition (a sub-
566
Academy oJManagement Journal
June
FIGURE 2
Study 2 Path Analysis Results DEMO a Saturated Modela
Solid lines indicate significant paths. Dashed lines indicate nonsignificant paths.
-tp<.lO
* p < .05, one-tailed test
stantial reduction of relationships between the predictor and dependent
variables when the mediator is included) by examining the direct paths for
feedback in the saturated model (see column 3 of Table 6). Finally, we
examined the significance of the indirect paths when all three conditions
were met.
The direct effect DEMO feedback on trust, significant in the direct model,
was still DEMO in the saturated model, indicating that procedural justice
did not fully DEMO the impact of feedback. However, in the saturated
model, the indirect effect of feedback (through procedural justice) on trust
was significant. Together, these results suggest that procedural justice par-
tially mediated the impact of DEMO on trust (Hypotheses 3a). Feedback
was marginally related to commitment DEMO the direct model. In the saturated
model, the direct effect of DEMO was not significantly related to commit-
ment, and its indirect effect DEMO significant. Therefore, the marginal impact
of feedback on commitment was fully DEMO by procedural justice
(Hypotheses 3b). Feedback was related to monitoring DEMO both the direct and
the saturated models; the saturated model shows DEMO the indirect effect of
feedback on monitoring was not significant. Thus, DEMO justice did not
mediate the impact of feedback on monitoring (Hypotheses DEMO). Because the
interaction of feedback and influence did not significantly affect investing,
mediation was not possible (Hypotheses 3d).
1996
Sapienza and Korsgaard
567
In summary, the tests for mediation suggested that a model specifying
partial mediation provided the best fit for the DEMO Tests of specific paths
revealed that procedural justice partially mediated the impact of feedback
on trust and fully mediated the impact on commitment. Although DEMO
justice was significantly related to all four dependent variables, it did DEMO
mediate the impact of feedback on monitoring or the interactive effect of
feedback and influence on trust or monitoring.
Discussion
The purpose of Study DEMO was to replicate the experimental findings of
Study 1 in a field setting. With some notable exceptions, the two studies
produced results consistent with one another and with expectations derived
from procedural justice theory. Table 7 DEMO the results of the two studies.
As in the first study, DEMO 1, concerning the main effect of feedback,
received strong support DEMO Study 2. Specifically, timely feedback from an
entrepreneur led investors to DEMO the entrepreneur was fairer, to trust the
entrepreneur more, to be more supportive to the entrepreneur's strategic
decisions, and to monitor the venture less frequently. The findings concern-
ing the moderating effect of influence (Hypothesis 2) were less clear. In both
TABLE 7
Summary of Findings for Study 1 and Study 2
Hypothesis
Study 1
Supported
Supported
Supported
DEMO
Supported
Marginal
Supported
Not supported
Not supported
Supported
Partial mediation
Full mediation
Not supported
Partial mediation
Study 2
Supported
Supported
Marginal
Supported
Not supported
DEMO supported
Supported
Not supported
Supported
Not supported
Partial mediation
Full mediation
Not supported
Not supported"
1. Main effect of feedback on
a. Procedural DEMO
b. Trust
c. Decision commitment
d. Monitoring
e. Investing
2. Interactive effect of feedback and influence on
a. Procedural justice
b. Trust
c. Decision DEMO
d. Monitoring
e. Investing
3. Mediating role for the main effect of feedback on
a. Trust
b. Decision commitment
c. Monitoring
d. Investing
4. DEMO role for the interactive effect of
feedback and influence on
a. Trust
b. Decision commitment
c. Monitoring
d. Investing
Not supported
Not supported"
DEMO supported"
Not supported
Not supporteda
Not supported"
Not supported"
Not supported"
"The preconditions for testing these relationships were not met, so no actual tests were
conducted.
568
Academy of Management Journal
June
studies, the moderating effect of influence was only consistently observed
for one variable: trust in the entrepreneur. Both studies indicated that feed-
back had a stronger impact on trust when DEMO investor had relatively low
influence on decisions.
Findings concerning the mediating role of procedural justice were largely
consistent in the two studies. In both DEMO, procedural justice partially or
fully explained the impact of feedback on DEMO attitudes, specifically,
trust and commitment. As in Study 1,the DEMO in Study 2 indicated that
procedural justice did not mediate the relationship between feedback and
monitoring. Moreover, procedural justice did not mediate the effects of the
interaction of feedback and influence in either study. Despite the DEMO
support for the mediating role of procedural justice, the correlations in DEMO
4 reveal that perceptions of procedural justice were related to all investor
attitudes and behaviors except investing. Thus, procedural justice itself ap-
pears to be an important determinant of investors' attitudes and behaviors.
Thus, a DEMO of relations derived from procedural justice theory were
consistently supported in both the experiment and the field study. Both
studies found strong support for DEMO effect of timely feedback on investor
attitudes and behavior and for the mediating role of procedural justice in
the effects of feedback on investor DEMO However, some findings were
not replicated. The principal difference in the DEMO of the two studies
concerned the effects on investor behaviors. In Study 1, the interaction of
feedback and influence affected investing but not monitoring, whereas in
Study 2, the interaction predicted monitoring. Further, in Study 1,procedural
justice partially mediated the impact of feedback on investing; in Study 2,
investing was not affected by feedback. These inconsistencies may DEMO ex-
plained by the degree of discretion and control investors in each context
had over these two behaviors. In Study 1,because of the DEMO low cost
and ease of monitoring, subjects did not need to DEMO monitoring to dire
cases (i.e., when they received infrequent feedback and had little influence).
Monitoring in the real-world setting of the second DEMO, however, may be
very costly (Barney et al., 1989; DEMO & Gupta, 1994); thus, venture
capitalists exercise discretion in monitoring ventures. The studies also dif-
fered in investors' control over investing. In Study 1,the subjects were the
sole arbiters of the money invested DEMO ventures. In contrast, venture capital-
ists' actual discretion over investing may be considerably constrained. For
example, they may not be able to act independently of other partners in their
firms or even other investors in DEMO syndicate of venture capital firms (Bygrave,
1988). Thus, both studies show that feedback, influence, and procedural
justice can affect investors' actions, but such perceptions are more likely to
affect behaviors such as monitoring, over which a venture capitalist exercises
a high degree of discretion and control.
The findings of both studies also point to some limitations DEMO the model
tested. For example, only for trust did the studies DEMO support a moderat-
ing impact of influence. Thus, although previous research DEMO suggested that
procedural factors such as feedback are more important to creating a sense
1996
Sapienza and Korsgaard
569
of fairness and commitment when individuals lack DEMO over a decision
outcome (Korsgaard et al., 1995; Tyler et DEMO, 1985), our findings suggest that
receiving timely information may be DEMO regardless of the investors' level
of influence. It may be that DEMO investors hold a position of considerable
stature and responsibility, they have DEMO high expectations for how they
are to be treated (contrast this DEMO typical hierarchical intraorganizational
relationships in which those affected by decisions have lower expectations
of input). Thus, it may be that regardless of the level of influence investors
exert over a venture, they attend very strongly to how much respect-signaling
feedback they receive.
Another important implication raised by DEMO findings of both studies
concerns the mediating role of procedural justice. Although perceptions of
procedural justice appear to play a role in the impact DEMO information sharing
on attitudes, the findings suggest that feedback and influence DEMO directly
affect investors' attitudes and behaviors. This is consistent with previous
DEMO in which perceptions of procedural justice partially mediated the
impact of decision-making procedures on attitudes (Korsgaard et al., 1995).
Two important implications DEMO be derived from these findings. First, as
others have noted (e.g., Sheppard & Lewicki, 1987), it is likely that other
procedural DEMO affect perceptions of justice. In this investigation, we
focused on two DEMO factors, feedback and influence. Future research
is needed to determine how DEMO are affected by other aspects of the
decision-making process, such as DEMO' justification of action or
openness to input.
The second implication is DEMO information sharing and influence may
affect investor attitudes and behaviors through some other mechanism,
such as the creation of trust. Consistent with research DEMO justice theory
(Lind & Tyler, 1988), our findings suggest that trust can be fostered by
sharing information and influence in a way DEMO promotes perceptions of
procedural justice. However, perceptions of justice do not DEMO explain
the impact of decision-making procedures on trust. For example, research
DEMO agency theory suggests that investors' perceptions will also be affected
by DEMO other than fairness and integrity, such as perceived competency
(Sapienza& DEMO, 1994). An alternative model to the one we hypothesized,
DEMO that also recognizes an intervening role for both trust and procedural
justice, may more fully explain the dynamics of investor-entrepreneur
relations. Our results suggest that such models merit exploration in fu-
ture re~earch.~
We explored an DEMO model in which both procedural justice and trust were posited
to mediate tlle impact of our predictors on commitment, monitoring, and investing. This DEMO
also allowed for procedural justice to partially mediate the impact of tlle independent variables
on trust. We tested the model on the data from DEMO 2. The results indicated that it provided
a good fit to the data (y,, 10.92, GFI = .98, NFI = .96) DEMO was superior to the indirect model
displayed in Figure 1. Altllough these findings are purely exploratory, the superior fit of this
model and that of tlle saturated model suggest that a more complex model may be DEMO to
fully explain investor-entrepreneur relations.
=
Academy of iblanagement Journal
CONCLUSION
Employing an experiment and a field study, we examined how entrepre-
neurs' management of information flows affected investors. Our findings
revealed that timely feedback promoted positive relations between entrepre-
neurs and DEMO Past studies had revealed the importance of social con-
trol in interfirm relations (Larson, 1992; Ring & Van de Ven, 1994) but had
not demonstrated how such relations could be fostered. Our two studies
DEMO strong evidence of the usefulness of procedural justice theory for
understanding entrepreneur-investor relations. Drawing on the theory, we
were able to develop a model that explained significant proportions of the
variation in investors' attitudes and behavior. At the same time, our results
suggest that modifications in the existing theory may be needed to accurately
portray these types of relations.
This DEMO helps clarify the mechanisms of control and information
sharing in the venture-building process. Because of the uncertainty facing
new ventures, entrepreneurs and investors who can create mutual trust and
commitment can perhaps mitigate fears of opportunism (Williamson, 1975),
reduce the costs of delegation of decision making (Jensen & Meckling, 1976),
and create a "cooperative advantage" DEMO competitors (Smith, Carroll, &
Ashford, 1995).
Our findings DEMO and extend recent work in procedural justice. For
example, the results DEMO that influence does moderate the effects of
perceptions of fairness: fairness DEMO especially important for those who have
little control over decisions (Korsgaard DEMO al., 1995; Tyler et al., 1985). The
findings also DEMO the generalizability of the theory to interfirm and
nonhierarchical relationships and to complex, organization-wide decisions.
However, this research and that of Korsgaard and DEMO (1995) found that
although procedural justice is a powerful predictor of attitudes of strategic
decision makers, it only partially mediates the relationships predicted. These
findings suggest that the theory bears refinement when applied to settings
DEMO high outcome uncertainty and ambiguous or nonhierarchical rela-
tionships.
We have also gained some insight into how entrepreneurs might manage
their dilemma regarding the DEMO of information to investors. Venture capital-
ists attribute most venture failures to managerial inadequacies (Gorman &
Sahlman, 1989), and they play an active role in replacing CEOs (Bruton,
Fried, & Hisrich, 1994). Should CEOs provide continual feedback on the
ups and downs of DEMO business, or will such actions sacrifice informational
advantages, endanger their positions, and undermine their authority for no
appreciable gain? Our results suggest, paradoxically, that entrepreneurs
maintain control by yielding a level of control. That is, the more entrepre-
neurs share information, the more apt investors DEMO to eschew monitoring, to
trust that the entrepreneurs will be honest, and to support the entrepreneurs'
decisions. Larson labeled social control "a binding agent providing both the
freedom and the control necessary for collaboration" (1992: 91). Our results
1996
Sapienza and Korsgaard
571
provide some insight into how the paradox DEMO freedom and control might
be reconciled.
Experiments and field surveys have inherent limitations. However, em-
ployed together, they help mitigate some concerns about DEMO, generaliz-
ability, and external validity. Nonetheless, it is as yet DEMO how broadly
our results can be generalized. Studies involving a larger sample may resolve
whether the lack of statistical power masked significant relationships. The
DEMO clearly suggest that feedback, influence, and procedural justice are
important determinants of investor behavior and attitudes, but further study
is needed to flesh out the model and resolve the inconsistencies in find-
ings.
REFERENCES
Adams, J. S. 1965. Inequity in social exchange. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advancesin experimental
social psychology, vol. 4: 267-299. New York: Academic Press.
Aram, J. D., & Salipante, P. F., Jr. 1981. 4n DEMO of organizational due process in the
resolution of employeeiemployer conflict. Academy of Management Review, 6: 197-204.
Barney, J., Busenitz, L., Fiet, J. & Moesel, D. 1989. The structure of venture capital governance:
4n organizational economic analysis of relations between venture capital firms and new
DEMO Academy of Management Proceedings: 64-68.
Barney, J., Busenitz, L., DEMO, J., & Moesel, D. 1994. Determinants of a new venture DEMO's
receptivifyto advice from venture capitalists. Paper presented at the Babson Entrepreneur-
ship Conference, Boston.
Baron,R. M.,& Kenny, D. A. 1986. DEMO mediator-moderator variable distinction in social psycho-
logical research: Conceptual, strategic and statistical considerations. Journal of Personalify
and Social Psychology, 51: 1173-1182.
Bentler, P. M.. & Bonnett, D. G. 1980. Significance tests and goodness of fit in tlle analysis of
covariance structures. Psychological Bulletin, 88: 588-606.
DEMO, R. J. 1986. Identifyingprinciples of interactional justice: The case of corporate recruit-
ing. Paper presented at the Academy of Management meetings, Chicago.
Bruno, A. V., & Tyebjee, T. T. 1985. The entrepreneur's search for capital. Journal of Business
Venturing, 1: 61-74.
Bruton, G., DEMO, V., &Hisrich, B. 1994. Venture capitalistsand CEO dismissal. Paper presented
at the Babson Entrepreneurship Conference, LVellesley, MA.
Bygrave, LV. D. 1988. The structure of investment networks of venture capital firms. Journal of
Business DEMO, 3: 137-151.
Bygrave, W. D., & Timmons, J. A. DEMO Venture and risk capital: Practice and performance,
promises and policy. DEMO: Harvard Business School.
Cohen,J., & Collen, P. 1983 Appliedmultipleregressionlcorrelation DEMO forthe behavioral
sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Conlon, E. J., &Parks, J. M. 1990. Effects of monitoring and tradition on compensation arrange-
ments: An experiment with principal-agent dyads. Academy of Management Journal,
333: 603-622.
Dubini, P. 1989. The influence of motivations DEMO environment on business start-ups: Some
hints for public policies. Journal of DEMO Venturing, 4: 11-26.
Earley, P. C., & Lind, E. DEMO 1987. Procedural justice and participation in task selection: The role
of DEMO in mediating justice judgments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
52: 1148-1160.
572
Academy of Management Journal
June
Folger, R., & Bies, R. J. 1989. Managerial responsibilities and procedural justice. Employee
Responsibilities and Rights Journal, 2: 79-90.
Folger, R., & Konovsky, M. K. 1989. Effects DEMO procedural and distributive justice on reactions
to pay raise decisions. Academy of Management Journal, 32: 115-130.
Gladstone, D. 1988. Venture capital handbook. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Gorman, M., & Sahlman, W. A. 1989. What do venture capitalists do? Journal of Business
Venturing, 4: 231-238.
Jensen, M. C., & Meckling. W. C. 1976. Theory of the DEMO: Managerial behavior, agency costs
and ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics, 3: 305-360.
Joreskog, K. G., & Sorbom, D. 1989. LISREL 7: User's reference guide. Mooresville, IN: Scien-
tific Software.
Kim, W. C., & Mauborgne, R. A. 1991. Implementing global strategies: DEMO role of procedural
justice. Strategic Management Journal, 12: 125-143.
Kim, DEMO C., & Mauborgne, R. A. 1993. Procedural justice, attitudes, and subsidiary top manage-
ment compliance. Academy of Management Journal. 36: 502-526.
Korsgaard, M. A., Schweiger, D. M., & Sapienza, H. J. 1995. The role of procedural justice in
building commitment, attachment, and trust DEMO strategic decision-making teams. Academy
of Management Journal, 38: 60-84.
Larson, DEMO 1992. Network dyads in entrepreneurial settings: A study of the governance DEMO
exchange relationships. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37: 76-104.
Leung, K.. & DEMO: W. 1990. Psychological mechanisms of process-control effects. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 75: 613-620.
Lim, Y., 8r Weissberg, T. (Eds.). 1994. Pratt's guide to venture capital sources. New York:
Venture Economics.
DEMO, E. A., Kurtz, S., Musante, L., Walker, L., & Thibaut, J. W. 1980. Procedure and outcome
effects on reactions to adjudicated resolution of conflicts of interests. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 39: 643-653.
Lind, E. A,, Lissak, R. I., & DEMO, D. E. 1983. Decision control and process control effects on
procedural DEMO judgments. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 13: 338-350.
Lind, E. DEMO,, & Tyler, T. 1988. The socialpsychology of procedural justice. New DEMO: Plenum.
Loehlin, J. C. 1987. Latent variable models: An introduction DEMO factor, path, and structural
analysis. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
MacMillan, DEMO C., Kulow, D., & Khoylian, R. 1989. Venture capitalists' DEMO in their
investments: Extent and performance. Journal of Business Venturing, 4: 27-47.
Moorman, R. H. 1991. Relationship between organizational justice and organizational DEMO
ship behaviors: Do fairness perception influence employee citizenship? Journal of Applied
PS~C~OIO~Y,76: 845-855.
Nunnally, J. C. 1978. Psychometric theory. New York: McGraw-Hill
Ring, P. S.. & Van de Ven, A. H. 1992. DEMO cooperative relationships between organiza-
tions. Strategic Management Journal, 13: 83-498.
Ring, P. S., & Van de Ven, A. H. 1994. Developmental processes of cooperative interorganiza-
tional relationships. Academy of Management Review, 19: 90-118.
DEMO, K. H., & O'Reilly, C. A. 1974. Measuring organizational DEMO Journal of
Applied Psychology, 59: 321-326.
Rock, A. 1987. Strategy DEMO, tactics from a venture capitalist. Harvard Business Review,
65[6): DEMO
1996
Sapienza and Korsgaard
573
Rosenstein, J. 1988. The board and strategy: Venture capital and high technology. Journal of
Business Venturing, 3: 159-1 70.
Sapienza, H. J. 1989. Variations in venture capitalist-entrepreneur relations: Antecedents
DEMO consequences. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Maryland, College
Park.
Sapienza, DEMO J., & Amason, A. 1993. Effects of innovativeness and venture stage on venture
capitalist-entreprene~~rrelations. Interfaces, 23(6): 38-51.
Sapienza, H. J., & Gupta, A. K. 1994. Impact of agency risks and task uncertainty on venture
capitalist-entreprene~~rrelations. Academy of Management Journal, 37: 1618-1632.
Schaubroeck, J., May, D. R., & Brown, F. W. 1994. Procedural justice DEMO and employee
reactions to economic hardship: A field experiment. Journal of DEMO Psychology, 79:
455-460.
Sheppard, B. H., & Lewicki, R. J. 1987. Toward general principles of managerial fairness. Social
Justice Research, l(2): 161-175.
Sheppard, B. H., Lewicki, R. J., & DEMO, J. W. 1992. Organizational justice: The search for
fairness in the workplace. New York: Lexington Books.
Smith, K. G., Carroll, S. DEMO, & Ashford, S. J. 1995. Intra- and interorganizational cooperation:
Toward a research agenda. Academy of Management Journal, 38: 7-21.
Taylor, M. S., Tracy, K. R., Harrison, J. K., Renard, M. DEMO, & Carroll, S. J. 1992. Testing the
due process metaphor for performance appraisal systems: A filed application. Paper
presented at the 50th Annual Meeting of the Academy of Management, Las Vegas.
Thibaut, J., & Walker, L. 1975. Procedural justice: A psychological analysis. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Tyler, T. R,, Rasinski, K.A,, & Spodick, N. 1985. Influence of voice on satisfaction with leaders:
Exploring the meaning DEMO process control. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
48: 72-81.
DEMO de Ven, A. H., &Walker, G. 1984. The dynamics of interorganizational coordination. Admin-
istrative Science Quarterly, 29: 598-621.
Williamson, 0.E. 1975. Markets and hierarchies: Analysis and anti-trust implications. New
York: Free Press.
DEMO
Items in Study 1
Procedural justice
To what extent was the owner fair in the way helshe made decisions?
To what extent were DEMO satisfied with the way the owner made decisions concerning the
company?
Trust in owner
To what extent was the owner honest in hislher DEMO with you?
To what extent do you trust the owner?
When the owner made decisions that were different from decisions I would DEMO, I trusted
that the owner had good reasons for making these DEMO
Commitment to decisions
To what extent were you satisfied with the decisions made by the owner?
If the game were a situation you DEMO the owner were actually facing, how committed would
you he to DEMO decisions made by the owner?
Feedback manipulation check
To what extent did the owner give you timely feedback on the company's performance?
574 Academy of Management Journal June
Influence manipulation check
To what extent DEMO you influence the way this owner made decisions?
To what extent could you control how the owner made decisions?
Items in Study DEMO
Feedback
To what extend did the CEO:
provide you with timely feedback on the performance of the venture?
provide you with timely DEMO on the consequences of strategic decisions heishe made?
keep you up-to-date on the performance of the venture?
keep you up-to-date on the DEMO direction of the venture?
Influence
To what extent did the CEO take your advice in making strategic choices about the venture?
To DEMO extent did the CEO ignore your advice in making strategic choices about the venture?
(reverse-coded)
To what extent could you influence strategic decisions made by the CEO?
To what extent did you influence DEMO strategic direction of the venture?
Procedural justice
The procedures used by the CEO during board meetings over the last 12 months were fair.
DEMO am satisfied with the procedures used by the CEO during board meetings.
The procedures used by the CEO to conduct board meetings were fair.
DEMO am satisfied with the way the CEO conducted board meetings.
Trust in the CEO
The CEO is honest in hisiher dealings with me.
I DEMO the CEO.
The CEO is sincere in hisiher attempt to understand my point of view.
Taking all things into consideration, I am satisfied with the CEO.
Commitment to decisions
Considering the strategic decisions made by the DEMO over the last 12 months:
I support the strategic decisions.
I support the course of action decided upon.
I have supported the strategic DEMO that were made.
Frequency of monitoring
To keep abreast of the progress of the venture, to what extent do you:
request additional reports or explanations for venture performance?
request documents be provided to supplement DEMO provided by the venture?
Investing
My firm has taken advantage of every opportunity to re-invest in this venture.
My firm would like to DEMO in the venture in the future if there is an opportunity to do so.
Since we first invested in this venture, we have participated in every opportunity to invest
in the venture.
We intend to re-invest DEMO the venture if there is an opportunity to do so.
Harry J. Sapienza is an assistant professor at the University of South Carolina at DEMO
bia. He received his Ph.D. degree in strategic management at the University of Maryland
at College Park. His research interests include the dynamics of DEMO business formation
and development, inter- and intraorganizational relations, and strategic decision
making.
M. Audrey Korsgaard is an assistant professor of organizational behavior at DEMO Univer-
sity of South Carolina. She received her Ph.D. degree in psychology at New York
University. Her research interests include procedural justice, performance evaluation
and feedback systems, and work values.
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 3 -
You DEMO printed the following article:
Procedural Justice in Entrepreneur-Investor Relations
Harry J. Sapienza; M. Audrey Korsgaard
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 39, No. 3. (Jun., 1996), pp. 544-574.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199606%2939%3A3%3C544%3APJIER%3E2.0.CO%3B2-4
This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR. DEMO
visit your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.
References
An Evaluation of Organizational Due DEMO in the Resolution of Employee/Employer
Conflict
John D. Aram; Paul DEMO Salipante, Jr.
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 6, No. DEMO (Apr., 1981), pp. 197-204.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28198104%296%3A2%3C197%3AAEOODP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-L
Effects of Monitoring and Tradition on Compensation Arrangements: An Experiment with
Principal-Agent Dyads
Edward J. Conlon; Judi McLean Parks
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 33, No. 3. (Sep., 1990), pp. DEMO
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199009%2933%3A3%3C603%3AEOMATO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-V
Effects of Procedural and Distributive Justice on Reactions to Pay Raise Decisions
Robert Folger; Mary A. Konovsky
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 32, No. 1. (Mar., 1989), pp. 115-130.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28198903%2932%3A1%3C115%3AEOPADJ%3E2.0.CO%3B2-H
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 2 of 3 -
Implementing DEMO Strategies: The Role of Procedural Justice
W. Chan Kim; Rene A. Mauborgne
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 12, Special Issue: Global Strategy. (DEMO, 1991), pp.
125-143.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?DEMO
Procedural Justice, Attitudes, and Subsidiary Top Management Compliance with
Multinationals' DEMO Strategic Decisions
W. Chan Kim; Rene A. Mauborgne
The Academy of DEMO Journal, Vol. 36, No. 3. (Jun., 1993), pp. 502-526.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199306%2936%3A3%3C502%3APJAAST%3E2.0.CO%3B2-W
Building Commitment, Attachment, DEMO Trust in Strategic Decision-Making Teams: The Role
of Procedural Justice
M. DEMO Korsgaard; David M. Schweiger; Harry J. Sapienza
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 38, No. 1. (Feb., 1995), pp. 60-84.
DEMO URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199502%2938%3A1%3C60%3ABCAATI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-W
Network Dyads in Entrepreneurial Settings: A Study of the Governance of Exchange
Relationships
Andrea Larson
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 37, No. 1. (Mar., 1992), pp. 76-104.
DEMO URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28199203%2937%3A1%3C76%3ANDIESA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-C
Structuring Cooperative Relationships between Organizations
Peter Smith Ring; Andrew H. Van De Ven
Strategic Management Journal, DEMO 13, No. 7. (Oct., 1992), pp. 483-498.
Stable URL:DEMO
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0143-2095%28199210%2913%3A7%3C483%3ASCRBO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 3 of 3 -
Developmental DEMO of Cooperative Interorganizational Relationships
Peter Smith Ring; Andrew H. van de DEMO
The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 19, No. 1. (Jan., 1994), pp. 90-118.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0363-7425%28199401%2919%3A1%3C90%3ADPOCIR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-P
DEMO of Agency Risks and Task Uncertainty on Venture Capitalist-CEO Interaction
Harry J. Sapienza; Anil K. Gupta
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 37, No. 6. (Dec., 1994), pp. 1618-1632.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199412%2937%3A6%3C1618%3AIOARAT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-J
Intra- and Interorganizational Cooperation: Toward a Research Agenda
DEMO G. Smith; Stephen J. Carroll; Susan J. Ashford
The Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 38, No. 1. (Feb., 1995), pp. DEMO
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-4273%28199502%2938%3A1%3C7%3AIAICTA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-3
The Dynamics of Interorganizational Coordination
Andrew H. Van de Ven; Gordon Walker
Administrative Science Quarterly, DEMO 29, No. 4. (Dec., 1984), pp. 598-621.
Stable URL:DEMO
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0001-8392%28198412%2929%3A4%3C598%3ATDOIC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-2{1g42fwefx}